==== Page 1 ====
Report from Dagstuhl Seminar 18371
Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge
Representation on the Semantic Web
Edited by
Piero Andrea Bonatti1, Stefan Decker2, Axel Polleres3, and
Valentina Presutti4
1 University of Naples, IT, pieroandrea.bonatti@unina.it
2 RWTH Aachen, DE, decker@informatik.rwth-aachen.de
3 Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT, axel.polleres@wu.ac.at
4 STLab, ISTC-CNR – Rome, IT, valentina.presutti@istc.cnr.it
Abstract
The increasingly pervasive nature of the Web, expanding to devices and things in everyday
life, along with new trends in Artiﬁcial Intelligence call for new paradigms and a new look on
Knowledge Representation and Processing at scale for the Semantic Web. The emerging, but still
to be concretely shaped concept of “Knowledge Graphs” provides an excellent unifying metaphor
for this current status of Semantic Web research. More than two decades of Semantic Web
research provides a solid basis and a promising technology and standards stack to interlink data,
ontologies and knowledge on the Web. However, neither are applications for Knowledge Graphs
as such limited to Linked Open Data, nor are instantiations of Knowledge Graphs in enterprises
– while often inspired by – limited to the core Semantic Web stack. This report documents the
program and the outcomes of Dagstuhl Seminar 18371 “Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for
Knowledge Representation on the Semantic Web”, where a group of experts from academia and
industry discussed fundamental questions around these topics for a week in early September 2018,
including the following: what are knowledge graphs? Which applications do we see to emerge?
Which open research questions still need be addressed and which technology gaps still need to
be closed?
Seminar September 9–14, 2018 – http://www.dagstuhl.de/18371
2012 ACM Subject Classiﬁcation Information systems →Semantic web description languages,
Computing methodologies →Artiﬁcial intelligence, Computing methodologies →Knowledge
representation and reasoning, Computing methodologies →Natural language processing,
Computing methodologies →Machine learning, Human-centered computing →Collaborative
and social computing
Keywords and phrases knowledge graphs, knowledge representation, linked data, ontologies,
semantic web
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.4230/DagRep.8.9.29
Edited in cooperation with Michael Cochez
Acknowledgements The editors are grateful to Michael Cochez for his valuable contributions
to the planning and organization of this workshop. He was in all respects the ﬁfth organizer.
Except where otherwise noted, content of this report is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge Representation on the Semantic Web, Dagstuhl Reports ,
Vol. 8, Issue 09, pp. 29–111
Editors: Piero Andrea Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti
Dagstuhl Reports
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

==== Page 2 ====
30 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
1 Executive Summary
Piero Andrea Bonatti (University of Naples, IT)
Michael Cochez (Fraunhofer FIT, DE)
Stefan Decker (RWTH Aachen, DE)
Axel Polleres (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT)
Valentina Presutti (STLab, ISTC-CNR – Rome, IT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Piero Andrea Bonatti, Michael Cochez, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and
Valentina Presutti
In 2001 Berners-Lee et al. stated that “The Semantic Web is an extension of the current web
in which information is given well-deﬁned meaning, better enabling computers and people to
work in cooperation.”
The time since the publication of the paper and creation of the foundations for the
Semantic Web can be roughly divided in three phases: The ﬁrst phase focused on bringing
Knowledge Representation to Web Standards, e.g., with the development of OWL. The
second phase focused on data management, linked data and potential applications. In the
third, more recent phase, with the emergence of real world applications and the Web emerging
into devices and things, emphasis is put again on the notion of Knowledge, while maintaining
the large graph aspect: Knowledge Graphs have numerous applications like semantic search
based on entities and relations, disambiguation of natural language, deep reasoning (e.g.
IBM Watson), machine reading (e.g. text summarisation), entity consolidation for Big Data,
and text analytics. Others are exploring the application of Knowledge Graphs in industrial
and scientiﬁc applications.
The shared characteristic by all these applications can be expressed as a challenge:
the capability of combining diverse (e.g. symbolic and statistical) reasoning methods and
knowledge representations while guaranteeing the required scalability, according to the
reasoning task at hand. Methods include: Temporal knowledge and reasoning, Integrity
constraints, Reasoning about contextual information and provenance, Probabilistic and
fuzzy reasoning, Analogical reasoning, Reasoning with Prototypes and Defeasible Reasoning,
Cognitive Frames, Ontology Design Patterns (ODP), and Neural Networks and other machine
learning models.
With this Dagstuhl Seminar, we intend to bring together researchers that have faced and
addressed the challenge of combining diverse reasoning methods and knowledge representa-
tions in diﬀerent domains and for diﬀerent tasks with Knowledge Graphs and Linked Data
experts with the purpose of drawing a sound research roadmap towards deﬁning scalable
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning principles within a unifying Knowledge Graph
framework. Driving questions include:
What are fundamental Knowledge Representation and Reasoning methods for Knowledge
Graphs?
How should the various Knowledge Representation, logical symbolic reasoning, as well as
statistical inference methods be combined and how should they interact?
What are the roles of ontologies for Knowledge Graphs?
How can existing data be ingested into a Knowledge Graph?
In order to answer these questions, the present seminar was aiming at cross-fertilisation
between research on diﬀerent Knowledge Representation mechanisms, and also to help
to identify the requirements for Knowledge Representation research originating from the
deployment of Knowledge graphs and the discovery of new research problems motivated by

==== Page 3 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 31
applications. We foresee, from the results summarised in the present report, the establishment
of a new research direction, which focuses on how to combine the results from knowledge
representation research in several subﬁelds for joint use for Knowledge Graphs and Data on
the Web.
The Seminar
The idea of this seminar emerged when the organisers got together discussing about writing
a grant proposal. They all shared, although from diﬀerent perspectives, the conviction
that research on Semantic Web (and its scientiﬁc community) reached a critical point: it
urged a paradigm shift. After almost two decades of research, the Semantic Web community
established a strong identity and achieved important results. Nevertheless, the technologies
resulting from its eﬀort on the one hand have proven the potential of the Semantic web vision,
but on the other hand became an impediment; a limiting constraint towards the next major
breakthrough. In particular, Semantic Web knowledge representation models are insuﬃcient
to face many important challenges such as supporting artiﬁcial intelligence systems in showing
advanced reasoning capabilities and socially-sound behaviour at scale. The organisers soon
realised that a project proposal was not the ideal tool for addressing this problem, which
instead needed a confrontation of the Semantic Web scientiﬁc community with other relevant
actors, in the ﬁeld. From this discussion, the ”knowledge graph” concept emerged as a key
unifying ingredient for this new form of knowledge representation – embracing both the
Semantic Web, but also other adjacent communities – and it was agreed that a Dagstuhl
seminar on ”Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge Representation on the
Semantic Web” was a perfect means for the purpose.
The list of invitees to the seminar included scientists from both academia and industry
working on knowledge graphs, linked data, knowledge representation, machine learning,
automated reasoning, natural language processing, data management, and other relevant
areas. Forty people have participated in the seminar, which was very productive. The
active discussions during plenary and break out sessions conﬁrmed the complex nature of
the proposed challenge. This report is a fair representative of the variety and complexity of
the addressed topics.
The method used for organising the seminar deserves further elaboration. The seminar
had a ﬁve-day agenda. Half of the morning on the ﬁrst day was devoted to ten short
talks (5 minutes each) given by a selection of attendees. The speakers were identiﬁed by
the organisers as representatives of complimentary topics based on the result of a Survey
conducted before the seminar: more than half of the invitees ﬁlled a questionnaire that gave
them the opportunity to brieﬂy express their perspectives on the topic and to point out
relevant challenges that they would put in their future research agenda with the highest
priority.
The aim of these short speeches was to ignite the confrontation by sharing the emerging
views on the main challenges from this survey. After the speeches we organised the further
discussion in an “Open Space” session that served to collaboratively build the agenda for the
rest of the day (and that inﬂuenced the agenda of the next days). The open space method
consists of giving everyone the opportunity to propose one or more break out topics. To
propose a topic, a proposer had to explain in few words what it was about, then write it
down on a post-it that was attached on a blackboard (see Figure 1). At the end of the
session, attendees were invited to sign up for the topics of their interest (by marking the
corresponding post-it).
18371

==== Page 4 ====
32 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Figure 1 Blackboard with post-its from the open session.
The more popular ones (up to ﬁfteen and having at least three sign ups) were selected
to compose the agenda. Each break out session used a one-hour slot during the afternoon.
The second day continued with most of the break out sessions with the aim of continuing
the discussion started the ﬁrst day and work towards consolidating a report (ﬁnalised on
the fourth day). Reports would reﬂect view and vision emerging from the break out group.
On the same day attendees had the opportunity to self-propose to give additional short
speeches, addressing missing relevant topics. We used part of the second day’s morning for
these speeches. We explicitly asked attendees to avoid speeches on “my research” and to
only address relevant challenges that were overlooked so far.
On the third day we started with a plenary discussion and the seminar group agreed on
splitting into four groups to discuss “Grand challenges” separately, then share the results
before going back to the break out sessions. The aim was to share a common high level
vision reference before consolidating the more speciﬁc discussions that were ongoing in the
break out sessions. On the fourth day, the seminar group split again in break out sessions
including a “Grand challenges” one. Each session was assigned to at least two coordinators,
who committed to consolidate in a draft report the results from the previous meetings. It
was decided to merge a few topics, when appropriate.
Break out sessions had varied level of technical abstraction depending on the nature of
the topic, and its level of maturity within the state of the art. To give some examples: the
break out session about “Grand challenges” mainly discussed a vision for a future research
agenda and maintained a high level of abstraction, while the session on “Human and Social
Factors in Knowledge Graphs” provided more concrete insights as it could build on both
academic and industrial research results, projects and practical experiences. The session on
“Applications of Knowledge Graphs” focused on technical details and issues on two relevant
sample applications.

==== Page 5 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 33
Overview of the Report
This report is organised in two main parts: Section 3 includes a list of abstracts providing
an overview of the short speeches that we had the ﬁrst two days. All the other sections are
consolidated reports of the emerging vision, research challenges, possible research agenda,
and proposed approaches, from break out sessions. When applicable, the reports give an
overview of speciﬁc relevant research work.
18371

==== Page 6 ====
34 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
2 Table of Contents
Executive Summary
Piero Andrea Bonatti, Michael Cochez, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and
Valentina Presutti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Overview of Short Talks
Evolution and dynamics
Eva Blomqvist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Enabling Accessible Scholarly Knowledge Graphs
Sarven Capadisli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Logic and learning – Can we provide Explanations in the current Knowledge Lake?
Claudia d’Amato . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Knowledge graph creation and management
Michel Dumontier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
New Symbol Groundings for Knowledge Graphs
Paul Groth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Cultural issues in multilingual knowledge graph
Roberto Navigli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Quality and Evaluation of Knowledge Graphs (beyond DBpedia)
Heiko Paulheim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Humans in the Loop, Human readable KG
Marta Sabou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
ML with KGs – research and use cases around KGs at Siemens
Volker Tresp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Privacy and constrained access
Sabrina Kirrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Value Proposition of Knowledge Graphs
Sonja Zillner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Social-Technical Phenomena of (Enterprise) Knowledge Graph Management
Juan F. Sequeda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Concise account of the notion of Knowledge Graph
Claudio Gutierrez . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Grand Challenges
Paul Groth, Frank van Harmelen, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Valentina Presutti,
Juan Sequeda, and Michel Dumontier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
On the Creation of Knowledge Graphs: A Report on Best Practices and their
Future
Sabbir M. Rashid, Eva Blomqvist, Cogan Shimizu, and Michel Dumontier . . . . . 49
Knowledge Integration at Scale
Andreas Harth, Roberto Navigli, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Maria-Esther Vidal . 54
Knowledge Dynamics and Evolution
Eva Blomqvist, Cogan Shimizu, Barend Mons, and Heiko Paulheim . . . . . . . . . 58

==== Page 7 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 35
Evaluation of Knowledge Graphs
Heiko Paulheim, Marta Sabou, Michael Cochez, and Wouter Beek . . . . . . . . . . 63
Combining Graph Queries with Graph Analytics
Dan Brickley, Aidan Hogan, Sebastian Neumaier, and Axel Polleres . . . . . . . . 69
(Re)Deﬁning Knowledge Graphs
Aidan Hogan, Dan Brickley, Claudio Gutierrez, Axel Polleres, and Antoine Zim-
mermann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Foundations
Claudia d’Amato, Sabrina Kirrane, Piero Bonatti, Sebastian Rudolph, Markus
Krötzsch, Marieke van Erp, and Antoine Zimmermann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Graphs
Paul Groth, Roberto Navigli, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Marieke van Erp, and
Gerard de Melo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Machine Learning and Knowledge Graphs
Steﬀen Staab, Gerard de Melo, Michael Witbrock, Volker Tresp, Claudio Gutierrez,
Dezhao Song, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Human and Social Factors in Knowledge Graphs
Marta Sabou, Elena Simperl, Eva Blomqvist, Paul Groth, Sabrina Kirrane, Gerarrd
de Melo, Barend Mons, Heiko Paulheim, Lydia Pintscher, Valentina Presutti, Juan
F. Sequeda, and Cogan Matthew Shimizu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Applications of Knowledge Graphs
Sarven Capadisli and Lydia Pintscher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
Knowledge Graphs and the Web
Sarven Capadisli, Michael Cochez, Claudio Gutierrez, Andreas Harth, and Antoine
Zimmermann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
18371

==== Page 8 ====
36 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3 Overview of Short Talks
3.1 Evolution and dynamics
Eva Blomqvist (Linköping University, SE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Eva Blomqvist
Nobody would today consider the Web as a static thing. Similarly, knowledge in a company is
never static, it is constantly changing. So why is it that so many approaches developed in the
past decades make the assumption that knowledge on the web, or elsewhere, is not going to
change? At an early stage this can be a way to manage the complexity of a problem, simply
to get started, but we cannot aﬀord to use that excuse any more – if we want to be taken
seriously by developers and users out in industry. New methods, technologies and standards
that we produce, or propose, need to start from this assumption, i.e., that everything is
dynamic, and build on that, rather than ignoring it and then potentially trying to cover it by
add-ons at the end. Knowledge graphs in a highly dynamic environment necessarily needs to
themselves be highly dynamic and constantly evolving, and we are the ones that have to
provide the technology to support that evolution!
3.2 Enabling Accessible Scholarly Knowledge Graphs
Sarven Capadisli (TIB – Hannover, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sarven Capadisli
Scholarly knowledge includes a range of research artefacts that needs to be described. These
include research articles, peer reviews, research data, social interactions like review requests
and notiﬁcations in general, as well as diﬀerent kinds of annotations on research objects. The
current state of access and use of scholarly knowledge is insuﬃcient for society at large. By
enabling accessible scholarly knowledge graphs as well as applications which make use of
it, we hope to enable universal access to previous research. By improving the availability
through linked research, we can facilitate discovery and building on existing research. A
fundamental ﬁrst step is to investigate and develop eﬀective ways to represent ﬁne-grained
information that is accessible, human and machine-interpretable, and interconnected. Other
challenges look into ways in which academic journals can decouple the registration and
certiﬁcation functions of scholarly communication. Also we can investigate the feasibility
of universal access to knowledge through decentralisation, freedom of expression, privacy
respecting, and social.

==== Page 9 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 37
3.3 Logic and learning – Can we provide Explanations in the current
Knowledge Lake?
Claudia d’Amato (University of Bari, IT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Claudia d’Amato
The goal of the talk is to raise the attention on the following research questions: a) is it
important to provide explanations when providing information by exploiting a Knowledge
Graph (KG)? b) Would it be possible to design integrated numeric and symbol-based machine
learning methods, to be used for tackling the link prediction problem, that are scalable
and able to provide interpretable models? c) Are interpretable models a suﬃcient form of
explanation or do we need to provide an actual line of reasoning, illustrating the decision
making process? d) Is it possible to develop a uniﬁed framework integrating diﬀerent
reasoning paradigms?
A KG is often deﬁned as an object for describing entities and their interrelations, by
means of a graph. Knowledge graphs are usually assumed to be large and arbitrary entities
may be interrelated, thus covering various topical domains [ 1]. The importance of assessing
relations among entities has driven research on developing eﬀective methods for solving the
link prediction problem. This is often regarded as a classiﬁcation problem that can be solved
by the use of machine learning classiﬁcation methods. In the last few years, vector space
embedding solutions have been largely adopted [ 2,3]. They allow to create propositional
feature vector representations starting from more complex representations, such as graphs,
thus allowing to apply numeric approaches resulting scalable besides of eﬀective. The main
problem of numeric approaches is that they do not allow to provide somehow an explanation
of the predicted results, that is, similarly to the goal of “Explainable AI” research ﬁeld
(which aims to produce “glass box” models that are explainable to a human, without greatly
sacriﬁcing performances), an explanation of the reason why a certain entity is predicted as
being related (with respect to a given relation) to another one. The exploitation of symbol-
based learning methods would be useful at this regards since they are known to generate
interpretable models that allow to explain how conclusions are drawn [ 4,5]. Nevertheless,
symbol-based learning methods are also known to be less scalable than numeric methods.
As such integrated numeric and symbol-based approaches need to be developed in order to
come up with interpretable models whilst still staying scalable. Such an integrated solution
would be an initial step ahead towards providing explanation. Indeed interpretable models
actually describe how solutions are obtained but not why they are obtained. Providing an
actual explanation means to formulate and supply a line of reasoning, illustrating the decision
making process of a model whilst using human understandable features of the input data.
The ability of performing reasoning is important not only for providing explanations. KGs are
often considered as the output of an information acquisition and integration process, where
information may come from several and diﬀerent sources. As such, problems such as noise
and conﬂicting information may arise. Additionally, some acquired information could be valid
only in some contexts or with respect to a certain period of time. As such the ability to apply
diﬀerent reasoning paradigms such deductive reasoning, paraconsistent reasoning, inductive
reasoning, normative reasoning, analogical reasoning could be necessary. Large research
eﬀorts have been devoted to study each reasoning paradigm, however, when considering
large KGs coming from the integration of multiple sources of information, multiple reasoning
paradigms could be needed at the same time. As such a uniﬁed framework integrating
diﬀerent reasoning paradigms needs to be formalized.
18371

==== Page 10 ====
38 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
References
1H. Paulheim. Knowledge graph reﬁnement: a survey of approaches and evaluation methods.
Semantic Web Journal , 8(3):489–508, IOS Press, 2017.
2P. Minervini and C. d’Amato and N. Fanizzi. Eﬃcient energy-based embedding models
for link prediction in knowledge graphs. Journal of Intelligent Information Systestems ,
47(1):91–109, 2016.
3M. Cochez and P. Ristoski and S. P. Ponzetto and H. Paulheim. Global RDF Vector
Space Embeddings. In C. d’Amato et. al (eds.). The Semantic Web – ISWC 2017 – 16th
International Semantic Web Conference (2017), Proceedings, Part I volume10587of LNCS,
pages 190–207. Springer, 2017.
4G. F. Luger. Arti1cial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem Solving.
Addison Wesley, 5 edition, 2005.
5L. De Raedt. Logical and Relational Learning: From ILP to MRDM (Cognitive Technolo-
gies) Springer-Verlag, 2008.
6L.Galárraga, C.Teﬂioudi, F.Suchanek, andK.Hose. AMIE:Associationruleminingunder
incompleteevidenceinontologicalknowledgebases. In Proceedings of the 20th International
World Wide Web Conference (WWW 2013) . ACM, 2013.
7F. A. Lisi. AL-QuIn: An onto-relational learning system for semantic web mining. Inter-
national Journal of Semantic Web and Information Systems , 2011.
8J. Józefowska, A. Lawrynowicz, and T. Lukaszewski. The role of semantics in mining
frequentpatternsfromknowledgebasesindescriptionlogicswithrules. Theory and Practice
of Logic Programming , 10(3):251–289, 2010.
9J. Völker and M. Niepert. Statistical schema induction. In G. Antoniou et al., editors,
The Semantic Web: Research and Applications – 8th Extended Semantic Web Conference,
(ESWC 2011), Proc., Part I , volume 6643 of LNCS, pages 124–138. Springer, 2011.
10A. K. Joshi and P. Hitzler and G. Dong Logical Linked Data Compression In The Semantic
Web: Research and Applications – 10th Extended Semantic Web Conference, (ESWC 2013),
Proceedings , volume 7882 of LNCS, pages 170–184. Springer, 2013.
11L. Dehaspeand and H. Toironen. Discovery of frequent datalog patterns. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery , 3(1):7–36, 1999.
12B. Goethals and J. Van den Bussche. Relational association rules: Getting warmer. In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Pattern Detection and Discovery , volume
2447 ofLNCS, pages 125–139. Springer, 2002.
13C. d’Amato and V. Bryl and L. Seraﬁni. Semantic Knowledge Discovery and Data-Driven
Logical Reasoning from Heterogeneous Data Sources. In F. Bobillo et al.(Eds.), ISWC
International Workshops, URSW 2011-2013, Revised Selected Papers, vol. 8816 Springer,
LNCS/LNAI (2014).
14R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. N. Swami. Mining association rules between sets of
items in large databases. In P. Buneman and S. Jajodia, editors, Proc. of the 1993 ACM
SIGMOD Int. Conf. on Management of Data , pages 207–216. ACM Press, 1993.
15C. d’Amato and V. Bryl and L. Seraﬁni. Data-Driven Logical Reasoning. In Proc. of the
8th Int. Workshop on Uncertainty Reasoning for the Semantic Web (URSW’12), vol. 900,
CEUR (2012).

==== Page 11 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 39
3.4 Knowledge graph creation and management
Michel Dumontier (Maastricht University, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Michel Dumontier
While there are many manifestations of knowledge graphs (KGs), there are few guidelines as
to how to create them or make them widely available in a reliable manner owing to ambiguity
in their deﬁnition. In the most basic sense, KGs represent some form of knowledge that
is amenable to processing by graph or reasoning algorithms, in which entities are related
to their attributes and to other entities, along with provenance of where that knowledge
was obtained. KGs are created through a myriad of approaches – be it manual, automatic,
or semi-automatic – using a variety of data sources such as textual documents, microdata
embedded in web pages, large and small databases, and crowdsourced statements. They are
subject to a wide variety of data processing activities such as mapping entities to concepts,
extracting relations from text, transforming facts to speciﬁc formats for indexing, integrating
vastly diﬀerent data sources, and ﬁnding errors through quality assessment. All KG creation
methods have their advantages and disadvantages, and can often create vastly diﬀerent
KGs that can have important implications in downstream applications such as answering
questions, oﬀering recommendations, and making new predictions. Clearly, there remain
great challenges towards organizing the emerging KG community in making their KGs FAIR
– Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable – to the beneﬁt of both humans and
machines.
3.5 New Symbol Groundings for Knowledge Graphs
Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Paul Groth
Today’s knowledge graphs primarily use social systems in combination with logics to deﬁne
the meaning of their symbols. For example, a knowledge graph might use rdfs:subClassOf to
deﬁne a subclass hierarchy – the meaning of which is found by dereferencing to a document
on the web and then interpreting the natural language and mathematical deﬁnitions found
at the location. I suggest that we should instead think about grounding the symbols of
a knowledge graph (the entities and relations) in other mediums. For example, one can
think about grounding these symbols in a sub-symbolic space (e.g. vector embeddings).
Likewise, it is possible to ground symbols in physical reality through sensors or in shared
simulations. Adopting these other forms of groundings would allow for more expressive
knowledge graphs. There are a number of sets of related work that provide good routes into
these alternative mechanisms. The work of Douwe Kiela is highly relevant as discussed in
his thesis “Deep embodiment: grounding semantics in perceptual modalities”. The work of
Cynthia Matuszek on grounded language acquisition using robotics is also highly relevant.
Additionally, resources such as visualgenome.org enable the connection of symbols and images.
Overall, combining these lines of work with Knowledge Graphs can provide a rich set of new
research avenues around integration, reasoning, use and exchange.
18371

==== Page 12 ====
40 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3.6 Cultural issues in multilingual knowledge graph
Roberto Navigli (Sapienza University of Rome, IT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Roberto Navigli
When dealing with multilingual lexicalized knowledge graphs, such as Wikidata or BabelNet,
a number of issues arise, including the impossibility to lexicalize a certain concept in a given
language (e.g. ikigai from Japanese; gezellig from Dutch), the diﬀerent perception of the same
concept in diﬀerent cultures (e.g. copyright in the UK vs. Germany) or the granularity of
sense distinctions. All these issues need to be addressed in upcoming research of multlingual
KGs.
3.7 Quality and Evaluation of Knowledge Graphs (beyond DBpedia)
Heiko Paulheim (Universität Mannheim, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Heiko Paulheim
Various metrics for the quality evaluation of knowledge graphs have been proposed. Zaveri et
al. [1] propose a set of 17 metrics, focusing mostly on technical and legal dimensions of the
data and Linked Data recommendations. They cluster the metrics into availability, licensing,
interlinking, security, and performance. Färber et al. [ 2] come up with a broader collection,
encompassing accuracy, trustworthiness, consistency, relevancy, completeness, timeliness,
ease of understanding, interoperability, accessibility, licensing, and interlinking. Looking not
only at those papers, but also at the open reviews reveals that deﬁning objective metrics for
KG quality is a challenging endeavour. Despite the mere analysis of the quality of existing
knowledge graphs, various methods for improving the quality of those knowledge graphs have
been proposed as well, which we have reviewed in [ 3]. In that article, we do not only review
more than 40 approaches of KG completion and error detection, but also shed more light on
the evaluation.
Some of the key ﬁndings of the survey include:
1.Although KG completion and error detection seem related, there are rarely any approaches
that tackle both tasks simultaneously.
2.Likewise, although quite a few approaches deal with error detection, error correction is
hardly addressed.
3.DBpedia is the most used KG for evaluation. Many papers only report on DBpedia,
hence making it diﬃcult to derive general applicability of the proposed approaches.
4.There is a large variety of evaluation setups, ranging from split validation to cross
validation with various splits and foldings, and a large number of diﬀerent metrics used
aside precision, recall, and F1-score. Due to those diﬀerences in the setup, it is hard to
compare results between diﬀerent papers directly.
5.Scalability evaluations are still rare; almost half of the papers do not mention scalability
at all.
Following up on those observations, there are some research question that we identfy
worthwhile diving into:
1.Which quality improvements does the community deem the most necessary (e.g., com-
pleteness, correctness, linkage, ...)

==== Page 13 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 41
2.How can we come up with standardized evaluation setups for KGs and KG completion/-
correction methods?
3.How can we best preserve the eﬀorts made towards KG improvements?
References
1A. Zaveri, A. Rula, A. Maurino, R. Pietrobon, J. Lehmann, and S. Auer: Quality Assess-
ment for Linked Open Data: A Survey. SWJ 7(1), 2016
2Michael Färber, Frederic Bartscherer, Carsten Menne, and Achim Rettinger: Linked data
quality of DBpedia, Freebase, OpenCyc, Wikidata, and YAGO SWJ 9(1), 2018
3H. Paulheim: Knowledge Graph Reﬁnement – A Survey of Approaches and Evaluation
Methods. SWJ 8(3), 2017
3.8 Humans in the Loop, Human readable KG
Marta Sabou (TU Wien, AT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Marta Sabou
We consider two interaction interfaces between humans and knowledge graphs. On the
one hand, during the process of knowledge acquisition and veriﬁcation, humans act as
sources for diﬀerent types of knowledge, including, factual, expert, or social knowledge.
Mechanisms for acquiring such knowledge are diverse and range from manual approaches, to
semi-automatic and human-in-the loop systems where algorithmic and human computation
are intertwined (e.g., through active learning). On the other hand, knowledge graphs enable
various information seeking tasks, such as question answering, search (semantic, exploratory,
serendipitous) and conversational systems (e.g., chatbots). Technical challenges in these
interaction settings arise from dealing with large KGs and from the need to adapt generic
methods to domain/enterprise speciﬁc scenarios. Opportunities arise in terms of being able
to collect viewpoints, opinions etc from humans that enable the creation of more realistic
applications. Additionally, knowledge graphs enable a range of new applications (such as
sense making) which should be built by relying on cognitive science theories to maximize
the eﬀectiveness of the information transfer to humans. Besides technical challenges, ethical
issues should be considered when involving humans in KG creation processes (e.g., through
crowdsourcing) as well as for ensuring correct, unbiased and diversity aware output of
applications built on top of KGs.
3.9 ML with KGs – research and use cases around KGs at Siemens
Volker Tresp (Siemens AG – München, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Volker Tresp
Labeled graphs can describe states and events at a cognitive abstraction level, representing
facts as subject-predicate-object triples. A prominent and very successful example is the
Google Knowledge Graph, representing on the order of 100B facts. Labeled graphs can
be represented as adjacency tensors which can serve as inputs for prediction and decision
making, and from which tensor models can be derived to generalize to unseen facts. These
18371

==== Page 14 ====
42 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
ideas can be used, together with deep recurrent networks, for clinical decision support by
predicting orders and outcomes. Following Goethe’s proverb, “you only see what you know”,
we presented how background knowledge can dramatically improve information extraction
from images by deep convolutional networks and how tensor train models can be used for the
eﬃcient classiﬁcation of videos. We discussed potential links to the memory and perceptual
systems of the human brain. We concluded that tensor models, in connection with deep
learning, can be the basis for many technical solutions requiring memory and perception,
and might be a basis for modern AI.
3.10 Privacy and constrained access
Sabrina Kirrane (WU Wien, AT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sabrina Kirrane
Irrespective of whether the goal is to provide open access to a knowledge graph or to constrain
access to the graph or a subset of the knowledge held therein, policies have an important role
to play. For instance, if a data publisher does not specify a license the default is all rights
reserved. a company may wish to restrict access to their Enterprise knowledge graph and
likewise individuals may exercise there rights to specify how there data should be used and
by whom. There are already several existing ontologies and policy languages that could be
leveraged ranging from general policy languages, to speciﬁc policy languages, including some
standardisation eﬀorts, however the expressivity, correctness and completeness with respect
to speciﬁc use case requirements is still and open research challenge. Although it may be
possible to employ existing encryption and anonymisation techniques to knowledge graphs,
the utility of the knowledge will most certainly be compromised. Constraints are a fact of
life. Therefore we need to ﬁgure out how to deal with them!
3.11 Value Proposition of Knowledge Graphs
Sonja Zillner, (Siemens AG, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sonja Zillner
We often talk about the value of knowledge graphs. But what is their main value proposition
and what is their USP? In industrial settings, knowledge graphs are an important asset
for realizing industrial Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) applications. Through the combination
of both, knowledge graphs that capture relevant domain knowhow and AI algorithms that
reason and learn to solve problems or answer questions, augmented intelligence applications
supporting users to focus on ambitious and creative instead of repetitive tasks can be
developed. Examples range from the improved visualization of radiological ﬁndings to
advanced diagnostics systems for power plants to ﬂexible manufacturing for Industry 4.0
applications. But is there also a clear correlation between the type of a knowledge graph’s
value proposition and its addressed technical requirements?

==== Page 15 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 43
3.12 Social-Technical Phenomena of (Enterprise) Knowledge Graph
Management
Juan F. Sequeda, (Capsenta, USA)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Juan F. Sequeda
An early vision in Computer Science has been to create intelligent systems combining
Knowledge and Data capable of reasoning on large amounts of data. Today, this vision is
starting to be fulﬁlled through Knowledge Graphs.
Even though we are starting to see adoption of Knowledge Graphs by the large enterprises,
we are also observing barriers for adoption by small and medium enterprises. It is important
to understand why and see if there are new scientiﬁc problems and opportunities.
We argue that these barriers are not just technical/engineering but also social. For
example, we lack tools for non-experts, methodologies to design conceptual models together
withmappings, understandingwhoarethediﬀerentstakeholdersandtherolestheycan/should
play. Therefore it is important to study and understand the socio-technical phenomena of
managing (creation, maintenance, evolution, etc) Knowledge Graphs.
3.13 Concise account of the notion of Knowledge Graph
Claudio Gutierrez (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Claudio Gutierrez
Brief origins of the notion.
If one would try to ﬁnd a footprint of the prehistory of the notion of knowledge graph (KG), it
would be the idea of representing knowledge in a diagrammatic form, in people like Aristotle
(∼350 BC), Sylvester (1878 [11]) , Peirce (1878 [6]), Frege (1879 [2]), etc.
The origins of the modern idea can be traced back to Ritchens (1956 [ 8]), Qullian (1963
[7]) and Milgram (1967 [ 12]). From a formal point of view, it was very inﬂuential the
introduction of the notion of frames (M. Minsky (1974 [ 4])A Framework for representing
knowledge ); the formalization of semantic networks (W. A. Woods (1978 [ 13]),What’s in a
Link: Foundations for Semantic Networks ); and the notion of conceptual graphs (J. Sowa
(1979 [9]), Semantics of Conceptual Graphs ).
A systematic study involving KG is the Ph.D. Thesis of R. R. Bakker, Knowledge Graphs:
representation and structuring of scientiﬁc knowledge in 1987 [ 1]. Many of these ideas were
published in 1992 in a paper authored by P. James (a name representing many researchers)
and titled Knowledge Graphs [3].
Twenty years later, in 2012, Google popularized the notion worldwide with the patent
Knowledge graph based search system , a system described as follows:
“[...]a novel, useful system that develops and maintains one or more individual and/or
group contexts in a systematic fashion and uses the one or more contexts to develop
a Personalized Medicine Service [...] The innovative system of the present invention
supports the development and integration of any combination of data, information
and knowledge from systems that analyze, monitor, support and/or are associated
with entities in three distinct areas:[...]”
18371

==== Page 16 ====
44 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
What is really a Knowledge Graph?
John Sowa wrote in the entry Semantic networks in the Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science
(1987 [10]):
“Woods (1975) and McDermott (1976) observed, the semantic networks themselves
have no well-deﬁned semantics. Standard predicate calculus does have a precisely
deﬁned, model theoretic semantics; it is adequate for describing mathematical theories
with a closed set of axioms. But the real world is messy, incompletely explored, and
full of unexpected surprises.”
P. James, mentioned before, deﬁned a Knowledge Graph as follows:
“A knowledge graph is a kind of semantic network. [...] One of the essential diﬀerences
between knowledge graphs and semantic networks is the explicit choice of only a few
types of relations.”
Later Lei Zhang in a Ph.D. thesis titled Knowledge Graph Theory and Structural Parsing
(2002 [14]) deﬁned:
“Knowledge graph theory is a kind of new viewpoint, which is used to describe human
language [...] knowledge graphs have advantages, which are stronger ability to express,
to depict deeper semantic layers, to use a minimum relation set and to imitate the
cognition course of mankind etc. Its appearance gave a new way to the research of
computer understanding of human language.”
The Google Patent (2012) referred above conceptualized KG as systems:
“The system of the present invention systematically develops the one or more complete
contexts for distribution in a Personalized Medicine Service. These contexts are in
turn used to support the comprehensive analysis of subject performance, develop
one or more shared contexts to support collaboration, simulate subject performance
and/or turn data into knowledge.”
More recently, M. Nickel, K. Murphy, V. Tresp and E. Gabrilovich in their article A
Review of Relational Machine Learning for Knowledge Graph (2016 [5]) deﬁned KG as
follows:
“[...] a graph structured knowledge bases (KBs) that store factual information in form
of relationship between entities.”
In summary, we learned that a knowledge graph is a kind of semantic network, an artifact
whose scope, characteristic, features, even uses, remain open and are in the process of being
deﬁned. The brief history presented above suggests that, to design the future of the ﬁeld,
it would be valuable to climb on the shoulders of three giant notions: Frames, Semantic
Networks andConceptual Graphs .
References
1R.R. Bakker. Knowledge Graphs: Representation and Structuring of Scientiﬁc Knowledge .
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Twente, 1987.
2G. Frege. Begriﬀsschrift . Halle, 1879.
3P. James. Knowledge graphs. Linguistic Instruments in Knowledge Engineering. Elsevier
Publ., 1992.

==== Page 17 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 45
4M. Minsky. A framework for representing knowledge. MIT-AI Memo 306, Santa Monica ,
1974.
5M. Nickel, K. Murphy, V. Tresp, and E. Gabrilovich. A review of relational machine
learning for knowledge graphs. Proc. of the IEEE , 2016.
6C.S. Peirce. How to make our ideas clear. Popular Science Monthly 12 , 1878.
7R. Quillian. A notation for representing conceptual information: An application to se-
mantics and mechanical English paraphrasing. Systems Development Corp. Santa Monica ,
1963.
8R.H. Ritchens. General program for mechanical translation between any two languages
via an algebraic interlingua. Report on Research: Cambridge Language Research Unit.
Mechanical Translation 3 (2) , 1956.
9J. Sowa. Semantics of conceptual graphs. Proc. 17th. ACL , 1979.
10J. Sowa. Semantic networks. In: Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science , 1987.
11J.J. Sylvester. Chemistry and algebra. Nature 17: 284 , 1878.
12Jeﬀrey Travers and Stanley Milgram. An experimental study of the small world problem.
Sociometry, Vol. 32, No. 4 , 1967.
13W.A. Woods. What’s in a link: Foundations for semantic networks. Representation and
Understanding. Studies in Cognitive Science, 35-82. , 1978.
14L. Zhang. Knowledge Graph Theory and Structural Parsing . Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Twente, 2002.
3.14 Grand Challenges
Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs, NL), Frank van Harmelen
(Free University Amsterdam, NL), Axel-Cyrille Ngonga-Ngomo (Universität Paderborn, DE),
Valentina Presutti (CNR – Rome, IT), Juan F. Sequeda (Capsenta Inc. – Austin, US), and
Michel Dumontier (Maastricht University, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Paul Groth, Frank van Harmelen, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Valentina Presutti, Juan
Sequeda, and Michel Dumontier
The emergence of large scale knowledge graphs (KGs) has opened up the possibility for
a wide-range of exciting research directions. This chapter attempts to capture some of
these large scale challenges. The participants tried to formulate challenges that pushed the
boundaries of current thinking. We clustered 14 speciﬁc challenges into four groups:
1.Representing Knowledge i.e. “How do you say that?”
2.Access and interoperability at scale i.e “How do you get that?”
3.Applications i.e. “How do you do that?”
4.Machine⇔Humanity Knowledge Sharing i.e .”Computamus ergo sumus”
These clusters range from deep technical challenges that are being tackled today (e.g. the
connection between subsymbolic and symbolic representations) to future visions where
knowledge graphs act as the communication mechanism between humanity and AI. We see
these challenges not as the deﬁnitive list but as inspiration for the broader community to
think about where the foundations of knowledge graphs can take us.
During the discussion, one frame that helped us was to think about the notion of
knowledge and data at scale. We begin by introducing that context. We then list the
challenges themselves.
18371

==== Page 18 ====
46 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Context: the structure of knowledge & data at scale
There are credible models of data at scale (from Data Management). There are credible
models of knowledge (from Knowledge Representation and Knowledge Engineering), but
there are very few credible models of knowledge and data at scale . (where “scale” is with
respect to each of the V’s: volume, variety, veracity, velocity, etc).
Our object of study is therefore the structure of knowledge and data at scale .
As in any scientiﬁc ﬁeld, we distinguish the following three layers:
Models: a model of the structure of knowledge and data at scale (e.g. knowledge graphs)
Manifestations: instances of such a model (e.g. Wikidata, DBpedia)
Applications: methods and tools that rely on such instances (e.g. “search engine”, “re-
commender system’, “data interoperability”,”knowledge integration system”, “knowledge
discovery”)
In the light of the above, what the community has done is to develop a model for the
structure of knowledge & data at scale, namely: Knowledge Graphs.
Multiple models for the structure of knowledge and data at scale have been proposed:
1.Relation algebra (“it’s a table!”)
2.Knowledge graphs (“it’s a graph!”)
3.Latent semantics (“it’s a vector space!”)
4.World Wide Web (“it’s a network of documents!”)
Thus, current knowledge graphs are just one model for the “structure of knowledge & data
at scale”, and alternative and complementary models have been studied and will no doubt
be proposed in the future. Each of these will explain/describe/implement other aspects of
the structure of knowledge & data at scale. Essential to our understanding of the structure
of knowledge & data at scale is knowing when to use which of these complementary and
sometimes competing models.
Any model has to be testable, in order to distinguish it from other models and to decide
when which model is most appropriate. A model for knowledge and data at scale can
be tested against:
Theoretical properties (Kuhn’s properties of scientiﬁc theories: accuracy, internal consist-
ency, scope, simplicity; as well as properties speciﬁc for models of knowledge and data at
scale such as robustness, graceful degradation and others)
Performance in a task at scale (the V’s): how well does this model support performance
of a particular task, measured in various ways: ease of design, ease of implementation,
ease of maintenance, does it combine with other models, and others).
Performance for users: supporting useful abstractions for presentation, explainability, etc.
Cognitive “convenience”
Occam’s razor (as always)
These and other criteria will allow models to be compared against other models, telling
us when to use which model. When a model falls short on some of these criteria, that
is a prompt to improve or extend the model. For example, current knowledge graphs
fall short on representing time, versioning, probability, fuzziness, context, reiﬁcation, and
handling inconsistency among others. New generations of knowledge graph models should
explain/describe/implement these and other aspects of the structure of “knowledge & data
at scale”.
The challenges clustered below can be thought of as directions in the exploration of
knowledge & data at scale.

==== Page 19 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 47
Representing Knowledge
How do you say that?
Diversityandﬂexibilityinmethodsforknowledgerepresentation. To have at our disposal
a plurality of knowledge representations (from logics to embeddings, and others) to eﬀectively
capture all forms of knowledge including ambiguous, inconsistent, incomplete, erroneous,
biased, diverging, approximate, contested, and context-speciﬁc knowledge.
How do we capture and represent change within Knowledge Graphs? Knowledge Graphs
today are primarily entity centric. The goal here is develop new formalisms, algorithms,
techniques to handle the evolution and change of events, languages, and entities.
Symbolic meets subsymbolic (KG + ML): Knowledge graphs represent knowledge by
means which generalize well but lack the ﬂexibility of more fuzzy models to knowledge
representation such as those used by connectionist paradigms. Connectionist approaches on
the other hand fail to generalize and lack explainability. The is a need to enable connectionist
ML to consume and generate knowledge graphs while allowing for knowledge to represent
and infer upon knowledge stored in connectionist models.
Access and interoperability at scale
How do you get that?
Interoperable knowledge graphs: A large number of KGs are already available and they
capture a large portion of the knowledge of domains such as products, persons, locations,
etc. However, these knowledge graphs are available in heterogeneous formats with partly
incompatible semantics. The multitude of formats and semantics is likely to persist. How
can we create a universe of knowledge graphs with diﬀerent semantics that can interoperate
and represent all knowledge necessary for both humans and AIs. Related questions include
scalable partial/incomplete reasoning under these constraints as well the need to abide by
practical restrictions while using KGs.
A Public FAIR Knowledge Graph of Everything. We increasingly see the creation of
knowledge graphs that capture information about the entirety of a class of entities. For
example, Amazon is creating a knowledge graph of all products in the world and Google and
Apple have both created knowledge graphs of all locations in the world. This grand challenge
extends this further by asking if we can create a knowledge graph of “everything” ranging
from common sense concepts to location based entities. This knowledge graph should be
“open to the public” in a FAIR manner democratizing this mass amount of knowledge.
Uniform computational access to knowledge-based services. Can we access all forms
of knowledge, whether previously stated or inferred by computational service) through a
common interface, thereby reducing the barrier to ﬁnding and using knowledge at the time
it is needed?
Rapid task-performant reindexing of knowledge. Successful execution of particular tasks
(ﬁnding relevant datasets, predicting new drug uses, etc) may require transformation of
knowledge to other representations that are better suited for the task. Can we create an
infrastructure to facilitate this repurposing of global knowledge?
18371

==== Page 20 ====
48 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Applications
How do you do that?
Answering sophisticated questions over heterogeneous knowledge graphs. Can we an-
swer sophisticated, context-sensitive questions over diﬀerent knowledge graphs with diﬀerent
formalisms, languages, schemas, content, availability, restrictions, access methods?
Make the translation of knowledge to praxis instantaneous. Currently, knowledge is
transferred to practice through complex chains where humans translate knowledge into
software and physical systems. With the advent of cyber-physical systems (e.g. augmented
reality, IoT), there is the potential to directly translate knowledge into action. Thus, the
vision is that gap between knowing and practicing will approach zero.
Knowledge graphs as socio-technical systems. Graphs and their applications are largely
created by people. We need to leverage theory, methods and empirical evidence from other
disciplines (behavioural economics, CSCW, UX, cognitive psychology etc) to: Understand
the cognitive and social processes by which knowledge (and knowledge shaped as a graph)
emerges; Identify patterns and best practices to support these processes; Improve developer
experience to allow them to create, curate and reuse KGs eﬀectively; Provide guidelines
and best practices to help developers use and appreciate large-scale KGs that are inherently
messy, diverse and evolving; Understand what social features (expertise of KG contributors,
their motivations, group composition) inﬂuence the outcomes (completeness of the knowledge,
how it is represented, what is missing, viewpoints and opinions etc.)
Machine⇔Humanity Knowledge Sharing
Computamus ergo sumus (We compute, therefore we are).
Knowledge graphs as an interface between humanity and machines as well as machines
and machines. As machines become generators of knowledge how do we enable communic-
ation between those machines and humanity as whole. Likewise, just as humans share their
knowledge through institutions such as libraries how do we enable machines and humans to
share their knowledge at scale.
Generating, grounding, translating, and using machine generated languages. Recent
work suggests how machines may create their own languages that are distinct from those
that we know and understand. How can we explain or translate statements made in those
languages to other (human / non-human) languages?
Natural Data Understanding: The plethora of data formats and implicit semantics required
universal machinery which can consume arbitrary data (incl. KGs) and generate KGs. All
existing eﬀorts in natural language understanding, processing of web tables, etc. can be
regarded as a foundation for this eﬀort.
Self-aware KGs: What should KGs be? They are currently regarded as the result of some
(partly continuous) knowledge extraction processes. One possible path towards knowledge
graphs being universal enablers for agent-agent interchange (where agent = humans +
machines) would be to regard them as biological entities, which live in a digital space. These
universal independent social agents would be able to interface with other agents (humans,
machines) to fulﬁll goals set externally or internally.

==== Page 21 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 49
3.15 On the Creation of Knowledge Graphs: A Report on Best
Practices and their Future
Sabbir Rashid (Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute – Troy, US) Eva Blomqvist (Linköping
University, SE), Cogan Matthew Shimizu (Wright State University – Dayton, US), and
Michel Dumontier (Maastricht University, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sabbir M. Rashid, Eva Blomqvist, Cogan Shimizu, and Michel Dumontier
Knowledge Graphs have an important role in organizing and making information more broadly
available to people and machines. While many knowledge graphs have been developed, the
approaches used to build them can diﬀer substantially. The elusiveness of standards or
best practices in this area poses a substantial challenge to the knowledge engineer that
wants to maximize their discovery and reuse, as dictated by the FAIR (Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, Reusable) principles. In this chapter, we deﬁne a set of best practices to
constructing FAIR knowledge graphs.
Introduction
A knowledge graph (KG) is a conceptual entity that, as the name implies, is a graph
structure that represents knowledge [ 13]. Knowledge graphs have been used for a variety
of tasks, including question answering, relationship prediction, and searching for similar
items. A knowledge graph has several components, including resources that convey attributes
and entities, relationships between such resources, and additionally annotations to express
metadata about the resources. Several requirements for KGs [ 13] are that they express
meaning as structure and use a limited set of relations. All statements and entities in
a knowledge graph should be unambiguous, which can be accomplished by “using global
identiﬁers with unambiguous denotation.” Furthermore, knowledge graphs must provide
justiﬁcation for statements by including explicit provenance information.
The Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and Reusability (FAIR) [ 17] principles
provide guidelines for publishing data and metadata on the web. In order for a knowledge
graph to adhere to the FAIR principles, resources in the graph should use unique and
persistent identiﬁers. The knowledge graph should be accessible, freely and openly, even after
the data has been retired. The resources should be described using descriptive metadata that
is written using vocabularies that adhere to the FAIR principles. Furthermore, provenance
about the resource, such as how they was derived, should be rich and detailed.
Interoperability is the ability of data or tools from diﬀerent sources to be integrated
[17]. It is one important aspect of knowledge graphs, as it advocates understanding and
reuse amongst various users. In order to achieve this across the multitude of engineers,
developers, and researchers, it is important to deﬁne a coherent set of best practices for
the engineering and creation of knowledge graphs. However, today there exist many best
practices and methodologies for creating diﬀerent kinds of knowledge graphs (e.g. ontologies,
linked data, etc.), resulting in knowledge graphs of various quality. Worse yet, when drawing
the best practices from these diﬀerent development communities, we see that they are
sometimes incompatible. For example, there is conﬂict over the best practices between those
communities that adhere to strong or weak weight semantics for their knowledge graphs.
In addition, we must consider how these best practices may apply to knowledge graphs in
general outside of semantic web communities, such as those used by the Natural Language
18371

==== Page 22 ====
50 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Processing (NLP) or Machine Learning (ML) communities. Often, at the application or
project level, methodologies used for the creation of knowledge graphs may not necessarily
follow any particular set of best practices. For example, several methods employed when
constructing knowledge graphs may include using models inherent in speciﬁc ontologies that
suggest a particular knowledge representation pattern. Additionally, for annotation using
concepts from ontologies, such as the annotation of dataset variables, the use of public search
engines on vocabulary repositories (Bioportal [ 14], Ontobee [ 18], linked open vocabularies
[16]) are often employed. The result may be the use of a concept that best matches the
task at hand. The use of multiple ontologies may have undesirable consequences, such as
resulting in inconsistencies between terms. If such concepts do not exist, one may continue
to deﬁne their own terms and build their own ontology without using commonly agreed upon
deﬁnitions. As a validation approach, some form of consistency checking is required in order
to keep the knowledge graph suitable for inference activities.
Knowledge graph developers must choose between methodologies and best practices
for speciﬁc domains, or for engineering diﬀerent kinds of knowledge graphs. Therefore,
one challenge is to examine and consolidate existing best practices, and possibly extend
them, to encompass all kinds of knowledge graphs, as well as currently unaddressed aspects
of knowledge graphs. Thus, we may ultimately provide a clear workﬂow for an arbitrary
development team to create FAIR [ 17] (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Re-usable)
knowledge graphs.
Existing Best Practices
We distinguish between two diﬀerent categories of best practices for the creation of knowledge
graphs: its provision (driving “ﬁndable” and “accessible”) and its design (driving “interoper-
able” and “re-usable”). In addition, we must promote these standards, because, even within
the Semantic Web community, an exhaustive set of best practices or standards is nonexistent.
It is hard to know which best practices to develop if we do not know which others may exist.
It then seems unreasonable to expect a similar set of best practices from the NLP and ML
communities with whom we try to bridge the gap. While an exhaustive set is diﬃcult to
come by, we have identiﬁed a non-exhaustive list of existing best practices related to the
design of knowledge graphs, inclusion of high quality metadata and provenance, and methods
for converting structured data into knowledge graphs.
Knowledge Graph Design
When starting to design an ontology or knowledge graph, all the necessary concepts or possible
uses may not be initially known. Agile [ 9] & eXtreme [ 15,1] Design (XD) methodologies
allows for modular updates when needed, which is pertinent for the design and sharing
of ontologies among collaborative groups. This approach is often referred to as modular
ontology modelling or design [8].
Agile design encourage simplicity, in which only essential features are implemented at
ﬁrst, and additional features can be included in the future. When following this methodology,
one should explain complex ideas fully and keep straightforward ideas simple. The eXtreme
Design methodology was inspired by this Agile approach, as ontologies used should only
contain concepts and properties that are essential for the particular task at hand. XD

==== Page 23 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 51
requires end-user or customer involvement, is driven based on a set of design requirements,
and is iterative in that it produces an early deliverable and subsequently builds on the end
result.
Ontology Design Patterns (ODPs) [ 5] can provide guidance into speciﬁc ways to represent
diﬀerent forms of knowledge1. Use of ODPs promote interoperability across disciplines.
Ontology Design Patterns include a set of ontology pattern types, a list of existing patterns,
and a table of domains and their descriptions for which the patterns can be applied. Ontology
pattern types cover structural ODPs, such as logical and architectural ODPs, correspondence
ODPs, such as re-engineering and alignment ODPs, and presentation ODPs, such as naming
and annotation ODPs. Additionally, content, reasoning, and lexico-syntactic ODPs are
included. The list of patterns contain community submitted patterns for content, re-
engineering, alignment, logical, architectural and lexico-syntactic ODPs. The speciﬁed
domains are available on the organization wiki2and include various sciences, linguistics,
music and media, and various industry related topics, such as management, industrial
processes, and manufacturing. Creating ODPs allows for re-usability of artifacts across
diﬀerent use cases. Re-usability and interoperability is further promoted by following best
practices for documenting Ontology Design Patterns [10].
High Quality Metadata
High quality metadata is crucial to help users ﬁnd relevant knowledge graphs. Two useful
speciﬁcation are the HCLS dataset speciﬁcation [ 6] and the Data on the Web Best Practices
[12]. The HCLS dataset speciﬁcation provides detailed requirements on how to describe
datasets in terms of Semantic Web vocabularies in order to promote the search and reuse of
datasets. Many of the properties recommended in this speciﬁcation can be applied to the
publication of knowledge graphs, such as the inclusion of publication and version information,
descriptions and keywords, and provenance.
The Data on the Web Best Practices W3C recommendation also provides guidelines
related to the publication of data that can also be extended to publishing knowledge graphs.
This document includes the speciﬁcations of providing detailed metadata, data quality
information, provenance, persistent identiﬁers, and documentation. Furthermore, the reuse
of existing vocabularies and making the data accessible through an application program
interface (API) are also recommended.
As mentioned above, an important aspect of high quality metadata is the inclusion of
detailed provenance, where the content comes from and how it was generated or derived.
PROV-O [ 11] and Nanopublications [ 7] oﬀer guidance in this respect. The PROV-O ontology
is a W3C recommendation that provides a set of OWL classes, properties, and restrictions
that can be used to include provenance annotations. PROV-O includes high level classes
for prov:Entity, prov:Agent, and prov:Activity. Entities are deﬁned as anything physical,
digital, conceptual, real or imaginary that has ﬁxed features. Example prov:Entity classes
include prov:Collection, prov:Plan and prov:Bundle. Agents are deﬁned as the bearers of
responsibility for an activity. Included in the set of prov:Agent classes are prov:Organization,
prov:Person and prov:SoftwareAgent. Finally, prov:Activities represent events that occur
over a period of time that involve entites.
1http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/
2http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Community:Domain
18371

==== Page 24 ====
52 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Nanopublications allow for context to reinforce the value of an assertion, which can be
included in the form of provenance statements about assertions or facts. The nanopublication
model can be implemented using a collection of RDF Named Graphs. Facts are included in
an assertion graph. Provenance information about the assertion is included in a provenance
graph. Provenance about the nanopublication itself is included in a publication information
graph.
Linked Data oﬀers another way of providing semantically rich knowledge graphs. The
Best Practices for Publishing Linked Data [ 2] speciﬁes a set of guidelines as a sequence
of steps. These steps include selecting and then modeling a dataset, choosing appropriate
URIs, referencing standard vocabularies when possible, converting the data to a Linked
Data representation, and providing machine access such that the data is reachable by search
engines and similar web processes.
Structured Data Transformation
Standardized methods to transform data into knowledge graphs make it easier to maintain
and reproduce. Two such methods for data tranformation that we recommend include using
R2RML [ 3] or RML [ 4]. R2RML is language that allows the user to deﬁne custom mappings
from a relational database schema to an RDF model. The R2RML document itself is written
in RDF, in which mappings for each table can include a template for the desired output
URI structure, speciﬁed ontology classes to be instantiated to, and relationships between
columns. Such relationships can be used to link to other relational databases through, for
example, primary keys. Since the input data are stored in relational databases, SQL queries
can be used in the R2RML mapping ﬁles when constructing the desired RDF. An extension
to R2RML is RML, which aims to be more generic by keeping the core model of the R2RML
vocabulary, but excluding database speciﬁc concepts.
Challenges
We have identiﬁed four challenges that must be overcome to promote the use of best practices
when constructing knowledge graphs. It is important to promote the best practices identiﬁed
in this chapter in order to encourage wide spread use. We must also ﬁnd additional best
practices that were missed in this initial search. Overcoming the challenges of consolidating
and integrating best practices from diﬀerent communities will allow for interdisciplinary
collaboration. Finally, the set of best practices that are required for diﬀerent methodologies
of knowledge graph creation should be speciﬁed. For example, the best practices used for
manual creation of knowledge graphs may diﬀer from automated approaches. Corresponding
sets have to be discovered and organized accordingly.
Conclusion
In this chapter we considered how to apply best practices to knowledge graphs by identifying
a non-exhaustive list of existing best practices. We discussed best practices pertaining
to knowledge graph design, including Agile and eXtreme Design methodologies, as well
as Ontology Design Patterns. We considered W3C speciﬁcations pertaining to including

==== Page 25 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 53
high quality metadata when publishing knowledge graphs, including the HCLS dataset
speciﬁcation, the Data on the Web best practices, and the Best Practices for Publishing
Linked Data. Furthermore, we considered existing mapping languages for transforming
structured data into knowledge graphs, including R2RML and RML. Finally, we discussed
some challenges that need to be overcome. A coherent set of best practices for the engineering
and creation of knowledge graphs advocates understanding and reuse amongst engineers,
developers, and researchers working with knowledge graphs.
References
1E. Blomqvist, K. Hammar, and V. Presutti. Engineering ontologies with patterns-the
extreme design methodology., 2016.
2B. Hyland, G. Atemezing, and B. Villazón-Terrazas. Best practices for publishing linked
data.W3C recommendation , 2014.
3S. Das, S. Sundara, and R. Cyganiak. R2RML : RDB to RDF mapping language. W3C
Recommendation http://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml/ , 2011.
4A. Dimou, M. Vander Sande, P. Colpaert, R. Verborgh, E. Mannens, and R. Van de Walle.
RML: A generic language for integrated rdf mappings of heterogeneous data. In LDOW,
2014.
5A. Gangemi. Ontology design patterns for semantic web content. In International semantic
web conference , pages 262–276. Springer, 2005.
6A.J. Gray, J. Baran, M.S. Marshall, and M. Dumontier. Dataset descriptions: HCLS
community proﬁle. Interest group note, W3C (May 2015) http://www. w3. org/TR/hcls-
dataset, 2015.
7P. Groth, A. Gibson, and J. Velterop. The anatomy of a nanopublication. Information
Services & Use , 30(1-2):51–56, 2010.
8K. Hammar, P. Hitzler, and A. Krisnadhi. Advances in Ontology Design and Patterns ,
volume 32. IOS Press, 2017.
9A. Hunt and D. Thomas. The trip-packing dilemma [agile software development]. IEEE
Software, 20(3):106–107, 2003.
10N. Karima, K. Hammar, and P. Hitzler. How to document ontology design patterns. Ad-
vances in Ontology Design and Patterns, Studies on the Semantic Web , 32:15–28, 2017.
11T. Lebo, S. Sahoo, and D. McGuinness. PROV-O: The PROV ontology. W3C recommend-
ation, 2013.
12B.F. Lóscio, C. Burle, and N. Calegaro. Data on the web best practices. W3C recommend-
ation, 2017.
13J. McCusker, J. Erickson, K. Chastain, S. Rashid, R. Weerawarana, and D. McGuinness.
What is a Knowledge Graph? Semantic Web Journal , Under Review, 2018.
14N.F. Noy, N.H. Shah, P.L. Whetzel, B. Dai, M. Dorf, N. Griﬃth, C. Jonquet, D.L. Rubin,
M.-A. Storey, C.G. Chute, and M.A. Musen. BioPortal: ontologies and integrated data
resources at the click of a mouse. Nucleic acids research , 37(suppl_2):W170–W173, 2009.
15V.Presutti, E.Daga, A.Gangemi, andE.Blomqvist. eXtremedesignwithcontentontology
design patterns. In Proc. Workshop on Ontology Patterns , 2009.
16P.-Y. Vandenbussche, G.A. Atemezing, M. Poveda-Villalón, and B. Vatant. Linked open
vocabularies (LOV): a gateway to reusable semantic vocabularies on the web. Semantic
Web, 8(3):437–452, 2017.
17M.D. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, I.J. Aalbersberg, G. Appleton, M. Axton, A. Baak,
N. Blomberg, J.-W. Boiten, L. B. da Silva Santos, P.E. Bourne, et al. The FAIR guid-
ing principles for scientiﬁc data management and stewardship. Scientiﬁc data , 3, 2016.
18Z. Xiang, C. Mungall, A. Ruttenberg, and Y. He. Ontobee: A linked data server and
browser for ontology terms. In ICBO, 2011.
18371

==== Page 26 ====
54 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3.16 Knowledge Integration at Scale
Andreas Harth (Fraunhofer IIS – Nürnberg, DE), Roberto Navigli (Sapienza University of
Rome, IT), Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese (CNR – Rome, IT), Maria-Esther Vidal (TIB –
Hannover, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Andreas Harth, Roberto Navigli, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Maria-Esther Vidal
Introduction
The number and variety of data sets have grown exponentially during the last decades and a
similar growth rate is expected in the next years. In order to transform the enormous amount
of disparate data into actionable knowledge, fundamental problems, such as knowledge
integration, must be solved. Integrating data sets requires the eﬀective identiﬁcation of
entities that, albeit described diﬀerently, correspond to the same real-world entity. This
integration problem has received considerable attention from various computer science
domains such as databases, artiﬁcial intelligence, and semantic web. However, there are still
key challenges that need to be faced in order to integrate knowledge at scale. Open issues
arise because entities can be made available by autonomous sources either at rest or in motion,
and represented in various models or (un)structured formats. Moreover, entity meaning may
change over time and become inconsistent and incomplete with periodic peaks. During the
Dagstuhl seminar “Knowledge Graphs: New Directions for Knowledge Representation on
the Semantic Web”, members of the “Knowledge Integration at scale” working group have
discussed these challenges around entity meaning and identity reasoning. Results of these
discussions are reported, as well as existing approaches for knowledge integration, grand
challenges, and future research directions.
Knowledge Integration and Existing Approaches
The problem of knowledge integration can be framed as follows. Given a collection of data
sets such as unstructured text, media (e.g., images, videos, sounds), knowledge graphs,
databases, and knowledge bases, the problem of knowledge integration is to identify if two
entities in the collection of data sets match or do not match the same real-world entity. An
entity–in a data collection–is a multi-modal item of knowledge like a word, a concept, a
sentence, a text, a database record, a media segment, a knowledge graph, or an ontology.
Solving the problem of knowledge integration requires ﬁrst identifying the knowledge items
in diverse data sets. Then, interoperability conﬂicts among these items need to be detected,
and ﬁnally, these conﬂicts need to be resolved. Once equivalent entities have been matched,
diﬀerent fusion policies are performed for merging them into a single entity [ 6]. Considering
the wide nature of entities, the state of the art has focused on integration methods that
reduce manual work and maximize accuracy and precision.
Data integration has been extensively treated in the context of databases [ 9]. As a result,
a vast amount of integration frameworks [ 13] have been developed; they implement data
integration systems following the local-as-view (LAV), global-as-view paradigms (GAV), and
global and local as view (GLAV) [ 20]. Further, query processing has also played a relevant
role in solving data integration on the ﬂy. Graph-based traversal [ 2,21], and distributed and
federated query processing [ 3,5,27,31] are representative approaches for enabling the fusion
of the properties of equivalent entities on demand, i.e., at query execution time.

==== Page 27 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 55
To overcome interoperability conﬂicts generated by the wide variety of existing formats–
short notes, videos, images, maps, or publications–several unstructured processing techniques
have been proposed. Natural language processing techniques contribute to integrating struc-
tured and textual data by providing linguistic annotation methods at diﬀerent levels [ 25], e.g.,
part-of-speech tagging, syntactic parsing, named entity recognition, word sense disambigu-
ation, entity linking, and anaphora resolution. Further, visual analytics techniques facilitate
the extraction and annotation of entities from non-textual data sources [ 1,15]. Annotations
extracted from unstructured data represent the basis for determining relatedness among the
annotated entities by the mean of similarity measures, as well as for identifying matches
between highly similar entities.
Several approaches have been proposed to integrate structured data. KARMA [ 18] is
a semi-automatic framework that relies on ontologies and mapping rules for transforming
data sources such as relational tables or JSON ﬁles, into RDF knowledge graphs. LDIF
[32], LIMES [ 26], MINTE [ 6], Sieve [22], Silk [36], and RapidMiner LOD Extension [ 29] also
tackle the problem of data integration. However, they resort to similarity measures and link
discovery methods to match equivalent entities from diﬀerent RDF graphs. Likewise, Galkin
et al. [12] present SJoin, a join operator, for identifying entity matches in heterogeneous
RDF knowledge during query processing. With the aim of transforming structured data in
tabular or nested formats like CSV, relational, JSON, and XML, into RDF knowledge graphs,
diverse mapping languages have been proposed [ 7,16,19,34]. Exemplary mapping languages
and frameworks include RDF Mapping Language (RML) [ 8], R2RDF [ 33], and R2RML [ 28].
Additionally, a vast amount of research has been conducted to propose eﬀective and eﬃcient
approaches for ontology alignment [ 4,11,23]. Regardless of the eﬀort of automatizing entity
and ontology matching, still a signiﬁcant amount of manual work is required in all these
approaches. This lack of automation prevents applications from scaling up to large and
heterogeneous data sets.
The AI community has also actively contributed to the problem of data integration [ 14].
Speciﬁcally, recent machine learning methods provide eﬀective and accurate building blocks
for entity matching, entity linking, name resolution, deduplication, and identity resolution.
For instance, random forest models have shown signiﬁcant improvement of entity matching
[10,30]. Further, deep learning and embedding representations are promising methods for
matching knowledge items represented in diverse formats [ 24,35]. Moreover, logic-based
approaches like probabilistic soft logic, have evidenced accurate performance in matching of
entities from multiple types [ 17]. Notwithstanding the overall cost reduction and improved
precision observed by the state-of-the-art machine learning approaches, the outcome of these
approaches directly depends on the quality of the training data. Given the large variety
and volume of existing data sets, the generation of these training data sets represents a
fundamental open challenge.
Grand Challenges of Knowledge Integration
The tremendous amount of research contributions for integrating knowledge items accurately
corroboratestheimportanceoftheproblem. Nevertheless, datacomplexitychallengesimposed
by current available data sets and modern knowledge-driven applications demand novel
computational methods for solving knowledge integration at scale. Particularly, integration
of multi-modal entities represented at diﬀerent levels of abstraction and evolving over time,
remains unsolved. Finally, context-based knowledge integration, including cultural speciﬁcity
of a concept, temporal context (within a given culture), and domain context also demand
eﬀective and eﬃcient solutions from the community.
18371

==== Page 28 ====
56 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Opportunities of Knowledge Integration in Knowledge Graphs
Knowledge graphs encompass large volume of knowledge items, and enable the description
of the meaning of their main properties and relations. Albeit challenging in terms of data
and knowledge complexity, knowledge graphs bring enormous opportunities for improving
modern methods of knowledge integration. First, machine learning approaches like knowledge
graph embeddings, transfer learning, bidirectional information extraction, active learning,
and distance supervision, can beneﬁt from the knowledge encoded in knowledge graphs, thus
providing more accurate results during knowledge integration. Further, the deﬁnition of
expressive formalisms for describing integrated knowledge such as probabilistic logic, and
symbolic or subsymbolic knowledge representation, represent open challenges. Similarly,
the deﬁnition of entity matching methods capable of exploiting these novel representations
correspond to a propitious research topic. Finally, there is an expeditious need of devising
methods for eﬃciently including humans in the loop , and enabling them to eﬀectively deﬁne
and curate high-quality training data sets.
Conclusions and Future Directions
The problem of knowledge integration in a vast variety of large data sets has been discussed.
Existing approaches in areas like databases and semantic web, as well as the application
of modern machine learning methods, not only evidence the relevance of the problem, but
also the diversity of challenges that demand to be faced. The future of the area promises
a wide range of opportunities that vary from representation formalisms, modern machine
learning methods, and hybrid knowledge integration techniques. Our ambition is that the
presented discussion encourages the community to develop novel methods that enable the
overall reduction of knowledge integration while providing highly accurate results.
References
1R. Agerri, X. Artola, Z. Beloki, G. Rigau, and A. Soroa. Big Data for Natural Language
Processing: A streaming approach. Knowl.-Based Syst. , 79:36–42, 2015.
2R. Angles, M. Arenas, P. Barceló, A. Hogan, J.L. Reutter, and D. Vrgoc. Foundations
of Modern Query Languages for Graph Databases. ACM Comput. Surv. , 50(5):68:1–68:40,
2017.
3C.B. Aranda. Federated Query Processing for the Semantic Web . PhD thesis, Technical
University of Madrid, Spain, 2014.
4M. Cheatham, I.F. Cruz, J. Euzenat, and C. Pesquita. Special issue on ontology and linked
data matching. Semantic Web , 8(2):183–184, 2017.
5C. Chen, B. Golshan, A.Y. Halevy, W. Tan, and A. Doan. BigGorilla: An Open-Source
Ecosystem for Data Preparation and Integration. IEEE Data Eng. Bull. , 41(2):10–22, 2018.
6D. Collarana, M. Galkin, I. Traverso-Ribón, M. Vidal, C. Lange, and S. Auer. MINTE:
semantically integrating RDF graphs. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics, WIMS , 2017.
7D. V. Deursen, C. Poppe, G. Martens, E. Mannens, and R. V. de Walle. XML to RDF
Conversion: A Generic Approach. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on
Automated Solutions for Cross Media Content and Multi-channel Distribution , AXMEDIS
’08, pages 138–144, 2008.
8A. Dimou, M.V. Sande, P. Colpaert, R. Verborgh, E. Mannens, and R. V. de Walle. RML:
A generic language for integrated RDF mappings of heterogeneous data. In Proceedings

==== Page 29 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 57
of the Workshop on Linked Data on the Web co-located with the 23rd International World
Wide Web Conference (WWW 2014) , 2014.
9A. Doan, A.Y. Halevy, and Z.G. Ives. Principles of Data Integration . Morgan Kaufmann,
2012.
10X.L. Dong and T. Rekatsinas. Data Integration and Machine Learning: A Natural Synergy.
InProceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD
Conference 2018, Houston, TX, USA, June 10-15, 2018 , pages 1645–1650, 2018.
11J. Euzenat and P. Shvaiko. Ontology Matching, Second Edition . Springer, 2013.
12M. Galkin, D. Collarana, I.T. Ribón, M. Vidal, and S. Auer. Sjoin: A semantic join
operator to integrate heterogeneous RDF graphs. In Database and Expert Systems Applic-
ations – 28th International Conference, DEXA 2017, Lyon, France, August 28-31, 2017,
Proceedings, Part I , pages 206–221, 2017.
13B. Golshan, A.Y. Halevy, G.A. Mihaila, and W. Tan. Data Integration: After the Teenage
Years. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on Principles
of Database Systems, PODS 2017, Chicago, IL, USA, May 14-19, 2017 , pages 101–106,
2017.
14A.Y. Halevy, A. Rajaraman, and J.J. Ordille. Data Integration: The Teenage Years. In
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Seoul, Korea,
September 12-15, 2006 , pages 9–16, 2006.
15C.A. Henning and R. Ewerth. Estimating the information gap between textual and visual
representations. IJMIR, 7(1):43–56, 2018.
16P. Heyvaert, A. Dimou, B.D. Meester, T. Seymoens, A. Herregodts, R. Verborgh,
D. Schuurman, and E. Mannens. Speciﬁcation and implementation of mapping rule visual-
ization and editing: Mapvowl and the rmleditor. J. Web Sem. , 49:31–50, 2018.
17A. Kimmig, A. Memory, R.J. Miller, and L. Getoor. A Collective, Probabilistic Approach
to Schema Mapping. In 33rd IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, ICDE
2017, San Diego, CA, USA, April 19-22, 2017 , pages 921–932, 2017.
18C.A. Knoblock and P.A. Szekely. Exploiting Semantics for Big Data Integration. AI
Magazine , 36(1):25–38, 2015.
19M. Lefrançois, A. Zimmermann, and N. Bakerally. A SPARQL extension for generating
RDF from heterogeneous formats. In The Semantic Web – 14th International Conference,
ESWC 2017, Portorož, Slovenia, May 28 – June 1, 2017, Proceedings, Part I , pages 35–50,
2017.
20M. Lenzerini. Data Integration: A theoretical perspective. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
ﬁrst ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems,
June 3-5, Madison, Wisconsin, USA , pages 233–246, 2002.
21L. Libkin, J.L. Reutter, A. Soto, and D. Vrgoc. TriAL: A navigational algebra for RDF
triplestores. ACM Trans. Database Syst. , 43(1):5:1–5:46, 2018.
22P.N. Mendes, H. Mühleisen, and C. Bizer. Sieve: linked data quality assessment and fusion.
InProceedings of the 2012 Joint EDBT/ICDT Workshops, Berlin, Germany, March 30,
2012, pages 116–123, 2012.
23M. Mohammadi, A.A. Atashin, W. Hofman, and Y. Tan. Comparison of Ontology Align-
ment Systems Across Single Matching Task Via the McNemar’s Test. TKDD, 12(4):51:1–
51:18, 2018.
24S. Mudgal, H. Li, T. Rekatsinas, A. Doan, Y. Park, G. Krishnan, R. Deep, E. Arcaute,
and V. Raghavendra. Deep Learning for Entity Matching: A Design Space Exploration.
InProceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD
Conference 2018, Houston, TX, USA, June 10-15, 2018 , pages 19–34, 2018.
18371

==== Page 30 ====
58 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
25R.Navigli. NaturalLanguageUnderstanding: Instructionsfor(PresentandFuture)Use. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
IJCAI 2018, July 13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden. , pages 5697–5702, 2018.
26A.N. Ngomo and S. Auer. LIMES – A time-eﬃcient approach for large-scale link discovery
on the web of data. In IJCAI 2011, Proceedings of the 22nd International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages 2312–2317, 2011.
27M.T. Özsu and P. Valduriez. Distributed and Parallel Database Systems. In Computing
Handbook, Third Edition: Information Systems and Information Technology , pages 13: 1–
24. 2014.
28F. Priyatna, Ó. Corcho, and J.F. Sequeda. Formalisation and experiences of R2RML-based
SPARQL to SQL query translation using morph. In 23rd International World Wide Web
Conference, WWW ’14, Seoul, Republic of Korea, April 7-11, 2014 , pages 479–490, 2014.
29P. Ristoski, C. Bizer, and H. Paulheim. Mining the web of linked data with RapidMiner.
J. Web Sem. , 35:142–151, 2015.
30S.Rong, X.Niu, E.W.Xiang,H.Wang, Q.Yang, andY.Yu. AMachineLearningApproach
for Instance Matching Based on Similarity Metrics. In The Semantic Web – ISWC 2012
– 11th International Semantic Web Conference, Boston, MA, USA, November 11-15, 2012,
Proceedings, Part I , pages 460–475, 2012.
31S. Sakr, M. Wylot, R. Mutharaju, D.L. Phuoc, and I. Fundulaki. Linked Data – Storing,
Querying, and Reasoning . Springer, 2018.
32A. Schultz, A. Matteini, R. Isele, C. Bizer, and C. Becker. LDIF – Linked Data Integration
Framework. In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Consuming Linked
Data (COLD2011) , 2011.
33J.F.SequedaandD.P.Miranker. MappingRelationalDatabases toLinkedData. In Linked
Data Management. , pages 95–115. 2014.
34D. Spanos, P. Stavrou, and N. Mitrou. Bringing relational databases into the semantic web:
A survey. Semantic Web , 3(2):169–209, 2012.
35Z. Sun, W. Hu, Q. Zhang, and Y. Qu. Bootstrapping Entity Alignment with Knowledge
Graph Embedding. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, July 13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden. , pages 4396–
4402, 2018.
36J. Volz, C. Bizer, M. Gaedke, and G. Kobilarov. Silk – A link discovery framework for
the web of data. In Proceedings of the WWW2009 Workshop on Linked Data on the Web,
LDOW, 2009.
3.17 Knowledge Dynamics and Evolution – “No Dynamic or Evolving
Knowledge Graph Without Provenance”
Eva Blomqvist (Linköping University, SE), Cogan Matthew Shimizu (Wright State University
– Dayton, US), Barend Mons (Leiden University Medical Center, NL), and Heiko Paulheim
(Universität Mannheim, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Eva Blomqvist, Cogan Shimizu, Barend Mons, and Heiko Paulheim
Knowledge lives. It is not static, nor does it stand alone. It may change or grow–evolve;
its provenance may become more or less certain. Belief in it may wax or wane over time.
Studying how knowledge graphs may capture the evolutionary nature of knowledge is a
critical need that the community must address. In this chapter, we outline some motivating
use-cases and the accompanying challenges, as well as starting points in existing literature.

==== Page 31 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 59
Introduction
Knowledge is not static, but constantly evolving. This is true, regardless of whether we are
representing personal knowledge, knowledge within a company, or open, common knowledge
on the web. Not only does the knowledge itself change, but also our perception of and beliefs
about it, such as its trustworthiness or accuracy. Therefore, if knowledge graphs are to
capture at least a signiﬁcant portion of the world’s knowledge, they also need to be able to
evolve and capture the changes made to the knowledge it contains. There already exist some
approaches, in various related ﬁelds, for both describing those changes, as well as for dealing
with volatile knowledge. However, quite a few open questions still exist.
Perhaps foremost and fundamental of those is the question, ”What exactly does it mean
for a knowledge graph to evolve?” We do not, at this time, have a clear deﬁnition or
description of what knowledge graph evolution means. Then, we must address the following.
1.“Are existing methods for reﬂecting the evolutionary nature of knowledge suﬃcient for
capturing such knowledge in a knowledge graph?”
2.“What problems are not solved by existing methods?”
3.“What tasks are to be performed manually versus completed by a system?”
Yet, we do know that evolution is a very important aspect to the future of knowledge graphs;
this is recognised by almost all large knowledge graph developers and providers, today.
Examples of this were given during the Enterprise-Scale Knowledge Graphs Panel at the
17th International Semantic Web Conference.3For instance, Yuqing Gao from Microsoft
pointed out their challenge of having a real-time knowledge graph, but with archiving, which
is still a research challenge at Microsoft. Jamie Taylor of Google also acknowledged the long
term evolution of the Google Knowledge Graph as one of their main challenges. The IBM
Watson group is also struggling with similar challenges, although they claim to take a more
dynamic approach, not focusing on one global knowledge graph, but a framework for building
domain speciﬁc knowledge graphs, including knowledge discovery and analysis of change
eﬀects. Thus, their main struggles include modelling and analysing changing information
and incrementally updating global knowledge on horizontally scaled storage solutions.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 3.17 brieﬂy explores related
work that we may use as as starting points for further studying evolving knowledge graphs.
Section 3.17 describes some use-cases for evolving knowledge graphs, as identiﬁed during this
Dagstuhl seminar. Section 3.17 presents the initial challenges facing developers for evolving
knowledge graphs. Finally, in Section 3.17, we summarize and conclude.
Starting Points
While we may not have a clear deﬁnition for evolution in knowledge graphs, we may still
draw inspiration from previous work in related ﬁelds. As, in the realm of knowledge graphs,
there is no clear distinction between data and information on one side and knowledge4on
the other (ontologically, or in terms of description logics, we would say, ABox and TBox,
respectively), we may draw from a wide variety of ﬁelds. For example, this means that
both approaches for managing changing (web) data [ 8,4] as well as schema and ontology
evolution[7, 2, 10, 5, 6] may be relevant for knowledge graph dynamics and evolution.
3http://iswc2018.semanticweb.org/panel-enterprise-scale-knowledge-graphs/
4as the term is classically used in knowledge representation
18371

==== Page 32 ====
60 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
It is also important to examine the rate of change in the data, as approaches diﬀer across
the spectrum. When data changes infrequently, state of the art approaches most often include
the production of new, manually curated versions of the data at certain time intervals, and
some appropriate version tracking and archiving of the dataset[ 8,4], possibly combined with
query rewriting and other techniques. At the other end of the spectrum, data may be treated
as a stream, where approaches for data stream management and stream reasoning[ 9,1,3],
including RDF stream processing, have been applied.
The versioning of datasets and ontologies is a quite well-studied problem. For example,
there exist annotation schemas and ontologies for describing datasets and ontologies and
track versions, such as through extensions of the PROV-O.5In addition, there exist mapping
languages for mapping between versions. Query rewriting has been used to transform queries
over one version to queries over a new version of the data.
Inherently, due to the open world assumption, languages proposed for the web are also
quite well suited for managing incomplete information. However, there are less approaches
proposed for how to actually manage the change process, detect change needs, apply changes,
and so on. We do know quite well, at a technical level, how to manually update ontologies
(e.g. implement changes, check consistency, track provenance of changes). Unfortunately, how
to automate parts of this process, or how to trigger and guide the change process is largely
unstudied. This is particularly true for schemas/ontologies, while for change management
in data we can rely on the history of relational database research and thereby also more
approaches have been proposed for graph data.
Additionally, there are approaches proposed for managing inconsistent and fuzzy know-
ledge, for example when using ontologies. These are maybe not so well used in practice, but
are usually well founded theoretically, and may have an important role to play when dealing
with large scale real-world knowledge that is rarely precise and consistent.
However, particularly targeted at knowledge graphs there are still not many approaches
available, hence, we are again left with either applying approaches originally developed with
some related structure in mind, e.g. ontologies and linked data, or we may look at the actual
practices for managing large knowledge graphs today and learn from there. While the former
was already discussed above, instead considering the latter an example of a change tracking
model, particularly targeted at knowledge graphs, is the Wikidata model for storing edit
history.
Use Cases
As an additional starting point, during the Dagstuhl seminar we collected a small (incomplete)
set of motivating use cases that may provide enough challenges in order to actually start
specifying the possible tasks involved and create a more detailed map of what solutions exist
and where the white spots are.
Newlawsare usually written as modiﬁcations of previous laws. This creates a complex
network of changes to laws, which together makes up the law of a country. If this is
to be modelled in a knowledge graph, the evolution/change history conveys important
information about the actual content and meaning of the law.
5https://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/

==== Page 33 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 61
Patient records contain information about the states of a patient. Something that is
believed at one point might be proven false in the next time instant. This needs to be
captured, tracked and reasoned with, when analysing patient data.
A related use case is that of patient monitoring , where IoT devices and sensors are
used to monitor patients, either at home or in a care facility. Streams of data come
from each sensor and need to be interpreted both with respect to the patient record
and history, as well as in relation to generic medical knowledge. This in order to create
situation awareness, and reason on potential future situation that are likely to occur,
e.g. to prevent dangerous situations and alert medical staﬀ. Here several KGs can be
envisioned, i.e. both the personal, patient speciﬁc, knowledge, but also generic medical
knowledge graphs, and all of them have to evolve, although potentially at a very diﬀerent
pace.
Knowledge discovery, for instance in drug discovery , implies to treat concepts individu-
ally in a local context, to allow for diﬀerent viewpoints. In this way changes can happen
locally, without aﬀecting the whole knowledge graph. Knowledge graphs can later be
composed of these components, ﬁltered for certain views. Creating what could be called
a ﬂuent KG, where new knowledge can emerge at every new KG composition.
Inmanyorganisations, suchasa policedepartment , individuals(suchaspoliceanalysts)
want to have their own concepts represented in the knowledge graph. This may imply to
have individual knowledge graphs, or individual views of a knowledge graph, but such
additions or changes may also need to be introduced into the overall shared knowledge
graph if they reﬂect evolution or emergenc of new concepts, rather than just individual
views. Such changes need to be tracked, and one needs to determine what view (or
version) to use in a speciﬁc case, what knowledge from individual views (or contexts) to
propagate and what should stay private.
Crisis detection of large scale events (i.e. natural disaster, battle spaces, crime) is
another use case. Inputs will be frequent and likely conﬂicting. Representative, underlying
knowledge graphs will need to handle this in order to reason on what has actually occurred
and what is currently happening. We will need ways to also visualize and render such
information as well as tracking provenance and uncertainty and enabling evolution of
data in the graph.
Major Challenges
Based on what we know about the state of the art in knowledge and data evolution and
dynamics, and these use cases we have identiﬁed a (probably still incomplete) list of challenges
in this area, which are listed below.
Deﬁne the exact notion of evolution, i.e. distinguish it from notions such as change,
dynamicity, versioning, etc.
Diﬀerent levels of tracking evolution will be needed for diﬀerent use cases; best practices
and guidelines will need developed.
Manage the volume of provenance (i.e. preventing provenance explosion) caused by
capturing all evolution information, all data versions, etc.
This could include patterns for providing provenance information outside the actual
knowledge graphs.
Presenting provenance (and information about evolution) to an end user, developer,
knowledge engineer.
18371

==== Page 34 ====
62 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Lenses could be used (e.g., show just the current state versus showing the evolution
path to this statement). This allows for diﬀerent viewpoints on a subject.
Managing the full scale of evolution rates, i.e. from slowly changing concepts to rapidly
changing streams of data – potentially all in one system.
Engineering mechanisms for evolution (e.g., detecting and submitting updates)
Social processes need to be taken into account – someone usually owns a KG and may
not want it to be changed.
Mechanism for curation, change suggestions, moderation etc. are needed.
∗Managing the computational challenge of assessing and handling the eﬀects of the
updates.
Developing those mechanisms in a “tolerant” way (i.e., accepting local changes but
avoiding global drift), predicting eﬀects of a change on local and global levels.
Methods for automating evolution, e.g. detecting signals of change, generating sugges-
tions, ﬁnding the most appropriate change action.
Tooling and methodology support
Embracing controversy – we must be able to represent diﬀerent viewpoints, contexts,
inconsistencies, and even fuzzy or unclear notions that may or may not later evolve into
more crisp ones. For example, consider a knowledge graph that encompasses religions.
Overcoming current storage and computation limitations for implementing evolution and
dynamics of KGs in real-world systems, i.e. it all needs to scale.
Conclusion
Capturing the evolutionary nature of knowledge is critical as the community moves forward
and continues to build large, encompassing knowledge graphs, especially those that aim
to capture knowledge as it is created, discovered, or genreated. Of course, there are many
challenges inherent to this, from provenance explosion to what it actually means for an
knowledge graph to evolve. In this chapter, we have described several motivating use-cases
that capture useful knowledge, but in order to be eﬀective, must address the notion of
evolving knowledge. In addition, we have described the challenges that these developers must
face, but have also included a number of well-studied starting points from similar ﬁelds.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Sonja Zillner, Michel Dumontier, Sarven Capadisli, Maria-
Esther Vidal, Elena Simperl, and Juan Sequeda for their valuable discussion and input.
References
1D. Barbieri, D. Braga, S. Ceri, E. Della Valle, and M. Grossniklaus. Stream reasoning:
Where we got so far. In NeFoRS 2010: 4th International Workshop on New Forms of
Reasoning for the Semantic Web: Scalable and Dynamic , 2010.
2S. Bloehdorn, P. Haase, Y. Sure, and J. Voelker. Ontology Evolution , chapter 4, pages
51–70. Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.
3D. Dell’Aglio, E. Della Valle, F. van Harmelen, and A. Bernstein. Stream reasoning: A
survey and outlook. Data Science , (Preprint):1–25.
4J.D. Fernández, J. Umbrich, A. Polleres, and M. Knuth. Evaluating query and storage
strategies for RDF archives. In SEMANTICS , pages 41–48. ACM, 2016.

==== Page 35 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 63
5M. Hartung, J.F. Terwilliger, and E. Rahm. Recent advances in schema and ontology
evolution. In Schema Matching and Mapping , Data-Centric Systems and Applications,
pages 149–190. Springer, 2011.
6P.D. Leenheer and T. Mens. Ontology evolution. In Ontology Management , volume 7 of
Semantic Web and Beyond: Computing for Human Experience , pages 131–176. Springer,
2008.
7N.F. Noy and M.C.A. Klein. Ontology evolution: Not the same as schema evolution.
Knowl. Inf. Syst. , 6(4):428–440, 2004.
8V. Papakonstantinou, G. Flouris, I. Fundulaki, K. Stefanidis, and G. Roussakis. Versioning
for linked data: Archiving systems and benchmarks. In BLINK@ISWC , volume 1700 of
CEUR Workshop Proceedings . CEUR-WS.org, 2016.
9E.D. Valle, S. Ceri, F. van Harmelen, and D. Fensel. It’s a streaming world! reasoning
upon rapidly changing information. IEEE Intelligent Systems , 24(6):83–89, 2009.
10F. Zablith, G. Antoniou, M. d’Aquin, G. Flouris, H. Kondylakis, E. Motta, D. Plexousakis,
and M. Sabou. Ontology evolution: a process-centric survey. Knowledge Eng. Review ,
30(1):45–75, 2015.
3.18 Evaluation of Knowledge Graphs
Heiko Paulheim (Universität Mannheim, DE), Marta Sabou (TU Wien, AT), Michael Cochez
(Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt Augustin, DE), and Wouter Beek (University of Amsterdam, NL)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Heiko Paulheim, Marta Sabou, Michael Cochez, and Wouter Beek
As there are more and more eﬀorts to build knowledge graphs that complement the “main-
stream” KGs such as DBpedia and Wikidata, and a plethora of work that try to improve
those knowledge graphs in various directions (e.g., adding missing pieces of information, or
ﬂagging incorrect axioms), there is a growing need to deﬁne the standards for an evaluation.
Moreover, since each research work has to prove itself against the state of the art, there is a
stronger focus on reproducibility of scientiﬁc experiments, also for knowledge graphs. This
chapter discusses some questions and guidelines regarding evaluation methods and protocols
for knowledge graphs.
Introduction
The evaluation of conceptual models has its roots in the ﬁeld of Knowledge-based systems
and was adapted to the evaluation of Description Logics ontologies popular in Semantic Web
[9], leading to a vibrant ﬁeld [ 6,8,29,24]. Ontology evaluation focuses on “checking the
technical quality of an ontology against a frame of reference” such as a gold standard ontology,
a representative domain corpus, a speciﬁcation document, or general human knowledge [ 9].
Evaluation activities have the goal of assessing the ontology’s domain coverage, quality of
modeling (syntactic, structural, semantic quality), suitability for anapplication, or community
adoption [ 24]. Evaluation goals are achieved with evaluation methods. Metrics-based methods
assess ontology quality by computing a numeric value based on its characteristics [ 6,8].
Veriﬁcation methods identify defects (a.k.a. errors, or pitfalls) in the ontology, i.e., a set of
issues related to a part of the ontology that should be corrected [22].
18371

==== Page 36 ====
64 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
When discussing knowledge graph evaluation, there can be two possible targets:
1.Evaluating a knowledge graph as such, and
2.Evaluating techniques for constructing and/or improving knowledge graphs
The ﬁrst target is rather related to data proﬁling [ 5,14,17] – i.e., which data exists and and
in which quality – whereas the second is more concerned with the process of data creation
and/or manipulation. Nevertheless, it can be argued that both of the targets are actually
two sides of the same coin. In both cases, the object of study is a knowledge graph, so
that the same metrics can be applied. Evaluating a knowledge graph is also implicitly an
evaluation of the process that created that KG, and evaluating a method for construction or
improvement of a knowledge graph is usually done by evaluating the knowledge graph that
is the outcome of that process [18].
Evaluation Setups
On a coarse grained level, we can distinguish two orthogonal dimensions: intrinsic vs.
task-based evaluation, and automatic vs. human-centric evaluation.
Intrinsic vs. Task-based Evaluation
Intrinsic evaluation only looks at the knowledge graph per se. It measures, e.g., the size,
the fraction of correct statements, or the completeness. A larger set of quality metrics for
intrinsic evaluation have been proposed in the literature [ 7,30]. While these measures are
intuitive and objective, they can only be a ﬁrst attempt to evaluate a knowledge graph.
Knowledge graphs are not created as a means in themselves, thus, it is questionable
whether intrinsic evaluations can be the only means of evaluation, or whether we should
rather measure the quality of a knowledge graph by the added value it brings on an actual
task, such as question answering or recommender systems. The beneﬁt of this task-based of
evaluation is that it clearly shows the potential impact of the system under scrutiny. Another
aspect of this type of evaluation is that it can show how eﬀorts from diﬀerent communities
can be integrated.
The main diﬃculty with task-based evaluations is that the interpretation of the results
can become more diﬃcult. Often there are many aspects involved in running an evaluation,
and it is not always clear how they interact. In other words, even when the results of the
task are looking good, it might be that the actual performance is explainable by the interplay
of the other components. It is important to point out that neither of the two can serve as a
proxy or approximation for the other. A knowledge graph with good measures on internal
quality may perform poorly in a speciﬁc task (e.g., since it may have a good quality globally,
but bad quality in the domain at hand), and vice versa.
Automatic vs. Human-centric evaluation
While some evaluation protocols can be fully automated, especially if there is a gold standard
available, others cannot. Thus, human-centric evaluation is often used at least as one building
block for knowledge graph evaluation.

==== Page 37 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 65
It is clear that this kind of evaluation is not equally feasible for all tasks which are
reported in research work. Here we think especially about evaluation processes with a
human in the loop, evaluations which require special infrastructure or access to datasets
which are not publicly available. An important research question refers to identifying those
evaluation tasks that cannot (at this moment) be performed with automatic techniques,
but rather require input from humans. Some examples are: checking the freshness of the
information (i.e., whether it is up-to-date), checking completeness (e.g., does a KG contain
allGerman cities) [ 23], correctness of domain knowledge (e.g., was a person born in the given
place or not); correctness appropriateness of modeling decisions (e.g., whether some entities
should be modeled as concepts or instances, whether partonomy is modeled as subsumption).
Necessarily, the types of tasks will dictate the choice of the suitable human subjects (e.g.,
experts vs. laymen), as well as the most suitable human computation approach (e.g.,
gamiﬁcation [ 12,26] vs. expert-sourcing vs. crowdsourcing [ 1,13]). A further challenge refers
to how to scale up human-centric evaluation [ 19], especially by combining with automatic
approaches [ 20]. Active learning approaches [ 25] are a possible solution, but have not yet
been applied in the evaluation.
Reproducibility
Reproducibility is an essential part of evaluation. Only if the experiments performed are
reproducible, one can independently verify whether reported results are factual. Besides, one
can then compare the presented result with the results obtained from diﬀerent experiments.
Or at least see whether these results are in fact produced in similar conditions and whether
a comparison would make sense. [ 21] In our community, we have more or less generally
accepted tasks and even evaluation frameworks for SPARQL querying [ 4,16], reasoning [ 10],
natural language question answering [27], entity linking [28], and ontology matching [2].
We identiﬁed at least one other community which has a reproducibility initiative – i.e., the
database community has reproducibility guidelines for SIGMOD6. With these guidelines, each
paper has the option to prove its reproducibility by sending the code, data, and parameter
settings for the experiments to a review board. They will then rerun the experiments to
see whether the same, or at least very close results can be obtained. In this process, the
evaluator will also investigate how sensitive the evaluation is to changes in both the input
data and changes in the parameter settings.
Currently, reproducing or even comparing research results is diﬃcult due to various
datasets, protocols, and metrics used (but not always documented) in diﬀerent experiments
[18]. E.g., a sentences such as “We achieve an F1 score of 0.89 for type prediction on
DBpedia”’ is usually not enough to reproduce the results. Hence, in order to come to
reproducible and comparable results, the characteristics of the experiments carried out need
to be speciﬁed along various dimensions. Those include:
1.Dataset(s) / KG(s) used
2.Evaluation protocol
3.Evaluation metrics
4.Tasks (in case of task-based evaluation)
6http://db-reproducibility.seas.harvard.edu/
18371

==== Page 38 ====
66 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Specifying Datasets and Knowledge Graphs
Specifying the dataset(s) or KG(s) used is the ﬁrst step towards reproducible results. This
does not only include referring to a dataset by name (e.g., “DBpedia”), but being as speciﬁc
as possible. Recommended attributes to be reported include: which version was used? which
subset of the dataset (if any)? The same applies to external sources of knowledge used (e.g.,
text corpora), if any. One possible way to verify the replicability of the experiments is to
report a content-based hash of the dataset(s) used for the evaluation. In case of KGs that
are not release-based (such as DBpedia), but constantly changing (such as Wikidata), either
a snapshot of the version used or clear instructions on how to obtain the version used should
be included.
As far as datasets or KGs are concerned, well-known knowledge graphs like DBpedia are
the most widely used [ 18]. However, the use of synthetic knowledge graphs has also been
proposed [ 11,15]. While evaluations encompassing a larger variety of KGs are clearly better
suited to harden the evidence that an approach works well in general (and not just on a
speciﬁc KG), evaluations on speciﬁc knowledge graphs still have their own utility, e.g., when
demonstrating a solution for a particular domain.
Specifying the Evaluation Protocol
The evaluation protocol is as important as the datasets. For example, for machine-learning
based approaches, cross or split validation may be used, and the random seed for folds can
have an impact on the results as well.
Specifying Evaluation Metrics
There are quite a few evaluation metrics, and although there is a wide adoption of recall,
precision, and F1-score, these are not the only metrics used (and in many cases, it may
make sense to use other metrics as well). Here, it is also important to be as speciﬁc as
possible. Typical distinctions include: macro vs. micro average, subset of entities on which
the evaluation is carried out (e.g., for type prediction: is the evaluation only carried out on
previously untyped entities?), and exact computation of the metrics (e.g., is the prediction of
the type owl:Thing for an entity counted as a true positive or ignored due to being trivial?).
Specifying Tasks
Finally, for task-based evaluations, the task has to be speciﬁed with equal care. For example,
for evaluating the performance of particular KGs in tasks like entity linking, question
answering, or recommender system, it is important to describe both the task and the KGs
used along the dimensions above.
Recommendations and Conclusions
As we can assume that there is no single approach for creating and/or reﬁning a knowledge
graph that works best in all tasks and for all knowledge graphs, one higher level goal of
evaluations (which is rarely addressed in current research) is to understand which approaches

==== Page 39 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 67
work well under which characteristics of the KGs (e.g.: size, connectivity, etc.). Therefore,
when conducting more systematic evaluations, those can be done either by synthesizing
datasetswithdiﬀerentvariations, orbyusingavarietyofdatasetswithdiﬀerentcharacteristics.
Therefore, datasets for such evaluations may include:
1.Synthetic datasets, which could rely on some existing benchmark datasets such as LUBM
[11] or SP /two.superiorB [16]. Those can be used both for systematic testing of scalability, as well as
for analyses of the behavior of approaches when varying certain other properties of the
KG.
2.Alternatively, we could index existing datasets in terms of relevant properties that
are relevant for evaluation algorithms. These properties include: (a) graph/network
properties (degree, connectedness); (b) descriptive statistics of graph elements (e.g.,
number and distribution of classes, property types, entities); (c) expressiveness of the
data (e.g., RDF(S), OWL); (d) whether the dataset is fully materialized or contains
implicit knowledge; (e) natural language metrics (languages used, presence/absence of
natural language information); (f) the presence of speciﬁc domains (e.g., use of certain
namespaces, presence of geospatial data); (g) other: what were the main mechanisms
for creation. Note that many of these properties are easy to compute automatically, for
example, as in LOD Laundromat [ 3]. One issue is that they are mostly computed at the
level of ﬁle, rather than at the level of datasets/KGs.
3.Hybrid approaches, e.g., use properties calculated over (2) in order to improve the
generation of synthetic benchmarks [15].7
There is still some steps to be taken from the way evaluations are mostly carried out today
and the vision sketched above. As it is hard to enforce a change over night, we suggest we
propose to have a similar eﬀort ongoing in the major semantic web conferences. One option
is to award a “most reproducible paper” award. This way, we can increase the credibility of
our research and hopefully get more reuse of existing eﬀort. This would likely also lead to
more research software being open sourced and further built upon as code which is under
scrutiny of a reviewer will be written much cleaner.
References
1Maribel Acosta, Amrapali Zaveri, Elena Simperl, Dimitris Kontokostas, Sören Auer, and
Jens Lehmann. Crowdsourcing linked data quality assessment. In International Semantic
Web Conference , pages 260–276. Springer, 2013.
2Alsayed Algergawy, Michelle Cheatham, Daniel Faria, Alﬁo Ferrara, Irini Fundulaki,
Ian Harrow, Sven Hertling, Ernesto Jiménez-Ruiz, Naouel Karam, Abderrahmane Khiat,
Patrick Lambrix, Huanyu Li, Stefano Montanelli, Heiko Paulheim, Catia Pesquita, Tzanina
Saveta, Daniela Schmidt, Pavel Shvaiko, Andrea Splendiani, Elodie Thiéblin, Cássia Tro-
jahn, Jana Vataščinová, Ondřej Zamazal, and Lu Zhou. Results of the ontology alignment
evaluation initiative 2018. In Ontology Matching , 2018.
3Wouter Beek, Laurens Rietveld, Hamid R Bazoobandi, Jan Wielemaker, and Stefan Sch-
lobach. LOD laundromat: a uniform way of publishing other people’s dirty data. In
International Semantic Web Conference , pages 213–228. Springer, 2014.
4Christian Bizer and Andreas Schultz. The Berlin SPARQL benchmark. International
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS) , 5(2):1–24, 2009.
5Christoph Böhm, Felix Naumann, Ziawasch Abedjan, Dandy Fenz, Toni Grütze, Daniel
Hefenbrock,MatthiasPohl,andDavidSonnabend. ProﬁlinglinkedopendatawithProLOD.
7See http://ldbcouncil.org for an existing initiative.
18371

==== Page 40 ====
68 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
InData Engineering Workshops (ICDEW), 2010 IEEE 26th International Conference on ,
pages 175–178. IEEE, 2010.
6Christopher Brewster, Harith Alani, Srinandan Dasmahapatra, and Yorick Wilks. Data
Driven Ontology Evaluation. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), 2004.
7Michael Färber, Frederic Bartscherer, Carsten Menne, and Achim Rettinger. Linked
data quality of DBpedia, Freebase, OpenCyc, Wikidata, and YAGO. Semantic Web ,
(Preprint):1–53, 2016.
8Aldo Gangemi, Carola Catenacci, Massimiliano Ciaramita, and Jos Lehmann. Modelling
Ontology Evaluation and Validation. In Pro. Int. Semantic Web Conf. , pages 140–154.
Springer, 2006.
9Asunción Gómez-Pérez. Ontology Evaluation. In Steﬀen Staab and Rudi Studer, editors,
Handbook on Ontologies , pages 251–273. Springer, 2004.
10Rafael S Gonçalves, Samantha Bail, Ernesto Jiménez-Ruiz, Nicolas Matentzoglu, Bijan
Parsia, Birte Glimm, and Yevgeny Kazakov. OWL reasoner evaluation (ORE) workshop
2013 results. In ORE, pages 1–18, 2013.
11Yuanbo Guo, Zhengxiang Pan, and Jeﬀ Heﬂin. LUBM: A benchmark for owl knowledge
base systems. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web ,
3(2-3):158–182, 2005.
12Jörn Hees, Thomas Roth-Berghofer, Ralf Biedert, Benjamin Adrian, and Andreas Dengel.
BetterRelations: usingagametoratelinkeddatatriples. In Annual Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , pages 134–138. Springer, 2011.
13Dimitris Kontokostas, Amrapali Zaveri, Sören Auer, and Jens Lehmann. TripleCheckMate:
A tool for crowdsourcing the quality assessment of linked data. In International Conference
on Knowledge Engineering and the Semantic Web , pages 265–272. Springer, 2013.
14Huiying Li. Data proﬁling for semantic web data. In International Conference on Web
Information Systems and Mining , pages 472–479. Springer, 2012.
15André Melo and Heiko Paulheim. Synthesizing knowledge graphs for link and type pre-
diction benchmarking. In European Semantic Web Conference , pages 136–151. Springer,
2017.
16S Michael, H Thomas, L Georg, and P Christoph. Sp2Bench: a SPARQL performance
benchmark. In ICDE, 2009.
17Felix Naumann. Data proﬁling revisited. ACM SIGMOD Record , 42(4):40–49, 2014.
18Heiko Paulheim. Knowledge graph reﬁnement: A survey of approaches and evaluation
methods. Semantic web , 8(3):489–508, 2017.
19Heiko Paulheim and Christian Bizer. Improving the quality of linked data using statistical
distributions. International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS) ,
10(2):63–86, 2014.
20Heiko Paulheim and Aldo Gangemi. Serving DBpedia with dolce – more than just adding a
cherry on top. In International Semantic Web Conference , pages 180–196. Springer, 2015.
21Roger D Peng. Reproducible research in computational science. Science, 334(6060):1226–
1227, 2011.
22MariaPoveda-Villalón, AsunciónGómez-Pérez, andMariCarmenSuárez-Figueroa. OOPS!:
A Pitfall-Based System for Ontology Diagnosis. In Miltiadis D. Lytras, Naif Aljohani, Ern-
esto Damiani, and Kwok Tai Chui, editors, Innovations, Developments, and Applications
of Semantic Web and Information Systems , pages 120–148. IGI Global, 2018.
23Daniel Ringler and Heiko Paulheim. One knowledge graph to rule them all? In German
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2017.

==== Page 41 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 69
24Marta Sabou and Miriam Fernández. Ontology (network) evaluation. In Mari Carmen
Suárez-Figueroa, Asunción Gómez-Pérez, Enrico Motta, and Aldo Gangemi, editors, On-
tology Engineering in a Networked World. , pages 193–212. Springer, 2012.
25Burr Settles. Active learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine
Learning , 6(1):1–114, 2012.
26Katharina Siorpaes and Martin Hepp. Games with a purpose for the semantic web. IEEE
Intelligent Systems , 23(3), 2008.
27Christina Unger, Corina Forascu, Vanessa Lopez, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Elena Cab-
rio, PhilippCimiano, andSebastianWalter. Questionansweringoverlinkeddata(QALD-4).
InWorking Notes for CLEF 2014 Conference , 2014.
28Marieke Van Erp, Pablo N Mendes, Heiko Paulheim, Filip Ilievski, Julien Plu, Giuseppe
Rizzo, and Jörg Waitelonis. Evaluating entity linking: An analysis of current benchmark
datasets and a roadmap for doing a better job. In LREC, volume 5, page 2016, 2016.
29Denny Vrandečić. Ontology Evaluation . PhD thesis, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
2010.
30Amrapali Zaveri, Anisa Rula, Andrea Maurino, Ricardo Pietrobon, Jens Lehmann, and
Sören Auer. Quality assessment for linked data: A survey. Semantic Web , 7(1):63–93,
2016.
3.19 Combining Graph Queries with Graph Analytics
Dan Brickley (Google Research – Mountain View, US), Aidan Hogan (IMFD, DCC, University
of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL), Sebastian Neumaier (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT),
and Axel Polleres (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Dan Brickley, Aidan Hogan, Sebastian Neumaier, and Axel Polleres
Introduction
The topics of data analytics and querying in the context of Knowledge Graphs have been
addressed as part of two separate ﬁelds. However, most data processing pipelines using
Knowledge Graphs require interleaving analytical and query tasks. While there exists
infrastructure (languages, tools, algorithms, optimisations, etc.) for performing queries and
analytics as separate processes, currently there does not exist an infrastructure for integrating
the two. Still, many conceptual questions that a domain expert may wish to ask imply
such a combination. There are several applications for combining analytical algorithms and
querying relevant to Knowledge Graphs, for example:
Ranking query results (e.g., ordering solutions based on the centrality of nodes in a
graph),
selecting topical sub-graphs to query (e.g., performing community detection to run queries
on parts of a graph relevant to a given topic),
exploratory search (e.g., ﬁnding weighted shortest paths between pairs of nodes returned
as results for a query),
dataset search (e.g., considering various graph metrics to select an external dataset
suitable to querying), or
data quality issues (e.g., analysing the connectivity of the graph).
These examples illustrate that in some cases we may wish to query the results of an analytical
process, in other cases we may wish to perform analysis on the results of a query, or in other
cases still, we may wish to interleave various query/analysis steps.
18371

==== Page 42 ====
70 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
In this chapter we attempt to identify some essential steps towards combining graph
querying and analytics in terms of useful features. We brieﬂy discuss the state-of-the-art
standard technologies to implement these features. We shall also turn towards questions
about how to implement those features in a scalable manner, and missing bits and pieces
with respect to these standard technologies. With currently available technologies we likely
end up with the necessity to store and transfer graphs between diﬀerent systems and stores
to enable all of these features, due to the non-availability of a single system and engine to
implement them. We argue that (extensions of) RDF and SPARQL seem to be the most
suitable anchor points as a crystallisation point to enable such interchange and integration
of query and analytics features.
Potential Starting points & Prior attempts
Although there have been proposals of various languages for querying graphs [ 2], including
for example Cypher [ 11] and G-CORE [ 1], in the Semantic Web community, SPARQL [ 6] has
been set as the standard query language for (Knowledge) Graphs, until now remaining the
only graph query language backed by a standardisation body and implemented by numerous
engines. The following discussion thus focuses on SPARQL, though the topics covered
generalise also to other query languages for graphs, such as those mentioned.
Since the original standardisation of SPARQL [ 9], the scientiﬁc community has proposed
lotsofusefulextensionsforthislanguageintermsofanalyticsanddataprocessingfeaturesand
combinations with other languages. This has led to SPARQL 1.1. which was a conservative
extension of features agreed, by the W3C, to be key to the future of the language, essentially
taking on board and consolidating the most urgent of these proposed features.
However, as for speciﬁc connections to graph analytics, apart from basic path query and
aggregation features, many issues and in meanwhile urgent features remain unaddressed. In
particular, core features relating to graph algorithms and network analysis have not found
their way into the standard, despite being part of many typical (knowledge) graph processing
pipelines.
While there have been attempts to combine SPARQL with other Turing-complete lan-
guages, e.g. Spark, Gremlin [ 3], XSPARQL [ 4], which would allow to address and implement
all such features – herein, we rather aim at investigating which are the core features and
tasks that typically are needed and that would deserve to be added as ﬁrst-class citizens (or
built-ins) in such a language.
Likewise, extensions of typical analytics languages like R [ 12], working on data frames,
have simple libraries to import/incorporate SPARQL results tables as such data frames, but
not allowing per se the reuse of analytical results as graphs again in a SPARQL-like query
language, nor providing an integrated graph analytics and query language.
Also, potentially interesting starting points are widely-used graph analysis systems outside
of the Semantic Web world; to name a few, e.g.: Shark [ 14], that allows to run SQL queries
and sophisticated analytics functions; Google’s Pregel [ 8], a system to eﬃciently process large
graphs (of billions of vertices and trillions of edges) which powers Google’s PageRank; as
well as frameworks built on top of Apache Spark [ 13,5], as well as various academic projects
such as Signal-Collect [10].

==== Page 43 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 71
Motivating Examples
Before continuing, we enumerate some motivating examples that help to illustrate the
importance of considering queries and analytics in a uniﬁed framework. We will consider
a hypothetical Knowledge Graph of bibliographical data considering scientiﬁc articles, the
articles they cite, where they were published, their authors, their ﬁelds, and relations between
ﬁelds. Potentially relevant questions on such a Knowledge Graph include:
Find sub-communities of Computer Science in Mexico.
Find the most important papers in AI published in IJCAI.
Find connections (paths) from researchers in UChile and UBA.
Such questions involve goals that are naturally expressed through queries (Computer Science
papers, authors in Mexico, papers in IJCAI, researchers in UChile, etc.) and goals that are
naturally expressed through analytics (sub-communities, important papers, connections).
Inspecting these questions, we can see that querying and analytical goals are interleaved,
where we may wish to analyse a graph produced as the result of a query, or querying a graph
enriched with the results of analyse, or any such combination.
Rather than pushing data between separate querying and analytical frameworks, the goal
would be to combine both into one framework, allowing for the design of a uniﬁed language,
hybrid algorithms optimised to consider all goals, as well as practical tools, interfaces and
implementations.
Graph Analysis Requirements:
Letusconsidersomeofthecommontypesofalgorithmsusedinthegraphanalyticscommunity
that could be interesting to combine with queries in a uniﬁed framework.
Centrality. Centrality of graphs can serve as indicators of ﬁnding the most important/most
inﬂuential vertices of a graph. As an example, centrality measure would allow, e.g., an
analysis of the most inﬂuential papers in a network of publications, cross-citations, and
co-authorships (given the above example bibliographic Knowledge Graph).
Community structure/detection. A graph is said to have communities if there are densely
connected structures that can be grouped in node subsets. Community detection al-
gorithms, such as minimum-cut algorithms, allow to discover these sub-communities,
which, for instance, could relate to a connected sub-community of researchers, given the
above example.
Paths/Flows. A path in a graph generically denotes a connection between two nodes that
may traverse multiple edges. Various technical deﬁnitions exist that restrict the set of
valid paths between such nodes, including simple paths that do not visit the same node
twice, or regular path queries that restrict the labels of edges that can be traversed by
the path [ 2]. Additionally, extensions of such regular path queries with more complex
conditions on properties have been deﬁned, which are particularly important when dealing
with graph data beyond “ﬂat” RDF, such as property graphs that express provenance or
other contextual information along the edges.
Vertex similarity. There exist measures for “vertex similarity” that capture the relatedness
of nodes in a graph by considering the neighbours they have in common and/or the
speciﬁcity of the paths that exist between them. These methods allow to understand
what connects nodes, and, thereafter, in what ways they are similar.
Connectivity/Spanning trees. The connectivity of a graph – deﬁned as the number of vertices
or edges that need to be removed to disconnect the graph – in the context of Knowledge
Graphs allows to analyse the resilience and (un)reachability of components. Also, related
to the connectivity is the spanning tree of such a graph.
18371

==== Page 44 ====
72 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Semantic Graph Analytics
There are various data models that can be used to describe “graphs”, including, for example,
directed-edge labelled graphs, property graphs, and so forth. However, many of the traditional
graph algorithms – though their generality and usefulness have been well-established in a
variety of domains – are proposed and studied for simple graphs or directed graphs without
labels. Hence the question arises of how to adapt and apply these algorithms to other
structures; there may be many options to “project” out a directed graph from a more
complex Knowledge Graph model, where each such projection may yield radically diﬀerent
results; respectively, depending on how the Knowledge Graph is stored, computing such
a projection and transforming it into a format amenable to these algrotithms itself might
impose a signiﬁcant eﬀort.
Aside from structure, Knowledge Graphs often embed semantics of domain terms ex-
pressed, for example, using formal model theory. Such semantics then permit reasoning
methods that allow for transforming or extending graphs in a manner that preserves truth
(i.e., applying inference); examples include subclass reasoning, or inferences over transitive or
inverse properties, identity reasoning, and so forth [ 2]. Applying analytics before or after
such transformations may again yield radically diﬀerent results, and hence it is important
to study such diﬀerences, and to study (and justify/evaluate) which transformations better
reﬂect the real-world phenomena under analysis.
Projections here can involve “Inference-based transformations”, i.e. materialisation or
core-reduction (e.g. removing transitives or inverse edges to reduce a graph to its raw form,
resolving non-unique names by choosing canonical representatives for an equivalence class)
wrt. semantic rules (related to e.g. spanning trees computation). That is, when doing
analytics one often needs to be aware that “semantically equivalent” graphs (with respect to
the chosen KG semantics) may behave fundamentally diﬀerently when taken as inputs for
graph analytics steps.
Conclusions and Next Steps
To present the herein discussed topics to a broader and appropriate audience we plan to
submit an extended version of this report as a position paper to the upcoming W3C Workshop
on Web Standardization for Graph Data.8The scope of the Workshop includes requirements
for graph query languages and diﬀerent kinds of reasoning in graph database systems. Also, it
aims at bringing together the adjacent worlds of RDF and Property Graphs (cf. for instance
[7]), to achieve productive and interoperable boundaries, and foster information exchange
and mutual awareness.
Acknowledgements
Axel Polleres’ and Sebastian Neumaier’s work is supported by the EC under the H2020
project SPECIAL and by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) under the projects
“CitySpin”, “Communidata” and “DALICC”. Aidan Hogan is funded by the Millennium
Institute for Foundational Research on Data (IMFD) and Fondecyt Grant No. 1181896.
8https://www.w3.org/Data/events/data-ws-2019/

==== Page 45 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 73
References
1Renzo Angles, Marcelo Arenas, Pablo Barceló, Peter A. Boncz, George H. L. Fletcher,
Claudio Gutierrez, Tobias Lindaaker, Marcus Paradies, Stefan Plantikow, Juan F. Sequeda,
Oskar van Rest, and Hannes Voigt. G-CORE: A core for future graph query languages.
In Gautam Das, Christopher M. Jermaine, and Philip A. Bernstein, editors, Proceedings
of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD Conference 2018,
Houston, TX, USA, June 10-15, 2018 , pages 1421–1432. ACM, 2018.
2Renzo Angles, Marcelo Arenas, Pablo Barceló, Aidan Hogan, Juan L. Reutter, and
Domagoj Vrgoc. Foundations of modern query languages for graph databases. ACM Com-
put. Surv. , 50(5):68:1–68:40, 2017.
3ApacheTinkerPop. TinkerPop3Documentationv.3.2.5. http://tinkerpop.apache.org/docs/
current/reference/, June 2017.
4Stefan Bischof, Stefan Decker, Thomas Krennwallner, Nuno Lopes, and Axel Polleres. Map-
ping between RDF and XML with XSPARQL. J. Data Semantics , 1(3):147–185, 2012.
5Ankur Dave, Alekh Jindal, Li Erran Li, Reynold Xin, Joseph Gonzalez, and Matei Zaharia.
Graphframes: an integrated API for mixing graph and relational queries. In Proceedings of
the Fourth International Workshop on Graph Data Management Experiences and Systems,
Redwood Shores, CA, USA, June 24 - 24, 2016 , page 2, 2016.
6Steve Harris and Andy Seaborne. SPARQL 1.1 Query Language. W3C Recommendation,
2013.
7Olaf Hartig. Reconciliation of RDF* and Property Graphs, Technical Report, CoRR
abs/1409.3288 , 2014.
8Grzegorz Malewicz, Matthew H. Austern, Aart J. C. Bik, James C. Dehnert, Ilan Horn,
Naty Leiser, and Grzegorz Czajkowski. Pregel: a system for large-scale graph processing.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data,
SIGMOD 2010, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, June 6-10, 2010 , pages 135–146, 2010.
9Eric Prud’hommeaux and Andy Seaborne. SPARQL Query Language for RDF. W3C
Recommendation, 2008.
10Philip Stutz, Daniel Strebel, and Abraham Bernstein. Signal/Collect12. Semantic Web
7(2): 139–166, 2016.
11The Neo4j Team. The Neo4j Manual v3.0. http://neo4j.com/docs/stable/, 2016.
12The R Foundation. The R Project for Statistical Computing. https://www.r-project.org,
since 1992.
13Reynold S. Xin, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Michael J. Franklin, and Ion Stoica. Graphx: a
resilientdistributedgraphsystemonspark. In First International Workshop on Graph Data
Management Experiences and Systems, GRADES 2013, co-loated with SIGMOD/PODS
2013, New York, NY, USA, June 24, 2013 , page 2, 2013.
14Reynold S. Xin, Josh Rosen, Matei Zaharia, Michael J. Franklin, Scott Shenker, and Ion
Stoica. Shark: SQL and rich analytics at scale. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2013, New York, NY, USA,
June 22-27, 2013 , pages 13–24, 2013.
18371

==== Page 46 ====
74 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
3.20 (Re)Deﬁning Knowledge Graphs
Aidan Hogan (IMFD, DCC, University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL), Dan Brickley
(Google Research – Mountain View, US), Claudio Gutierrez (IMFD, DCC, University of Chile
– Santiago de Chile, CL), Axel Polleres (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT), and Antoine
Zimmermann (École des Mines de Saint-Étienne, FR)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Aidan Hogan, Dan Brickley, Claudio Gutierrez, Axel Polleres, and Antoine Zimmermann
The phrase “Knowledge Graph” has recently gained a lot of attention in both industry and
academia. But what is a “Knowledge Graph”? Several deﬁnitions have been proposed but –
we shall argue – fall short of capturing the full generality of the usage of the term. We argue
for a looser, more permissive deﬁnition that may be instantiated in various concrete ways,
setting the stage for the study and practice of “Knowledge Graphs” to become a commons
that unites – rather than divides – previously disparate areas of Computer Science, focused
on a shared goal: using graphs as a medium to make sense of large-scale, diverse data.
Introduction
Since the launch of the Google Knowledge Graph in 2012 – and subsequent announcements
of Knowledge Graphs by companies such as AirBnB, eBay, Elsevier, Facebook, Microsoft,
Springer Nature, and others – the notion of a “Knowledge Graph” has crystallised a number of
eﬀorts that draw upon a variety approaches for collecting, managing, integrating, publishing,
annotating, processing and analysing diverse data using a graph abstraction.
Given its origins, the phrase “Knowledge Graph” (in its modern use) naturally encourages
a pragmatic view of the data management and knowledge representation landscape. The
Knowledge Graph (KG) viewpoint emphasises that the expense and diﬃculty of curating and
extracting knowledge from large-scale data motivates interdisciplinary collaboration around
common data structures, knowledge extraction and knowledge representation techniques.
Initiatives, datasets and systems that self-describe as “KGs” are not (and, we argue, should
not be) dominated by a speciﬁc scientiﬁc research ﬁeld or application domain, but rather
should be seen as a commons within which various complementary perspectives are combined,
involving not only academia, but also industry, public organisations, developers, etc.
In terms of academic stakeholders, research on KGs should bring together techniques
from scientiﬁc disciplines such as Knowledge Representation, Machine Learning, Semantic
Web, Databases, Natural Language Processing, Multimedia Processing and Information
Extraction, amongst others, leading to applications in a variety of domains such as Life
Sciences, Library Science, Astronomy, Economics, Sociology, and more besides.
This inclusive view then leads to a contentious but key question that we address here:
“What is a Knowledge Graph? ”. We ﬁrst begin by reviewing several prior attempts to answer
this question, concluding that many of the deﬁnitions proposed recently in the literature
are too narrow-focused, adding technical requirements that – while concretising the notion
of a Knowledge Graph – exclude other viewpoints; some of these deﬁnitions arguably even
preclude the industrial KGs responsible for the recent popularisation of the phrase. We thus
aim to (re)deﬁne a Knowledge Graph not based on what it denotes, but rather by what it
has become to connote: the use of graphs to represent data from which knowledge can (later)
be composed. Our goal with this (re)deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs is to position the topic
as a commons that can beneﬁt from work combining various disciplines, outlining a more
general scope within which various concrete deﬁnitions and research questions can coexist.

==== Page 47 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 75
Knowledge Graphs: Background
Several works have attempted to provide deﬁnitions of what a knowledge graph is (or isn’t).
We provide a non-exhaustive collection of examples herein to serve as general background.
Long before Google popularised the phrase “Knowledge Graph”, mentions can be found
in the scientiﬁc literature. In 1974, Marchi and Miguel [ 6] deﬁned a “Knowledge Graph” as a
mathematical structure with vertices as knowledge units connected by edges that represent
the prerequisite relation; this implies that units of knowledge are only accessible if other
units are previously known. In the late 1980’s, Bakker, in his Ph.D. Thesis [ 1], developed
his notion of a “Knowledge Graph” as a way of structuring and representing text encoding
scientiﬁc knowledge. In 1994, van der Berg [ 9] presented an extension of this work using
First Order Logic to model consistency and implication in such Knowledge Graphs. Though
related, we assume that the modern incarnation of the notion of a “Knowledge Graph” was
derived independently from such earlier deﬁnitions; these independent inventions of the
phrase do indicate some level of “naturalness” of the abstract idea, which can also be seen in
similar proposals, for example, of “Semantic Networks” [3], though under a diﬀerent name.
Nor did the 2012 announcement of the Google Knowledge Graph appear out of the blue:
the direct lineage of the Google Knowledge Graph can, in fact, be traced back to a 2000 essay
by Hillis [ 5] outlining his vision of “Aristotle”: a knowledge web in the form of an online
database “ organized according to concepts and ways of understanding them [containing]
speciﬁc knowledge about how the concepts relate, who believes them and why, and what they
are useful for ”. Hillis would later go on to co-found (in 2005) the Metaweb company, which
oversaw the development of the collaboratively-edited Freebase knowledge-base [ 2]. Metaweb
in turn was acquired by Google in 2010, with Freebase subsequently forming an important
source for the Google Knowledge Graph (with key involvement from ex-Metaweb personnel),
as well as the collaboratively-edited Wikidata knowledge-base [ 8,10]. These developments
have directly led to the recent popularisation of the phrase “Knowledge Graph”.
Turning to more recent times, the following descriptions have been provided by various
participants of the Dagstuhl Seminar 18371, Sept. 2018, within the plenary discussions:
“A graph-structured knowledge-base ”
“Any Dataset that can be seen through the lense of a Graph perspective ”
“Something that combines data and semantics in a graph structure ”
“Structured data organisation with a formal semantics and labels [that is] computationally
feasible & cognitively plausible ”
“[Knowledge Graphs are deﬁned] by example: Babelnet, OpenCyc, DBpedia, Yago,
Wikidata, NELL and their shared features ”
We see some varying and sometimes orthogonal approaches to the deﬁnition, including
some descriptions that focus on the graph abstraction, some that emphasise the role of
(formal) semantics, one that emphasises the importance of cognitive understanding, with the
latter description rather proposing that Knowledge Graphs should be deﬁned extensionally
by looking at common characteristics of a class of important graph-structured datasets.
Various other proposed deﬁnitions of a “Knowledge Graph” appear in the literature,
amongst which McCusker et al. [7] put forward that:
“a knowledge graph represents knowledge, and does so using a graph structure. ”
before coming to more binding technical criteria for deﬁning a “Knowledge Graph”:
“Knowledge graph meaning is expressed as structure. ”
“Knowledge graph statements are unambiguous. ”
18371

==== Page 48 ====
76 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
“Knowledge graphs use a limited set of relation types. ”
“All identiﬁed entities in a knowledge graph, including types and relations, must be
identiﬁed using global identiﬁers with unambiguous denotation. ”
Ehrlinger and Wöß [4] also collect proposed deﬁnitions, and even go as far as adding:
“A knowledge graph acquires and integrates information into an ontology and applies a
reasoner to derive new knowledge. ”
The beneﬁt of these latter more speciﬁc deﬁnitions would be to provide an initial technical
agreement upon which further works can be elaborated and made interoperable. However,
the consensus at the Dagstuhl Seminar – which included various industry stakeholders – was
that these latter proposed deﬁnitions:
are biased towards particular scientiﬁc disciplines (particularly the Semantic Web);
deﬁne aspects that are in fact not essential for a Knowledge Graph, and thus, for example,
are not satisﬁed by the industrial Knowledge Graphs that have played a key role in the
recent popularisation of the phrase.
Upon reviewing prior proposals, it was decided to seek a more inclusive deﬁnition that
repositions Knowledge Graphs as a commons for researchers and practitioners from various
disciplines that are interested, more generally, in both the practical and scientiﬁc challenges
stemming from the collection, management, integration, publication, annotation, processing
and analysis of graph-structured data at scale. Beyond the (perhaps questionable) exercise
of laying claim to “yet another deﬁnition” of a Knowledge Graph, our goal is to outline a
scope and direction for this topic within which complementary perspectives can coexist.
Knowledge Graphs: A New Deﬁnition
Rather than assuming any speciﬁc core formalism for representing “knowledge” (e.g., rule-
based axiomatisation, description logics, computational linguistics, machine learning models,
relational schema and constraints), KGs start with data, and it is the data itself – organised
and viewed as a graph of entities and their relationships – that takes centre stage. This
graph representation allows data to cross application barriers, be aggregated and integrated
at diﬀerent levels of abstraction, without the encumbrance of sticking rigidly to a particular
formalism: a particular schema, notion of logical consistency, ontological language, etc.
Various mechanisms for extracting and representing “knowledge” can then be applied to
complement the data in its graph abstraction, making explicit more of its meaning, allowing
its interpretation in increasing depth and with increasing sophistication.
We thus propose to deﬁne a “Knowledge Graph”, succinctly, as:
“a graph of data with the intent to compose knowledge ”.
We elaborate on this deﬁnition in the following.
In terms of a “graph of data”, we refer to a dataset viewed as a set of entities represented
as nodes, with their relations represented as edges; technically this notion can be instantiated
with a number of concrete graph models, including for example:
directededge-labelledgraphs (akasetsoftriples), composedofnamedbinaryrelations
(labelled edges) between entities (nodes);
property graphs , which extends directed edge-labelled graphs such that both nodes
and edges may be additionally annotated with sets of property-attribute pairs;

==== Page 49 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 77
named graphs , where rather than supposing one large graph, data are represented as a
collection of (typically directed edge-labelled) graphs, each associated with an identiﬁer.
We do not see a particular choice of graph model as being necessary for constituting a
KG: any such graph model will suﬃce since – although diﬀerent models may oﬀer particular
conveniences or give rise to particular challenges in particular scenarios – data in one model
can be automatically converted to another with a suitable structural mapping. Hence the
choice of graph model is not fundamental to the challenges that KGs address. On the
other hand, the choice of such a graph model is not suﬃcient for constituting a KG: a
randomly-generated property graph, for example, does not intend to compose knowledge.
We then view the conceptual shift from “data” to “knowledge” as characterised by the
“interpretation” of the data. In terms of “composing knowledge”, we view this process as
starting with the graph of data, and as involving both the extraction and representation of
knowledge – potentially drawing upon a variety of formalisms, descriptions, and techniques –
in order to enrich the graph, and allow it to be interpreted, in greater and greater detail, by
human and machine alike. Such knowledge may originate from the graph itself or from other
complementary sources; the resulting knowledge may be represented as part of the graph
abstraction, or as an attachment to the graph. Some directions in which the composition of
knowledge may follow include, but are not limited to:
describing the formal semantics of terms used in the graph, through (for example)
logics founded in model theory; this increases the machine-interpretability of the under-
lying graph and allows for formal reasoning methods that can infer new data, detect
inconsistencies, enable query answering over implicit knowledge, etc.;
addinglexical knowledge , such as multilingual labels and descriptions, increasing the
interpretability of the graph by humans who speak particular languages and by machines
in relation to natural language in text documents, user questions, etc.;
capturing the completeness andbiasof the graph, denoting for example which parts of
the graph are complete with respect to the real world, how representative are the entities
captured in the graph in terms of the complete real-world population studied, etc.; this
increases the interpretability of, for example, statistics and machine learning models built
on top of the graph;
providinglinks(particularly relating to identity) from the local graph to external datasets;
such links increase the interpretability of the graph in relation to other datasets;
representing context thatmaycapture, forexample, theprovenanceofparticularelements
of the graph, spatial or temporal settings in which (parts of) the graph are known to be
valid, and so forth; such representations of context help to understand how the graph
should be interpreted in diﬀerent settings.
This is intended to be an illustrative rather than a complete list. By “composing
knowledge”, again we generally refer to a continual process of extracting and representing
knowledge in a manner that enhances the interpretability of the resulting Knowledge Graph;
there are of course other directions in which this idea could be followed. No single example
is necessary to fulﬁl our deﬁnition of a “Knowledge Graph”, but rather each gives a concrete
direction in which the “intent to compose knowledge” could follow. We deliberately choose
not to restrict this notion of the “intent to compose knowledge”, but rather allow for diﬀerent
techniques that increase both machine and human interpretability for diﬀerent purposes; for
example, this neither precludes nor prescribes a goal that has often been mentioned in the
context of the term Knowledge Graphs: to eventually serve as a key for the “explainability”
of data and models built from and around data.
18371

==== Page 50 ====
78 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Knowledge Graphs: A Commons
Our deﬁnition establishes a deliberately low barrier to entry for what is considered a
“Knowledge Graph” to not only ﬁt the diverse views now established in practice, but also
to encourage study across a variety of areas, ﬁtting with our goal that it may become a
commons for more interdisciplinary research. The study of “Knowledge Graphs” ideally
involves participation of researchers from the variety of ﬁelds previously mentioned, beneﬁting
from tighter collaborations between such ﬁelds, leading to novel research questions, theories
and techniques being applied speciﬁcally to understanding how to compose knowledge from
diverse data at scale. By scale we refer not only to volume, but also the notions of velocity,
variety and veracity often referred to under the moniker of “Big Data”.
On the other hand, we strongly encourage researchers who wish to refer to “Knowledge
Graphs” as their object of study to rigorously deﬁne how they instantiate the term as
appropriate to their investigation. Such a deﬁnition should begin by deﬁning the particular
graph-based model/view of data adopted by that particular study (while refraining from
excluding other deﬁnitions). Thereafter, the study should clarify what is the form of
“knowledge” that such a graph intends to compose, how this form of “knowledge” contributes
to the interpretability of such graphs, and what techniques are proposed along those lines.
Acknowledgements
Axel Polleres’ work is supported by the EC under the H2020 project SPECIAL and by the
Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) under the projects “CitySpin”, “Communidata”
and“DALICC”.AidanHoganisfundedbytheMillenniumInstituteforFoundationalResearch
on Data (IMFD) and Fondecyt Grant No. 1181896.
References
1R.R. Bakker. Knowledge Graphs: representation and structuring of scientiﬁc knowledge .
PhD thesis, University of Twente, Enschede, 1987.
2K. Bollacker, C. Evans, P. Paritosh, T. Sturge, J. Taylor Freebase: A Collaboratively
Created Graph Database For Structuring Human Knowledge . InSIGMOD Conference , pages
1247-1250, 2008.
3A. Borgida and J.F. Sowa. Principles of semantic networks – explorations in the represent-
ation of knowledge . The Morgan Kaufmann Series in representation and reasoning. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1991.
4L. Ehrlinger and W. Wöß. Towards a Deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs. In International
Conference on Semantic Systems (SEMANTiCS2016), Posters & Demos . CEUR-WS.org,
2016.
5W.D. Hillis. “Aristotle” (The Knowledge Web). Later republished in Edge (May 2004) ,
https://www.edge.org/conversation/w_daniel_hillis-aristotle-the-knowledge-web, 2000.
6E. Marchi and O. Miguel. On the structure of the teaching-learning interactive process.
Int. Journal of Game Theory , 3(2):83–99, 1974.
7J.P. McCusker, J.S. Erickson, K. Chastain, S. Rashid, R. Weerawarana, and D.L. McGuin-
ness. What is a Knowledge Graph? Semantic Web , 2018. (under review; available from
http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/content/what-knowledge-graph).
8T. Pellissier Tanon, D. Vrandecic, S. Schaﬀert, T. Steiner, and L. Pintscher. From Freebase
to Wikidata: The Great Migration. In International World Wide Web Conference (WWW) ,
pages 1419–1428, 2016.

==== Page 51 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 79
9H. van den Berg. First-Order Logic in Knowledge Graphs. In C. Martín-Vide, editor,
Current Issues in Mathematical Linguistics , volume 56 of North-Holland Linguistic Series:
Linguistic Variations , pages 319–328. Elsevier, 1994.
10D. Vrandečić and M. Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communic-
ations of the ACM , 57(10):78–85, 2014.
3.21 Foundations
Claudia d’Amato (University of Bari, IT), Sabrina Kirrane (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien,
AT), Piero Andrea Bonatti (University of Naples, IT), Sebastian Rudolph (TU Dresden,
DE), Markus Krötzsch (TU Dresden, DE), Marieke van Erp (KNAW Humanities Cluster –
Amsterdam, NL), and Antoine Zimmermann (École des Mines de Saint-Étienne, FR)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Claudia d’Amato, Sabrina Kirrane, Piero Bonatti, Sebastian Rudolph, Markus Krötzsch,
Marieke van Erp, and Antoine Zimmermann
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are becoming more and more popular with an increasing interest
of both big industrial players and scientiﬁc communities in diﬀerent research ﬁelds such as
Semantic Web (SW), Databases, Machine Learning and Data Mining. However, an agreed
formal deﬁnition of KG is nowadays missing [ 15] and, as a consequence, also a shared view
on the needed KG semantics. Starting from deﬁning a KG, the attention of this document is
devoted to ﬁx the semantics that is needed for KGs and importantly, the requirements to
be taken into account when ﬁxing such a semantics. The importance of taking into account
(diﬀerent kinds of) contextual information is also analyzed and possible research directions for
tackling this aspect are illustrated. Finally, we analyzed another issues related to accessing
KGs, speciﬁcally when a fully open setting cannot be assumed, hence we report the main
research questions that need to be addressed.
Introduction
Knowledge Graphs (KGs) are becoming more and more popular with an increasing interest
of both big industrial players, such as Google and Amazon, and scientiﬁc communities in
diﬀerent research ﬁelds such as Semantic Web (SW), Databases, Machine Learning and Data
Mining. However, despite this increasing interest in KGs, an agreed formal deﬁnition of KG is
nowadays missing [ 15] and, as a consequence, also a shared view on the needed KG semantics.
Starting from deﬁning a KG as a graph-based structured data organization, endowed with
formal semantics (i.e. a graph-based data organization where a schema and multiple labelled
relations with formal meaning are available), the attention of this document is devoted to ﬁx
the semantics needed for KGs and importantly, the requirements to be taken into account
when ﬁxing the semantics. The main motivation for looking at this direction is that, as
testiﬁed by recent studies on understanding the Empirical semantics [ 4,14,27,43] in SW
(where clear and formal semantics is often provided), the actual usage of formal languages by
human experts does not always matches the formal speciﬁcations.
Particularly, in [ 4,27,43] the formal and actual meaning of owl:sameAs has been
investigated, whilst in [ 14] the empirical proof that some semantics is encoded within
IRIs is provided; as a consequence, meanings within IRIs are practically exploited thus
generating polysemy issues of IRIs (similarly to texts) and wrong reuse of IRIs due to
18371

==== Page 52 ====
80 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
the misinterpretation of the IRI’s intended meanings. Additional problems that have been
experimentally shown are: the misuse of classes and instances (classes adopted as instances
and vice-versa) [ 1], the incorrect interpretation of domain and/or range for properties, and
the injection of logical inconsistencies due to wrong conceptualizations. The results of these
empirical studies, the diﬀusion of tools aiming at limiting the usage of formal semantics [ 44],
the very large size of (existing) KGs [ 15], that may also evolve by interlinking existing KGs
(the Linked Open Data Cloud9can be considered an example in this direction), suggest
that the semantics for KGs needs to satisfy the following basic requirements: facilitate
interoperability, simplicity (of usage), cognitive plausibility. Nevertheless, besides these
basics requirements, additional aspects and potential issues need to be taken into account.
Speciﬁcally, KGs are meant to represent large corpora of knowledge, possibly referring to
several, potentially interconnected, domains, as such conﬂicting information may arise. This
may not only be due to the fact that one piece of information and its opposite are declared,
e.g in diﬀerent KGs, but also to additional factors that are currently almost disregarded.
One of them is represented by the fact that the validity of (pieces of) knowledge can be:
context dependent, e.g., there exists norms that are valid in some countries whilst they
are not applicable in other countries; or it can be time dependent, e.g., Barack Obama as
USA president is applicable only to a certain period of time. Many KG-related projects
show the need to represent contexts: statement qualiﬁers in Wikidata; attributes in the
property graph data model; temporal and spatial validity in Yago(2). Actually, the word
context has several meanings and as such several forms of context may need to be taken into
account. Speciﬁcally, the following kinds of context are considered of particular importance:
a) temporal and spatial; b) domain, application, task and process; c) social, cultural, legal;
d) provenance, sourcing circumstances, trust; e) “view” such as looking at knowledge from
a perspective that is not entity-centric. This implies that the semantics for KGs needs to
allow for expressing (diﬀerent kinds of) contextual information while granting ambiguity and
inconsistency. Consequently, approximate inferences from approximate statements could
be allowed but, on the same time, the ability to make sound and complete inferences from
correct facts is somehow lost.
Arguably, one semantics may not be able to adequately address all requirements, intended
meanings, and usage scenarios. This means there is the need to allow for individual,
diverging semantics. At the same time, the “intended” meaning and/or usage should be
made transparent for the sake of interoperability, common understanding and appropriate
reuse.
A possible solution is to allow the KG to be accompanied by (meta)information about
how it is meant to be interpreted. Approaches to be considered are: a) the adoption of a
declarative description of the KG formal semantics, e.g., in terms of model theory; b) the
speciﬁcation of a piece of code as an operational or procedural semantics; c) the usage of a
pointer to a semantic proﬁle already deﬁned elsewhere.
In the following, possible research directions for tackling the issues and requirements
illustrated above are presented.
9https://lod-cloud.net/

==== Page 53 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 81
Taking context into account
To tackle the issue of managing and specifying diﬀerent kinds of contexts, two main research
directions are envisioned:
1.Representing contexts explicitly by extending the representation (reminding the trade-oﬀ
with the requirement of keeping things simple);
2.Discovering context by exploiting on the actual data available in KGs, e.g., ﬁnding
consistent subgraphs.
As regards the ﬁrst direction, some proposals have been made in the literature such as:
Reiﬁcation: representing contextual information on the level of the graph structure
(e.g., in plain RDF) by introducing auxiliary graph vertices to represent anything that
needs to be annotated (a comparison of reiﬁcation approaches is presented in [18]);
Named graphs, Nquads: extensions of graph models that provide the “handle” to
edges and groups of edge, avoiding reiﬁcation [28, 10];
Property graph, Wikidata, attributed logics: enriched graph models that add a
second layer for representing contextual data;
Semiring annotations: attaching a value from a well deﬁned algebraic structure
(semring) to all statements, that expresses to what extent the assertion can be considered
“true”. The value can capture contextual information such as provenance, probability, and
access permissions in (graph) databases.
The variety of solutions reﬂects a basic syntactic question, namely, “What belongs in the
KG and what belongs in the context?” Furthermore, is it necessary to separate context
from data? Answering these syntactic questions represents one of the main priorities when
considering the solution of representing contexts explicitly.
Additionally, the explicit representation of contexts also raises a basic related semantic
question, that is: “If a statement holds in one context, can we infer that it also holds in
another context?” In order to answer this question, hybrid reasoning approaches may need
to be formalized and developed. Additionally, the following views need to be taken into
account: crispness vs. uncertainty; discrete vs. continuous; declarative vs. procedural;
unstructured vs. semi-structured vs. structured; monotonicity; inconsistency tolerance.
Such a hybrid reasoning solution should be somewhere on the spectrum between latent
semantics (e.g. embeddings in vector spaces) and model-based semantics, and should include
statistics, graph theory, and (limited) natural language forms. This also implies that a sort
of multidimensional semantics needs to be considered. The semantic question has been
answered diﬀerently in the literature:
Semiring-stylesemanticsandannotatedlogics(suchasAnnotatedLogicProgramming[ 31],
Annotated RDF and RDFS [ 46,51]): deﬁne what can be entailed based on formal, logical
semantics and non-obvious consequences can be obtained.
Reiﬁcation: makes contexts part of the normal graph data, which might still be evaluated
under some general semantics (e.g., RDFS), but the method does not specify how to use
context. Diﬀerent reiﬁcation models aﬀect entailments diﬀerently, as shown in [21, 50]
Named graphs and Nquads: do not oﬀer a standard semantics for making entailments,
but various, conﬂicting approaches can be used to formalize it [49].
Property graphs: do not support entailment or formal semantics of any kind whilst attrib-
uted logics are a proposal for deﬁning an entailment semantics for property-graphs [34].
Logics where context is a ﬁrst class citizen: an example is given by McCarthy’s logic of
context [ 39] which has been formalized in diﬀerent ways [ 24,9,2,8,41] and applied to
RDF [25].
18371

==== Page 54 ====
82 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Logics where contexts are separated from the universe of discourse: based on Giunchiglia’s
approach of contextual reasoning [ 22] and local model theory [ 20] (DFOL, DDL, E-
connection, Package-based DL, IDDL, CKR, E-SHIQ and other variations).
The inconvenients of the last two options are that the logical formalisms are diverse, com-
plicated, and non intuitive. Despite of the multiple existing proposals, converging on a
suﬃciently ﬂexible, yet not overly general approach remains a major challenge.
As regards the second research direction, that is discovering contexts, the works on
empirical semantics (see the previous section) have shown that capturing the intended
semantics starting from the evidence provided by the mass of data is actually doable. As
such, by extensions, discovering contexts appears to be meaningful in principle. Particularly,
latent semantic approaches [ 35,36] could be exploited for discovering preliminary (even
if weak) notion of context, whilst semantic data mining [ 37] methods could be extended
for tackling more complex notions of contexts. Also pattern mining methods applied to
semantically reach representations [ 19,13] could be an important direction to be investigated.
Speciﬁcally, in this case, the pattern discovery process should be goal driven, where goals
should be given by diﬀerent kinds of context to be possibly discovered.
The two research directions represent orthogonal views of the same issue: contextual
information can be represented when available whilst additional contextual information can
possibly be captured by exploiting the evidence coming from the data (contexts are described
extensionally whilst no explicit (intensional) representation is provided). A mixture of the
solutions developed in each direction is considered a valuable research perspective potentially
delivering even more powerful results (e.g. on performing “context discovery”) when applying
it to rich data that has “explicit context”.
Accessing Knowlege Graphs
Until now, mostly KGs in an open access scenerio have been implicitely considered. However,
in broader scenarios, this would not be the case, whilst conﬁdentiality requirements and
usage constraints may arise, due to privacy concerns, laws, licensing, and more. The lack
of technical instruments for regulating access to knowledge and its usage, may hinder the
adoption of knowledge-based technologies in application contexts where such technologies
may give signiﬁcant contributions. Knowledge graphs – and the other forms of digitized,
processable knowledge – play diﬀerent roles with respect to constrained access and usage,
as they can be both the object that must be “protected”, and the speciﬁcation of the
constraints, namely the policies. The former role leads to speciﬁc conﬁdentiality requirements
such as being inference-proof. In other words, it should not be possible to reconstruct
concealed information by (automatically) reasoning on the visible part. The latter role poses
expressiveness requirements on the (knowledge based) policy language. Both roles pose
scalability requirements, since the access control layer should not introduce unsustainable
overhead. We use two scenarios to illustrate the importance of regulating access to knowledge,
and the main open research challenges in this area. The scenarios consist of: (i) integrating
diﬀerent knowledge graphs with diﬀerent licenses, and (ii) providing support for a knowledge
graphs marketplace.
In the marketplace use case, there is a need to build a marketplace for knowledge that
could be used to speed up business processes and systems. The primary challenge relates
to the automated matchmaking between knowledge owners and knowledge consumers.
In order to support this matchmaking, we must be able to represent not only potential

==== Page 55 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 83
usage constraints (like licenses) but also the knowledge request in a manner in which it
can be checked automatically.
In the biomedical use case we need to give a license to a knowledge graph that has been
composed from several other knowledge graphs, each with an associated license. Here the
primary challenges relate to extracting terms of use from textual licenses, and representing
individual licenses in a manner that enables license composition and conﬂict resolution.
In terms of enabling inference-proof secure access control for knowledge graphs, eﬀorts in
integrating symbolic AI with machine learning will introduce new challenges in preserving
the conﬁdentiality of knowledge. In the long term, where machine learning and symbolic
knowledge feed into each other and the respective inference mechanisms are integrated or
composed, new attack models arise. For example, symbolic knowledge may be exploited
as background knowledge to “break” the conﬁdentiality guarantees oﬀered by diﬀerentially
private learning mechanisms. Conversely, link prediction and other ML-based inferences may
be used to attack the (supposedly) secure views on knowledge bases obtained with methods
that take into account purely symbolic attacks.
Taking access constraints into account
In terms of supporting constrained access to knowledge graphs, fundamental challenges relate
to associating various policies with data and knowledge, enforcing inference proof access
control and ensuring knowledge conﬁdentiality.
3.21.1 Associating policies with data and knowledge
Generally speaking, the sticky policy concept [ 29] is used to tightly couple usage policies
to data and knowledge. When it comes to the state of the art, sticky policies are usually
implemented by using cryptography to strongly associate policies with data [ 40,42]. However,
itisworthnotingthattherearecurrentlynostandardapproachesforattachingpoliciestodata
in a linked data setting. Also, it is important to highlight that from a practical perspective it
is not possible for said policies to be enforced automatically (more precisely, it is an honors
system whereby data controllers and processors can choose to either obey the policy or not).
One of the challenges with respect to existing approaches is that there is a need for a trusted
third party to ensure that obligations speciﬁed in the policy are fulﬁlled. Methodologies and
formats for linking data and policies in a semantic framework are currently being investigated
in the SPECIAL H2020 project10. When it comes to usage control in the form of licensing,
research topics range from using Natural Language Processing to extract license rights and
obligations to licenses compatibility validation and Composition [ 47,26,23]. However, there
are currently no standard license-aware data querying and processing mechanisms.
3.21.2 Inference-proof access control
[32] provide a detailed survey of the various access control models, standards and policy
languages, and the diﬀerent access control enforcement strategies for RDF. However, at
the level of (possibly distributed) queries, linked data protocols do not currently support
inference-proof access control in a standard way. Considering the array of access control
10SPECIAL H2020 project, https://www.specialprivacy.eu/
18371

==== Page 56 ====
84 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
speciﬁcation and enforcement mechanisms proposed to date, a necessary ﬁrst step towards is
to develop a framework that can be used to evaluate existing access control oﬀerings in terms
of expressivity, correctness and completeness. Inference-proof access control for distributed
data sources has been extensively discussed in a recent Dagstuhl workshop (n.17262, on
Federated Data Management, 2017) in the context of federated query processing. A recent
proposal in this direction is [17].
3.21.3 Knowledge conﬁdentiality
Several proposals to enable conﬁdentiality of RDFS and OWL knowledge bases that adopt
simple conﬁdentiality models exist (cf. [3, 11, 33, 45, 16]).
These approaches are vulnerable to attacks based on meta-knowledge; this issue has
been dealt with in [ 7,6], that show how to construct robust secure views. However, this
method probably does not scale suﬃciently yet.
Another limitation of this conﬁdentiality criterion lies in its “crisp” nature: what if a
secret is not entailed by the available (meta)knowledge but is very likely, given that
same knowledge? We cannot still assume the secret to be eﬀectively protected. The
probabilistic and correlation information used for this kind of attacks can be obtained
through both standard statistical analyses and machine learning algorithms. A reﬁned,
probabilistic conﬁdentiality model has already been developed [ 5], but it is diﬃcult to
implement eﬃciently, given the inherent complexity of probabilistic reasoning. Moreover,
the probabilistic criterion does not currently handle the knowledge produced by learning
algorithms, that is not strictly probabilistic.
Conversely, symbolic reasoning may be used to attack the conﬁdentiality of privacy-
preserving data mining algorithms. Such algorithms produce k-anonymous or diﬀerentially
private outputs (a survey is available in deliverable D1.7 of the H2020 project SPECIAL).
It is known that anonymization techniques are vulnerable to background knowledge
[48,30,12,38]. So it is important to investigate whether and how the symbolic background
knowledge encoded in KGs can be used to leak conﬁdential information.
Open research questions in relation to providing constrained access to Knowledge Graphs
include:
How does the whole protocol work?
How do we attach policies to data and how do we query considering the policy? Can
sticky policies be used?
Can we support automatic negotiation using policies?
Which additional information shall be removed to avoid inferring knowledge that should
not be accessible?
How do we avoid hybrid symbolic/ML attacks?
Conclusions
In this section we provided our envisioned deﬁntion for Knowledge Graph, since an agreed
formal deﬁnition of KG is nowadays still missing. Starting from deﬁning a KG as a graph-
based structured data organization, endowed with formal semantics we ﬁxed the semantics
that should be needed for KGs and most importantly, the necessary requirements to be
taken into account when ﬁxing the semantics. We particularly argued on the importance
of taking (diﬀerent kinds of) context and contextual information into account. Hence, we

==== Page 57 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 85
illustrated threee main research directions that we considered appropriate for the the purpose.
Furthremore we argued on existing open issues concerning the access to KGs, when a fully
open setting cannot be assumed.
Acknowledgements
Sabrina Kirrane’ work is supported by the EC under the H2020 project SPECIAL and by
the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG) under the project “DALICC”.
References
1Luigi Asprino, Valerio Basile, Paolo Ciancarini, and Valentina Presutti. Empirical analysis
of foundational distinctions in Linked Open Data. In Jérôme Lang, editor, Proceedings of
the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2018,
July 13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden. , pages 3962–3969. ijcai.org, 2018.
2Guiseppe Attardi and Maria Simi. A Formalization of Viewpoints. Fundamenta Informat-
icae, 23(2-4):149–173, 1995.
3Franz Baader, Martin Knechtel, and Rafael Peñaloza. A generic approach for large-scale
ontological reasoning in the presence of access restrictions to the ontology’s axioms. In The
Semantic Web – ISWC 2009, 8th International Semantic Web Conference, ISWC 2009,
Chantilly, VA, USA, October 25-29, 2009. Proceedings , pages 49–64, 2009. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-04930-9_4, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-04930-9\_4 .
4Wouter Beek, Stefan Schlobach, and Frank van Harmelen. A contextualised semantics
for owl:sameAs. In Harald Sack, Eva Blomqvist, Mathieu d’Aquin, Chiara Ghidini, Si-
mone Paolo Ponzetto, and Christoph Lange, editors, The Semantic Web. Latest Advances
and New Domains – 13th International Conference, ESWC 2016, Heraklion, Crete, Greece,
May 29 – June 2, 2016, Proceedings , volume 9678 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,
pages 405–419. Springer, 2016.
5Joachim Biskup, Piero A. Bonatti, Clemente Galdi, and Luigi Sauro. Inference-proof data
ﬁltering for a probabilistic setting. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Society, Privacy
and the Semantic Web – Policy and Technology (PrivOn2017) co-located with 16th Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2017), Vienna, Austria, October 22, 2017. , 2017.
URL: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1951/PrivOn2017_paper_2.pdf.
6Piero A. Bonatti, Iliana M. Petrova, and Luigi Sauro. Optimized construction of secure
knowledge-base views. In Proceedings of the 28th International Workshop on Descrip-
tion Logics, Athens,Greece, June 7-10, 2015. , 2015. URL: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1350/
paper-44.pdf.
7Piero A. Bonatti and Luigi Sauro. A conﬁdentiality model for ontologies. In The Semantic
Web – ISWC 2013 – 12th International Semantic Web Conference, Sydney, NSW, Australia,
October 21-25, 2013, Proceedings, Part I ,pages17–32, 2013. URL:https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-41335-3_2, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-41335-3\_2 .
8Saša Buvač. Quantiﬁcational Logic of Context. In William J. Clancey and Daniel S. Weld,
editors,Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Eighth Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference, AAAI 96, IAAI 96,
Portland, Oregon, August 4-8, 1996, Volume 1 , pages 600–606. AAAI Press / The MIT
Press, 1996.
9Saša Buvač, Vanja Buvač, and Ian A. Mason. Metamathematics of Contexts. Fundamenta
Informaticae , 23(2/3/4):263–301, 1995.
18371

==== Page 58 ====
86 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
10Gavin Carothers. RDF 1.1 N-Quads – A line-based syntax for RDF datasets, W3C Re-
commendation 25 February 2014. W3c recommendation, World Wide Web Consortium,
February 25 2014. URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-n-quads-20140225/.
11Willy Chen and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. A model-driven approach to enable access control
for ontologies. In Business Services: Konzepte, Technologien, Anwendungen. 9. Interna-
tionale Tagung Wirtschaftsinformatik 25.-27. Februar 2009, Wien , pages 663–672, 2009.
URL: http://aisel.aisnet.org/wi2009/65.
12Chris Clifton and Tamir Tassa. On syntactic anonymity and diﬀerential privacy. Trans.
Data Privacy , 6(2):161–183, 2013. URL: http://www.tdp.cat/issues11/abs.a124a13.php.
13Claudia d’Amato, Steﬀen Staab, Andrea G. B. Tettamanzi, Tran Duc Minh, and Fabien L.
Gandon. Ontology enrichment by discovering multi-relational association rules from onto-
logical knowledge bases. In Sascha Ossowski, editor, Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM
Symposium on Applied Computing, Pisa, Italy, April 4-8, 2016 , pages 333–338. ACM, 2016.
URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2851613.2851842, doi:10.1145/2851613.2851842 .
14Steven de Rooij, Wouter Beek, Peter Bloem, Frank van Harmelen, and Stefan Schlobach.
Arenamesmeaningful? quantifyingsocialmeaningontheSemanticWeb. InPaulT.Groth,
Elena Simperl, Alasdair J. G. Gray, Marta Sabou, Markus Krötzsch, Freddy Lécué, Fabian
Flöck, and Yolanda Gil, editors, The Semantic Web – ISWC 2016 – 15th International
Semantic Web Conference, Kobe, Japan, October 17-21, 2016, Proceedings, Part I , volume
9981 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 184–199, 2016.
15Lisa Ehrlinger and Wolfram Wöß. Towards a deﬁnition of Knowledge Graphs. In
Michael Martin, Martí Cuquet, and Erwin Folmer, editors, Joint Proceedings of the
Posters and Demos Track of the 12th International Conference on Semantic Systems –
SEMANTiCS2016 and the 1st International Workshop on Semantic Change & Evolving
Semantics (SuCCESS’16) co-located with the 12th International Conference on Semantic
Systems (SEMANTiCS 2016), Leipzig, Germany, September 12-15, 2016. , volume 1695 of
CEUR Workshop Proceedings . CEUR-WS.org, 2016. URL: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1695/
paper4.pdf.
16Eldora, Martin Knechtel, and Rafael Peñaloza. Correcting access restrictions to a con-
sequence more ﬂexibly. In Proceedings of the 24th International Workshop on Description
Logics (DL 2011), Barcelona, Spain, July 13-16, 2011 , 2011. URL: http://ceur-ws.org/
Vol-745/paper_9.pdf.
17Kemele M. Endris, Zuhair Almhithawi, Ioanna Lytra, Maria-Esther Vidal, and Sören Auer.
BOUNCER: privacy-aware query processing over federations of RDF datasets. In Database
and Expert Systems Applications – 29th International Conference, DEXA 2018, Regensburg,
Germany, September 3-6, 2018, Proceedings, Part I , pages 69–84, 2018. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-98809-2_5, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-98809-2\_5 .
18Johannes Frey, Kai Müller, Sebastian Hellmann, Erhard Rahm, and Maria-Esther Vidal.
Evaluation of Metadata Representations in RDF stores. Semantic Web Journal . To appear.
19Luis Galárraga, Christina Teﬂioudi, Katja Hose, and Fabian M. Suchanek. Fast rule mining
in ontological knowledge bases with AMIE+. VLDB J. , 24(6):707–730, 2015. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00778-015-0394-1, doi:10.1007/s00778-015-0394-1 .
20Chiara Ghidini and Fausto Giunchiglia. Local Models Semantics, or contextual reason-
ing=Locality+Compatibility. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 127(2):221–259, 2001.
21José Miguel Giménez-García, Antoine Zimmermann, and Pierre Maret. NdFluents: An
Ontology for Annotated Statements with Inference Preservation. In Eva Blomqvist, Diana
Maynard, Aldo Gangemi, Rinke Hoekstra, Pascal Hitzler, and Olaf Hartig, editors, The
Semantic Web – 14th International Conference, ESWC 2017, Portorož, Slovenia, May 28
– June 1, 2017, Proceedings, Part I , volume 10249 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,
pages 638–654. Springer, May 2017.

==== Page 59 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 87
22Fausto Giunchiglia. Contextual Reasoning. Epistemologia , 16:345–364, 1993.
23Guido Governatori, Ho-Pun Lam, Antonino Rotolo, Serena Villata, Ghislain Auguste Ate-
mezing, and Fabien L Gandon. LIVE: a tool for checking licenses compatibility between
vocabularies and data. In International Semantic Web Conference , 2014.
24Ramanathan V. Guha. Contexts: a Formalization and Some Applications . PhD thesis,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA (USA), 1991. Revised version at http://www-formal.
stanford.edu/guha/guha-thesis.ps.
25Ramanathan V. Guha, Rob McCool, and Richard Fikes. Contexts for the Semantic Web. In
Frank van Harmelen, Sheila McIlraith, and Dimitri Plexousakis, editors, The Semantic Web
– ISWC 2004: Third International Semantic Web Conference,Hiroshima, Japan, November
7-11, 2004. Proceedings , volume 3298 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 32–46.
Springer, 2004.
26Governatori Guido, Lam Ho-Pun, Rotolo Antonino, Villata Serena, and Gandon Fabien.
Heuristics for Licenses Composition. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications ,
2013.
27Al Koudous Idrissou, Rinke Hoekstra, Frank van Harmelen, Ali Khalili, and Peter Van den
Besselaar. Is my:sameAs the same as your:sameAs?: Lenticular lenses for context-speciﬁc
identity. In Óscar Corcho, Krzysztof Janowicz, Giuseppe Rizzo, Ilaria Tiddi, and Daniel
Garijo, editors, Proceedings of the Knowledge Capture Conference, K-CAP 2017, Austin,
TX, USA, December 4-6, 2017 , pages 23:1–23:8. ACM, 2017.
28Jeremy J. Carroll, Christian Bizer, Pat Hayes, and Patrick Stickler. A survey of trust in
computer science and the semantic web. Journal of Web Semantics , 5(2):58–71, 2007.
29Günter Karjoth, Matthias Schunter, and Michael Waidner. Platform for enterprise privacy
practices: Privacy-enabled management of customer data. In International Workshop on
Privacy Enhancing Technologies , pages 69–84. Springer, 2002.
30Daniel Kifer and Ashwin Machanavajjhala. No free lunch in data privacy. In Proceedings
of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2011,
Athens, Greece, June 12-16, 2011 , pages 193–204, 2011. URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1989323.1989345, doi:10.1145/1989323.1989345 .
31MichaelKiferandV.S.Subrahmanian. Theoryofgeneralizedannotatedlogicprogramming
and its applications. Journal of Logic Programming , 12(3&4):335–367, 1992.
32Sabrina Kirrane, Alessandra Mileo, and Stefan Decker. Access control and the re-
source description framework: A survey. Semantic Web , 2017. URL: http://www.
semantic-web-journal.net/system/ﬁles/swj1280.pdf.
33Martin Knechtel and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. Query-based access control for ontolo-
gies. In Web Reasoning and Rule Systems – Fourth International Conference, RR 2010,
Bressanone/Brixen, Italy, September 22-24, 2010. Proceedings , pages 73–87, 2010. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15918-3_7, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15918-3\_7 .
34Markus Krötzsch, Maximilian Marx, Ana Ozaki, and Veronika Thost. Attributed Descrip-
tion Logics: Reasoning on Knowledge Graphs. In Jérôme Lang, editor, Proceedings of the
Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, July
13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden , pages 5309–5313. ijcai.org, July 2018.
35T.K. Landauer and S.T. Dumais. How come you know so much? from practical problem
to theory. In D. Hermann, C. McEvoy, M. Johnson, and P. Hertel, editors, Basic and
applied memory: Memory in context. , pages 105–126. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1996.
36T.K. Landauer and S.T. Dumais. A solution to plato’s problem: The latent semantic
analysistheoryoftheacquisition, induction, andrepresentationofknowledge. Psychological
Review, 104:211–240, 1997.
18371

==== Page 60 ====
88 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
37Agnieszka Lawrynowicz. Semantic Data Mining – An Ontology-Based Approach , volume 29
ofStudies on the Semantic Web . IOS Press, 2017. URL: https://doi.org/10.3233/
978-1-61499-746-7-i, doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-746-7-i .
38Changchang Liu, Supriyo Chakraborty, and Prateek Mittal. Dependence makes you vulner-
able: Diﬀerential privacy under dependent tuples. In 23rd Annual Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium, NDSS 2016, San Diego, California, USA, February 21-24,
2016, 2016. URL: http://wp.internetsociety.org/ndss/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2017/
09/dependence-makes-you-vulnerable-diﬀerential-privacy-under-dependent-tuples.pdf.
39John McCarthy. Notes on Formalizing Context. In Ruzena Bajcsy, editor, Proceedings
of the 13th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Chambéry, France,
August 28 – September 3, 1993 , pages 555–562. Morgan Kaufmann, 1991.
40MarcoCasassaMont, SianiPearson, andPeteBramhall. Towards accountablemanagement
of identity and privacy: Sticky policies and enforceable tracing services. In Database and
Expert Systems Applications, 2003. Proceedings. 14th International Workshop on , pages
377–382. IEEE, 2003.
41Rolf Nossum. A decidable multi-modal logic of context. Journal of Applied Logic , 1(1–
2):119–133, 2003.
42Siani Pearson and Marco Casassa Mont. Sticky policies: an approach for privacy manage-
ment across multiple parties. IEEE Computer , 44(9):60–68, 2011.
43Joe Raad, Wouter Beek, Frank van Harmelen, Nathalie Pernelle, and Fatiha Saïs. De-
tecting erroneous identity links on the Web using network metrics. In Denny Vrandecic,
Kalina Bontcheva, Mari Carmen Suárez-Figueroa, Valentina Presutti, Irene Celino, Marta
Sabou, Lucie-Aimée Kaﬀee, and Elena Simperl, editors, The Semantic Web - ISWC 2018
– 17th International Semantic Web Conference, Monterey, CA, USA, October 8-12, 2018,
Proceedings, Part I , volume 11136 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 391–407.
Springer, 2018.
44Md. Kamruzzaman Sarker, Adila Alfa Krisnadhi, and Pascal Hitzler. OWLAx: A Protégé
plugin to support ontology axiomatization through diagramming. In Takahiro Kawamura
and Heiko Paulheim, editors, Proceedings of the ISWC 2016 Posters & Demonstrations
Track co-located with 15th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2016), Kobe,
Japan, October 19, 2016. , volume 1690 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings . CEUR-WS.org,
2016.
45Jia Tao, Giora Slutzki, and Vasant G. Honavar. Secrecy-preserving query answering for
instance checking in EL\mathcal{EL}. In Web Reasoning and Rule Systems – Fourth
International Conference, RR 2010, Bressanone/Brixen, Italy, September 22-24, 2010.
Proceedings , pages 195–203, 2010. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15918-3_16,
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15918-3\_16 .
46Octavian Udrea, Diego Reforgiato Recupero, and V. S. Subrahmanian. Annotated RDF.
ACM Transaction on Computational Logics , 11(2), 2010.
47Serena Villata and Fabien Gandon. Licenses compatibility and composition in the web of
data. In Third International Workshop on Consuming Linked Data (COLD2012) , 2012.
48Xiaokui Xiao, Yufei Tao, and Nick Koudas. Transparent anonymization: Thwarting ad-
versaries who know the algorithm. ACM Trans. Database Syst. , 35(2):8:1–8:48, 2010. URL:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1735886.1735887, doi:10.1145/1735886.1735887 .
49Antoine Zimmermann. RDF 1.1: On Semantics of RDF Datasets, W3C Working Group
Note 25 February 2014. W3c working group note, World Wide Web Consortium, Febru-
ary 25 2014. URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/NOTE-rdf11-datasets-20140225/.
50Antoine Zimmermann and José M. Giménez-García. Contextualizing DL Axioms: Formal-
ization, aNewApproach, andItsProperties. InDanieleDell’Aglio, DarkoAnicic, PayamM.
Barnaghi, Emanuele Della Valle, Deborah L. McGuinness, Loris Bozzato, Thomas Eiter,

==== Page 61 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 89
Martin Homola, and Daniele Porello, editors, Joint Proceedings of the Web Stream Pro-
cessing Workshop (WSP 2017) and the 2nd International Workshop on Ontology Modular-
ity, Contextuality, and Evolution (WOMoCoE 2017) Co-Located with 16th International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2017), Vienna, Austria, October 22nd, 2017 , volume
1936 ofCEUR Workshop Proceedings , pages 74–85. Sun SITE Central Europe (CEUR),
October 2017.
51Antoine Zimmermann, Nuno Lopes, Axel Polleres, and Umberto Straccia. A general frame-
work for representing, reasoning and querying with annotated Semantic Web data. Journal
of Web Semantics , 11:72–95, 2012.
3.22 Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Graphs
Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam – Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs – Amsterdam, NL),
Roberto Navigli (Sapienza University of Rome, IT), Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese (CNR –
Rome, IT), Marieke van Erp (KNAW Humanities Cluster – Amsterdam, NL), and Gerard
de Melo (Rutgers University – Piscataway, US)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Paul Groth, Roberto Navigli, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Marieke van Erp, and Gerard de Melo
Introduction
The Natural Language Processing (NLP) community has focused on machine learning and
data-driven approaches to linguistic problems for several decades now, leading to the recent
proposal of implicit, latent models and representations obtained from large amounts of
training data [ 9,17]. In contrast, the Semantic Technology community has primarily taken
a symbolic approach resulting in the production of explicit, human-readable knowledge
representations [ 7,19]. However, both communities share core goals of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
such as making applications more intelligent and interactive, and, in the longer term, enabling
machine understanding. Knowledge Graphs provide a key contribution to bridging the gap
between the two areas and join forces to achieve their common mission.
Challenges in NLP
A central goal in NLP is to study the design and implementation of abstractive and com-
prehensive representations of the knowledge captured in natural language. In many cases,
this can be achieved by means of knowledge graphs. The problem can be viewed from two
perspectives:
Capturing the richness of text as a knowledge graph: this perspective is charac-
terized by challenges such as extracting and representing:
quantiﬁers (e.g., “in this country a woman gives birth every15 minutes”);
modality (e.g., “it canbe a good opportunity”);
negation and logical structures (e.g., “this solution is notgood”);
temporal aspects, based on context and tenses (e.g., “Barack Obama served as US
President from 2009 to 2017 ”) or based on historical context (e.g., the evolution of
cultural heritage goods);
pragmatics, including coreference and anaphora resolution, common-sense reasoning
and irony detection (e.g., referring to the above sentence, “our job is to ﬁnd that
woman and stop her”).
18371

==== Page 62 ====
90 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Enhancing NLP techniques with knowledge graphs: the key idea here is to
leverage graph-structured knowledge to improve tasks that are typically solved via
mainstream supervised techniques, such as deep learning. This perspective would beneﬁt
several NLP tasks including:
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), where the use of symbolic, structured knowledge
has already been shown to improve the performance [14, 11, 1];
Named Entity Linking, a task analogous to WSD where, instead of associating word
senses, we associate named entities with mentions occurring in context;
Semantic parsing, where the need for structured knowledge is intrinsic to the task and
a graph representing a sentence or a larger text is produced by the system;
Cultural-centric sentiment analysis, where the sentiment associated with certain situ-
ations might vary considerably on a cultural basis, therefore requiring encoding cultural-
speciﬁc knowledge in structured form.
Existing Approaches
There is a large body of work that touches on these themes, including primers on knowledge
graph construction from text111213and work from the emerging community of automated
knowledge base construction14. Likewise, the recent attempts at providing universal struc-
tured representations of text such as Abstract Meaning Representation15, UCCA16and
Universal Dependencies17are of interest, although their representation of world knowledge
is less rich in comparison with knowledge graphs. Additionally, the state of the art in
Word Sense Disambiguation as well as entity linking and distant supervision often leverages
knowledge graphs [12, 8].
To tackle the well-known issue of the knowledge acquisition bottleneck which aﬀects
supervised lexical-semantic disambiguation techniques, recent approaches, like Train-O-Matic
[16], use lexicalized knowledge graphs such as BabelNet [ 15] to create large training data
and scale to arbitrary languages. Relevant research has also been carried out trying to
bridge NLP with the world of knowledge graphs. For example, it is worth mentioning the
paradigm of machine reading [ 4], i.e., systems able to transform natural language text to
formal structured knowledge such that the latter can be interpreted by machines, according
to a shared semantics. The NELL knowledge base [ 10], for instance, is built from triples
extracted from the Web. Tools such as FRED [ 6] and PIKES [ 2] aim at machine reading
beyond the level of subject-predicate-object triples. But while linguistic resources are brought
together in the Linguistic Linked Open Data Cloud, integrating these sources in (statistical
and neural) NLP tools is still an open issue. Relevant examples of datasets part of the
Linguistic Linked Open Data initiative are BabelNet [15], Framester [5], Lexvo.org [3], and
FrameBase [18].
11https://kgtutorial.github.io
12https://kdd2018tutorialt39.azurewebsites.net
13http://usc-isi-i2.github.io/AAAI18Tutorial/
14http://www.akbc.ws/
15https://amr.isi.edu
16http://www.cs.huji.ac.il/~oabend/ucca.html
17http://universaldependencies.org

==== Page 63 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 91
Opportunities
The following opportunities are open at the intersection between knowledge graphs and NLP:
Mutual exchange between knowledge graphs and NLP: Explicit knowledge may
help ﬁlter out incorrect named entity linking candidates based on temporal constraints (a
car model cannot be involved in an accident before it is produced). Accordingly:
Is a knowledge graph expressive enough for NLP? An opportunity is to in-
vestigate new formalisms or theories for enabling knowledge graphs to represent the
richness of natural language;
CanlexicalizedknowledgegraphsimproveNLP? Multilingualknowledgegraphs
on Web scale can be used as background knowledge for addressing NLP tasks more
eﬀectively. For example, NLP tasks that needs to be context-aware or require commons
sense might beneﬁt from lexical knowledge graphs.
Representation issues: for instance, the semantics of an apparently unambiguous word
like copyright has distinct culturally-speciﬁc meanings in diﬀerent countries; some words,
such asikigaiorgezellig, cannot be expressed in other languages and alternative (typically
more general) meanings have to be provided.
How to address cultural speciﬁcity? Applications can be better tailored to users
needs, and barriers in cross-cultural communication can be overcome. This, together with
the above point, are important research opportunities to tailor solutions to the culture
which speaks (or translates from) a certain language.
Is there any eﬀective and usable formal semantics that, from an NLP perspective,
can be consistently adopted to capture the meaning of language (independently of which
language is used)? For instance, work in the ﬁeld of semantic parsing is still struggling
for the right type of structured representation [13].
Conclusions
The time is ripe for NLP and knowledge graphs to get together. Several opportunities
are open which can provide the two areas with mutual beneﬁts and clear performance
improvements, on one hand, in the type and quality of the represented knowledge, and, on
the other hand, on the use of general knowledge for improving text understanding.
References
1Eneko Agirre, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, and Aitor Soroa. Random walks for knowledge-based
word sense disambiguation. Computational Linguistics , 40(1):57–84, 2014.
2Francesco Corcoglioniti, Marco Rospocher, and Alessio Palmero Aprosio. Frame-based
ontology population with pikes. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng. , 28(12):3261–3275,
December 2016.
3Gerard de Melo. Lexvo.org: Language-related information for the Linguistic Linked Data
cloud.Semantic Web , 6(4):393–400, August 2015.
4Oren Etzioni, Michele Banko, and Michael J. Cafarella. Machine reading. In Machine Read-
ing, Papers from the 2007 AAAI Spring Symposium, Technical Report SS-07-06, Stanford,
California, USA, March 26-28, 2007 , pages 1–5, 2007.
5Aldo Gangemi, Mehwish Alam, Luigi Asprino, Valentina Presutti, and Diego Reforgiato
Recupero. Framester: Awidecoveragelinguisticlinkeddatahub. In Knowledge Engineering
and Knowledge Management – 20th International Conference, EKAW 2016, Bologna, Italy,
November 19-23, 2016, Proceedings , pages 239–254, 2016.
18371

==== Page 64 ====
92 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
6AldoGangemi, ValentinaPresutti, DiegoReforgiatoRecupero, AndreaGiovanniNuzzolese,
Francesco Draicchio, and Misael Mongiovì. Semantic Web Machine Reading with FRED.
Semantic Web , 8(6):873–893, 2017.
7Jens Lehmann, Robert Isele, Max Jakob, Anja Jentzsch, Dimitris Kontokostas, Pablo N.
Mendes, Sebastian Hellmann, Mohamed Morsey, Patrick van Kleef, Sören Auer, and Chris-
tian Bizer. Dbpedia – A large-scale, multilingual knowledge base extracted from wikipedia.
Semantic Web , 6(2):167–195, 2015.
8Diana Maynard, Kalina Bontcheva, and Isabelle Augenstein. Natural Language Processing
for the Semantic Web . Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2016.
9Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeﬀrey Dean. Eﬃcient estimation of word
representations in vector space. CoRR, abs/1301.3781, 2013.
10Tom M. Mitchell, William W. Cohen, Estevam R. Hruschka Jr., Partha Pratim Taluk-
dar, Justin Betteridge, Andrew Carlson, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Matthew Gardner, Bryan
Kisiel, Jayant Krishnamurthy, Ni Lao, Kathryn Mazaitis, Thahir Mohamed, Ndapandula
Nakashole, Emmanouil A. Platanios, Alan Ritter, Mehdi Samadi, Burr Settles, Richard C.
Wang, Derry Wijaya, Abhinav Gupta, Xinlei Chen, Abulhair Saparov, Malcolm Greaves,
and Joel Welling. Never-ending learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, January 25-30, 2015, Austin, Texas, USA. , pages 2302–2310,
2015.
11Andrea Moro, Alessandro Raganato, and Roberto Navigli. Entity linking meets word sense
disambiguation: a uniﬁed approach. TACL, 2:231–244, 2014.
12Roberto Navigli. Word sense disambiguation: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. , 41(2):10:1–
10:69, 2009.
13Roberto Navigli. Natural language understanding: Instructions for (present and future)
use. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, July 13-19, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden. , pages 5697–5702, 2018.
14Roberto Navigli and Mirella Lapata. An experimental study of graph connectivity for unsu-
pervised word sense disambiguation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , 32(4):678–
692, 2010.
15Roberto Navigli and Simone Paolo Ponzetto. Babelnet: The automatic construction, eval-
uation and application of a wide-coverage multilingual semantic network. Artif. Intell. ,
193:217–250, 2012.
16Tommaso Pasini and Roberto Navigli. Train-o-matic: Large-scale supervised word sense
disambiguation in multiple languages without manual training data. In Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2017,
Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017 , pages 78–88, 2017.
17Jeﬀrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. Glove: Global vectors
for word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2014, October 25-29, 2014, Doha, Qatar , pages
1532–1543, 2014.
18Jacobo Rouces, Gerard de Melo, and Katja Hose. Framebase: Enabling integration of
heterogeneous knowledge. Semantic Web , 8(6):817–850, 2017.
19Fabian M. Suchanek, Gjergji Kasneci, and Gerhard Weikum. YAGO: A large ontology
from wikipedia and wordnet. J. Web Sem. , 6(3):203–217, 2008.

==== Page 65 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 93
3.23 Machine Learning and Knowledge Graphs
Steﬀen Staab (Universität Koblenz-Landau, DE), Gerard de Melo (Rutgers University –
Piscataway, US), Michael Witbrock (IBM Research – Yorktown Heights, US), Volker Tresp
(Siemens AG – München, DE), Claudio Gutierrez (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile,
CL), Dezhao Song (Thomson Reuters – Eagan, US), and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga-Ngomo (Uni-
versität Paderborn, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Steﬀen Staab, Gerard de Melo, Michael Witbrock, Volker Tresp, Claudio Gutierrez, Dezhao
Song, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo
Machine learning with deep networks, and Knowledge Representation with knowledge graphs
are both advancing rapidly, both in depth and scale. Each has distinct advantages: symbolic
(knowledge graph) representation and inference brings high reliability, explainability and
reusability; machine learning brings the ability to learn from very weak signals (whole image
labels, or reinforcement signals), and to learn to do tasks that humans cannot program. These
sources of power are largely orthogonal, but applicable to similar problems and domains.
Although their advances have been proceeding largely independently, and sometimes in
ignorance of the other, there are early indications that they can be combined eﬀectively. We
believe that the potential value of this combination warrants immediate joint action.
To draw a roadmap for such action, the section is structured as follows:
1.position knowledge graphs in relation to the most closely related machine learning
paradigms (see Sect. 1)
2.identify some major opportunities that knowledge graphs may oﬀer to machine learning
to improve overall learning and inference (see Sect. 3).
3.analyse commonalities and diﬀerences that machine learning systems and knowledge
graph systems oﬀer with regard to manipulation of knowledge (see sect. 2).
4.provide a brief survey of methods and representations that beneﬁt from knowledge graphs
already today (see Sect. 4).
5.sketch future challenges for an integration of the two disciplines.
6.conclude with a call for action.
Positioning Knowledge Graphs with respect to Machine Learning
Paradigms
Traditional machine learning algorithms operate over feature vectors representing objects in
terms of numeric or categorical attributes. The main learning task is to learn a mapping
from such feature vectors to an output prediction in some form. This could be class labels, a
regression score, an unsupervised cluster ID or a latent vector (embedding). In knowledge
induction generally, the representation of an object, event or type can contain explicit
representations of the properties and simple or complex relationships with other objects,
types or events. In knowledge graph learning more speciﬁcally, the representation of an object
can include representations of its direct relationships to other individual objects, thus, the
data is in the form of a graph, consisting of nodes (entities) and labelled edges (relationships
between entities).
There are three main paradigms (for a survey consult [ 13] and [17]) that can be used for
performing the aforementioned learning task.
18371

==== Page 66 ====
94 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
In Inductive Logic Programming, the learned machine learning models make deterministic
or close to deterministic based predictions, formulated in some logic language. ILP-
type approaches also permit the integration of ontological background knowledge. In
ILP, the main object of research is not making the predictions per se, but techniques
for automatically acquiring components of the theory that enables them, in a logical
language,
In Statistical Relational Learning approaches, learned machine learning models make
probabilistic statements formulated either as a conditional probability (as in Probabilistic
Relational Models) or as a potential function (as in Markov Logic Programming).
Currently most popular are models using latent representations. Popular examples are
RESCAL, TransE, HolE and ComplEx. More recent developments are Graph Convolu-
tional approaches.
When considering KGs, most often the learning problem is formulated as a link prediction
problem (“Is component A suitable for problem B?”) or a class (type) prediction problem
(“Is this a promising customer?”). Recently, KGs have been used also in transfer learning
approaches, where the latent representations are shared between knowledge graph models,
and the representations are used in a particular application. This has been the basis, for
instance, for a medical decision support system. Particularly interesting is the pairing of
knowledge graph-based learning with the use of unstructured data. For instance, this research
direction has been used to better understand texts and images, and, conversely, also for
knowledge graph completion.
Managing and Manipulating Knowledge: Comparing Machine Learning
and Knowledge Graphs
The symbolic representations of knowledge encountered in knowledge graphs have a number
of distinct characteristics in comparison with the kinds of latent representations at the
subsymbolic level that can be induced using machine learning.
Latent representations excel at capturing knowledge that is not crisp , e.g., statistical
regularities and similarities [ 3,4]. A knowledge graph, in contrast, captures discrete facts
and it is non-trivial – though still possible [ 5,22] – to quantify the strength of association
between arbitrary items.
An important advantage of latent representations is their ability to generalize beyond
what is known explicitly [ 3]. For instance, while a knowledge graph might store genre
information for several thousands of movies, latent representations may enable us to infer the
genre of additional movies based on various informative cues. However, latent representations
do not straightforwardly allow us to keep track of exceptions to typical patterns. They may
learn the typical attributes of 14-year old Canadian teens, but would not be able to keep
track of the fact that Computer scientist Erik Demaine completed his Bachelor’s degree at
the age of 14 and was awarded his PhD degree at the University of Waterloo at the age of 20.
More generally, latent representations typically fail to record precise identities . Dense
vector representations do not normally accurately keep track of who is married to whom.
Services such as Google or Siri would not try to rely on latent representations to deliver
answers to queries such as “Where was Einstein born?’ [ 10]’. Depending on the application,
it may be important to distinguish precisely whether someone won the Nobel Prize for
Literature or rather a similar – but distinct – literature award.

==== Page 67 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 95
This aﬀects the interpretability of the knowledge and the explainability and thus also
trustworthiness of results derived from such knowledge. Latent representations consist of
series of numbers without any obvious human interpretation. The knowledge in a knowledge
graph, in contrast, can straightforwardly be inspected.
The inability to record information precisely further also aﬀects the updatability of the
stored knowledge. While one can easily add a new fact to a knowledge graph, updating latent
representations is often non-trivial and even if it is possible, the newly added information
may still fail to be reﬂected the predictions made from the representations. The same applies
when removing facts. One can easily remove a fact from a knowledge graph, but updating a
machine learning model to capture such a change is challenging.
This suggests that representation learning alone cannot exhaustively address all knowledge
needs of modern AI-driven applications. The machine learning components in conversational
agents, Web search, and intelligent decision support systems will have to draw on large
repositories of knowledge to obtain the desired results.
Knowledge Graph Assets for Machine Learning: Grand Opportunities
Most of human learning is intrinsically linked to knowledge that the individual possesses.
Thus, we believe that bringing knowledge graphs to machine learning will systematically
improve the accuracy and extend the range of machine learning capabilities. In particular,
we see the following four grand opportunities:
1.Data eﬃciency: When data is sparse, knowledge structures may help to ﬁll the gap.
Knowledge graph abstractions may be used for coping with data sparsity by generating
additional training data, e.g. negative data that would lead to inconsistent interpretations,
or by giving indications of how to aggregate uncertain predictions over categories related
or similar in the knowledge graph. Thus, knowledge graphs may improve data eﬃciency.
2.Zero-shot learning describe the challenge to cope with previously unencountered types
of situations. The combination of induction from machine learning and deduction from
knowledge graphs provides for the opportunity to deal, e.g., with pictures where the
type of situation did not appear in the training data. One example might be a group of
dark wild boars roaming a street at night where an autonomous car is driving and thus
encountering a situation that might not have been in the training data at all.
3.Consistent and coherent structured predictions: The more complex the actual
prediction the less accurate it tends to be. Structured predictions may aim at predicting a
whole course of events (e.g. how a video will continue, how a patient’s illness will develop),
but not all of these predictions may exhibit the same level of consistency. Knowledge
graphs let us check which predictions might be consistent/inconsistent or coherent/inco-
herent with our available knowledge. For instance, the most likely classiﬁcation of traﬃc
signs – even under adversarial attacks – might be re-assessed with regard to a vehicle’s
knowledge graph.
4.Succinct explanations: Several diﬃculties arise when explaining predictions made by
machine learning systems. One issue is the implicit representations causing the predictions
(e.g. neural curve ﬁtting). A second problem is the possible low level of explanation a
system might give, even when it works on explicit representations. A third issue may
result from the sheer volume of explanation produced, and, fourth, an actual user might
only be interested in a speciﬁc detail of the overall explanation. Knowledge graphs may
alleviate all these four issues by (i) mapping the explanation to (ii) an appropriate level
of generalization, (iii) summarizing the found phenomenon and (iv) comparing this to a
state of knowledge that the user might already have.
18371

==== Page 68 ====
96 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
These are a few opportunities arising from the usage of knowledge graphs in machine
learning, which we consider could lead to step changes. More will likely be developed and
many gradual improvements may result from progressing machine learning to learn not only
from tables, but also from knowledge graphs of various levels of expressiveness and size.
Vice versa, as reported also in other sections of this report, creating and maintaining
knowledge tasks constitutes a major eﬀort, which beneﬁts already know beneﬁts a lot from
machine learning [7] – and probably even more so in the future.
Representations and Methods
Some prominent cases
1.Language/Images:
Question answering
Question answering is one important application of knowledge graphs. KGs contain a
wealth of information and question answering could be a good way to help end users to
more eﬀectively and also more eﬃciently retrieve information from the KGs. Various
approaches have been developed in this area and they are targeting diﬀerent types of
knowledge bases. A number of challenges pertaining to using knowledge graphs for
question answering are presented in [9].
Berant et al. [ 1] developed the SEMPRE system that translates/parses a natural
language question into a logic form. The approach takes into account both free text
and a knowledge base (more speciﬁcally, freebase) when translating the questions.
TR Discover [ 20] takes advantage of a feature-based context free grammar in order to
translate natural language questions into a ﬁrst-order logic representation. The logic
representation serves as an intermediate representation and it is further translated to
executable queries in diﬀerent query languages, including Cypher (Neo4J), SPARQL
and SQL. By further adopting a deep learning-based approach, the system tags the
tokens in a natural language question in order to reduce its dependence on the grammar
[19].
Deep learning-based approaches have been actively developed for question answering,
not only for RDF-based knowledge bases but also other types of databases. decaNLP
[11] is a recent system that provides question answering capability against relational
databases. It provides the general concept that a natural language question can be
represented by the question itself and its context (e.g., PoS tagging, semantic role
labeling result and relation extraction result). Instead of learning on a single task, it
tries to perform multi-task learning on various tasks and observed better performances
on some of the tasks.
In addition to adopting fully automatic query parsing, CrowdQ [ 6] also incorporates
crowd-sourcing techniques for understanding natural language questions.
Machine translation. [12]
Natural language generation (NLG) for structured data.
The NLG community has an increasing interest in the generation of natural language
from knowledge graphs, especially as this interface promises to generate the interface
between the data-centric world in which knowledge graphs dwell and humans. Chal-

==== Page 69 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 97
lenges such as E2E18,19[14] and the WebNLG challenge [ 8] provide ﬁrst indications as
to KGs a potential lingua franca for human-machine interaction.
Early approaches to NLG are mostly template-based, which prevents them from being
easily adapted to other domains [ 16]. There are also approaches that compare and
contrast deep learning-based and template-based approaches [15, 2].
Caption generation for images
Video prediction
2.Medical / Drug:
Drug activity prediction
Transparency in the knowledge, behaviour and assumption change in the clinical
decision process.
The Clinical Data Intelligence Project. The notion of “clinical data intelligence” refers
to the integration of medical data from heterogeneous resources, the combination of
the extracted information, and the generation of medical clinically-relevant knowledge
about patients or treatments. [ 21]. Again here the semantic integration, that is,
the codiﬁcation of data, metadata and relationships with other sources and user
description together in one standard format, allows us to uniformly apply machine
learning techniques to this now uniﬁed knowledge.
Blue Brain Nexus20is a data repository and metadata catalogue organizing (agnostic
of the domain) that treats provenance as a ﬁrst-class citizen, thus facilitating the
tracking of the origin of data and how it is being used, thus allowing to assess data
quality.
3.Link Recommendation
4.Robotics. RoboBrain (2014): “Building such an engine brings with it the challenge
of dealing with multiple data modalities including symbols, natural language, haptic
senses, robot trajectories, visual features and many others. The knowledge stored in the
engine comes from multiple sources including physical interactions that robots have while
performing tasks (perception, planning and control), knowledge bases from the Internet
and learned representations from several robotics research groups.” [18].
Integrating these data sources to build a dataset requires importing and documenting in
the data the sources, types, interrelations, etc., that is, building a knowledge graph.
5.Deep Learning
Knowledge Graphs supporting DL for prediction and decision support
Transfer Learning: from KGs to DL
Knowledge Graph supported DL Perception Systems
Autonomous training of new DL models using data stored in KG, based on problem
description (completely automate training of a DL classiﬁer or transformer by storing
the data in a KG and identifying the relevant training examples using inference).
Similarly, supporting completely automated Data Science
Demonstrate storing outputs from a DL system in a KG in a form that allows another
DL system to perform better on a new task
E.g. translation system learns a new language with few examples using grammatical
or semantic knowledge acquired elsewhere
E.g. same KG improves caption generation
18http://www.macs.hw.ac.uk/InteractionLab/E2E/
19https://inlg2018.uvt.nl/special-session-generation-challenges/
20https://bluebrain.epﬂ.ch/page-153280-en.html
18371

==== Page 70 ====
98 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Novel Representations and Paradigms
Knowledge about inference; rules, higher order, Meta knowledge, problem-solving know-
ledge
Learning to do inference or do it better
Interpretation
Conclusions and Calls to Action
Conclude by comparing the two:
Explicit KG representations Implicit KG representations
Retrieving facts Trivial Noisy
Adding facts Trivial Challenging
Removing facts Trivial Challenging
Generalizing facts Requires additional machine
learningStraightforward
Computing similarities Requires graph algorithms /
weightsStraightforward
Interpretability Trivial Very limited
Call for action for academia (machine learning, data base and knowledge graph com-
munities):
Treat knowledge/metadata/provenance as ﬁrst order citizens
Call for action for funding agencies
China does it! Japan does it?
Call-for-action for knowledge graph users (industry)
Build and publish knowledge graphs in various domains for machine learnig
Exampleproponents: ThomsonReuters(https://permid.org/),BlueBrainNexus, Amazon
Product Knowledge Graphs and Alexa AI Knowledge Graph
References
1Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on
freebase from question-answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2013, 18-21 October 2013, Grand Hyatt
Seattle, Seattle, Washington, USA, A meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of the
ACL, pages 1533–1544. ACL, 2013.
2Charese Smiley, Elnaz Davoodi, Dezhao Song, Frank Schilder. The E2E NLG Challenge:
A Tale of Two Systems. In INLG 2018 , pages 472-477, 2018.
3Jiaqiang Chen, Niket Tandon, Charles Darwis Hariman, and Gerard de Melo. WebBrain:
Joint neural learning of large-scale commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of ISWC 2016 ,
pages 102–118. Semantic Web Science Association, 2016.
4Gerard de Melo. Inducing conceptual embedding spaces from Wikipedia. In Proceedings
of WWW 2017 . ACM, 2017.
5Gerard de Melo and Gerhard Weikum. On the utility of automatically generated wordnets.
InProceedings of the Fourth Global WordNet Conference (GWC 2008) , pages 147–161.
University of Szeged, December 2007.

==== Page 71 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 99
6Gianluca Demartini, Beth Trushkowsky, Tim Kraska, and Michael J. Franklin. Crowdq:
Crowdsourced query understanding. In CIDR 2013, Sixth Biennial Conference on Innov-
ative Data Systems Research, Asilomar, CA, USA, January 6-9, 2013, Online Proceedings .
www.cidrdb.org, 2013.
7Xin Dong, Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Geremy Heitz, Wilko Horn, Ni Lao, Kevin Murphy,
Thomas Strohmann, Shaohua Sun, and Wei Zhang. Knowledge vault: a web-scale approach
to probabilistic knowledge fusion. In The 20th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’14, New York, NY, USA – August 24 –
27, 2014, pages 601–610, 2014.
8Claire Gardent, Anastasia Shimorina, Shashi Narayan, and Laura Perez-Beltrachini. Cre-
ating training corpora for micro-planners. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Vancouver, Canada,
August 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.
9Konrad Höﬀner, Sebastian Walter, Edgard Marx, Ricardo Usbeck, Jens Lehmann, and
Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. Survey on challenges of question answering in the semantic
web.Semantic Web , 8(6):895–920, 2017.
10Huadong Li, Yafang Wang, Gerard de Melo, Changhe Tu, and Baoquan Chen. Multimodal
question answering over structured data with ambiguous entities. In Proceedings of WWW
2017 (Cognitive Computing Track) . ACM, 2017.
11Bryan McCann, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. The nat-
ural language decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.08730 , 2018.
12Diego Moussallem, Matthias Wauer, and Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo. Machine translation
using semanticweb technologies: A survey. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents
on the World Wide Web , 0(0), 2018.
13Maximilian Nickel, Kevin Murphy, Volker Tresp, and Evgeniy Gabrilovich. A review of
relational machine learning for knowledge graphs. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104(1):11–33,
2016.
14Jekaterina Novikova, Ondrej Dušek, and Verena Rieser. The E2E dataset: New challenges
for end-to-end generation. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest
Group on Discourse and Dialogue , Saarbrücken, Germany, 2017. arXiv:1706.09254.
15Yevgeniy Puzikov and Iryna Gurevych. E2e nlg challenge: Neural models vs. templates. In
E2E NLG Challenge , 2017.
16Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. Building applied natural language generation systems. Nat-
ural Language Engineering , 3(1):57–87, 1997.
17Achim Rettinger, Uta Lösch, Volker Tresp, Claudia d’Amato, and Nicola Fanizzi. Mining
the semantic web. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 24(3):613–662, 2012.
18Ashutosh Saxena, Ashesh Jain, Ozan Sener, Aditya Jami, Dipendra Kumar Misra, and
Hema Swetha Koppula. Robobrain: Large-scale knowledge engine for robots. CoRR,
abs/1412.0691, 2014.
19Dezhao Song and Frank Schilder. Systems and methods for automatic semantic token
tagging, August 9 2018. US Patent App. 15/889,947.
20Dezhao Song, Frank Schilder, Charese Smiley, Chris Brew, Tom Zielund, Hiroko Bretz,
Robert Martin, Chris Dale, John Duprey, Tim Miller, and Johanna Harrison. TR discover:
A natural language interface for querying and analyzing interlinked datasets. In Mar-
celo Arenas, Óscar Corcho, Elena Simperl, Markus Strohmaier, Mathieu d’Aquin, Kavitha
Srinivas, Paul T. Groth, Michel Dumontier, Jeﬀ Heﬂin, Krishnaprasad Thirunarayan, and
Steﬀen Staab, editors, The Semantic Web – ISWC 2015 – 14th International Semantic Web
Conference, Bethlehem, PA, USA, October 11-15, 2015, Proceedings, Part II , volume 9367
ofLecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 21–37. Springer, 2015.
18371

==== Page 72 ====
100 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
21Daniel Sonntag, Volker Tresp, Sonja Zillner, Alexander Cavallaro, Matthias Hammon, An-
dré Reis, Peter A. Fasching, Martin Sedlmayr, Thomas Ganslandt, Hans-Ulrich Prokosch,
Klemens Budde, Danilo Schmidt, Carl Hinrichs, Thomas Wittenberg, Philipp Daumke,
and Patricia G. Oppelt. The clinical data intelligence project – A smart data initiative.
Informatik Spektrum , 39(4):290–300, 2016.
22Ganggao Zhu and Carlos A. Iglesias. Computing semantic similarity of concepts in know-
ledge graphs. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng. , 29(1):72–85, January 2017.
3.24 Human and Social Factors in Knowledge Graphs
Marta Sabou (TU Wien, AT), Elena Simperl (University of Southampton, GB), Eva Blomqvist
(Linköping University, SE), Paul Groth (University of Amsterdam, NL & Elsevier Labs, NL),
Sabrina Kirrane (Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT), Gerard de Melo (Rutgers University –
Piscataway, US), Barend Mons (Leiden University Medical Center, NL), Heiko Paulheim
(Universität Mannheim, DE), Lydia Pintscher (Wikimedia Deutschland, DE), Valentina
Presutti (STLab, ISTC-CNR, IT), Juan F. Sequeda (Capsenta Inc. – Austin, US), and
Cogan Matthew Shimizu (Wright State University – Dayton, US)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Marta Sabou, Elena Simperl, Eva Blomqvist, Paul Groth, Sabrina Kirrane, Gerarrd de Melo,
Barend Mons, Heiko Paulheim, Lydia Pintscher, Valentina Presutti, Juan F. Sequeda, and Cogan
Matthew Shimizu
Knowledge graphs are created in socio-technical systems. The fewest of them are produced
without any form of human or social activity. In most cases, whether it is community projects
such as Wikidata and the Linked Open Data Cloud or enterprise knowledge graphs such as
Amazon’s product graph, various knowledge acquisition and curation aspects can hardly be
fully automated for technical or operational reasons. Through their applications, knowledge
graphs also reach people as end-users or consumers, and fuel algorithmic decision-making
with potentially far-reaching economic and social impact.
Exploring the human and social factors of knowledge graphs has hence extensive beneﬁts:
It aids tech designers come up with methods and tools that support people at their
knowledge graph work.
It gives insight into the range of skills required to create, maintain and use knowledge
graphs, hence making projects more eﬀective.
It helps develop an understanding of the social processes that underpin community
projects such as Wikidata and DBpedia, and of the links between the social make-up of
the community and the qualities of its outcomes.
In the same context, it can assist community managers in improving teams’ performance
and collaboration, and spot areas that could beneﬁt from a greater diversity of skills,
interests and opinions.
It informs the design of useful interfaces and representations of knowledge graphs, partic-
ularly towards application end-users with limited technical abilities.
It supports the generation of richer explanations and other forms of transparency and
accountability of AI systems.
People and communities engage with knowledge graphs in multiple ways. Interactions
can be explicit (for instance, adding a statement to Wikidata) or implicit (for instance,
clicking on a product in Amazon’s knowledge graph when browsing the Amazon’s website).
To characterise them, we considered three dimensions:

==== Page 73 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 101
Scenarios (centred around the types of knowledge graphs created and the underlying
processes): open vs. closed (e.g. in an enterprise); generic vs. domain-speciﬁc.
Lifecyle of KGs (types of activities and the ways each activity impacts KGs): from KG
creation to developing KG-based applications to using those applications.
Types of users (roles across scenarios and KG lifecycle and their characteristics, needs, and
expectations): individual vs. community contributors; lay people vs. experts; developers
vs. end-users.
Following these dimensions, we discussed open research challenges, which require input
from several disciplines: knowledge representation, knowledge engineering, social computing,
social sciences, behavioural economics, software engineering and HCI.
Challenges
Tailored support to KG engineering. The scenarios introduced earlier greatly inﬂuence the
choice of methods and tools to create and curate knowledge graphs. Organisations operate
within existing process, project and quality assurance frameworks. Grassroots initiatives
tend to deﬁne such frameworks as they advance with their work, leveraging the skills, ideas
and views of the participants. Hence, an approach suitable to develop a knowledge graph
in an enterprise context is likely to need substantial alterations if applied to a bottom-up,
community-driven project.
Existing knowledge and ontology engineering literature is rich in methodologies, tools,
and best practices, which should be revisited and updated to state-of-the-art technology
and practice. For open, decentralised scenarios, we have access to several notable initiatives
which could be subject to observational studies, interventions, and experiments to map the
research space and derive guidelines for system designers and community managers. As
organisations embrace participatory approaches in internal contexts to seek a broader base
of contributions and ideas, it would be equally interesting to study how ideas and lessons
learned in large community projects could transfer to enterprise or government contexts.
We have identiﬁed the following needs:
Update existing methodological guidelines to match the skills and requirements of their
audiences, oﬀer bespoke support to diﬀerent scenarios, and be clear about the scenarios
they work best in.
Add advanced features for the use of patterns in tool, for example through search and
composition.
Provide platforms and champion the publication of case studies and experience reports,
for example in the form of data study groups that bring together experts in databases,
RDF, knowledge acquisition, online communities etc.
Create a stronger culture of user-centric research and encourage comprehensive evaluations
of new methodologies, for example through the use of crowdsourcing.
Transparency and accountability in AI. Knowledge graphs are a valuable resource. They
empower decision-making algorithms and support people in seeking information. In a world
of ﬁlter bubbles and fake news, is it more important than ever to be able to explains how
particular outcomes or conclusions came about and knowledge graphs can turn into powerful
gateways to produce more transparent and accountable AI ecosystems. Considering the three
dimensions introduced earlier, any approach to explainability will have to be tailored to
the speciﬁc scenario, activities and roles involved, from developers issuing SPARQL queries
against Wikidata to end-users asking questions to intelligent assistants such as Siri, which
leverages Wikidata to generate answers.
18371

==== Page 74 ====
102 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
We discussed features of knowledge graph representation which would help developers add
transparency and accountability by design to their knowledge graph applications. Provenance
and trust, as well as the ability to capture knowledge diversity were mentioned in this
context. Challenges remain in understanding the best ways to use these features, which
some knowledge graphs already oﬀer, in applications and to create tools and incentives for
developers to explore them in greater detail. More research is needed, for example in the
form of studies using ethnographic,as well as other qualitative and quantitative methods
to build a better understanding how developers work with knowledge graphs and how it
could be improved to support them in delivering transparent, accountable knowledge graph
experiences.
In addition, the knowledge graph community should consider existing work from related
ﬁelds on frameworks and approaches to communicate provenance and uncertainty of data
and analyses built on top of knowledge graphs to support question answering, information
retrieval and decision making. There are also opportunities to advance the state of the art in
human data interaction and data visualisation, as most relevant literature has focused on
tabular, numerical data rather than graphs, possibly labelled in multiple languages.
Finally, while some knowledge graph projects have been ahead of the curve in raising
awareness about the need to promote knowledge diversity, in most cases we have a rather
limited understanding of how biased knowledge graphs are. By the nature of knowledge
representation, knowledge graphs will capture an simpliﬁed view of the world. They may
abstract from particular details, make choices on how to model speciﬁc aspects and vary in
the quality and level of detail of the information they cover.
We need more research into knowledge representation approaches that can tackle complex-
ity and methods and tools to make it easier for developers to support and facilitate contextual
depth, diversity and potentially conﬂicting viewpoints when processing and analysing inform-
ation from a knowledge graph. Studies in other disciplines, including cognitive, behavioural,
social and political sciences can oﬀer very interesting impulses to put forward proposals that
are not only novel from a technology point of view, but also match the capabilities, needs and
expectations of the people engaging with the information – some participants noted there
are lessons to be learned from existing proposals such as link sets which were not eﬀective in
user studies [1].
Besides ways to capture and use additional knowledge graph features, there is a need
for representations and methods to study the inherent biases knowledge graphs suﬀer from
as they evolve in time. Data ingestion, social processes and the availability of resources
and expertise inadvertently lead to imbalances in the content and quality of a knowledge
graph, which may be remedied in time. To be able to do so eﬀectively, we need new models
and techniques to analyse and improve the quality of knowledge graphs (e.g. completeness,
correctness) and to conceptualise and measure diversity. We discussed the challenges arising
from deﬁning a suitable framework of reference, as biases in a knowledge graph may merely
reﬂect biases in the data sources it relies on. Visual analytics and dashboards, similar to what
Wikidata does with geographical coverage of entities, could be used to monitor additions
and changes to a knowledge graph and detect anomalies, though more research is needed to
understand user requirements for these tools in a knowledge graph context.
Make knowledge graph research truly interdisciplinary. There are many techniques that
can facilitate engagement with knowledge graphs: entity-centric exploratory search; narrative
generation; or games with a purpose. To be eﬀective, these techniques need to be better
aligned with theory and empirical evidence from cognitive sciences, which teach us how
diﬀerent demographics and professional groups create, organise and make sense of knowledge.

==== Page 75 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 103
For example, healthcare practitioners are used to work with lists of concepts, rather than
networks and graphs. Studies in cognitive sciences can help evaluate knowledge representation
decisions and inform the design of the tools and applications through which people interact
with knowledge graph structures, suggesting eﬀective ways to render and present them.
The UX of entity-centric exploratory tasks could be greatly enhanced if considering
theories about the nature of learning and the best ways to support it. For example, tools
could start by showing users entities they are familiar with, or entities that are far away
from their area of expertise, depending on the eﬀect that needs to be achieved. Learning
considerations should also inform the design of evaluations and benchmarks, which should
be extended to capture the eﬀects a particular technique or algorithm had on the reference
model of their users.
Natural language generation (NLG) can be used to create text summaries of datasets
which are more accessible to audiences that are not familiar with the particulars of data
modeling and engineering. Accessibility is critical to allow a greater range of people and
communities to contribute to knowledge graphs. In open contexts, this is very much aligned
with their diversity and inclusivity agendas. For enterprise knowledge graphs, broadening the
base of contributors is a pathway to sustainability. Existing narrative generation techniques
follow a tech-centric approach, using rule-based templates to capture domain knowledge or
data-heavy deep learning. The underlying models should incorporate insights from theoretical
and empirical cognitive science to ensure that the text they produce matches the abilities
and needs of the people using it.
Beyond text, the human data interaction community is exploring alternative data repres-
entations, interfaces and experiences, for instance by using games with a purpose, interactive
storytelling, orvirtualandaugmentedreality. Theseapproachescouldbeappliedtoknowledge
graphs, which through their rich content and connectedness oﬀer an interesting playground
for the development of bespoke projects that appeal to broader, non-expert audiences in
various professional roles.
In summary, there is a need to reach out to communities traditionally involved in studying
human and social factors. All challenges discussed by the group would beneﬁt from insights
and methods from complementary disciplines, including HCI and behavioural, cognitive,
social and political sciences. We should as a community strive to support the organisation of
workshops at venues such as CSCW, CHI, Information Science and Web Science, including
researchers and practitioners from other ﬁelds early on.
Summary
In summary, this working group concluded that a major challenge related to human and
social factors of knowledge graphs lies in leveraging theory, methods and empirical evidence
from other disciplines in order to:
Understand the cognitive and social processes by which knowledge (and knowledge shaped
as a graph) emerges.
Identify patterns and best practices to support these processes.
Improve developer experience to allow them to create, curate and reuse knowledge graph
eﬀectively.
Build an understanding of the frameworks, methods and tools required to support
developers create knowledge graph applications that are transparent and accountable by
design.
18371

==== Page 76 ====
104 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Provide guidelines and best practices to help developers use and appreciate large-scale
knowledge graphs that are inherently messy, diverse and evolving.
Understand what social features (for example, expertise, motivation, team composition)
inﬂuence what qualities of the graph.
References
1Al Koudous Idrissou, Rinke Hoekstra, Frank van Harmelen, Ali Khalili, and Peter van den
Besselaar. Is my:sameas the same as your:sameas?: Lenticular lenses for context-speciﬁc
identity. In Proceedings of the Knowledge Capture Conference , K-CAP 2017, pages 23:1–
23:8, New York, NY, USA, 2017. ACM.
3.25 Applications of Knowledge Graphs
Sarven Capadisli (TIB – Hannover, DE) and Lydia Pintscher (Wikimedia – Germany, DE)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sarven Capadisli and Lydia Pintscher
We report on two application areas for knowledge graphs as well as potential research
directions.
Scholarly Knowledge
Findability and use of scholarly and scientiﬁc knowledge is integral to the advancement of
human knowledge. Scholarly knowledge includes a range of research artefacts that needs to
be described and connected. These include research articles, peer reviews, research data,
social interactions like review requests and notiﬁcations in general, as well as diﬀerent kinds
of annotations on research objects.
The common methods of access and (re)use of scholarly output is technically and ethically
inadequate for the society at large. By enabling accessible scholarly knowledge graphs as
well as applications which make use of it, we hope to enable universal access to previous
research. By improving the availability through accessible knowledge graphs, we can facilitate
discovery and building on existing research.
The construction of a scholarly commons that meets the core requirements of a scholarly
communication system, i.e. registration, awareness, certiﬁcation, and archiving functions in
scientiﬁc communication [ 3], that is accessible to both humans and machines would require
capturing information at diﬀerent parts of the process. The incentive for content creators
and consumers of content would require lowering the barriers through useful and accessible
applications.
Some of the open challenges include identifying and building mechanisms to deal with
disagreements both within scholarly knowledge as well as knowledge on the Web at large.
Improving tooling to create knowledge graphs also facilitates the discovery of knowledge.
For example, academic authors can ﬁnd relevant scientiﬁc assertions during the writing
process. Hence, one of the research directions is to investigate and develop eﬀective ways to
represent ﬁne-grained information. Knowledge graphs at diﬀerent degrees of abstraction can
be formulated, whether they are about a collection of documents, at the document level, or
for any unit of information.

==== Page 77 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 105
Other research directions would include the creation and management of scholarly journals
that are machine-readable. One of the related challenges in this respect is an aim to decouple
theregistration andcertiﬁcation functions in scientiﬁc communication so that free expression
can be exercised towards materialising open and accessible scholarly knowledge [4].
Further research directions would include the development of interoperable applications
to improve discovery, accessibility, integrability, and reusability of knowledge graphs. More
generally, facilitating interactions with knowledge graphs where applications enabling read-
write operations on information at distributed locations with diﬀerent access controls,
factoring in user’s privacy and security, as well as, allowing multiple researcher identities (eg
personal, professional) working on diﬀerent parts of a graph. For example, along the lines of
research and development around decentralised and interoperable systems [1, 2].
Wikidata
Wikidata [ 5] is a knowledge base that has gained a lot of attention over the last years and is
growing. It has various interesting features that the knowledge graph community can learn
from. It also faces a number of challenges.
Wikidata’s data model has a number of features that make dealing with diverse knowledge
possible for its community. These include the ability to record conﬂicting data as well as
qualifying data with additional statements to for example give it temporal information and
record the provenance of the data. It strikes an interesting balance between a strict ontology
that makes re-use easy and a ﬂexible data model that makes it possible to capture the
complexity of the world.
Through its open and ﬂexible nature Wikidata also faces a number of challenges. These
can roughly be grouped along the data lifecycle of import, clean-up/maintenance and export.
Some of them include:
During import it is a challenge to understand what consequences adding a particular
change will have. This includes violating of constraints in the system or unintended
changes to the larger ontology.
Wikidata lacks provenance information in the form of references for a considerable part
of the existing statements it contains. It is a challenge to ﬁnd references in an automated
way for this existing data.
Some of the concepts in Wikidata are not separated cleanly (e.g. a website and the
company operating the website being treated as one accidentally). It is not trivial to ﬁnd
such concepts in order to separate them more cleanly.
By its nature Wikidata is concept-centric. This makes it harder to see and understand
the ontology and how individual classes ﬁt into the ontology. Becauses of this lack of
high-level overview it is easy for editors to make mistakes that have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the ontology without realizing it.
With its hundreds of millions of statements it is unavoidable that some of them become
outdated, vandalized or otherwise wrong. These are hard to spot for editors and without
more visibility this data is propagated to the users of that data.
Users of Wikidata’s data want to understand the state of the data before committing
to using it in their application or visualisation. It is currently not possible to get an
overview of the quality of a particular subset of the data.
When using Wikidata’s data a number of statements will have multiple values like the
prizes a famous person won. Wikidata’s built-in mechanism to rank those values by are
not always suﬃcient.
18371

==== Page 78 ====
106 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
Querying Wikidata’s data is an important way to access the data and gain new insights.
It requires writing SPARQL queries, which is not possible for a signiﬁcant part of the
intended users – especially considering the data model’s special features (qualiﬁers, ranks,
references).
We invite the research community in helping us address these challenges in order to build
and maintain a general-purpose knowledge graph for everyone.
References
1S. Capadisli, A. Guy, R. Verborgh, C. Lange, S. Auer, and T. Berners-Lee. Decentralised
authoring, annotations and notiﬁcations for a read-write web with dokieli. 2017.
2E. Mansour, A.V. Sambra, S. Hawke, M. Zereba, S. Capadisli, A. Ghanem, A. Aboulnaga,
and T. Berners-Lee. A demonstration of the solid platform for social web applications. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference Companion on World Wide Web , WWW
’16 Companion, pages 223–226. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Com-
mittee, 2016.
3H. Roosendaal and P. Geurts. Forces and functions in scientiﬁc communication: an analysis
of their interplay. cooperative research information systems in physics, august 31-september
4 1997.(oldenburg, germany), 1997.
4H. Van de Sompel and A. Treloar. A perspective on archiving the scholarly web. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Preservation (iPRES) , pages 194–
198, 2014.
5D. Vrandečić and M. Krötzsch. Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledgebase. Communic-
ations of the ACM , 57(10):78–85, 2014.
3.26 Knowledge Graphs and the Web
Sarven Capadisli (TIB – Hannover, DE), Michael Cochez (Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt Augustin,
DE), Claudio Gutierrez (University of Chile – Santiago de Chile, CL), Andreas Harth
(Fraunhofer IIS – Nürnberg, DE), and Antoine Zimmermann (École des Mines de Saint-
Étienne, FR)
License
 Creative Commons BY 3.0 Unported license
©Sarven Capadisli, Michael Cochez, Claudio Gutierrez, Andreas Harth, and Antoine Zimmermann
Introduction
The web provides a large store of data and information from which knowledge graphs can be
constructed. The raw input that can be sourced from the web for constructing knowledge
graphs diﬀers in formality, in variety and scope, from text to HTML and XSL documents
to RDF. Some knowledge graphs rely on information extracted from unstructured sources,
while other knowledge graphs focus on information already available as RDF.
In the text, we focus on diﬀerent ways to organise knowledge graphs built from structured
data such as RDF or other graph-centric frameworks.
In this report we focus essentially on the counterpoint between centrally organized versus
decentralized knowledge graphs. Some current examples of centralised or organisational
knowledge graphs are the Google Knowledge Graph (former: Freebase), Wikidata, and
DBpedia. Examples of decentralized or personal knowledge graphs are the Linking Open
Data (LOD) cloud and the collection of all Linked Data on the web. The web with its
decentralised architecture is able to accommodate in principle both approaches.

==== Page 79 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 107
Problem Statement
Centralised knowledge graphs and decentralised knowledge graphs exhibit diﬀerent qualities.
To make informed decisions on which of these designs to use, we need to ﬁnd out the trade-oﬀs
between them. Once these quality criteria are established, we want to know whether these
aspects are inherent to the fact whether the knowledge graph is centralised or decentralised.
If they are not, we want to be able to transfer approaches and techniques in one design
approach to the other.
The Centralised vs. Decentralised Spectrum
There is a spectrum of knowledge graphs being published: on the one hand, the more
organisational-centric, which are centralised, and on the other hand the more individual-
centric, which are decentralised.
The spectrum between centralised and decentralised approaches has been a topic of
research in information systems [ 2,1] and databases [ 7] in general and in personal data [ 4],
social networks [3] and querying the Web of Data [5, 6] in particular.
In the following, we contrast properties of centralised and decentralised knowledge graphs.
We identiﬁed the following characteristics. We start with centralised knowledge graphs and
ﬁrst list characteristics related to organization, then move on to characteristics related to
implementation.
Survivability and Robustness: Centralised knowledge graphs can be controlled by a single
entity that can decide strategic issues, thus giving more powerful control over all aspects
of the knowledge graph. This can be beneﬁcial for their owners but, with regard to
survivability and robustness, not necessarily for its users (e.g., the shutdown of Freebase).
Besides organizational aspects, centralised knowledge graphs rely on one big node and
can thus can become unavailable for technical reasons.
Stability: Centralised knowledge graphs have uniform terms of use, a degree of promise of
longevity and availability. Hence, they have a more stable behaviour and are less likely
to suﬀer from disappearing links or can at least give a clear indication when a link would
disappear, or preserve the provenance information of changes made.
Curation: Centralised knowledge graphs have a clear curation mechanism in place, which
is expected to have a positive eﬀect on the consistency and quality of the data.
Rights and License: Centralized knowledge graphs usually have a clear license. Wikidata
and DBpedia are intended as public resources, indicated by their respective CC0 and
CC BY-SA 3.0 Unported licence. Other organizational knowledge graphs are typically
seen as an internal organizational asset. Sometimes parts of these are also made publicly
available, especially for reasons of interoperability with other systems. Examples include
the schemas developed by schema.org used by search engines to extract information from
web pages and Thomson Reuters’ permid.org, which has a public part licensed using
CC-BY 4.0 and CC-NC 3.0, and a part of the data not publicly available.
Service Level Agreements: Centralized knowledge graphs may have Service Level Agree-
ments (SLAs), giving clear guarantees on aspects such as response time and correctness.
One could even imagine a company being liable for the information provided.
Privacy and Security: If the KG contains personal information, with centralized knowledge
graphs, users give up some privacy in exchange of some convenience. In particular, the
access logs are also centralised, which facilitates analysing the logs. However, because the
18371

==== Page 80 ====
108 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
graph is centralized, the company responsible for it might have more means to devise
proper security measures for the system. Indeed, users would not be prepared to share
their data if it appears the solution is not secure.
Characteristics related to implementation include:
Identiﬁers: Centralised knowledge graphs control and manage their own identiﬁers and
namespaces. Not all knowledge graphs (e.g., the Google Knowledge Graph) expose their
identiﬁers to the outside. Sometimes centralised knowledge graphs do link to external
sources as well, leading to a hub-and-spoke structure of the graph.
Schema: Centralised knowledge graphs have a single schema, used all over the data.
Query:Centralised knowledge graphs oﬀer an API for data retrieval (or provide data
dumps) and querying. These systems are furthermore optimised for the type of queries
they support.
Location: Centralised knowledge graphs require substantial computing infrastructure to
be able to handle the load, especially for knowledge graphs that oﬀer a query interface.
Timeliness: If data for centralised knowledge graphs needs to be aggregated from outside
sources, the update interval of the aggregator inﬂuences the overall timeliness of the
knowledge graph.
Modularity/Allocation: Resources are allocated at the central point, so infrastructure has
to be provided at the central point.
Data Volume: Centralized knowledge graphs can be partitioned according to centrally
deﬁned criteria.
Consistency: Given a centrally managed curation process, in combination with test cases
run on the integrated data, the overall consistency of centralised knowledge graphs can
be ensured.
Load Balancing: Access load can be easily balanced in an organisation’s internal infra-
structure.
Decentralised knowledge graphs promise beneﬁts which cannot be oﬀered by centralised
variants. Again, we start with aspects related to organisation, and then list aspects related
to implementation.
Survivability and Robustness: Decentralized knowledge graphs do not assume a central
authority over all resources. With decentralised variants, resources are independently
created, managed, and distributed such that unavailability of any particular part will not
necessarily inﬂuence the other knowledge graphs. Hence, one could say that the system
has a higher survivability and robustness, at the cost of a chance that parts become
unavailable.
Stability: The decentralised architecture, once socialised and embraced by a critical mass
of users, gives strong stability to applications, not depending on external inﬂuences (like
change of owner, company commercial decisiones, etc.). Although parts of the knowledge
graphs can become unavailable if individual providers go oﬄine, the overall knowledge
graph is potentially more resilient than centralized systems.
Curation: As the experience of free software has shown, curating open artifacts is far
more convenient that closed or private ones.
Rights and License: The diﬀerent parts are owned by their creators; parts of decentralised
knowledge graphs tend to be copyrighted or unlicensed, however often with intention for
public reuse.

==== Page 81 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 109
Service Level Agreements: As data is not centralized, there are no SLAs. Indeed, it would
be impossible to enforce them in case they are not met. On the other hand, because the
data is decentralized, one could in case of need decide to make local copies of the data,
i.e., centralize parts for which a speciﬁc level of service is expected.
Privacy and Security: With decentralised knowledge graphs, users retain their privacy to
the extent that usage patterns are distributed across systems. In these systems the security
aspect is often not stringent as the data is intended to be shared. One exception would
be the provenance of the data. Techniques like signing statements using public-private
key infrastructure exist to enable guaranteed authenticity of statements.
Characteristics related to implementation include:
Identiﬁers: Even when knowledge is distributed, there could be shared vocabularies.
Besides, one could implement a system for shared identiﬁers where people can create
their own (persistent) identiﬁers, hoping that others will reuse these. However, one would
not expect there to be a centralized identiﬁer system which all users have to adhere to,
as this would become a single point of failure and essentially make this a centralized
system. In eﬀect, one cannot prevent users from using identiﬁers in a wrong way or even
for completely wrong entities, nor can it be prevented that new identiﬁers are created for
already existing entities.
Schema: As mentioned, in a distributed system, there can be shared schemas. However,
anyone would be able to add their own schema parts to the system. One could also
imagine a distributed system in which users get to vote for schemas. This could be
combined with micropayments.
Query:As the system is not centralized, it would be expected that querying results in
more communication and total processing overhead. Data has to be aggregated from
many sources during query time. Parallelized data access can mitigate some of the
performance penalty, however, wide-area network access remains much slower than access
to local storage.
Location: Decentralised knowledge graphs can be made available from any location (e.g.,
own personal web server)
Timeliness: The data in decentralised knowledge graphs is updated immediately whenever
the data owner wants to update it.
Modularity/Allocation: The distributed nature results in a distributed allocation of
resources (processing, storage, and communication). The cost of deployment of the graph
is a) distributed over many parties and b) the upfront cost (capital expenditure) is low
for each participant.
Data Volume: Distributed knowledge graphs are already partitioned into smaller parts
where each has a speciﬁc purpose.
Consistency: Parts of the knowledge graphs are likely more consistent as providers
maintain their own data. But the combination of parts of the graph is likely to be less
consistent as in a centralized approach.
Load Balancing: The decentralisation works eﬀectively as a load balancing when consid-
ering the knowledge graph as a whole.
Conclusion
We have identiﬁed the above directions for further research and development of applic-
ations, to enable content creators and consumers to better access distributed resources.
Such applications should aim to preserve the beneﬁts decentralised approaches (e.g., be
18371

==== Page 82 ====
110 18371 – Knowledge Graphs
privacy-aware, support multiple online user identities, provide mechanisms for extensible
resource descriptions, enable read-write operations on personal and group data storages) and
conform to interoperable open web standards. Many of such applications could beneﬁt from
visualisations of schema-less data.
It is possible that a compromise emerges: knowledge graphs with a curated, centrally
organised core, which on the fringes of the graph link external knowledge graphs under
diverse ownership. The way DBpedia and Wikidata evolved points in such a direction.
In all but the fully centralised approaches, a research direction concerns the notion of
agents that are able to access, integrate and interact with distributed knowledge graphs.
Instead of having a single centralised component that provides a single integrated knowledge
graph, the notion of agents could bring more ﬂexibility and distribution. A starting point
could be both resident agents (running on one user’s machine) and transient agents that roam
from machine to machine in the network. Especially in the area of connected devices, further
research is needed to provide the ability to access knowledge graphs from many devices.
On the non-technical side, further research could consider moving organisational structures
from the centralised approach to the decentralised approach, including the design of business
models in decentralised settings.
References
1Roger Alan Pick. Shepherd or servant: Centralization and decentralization in informa-
tion technology governance. International Journal of Management & Information Systems
(IJMIS), 19:61, 03 2015.
2John Leslie King. Centralized versus decentralized computing: Organizational considera-
tions and management options. ACM Comput. Surv. , 15(4):319–349, December 1983.
3Ching man Au Yeung, Ilaria Liccardi, Kanghao Lu, Oshani Seneviratne, and Tim Berners-
lee. Decentralization: The future of online social networking. In In W3C Workshop on the
Future of Social Networking Position Papers , 2009.
4Arvind Narayanan, Vincent Toubiana, Solon Barocas, Helen Nissenbaum, and Dan Boneh.
A critical look at decentralized personal data architectures. CoRR, abs/1202.4503, 2012.
5J. Umbrich, C. Gutierrez, A. Hogan, M. Karnstedt, and J. Xavier Parreira. Eight fallacies
when querying the web of data. In 2013 IEEE 29th International Conference on Data
Engineering Workshops (ICDEW) , pages 21–22, April 2013.
6Jürgen Umbrich, Claudio Gutierrez, Aidan Hogan, Marcel Karnstedt, and Josiane
XavierParreira. TheACEtheoremforqueryingthewebofdata. In Proceedings of the 22Nd
International Conference on World Wide Web , WWW ’13 Companion, pages 133–134, New
York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.
7Patrick Valduriez. Principles of distributed data management in 2020? CoRR,
abs/1111.2852, 2011.

==== Page 83 ====
Piero A. Bonatti, Stefan Decker, Axel Polleres, and Valentina Presutti 111
Participants
Wouter Beek
University of Amsterdam, NL
Christian Bizer
Universität Mannheim, DE
Eva Blomqvist
Linköping University, SE
Piero Andrea Bonatti
University of Naples, IT
Daniel Brickley
Google Research –
Mountain View, US
Sarven Capadisli
TIB – Hannover, DE
Michael Cochez
Fraunhofer FIT – Sankt
Augustin, DE
Claudia d’Amato
University of Bari, IT
Gerard de Melo
Rutgers University –
Piscataway, US
Stefan Decker
RWTH Aachen, DE
Michel Dumontier
Maastricht University, NL
Paul Groth
Elsevier Labs – Amsterdam, NL
Claudio Gutierrez
University of Chile –
Santiago de Chile, CL
Andreas Harth
Fraunhofer IIS – Nürnberg, DEAidan Hogan
University of Chile –
Santiago de Chile, CL
Sabrina Kirrane
Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT
Markus Krötzsch
TU Dresden, DE
Barend Mons
Leiden University Medical
Center, NL
Roberto Navigli
Sapienza University of Rome, IT
Sebastian Neumaier
Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT
Axel-Cyrille Ngonga-Ngomo
Universität Paderborn, DE
Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese
CNR – Rome, IT
Heiko Paulheim
Universität Mannheim, DE
Lydia Pintscher
Wikimedia – Germany, DE
Axel Polleres
Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, AT
Valentina Presutti
CNR – Rome, IT
Sabbir Rashid
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute –
Troy, US
Sebastian Rudolph
TU Dresden, DEMarta Sabou
TU Wien, AT
Juan F. Sequeda
Capsenta Inc. – Austin, US
Cogan Matthew Shimizu
Wright State University –
Dayton, US
Elena Simperl
University of Southampton, GB
Dezhao Song
Thomson Reuters – Eagan, US
Steﬀen Staab
Universität Koblenz-Landau, DE
Volker Tresp
Siemens AG – München, DE
Marieke van Erp
KNAW Humanities Cluster –
Amsterdam, NL
Frank van Harmelen
Free University Amsterdam, NL
Maria-Esther Vidal
TIB – Hannover, DE
Michael Witbrock
IBM Research – Yorktown
Heights, US
Sonja Zillner
Siemens AG – München, DE
Antoine Zimmermann
Ecole des Mines –
St. Etienne, FR
18371

