==== Page 1 ====
Learning Which Features Matter: RoBERTa Acquires a Preference for
Linguistic Generalizations (Eventually)
Alex Warstadt,1Yian Zhang,2Haau-Sing Li,3Haokun Liu,3Samuel R. Bowman1;2;3
1Dept. of Linguistics,2Dept. of Computer Science,3Center for Data Science
New York University
Correspondence: warstadt@nyu.edu
Abstract
One reason pretraining on self-supervised lin-
guistic tasks is effective is that it teaches mod-
els features that are helpful for language under-
standing. However, we want pretrained mod-
els to learn not only to represent linguistic fea-
tures, but also to usethose features preferen-
tially during ﬁne-turning. With this goal in
mind, we introduce a new English-language di-
agnostic set called MSGS (the Mixed Signals
Generalization Set), which consists of 20 am-
biguous binary classiﬁcation tasks that we use
to test whether a pretrained model prefers lin-
guistic or surface generalizations during ﬁne-
tuning. We pretrain RoBERTa models from
scratch on quantities of data ranging from 1M
to 1B words and compare their performance on
MSGS to the publicly available RoBERTa BASE.
We ﬁnd that models can learn to represent lin-
guistic features with little pretraining data, but
require far more data to learn to prefer linguis-
tic generalizations over surface ones. Eventu-
ally, with about 30B words of pretraining data,
RoBERTa BASE does demonstrate a linguistic
bias with some regularity. We conclude that
while self-supervised pretraining is an effec-
tive way to learn helpful inductive biases, there
is likely room to improve the rate at which
models learn which features matter.
1 Introduction
Self-supervised pretraining through language mod-
eling on massive datasets has revolutionized NLP.
One reason this method works is that pretraining
shapes a model’s hypothesis space, giving it in-
ductive biases that help it learn linguistic tasks
(Howard and Ruder, 2018). Numerous probing
studies have provided support for this idea by show-
ing that language models learn representations that
encode linguistic features (Gulordava et al., 2019;
Tenney et al., 2019; Hewitt and Manning, 2019).
However, feature learning is just the ﬁrst step to
acquiring helpful inductive biases. Models must
The rumor that a CEO is losing spread. A boy who is hugging the cat sneezed. 
A guest said that the boat is sinking. 
Test behavior:  Surface bias observed 
Label=0,Prediction=1 A rumor that the CEO lost is spreading. 
Label=0,Prediction=0 The boy who hugged a cat is sneezing. 
1   2   3   4       5 6   7  8 
A rumor that the CEO lost is spreading. Disambiguating Test Data 
Test behavior:  Linguistic bias observed Linguistic Generalization: 
Is the main verb in the “-ing” form? Ambiguous Training Data 
Surface Generalization: 
Does the word “the” precede “a”? Hypothesis Space ?
A boy who hugged the cat is sneezing. 
1 2   3   4     5   6   7  8 Label=1
The boy who hugged a cat is sneezing. 
Label=1
The guest is saying that a boat sinks. Label=0
Label=0
Label=1,Prediction=1 
The rumor that a CEO is losing spread. Label=1,Prediction=0 Figure 1: Example of an ambiguous experiment (with-
out inoculation). A model is trained on ambiguous data
whose labels are consistent with either a linguistic or
a surface generalization, and tested on disambiguating
data whose labels support only the linguistic general-
ization. Light green and dark red shading represents
data or features associated with the positive and nega-
tive labels/predictions, respectively.
also be able to learn which features matter. The
NLU datasets these models are often ﬁne-tuned
on are ambiguous and contain artifacts, and often
support multiple possible generalizations. Neural
networks are not mind readers: Models that have
been shown to represent linguistic features some-
times fail to use them during ﬁne-tuning on NLU
tasks, instead adopting shallow surface generaliza-
tions (Jia and Liang, 2017; McCoy et al., 2019). To
this end, recent work in probing pretrained models
advocates for shifting the focus of study away from
whether they represent linguistic features and in
favor of whether they learn useful representations
of those features (V oita and Titov, 2020; Pimentel
et al., 2020; Elazar et al., 2020).
We investigate how RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b)
acquires language-speciﬁc inductive biases during
self-supervised pretraining. We track separatelyarXiv:2010.05358v1  [cs.CL]  11 Oct 2020

==== Page 2 ====
Feature type Feature description Positive example Negative exampleSurfaceAbsolute position Is the ﬁrst token of S “the”? The cat chased a mouse. A cat chased a mouse.
Length Is S longer than n(e.g., 3) words? The cat chased a mouse. The cat meowed.
Lexical content Does S contain “the”? That cat chased the mouse. That cat chased a mouse.
Relative position Does “the” precede “a”? The cat chased a mouse. A cat chased the mouse.
Orthography Does S appear in title case? The Cat Chased a Mouse. The cat chased a mouse.LinguisticMorphology Does S have an irregular past verb? The cats slept. The cats meow.
Syn. category Does S have an adjective? Lincoln was tall. Lincoln was president.
Syn. construction Is S the control construction? Sue is eager to sleep. Sue is likely to sleep.
Syn. position Is the main verb in “ing” form? Cats who eat mice are purring. Cats who are eating mice purr.
Table 1: Schematic examples of the linguistic and surface features in our experiments.
how RoBERTa’s representation of linguistic fea-
tures and its preferences for linguistic generaliza-
tions over surface generalizations change as the
amount of pretraining data increases. We pretrain
RoBERTa from scratch on datasets ranging from
1M to 1B words and evaluate these models along-
side RoBERTa BASE in a series of experiments to
probe the inductive biases of a pretrained model at
the time of ﬁne-tuning on a downstream task.
We probe these models in three kinds of ex-
periments: First, we conduct control experiments
where we ﬁne-tune models on unambiguous binary
classiﬁcation tasks to test whether they learn to rep-
resent simple linguistic and surface features. Sec-
ond, we conduct ambiguous experiments following
thepoverty of the stimulus design (Wilson, 2006),
as illustrated in Figure 1. In these experiments,
we ﬁne-tune a pretrained model on an ambiguous
binary classiﬁcation task in which the training set
is consistent with both a linguistic generalization
and a surface one. We then test the classiﬁer on
disambiguating data to reveal which generalization
the model adopted, and by extension its preference
among the two features. Third, we conduct inocu-
lation experiments (following Liu et al., 2019a) to
test how hard it is to sway a model with a surface
bias to adopt a linguistic generalization. We do this
by introducing small amounts of disambiguating
data into an otherwise ambiguous training set. We
automatically generate data for all these tasks, and
call the resulting dataset MSGS (Mixed Signals
Generalization Set), pronounced “messages”.
The results show that RoBERTa acquires a
stronger linguistic bias as pretraining increases.
RoBERTa BASE has the strongest linguistic bias,
and requires little to no inoculating data to reli-
ably make the linguistic generalization. In general,
models with more pretraining data can generally be
induced to adopt linguistic generalizations with lessinoculating data. We also ﬁnd a large gap between
the amount of pretraining data that RoBERTa needs
to learn the linguistic features necessary to general-
ize out-of-domain and the amount it needs to learns
that it should prefer those features when generaliz-
ing. The control experiments on unambiguous data
reveal that models with little pretraining do actually
represent the linguistic features, but nonetheless
show a strong surface bias. In other words, the
main contribution of pretraining to linguistic bias
learning is devoted not to extracting features, but
to learning which features matter.
We conclude that helpful inductive biases can
be learned through pretraining, but current mod-
els require abundant data to do so. The implica-
tions of this conclusion point in two directions:
First, we can probably continue to pretrain on
increasingly massive training sets to improve on
the generalization and few-shot learning abilities
of models like T5 (Raffel et al., 2019) and GPT-
3 (Brown et al., 2020). Second, since models
learn useful features early, there is hope that fu-
ture advances could accelerate by reducing the
amount of data needed to learn which features mat-
ter. To aid in this effort, we release the MSGS
dataset, our pretrained RoBERTas, and all our code:
https://github.com/nyu-mll/msgs .
2 Inductive Bias
Background: Learning Inductive Bias Any ﬁ-
nite set of training examples shown to a learning
algorithm like a neural network is consistent with
inﬁnitely many generalizable decision functions.
Inductive biases are a learner’s preferences among
these functions. An inductive bias can eliminate
certain possible functions altogether, or result in a
preference for some over others (Haussler, 1988).
For instance, an RNN classiﬁer is capable of rep-
resenting anyfunction, but prefers ones that focus

==== Page 3 ====
mostly on local relationships within the input se-
quence (Dhingra et al., 2018; Ravfogel et al., 2019).
Some recent work seeks to design neural archi-
tectures that build in desirable inductive biases
(Dyer et al., 2016; Battaglia et al., 2018), or com-
pares the immutable biases of different architec-
tures (McCoy et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020). How-
ever, inductive biases can also be learned by bio-
logical (Harlow, 1949) and artiﬁcial systems alike
(Lake et al., 2017). In the language model ﬁne-
tuning paradigm proposed by Howard and Ruder
(2018) and popularized by models such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019), a pretrained neural network
plays the role of the learner. Pretraining adjusts a
model’s weights so that it will navigate the hypoth-
esis space during training on a downstream task
more effectively than a randomly initialized model.
There is a difference between learning to extract
a linguistic feature and acquiring a bias towards us-
ing it when generalizing. There is ample evidence
that BERT encodes features such as syntactic cate-
gory and constituency (Tenney et al., 2019; Clark
et al., 2019; Hewitt and Manning, 2019). The ac-
quisition of linguistic features is a prerequisite for a
linguistic bias. However, these ﬁndings do not tell
us if the model will make use of these features to
form generalizations during target task training, or
if it will fall back on surface features that account
for most of the data.
Methods: Measuring Inductive Bias We con-
duct three kinds of experiments to probe a model’s
preference for linguistic or surface generalizations:
unambiguous control experiments, fully ambiguous
experiments, and partially ambiguous inoculation
experiments. Figure 1 gives an overview of the
ambiguous experiment design.
First, it only makes sense to compare a model’s
preference between two features if it actually repre-
sents both features. This is the goal behind control
experiments , in which we ﬁne-tune RoBERTa to
classify sentences based on a single linguistic or
surface feature in a totally unambiguous setting.
Second, we conduct ambiguous experiments on
models that pass the controls. We ﬁne-tune a pre-
trained model on a binary sentence classiﬁcation
task using ambiguous data, which equally supports
both a simple linguistic generalization and a simple
surface one. For example, Figure 1 shows a linguis-
tic task where sentences in the positive class are de-
ﬁned by having a main verb in the “ing” form. We
make the training data ambiguous by introducing asurface feature that distinguishes the two classes:
In all (and only) training examples with label 1,
the word “the” precedes the word “a”. Based on
this training data, a model could reasonably adopt
either a linguistic generalization or a surface one.
We then test the classiﬁer on disambiguating
data to observe which generalization it made. In
this kind of data, the labels align with the linguistic
generalization, and contradict the surface one: For
example, in Figure 1, “a” now always precedes
“the” in the positive test examples with label 1. We
quantify a model’s inductive bias using a metric we
call the linguistic bias score (LBS). We deﬁne LBS
as the Matthews correlation between the model
predictions and the labels on the disambiguating
test set (Matthews, 1975). If LBS is 1, the learner
shows a systematic linguistic bias. If LBS is -1,
it shows a systematic surface bias. If LBS is 0, it
shows neither bias.
Finally, while the fully ambiguous experiments
probe models’ biases in an idealized setting, train-
ing data in more naturalistic contexts often does
contain some evidence supporting a linguistic gen-
eralization over a simple surface one. To simulate
this, we also conduct a series of inoculation exper-
iments (following Liu et al., 2019a), in which we
introduce small amounts of disambiguating data
into an otherwise ambiguous training set. For each
experiment, we replace 0.1%, 0.3%, or 1% of the
training data with examples that support the lin-
guistic generalization and contradict the surface
one. These experiments allow us to compare the
strength of linguistic bias in models that show an
overall surface bias: If two models adopt the sur-
face generalization in the fully ambiguous case, we
can still say that one has a stronger linguistic bias
than the other if it requires less inoculation data to
be swayed towards the linguistic generalization.
3 Evaluation Data
We introduce MSGS (Mixed Signals Generaliza-
tion Set), pronounced “messages”, a dataset we
design to be used in poverty of the stimulus and
inoculation experiments. With the goal of contrast-
ing inductive biases that are helpful and harmful in
most NLP applications, the tasks in MSGS test a
model’s preferences for generalizations based on
linguistic or surface features.
Features under Study Table 3 illustrates the 4
linguistic features and 5 surface features we con-

==== Page 4 ====
Dom. Split L LLSSentence
InTrain (Ambiguous)1 1 These men weren’t hating that this person who sang tunes destroyed the vase.
0 0 These men hated that this person who sang tunes was destroying some vase.
Inoc. (Disamb.)1 0 These men weren’t hating that this person who sang tunes destroyed some vase.
0 1 These men hated that this person who sang tunes was destroying the vase.
OutTest (Disamb.)1 0 These reports that all students built that school were impressing some children.
0 1 These reports that all students were building the school had impressed some children.
Aux. (Ambiguous)1 1 These reports that all students built the school were impressing some children.
0 0 These reports that all students were building that school had impressed some children.
Table 2: A full paradigm from the SYNTACTIC POSITION LEXICAL CONTENT task. LLandLSmark the
presence of the linguistic feature ( Is the main verb in the “ing” form? ) and surface feature ( Does S contain
“the”? ), respectively. Dom. is short for domain .
sider.1Each feature is meant to be representative
of a broad category of features (e.g. morpholog-
ical features), though the precise implementation
of each feature is necessarily much narrower (e.g.
Does the sentence have an irregular past verb? ).
Forming generalizations based on surface features
entails knowledge of the identity of certain words
(in our case, only “the” and “a”), the positional
indices of words in the string, the total number of
words in a string, or whether certain characters are
lowercase or uppercase.2Forming generalizations
based on linguistic features requires more abstract
knowledge of tense and inﬂectional morphemes,
parts of speech, the control construction,3and hi-
erarchical syntactic structures, none of which are
encoded in the surface string.
Dataset Structure MSGS contains 20 ambigu-
ous binary classiﬁcation tasks each gotten by pair-
ing one of 4 linguistic features with one of 5 surface
features. We write FEAT 1FEAT 2to denote a task
that combines features FEAT 1and FEAT 2. Each am-
biguous dataset contains 50k sentences split into
1We explored a slightly larger set of linguistic features and
excluded several based on initial experiments showing our
models did not encode them. For example, we constructed a
task with the objective of identifying sentences that contain
antonyms (e.g. The little girl likes the big dog. ), but found that
only RoBERTa BASE could solve the unambiguous control task.
2Although these are surface properties of the string, they
are not all trivial for RoBERTa due to its subword tokenization.
3The control construction is a syntactic construction in
which a semantic argument of a predicate ﬁlls or controls an
argument slot of an embedded verb. The raising construction
is superﬁcially similar, but the ﬁller of the embedded argument
slot is not a semantic argument of the main predicate (Sag
et al., 2003). For instance, Sue is eager to sleep is an example
of control because the NP Sueis the semantic subject of both
eager andsleep . By contrast, Sue is likely to sleep is an
example of raising because Sueis the semantic subject of
sleep , but not of likely . These two phenomena have different
syntactic derivations in some theories (Chomsky, 1981).training, evaluation, and inoculation sets. MSGS
also includes 9 unambiguous control tasks —one
for each feature. Each control dataset contains 30k
sentences split into training and evaluation sets.
For ambiguous tasks, we generate data in
paradigms of 8 sentences following a 222
design, as shown in Table 2. We vary the following
three features: a binary linguistic feature, a binary
surface feature, and the domain from which the
sentence is sampled. We generate in-domain and
out-of-domain sentences from different templates
(see §3:Data Generation for more detail).
As shown in Table 2, we split the data into four
contrasting pairs with different purposes: (1) Train-
ing data is ambiguous in-domain data makes up
99% to 100% of the training set. (2) Inoculat-
ing data is disambiguating in-domain data which
makes up 0.1% to 1% of the training set in exper-
iments with inoculation. We show the classiﬁer
only the linguistic label ( LL) to nudge it towards
adopting a linguistic generalization. (3) Test data
is disambiguating out-of-domain data used to test
whether the model adopted the linguistic or surface
generalization. (4) Auxiliary data is ambiguous
out-of-domain data used to test how well the model
adapts to the out-of-domain templates, regardless
of which generalization it makes.
For control tasks, we generate data in paradigms
of 4 sentences following a 22design by vary-
ing the feature and domain. We use control tasks
to test whether each pretrained model represents
each feature well enough to ﬁne-tune an effective
classiﬁer in an unambiguous setting.
Data Generation The data is generated from
templates using a generation toolkit from Warstadt
et al. (2020). This toolkit includes a vocabulary
of over 3000 entries labeled with grammatical fea-

==== Page 5 ====
Absolute positionSurface
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
1M10M100M 1B30BOrthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M10M100M 1B30BMorphologyLinguistic
1M10M100M 1B30BSyntactic category
1M10M100M 1B30BSyntactic position
1M10M100M 1B30BSyntactic construction
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Pretraining Dataset Size
Matthews Correlation
Pretraining Dataset Size
Matthews CorrelationFigure 2: Results on the main experiments measured in Matthews correlation for the surface control tasks (top)
and linguistic control tasks (bottom). Note: For surface tasks a positive score represents a surface generalization.
tures that allow for lexical variation in the data
while maintaining grammatical well-formedness.
Although generated sentences often describe un-
likely or implausible scenarios (e.g., The lawyer
was sinking all canoes ), semantic plausibility is
independent of all the features we examine, so this
should not affect a model that genuinely encodes
these features. To prevent out-of-vocabulary tokens
affecting our results, we ensure that every word
stem in the vocabulary appears in the pretraining
datasets for our RoBERTa models (see §4.1).
Our experimental logic only makes sense if
we are reasonably conﬁdent that models can only
achieve high test performance by genuinely adopt-
ing a linguistic generalization. However, training
models on generated data can easily lead to overﬁt-
ting, and classiﬁers trained and tested on data from
the same domain can achieve perfect performance
even on arbitrary tasks with random labels (Hewitt
and Liang, 2019). For this reason, our primary
evaluations test models’ ability to generalize out-
of-domain. We manipulate domain in two ways:
First, we generate training data and test data for
each dataset from separate in-domain and out-of-
domain templates. Thus a model cannot succeed at
test time simply by recognizing a template or a key
part of a template. For example, in the SYNTACTIC
POSITIONLEXICAL CONTENT paradigm shown
in Table 2, the in-domain data contrasts the main
verb with a verb in a relative clause embedded in
the complement clause of a verb; while the out-of-
domain data contrasts the main verb with a verb in
the complement clause of a noun. In most tasks,each domain itself is generated from multiple tem-
plates as well to widen the domain and encourage
better generalization during training.
Second, on tasks that test lexical knowledge (for
instance, the knowledge that slept is an irregular
past verb and meow is not), we divide the crucial
lexical items into in-domain and out-of-domain
sets. Thus, a model cannot succeed by memorizing
the keywords associated with each class. See the
Appendix for a more detailed description of the
implementation details for each feature.
4 Models, Pretraining, & Fine-Tuning
We test 13 RoBERTa models in our main experi-
ments: We pretrain 12 from scratch, and also test
RoBERTa BASE pretrained by Liu et al. (2019b).
4.1 Pretraining
Pretraining Data We pretrain RoBERTa using
scaled-down recreations of the dataset used by
Devlin et al. (2019) to train BERT, i.e English
Wikipedia (2.5 billion tokens) and BookCorpus
(800 million tokens). Both are included in the
RoBERTa pretraining data.4We download the lat-
est Wikipedia dump as of Feb 1, 2020. The original
BookCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015) is no longer avail-
able, so we collect similar data from Smashwords,
the original source of BookCorpus.5
4RoBERTa uses English Wikipedia, BookCorpus, CC-
News, OpenWebText, and STORIES in pretraining.
5We collect our data using the Wikipedia XML
dump https://dumps.wikimedia.org/mirrors.html and data-
processing code https://github.com/attardi/wikiextractor, and
a Smashwords crawler https://github.com/soskek/bookcorpus.

==== Page 6 ====
1M10M100M 1B30BInoculation rate: 0%
1M10M100M 1B30BInoculation rate: 0.1%
1M10M100M 1B30BInoculation rate: 0.3%
1M10M100M 1B30BInoculation rate: 1.0%
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Pretraining Dataset Size
Linguistic Bias Score (LBS)Figure 3: Results measured in LBS for each pretraining and inoculating data amount, aggregated over the 20 tasks
in MSGS. We exclude models that fail the corresponding controls, as described in Section 5. High density near
LBS of 1 means many models in that group have a linguistic bias; high density near -1 means many models have
a surface bias. Models with stronger linguistic bias achieve higher LBS with less inoculation data.
We pretrain RoBERTa on four training sets con-
taining different numbers of words: 1M, 10M,
100M, and 1B.6To make these datasets, we sample
entire Wikipedia articles and Smashwords books in-
dependently, keeping the proportions of Wikipedia
and Smashwords text approximately constant.
Model Sizes Model size is the only hyperparam-
eter we systematically search over during pretrain-
ing. We consider smaller model sizes to prevent
overﬁtting on small training sets. The detailed con-
ﬁgurations of the model sizes are summarized in
the Appendix. We use RoBERTa BASE from Liu
et al. (2019b) as our largest model size. The other
conﬁgurations represent a scale roughly based on
settings used in Sanh et al. (2019), Vaswani et al.
(2017), Jiao et al. (2019), and Tsai et al. (2019).
Search Range For dropout, attention dropout,
learning rate decay, weight decay and the Adam
parameters, we adopt the same parameter values
used in Liu et al. (2019b). We ﬁx warm up steps
to be 6% of max steps, peak learning rate to be
5e-4, early stopping patience to be 100M tokens,
and heuristically deﬁne the search range of model
size, max steps and batch size for each training set.
Search Results We randomly sample hyperpa-
rameters from the search range and train 25 models
for each of the 1M, 10M, 100M datasets. We train
10 models on the largest (1B) dataset due to re-
source limitations. For each training set size, we
choose three of the resulting models to evaluate. In
order to avoid confounds caused by different model
sizes, for each training set we choose three models
6The publicly available RoBERTa BASE is trained on 160GB
of data, which we estimate to be about 30B words.of the same size that have the lowest perplexity.
The hyperparameters and validation perplexities of
the selected models are listed in the Appendix.
4.2 Fine-Tuning
We loosely follow the hyperparameter settings that
Liu et al. (2019b) used for ﬁne-tuning on GLUE
tasks (Wang et al., 2018), and use the following
learning rates:f1E-5, 2E-5, 3E-5g. We depart from
Liu et al. in using a batch size of 16 and training for
5 epochs without early-stopping in all runs. These
changes are based on pilots that showed that larger
batch sizes and longer ﬁne-tuning were no more
effective for our tasks.
We conduct 3,471 ﬁne-tuning runs: We ﬁne-tune
13 RoBERTa models: (3 random initializations) 
(4 pretraining data amounts) +(1 RoBERTa base).
We ﬁne-tune each model 267 times: (3 learning
rates)((9 control tasks) +(20 ambiguous tasks)
(4 inoculation amounts)). We evaluate model
performance using LBS (see §2:Methods: Measur-
ing Inductive Bias).
5 Results & Discussion
We have several main ﬁndings: (1) models learn
torepresent both surface features and linguistic
features with relatively little data; (2) RoBERTa be-
gins to acquire a linguistic bias with over 1B words
of pretraining data; (3) increasing pretraining data
strengthens linguistic bias; (4) there is considerable
variation in models’ preferences between speciﬁc
pairs of linguistic and surface features.
Control results Figure 2 shows the results for
the controls. Performance is near ceiling for most
models and features. Because we evaluate all the

==== Page 7 ====
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syn. category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syn. position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M10M100M 1B30BSyn. construction
1M10M100M 1B30B
 1M10M100M 1B30B
 1M10M100M 1B30B
 1M10M100M 1B30B-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Failed control Inoculation rate: 0% Inoculation rate: 0.1% Inoculation rate: 0.3% Inoculation rate: 1.0%Pretraining Dataset Size
Linguistic Bias Score (LBS)Figure 4: Results of the ambiguous binary classiﬁcation tasks measured in LBS for every (linguistic feature, surface
feature) pair. Each plot in the matrix shows the results on the disambiguating test items after training on an
ambiguous task. All experiments on the same row investigate the same linguistic feature; all experiments on the
same column investigate the same surface feature. Each data point represents one run. The x-axis of the point is
the pretraining size of the model, and the y-axis is its LBS. Models with stronger linguistic bias achieve higher
LBS with less inoculation data. Gray points show runs where the corresponding controls did not pass. A black-
and-white version of this ﬁgure separating color channels into separate plots, can be found in the Appendix.
models out-of-domain, this result cannot be ex-
plained by the models simply memorizing the fea-
tures from the task training data. Thus, we con-
clude that most pretrained models we test encode
both linguistic and surface features.
The only exceptions are the syntactic category
and syntactic construction features, for which mod-
els with less than 100M perform poorly. In subse-
quent plots, we ﬁlter out results where the controls
are not passed. Speciﬁcally, if a particular combina-
tion of model checkpoint and learning rate achieves
a Matthews correlation of less than 0.7 on the con-
trol task for feature F, we eliminate all results with
this combination for any task involving Fin Figure
3, or represent them as gray points in Figure 4.
Main Experiment Results Figure 3 summarizes
the main experiment results. For a given amount
of pretraining and inoculation data, we consider all
classiﬁers trained on all 20 tasks in MSGS and plotthe density of their linguistic bias scores (LBSs).
The results in the leftmost box (with 0% inocula-
tion) show that only RoBERTa BASE demonstrates a
consistent linguistic bias in the fully unambiguous
setting. That said, it still adopts the surface bias
much of the time. The other models show a clear
surface bias overall. The results of experiments
with inoculation data show that models with more
pretraining data require less inoculation data to be
swayed towards the linguistic generalization. We
consistently observe, for each pretraining quantity,
a phase transition where the linguistic generaliza-
tion begins to overtake the surface generalization
upon exposure to a certain amount of inoculating
data. For example, the 1B model goes through
this transition between 0.1% and 0.3% inoculating
data. The 100M and 10M models go through this
transition between 0.3% and 1% inoculating data.
The phase transition comes earlier for models with

==== Page 8 ====
more pretraining, indicating they have a stronger
linguistic bias. We also notice distinctive behavior
for the models at the extreme ends of pretraining
data quantity: The 1M model never completes the
transition, suggesting it has a strong surface bias,
and RoBERTa BASE appears to be in the middle of
this transition with 0% inoculating data, suggesting
that even more pretraining data could produce a
model with a more consistent linguistic bias.
These ﬁndings are echoed in individual task
results in Figure 4.7In each plot, models with
the same amount of inoculation data (i.e. points
with a given color) have higher LBS as the
amount of pretraining data increases. Notably, on
ambiguous tasks involving LEXICAL CONTENT ,
RoBERTa BASE usually favors generalizations based
on linguistic features without any inoculating data,
which no other pretrained model does. We ﬁnd this
result quite striking: Even if the labels are perfectly
correlated with the presence or absence of the word
“the”, RoBERTa BASE overlooks that fact in favor of
a deeper generalization based on an abstract feature
like the inﬂectional form of a verb in a particular
syntactic position. Furthermore, this preference
is clearly acquired through additional pretraining.
The results for MORPHOLOGYORTHOGRAPHY
is a typical illustration of the differences between
models. The 1M model never adopts the linguistic
generalization based on the morphological feature,
though it eventually rejects the surface general-
ization. The 100M and 1B models make robust
linguistic generalizations only with 1.0% inoculat-
ing data. By contrast, RoBERTa BASE requires only
0.1% inoculating data (i.e. 10 out of 10k examples)
to adopt the linguistic generalization.
Surface Biases of RoBERTa Our results also
suggest some speciﬁc conclusions about which
kinds of surface features RoBERTa pays attention
to.8For instance, these models have little prefer-
ence for sentence length. As shown in the second
column of Figure 4, most of the models form lin-
guistic generalizations rather than generalizations
based on sentence length, even with no inoculat-
ing data. By contrast, the models strongly prefer
generalizations based on orthography—and to a
lesser extent lexical content and word order—over
7Analogous results for the held out training-condition data,
inoculation data, and auxiliary data are in the Appendix.
8MSGS does not come close to representing the full range
of possible relevant lexical or syntactic features, preventing us
from making strong conclusions about which speciﬁc linguis-
tic features RoBERTa has biases in favor of.linguistic generalizations.
The Success of Pretrained Models Our ﬁnd-
ings provide insight into why pretraining on mas-
sive datasets is so successful. While linguistic fea-
ture learning is a major effect of pretraining, it
is far from the end of the story: Pretraining also
helps models learn which features are central to
language. However, this second kind of learning
seems to require far more exposure to data with
current models and pretraining techniques. There-
fore, massive datasets are needed to teach models
which features are useful for generalizing.
The data scale at which we observe RoBERTa
beginning to show a linguistic bias (between 1B
and 30B words) is similar to the amount of pretrain-
ing data used by the ﬁrst pretrained LMs to achieve
major successes at NLU tasks, such as ELMo (Pe-
ters et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019).
This suggests a crucial data threshold below which
language model pretraining is unlikely to be signif-
icantly helpful for most applications with current
model architectures, and may explain the many-
year gap between the development of neural LMs
and the ﬁrst major applications of LM pretraining:
The early LMs must have not have been trained
sufﬁciently to cross that threshold, yielding consis-
tently poor results.
6 Related work
There is increasing interest in studying the induc-
tive biases of neural networks. Much of this work
has grown out of numerous ﬁndings that these mod-
els often fail to generalize in ways that task design-
ers intend. For example, Jia and Liang (2017) and
McCoy et al. (2019) demonstrate that ambiguity in
widely used NLU datasets like SQuAD (Rajpurkar
et al., 2016) and MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018)
leads models like BERT to adopt some surface
generalizations, despite the fact that they represent
linguistic features. This continues to be a problem
for models like RoBERTaBASEwhich show an over-
all linguistic bias in our experiments. However,
for tasks like NLI, the underlying linguistic feature
depends on a combination of signiﬁcant syntactic
knowledge, semantic knowledge, and world knowl-
edge. It stands to reason that representations and
preferences for such high level features require
more data to learn than the features we probe.
Other work has used the poverty of stimulus
design to study inductive biases associated with
particular neural architectures during syntactic gen-

==== Page 9 ====
eralization. Ravfogel et al. (2019) train RNNs
on a morphological prediction task using artiﬁ-
cial languages derived from naturally occurring
English text, ﬁnding that RNNs show a recency
bias in acquiring agreement rules. McCoy et al.
(2018, 2020) train a seq2seq models on generated
data ambiguous between a surface and a structural
generalization to learn the subject-auxiliary inver-
sion rule in English question formation. They ﬁnd
that, while tree-structured models show a struc-
tural bias, sequence models do not. Warstadt and
Bowman (2020) conduct related experiments on
subject-auxiliary inversion and other English struc-
tural rules, and ﬁnd that BERT likely acquires a
structural bias from pretraining.
More abstract inductive biases have also been
studied. Using zero-shot learning in an artiﬁcial
language, Lake and Baroni (2018) show that RNNs
lack a bias in favor of learning compositional mean-
ings for new symbols. Gandhi and Lake (2019) and
Gulordava et al. (2020) explore conditions under
which neural networks exhibit a bias towards learn-
ing mutually exclusive meanings for new symbols.
Data augmentation and inoculation have also
been explored previously as a way to inﬂuence how
models generalize. McCoy et al. (2019) and Min
et al. (2020) show that small amounts of inocu-
lating data during training on textual entailment
help BERT overlook certain surface generaliza-
tions. Jha et al. (2020) study inoculation using
a constructed language of numerical sequences.
Like us, they generate ambiguous datasets, though
they only compare features that resemble our sur-
face features. They ﬁnd that it is relatively easy to
nudge models away from shallow generalizations,
but harder to nudge them towards deeper ones.
Finally, several earlier studies explored how in-
creasing training data impacts linguistic knowledge
in LMs. Unlike the present study, these studies
evaluate LMs using an unsupervised acceptability
judgment task on minimal pairs (i.e. not during
ﬁne-tuning), and do not attempt to separate feature
learning from feature preferences. van Schijndel
et al. (2019) ﬁnd the greatest increase in sensitivity
to acceptability contrasts occurs between training
on 2M and 10M words. Warstadt et al. (2020)
ﬁnd that while LMs learn agreement phenomena
at a similarly early stage, other phenomena require
more data to learn. Finally, Hu et al. (2020) ﬁnd
that adopting architectures that build in linguistic
bias, such as RNNGs (Dyer et al., 2016), has a big-ger effect on the acceptability task than increasing
training data from 1M to 40M words.
7 Future Work & Conclusion
Our experiments shed light on the relationship be-
tween pretraining data and an inductive bias to-
wards linguistic generalization. Our results indi-
cate that, although some abstract linguistic features
are learnable from relatively small amounts of pre-
training data, models require signiﬁcant pretraining
after discovering these features to develop a bias
towards using them when generalizing. This gives
some insight into why extensive pretraining helps
general-purpose neural networks adapt to down-
stream tasks with relative ease.
We also introduce MSGS, a new diagnostic
dataset for probing the inductive biases of learn-
ing algorithms using the poverty of the stimulus
design and inoculation, and also introduce a set
of 12 RoBERTa models we pretrain on smaller
data quantities. These models could prove to be a
helpful resource for future studies looking to study
learning curves of various kinds with respect to the
quantity of pretraining data.
Finally, while our results naturally lead to the
conclusion that we should continue to pursue mod-
els with ever more pretraining, such as GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020), we do not wish to suggest
that this will be the only or best way to build mod-
els with stronger inductive biases. Future work
might use MSGS as a diagnostic tool to measure
how effectively new model architectures and self-
supervised pretraining tasks can more efﬁciently
equip neural networks with better inductive biases.
Acknowledgments
This project has beneﬁted from ﬁnancial support
to SB by Eric and Wendy Schmidt (made by rec-
ommendation of the Schmidt Futures program),
by Samsung Research (under the project Improv-
ing Deep Learning using Latent Structure ), by In-
tuit, Inc., and in-kind support by the NYU High-
Performance Computing Center and by NVIDIA
Corporation (with the donation of a Titan V GPU).
This material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
1850208 and 1922658. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-
essarily reﬂect the views of the National Science
Foundation.

==== Page 10 ====
References
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst,
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi, Ma-
teusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Ra-
poso, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Caglar Gul-
cehre, Francis Song, Andrew Ballard, Justin Gilmer,
George Dahl Dahl, Ashish Vaswani, Kelsey Allen,
Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nico-
las Heess, Daan Wierstral, Pushmeet Kohli, Matt
Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li Li, and Razvan
Pascanu. 2018. Relational inductive biases, deep
learning, and graph networks.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers. ArXiv preprint 2005.14165.
Noam Chomsky. 1981. Lectures on government and
binding . Walter de Gruyter.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and
Christopher D Manning. 2019. What does BERT
look at? An analysis of BERT’s attention. ArXiv
preprint 1906.04341.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4171–4186.
Bhuwan Dhingra, Qiao Jin, Zhilin Yang, William Co-
hen, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2018. Neural mod-
els for reasoning over multiple mentions using coref-
erence. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 42–48.
Chris Dyer, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros,
and Noah A. Smith. 2016. Recurrent neural network
grammars. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies , pages 199–209, San Diego, California.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and Yoav
Goldberg. 2020. When BERT forgets how to POS:
Amnesic probing of linguistic properties and MLM
predictions. ArXiv preprint 2006.00995.Kanishk Gandhi and Brenden M Lake. 2019. Mutual
exclusivity as a challenge for neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.10197 .
Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave,
Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2019. Colorless
green recurrent networks dream hierarchically. Pro-
ceedings of the Society for Computation in Linguis-
tics, 2(1):363–364.
Kristina Gulordava, Thomas Brochhagen, and Gemma
Boleda. 2020. Which one is the dax? achiev-
ing mutual exclusivity with neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.03902 .
Harry F Harlow. 1949. The formation of learning sets.
Psychological review , 56(1):51.
David Haussler. 1988. Quantifying inductive bias:
Ai learning algorithms and valiant’s learning frame-
work. Artiﬁcial intelligence , 36(2):177–221.
John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and
interpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2733–2743, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. 2019. A
structural probe for ﬁnding syntax in word represen-
tations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4129–4138.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
language model ﬁne-tuning for text classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 328–339.
Jennifer Hu, Jon Gauthier, Peng Qian, Ethan Wilcox,
and Roger P Levy. 2020. A systematic assessment
of syntactic generalization in neural language mod-
els.arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03692 .
Rohan Jha, Charles Lovering, and Ellie Pavlick. 2020.
When does data augmentation help generalization in
nlp? arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.15012 .
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. 2017. Adversarial exam-
ples for evaluating reading comprehension systems.
InProceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
2021–2031.
Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang,
Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang Wang, and Qun Liu.
2019. Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10351 .

==== Page 11 ====
Brenden Lake and Marco Baroni. 2018. Generalization
without systematicity: On the compositional skills
of sequence-to-sequence recurrent networks. In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages
2879–2888.
Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenen-
baum, and Samuel J Gershman. 2017. Building ma-
chines that learn and think like people. Behavioral
and brain sciences , 40.
Nelson Liu, Roy F Schwartz, and Noah A Smith. 2019a.
Challenge. manuscript .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019b.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 .
Brian W. Matthews. 1975. Comparison of the pre-
dicted and observed secondary structure of t4 phage
lysozyme. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-
Protein Structure , 405(2):442–451.
R Thomas McCoy, Robert Frank, and Tal Linzen. 2018.
Revisiting the poverty of the stimulus: hierarchical
generalization without a hierarchical bias in recur-
rent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 40th An-
nual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
R. Thomas McCoy, Robert Frank, and Tal Linzen.
2020. Does syntax need to grow on trees? sources of
hierarchical inductive bias in sequence-to-sequence
networks. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , 8:125–140.
R Thomas McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
heuristics in natural language inference. Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Junghyun Min, R Thomas McCoy, Dipanjan Das,
Emily Pitler, and Tal Linzen. 2020. Syntactic
data augmentation increases robustness to inference
heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11999 .
Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word repre-
sentations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , volume 1,
pages 2227–2237.
Tiago Pimentel, Josef Valvoda, Rowan Hall Maudslay,
Ran Zmigrod, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell.
2020. Information-theoretic probing for linguistic
structure. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 4609–4622, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2019. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former. arXiv e-prints .
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+ questions for
machine comprehension of text. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 2383–2392.
Shauli Ravfogel, Yoav Goldberg, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
Studying the inductive biases of rnns with synthetic
variations of natural languages. In Proceedings of
NAACL-HLT , pages 3532–3542.
Ivan A. Sag, Thomas Wasow, and Emily M. Bender.
2003. Syntactic Theory: A Formal Introduction , 2
edition. CSLI Publications.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108 .
Marten van Schijndel, Aaron Mueller, and Tal Linzen.
2019. Quantity doesn’t buy quality syntax with
neural language models. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5831–5837, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang,
Adam Poliak, R. Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipan-
jan Das, et al. 2019. What do you learn from con-
text? Probing for sentence structure in contextual-
ized word representations. In Proceedings of ICLR .
Henry Tsai, Jason Riesa, Melvin Johnson, Naveen Ari-
vazhagan, Xin Li, and Amelia Archer. 2019. Small
and practical bert models for sequence labeling. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3623–
3627.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In I. Guyon, U. V . Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 30 , pages 5998–6008. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Elena V oita and Ivan Titov. 2020. Information-
theoretic probing with minimum description length.
ArXiv preprint 2003.12298.

==== Page 12 ====
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2018.
GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis plat-
form for natural language understanding. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Net-
works for NLP , pages 353–355.
Alex Warstadt and Samuel R Bowman. 2020. Can neu-
ral networks acquire a structural bias from raw lin-
guistic data? In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-
hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R.
Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-
tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics , 8:377–392.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of NAACL 2018 , volume 1, pages 1112–1122.
Colin Wilson. 2006. Learning phonology with sub-
stantive bias: An experimental and computational
study of velar palatalization. Cognitive science ,
30(5):945–982.
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhut-
dinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies: Towards
story-like visual explanations by watching movies
and reading books. In Proceedings of the IEEE inter-
national conference on computer vision , pages 19–
27.

==== Page 13 ====
A Data Description
MSGS contains 5 surface features and 4 linguis-
tic features, summarized in Table 3 (repeated from
the main body of the paper, for convenience). Im-
plementation details for the features are described
below. The implementation of one feature some-
times depends on other feature it is paired with in
an ambiguous dataset.
Absolute position This feature is 1 iffthe sen-
tence begins with the word “the”. We generally
ensure that sentences bearing a value for this fea-
ture contains two clauses and four determiners total.
Some sentences in SYNTACTIC CATEGORY AB-
SOLUTE POSITION contain fewer than four NPs.
The in-domain and out-of-domain sentences differ
in the order or position of the clauses.
Length This feature is 1 iffthe sentence exceeds
some number of tokens. The exact threshold varies
depending on the linguistic feature in an ambigu-
ous task, since different linguistic features lead to
sentences of different length, on average. In mixed
tasks, we vary the length of sentences by adjoining
subordinate clauses (e.g. If Sue wakes ) of varying
length to the clause in which the linguistic feature
is varied.
Lexical content This feature is 1 iffthe sentence
contains the. The sentences generally contain at
least two clauses and four determiners. The posi-
tion of thevaries between in-domain and out-of-
domain sentences.
Relative position This feature is 1 when thepre-
cedes a, and 0 when aprecedes the. The sentences
generally contain at least two clauses and four deter-
miners. Thus, there are six different conﬁgurations
in which theprecedes a, and these are separated
into in-domain and out-of-domain templates.
Orthography This feature is 1 iffthe sentence
appears in title case. In the control paradigm, the
sentences generally contain two clauses, whose
positions are varied between in-domain and out-of-
domain sentences.
Lexical semantics This feature is 1 iffthe sen-
tence contains a pair of antonyms. In sentences
with label 0, there is a pair of words in a hyper-
nym/hyponym or synonym relation. There are
21 pairs of adjective antonyms and 21 pairs of
verb antonyms (not accounting for different inﬂec-
tional forms). To prevent the task being solvableusing lexical content, these pairs are divided into in-
domain and out-of-domain sets. There are different
templates corresponding to whether the antonyms
are adjectives, intransitive verbs, or transitive verbs.
Each template appears in both in-domain and out-
of-domain sentences.
Morphology This feature is 1 when the sentence
contains an irregular past tense verb, and 0 when
it contains a 3rd person present plural verb (iden-
tical to the bare form). Sentences either contain
an irregular past tense verb or a regular 3rd person
present plural verb (identical to the bare form). We
do this because other verb forms can be identiﬁed
by inﬂectional morphemes such as -sor auxiliaries
such as have , and so discrimination between them
could in some cases reduce to a lexical content
task. The verbs are divided into in-domain and
out-of-domain sets.
Syntactic category This feature is 1 iffthe sen-
tence contains an adjective. To diversify the tem-
plates, we consider all grammatical combinations
of a noun, an adjective, a locative PP, and a proper
name (e.g., Sue is the tall actress in the park , or
The actress is Sue ). In out-of-domain sentences we
also include single-word nominal predicates like
president (see the example in Table 3 to control
for the fact that predicative adjectives are always a
single, lowercase word. This gives a total of 19 tem-
plates divided into in-domain and out-of-domain
sets, some with adjectives and some without. The
set of adjectives is also split between domains.
Syntactic construction This feature has value 1
iffthe sentence contains the control construction.
In the control construction a semantic argument of
a predicate ﬁlls or controls an argument slot of an
embedded verb (Sag et al., 2003). For instance, in
Sue is eager to sleep , the NP Suesurfaces as the syn-
tactic subject of eager , but Sueis also understood as
the semantic subject of sleep . This contrasts with
theraising construction in Sue is likely to sleep ,
where Sueis again surfaces as the syntactic subject
oflikely in the main clause, and is the semantic sub-
ject of sleep in the embedded position, but is not a
semantic argument of likely . Different predicates
are compatible with control and raising: eager is
a control predicate and likely is a raising predi-
cate. We include control and raising predicates of
three kinds: subject control/raising verbs, object
control/raising verbs, and control/raising adjectives.
Speciﬁc predicates are divided into in-domain and

==== Page 14 ====
Feature type Feature description Positive example Negative exampleSurfaceAbsolute position Is the ﬁrst token of S “the”? The cat chased a mouse. A cat chased a mouse.
Length Is S longer than n(e.g., 3) words? The cat chased a mouse. The cat meowed.
Lexical content Does S contain “the”? That cat chased the mouse. That cat chased a mouse.
Relative position Does “the” precede “a”? The cat chased a mouse. A cat chased the mouse.
Orthography Does S appear in title case? The Cat Chased a Mouse. The cat chased a mouse.LinguisticMorphology Does S have an irregular verb? The cat slept. The cat meows.
Syn. category Does S have an adjective? Lincoln was tall. Lincoln was president.
Syn. construction Is S the control construction? Sue is eager to sleep. Sue is likely to sleep.
Syn. position Is the main verb in “ing” form? Cats who eat mice are purring. Cats who are eating mice purr.
Table 3: Schematic examples of the linguistic and surface features.
out-of-domain sets, but all three kinds of predicates
appear in both domains.
Syntactic position All sentences contain at one
or two embedded clauses. We include six sentence
types, divided into in-domain and out-of-domain.
For example, some sentences contain a relative
clause within a relative clause, or a verb phrase
with a complement clause. Each sentence type
is generated from multiple templates varying the
position of the clauses. The set of -ingverbs is not
split between domains.

==== Page 15 ====
B Pretraining Details
Name L AH HS FFN P
Base 12 12 768 3072 125M
Med 6 12 768 3072 82M
Med-Small 6 8 512 2048 45M
Small 4 8 384 1200 26M
XSmall 3 4 256 1024 15M
Table 4: The RoBERTa model sizes we search over during pretraining. AH = number of attention heads; HS =
hidden size; FFN = feed-forward network dimension; P = number of parameters.
Training Size Model Size Max Steps Batch Size Validation Perplexity
1B BASE 31K 4096 3.84
1B BASE 100K 512 3.93
1B BASE 31K 1024 4.25
100M BASE 31K 1024 4.61
100M BASE 100K 512 4.99
100M BASE 31K 512 5.02
10M BASE 10K 512 10.78
10M BASE 10K 1024 11.31
10M BASE 31K 512 11.58
1M MED -SMALL 10K 512 134.18
1M MED -SMALL 31K 512 139.39
1M MED -SMALL 100K 512 153.38
Table 5: The pretraining parameters of the 12 models we use in our experiments.

==== Page 16 ====
C Additional Results
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Failed control Inoculation rate: 0% Inoculation rate: 0.1% Inoculation rate: 0.3% Inoculation rate: 1.0%
Figure 5: Results on the held-out training-condition items (in-domain/mixed) measured in LBS.
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Failed control Inoculation rate: 0% Inoculation rate: 0.1% Inoculation rate: 0.3% Inoculation rate: 1.0%
Figure 6: Results on the held-out auxiliary-condition items (out-of-domain/mixed) measured in LBS.

==== Page 17 ====
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Failed control Inoculation rate: 0% Inoculation rate: 0.1% Inoculation rate: 0.3% Inoculation rate: 1.0%Figure 7: Results on the held-out inoculation-condition items (in-domain/unmixed) measured in LBS.

==== Page 18 ====
D Black and white versions of Fig. 4
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Figure 8: Results of the mixed binary classiﬁcation tasks with no inoculation data.
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Figure 9: Results of the mixed binary classiﬁcation tasks with 0.1% inoculation data.

==== Page 19 ====
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0Figure 10: Results of the mixed binary classiﬁcation tasks with 0.3% inoculation data.
Absolute positionMorphology
Length
 Lexical content
 Relative position
 Orthography
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic category
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Syntactic position
-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
1M 10M 100M 1BbaseSyntactic construction
1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase
 1M 10M 100M 1Bbase-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Figure 11: Results of the mixed binary classiﬁcation tasks with 1% inoculation data.

