==== Page 1 ====
LEARNING FROM FEWEXAMPLES :
A S UMMARY OF APPROACHES TO FEW-SHOT LEARNING
Archit Parnami and Minwoo Lee
Department of Computer Science
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Charlotte, NC, USA
{aparnami, minwoo.lee}@uncc.edu
ABSTRACT
Few-Shot Learning refers to the problem of learning the underlying pattern in the data just from
a few training samples. Requiring a large number of data samples, many deep learning solutions
suffer from data hunger and extensively high computation time and resources. Furthermore, data is
often not available due to not only the nature of the problem or privacy concerns but also the cost of
data preparation. Data collection, preprocessing, and labeling are strenuous human tasks. Therefore,
few-shot learning that could drastically reduce the turnaround time of building machine learning
applications emerges as a low-cost solution. This survey paper comprises a representative list of
recently1proposed few-shot learning algorithms. Given the learning dynamics and characteristics,
the approaches to few-shot learning problems are discussed in the perspectives of meta-learning,
transfer learning, and hybrid approaches (i.e., different variations of the few-shot learning problem).
1Until January 2020.arXiv:2203.04291v1  [cs.LG]  7 Mar 2022

==== Page 2 ====
Parnami & Lee
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 Background 3
2.1 Meta-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.1.1 Problem Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.2 Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 Few-Shot Learning 5
3.1 The Few-Shot Classiﬁcation Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3.2 Meta-Learning-based Few-Shot Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.2.1 Main Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.2.1.1 Metric-based Meta-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2.1.2 Optimization-based Meta-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2.1.3 Model-based Meta-Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2.2 Hybrid Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3 Non-Meta-Learning based Few-Shot Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.1 Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3.2 Miscellaneous: Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4 Progress in Few-Shot Learning 27
5 Challenges and Open Problems 27
List of Tables
1 Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2 Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3 Common datasets used for Few-Shot Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
4 Meta-Learning Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
5 Metric-based Meta-Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
6 Optimization-based Meta-Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
7 Model-based Meta-Learning Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
8 Hybrid Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
9 Accuracy of 5-way classiﬁcation task on miniImageNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2

==== Page 3 ====
Parnami & Lee
1 Introduction
The ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has been through ups and downs since its inception in the 1950s. Yet, the last
few years have been marked by exceptional progress in the ﬁeld of AI. Much of this progress can be attributed to
recent advances in “deep learning” characterized by learning large neural network-style models with multiple layers
of representation. These models have shown great performance in a variety of tasks with large amounts of labeled
data in image classiﬁcation [ 1], machine translation [ 2] and speech modeling [ 3]. However, these achievements have
relied on the fact that the optimization of these deep, high-capacity models requires many iterative updates across many
labeled examples. This type of optimization breaks down in the small data regime where we want to learn from very
few labeled examples. In contrast, humans can quickly learn to solve a new problem just from a few examples. For
instance, given a few photos of a stranger, one can easily identify the same person from a large number of photos. This
is not only due to the human mind’s computational power but also to its ability to synthesize and learn new information
from previously learned information. For example, if a person has a skill for riding a bicycle, that skill can prove helpful
when learning to ride a motorcycle.
Recent years have seen a rise of research attempting to bridge this gap between human-like learning and machine
learning, which has given birth to this new sub-ﬁeld of Machine Learning known as Few-Shot Learning (FSL) i.e.,the
ability of machine learning models to generalize from few training examples . When there is only one example to
learn from, FSL is also referred to as One-Shot Learning. The motivation for FSL lies in the fact that models excelling at
this task would have many useful applications. First, we would not be required to collect thousands of labeled examples
to attain a reasonable performance on a new task which would help alleviate the data-gathering effort and reduce the
computation costs and time spent in training a model. Furthermore, in many ﬁelds, data is hard or impossible to acquire
due to reasons such as privacy and safety. Models that generalize from a few examples would be able to capture this
type of data effectively. Therefore in this survey, we study various approaches that have been recently proposed in an
attempt to solve the problem of Few-Shot Learning. We categorize the FSL approaches as seen in Figure 1.
Much of the work in this survey is inspired from prior works that attempted to summarize the ﬁeld of few-shot learning.
Wang et al. [ 4] deﬁnes the core issue of FSL as an unreliable empirical risk minimizer that makes it a hard problem.
Chen et al. [ 5] present a comparative analysis of several representative few-shot classiﬁcation algorithms. Similar
to ours, Weng [ 6] discusses meta-learning approaches to FSL. In addition, we discuss non-meta-learning and hybrid
meta-learning approaches to FSL. We also extend the discussion of main meta-learning approaches by including the
recent state-of-the-art methods.
The rest of the survey is organized as follows. Section 2 covers meta-learning which is a prerequisite to understand
recent FSL methods. Section 3 deﬁnes the few-shot classiﬁcation problem, introduces the available datasets, and divides
the approaches to FSL into two sub-sections: Meta-Learning-based FSL (Section 3.2 and Non-Meta-Learning-based
FSL (Section 3.3). Next, we list the performance of various FSL methods and progress made so far in Section 4. Finally,
we conclude with a discussion on challenges involved in Section 5.
2 Background
In this section, we discuss the necessary background required for understanding the recent few-shot learning algorithms.
2.1 Meta-Learning
Meta-Learning [ 7,8] or Learning to Learn [ 9] has been the basic technique which most few-shot learning algorithms
employ. Motivated by human development theory, meta-learning, a sub-ﬁeld of machine learning, focuses on learning
priors from previous experiences that can lead to efﬁcient downstream learning of new tasks. For instance, a simple
learner learns a single classiﬁcation task, but a meta-learner gains an understanding of learning to solve a classiﬁcation
task by exposing itself to multiple similar classiﬁcation tasks. Hence when presented with a similar but new task, the
meta-learner could solve it quickly and better than a simple learner which has no prior experience in solving the task. A
meta-learning procedure generally involves learning at two levels, within and across tasks. First, rapid learning occurs
within a task, for example, learning to accurately classify within a particular dataset. Next, this learning is guided by
knowledge accrued more gradually across tasks, which captures the way task structure varies across target domains.
Meta-Learning can be different from similar approaches such as transfer learning, multi-task learning, or ensemble
learning. In Transfer Learning [10], a model is trained on a single task known as the source task in the source domain
where the sufﬁcient training data is available. This trained model is then again retrained or ﬁnetuned on another single
task known as the target task in the target domain. The transfer of knowledge occurs from the source task to the target
task. Thus more similar the two domains are the better it performs . Multi-Task Learning [ 11], involves learning
3

==== Page 4 ====
Parnami & Lee
Figure 1: Approaches to FSL are categorized into Meta-Learning-based FSL and Non-Meta-Learning-based FSL.
The three main meta-learning approaches are: metric-based, optimization-based and model-based meta-learning.
Furthermore, variations of the FSL problem which use meta-learning are categorized as hybrid approaches.
multiple tasks simultaneously. It starts from no prior experience and attempts to optimize over solving multiple tasks at
the same time. On the other hand, Ensemble Learning [ 12] is the process by which multiple models, such as classiﬁers
or experts, are strategically generated and combined to solve a particular task. In contrast, meta-learner ﬁrst gathers
experience across multiple similar tasks and then use that experience to solve new tasks. Nonetheless, these techniques
can be and often are meaningfully combined with meta-learning systems. We provide the formal deﬁnition for the
meta-learning problem and explain it with the help of an example.
2.1.1 Problem Deﬁnition
In a typical supervised learning setting, we are interested in a task Twith a datasetD=f(xk;yk)gn
k=1withndata
samples. We usually split DintoDtrainandDtestsuch that:
Dtrain=f(xk;yk)gt
k=1 (1)
and
Dtest=f(xk;yk)gn
k=t+1; (2)
wheretdenotes the number of training samples. We optimize parameters on the training setDtrainand evaluate its
generalization performance on the test set Dtest. Thus the learning problem here is to approximate the function fwith
parametersas2:
yf(x;)where (x;y)2Dtest(3)
and
=argmin
X
(x;y)2DtrainL(f(x;);y) (4)
2We omit sample subscript kfor simplicity in the following discussion
4

==== Page 5 ====
Parnami & Lee
whereLis any loss function measuring the error between the prediction f(x;)and the true label y.
In meta-learning, we have a distribution p(T)of taskT. A meta-learner learns from a set of training tasks Titrainp(T)
and is evaluated on a set of testing tasks Titestp(T). Each of these task has its own dataset DiwhereDi=
fDtrain
i;Dtest
ig.
Let us denote the set of training tasks as Tmeta train =fT1;T2;:::::;Tngand the set of testing tasks as Tmeta test=
fTn+1;Tn+2;:::::;Tn+kg. Correspondingly, the training dataset for the meta-learner will be Dmeta train =
fD1;D2;:::::;Dngand the testing dataset will be Dmeta test=fDn+1;Dn+2;:::::;Dn+kg.
The parameters of the meta-learner are optimized on Dmeta train and its generalization performance is tested on
Dmeta test. Then, the meta-learning problem is to approximate the function fwith parameters as:
yf(Dtrain
i;x;)where (x;y)2Dtest
i (5)
and
Di=fDtrain
i;Dtest
igwhereDi2Dmeta test
i.e.,Diis the dataset for a test task Tisampled fromTmeta test. Then the optimal model parameters are obtained as:
=argmin
X
Di2Dmeta trainX
(x;y)2Dtest
iL(f(Dtrain
i;x;);y): (6)
That is the meta-learner learns parameters such that given a task Tip(T), its performance on its test data Dtest
i
given its training data Dtrain
i would be optimal. Figure 2 demonstrates a setup for example meta-learning problem.
2.1.2 Nomenclature
In meta-learning and few-shot learning literature, certain notations and terms are used interchangeably. Table 1 lists
these terms and their equivalent usage. Notation Ais more commonly used in optimization-based meta-learning
literature (Section 3.2.1.2) while notation Bis used when discussing metric-based meta-learning methods (Section
3.2.1.1). Additionally, Table 2 lists the commonly used symbols in this survey.
Notation A Term A Notation B Term B
Dtrain
i Training set for task TiSi Support Set for task Ti
Dtest
i Test set for taskTiQi Query Set for task Ti
Dmeta train Meta-training set Dtrain Training Set
Dmeta test Meta-testing set Dtest Test Set
Table 1: Nomenclature
3 Few-Shot Learning
Much of the recent progress in FSL has come through meta-learning. Therefore we ﬁrst divide the approaches to FSL
into two categories: meta-learning-based FSL and non-meta-learning-based FSL. Also, most of these approaches that
we are about to discuss were developed with the perspective of solving the few-shot image classiﬁcation problem.
However, they are still applicable for solving other problems such as regression, object detection, segmentation, online
recommendation, reinforcement learning, etc. We discuss the approaches to the few-shot image classiﬁcation problem
in this section and the applications to other domains in Section 4 .
3.1 The Few-Shot Classiﬁcation Problem
Consider the taskT(deﬁned in Section 2.1.1) as a classiﬁcation task where xis input and yis the output label. The
objective is to approximate the function f(Eqn. 3) with parameters (Eqn. 4) . This is generally possible when we
have sufﬁcient training data Dtrain(Eqn. 1) i.e., tis a large number. However, when tis small, it becomes difﬁcult to
approximate the function fso that it has good generalization performance over Dtest(Eqn. 2). This can be referred to
as afew-shot classiﬁcation problem as the number of examples (shots) are too few to learn a good model.
5

==== Page 6 ====
Parnami & Lee
Figure 2: Meta-Learning Example Setup . Each taskTiis a binary classiﬁcation task with a training set Dtrain
i and
test setDtest
i. During meta-training, the labels for samples in Dtest
iis known and the goal of meta-learner is to ﬁnd
optimalas per equation 6. During meta-testing, new task with unseen categories is presented and the labels are
predicted as per equation 5 .
Symbol Meaning Context
Ti Taski
L Loss function
(xk;yk) Input-Output pair
f Model (function) with parameters 
g1 Embedding function Sec. 3.2.1.1
d2ord Distance function Sec. 3.2.1.1
g Meta-Learning model with parameters  Sec. 3.2.1.2
P(yjx) Output probability of yfor inputxusing model parameters 
k(x1;x2)Kernel function measuring similarity between two vectors x1andx2 Table 4
 Softmax function
; Learning rates
w Weights
vc Prototype of class c Eq. 9
C Set of classes present in S
ScSubset of S containing all elements (xk;yk)such thatyk=c
 Concatenation operator Table 5
B Number of batches (Xb;Yb)sampled in inner-loop for a randomly sampled task TiTable 6
I Number of tasksTisampled in inner-loop Table 6
J Number of outer-loop iterations Table 6
Table 2: Symbols
6

==== Page 7 ====
Parnami & Lee
Usually people deﬁne few-shot classiﬁcation task as a standard M-way-K-shot task [ 13,14], where M is the number of
classes and K is the number of examples per class present in Dtrain. Usually K is a small number (ex., 1,5,10) and
jDtrainj=MK. The performance is measured by a loss function L(^y;y)deﬁned over the prediction ^y=f(x;)
and the ground truth y.
TheM-way-K-shot tasks are usually sampled from a larger dataset with classes much higher in number than M. Table
3 lists such commonly used datasets for conducting experiments for few-shot classiﬁcation.
Dataset Number of classes Samples per class Description
Omniglot [15] 1623 20 Handwritten characters from different languages.
miniImageNet [13] 100 600 100 classes randomly sampled from ImageNet.
FC100 [16] 100 600 Derived from CIFAR100 for FSL.
tiered ImageNet [17] 608 1280 (avg.) Like miniImageNet but ensures that there is a
wider degree of separation between training, val-
idation and test classes.
Table 3: Common datasets used for Few-Shot Learning
3.2 Meta-Learning-based Few-Shot Learning
The objective of meta-learning is to approximate the function fwith parameters such that the performance on any task
Tirandomly sampled from the task distribution p(T)is optimal (equation 5). We use this strategy for FSL such that the
distribution p(T)is now a distribution of few-shot tasks and each task Tiis a few-shot task. For example, consider
the M-way-K-shot few-shot classiﬁcation (FSC) task. During training, we meta-learn a prior over a distribution of
M-way-K-shot FSC tasks so that at test time we can solve for a new M-way-K-shot FSC task.
Meta-Learning-based FSL can be classiﬁed into three approaches [ 18]: metric-based, optimization-based and model-
based. Further, various meta-learning-based hybrid approaches were proposed to handle FSL problems such as
cross-domain FSL, generalized FSL, etc. We discuss the three main approaches in Section 3.2.1 and hybrid approaches
in Section 3.2.2.
3.2.1 Main Approaches
Consider a taskTwith support set Sand query set Q. Letfbe a few-shot classiﬁcation model with parameters . Then
for(x;y)2Q, the meta-learning approaches to FSL can be differentiated in the way they model the output probability
P(yjx)[18] (Table 4).
Metric-based Optimization-based Model-based
Key idea Metric Learning [19] Gradient Descent Memory; RNN
HowP(yjx)
is modeled? X
(xk;yk)2Sk(x;xk)yk;P0(yjx);
where0=g(;S)f(x;S):
Advantages Faster Inference. Offers ﬂexibility to optimize
in dynamic environments.Faster inference with mem-
ory models.
Easy to deploy. Scan be discarded post-
optimization.Eliminates the need for deﬁn-
ing a metric or optimizing at
test.
Disadvantages Less adaptive to optimization
in dynamic environments.Optimization at inference is
undesirable for real-world
deployment.Less efﬁcient to hold data in
memory asSgrows.
Computational complexity
grows linearly with size of
Sat test.Prone to overﬁtting. Hard to design.
Table 4: Meta-Learning Approaches
7

==== Page 8 ====
Parnami & Lee
3.2.1.1 Metric-based Meta-Learning
Metric Learning [ 19] is the task of learning a distance function over data samples. Consider two image-label pair
(x1;y1)and(x2;y2)and a distance function dto measure the distance between two images. If we were to assign a label
to a query image x3, we could compute the two distances d(x1;x3)andd(x2;x3))and assign the label corresponding
to the image with a shorter distance, which is also the key idea in nearest neighbors algorithms (k-NN). However, with
high dimensional inputs such as images, we typically use an embedding function gto transform the input to a lower
dimension before computing the distances:
g:Rn!Rmwheren>m:
Therefore, the core idea behind metric-based few-shot learning is to leverage meta-learning architecture to either learn
an embedding function g(;1)(parameterized by a neural network with parameters 1) given a distance function d
(such as euclidean distance) or to learn both the embedding function g(;1)(with parameters 1) and the distance
functiond(;2)(usually parameterized by another neural network with parameters 2). This is illustrated in Figure 3 .
Figure 3: Example metric-based meta-learning setup for a 4-way-1-shot classiﬁcation task. The embedding function g1
outputs the embedding vectors for support images (labeled) and the query image (unlabeled, denoted by ’?’). Distance
functiond2measures the distance between support and query vectors to output a similarity score.
Training proceeds by randomly sampling M-way-K-shot episodes from the training set. Each episode has a support set
and a query set. The average error computed on query sets across multiple training few-shot episodes is used to update
the parameters of the embedding function and the distance function (if any). Finally, new M-way-K-shot episodes are
sampled from the testing set to evaluate the performance of the network. This episodic training paradigm is explained
in Algorithm 1 .
Table 5 compares the recent metric-based meta-learning methods based on their characteristics like embedding function,
distance measure, prediction method, loss function and if the embedding function is ﬁxed for all tasks i.e., task-
independent ( T.I) or is adaptive (task-dependent). In the following paragraphs we discuss each of these methods in
further detail.
8

==== Page 9 ====
Parnami & Lee
Algorithm 1: Episodic Training in Metric-based Meta-Learning Methods
Given: In datasetD,nis the number of examples, Nis the set of classes, Ntrain is the set of classes used for
training,Ntestis the set of classes used for testing, M <Ntrain is the number of classes per episode, Kis the
number of support examples per class, Qis the number of query examples per class. RandomSample (A;B)
denotes a set of Belements chosen uniformly at random from set A,jNtrainj+jNtestj=jNjand
Ntrain\Ntest=;.
Input:D=f(x1;y1);:::;(xn;yn)gwhereyi2f1;:::;Ng.Dcdenotes the subset of D containing all elements
(xi;yi)such thatyi=c.
Training : .M-way K-shot training episodes
while True do
.1. Constructing Task
C RandomSample (Ntrain;M) .Sample M classes
S fg .Support set
Q fg .Query set
forcinCdo
Sc RandomSample (Dc;K) .Sample K support
Qc RandomSample (DcnSc;Q) .Sample Q query
S S[Sc
Q Q[Qc
end
.2. Learning Metric
fori 1tojSjdo
(xs;ys) S[i]
forj 1tojQjdo
(xq;yq) Q[j]
dij d2(g1(xs);g1(xq))) .Compute distances
end
end
Compute total loss Lbased ondij’s such thatdijis minimum when yi=yjand maximum otherwise.
Update parameters 1and2onL.
end
Testing : Sample a random M-way K-shot episode but this time using the classes from Ntestand evaluate its
performance.
Method T.I g1d2 Prediction Loss
Siamese Net-
works [20]Yes CNN L1 v=wd(g1(x1);g2(x2))
p=sigmoid (P
jvj) (ylog(p) +
(1 y)(log(1 
p))
Matching Net-
works [13]Yes CNN +
LSTM w/
attentionCosine
Similarity^y =Pt
k=1(d(f(^x);g1(xk))yk
P(y=cj^x) = ^yc logP
Prototypical
Networks [ 21]Yes CNN Euclidean P(y =cjx) =
( d(g1(x);vc)) logP
Relation Net-
works [22]Yes CNN Learned
by CNNrc=d2(g1(x)vc))P
c2C(rc 
1(y==c))2
TADAM [16] No ResNet-
12Cosine /
EuclideanP(y =cjx) =
( d(g1(x; );vc)) logP
TapNet [23] No Resnet-12 Euclidean P(y =cjx) =
( d(M(g1(x));M(c))) logP
CTM [24] No Any Any - -
Table 5: Metric-based Meta-Learning Methods
9

==== Page 10 ====
Parnami & Lee
Convolutional Siamese Networks
Siamese Neural Networks [ 25] are a pair of identical neural networks with shared weights originally proposed for
signature veriﬁcation. The two networks are joined at their output, where the joining neurons measures the distance
between the feature vector output of each network. In 2015, Koch et al. [ 20] used a pair of identical convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [ 26] with shared weights as done in Siamese Networks for image veriﬁcation. The network
was trained to recognize if the two images belong to the same class or not. The network outputs a probability score
(similarity) of the two images belonging to the same class. This idea was further extended to perform one-shot
recognition by comparing the similarity score between a query image and support images from different classes. This is
illustrated in Figure 4 . Here the embedding function g1is a CNN and the distance between two embedding vectors
is simply the L1 distance i.e., jg1(x1) g1(x2)j. The distance is converted to the probability of similarity by a
linear feed-forward layer and a sigmoid function. The network is then trained on binary cross-entropy loss. Similar to
Convolutional Siamese Networks, Mehrotra et al. [ 27] proposed Skip Residual Pairwise Networks (SRPNs) where
they used a Wide Residual Network [ 28] as the embedding function g1and a network of residual blocks to act as the
distance function d2.
Figure 4: Convolutional Siamese Network
Matching Networks
Given a support set S=fxi;yigK
k=1and a query ^x, Matching Networks [ 13] (Figure 5) deﬁne a probability distribution
over the output labels yusing an attention kernel a(^x;xk). The attention kernel basically computes the cosine similarity
between the embeddings of support and query examples and then normalize the similarity score by taking a softmax:
a(^x;xk) =ecos(f(^x);g(xk))=tX
k=1ecos(f(^x);g(xk)): (7)
The classiﬁer’s output is then deﬁned as a sum of the labels (one-hot encoded) of support samples weighted by the
attention kernel a(^x;xk):
P(yj^x;S) =KX
k=1a(^x;xk)yk (8)
In a simple case, the embedding function for query ( f) and the embedding function for examples in the support set
(g1) are same i.e., f=g. Alternatively, Matching Networks propose using Full Context Embeddings where embedding
functions contextually embeds images i.e for a given support image xand support set S, the embedding of xis obtained
byg1in the presence of Sasg1(x;S). Similarly for a query ^x, its embedding would be f(^x;S). i.e.,Sshould be
able to modify how we embed ^xthroughf. Using contextual embedding showed in improvement in the performance of
few-shot classiﬁcation on miniImageNet but no difference was observed on the simpler omniglot dataset.
10

==== Page 11 ====
Parnami & Lee
Figure 5: Matching Networks (Figure adapted from [13]).
Prototypical Networks
Prototypical Networks [ 21] use a 4-layer-CNN as an embedding function g1. A prototype for each class is deﬁned by
taking an average of embedding vectors obtained from the support images belonging to that class (Eqn. 9):
vc=1
jScjX
(xk;yk)2Scg1(xk): (9)
The similarity is measured by calculating the squared euclidean distance between the query’s embedding and each class
prototype. The output probability over classes is calculated by taking a softmax over the negative distances (Eqn. 10):
P(y=cj^x) =softmax ( d(g1(^x);vc)) =e( d(g1(^x);vc))
P
^c2Ce( d(g1(^x);v^c)): (10)
The lossLis given by the negative log-likelihood of the correct class (Eqn. 11):
L(1) = logP1(y=cj^x): (11)
Furthermore, to generate more discriminative embeddings, Zhang et al. [ 29] proposed using a multi-way contrastive
loss function with margin to pull the examples belonging to the same class together and push the others away in the
embedding space.
Figure 6: Few-shot prototypes vcare computed as the mean of embedded support examples for each class. The
embedded query points are classiﬁed via a softmax over distances to the class prototypes.
11

==== Page 12 ====
Parnami & Lee
Relation Networks
Relation Networks [ 22] get rid of manually constructing a similarity metric and instead just employs another CNN to
output a similarity score. The representations of the support and query examples (obtained from g) are concatenated
together and fed into dto obtain a relation score between each query and a support class (Figure 3). When the number
of support examples per class are more than one, the relation score is calculated between a query and a prototype of a
classvc, which is an element wise sum of embeddings of support examples of that class. The relation score for a match
should be 1 and 0 for a no-match. The network is then trained to minimize the mean squared error of relation scores.
Relation score of query ^xwith classc:
rc=d2(g1(^x)vc)
Optimization Objective:
1;2 argmin
1;2X
c2C(rc 1(y==c))2
Figure 7: Relation Network (Source: [22])
Task-Dependent Adaptive Metric (TADAM)
In the approaches discussed previously, the embedding function g1wastask-independent , meaning given any task
T p(T), its samples will be embedded using a ﬁxed embedding function g1. Moreover, the choice of distance
metric function (i.e. cosine or euclidean) was also something to be experimented with depending upon the task at hand.
Oreshkin et al. [ 16] proposed using 1)a learnable softmax temperature [ 30] with a scaling factor to bridge the gap
between the performance of cosine and euclidean distance metric and 2)a Task Embedding Network (TEN) factored
into the embedding network g1to output task adaptive representations. These contributions combined with using a
deeper embedding network (Resnet-12 [ 1]) as the feature extractor resulted in 8.5% absolute accuracy improvement
over Prototypical Networks [21] on the miniImageNet [13] 5-way 5-shot classiﬁcation task.
1.Metric Scaling: It was observed that Prototypical Networks [ 21] which used euclidean distance performed
better on few-shot image classiﬁcation when compared to Matching Networks [ 13] which used cosine distance.
Oreshkin et al. [ 16] suggested that the difference in performance could be directly attributed to the interaction
of the different scaling of the metrics with the softmax. Hence they propose to scale the distance metric by a
learnable temperature, , and observed that both distances produced equivalent performance when scaled with
learned parameter (Eqn. 12):
P(y=cjx) =softmax ( d(g1(x);vc)): (12)
2.Task Conditioning: Previously, Matching Networks used contextual embeddings i.e, embedding for an input
imagexwas obtained in presence of its support set S,g1(x;S). This was achieved with a bidirectional
LSTM as a post-processing of a ﬁxed feature extractor. Differently, TADAM explicitly deﬁne a dynamic
feature extractor g1(x; )where  is the set of parameters predicted from a task representation such that the
performance of g1(x; )is optimized given the task sample set S.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Parnami & Lee
Task-Adaptive Projection (TapNet)
In addition to the embedding function g1and the distance function d, TapNet [ 23] proposed a concept of per-class
reference vectors and a task dependent projection space or mapping M. Unlike class prototypes in Prototypical
Networks, reference vectors for each class are learned. The projection space Mis non-parametric and is built speciﬁc
to each task. The input query xis then classiﬁed by measuring its distance to different reference vectors in the
projection space M(Eqn. 13):
P(y=cjx) =softmax ( d(M(g1(x));M(c))): (13)
The motivation is to ﬁnd a projection space Mwhich could remove the misalignment between the task-embedded
features and the references and thus resulting in better classiﬁcation performance.
Task-Relevant Features (CTM)
Similar to Matching Networks, Li et al. [ 24] propose using a plugable component called Category Traversal Module
(CTM) parameterized by to ﬁnd contextual embeddings of the images in the support set Sand the query set Q. The
parametersare learned during the training along with parameters 1of the embedding function g.
CTM (g1(S);)!I(S)
CTM (g1(Q);)!I(Q)
The CTM takes support set features g1(S)as an input and produces a mask pvia a concentrator and projector that
make use of intra and inter-class views respectively. The mask pis applied to reduced-dimension features of both the
support and query, producing improved features Iwith dimensions relevant for the current task. These improved feature
embeddings are ﬁnally fed into a metric learner. This is illustrated in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Category Traversal Module (CTM) (Figure adapted from [24])
3.2.1.1.1 Attention-based methods
Much like Matching Networks and CTM, few others have proposed integrating attention [ 31] modules in existing
methods for learning more discriminative feature embeddings. Hou et al. [ 32] proposed Cross Attention Networks
(CAN) with a Cross Attention Module (CAM) to transform the class prototypes Pand queryQto more discriminative
prototypes Pand query Q. Furthermore, Hao et al. [ 33] propose Semantic Alignment Metric Learning (SAML) method
to align semantically relevant local regions on support and query images using attention maps.
13

==== Page 14 ====
Parnami & Lee
3.2.1.2 Optimization-based Meta-Learning
Earlier in Section 3.1, we discussed that for a few-shot classiﬁcation task Twith training dataDtrain(Eqn. 1) where
the number of training examples tis small, it is difﬁcult to approximate f(Eqn. 3) with parameters (Eqn. 4) from
scratch using gradient-based optimization as its not designed to cope with small number of training samples and thus
will lead to overﬁtting. This ponders the question, "is there any way to optimize on limited training data and still achieve
good generalization performance?" Optimization-based meta-learning for FSL answers to this question. Basically,
leveraging the meta-learning architecture (Figure 2) and episodic training (Algorithm 1), optimization-based methods
enables an optimization procedure to work on limited training examples.
Learner and Meta-Learner
Optimization-based methods generally involves learning in two stages:
1.Learner: A learner model fis task-speciﬁc and trained for a given task. For a given few-shot task, a
stand-alone learner model trained from scratch using gradient descent (Eqn. 4) will not be able to generalize
(Eqn. 3).
2.Meta-Learner: A meta-learner model gis not task speciﬁc and is trained on a distribution of tasks T p(T)
(Figure 2). Using episodic training, the meta-learner learns ( ) to update the learner model’s parameters ( )
via training setDtrain,
=g(;Dtrain): (14)
The objective of the meta-learner model is to produce updated learner model parameters such that they are
better than stand-alone learner model parameters .
During meta-training (notation Ain Table 1), the optimization process involves updating for the meta-learner and 
for individual training tasks. Once the meta-training ﬁnishes, the prior knowledge is encompassed into and onlyis
updated for a test task (Eqn. 14).
Table 6 compares different optimization-based meta-learning methods based on how they update learner’s parameters
and meta-learner parameters . In all the listed methods, learning happens in two-stages. Initially, in the outer-
loop, the meta-learner’s parameters are randomly initialized. Next, in the inner-loop the learner parameters ( )
are updated/proposed by meta-learner (Eqn. 14). The learners’ training loss Ltrainis further used to obtain optimal
parameters. Finally, in the outer loop the cumulative test loss of learner obtained using is used for updating . In
some cases learner’s initial parameters are also meta-learned along with .
In the following paragraphs, we discuss the the recent optimization based meta-learning approaches in more detail.
LSTM Meta-Learner
Normally when given a task T, we try to learn function f()on its training data Dtrain. The parameters of the neural
networkfare updated using some form of gradient descent as such:
i+1=i rf(i): (15)
Instead of using an hand designed optimizer such as SGD and a ﬁxed learning rate , Andrychowicz et al. [ 34] learn an
optimizer function gsuch that:
i+1=i+gi(rf(i);): (16)
Similarly, Ravi & Larochelle [ 35] modeled an LSTM [ 36] as a meta-learner gto propose parameters for the learner f:
i+1=gi(rf(i);i;): (17)
Optimizergis trained to produce parameters in just few steps for the few-shot learning task T. It follows the episodic
training paradigm and mimics the testing scenario. This training procedure is described in Algorithm 2 and depicted in
Figure 9.
14

==== Page 15 ====
Parnami & Lee
Method Learner Meta-Learner
Repeat8b2[1::B] Repeat8j2[1::J]
LSTM Meta-Learner [35]
Lb L(f(Xb;b 1);Yb)
b g((rb 1Lb;Lb);j 1)Ltest
j L(f(X;B);Y)
j j 1 rj 1Ltest
j
Repeat8i2[1::I] Repeat8j2[1::J]
MAML [14]
Ltrain
i L(f(Dtrain
i;j 1))

i j 1 rj 1Ltrain
t
Ltest
i L(f(Dtest
i;
t))j j 1 rj 1IX
i=1Ltest
i
MTL [37]
Ltrain
i L(f(Dtrain
i; [j 1;j 1;]))

i j 1 rj 1Ltrain
i
Ltest
i L(f(Dtest
i;
i))j j 1 rj 1IX
i=1Ltest
i
j j 1 rj 1IX
i=1Ltest
i
LEO [38]
j 1=fe;r;d;g
zi g(Dtrain
i; [e;r;])
i g(zi;d)
Ltrain
i L(f(Dtrain
i;i))
z
i zi rziLtrain
i

i g(z
i;d)
Ltest
i L(f(Dtest
i;
i))j j 1 rj 1IX
i=1Ltest
i
Table 6: Optimization-based Meta-Learning Methods
15

==== Page 16 ====
Parnami & Lee
Algorithm 2: Train Meta-Learner
Input: Meta-training set Dmeta train , Learnerfwith parameters , Meta-Learner gwith parameters 
0 random initialization
forj 1toJdo
Dtrain;Dtest random dataset from Dmeta train
0 c0
forb 1toBdo
Xb;Yb random batch from Dtrain
Lb L(f(Xb;b 1);Yb) .Get loss of learner on train batch
cb g((rb 1Lb;Lb);j 1) .Get output of meta-learner
b cb .Update learner parameters
end
X;Y Dtest
Ltest L(f(X;b);Y) .Get loss of learner on test batch
Updatejusingrj 1Ltest .Update meta-learner parameters
end
Figure 9: Computational graph for the forward pass of the meta-learner (Figure adapted from [35]).
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML)
They key idea in MAML or Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning [ 14] is to achieve good initialization parameters such
that new tasks can optimize quickly from through one or more gradient descent steps computed with a small amount
of data (Figure 10). These initial parameters are meta-learned over a distribution of tasks p(T). Unlike LSTM
meta-learner which has two separate models, a meta-learner model gand a task learner model f, MAML has a single
model with parameters . Individual tasks use the model parameters as initialization to arrive at optimal parameters
for the task at hand (Algorithm 3).
Proto-MAML [39] extends MAML by combining ideas from Prototypical Networks [ 21] and MAML [ 14]. During
training, the former focuses on learning a good embedding function gand does not perform any task adaptation
whereas later approach focuses on learning a good initialization parameters which are then ﬁne-tuned to adapt to
each task. In Proto-MAML, the initial weights of the classiﬁer are obtained from prototypical networks which are then
subsequently ﬁne-tuned to the individual task.
Task Agnostic Meta-Learning (TAML) [40] argues that the initial model of the meta-learner could be too biased toward
existing tasks to adapt to new tasks, especially in the case of few-shot learning with discrepancy between new tasks from
those in the training tasks. In such case, we wish to avoid an initial model over-performing on some tasks. Therefore,
16

==== Page 17 ====
Parnami & Lee
Algorithm 3: MAML
Require:p(T) :distribution over tasks
Require:;:step size hyperparameters
0 random initialization
forj 1toJdo
Sample a batch of Itasks randomly from p(T)
fori 1toIdo
Dtrain
i;Dtest
i dataset for taskTifromDmeta train
Ltrain
i L(f(Dtrain
i;j 1)) .Get loss of learner on training data

i j 1 rj 1Ltrain
i .Adapt to learner’s training loss
Ltest
i L(f(Dtest
i;
i)) .Get test loss of learner on adapted parameters
end
j j 1 rj 1IP
i=1Ltest
i .Update parameters on total test loss of learners
end
Figure 10: Diagram of MAML, which optimizes for a representation that can quickly adapt to new tasks (Figure
adapted from [14]).
TAML aims to meta-train an unbiased initial model by preventing it from over-performing on some tasks or directly
minimizing the inequality of performance across different tasks, in hope to make it more generalizable to unseen tasks.
Antoniou et al. [ 41] argue that even though MAML is a simple yet elegant meta-learning framework, it suffers from a
variety of problems which can cause 1) instability during training, 2) restricted generalization performance, 3) reduction
in the framework’s ﬂexibility, 4) increase in the system’s computational overhead and 5) a costly hyperparameter
tuning before it can work robustly on a new task. Hence they proposed MAML++ [41], an improved meta-learning
framework that offers the ﬂexibility of MAML along with stability, computational efﬁciency and improved generalization
performance.
Hierarchically Structured Meta-Learning (HSML) [42] attempts to address the challenge of task uncertainty and
heterogeneity in meta-learning, which can not be handled by globally sharing knowledge among tasks or to learn a
single initialization for all kinds of tasks as done in MAML. Therefore, HSML explicitly tailor transferable knowledge
to different clusters of tasks by learning task representations where each cluster of tasks has its own initial parameters
(Figure 11).
FastContext Adaptation ViaMeta-Learning (CA VIA) [ 43] is a simple extension to MAML that is more interpretable
and less prone to overﬁtting. CA VIA partitions the model parameters into two parts: context parameters context
that serve as additional input to the model and are adapted on individual tasks, and shared parameters shared that are
meta-trained and shared across the tasks. At test time, only context parameters are updated, leading to a low dimensional
task representation.
17

==== Page 18 ====
Parnami & Lee
Figure 11: MAML vs HSML (Figure adapted from [42])
Meta-Transfer Learning (MTL)
In MAML [ 14], the meta-learned model parameters are adapted as to an individual task. The effectiveness of this
strategy is limited to shallow networks, as the adaptation in deep networks can lead to overﬁtting. Therefore, Sun et al.
[37] propose a technique called Meta-Transfer Learning (MTL) (Figure 12). The key idea is to use a pretrained DNN as
a feature extractor ( ) and meta-learn only the last layer classiﬁer parameters . In addition, MTL also meta-learns
scale (S1) and shift (S2) parameters to adapt the to individual tasks. The scale and shift parameters are few in
number when compared to .
Figure 12: Difference between learning strategies. Meta-Task Learning (MTL) adopts transfer learning strategy for
Meta-Learning. A pre-trained model’s weights are shift and scaled on task basis. The shift and scale (SS) parameters
are learned through meta-learning across tasks (Source: [22]).
18

==== Page 19 ====
Parnami & Lee
Latent Embedding Optimization
Latent Embedding Optimization(LEO) [ 38] learns a low-dimensional latent embedding of model parameters and
performs optimization-based meta-learning in this space. Learning low-dimensional latent representation is motivated
by the fact that it is difﬁcult to optimize in high-dimensional spaces in extreme low-data regimes. The following steps
explain the optimization process of LEO:
1.Pretraining : Like MTL, input feature embeddings are not learned, but are pretrained on a deep network
(WRN [ 28]). Using the meta-training dataset, a ResNet classiﬁer is trained to distinguish between training
classes. Features from an intermediate layer of this trained classiﬁer is used for getting input embeddings.
2.Inner Loop Training : Each task’s dataset Dtrainis used to obtain the initial parameters of the classiﬁer f.
•The pre-trained embeddings for examples Dtrainare fed into a Encoder-Relation network which outputs
latent representation zfor each class (like a prototype).
• The low dimensional latent representation generates task classiﬁer parameters through a decoder.
• The training loss Ltrainoffis used to update the latent representations z.
3.Outer Loop Training : The lossLtestcalculated on each task’s test examples Dtestwithfis used to update
the parameters of encoder, relation network and decoder.
Intuitively, this provides two advantages. First, the initial parameters for a new task are conditioned on the training data,
which enables a task-speciﬁc starting point for adaptation. Second, by optimizing in the lower-dimensional latent space,
the approach can adapt the behavior of the model more effectively (Figure 13).
Figure 13: Overview of the architecture of LEO (Source: [38])
19

==== Page 20 ====
Parnami & Lee
3.2.1.3 Model-based Meta-Learning
Metric-based methods for FSL learn a function gto generate discriminative embeddings based on a metric where as
optimization-based methods learn a priors ;to optimize quickly from. Different from these approaches, model-based
meta-learning methods makes no assumption on the form of P(yjx). Rather it involves model architectures speciﬁcally
tailored for fast learning. Table 7 summarizes the methods in this category. Based on the kind of model architecture
(f), these methods are further categorized into memory-based, rapid-adaptation-based and miscellaneous models.
Method Type Key Idea
MANN [44] Memory Using NTM [45] for sequence prediction
MM-Net [46] Memory Key-Value Memory Networks [47] combined with Matching Networks [13]
MetaNets [48] Rapid Adaptation Fast-Weights stored in memory
CSN [49] Rapid Adaptation Task speciﬁc conditioning of activation values stored in memory
SNAIL [50] Miscellaneous Temporal Convolutions and Causal Attention layers for sequence prediction
Table 7: Model-based Meta-Learning Methods
3.2.1.3.1 Memory as a component
A family of model architectures integrates an external memory component to facilitate their learning process. This
external memory component is usually a 2D matrix called the memory bank, memory matrix or just plain memory .
The memory acts as a storage buffer to which neural networks can write new information and retrieve previously
stored information. Note that this memory component is different than internal memory found in vanilla RNNs or
LSTMs. Neural Turing Machines (NTM) [ 45] and Memory Networks [ 51], [52,47] are the examples of two such
model architectures which incorporates external memory in their learning process. In the context of FSL, memory as an
external component can relieve the burden of training in low data regime and can allow for faster generalization. Next,
we discuss such model architectures which integrates memory into their design and use meta-learning for learning from
few-examples.
Memory Augmented Neural Networks
Memory Augmented Neural Networks (MANN) [ 44] use a modiﬁed NTM to rapidly assimilate new data into memory
and leverage this data to make accurate predictions after only a few samples.
•Neural Turing Machine
A Neural Turing Machine (NTM) couples a controller neural network with external memory storage (Figure
14). Like most neural networks, the controller interacts with the external world via input and output vectors.
Unlike standard networks, the controller also learns to read and write memory rows by soft attention, while the
memory serves as a knowledge repository. The attention weights are generated by its addressing mechanism.
Figure 14: The architecture of NTM. The memory at time t, Mtis a matrix of size NM, containing N vector rows
and each has M dimensions (Source: [6]).
•Addressing Mechanism in MANN
The controllers in MANN are either LSTMS or feed-forward networks. Given some input xtat timet, the
20

==== Page 21 ====
Parnami & Lee
controller produces a key feature vector kt, which is then either stored in a row of a memory matrix Mt, or
used to retrieve a particular memory, i, from a row; i.e. Mt(i). A memory, rt, is retrieved using the weighting
vectorwr
t(i)as:
rt X
iwr
t(i)Mt(i)wherewr
t(i) =softmax (ktMt(i)
jjktjjjjMt(i)jj):
Writing to memory in MANN model involves the use of Least Recently Used Access (LRUA) module. The
LRUA module is a pure content-based memory writer that writes memories to either the least used memory
location or the most recently used memory location.
•Meta-Learning Setup for MANN
Memory encoding and retrieval in a NTM external memory is rapid, with vector representations being replaced
into or taken out of memory potentially every time-step. This ability makes the NTM a perfect candidate for
meta-learning and low-shot prediction, as it is capable of both long-term storage via slow update of weights,
and short term storage via its external memory module. Training in MANN follows the same episodic paradigm
discussed earlier, except the truth label ytis presented with one step offset i.e f(xt;yt 1);(xt+1;yt);:::g.
The network is tasked to output the appropriate label for xt(i:e:;yt)at the given timestep. This prevents the
network from slowly learning sample-class bindings in its weights. Instead, it must learn to hold data samples
in memory until the appropriate labels are presented at the next time-step, after which sample-class information
can be bound and stored for later use (Figure 15).
Figure 15: Task Structure. (a) Images xtare presented with time-offset labels, (b) External memory stored the bounded
sample representation-class label information (Source: [44]).
Memory Matching Networks
Memory Matching Networks (MM-Net) [ 46] integrates the memory module from Key-Value Memory Networks [ 47]
into Matching Networks [ 13]. It extends the idea of metric-based meta-learning with a memory module to encode
and generalize the whole support set into memory slots. Given the support set S, the memory module encodes the
sequence of Nsupport images into Mmemory slots with the write controller . For each support image xand its
embedded representation zin memory key space, the read controller measures the dot product similarity between the
input support image and the memory slots to retrieve a conditioned representation g(xjM). Meanwhile, a contextual
learner is devised to predict the parameters of CNNs for embedding unlabeled image in the query set.
3.2.1.3.2 Rapid Adaptation
The following model-based approaches uses techniques like "fast-weights" to rapidly adapt the parameters of a model
for a given task. Normally weights in the neural networks are updated by stochastic gradient descent in an objective
function and this process is known to be slow. One faster way to learn is to utilize one neural network to predict the
parameters of another neural network and the generated weights are called fast weights. In comparison, the ordinary
SGD-based weights are named slow weights.
Meta Networks
Meta Networks (MetaNet) [ 48] is a meta-learning model with architecture and training process designed for rapid
generalization across tasks. It consists of two main learning components, a base learner and a meta-learner, and is
equipped with an external memory. The rapid generalization of MetaNet relies on fast-weights. The external memory is
used to store these fast weights and the input representations.
21

==== Page 22 ====
Parnami & Lee
Figure 16: Architecture of Memory Matching Networks (Source: [46])
In MetaNet, loss gradients are used as meta information to populate models that learn fast weights. Slow and fast
weights are combined to make predictions in neural networks.
Figure 17: Combining slow and fast weights in a MLP.Lis element-wise sum (Source: [48]).
Conditionally Shifted Neurons
Conditionally Shifted Neurons (CSNs) [ 49] modify their activation values with task-speciﬁc shifts retrieved from a
memory module, which is populated rapidly based on a limited task experience. Building upon Meta-Networks, CSNs
also have a base learner, a meta-learner and a memory module. The learning happens in the following manner:
•A base learner works on individual tasks. Using its current weights it makes predictions on the examples in
the support set (description phase).
•The loss incurred from each prediction from support set is stored in the form of conditioning information
Iin the key-value memory where keys are the embeddings of inputs and the values are the conditioning
information.
•To classify a query (prediction phase), its embeddings are compared with the embeddings of the keys in the
memory using cosine similarity and the similarity score is then weighted using a softmax. The conditioning
information for each key is weighted by its similarity score and summed together to obtain joint conditioning
information.
22

==== Page 23 ====
Parnami & Lee
•The base network is updated with this joint conditioning information and the prediction for the query is made
with these updated weights.
•The loss obtained on the query is then used to update the key embeddings network f, the value network gand
the prediction network (the initial base network).
Figure 18: Rapid Adaptation with Conditionally Shifted Neurons. In the description phase, the meta learner populates
working memory with keys and values, based on the base learner’s performance on the task description; in the prediction
phase, the meta learner retrieves task-speciﬁc shifts from memory through key-based attention and feeds them to the
base learner to adapt it to the task (Source: [49]).
3.2.1.3.3 Miscellaneous Models: SNAIL
Each episode in SNAIL [ 50] receives as input a sequence of example-label pairs (x1;y1);:::;(xt 1;yt 1)for timesteps
1, ...,t 1, followed by an unlabeled example (xt;_)(Figure 19). It is then tasked to output prediction for xtbased on
the previous labeled examples it has seen. Formalizing meta-learning as a sequence-to-sequence problem, it argues
that meta-learner should be able to internalize and refer to past experience. It proposes use of embedding networks
with interleaved temporal convolutions and causal attention layers; the former to aggregate information from past
experience and the latter to pinpoint speciﬁc pieces of information. The temporal convolution layers in SNAIL provides
high-bandwidth access over its past experience without constraints on the amount of experience it can effectively
use. SNAIL architectures are easier to train than traditional RNNs such as LSTM or GRUs and can be efﬁciently
implemented so that an entire sequence can be processed in a single forward pass.
Figure 19: Overview of SNAIL; in this example, two blocks of temporal convolution layers (orange) are interleaved
with two causal attention layers (green) (Source: [50]).
23

==== Page 24 ====
Parnami & Lee
3.2.2 Hybrid Approaches
This section discusses the variations of the few-shot learning problem and the hybrid meta-learning based approach
towards them. Table 8 list the hybrid approaches and summarizes the key idea behind them.
Approach Key Idea
Cross-Modal FSL Leverage semantic data from a different modality .
Semi-Supervised FSL Using few training examples, label the given unlabeled examples and
improve the few-shot classiﬁer.
Generalized FSL Classify query into either one of the meta-training classes or a class
from the support set.
Generative FSL Learning to generate more samples from the given few.
Cross Domain FSL Training in one domain and testing in another .
Transductive FSL Jointly predict all the query examples.
Unsupervised FSL Support examples are unlabeled .
Zero-Shot Learning No support examples present.
Table 8: Hybrid Approaches
Cross-Modal Few-Shot Learning
The recent progress in few-shot image classiﬁcation has primarily been made in the context of unimodal learning. In
order to alleviate the problem of limited data in image domain, some approaches [ 53,54] employ data from different
modality (eg., text). This is referred to as Cross-Modal Few-Shot Learning. For example, Xing et al. [ 54] propose
an Adaptive Modality Mixture Mechanism (AM3) that combines information from an image and its label’s word
embedding to develop a better prototype of its class.
Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Learning
Semi-Supervised FSL considers the scenario when there is limited labeled data but sufﬁcient unlabeled data is available
during the training. For example in approaches which use meta-learning for few-shot classiﬁcation, a weakly supervised
classiﬁer trained on support set (labeled) learns to label unlabeled data and then use it to improve its performance on the
classiﬁcation task. Using metric-based meta-learning approach, Ren et al. [ 17] propose three semi-supervised variants
of Prototypical Networks [ 21], basically using Soft k-Means method to tune clustering centers with unlabeled data.
Alternatively, Sun et al. [ 55] use an optimization-based meta-learning approach for learning to initialize a classiﬁcation
model for semi-supervised FSL.
Generalized Few-Shot Learning
In general, FSL approaches involve meta-training on base (seen) classes and meta-testing on novel (unseen) classes.
Given a novel task sampled from the meta-testing set, the few-shot classiﬁer will classify a query into one of the classes
present in the novel task’s support set (task’s training set) and will not be able to recognize if the query example is from
a base class. Generalized Few-Shot Learning (GFSL) focuses on the joint classiﬁcation of both the base classes and
novel classes. In particular, the goal is, for the model trained on the seen categories to be capable of incorporating the
limited unseen class instances and make predictions for test/query instances in the both set of classes. Recent work of
Gidaris & Komodakis [56], Ye et al. [57] and Ren et al. [58] attempts to address this problem.
Generative Few-Shot Learning
One usual way one may think to alleviate the problem of learning from low data samples is to augment them with
synthesized samples. To this end, Wang et al. [ 59] propose a meta-learning approach for generating samples from
limited data. This generative model is referred to as hallucinator , a model that maps real examples to hallucinated
examples. The few-shot training set is ﬁrst fed to the hallucinator, and it produces an expanded training set, which is
then used by the learner. We refer to approaches of this kind as Generative Few-Shot Learning.
Cross Domain Few-Shot Learning
The FSL approaches discussed so far in the context of few-shot classiﬁcation aimed to recognize novel categories with
only few labeled examples in each class. One assumption that was followed was that all few-shot tasks belong to the
same distribution or domain. For example, most approaches sampled tasks from miniImageNet during training and
as well as testing. While promising results were observed following this assumption, the existing methods often fail
to generalize to unseen domains due to large discrepancy of the feature distribution across domains. This problem of
few-shot learning under domain shifts is referred to as Cross Domain FSL. To this end, the early works of Tseng et al.
[60] attempt to address this problem by simulating various feature distributions under different domains in the training
stage.
24

==== Page 25 ====
Parnami & Lee
Transductive Few-Shot Learning
Although, meta-learning is an effective strategy for few-shot learning as it aims at generalizing to unseen classiﬁcation
tasks, the fundamental difﬁculty with learning with scarce data remains for a novel classiﬁcation task. One way to
achieve larger improvements with limited amount of training data is to consider relationships between instances in the
test set and thus predicting them as whole, which is referred to as transduction or transductive inference [ 61]. Therefore,
transductive few-shot learning techniques [ 32,62,63] utilize the information present in unlabeled examples in the
query set as whole to make prediction about individual queries. For example Liu et al. [ 62] proposed Transductive
Propagation Networks, where the examples in the support and query sets are modeled as nodes of a graph. The labels of
the support set nodes are known and the task is to predict the labels of the query set nodes which is achieved using their
label propagation algorithm.
Unsupervised Few-Shot Learning
In supervised few-shot learning, the labels of the examples in the support set are available during the training and the
label of the examples in the query set have to be estimated. In contrast, in unsupervised few-shot learning, the examples
in the support set are also unlabeled. Huang et al. [ 64] proposed a strategy for unsupervised few-shot classiﬁcation task
which involves ﬁrst performing clustering on the examples in the support set and then assigning the query to one of the
clusters.
Zero-Shot Learning
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [ 65] attempts to solve a task without the presence of any training examples for that task.
For an image classiﬁcation task, ZSL methods rely mostly on visual-auxiliary modality alignment. Often times, the
auxiliary data is image’s label i.e., samples for the same class from two modalities are mapped together so that two
modalities obtain the same semantic structure. Because ZSL does not have access to any visual information when
learning new concepts, ZSL models have no choice but to align the two modalities. This way, during test the image
query can be directly compared to auxiliary information for performing classiﬁcation [66].
3.3 Non-Meta-Learning based Few-Shot Learning
In this section, we discuss strategies other than meta-learning that can aid learning in limited data regime.
3.3.1 Transfer Learning
Transfer Learning [ 67] is the improvement of learning in a new task through the transfer of knowledge from a related
task that has already been learned. In few-shot learning scenario where the data is too limited to train a deep network
from scratch, transferring knowledge from another network can be a viable option. For a classiﬁcation task, this
knowledge transfer is achieved by pretraining a deep network on large amounts of training data on base classes (seen)
and then ﬁne-tuning it on a new few-shot classes (unseen). However, naive ﬁne-tuning using just few example can lead
to overﬁtting and thus poor generalization performance on the few-shot task. Therefore, in this section, we discuss
approaches which attempts to address this problem.
Distance Metric Classiﬁcation Using Embeddings from a Pretrained Network
In section 3.2.1.1, we discussed approaches that used meta-learning to extract feature embeddings and perform
classiﬁcation using a nearest neighbour classiﬁer with a distance metric. SimpleShot [ 68] instead uses a pretrained
deep network to get feature embeddings for the input and query images, perform centering & L2 normalization on the
obtained features and use euclidean distance as the distance measure for nearest neighbour classiﬁcation. This simple
approach has shown considerable improvement in accuracy in comparison to meta-learning approaches. Similarly chen
et al. [ 69], shows comparable results from using cosine metric for nearest neighbour classiﬁcation on embeddings
obtained from a network trained on base classes.
Training a New Classiﬁer Using Embeddings from a Pretrained Network
Training a classiﬁer from scratch isn’t possible when the number of training samples are limited, due to the poor
resulting representations. However one could still obtain the representations from a pre-trained network and then train a
new classiﬁer using them. Tian et al. [ 70], demonstrate this exactly. Along with using representations from a pre-trained
network, they also L2 normalize them before training a new classiﬁer for each few-shot task. They also show that this
approach outperforms the simple nearest neighbour classiﬁcation using pretrained embeddings.
Transductive Inference Using Embeddings from a Pretrained Network
Certain approaches attempt to exploit the structure of information present in the query set and collectively classify
the examples in the query set. This is know as transductive inference. For example, in section 3.2.2, we mentioned
Transductive Propagation Networks [ 62] which utilized meta-learning to transductively assign labels to the examples
in the query set. Alternatively, instead of using meta-learning, Dhillon et al. [ 71] choose to transductively ﬁne-tune a
25

==== Page 26 ====
Parnami & Lee
pretrained network on a given few-shot task. That means along with the support examples (labeled), query samples are
also utilized in the ﬁne-tuning process. The proposed transductive ﬁne-tuning phase solves for:
=argmin
1
jSjX
(x;y)2S logp(yjx) +1
jQjX
(x;y)2QH(p(:jx)): (18)
The ﬁrst term in the equation is the data ﬁtting term using labeled support samples whereas the second term, the
regularizer, uses the unlabeled query samples to minimize the entropy of predictions.
Similarly, Ziko et al. [ 72], propose a transductive laplacian-regularized inference for few-shot tasks. Using the feature
embeddings learned from the base classes (pretrained), they minimize a quadratic binary-assignment function containing
two terms:
E(Y) =N(Y) +
2L(Y); (19)
where
N(Y) =NX
q=1CX
c=1yq;cd(xq mc)
and
L(Y) =1
2X
q;pw(xq;xp)jjyq ypjj2
•N(Y), a unary term, is minimized globally when each query point is assigned to the class of the nearest
prototype mc(obtained from the support set) using a distance metric d(xq;mc).
•L(Y), a pairwise Laplacian term, encourages nearby points (xp;xq)in the label space to the same latent label
assignment ( wis any similarity metric).
These transfer learning based methods have often come to exhibit better or equivalent performance on FSL tasks when
compared to the complex meta-learning methods discussed earlier.
3.3.2 Miscellaneous: Autoencoders
Mocanu [ 73] proposes a one-shot learning method, dubbed MoV AE (Mixture of Variational Autoencoders), to perform
classiﬁcation. A Variational Autoencoder (V AE) [ 74] provides a probabilistic manner for describing an observation in
latent space. Thus, rather than building an encoder which outputs a single value to describe each latent state attribute, a
V AE encoder to describe a probability distribution for each latent attribute. Given C classes, C V AEs are trained, one
for each class. Then the reconstruction loss from the V AEs are measured to perform classiﬁcation on the unlabeled data
sample. A downside of this approach is that requires constructing and training new Autoencoders for each new task
even at test. In contrast, most meta-learning methods work out-of-the-box at test time.
26

==== Page 27 ====
Parnami & Lee
4 Progress in Few-Shot Learning
Early few-shot research focused on computer vision applications and mainly image classiﬁcation [ 13,21,16,14].
This is because visual information is easy to acquire and has been extensively examined in machine learning. Other
computer vision problems such as Object Detection [ 75,76,77,78] and Segmentation [ 79] have also received recent
attention from the few-shot learning community. Apart from computer vision applications, FSL has been used for fault
diagnosis [ 80], text classiﬁcation [ 81,82], image colorization [ 83] and cold-start item recommendation [ 84,85]. In
graph modeling, FSL has been used for node classiﬁcation [ 86], edge labelling [ 87] and relation classiﬁcation [ 88]. In
audio, its used for few-shot speaker recognition [ 89,90] and sound recognition [ 91]. Finally, imitation learning [ 92] in
robotics and control [14] in reinforcement learning [93].
Since its emergence in 2016, the ﬁeld of few-shot learning has shown promising improvement in learning from limited
data. Figure 20 shows the trend of improvement in accuracy for 5-way 1-shot classiﬁcation task on miniImageNet
[13]. Beginning with Matching Networks [ 13] at 43% accuracy, various optimization, metric, model-based and hybrid
approaches were proposed in past four years, pushing the accuracy to 80% (as of Jan 2020). Although model-based
approaches have seen less progress, there is no clear consensus if any one particular approach is the best way forward.
Table 9 lists the accuracy of methods discussed in this survey (sorted by 1-shot accuracy and color coded by type).
Metric-based, Optimization-based, Hybrid Meta-Learning and even Non-Meta-Learning approaches, all seem to be
leading the race.
Figure 20: Progress in FSL3
5 Challenges and Open Problems
Recent years witnessed a great deal of interest from the machine learning community in solving the problem of learning
from few examples. Consequently, many approaches were proposed, and each of them involved some kind of knowledge
transfer, either though meta-learning or transfer learning. The success of these approaches relied on certain assumptions,
which might become challenging to uphold in real-world settings. Therefore, in this section we discuss the challenges
involved in the nitty-gritty of FSL approaches.
Training the Same Way as Testing Most meta-learning methods employ M-way K-shot episodic training paradigm
(Algorithm 1), i.e, we train the few-shot learning model to distinguish between M classes each with exactly K training
examples. This makes the trained few-shot classiﬁer very rigid to be deployed in real world scenarios as one cannot
expect to know beforehand the number of classes (M) and the number of training examples (K) available for an unseen
task. Moreover, the model will suffer performance degradation if the number of examples present are less than K [ 94].
3https://paperswithcode.com/sota/few-shot-image-classiﬁcation-on-mini-2
27

==== Page 28 ====
Parnami & Lee
Model 1-shot 5-shot Type
Matching Networks [13] 43.56 55.31 Metric
MAML [14] 48.7 63.15 Optimization
ProtoNet [21] 49.42 68.2 Metric
Relation Net [22] 50.44 65.32 Metric
ProtoNet + Margin [29] 51.62 70.24 Metric
CA VIA [43] 51.82 65.85 Optimization
SNAIL [50] 55.71 68.88 Model
TPN [62] 55.51 69.86 Hybrid
Dynamic FSL [56] 56.2 73 Hybrid
CSN [49] 56.88 71.94 Model
SAML [33] 57.69 73.03 Metric
TADAM [16] 58.5 76.7 Metric
MTL [37] 61.2 75.5 Optimization
TapNet [23] 61.65 76.36 Metric
LEO [38] 61.76 77.59 Optimization
CTM [24] 62.05 78.63 Metric
SCA [63] 62.86 77.64 Optimization
CAN [32] 63.85 79.44 Metric
SimpleShot [68] 64.29 81.5 Non-Meta-Learning
AM3 [54] 65.3 78.1 Hybrid
LST [55] 70.1 78.7 Hybrid
Table 9: Accuracy of 5-way classiﬁcation task on miniImageNet
Learning Constrained to a Single Distribution of Tasks
In few-shot learning experiments, training and testing tasks are sampled from the same distribution p(T), which
constraints the learning to a single domain. For example, a FSL model trained for character classiﬁcation tasks on
Omniglot [ 15] may not work well with digit classiﬁcation on MNIST [ 95]. Similarly a general few-shot image classiﬁer
built on miniImagenNet [ 13] may not work well for ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation of Birds [ 96] or Cars [ 97]. This problem
is also referred to as Cross Domain FSL.
Performing Joint Classiﬁcation from Seen and Unseen Classes
The classes used in the training phase are not retained by the few-shot classiﬁer, i.e. once the training ﬁnishes, the model
can only classify the incoming query into one of the classes present in the support set of the given task. In real-world
usage, it would be desirable to jointly classify the incoming query from training classes (seen) and the new classes
(unseen) present in the support set of the task. This challenge is also referred to as Generalized Few-Shot Learning.
Few-Shot Learning in Data Domains Other than Images
Availability of large amount of image datasets have resulted in considerable progress in few-shot image classiﬁcation.
Besides the availability, image datasets can be constructed to have uniformly sized images easily categorized into
different classes. Contrary to images, data domains like audio and wireless signals have limited large-scale datasets
that are uniformly curated. Since uniformity of a dataset is essential to meta-learning, it is a challenge to deploy FSL
methods from images to domains like signals.
References
[1]Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
[2]Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V . Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim
Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin Johnson, Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz
Kaiser, Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant
Patil, Wei Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff
Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and
machine translation. CoRR , abs/1609.08144, 2016.
[3]Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalch-
brenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.03499 , 2016.
28

==== Page 29 ====
Parnami & Lee
[4]Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni. Generalizing from a few examples: A survey
on few-shot learning. 2019.
[5]Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer look at few-shot
classiﬁcation. ArXiv , abs/1904.04232, 2019.
[6] Lilian Weng. Meta-learning: Learning to learn fast. 2018.
[7]Jurgen Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning. on learning now to learn: The meta-
meta-meta...-hook. Diploma thesis, Technische Universitat Munchen, Germany, 14 May 1987.
[8] T. Schaul and J. Schmidhuber. Metalearning. Scholarpedia , 5(6):4650, 2010. revision #91489.
[9] Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt, editors. Learning to Learn . Kluwer Academic Publishers, USA, 1998.
[10] Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data
engineering , 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.
[11] Rich Caruana. Multitask Learning , pages 95–133. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1998.
[12] R. Polikar. Ensemble learning. Scholarpedia , 4(1):2776, 2009. revision #186077.
[13] Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Matching networks
for one shot learning. CoRR , abs/1606.04080, 2016.
[14] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
networks. CoRR , abs/1703.03400, 2017.
[15] Brenden M. Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Human-level concept learning through
probabilistic program induction. Science , 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015.
[16] Boris N. Oreshkin, Pau Rodríguez López, and Alexandre Lacoste. Tadam: Task dependent adaptive metric for
improved few-shot learning. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[17] Mengye Ren, Eleni Triantaﬁllou, Sachin Ravi, Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Hugo Larochelle,
and Richard S. Zemel. Meta-learning for semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation. ArXiv , abs/1803.00676, 2018.
[18] Oriol Vinyals. Model vs optimization meta learning. Meta-Learning Symposium at NIPS , 2017.
[19] Brian Kulis. Metric learning: A survey. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning , 5(4):287–364, 2013.
[20] Gregory R. Koch. Siamese neural networks for one-shot image recognition. 2015.
[21] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard S. Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In NIPS , 2017.
[22] Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip H. S. Torr, and Timothy M. Hospedales. Learning to
compare: Relation network for few-shot learning. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 1199–1208, 2018.
[23] Sung Whan Yoon, Jun Seo, and Jaekyun Moon. Tapnet: Neural network augmented with task-adaptive projection
for few-shot learning. In ICML , 2019.
[24] Hongyang Li, David Eigen, Samuel F. Dodge, Matthew D. Zeiler, and Xiaogang Wang. Finding task-relevant
features for few-shot learning by category traversal. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , pages 1–10, 2019.
[25] Jane Bromley, James W. Bentz, Léon Bottou, Isabelle Guyon, Yann LeCun, Cliff Moore, Eduard Säckinger, and
Roopak Shah. Signature veriﬁcation using a "siamese" time delay neural network. In IJPRAI , 1993.
[26] Yann Lecun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE , pages 2278–2324, 1998.
[27] Akshay Mehrotra and Ambedkar Dukkipati. Skip residual pairwise networks with learnable comparative functions
for few-shot learning. In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, WACV 2019, Waikoloa
Village, HI, USA, January 7-11, 2019 , pages 886–894. IEEE, 2019.
[28] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Edwin R. Hancock Richard C. Wilson and
William A. P. Smith, editors, Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) , pages 87.1–87.12.
BMV A Press, September 2016.
[29] Xianchao Zhang, Jinlong Nie, Linlin Zong, Hong Yu, and Wenxin Liang. One shot learning with margin. In
PAKDD , 2019.
[30] Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. ArXiv ,
abs/1503.02531, 2015.
29

==== Page 30 ====
Parnami & Lee
[31] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and
Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS , 2017.
[32] Ruibing Hou, Hong Chang, Bingpeng Ma, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen. Cross attention network for few-shot
classiﬁcation. In NeurIPS , 2019.
[33] Fusheng Hao, Fengxiang He, Jun Cheng, Lei Wang, Jian zhong Cao, and Dacheng Tao. Collect and select:
Semantic alignment metric learning for few-shot learning. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV) , pages 8459–8468, 2019.
[34] Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Matthew W. Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul,
and Nando de Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient descent. In NIPS , 2016.
[35] Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model for few-shot learning. In ICLR , 2017.
[36] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9:1735–1780, 1997.
[37] Qianru Sun, Yaoyao Liu, Tat-Seng Chua, and Bernt Schiele. Meta-transfer learning for few-shot learning. 2019
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 403–412, 2018.
[38] Andrei A. Rusu, Dushyant Rao, Jakub Sygnowski, Oriol Vinyals, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, and Raia
Hadsell. Meta-learning with latent embedding optimization. ArXiv , abs/1807.05960, 2018.
[39] Eleni Triantaﬁllou, Tyler Zhu, Vincent Dumoulin, Pascal Lamblin, Kelvin Xu, Ross Goroshin, Carles Gelada,
Kevin Swersky, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, and Hugo Larochelle. Meta-dataset: A dataset of datasets for learning
to learn from few examples. ArXiv , abs/1903.03096, 2020.
[40] Muhammad Abdullah Jamal, Guo-Jun Qi, and Mubarak Shah. Task agnostic meta-learning for few-shot learning.
2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11711–11719, 2018.
[41] Antreas Antoniou, Harrison A Edwards, and Amos J. Storkey. How to train your maml. ArXiv , abs/1810.09502,
2018.
[42] Huaxiu Yao, Ying Wei, Junzhou Huang, and Zhenhui Li. Hierarchically structured meta-learning. In ICML , 2019.
[43] Luisa M. Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast context adaptation
via meta-learning. In ICML , 2019.
[44] Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew M Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy P. Lillicrap. One-shot
learning with memory-augmented neural networks. ArXiv , abs/1605.06065, 2016.
[45] Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines. ArXiv , abs/1410.5401, 2014.
[46] Qi Cai, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Chenggang Clarence Yan, and Tao Mei. Memory matching networks for one-shot
image recognition. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4080–4088,
2018.
[47] Alexander H. Miller, Adam Fisch, Jesse Dodge, Amir-Hossein Karimi, Antoine Bordes, and Jason Weston.
Key-value memory networks for directly reading documents. ArXiv , abs/1606.03126, 2016.
[48] Tsendsuren Munkhdalai and Hong Yu. Meta networks. Proceedings of machine learning research , 70:2554–2563,
2017.
[49] Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Xingdi Yuan, Soroush Mehri, and Adam Trischler. Rapid adaptation with conditionally
shifted neurons. In ICML , 2017.
[50] Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner. In
ICLR , 2017.
[51] Jason Weston, Sumit Chopra, and Antoine Bordes. Memory networks. CoRR , abs/1410.3916, 2015.
[52] Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and Rob Fergus. End-to-end memory networks. In NIPS ,
2015.
[53] Peng Wang, Lingqiao Liu, Chunhua Shen, Zi Huang, Anton van den Hengel, and Heng Tao Shen. Multi-attention
network for one shot learning. 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,
pages 6212–6220, 2017.
[54] Chen Xing, Negar Rostamzadeh, Boris N. Oreshkin, and Pedro H. O. Pinheiro. Adaptive cross-modal few-shot
learning. In NeurIPS , 2019.
[55] Qianru Sun, Xinzhe Li, Yaoyao Liu, Shibao Zheng, Tat-Seng Chua, and Bernt Schiele. Learning to self-train for
semi-supervised few-shot classiﬁcation. In NeurIPS , 2019.
[56] Spyros Gidaris and Nikos Komodakis. Dynamic few-shot visual learning without forgetting. 2018 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 4367–4375, 2018.
30

==== Page 31 ====
Parnami & Lee
[57] Han-Jia Ye, Hexiang Hu, De-Chuan Zhan, and Fei Sha. Learning classiﬁer synthesis for generalized few-shot
learning. ArXiv , abs/1906.02944, 2019.
[58] Mengye Ren, Renjie Liao, Ethan Fetaya, and Richard S. Zemel. Incremental few-shot learning with attention
attractor networks. In NeurIPS , 2019.
[59] Yu-Xiong Wang, Ross B. Girshick, Martial Hebert, and Bharath Hariharan. Low-shot learning from imaginary
data. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7278–7286, 2018.
[60] Hung-Yu Tseng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Jia-Bin Huang, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Cross-domain few-shot classiﬁcation via
learned feature-wise transformation. ArXiv , abs/2001.08735, 2020.
[61] Vladimir N. Vapnik. Transductive inference and semi-supervised learning. In Semi-Supervised Learning , 2006.
[62] Yanbin Liu, Juho Lee, Minseop Park, Saehoon Kim, Eunho Yang, SungJu Hwang, and Yang Yang. Learning to
propagate labels: Transductive propagation network for few-shot learning. In ICLR , 2019.
[63] Antreas Antoniou and Amos J. Storkey. Learning to learn via self-critique. ArXiv , abs/1905.10295, 2019.
[64] Gabriel Huang, Hugo Larochelle, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Centroid networks for few-shot clustering and
unsupervised few-shot classiﬁcation. ArXiv , abs/1902.08605, 2019.
[65] Yongqin Xian, Bernt Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. Zero-shot learning - the good, the bad and the ugly. CoRR ,
abs/1703.04394, 2017.
[66] Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, and Shaogang Gong. Learning a deep embedding model for zero-shot learning. 2017 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 3010–3019, 2017.
[67] Lisa Torrey and Jude Shavlik. Transfer learning. In Handbook of research on machine learning applications and
trends: algorithms, methods, and techniques , pages 242–264. IGI Global, 2010.
[68] Yan Wang, Wei-Lun Chao, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and Laurens van der Maaten. Simpleshot: Revisiting nearest-
neighbor classiﬁcation for few-shot learning. ArXiv , abs/1911.04623, 2019.
[69] Yinbo Chen, Xiaolong Wang, Zhuang Liu, Huijuan Xu, and Trevor Darrell. A new meta-baseline for few-shot
learning. ArXiv , abs/2003.04390, 2020.
[70] Yonglong Tian, Yue Wang, Dilip Krishnan, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Phillip Isola. Rethinking few-shot image
classiﬁcation: a good embedding is all you need?, 2020.
[71] Guneet S. Dhillon, P. Chaudhari, Avinash Ravichandran, and Stefano Soatto. A baseline for few-shot image
classiﬁcation. ArXiv , abs/1909.02729, 2019.
[72] Imtiaz Masud Ziko, Jose Dolz, Éric Granger, and Ismail Ben Ayed. Laplacian regularized few-shot learning.
ArXiv , abs/2006.15486, 2020.
[73] Decebal Constantin Mocanu and Elena Mocanu. One-shot learning using mixture of variational autoencoders: a
generalization learning approach. ArXiv , abs/1804.07645, 2018.
[74] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013.
[75] Hao Chen, Yali Wang, Guoyou Wang, and Yu Qiao. Lstd: A low-shot transfer detector for object detection. ArXiv ,
abs/1803.01529, 2018.
[76] Bingyi Kang, Zhuang Liu, Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Jiashi Feng, and Trevor Darrell. Few-shot object detection via
feature reweighting. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 8419–8428,
2018.
[77] Qi Fan, Wei Zhuo, and Yu-Wing Tai. Few-shot object detection with attention-rpn and multi-relation detector.
ArXiv , abs/1908.01998, 2019.
[78] Eli Schwartz, Leonid Karlinsky, Joseph Shtok, Sivan Harary, Mattias Marder, Sharath Pankanti, Rogério Schmidt
Feris, Abhishek Kumar, Raja Giryes, and Alexander M. Bronstein. Repmet: Representative-based metric learning
for classiﬁcation and few-shot object detection. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5192–5201, 2018.
[79] Claudio Michaelis, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Matthias Bethge, and Alexander S. Ecker. One-shot instance segmentation.
ArXiv , abs/1811.11507, 2018.
[80] Ansi Zhang, Shaobo Li, Yuxin Cui, Wanli Yang, Rongzhi Dong, and Jianjun Hu. Limited data rolling bearing
fault diagnosis with few-shot learning. IEEE Access , 7:110895–110904, 2019.
[81] Mo Yu, Xiaoxiao Guo, Jinfeng Yi, Shiyu Chang, Saloni Potdar, Yu Cheng, Gerald Tesauro, Haoyu Wang, and
Bowen Zhou. Diverse few-shot text classiﬁcation with multiple metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07513 , 2018.
31

==== Page 32 ====
Parnami & Lee
[82] Shumin Deng, Ningyu Zhang, Zhanlin Sun, Jiaoyan Chen, and Huajun Chen. When low resource nlp meets
unsupervised language model: Meta-pretraining then meta-learning for few-shot text classiﬁcation. arXiv , pages
arXiv–1908, 2019.
[83] Seungjoo Yoo, Hyojin Bahng, Sunghyo Chung, Junsoo Lee, Jaehyuk Chang, and Jaegul Choo. Coloring with
limited data: Few-shot colorization via memory augmented networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11283–11292, 2019.
[84] Manasi Vartak, Arvind Thiagarajan, Conrado Miranda, Jeshua Bratman, and Hugo Larochelle. A meta-learning
perspective on cold-start recommendations for items. In NIPS , 2017.
[85] Zhengxiao Du, Xiaowei Wang, Hongxia Yang, Jingren Zhou, and Jie Tang. Sequential scenario-speciﬁc meta
learner for online recommendation. Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery & Data Mining , 2019.
[86] Fan Zhou, Chengtai Cao, Kunpeng Zhang, Goce Trajcevski, Ting Zhong, and Ji Geng. Meta-gnn: On few-
shot node classiﬁcation in graph meta-learning. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management , pages 2357–2360, 2019.
[87] Jongmin Kim, Taesup Kim, Sungwoong Kim, and Chang D Yoo. Edge-labeling graph neural network for few-shot
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11–20,
2019.
[88] Xu Han, Hao Zhu, Pengfei Yu, Ziyun Wang, Yuan Yao, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Fewrel: A large-scale
supervised few-shot relation classiﬁcation dataset with state-of-the-art evaluation. In EMNLP , 2018.
[89] Prashant Anand, Ajeet Kumar Singh, Siddharth Srivastava, and Brejesh Lall. Few shot speaker recognition using
deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08775 , 2019.
[90] Archit Parnami and Minwoo Lee. Few-shot keyword spotting with prototypical networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.14463 , 2020.
[91] Szu-Yu Chou, Kai-Hsiang Cheng, Jyh-Shing Roger Jang, and Yi-Hsuan Yang. Learning to match transient sound
events using attentional similarity for few-shot sound recognition. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 26–30. IEEE, 2019.
[92] Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly Stadie, OpenAI Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya Sutskever, Pieter
Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 1087–1098, 2017.
[93] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction . MIT press, 2018.
[94] Tianshi Cao, Marc Teva Law, and Sanja Fidler. A theoretical analysis of the number of shots in few-shot learning.
ArXiv , abs/1909.11722, 2020.
[95] Yann LeCun and Corinna Cortes. MNIST handwritten digit database. 2010.
[96] P. Welinder, S. Branson, T. Mita, C. Wah, F. Schroff, S. Belongie, and P. Perona. Caltech-UCSD Birds 200.
Technical Report CNS-TR-2010-001, California Institute of Technology, 2010.
[97] J. Krause, M. Stark, J. Deng, and L. Fei-Fei. 3d object representations for ﬁne-grained categorization. In 2013
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops , pages 554–561, 2013.
32

