==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Journal of Business Ethics (2022) 179:43–61 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-021-04843-y
ORIGINAL PAPER
Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An 
Ethical Perspective
Erik Hermann1
Received: 2 December 2020 / Accepted: 12 May 2021 / Published online: 26 May 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Artificial intelligence (AI) is (re)shaping strategy, activities, interactions, and relationships in business and specifically in 
marketing. The drawback of the substantial opportunities AI systems and applications (will) provide in marketing are ethical 
controversies. Building on the literature on AI ethics, the authors systematically scrutinize the ethical challenges of deploying 
AI in marketing from a multi-stakeholder perspective. By revealing interdependencies and tensions between ethical princi-
ples, the authors shed light on the applicability of a purely principled, deontological approach to AI ethics in marketing. To 
reconcile some of these tensions and account for the AI-for-social-good perspective, the authors make suggestions of how 
AI in marketing can be leveraged to promote societal and environmental well-being.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Marketing · Ethics · Social good · Well-being
Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is not just a technology but a 
powerful force reshaping and benefiting societies by reduc-
ing costs and risks, increasing consistency and reliability, 
and providing new solutions to complex problems (Taddeo 
& Floridi, 2018). AI systems and applications have become 
pervasive across industries and sectors (Campbell et al., 
2020) and also bring forth diverse opportunities for market-
ing strategy and actions (e.g., Huang & Rust, 2021b) as well 
as customer experience (e.g., Puntoni et al., 2021 ), relation -
ships (e.g., Libai et al., 2020) and engagement (Kumar et al., 
2019). The increasing computational power, data availabil-
ity and intensity, context awareness, and emotional-sensing 
capabilities of AI allow to tailor customized and person -
alized offerings, and establish and maintain responsive 
customer interactions and relationships with experiential 
value (e.g., Grewal, Hulland, et al., 2020; Huang & Rust, 
2021b; Ma & Sun, 2020; Puntoni et al., 2021). However, the 
substantial and growing scale and scope of consumer data 
feeding AI systems, the level of AI (emotional) intelligence, 
and AI-driven sales and consumption increases raise ethical controversies and challenges (e.g., Davenport et al., 2020; 
De Bruyn et al., 2020; Vlačić et al., 2021). Among other 
things, AI applications and systems can be discriminatory in 
various respects. On the customer level, discrimination can 
arise from customer prioritization based on demographic 
and economic factors (e.g., Libai et al., 2020) and target-
ing (e.g., Matz & Netzer, 2017) or alienation (e.g., Puntoni 
et al., 2021) of vulnerable consumer groups. On the com-
pany level, market share concentration through AI-enabled 
e-commerce platforms (e.g., Lee & Hosaganar, 2019 ) and 
unequal representation on them (e.g., Milano et al., 2021) 
can disadvantage some companies while privileging others. 
Such discriminatory treatments can reinforce and exacerbate 
existing economic and societal inequalities. Thus, ethical 
challenges related to AI in marketing can emerge on the cus-
tomer, company, and societal levels. However, the discussion 
of ethical issues of AI in marketing is partly anecdotal and 
has hitherto focused on specific AI applications or aspects 
thereof and/or single ethical principles, for example, explain-
ability (e.g., De Bruyn et al., 2020; Huang & Rust, 2021b; 
Rai, 2020) or privacy (e.g., Davenport et al., 2020; Kumar 
et al., 2019; Puntoni et al., 2021).
Given the substantial advancement and increasing preva-
lence of AI as well as its encompassing impact on the indi-
vidual, economic, and societal levels, the debate on ethical 
principles and values guiding AI development and use has 
gained center stage (e.g., Cowls et al., 2021; Farisco et al.,  * Erik Hermann 
 hermann@ihp-microelectronics.com
1 Wireless Systems,             IHP - Leibniz-Institut für 
innovative Mikroelektronik, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany

==== Page 2 ====
44 E. Hermann 
1 3
2020; Floridi et al., 2018, 2020; Hagendorff, 2020; Jobin 
et al., 2019; McLennan et al., 2020; Mittelstadt, 2019; Mit-
telstadt et al., 2016; Morley et al., 2020; Stahl et al., 2021). 
To date, the AI ethics landscape is rather fragmented and 
entails recurring principles (Jobin et al., 2019) that are of 
high-order, deontological nature (Hagendorff, 2020). Trans-
lating these principles into business practice by simultane-
ously accounting for different stakeholder interests might 
demand tradeoffs, for instance, between need satisfaction 
due to personalization of offerings and privacy (e.g., Rust, 
2020) or between customer prioritization and non-discrim-
ination (e.g., Libai et al., 2020). That becomes particularly 
important when the objectives of AI should be to promote 
social good (beneficence) and prevent any harm (non-
maleficence)—the call for and stance of AI for (social) good 
(Cowls et al., 2021; Floridi et al., 2018, 2020; Taddeo & 
Floridi, 2018).
To the best of our knowledge, our conceptual analysis 
is the first study to systematically apply the ethical prin-
ciples related to AI to AI applications in marketing from 
a multi-stakeholder perspective. Our systematic conceptual 
assessment of the ethics of AI in marketing is informed by 
a comprehensive review of the literatures on both AI ethics 
and AI in marketing and provides two important contribu-
tions to both streams of research. First, we reveal interde-
pendencies and tensions of ethical principles in dependence 
of the stakeholders concerned. Particularly, the principles 
beneficence and non-maleficence are interrelated and judged 
differently across the customer, company, and societal and 
environmental levels. We further identify explicability (i.e., 
intelligibility and accountability) as enabling ethical princi -
ple. Moreover, ethical challenges and interdependencies are 
likely to intensify with increasing levels of intelligence and 
humanization of AI. To still harness and not miss opportu-
nities provided by AI in marketing, the prevailing princi-
pled, deontological approach to AI ethics should be sup-
plemented by a utilitarian perspective weighing benefits and 
costs across stakeholders. Second, we provide insights of 
how AI in marketing can be leveraged to promote social and 
environmental well-being and thus to reconcile the ethical 
principles of beneficence and non-maleficence. Our sugges-
tions add knowledge to the scholarly work on AI for social 
good and sustainable consumption and marketing. The AI-
for-social-good perspective stresses that AI-based solutions 
have the potential to tackle societal problems (e.g., Floridi 
et al., 2020)—among them, sustainable development as a 
focal challenge and objective of our time (Vinuesa et al., 
2020 ). Given that marketing and consumption are part of our 
everyday lives, AI in marketing following the AI-for-social-
good perspective can strive for and substantially contribute 
to sustainable development. In light of the environmental 
imperative (Kotler, 2011) and in the tradition of social mar -
keting which its 50-year history (Kotler & Zaltman, 1971), companies increasingly pursue the transition to sustainable 
business and marketing practices (White et al., 2019). In the 
same vein, customers are concerned with the environmen-
tal and social impact of their purchases (Vadakkepatt et al., 
2021) and demand sustainable products and services (Kotler, 
2011). Therefore, AI in marketing that fosters environmental 
and social good can create win–win–win situations for com-
panies, customers, and society at large (Vlačić et al., 2021).
The remainder of our study is structured as follows. After 
delineating our methodological approach and briefly illus-
trating the role and uses of AI in marketing, we present an 
overview of the rapidly expanding research on AI ethics. 
Afterward, we consolidate both perspectives by applying 
selected ethical principles to AI applications in marketing. 
We conclude our investigation with suggestions of how to 
harness AI in marketing for promoting societal and environ-
mental well-being and with directions for future research.
Methodology
To identify relevant scholarly work on AI ethics and AI in 
marketing, we conducted a systematic search of published 
papers. First, we performed a keyword search of elec-
tronic databases (Web of Science, EBSCO, and Google 
Scholar) using the following keywords: “ethic*,” “guide-
lines,” “principles,” “framework,” (for AI ethics) and “mar -
keting,” “service,” “retailing,” “consumer,” “customer,” 
(for AI in marketing) each in combination with “artificial 
intelligence,” “AI,” “artificial,” “machine learning,” “algo-
rithm*,” “robot*.” Second, we searched review and seminal 
articles in both fields (e.g., Davenport et al., 2020; Huang & 
Rust, 2021b; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019; and Floridi et al., 
2018; Jobin et al., 2019; Mittelstadt, 2019, respectively), 
examining their references and applying an ancestry tree 
search by screening all papers citing these articles. Third, 
we performed manual search of journal outlets that turned 
out to be major sources for journal articles dealing with AI 
in marketing and business (e.g., Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, Journal of Business Research, Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, Journal of Service Research, Journal 
of Marketing; and particularly special issues on AI or robots 
in these journals) and AI ethics (i.e., Ethics and Informa-
tion Technology, Minds and Machines, Nature Machine 
Intelligence, Science and Engineering Ethics). This search 
procedure and screening of abstracts and titles lead to the 
selection of 300 potentially eligible articles (148 for AI in 
marketing and 152 for AI ethics), which were then reviewed 
in more detail. The systematic examination of the literatures 
on AI ethics and AI in marketing allows us to identity the 
focal areas of application of AI in marketing and to map 
the most relevant and appropriate ethical principles related 
to AI. Both are then synthesized to inform our conceptual 

==== Page 3 ====
45 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
analysis of the ethical concerns of AI in marketing from a 
multi-stakeholder perspective.
AI in Marketing
AI can be conceptualized as “the use of computational 
machinery to emulate capabilities inherent in humans” 
(Huang & Rust, 2021b, p. 31) and refers to “programs, algo-
rithms, systems or machines that demonstrate intelligence” 
in its simplest sense (Shankar, 2018 , p. vi). In more meth -
odological terms, AI can be defined as “a system’s ability 
to correctly interpret external data, to learn from such data, 
and to use those learnings to achieve specific goals and tasks 
through flexible adaptation” (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019, p. 
17). However, one should not assume that definitions of AI 
will be permanently stable given the conceptually challeng-
ing and changing nature of AI technologies (Stahl et al., 
2021). AI in marketing has become increasingly important 
and is breaking new grounds in marketing research, strat-
egy, and actions, customer relationships and experience 
(Davenport et al., 2020; Hoyer et al., 2020; Huang & Rust, 
2021b ; Kumar et al., 2019 ; Libai et al., 2020 ; Liu et al., 
2019; Mustak et al., 2021; Puntoni et al., 2021). As the 
prevalence and diversity of AI advancements and applica-
tions is constantly growing across industries and sectors 
(Campbell et al., 2020; Haenlein & Kaplan, 2021; Kaplan 
& Haenlein, 2019), so do AI applications in marketing. To 
name but a few, AI is employed in and (re-)shaping ser -
vices (e.g., Castillo et al., 2020; Huang & Rust, 2018, 2021a; 
Klaus & Zaichkowsky, 2020; Lin et al., 2021; McLeay et al., 
2021 ; Mende et al., 2019 ; Wirtz et al., 2018 ; Xiao & Kumar, 
2021), retailing (e.g., de Bellis, & Johar, 2021; Guha et al., 
2021; Shankar, 2018), customer experience (e.g., Ameen 
et al., 2021; Hoyer et al., 2020; Puntoni et al., 2021), and 
customer relationships, engagement, and decision-making 
(e.g., Dellaert et al., 2020; Huang & Rust, 2021a; Kumar 
et al., 2019 ; Libai et al., 2020 ; Youn & Jin, 2021 ). At the 
core, AI applications aim at fine-grained and data-driven 
personalization and customization of products, services, and 
the marketing mix variables (e.g., Davenport et al., 2020; 
Huang & Rust, 2021b; Tong et al., 2020) along the entire 
customer journey (e.g., Hoyer et al., 2020) and service pro-
cess (e.g., Huang & Rust, 2021a) to engage customers and 
optimize experiential value (e.g., Hoyer et al., 2020; Kumar 
et al., 2019; Puntoni et al., 2021).
To specify and systematize the opportunities of deploying 
AI in marketing, Huang and Rust (2021b) developed a three-
stage strategic planning framework based on the marketing 
research–marketing strategy–marketing action cycle and 
three levels of AI intelligences, that is, mechanical, thinking, 
and feeling AI. While mechanical AI entails automation of 
repetitive and routine tasks, thinking AI relates to processing data for new insights and decision-making, and feeling AI 
refers to interactions with humans or analyzing human feel-
ings and emotions. Huang and Rust (2021b) identified the 
following opportunities to leverage and benefit from AI in 
marketing:
(1) Mechanical AI for data collection (marketing research), 
segmentation (marketing strategy), and standardization 
(marketing action).
(2) Thinking AI for market analysis (marketing research), 
targeting (marketing strategy), and personalization 
(marketing action).
(3) Feeling AI for customer understanding (marketing 
research), positioning (marketing strategy), and rela -
tionization (marketing action).
Davenport et al. (2020) also proposed a framework to 
foster the understanding and anticipation of the AI’s future 
impact on marketing and business. They proposed the fol-
lowing three AI-related dimensions: the level of intelligence 
(i.e., task automation versus context awareness), the task 
type (i.e., analysis of numbers versus non-numeric data such 
as text, voice, images, or facial expression), and whether 
the AI is embedded in a robot (i.e., virtuality–reality con-
tinuum). In a similar vein, Kaplan and Haenlein (2019) clas-
sified AI applications according to the level of intelligence 
into analytical AI (cognitive intelligence), human-inspired 
AI (cognitive and emotional intelligence), and humanized 
AI (cognitive, emotional, and social intelligence). The level 
of intelligence of AI as focal and recurring classification 
criterion relates to immense opportunities to harness AI 
by maximizing customer orientation and interaction, but it 
simultaneously poses challenges.
That is, AI systems that are humanized or emotionally 
intelligent do not come without ethical controversies (e.g., 
Belk, 2020; De Bruyn et al., 2020). Ethical questions are 
also raised in terms of explainability (e.g., De Bruyn et al., 
2020; Rai, 2020), privacy (e.g., Davenport et al., 2020; 
Kumar et al., 2019), and trustworthiness (e.g., Glikson & 
Wolley, 2020), among others. Before we delve into the ethi-
cal questions related to AI in marketing, we shed light on the 
overarching debate on AI ethics.
AI Ethics
The discourse on moral and ethical implications of AI dates 
back from 1960 (Samuel, 1960; Wiener, 1960). The tremen-
dously intensifying development, use, and (societal) impact 
of AI in recent years has sparked calls for and discussions 
of accompanying ethical guidelines: “the ethical debate has 
gone mainstream” (Morley et al., 2020, p. 2141).

==== Page 4 ====
46 E. Hermann 
1 3
In a comprehensive review, Jobin and et al. ( 2019 ) con -
tent-analyzed the principles and guidelines for ethical AI 
issued by private, public, and research institutions. Remark -
ably, no single ethical principle is referenced in all 84 docu-
ments being analyzed. However, there is convergence around 
the principles transparency, justice and fairness, non-malef-
icence, responsibility, and privacy, which are featured in 
more than half of all documents. Among these principles, 
transparency constitutes the most prevalent one with refer -
ences in 73 out of 84 documents, followed by justice and 
fairness (referenced in 68 documents), non-maleficence  
(referenced in 60 documents), responsibility (referenced in 
60 documents),  and privacy (referenced in 47 documents).
Besides, Jobin et al. (2019) draw the following notewor -
thy conclusions. First, the prevalence of transparency could 
be partly explained by the reasoning that “is not an ethical 
principle in itself but a proethical condition for enabling or 
impairing other ethical practices or principles”, as suggested 
earlier by Turilli and Floridi ( 2009 , p. 105). Second, the fre -
quent occurrences of justice and fairness, non-maleficence, 
and privacy reflect a cautious view on potential risks of AI. 
Third, the more frequent references to non-maleficence as 
compared to beneficence imply the moral obligation to avoid 
any negative impact of AI and could imply a certain nega-
tivity bias. Fourth, the principle trust constitutes a critical 
ethical issue in AI governance. However, it is not without 
opposition and ambiguity, particularly, whether trust is a 
principle in itself or rather an outcome of other foundational 
principles (e.g., Floridi, 2019; Glikson & Wolley, 2020; 
Ryan, 2020; Thiebes et al., 2020). Although the principle 
solidarity refers to redistributing the benefits of AI to not 
jeopardize social cohesion (Jobin et al., 2019), it is featured 
in only 6 out of 84 documents. In light of significant dif -
ferences in distributions of wealth and incomes within and 
between countries and economies (e.g., Piketty, 2014, 2020), 
prosperity and burdens created by AI should be shared to 
avoid further inequalities. That is, solidarity should be con-
sidered as a focal ethical principle of AI (Luengo-Oroz, 
2019).
The principles solidarity and beneficence  already hint 
at the need to harness the advantageous effects of AI on a 
societal level. Hence, the discourse on AI ethics also focuses 
ethical frameworks for AI for (social) good (Floridi et al., 
2018, 2020; Taddeo & Floridi, 2018). In this context, Floridi 
et al. (2018) condensed five ethical principles: beneficence, 
non-maleficence, autonomy, justice, and explicability.
While beneficence entails to the promotion of well-being 
as well as social, environmental, and common good (Jobin 
et al., 2019; Thiebes et al., 2020), the tenet of non-malef-
icence cautions against the potentially negative aspects of 
AI. It emphasizes the importance of safety, security, and 
privacy as well as the prevention of risks and any harm—
both accidentally/unintentionally (overuse) and deliberately (misuse) caused (Floridi et al., 2018; Jobin et al., 2019). 
Although beneficence and non-maleficence seem logically 
equivalent, they are not opposite ends of a continuum but 
coexist (Floridi et al., 2018). The principle autonomy refers 
to self-determination and the power to and whether to decide 
in an uncoerced way. That is, it concerns balancing human 
and AI agency and decision-making power (Floridi et al., 
2018; Morley et al., 2020). Justice advocates fairness and the 
avoidance of unwanted/unfair biases and discrimination, also 
amending past inequalities (Jobin et al., 2019; Morley et al., 
2020; Thiebes et al., 2020). Justice further relates to shar -
ing benefits and prosperity and fostering solidarity (Floridi 
et al., 2018). Thus, the conceptual scope encompasses the 
solidarity principle, as opposed to its infrequent occurrence 
in official documents as indicated above (Jobin et al., 2019). 
Finally, explicability (also often conceptualized as trans-
parency) means intelligibility, that is, how AI works (the 
epistemological sense), and accountability, that is, who is 
responsible for the way AI works (the ethical sense). It com-
plements and enables the preceding four principles. In other 
words, understanding of the functionalities (i.e., intelligibil -
ity) and responsibilities (i.e., accountability) informs evalua-
tions of and judgments of the other principles by facilitating 
understanding if and how AI benefits or harms individuals 
and society (beneficence and non-maleficence), anticipat-
ing AI systems’ predictions to decide about human and AI 
agency (autonomy) and ensuring accountability in case of 
failures or biases (justice) (Floridi et al., 2018; Thiebes et al., 
2020). This is in line with the reasoning that transparency  
constitutes a pro-ethical condition for enabling other ethical 
principles (Turilli & Floridi, 2009 ). Explicability  (particu -
larly, intelligibility) gains in importance against the back -
drop of the black box nature and opacity of AI systems and 
applications (e.g., Ananny & Crawford, 2018; Milano et al., 
2020; Mittelstadt et al., 2016; Rudin, 2019; Thiebes et al., 
2020), since black box AI could thwart evaluations of benefi -
cence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy.
The first four principles are akin to bioethical principles 
(Beauchamp & Childress, 2013). This comes as no sur -
prise, because bioethics closely resemble digital ethics in 
the way new forms of agents, patients, and environments 
are addressed. Thus, bioethical principles meet the ethical 
challenges caused by AI quite well (Floridi et al., 2018). 
An ethical approach to AI contributes to solve the tension 
between leveraging the benefits and preventing or at least 
mitigating potential harms of AI—a “dual advantage” for 
society (Floridi et al., 2018, p. 694).
A unifying characteristic of the discourse on AI ethics 
is the focus on high-level ethical principles and little refer -
ence to philosophical ethical theories (Stahl et al., 2021). 
However, the suitability and practicability of a predomi-
nantly principled approach is called into question (e.g., 
Hagendorff, 2020; Mittelstadt, 2019; Theodorou & Dignum, 

==== Page 5 ====
47 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
2020). First, artificial intelligence cannot be considered in 
isolation, but within the socio-technical system (i.e., people, 
organizations, their interactions, and processes organizing 
these interactions) it is operating and unfolding. Therefore, 
concrete ethical and socio-legal governance and policies are 
needed (Cath, 2018; Theodorou & Dignum, 2020). Second, 
the rather deontological, principled approach to AI ethics 
based on normative, high-level imperatives and principles 
(Hagendorff, 2020) lacks translation into practice through 
mid-level norms and low-level requirements taking into 
consideration the legal, technical, and social circumstances 
(Mittelstadt, 2019 ). Among other things, practical guidance 
on how to develop ethical AI is required in order to close the 
gap between principles (what) and practice (how ). Hence, 
applied AI ethics are in demand (Morley et al., 2020).
Generally, the ethical principles related to AI cover ethi-
cal issues in respect to particular features of the technology 
or the consequences of its use (Stahl et al., 2021), which is 
in the tradition of computer and (information) technology 
ethics (e.g., Brey, 2000, 2012; Moor, 1985, 2005; Royakkers 
et al., 2018; Wright 2011). In the technology ethics context, 
Moor (2005) proposed a tripartite model for understanding 
technological revolutions that ranges from the introduction 
and permeation stages to the power stage. As use intensity, 
number of users, understanding, and integration into and 
impact on society increase with these stages, so do the ethi-
cal challenges. The ethical issues do not simply result from the number of individuals being affected but from the mani-
fold application opportunities of revolutionary technolo-
gies for which ethical policies have not been developed yet 
(Moor, 2005). Just as the AI ethics literature, the literature 
on ethical (information) technology incorporates recur -
ring principles and themes including autonomy, justice, 
beneficence (well-being, common good), non-maleficence  
(avoiding harm and risks), dignity, and privacy (Brey, 2012; 
Royakkers et al., 2018; Wright 2011). Figure  1 provides a 
systematization of the principles identified by Floridi et al. 
(2018); Jobin et al. (2019), and Wright (2011)—the latter to 
establish the connection to information technology ethics.
Across frameworks, principles and themes are sometimes 
labeled and subsumed differently. For instance, Floridi et al. 
(2018) assign solidarity to the justice principle, whereas 
Wright (2011) subsumes solidarity under non-maleficence, 
and Jobin et al. (2019) consider solidarity as a principle 
on its own. Dignity is another example of deviating prin-
ciple alignments: an independent principle according to 
Jobin et al. (2019) versus subsumed under beneficence and 
autonomy by Floridi et al. (2018) and Wright (2011), respec-
tively. Moreover, some principles are not entirely distinct or 
independent and seem to overlap. Particularly, the empha-
sis of avoiding biases and discrimination under the justice  
principle narrowly relates to avoiding any harm under the 
non-maleficence principle. We will further expand on this 
relation when discussing the ethics of AI in marketing.
Fig. 1  AI ethics map. Principles in blue boxes are taken from Floridi 
et  al. (2018), principles in gray boxes are taken from Jobin et  al. 
(2019), and principles in white boxes are taken from Wright (2011). Principles in italics were not subsumed under beneficence, non-malef-
icence, autonomy, justice, or explicability, but listed as independent 
principles by Jobin et al. (2019) and Wright (2011), respectively

==== Page 6 ====
48 E. Hermann 
1 3
Three other points might need clarification. First, privacy 
is often referenced as a principle on its own. However, the 
privacy theme in AI and technology ethics regularly empha-
sizes that infringements of privacy, breaches of data protec-
tion, and misuse of data have to be avoided in the adoption 
of AI and technology. That is, harms and risks in respect to 
personal data and privacy have to be limited and prevented, 
which is pivotal to the non-maleficence principle. There-
fore, we follow Floridi et al. (2018) and subsume privacy 
under the non-maleficence principle. Second, synthesizing 
transparency, intelligibility, responsibility, and account-
ability as explicability  accounts for the interrelationships 
of these themes (e.g., Coeckelbergh, 2020; de Laat, 2018; 
Lepri et al., 2018; Martin, 2019; Morley et al., 2020). Judg-
ments about the responsibility or accountability for AI-based 
decision outcomes necessitate a certain understanding of the 
underlying processes leading to these decisions (i.e., trans-
parency or intelligibility). That is, transparency can be a key 
enabler of and prerequisite for accountability (Lepri et al., 
2018). Third, we concur with prior research that consid-
ers trust as an outcome of ethical principles (e.g., Thiebes 
et al., 2020) and AI characteristics (e.g., Glikson and Wol-
ley, 2020). Besides, others scholars even claim that “one 
needs to either change ‘trustworthy AI’ to ‘reliable AI’ or 
remove it altogether” (Ryan, 2020, p. 2765). Therefore, 
we refrained from presenting trust  as an ethical principle 
in itself. In our following conceptual analysis, we examine the ethical principles and controversies related to AI in the 
marketing context.
The Ethics of AI in Marketing
We investigate the ethical implications and concerns of using 
AI in marketing from the standpoint of multiple stakehold-
ers encompassing the company, customer, and societal and 
environmental perspectives (see Fig.  2). Thereby, we scruti-
nize the validity and applicability of ethical principles across 
different stakeholder levels, and whether tensions between 
ethical principles emerge due to different stakeholder inter -
ests. This multiperspectivity further accounts for the AI-for-
social-good perspective stressed by prior AI ethics literature 
(e.g., Cowls et al., 2021; Floridi et al., 2018, 2020; Taddeo 
& Floridi, 2018). Correspondingly, we rely our analyses on 
the applied AI ethics typology suggested by this stream of 
research, that is, beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, 
justice, and explicability (Floridi et al., 2018; Morley et al., 
2020 ). Since we aim to provide an epistemological picture 
on AI ethics in marketing, the list of AI applications we 
cover does not claim to be exhaustive. We also refrain from 
providing technical or methodological details on respective 
AI applications and systems (for brief overviews of differ -
ent AI methods such as machine or deep learning, see for 
Fig. 2  Multi-stakeholder model 
of AI ethics in marketing


==== Page 7 ====
49 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
instance Campbell et al., 2020; De Bruyn et al., 2020; Hagen 
et al., 2020; Ma & Sun, 2020).
Beneficence
A focal advantage of leveraging AI in marketing is the 
opportunity to personalize and customize products and ser -
vices and the entire marketing mix to maximize engagement, 
relevance and persuasion, as well as customer satisfaction 
(Huang & Rust, 2021a, 2021b; Kumar et al., 2019; Puntoni 
et al., 2021). For example, predicting individuals’ psycho-
logical traits from their digital footprints and smartphone 
data (e.g., Gladstone et al., 2019; Stachl et al., 2020; Youyou 
et al., 2015) offers substantial opportunities for psychologi-
cal targeting by crafting psychologically tailored advertising 
and persuasive appeals (Hagen et al., 2020; Matz & Netzer, 
2017; Matz et al., 2017; Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, 
Menges, et al., 2019; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019). Recent 
research showed that even individuals’ income can be pre -
dicted from their Facebook Likes and status updates with 
an accuracy of up to r  = 0.43 (Matz, Menges et al., Matz, 
Appel, et al., 2019). Digital customer data in the form of 
user-generated content can be further employed to identify 
customer needs by means of AI (Timoshenko & Hauser, 
2019). Furthermore, AI-based recommender systems can 
benefit both companies and customers. Recommender sys-
tems refer to (algorithmic) functions that use information 
about customer preferences (e.g., products) as inputs to pre-
dict how customers would rate certain items under evalua-
tion (e.g., new products available) and how they would rank 
a set of items individually or as a bundle (Milano et al., 
2020 ). In the case of collaborative filtering as one dominant 
form of recommender systems, recommendations are based 
on customers’ past behavior, choices, and preferences, and 
on preferences of other customers that are structurally simi-
lar to them (Cappella, 2017). Recommender systems help 
e-commerce companies and online retailers to turn brows-
ers into buyers, foster cross-selling, and personalize offer -
ings and browsing experience. On the other hand, customers 
profit from them through information (pre-)filtering as well 
as higher quality and efficiency of purchase decisions (e.g., 
Banker & Khetani, 2019; Lee & Hosaganar, 2019; Lu et al., 
2015; Shankar, 2018).
In sum, both companies and customers can gain from per -
sonalized recommendations, products, services, persuasive 
appeals, and marketing mix in general. These supply- and 
demand-side benefits result from better addressing and serv -
ing customers’ cognitive and affective needs and preferences 
on the one hand and resource efficiency (i.e., time and costs) 
on the other hand. Thus, beneficence on the company and 
customer levels can be assumed. Besides, the use of AI in 
marketing is linked to a clear benefit and not developed and 
employed for the sake of it. In other words, it has a clear purpose, which implies justification as one requirement for 
beneficence (Morley et al., 2020). Of course, one has to point 
out that the notion of goodness, which is at the core of the 
beneficence  principle, is far from being objective both on 
the individual and superordinate levels (D’ Acquisto, 2020). 
On the individual (customer) level, predictions of future 
choices based on patterns of customers’ past choices and 
preferences of similar other customers through recommender 
systems can be considered as a surrogate for social influence 
(Cappella, 2017). Customers’ evaluations of recommender 
systems’ beneficence might differ (or worsen) if they would 
be aware of these indirect social influences by understanding 
recommender systems’ underlying processes and function-
alities (i.e., intelligibility). However, black box AI can be an 
obstacle to such an understanding.
Potential irreconcilability of what is deemed good for 
individuals (e.g., customers) and what goodness means on 
a superordinate level (e.g., society, environment) tends also 
to arise in the case of AI applications in marketing. That is, 
the unconditional beneficence of these AI applications can 
be questioned on the societal and environmental level.
In essence and simplified terms, AI applications in mar -
keting pursue sales objectives and increase consumption. 
While consumption satisfies needs and is thus beneficial 
on the individual (customer) level (e.g., Csikszentmiha-
lyi, 2000), it simultaneously deplete resources, negatively 
impacts the environment, and drives climate change (e.g., 
Swim et al., 2011; Wiedmann et al., 2020). Consumption 
externalities, which are not self-correcting and inhibit 
growth, emerge (Dasgupta & Ehrlich, 2013). For instance, 
clothing consumption, partly due to the rise of fast fashion 
models, results in a tremendous environmental impact of the 
fashion industry and its supply chain operations. It ranges 
from 79 trillion liters of water consumption per year and 4–5 
billion tons  CO2 emissions annually (8–10% of global  CO2 
emissions) to over 92 million tons of textiles waste per year 
(Niinimäki et al., 2020 ). These issues could be aggravated by 
recommender systems and inherent information exploitation 
versus exploration strategies. For example, Amazon, whose 
e-commerce platform relies on AI-driven recommender sys-
tems and collaborative filtering (Milano et al., 2020 ), had 
a relative carbon footprint of 122.8 g of  CO2 equivalents 
(including packaging, transportation, purchased electric-
ity, fossil fuel emissions from direct operations etc.) per 
dollar of gross merchandise sales in 2019 (Amazon, 2020) 
and net sales of $386.1 billion in 2020 (Amazon, 2021). 
Even if one assumes that both the relative carbon footprint 
(due to decarbonization efforts and investments) and sales 
(due to customers’ return to offline channels and shopping 
when the Covid-19 pandemic will impose less restrictions) 
might decrease in 2021, the carbon footprint of the world’s 
largest e-commerce company amounts to dozens of tons of 
 CO2 emissions annually. Generally, e-commerce and online 

==== Page 8 ====
50 E. Hermann 
1 3
retailing can have more detrimental environmental impacts 
and larger ecological footprints due to packaging, product 
returns, last mile transportation, and shopping basket sizes 
as compared to traditional retailing and shopping (e.g., 
Escursell et al., 2021; Pålsson et al., 2015; Shahmoham-
madi et al., 2020; van Loon et al., 2015). Moreover, AI-
enabled personalized mobile marketing (e.g., Tong et al., 
2020) and in-store communication and technology (e.g., 
Dekimpe et al., 2020; Grewal, Noble, et al., 2020; van Esch 
et al., 2021) can prompt unplanned offline purchases and 
impulsive buying, which, in turn, amplify consumption and 
its environmental drawbacks. Finally, information and com-
munication technologies, applications, and systems related 
to AI themselves can have rebound effects caused by energy 
consumption and emissions of AI development, production, 
and deployment (e.g., Belkhir & Elmeligi, 2018; Dhar, 2020; 
Lange et al., 2020).
On the individual level, exploitation of customer infor -
mation that AI systems already possess constitutes the 
optimal (standard) strategy to maximize individual utility 
by satisfying preferences. Conversely, AI systems’ explora-
tory recommendations of new alternatives (e.g., sustainable 
items) might be the strategy with greatest expected utilities 
on a societal level (Milano et al., 2021). The environmental 
impact and material footprint of consumption (Wiedmann 
et al., 2015) that could be additionally fueled by AI applica-
tions in marketing contravene the beneficence principle of 
promoting well-being of humans and the planet. The nega-
tive externalities further establish the connection to the non-
maleficence principle that advocate the prevention of any 
risk and harm due to overuse or misuse of AI (Floridi et al., 
2018).
Non‑Maleficence
In terms of the potentially adverse consequences of intensi-
fied, AI-driven consumption on the societal and environ-
mental level, the judgments of beneficence and non-malef-
icence are akin. That is, AI applications do not necessarily 
advance the environmental good (beneficence principle not 
met) but can impair it (non-maleficence principle not met). 
In contrast, these ethical judgments do not coincide on the 
company and customer levels. That means, AI applications 
could be beneficent and maleficent at the same time (Milano 
et al., 2021).
Of particular importance in respect to non-maleficence of 
AI are personal privacy, accuracy, as well as data protection 
and quality (e.g., Floridi et al., 2018; Morley et al., 2020). 
Privacy risks can arise (1) when data are collected with-
out informed consent of customers, (2) after storage when 
they are leaked or de-anonymized (i.e., data breaches), or 
(3) when AI systems draw inferences from both the indi-
vidual customer data (directly) or interaction data with other customers (indirectly). The latter particularly pertains to col -
laborative filtering (Milano et al., 2020). Given the exten-
sive use of customer information and data-driven, analytical 
approaches in marketing, marketing scholars and practition-
ers have been and are highly concerned with privacy issues 
(e.g., Bleier et al., 2020; Martin & Murphy, 2017; Martin & 
Palmatier, 2020; Martin et al., 2020; Okazaki et al., 2020; 
Stewart, 2017; Thomaz et al., 2020). The massive amounts 
of data feeding AI systems and applications potentiates pri-
vacy and data protection issues, as discussed for algorithms 
(e.g., Mittelstadt et al., 2016), recommender systems (e.g., 
Milano et al., 2020), and psychological targeting (e.g., Matz, 
Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, Menges, et al., 2019; Matz, Sega-
lin, et al., 2019), among other things. Supranational regula-
tions such as the European Union’s General Data Protec-
tion Regulation (GDPR) attempt to counter these issues 
by requiring data protection impact assessment (Art. 35 
GDPR) and data protection by design and by default (Art. 25 
GDPR). The latter stipulates that companies have to proac-
tively integrate privacy protection into the design, develop-
ment, and application of data-driven technologies and to set 
privacy defaults to reasonable levels of protection (Andrew 
& Baker, 2021; Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, Menges, 
et al., 2019; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019).
Since ethical issues related to privacy and data protection 
are extensively discussed elsewhere (e.g., Floridi & Taddeo, 
2016; Mittelstadt & Floridi, 2016), we want to briefly hint 
at the tension and potential tradeoff between the scale and 
scope of data capture and privacy concerns. That means that 
predictive validity and accuracy of AI predictions increase 
with the amount of input data, which, however, could inter -
fere with data protection and privacy. In the marketing con-
text, personalization of marketing measures and customer 
privacy trade off (Rust, 2020). Accuracy of results predicted 
by AI applications also rests upon the quality and integrity 
of data. AI systems’ inferences are as reliable as the underly -
ing data. Biases, inaccuracies, errors, and mistakes inherent 
in the data could lead to biased results and false conclusions 
(Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; Morley et al., 2020), which, in 
turn, could be maleficent for both customers and companies 
(e.g., Banker & Khetani, 2019). Besides, algorithmic deci-
sions based on (potentially spurious) correlations found in 
large data sets could be problematic. That can be the case 
when causality is not established prior to actions, and actions 
are then directed to individuals, although the knowledge gen-
erated concerns populations (Mittelstadt et al., 2016). Infe-
rior predictions and recommendations can be particularly 
adverse for customers if they depend too much on algorithm-
generated recommendations that could then diminish their 
well-being (Banker & Khetani, 2019). Banker and Khetani 
(2019 ) refer to this phenomenon as algorithm overreliance 
and frame it as a type I problem (false positive). That means 
that false propositions (i.e., inferior recommendations) are 

==== Page 9 ====
51 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
incorrectly deemed true (i.e., customers adopt recommen-
dations). Following this classification, type II problems 
(false negative) could negatively impact companies (e.g., 
cross-selling), since customers favor their own intuitions and 
do not adopt superior algorithm-based recommendations. 
This (behavioral) phenomenon has been conceptualized 
as algorithm aversion (e.g., Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2018). 
Reliance on algorithms can not only impact companies 
indirectly through their customers, but also directly when 
used for setting real-time prices for products and services 
(Hansen et al., 2021). Tacit collusions among algorithms—
that is, neither communication between algorithms nor ex 
ante design or instruction to collude—(e.g., Calvano et al., 
2020) or misspecified models overestimating price sensitivi-
ties (e.g., Hansen et al., 2021) can make algorithms charge 
supra-competitive prices. That eventually harms companies 
in their entirety, customers, and at worst society at large due 
to increasing overall price levels.
Again, black box AI in respect to the extent of data cap-
ture, data quality, model specification, among other things, 
complicate the judgments of non-maleficence and the deci-
sion of whether to rely on algorithmic predictions for both 
customers and companies. While the perspective on algo-
rithm-driven decision-making focuses on decision outcomes, 
the autonomy  principles rather entails the process view of 
decision-making.
Autonomy
Consumer autonomy is central to consumer choice and 
defined as “consumers’ ability to make and enact decisions 
on their own, free from external influences imposed by other 
agents” (Wertenbroch et al., 2020, p. 430). In the AI ethics 
context, autonomy relates to a meta-autonomy or decide-to-
delegate model. That is, “humans should always retain the 
power to decide which decisions to take” on their own or 
when to cede decision-making control (Floridi et al., 2018, 
p. 698). In general, freedom of choice and self-determina-
tion can be seen as intrinsic good or right contributing to 
individuals’ well-being (Burr et al., 2020). Human agency 
(i.e., autonomous decisions) and human oversight are focal 
requirements of autonomy in relation to AI applications 
(Morley et al., 2020).
On the company level, governance mechanism should 
be implemented to keep humans in the loop (e.g., Thiebes 
et al., 2020). That is particularly important when AI sys-
tems are operating in ethically or morally salient contexts 
(e.g., Jotterand & Bosco, 2020), which could be the case for 
developing and deploying feeling AI (Huang & Rust, 2021b) 
or humanized AI (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019) in marketing. 
To date, the development of artificial moral agents is still 
in its infancy (e.g., Cervantes et al., 2020). However, it is 
not unlikely that future (emotionally intelligent) AI systems and applications in service and customer relationship man-
agement will encounter moral decisions, ethical issues, or 
emotionally charged customer interactions. To effectively 
apply AI in the latter situation necessitates AI systems’ 
understanding of emotions beyond simple recognition. Until 
AI systems turn from “psychopaths” recognizing and fak -
ing emotions into emotionally intelligent and moral agents, 
human agency will be crucial (De Bruyn et al., 2020, p. 96).
On the customer level, AI applications can shape deci-
sion-making processes. Personalization, psychological 
targeting, and recommender systems can serve as adap-
tive, structural, or informational nudges (Burr et al., 2018; 
Floridi, 2016; Milano et al., 2020; Sunstein, 2016). These 
kind of interventions influence customers’ choice sets—the 
choice architecture (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008) -, or infor -
mation related to choices and eventually preferences and 
decisions. Customers’ autonomy is impacted in such a way 
that decisions are delegated to AI systems at the information 
collection stage of the decision-making process, particularly, 
(pre-)filtering of information and options customers are 
exposed to. That can be beneficial due to resource efficiency 
(e.g., time, cognitive resources) and tailored content (Burr 
et al., 2018), but also detrimental to customers in case of 
aversion of or overreliance on AI systems’ recommendations 
(e.g., Banker & Khetani, 2019; Dietvorst et al., 2015, 2018) 
or due to manipulated or deceptive content (e.g., Burr et al., 
2018; Milano et al., 2020). An informed and conscious deci-
sion of humans (as customers or company representatives) of 
whether to delegate their decision-making power to AI sys-
tems and applications would again demand a certain degree 
of understanding of AI functionalities (i.e., intelligibility).
Justice
Human judgments can be biased and discriminating, 
and so the predictions of AI applications and algorithms 
constructed by humans can be biased and result in dis-
crimination as well (Kleinberg et al., 2018, 2020). AI can 
fall victim to the same errors and biases that humans do, 
reproduce, and amplify them (Rich & Gureckis, 2019). 
Among other things, AI-powered personalization strate-
gies in marketing (e.g., Huang & Rust, 2021b), psycho-
logical targeting (e.g., Matz & Netzer, 2017; Matz et al., 
2017; Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, Menges, et al., 
2019; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019), and customer prioriti-
zation in customer relationship management (e.g., Libai 
et al., 2020) could discriminate certain customer groups 
against others on the basis of demographic, psychological, 
and economic factors. Particularly, gender, age, and racial 
disparities, prejudices, and stereotypes can be reinforced 
by AI systems and applications (Bol et al., 2020; Datta 
et al., 2015 ; Lambrecht & Tucker, 2019 ; Obermeyer et al., 
2019). Moreover, targeting of vulnerable customer groups 

==== Page 10 ====
52 E. Hermann 
1 3
or prioritization in respect to income or profitability can be 
problematic, aggravate existing inequalities, or harm cus-
tomers (e.g., Libai et al., 2020; Matz & Netzer, 2017; Matz 
et al., 2017). Personalization of offerings or the whole mar -
keting mix could “segment a population so that only some 
segments are worthy of receiving some opportunities or 
information, re-enforcing existing social (dis)advantages” 
(Mittelstadt et al., 2016 , p. 9). As mentioned above, biased 
AI predictions, unfair and unequal treatments and targeting 
can result from biases in and skewness of underlying data 
(Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; Morley et al., 2020). Biased 
and skewed data can be due to over- and underrepresenta-
tion of certain demographic groups or sensitive features, 
inclusion of misleading proxy features (Barredo Arrieta 
et al., 2020), or sparse (small) data for certain individuals/
groups, phenomena, and features (Rich & Gureckis, 2019). 
Imbalances in customer data and corresponding data- and 
AI-driven discrimination and biases can also stem from 
customers’ increasing unwillingness to share data online 
and/or with companies due to privacy concerns (Du et al., 
2021 ). Finally, endogeneity in data and feedback loops can 
bias AI predictions. That is, (biased) data lead to (biased) 
predictions that inform decisions, which, in turn, serve as 
data inputs (De Bruyn et al., 2020). In light of these mul-
tiple sources of biases, diligence and monitoring along the 
entire data lifecycle and in respect to AI development (e.g., 
model specification) are advisable if not indispensable. 
Therefore, marketers, data scientists, and AI developers 
could team up with ethicists. The “gold standard … would 
be an ethicist … as a dedicated member of the develop-
ment team” (McLennan et al., 2020, p. 488).
Taken together, customers can be differently targeted and 
affected by AI. Consequent discrimination and amplification 
of existing inequalities can, in turn, diminish social good 
and well-being, which establishes the connection to the 
beneficence  and non-maleficence  principles. For the sake 
of completeness, we also have to note that recent research 
showed that algorithms can be employed as discrimination 
detectors and to de-bias human judgments (Kleinberg et al., 
2018, 2020).
On the company level, recommender systems can dis-
criminate firms by decreasing the variety of products con-
sumers explore and purchase (i.e., sales diversity) and by 
increasing market share concentration for popular products 
(Lee & Hosaganar, 2019). Besides, the rise of multisided 
e-commerce platforms deploying AI-generated recommen-
dations can endanger traditional retailers that do not par -
ticipate in these platforms by undermining their business 
models and impeding market access (Milano et al., 2021).
As in the case with the non-maleficence principle, black 
box AI can obfuscate biased inputs and outputs of AI sys-
tems and thus hamper judgments of justice.Explicability
Explicability might be the most prevalent and controversial 
principle of AI ethics due to the black box nature of AI sys-
tems, their opacity, and lack of accountability (Ananny & 
Crawford, 2018; Milano et al., 2020; Mittelstadt et al., 2016; 
Rai, 2020; Rudin, 2019; Thiebes et al., 2020). Correspond-
ingly, calls for interpretable and explainable AI (XAI) are 
growing louder, particularly, when high-stake decisions and 
sensitive, personal data are involved (Barredo Arrieta et al., 
2020; De Bruyn et al., 2020; Gunning et al., 2019; Proserpio 
et al., 2020; Rai, 2020; Rudin, 2019). In the literature, differ -
ent nomenclature and concepts including intelligibility, com-
prehensibility, interpretability, explainability, and transpar -
ency are used interchangeably and inconsistently (Barredo 
Arrieta et al., 2020), and are partly misconceived (Rudin, 
2019). For instance, Rai (2020) defined XAI as “the class of 
systems that provide visibility into how an AI system makes 
decisions and predictions and executes its actions” (pp. 
137–138). On the other hand, Rudin (2019) conceptualized 
XAI as a second (post hoc) model to explain the initial first 
black box model and thus advocated inherently interpretable 
models (i.e., interpretable AI) instead of XAI. De Bruyn 
et al. (2020) summed up explainable and interpretable AI as 
methods to explain AI systems’ intentions, data inputs and 
sources, and the relation between inputs and outputs, so that 
results such as predictions, classifications, and recommen-
dations could be understood by human experts. In a com -
prehensive review, Barredo Arrieta et al. (2020) identified 
intelligibility (i.e., human understanding of a model’s func-
tion without any need for explaining its internal structure or 
underlying data processing algorithm) as the focal concept 
related to XAI. This finding further corroborates the focus 
on intelligibility by Floridi et al. (2018). Given that intel-
ligibility can have an enabling function for the other ethical 
principles, a lack thereof (i.e., black box AI) could impede 
individuals’ judgments about beneficence, non-maleficence, 
justice, and autonomy. That could particularly shape indi-
viduals’ self-determination and decisions about whether to 
delegate decisions to AI systems at all (i.e., meta-autonomy).
For customers, simple explanations of how AI works (i.e., 
intelligibility as the epistemological dimension) might be 
more effective and satisfying than complicated ones causing 
information overload, irritation, and frustration (Rai, 2020). 
In light of direct or indirect consequences of AI-based per -
sonalization, targeting, and recommendation applications, 
customers have a legitimate interest in knowing who to 
hold accountable (i.e., accountability as the ethical dimen-
sion) for adverse, biased, or discriminatory outcomes of 
AI predictions. This will acquire increasing importance if 
AI systems and algorithms are considered and conceptual-
ized as value-laden rather than neutral (e.g., Martin, 2019). 
That, again, relates to potential biases of AI developers, the 

==== Page 11 ====
53 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
corresponding need of a certain degree of human oversight, 
and hence to the autonomy and justice principles. Eventu-
ally, companies should be responsible for the AI systems 
they develop and deploy and obliged to deal with the respec-
tive ethical implications or challenges.
Concepts remedying the black box issue of AI are not 
undisputed. For instance, transparency can interfere with 
privacy concerns and proprietary boundaries aiming at facil-
itating exclusivity or competitive advantages. Furthermore, 
transparency can be subject to cognitive (i.e., information 
overload, lack of understanding), technical (i.e., methodo-
logical and technical complexity), and temporal restrictions 
(i.e., rapid advancements and development cycles) (Ananny 
& Crawford, 2018). Moreover, explainable AI methods could 
provide explanations that are too complicated for humans to 
comprehend, not faithful to what original models compute, 
or insufficiently detailed to understand what models are 
doing (Rudin, 2019). Besides, transparency and disclosure 
of AI identities can compromise performance and efficiency 
of AI systems such as bots (e.g., customer purchases). That 
raises the question whether intelligent machines should hide 
their non-human nature for the sake of efficiency and how 
to weigh costs and benefits of transparency (Ishowo-Oloko 
et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2019). Finally, explaining customer 
why they received certain recommendations—for example, 
since the item presented is the most popular one among 
users—might amplify desirability of a choice alternative and reinforces its popularity. Thereby, variety of alternatives and 
plurality of choices can decline, which hampers competi-
tion and negatively affects companies (Milano et al., 2020). 
Our preceding assessment reveals several interdependencies 
between ethical principles, which we illustrate subsequently.
Interdependencies Between Ethical Principles 
and Levels of Intelligence
As our conceptual analyses have shown, ethical principles 
related to AI in marketing interact and collide and thus can-
not be judged in isolation, but in relation to each other. First, 
explicability can be considered as enabling principle for 
beneficence, non-maleficence, justice, and autonomy, while 
the latter two determine beneficence and non-maleficence  
as well (see Fig.  3). Second, AI systems and applications 
can be beneficent and maleficent at the same time, depend-
ing on which stakeholders are concerned. Even an inverse 
relation between beneficence and non-maleficence does not 
seem unlikely. For example, increased AI-based personali-
zation strategies satisfy customer needs (customer benefit) 
which increases company sales (company benefit), but also 
raises the aggregate consumption level, which harms the 
environment and society at large (societal and environmental 
harm). Furthermore, the benefits of personalization for both 
customers and companies (whose potential might increase 
with the amount of customer data) can be compromised by 
Fig. 3  Interdependencies of ethical principles and levels of intelligence and future research questions

==== Page 12 ====
54 E. Hermann 
1 3
privacy and data protection issues (e.g., Rust, 2020). Under 
certain conditions, AI applications can be both beneficent 
and non-maleficent. Assuming that sensitive health data are 
gathered after obtaining informed consent, treated confi-
dentially, and used conscientiously, medical AI (e.g., Lon-
goni et al., 2019; Yun et al., 2021) has the potential to pro-
mote individual well-being and preventing harm, which, in 
turn, benefits health care systems and thus society at large. 
Besides, customer service robots can ameliorate customer 
experience and reverse information technology service work 
offshoring (i.e., through botsourcing) while addressing the 
technology inequality phenomenon by reducing access bar -
riers for seniors (Xiao & Kumar, 2021).
Ethical issues related to AI are not static and uniform but 
differ across areas of application, technological sophistica-
tion, and pervasiveness. Following Moor (2005), we assume 
that ethical challenges and tensions (can) increase with the 
level of intelligence and degree of humanization of AI (see 
Fig. 3). As conceptualizations of the AI development stages 
are multi-faceted and deviate (Davenport et al., 2020; Huang 
& Rust, 2021b; Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019), they are also 
subject to temporal change (Stahl et al., 2021), and transi-
tions between stages are rather fluid. Therefore, we simplisti-
cally refer to increasing levels of intelligence capturing the 
transition from cognitive (analytical, mechanical) to emo -
tional (feeling) and social intelligence of AI systems and 
applications and an increasing degree of humanization. We 
suggest that beneficence of AI increases with the level of 
intelligence and humanization of AI (e.g., targeted customer 
need identification and satisfaction), but so do the issues 
related to explicability (e.g., black box AI, accountability 
in case of failures). Ethical challenges in respect to justice  
and autonomy can increase, but do not necessarily have to. 
For instance, AI could serve as discrimination detectors 
(Kleinberg et al., 2018, 2020). However, the need for human 
agency and oversight is assumed to increase, particularly, 
when (rather opaque) AI is operating in ethically salient 
contexts. Whether non-maleficence will be achieved in the 
future depends on the extent of customer data gathering and 
treatment of sensitive data, among other things. Increasing 
levels of emotional/social intelligence and humanization of 
AI are related to anthropomorphism (Epley et al., 2007; Kim 
et al., 2019; Waytz, Cacioppo, et al., 2010; Waytz, Gray, 
et al., 2010) as well as mind perception of and attribution 
of experience/warmth and agency/competence to AI (e.g., 
Choi et al., 2020; Fiske et al., 2007; Gray et al., 2007; Waytz, 
Cacioppo, et al., 2010; Waytz, Gray, et al., 2010). Intense 
use of and interaction with human-like AI could lead to psy -
chological ownership and emotional attachment (e.g., More-
wedge, 2021; Morewedge et al., 2021; Shu & Peck, 2011). 
Both psychological phenomena might have detrimental psy -
chological effects if AI deployment gets out of control and/
or overreliance occurs. In a similar vein, extensive use could end up in (perceived) dehumanization of users (e.g., Castelo 
et al., 2019; Haslam, 2006; Haslam & Loughnan, 2014).
From a purely deontological perspective, AI appli-
cations could be entirely called into question when 
non-maleficence cannot be taken for granted. In conse-
quence, promising opportunities to serve customers and 
beneficence on the customer and company levels would 
be missed. Thus, a principled, deontological AI ethics 
approach with normative imperatives and maxims could 
to be inappropriate to account for colliding principles. 
A “deontologically inspired tick-box exercise” (Hagen-
dorff, 2020, p. 112) might be ill-suited to scrutinize such 
far reaching ethical concerns. Instead, a utilitarian per -
spective weighing benefits and costs across all stakehold-
ers—for instance, utilitarian calculations based on ethical 
foresight (e.g., Floridi & Strait, 2020)—could comple-
ment high-level ethical principles. While the deontologi-
cal perspective proves valuable in providing guidelines 
oriented on and aligned to human values, the utilitarian 
approach could better account for multiple values, objec-
tives, and utilities at the individual, group, and societal 
levels. AI applications and systems could incorporate 
multi-objective maximum-expected-utility concepts that 
are aligned to human values and ethical principles (e.g., 
Vamplew et al., 2018). The technological design and 
implementation of such concepts is anything but trivial 
and challenging on two counts. First, utilities to be opti-
mized are difficult to grasp and determine or differ across 
stakeholders (Butkus, 2020). Second, the nascent stage 
of artificial moral agency still demands human agency. 
Eventually, humans are in charge of determining to which 
ethical principles and human values AI applications and 
systems (and their utility functions) should be aligned. 
Besides, decisions about AI design approaches to equip 
AI applications and systems with ethical judgments com-
petences have to be taken by humans. Initially, humans 
have to determine whether AI systems base their ethical 
decision-making on pre-defined ethical theories (top-
down), on more flexible self-learning mechanisms based 
on certain values (bottom-up), or on a combination of 
both (hybrid) (Bonnemains et al., 2018; Cervantes et al. 
2020). In the following section, we provide thoughts and 
ideas of how to align AI applications in marketing with 
ethical principles to promote social and environmental 
good.
AI in Marketing for Social and Environmental 
Good
As delineated above, AI in marketing can additionally 
fuel consumption due to personalized marketing mix 
measures, psychological targeting, and effective customer 

==== Page 13 ====
55 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
relationship management. However, augmented consump-
tion or overconsumption undermines the transition to sus-
tainability, resulting in calls for sufficiency-oriented life-
styles and to “consume better but less” (Wiedmann et al., 
2020, p. 4). Likewise, approaches focusing sufficient con-
sumption (e.g., Gossen et al., 2019 ), mindful consumption 
(e.g., Bahl et al., 2016; Sheth et al., 2011), sustainable 
consumption (e.g., White et al., 2019 ) and marketing (e.g., 
Hunt, 2011; Sheth & Parvatiyar, 2021), and consumption 
ethics (e.g., Carrington et al., 2021) have become the focus 
of scholarly attention. In this context, White et al. (2019, 
p. 23) argued that “marketing and sustainability are inex-
tricably intertwined”, although goals and assumptions of 
both seem incompatible at first sight. AI can be a powerful 
force in reconciling marketing activities with sustainabil-
ity and social good objectives.
Data-driven segmentation and targeting approaches can 
bring together tailored persuasive appeals and offerings 
and consumers in relation to their predisposition to ethical 
and sustainable consumption and products. The sophisti-
cation and computational power of AI applications allow 
to account for the complex interrelationships between 
supply-side (e.g., marketing mix) and demand-side factors 
(e.g., consumer demographics and personality, decision-
making processes) in respect to ethical and sustainable 
consumption. For instance, price, product, and sustain-
ability attributes are differentially valued in dependence 
of consumers’ self-other orientations (Ross & Milne, 
2020). Moreover, the purchases of sustainable products 
using green-identity labels can decrease when combined 
with price discounts (Schwartz et al., 2020). Brands’ ethi-
cal attributes and strengths (i.e., cause-related marketing 
and corporate social responsibility) further exert stronger 
influences in the choice phase than in the consideration 
(set formation) phase of the consumer decision journey 
(Schamp et al., 2019). In general, a multitude of social, 
structural, and individual factors can strengthen or atten-
uate consumers’ sustainable consumption intentions and 
behavior (White et al., 2019). Particularly, psychologi-
cal factors can become barriers to behavioral change and 
“dragons of inaction” (Gifford, 2011, p. 290).
This anecdotal evidence already alludes to one oppor -
tunity to harness AI for societal and environmental well-
being, that is, psychological targeting. Psychological 
targeting facilitates to identify consumers predisposed 
to sustainable and ethical products and attributes based 
on their psychological traits and to tailor respective per -
suasive appeals (e.g., Matz, Appel, et al., 2019; Matz, 
Menges, et al., 2019 ; Matz, Segalin, et al., 2019), for 
example, by emphasizing specific product attributes or 
using green-identity and eco labels. Given the possibil-
ity to predict income from digital footprints (e.g., Matz, 
Menges et al., Matz, Appel, et al., 2019), marketers can also personalize prices by deriving consumers’ willing -
ness to pay for environmentally friendly products. That 
also helps to streamline promotion and price policies, par -
ticularly, against the backdrop of the moderating effect of 
price on the relation between green-identity labeling and 
consumer behavioral responses (Schwartz et al., 2020 ). 
These opportunities relate to the stance of promoting 
social and environmental good (i.e., beneficence), but 
marketers are also obliged to avoid misuse of psycho-
logical targeting and corresponding harm to individuals 
(i.e., non-maleficence). Therefore, marketers should avoid 
targeting vulnerable groups or consumers who are prone 
to addictive and compulsive behaviors (Matz & Netzer, 
2017) or compulsive buying, which can be inferred from 
psychological factors (e.g., O’Guinn & Faber, 1989). As 
aforementioned, discriminatory treatment of individuals 
and groups by AI systems such as targeting vulnerable 
groups can arise from biased or skewed underlying data 
and/or misspecified models (Barredo Arrieta et al., 2020; 
Morley et al., 2020). To prevent such unfavorable (i.e., 
non-maleficence) and unfair (i.e., justice) outcomes that 
undermine the beneficent purpose of AI applications, mar -
keters should gain a certain understanding of data inputs 
(e.g., features taken into account or data distributions) and 
AI functionalities (i.e., intelligibility). Marketers’ aware-
ness of potentially biased data or AI models is a crucial 
step of this non-trivial task, since they are likely to be 
held accountable (Huang & Rust, 2021b). Data scientists 
and AI developers should contribute by leveraging their 
methodological expertise to identify and correct biases 
and errors.
As personalized, psychologically tailored messages and 
appeals can serve as nudges, so can recommendations gener -
ated by AI systems for consumer decision-making processes 
(e.g., Burr et al., 2018; Milano et al., 2020). Basically, AI-
based recommender systems should follow the same ration-
ale as psychological targeting. Based on comprehensive 
purchase (history) and user data, recommendations could 
nudge consumers to sustainable products or at least offer 
sustainable alternatives to conventional products. That is, 
recommender systems should balance exploration of (new 
sustainable) items and exploitation of existing preferences 
for their recommendations (Milano et al., 2021). In this 
way, diversity of product offerings could be increased in 
terms of environmental friendliness, material footprint, and 
sustainability (e.g., fast- vs. slow fashion items). Further -
more, customer data can be leveraged to mitigate compulsive 
buying tendencies (i.e., daily or highly frequent purchases, 
repeated purchases of comparable or identical products etc.) 
by providing respective notices to customers. For this pur -
pose, interventions in the form of nudges to reason could be 
applied. These informational nudges do not affect behav -
ior directly, but attempt to change minds by increasing 

==== Page 14 ====
56 E. Hermann 
1 3
individuals’ responsiveness to genuine evidence (Levy, 
2017). Such evidence can take the form of underlining the 
individual or environmental consequences of excessive or 
compulsive buying. Stressing the impact of certain purchase 
decisions can spur consumer to rethink consumption pat-
terns and account for social norms, social desirability, and 
system justification beliefs (e.g., Gifford, 2011; White et al., 
2019). Comparably, recent prior research revealed that mak -
ing consumers reflect their personal possessions and recall 
their recent use of it can diminish the desire to shop impul-
sively (Dholakia et al., 2018).
To minimize interferences with customers’ autonomy, 
informational nudges (i.e., changes of the nature of infor -
mation consumer are exposed to) should be preferred over 
structural nudges (i.e., changes of the choice architecture 
consumers are exposed to), although the former are less 
successful than the latter (Floridi, 2016). In general, the AI 
applications illustrated above suggest that the development, 
design, and deployment of AI should focus on the creation 
of new opportunities and capabilities to foster societal and 
environmental well-being. That is the core of the positive 
computing perspective (Burr et al., 2020). Whether eth-
ics have to be embedded in the design process in a rather 
structural (i.e., ethics by design) or informational way (i.e., 
pro-ethical design) (Floridi, 2016) does not only depend on 
autonomy and accountability (i.e., explicability) if AI is mis-
used or fails. It is also dependent on the subjective nature 
of well-being (and utilities) and eventually on customers’ 
acceptance and behavioral responses. An embedded ethics 
approach guiding AI developers of how to translate ethical 
principles into practice through ethics training and exchange 
with ethicists (Brey, 2000; McLennan et al., 2020; Moor, 
2005) should be contemplated to take on this challenge.
Directions for Future Research
The AI-for-social-good perspective in marketing opens up 
various research opportunities (see Fig.  3). First, future 
research should examine which degree of intelligibility and 
transparency of respective AI applications and systems best 
matches the tension between customers’ cognitive abilities 
(e.g., Rai, 2020), information needs, and potential tradeoffs 
between disclosure of non-human nature and efficiency/
performance of AI (e.g., Ishowo-Oloko et al., 2019; Luo 
et al., 2019; Rai, 2020). Second, safeguards along the entire 
data lifecycle as well as for AI development and deploy -
ment to minimize the risk of biased data and AI predictions 
and treatments should be investigated. Embedded ethics 
approaches (e.g., McLennan et al., 2020) that bring together 
marketers, data scientists, AI developers, and ethicists seem 
promising. However, appropriate and efficient organizational 
governance structures and decision-making processes might be in demand. Partly or fully automated internal auditing 
mechanisms (e.g., Floridi et al., 2018; Rahwan, 2018) could 
serve as monitoring measures and both internal and external 
compliance evidence. Third, the autonomy principle raises 
research question on at least two counts. Assuming that the 
whether is a matter of time, companies and AI developers 
have to craft policies of how  to endow AI with (a certain) 
degree of ethical judgment competence for ethically salient 
contexts, decisions, and customer interactions (e.g., health 
care robots, emotionally intelligent AI in general). Besides, 
customers have to retain their decisional power and auton-
omy. In other words, AI-created choice architectures should 
be free from coercive, deceptive, and paternalistic structures. 
That might be even more important when it comes to con-
sumption and purchases that are personally relevant or for 
which humans are deemed more competent than artificial 
agents (e.g., Granulo et al., 2021; Longoni & Cian, 2021). 
If AI-shaped customer decisions and behavior in the aggre-
gate take effect on societal and environmental level, humans 
and even society have to be kept in the loop (e.g., Rahwan, 
2018). Finally, on a national or supranational level, binding 
ethical and socio-legal governance and policies (e.g., Cath, 
2018; Stahl et al., 2021; Theodorou & Dignum, 2020) have 
to be conceived to commit companies to develop and deploy 
AI in an ethical way in order to promote social good while 
preventing any harm. Otherwise, one could run the risk of 
“creating a supermarket of principles and values, where pri-
vate and public actors may shop for the kind of ethics that 
is best retrofitted to justify their behaviours” (Floridi, 2019, 
p. 262).
Conclusion
This paper synthesizes the mounting research areas of AI 
ethics and AI in marketing. By scrutinizing the validity of 
ethical principles related to AI in the marketing context and 
across stakeholders, we show that ethical principles interde-
pend and collide, partly, in dependence of the stakeholders 
concerned. Particularly, beneficence and non-maleficence  
cannot be taken for granted, since the advances of AI appli-
cations in marketing are likely to increase individual and 
aggregate consumption. Besides, explicability (i.e., intel-
ligibility and accountability) turns out to enable the other 
ethical principles. Ethical challenges and interdependen-
cies between ethical principles might increase with levels 
of intelligence and humanization of AI. Thus, a principled, 
deontological approach to AI ethics, which implies to refrain 
from AI applications contravening ethical principles, does 
not account for the complexity of the future AI development 
and pervasiveness from an ethical perspective. Therefore, 
we suggest to complement ethical considerations of AI in 

==== Page 15 ====
57 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
marketing by a utilitarian perspective balancing benefits and 
costs.
In essence, ethical principles should not pursue the 
objective of inhibiting actions or (technological) progress; 
they should rather amplify the scope of action, autonomy, 
freedom, and self-responsibility (Hagendorff, 2020). We 
follow this path and provide ideas of how to leverage AI 
applications in marketing to promote social and environ-
mental good. Kaplan and Haenlein (2020, p. 44) noted that 
“AI can be major game changer” to address climate change. 
We concur with this thought and attempted to show how to 
add the fuel of AI to the fire of sustainability efforts in the 
marketing context. To achieve a dual advantage for society 
(Floridi et al., 2018), this beneficence-inspired view is com-
plemented by cautioning against misuse of AI, particularly, 
when directed at vulnerable consumers. We hope that some 
of our suggestions motivate marketing researchers and prac-
titioners to further investigate how the AI-powered promo-
tion of well-being can be refined, advanced, and effectively 
put into practice.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 
DEAL. No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this 
manuscript.
Declarations  
Conflict of Interest The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare 
that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Amazon (2020). All in: Staying the course on our commitment to sus-
tainability. Retrieved February 4, 2021, from https:// susta inabi  
lity. about  amazon. com/ pdfBuilderDownload?name=sustainabil
ity-all-in-december-2020.
Amazon (2021). Quarterly Results 2020: Q4 earnings. Retrieved Feb-
ruary 4, 2021, from https:// s2. q4cdn. com/ 29928 7126/ files/ doc_  
finan cials/ 2020/ q4/ Amazon- Q4- 2020- Earni ngs- Relea se. pdf.
Ameen, N., Tarhini, A., Reppel, A., & Anand, A. (2021). Customer 
experiences in the age of artificial intelligence. Computers in 
Human Behavior, 114, 106548.Ananny, M., & Crawford, K. (2018). Seeing without knowing: Limita -
tions of the transparency ideal and its application to algorithmic 
accountability. New Media & Society, 20(3), 973–989.
Andrew, J., & Baker, M. (2021). The general data protection regulation 
in the age of surveillance capitalism. Journal of Business Ethics, 
168(3), 565–578.
Bahl, S., Milne, G. R., Ross, S. M., Mick, D. G., Grier, S. A., et al. 
(2016). Mindfulness: Its transformative potential for consumer, 
societal, and environmental well-being. Journal of Public Pol-
icy & Marketing, 35(2), 198–210.
Banker, S., & Khetani, S. (2019). Algorithm overdependence: How 
the use of algorithmic recommendation systems can increase 
risks to consumer well-being. Journal of Public Policy & Mar -
keting, 38(4), 500–515.
Barredo Arrieta, A., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Benneto, A., 
Tabik, S., Barbado, A., et al. (2020). Explainable artificial 
intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and 
challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion, 58, 
82–115.
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (2013). Principles of biomedical 
ethics (7th ed.). . New York: Oxford University Press.
Belk, R. (2020). Ethical issues in service robotics and artificial intel-
ligence. The Service Industries Journal. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
02642 069. 2020. 17278 92.
Belkhir, L., & Elmeligi, A. (2018). Assessing ICT global emissions 
footprint: Trends to 2040 & recommendations. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 177, 448–463.
de Bellis, E., & Johar, G. V. (2021). Autonomous shopping systems: 
Identifying and overcoming barriers to consumer adoption. Jour -
nal of Retailing, 96(1), 74–87.
Bleier, A., Goldfarb, A., & Tuckerc, C. (2020). Consumer privacy and 
the future of data-based innovation and marketing. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 37(3), 466–480.
Bol, N., Strycharz, J., Helberger, N., van de Velde, B., & de Vreese, C. 
H. (2020). Vulnerability in a tracked society: Combining track -
ing and survey data to understand who gets targeted with what 
content. New Media & Society, 22(11), 1996–2017.
Bonnemains, V., Saure, C., & Tessier, C. (2018). Embedded ethics: 
Some technical and ethical challenges. Ethics and Information 
Technology, 20(1), 41–58.
Brey, P. A. E. (2000). Method in computer ethics: Towards a multi-
level interdisciplinary approach. Ethics and Information Technol-
ogy, 2(2), 125–129.
Brey, P. A. E. (2012). Anticipating ethical issues in emerging IT. Ethics 
and Information Technology, 14(4), 267–284.
De Bruyn, A., Viswanathan, V., Beh, Y. S., Brock, J.K.-U., & von Wan-
genheim, F. (2020). Artificial intelligence and marketing: Pitfalls 
and opportunities. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 51, 91–105.
Burr, C., Cristianini, N., & Ladyman, J. (2018). An analysis of the 
interaction between intelligent software agents and human users. 
Minds and Machines, 28(4), 735–774.
Burr, C., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2020). The ethics of digital well-
being: A thematic review. Science and Engineering Ethics, 26(4), 
2313–2343.
Butkus, M. A. (2020). The human side of artificial intelligence. Science 
and Engineering Ethics, 26(5), 2427–2437.
Calvano, E., Calzolari, G., Denicolò, V., & Pastorello, S. (2020). Arti-
ficial intelligence, algorithmic pricing, and collusion. American 
Economic Review, 110(10), 3267–3297.
Campbell, C., Sands, S., Ferraro, C., Tsao, H.-Y., & Mavrommatis, A. 
(2020). From data to action: How marketers can leverage AI. 
Business Horizons, 63(2), 227–243.
Cappella, J. N. (2017). Vectors into the future of mass and interpersonal 
communication research: Big data, social media, and computa-
tional social science. Human Communication Research,  43(4), 
545–558.

==== Page 16 ====
58 E. Hermann 
1 3
Carrington, M., Chatzidakis, A., Goworek, H., & Shaw, D. (2021). 
Consumption ethics: A review and analysis of future directions 
for interdisciplinary research. Journal of Business Ethics, 168(1), 
215–238.
Castelo, N., Schmitt, B., & Sarvay, M. (2019). Human or robot? 
Consumer responses to radical cognitive enhancement prod-
ucts. Journal of the Association for Consumer Research, 4(3), 
217–230.
Castillo, D., Canhoto, A. I., & Said, E. (2020). The dark side of AI-
powered service interactions: Exploring the process of co-
destruction from the customer perspective. The Service Indus-
tries Journal. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 02642 069. 2020. 17879 93.
Cath, C. (2018). Governing artificial intelligence: Ethical, legal and 
technical opportunities and challenges. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society A, 376(2133), 20180080.
Cervantes, J.-A., López, S., Rodríguez, L.-F., Cervantes, S., Cer -
vantes, F., & Ramos, F. (2020). Artificial moral agents: A sur -
vey of the current status. Science and Engineering Ethics, 26(2), 
2313–2343.
Choi, S., Mattila, A. S., & Bolton, L. E. (2020). To err is human(-oid): 
How do consumers react to robot service failure and recovery? 
Journal of Service Research. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 10946  
70520 978798.
Coeckelbergh, M. (2020). Artificial intelligence, responsibility attribu-
tion, and a relational justification of explainability. Science and 
Engineering Ethics, 26(2), 2051–2068.
Cowls, J., Tsamados, A., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2021). A defini-
tion, benchmark and database of AI for social good initiatives. 
Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(2), 111–115.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). The costs and benefits of consuming. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 27(2), 267–272.
D’ Acquisto, G. (2020). On conflicts between ethical and logical prin-
ciples in artificial intelligence. AI & SOCIETY, 35(4), 895–900.
Dasgupta, P. S., & Ehrlich, P. R. (2013). Pervasive externalities at 
the population, consumption, and environment nexus. Science,  
340(6130), 324–328.
Datta, A., Tschantz, M. C., & Datta, A. (2015). Automated experi-
ments on ad privacy settings: A tale of opacity, choice, and dis-
crimination. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies,  
1, 92–112.
Davenport, T., Guha, A., Grewal, D., & Bressgott, T. (2020). How 
artificial intelligence will change the future of marketing. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(1), 24–42.
Dekimpe, M. G., Geyskens, I., & Gielens, K. (2020). Using technol-
ogy to bring online convenience to offline shopping. Marketing 
Letters, 31(1), 25–29.
de Laat, P. B. (2018). Algorithmic decision-making based on machine 
learning from big data: Can transparency restore accountability? 
Philosophy & Technology, 31(4), 525–541.
Dellaert, B. G. C., Shu, S. B., Arentze, T. A., Baker, T., Diehl, K., 
Donkers, B., et al. (2020). Consumer decisions with artificially 
intelligent voice assistants. Marketing Letters, 31(4), 335–434.
Dhar, P. (2020). The carbon impact of artificial intelligence. Nature 
Machine Intelligence, 2(8), 423–425.
Dholakia, U., Jung, J., & Chowdhry, N. (2018). Should I buy this when 
I have so much? Reflection on personal possessions as an anti-
consumption strategy. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing,  
37(2), 260–273.
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2015). Algorithm aver -
sion: People erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(1), 114–126.
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2018). Overcoming 
algorithm aversion: People will use imperfect algorithms if they 
can (even slightly) modify them. Management Science, 64(3), 
1155–1170.Du, R. X., Netzer, O., Schweidel, D. A., & Mitra, D. (2021). Captur -
ing marketing information to fuel growth. Journal of Marketing,  
85(1), 163–183.
Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). On seeing human: A 
three-factor theory of anthropomorphism. Psychological Review,  
114(4), 864–886.
van Esch, P., Cui, Y., & Jain, S. P. (2021). Stimulating or intimidating: 
The effect of AI-enabled in-store communication on consumer 
patronage likelihood. Journal of Advertising, 50(1), 63–80.
Escursell, S., Llorach, P., & Roncero, M. B. (2021). Sustainability in 
e-commerce packaging: A review. Journal of Cleaner Produc-
tion, 280, 124314.
Farisco, M., Evers, K., & Salles, A. (2020). Towards establishing cri-
teria for the ethical analysis of artificial intelligence. Science and 
Engineering Ethics, 26(5), 2413–2425.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., & Glick, P. (2007). Universal dimensions 
of social cognition: Warmth and competence. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 111(2), 77–83.
Floridi, L. (2016). Tolerant paternalism: Pro-ethical design as a reso-
lution of the dilemma of toleration. Science and Engineering 
Ethics, 22(6), 1669–1688.
Floridi, L. (2019). Establishing the rules for building trustworthy AI. 
Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(6), 261–262.
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand, P., Dig-
num, V., et al. (2018). AI4People—an ethical framework for a 
good AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles, and recom-
mendations. Minds and Machines, 28(4), 689–707.
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., King, T. C., & Taddeo, M. (2020). How to design 
AI for social good: Seven essential factors. Science and Engi -
neering Ethics, 26(3), 1771–1796.
Floridi, L., & Strait, A. (2020). Ethical foresight analysis: What it is 
and why it is needed? Minds and Machines, 30(1), 77–97.
Floridi, L., & Taddeo, M. (2016). What is data ethics? Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A, 374(2083), 20160360.
Gifford, R. (2011). The dragons of inaction: Psychological barriers 
that limit climate change mitigation and adaptation. American 
Psychologist, 66(4), 290–302.
Gladstone, J. J., Matz, S. C., & Lemaire, A. (2019). Can psychologi-
cal traits be inferred from spending? Evidence from Transaction 
Data. Psychological Science, 30(7), 1087–1096.
Glikson, E., & Wolley, A. W. (2020). Human trust in artificial intel-
ligence: Review of empirical research. Academy of Management 
Annals, 14(2), 627–660.
Gossen, M., Ziesemer, F., & Schrader, U. (2019). Why and how com-
mercial marketing should promote sufficient consumption: A 
systematic literature review. Journal of Macromarketing, 39(3), 
252–269.
Granulo, A., Fuchs, C., & Puntoni, S. (2021). Preference for human 
(vs. robotic) labor is stronger in symbolic consumption contexts. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 31(1), 72–80.
Gray, H. M., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007). Dimensions of mind 
perception. Science, 315(5812), 619–719.
Grewal, D., Hulland, J., Kopalle, P. K., & Karahanna, E. (2020). The 
future of technology and marketing: A multidisciplinary perspec-
tive. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(1), 1–8.
Grewal, D., Noble, S. M., Roggeveen, A. L., & Nordfalt, J. (2020). The 
future of in-store technology. Journal of the Academy of Market-
ing Science, 48(2), 96–113.
Guha, A., Grewal, D., Kopalle, P. K., Haenlein, M., Schneider, M. J., 
Jung, H., et al. (2021). How artificial intelligence will affect the 
future of retailing. Journal of Retailing, 97(1), 28–41.
Gunning, D., Stefik, M., Choi, J., Miller, T., Stumpf, S., & Yang, G.-Z. 
(2019). XAI—explainable artificial intelligence. Science Robot-
ics, 4(37), 7120.

==== Page 17 ====
59 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
Haenlein, M., & Kaplan, A. (2021). Artificial intelligence and robotics: 
Shaking up the business world and society at large. Journal of 
Business Research, 124, 405–407.
Hagen, L., Uetake, K., Yang, N., Bollinger, B., Chaney, A. J. B., Dzy -
abura, D., et al. (2020). How can machine learning aid behavioral 
marketing research? Marketing Letters, 31(4), 393–404.
Hagendorff, T. (2020). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guide-
lines. Minds and Machines, 30(1), 99–120.
Hansen, K. T., Misra, K., & Pai, M. M. (2021). Frontiers: Algorithmic 
collusion: Supra-competitive prices via independent algorithms. 
Marketing Science, 40(1), 1–12.
Haslam, N. (2006). Dehumanization: An integrative review. Person-
ality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 252–264.
Haslam, N., & Loughnan, S. (2014). Dehumanization and infrahu-
manization. Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 399–423.
Hoyer, W. D., Kroschke, M., Schmitt, B., Kraume, K., & Shankar, 
V. (2020). Transforming the customer experience through new 
technologies. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 51, 57–71.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in service. 
Journal of Service Research, 21(2), 155–172.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2021a). Engaged to a robot? The role 
of AI in service. Journal of Service Research, 24(1), 30–41.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2021b). A strategic framework for 
artificial intelligence in marketing. Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, 49(1), 30–50.
Hunt, S. D. (2011). Sustainable marketing, equity, and economic 
growth: A resource-advantage, economic freedom approach. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39(1), 7–20.
Ishowo-Oloko, F., Bonnefon, J.-F., Soroye, Z., Crandall, J., Rahwan, 
I., & Rahwan, T. (2019). Behavioural evidence for a trans-
parency–efficiency tradeoff in human–machine cooperation. 
Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(11), 517–521.
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape 
of AI ethics guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(9), 
389–399.
Jotterand, F., & Bosco, C. (2020). Keeping the “human in the loop” in 
the age of artificial intelligence. Science and Engineering Ethics,  
26(5), 2455–2460.
Kaplan, A., & Haenlein, M. (2019). Siri, Siri, in my hand: Who’s 
the fairest in the land? On the interpretations, illustrations, and 
implications of artificial intelligence. Business Horizons, 62(1), 
15–25.
Kaplan, A., & Haenlein, M. (2020). Rulers of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of artificial intelligence. Business 
Horizons, 63(1), 37–50.
Kim, S. Y., Schmitt, B., & Thalmann, N. M. (2019). Eliza in the 
uncanny valley: Anthropomorphizing consumer robots increases 
their perceived warmth but decreases liking. Marketing Letters,  
30(1), 1–12.
Klaus, P., & Zaichkowsky, J. (2020). AI voice bots: A services mar -
keting research agenda. Journal of Services Marketing,  34(3), 
389–398.
Kleinberg, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., & Sunstein, C. R. (2018). 
Discrimination in the age of algorithms. Journal of Legal Analy -
sis, 10, 113–174.
Kleinberg, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., & Sunstein, C. R. (2020). 
Algorithms as discrimination detectors. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science, 117(48), 30096–30100.
Kotler, P. (2011). Reinventing marketing to manage the environmental 
imperative. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 132–135.
Kotler, P., & Zaltman, G. (1971). Social marketing: An approach to 
planned social change. Journal of Marketing, 35(3), 3–12.
Kumar, V., Rajan, B., Venkatesan, R., & Lecinski, J. (2019). Under -
standing the role of artificial intelligence in personalized 
engagement marketing. California Management Review, 61(4), 
135–155.Lambrecht, A., & Tucker, C. (2019). Algorithmic bias? An empirical 
study of apparent gender-based discrimination in the display of 
STEM career ads. Management Science, 65(7), 2966–2981.
Lange, S., Pohl, J., & Santarius, T. (2020). Digitalization and energy 
consumption. Does ICT reduce energy demand? Ecological Eco-
nomics, 176, 106760.
Lee, D., & Hosaganar, K. (2019). How do recommender systems affect 
sales diversity? A cross-category investigation via randomized 
field experiment. Information Systems Research, 30(1), 239–259.
Lepri, B., Oliver, N., Letouzé, E., Pentland, A., & Vinck, P. (2018). 
Fair, transparent, and accountable algorithmic decision-making 
processes. The premise, the proposed solutions, and the open 
challenges. Philosophy & Technology, 31(4), 611–627.
Levy, N. (2017). Nudges in a post-truth world. Journal of Medical 
Ethics, 43(8), 495–500.
Libai, B., Bart, Y., Gensler, S., Hofacker, C., Kaplan, A., Kötterhein-
rich, K., et al. (2020). Brave new world? On AI and the manage-
ment of customer relationships. Journal of Interactive Marketing,  
51, 44–56.
Lin, Y.-T., Doong, H.-S., & Eisingerich, A. B. (2021). Avatar design 
of virtual salespeople: Mitigation of recommendation conflicts. 
Journal of Service Research, 24(1), 141–159.
Liu, X., Lee, D., & Srinivasan, K. (2019). Large-scale cross-category 
analysis of consumer review content on sales conversion lev -
eraging deep learning. Journal of Marketing Research, 56(6), 
918–943.
Longoni, C., & Cian, L. (2021). Artificial intelligence in utilitarian 
vs. hedonic contexts: The “word-of-machine” effect. Journal of 
Marketing, https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00222 42920 957347.
Longoni, C., Bonezzi, A., & Morewedge, C. K. (2019). Resistance to 
medical artificial intelligence. Journal of Consumer Research,  
46(4), 629–650.
van Loon, P., Deketele, L., Dewaele, J., McKinnon, A., & Ruther -
ford, C. (2015). A comparative analysis of carbon emissions 
from online retailing of fast moving consumer goods. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 106, 478–486.
Lu, J., Wu, D., Mao, M., Wang, W., & Zhang, G. (2015). Recommender 
system application developments: A survey. Decision Support 
Systems, 74, 12–32.
Luengo-Oroz, M. (2019). Solidarity should be a core ethical principle 
of AI. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(11), 494.
Luo, X., Tong, S., Fang, Z., & Quc, Z. (2019). Frontiers: Machines vs. 
humans: The impact of artificial intelligence chatbot disclosure 
on customer purchases. Marketing Science, 38(6), 937–947.
Ma, L., & Sun, B. (2020). Machine learning and AI in marketing—
connecting computing power to human insights. International 
Journal of Research in Marketing, 37(3), 481–504.
Martin, K. (2019). Ethical implications and accountability of algo -
rithms. Journal of Business Ethics, 160(4), 835–850.
Martin, K. D., & Murphy, P. E. (2017). The role of data privacy in 
marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 45(2), 
135–155.
Martin, K. D., & Palmatier, R. W. (2020). Data privacy in retail: Navi-
gating tensions and directing future research. Journal of Retail-
ing, 96(4), 449–457.
Martin, K. D., Kim, J. J., Palmatier, R. W., Steinhoff, L., Stewart, D. 
W., Walker, B. A., et al. (2020). Data privacy in retail. Journal 
of Retailing, 96(4), 474–489.
Matz, S. C., Appel, R. E., & Kosinski, M. (2019). Privacy in the age 
of psychological targeting. Current Opinion in Psychology, 31, 
116–121.
Matz, S. C., Kosinski, M., Nave, G., & Stilwell, D. J. (2017). Psycho-
logical targeting as an effective approach to digital mass persua-
sion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,  114(48), 
12714–12719.

==== Page 18 ====
60 E. Hermann 
1 3
Matz, S. C., Menges, J. I., Stillwell, D. J., & Schwartz, H. A. (2019). 
Predicting individual-level income from facebook profiles. PLoS 
ONE, 14(3), e0214369.
Matz, S. C., & Netzer, O. (2017). Using big data as a window into 
consumers’ psychology. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences,  
18, 7–12.
Matz, S. C., Segalin, C., Stillwell, D., Müller, S. R., & Bos, M. (2019). 
Using computational methods to predict personal image appeal. 
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 29(3), 370–390.
McLeay, F., Osburg, V. S., Yoganathan, V., & Patterson, A. (2021). 
Replaced by a robot: Service implications in the age of the 
machine. Journal of Service Research, 24(1), 104–121.
McLennan, S., Fiske, A., Celi, L. A., Müller, R., Harder, J., Ritt, K., 
et al. (2020). An embedded ethics approach for AI development. 
Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(9), 488–490.
Mende, M., Scott, M. L., van Doorn, J., Grewal, D., & Shanks, I. 
(2019). Service robots rising: How humanoid robots influence 
service experiences and food consumption. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 56(4), 535–556.
Milano, S., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2020). Recommender systems 
and their ethical challenges. AI & SOCIETY, 35(4), 957–967.
Milano, S., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2021). Ethical aspects of multi-
stakeholder recommendation systems. The Information Society,  
37(1), 35–45.
Mittelstadt, B. D. (2019). Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI. 
Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(11), 501–507.
Mittelstadt, B. D., Allo, P., Taddeo, M., Wachter, S., & Floridi, L. 
(2016). The ethics of algorithms: Mapping the debate. Big Data 
& Society, 3(2), 1–21.
Mittelstadt, B. D., & Floridi, L. (2016). The ethics of big data: Cur -
rent and foreseeable issues in biomedical contexts. Science and 
Engineering Ethics, 22(2), 303–341.
Moor, J. H. (1985). What is computer ethics? Metaphilosophy, 16(4), 
266–275.
Moor, J. H. (2005). Why we need better ethics for emerging technolo-
gies. Ethics and Information Technology, 7(3), 111–119.
Morewedge, C. K. (2021). Psychological ownership: Implicit and 
explicit. Current Opinion in Psychology, 39, 125–132.
Morewedge, C. K., Monga, A., Palmatier, R. W., Shu, S. B., & Small, 
D. A. (2021). Evolution of consumption: A psychological owner -
ship framework. Journal of Marketing, 85(1), 196–218.
Morley, J., Floridi, L., Kinsey, L., & Elhalal, A. (2020). From what 
to how: An initial review of publicly available AI ethics tools, 
methods and research to translate principles into practices. Sci-
ence and Engineering Ethics, 26(4), 2141–2168.
Mustak, M., Salminen, J., Plé, L., & Wirtz, J. (2021). Artificial intelli-
gence in marketing: Topic modeling, scientometric analysis, and 
research agenda. Journal of Business Research, 124, 389–404.
Niinimäki, K., Peters, G., Dahlbo, H., Perry, P., Rissanen, T., & Gwilt, 
A. (2020). The environmental price of fast fashion. Nature 
Reviews Earth & Environment, 1(4), 189–200.
O’Guinn, T. C., & Faber, R. J. (1989). Compulsive buying: A phenom-
enological exploration. Journal of Consumer Research, 16(2), 
147–157.
Obermeyer, Z., Power, B., Vogeli, C., & Mullainathan, S. (2019). Dis-
secting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of 
populations. Science, 366(6464), 447–453.
Okazaki, S., Eisend, M., Plangger, D., de Ruyter, K., & Grewal, D. 
(2020). Understanding the strategic consequences of customer 
privacy concerns: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Retailing,  
96(4), 458–473.
Pålsson, H., Pettersson, F., & Winslott Hiselius, L. (2015). Energy 
consumption in e-commerce versus conventional trade chan-
nels: Insights into packaging, the last mile, unsold products and 
product returns. Journal of Cleaner Production, 164, 765–778.Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the twenty-first century . Cambridge: Har -
vard University Press.
Piketty, T. (2020). Capital and ideology. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Proserpio, D., Hauser, J. R., Liu, X., Amano, T., Burnap, A., Guo, T., 
et al. (2020). Soul and machine (learning). Marketing Letters,  
31(4), 393–404.
Puntoni, S., Walker Reczek, R., Giesler, M., & Botti, S. (2021). Con-
sumers and artificial intelligence: An experiential perspective. 
Journal of Marketing, 85(1), 131–151.
Rahwan, I. (2018). Society-in-the-loop: programming the algorith-
mic social contract. Ethics and Information Technology, 20(1), 
5–14.
Rai, A. (2020). Explainable AI: From black box to glass box. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(1), 137–141.
Rich, A. S., & Gureckis, T. M. (2019). Lessons for artificial intel-
ligence from the study of natural stupidity. Nature Machine 
Intelligence, 1(4), 174–180.
Ross, S. M., & Milne, G. R. (2020). Price? Quality? Or sustain-
ability? Segmenting by disposition toward self-other tradeoffs 
predicts consumers’ sustainable decision-making. Journal of 
Business Ethics. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10551- 020- 04478-5.
Royakkers, L., Timmer, J., Kool, L., & van Est, R. (2018). Societal 
and ethical issues of digitization. Ethics and Information Tech-
nology, 20(2), 127–142.
Rudin, C. (2019). Stop explaining black box machine learning mod-
els for high stakes decisions and use interpretable models 
instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5), 206–215.
Rust, R. T. (2020). The future of marketing. International Journal 
of Research in Marketing, 37(1), 15–26.
Ryan, M. (2020). In AI we trust: Ethics, artificial intelligence, and 
reliability. Science and Engineering Ethics, 26(5), 2749–2767.
Samuel, A. L. (1960). Some moral and technical consequences of 
automation—a refutation. Science, 132(3429), 741–742.
Schamp, C., Heitmann, M., & Katzenstein, R. (2019). Considera-
tion of ethical attributes along the consumer decision-making 
journey. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 47(2), 
328–348.
Schwartz, D., Loewenstein, G., & Agüero-Gaete, L. (2020). Encour -
aging pro-environmental behaviour through green identity 
labelling. Nature Sustainability, 3(9), 746–752.
Shahmohammadi, S., Steinmann, Z. J. N., Tambjerg, L., van Loon, 
P., King, J. M. H., & Huijbregts, M. A. J. (2020). Comparative 
greenhouse gas footprinting of online versus traditional shop-
ping for fast-moving consumer goods: A stochastic approach. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 54(6), 3499–3509.
Shankar, V. (2018). How artificial intelligence (AI) is reshaping 
retailing. Journal of Retailing, 94(4), vi–xi.
Sheth, J. N., & Parvatiyar, A. (2021). Sustainable marketing: Market-
driving, not market-driven. Journal of Macromarketing, 41(1), 
150–165.
Sheth, J. N., Sethia, N. K., & Srinivas, S. (2011). Mindful consump-
tion: A customer-centric approach to sustainability. Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, 39(1), 21–39.
Shu, S. B., & Peck, J. (2011). Psychological ownership and affec-
tive reaction: Emotional attachment process variables and the 
endowment effect. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21(4), 
439–452.
Stachl, C., Au, Q., Schoedel, R., Gosling, S. D., Harari, G. M., 
Buschek, D., et al. (2020). Predicting personality from pat-
terns of behavior collected with smartphones. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science, 117(30), 17680–17687.
Stahl, B. C., Andreou, A., Brey, P., Hatzakis, T., Kirichenko, A., 
Macnish, K., et al. (2021). Artificial intelligence for human 
flourishing—beyond principles for machine learning. Journal 
of Business Research, 124, 374–388.

==== Page 19 ====
61 Leveraging Artificial Intelligence in Marketing for Social Good—An Ethical Perspective  
1 3
Stewart, D. W. (2017). A comment on privacy. Journal of the Acad-
emy of Marketing Science, 45(2), 156–159.
Sunstein, C. R. (2016). The ethics of influence: Government in the 
age of behavioral science. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Swim, J. K., Clayton, S., & Howard, G. S. (2011). Human behavioral 
contributions to climate change: Psychological and contextual 
drivers. American Psychologist, 66(4), 251–264.
Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2018). How AI can be a force for good. 
Science, 361(6404), 751–752.
Thaler, R., & Sunstein, C. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about 
health, wealth, and happiness. London: Yale University Press.
Theodorou, A., & Dignum, V. (2020). Towards ethical and socio-
legal governance in AI. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(1), 
10–12.
Thiebes, S., Lins, S., & Sunyae, A. (2020). Trustworthy artificial 
intelligence. Electronic Markets. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s12525- 020- 00441-4.
Thomaz, F., Salge, C., Karahanna, E., & Hulland, J. (2020). Learn-
ing from the dark web: Leveraging conversational agents in 
the era of hyper-privacy to enhance marketing. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 48(1), 43–63.
Timoshenko, A., & Hauser, J. R. (2019). Identifying customer needs 
from user-generated content. Marketing Science, 38(1), 1–20.
Tong, S., & Luo, X. (2020). Personalized mobile marketing strat-
egies. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 48(1), 
64–78.
Turilli, M., & Floridi, L. (2009). The ethics of information trans-
parency. Ethics and Information Technology, 11(2), 105–112.
Vadakkepatt, G. G., Winterich, K. P., Mittal, V., Zinn, W., Beitel-
spacher, L., Aloysius, J., et al. (2021). Sustainable retailing. 
Journal of Retailing, 97(1), 62–80.
Vamplew, P., Dazeley, R., Foale, C., Firmin, S., & Mummery, J. 
(2018). Human-aligned artificial intelligence is a multiob-
jective problem. Ethics and Information Technology, 20(1), 
27–40.
Vinuesa, R., Azizpour, H., Leite, I., Balaam, M., Dignum, V., & 
Domisch, S. (2020). The role of artificial intelligence in 
achieving the sustainable development goals. Nature Commu-
nications, 11, 233.
Vlačić, B., Corbo, L., Costa e Silva, S., & Dabić, M. (2021). The 
evolving role of artificial intelligence in marketing: A review 
and research agenda. Journal of Business Research, 128, 
187–203.
Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J. T., & Epley, N. (2010). Who sees human? 
The stability and importance of individual differences in anthropomorphism. Perspectives on Psychological Science,  
5(3), 219–232.
Waytz, A., Gray, K., Epley, N., & Wegner, D. M. (2010). Causes 
and consequences of mind perception. Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 14(8), 383–388.
Wertenbroch, K., Schrift, R. Y., Alba, J. W., Barasch, A., Bhattacha-
rjee, A., Giesler, M., et al. (2020). Autonomy in consumer 
choice. Marketing Letters, 31(4), 429–439.
White, K., Habib, R., & Hardisty, D. J. (2019). How to SHIFT con-
sumer behaviors to be more sustainable: A literature review 
and guiding framework. Journal of Marketing, 83(3), 22–49.
Wiedmann, T., Lenzen, M., Keyßer, L. T., & Steinberger, J. K. 
(2020). Scientists’ warning on affluence. Nature Communica-
tions, 11, 3107.
Wiedmann, T., Schandl, H., Lenzen, M., Moran, D., Suh, S., West, J., 
et al. (2015). The material footprint of nations. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science, 112(20), 6271–6276.
Wiener, N. (1960). Some moral and technical consequences of auto-
mation. Science, 131(3410), 1355–1358.
Wirtz, J., Patterson, P. G., Kunz, W. H., Gruber, T., Lu, V. N., Paluch, 
S., et al. (2018). Brave new world: Service robots in the front-
line. Journal of Service Management, 29(5), 907–935.
Wright, D. (2011). A framework for the ethical impact assessment of 
information technology. Ethics and Information Technology,  
13(3), 199–226.
Xiao, L., & Kumar, V. (2021). Robotics for customer service: A use-
ful complement or an ultimate substitute? Journal of Service 
Research, 24(1), 9–29.
Youn, S., & Jin, S. V. (2021). In A.I. we trust?” The effects of para-
social interaction and technopian versus luddite ideological 
views on chatbot-based customer relationship management in 
the emerging “feeling economy.” Computers in Human Behav -
ior, 119, 106721.
Youyou, W., Kosinski, M., & Stillwell, D. (2015). Computer-based 
personality judgments are more accurate than those made by 
humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science,  
112(4), 1036–1040.
Yun, J. H., Lee, E.-J., & Kim, D. H. (2021). Behavioral and neural 
evidence on consumer responses to human doctors and medical 
artificial intelligence. Psychology & Marketing, 38(4), 610–625.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

