==== Page 1 ====
LRSpeech: Extremely Low-Resource Speech Synthesis and
Recognition
Jin Xu1, Xu Tan2, Yi Ren3, Tao Qin2, Jian Li1, Sheng Zhao4, Tie-Yan Liu2
1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University, China,3Zhejiang University, China
2Microsoft Research Asia,4Microsoft Azure Speech
j-xu18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,xuta@microsoft.com,rayeren@zju.edu.cn
lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,{taoqin,sheng.zhao,tyliu}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Speech synthesis (text to speech, TTS) and recognition (automatic
speech recognition, ASR) are important speech tasks, and require
a large amount of text and speech pairs for model training. How-
ever, there are more than 6,000 languages in the world and most
languages are lack of speech training data, which poses significant
challenges when building TTS and ASR systems for extremely low-
resource languages. In this paper, we develop LRSpeech, a TTS and
ASR system under the extremely low-resource setting, which can
support rare languages with low data cost. LRSpeech consists of
three key techniques: 1) pre-training on rich-resource languages
and fine-tuning on low-resource languages; 2) dual transformation
between TTS and ASR to iteratively boost the accuracy of each
other; 3) knowledge distillation to customize the TTS model on a
high-quality target-speaker voice and improve the ASR model on
multiple voices. We conduct experiments on an experimental lan-
guage (English) and a truly low-resource language (Lithuanian) to
verify the effectiveness of LRSpeech. Experimental results show that
LRSpeech 1) achieves high quality for TTS in terms of both intelligi-
bility (more than 98%intelligibility rate) and naturalness (above 3.5
mean opinion score (MOS)) of the synthesized speech, which satisfy
the requirements for industrial deployment, 2) achieves promising
recognition accuracy for ASR, and 3) last but not least, uses ex-
tremely low-resource training data. We also conduct comprehensive
analyses on LRSpeech with different amounts of data resources, and
provide valuable insights and guidances for industrial deployment.
We are currently deploying LRSpeech into a commercialized cloud
speech service to support TTS on more rare languages.
ACM Reference Format:
Jin Xu1, Xu Tan2, Yi Ren3, Tao Qin2, Jian Li1, Sheng Zhao4, Tie-Yan Liu2.
2020. LRSpeech: Extremely Low-Resource Speech Synthesis and Recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’20), August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, CA,
USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.
3403331
1This work was conducted at Microsoft. Correspondence to: Tao Qin <tao-
qin@microsoft.com>.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
KDD ’20, August 23–27, 2020, Virtual Event, CA, USA
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7998-4/20/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.34033311 INTRODUCTION
Speech synthesis (text to speech, TTS) [ 28,30,35,41] and speech
recognition (automatic speech recognition, ASR) [ 6,10,11] are
two key tasks in speech domain, and attract a lot of attention in
both the research and industry community. However, popular com-
mercialized speech services (e.g., Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud,
Nuance, etc.) only support dozens of languages for TTS and ASR,
while there are more than 6,000 languages in the world [ 21]. Most
languages are lack of speech training data, which makes it difficult
to support TTS and ASR for these rare languages, as large-amount
and high-cost speech training data are required to ensure good
accuracy for industrial deployment.
We describe the typical training data to build TTS and ASR
systems as follows:
•TTS aims to synthesize intelligible and natural speech from text
sequences, and usually needs single-speaker high-quality record-
ings that are collected in professional recording studio. To im-
prove the pronunciation accuracy, TTS also requires a pronunci-
ation lexicon to convert the character sequence into phoneme
sequence as the model input (e.g., “speech" is converted into “s p
iy ch"), which is called as grapheme-to-phoneme conversion [ 36].
Additionally, TTS models use text normalization rules to con-
vert the irregular word into the normalized type that is easier to
pronounce (e.g., “Sep 7th" is converted into “September seventh").
•ASR aims to generate correct transcripts (text) from speech se-
quences, and usually requires speech data from multiple speakers
in order to generalize to unseen speakers during inference. The
multi-speaker speech data in ASR do not need to be as high-
quality as that in TTS, but the data amount is usually an order
of magnitude bigger. We call the speech data for ASR as multi-
speaker low-quality data1. Optionally, ASR can first recognize
the speech into phoneme sequence, and further convert it into
character sequence with the pronunciation lexicon as in TTS.
•Besides paired speech and text data, TTS and ASR models can
also leverage unpaired speech and text data to further improve
the performance.
1.1 Related Work
According to the data resource used, previous works on TTS and
ASR can be categorized into rich-resource, low-resource and unsu-
pervised settings.
As shown in Table 1, we list the data resources and the corre-
sponding related works in each setting :
1The low quality here does not mean the quality of ASR data is very bad, but is just
relatively low compared to the high-quality TTS recordings.arXiv:2008.03687v1  [eess.AS]  9 Aug 2020

==== Page 2 ====
Setting Rich-Resource Low-Resource Extremely Low-Resource Unsupervised
Datapronunciation lexicon ✓ ✓ × ×
paired data (single-speaker, high-quality) dozens of hours dozens of minutes several minutes ×
paired data (multi-speaker, low-quality) hundreds of hours dozens of hours several hours ×
unpaired speech (single-speaker, high-quality) ✓ dozens of hours × ×
unpaired speech (multi-speaker, low-quality) ✓ ✓ dozens of hours ✓
unpaired text ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Related WorkTTS [22, 28, 30, 35] [2, 12, 23, 31]Our Work/
ASR [6, 10, 11] [16, 32, 33, 39] [8, 24, 45]
Table 1: The data resource to build TTS and ASR systems and the corresponding related works in rich-resource, low-resource,
extremely low-resource and unsupervised settings.
•In the rich-resource setting, both TTS [ 22,28,30,35] and ASR [ 6,
10,11] require a large amount of paired speech and text data
to achieve high accuracy: TTS usually needs dozens of hours
of single-speaker high-quality recordings, while ASR requires
at least hundreds of hours multiple-speaker low-quality data.
Besides, TTS in the rich-resource setting also leverages pronun-
ciation lexicon for accurate pronunciation. Optionally, unpaired
speech and text data can be leveraged.
•In the low-resource setting, the single-speaker high-quality paired
data are reduced to dozens of minutes in TTS [ 2,12,23,31] while
the multi-speaker low-quality paired data is reduced to dozens
of hours in ASR [ 16,32,33,39], compared to that in the rich-
resource setting. Additionally, they leverage unpaired speech
and text data to ensure the performance.
•In the unsupervised setting, only unpaired speech and text data
are leverage to build ASR models [8, 24, 45].
As can be seen, a large amount of data resources are leveraged
in the rich-resource setting to ensure the accuracy for industrial
deployment. Considering nearly all low-resource languages are
lack of training data and there are more than 6,000 languages in the
world, it will be a huge cost for training data collection. Although
data resource can be reduced in the low-resource setting, it still
requires 1) a certain amount of paired speech and text (dozens of
minutes for TTS and dozens of hours for ASR), 2) a pronunciation
lexicon, and 3) a large amount of single-speaker high-quality un-
paired speech data that still incur high data collection cost2. What is
more, the accuracy of the TTS and ASR models in the low-resource
setting is not high enough. The purely unsupervised methods for
ASR suffer from low accuracy and cannot meet the requirement of
industrial deployment.
1.2 Our Method
In this paper, we develop LRSpeech, a TTS and ASR system under
the extremely low-resource setting, which supports rare languages
with low data collection cost. LRSpeech aims for industrial deploy-
ment under two constraints: 1) extremely low data collection cost,
and 2) high accuracy to satisfy the deployment requirement. For
the first constraint, as the extremely low-resource setting shown
in Table 1, LRSpeech explores the limits of data requirements by
2Although we can crawl the multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech data from
the web, it is hard to crawl the single-speaker high-quality unpaired speech data.
Therefore, it has the same collection cost (recorded by human) with the single-speaker
high-quality paired data.1) using single-speaker high-quality paired data as few as possi-
ble (several minutes), 2) using a few multi-speaker low-quality
paired data (several hours), 3) using slightly more multi-speaker
low-quality unpaired speech data (dozens of hours), 4) not using
single-speaker high-quality unpaired data, and 5) not using the
pronunciation lexicon but directly taking character as the input of
TTS and the output of ASR.
For the second constraint, LRSpeech leverages several key tech-
niques including transfer learning from rich-resource languages,
iterative accuracy boosting between TTS and ASR through dual
transformation, and knowledge distillation to further refine TTS
and ASR models for better accuracy. Specifically, LRSpeech consists
of a three-stage pipeline:
•We first pre-train both TTS and ASR models on rich-resource lan-
guages with plenty of paired data, which can learn the alignment
capability between speech and text and benefit the alignment
learning on low-resource languages.
•We further leverage dual transformation between TTS and ASR
to iteratively boost the accuracy of each other with unpaired
speech and text data.
•Furthermore, we leverage knowledge distillation with unpaired
speech and text data to customize the TTS model on a high-
quality target-speaker voice and improve the ASR model on
multiple voices.
1.3 Data Cost and Accuracy
Next, we introduce the extremely low data cost while promising
accuracy achieved by LRSpeech.
According to [ 4,14,15,38,43], the pronunciation lexicon, single-
speaker high-quality paired data and single-speaker high-quality
unpaired speech data require much higher collection cost than
other data such as multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech data
and unpaired text, since they can be crawled from the web. Accord-
ingly, compared to the low-resource setting in Table 1, LRSpeech 1)
removes the pronunciation lexicon, 2) reduces the single-speaker
high-quality paired data by an order of magnitude, 3) removes
single-speaker high-quality unpaired speech data, 4) also reduces
multi-speaker low-quality paired data by an order of magnitude, 5)
similarly leverages multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech, and
6) additionally leverage paired data from rich-resource languages
which incur no additional cost since they are already available in the
commercialized speech service. Therefore, LRSpeech can greatly
reduce the data collection cost for TTS and ASR.

==== Page 3 ====
Knowledge	DistillationTTS(single-speaker)ASR(multi-speaker)Dual	TransformationPre-trainingFine-tuningPaired	data	from	rich-resource	languagePaired	data	(single-speakerhigh,	multi-speaker	low)Unpaired	data	(multi-speaker	low)Synthesized	dataFigure 1: The three-stage pipeline of LRSpeech.
To verify the effectiveness of LRSpeech under the extremely
low-resource setting, we first conduct comprehensive experimen-
tal studies on English and then verify on the truly low-resource
language: Lithuanian, which is for product deployment. For TTS,
LRSpeech achieves 98.08% intelligibility rate, 3.57 MOS score, with
0.48 gap to the ground-truth recordings, satisfying the online de-
ployment requirements3. For ASR, LRSpeech achieves 28.82% WER
and 14.65% CER, demonstrating great potential under the extremely
low-resource setting. Furthermore, we also conduct ablation studies
to verify the effectiveness of each component in LRSpeech, and
analyze the accuracy of LRSpeech under different data settings,
which provide valuable insights for industrial deployment. Finally,
we apply LRSpeech to Lithuanian and also meets the online re-
quirement for TTS and achieves promising results on ASR. We are
currently deploying LRSpeech to a commercialized speech service
to support TTS for rare languages.
2 LRSPEECH
In this section, we introduce the details of LRSpeech for extremely
low-resource speech synthesis and recognition. We first give an
overview of LRSpeech, and then introduce the formulation of TTS
and ASR. We further introduce each component of LRSpeech re-
spectively, and finally describe the model structure of LRSpeech.
2.1 Pipeline Overview
To ensure the accuracy of TTS and ASR models under extremely
low-resource scenarios, we design a three-stage pipeline for LR-
Speech as shown in Figure 1:
•Pre-training and fine-tuning. We pre-train both TTS and ASR
models on rich-resource languages and then fine-tune them on
low-resource languages. Leveraging rich-resource languages in
LRSpeech are based on two considerations: 1) a large amount of
paired data on rich-resource languages are already available in
the commercialized speech service, and 2) the alignment capa-
bility between speech and text in rich-resource languages can
benefit the alignment learning in low-resource languages, due to
the pronunciation similarity between human languages [42].
•Dual transformation. Considering the dual nature between TTS
and ASR, we further leverage dual transformation [ 31] to boost
the accuracy of each other with unpaired speech and text data.
•Knowledge distillation. To further improve the accuracy of TTS
and ASR and facilitate online deployment, we leverage knowledge
3According to the requirements of a commercialized cloud speech service, the intelli-
gibility rate should be higher than 98% and the MOS score should be higher than 3.5
while the MOS gap to the ground-truth recordings should be less than 0.5.distillation [ 18,37] to synthesize paired data to train better TTS
and ASR models.
2.2 Formulation of TTS and ASR
TTS and ASR are usually formulated as sequence to sequence prob-
lems [ 6,41]. Denote the text and speech sequence pair (x,y)∈D,
where Dis the paired text and speech corpus. Each element in the
text sequence xrepresents a phoneme or character, while each
element in the speech sequence yrepresents a frame of speech. To
learn the TTS model θ, a mean square error loss is used:
L(θ;D)=−Σ(x,y)∈D(y−f(x;θ))2. (1)
To learn the ASR model ϕ, a negative log likelihood loss is used:
L(ϕ;D)=−Σ(y,x)∈DlogP(x|y;ϕ). (2)
TTS and ASR models can be developed based on an encoder-attention-
decoder framework [ 3,25,40], where the encoder transforms the
source sequence into a set of hidden representations, and the de-
coder generates the target sequence autoregressively based on the
source hidden representations obtained through an attention mech-
anism [3].
We make some notations for the data used in LRSpeech. Denote
Drich_tts as the high-quality TTS paired data in rich-resource lan-
guages, Drich_asr as the low-quality ASR paired data in rich-resource
languages, Dhas the single-speaker high-quality paired data for
target speaker, and Dlas the multi-speaker low-quality paired data.
Denote Xuas unpaired text data while Yuas multi-speaker low-
quality unpaired speech data.
Next, we introduce each component of the LRSpeech pipeline in
the following subsections.
2.3 Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning
The key to the conversion between text and speech is to learn the
alignment between the character/phoneme representations (text)
and the acoustic features (speech). Since people coming from dif-
ferent nations and speaking different languages share similar vocal
organs and thus similar pronunciations, the ability of alignment
learning in one language can help the alignment in another lan-
guage [ 19,42]. This motivates us to transfer the TTS and ASR
models that trained in rich-resource languages into low-resource
languages, considering there are plenty of paired speech and text
data for both TTS and ASR in rich-resource languages.
Pre-Training. We pre-train the TTS model θwith data corpus
Drich_tts following Equation 1 and pre-train the ASR model ϕwith
Drich_asr following Equation 2.

==== Page 4 ====
Fine-Tuning. Considering the rich-resource and low-resource lan-
guages have different phoneme/character vocabularies and speak-
ers, we initialize the TTS and ASR models on low-resource language
with all the pre-trained parameters except the phoneme/character
and speaker embeddings in TTS and the phoneme/character em-
beddings in ASR4respectively. We then fine-tune the TTS model θ
and ASR model ϕboth with the concatenation corpus of Dhand
Dlfollowing Equation 1 and Equation 2 respectively. During fine-
tuning, we first fine-tune the character embeddings and speaker
embeddings following the practice in [ 1,7], and then fine-tune
all parameters. It can help prevent the TTS and ASR models from
overfitting on the limited paired data in a low-resource language.
2.4 Dual Transformation between TTS and
ASR
TTS and ASR are two dual tasks and their dual nature can be
explored to boost the accuracy of each other, especially in the low-
resource scenarios. Therefore, we leverage dual transformation [ 31]
between TTS and ASR to improve the ability to transform between
text and speech. Dual transformation shares similar ideas with back-
translation [ 34] in machine translation and cycle-consistency [ 46]
in image translation, which are effective ways to leverage unla-
beled data in speech, text and image domains respectively. Dual
transformation works as follows:
•For each unpaired text sequence x∈Xu, we transform it into
speech sequence using the TTS model θ, and construct a pseudo
corpus D(Xu)to train the ASR model ϕfollowing Equation 2.
•For each unpaired speech sequence y∈Yu, we transform it into
text sequence using the ASR model ϕ, and construct a pseudo
corpus D(Yu)to train the TTS model θfollowing Equation 1.
During training, we run the dual transformation process on the
fly, which means the pseudo corpus are updated in each iteration
and the model can benefit from the newest data generated by each
other. Next, we introduce some specific designs in dual transforma-
tion to support multi-speaker TTS and ASR.
Multi-Speaker TTS Synthesis. Different from [ 23,31] that only
support a single speaker in both TTS and ASR model, we support
multi-speaker TTS and ASR in the dual transformation stage. Specif-
ically, we randomly choose a speaker ID and synthesize speech of
this speaker given a text sequence, which can benefit the training of
the multi-speaker ASR model. Furthermore, the ASR model trans-
forms multi-speaker speech into text, which can help the training
of the multi-speaker TTS model.
Levering Unpaired Speech of Unseen Speakers. Since multiple-
speaker low-quality unpaired speech data are much easier to obtain
than high-quality single-speaker unpaired speech data, enabling the
TTS and ASR models to utilize unseen speakers’ unpaired speech in
dual transformation can make our system more robust and scalable.
Compared to ASR, it is more challenging for TTS to synthesize
voice on unseen speakers. To this end, we split dual transformation
into two phases: 1) In the first phase, we only use the unpaired
speech whose speakers are seen before in the training data. 2) In
4ASR model does not need speaker embeddings, and the target embeddings and
the softmax matrix are usually shared in many sequence generation tasks for better
accuracy [29].the second phase, we also add the unpaired speech whose speakers
are unseen in the training data. As the ASR model can naturally
support unseen speakers, the pseudo paired data can be used to
train and enable the TTS model with the capability to synthesize
speech of new speakers.
2.5 Customization on TTS and ASR through
Knowledge Distillation
The TTS and ASR models we currently have are far from ready
for online deployment after dual transformation. There are sev-
eral issues we need to address: 1) While the TTS model can sup-
port multiple speakers, the speech quality of our target speaker
is not good enough and needs further improvement; 2) The syn-
thesized speech by the TTS models still have word skipping and
repeating issues; 3) The accuracy of the ASR model needs to be
further improved. Therefore, we further leverage knowledge dis-
tillation [ 18,37], which generates target sequences given source
sequences as input to construct a pseudo corpus, to customize the
TTS and ASR models for better accuracy.
2.5.1 Knowledge Distillation for TTS. The knowledge distillation
process for TTS consists of three steps:
•For each unpaired text sequence x∈Xu, we synthesize the
corresponding speech of the target speaker using the TTS model
θ, and construct a single-speaker pseudo corpus D(Xu).
•Filter the pseudo corpus D(Xu)whose synthesized speech has
word skipping and repeating issues.
•Use the filtered corpus D(Xu)to train a new TTS model dedicated
to the target speaker following Equation 1.
In the first step, the speech in the pseudo corpus D(Xu)are
single-speaker, which is different from the multi-speaker pseudo
corpus D(Xu)in Section 2.4. The TTS model (obtained by dual
transformation) in the first step has word skipping and repeating is-
sues. Therefore, in the second step, we filter the synthesized speech
which has word skipping and repeating issues, and thus the dis-
tilled model can be trained on accurate text and speech pairs. In
this way, the word skipping and repeating problem can be largely
reduced. We filter the synthesized speech based on two metrics:
word coverage ratio (WCR) and attention diagonal ratio (ADR).
Word Coverage Ratio. We observe that word skipping happens
when a word has small or no attention weights from the target mel-
spectrograms. Therefore, we propose word coverage ratio (WCR):
WCR =min
i∈[1,N]{max
t∈[1,Ti]max
s∈[1,S]At,s}, (3)
where Nis the number of words in a sentence, Tiis the number of
characters in the i-th word, Sis the number of frames of the target
mel-spectrograms, and At,sdenotes the element in the t-th row and
s-th column of the attention weight matrix A. We get the attention
weight matrix Afrom the encoder-decoder attention weights in
the TTS model and calculate the mean over different layers and
attention heads. A high WCR indicates all words in a sentence have
high attention weights from target speech frames, and thus is less
likely to cause word skipping.

==== Page 5 ====
(a) TTS model (b) ASR model (c) Speaker module (d) Encoder (left) and (e) Input/Output module
Decoder (right) for speech/text
Figure 2: The Transformer based TTS and ASR models in LRSpeech.
Attention Diagonal Ratio. As demonstrated by previous works [ 30,
41], the attention alignments between text and speech are mono-
tonic and diagonal. When the synthesized speech has word skipping
and repeating issues, or is totally crashed, the attention alignments
will deviate from the diagonal. We define the attention diagonal
ratio (ADR) as:
ADR =ÍT
t=1Íkt+b
s=kt−bAt,s
ÍT
t=1ÍS
s=1At,s, (4)
where TandSare the number of characters and speech frames in a
text and speech pair, k=S
T, and bis a hyperparameter to determine
the width of diagonal. ADR measures how much attention lies in
the diagonal area with a width of b. A higher ADR indicates that
the synthesized speech has good attention alignment with text and
thus has less word skipping, repeating or crashing issues.
2.5.2 Knowledge Distillation for ASR. Since the unpaired text and
low-quality multi-speaker unpaired speech are both available for
ASR , we leverage both the ASR and TTS models to synthesize data
during the knowledge distillation for ASR:
•For each unpaired speech y∈Yu, we generate the corresponding
text using the ASR model ϕ, and construct a pseudo corpus D(Yu).
•For each unpaired text x∈Xu, we synthesize the corresponding
speech of multiple speakers using the TTS model θ, and construct
a pseudo corpus D(Xu).
•We combine the above pseudo corpus D(Yu)andD(Xu), as well
as the single-speaker high-quality paired data Dhand multi-
speaker low-quality paired data Dlto train a new ASR model
following Equation 2.
Similar to the knowledge distillation for TTS, we also leverage
a large amount of unpaired text to synthesize speech. To further
improve the ASR accuracy, we use SpecAugment [ 27] to add noise
in the input speech which acts like data augmentation.
2.6 Model Structure of LRSpeech
In this section, we introduce the model structure of LRSpeech, as
shown in Figure 2.
Transformer Model. Both the TTS and ASR models adopt the
Transformer based encoder-attention-decoder structure [ 40]. One
difference from the original Transformer model is that we replacethe feed-forward network with a one-dimensional convolution
network following [ 31], in order to better capture the dependencies
in a long speech sequence.
Input/Output Module. To enable the Transformer model to sup-
port ASR and TTS, we need different input and output modules
for speech and text [ 31]. For the TTS model: 1) The input module
of the encoder is a character/phoneme embedding lookup table,
which converts character/phoneme ID into embedding; 2) The in-
put module of the decoder is a speech pre-net, which consists of
multiple dense layers to transform each speech frame non-linearly;
3) The output module of the decoder consists of a linear layer to
convert hidden representations into mel-spectrograms, and a stop
linear layer with a sigmoid function to predict whether current
step should stop or not. For the ASR model: 1) The input module
of the encoder consists of multiple convolutional layers, which
reduce the length of the speech sequence; 2) The input module of
the decoder is a character/phoneme embedding lookup table; 3)
The output module of the decoder consists of a linear layer and a
softmax function, where the linear layer shares the same weights
with the character/phoneme embedding lookup table in the decoder
input module.
Speaker Module. The multi-speaker TTS model relies on a speaker
embedding module to differentiate multiple speakers. We add a
speaker embedding vector both in the encoder output and decoder
input (after the decoder input module). As shown in Figure 2 (c),
we convert the speaker ID into a speaker embedding vector using
an embedding lookup table, and then add a linear transformation
with a softsign function x=x/(1+|x|). We further concatenate the
obtained vector with the encoder output or decoder input, and use
another linear layer to reduce the hidden dimension to the original
hidden of the encoder output or decoder input.
3 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate LRSpeech for
extremely low-resource TTS and ASR. We first describe the experi-
ment settings, show the results of our method, and conduct some
analyses of LRSpeech.
3.1 Experimental Setup

==== Page 6 ====
Notation Quality Type Dataset #Samples
Dh High Paired LJSpeech [17] 50 (5 minutes)
Dl Low Paired LibriSpeech [26] 1000 (3.5 hours)
Yuseen Low Unpaired LibriSpeech 2000 (7 hours)
Yuunseen Low Unpaired LibriSpeech 5000 (14 hours)
Xu/ Unpaired news-crawl 20000
Table 2: The data used in the low-resource language: English.
Dhrepresents target-speaker high-quality paired data. Dl
represents multi-speaker low-quality paired data (50 speak-
ers). Yuseen represents multi-speaker low-quality unpaired
speech data (50 speakers), where speakers are seen in the
paired training data. Yuunseen represents multi-speaker low-
quality unpaired speech data (50 speakers), where speakers
are unseen in the paired training data. Xurepresents un-
paired text data.
3.1.1 Datasets. We describe the datasets used in rich-resource and
low-resource languages respectively:
•We select Mandarin Chinese as the rich-resource language. The
TTS corpus Drich_tts contains 10000 paired speech and text data
(12 hours) of a single speaker from Data Baker5. The ASR corpus
Drich_asr is from AIShell [ 5], which contains about 120000 paired
speech and text data (178 hours) from 400 Mandarin Chinese
speakers.
•We select English as a low-resource language for experimental
development. The details of the data resources used are shown
in Table 2. More information about these datasets are shown in
Section A.1 and Table 6.
3.1.2 Training and Evaluation. We use a 6-layer encoder and a
6-layer decoder for both the TTS and ASR models. The hidden
size, character embedding size, and speaker embedding size are all
set to 384, and the number of attention heads is set to 4. During
dual transformation, we up-sample the paired data to make its
size roughly the same with the unpaired data. During knowledge
distillation, we filter the synthesized speech with WCR less than
0.7 and ADR less than 0.7. The width of diagonal ( b) in ADR is 10.
More model training details are introduced in Section A.2.
The TTS model uses Parallel WaveGAN [ 44] as the vocoder to
synthesize speech. To train Parallel WaveGAN, we combine the
speech data in the Mandarin Chinese TTS corpus Drich_tts with the
speech data in the English target-speaker high-quality corpus Dh.
We up-sample the speech data in Dhto make it roughly the same
with the speech data in Drich_tts .
For evaluation, we use MOS (mean opinion score) and IR (intelli-
gibility rate) for TTS, and WER (word error rate) and CER (character
error rate) for ASR. For TTS, we select English text sentences from
the news-crawl6dataset to synthesize speech for evaluation. We
randomly select 200 sentences for IR test and 20 sentences for MOS
test, following the practice in [ 30,41]7. Each speech is listened by
at least 5 testers for IR test and 20 testers for MOS test, who are all
native English speakers. For ASR, we measure the WER and CER
5https://www.data-baker.com/open_source.html
6http://data.statmt.org/news-crawl
7The sentences for IR and MOS test, audio samples and test reports can be founded in
https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech.score on the LibriSpeech “test-clean” set. The test sentences and
speech for TTS and ASR do not appear in the training corpus.
3.2 Results
SettingTTS ASR
IR (%) MOS WER (%) CER (%)
Baseline #1 / / 148.29 100.16
Baseline #2 / / 122.09 97.91
+PF 93.09 2.84 103.70 69.53
+PF+DT 96.70 3.28 38.94 19.99
+PF+DT+KD (LRSpeech) 98.08 3.57 28.82 14.65
GT (Parallel WaveGAN) - 3.88 - -
GT - 4.05 - -
Table 3: The accuracy comparisons for TTS and ASR. PF, DT
and KD are the three components of LRSpeech, where PF
represents pre-training and fine-tuning, DT represents dual
transformation, KD represents knowledge distillation. GT is
the ground-truth and GT (Parallel WaveGAN) is the audio
generated with Parallel WaveGAN from the ground-truth
mel-spectrogram. Baseline #1 and #2 are two baseline meth-
ods with limited paired data.
3.2.1 Main Results. We compare LRSpeech with the baselines that
purely leverage the limited paired data for training, including 1)
Baseline #1, which trains TTS and ASR model only with corpus Dh,
and 2) Baseline #2, which adds additional corpus Dlon Baseline #1
for TTS and ASR model training. We also conduct experiments to
analyze the effectiveness of each component (pre-training and fine-
tuning, dual transformation, knowledge distillation) in LRSpeech.
The results are shown in Table 3. We have several observations:
•Both baselines cannot synthesize reasonable speech and the cor-
responding IR and MOS are marked as “/”. The WER and CER
on ASR are also larger than 100%8, which demonstrates the poor
quality when only using the limited paired data DhandDlfor
TTS and ASR training.
•Based on Baseline #2, pre-training and fine-tuning (PF) can achieve
an IR score of 93.09% and a MOS score of 2.84 for TTS, and reduce
the WER to 103.70% and CER to 69.53%, which demonstrates the
effectiveness of cross-lingual pre-training for TTS and ASR.
•However, the paired data in both rich-resource and low-resource
languages cannot guarantee high accuracy, and thus we further
leverage the unpaired speech corpus YuseenandYuunseen , and un-
paired text corpus Xuthrough dual transformation (DT). DT can
greatly improve IR to 96.70% and MOS to 3.28 on TTS, as well as
WER to 38.94% and CER to 19.99%. The unpaired text and speech
samples can cover more words and pronunciations, as well as
more speech prosody, which help the synthesized speech in TTS
achieves higher intelligibility (IR) and naturalness (MOS), and
also help ASR achieves better WER and CER.
8The WER and CER can be larger than 100%, and the detailed reasons can be founded
in Section A.3.

==== Page 7 ====
(a) Baseline #1 (b) Baseline #2 (c) + PF (d) + PF + DT (e) + PF + DT + KD
Figure 3: The TTS attention alignments (where the column and row represent the source text and target speech respectively) of
an example chosen from the test set. The source text is “the paper’s author is alistair evans of monash university in australia”.
Setting WCR ADR (%)
PF 0.65 97.85
PF + DT 0.66 98.37
PF + DT + KD (LRSpeech) 0.72 98.81
Table 4: The word coverage ratio (WCR) and attention diago-
nal ratio (ADR) scores in TTS model under different settings.
•Furthermore, adding knowledge distillation (KD) brings 1.38% IR,
0.29 MOS, 10.12% WER and 5.34% CER improvements. We also list
the speech quality in terms of MOS for the ground-truth record-
ings (GT) and the synthesized speech from the ground-truth
mel-spectrogram by Parallel WaveGAN vocoder (GT (Parallel
WaveGAN)) in Table 3 as the upper bounds for references. It can
be seen that LRSpeech achieves a MOS score of 3.57, with a gap
to the ground-truth recordings less than 0.5, demonstrating the
high quality of the synthesized speech.
•There are also some related works focusing on low-resource TTS
and ASR, such as Speech Chain [ 39], Almost Unsup [ 31], and
SeqRQ-AE [ 23]. However, these methods require much data re-
source to build systems and thus cannot achieve reasonable accu-
racy in the extremely low-resource setting. For example, [ 31] re-
quires a pronunciation lexicon to convert the character sequence
into phoneme sequence, and dozens of hours of single-speaker
high-quality unpaired speech data to improve the accuracy, which
are costly and not available in the extremely low-resource setting.
As a result, [ 31] cannot synthesize reasonable speech in TTS and
achieves high WER according to our preliminary experiments.
As a summary, LRSpeech achieves an IR score of 98.08% and a MOS
score of 3.57 for TTS with extremely low data cost, which meets
the online requirements for deploying the TTS system. Besides, it
also achieves a WER score of 28.82% and a CER score of 14.65%,
which is highly competitive considering the data resource used,
and shows great potential for further online deployment.
3.2.2 Analyses on the Alignment Quality of TTS. Since the quality
of the attention alignments between the encoder (text) and decoder
(speech) are good indicators of the performance of TTS model, we
analyze the word coverage ratio (WCR) and attention diagonal ratio
(ADR) as described in Section 2.5.1 and show their changes among
different settings in Table 4. We also show the attention alignments
of a sample case from each setting in Figure 3. We have several
observations:•As can be seen from Figure 3 (a) and (b), both Baseline #1 and #2
achieve poor attention alignments and their synthesized speech
samples are crashed (ADR is smaller than 0.5). The attention
weights of Baseline #2 are almost randomly assigned and the
synthesized speech is crashed, which demonstrates that simply
adding a few low-quality multi-speaker data ( Dl) onDhcannot
help the TTS model but make it worse. Due to the poor alignment
quality of Baseline #1 and #2, we do not analyze their correspond-
ing WCR.
•After adding pre-training and fine-tuning (PF), the attention
alignments in Figure 3 (c) become diagonal, which demonstrates
the TTS model pre-training in rich-resource languages can help
build reasonable alignments between text and speech in low-
resource languages. Although the synthesized speech can be
roughly understood by humans, it still has many issues such as
word skipping and repeating. For example, the word “in" in the
red box of Figure 3 (c) has low attention weight (WCR), and thus
the speech skips the word “in".
•Further adding dual transformation (DT) improves WCR and
ADR, and also alleviates the words skipping and repeating issues.
Accordingly, the attention alignments in Figure 3 (d) are better.
•Since there still exist some word skipping and repeating issues
after DT, we filter the synthesized speech according to WCR
and ADR during knowledge distillation (KD). The final WCR
is further improved to 0.72 and ADR is improved to 98.81% as
shown in Table 4, and the attention alignments in Figure 3 (e)
are much more clear.
3.3 Further Analyses of LRSpeech
There are some questions to further investigate in LRSpeech:
•Low-quality speech data may bring noise to the TTS model. How
can the accuracy change if using different scales of low-quality
paired data Dl?
•As described in Section 2.4, supporting the LRSpeech training
with unpaired speech data from seen and especially unseen speak-
ers (YuseenandYuunseen ) is critical for a robust and scalable system.
Can the accuracy be improved if using YuseenandYuunseen ?
•How can the accuracy change if using different scales of unpaired
text data Xuto synthesize speech during knowledge distillation?

==== Page 8 ====
(a) Varying the data scale of Dl (b) Results using YuseenandYuunseen (c) Varying the data Xufor (d) Varying the data Xufor
TTS knowledge distillation ASR knowledge distillation
Figure 4: Analyses of LRSpeech with different training data.
We conduct experimental analyses to answer these questions. For
the first two questions, we simply analyze LRSpeech without knowl-
edge distillation, and for the third question, we analyze in the knowl-
edge distillation stage. The results are shown in Figure 49. We have
several observations:
•As shown in Figure 4 (a), we vary the size of Dlwith 1/5×,1/2×
and5×of the default setting (1000 paired data, 3.5 hours) used
in LRSpeech, and find that more low-quality paired data result
in the better accuracy for TTS.
•As shown in Figure 4 (b), we add YuseenandYuunseen respectively,
and find that both of them can boost the accuracy of TTS and ASR,
which demonstrates the ability of LRSpeech to utilize unpaired
speech from seen and especially unseen speakers.
•As shown in Figure 4 (c), we vary the number of synthesized
speech for TTS during knowledge distillation with 1/20×,1/7×
and1/4×of the default setting (20000 synthesized speech data),
and find more synthesized speech data result in better accuracy.
•During knowledge distillation for ASR, we use two kinds of data:
1) the realistic speech data (8050 data in total), which contains Dh,
Dland the pseudo paired data distilled from YuseenandYuunseen
by the ASR model, 2) the synthesized speech data, which are
the pseudo paired data distilled from Xuby the TTS model. We
vary the number of synthesized speech data from Xu(the second
type) with 0×,1/3×,1/2×,1×,2×,3×of the realistic speech data
(the first type) in Figure 4 (d). It can be seen that increasing the
ratio of synthesized speech data can achieve better results.
All the observations above demonstrate the effectiveness and scala-
bility of LRSpeech by leveraging more low-cost data resources.
3.4 Apply to Truly Low-Resource Language:
Lithuanian
Data Setting. The data setting in Lithuanian is similar to that
in English. We select a subset of Liepa corpus [ 20] and only use
the characters as the raw texts. The Dhcontains 50 paired text and
speech data (3.7 minutes), Dlcontains 1000 paired text and speech
data (1.29 hours), Yuseencontains 4000 unpaired speech data (5.1
hours), Yuunseen contains 5000 unpaired speech data (6.7 hours), and
Xucontains 20000 unpaired texts.
We select Lithuanian text sentences from the news-crawl dataset
as the test set for TTS. We randomly select 200 sentences for IR test
and 20 sentences for MOS test, following the same test configuration
in English. Each audio is listened by at least 5 testers for IR test and
9The audio samples and complete experiments results on IR and MOS for TTS, and
WER and CER for ASR can be founded in https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech.20 testers for MOS test, who are all native Lithuanian speakers. For
ASR evaluation, we randomly select 1000 speech data (1.3 hours)
with 197 speakers from Liepa corpus to measure the WER and CER
scores. The test sentences and speech for TTS and ASR do not
appear in the training corpus.
Results. As shown in Table 5, the TTS model on Lithuanian
achieves an IR score of 98.60% and a MOS score of 3.65, with a MOS
gap to the ground-truth recording less than 0.5, which also meets
the online deployment requirement10. The ASR model achieves a
CER score of 10.30% and a WER score of 17.04%, which shows great
potential under this low-resource setting.
Setting IR (%) MOS WER (%) CER (%)
Lithuanian 98.60 3.65 17.04 10.30
GT (Parallel WaveGAN) - 3.89 - -
GT - 4.01 - -
Table 5: The results of LRSpeech on TTS and ASR with re-
gard to Lithuanian.
4 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed LRSpeech, a speech synthesis and recog-
nition system under the extremely low-resource setting, which sup-
ports rare languages with low data costs. We proposed pre-training
and fine-tuning, dual transformation and knowledge distillation in
LRSpeech to leverage few paired speech and text data, and slightly
more multi-speaker low-quality unpaired speech data to improve
the accuracy of TTS and ASR models. Experiments on English and
Lithuanian show that LRSpeech can meet the requirements of on-
line deployment for TTS and achieve very promising results for
ASR under the extremely low-resource setting, demonstrating the
effectiveness of LRSpeech for rare languages.
Currently we are deploying LRSpeech to a large commercialized
cloud TTS service. In the future, we will further improve the accu-
racy of ASR in LRSpeech and also deploy it to this commercialized
cloud service.
5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Jin Xu and Jian Li are supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China Grant 61822203, 61772297, 61632016,
61761146003, and the Zhongguancun Haihua Institute for Frontier
10The audio samples can be founded in https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech

==== Page 9 ====
Information Technology, Turing AI Institute of Nanjing and Xi’an
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core Technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Mikel Artetxe, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama. 2019. On the cross-lingual
transferability of monolingual representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11856
(2019).
[2]Alexei Baevski, Michael Auli, and Abdelrahman Mohamed. 2019. Effective-
ness of self-supervised pre-training for speech recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.03912 (2019).
[3]Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473 (2014).
[4]Antoine Bruguier, Anton Bakhtin, and Dravyansh Sharma. 2018. Dictionary
Augmented Sequence-to-Sequence Neural Network for Grapheme to Phoneme
Prediction. Proc. Interspeech 2018 (2018), 3733–3737.
[5]Hui Bu, Jiayu Du, Xingyu Na, Bengu Wu, and Hao Zheng. 2017. Aishell-1: An
open-source mandarin speech corpus and a speech recognition baseline. In 2017
20th Conference of the Oriental Chapter of the International Coordinating Commit-
tee on Speech Databases and Speech I/O Systems and Assessment (O-COCOSDA) .
IEEE, 1–5.
[6]William Chan, Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc Le, and Oriol Vinyals. 2016. Listen, attend
and spell: A neural network for large vocabulary conversational speech recogni-
tion. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016 IEEE International
Conference on . IEEE, 4960–4964.
[7]Tian-Yi Chen, Lan Zhang, Shi-Cong Zhang, Zi-Long Li, and Bai-Chuan Huang.
2019. Extensible cross-modal hashing. In Proceedings of the 28th International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence . AAAI Press, 2109–2115.
[8]Yi-Chen Chen, Chia-Hao Shen, Sung-Feng Huang, and Hung-yi Lee. 2018. To-
wards Unsupervised Automatic Speech Recognition Trained by Unaligned Speech
and Text only. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10952 (2018).
[9]Yuan-Jui Chen, Tao Tu, Cheng-chieh Yeh, and Hung-Yi Lee. 2019. End-to-end
text-to-speech for low-resource languages by cross-lingual transfer learning.
Proc. Interspeech 2019 (2019), 2075–2079.
[10] Chung-Cheng Chiu, Tara N Sainath, Yonghui Wu, Rohit Prabhavalkar, Patrick
Nguyen, Zhifeng Chen, Anjuli Kannan, Ron J Weiss, Kanishka Rao, Ekaterina Go-
nina, et al .2018. State-of-the-art speech recognition with sequence-to-sequence
models. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 4774–4778.
[11] Jan Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
End-to-end continuous speech recognition using attention-based recurrent nn:
First results. In NIPS 2014 Workshop on Deep Learning, December 2014 .
[12] Yu-An Chung, Yuxuan Wang, Wei-Ning Hsu, Yu Zhang, and RJ Skerry-Ryan. 2019.
Semi-supervised training for improving data efficiency in end-to-end speech
synthesis. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 6940–6944.
[13] Erica Cooper, Emily Li, and Julia Hirschberg. 2018. Characteristics of Text-to-
Speech and Other Corpora. Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2018 (2018).
[14] Erica Lindsay Cooper. 2019. Text-to-speech synthesis using found data for low-
resource languages . Ph.D. Dissertation. Columbia University.
[15] Joel Harband. 2010. Text-to-Speech Costs âĂŤ Licensing and Pricing. http:
//elearningtech.blogspot.com/2010/11/text-to-speech-costs-licensing-and.html
[16] Takaaki Hori, Ramon Astudillo, Tomoki Hayashi, Yu Zhang, Shinji Watanabe,
and Jonathan Le Roux. 2019. Cycle-consistency training for end-to-end speech
recognition. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 6271–6275.
[17] Keith Ito. 2017. The LJ Speech Dataset. https://keithito.com/LJ-Speech-Dataset/.
[18] Yoon Kim and Alexander M Rush. 2016. Sequence-Level Knowledge Distillation.
InProceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing . 1317–1327.
[19] Patricia K Kuhl, Barbara T Conboy, Sharon Coffey-Corina, Denise Padden, Maritza
Rivera-Gaxiola, and Tobey Nelson. 2008. Phonetic learning as a pathway to
language: new data and native language magnet theory expanded (NLM-e).
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 363, 1493
(2008), 979–1000.
[20] Sigita Laurinčiukait ˙e, Laimutis Telksnys, Pijus Kasparaitis, Regina Kliukien ˙e, and
Vilma Paukštyt ˙e. 2018. Lithuanian Speech Corpus Liepa for development of
human-computer interfaces working in voice recognition and synthesis mode.
Informatica 29, 3 (2018), 487–498.
[21] M Paul Lewis and F Gary. 2013. Simons, and Charles D. Fennig (eds.).(2015).
Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Dallas, Texas: SIL International. Online
version: http://www. ethnologue. com (2013).
[22] Naihan Li, Shujie Liu, Yanqing Liu, Sheng Zhao, Ming Liu, and M Zhou. 2019.
Neural Speech Synthesis with Transformer Network. AAAI.
[23] Alexander H Liu, Tao Tu, Hung-yi Lee, and Lin-shan Lee. 2019. Towards Unsuper-
vised Speech Recognition and Synthesis with Quantized Speech RepresentationLearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12729 (2019).
[24] Da-Rong Liu, Kuan-Yu Chen, Hung-yi Lee, and Lin-shan Lee. 2018. Completely
Unsupervised Phoneme Recognition by Adversarially Learning Mapping Rela-
tionships from Audio Embeddings. Proc. Interspeech 2018 (2018), 3748–3752.
[25] Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning. 2015. Effective
Approaches to Attention-based Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the
2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 1412–1421.
[26] Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2015.
Librispeech: an ASR corpus based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE,
5206–5210.
[27] Daniel S Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D
Cubuk, and Quoc V Le. 2019. SpecAugment: A Simple Data Augmentation Method
for Automatic Speech Recognition. Proc. Interspeech 2019 (2019), 2613–2617.
[28] Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan O. Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan
Narang, Jonathan Raiman, and John Miller. 2018. Deep Voice 3: 2000-Speaker
Neural Text-to-Speech. In International Conference on Learning Representations .
[29] Ofir Press and Lior Wolf. 2017. Using the Output Embedding to Improve Language
Models. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers . 157–163.
[30] Yi Ren, Yangjun Ruan, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan
Liu. 2019. Fastspeech: Fast, robust and controllable text to speech. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems . 3165–3174.
[31] Yi Ren, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2019. Almost
Unsupervised Text to Speech and Automatic Speech Recognition. In International
Conference on Machine Learning . 5410–5419.
[32] Andrew Rosenberg, Yu Zhang, Bhuvana Ramabhadran, Ye Jia, Pedro Moreno,
Yonghui Wu, and Zelin Wu. 2019. Speech Recognition with Augmented Synthe-
sized Speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11699 (2019).
[33] Steffen Schneider, Alexei Baevski, Ronan Collobert, and Michael Auli. 2019.
wav2vec: Unsupervised Pre-Training for Speech Recognition. Proc. Interspeech
2019 (2019), 3465–3469.
[34] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Improving Neural
Machine Translation Models with Monolingual Data. In Proceedings of the 54th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , Vol. 1. 86–96.
[35] Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J Weiss, Mike Schuster, Navdeep Jaitly,
Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng Chen, Yu Zhang, Yuxuan Wang, Rj Skerrv-Ryan, et al .
2018. Natural tts synthesis by conditioning wavenet on mel spectrogram pre-
dictions. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 4779–4783.
[36] Hao Sun, Xu Tan, Jun-Wei Gan, Hongzhi Liu, Sheng Zhao, Tao Qin, and Tie-
Yan Liu. 2019. Token-Level Ensemble Distillation for Grapheme-to-Phoneme
Conversion. Proc. Interspeech 2019 (2019), 2115–2119.
[37] Xu Tan, Yi Ren, Di He, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2019. Multilingual Neural
Machine Translation with Knowledge Distillation. In International Conference on
Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1gUsoR9YX
[38] Ye Kyaw Thu, Win Pa Pa, Yoshinori Sagisaka, and Naoto Iwahashi. 2016. Compar-
ison of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion methods on a myanmar pronunciation
dictionary. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on South and Southeast Asian
Natural Language Processing (WSSANLP2016) . 11–22.
[39] Andros Tjandra, Sakriani Sakti, and Satoshi Nakamura. 2017. Listening while
speaking: Speech chain by deep learning. In Automatic Speech Recognition and
Understanding Workshop (ASRU), 2017 IEEE . IEEE, 301–308.
[40] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 5998–6008.
[41] Yuxuan Wang, RJ Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron J Weiss, Navdeep
Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, et al .2017.
Tacotron: Towards End-to-End Speech Synthesis. Proc. Interspeech 2017 (2017),
4006–4010.
[42] Jan Wind. 1989. The evolutionary history of the human speech organs. Studies
in language origins 1 (1989), 173–197.
[43] Junichi Yamagishi, Bela Usabaev, Simon King, Oliver Watts, John Dines, Jilei
Tian, Yong Guan, Rile Hu, Keiichiro Oura, Yi-Jian Wu, et al .2010. Thousands
of voices for HMM-based speech synthesis–Analysis and application of TTS
systems built on various ASR corpora. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing 18, 5 (2010), 984–1004.
[44] Ryuichi Yamamoto, Eunwoo Song, and Jae-Min Kim. 2019. Parallel WaveGAN: A
fast waveform generation model based on generative adversarial networks with
multi-resolution spectrogram. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11480 (2019).
[45] Chih-Kuan Yeh, Jianshu Chen, Chengzhu Yu, and Dong Yu. 2019. Unsupervised
Speech Recognition via Segmental Empirical Output Distribution Matching. ICLR
(2019).
[46] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. 2017. Unpaired
image-to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision . 2223–2232.

==== Page 10 ====
A REPRODUCIBILITY
A.1 Datasets
We list the detailed information of all of the datasets used in this
paper in Table 6. Next, we first describe the details of the data
preprocessing for speech and text data, and then describe what
is the “high-quality” and “low-quality” speech mentioned in this
paper11.
Data Proprocessing. For the speech data, we re-sample it to 16kHZ
and convert the raw waveform into mel-spectrograms following Shen
et al. [35] with 50ms frame size, 12.5ms hop size. For the text, we
use text normalization rules to convert the irregular word into the
normalized type which is easier to pronounce, e.g., “Sep 7th" will
be converted into “September seventh".
High-Quality Speech. We use high-quality speech to refer the
speech data from TTS corpus (e.g., LJSpeech, Data Baker as shown
in Table 6), which are usually recorded in a professional record-
ing studio with consistent characteristics such as speaking rate.
Collecting high-quality speech data for TTS is typically costly [ 13].
Low-Quality Speech. We use low-quality speech to refer the
speech data from ASR corpus (e.g., LibriSpeech, AIShell, Liepa as
shown in Table 6). Compared to high-quality speech, low-quality
speech usually contains noise due to the recording devices (e.g.,
smartphones, laptops) or the recording environment (e.g., room
reverberation, traffic noise). However, low-quality speech cannot
be too noisy for model training. We just use the term “low-quality”
to differ from high-quality speech.
A.2 Model Configurations and Training
Both the TTS and ASR models use the 6-layer encoder and 6-layer
decoder. For both the TTS and ASR models, the hidden size and
speaker ID embedding size is 384 and the number of attention heads
is 4. The kernel sizes of 1D convolution in the 2-layer convolution
network are set to 9 and 1 respectively, with input/output size
of 384/1536 for the first layer and 1536/384 in the second layer.
For the TTS model, the input module of the decoder consists of 3
fully-connected layers. The first two fully-connected layers have
64 neurons each and the third one has 384 neurons. The ReLU non-
linearity is applied to the output of every fully-connected layer. We
also insert 2 dropout layers in between the 3 fully-connected layers,
with dropout probability 0.5. The output module of the decoder
is a fully-connected layer with 80 neurons. For the ASR model,
the encoder contains 3 convolution layers. The first two are 3×3
convolution layers with stride 2 and filter size 256, and the third one
with stride 1 and filter size 256. The ReLU non-linearity is applied
to the output of every convolution layer except the last one.
We implement LRSpeech based on the tensor2tensor codebase12.
We use the Adam optimizer with β1=0.9,β2=0.98,ε=10−9
and follow the same learning rate schedule in Vaswani et al . [40] .
We train both the TTS and ASR models in LRSpeech on 4 NVIDIA
V100 GPUs. Each batch contains 20,000 speech frames in total. The
pre-training and fine-tuning, dual transformation and knowledge
11We show some high-quality speech (target speaker) and low-quality
speech (other speakers) from the training set in the demo page:
https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech.
12https://github.com/tensorflow/tensor2tensordistillation take nearly 1, 7, 1 days respectively. We measure the TTS
inference speed on a server with 12 Intel Xeon CPU, 256GB memory,
1 NVIDIA V100 GPU. The TTS model takes about 0.21s to generate
1.0s of speech, which satisfies online deployment requirements for
inference speed.
A.3 Evaluation Details
Mean Opinion Score (MOS). The MOS test is a speech quality
test for naturalness where listeners (testers) were asked to give
their opinions on the speech quality in a five-point scale MOS:
5=excellent, 4=good, 3=fair, 2=poor, 1=bad. We randomly select
20 sentences to synthesize speech for MOS test and each audio is
listened by 20 testers, who are all native speakers. We present a
part of the MOS test results in Figure 5. The complete test report
can be downloaded here13.
Figure 5: A part of the English MOS test report.
Intelligibility Rate (IR). The IR test is a speech quality test for
Intelligibility. During the test, the listeners (testers) are requested to
mark every unintelligible word in the text sentence. IR is calculated
by the proportion of the words that are intelligible over the total
test words. We randomly select 200 sentences to synthesize speech
for IR test and each audio is listened by 5 testers, who are all native
speakers. A part of the IR test results is shown in Figure 6. You can
find more test reports from the demo link.
WER and CER. Given the reference text and predicted text, the
WER calculates the edit distance between them and then normalizes
the distance by dividing the number of words in the reference
sentence. The WER is defined as W ER =S+D+I
N, where the Nis
the number of words in the reference sentence, Sis the number of
substitutions, Dis the number of deletions and Iis the number of
insertions. The WER can be larger than 100%. For example, given
the reference text “an apple” and predicted text “what is history”, the
predicted text needs two substitution operations and one insertion
operation. For this case, the WER is2+1
2=150%. The CER is similar
to WER.
A.4 Some Explorations in Experiments
We briefly describe some other explorations in training LRSpeech
in this paper:
13https://speechresearch.github.io/lrspeech

==== Page 11 ====
Dataset Type Speakers Language Open Source Usage
Data Baker High-quality speech Single Mandarin Chinese ✓ Pre-training
AIShell Low-quality speech Multiple Mandarin Chinese ✓ Pre-training
LJSpeech High-quality speech Single English ✓ Training
LibriSpeech Low-quality speech Multiple English ✓ Training / Engish ASR test
Liepa Low-quality speech Multiple Lithuanian ✓ Training / Lithuanian ASR test
news-crawl Text / English/Lithuanian ✓ English/Lithuanian training and TTS test
Table 6: The datasets used in this paper.
Setting Result
Reference some mysterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of the elements
Baseline #1 in no characters is the contrast between the ugly and vulgar illegibility of the modern type
Baseline #2 the queen replied in a careless tone for instance now she went on
+ PF some of these ceriase for seen to him to have both of a down of the old lomests
+ PF + DT some misterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of the elements
+ PF + DT + KD (LRSpeech) some mysterious force seemed to have brought about a convulsion of the elements
Table 7: A case analysis for ASR model under different settings.
Figure 6: A part of the English IR test report.
•Pre-training and Finetune We also try different methods such
as unifying the character spaces between rich-resource and low-
resource languages, or learning the mapping between the char-
acter embeddings of rich- and low-resource languages as used in
[9]. However, we find these methods result in similar accuracy
for both TTS and ASR.
•Speaker Module To design the speaker module, we explore
several ways including replacing softsign with ReLU, etc. Experi-
mental results show that the design as Figure 2 (c) can help model
reduce the repeating words and missing words.
•Knowledge Distillation for TTS We try to add the paired tar-
get speaker data for training. However, the result is slightly worse
than that using only synthesized speech.
•Knowledge Distillation for ASR Since the synthesized speech
can improve the performance, we try to remove the real speech
and add plenty of synthesized speech for training. However, theASR model cannot work well for real speech and WER is above
47%.
•Vocoder Training In our preliminary experiments, we only use
the dataset Drich_tts in the rich-resource language (Mandarin Chi-
nese) to train the Parallel WaveGAN. The vocoder can generate
high-quality speech for Mandarin Chinese but fail to work for
the low-resource languages. Considering that the vocoder has
not been trained on the speech in the low-resource languages,
we add single-speaker high-quality corpus Dhand up-sample the
speech data in Dhto make it roughly the same with the speech
data in Drich_tts for training. In this way, we find that the vocoder
can work well for the low-resource languages.
A.5 Case Analyses for ASR
We also conduct a case analysis on ASR as shown in Table 7. Please
refer to Section 3.2 for the descriptions of each setting in this table.
The generated text by Baseline #1 is completely irrelevant to the
reference. Besides, we find from the test set that the generated text
is usually the same for many completely different speech, due to
the lack of paired data (only 50 paired data) for training. Baseline
#2 can generate different text sentences for different speech, but
still cannot generate reasonable results. After pre-training and fine-
tuning (PF), the model can recognize some words like “have”. Similar
to the effect of pre-training on TTS, pre-training ASR on rich-
resource language can also help to learn the alignment between
speech and text. By further leveraging unpaired speech and text,
with dual transformation (DT), the generated sentence is more
accurate. However, for some hard words like “mysterious”, the
model cannot recognize it correctly. TTS and ASR can also help
each other not only in dual transformation but also in knowledge
distillation (KD). During KD, a large amount of pseudo paired data
generated from the TTS model can help the ASR model recognize
most words and give correct results as shown in Table 7.

