==== Page 1 ====
Chapter 3.3: Machine Translation : where are we at today?   
Andy Way  
I. Introduction  
Machine translation (MT) usage t oday is staggering. C onsider Google Translate,1 which as of 
May 2016 was translating an average of 143 billion words a day – 20 words/day for every 
person on the planet , just for a single  (albeit the largest) MT service provider – across 100 
language combinations, a doubling in translation volume in just 4 years. This number alone 
already means that MT quality is ‘good enough ’ for a range of use -cases, so continuing to 
question  the utility of MT is moot.  
The aim of this chapter is to explain to translati on/interpreting students and academics, 
professional translators and other industry stakeholders how  MT works today, and how the 
field has altered in the last 30 years. I describe the underlying reasons why MT engine -
building changed from being underpinned  by grammatical rules to the situation today where it 
is almost e ntirely data -driven; while for some time most of the research in academia was 
corpus -based, the leading MT engines in industry remained almost wholly  rule-based, but 
this dichotomy has now largely disappeared, principally due to the introduction of the Mos es 
Statistical MT (SMT) toolkit (Koehn et al., 2007) , and the subsequent rise of Neural MT 
(NMT) . 
While it was already the case that the dominant paradigm was SMT , a performance ceiling 
was reached relatively quickly, such that for the past ten years or so , MT system developers 
have been ‘ smuggling in ’ linguistic information in order to improve performance  as 
demonstrated by both automatic and human evaluation . Until just three  or four years ago, 
SMT was undoubtedly state -of-the-art, but NMT has recently  emerged , and in academic 
circles at least, appears to be so promising that many protagonists are already claiming it to 
have surpassed the performance of SMT . In this chapter, I will consider the extent to which it 
is appropriate at this juncture to make t his call; SMT remains dominant in the translation 
industry  among many translation providers, but the big players like Google Translate and 
Bing Translator2 have already launched NMT systems for many of their language pairs .  
When SMT was launched, many pra ctitioners advocated a ‘pure’ approach, where the 
strategy taken was “let the data decide”; no data cleaning or annotation was countenanced, 
at least initially, so that whatever quality was obtained was due entirely to the intrinsic 
characteristics of the approach rather than any pre -processing techniques.  Nonetheless, as 
mentioned  above, SMT system developers observed improvements in performance as 
measured by automatic evaluation metrics when introducing linguistic information into the 
engine -building pro cess. With the advent of NMT , similarly ‘pure’ approaches to NMT are in 
vogue, but I  question whether here too quality will improve only if syntactic, semantic and 
discourse features are integrated.  
It is clear that human translators have for some time now  been using Translation Memory 
(TM) systems (Heyn, 1998) to good effect. Many researchers have demonstrated that SMT 
and TM can be integrated to improve translator productivity  (e.g. Ma et al., 2011; Bulté et 
al., 2018 ), and these benefits now appear fairly regularly in today’s industry -leading CAT 
                                                           
1 https://translate.google.com  
2 https://www.bing.com/translator  

==== Page 2 ====
tools. TM integration has yet to be  done for NMT, and given that I  expect TM technology to 
remain as an essential tool in the translator’s armoury for some time to come, I will consider 
how such inte gration might  be brought about.  
I will also discuss how MT quality is measured, the extent to which ‘traditional’ MT 
evaluation is equipped to demonstrate improvements delivered by NMT, what human 
evaluations are currently adding to the mix, and how emerging use -cases where there is no 
place for human translators cause us to fundamentally question the notion of quality.  
 
Figure 1: Progress in Machine Translation over the years ( Luong et al., 2016 ) 
II. The Rise and Fall of Different MT Paradigms  
In this section, I provide a brief history of the major paradigms that have been put forward in 
MT. As Figure 1 illustrates schematically, different MT models have been in vogue at 
different times. Early MT systems were entirely rule -based, but in the 1980s corpus -based 
mode ls came along and became the state -of-the-art by the mid -1990s. In just the last few 
years, the advent of NMT has really shaken up both academia and the wider MT and 
translation industry, and now appears to have taken over the mantle from SMT as the 
domina nt paradigm today. In the next sections, I describe briefly the mechanics of each of 
these system  types, as well as how the field reacted when they were suggested as 
competing paradigms to the dominant approaches of the day.  
II.1 From Rule -based MT to SMT  
As I describe in Way (2009 ), when Peter Brown of IBM (at the time) stood up at TMI in 
Pittsburgh and again at COLING in Budapest in 1988 and presented SMT as an alternative 
to rule -based translation, significant players in traditional approaches to MT wer e astonished. 
Pierre Isabelle’s reaction was “ We were all flabbergasted. All throughout Peter’s 


==== Page 3 ====
presentation, people were shaking their heads and spurting grunts of disbelief or even of 
hostility .” Harold Somers noted “ The audience reaction was either incr edulous, dismissive or 
hostile ”, while Walter Daelemans observed “ the Leuven Eurotra people weren’t very 
impressed by the talk and laughed it away as a rehash of ‘direct’ (word -by-word) translation ”. 
Prior to Brown et al. (1988a/b), rule -based MT (RBMT) wa s divided into two camps: 
transfer -based MT and interlingual MT. The Vauquois Pyramid (see Figure 2) visualises 
schematically what was involved in building such systems quite succinctly, with the length of 
each arrow corresponding to roughly the amount of work needed by each component.  
 
Figure 2 : the Vauquois Pyramid depicting the three main approaches to RBMT: direct 
translation, transfer -based and interlingual MT (Vauquois, 1968)  
Transfer and interlingual systems were both known as indirect, second -generation 
approaches to MT, and were compared to direct, first -generation MT systems. As can be 
seen in Figure 1, these la tter did very little analysis (‘parsing’ ) of the source language or 
structural generation of the target language; that they wo rked at all was down to their very 
large bilingual  dictionaries. Somewhat surprisingly, these systems enjoyed a relatively long 
shelf life, partly due to the fact that they were very robust, and compared to indirect systems, 
always produced some  output, which between ‘similar’ languages (e.g. Portuguese and 
Spanish) could often be very reasonable indeed. In contrast, given that indirect systems 
depended on parsing (to different depths) the source -language input, they were explicitly 
designed to rule out ill -formed input; when I worked on Eurotra (King & Perschke, 1984) 
between 1988 -1991, we wrote explicit test suites (Arnold et al., 1993 ) containing well -formed 
sentences that the analysis component ought to parse correctly and pass on an appropriate 
representation to the transfer stage, as well as ill -formed strings that the analysis stage 


==== Page 4 ====
shou ld decree ungrammatical and cause further processing to cease . There were two main 
problems with such an approach: (i) there was a general assumption that people  would 
always try to input well -formed sentences into an MT system, and (ii) given that the parser 
was based on a set of handcrafted rules by an expert linguist which was necessarily 
incomplete, the system could not tell the difference between a truly ill -formed string and well -
formed input that simply was not covered by the set of linguistic rules in the grammar.  
Note that in transfer -based systems, the three processes do ‘about the same’ amount of 
work: the source string is parsed into a syntactic (consti tuency or dependency ) tree indicating 
the main actors in the sentence as well as any modifiers; this s ource -language 
representation i s then passed to the transfer component per se , where appropriate lexical, 
syntactic and semantic rules generated a ‘meanin g-equivalent’ target -language structure ; this 
target dependency tree i s then input into the generation (or ‘synthesis’) phase, where a se t of 
target -language rules try  to produce an appropriate translation.  
In contrast, in interlingual systems, there was no explicit transfer phase, so that the output 
from the  deep analysis phase was exactly  the same as the input to the deep synthesis 
phase . While this was very attractive in theory, it proved impossible to bring about from a 
practical perspective. Languages simply don’t act the same way, with different languages 
having different ways of representing similar concepts. For example, in English,  the 
periphrastic expression “to bake  with cheese on top” has to be used, while French has a 
single lexical item – gratiner  – to represent the same concept. Assuming an interlingual  
system  involving French, English and Japanese, the amount of work that wou ld need to be 
done in (say) a French -to-English engine just because Japanese has different words for “my 
mother ”, “your mother ” and “mothers in general ” would be wasteful, given that neither French 
nor English has different lexical entries for these concep ts (Hutchins & Somers, 1992) . 
At the onset of SMT in the late -80s, it was clear what camp you were in: either the transfer 
camp or the interlingual camp. However, in Way (2009), I noted that pretty quickly, these two 
camps merged to form a de facto  allianc e against this arrogant statistical newcomer which 
was set to undo all that they stood for. Despite this resistance, the language used early on by 
the new statistical practitioners was conciliatory, indicating a hope that the two communities 
would work together for the betterment of the discipline. I lamented that  this did not happen,  
and that  this impaired the creation and adoption of the syntax -based systems that came  
onstream in the l ate 200 0s. 
Nonetheless, certainly by the mid -1990s , SMT had come to be dominant, largely due to 
the very influential IBM models laid out in Brown et al. (1993), one of the seminal papers in 
the field. At this time, however, most SMT was word -based, which w as odd when one 
considers that example -based MT (Nagao, 1984; Carl & Way, 2003) had from its very 
inception considered the phrase – not the word – as the primary linguistic construct  to be 
used as the unit of translation . Koehn et al. (2003) demonstrated h ow SMT might work in a 
phrase -based manner, and with the advent of tools like Giza++ (Och & Ney, 2003, for word 
alignment) and the Moses toolkit (including phrase alignment) in 2007, phrase -based SMT  
(PBMT)  became the dominant paradigm for the next ten yea rs.  
Larger and larger amounts of SMT training data came onstream (e.g. Europarl: Koehn, 
2005), which allowed better and better PBMT  models to be built, but only for those 
languages and genres where sufficiently large sets of aligned source —target sentences 
existed. The licence issued with Moses allowed it to be used commercially, so SMT systems 

==== Page 5 ====
were quickly deployed  to good effect  in real industrial scenarios .3 SMT was robust, and 
capable of ve ry good translation output, but suffered from problems such as the omission of  
target -language equivalents to parts of the source sentence (including on occasion really  
important words like not), and wrong target -language word order. As with RBMT, PBMT 
worked especially well between closely -related languages, and much less well when 
translating into morphologically complex languages (like German).  
It was certainly the case when SMT first came along that most system developers relied 
solely on larger and lar ger amounts of training  data to deliver impro vements in translation 
quality, as measured by automatic metrics like BLEU ( Papineni et al., 2002) , METEOR 
(Banerjee & Lavie, 2005 ) and TER (Snover et al., 2006). However, l ittle by little , SMT engine -
builders began to realise that the only way to break th rough the performance ceiling –often a 
pretty good level of quality, mind – was to integrate additional syntactic and semantic 
information  (e.g. Chiang, 2005) . By 2015 or so, such linguisti cally informed PBMT systems 
were acknowledged to be the state -of-the-art in the field.  
II.2 From SMT to NMT  
However, around this time, researchers (including many newcomers to the field of MT) 
started to demonstrate that  NMT systems could be built with good performance . While the 
preferred system set -ups were not so different from those that had been conceived some 
time bef ore (e.g. Forcada & Ñeco, 1997), the hardware that facilitated the huge explosion in 
computation req uired was now sufficiently powerful to allow these systems to be built in 
practice.  
The first NMT systems started off  using convolutional neural nets  (Kalchbrenner & 
Blunsom, 2013), but could not beat a PBMT  baseline  (cdec: Dyer e t al, 2010) . Improvements 
were seen quite quickly with the first  encoder -decoder frameworks (Sutskever et al. , 2014), 
which were subsequently extended with a source -language attention model (Bahdanau et al., 
2014 ). While further improvements have been seen in the interim, this set -up – an encoder -
decoder model with attention – remains pretty much the state -of-the-art today.  
What really disrupted the field were the results achieved by NMT systems at the 
International Workshop on Spoken Language Translation in 2015 .4 Luong and Manning 
(2015 ) demonstrated clear wins over a range of different SMT systems for English -to-
German, a significantly difficult language pair , in terms of automatic evaluation scores . 
Bentivogli et al . (2016 ) performed an in -depth human evaluation of exactly how the NMT 
model of Luong and Manning (2015) improved in terms of quality , noting that s ignificantly 
fewer morphological, lexical and  word order errors were m ade compared to SMT. They also 
demonstrated that NMT lowered overall post -editing effort  by about 25%.   
One of the main reasons why NMT improves compared to SMT on a range of use -cases is 
that once the source sentence has been processed by the encoder, the full context of the 
sentence is available  to the decoder for consideration as to wha t targe t-language words and 
phrases should be suggested as part of the translation. That is, all source words and their 
context – what are known as “word embeddings” (cf. Mikolov et al., 2013), i.e. how each 
word relates to each other in the particular sen tence at hand – are encoded in a single  
                                                           
3 The first commercial system, LanguageWeaver, was based not on Moses but rather on the SMT models of 
Kevin Knight and Dan Marcu at ISI (cf. Benjamin et al., 2003).  
4 http://workshop2015.iwslt.org/  

==== Page 6 ====
numerical representation (a vector of numbers indicating the final state of the encoder) which 
is sent to the decoder to generate a target -language string. In SMT, a source sentence is 
only translated using lexical a nd phrasal chunks; unless it is very short, it is never translated 
en bloc . Clearly having a window on the full source sentence is advantageous compared to a 
restriction of just a few words at a time , but managing all that information is non -trivial . 
The e ncoder -decoder architecture works well, but significant improvement came about 
when the source -language attention m odel was added. Rather than accepting  that all source 
words are equally imp ortant in suggesting all target -language words, the attention model 
(similar to word and phrase alignments in SMT ) demonstrates  which source words are most 
relevant when it comes to hypothesising target -language equivalents. In practice, this means 
that each translation is genera ted from  specific encoder states, with information which is 
much less relevant from other words – perhaps some distance away from the current word of 
focus and of little or no relevance to its translation – being ignored.  
III. Is NMT the new state -of-the-art? 
While the study by Bentivogli et al. (2016) was significant and far -reaching, it has to be noted 
that it only examined one language pair (English -to-German) and one use -case (TED talks). 
Further studies (e.g. Castilho et al. (2017)) have shown that there are s ituations where PBMT  
can still beat NMT  in terms of both human and automatic evaluation . It is widely recognized  
that much larger amounts of training data are needed for good NMT performance compared 
to SMT  (cf. Koehn & Knowles, 2017) , and training and translation times remain much slower 
than for SMT.  
Nonetheless, m any MT practitioners believe that NMT  is – or at least will be very soon – 
the new state -of-the-art, to the extent that all MT papers in the very top academic 
conferences feature only NMT mod els, and Moses scores are only given as comparative 
baseline levels of quality.  
III.1 How is MT Quality Measured?  
In Way (2018) , I note  that there are three ways in which MT quality is typically measured: via 
human evaluation, automatic evaluation, and tas k-based evaluation. In the former, human 
raters are asked to select from a (more or less) fine -grained numerical scale for “fidelity ” (or 
“accuracy”  or “adequacy” ), the extent to which a translated text contains the same 
information as the source text; and  (ii) intelligibility  (or “fluency”), the extent to which the 
output sentence is a well -formed example of the target language.5 While such evaluations 
are (usually) very informative, they are subjective, often inconsistent and take a long time to 
carry out . Accordingly, as is often the case in MT, insights from speech recognition were 
brought to bear in this field too, in particular Word Error Rate (WER: Levenshtein, 1966), a nd 
Position -Independent Word Er ror Rate (PER: Tillmann et al., 1997) . However, it w asn’t until 
the BLE U metric  came in that MT evaluation per se  took off. BLEU (and NIST (Doddington, 
2002), which came along around the same time) used different (but related) ways to compute 
the similarity between one or more  human supplied ‘gold standard’  reference s and the MT 
output string based (largely) on n-gram co -occurrence.  
                                                           
5 Here I give primacy to the terms originally used in the ALPAC report (Pierce et al., 1966), with more usual 
terms given in parentheses.  

==== Page 7 ====
In Way (2018) , I provide  a number of problems with such metrics, as well as others arising 
from their (mis)use in the field. I  will not rehash those here, but ultimately an MT system 
needs to be used for a particular use -case, which is where task-based evaluation  comes in : 
who is the translation actually for? As I point out in that paper:  
“WMT evaluations regularly include speci fic tasks nowadays, including medical 
translation (e.g. Zhang et al., 2014), automatic post -editing (e.g. Chatterjee et al., 
2015) and MT for the IT domain (e.g. Cuong et al., 2016). We take this as evidence 
that the community as a whole is well aware of t he fact that when evaluating MT 
quality, the actual use -case and utility of the translations therein need to be borne in 
mind .” 
III.2 Does MT Evaluation need to change with NMT coming onstream?  
It has to be acknowledged that the problem of MT quality assessment is an unsolved one, 
and research efforts are ongoing to improve on the metrics that are commonly used today.  
One question that is worth asking is the extent to which such metrics are sufficiently 
discriminative to accurately demonstrate the real  improvement that NMT offers over SMT.  
The translational improvements discovered by Bentivogli et al. (2016) are astonishing, 
especially bearing in mind that PBMT  had been the dominant paradigm for 25 years or so, 
and that NMT has only come in as a realistic alternative in the past four years. In my opinion, 
n-gram -based metrics such as BLEU  significantly underplay the real benefit to be seen when 
NMT output is evaluated. As I note in Way (2018), it simply cannot  be the case that a 2-point 
improvement in BLEU score – almost an irrelevance on a real industrial translation use -case 
– which was typically seen in WMT -2016  where NMT systems swept the board on all tasks 
and language -pairs (Sennrich et al., 2016) , can be reflective of the improvements in word 
order and lexical selection noted by Bentivogli et al. ( 2016) . Note that Shterionov et al. ( 2018) 
actually computed the degree of underestimation in quality of three popular automatic 
evaluation metrics – BLEU, METEOR and TER – showing that for NMT, this may be up to 
50%.  
Metrics such as ChrF (Popović, 2015) which operate at the character level  – or 
combinations of word - and character -based models (e.g. Chung et al. 2016; Luong & 
Manning, 2016)6 – may be  a mov e in the right direction, but the field  will doubtless see new 
metrics tuned particularly to NMT in the very near future.  
III.3 Is the Tran slation Industry r eady to provide NMT?  
Let us suppose  that NMT either already is the new state -of-the-art in terms of MT quality, or 
very soon will be. The big free online players – Google Translate and Bing Translator  – have 
both switched over at least some of their language -pairs to NMT models. Note that Amazon 
AWS only very recently announced their own NMT service,7 so there is no doubt that where 
the largest multinational companies are concerned, the decision has been made to t hrow in 
their lot with NMT.  
                                                           
6 In order to mitigate the problem of unknown words , character -based NMT models were proposed; if a word is 
unknown at the level of the lemma, some translation knowledge may be available at the subword level. 
Passban et al. (2018) demonstrate that splitting lemmas into roots and morphemes in a principled l inguistic 
manner outperforms such arbitrary subword models.  
7 https://aws.amazon.com/translate/  

==== Page 8 ====
Accordingly, those language service providers (LSPs) who rely on online MT provided by 
third-parties such as these will already have benefit ed from the improvements in quality 
afforded by NMT. But what about those MT providers w ho have developed services in -house 
around the Moses platform?  I have already noted that neural MT engine training times are 
much slower – typically of the order of several  weeks – than their SMT counterparts, so 
much so that people are claiming PBMT  training times to be fast nowadays, although of 
course nothing has changed  in that regard ; it is simply the case that in comparison, NMT 
model training is incredibly slow, with billions of mathematical optimisations needed until the 
neural net converges to its optimal set-up. I have also noted that typically an order of 
magnitude larger data is needed to train a good NMT model compared to PBMT , and it is a 
fact that these datasets do not exist for almost all industry clients.  In addition, the hardware 
needed to train an NMT system is expensive; GPUs contain thousands of CPUs, each of 
which can carry out its own calculation in parallel. Assuming most suppliers of customised 
MT engines do not have such hardware in -house, but rat her rely on cloud -based services, 
the cost of additional MT engine training will have to be passed on to clients, although the 
latter should see most if not all of this returned by the huge improvements in MT quality and 
resultant decrease in post -editing effort required.  
Those forward -thinking translators who have already integrated MT into their pipeline 
should benefit immediately from the improvements  in MT quality to be seen. As I  noted in the 
previous section, current MT quality assessment metrics are insufficiently discriminative to 
provide a realistic representation of the absolute improvement in quality seen with NMT, so it 
is open to doubt as to whether LSPs will be able to reflect this better quality in terms of 
higher levels of TM fuzzy matches  (Sikes, 2007) , with the concomitant reductions in pay to 
translators who are post -editing MT output.  It seems to me that this is a good time for 
translators who have yet to use MT in their translation workflow to consider doing so without 
delay, as their pro ductivity should rise pre tty quickly, while LSPs are still tied in to post -
editing rates of pay related to SMT.  
MT has been integrated very well now with existing TM tools, with TM matches above  well-
defined thresholds being suggested to translators for po st-editing, and MT used for all 
segments below such thresholds.8 NMT shouldn’t make too much of a difference, here, 
except that  even more so than SMT, NMT output can be deceptively fluent; sometimes 
perfect target -language sentences are output, and less th orough translators and 
proofreaders may be seduced into accepting such translations,  despite the fact that they may 
not be related to  the source sentence at hand at all! In contrast, when the attention model 
provides too much focus on particular source -language words, errors such as that  in Figure 3 
can be seen; fort unately, these are easy to spot.  
Finally, on the subject of quality, for a long time SMT models failed to deliver good enough 
quality for English -to-Japanese for Japanese translators t o even consider post -editing MT 
output. Mike Dillinger (personal communication) now informs me that the quality seen from 
NMT is leading them to reconsider, and the sorts of questions being asked are exactly  the 
same as those raised  years ago in the scope of European languages.  
 
                                                           
8 Moorkens  and Way (2016) discuss the extent to which translation jobs should be carved up in this way, as 
well as how MT output is significantly preferred to TM matches when fuzzy match thresholding is removed.  

==== Page 9 ====
 
Figure 3 : Google NMT error due to an overly attentive Attention Model ( 18th July 2017 ) 
IV. Informing research through the industry  
As I stated at the outset, MT has never been as popular, and pretty much everyone in the 
industry knows that they have to embrace it as an enabling  technology. Rather than 
outsource their MT requirements, companies like Google, Microsoft, Facebook, eBay and 
Amazon have (understandably) been recruiting  leading academics to build their own internal 
MT offerings  for some time now . 
However, the result is that the relatively few MT centres of e xcellence that existed five 
years ago have become even rar er. I also took three years leave -of-absence to build 
industry -leading customised MT engines for two translation companies in the UK, but 
decided to return to my academic position to keep the MT team at my university  together. 
One knock -on benefit to academic MT  teams like my own is that excellent staff can be 
recruited from disbanded academic MT teams. However, at the same time, professionals 
with artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) skills are highly prized, and the 
discrepancy between rates of pay which has always been there in academ ia and industry is 
widening at a rate of knots.9 
Despite taking on leaders of academic teams into their companies, industry leaders are in 
the same breath bemoaning the fact that they are unable to recruit MT developers, as there 
are not enough trained exp erts coming from academic programmes  to fill all the vacancies 
currently available . But t hey can’t have it both ways: if they recruit the leaders of large,  
renowned academic groups, who used to train  the MT developers of tomorrow, they 
should n't be surpris ed when the number of such potential recruits falls away . What MT 
academics  want, therefore, is for industry to petition g overnment to obtain more support for 
MT, AI, and ML in academia , so that the industrial community can be served to our mutual 
advantage.10 
Note, however, that this can not all be centrally funded by g overnment. While there is no 
doubt that attracting research hubs of multinational companies pays off considerably – not 
                                                           
9 https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/22/technology/artificial -intelligence -experts -salaries.html  
10 This is starting to happen in my own country, Ireland: https://irishtechnews.ie/irelands -first-industry -driven -
masters -in-artificial -intelligence -is-launched/  


==== Page 10 ====
just in terms of direct employment and return to the exchequer b ut also as it  pertains to 
ancillary services – if those companies want a steady stream of suitably equipped new staff 
with up -to-date skill -sets trained by the best available lecturing staff, then they too will need 
to (at least part -)pay towards the tools  and services required for their education.  
As this problem resolves itself, further and deeper collaboration between industry and 
research  is likely to be seen . More and more researchers are interested not just in an 
academic publication, but also in solv ing real problems of benefit not just to industry, but also 
relevant  to their fellow academics. While  many authors of papers at leading conference s in 
the field seldom consider potential end -users, it was recently announced that from 2018 , the 
North Americ an branch of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL ) will feature 
an industry track, focu sing on disseminating results which apply cutting -edge research to real 
world problems. While plenty of such work exists already (e.g. Wang et al., 2016; Calixto et 
al., 2017), anything which explicitly gets more researchers to try to focus on truly impactful 
endeavours as opposed to being strictly of academic value is to be welcomed.  
V. Informing the industry through research  
There are d iffering view s on whether users of a technology need to know the principles on 
which it is founded in order to (i) understand how the outputs are formed, and (ii) try to 
improve the underlying technology. Assuming  that knowing how an MT system is built is 
useful, there is no doubt that non -experts found the principles of SMT hard to understand. In 
two companion papers (Hearne & Way, 2011; Way & Hearne, 2011), we provided an 
explanation of SMT for linguists and tran slators  which attracted positive feedback .  
Accordingly, translators  that have already embraced MT have just about gotten their heads 
around SMT an d how it works, but now NMT looks like eclipsing that framework . While 
PBMT quickly consolidated ar ound the M oses toolkit, in contrast there i s a proliferation of 
deep neural net tools in existence which NMT developers can use, including Tensorflow,11 
OpenNMT,12 PyTorch,13 and Nematus.14 
Again, unsurprisingly, many non -experts – even those who have been around the 
language industry for some time – find recent r esearch papers on NMT unintelligible. I have 
already provided a high -level explanation of how an NMT system works in Section II.2 , and I 
hope that my description of the encoder -decoder system with attention is  understandable to 
a broad audience; interested readers should consult Forcada (2017) for another explanation 
of NMT for non -experts.  
                                                           
11 https://www.tensorflow.org/  
12 http://opennmt.net  
13 https://pytorch.org/  
14 https://github.com/rsennrich/nematus  

==== Page 11 ====
 
Figure 4 : a schematic depiction of a feed -forward neural network  
NMT is just one example of sequence -to-sequence learning using a neural network; others 
include text summarization  and speech recognition. Essentially the neural network comprises 
(i) a set of input nodes, (ii) a set of hidden nodes (in one or more hidden layers; if there is 
more than one, the network is said to be ‘deep’, hence “deep learning”), and (iii) a set of 
output nodes, as in Figure 4. Each input node is connected to each hidden unit, and each 
hidden unit is connected to each output node; if there is more than one hidden layer, then 
each node in one hidden layer is connected to all the nodes in the next hidden layer, and so 
on. The mathematical complexity of deep learning comes about as the weight (or 
importance) of every connection between every no de needs to be optimised. One way of 
doing t his in the “training” phase is to (i) initially assign  random weights to each connection,15 
(ii) supply  a set of inputs where the outputs are known (e.g. if a vectoral representation of an 
image of a bird  is input , the neural net can be expected to predict the label “bird”, not “dog”)), 
and (iii) percolate  (via “back -propagation” : Rumelhart et al. (1986) ) any error s back through 
the network until the weights are optimally adjusted and no further improvement in accu racy 
can be seen . The neural net is then frozen, and new inputs are provided to the system (in the 
“testing” phase) and the accuracy is evaluated by observing how often the neural net 
accurately predicts the correct label.  
Most people acknowledge  that MT is one of the hardest problems we are trying to address 
in computer science, as so many inputs (each word in each sentence) are required, many 
hidden units in many hidden layers are needed, and many outputs (i.e. possible translations) 
may be observed. Note too  that unlike the feed-forward neural network in Figure 4, most 
state -of-the-art networks are “recurrent” , meaning that some units are linked to themselves; 
this permits inputs and outputs of any size, whereas feed -forward networks allow only f ixed-
                                                           
15 Including to “bias” nodes, which are connected to each hidden unit to prevent that hidden unit from being 
‘switched off’ in case of a zero -sum input.  


==== Page 12 ====
length inputs and outputs. Accordingly, it can be seen quite quickly  that the number of 
calculations is astronomical. Billions of tweaks of the weights are needed before the optimal 
configuration of the neural net is arrived at, and no further improvement can be seen. This is 
why GPUs – excellent at performing calculations on matrices, which are standard structures 
used in neural processing – are needed for network training, although decoding can be run 
fairly smoothly on CPUs.  
The mathematical underpinning  of neural networks is fairly hair -raising, but I anticipate that 
the description of neural nets provided together with my description of the state -of-the-art 
NMT model today and the explanation provided in Forcada (2017) will suffice for most 
translators  to know how the whole set -up works, and how they may help deep -learning 
engineers improve their systems. At the same time, I trust that this will prove useful to other 
industry players not au fait  with the current technology, in order for them to consider  using 
NMT to underpin their translation service s. 
VI. Concluding Remarks  
This paper has undertaken several challenges: (i ) to discuss different MT paradigms, (ii) to 
argue which of those paradigms might be considered state -of-the-art today, (iii) to explain to 
non-experts how neural MT works, (iv) to discuss whether today’s automatic evaluation 
metrics are sufficiently fine -grained to accurately reflect the dramatic improvements we have 
seen recently in terms of MT quality, and (v) to reflect on the relationship between academia 
and industry in the field of MT today.  
We concluded that if NMT is not already  the state -of-the-art in the field , it certainly has the 
potential to become so, and very soon. Accordingly, I trust that the description of the 
underlying deep -learning technology and the state -of-the-art NMT configuration may benefit 
a wide range of non -experts, who might b e struggling to understand how this new paradigm 
actually works, why it outperforms PBMT , but also what pro blems remain to be solved. 
These can be examined both from a research perspective – including providing fine -grained 
MT evaluation metrics to accurat ely reflect the considerable improvement in MT quality that 
has recently been  seen  – and an optimisation point of view, especially in terms of improving 
NMT engine training times.  
By providing an insight into how academia and industry need to help each other in these 
turbulent times, I anticipate that this will contribute to the building of stronger bridges 
between academic res earch and the language industry . As we concluded in Way & Hearne 
(2011), this collaboration is sorely needed if the field as a whole is to benefit. While SMT 
appears to have only a limited future , with NMT having  emerged as the dominant force in 
MT, such collabor ation is needed more than ever. It is encouraging  to see that the lesson  
learned by SMT practitioners regarding the improvements to be seen by incorporating 
linguistic information seem to be being taken onboard, by some  NMT practitioners  at least 
(cf. García -Martí nez et al., 2016; Sennrich & Haddow, 2016 ).  
With the considerable improvements in MT quality that have been seen in recent times has 
come an increase in hype, most notably from journalists, most of whom don’t understand 
how the technology works, but also from MT developers such as the Google and Microsoft 
NMT team s; the claim by Wu et al. (2016) that Google NMT was “ bridging the gap between  
human and machine translation [quality] ” led to considerable  hyperbole an d hysteria from 
different camps, which was amplified recently by the claim by Hassan  et al. (2018) that 

==== Page 13 ====
Microsoft had “achieved human parity” in terms of translation quality .16 Those of us who have 
seen many paradigms come and go know that overgilding the lily does none of us any good, 
especially those of us who have been trying to build b ridges between MT developers and the 
translation community  for many years . The human -in-the-loop will always  remain the most 
important link in the chain , at least where dissemination of translated material is required ; all 
MT system developers are trying t o do is improve the output from thei r systems to make 
technology -savvy translators more productive. MT systems are unlikely ever to “bridge the 
gap” or “achieve human parity” with human quality translation. Just because a new paradigm 
is in vogue does not mean that MT has become easy, or a solved problem, as some would 
like to make o ut (e.g. Goodfellow et al., 2016 :473). Let’s see how many of the newcomers to 
MT are still here in a decade; my prediction is that a good percentage of them will indeed 
discover  that MT is too difficult , and that certain problems remain  hard to solve, just like 
they’ve always been … which is why translators are very much still needed, and always will 
be. 
Acknowledgements  
Many thanks indeed to the anonymous reviewers of this paper , as well as to Mikel Forcada, 
whose comments served to improve this paper considerably. This work has been supported 
by the ADAPT Centre for Digital Content Technology which is funded under the SFI 
Research Centres Programme (Grant 13/RC/2106) and is co -funded under the European 
Region al Development Fund.  
References  
Arnold, D., D. Moffat, L. Sadler , and A. Way . (1993),  Automatic Generation of Test Suites. 
Machine Translation  8:29—38.  
Bahdanau, D., K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. (2014 ), Neural Machine Translation  by Jointly 
Learning to Align and Translate. eprint arXiv:1409.0473 
(https://arXiv.org/abs/1409.0473 ). 
Banerjee, S. , and A. Lavie. (2005 ), METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with 
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. In ACL 2005, Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or Summarization 
at the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, pp.65 —72.  
Benjamin,  B., L.  Gerber , K. Knight, and D. Marcu. (2003 ), Language Weaver: the next 
generation of machine translation . MT Summit IX , New Orleans, USA, pp.229 —231. 
Bentivogli, L., A.  Bisazza, M. Cettolo, and M. Federico. (2016 ), Neural versus Phrase -
Based Machine Translat ion Quality: a Case Study. In Proceedings of the 2016 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Austin, Texas, 
pp.257 —267. 
                                                           
16 Even more recently, SDL announced on June 19th 2018 that they had “cracked Russian to English Neural 
Machine Translation ”: https://www.sdl.com/about/news -media/press/2018/sdl -cracks -russian -to-english -
neural -machine -translation.html . As with the other similar claims, this has met with som e incredulity on social 
media platforms, including by this author (@tarfandy).  

==== Page 14 ====
Brown, P., J. Cocke, S.  Della Pietra, V.  Della Pietra, F.  Jelinek, R. Mercer, and P. Roossin. 
(1988a ), A statis tical approach to French/English translation. In Second International 
Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural 
Languages , Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 16pp.  
Brown, P., J. Cocke, S.  Della Pietra, V.  Della Pietra, F.  Jelinek, R. Mercer, and P. Roossin. 
(1988b ), A statistical approach to language translation. In Coling Budapest: Proceedings 
of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  (vol.1 ), Budapest, 
Hungary,  pp.71 —76.  
Brown, P., S. Della Pietr a, V. Della Pietra, and R.  Mercer. (1993 ), The mathematics of 
statistical machine translation: parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics  19(2): 
263—311. 
Bulté, B., T. Vanallemeersch, and V. Vindeghinste. (2018 ), M3TRA: integrating TM and MT 
for professional translators. In EAMT2018, Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference 
of the European Association for Machine Translation , Alacant, Spain, pp.69 —78. 
Calixto, I, Q.  Liu, Qun , and N. Campbell. (2017 ), Doubly -Attentive Decoder for Multi -modal 
Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , Vancouver, Canada , 
pp.1913—1924 . 
Carl, M. , and A. Way (eds). (2003 ), Recent Advances in Example -Based Machine 
Translation . Dordrecht, The Netherlands : Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
Castilho, S., J.  Moorkens, F. Gaspari, I. Calixto, J. Tinsley , and A. Way. (2017 ), Is Neural 
Machine Translation the New State -of-the-Art? Prague Bulleti n of Mathematical 
Linguistics  108:109—120. 
Chatterjee, R., M. Turchi, and M. Negri. (2015 ), The FBK Participation in the WMT15 
Automatic Post -editing Shared Task. In Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on 
Statistical Machine Translation , Lisbon, Portugal, pp.210 —215. 
Chiang, D. (2005 ), A hierarchical phrase -based model for statistical machine translation. In 
ACL-2005: 43rd Annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Ann 
Arbor, MI, pp. 263—270. 
Chung, J., K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. (2016 ), A character -level decoder without explicit 
segmentation for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . Berlin, 
Germany, pages 1693 —1703.  
 
Cuong , H., S.  Frank, and K. Sima’an. (2016 ), ILLC -UvA Adaptation System (Scorpio) at 
WMT'16 IT -DOMAIN Task. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine 
Translation , Berlin, Germany, pp.423 —427. 
Doddington, G. (2002 ), Automatic evaluation of machine trans lation quality using n -gram 
co-occurrence statistics.  In HLT 2002: Human Language Technology Conference : 
proceedings of the second international conference on human language technology 
research , San Diego, California, pp.138 —145. 

==== Page 15 ====
Dyer, C., A. Lopez, J. Gan itkevitch, J. Weese, F. Ture, P. Blunsom, H. Sewatian, V. 
Eidelman, and P. Resnik. (2010 ), cdec: a decoder, alignment, and learning framework 
for finitestate and context -free translation models. In Proceedings of the ACL 2010 
System Demonstrations , Uppsala, Sweden, pp.7 —12. 
Forcada, M. (2017 ), Making sense of neural machine translation . Translation Spaces  
6(2):291 —309. 
Forcada, M. , and R. Ñeco. (1997 ), Recursive hetero -associative memories for  translation. 
In Biological and Artificial Computation: From Neuroscience to Technology  (International 
Work -Conference on Artificial and Natural Neural Networks, IWANN’97 , Proceedings) , 
Lanzarote, Canary Islands, Spain, pp. 453—462. 
García -Martínez, M., L. Barrault, and F. Bougares. (2016 ), Factored Neural Machi ne 
Translation. eprint arXiv:1609.04621 ( https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04621 )  
Goodfellow, I., Y.  Bengio , and A. Courville . (2016 ), Deep Learning . Cambridge, MA.: MIT 
Press.  
Hassan, H., A. Aue, C. Chen, V. Chowdhary, J. Clark, C. Federmann, X. Huang, M. 
Junczys -Dowmunt, W. Lewis, M. Li, S. Liu, T-Y. Liu, R. Luo, A. Menezes, T . Qin, F. 
Seide, X. Tan, F . Tian, L. Wu, S. Wu, Y. Xia, D. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and M.  Zhou. (2018 ), 
Achieving Human Parity on Automatic Chinese to English News Translation . eprint arXiv:  
1803.05567  (https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05567 ). 
Hearne, M. , and A. Way. (2011 ), Statistical Machine Translation: A Guide for Linguists and 
Translators. Language and Linguistics Compass  5:205—226. 
Heyn, M. (1998 ), Translation Memories – Insights & Prospects. In L. Bowker, M. Cronin, D. 
Kenny and J. Pearson (Eds.) Unity in Diversity? Current Trends in Translation Studies , 
Manchester: St. Jerome, pp.123 —136. 
Hutchins , W.J. , and H.L. Somers. (1992 ), An Introduction to Machine T ranslation . London: 
Academic Press . 
Kalchbrenner, N. , and P. Blunsom. (2013 ), Recurrent  continuous translation models. In 
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing , Seattle,  WA., USA, pp.1700 —1709.  
King, M., and S.  Perschke. (1984 ), EUROTRA.  In M. King (ed.) Machine translation today: 
the state of the art. Proceedings of the Third Lugano Tutorial , Lugano, Switzerland, 
Edinburgh: Edi nburgh  University Press, 1987, pp. 373—391. 
Koehn, P. (2005 ), Europarl: a parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In MT 
Summit X, Conference Proceedings: the tenth Machine Translation Summit , Phuket, 
Thailand , pp.79 —86. 
Koehn, P., H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison -Burch, M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. 
Shen, C. Moran, R. Zens, C.  Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin, and  E. Herbst. (2007 ), 
Moses: open source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In ACL 2007: proceedi ngs 
of demo and poster sessions , Prague, Czech Republic, pp.177 —180. 

==== Page 16 ====
Koehn, P.,  and R. Knowles. (2017 ), Six challenges for neural machine translation. In 
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation , Vancouver, Canada, 
pp.28 —39. 
 
Koehn, P., F. O ch, and D. Marcu. (2003 ), Statistical phrase -based translation . In HLT-
NAACL 2003: conference combining Human Language Technology conference series 
and the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
conference se ries,  Edmonton, Canada,  pp.48 —54. 
Levenshtein, V.I. (1966 ), Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and 
reversals. Soviet Physics Doklady  10 (8): 707 —710.  
Luong, M -T., K. Cho , and C. Manning. (2016 ), Neural Machine Translation. Tutorial  
presented at  54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Berlin, 
Germany  (https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/nmt/Luong -Cho-Manning -NMT -ACL2016 -
v4.pdf ). 
Luong , M-T., and C. Manning. (2015 ), Stanford neural  machine translation systems for 
spoken language  domains. In Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on Spoken 
Language Translation , Da Nang, Vietnam , pp.76 —79. 
Luong, M -T., and C. Manning. (2016 ), Achieving Open Vocabulary Neural Machine 
Translation with Hybrid Word -Character Models. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 
Berlin, Germany, pp.1054 —1063.  
Ma, Y., Y.  He, A. Way, and J. Van Genabith. (2011 ), Consistent Translation using 
Discriminative Learning: A Translation Memory -inspired Approach. In ACL-HLT 2011: 
Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , Portland, Oregon, USA, pp.1239 —1248.  
Mikolov, T., K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean. (2013 ), Efficient Estimation of Word 
Representations in Vector Space. In Proceedings of a Workshop at the Internat ional 
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR -13), Scottsdale, AZ, USA , 12pp.  
Moorkens, J. , and A. Way. (2016 ), Comparing Translator Acceptability of TM and SMT 
Outputs. Baltic Journal of Modern Computing  4(2):141 —151. 
Nagao, M. (1984 ), A framework of a mechanical translation between Japanese and English 
by analogy principle, Artificial and human intelligence: edited review papers presented at 
the international NATO Symposium , October 1981, Lyons, France; ed. A. Elithorn and R. 
Banerji. A msterdam: North Holland , pp.173 —180. 
Och, F. , and H. Ney. (2003 ), A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment 
models. Computational Linguistics  29 (1):19—51. 
Papineni, K., S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W -J. Zhu. (2002 ), BLEU: a method for automatic 
evaluation of machine translation. In ACL-2002: 40th Annual M eeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics , Philadelphia, PA., pp.311 —318. 
Passban, P. , Qun Liu, and A. Way. (2018 ), Improving Character -based Decoding Using 
Target -Side Morphological Information for Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of 
HLT-NAACL 2018, the 16th Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the 

==== Page 17 ====
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , New 
Orlean s, LA, USA (to appear).  
 
Pierce, J., J. Carroll, E. Hamp, D.  Hays, C. Hockett, A. Oettinger, and A. Perlis.  (1966 ), 
Language and Machines — Computers in Translation and Linguistics. ALPAC report, 
National Academy of Sciences, National Research Council, Wash ington, DC.  
 
Popović, M. (2015 ), ChrF: character n -gram F -score for automatic MT evaluation. In 
Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , Lisbon, Portugal, 
pp.392 —395. 
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G.E., and Williams, R.J. (1986 ), Learning representations by back -
propagating errors. Nature  323: 533 —536. 
Sennrich, R., and B. Haddow. (2016 ), Linguistic Input Features Improve Neural Machine 
Translation. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation , Berlin, 
Germany, pp.83 —91. 
Sennrich, R., B. Haddow, and A. Birch. (2016 ), Edinburgh Neural Machine Translation 
Systems for WMT 16. In Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation , 
Berlin, Germany, pp.371 —376. 
Shterionov, D., R.  Superbo, P. Nagle, L. Casanella s, T. O’Dowd , and A. Way. (2018 ), 
Human vs. Automatic Quality Evaluation of NMT and PBSMT. Machine Translation  32(3-
4) (in press).  
Sikes, R. (2007 ), Fuzzy matching in theory and practice. Multilingual  18(6):39 —43. 
Snover, M., B. Dorr, R. Schwartz, L. Micciulla, and J.  Makhoul. (2006 ), A study of 
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation. In AMTA 2006, Proceedings of the 
7th Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas , Cambridge, 
MA., pp.223 —231. 
Sutskever, I., O. Vinyals, and Q.V. Le. (2014 ), Sequence to Sequence Learning with  Neural 
Networks.  In NIPS 2014:  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Montréal , 
Canada, pp.3104 —3112.  
Tillmann, C., S. Vogel, H.  Ney, H. Sawaf, and A. Zubiaga. (1997 ), Accelerated  DP-based 
search for statistical translation. In Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on 
Speech Communication and Technology (EuroSpeech ’97) , Rhodes, Greece, pp.2667 —
2670.  
Vauquois, B. (1968 ), A Survey of Formal Grammars and Algorithms for Recognition and 
Transformation in Machine Translation. In Information Processing 68, Proceedings of 
IFIP Congress 1968 , Edinburgh, UK , pp.254 —60. 
Wang, L., Z.  Tu, X. Zhang, H. Li, A. Way, and Q. Liu. (2016 ), A Novel Approach to Dropped 
Pronoun Translation. In NAACL HLT 2016: Proceedings of The 15th Annual Conference 
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human 
Language Technologies , San Diego, CA, pp.983 ---993. 
Way, A.  (2009 ), A Critique of Statistical Machine Translation. Journal of translation and 
interpreting studies:  Special Issue on Evaluation of Translation Technology  8:17—41. 

==== Page 18 ====
Way, A. (2018 ), Quality expectations of machine translation. In S. Doherty, S. Castilho, J . 
Moorkens, and F. Gaspari (eds.) Human and Machine Translation Quality and 
Evaluation - From Principles to Practice , Springer: Berlin (in press).  
Way, A. , and M. Hearne. (2011 ), On the Role of Translations in State -of-the-Art Statistical 
Machine Translation . Language and Linguistics Compass  5:227—248. 
Wu, Y., M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q, V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey, M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. 
Gao, K. Macherey, J. Klingner, A. Shah, M. Johnson, X. Liu, L. Kaiser, S. Gouws, Y. 
Kato, T. Kudo, H. Kazawa, K. Stevens, G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young,  J. Smith, 
J. Riesa, A. Rudnick, O. Vinyals, G. Corrado, M. Hughes,  and J. Dean. (2016 ), Google’s 
Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap  between Human and Machine 
Translation. eprint arXiv:1609.08144 ( https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144 ). 
Zhang, J., X. Wu, I. Calixto, A. Hosseinzadeh Vahid, X. Zhang, A. Way , and Q. Liu. (2014 ), 
Experiments in Medical Translation Shared Task at WMT 2014. In Proceedings of WMT 
2014: the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , Baltimore, MD., pp.260 —
265. 

