==== Page 1 ====
  Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  46 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
  
MARKETING AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE   
 
———————————————————————————————————————  
Jarek , K., Mazurek, G. 
———————————————————————————————————————  
Krystyna Jarek , Grzegorz Mazurek  / Kozminski University , Poland .  
Email: krystyna.jarek@kozminski.edu.pl , gmazurek@kozminski.edu.pl  
 
Abstract  
In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has become an emerging trend in different fields: 
science, business, medicine, automotive and education. AI has also reached marketing. 
The aim of the paper is to research how deeply AI is applied in marketing and what 
implications there are for marketing practitioners. Authors stated two research questions - 
which areas of AI are used in marketing and what implications AI deliv ers for marketing 
managers. To answer those questions , the authors conducted research o n secondary data 
with AI examples used for marketing purpose. The analysis of gathered examples show s 
that AI is widely introduced into the marketing field, though the applications are at the 
operational level. This may be the effect of careful implementati on of the new technology, 
still at the level of experimenting with it. The uncertainty of the outcome of AI 
implementation may affect the caution in putting these innovations into practice as well. 
Gathered examples proved that AI influences all aspects of  marketing mix impacting both 
consumer value delivery as well as the marketing organization and management. The 
paper delivers implications for business , especially ideas about implementing AI into 
marketing, designing innovations and the ideas  on how to incorporate new skills into 
marketing team required by the new technology.  
 
Keywords : artificial intelligence, AI, marketing, AI application, AI implications, AI in 
Marketing  
JEL Classification : M31, M15 
 
Introduction  
Artificial intelligence (AI) has lately become a very popular subject in the area of 
management and marketing sciences, although, quite paradoxically, the works on its 
development in other fields of science have been proceeding continuously for over half a  
century. Over the years, AI has been appearing in and disappearing from the spotlight 
depending on the level of its advancement and the increase in its potential applicability. The 
interest in and the extensive discussion on AI are caused by the first wid e-scale commercial 
applications of AI, which have shown the potential and the capabilities of this technology 
also in the area of marketing. The rapid development of AI in recent years has been 
possible thanks to the advancement of the cognitive mechanisms  of AI and of capabilities of 
machines to learn based on the obtained data (Lieto, Bhatt, Oltramari, & Vernon, 2017), as 
well as thanks to the possibility to create previously non -existing information (Grawal, Gans, 
& Goldfarb, 2017). The power of AI also lies in the spectrum of processing of various 

==== Page 2 ====
   Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 47 formats of data - apart from numerical data, artificial intelligence processes texts, images, 
and sounds, providing them with significance and relevance for further analyses (Dhar, 
2016).  
AI has been so far dr awing the attention of engineers, IT experts, and analysts, but is now 
moving outside its traditional areas of occurrence, making an increasingly stronger mark in 
the field of management and marketing. The ever -increasing amount of consumer data 
available online, in big data systems or mobile devices, makes AI become an important ally 
of marketing, as it is based on data analysis in almost every area of its application. 
Marketing takes advantage of data to a large extent - from consumer needs research, 
mark et analyses, customer insights, and competition intelligence through pursuing activities 
in various communication or distribution channels to measuring the results and effects of 
the adopted strategies. Marketing becomes a natural beneficiary of developing  information 
technology (Mazurek, 2011a, 2011b, 2014). The proximity of both domains makes it 
possible to achieve a synergy effect. Therefore, it seems important to emphasise the 
potential of artificial intelligence and of the available AI -based tools and to discuss the 
commercial applications of AI in the area of marketing.  
The article is divided into four parts. The first part includes the key definitions of the ideas 
related to AI. The second discusses examples of AI solutions implemented in the area of  
marketing. The third part, being an effect of an analysis of the collected examples, provides 
a description of areas of AI’s impact on marketing. The final part of the article covers the 
opportunities and risks underlying the application of AI in marketin g activity.  
1 Theoretical background  
1.1 Artificial Intelligence overview  
Artificial intelligence derives from information technology. It is often used interchangeably 
with notions like automation or robotization. It also tends to be confused with machine 
learning or algorithm application. According to Oxford Dictionary, AI is “the theory and 
development of computer systems able to perform tasks normally requiring human 
intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision -making, an d 
translation between languages” ("artificial intelligence | Definition of artificial intelligence in 
English by Oxford Dictionaries", 2019) . The technology based on artificial intelligence is 
able to imitate the cognitive functions that we attribute to th e human mind, including the 
ability to solve problems and learn (Syam, Sharma, 2018). The role and of AI is to process 
and identify the acquired data and then to perform certain tasks. This is the definition of the 
so-called Artificial Narrow Intelligence , which functions and carries out tasks in a defined 
area (Shanahan, 2015). The second type of AI is Artificial General Intelligence , whose 
scope of intellectual capacity is comparable to that of the human brain (Sterne, 2017). The 
current potential of AI w orks in a narrow area, and tasks are performed thanks to the 
advancement of three technologies: machine learning, deep learning, and natural language 
processing.  
Machine learning (ML) has taken AI to a higher level, one above the level of following a set 
of predefined rules. Therefore, ML has changed the role of algorithms that have been used 
so far with AI. ML has enabled computers to learn by themselves based on the available 

==== Page 3 ====
  Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  48 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 data by establishing links between individual pieces of data. Thanks to these ca pabilities, 
ML makes it possible to draw conclusions and form generalisations on the basis of 
performed analyses (McIlwraith, Marmanis, & Babenko, 2017). ML comes in many forms 
and may be presented as pattern recognition, statistical modelling, data explor ation, 
knowledge discovery, predictive analytics, data analytics, adaptive systems, self -organising 
systems, and many more (Domingos, 2016).  
Deep learning (DL) is a higher level of ML because it is based on learning algorithms that 
do not need to be manage d manually. DL, taking advantage of big data and computing 
power (of , e.g. server farms, CPU power, cloud computing), makes it possible to decipher 
and provide the result for a new piece of information instantly (Alpaydin, 2016).  
Natural language processin g (NLP) is one of the applications of ML and DL, aiming at 
speech recognition. Many years of research in this area have made it possible to work on 
large amounts of data (text samples) that act as sources of the context, the vocabulary, the 
syntax, and the  semantic meaning (Alpaydin, 2016).  
Advancements conducted in those technologies have enabled the development of AI in the 
areas of voice, text, and image recognition, decision -making, and autonomous robots and 
vehicles. Practical applications can be met for each of these areas. Voice recognition is 
available , for example , in smartphones (e .g. Siri, Google Assistant). Text recognition 
solutions are used as virtual assistants wh o deliver rapid answers (e .g. Deakin Univ ersity 
and IBM Watson). Image recog nition is used for payment approval, thanks to comparison 
face image the system can make payments (e .g. food chain KFC). Decision -making system 
is available for educational purpose – IBM Elements is dedicated for teachers to support 
them in student assessm ent and to deliver creates recommended individual development 
path for each student. Finally, autonomous robots and vehicles are used in the warehouses 
to manage the stock (e .g. in Amazon Kiva system).  
1.2 Marketing mix  
In 2013 by the American Marketing As sociation approved a new version of marketing 
definition. According to the association “marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and 
processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have 
value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large”  ("What is Marketing? — The 
Definition of Marketing — AMA", 2019) .  
The critical aspect of marketing is the value delivery to customers (Grönroos, 2006), while 
the value may represent different product aspects such as goods, ideas, services, 
information, or any type of solution that fulfil customer needs.  
McCarthy propose d the idea of “marketing mix” as a conceptual framework translating 
marketing planning into practice (Bennett, 1997). Though the marketing mix is not a 
scientific theory, its tools can develop both long -term strategies and short -term tactical 
marketing pro grammes (Palmer, 2004). McCarthy refined previous Borden's conception of 
satisfying the target market. He regrouped Borden's 12 elements (product planning, pricing, 
branding, channels of distribution, personal selling, advertising, promotions, packaging, 
display, servicing, physical handling, fact -finding and analysis) into four elements, called 

==== Page 4 ====
   Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 49 4Ps: product, price, promotion, and place. There were further advancements made within 
the marketing mix concept, such as adding another Ps - people, processes, phy sical 
evidence (Booms, Bittner, 1980), though the idea of 4Ps is still widely used and accepted.  
2 Methodology  
Due to the emerging trends of AI application in the business area, the aim of this paper is to 
review the AI implementation in the field of marketing. The goal of the research is to assess 
the scope of AI application within marketing mix and find answers to the research 
questions: (1) do all areas of AI (voice, text, image recognition, decision -making, 
autonomous vehicles and robots) find appl ication in marketing; (2) what kind of implications 
does AI make in marketing practice. To answer these questions , the authors decided to 
conduct secondary data research to gather examples of AI application. The procedure of 
collecting AI application w as made in two steps. The f irst step was a focus on review the 
marketing portals (www.marketingweek.com, www.adweek.com, www.warc.com) to gather 
AI application in marketing. The second step was the validation of selected examples by 
confirming  gathered examples with the information on the company site or in the press 
release of each example. There was no limitation connected with the sample location ; the 
goal of the secondary research was to collect any example of AI application. The presented 
conclusions are based on the results of the authors ' analysis of gathered examples.  
3 Results   
To answer the first research question ( Do all areas of AI find application in marketing?) , 
authors compiled all validated examples grouped according to the five AI areas which are 
presented in Table 1. For each mentioned AI area (text, voice, image recognition, decision 
making, autonomous vehicles and robots) authors have found AI application in marketing. 
While text recognition, image recognition, decision -making  technologies are widely used, 
the voice technology , as well as autonomous vehicles and robots,  are not so popular. This 
can be caused by the greater complexity of both technologies. Moreover, autonomous 
vehicles and robots are more often perceived as a pa rt of Industry 4.0 domain than 
marketing . Thus it is seldom perceived as a way of creating and developing innovations in 
sales channel management, merchandising optimization or delivering customer service 
which are placed in a marketing mix program within the ‘place’ domain.  
Table 1  | Examples of application of AI in marketing  
AI areas  Examples of application in marketing  
Voice processing 
technologies  • Voice purchase requests made through a device or the Amazon Alexa 
app.  
• Virtual assistants  are supporting task execution (Siri, Google Home, 
Cortana) .  
Text processing 
technologies  • Use of a virtual assistant as a guide to walk you through a shopping 
centr e (Alpine.AI) . 
• A virtual assistant embedded in a mobile bank  app, taking advantage 
of NLP, handles client requests alone by responding to their inquiries. 
A virtual assistant  is presenting application features, options to make a 
purchase of bank products by oneself, and providing information about 
the location of b ank branches and cash machines (ING Bank Śląski) . 
• A GPS navigation system that apart from showing the route to the 

==== Page 5 ====
  Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  50 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 selected destination suggests attractions found nearby or on the way 
to the destination, and shows similar objects to those related to the se t 
destination (Naver) . 
• An analysis of statements made by clients of banks, insurance 
companies, and telecoms performed in order to diagnose irritating 
situations, which led to the elimination of negative events that might 
occur in the customer journey, and  to modification of the customer 
service process (Touchpoint) . 
• Development and launch of new beer recipes, and modification of the 
existing products thanks to information gathered by a chatbot 
(Intelligentx Brew) . 
• Development of a marketing campaign to lau nch a new car model - 
the Toyota Mirai. Using data provided by a selected target group, 
computers performed an analysis of texts and videos on YouTube in 
order to teach the machines the preferred style of the said target 
group. Next, through multiple itera tions, they developed the first 
creative advertising campaign, and the final texts for the adverts were 
approved by the supervising team. The result was almost a thousand 
of advertising spots tailored to the profiles of the ad recipients on 
Facebook (Toyot a, Saatchi&Saatchi) . 
• Promotion of the Milonerzy  TV show, the Polish edition of Who Wants 
to Be a Millionaire? , on Facebook taking advantage of a 
conversational chatbot. Maintaining the format and the style typical of 
the show made it possible to offer new and unique experience (TVN) . 
Image 
recognition and 
processing 
technology  • Face recognition as a way to make payments (KFC) . 
• Recognising the condition of face skin, followed by an individual 
selection of the type of face cream based on an analysis of one’s 
photo and data , including information about the current weather 
(Shiseido) . 
• A photo as a medium to search  for items online. Apart from search 
results in the form of identical items, the search engine offers similar 
or complementary items (eBay) . 
• Using the client’s face image to select colour cosmetics individually 
during online shopping (Estée Lauder) . 
• Service -free bricks and mortar shop where video cameras analyse the 
selected products and payments are made automatically (Amazon) . 
• Electronic mirrors in a clothing shop that match the collection to the 
client’s appearance, style, and taste (FashionAI) . 
• Selection of  the best Christmas gift by going through twelve best 
suggestions. Based on the recognition of the buyer’s face and emotion 
analysis, the programme suggested the best option to go for (eBay) . 
• Identification of clients before the start of a video consultati on by 
comparing the video image with a photo provided earlier by the client 
(BBVA) . 
• Embedded ML mechanisms make it possible to automatically frame 
images according to the requirements of the brand and 
communication channels (Adobe Sensei) . 
• An image finder that makes it possible to select the best photos and 
reject the less appealing ones (Everypixel) . 
Decision -making  • Development of individual savings plan thanks  to an analysis of the 
funds available on one’s account, receipts, amount of expenses and  
the way one spends their money. By comparing the financial 
behaviour of a user and a given community, the application develops 
a tailor -made savings plan to match the financial capabilities of a 
given person (Plum) . 
• Travel destinations matched individuall y based on the traveller’s 
musical preferences. Apart from the city, the app chooses specific 
districts and attractions to match the user’s profile (Spotify, Emirates) . 

==== Page 6 ====
   Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 51 • A chatbot  is preparing a cocktail recipe using the ingredients the 
consumer has at home and based on the consumer’s preferences. 
The chatbot analyses 300 recipes and offers the best -matched 
solution (Diageo Simi Bartender) . 
• Based on the user’s mobile phone data (locat ion, sun exposure time), 
the app indicates the right level of UV protection filter (Monteloeder) . 
• Dynamic matching of prices to the user based on their shopping 
record visited websites, or the owned mobile phone (iperfumy.pl, 
kontigo.pl) . 
• Matching adverts to user characteristics based on one’s online history 
(ING Bank Śląski) . 
• New product recommendations (Amazon, Netflix) . 
• GO-I-PACE, an application  is analysing one’s driving style, route 
choices, and frequency of charging the car (electric car). Based on th e 
results, the app offers suggestions on how to drive the care in a more 
efficient and effective manner (Jaguar I -PACE) . 
• ZozoSuit helps customers order clothes fitted perfectly to their figure. 
Thanks to in -built 150 sensors, ZozoSuit makes it possible to take 
150,000 measurements (Start Today, StretchSense) . 
• A platform to manage marketing campaigns online. In the first weeks, 
AI learns the specificity of a given company, then, based on data 
analysis, comes up with recommendations concerning the campaign 
strategy (Albert AI, Harley Davidson) . 
• Detecting faults and errors in product functioning and forecasting 
malfunction occurrences. The s ynchronisation of the work performed 
by the technical team responsible for device (lift) monitoring and repair 
works (if n ecessary) (KONE, IBM Watson IoT, Salesforce Einstein) . 
• Creation of a consolidated customer record regardless of the products 
purchased and used, linking customer data from every company area 
(Sales Cloud Einstein, U.S. Bank) . 
• Synchronisation of customer da ta from all possible points of contact 
with the brand (social media, website, e -mail, phone conversation). All 
interactions are aggregated and presented in one place in order to 
offer improved customer service (Salesforce, Adidas) . 
Autonomous 
robots and 
vehicles  • Service -free shops (Ford & Alibaba, Amazon Go, Zaitt Brasil) . 
• A robot used to check the stock on shop shelves and the arrangement 
of the products displayed. Information of shortages or incorrect 
arrangement is sent to the service staff, who take their time to look 
into the reported issues (Schnuck) . 
• An autonomous sho p is offering basic and fresh products and 
magazines, able to travel independently to the warehouse in order to 
replenish the stock. The shop was tested in Shanghai (Moby Mart) . 
Source : author s 
 
4 Findings and Discussion  
4.1  Implications for marketing  
To answer the second research question ( what kind of implications does AI make in 
marketing practice ?) authors conducted an analysis of gathered examples and made a 
synthesis  of how the examples reflect the marketing mix. Conclusions are presented in 
Table 2. Each validated examples shows that AI impact each area of marketing mix 
program. This fining is especially important for practitioners who are responsible for 
developing innovations as AI influence the whole spectrum of marketing activity. It is worth 
mentioning that the area of ‘place’ requires cooperation with Industry 4.0 specialist, as 

==== Page 7 ====
  Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  52 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 autonomous vehicles and robots play a crucial role in creating new sales channels and new 
customer service. Additiona lly, AI applications that extend the core product requires 
innovation design approach to find the insights that match ideas going beyond the product 
or even category. This Is important for implementing AI within ‘product’ and ‘promotion’ 
areas in the marke ting mix program.  
Table 2  | Areas of the impact of AI on marketing mix  
Product  Price  Promotion (Brand)  Place (Sales & 
distribution)  
• New product 
development  
• Hyper -
personalisation  
• Automatic 
recommendations  
• Creating 
additional value  
• Additional 
solutions beyond 
product category  
 • Price 
management and 
dynamic price 
matching to 
customer profile  
 • Creating a unique 
experience  
• Personalised 
communication  
• Creating the wow 
factor and offering 
benefits  
• Elimination of the 
process of learning 
product categor ies 
• Positive impact on 
the customer  
• Minimised 
disappointment  
 • Convenient shopping  
• The f aster and 
simpler sales process  
• 24/7 customer service 
(chatbot)  
• Purchase automation  
• Service -free shops  
• Consultant -less 
customer support  
• New distribution 
channels  
• Mercha ndising 
automation  
Source : author s 
 
The analysis of the collected cases shows that AI activities have a two -way impact on 
marketing. On the one hand, the beneficiary of changes is the consumer, but on the other, 
new solutions affect the entirety of the pursued marketing activities.  
4.2  The impact of AI on consumers  
Just as the Internet has brought about many advantages from the consumer’s point of view, 
such as automatic recommendations and relevant product suggestions (Grewal, 
Roggeveena, & Nordfältba, 2017), shorter shopping time (Moncrief, 2017), or customer 
servi ce personalisation (Jordan, & Mitchell, 2015), AI goes one step further and offers new 
opportunities in marketing activity. The analysis of the collected examples of the application 
of AI in marketing shows a whole spectrum of advantages that AI offers to consumers:  
• More convenient and quicker shopping  time thanks to improved processes (e .g. 
automatic payments, the better quality of search engines, 24/7 customer service).  
• New consumer experience  via mass -scale hyper -personalisation, after -sales 
service that  creates additional value going beyond the basic product.  
• A new dimension of the consumer -brand relationship  delivered by building 
surprise and delight minimised post -purchase dissonance thanks to the possibility 
to test the considered product virtually, e limination of the process of category 
learning, and finally taking advantage of benchmarking against other users.  
 

==== Page 8 ====
   Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 53 4.3  The impact of AI on marketing management  
When it comes to marketing management, AI has a significant impact on contemporary 
practices, and will surely require a new approach to tasks fulfilled in marketing teams:  
• Elimination of laborious and time -consuming activities . AI automates routine 
and repeatable tasks (e.g. data collection and analysis, image search and 
adaptation/processing).  
• Bigger significance of creative and strategic activities . Precise analyses 
performed by AI increases the role of creative and strategi c activities to build 
competitive advantage.  
• Design innovations . AI redefine the way the value is delivered to the customer 
and increase the role of finding new solutions through design.  
• Developing new competences in the marketing team . AI requires incor porating 
data scientist skills as well as an understanding of the new technology possibilities 
in the marketing team.  
• A new marketing ecosystem . The complexity of AI increases the role of 
companies producing AI solutions. Due to the current level of AI adv ancement (the 
level of Artificial Narrow Intelligence), there is a need to develop a new model of 
cooperation with AI entities offering data engineering or ML tools.  
Conclusion  
The analysis confirmed that AI is applied in many areas of marketing. The commercial 
solutions based on it take advantage of all five AI areas: image recognition, text recognition, 
decision -making, voice recognition and autonomous robots and vehicles. Whil e the first 
three are applied quite extensively in marketing, the instances practical application of voice 
recognition are rare and developed by the biggest tech companies such as Amazon, 
Google, Apple, or Microsoft on a large scale. Similarly, the autonom ous vehicles and robots 
are not so frequent solution, as this area is much more connected with Industry 4.0, than 
innovation design within the marketing mix.  
AI in marketing tends to be currently implemented at the operational level, usually as one -
off ini tiatives or activities. This may result from the fact that we are dealing with the first 
instances of the practical application of AI, and companies are careful with implementing 
this new technology, experimenting with it. The costs related to the developm ent of new 
concepts and the uncertainty of the outcome of their implementation may affect the caution 
in putting these innovations into practice as well.  
When analysing product popularity, i.e. of Salesforce Einstein and Albert AI, it seems that 
the first implementations inspire trust to AI solutions and companies are more willing to take 
advantage of them if they see positive results of their application.  
The analysis of the collected examples shows that AI offers a new quality to a consumer’s 
life. 24/7 c ustomer service, hyper -personalised solutions, more convenient shopping, or the 
possibility to avoid making the wrong choice all contribute to a new dimension in the area of 
the marketing organisation.  

==== Page 9 ====
  Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  54 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 These changes have an unquestionable impact on the fu nctioning of marketing 
departments and organisations. Most of all, it necessitates introducing new functions and 
skills to marketing teams, i.e. people with the right knowledge about AI, data science and 
qualifications in design and implementation of new s olutions. It is also about managing a 
new model of cooperation with the entities offering advanced AI solutions and reaching a 
synergy effect with regard to AI and other functions.  
The research proved that AI applications are incorporated in all areas od marketing mix as 
well as five different AI technolog ies are used within marketing practice. As the authors 
found that the first AI applications are made as a single implementation, often as an 
experiment, there is a need for further research to assess the impact of AI on marketing, 
especially the business effect.  
References  
Alpaydin, E. (2016). Machine Learning . MIT Press . 
Artificial intelligence | Definition of artificial intelligence in English by Oxford Dictionaries. (2019). 
Retrieved from https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/artificial_intelligence . 
Bennett, A. R. (1997). The five Vs -a buyer’s perspective of the marketing mix. Marketing Intelligence & 
Planning, 15(3), 151 -156. 
Booms, B. H., Bitner, B. J. (1980). Marketing strategies  and organisation structures for service firms. In 
Donnelly, J. & George W. R. (Eds.), Marketing of services . American Marketing Association, p. 
47-51. 
Dhar, V. (2016). The Future of Artificial Intelligence. Big Data , 4(1), 5 -9, 
https://doi.org/10.1089/big .2016.29004.vda.  
Domingos, P. (2016). Naczelny Algorytm: Jak jego odkrycie zmieni nasz świat . Helion, Gliwice.  
Grawal, A., Gans, J. S., & Goldfarb, A. (2017). What to Expect From Artificial Intelligence. MIT Sloan 
Management Review . Retrieved August, 10, 2018, from 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/what -to-expect -from-artificial -intelligence/.  
Grewal, D., Roggeveen, A. L., & Nordfält, J. (2017). The future of retailing. Journal of Retailing , 93(1), 
1-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2016.1 2.008.  
Grönroos, Ch. (2006), On defining marketing: finding a new roadmap for marketing . Marketing Theory , 
6(4), 395 –417. 
Haridy, R. (2017). 2017: The year AI beat us at all our own games . Retrieved May, 10, 2018, from 
https://www.google.pl/url?sa=t&rct=j& q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2a
hUKEwi3qejh88PcAhXBA5oKHXjyDoYQFjABegQIARAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Fnewatlas.com
%2Fai -2017 -beating -humans -
games%2F52741%2F&usg=AOvVaw0ynvQnvrHHNWMIs5LvYFK4.  
Jordan, M. I., & Mitchell, T. M. (2015). Machine learning:  Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science, 
349(6245), 255 -260. https://doi.org /10.1126/science.aaa8415.  

==== Page 10 ====
   Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
 
 55 Lieto, A., Bhatt, M., Oltramari, A., & Vernon, D. (2017). The role of cognitive architectures in general 
artificial intelligence. Cognitive Systems Research , 48, 1 -3, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsys.2017.08.003.  
Mlot, S. (2018). AI Beats Human Lawyers at Their Own Game. Retrieved May, 10, 2018, from 
https://www. google.pl/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=14&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2
ahUKEwi3qejh88PcAhXBA5oKHXjyDoYQFjANegQIAxAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.geek.c
om%2Ftech%2Fai -beats -human -lawyers -at-their-own-game -
1732154%2F&usg=AOvVaw02zOiXuratoHCB8YfsmLQV.  
Mazurek, G. ( 2011a). Informacja w wirtualnym środowisku a rozwój społeczeństwa informacyjnego. 
Zeszyty Naukowe Uniwersytetu Szczecińskiego – Ekonomiczne Problemy Usług , 650(1), 186 -
194. 
Mazurek, G. (2011b). Virtualization of marketing - conceptual model.  In Proceeding s of the 2011 
International Conference on Marketing Studies (ICMS2011) , Academy of Taiwan Information 
Systems Research (ATISR), Kuala Lumpur, 9 -11th September, 220 -229.  
Mazurek, G. (2014). Network Value Creation through Marketing, Management & Business 
Administration. Central Europe , 22(4), 70 -77. https://doi.org/10.7206/mba.ce.2084 -3356.120.  
McIlwraith D., Marmanis H., & Babenko D. (2017). Inteligentna sieć. Algorytmy przyszłości . Helion, 2nd 
edition, Gliwice, p. 27.  
Moncrief, W. C. (2017). Are sales as we know it dying ... or merely transforming? Journal of Personal 
Selling & Sales Management , 37(4), 271 -279, https://doi.org/10.1080/08853134.2017.1386110.  
Palmer, A. (2004). Introduction to Marketing - Theory and Pract ice. UK: Oxford University Press.  
Shanahan, M. (2015). The Technology Singularity . MIT Press.  
Simonite, T. (2018). AI beat humans at reading! Maybe not . Retrieved May,  10, 2018, from 
https://www.google.pl/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=17&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2
ahUKEwi3qejh88PcAhXBA5oKHXjyDoYQFjAQegQIBxAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.wired.c
om%2Fstory%2Fai -beat-humans -at-reading -maybe -
not%2F&usg=AOvVaw0b1rNX76rschfKgbWprQ sz. 
Sterne, J. (2017). Artificial Intelligence in Marketing. Practical Applications . Wiley and SAS Business 
Series.  
Syam, N., & Sharma, A. (2018). Waiting for a sales renaissance in the fourth industrial revolution: 
Machine learning and artificial intellig ence in sales research and practice. Industrial Marketing 
Management , 69, 135 -146. https://www.ama.org/the -definition -of-marketing/ (access 
13/04/2019) . 
What is Marketing? — The Definition of Marketing — AMA. (2019). Retrieved from 
https://www.ama.org/the -definition -of-marketing/ . 
The research paper  has been re viewed . | Rece ived: February 21, 2019 ; Accepted: May 13, 2019 ; 
Prepublished online: June 10, 2019 ; Published: June 19, 2019  
 

==== Page 11 ====
  Volume 8 | Issue  2 | 2019  
DOI: 10.18267/j.cebr.2 13 
  56 CENTRAL EUROPEAN BUSINESS REVIEW  
  

