==== Page 1 ====
1
Medical Image Segmentation Review:
The Success of U-Net
Reza Azad , Ehsan Khodapanah Aghdam , Amelie Rauland, Yiwei Jia , Atlas Haddadi Avval ,
Afshin Bozorgpour , Sanaz Karimijafarbigloo , Joseph Paul Cohen , Ehsan Adeli , and Dorit Merhof
Abstract —Automatic medical image segmentation is a crucial topic in the medical domain and successively a critical counterpart in
the computer-aided diagnosis paradigm. U-Net is the most widespread image segmentation architecture due to its ﬂexibility, optimized
modular design, and success in all medical image modalities. Over the years, the U-Net model achieved tremendous attention from
academic and industrial researchers. Several extensions of this network have been proposed to address the scale and complexity
created by medical tasks. Addressing the deﬁciency of the naive U-Net model is the foremost step for vendors to utilize the proper
U-Net variant model for their business. Having a compendium of different variants in one place makes it easier for builders to identify
the relevant research. Also, for ML researchers it will help them understand the challenges of the biological tasks that challenge the
model. To address this, we discuss the practical aspects of the U-Net model and suggest a taxonomy to categorize each network
variant. Moreover, to measure the performance of these strategies in a clinical application, we propose fair evaluations of some unique
and famous designs on well-known datasets. We provide a comprehensive implementation library with trained models for future
research. In addition, for ease of future studies, we created an online list of U-Net papers with their possible ofﬁcial implementation. All
information is gathered in https://github.com/NITR098/Awesome-U-Net repository.
Index Terms —Medical Image Segmentation, Deep Learning, U-Net, Convolutional Neural Network, Transformer.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
IMAGE segmentation, deﬁned as the partition of the en-
tire image into a set of regions, plays a vital role in a
wide range of applications. Medical image segmentation
is a crucial example of this domain and offers numerous
beneﬁts for clinical use. Automated segmentation facilitates
the data processing time and guides clinicians by providing
task-speciﬁc visualizations and measurements. In almost all
clinical applications the visualization algorithm not only
provides insight into the abnormal regions in human tissue
but also guides the practitioners to monitor cancer progres-
sion. Semantic segmentation as a preparatory step in auto-
matic image processing technique can further enhance the
visualization quality by modeling to detect speciﬁc regions
which are more relevant to the task on hand (e.g., heart
segmentation) [1].
R. Azad and E. Khodapanah Aghdam contributed equally to this work.
R. Azad, A. Rauland, Y. Jia, and S. Karimijafarbigloo are with the Institute
of Imaging and Computer Vision, RWTH Aachen University, 52074
Aachen, Germany.
E. Khodapanah Aghdam is with the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran 1983969411, Iran.
A. Haddadi Avval is with the School of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad 9177899191, Iran.
A. Bozorgpour is with the Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif
University of Technology, Tehran 1458889694, Iran.
J.P . Cohen is with the Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine &
Imaging, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA, and
this work was done prior to joining Amazon.
E. Adeli is with Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
D. Merhof is with the Faculty of Informatics and Data Science, University
of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany, and also with the Fraunhofer
Institute for Digital Medicine MEVIS, 28359 Bremen, Germany.
(Corresponding author: D. Merhof. E-mail: dorit.merhof@ur.de.)
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright
may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible.Image segmentation tasks can be classiﬁed into two cat-
egories: semantic segmentation and instance segmentation
[2], [3]. Semantic segmentation is a pixel-level classiﬁcation
that assigns corresponding categories to all the pixels in an
image, whereas instance segmentation also needs to identify
different objects within the same category based on semantic
segmentation. Designing segmentation methods to distin-
guish organ or lesion pixels requires task-speciﬁc image data
to provide the appropriate critical details. Common medical
imaging modalities for acquiring data are X-ray, Positron
Emission Tomography (PET), Computed Tomography (CT),
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), and Ultrasound (US)
[4]. Early traditional approaches to medical image segmen-
tation mainly focused on edge detection, template matching
techniques, region growing, graph cuts, active contour lines,
machine learning, and other mathematical methods. In re-
cent years, deep learning has matured in diverse ﬁelds for
solving many edge cases speciﬁc to the medical domain.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have successfully
implemented feature representation extraction for images,
thus eliminating the need for hand-crafted features in image
segmentation, and their superior performance and accuracy
make them the main choice in this ﬁeld.
An initial attempt to model the semantic segmentation
using a deep neural network was proposed in [5]. This
approach passes the input images through the convolutional
encoder to produce the latent representation. Then on top
of the generated feature maps the fully connected layers
are included to produce a pixel-level prediction. The main
limitation of this architecture was the use of fully connected
layers, which depleted the spatial information and conse-
quently degraded the overall performance. Long et al. [6]
proposed Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) to addressarXiv:2211.14830v1  [eess.IV]  27 Nov 2022

==== Page 2 ====
2
this limitation. The FCN structure applies several convolu-
tional blocks consisting of the convolution, activation, and
pooling layers on the encoder path to capture semantic
representation, and similarly uses the convolutional layer
along with the up-sampling operation in the decoding path
to provide a pixel-level prediction. The main motivation
underlying the successive up-sampling process on the de-
coding path was to gradually increase the spatial dimension
for a ﬁne-grained segmentation result.
Inspired by the architecture of FCNs and the encoder-
decoder models, Ronneberger et al. develop the U-Net [7]
model for biomedical image segmentation. It is tailored to
practical use in medical image analysis and can be applied
in a variety of modalities, including CT [8], [9], [10], [11],
[12], MRI [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], US [18], [19], [20], X-ray
[21], [22], Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) [23], [24],
and PET [25], [26].
FCN networks, speciﬁcally the U-Net, can efﬁciently ex-
ploit a limited number of annotated datasets by leveraging
data augmentation (e.g., random elastic deformation) to
extract detailed features of images without the need for new
training data, resulting in good segmentation performance
[27]. This superiority has made it a great success and has
led to the extensive use of U-Net model in the ﬁeld of
medical segmentation. The U-Net network is composed
of two parts. The ﬁrst part is the contracting path that
employs the downsampling module consisting of several
convolutional blocks to extract semantic and contextual
features. And in the second part, the expansive path applies
a set of convolutional blocks equipped with the upsampling
operation to gradually increase the spatial resolutions of the
feature maps, usually by a factor of two, while reducing the
feature dimensions to produce the pixel-wise classiﬁcation
score. The most signiﬁcant and important part of U-Net is
the skip connections which copy the outputs of each stage
within the contracting path to the corresponding stages in
the expansive path. This novel design propagates essential
high-resolution contextual information along the network,
which encourages the network to re-use the low-level rep-
resentation along with the high-context representation for
accurate localization. This novel structure becomes the back-
bone in the ﬁeld of medical image segmentation since 2015,
and several variants of the model have been derived to
progress the state of the art based on it.
The auto-encoder design of U-Net makes it a unique
tool for breaching its structure in signiﬁcant applications,
e.g., image synthesis [28], [29], [30], image denoising [31],
[32], [33], image reconstruction [34], [35], and image super-
resolution [36]. To provide more insight into the importance
of the U-Net model in the medical domain, we provide Fig-
ure 1, statistical information regarding the methods utilized
U-Net model in their pipeline to address medical image
analysis challenges. From Figure 1, it is evident that U-Net
inﬂuenced most of the diverse segmentation tasks in the
medical image analysis domain with the extreme growth
in publication numbers during the past decade and being
bespeak for future remedies.
Our review covers the most recent U-Net-based medical
image segmentation literature and discusses more than a
hundred methods proposed until September 2022. We de-
liver a broad review and perspicuity on different aspects
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Years050010001500200025003000Number of articlesClassification
Segmentation
Reconstruction
Detection
Registration
Denoising
Image synthesis
OthersFig. 1: The number of research works published in the past
decade using the U-Net model as their baseline to address
various medical image analysis challenges. The visualiza-
tion shows sumptuous attention from the research/industry
community for this architecture, particularly the segmenta-
tion task which is the main objective of this review paper.
of these methods, including network architecture enhance-
ments concerning vanilla U-Net, medical image data modal-
ities, loss functions, evaluation metrics, and their critical
contributions. According to the rapid developments in U-
Net and its variants, we propose a summary of highly cited
approaches in our taxonomy. we group the U-Net variants
into the following categories:
1) Skip Connection Enhancements
2) Backbone Design Enhancements
3) Bottleneck Enhancements
4) Transformers
5) Rich Representation Enhancements
6) Probabilistic Design
Some of the key contributions of this review paper can be
outlined as follows:
This review covers the most recent literature on U-Net
and its variants for medical image segmentation problems
and overviews more than 100 segmentation algorithms
proposed till September 2022, grouped into six categories.
We provide a comprehensive review and insightful analy-
sis of different aspects of U-Net-based algorithms, includ-
ing the reﬁnement of base U-Net architectures, training
data modality, loss functions, evaluation metrics, and their
critical contributions.
We provide comparative experiments of some reviewed
methods on popular datasets and offer codes and pre-
trained weights on GitHub.
As a result, the remainder of the paper is organized as
follows: Section 2 includes the taxonomy of review methods.
Section 2.1 and Section 2.2 provide a a detailed insight into
the basic 2D U-Net and 3D U-Net architectures, respectively.
In Section 3 we will cover U-Net extensions, overview at
least ﬁve top-cited methods in each taxonomical branch,
and highlights their key contribution. Section 4 provides a
comprehensive practical information such as the experimen-

==== Page 3 ====
3
tal datasets, training process, the loss functions, evaluation
metrics, comparative results, and ablation studies. Section 5
discusses the current challenges in the literature and future
directions. Eventually, the last chapter provides the conclu-
sion.
2 T AXONOMY
This section suggests a taxonomy that organizes different
approaches presented in the literature to modify U-Net
architecture for medical image segmentation. Due to the
modular design of U-Net, we proposed our taxonomy to
cope with the inheritance design of U-net rather than the
conceptual taxonomies offered in [37]. Furthermore, this
property makes it difﬁcult to ﬁt each study into only one
group so that a method may belong to several groups of
divisions. Figure 2 depicts our structure for taxonomy, and
we think this taxonomy helps the ﬁeld be organized and
even motivational for future research. In Section 3, we will
go through each concept of taxonomy. In the remainder of
this section, we will ﬁrst explain the naive 2D U-Net, and
following that, we will introduce the 3D U-Net. Eventually,
we will elaborate on the importance of the U-Net model
from a clinical perspective.
2.1 2D U-Net
Before recapitulating the U-Net structure in more detail,
we will ﬁrst consider the path that brings us to the U-
Net architecture. The story begins with the EM segmenta-
tion challenge in 2012, where Ciresean et al. [5] were the
ﬁrst researchers who outperform the previous biomedical
imaging segmentation methods using convolutional layers.
The key factor that made them able to win the challenge
was the availability of huge annotated data (CNN can learn
comparatively better than the classical machine learning
approach on large datasets [84], [85]). However, access to
the high amount of annotated data in biomedical tasks is
always inherently challenging due to privacy concerns, the
complexity of the annotation process, expert skill require-
ments, and the high price of taking images with biomedical
imaging systems. The ﬁrst step toward alleviating the need
for large annotated data was proposed in [5]. This method
used an image patching technique to not only increase the
number of samples but also model the data distribution with
small patches. Using this technique the CNN network learns
the visual concept by simply deploying a sliding window.
However, the sliding window usually brings more compu-
tation burden than its performance increase. Hence, there is
always a trade-off between performance and computational
complexity.
In 2015, Ronnebreger et al. [7] proposed a new archi-
tecture with respect to Long et al.’s [6] FCN framework
in conjunction with ISBI cell tracking challenge , where they
won the competition by a large margin. Figure 3 shows the
structure of the U-Net model. Their proposed method is a
cornerstone in a few attitudes those days. First, it is based on
a fully convolutional network in an encoder-decoder design
with insufﬁcient data than the DNNs instinct with some
intuitive data augmentation techniques. Second, their model
was reasonably fast and outperformed other methods in thechallenge. The model architecture can be divided into two
parts: The ﬁrst part is the contracting path, also known as
the encoder path, where its purpose is to capture contextual
information. This path consists of repeated blocks, where
each block contains two successive 33convolutions,
followed by a ReLU activation function and max-pooling
layers. The max pooling layer is also included to gradually
increase the receptive ﬁeld of the network without imposing
an additional computational burden.
The second part is expanding the path, also called
the decoder path, where it aims to gradually up-sample
feature maps to the desired resolution. This path consists
of one 22transposed convolution layer (up-sampling),
followed by two consecutive 33convolutions and a
ReLU activation. The connection path between encoder and
decoder paths (also known as a bottleneck) includes two
successive 33convolutions followed by a ReLU activation.
The successive convolutional operations included in the U-
Net model enables the network’s receptive ﬁeld size to be
increased linearly. This process makes a network gradually
learn coarse contextual and semantic representation in deep
layers compared to shallow layers. Learning high-level se-
mantic features makes the network slowly lose localization
of extracted features, where this aspect is essential to re-
construct segmentation results. Ronnebreger et al. presented
skip connections from the encoder path to the decoder
path on the same scales to overcome this challenge. The
existential reason for these skip connections is to impose
localization information of extracted semantic features at the
same stage from the encoder. To this end, the connection
module concatenates low-level features coming from the
encoder path with high-level representation derived from
the decoding path to enrich localization information. Even-
tually, the network uses a 11convolution to map the ﬁnal
representation to the desired number of classes. To mitigate
the loss of contextual information in the missing image’s
border pixels, the U-Net model uses an overlap tile strategy.
In addition, to deal with insufﬁcient training data a typical
data augmentation technique such as rotation, and gray-
level intensities invariance, elastic deformation is utilized.
It should be noted that elastic deformation is a common
strategy to make the model resistant to deformations, a
common variation in tissues. From a practical perspective,
the original U-Net model outperformed a sliding-window
convolutional network [5] in warping error terminology in
theEM segmentation challenge dataset [7]. This network also
became a new state-of-the-art on two other cell segmen-
tation datasets, PhC-U373 and DIC-Hela cells, by a large
margin of approximately 9%and31% from the previous
best methods in the ISBI Cell Tracking Challenge 2015 by
reporting Intersection over Union (IoU) metric [7].
2.2 3D U-Net
Due to the abundance and representation power of vol-
umetric data, most medical image modalities are three-
dimensional. So, C ¸ ic ¸ek et al. [92] proposed a 3D volumetric-
based U-Net not only to pay attention to this need but also
to overcome the time-consuming slice-by-slice annotation
process for data. As it is noticeable that neighboring slices
share the same information, there is no need for this much

==== Page 4 ====
4
 U-Net
 Taxonomy Backbone Design 
 Enhancement 24. Residual U-Net
 25. V-Net
 26. H-DenseUnet
 27. MultiResU-Net
 28. DR-VNet
 29. DoubleU-Net
 30. DU-Net
 31. S3D-UNet
 32. DRU-Net
 33. R2U-Net Residual
 Multi-Resolution
 Re-considering Convolution
 Recurrent U-Net
 Skip Connection 
 Enhancement 34. U-Net++
 35. U-Net 3+
 36. BiO-Net
 37. Attention U-Net
 38. RA-UNet
 39. Attention UNet++
 40. Projective Skip-Connections
 41. BCDU-Net
 42. CR-Unet Combination of Encoder and 
 Decoder Feature Maps Processing Feature Maps 
 within the Skip 
 Connections Increasing the Number of 
 Skip Connections
 Bottleneck 
 Enhancement 43. MA-Net
 44. SA-UNet
 45. RIC U-Net
 46. FRCU-Net
 47. SMU-Net
 48. ASPP-FC DenseNet
 49. COPLE-Net
 50. JCS Attention Modules
 Multi-scale Representation Rich Representation 
 Enhancement 18. Focal Tversky Attention U-Net
 19. Polar Transformation M-Net
 20. MFP-UNet
 21. Dense Multi-path U-Net
 22. Cascaded U-Net
 23. 3D Attention U-Net Multi-scale Fusion
 Multi-modality Fusion
 Leveraging Depth Information Probabilistic
  Design 14. MRF-UNet
 15. Bayesian Skip Net
 16. VAE U-Net
 17. Probabilistic U-Net Graphical Model Algorithms
 Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) Regularization Transformers 1. TransU-Net
 2. TransBTS
 3. GT U-Net
 4. CoTr
 5. UNETR
 6. MTU-Net
 7. TMU
 8. UCTransNet
 9. ScaleFormer
 10. MedT
 11. Swin-UNet
 12. MISSFormer
 13. D-Former Transformer Complement to 
 CNN-based U-Net
 Standalone Transformer Backbone 
 for U-Net Design
Fig. 2: The proposed U-Net taxonomy categorizes different extensions of the U-Net model based on their underlying design
idea. More speciﬁcally, our taxonomy takes into account the modular design of the U-Net model and shows where the
improvement happens (e.g., skip connection). Due to the clariﬁcation and unity in the studies’ denomination, we may
utilize some brevities. In this case, each preﬁx number denotes 1. [38], 2. [39], 3. [40], 4. [41], 5. [42], 6. [43], 7. [44], 8. [45], 9.
[46], 10. [47], 11. [48], 12. [49], 13. [50], 14. [51], 15. [52], 16. [53], 17. [54], 18. [18], 19. [55], 20. [56], 21. [57], 22. [58], 23. [59],
24. [60], 25. [61], 26. [62], 27. [15], 28. [63], 29. [64], 30. [65], 31. [13], 32. [66], 33. [32], 34. [67], 35. [68], 36. [69], 37. [70], 38.
[71], 39. [72], 40. [73], 41. [74], 42. [75], 43. [76], 44. [77], 45. [78], 46. [79], 47. [80], 48. [81], 49. [82], 50. [83].
copy and cropinput
image
tileoutput 
segmentation 
map641
128
256
512
1024max pool 2x2
up-conv 2x2conv 3x3, ReLU572 x 572
284²64
128
256
512570 x 570
568 x 568
282²
280²140²
138²
136²68²
66²
64²32²
28²56²
54²
52²512
104²
102²
100²200²30²
198²
196²392 x 392
390 x 390
388 x 388
388 x 388
102451225625612864128642
conv 1x1
Fig. 3: The initial 2D U-Net architecture that is designed
to cope with semantic segmentation challenge. Figure from
[86].data redundancy. In [92], they replaced all 2D operations
in U-Net architecture with the equivalent 3D companions
and embedded a batch normalization layer for faster con-
vergence after each 3D convolution layer. 3D U-Net was
successfully applied to sparsely annotated three samples of
Xenopus kidney embryos with reporting comparison results
of IoU between 2D U-Net and 3D U-Net. To further support
this we ﬁnd the top 9/10 participants of the Kidney Tumor
Segmentation (KiTS) 2021 challenge hosted by the Medi-
cal Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
(MICCAI) 2021 society [93], [94] challenge utilized a 3D U-
Net and 1/10 utilized a 2D one1.
Figure 4 shows samples of 2D and 3D medical image
segmentation challenges designed for different tasks. It can
be seen that the 3D data provides more comprehensive
information regarding the tissue and tumors, however, com-
pared to the 2D data it has more computational cost.
1. https://kits21.kits-challenge.org/public/html/kits21 results.
html#

==== Page 5 ====
5
Fig. 4: Sample of the 3D medical dataset and a single selected 2D frame, where the target area (e.g., organ) is highlighted
using the annotation mask. c.1) Cervical spine [87], c.2) Lung [88], c.3) Fourteen abdominal organs [89], c.4) Brain [90], [91],
c.5) Heart [90], c.6) Hepatic vessel [90], c.7) Liver [90], c.8) Pancreas [90], c.9) Prostate [90].
2.3 Clinical Importance and Effect of U-Net
During the start of the COVID-19 pandemic and the in-
evitable loss of healthcare and staff, the importance of
utilizing artiﬁcial intelligence in images and test analysis
was prompted. According to WHO, between January 2020
till May 2021, almost 80,000 to 180,000 healthcare and
staff could have died from COVID-19 infection worldwide
[95]. Compensating for these skilled workforce losses, each
country would incur a signiﬁcant economic cost, and also
transferring experiences among medical staff is a time-
consuming process. In this direction, Michael et al. [96]
applied a Large scale segmentation network to count spe-
ciﬁc cells in pathological images. They explicitly indicate
that detecting cancerous cells from histopathological images
is a challenging task that relies on the experiences of the
expert pathologist. However, workﬂow efﬁciency can be
increased with automatic system. Indeed the recent success
of deep-learning-based segmentation methods, expansion of
medical datasets and their easy accessibility, and facilitated
access to modern and efﬁcient GPUs, their applicability to
speciﬁc image analysis problems of end-to-end users are
eased. Semantic segmentation transforms a plain biomed-
ical image modality into a meaningful and spatially well-
organized pattern that could aid medical discoveries and
diagnoses [97], [98] and sometimes is beneﬁcial to patients
too as they may be able to avoid an invasive medical proce-
dure [99]. Medical image segmentation is a vital component
and a cornerstone in most clinical applications, including
diagnostic support systems [100], [101], therapy planning
support [102], [103], intra-operative assistance [104], tumor
growth monitoring [105], [106], and image-guided clinical
surgery [107]. Figure 5 shows a general pipeline where the
U-Net can be utilized in a clinical application to reduce
experts’ burden and accelerate the disease detection process.
The entire end-to-end paradigm for using deep learning-
based methods, especially U-Net, is an empirical struggle
to ﬁt this concept into everyday life [98]. Computer-Aided
Diagnosis (CAD) can build from four main counterparts:
Input, Network, Output, and Application. The input block
could leverage different analyses on various available data
like documented transcripts, diverse human body signals
(EEG/ECG), and medical images. The multi-modal fusion
of different data types could boost the performance of a
pipeline for higher accuracy diagnosis. Based on speciﬁccriteria like Image modality, and data distribution, the net-
work module could make decisions to choose one of the
U-Net extensions which ﬁt more to the setting. The output
is a task-speciﬁc counterpart that the ultimate application
block’s decision could decide.
On the other hand, international image analysis com-
petitions have a high demand for automatic segmentation
methods, accounting for 70% [108] in the biomedical sec-
tion, which universities of medical sciences primarily host
or collaborate with them. One of the advantages of deep
learning competitions over conventional hypothesis-driven
research is innate distinctions in the approach to problem-
solving [109]. Data competitions, by nature, encourage mul-
tiple individuals or groups to address a speciﬁc problem
independently or collaboratively. According to Maier-Hein
et al. [108] of the 150 medical segmentation competitions
before 2016 the majority used U-Net based models
Based on the points above and across-the-board of U-
Net-based architectures, medical and clinical facilities could
utilize these in real-world and commercial settings where
nnU-Net [98] is one of these successful end-to-end designs.
3 U-N ETEXTENSIONS
U-Net is a ubiquitous network according to its approxi-
mately 48 thousand citations during its ﬁrst release in 2015.
This is evidence that it can handle diverse image modalities
in broad domains and not only in medical ﬁelds. From
our sight, the core advantage of U-Net is its modular and
symmetric design, which makes it a suitable choice for
broad modiﬁcation and collaboration with diverse plug-
and-play modules to increase performance. Therefore, by
pursuing this cue, we infringe the Ronneberger et al. [7]
network to modular improvable counterparts besides solid
auxiliary modiﬁcation for achieving SOTA or par with
segmentation performances. In this respect, we offer our
taxonomy (Figure 2) and divide the diverse variants of U-
Net modiﬁcations into systematic categories as follows:
1) Skip Connection Enhancements
2) Backbone Design Enhancements
3) Bottleneck Enhancements
4) Transformers
5) Rich Representation Enhancements
6) Probabilistic Design

==== Page 6 ====
6
Input
Signals
Text - DocumentOutput
Classification, Detection and, Segmentation
Individual  
informations
Patient tests
Transcript
Application 
Diagnosis, Planing, and MonitoringNetwork
Neural Architecture Search
Treatment Auxiliary Networks
Transformer neural
networkCriteria 
U-Net (2D-3D)
U-Net++Image modalities
Intensity distributionSpeed/Accuracy Meta data
Swin U-Net Residual U-Net
Tumor growth
monitoringEarly disease detectionLocating tumors /
regions of interest  
Measurement of tissue /
Region volumesAnatomical studies Medication regimen
Surgery planningIntra-sur gery navigation
Therapy planning
support
Diagnostic support systemElectrical output
Preprocessing
Image enhancementOperationExternal data  
resource
Data fusionData loading
Resolution
enhancementData labelingBiomedical signals and imaging
Generative dataEGG
Patching
EEGEMG
EOGECG
...
MRI
CTUltrasound
...
Image  
registrationDe-aliasing /  
De-noising
Image
correctionData
augmentationImage
transformationGenerative
networks
Deep belief  
networks...nnU-Net
V-Net
...
Remote sur gery
Normal Effusion Mass
Instance segmentation
Boundary
detectionSemantic segmentation
Post-processing Other
Semantic
labeling
Classification
Target visualization
RegistrationMorphological
operation
Rule-based
refinement  
Input Segmentation
Detection
Spinal Cord
Inter-vertebral
Labeling  
Fig. 5: A detailed overview of the U-Nets core involvement in medical image analysis and clinical use. An illustration of
how U-Nets are involved in clinical decisions is discussed in research papers. The ﬁrst block deals with image acquisition,
preparation, and pre-processing steps to provide the data in a common format for the deep neural network. The second
step uses a neural architecture search algorithm to ﬁnd an efﬁcient architecture for the task at hand while the third block is
designed to perform post operations to further reﬁne the network output. Finally, the application block uses the software
output to assist specialists with a certain action (e.g., tumor growth monitoring).
This taxonomy aims to provide comprehensive and
practical information for both vendors and researchers. In
the following parts of this section, each category will be
extensively discussed along with relevant papers.
3.1 Skip Connection Enhancements
Skip connections are an essential part of the U-Net ar-
chitecture as they combine the semantic information of a
deep, low-resolution layer with the local information of
a shallow, high-resolution layer. This section provides a
deﬁnition of skip connections and explains their role in
the U-Net architecture before introducing extensions and
variants of the classic skip connection used in the original
U-Net. Skip connections are deﬁned as connections in a
neural network that do not connect two following layers but
instead skip over at least one layer. Considering a two-layernetwork a skip connection would connect the input directly
to the output, skipping over the hidden layer [110]. In image
segmentation, skip connections were ﬁrst used by Long et
al. in [6]. At the time, the most common use of convolutional
networks was for image classiﬁcation tasks which only have
a single label as output. In a segmentation task, however, a
label should be assigned to each pixel in the image adding
a localization task to the classiﬁcation task.
Long et al. [6] added additional layers to a usual con-
tracting network using upsampling instead of pooling lay-
ers to increase the resolution of the output and obtain a
label for every pixel. Since local, high-resolution information
gets lost in the contracting part of the network it cannot
be completely recovered when upsampling these volumes.
To combine the deep, coarse semantic information with the
shallow ﬁne appearance information they add skip connec-

==== Page 7 ====
7
Fig. 6: Architecture of the U-Net++ [67]. The U-Net++ uses
a nested structure of convolutional layers Xi;j(indicatej-th
convolution layer in the i-th scale) connected through the
skip connection paths to model multi-scale representation.
tions that connect up-sampled lower layers with ﬁner stride
with the ﬁnal prediction layer.
In the original U-Net architecture by Ronneberger et
al. [7] each level in the encoder path is connected to the
corresponding same-resolution level in the decoder path
by a skip connection to combine the global information
describing what with the local information resolving where.
The difference to the above approach is not only the higher
number of skip connections but also the way in which the
features are combined. Long et al. [6] up-sampled feature
maps from earlier layers to the output resolution and added
them to the output of the ﬁnal layer. Ronneberger et al. [7]
concatenated the features of the corresponding encoder and
decoder level and process them together by passing them
through two convolutional layers and an up-sampling layer
together.
Li et al. [62] conducted an ablation study on skip con-
nections by training a dense U-Net with and without skip
connections. The results clearly show that the network with
the skip connections generalize better than the network
without skip connections.
Over the following years, many variants and extensions
of the original U-Net architecture were developed con-
cerning the skip connections [111], [112]. Different types
of extensions dealing with processing the encoder feature
maps passed through the skip connections, combining the
two sets of feature maps, and extending the number of skip
connections will be presented in the following sections.
3.1.1 Increasing the Number of Skip Connections
In 2020 Zhou et al. [67] introduced the U-Net++ in which
they redesign skip connections to be more ﬂexible and there-
fore exploit multiscale features more effectively. Instead
of restricting skip connections to only aggregate features
that have the same scale in the encoder and decoder path,
they redesign them in such a way that features of different
semantic scales can be aggregated [67].
They argue that there has been no proof so far that
encoder and decoder feature maps at the same scale are the
best match for feature fusion and therefore design a more
ﬂexible setup. In their approach, they tackle two problems
Fig. 7: Architecture showing the full-scale skip connections
of the UNet3+ [68]. Xi
EeandXi
Dedenote the encoder and
decoder path feature maps at i-th scale, respectively. In
addition, each subscript under each feature map symbol
represents the number of feature maps to the corresponding
block.
simultaneously. Since the optimal depth of a U-Net is un-
known apriori and usually has to be determined through
an exhaustive search, they incorporate U-Nets of different
depths into one architecture. As can be seen in Figure 6
all the U-Nets share the same encoder but have their own
decoder. Instead of only passing the same-scale encoder
feature maps through the skip connections, each node in
the decoder is also presented with the feature maps of the
same-level decoders of the U-Nets with a lower depth. It
can then be learned during training, which of the presented
feature maps should ideally be used for the segmentation.
Huang et al. [68] take the dense skip connections in-
troduced in the U-Net++ one step further by introducing
full-scale skip connections in their architecture the U-Net3+.
They argue that both the original U-Net with plain skip
connections between same-level encoder and decoder nodes
and the U-Net++ with the dense and nested skip connec-
tions do not sufﬁciently explore features from full scales
making it challenging for the network to learn the position
and boundary of an organ explicitly. To overcome this
limitation they connect each decoder level with all encoder
levels and all preceding decoder levels as can be seen in
Figure 7. Since not all feature maps arriving at a decoder
node through skip connections have the same scale, higher-
resolution encoder feature maps will be downscaled using
a max-pooling operation and lower-resolution feature maps
coming from intra-decoder skip connections will be upsam-
pled using bilinear upsampling. Additionally, apart from
the up- or down-sampling operation, each skip connection
is equipped with a 33convolutional layer calculating 64
output maps. The 64 feature maps arriving through each
skip connection are stacked and the stack of feature maps
is passed through another convolutional layer, followed by
batch normalization and a ReLU activation before being
further processed in the respective decoder node.
Instead of increasing the number of forward skip con-
nections, Xiang et al. [69] add additional backward skip con-
nections: Their Bi-directional O-Shape network (BiO-Net) is
a U-Net architecture with bi-directional skip connections.
This means that there are two types of skip connections:
1) The forward skip connections are known from the origi-

==== Page 8 ====
8
CONVforward skip connectionbackward skip connection
dataflow directioninference directionconcat
512512256256128128
6464
3232161632326464128128256256512
512326432
128256128643232CONVUPCONVconcatCONVDOWN!"#$Encoder BlockDecoder Block!%"$!%"$!"#$&'#&()*+&'#+&()*
Fig. 8: BiO-Net Architecture. Figure from [113].
nal U-Net architecture, combining encoder and decoder
layers at the same level. These skip connections pre-
serve the low-level visual features from the encoder and
combine them with the semantic decoder information.
2) The backward skip connections pass decoded high-
level features from the decoder back to the same level
encoder. The encoder can then combine the semantic
decoder features with its original input and ﬂexibly
aggregate the two types of features.
Together these two types of skip connections build an O-
shaped recursive architecture that can be traversed multiple
times to receive improved performance (See Figure 8). The
recursive output of the encoder and decoder can be deﬁned
as follows:
xi
out=DOWN (ENC([DEC([fi 1
enc;^ xi 1
in]);xi
in]));
^ xi
out=UP(DEC([ENC([fi
dec;xi
in]);^ xi
in])); (1)
Here,irepresents the current inference iteration, UP stands
for an upsampling operation, DOWN for a downsampling
operation, DEC and ENC stand for a decoder and en-
coder level, respectively. An additional improvement was
achieved when collecting decoded features from all itera-
tions and feeding them to the last decoder stage together to
calculate the ﬁnal output. Although the recurrent training
scheme might increase training time, this extension of the
U-Net has the advantage that it does not introduce any
additional parameters as claimed by the authors.
3.1.2 Processing Feature Maps within the Skip Connec-
tions
In the attention U-Net established by Oktay et al. [70],
attention gates (AGs) are added to the skip connections to
implicitly learn to suppress irrelevant regions in the input
image while highlighting the regions of interest for the
segmentation task at hand. In biomedical imaging, when
organs to be segmented show high inter-patient variation
in terms of shape and size, a common approach is to use
a cascaded network. The ﬁrst network extracts a rough
region of interest (ROI) including the organ to be seg-
mented and the second network predicts the exact organ
segmentation in this ROI. These approaches, however, suffer
from redundant model parameters and high computational
resources. Adding attention gates to the skip connections
maintains a high prediction accuracy without the need for
an external organ localization model. It is therefore trainable
from scratch and introduces no signiﬁcant computational
Input Image
 x  x  x  F1H1W1D1 x  x  x  1H1W1D1
 x  x  x  F2H2W2D2 x  x  x  F1H2W2D2
 x  x  x  F3H3W3D3 x  x  x  F2H3W3D3
 x  x  x  F4H4W4D4 x  x  x  F3H4W4D4
 x  x  x  F3H3W3D3
 x  x  x  F2H3W3D3 x  x  x  F3H3W3D3
 x  x  x  F2H2W2D2
 x  x  x  F1H2W2D2 x  x  x  F2H2W2D2
 x  x  x  F1H1W1D1
 x  x  x  NcH1W1D1 x  x  x  F1H1W1D1
 xx +  (x2) (Conv333ReLU)
Upsampling (by 2)
Max-pooling (by 2)
Skip Connection
Gating Signal (Query)
Segmentation Map
Attention GateConcatenationFig. 9: Attention U-Net Architecture. Figure from [70].
overload and only a few additional model parameters. The
output of an AG is the elementwise multiplication of the
input feature maps with attention coefﬁcients i2[0;1]
as^ xl
i;c=xl
i;cl
i. For the computation of the attention
coefﬁcients both the input feature maps x, that have been
passed through the skip connection from the encoder and
the gating signal gare analyzed. Here, the gating signal is
collected from a coarser scale as can be seen in Figure 9
for adding contextual information. The applied additive
attention is formulated as follows:
ql
att= T(1(WT
xxl
i+WT
ggi+bg)) +b 
l
i=2(ql
att(xl
i;gi; att)); (2)
where1and2are ReLU and sigmoid activations respec-
tively,Wx2RFlFint,Wg2RFgFintand 2RFint1
are linear transforms and bgandb are bias terms. Adding
an AG to a skip connection, therefore, highlights the ROIs
in the feature maps from the encoder path before they are
concatenated with the feature maps of the decoder path.
So in addition to adding higher resolution information,
additional information on the location of the object(s) to
be segmented is added, eliminating the need for cascaded
multi-network approaches.
The attention U-Net++ by Li et al. combines the attention
U-Net with the U-Net++ [72]. Attention gates as described
in [70] are added to all the skip connections of the U-Net++
with its nested U-Nets and dense skip connections. With
similar motivation, Jin et al. [71] introduced a 3D U-Net with
attention residual modules in the skip connections, called
the RA-UNet. The network was developed for the task of
segmenting tumors in the liver. The main difﬁculties of this
task lie in the large spatial and structural variability, low
contrast between liver and tumor, and similarity to nearby
organs. The added attention residual learning mechanism in
the skip connections improve the performance by focusing
on speciﬁc parts of the image as claimed by the authors.
The output of the attention module ( OA) in the RA-UNet
structure is formulated as:
OA(x) = (1 + S(x))F(x); (3)
where S(x)originates from the soft mask branch and has
values in [0,1] to highlight important features and suppress
noise and redundant features in the original feature maps
F(x)passed through the trunk branch. The soft mask
branch itself uses a residual encoder-decoder architecture
to calculate its output.

==== Page 9 ====
9
feature slice feature slice
1×1 
conv concat &
1×1 convconcat &
1×1 convcopy copy
Fig. 10: The spatial RNN module used in the skip connec-
tions of the CR-Unet by Li et al. in [75].
To improve performance on the difﬁcult task of the ovary
and follicle segmentation from ultrasound images, Li et al.
[75] added spatial recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to
the skip connections of a U-Net. Since there are usually
many small follicles in an image, it is very likely that the
neighboring follicles are spatially correlated. In addition,
there might be a possible spatial correlation between the
follicles and the ovary. As the max-pooling operation in the
original U-Net brings a loss of spatially relative information
the spatial RNNs should improve the segmentation results
by learning multi-scale and long-range spatial contexts.
Li et al. [75] built the spatial RNNs from plain RNNs
with a ReLU activation. Each spatial RNN module takes
feature maps as input and produces spatial RNN features
as output. It uses four independent data translations to in-
tegrate local spatial information in up, down, left, and right
directions. The maps from each direction are concatenated
and passed through a 11convolutional layer to produce
feature maps where each point contains information from
all four directions. The process is then repeated to extend
the local spatial information to global contextual informa-
tion. As can be seen in Figure 10, the ﬁnal feature maps
passed through the skip connection are a combination of
the original encoder feature maps and the RNN features
extracted from these maps. The authors claim that the ar-
chitecture is especially strong at avoiding the segmentation
of false positives and detecting and segmenting very small
follicles. A limitation of the RNN modules is that they make
training more difﬁcult and computationally expensive. To
compensate for this, Li et al. added deep supervision.
While most medical applications demand segmentations
to be in the same dimension as the input image, there
are also medical protocols that require segmentation of the
image projection, e.g., Liefers et al. [114] studied the retinal
vessel segmentation as a 2D!1D retinal OCT segmentation
task. This adds the problem of dimensionality reduction
to the segmentation. Lachinov et al. [73] introduced a U-
Net with projective skip connections to handle ND!MD
segmentations, where M < N . The encoder is a classic U-
Net encoder with residual blocks. The decoder however
only restores the input resolution for the Mdimensions
of the segmentation. The remaining reducible dimensions
M < dNare left compressed. This means that the sizes
of the encoder and decoder feature maps no longer match
which is why Lachinov et al. [73] introduce the projective
32x64x256x128
64x32x128x64
128x16x64x32128x16x64x3264x32x128x3232x64x256x32
Transformation
Projective skip-connection
Strided Convolution
Linear upsampling
ConcatenationGAP
1x64x256x1
ConvolutionGAPGlobal Average 
Pooling
Fig. 11: Architecture of U-Net with 3D input and 2D output
segmentation. Figure from [115].
skip connections. The encoder feature maps passed along
the projective skip connections are processed by an average
pooling layer with varying kernel size so that the dimen-
sions which are not present in the segmentation are reduced
to the size they have in the bottleneck. This way they can be
concatenated with the corresponding decoder feature maps.
Global Average Pooling (GAP) and a convolutional layer
are added after the last decoder level to calculate the ﬁnal
MD segmentation. The overall architecture for N= 3 and
M= 2 can be seen in Figure 11. The third dimension is not
upsampled to its original resolution in the decoder path and
is ﬁnally reduced to one by the GAP .
3.1.3 Combination of Encoder and Decoder Feature Maps
Another extension of the classic skip connections is in-
troduced in the BCDU-Net by Azad et al. [74] where a
bi-directional convolutional long-term-short-term-memory
(LSTM) module is added to the skip connections. Azad et al.
argue that a simple concatenation of the high-resolution fea-
ture maps from the encoder and the feature maps extracted
from the previous up-convolutional layer containing more
semantic information might not lead to the most precise
segmentation output. Instead, they combine the two sets of
feature maps with non-linear functions in the bi-directional
convolutional LSTM module. Ideally, this leads to a set of
feature maps rich in both local and semantic information.
The architecture of the bi-directional convolutional LSTM
module used to combine the feature maps at the end of
the skip connection can be seen in Figure 12. It uses two
ConvLSTMs, processing the input data in two directions in
the forward and backward paths. The output will be deter-
mined by taking into consideration the data dependencies
in both directions. In contrast to the approach by Li et al.
[75], where only the encoder feature maps are processed by
the RNN and then concatenated with the decoder features,
this approach processes both sets of feature maps with the
RNN.
3.2 Backbone Design Enhancements
Apart from adapting the skip connections of a U-Net it is
also common to use different types of backbones in newer
U-Net extensions. The backbone deﬁnes how the layers in
the encoder are arranged and its counterpart is therefore
used to describe the decoder architecture.
In the original U-Net by Ronneberger et al. [7] each level
in the encoder consists of two 33convolutional layers

==== Page 10 ====
10
Batch Normalization
Up ConvolutionForward ConvLSTMBackward ConvLSTM
tanh
Forward ConvLSTMBackward ConvLSTM
tanh
Fig. 12: Bi-directional convolutional LSTM module for the
combination of encoder feature maps passed through the
skip connection and decoder feature maps from the previ-
ous up-convolutional layer. XeandXdrepresent the set of
feature maps copied from the encoding part and the output
of the previous scale’s convolutional layer, respectively. Yi
indicates the output of the BConvLSTM module in a i-th
block of a single skip connection. Figure from [116].
with ReLU activation followed by a max pooling operation.
The number of feature maps doubles at each level. Any 2D
or 3D CNN image classiﬁer can be used as an encoder in
a U-Net adding its mirrored counterpart as the decoder.
Dozens of studies modiﬁed the vanilla U-Net main blocks
to broaden the receptive ﬁelds of convolution operations
and extract rich, and ﬁne-grained semantic representations
for challenging multi-class problems, e.g., [64], [117], [118],
[119], [120]. This section presents several prominent back-
bones used in the U-Net architecture and explains their
beneﬁts and downsides.
3.2.1 Residual Backbone
A very common backbone for the U-Net architecture is
the ResNet initially developed by He et al. [121]. Residual
networks enable deeper network architectures by tackling
the vanishing gradient problem that often occurs when
stacking several layers in deep neural networks as well as a
degradation problem that leads to ﬁrst saturating and then
degrading accuracy when adding more and more layers to
a network. Residual building blocks, explicitly ﬁt a residual
mapping by adding skip connections and performing an
identity mapping that is added to the output of the stacked
layers.
In their implementation of a residual U-Net, Drozdzal et
al. [60] refer to the standard skip connections in the U-Net
as long skip connections and the residual skip connections
as short skip connections, as they only skip ahead over two
convolutional layers. Using residual blocks as the backbone
in a U-Net, Drozdzal et al. [60] can build deeper architec-
tures and ﬁnd that the network training converges faster
compared to the original U-Net. Milletari et al. [61] report
the same ﬁndings in their 3D U-Net architecture using 3d
residual blocks as the backbone.
A prominent adaption of the backbone is to exchange
all 2D convolutions with 3D convolutions to process an
Fig. 13: Schematic representation of V-Net structure for
volumetric biomedical image segmentation that comprises
residual connections in each scale. In addition, V-Net utilizes
the strided convolutional kernels rather than max-pooling
layers to lessen the memory footprint in the training stage.
Figure from [122].
entire image volume as can often be found in medical
applications. When processing a 3D image in a slice-wise
fashion using 2D convolutions, the contexts on the z-axis
can not be captured and learned by the network. Using fully
convolutional architecture with 3D convolutions elevates
this drawback and can fully leverage the spatial information
along all three dimensions.
A drawback of using 3D convolutional layers as the
backbone in a u-net is the high computational cost and
GPU memory consumption which limits the depth of the
network and the ﬁlter’s size i.e. its ﬁeld-of-view. Milletari
et al. [61] fully convolutional volumetric, V-Net architecture
uses 3D residual blocks (Figure 13) as a backbone, thereby
enabling fast and accurate segmentation in 3D images. The
H-DenseUNet by Li et al. [62] uses two U-Nets, one with
2D-dense-blocks as the backbone and the other with 3D-
dense-blocks as the backbone. This enables them to ﬁrst
extract deep intra-slice features and then learn inter-slice
features in shallower volumetric architecture with a lower
computational burden.
3.2.2 Multi-Resolution blocks
To tackle the difﬁculty of analyzing objects at different
scales, Ibtehaz et al. introduce the MultiResUNet with
inception-like blocks as a backbone [15]. Inception blocks,
introduced by Szegedy et al. [123], use convolutional layers
with different kernel sizes in parallel on the same input and
combine the perceptions from different scales before passing
them deeper into the network. The two following convo-
lutions with 33kernels in the classical U-Net resemble
one convolution with a 55kernel. For incorporating a
multi-resolution analysis into the network, 33and77
convolutions should be added in parallel to the 55convo-
lution. This can be achieved by replacing the convolutional
layers with inception-like blocks. Adding the additional
convolutional layers increases the memory requirement and

==== Page 11 ====
11
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 14: The MultiRes Block (c) is developed from the origi-
nal inception Block (a) with three parallel convolutions with
33,55, and 77kernels by expressing the 55
and77convolutions as two and three consecutive 33
convolutions as can be seen in (b) and adding a residual
skip connection. Figure from [124].
computational burden. Ibtehaz et al., therefore, formulate
the more expensive 55and77convolutions as consec-
utive 33convolutions. The ﬁnal MultiRes block is created
by adding a residual connection. The evolution from the
original inception block to the MultiRes block can be seen in
Figure 14. Instead of keeping an equal number of ﬁlters for
all consecutive convolutions, the number of ﬁlters is gradu-
ally increased to further reduce the memory requirements.
In the ﬁnal architecture, the two consecutive 33convolu-
tions from the original U-Net are replaced by one MultiRes
block, leading to faster convergence, improved delineation
of faint boundaries, and higher robustness against outliers
and perturbations.
Another well-known backbone for U-Net extensions is
the DenseNet introduced by Huang et al. in [125]. Similarly
to residual networks, the DenseNet also aims at ﬁghting
the vanishing gradient problem by creating skip connections
from early layers to later layers. The DenseNet maximizes
the information ﬂow by connecting all layers with the same
feature map size with each other. This means that every
layer obtains concatenated inputs from all preceding layers.
Contrary to what one might expect, a dense net actually
requires fewer parameters compared to a traditional CNN
because it does not have to relearn redundant feature maps
and can therefore work with very narrow layers with e.g.
only 12 ﬁlters and can learn multi-resolution features. The
direct connection from each layer to the loss function imple-
ments implicit deep supervision which helps train deeper
network architectures without vanishing gradients.
Normal Con volution
Deformable Con volutionFig. 15: One exemplary deformable convolutions with their
respective normal convolution with a 55kernel.
Karaali et al. [63] utilized Dense Residual blocks in the
U-Net-like representation for retinal vessel segmentation. To
this end, they were inspired by DenseNet [125], and ResNet
[121] to design a Residual Dense-Net (RDN) block. In their
architecture the ﬁrst sub-block comprises successive batch
Normalization, ReLu, Convolution, and Dropout counter-
parts, which employs the dense connectivity pattern as in
[125]. The following sub-block applies a residual connectiv-
ity pattern. Using a DenseNet-like backbone helps the U-
Net architecture learn more relevant features using fewer
parameters. The residual connectivity smooths the informa-
tion ﬂow across the layers to facilitate the optimization step.
3.2.3 Re-considering Convolution
This direction aims to reduce the computational burden
of the naive convolution operation by re-considering the
alternative convolutional operations. Jin et al. [65] exchange
each 33convolutional layer in the original U-Net with a
deformable convolutional block for the accurate segmenta-
tion of retinal vessels. Their architecture is named DUNet.
The deformable convolutional blocks are inspired by the
work on deformable convolutional networks by Dai et al.
[126] and should adapt the receptive ﬁelds to adjust opti-
mally to different shapes and scales of complicated vessel
structures in the input features. In deformable convolutions,
offsets are learned and added to the grid sampling locations
normally used in the standard convolution. One exemplary
illustration of adjusted sampling locations for a 55kernel
can be seen in Figure 15.
In a classic convolution the kernel sampling grid G
would be deﬁned as:
G= ( 2; 2);( 2; 1);:::;(2;1);(2;2): (4)
Considering this grid, every pixel m0in the output feature
mapycan be calculated as:
y(m0) =X
mi2G(w)(mi)x(m0+mi) (5)
from the input x. In the deformable convolution, an offset
miis added to the grid locations.
y(m0) =X
mi2G(w)(mi)x(m0+mi+ mi) (6)
Every deformable convolutional block consists of a convo-
lutional layer, to learn the ideal offsets from the input. A de-
formable convolution layer applying the convolution with

==== Page 12 ====
12
Previous Layer1×1×1 
Conv1×1×1 
Conv1×1×1 
Conv1×3×3 
Conv3×1×3 
Conv3×3×1 
Conv3×1×1
Conv1×3×1 
Conv1×1×3 
ConvConcatNext Layer
Fig. 16: Architecture of one separable 3D convolutional
block [13]. Using parallel design the architecture performs
the 3D convolution in three paths with less computation
burden.
the adapted sampling points followed by batch normaliza-
tion and ReLU activation. Since the calculated offset miis
usually not an integer, the input value at the sampling point
is determined using bilinear interpolation. Exchanging the
simple convolutions with deformable convolutions helps
the network adapt to different shapes, scales, and orienta-
tions but comes at a higher computational burden because
an additional convolutional layer per block is needed to
determine the offsets of the sampling grid.
When segmenting from 3D images it is important to
make use of the full spatial information from the volumetric
data. However, this is not possible with 2D convolutions
and 3D convolutions are computationally very expensive.
To address this problem, Chen et al. [13] used separable 3D
convolutions as the backbone of the U-Net. Each 3D convo-
lutional block in the original U-Net is replaced by an S3D
block which can be seen in Figure 16. The 3D convolution
is divided into three branches where each branch represents
a different orthogonal view so that the input is processed
in axial, sagittal, and coronal views. Additionally, a residual
skip connection is added to the separated 3D convolution.
Using separable 3D convolutions as the backbone of the
U-Net, Chen et al. [13] can take into consideration the
full spatial information from the volumetric data in the U-
Net architecture without the extremely high computational
burden of standard 3D convolution.
3.2.4 Recurrent Architecture
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are used frequently to
process sequential data such as in speech recognition. Liang
et al. [127] were among the ﬁrst groups to design a recurrent
convolutional neural network (RCNN) for images recogni-
tion. Although the input image, in contrast to sequential
data, is static, the activity of each unit is modulated by the
activities of its neighboring units because the activities of
RCNNs evolve over time. By unfolding the RCNN throughtime, they can obtain arbitrarily deep networks with a ﬁxed
number of parameters.
Using these RCNN blocks as the backbone of the U-Net
architecture enhances the ability of the model to integrate
contextual information. Alom et al. [128] used RCNN blocks
as a backbone in their RU-Net architecture, ensuring better
feature representation for segmentation tasks.
InputsOutputs
Conv. + R eLUConv. + R eLU
(a)Architecture of double recur-
rent convolutional block.
Conv. + R eLUUnfold(b) A single unfolded recurrent
convolutional block for t= 2.
Fig. 17: Recurrent Convolutional Mechanism introduced by
Alom et al. [128], namely RU-Net.
Figure 17a shows a recurrent convolutional unit, they
used as a backbone. Figure 17b shows one of the two sub-
blocks in Figure 17a unfolded for t= 2, which is also the
unfolding parameter chosen in their experiments. Adding
additional residual connections to the separate recurrent
convolutional blocks enables deeper networks and results
in their R2U-Net architecture.
3.3 Bottleneck Enhancements
The U-Net architecture can be separated into three main
parts: the encoder (contracting path), the decoder (expand-
ing path), and the bottleneck which lies between the encoder
and decoder. The bottleneck is used to force the model to
learn a compressed representation of the input data which
should only contain the important and useful information
needed to restore the input in the decoder. To this end,
various modules are designed in multiple studies [79], [129]
to recalibrate and highlight the most discriminant features.
In the original U-Net, the bottleneck consists of two 33
convolutional layers with ReLU activation. More recent
approaches however have extended the classic bottleneck
architecture to improve performance.
3.3.1 Attention Modules
Several works apply attention modules in the bottleneck
of their U-Net architecture. Fan et al. used a position-wise
attention block (PAB) in their MA-Net to model spatial
dependencies between pixels in the bottleneck feature maps
with self-attention [76]. The architecture of the PAB can
be seen in Figure 18. The feature maps passed into the
bottleneck at the end of the encoder path are ﬁrst processed
by a 33convolutional layer. The resulting outputs are
then processed by three individual 11convolutional layers
producingA,B, andC.AandBare reshaped to form two
vectors. A matrix multiplication of these two vectors passed

==== Page 13 ====
13
× × +
H×W×256H×W×512
H×W×512H×W×64H×W×64
3×3 Conv1×1 Conv
1×1 Conv1×1 Conv
H×W×512 H×W×512Reshape
ReshapeSoftmax
64×NReshape3×3 Conv
Fig. 18: Architecture of the position-wise attention block
introduced in [76].
through a softmax function yields the spatial feature atten-
tion mapP2RNNin which the positions pi;jencode the
inﬂuence of the ithposition on the jthposition in the feature
map. Subsequently, a matrix multiplication is performed
between the reshaped Cand the spatial feature attention
mapP, and the resulting feature maps are multiplied with
the inputI0before being passed through a ﬁnal 33
convolutional layer. The ﬁnal output Ois therefore deﬁned
as follows:
Oi=NX
i=1(PjiCi) +I0
j (7)
is set to zero at the beginning of training and it is
learned to assign more weight during the training process.
Considering that the ﬁnal output is the weighted sum of the
feature maps across all positions and the original feature
maps, it has a global contextual view and can selectively ag-
gregate rich contextual information. Intra-class correlation
and semantic consistency are improved because the PAB can
consider long-range spatial dependency between features in
a global view.
Guo et al. also add a spatial attention module to the
bottleneck of their SA-UNet architecture [77]. The spatial
attention module should enhance relevant features and
compress unimportant features in the bottleneck. In their
approach the input feature maps are passed through an
average pooling and a max pooling layer in parallel. Both
pooling operations are applied along the channel dimension
to produce efﬁcient feature descriptors. The outputs are then
concatenated and passed through a 77convolutional layer
and sigmoid activation to obtain a spatial attention map.
By multiplying the spatial attention map with the original
input features, the inputs can be weighted based on their
importance for the segmentation task at hand. The attention
module only adds 98 parameters to the original U-Net and
is therefore computationally very lightweight.
In another work, Azad et al. [80] utilized the idea of a
texture/style matching mechanism in the U-Net bottleneck
for brain tumor segmentation. In their design, an attention
agent is designed to distill the informative information from
a full modality (four MRI modalities, T1, T2, Flair and T1c)
into a missing-modality network (only Flair). Further infor-
mation regarding the missing-modality task can be found
in [27]. A deep frequency attention module is proposed in
[79] to perform a frequency recalibration process on the
U-Net bottleneck. This attention block aims to recalibrate
the feature representation based on the structure and shape
information rather than texture representation to alleviate
the texture bias in object recognition.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Fig. 19: 33convolutional kernel with different atrous
sampling rates rof (a)r= 1, (b)r= 2 and (c)r= 4.
3.3.2 Multi-Scale Representation
The aim of this direction is to enhance the bottleneck design
by including multi-scale feature representation, e.g. atrous
convolution. The atrous convolutions are performed like
standard convolutions, but with convolutional kernels with
inserted holes in them. The holes are deﬁned by setting
the weight of the convolutional kernel to zero at the cor-
responding locations and the pattern for doing so is deﬁned
by the atrous sampling rate r. Considering a sampling rate
r, this introduces r 1zeros between consecutive ﬁlter
values. Akkconvolutional kernel is thereby enlarged to a
k+(k 1)(r 1)k+(k 1)(r 1)ﬁlter. This way the
receptive ﬁeld of the layer is expanded without introducing
any additional network parameters to be learned.
Figure 19 shows a 33kernel with atrous sampling rates
rofr= 1 ,r= 2 andr= 4 . When the objects to be
segmented are of very different sizes it is important for the
network to extract multiscale information. Combining the
ideas of spatial pyramid pooling and atrous convolutions,
the feature maps in the bottleneck of the U-Net can be
resampled in parallel by atrous convolutions with different
sampling rates and then combined to obtain rich multiscale
features.
Hai et al. [81] use atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP)
in the bottleneck of a U-Net architecture for the segmenta-
tion of breast lesions. The ﬁnal feature maps of the encoder
are passed in parallel through a 11convolutional layer
and three atrous 33convolutional layers with atrous
sampling rates of 6, 12 and 18 respectively. These four
processed groups of feature maps are concatenated together
with the original feature maps passed to the bottleneck and
processed by a ﬁnal 11convolution before being passed
to the decoder.
Wang et al. make use of ASPP in the bottleneck as well in
their COPLE-Net for the segmentation of pneumonia lesions
from CT scans of COVID-19 patients [82]. Here, four atrous
convolutional layers with dilation rates of 1, 2, 4, and 6
respectively are used to process the bottleneck feature maps
to capture multi-scale features for the segmentation of small
and large lesions.
Similarly, Wu et al. [83] proposed a multi-task learning
paradigm, JCS, for COVID-19 CT image classiﬁcation and
segmentation. JCS [83] is a two branches architecture, which
utilizes a Group Atrous (GA) module, in its segmentation
branches bottleneck for feature modiﬁcation. GA ﬁrst ap-
plies 11convolution operation to expand the channels of
the feature map. Then the feature map is divided into four
equal sets. Utilizing the atrous convolutions with different

==== Page 14 ====
14
rates on these sets results in more global feature maps with
diverse receptive ﬁelds. To fully extract more discriminant
features from the ﬁnal feature map, JCS adopts a squeeze
and Excitation (SE) [130] block as an attention mechanism
for recalibrating channel-wise convolution features.
3.4 Transformers
Inspired by the recent success of the Transformer models
in Natural Language Processing (NLP), these models were
further extended to perform vision recognition tasks. More
speciﬁcally, the Vision Transformer model was introduced
by Dosovitskiy et al. [131] to alleviate the deﬁciency of
CNNs in capturing the long-range semantic dependencies.
Before going deeper into transformer-based methods, it
might be practical to review the concept of vision transform-
ers and the mechanism of self-attention utilized in these
networks.
Contrary to the Transformers in NLP tasks [133], the
computer vision tasks usually contains more than one di-
mensional data (e.g., 2D image, 3D video) which needs to be
prepared for the transformer model. Hence, ViT’s pipeline
starts with image sequentialization (see Figure 20a) process
to prepare the tokenized sequence for the encoder module.
From now on, the words patch and token will be used
interchangeably.
Ifx2RHWDCis a volumetric 3D image with a
(H;W;D )spatial resolutions and Cinput channels, ﬁrst the
xis dividing into N=HWD
P3 ﬂattened uniform, non-
overlapping patches xi
p2RN(P3:C),i2f1;;Ngwith
(P;P;P )spatial resolution for each patch, therefore each
patch is representing by a 1D sequence with a length of
1(P3:C). Afterward, a linear layer applies on top of the se-
quence to map them to a Kdimensional embedding space.
In order to retain the positional information of patches, a 1D
learnable positional encoding Epos2RNKadds to patch
embedding as follows:
z0=h
xclass;x1
pE;x2
pE;;xN
pEi
+Epos; (8)
where Edenotes patch embedding operation and the class
token,xclass, omitable in segmentation tasks. In the next step,
the embedded patch feed to the stack of Transformer en-
coder blocks ( L) containing the Multi-Head Self-Attention
(MSHA), Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), and Layer Nor-
malization [132] sub-blocks to generate the latent represen-
tation. The following formulations show the mathematical
process in Transformer encoder:
^zl=MSA (LN(zl 1)) +zl 1
zl=MLP(LN(^zl)) +^zl; (9)
wherel2f1;;Lg,^zl, and zldenote output of MHSA
operation and MLP function, respectively.
From Figure 20b the MHSA block comprises hparallel
Self-Attention sub-blocks that perform the attention (Scaled
Dot-Product Attention) htimes with different Qeury (Q),
Key (K), and Value (V) matrices from the input 1D se-
quence, zl2RNK. The attention function is a mapping
operation between query and key-value pairs to an outputthat measures the similarity between two components in z
as:
SA(z) =SoftMax (QKT
pKh)V; (10)
wherepKhdenotes a normalization factor to preserve the
attention matrix (Equation (10)) from the possible gradient
vanishing or exploding through the training. Furthermore,
the output of MHSA derives from the concatenation of
multiple heads:
MHSA =Linear ([SA1(z);SA2(z);;SAh(z)]): (11)
So far, we have brieﬂy introduced the ViT pipeline and the
related mathematics. In the next sections, we will discuss
the integration of the Transformer into the U-Net structure
in medical segmentation. We categorized the presence of
Transformers in U-shaped networks into two sub-categories:
(a) Transformer as a complement to CNN-based U-Net-
like structures and (b) U-shaped standalone Transformer
architectures.
3.4.1 Transformer Complement to CNN-based U-Net
The success of convolutional neural networks (CNN) in di-
verse dense prediction tasks in the vision domain, e.g., seg-
mentation, is noticeable. Their performance is underlined
in their multi-scale representation and ability to capture
local semantic and texture information. However, the local
representation derving from the CNN architecture might
not be robust enough to capture geometrical and structural
information existing in the medical data. Therefore, there is
a need for a mechanism to capture inter-pixel long relations
to extend the performances of the existing CNN-based U-
Net variants suffering from the limited receptive ﬁeld of
convolutional operations. Chen et al. [38] proposed one of
the ﬁrst studies that utilized the Vision Transformer (ViT) in
the U-Net structure to compensate for the U-Net’s disability
in long-range modeling dependencies, namely TransUNet
(See Figure 21). The stacked Transformers in the encoder
path feed with the tokenized paths from abstract features
extracted within the primal input to extract global contexts.
The decoder path upsamples the encoded features com-
bined with the high-resolution CNN feature maps to enable
precise localization. Chen et al. clariﬁed that the naive Trans-
former is not ﬁt for downstream tasks like segmentation
well due to its 1D functionality for capturing the interaction
of the tokenized information. Therefore, they proposed this
complementary Transformer design with U-Net, which they
conducted several ablation studies to prove their superiority
within the conventional attention collaborated networks
such as Attention U-Net [70] on Synapse [134] and ACDC
[101] datasets.
TransUNet is a 2D network that processes the volumetric
3D medical image slice-by-slice, and due to its seminal ViT
adaptation for its building blocks, it relies on pre-trained
ViT models on large-scale image datasets. These restrictions
made Wang et al. [39] point them out and propose TransBTS
as a U-Net-like architecture, modeling local and global infor-
mation in spatial and slice/depth dimensions. While Trans-
former’s computational complexity is quadratic and the
volumetric 3D data is large, on the other hand, ViT’s ﬁxed-
size tokenization process [131] discards the local structural

==== Page 15 ====
15
Linear Pr ojection of Flattened PatchesTransformer EncoderMLP HeadClass
COVID
COVID
Patch + Position
Embedding
Extra learnable
[class] embedding
(a)Overview of preliminary Vision Transformer (ViT) structure pro-
posed by Dosovitskiy et al. [131]. ViT splits an image into ﬁxed-size
patches with a non-overlapping regime and then linearly embeds each
of them to a 1D vector space, afterward adds position embeddings,
and feeds the resulting sequence of vectors to a standard Transformer
encoder. In order to perform classiﬁcation, naive ViT uses the stan-
dard approach of adding an extra learnable classiﬁcation token to the
sequence. However, this token is not practical in the segmentation
literature, although the MLP head (from the dashed line in the above
ﬁgure) is omitted in segmentation tasks.
Embedded
PatchesLNMulti-Head  
Self-Attention  LN MLP
MatMulScaleSoftMaxMatMul
Linear LinearScaled Dot-Pr oduct  
Attention  
LinearConcatLinear(b)Up: Transformer Encoder block visualization, down-left: Multi-
Head Self-Attention (MHSA) block, down-right: Attention mechanism
block feed by the query (Q), key (K), and value (V) representations
learned from the input embedded patches. LN and MLP denote the
Layer Normalization [132] and Multi-Layer Perceptron operations,
respectively.
Fig. 20: The above ﬁgure portrays the ViT [131] pipeline with all of its detailed counterparts from a top-down view.
reshape1/41/81/2 
Conv3x3, ReLUUpsampleSegmentation head(n_patch, D)(D, H/16, W/16)(512, H/16, W/16)(256, H/8, W/8)(128, H/4, W/4)(64, H/2, W/2)(16, H, W)
Transformer Layer…(n = 12)Hidden FeatureLinear ProjectionCNN
Hidden FeatureDownsampleFeature ConcatenationTransformer LayerEmbeddedSequence𝒙𝒑𝟏,𝒙𝒑𝟐,…,𝒙𝒑𝑵LayerNormMSALayerNormMLP++𝒛𝟏(a) (b) 
Fig. 21: The overview architecture of the TransUNet. The
Transformer layers are employed in the encoder part. The
schematic of the Transformer is shown on the left. Figure
from [38].
information, TransBTS utilizes the 3D CNN backbone for its
encoder and decoder path to capture local representation
across spatial and depth dimensions and unleash from the
high computational burden for the Transformer counterpart
in overall. The essential key points in the amalgamation
of the Transformer with the encoded low-resolution with
high-level representation ﬂow come from CNN blocks, are
linear projection and feature mapping blocks, where the
input/output signals reshape and downsample to be com-
patible for their usage. This hybrid network captures the
local and global information from 3D data and demonstrates
the improved performance within two Brain Tumor Seg-
mentation (BraTS) 2019-2020 [91], [135], [136] datasets over
the previous CNN U-Net structures.
Li et al. [40] proposed the GT U-Net structure to ad-
dress the low performance of previous segmentation meth-
ods in fuzzy boundaries while keeping the computationalcomplexity low within the hybrid structure of CNN and
the Transformer in a U-Net-like paradigm. Their method
was applied to the private orthodontist tooth X-ray images
and DRIVE dataset [137]. All the main counterparts of U-
Net are based on Group Transformer (GT) to dispense the
quadratic computational complexity within these successive
parallel convolution, Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA),
convolution modules in each stage to gradually increase
receptive ﬁled and extracting long local-dependencies. So
far, the presence of a Transformer in the segmentation tasks
is crucial because if a network wants to provide an efﬁcient
prediction mask, it should be able to minimize the miss-
classifying of the background and foreground pixels that
leads to a reduction in False Positives (FP). Therefore learn-
ing long-range contextual features is as essential as fuzzy
boundaries resulting from object overlappings or variation
in exposure of the medical imaging devices. To mitigate the
occurrence of this miss predicting in boundary levels, GT
U-Net utilizes a Fourier descriptor loss term within binary
cross entropy to impose the prior shape knowledge.
Xie et al. [41] addressed the computational complexity
that restrains the multi-scale functionality of conventional
Self-Attention (SA) and proposed the hybrid CoTr architec-
ture for volumetric medical image segmentation. The whole
network is a U-Net-like structure with CNN-based 3D resid-
ual blocks for encoder and decoder paths with the amalga-
mation of Deformable Transformer (DeTrans) for multi-scale
fusion, besides the conventional skip connections from the
encoder to the decoder for better localization information
and faster convergence. TransUNet suffers from parameters
overload within MHSA, which treats all image tokenization
positions equally. Therefore, CoTr instantiates the defor-
mation concept from [126], [138] into the deformable self-

==== Page 16 ====
16
attention mechanism in Transformer to decrease the compu-
tation complexity and prepare the ground for using Trans-
former to process multi-scale and high-resolution feature
maps. MS-DMSA layer is a deformable transformer instead
of MHSA that focuses on only a small set of key sampling
locations around a reference path. CoTr demonstrates the
competitive results in a score-parameter trade-off on The
Multi-Atlas Labeling Beyond the Cranial Vault (BCV) [89]
dataset.
UNETR [139] is a 3D segmentation network that directly
utilizes volumetric data incorporating ViT solely at the en-
coder stage to capture global multi-scale contextual informa-
tion in a 3D volumetric style which is usually of paramount
importance in medical image segmentation domain. The
architecture follows the U-shaped structure of [7] with skip
connections carrying successive 3D convolution operations
to the 3D CNN-based decoder. Using a CNN-based decoder
is since transformers can not capture spatial localization in-
formation well despite their excellent capability of learning
global information. Analogous to U-Net, Hatamizadeh et al.
[139] uses the different stages of Transformer in the encoder
to pass the ﬂow from the contracting path to extracting
path, and the multi-resolution contextual information (after
reshaping the embedded sequence to a proper tensor shape
and applying convolution operations) merges with CNN-
based decoder to improve the segmentation mask predic-
tion. UNETR produces uniform, non-overlapping patches
from volumetric data and applies a linear projection to
project patches into a constant embedding dimensional
space throughout the Transformer layers. Their ablation
studies depict that they outperformed the TranUNet [38],
TransBTS [39], and CoTr [41] on BCV [89], and MSD [90]
datasets on an average of 1% margin in the dice score metric.
In computer vision tasks, neighboring information of a
speciﬁc region tends to be more correlated than far regions.
To this end, Wang et al. [43] proposed the MT-UNet net-
work utilized with the Mixed Transformer Module (MTM)
to capture long-range dependencies wisely concerning the
most neighboring contextual information. Another critical
point is that the ViT with Self Attention (SA) calculates
the intra-tokens afﬁnities, ignoring the inter-tokens connec-
tions dispensed through the other dimensions, especially
in medical images. Therefore, MTM consists of an External
Attention (EA) counterpart in itself to address this concern.
MTM is used in conjunction with a U-Net-like structure
accompanied by CNN blocks. CNN blocks are used to not
only reduce the computational overhead by downsampling
the input feature maps but also introduce a structure prior
to the model in the case of small medical datasets. MT-UNet
performs well on Synapse [89] and ACDC [101] datasets in
comparison with TranUNet [38].
Azad et al. [44] proposed a contextual attention network,
namely TMU, for adaptively synthesizing the U-Net pro-
duced local feature with the ViT’s global information for
enhanced overlap boundary areas in medical images. TMU
is two branches pipeline, wherein the ﬁrst stream utilizes
a U-Net-like block without a segmentation head (Resnet
backbone [121]) to extract high semantic features and object-
level boundary heatmap interaction representation. In the
next branch, the ViT-based Transformer module applies to
non-overlap input images to extract long-range dependen-cies. Whereas the objective of segmentation differs from one
subject to another data, as mentioned before, TMU aims to
merge the local and global information adaptively. To do so,
Azad et al. proposed a contextual attention mechanism to
produce image-level contextual information and highlight
the most discriminative regions within importance coefﬁ-
cients delivered by attention weights from Transformer. This
paradigm not only revealed the efﬁciency of the bound-
ary information as a prior and adaptive collaboration of
local and long-range dependencies but also outperforms
the conventional hybrid and solely CNN-based methods on
SegPC challenge dataset [140], [141], [142] and skin lesion
segmentation datasets [143], [144], [145].
 
Sigmoid
Conv 1×1
CCT
CCT……L ×
MaxPool+ConvsConcat+  
UpSample+ConvsEmbedd Reconstruct+  
 Channel-wise Cr oss AttentionMulti-head  
Cross-AttentionMLP MLP MLP MLPConcat
LN LN LN LNLN LN LN LN
1×1×C
 1×1×C
GAP GAP
D iCCA
H×W×C H×W×C
T okensUpSample+ConvLinear  
+Sigmoid
1×1×C
 1×1×C
Fig. 22: Overview of the UCTransNet architecture. The
original skip connections of U-Net architecture are replaced
with the proposed CTrans Module including Channel-wise
Cross fusion Transformer (CCT) and Channel-wise Cross
Attention (CCA). CCT with the Multi-head Cross-Attention
module is illustrated on the left. Figure from [146].
Skip connections in the U-Net-based model are used
to transfer high spatial information from the encoder to
the decoder for accurate localization, while the successive
downsampling operations suffer from the loss of spatial
information. However, Wang et al. [45] studied the effec-
tiveness of the preliminary U-Net skip connections and
stated that the naive skip connections suffer from the highly
semantic gap such as semantic gaps among multi-scale
encoder features and between the encode-decoder stages.
They proposed UCTransNet [45] that alleviates these men-
tioned issues from the channel perspective with an atten-
tion mechanism, namely Channel Transformer (CTrans).
CTrans is a modiﬁcation for skip connections in a U-Net-
based pipeline and consists of two sub-counterparts Chan-
nel Cross fusion with Transformer (CCT) and Channel-wise
Cross-Attention (CCA), for aggregating multi-scale features
adaptively and guiding the fused multi-scale channel-wise
features to decoder effectively, respectively (see Figure 22).
CCT aims to fuse multi-scale encoder features to adaptively
compensate for the semantic gap between different scales
with the advantage of long-range dependency modeling
in the Transformer. CCT tokenized feature maps at each
stage within patch sizes from a multiple of1
2, preserving
the channel dimensions. From Figure 22, the proposed CCT
module accompanies tokenized feature maps as a query
and concatenated four tokens come from stages as key and
value matrixes. With the use of instance normalization [147]

==== Page 17 ====
17
operation for gradient smoothing through the process, the
primary distinction between the CCT and Self Attention
(SA) is that the attention operation applies on the channel
axis rather than the patch axis. Afterward, to rectify the
gap between the encoder and decoder’s inconsistent feature
representation, the output tokens of CCT pass through CCA
to apply a better fusion step and lessen the ambiguity with
the decoder feature. The UCTransNet network performs
SOTA Dice results on the GlaS [148], MoNuSeg [149], [150]
and Synapse [89] datasets in comparison with TransUNet
[38].
CNN Block 
Maxpooling
CNN Block 
Maxpooling
CNN Block 
Maxpooling
CNN Block 
Maxpooling
CNN Block 
MaxpoolingIntra-Scale T rans
Patch EmbeddingDecoder Block 
Upsampling
Decoder Block 
Upsampling
Decoder Block 
Upsampling
Decoder Block 
Upsampling
Decoder Block 
UpsamplingIntra-Scale T rans
Patch Embedding
Intra-Scale T rans
Patch Embedding
Intra-Scale T ransSpatial-A ware
Inter -Scale T rans
Patch Matching
Scale Fusion
Scale Di vision
Patch R eversionTransf ormer
FusionFusionFusionFusionCNN Block
Conv. Conv.
Conv.
Conv.BN + R eLU
BN + R eLU
BN + R eLU
Trans Block
Concatenation
Enhanced MLPConv.
Dual-Axis MSACNN TransDecoder Block
Conv.BN + R eLUBN + R eLU
Concatenation
Skip
ConnectionUpsamplingConv.
Fusion
Conv.
Concatenation
CNN TransCNN
CNN
CNN
CNNTrans
Trans
Trans
Trans
Fig. 23: Overview of the ScaleFormer [46] architecture. The
input image is ﬁrst passed through the CNN Block to extract
the local details. The output features of the last several
layers in the CNN block are then fed into the Intra-Scale
Transformers to model the global information for each scale.
Spatial-Aware Inter-Scale Transformer fuses the outputs of
Inter-scale Transformer modules to enable the interaction
among different scales. Finally, the decoder block performs
upsampling and concatenation with features of correspond-
ing scales to produce the segmentation prediction.
Similar to UCTransNet, Huang et al. [46] addressed
the inconsistency between local and global features in in-
ter and intra-scales in conventional architectures (hybrid
/ standalone) [38], [48], [49], [151] and proposed a Scale-
Former backbone based on a U-Net-like structure which
during this study is the SOTA method in 2D modality.
Their innovations through their design are to couple CNN-
based features within long-range contextual features in each
scale effectively within lightweight Dual-Axis MSA captures
attention in a row/column-wise manner. In addition, Scale-
Former [46] make a bridge with a spatial-aware inter-scale
Transformer to interact with the target regions’ multi-scales
features to surpass the shape, location, and variability of
organs’ limitation. ScaleFormer utilizes ResNet [121] variant
backbone, basic ResNet-34 blocks for CNN-feature extractor,
and in each stage, scale-wise intra-scale transformer (Dual-
Axis MSA) couples with the local features to highlight both
detailed local-spatial and long-spatial afﬁnities in each scale.
To alleviate the deﬁciencies of previous methods in captur-
ing sufﬁcient information from multiple scales by a hierar-
chical encoder, spatial-aware inter-scale Transformers merge
these features adaptively to strengthen the ScalFormer in
effectively segmenting various-scale organs. From Figure 23,
the inter-scale Transformer is a computation-efﬁcient design
by applying successive point-wise convolutions followed by
average-pooling on row/column-wise query and key matri-ces of the Transformer. This pipeline embraces the whole
operations in a single block rather than multi blocks for row
and column on input data [152]. The spatial-aware inter-
scale Transformer is a conventional Transformer with a dif-
ference in interaction calculation of tokens cue. To be more
precise, each input token to this Transformer ﬁrst reshapes
to its 2D representation. Every 2D representation of speciﬁc
tokens in each scale concatenates with their successive 2D
patch feature map in the following scales and then ﬂattens
to its 1D representation by producing a master token for
that speciﬁc token and applying the standard Transformer
calculation to it. Afterward, the enhanced representations
are aggregated in the decoder path with local-level CNN
features on the same stage in each skip connection to each
decoder block. ScaleFormer proves its functionality through
multiple datasets [89], [101], [149], [150] by outperform-
ing TransUNet [38], Swin-Unet [48], MISSFormer [49] and
AFTer-UNet [151].
Figures 21 and 23 show sample CNN-Transformer U-
shaped structures that Transformer is an add-on to a U-
Net-like network to model the long-range contextual infor-
mation in diverse stages of U-Net from encoder-decoder
to skip connection and bottleneck. The Swin UNETR [42]
is a modiﬁcation to the original UNETR [139] that the 3D
Vision Transformer replaced by the Swin Transformer in
encoder path. There are still other studies such as [153], [154]
noteworthy to review, but due to the limitation of the paper,
we excluded them.
3.4.2 Standalone Transformer Backbone for U-Net Designs
So far, multiple studies incorporating the Transformer con-
cept and conventional CNN modules have been reviewed
in Section 3.4.1. In this section, we investigate the usage of
Transformer as a standalone main counterpart for designing
backbones for U-Net-like structures. One of the pioneering
structures in this domain was proposed by Valanarasu et al.
[47], namely MedT. Like most of the other networks, MedT
plans to contribute to capturing long-range spatial context
with pure Transformer rather than the CNN-based methods
that partially broaden the hindered-receptive ﬁeld of CNN,
e.g., D-UNet [65] with deformable convolution operations
[126], ASPP-FC-DenseNet [81] with atrous convolution op-
erations [157], and H-DenseUNet [62] with successive con-
volution operations. However, Transformer’s performance
(also ViTs) has a strong bond with the fed data scale to the
Transformer module [131], which in the medical scale, could
be degraded more, and a high amount of data could not be
available. This lack of data is a considerable corner point in
learning positional encoding as one of the preliminary steps
of Transformers, which have shown their capacity to model
images’ spatial structure. Therefore MedT [47] proposes a
gated axial-attention mechanism to control the information
ﬂow by positional embeddings to query, key, and value [158]
in a multi-axis attention operation [152]. In [158] the accurate
relative positional encoding learned on large-scale datasets
rather than small-scale datasets improves the performance,
therefore MedT introduces a gating parameter to control
the amount of positional bias in capturing non-local infor-
mation in hindering non-accurate positional embedding. In
addition, to effectively extract information, MedT utilizes a
Local-Global (LoGo) training strategy to compensate for the

==== Page 18 ====
18
Global Branch
Local Branch
Encoder  
Block  Decoder  
Block  Image
Segmentation  
Mask  
1x1 
Conv  Add Conv  
Block  Resample
Patches
Patches
(a)Overview of the MedT architecture. The network uses the LoGo
strategy for training. The upper global branch utilizes the ﬁrst fewer
blocks of the transformer layers to encode the long-range dependency
of the original image. In the local branch, the images are converted
into small patches and then fed into the network to model the local
details within each patch. The output of the local branch is re-sampled
relying on the location information. Finally, a 11convolution layer
fuses the output feature maps from the two branches to generate the
ﬁnal segmentation mask. Figure from [155].
(b)The architecture of the Swin-Unet follows the U-Shape structure.
It contains the encoder, the bottleneck, and the decoder part which
are built based on the Swin transformer block. The encoder and the
decoder are connected with skip connections. Figure from [48].
Overlap Patch 
Embedding
Enhanced Transformer 
Blockx2
Overlap Patch MergingEnhanced Transformer 
Blockx2
Overlap Patch Merging
Enhanced Transformer 
Blockx2
Overlap Patch Merging
Enhanced Transformer 
Blockx2Enhanced Transformer 
Context Bridge
Enhanced Transformer 
Blockx2
Patch ExpandingEnhanced Transformer 
Blockx2
Patch Expanding
Enhanced Transformer 
Blockx2
Patch Expanding
Patch Expanding
44HWC
288HWC
416 16HWC
832 32HWCNC NC
44HWC
288HWC
416 16HWC
832 32HWCLinear Projection
HWCHWc l a s s
x4
(c)Overview of the MISSFormer architecture. The network is com-
posed of a hierarchical encoder, a decoder, and an Enhanced Trans-
former Context Bridge. The encoder and decoder are constructed
based on the enhanced transformer blocks and modules for patch
processing. The outputs of each stage within the encoder are fused and
passed through the bridge to model the local and global dependencies
of different scales. Figure from [49].
Patch Embedding
 Patch Expanding
D-Former
Block 1
Down -sampling
D-Former
Block 4
D-Former
Block 2
Down -sampling
D-Former
Block 3
Down -sampling
D-Former
Block 5
Up-sampling
D-Former
Block 6
Up-sampling
D-Former
Block 7
Up-sampling
D-Former
Block 8Skip Connection
Encoder Decoder2021.12.24
Skip ConnectionSkip ConnectionSkip Connection
H D
W
H
WD
GSMLSMGSMLSMGSMLSMDPE
(d)Overview of the D-Former architecture. One dynamic position
encoding block (DPE), multiple local scope modules (LSMs), and
global scope modules (GSMs) constitute each D-Former block. Figure
from [50].
Fig. 24: Overview of architectures mentioned in Section 3.4.2
Transformer’s patch-wise technique weakness in capturing
inter-patch pixel dependencies. To do so, MedT investigates
two branches in its network diagram (see Figure 24a), one
as a global branch to work on the original resolution of the
image and the local branch that operates on the patches of
the image. Overall, MedT demonstrated vanguard results
on Brain US [159], [160], Glas [148], and MoNuSeg [149],
[150] datasets in Dice and IoU metrics.Transformers are well capable of capturing long-range
dependencies through data, however, they suffer from se-
vere and inevitable handicaps that impede them from their
versatile use in vision tasks. These shortages commonly
are correlated with chains to each other, e.g., Transformers
computational complexity is quadratic [131], [161] and this
restrains its usability in dense vision tasks such as segmen-
tation and detection, which needs the neighboring pixel de-

==== Page 19 ====
19
LNW -MSALNMLP
++
LNSW -MSALNMLP
++
 
(a)The calculations through the Swin block
are:
^zl=W-MSA (LN(zl 1)) + zl 1,
zl=MLP(LN(^zl)) +^zl,
^zl+1=SW-MSA (LN(zl)) + zl,
zl+1=MLP(LN(^zl+1))+^zl+1,^zland^zl+1
denote the output features of the W-MSA
and SW-MSA modules, respectively.
LNEfficient  
Self-AttentionEnhanced  
Mix-FFN
++FCout
Depth-W ise ConvGELU
LN
+
FCinLN(b)The Efﬁcient Mix-FFN block applies the
following operations:
y1=LN(Conv33(FC(xin)) + FC(xin)),
xout=FC(GELU (y1)) +xin.
LNLS-MSALNMLP
++
LNGS-MSALNMLP
++
 
Local Scope Module  
(LSM)Global Scope Module  
(GSM)(c)The LSM and GSM modules (main coun-
terparts of the D-Former block) apply the
following formulations:
^zl=LS-MSA (LN(zl 1)) + zl 1,
zl=MLP(LN(^zl)) +^zl,
^zl+1=GS-MSA (LN(zl)) + zl,
zl+1=MLP(LN(^zl+1))+^zl+1,^zland^zl+1
denote the output features of the LS-MSA
and GS-MSA modules, respectively.
Fig. 25: Overview of main Transformer counterpart blocks mentioned in Section 3.4.2. (a) Swin Transformer block [48],
[156], (b) MISSFormer Enhanced Transformer block [49], (c) D-Former Transformer block [50]. MLP , FC, and LN operations
indicate the Multi-Layer Perceptron, Fully Connected, and Layer Normalization [132], respectively.
pendencies in the multi-scale and hierarchical pattern. Due
to the ﬁxed size non-overlapping tokenization step in the
naive Transformer rather than the pixel-by-pixel calculation
of attention to diminishing the mentioned computational
burden, the Transformer is unworthy of extracting the local
contextual dependencies in intra-path pixels. These con-
straints make the interest to provide efﬁcient Transformers,
Linear Transformers, with a signiﬁcant amount of reduction
in parameters and computational complexity [162]. In the
vision tasks, Swin Transformer [156] plays a critical role as
an efﬁcient and linear Transformer with the capability of
supporting hierarchical architectures. A key design coun-
terpart of the Swin Transformer is its shifted windowing
scheme that makes the Transformer calculate the afﬁnities
for patches in the same window. Afterward, the window
swipes on the patches, and the attention calculates among
the patches in the same window. This successive shifting
operation and capturing local contextual information within
patches in windows can stack multiple times. Ultimately
a patch merging layer is introduced to build CNN-like
hierarchical feature maps by merging image patches in
deeper layers. This intuition and the U-Net-like structure
success emerged Swin-Unet [48] structure in the medical
segmentation ﬁeld. From Figure 24b, Cao et al. [48] used
the Swin Transformer block as the main counterpart of
their U-shaped network. 2D medical images split into non-
overlapping patches, and each patch fed into the encoder
path comprised of Swin blocks. The contextual features from
the bottleneck output upsample in the decoder path with
patch expanding layer (contrary to path merging layer) endcouples with the multi-stage features from the encoder via
skip connections to restore the spatial information. Swin-
Unet presented SOTA results over the CNN-Transformer
hybrid structures like TransUNet [38] and demonstrated the
robust generalization ability with the help of two multi-
organ (Synapse) [89] and cardiac (ACDC) [101] segmenta-
tion datasets.
Due to some intrinsic features of medical images or,
more speciﬁcally, the properties of human body organs, e.g.,
multi-scale and deformations, [7], the necessity to capture
long-range dependencies for accurate segmentation bound-
aries [47] and inherence of generalizability of models even
with no pre-training strategies and applicable for low-data
regime [108], [109], [163], Huang et al. [49] proposed MISS-
Former a pure U-shaped Transformer network to address
these apprehensions. Figure 24c displays the MISSFormer
network with enhanced Transformer block as a primary
entity in the network. One of the Transformer’s drawbacks
mentioned earlier is their un-suitability for capturing local
context [164], [165], which comes with the solution for
lessening the computational complexity with patching op-
eration. However, the local contextual information plays a
pivotal role in high-resolution vision tasks, therefore some
studies in the vision Transfomer domain tackle this problem
by embedding convolution operations in their attention
module, e.g., PVTv1 [166], PVTv2 [167], and Uformer [168].
Huang et al. [49] argues this methodology and brings up the
point that direct usage of convolution layers in Transformer
blocks limits the discrimination of features. For an input im-
age, MISSFormer applies a 44convolutions with the stride

==== Page 20 ====
20
size instead of 4(overlapping windows) for preserving local
continuity in building the patches stage. The encoder path
molds hierarchical representation (see Figure 24c) with the
help of Enhanced Transformer Block, which accompanies
the Figure 25b Transformer module. Enhanced Transformer
block comprises an Efﬁcient Self-Attention module to de-
crease the traditional attention calculation by downsam-
pling the corresponding query, key, and value matrixes. Af-
terward, the Enhanced Mix-Feed Forward Network (FFN)
sub-module (modiﬁed clone of Mix FFN from [169]) aligns
features and makes discriminant representation with 33
depth-wise convolutions for capturing the local context
efﬁciently. Analogous to [45], MISSFormer rethinks the
skip connection design, utilizes the Enhanced Transformer
Context Bridge module for multi-scale information fusion,
and hinders the gap between encoder and decoder feature
maps. This module captures the local and global correlations
between different scale features. For a brief review of this
module, the context bridge (Figure 24c) ﬂattens the output
attention matrixes from different scales in the spatial dimen-
sion and reshapes it in a way to have a consistent channel
dimension and concatenates the representations in ﬂattened
spatial dimension and feed to enhanced Transformer block
to produce long-range dependencies and local context corre-
lations. Ultimately the output of Enhanced Mix-FFN is split
and restores to its original shape to get the discriminant
fused hierarchical multi-scale representation. MISSFormer
plotted high performances compared to TransUNet [38] and
Swin-Unet [48] over Synapse [89] and ACDC [101] datasets.
Since most U-Net-shaped standalone Transformer uti-
lized models incorporate 2D inputs, Wu et al. [50] proposed
a Dilated Transformer (D-Former) for 3D medical image
segmentation with consideration of degrading the computa-
tional complexity. D-Former [50], Figure 24d, is a U-shaped
hierarchical architecture with specialized D-former blocks
which consist of Local Scope Modules (LSMs) and Global
Scope Modules (GSMs) in an alternate order to capture local
and global contextual information. Each D-Former block
could repeat the successive LSM and GSM counterparts,
however the original D-Former [50] uses three successive
sequences of LSM-GSM modules in the third and sixth D-
Former blocks. LSM captures local self-attention by dividing
a 3D feature map into non-overlapping 3D-volumetric units
that consist of 3D patches and calculating the self-attention
within these 3D units. As a complement to the locally
ﬁne-grained attention, the GSM module attains interactions
through different units in a dilated manner to enlarge the
attention’s performance range. This intuition captures local
and global interactions with ﬁxed-size patches within sets
of 3D volumetric units without any computation overﬂow.
Also, D-Former takes advantage of positional encoding
within Transformers with Dynamic Positional Encoding
(DPE), which can be a vital cue in dense prediction tasks
such as segmentation. Due to the 3D functionality and 3D
contextual information, D-Former is a SOTA method on
various 3D datasets such as Synapse [89] and ACDC [101]
datasets with large margins in Dice score over CNN-hybrid
or standalone Transformer designs.
Still, numerous studies out there, e.g., DS-TransUNet
[170] utilize the Swin Transformer in the dual-path U-
shaped structure for modeling the multi-scale patch sizeto lessen the deﬁciency of Transformers in capturing the
local context. We reviewed multiple studies that utilized
the Transformer in their U-Net pipeline in various methods.
With such evidence and stunning growth in the Transformer
ﬁeld, we still hear about the outstanding collaboration be-
tween Transformers and U-Net-like networks so often.
3.5 Rich Representation Enhancements
To obtain a rich representation, the common approaches
applied to medical image segmentation are multi-scale and
multi-modal methods, e.g. [171], [172], [173]. The key ob-
jective is to enhance the performance of the trained models
by utilizing all available information from multi-modal or
multi-scale images while retaining the most desirable and
relevant features.
The multi-scale method, also referred to as the pyra-
mid method originated from the Laplace pyramid method
proposed by Burt et al. [174]. The approach converts the
source input image by resizing it into a series of images with
decreasing spatial resolutions. This scheme allows encoders
of models to directly access the features of the enhanced im-
ages of different sizes and thus learn the respective features.
The study of the organs of interest requires their speciﬁc
imaging modality to provide targeted information. How-
ever, each imaging technique has its limitations and can only
reveal partial details about the organ, which may lead to in-
accurate clinical analysis. Therefore, a fusion of images from
various imaging modalities can be conducted to supplement
each other’s information by integrating complementary in-
formation retrieved from several input images.
The powerful structural design of the UNet network
with the encoder and decoder allows the network to mine
salient features at multiple input levels and enables effective
feature fusion of different modalities.
Lachinov et. al. evaluate the performance of the Cas-
caded U-Net [58] with multiple encoders processing each
modality respectively to demonstrate the improvement due
to the extraction multi-modal representation. The results
indicate that the architecture taking the multiple modalities
into account outperforms the network only relying on one
single modality.
The following classiﬁcations will illustrate the modality
fusion proposed to learn richer representations.
3.5.1 Multi-scale Fusion
Image pyramid input or side output layers are aggregated
into U-Net structures to fuse the multi-scale information in
the encoder or decoder stage.
Abraham et al. [18] propose the Focal Tversky Attention
U-Net with a generalized focal loss function that modulates
the Tversky index [175] to address the issue of data imbal-
ance and improve precision and recall balance in medical
image segmentation. Furthermore, they incorporate multi-
scale image inputs into the attention U-Net model with
deep supervision output layers [70]. The novel architecture
facilitates the extraction of richer feature representations and
results in 3% dice score improvement on multi-class CT
abdominal segmentation task. Compared to the commonly
used Dice loss, the Tversky similarity index introduces a

==== Page 21 ====
21
3x3 conv + bn + relu
2x2 max-pooling2x2 max-pooling
2x2 learnable upconv
skip connection
1x1 conv + sigmoid
attention gate AG
multi-scale inputs deep supervision
]]AGAGAG
Fig. 26: Architecture of the Focal Tversky Attention U-
Net with multi-scale input and deep supervised output
layers. AGs indicate soft attention gates which combine spa-
tial information from low-level feature maps with coarser
contextual information from skip connections. Figure from
[176].
speciﬁc weight for each class, which is inversely propor-
tionate to the label occurrences. This index shown as fol-
lows alleviates precision and recall imbalance due to equal
weighting of false positive (FP) and false negative (FN).
TIc=PN
i=1picgic+
PN
i=1picgic+A+B+
A=NX
i=1picgic;B=NX
i=1picgic(12)
where, AandBrefer to FN and FP respectively. In the
terms AandB,picdenotes the probability that the pixel i
is classiﬁed to the lession class candpicis the probability
pixelibelongs to the non-lesion class c.gicandgicare of the
same form for ground truth pixels. Adjusting the weights 
andto ﬁne-tune the emphasis can enhance recall in case
of signiﬁcant class imbalance.
The authors further develop a focal Tversky loss function
(FTL) for better small regions-of-interest (ROIs) segmenta-
tion by forcing the function to shift the focus on less accurate
and misclassiﬁed predictions.
FTLc=X
(1 TIc)1=(13)
whereis set in the interval [1;3]to enable the loss func-
tion to concentrate more on incorrectly classiﬁed predictions
that are less accurate. The reason is that when  > 1, the
FTL is almost unaffected if a pixel is misclassiﬁed with a
high Tversky index. And if a pixel is incorrectly classiﬁed
with a small Tversky index, the FTL will be high and forces
the model to focus on hard samples.
As shown in Figure 26, they use Soft Attention Gates
(AGs) to prune features and propagate only relevant spatial
information to the decoding layers to enhance the balance
between precision and recall at a structural level. In addi-
tion, an input image pyramid injected into each of the max
pooling layers in the encoder and deep supervision module
enriches feature learning at different scales.
To better segment the Optic Disc (OD) and Optic Cup
(OC) for accurate diagnosis of glaucoma from fundus im-
ages, Fu et al. [55] introduce the polar transformation into
the U-shape convolutional network with multi-scale input
layers to build the Polar Transformation M-Net, aims to ex-
tract the richer context representation of the original image
in the polar coordinate system. Compared to prior work,
Fundus ImageOptic Disc DetectionPolar TransformationM-NetSegmentationMulti-label MapInverse Polar Transformation400 x 4003323264322
96
512256256256512256512256384192128128256128128128646464642
2225 x 2532400 x 400400 x 400400 x 400400 x 400200 x 200100 x 10050 x 50200 x 200100 x 10050 x 503
3
364
128
256+400 x 400
Multi-scaleU-Shape Convolutional NetworkSide-Output + Multi-label
Up-SampleDown-SampleMaxPoolingDeConv <2x2, 2>Conv <1x1, 1>, with SigmoidConv <3x3, 1>, with ReLUCopy and MergeMulti-label LossInputOutputL(1)sL(2)sL(3)s
L(4)sFig. 27: Illustration of the Polar Transformation M-Net
method. The upper part of the ﬁgure shows the overall
pipeline. The lower part demonstrates the architecture of M-
Net. The method ﬁrst localizes the disc center to extract the
ROI, then applies the polar transformation to the detected
patches of ROI. The transferred results are passed through
the M-Net to obtain multi-label maps. The inverse polar
transformation restored the ﬁnal segmentation prediction to
the Cartesian coordinate. The M-Net architecture is com-
posed of an input image pyramid, U-shape convolutional
network, and side-output layers. Figure from [177].
which treats OD and OC individually while ignoring their
interdependency and overlap, the proposed Polar transfor-
mation M-Net considers both OD and OC simultaneously
and formulates the segmentation as a multi-label task. More-
over, a novel loss function built on the Dice coefﬁcient
is employed to address the data imbalance between OD
and OC in the fundus images. The model aggregates the
side-output layers serving as early classiﬁers that generate
prediction maps at different scales.
Figure 27 demonstrates the overall structure of M-Net. It
consists of a multi-scale input layer, U-shape convolutional
network, side-output layer, and multi-label loss function.
The initial multi-scale layer constructs the image input
with descending resolutions for hierarchical representation
learning. The processed image pyramid is passed through a
U-shape network similar to the original U-Net architecture
[7] whose encoder path and decoder path are concatenated
by the skip connections. The output of each stage within the
decoder path is fed to a side-output layer that produces a
local output map. The superiority of the side-output layer is
that the issue of gradient vanishing could be mitigated by
the backpropagation of the side-output loss together with
the ﬁnal layer loss. Since the disc region overlays the cup
pixels, the authors evaluate segmentation performance by
the proposed multi-label loss function based on the Dice
coefﬁcient, which is deﬁned as:
Ls= 1 KX
k2wkPN
np(k;i)gk;iPN
ip2
(k;i)+PN
ig2
(k;i)(14)
whereKis the total number of classes and Ndenotes the
number of pixels. p(k;i)andg(k;i)are the predicted proba-
bility and binary ground truth respectively. Class weights

==== Page 22 ====
22
wkcontrol the contribution of each class to the ﬁnal results.
Another contribution of the network is the pixel-wise polar
transformation operated on the fundus image plane. The po-
lar transformation can map the radial relationship that OC
should be within the OD to the layer-like spatial structure,
which makes the features easier to identify. Additionally, the
interpolation during the polar transformation based on the
OD center could expand the cup region. It helps relieve the
heavily biased distribution of OC/background pixels. The
experiments on the ORIGA dataset have demonstrated an
increase in segmentation performance.
The original U-Net may not fully exploit all contribu-
tions of the semantic strength since it only generates output
segmentation maps from the ﬁnal layer of the decoder
path. Moreover, the output of the layers in different steps
cannot be connected to one another, which blocks feature
sharing and leads to redundant parameters. To address the
mentioned issue, Moradi et al. proposed MFP-UNet which
allows the output of all the blocks in different stages to be
fed to the last layer [178]. Their architecture is composed
of two pathways, the “bottom-up pathway” and the “top-
down pathway”. The encoder of the UNet with dilated
convolution ﬁlter serves as the ”bottom-up pathway”. The
dilated convolutional kernel can increase the receptive ﬁelds
of the module by the dilation factor. Besides, the expansion
path of U-Net acts as the FPN top-down pathway. Each
step of the top-down pathway provides prediction maps
where lower-resolution semantically stronger features can
be processed for transfer to higher resolutions. Additional
convolution layers are included for processing the feature
maps at different scales to one ﬁxed resolution compared to
the decoder path of the original U-Net, which can boost the
accuracy and improve the resolution of each stage. Accord-
ing to the experiment results, the novel model provides a
robust and powerful architecture regarding the capabilities
of feature representation in a pyramid, which shows robust-
ness to large and rich training sets.
3.5.2 Multi-modality Fusion
In this section, we summarize the U-Net variant models
with multimodal fusion modules, where a single encoder of
U-Net is extended to multiple encoders to receive medical
images in different modalities. The branches of encoders are
connected by their respective strategies of aggregation, thus
sharing information in different modalities, extracting richer
representations, and complementing each other.
The novel architecture Dolz et al. [57] propose in the
Dense Multi-path U-Net enhances traditional U-Net models
regarding rich representation learning on two key aspects:
modality fusion and inception module extension. Two typi-
cal strategies are employed to deal with multi-modal image
segmentation tasks. The early fusion merges the low-level
features of inputs of multiple imaging modalities at the
very early stage. As for the late fusion strategy, the CNN
outputs of different modalities are fused at a later point.
Nevertheless, these previous strategies cannot thoroughly
model the highly complex relation of the image information
across different paths of modalities. To alleviate the limi-
tation, the proposed HyperDenseNet adopts the strategy
where each stream receives inputs of image data of one
Fig. 28: The architecture of network for segmenting ischemic
stroke lesions across various imaging modalities. In the
encoding path, each imaging modality is input into a single
stream. All layers are directly connected to one another in
a single stream, which facilitates the information ﬂow of
the network. The dashed lines depict the dense connections
between the layer outputs in the streams of different modal-
ities. Figure from [179].
modality, and the layers in the same and different paths are
densely connected.
As shown in Figure 28, the encoding path contains N
streams, each responsible for one imaging modality. The
Dense Multi-path U-Net supports Hyper-dense connections
both within a single path and between several paths. In a
densely-connected network, the output of the lthlayer is
produced by the mapping Hlof the concatenation of all the
feature layers.
xl=Hl([xl 1;xl 2;:::;x 0]) (15)
HyperDenseNet integrates the outputs among different
paths based on the densely-connected network to obtain
richer feature representation from combined modalities. In
addition, the permuting and interleaving operations are
applied to the concatenation to improve performance. Con-
sidering the case of two modalities with streams 1 and 2
denoted asx1
landx2
lrespectively, the output of the lthlayer
of HyperDenseNet can be expressed as follows:
xs
l=Hs
l(s
l([x1
l 1;x2
l 1;x1
l 2;x2
l 2;:::;x1
0;x2
0])); (16)
wheres
lrepresents the shufﬂing function acting on the
feature maps.
Inspired by the Inception module in [123] which em-
ploys convolutions with multiple kernel sizes on the same
level to capture both local and global information, the au-
thors further expand the convolutional module of Inception
with two additional convolutional blocks to facilitate the
learning of multi-scale features. The two blocks exploit
different dilation rates to enable multiple receptive ﬁelds
larger than the original inception module. The nncon-
volutions are replaced with the consequent 1nandn1
convolutions with the aim to be more efﬁcient.
Lachinov et al. [58] propose a deep cascaded variant of
U-Net, Cascaded Unet, to process multi-modal input for
better performance regarding brain tumor segmentation.
Despite the feasibility of the original U-Net to handle multi-
modal MRI image input, it fuses the feature information
of all the modalities which is processed in an identical
manner. Based on the original U-Net, the proposed Cas-
caded Unet employs multiple encoders in parallel for better
exploiting feature representations for each speciﬁc modality.

==== Page 23 ====
23
maxmax
Cmaxmax
C CT1T2T1ceFLAIR
NNNN
2N2N2N2N
4N4N4N4N
8N8N8N8N2NN
8N4N 4N2NN
4N8N+K3
K3 K2 K14N+K2 2N+K1 2N N
Fig. 29: Architecture of Cascaded Unet with multiple en-
coders. T1, T2, T1CE, and FLAIR indicate several MRI
modalities. N denotes the current number of ﬁlters. K is
a number of ﬁlters in the context feature map produced
from lower-scale models. At each stage of the encoding path
across modalities, the resulting features are calculated as a
maximum of the feature maps processed by encoders. In the
decoder of the model, the output at each scale is obtained
from the skip connections from the encoder, the decoder
output from the previous stage, and the context connections.
Figure from [180].
The overall architecture of the Cascaded Unet model can
be seen in Figure 29. The encoder path contains separate
subpaths where every subpath utilizes a convolution group
to process one input modality and generate feature maps.
Then elementwise maximum operation acts on the multiple
feature maps per stage to obtain the resulting features. The
output of the feature map is afterward joined with the
corresponding feature map of the larger-scale block, which
boosts the information ﬂow between the feature maps at
different scales. The decoder of Cascaded UNet produces
output at each level depending on the output at the same
scale and the output of the decoder block at the previous
stage. This strategy encourages the model to iteratively
improve the results from earlier iterations.
3.5.3 Leveraging Depth Information
Some methods modify the U-Net into a 3D model and
design modules to extract the information across channels in
order to fully exploit the structural information of the third-
dimension medical images. For improving automatic brain
tumor prognosis, Islam et al. adapt the U-Net architecture
to a 3D model and integrate the 3D attention strategy to
perform image segmentation [59]. Compared to only skip
connections, the introduced 3D attention model is aggre-
gated into the decoder part of U-Net that includes channel
and spatial attention in parallel with skip connections. The
additional 3D attention layers encourage the module to
encode richer spatial features from the original images.
As shown in Figure 30, the 3D attention U-Net is com-
posed of a 3D encoder, the decoder, and skip connections
combined with the channel and spatial attention mech-
anism. In the path for 3D spatial attention, the authors
perform 11Cconvolution on the input feature maps to
obtain the result of the HW1dimension. In parallel, the
input feature maps are passed through an average pooling
and then fed to the fully-connected layer to get the 11C
sequential channel correlation. Since the two paths capture
features parallelly, the inconsistency and sparsity caused by
EncoderDecoderExcitation ModuleFinal Conv
Fig. 30: Architecture of 3D Attention U-Net with a channel
and a spatial attention parallel to skip connections. Figure
from [181].
the two excitations can be alleviated by fusing skip con-
nections. Furthermore, the integration of skip connections
can enhance the performance of segmentation prediction
which can be inferred from the experiments on the BraTS
2019 dataset.
3.6 Probabilistic Design
Another type of U-Net extension combines the classic U-Net
with different types of probabilistic extensions. Depending
on the task that should be achieved or the process that
should be enhanced, different types of extensions from
bayesian skip connections, over variational auto-encoders
to Markov random ﬁelds are used, which are introduced in
the following.
3.6.1 Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) Regularization
In medical image segmentation tasks, different graders often
produce different segmentations. Most of these different
segmentations are plausible as many medical images con-
tain ambiguities that can not be resolved considering only
the image at hand. Taking this into consideration, Kohl et
al. learn a distribution over segmentations from an am-
biguous input to produce an unlimited number of possible
segmentations instead of just providing the most likely
hypothesis [54]. In their approach, they combine a U-Net,
for producing reliable segmentations, with a conditional
variational autoencoder (CVAE), which can model complex
distributions and encodes the segmentation variants in a
low-dimensional latent space. The best results were ob-
tained for a latent space of dimension 6.
Figure 31 (a) shows the sampling process given a trained
prior net and u-net as well as a low-dimensional latent
space. Each position in the latent space encodes a different
segmentation variant. Passing the input image through the
prior net, it will determine the probability of the encoded
variants for the given input image. For each possible seg-
mentation to be predicted the network is applied to the same
input image. A random sample from the prior probability
distribution is drawn and broadcast to an N-channel feature
map with the same shape as the segmentation map. It will
then be concatenated with the ﬁnal feature maps of the u-
net and processed with successive 11convolutions to

==== Page 24 ====
24
z
U-NetImage
Sample  ᫤KL
Prior Net
Posterior Net
Predicted 
SegmentationGround
TruthCross-
Entropy
Latent Space
ᵤprior
ḙprior
ᵤpost,ḙpost
U-NetImage
SamplePrior Net
Latent Space
ᵤprior
ḙpriorz1z2
z3
*
1
2
3
z
᫤1,᫤2,᫤3,...a b
Fig. 31: (a)Illustration of the sampling process of M seg-
mentations with probabilistic U-Net. (b)Illustration of the
training process of the probabilistic U-Net for one training
sample. The green arrows represent loss functions. Figure
from [182].
produce the segmentation map corresponding to the drawn
point from the latent space. Only the combination needs to
be recalculated in each iteration, as the last feature maps of
the U-Net and the output of the prior net can be reused for
each hypothesis.
Figure 31 (b) shows the training procedure of the probabilis-
tic U-Net.
Apart from the standard training procedures for condi-
tional VAEs and deterministic segmentation models, it has
to be learned how to embed the segmentation variants in the
latent space in a useful way. This is solved by the posterior
net. It learns to recognize a segmentation variant and map
it to a certain position in the latent space. A sample from its
output posterior distribution combined with the activation
map of the u-net must result in a segmentation identical to
the ground truth segmentation. From this, it follows that the
training data set must include a set of different but plausible
segmentations for each input image.
Myronenko [53] adds a VAE branch to a 3D U-Net
architecture to address the problem of limited training data
for brain tumor segmentation. In their architecture, the U-
Net is used for the segmentation of the tumor, and the VAE
is used for the reconstruction of the image sharing the same
encoder. For the VAE, the output of the encoder is reduced
to a lower dimensional space and a sample is drawn from
the Gaussian distribution with the given mean and standard
derivation (std). The sample is then reconstructed to the
input image using an architecture similar to that of the U-
Net decoder but without any skip connections. The total loss
to be minimized during training is made up of three terms:
L=Ldice+ 0:1LL2+ 0:1LKL (17)
Ldiceis a soft dice loss between the predicted segmentation
of the u-net and the GT segmentation.
LL2andLKLare the losses for the VAE where LL2describes
how well the reconstructed image matches the input image
andLKLis the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between
the estimates normal distribution and a prior distribution
N(0;1). Using the VAE brach helps to better cluster the
features at the end of the encoder. This helps to guide and
regularize the shared encoder for small training set sizes.
Adding the additional VAE branch, therefore, improved the
performance and led to stable results for different random
initializations of the network.
UNet
MRF softmaxXlog-sum-exp
categorical 
cross -entropyR R*Z
Mean -field iterationUFig. 32: Schematic illustration of the MRF-UNet product.
Figure from [183].
3.6.2 Graphical Model Algorithm
While the classic U-Net performs well on data from the same
distribution as the training data, its accuracy decreases on
out-of-distribution data.
To address this problem, Brudfors et al. [51] combine
a U-Net with Markov random ﬁelds (MRFs) to form the
MRF-Unet. The low-parameter, ﬁrst-order MRFs are better
at generalization because they encode simpler distributions
which is an important quality to ﬁt out of distribution data.
The very accurate U-Net predictions make up for the fact
that the MRFs are less ﬂexible. The architecture of the pro-
posed model can be seen in Figure 32. As the combination of
the U-Net and MRF distribution is intractable by calculating
the product of the two, an iterative mean-ﬁeld approach is
used to estimate the closest factorized distribution under
the Kullback-Leibler divergence. A detailed mathematical
derivation of the process can be found in the work by Brud-
fors et al. [51]. Experiments showed that the combination of
MRF and U-Net improved performance on in- and out-of-
distribution data. The lightweight MRF component, which
does not add any additional parameters to the architecture,
serves as a simple prior and therefore learns abstract label-
speciﬁc features.
Klug et al. [52] use a Bayesian skip connection in an
attention-gated 3D U-Net to allow a prior to bypass most of
the network and be reintegrated at the ﬁnal layer in their
work to segment stroke lesions in perfusion CT images.
The skip connection provides the prior to the ﬁnal network
layer and should reduce false-positive rates for small and
patchy segmentations of varying shapes. As a prior, the
segmentation of the ischemic core obtained by a standard
thresholding method is used. Klug et al. [52] evaluated two
ways to combine the prior and the output of the U-Net
to calculate the ﬁnal output segmentation: Addition and
convolution of the two maps. Superior results were achieved
by using convolution for combination in all experiments.
The input to the U-Net is the concatenation of the
3D perfusion CT image and the prior. When comparing
a 3D attention gate U-Net to the same architecture with
the bayesian skip connection additionally reintegrating the
prior at the end of the network, the latter achieves a better
performance in terms of dice score with faster convergence.
It is worth mentioning that we have found excessive papers
in which probabilistic design is integrated into the U-Net in
applications such as for brain tumor [184], and skin lesion
segmentation [185].

==== Page 25 ====
25
Main 2D/3D U-Net
Skip Connection Enhancement
Backbone Design Enhancement
Bottleneck Enhancement
Transformers
Rich Representation Enhancement
Probabilistic Design
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20222D U-Net13D U-Net2V-Net3Residual U-Net4
GP-Unet53D-CNN6
Attention U-Net7U-Net++8S3D-UNet9Polar Transformation
M-Net10Dense Multi-path
U-Net11Cascaded U-Net12VAE U-Net13Probabilistic U-Net14
RIC U-Net15BCDU-Net16FD-UNet17DUNet18ASPP-FC
DenseNet19Focal Tversky
Attention U-Net20MFP-Unet213D Attention
UNet22
U-Net 3+23COPLE-Net24Attention UNet++25RA-Unet26MultiResUNet27MA-Net28Bayesian Skip Net29
Projective
Skip-Connections30JCS31SA-UNet32TransUNet33MedT34Swin-Unet35TransBTS36MRF-UNet37
BiO-Net38UNETR39TMU40UCTransNet41ScaleFormer42MISSFormer43D-Former44MT-UNet45
Fig. 33: The timeline of prominent U-Net-based methods proposed in medical semantic segmentation literature, from 2015
to 2022. The superscripts in ascending order denote the 1. [7], 2. [92], 3. [61], 4. [60], 5. [186], 6. [187], 7. [70], 8. [11], 9. [13],
10. [55], 11. [57], 12. [58], 13. [53], 14. [54], 15. [78], 16. [74], 17. [188], 18. [65], 19. [81], 20. [18], 21. [56], 22. [59], 23. [68], 24.
[82], 25. [72], 26. [71], 27. [15], 28. [76], 29. [52], 30. [73], 31. [83], 32. [77], 33. [38], 34. [47], 35. [48], 36. [39], 37. [51], 38. [69],
39. [139], 40. [44], 41. [45], 42. [46], 43. [49], 44. [50], 45. [43], respectively.
TABLE 1: The review of U-Net-like models for medical image segmentation based on the proposed taxonomy, Figure 2.
fSCE,BDE ,BE,T,RRE and PDgstands for Skip Connection Enhancement ,Backbone Design Enhancement ,Bottleneck
Enhancement ,Transformer ,Rich Representation Enhancement and Probabilistic Design , respectively.
Strategy Networks Core Ideas Practical Use Cases
SCE Attention U-Net [70]
UNet++ [11], [67]
RA-Unet [71]
BCDU-Net [74]
U-Net3+ [68]
BiO-Net [69]Skip connections are deﬁned as connections in a neural network that do not connect two
following layers but instead skip over at least one layer. This strategy initially aimed to
encourage feature reusability and compensate for gradient vanishing in a deeper
network. This modiﬁcation introduces the feasibility of transferring high spatial
localization features from the encoder to the decoder for better segmentation maps. In
addition, some use cases used skip connections as hierarchical multi-scale fusion paths
for feature enrichment in diverse U-Net stages. Furthermore, skip connection could
efﬁciently decrease the semantic feature gaps between different layers and scales.Exploit multiscale features [67]
Robust boundary representation [68]
Bi-directional feature representation [69]
Feature recalibration [70]
Suppress irrelevant regions besides feature reusability [71]
Enrich semantic representation [74]
BDE Residual U-Net [60], [61], [121]
Multi-Res U-Net [15], [123]
Dense U-Net [125], [188]
H-DenseUNet [62]
DUNet [65], [126]
S3D U-Net [13]The backbone deﬁnes how the layers in the encoder are arranged and its counterpart is
therefore used to describe the decoder architecture. Ideally, the strong backbone design
(e.g., inception model) with pre-trained weight can further improve the model
generalization capability.Converges to lower loss [62]
Addressing gradient vanishing [121]
Faster convergence rate [60]
Feature reusability [61]
Multi-scale encoding [15]
Better boundary representation [123]
Fine-grained feature set [125]
Cross-modality representation [62]
Reducing computation burden of multi-scale representation [65]
Efﬁcient multi-scale computation [13]
BE ASPP [81]
MA-Net [76]
COPLE-Net [82]
SA-UNet [77]
FRCU-Net [79]
JCS [83]
MS-Net [129]The network bottleneck contains the compressed representation of the input data and
provides necessary information (e.g., semantic, texture, shape features) to reconstruct the
segmentation map. Any improvement in the bottleneck design can further improve the
prediction result.Frequency recalibration [79]
Spatial attention [77]
Feature pyramid [81], [82]
Imposing attention mechanism [83]
T TransUNet [38]
TransBST [39]
Swin-Unet [48]
UNETR [139]
TMU [44]
UCTransNet [45]Transformers’ critical point is to compensate for CNN’s limited receptive ﬁeld. Extracting
long-range contextual information with intuition to look at the whole image at once is a
promotional function of Transformers. Due to the 1D sequence mapping functionality of
Transformers, they can use as a play-and-plug module at different parts of U-Net-like
structures. However, due to the quadratic computational complexity nature, utilizing
efﬁcient Transformers’ design even from the NLP ﬁeld within vision architectures is
beneﬁcial. Since Transformers calculate the afﬁnities between different parts of input
data adaptively, utilizing them is a wise solution for multi-scale feature amalgamation.Improving CNN bottleneck’s feature discriminancy [38]
Capture inter-slice afﬁnities from 3D data [39]
Hierarchical Efﬁcient Transformer-based design [48]
Modeling 3D volumetric data with global multi-scale information
[139]
Feature re-calibration / degrading the boundary maps erroneous
[44]
Decreasing the gap between multi-scale semantic features [45]
RRE Focal Tversky Attention U-Net [18]
PT M-Net [55]
Dense Multi-path U-Net [57]
MFP-Unet [56]
Cascaded Unet [58]The key objective is to enhance the performance of the trained models by utilizing all
available information from multi-modal or multi-scale images while retaining the most
desirable and relevant features. Some methods also operate directly on volumetric
images to take full advantage of depth information.Improved precision and recall balance [18]
Hierarchical representation learning [55]
Richer feature representation from combined modalities [57]
Robust architecture regarding the capabilities of feature
representation in a pyramid [56]
Boosted information ﬂow between the different scales [58]
PD Probabilistic U-Net [54]
MRF U-Net [51]
VAE Regularization [53]
Bayesian Skip [52]In medical image segmentation tasks, different graders often produce different
segmentations. Most of these different segmentations are plausible as many medical
images contain ambiguities that can not be resolved considering only the shot at hand.
Probabilistic models aim to model the nature of uncertainty in medical data.Modeling annotation uncertainty [54]
Addressing out-of-distribution [51]
Imposing regularization to address data limitation [53]
Encouraging feature-reusability and reduce FP rate [52]
3.7 Comparative Overview
In this section, we brieﬂy review the recent works regarding
U-Net variants presented in Section 3.1 to 3.6 for medical
image segmentation in Table 1. It lists the related network
list in each direction along with information about the core
ideas and the practical use cases. As detailed in Table 1,the modiﬁcation dealing with skip connections is one of the
directions for the extension of the U-Net structure. Some
works redesign skip connections by increasing the number
of forward skip connections or aggregating some modules
within the skip connections for processing feature maps.
Some methods also apply bi-directional LSTM to combine

==== Page 26 ====
26
the feature maps from Encoder and Decoder. The novel skip
connections in these mentioned methods enable the models
to be more ﬂexible and therefore explore local and semantic
features more efﬁciently and from different scales. However,
it also means a more complex design of the network archi-
tecture which leads to a larger number of parameters and
more expensive computation.
Instead of altering skip connections, some proposed
methods use other types of backbones apart from the orig-
inal U-Net by Ronneberger et al. [7]. Residual mapping
structure, inception modules, and dense-connections are in-
corporated into the architectures respectively. Such designs
alleviate the vanishing gradient and degradation problems,
which facilitates the faster convergence of the training pro-
cess. Several approaches focus on adapting convolution
operations such as using deformable convolutional kernels
to make the network more general and robust. Nevertheless,
a higher computational cost is needed due to the additional
convolution layers.
In the third strategy, some approaches utilize other
mechanisms in the bottleneck aiming at enhancing feature
extraction and compressing more useful spatial information.
Attention modules are employed to model long-range spa-
tial dependencies between pixels in the bottle-neck feature
maps. Atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP) with different
sampling rates can resample the compressed feature maps
in the bottleneck separately, which helps to gain the output
of bottleneck from different sizes of reception ﬁelds.
The rise of the Transformer, which is prevalent in the
ﬁeld of NLP , inspires the development of computer vision.
The proposed ViT facilitates the new trend of the combina-
tion of U-Net and Transformer. The tokenized input images
are passed through Transformer to extract global informa-
tion that will supplement U-Net. Despite the state-of-the-
art (SOTA) performance that the Transformer-based U-Net-
like models have achieved, the large number of parameters
of models sometimes cause a long time for convergence.
Some models are also highly dependent on the pretrained
weights.
The last direction combines the original U-Net with
various types of probabilistic extension modules resulting
in new types of variants. Probabilistic U-Net integrates
the U-Net structure with a conditional variational autoen-
coder (CVAE) to generate an unlimited number of plausible
prediction results when the inputs are obscure. Further-
more, the network with Markov Random Fields (MRF) has
the advantage of preventing the model from overﬁtting
with precise segmentations, which signiﬁcantly improves
the performance on out-of-distribution data. The methods
in this direction demonstrate more or less robustness to
defective input datasets, such as those of limited size or
containing ambiguous images.
Figure 33 demonstrates the timeline of typical U-Net-
based methods proposed in medical semantic segmentation
literature from 2015 to 2022. As shown in the timeline, the
U-Net structure has continued to be appealing in recent
years regarding the task of medical image segmentation.
The direction for the extension of U-Net is prominently
inﬂuenced by Transformer after 2021 as a result of the
emergence of ViT [131].4 Q UANTITATIVE COMPARISON
In this section, we evaluate the performance of several
of the previously discussed U-Net variants on favored
medical segmentation benchmarks. It is worth noting that
although most models reported their performance on stan-
dard datasets and used standard metrics, some failed to do
so, making across-the-board comparisons difﬁcult. Further-
more, only a small percentage of publications provide ad-
ditional information, such as hyper-parameters, execution
time, and memory footprint, in a reproducible way, which
is essential for industrial and real-world applications. To
compensate for the gap between the solid foundation for
comparison of the architectures, we conducted several stud-
ies on them in fair conditions to empower the equilibrium
insights on their performance.
4.1 Implementation details
In this section, we discuss our experiments and selected
networks criteria. Before diving in deep, we should mention
that all our implementation code is done in Python with the
PyTorch library [189]. We used a single Nvidia RTX 3090
GPU for training the networks. As a baseline network, we
select the 2D U-Net [7] to build our comparison upon the
naive U-Net and explore the effect of modiﬁcations to U-
Net. Next will be the Attention U-Net [70], which is the pi-
oneering method to integrate the attention mechanism with
U-Net to enhance the feature reusability and a feature se-
lection measure to make the features more discriminant. U-
Net++ [67] brings the highly dense skip connection schema
to U-Net to decrease the semantic gap between down-
sampling and up-sampling paths. However, some methods
tried to surpass the convolution operations of local receptive
ﬁelds by using dense backbones to U-Net, but not only
this procedure still lacks the real global context, but it also
adds more parameters to the model, which is not desirable.
To this end, Residual U-Net [173] brings a neighboring
afﬁnity recipe to hinder locality problems via RCNN blocks.
Although this model originally applied to non-medical data,
it demonstrated robust results on the medical images too.
MultiResUNet [15] by modeling the multi-modal informa-
tion in the backbone is another intuition that we will see
its contribution over the base U-Net, that which is more
successful than the other in compensating the locality of
CNN-based methods. Lastly, we selected three Transformer-
utilized U-shaped networks, TransUNet [38], UCTransNet
[190] and MISSFormer [49], to demonstrate the Transformer
evolution to the medical segmentation ﬁeld by effectively
capturing global contextual information. We should also
note that no pretraining weights were utilized during the
training process for any of the networks. Even though the
pretraining weights on Imagenet might bring some advan-
tages, we dropped the pretraining weight to provide a fair
evaluation criterion.
4.2 Datasets
To demonstrate a fair and productive comparison on the sec-
tion 4.1 networks, we selected several datasets from the di-
verse modalities for the semantic segmentation task. In this
respect, we consider Segmentation of Multiple Myeloma

==== Page 27 ====
27
Plasma Cells, SegPC [140], [141], [142], which is a collec-
tion of 2D microscopic images for cancer screening to aid
hematologists in better diagnosis. ISIC 2018 [144] is another
2D Dermoscopic dataset from the skin lesions for assisting
dermatologists with an early-stage cancer diagnosis. Next
is the multi-organ 3D CT Synapse [89] dataset covering the
13 organs’ annotations which are published through the
Synapse website [134]. Here we want to clarify that the
Synapse dataset is also known as Beyond the Cranial Vault
(BCV orBTCV ), so these two names using interchangeably,
but there is a slight difference between the Synapse and the
BCV datasets used in studies. Most of the studies used the
Synapse dataset name in their works [38] using the eight
organ classes annotation; the rest used the number of classes
for their report varies from eleven [41] to twelve [139].
4.2.1 SegPC
For decades, automatic cell segmentation in microscopy
images was studied, and various methods were developed
[191], [192]. Multiple Myeloma (MM) is a type of blood
cancer, speciﬁcally, a plasma cell cancer. The ﬁrst stage
of building an automated diagnostic tool for MM is the
robust segmentation of cells. Segmenting plasma cells in
these microscopic stained images is quite complex due to
the diversity of situations. For instance, cells may appear
in clusters or isolated, with varying nuclei and cytoplasm
sizes, some of which touch each other with overlapping
boundaries. The SegPC includes images captured from the
bone marrow aspirate slides of MM patients. The current
dataset has 775 images of MM plasma cells. In this study,
we sort the training set according to the single entity’s
name and choose 70% of the set as a train set, 10% for the
validation set, and 20% for the test set. Also, we applied the
resizing step to all images to a ﬁxed size of 224224. The
SegPC dataset slides were stained using Jenner-Giemsa stain
and contain the annotation for the Nucleus and Cytoplasm
of Plasma cells. It should be noted that for this dataset, we
only apply networks for the Cytoplasm segmentation task
after cropping the Nucleus samples in each image.
4.2.2 ISIC 2018
Human skin tissue consists of three types, i.e., dermis,
epidermis, and hypodermis. The epidermis is a susceptible
tissue, which under severe solar radiation, could trigger the
embedded melanocytes to produce melanin at a signiﬁcant
level [193]. Fatal skin cancer is a result of melanocyte
growth, which is known as melanoma. In 2022, the Amer-
ican Cancer Society reported approximate melanoma skin
cancer cases of 99,780, with death cases of 7,650, 7.66% of
all cases [194]. Early disease recognition plays a crucial role
in medical diagnosis, where it reported that detection of
melanoma in early phases could increase the relative sur-
vival rate to 92%. However, robust skin lesion segmentation
is a pretty challenging task due to the diverse lesion sizes,
illumination changes, differences in texture, position, colors,
and presence of unwanted objects like air bulbs, hair, or
ruler markers. The ISIC 2018 [144] dataset was published by
theInternational Skin Imaging Collaboration (ISIC) as a large-
scale dataset of dermoscopy images. It includes 2,594 RGB
images of 700900pixels size. First, we resized all images
to a 224224 pixels size, and then like [128], we used1,815 images for training, 259 for validation, and 520 for the
testing steps. The dataset consists of two class annotations:
cancer or non-cancer lesions’ heat map.
4.2.3 Synapse
The Synapse dataset is a multi-organ segmentation dataset
[89], which was presented with the 30 abdominal CT scans
provided in conjunction with the MICCAI 2015 Conference ,
with 3,779 axial contrast-enhanced abdominal clinical CT
images. Each CT volumetric data consists of 85198
slices of a consistent size 512512through whole samples.
The spatial resolution of each voxel are [0:540:54]
[0:980:98][2:55:0]mm3in each axis. In this report,
we used the same preferences for data preparation anal-
ogous to [38], [195], [196], randomly allocated 18 training
cases and 12 cases for validation, and during the testing
phase, we reported the ﬁnal scores on the validation set.
In addition, all slices resized to 224224 to follow the
same setting as [38], [48]. We used eight classes annotation
for our experiments with class names: Aorta, Gallbladder,
Spleen, Kidney (L/R), Liver, Pancreas, Spleen, and Stomach.
Our training process uses 2D data (similar to [38], [48]) and
reports the test results on the 3D volume.
4.3 Loss Functions
Selecting the proper loss/objective function while designing
the complex segmentation network is extremely important.
There are a variety of loss functions to choose and train
the network, but in this study, we determined the two
well-known and traditional loss functions in the medical
image segmentation domain: Cross Entropy ( CE) and Dice
Sørensen Coefﬁcient ( DSC ) loss functions.
4.3.1 CE Loss
CE [197] derives from the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence,
a measure of dissimilarity between two distributions. In the
segmentation task, CE is formulated as:
LCE= 1
NCX
i=1NX
j=1pi
jlogqi
j; (18)
wherepi
jdenotes the ground truth binary indicator of class
labeliof voxelj, andqi
jis the corresponding predicted
segmentation probability.
4.3.2 Dice Loss
Sørensen DiceCoefﬁcient ( DSC ) is typically used to evalu-
ate the similarity between two samples, which will discuss
in Section 4.4. Based on this coefﬁcient, Equation (24), the
Dice loss was introduced in 2017 by Sudre et al. [198] and
formulated as:
LDice(y;^y) = 1 2y^y+
y+ ^y+; (19)
whereyand^yare actual and predicted values by model,
respectively. protects the function to not be undeﬁned in
edge case scenarios, e.g., y= ^y= 0.

==== Page 28 ====
28
4.4 Evaluation Metrics
Unquestionably, a model should be examined from numer-
ous aspects, such as several accuracy metrics, speed, and
memory occupation efﬁciency. Nevertheless, most studies
evaluate their model based on different accuracy metrics.
This section brings brief keynotes on various accuracy met-
rics used in other research. Even though quantitative accu-
racy metrics are used to evaluate a segmentation algorithm
on diverse benchmark datasets, since the ultimate goal of
these approaches in computer vision is to apply them to
real-world problems, the model’s visual quality should also
be considered.
Precision / Recall / F1 score — These are the most
popular metrics for evaluating the accuracy of the seg-
mentation models, either classical or deep learning-based
methods resulting from the confusion matrix [3]. Precision
and recall can be deﬁned for each class or at the aggregate
level as follows:
Precision =TP
TP+FP;Recall =TP
TP+FN; (20)
where TP stands for the true positive fraction, FP refers to
the false-positive fraction and FN refers to the false-negative
fraction. Recall in the segmentation context known also
as sensitivity, which calculates the proportion of correctly
labeled foreground pixels discarding background pixels.
Usually, we are interested in a combined version of precision
and recall rates, so a famous metric is called the F1 score,
which is deﬁned as the harmonic mean of precision and
recall as follows:
F1=2Prec. Rec.
Prec. +Rec.=2TP
2TP+FP+FN(21)
Accuracy — Refers to as Class Average Accuracy , cal-
culates the ratio of correct pixels to the whole mask based on
each class. It is an updated version of pixel accuracy, which
describes the percent of pixels in a predicted segmentation
mask that is classiﬁed correctly. Accuracy is deﬁned as:
Acc=1
kkX
j=1pjj
gj; (22)
wherepjjis the number of pixels that are classiﬁed in
the correct class j, andgjis the total number of pixels of
the ground truth for class j. However, the class imbalance
prevalent in medical datasets will result in undesirable
performance.
Intersection over Union (IoU) — Also known as
Jaccard Index , is a measure to describe the extent of over-
lap of predicted segmentation mask with ground truth. It
is deﬁned as the intersection area between the predicted
segmentation and the ground truth, divided by the area of
union between the predicted segmentation mask and the
ground truth:
IoU=J(A;B) =jA\Bj
A[B=TP
TP+FP+FN; (23)
where A and B denote the ground truth and the predicted
segmentation, respectively, it goes between 0and1.
Dice Coefﬁcient — This metric commonly applied
in medical image analysis deﬁnes as the ratio of the twice
overlapping region of ground truth ( G) and prediction ( P)maps to the total pixels of ground truth and predicted area.
The Dice coefﬁcient for a certain class can be formulated as:
Dice =2jG\Pj
jGj+jPj; (24)
When Dice is used for binary segmentation maps, the Dice
score is equivalent to the F1 score. From Equation (21), it
is evident that this metric focuses on foreground pixels’
accuracy and penalizes them for wrong prediction labels.
Hausdorff Distance — This metric is one of the
extensively used metrics to indicate the segmentation error.
It computes the longest distance, Euclidean distance, from
a point in the ground truth contour qto one point in
segmented contour pas follows:
HD(X;Y ) =max(hd(p;q );hd(q;p )); (25)
wherehd(p;q )andhd(q;p )stand for the one-sided HD
fromptoqand fromqtoprespectively as follows:
hd(q;p ) =maxq2qminp2pjjq pjj2;
hd(p;q ) =maxp2pminq2qjjq pjj2: (26)
4.5 Experimental Results
4.5.1 Skin lesion (ISIC 2018)
Skin lesion segmentation is challenging due to various ar-
tifacts in dermoscopic images, such as ruler markers, water
bubbles, dark corners, and strands of hair [199]. Table 2a
presents the comparison results for ISIC 2018 [144] dataset.
It can be seen that the Dice score as a prominent metric
is almost the same among CNN and Transformer based
methods. The skin lesion usually appears in the texture and
does not follow a speciﬁc shape or geometrical pattern. This
might explain why transformer-based networks might not
bring more advantages to texture-related patterns. It also
can been seen that a network with multi-scale feature de-
scription capacity, e.g., U-Net++ [11] and UCTransNet [45]
are highly capable to localize abnormal regions comparing
to other extensions. Overall, the model with multi-scale
representation surpasses other extensions in both CNN and
Transformer based approaches.
For further investigation, we provided some segmenta-
tion results in Figure 34. Although the same dice trend en-
dorses the quantitative results among the CNN and Trans-
former models (Table 2a), the multi-scale representation
derived from the global contextual modeling of the Trans-
former models enables these architectures to provide more
smooth segmentation results even when the background
pixels have a high overlap with the skin lesion class. In
addition, the CNN-based networks generally are more likely
to over-segment or under-segment the lesions comparing
to the Transformer-based models. Since UCTransNet [45]
has the advantages of CNN hierarchical design and multi-
scale feature fusion property within the CTrans module, it
provides the SOTA results among the selected methods.
The critical difference between the multi-scale representa-
tion learning with MISSFormer [49] and UCTransNet [45]
is underlay the utilizing the down-sampling factor with
in Efﬁcient Transformer block, which degrades the feature
representation (see Section 3.4.2 and Figure 25b for more de-
tail). However, UCTransNet utilizes the CNN-based feature

==== Page 29 ====
29
representation instead of the Transformer-based backbone
in a U-shaped structure. This representation makes the
feature more discriminant, and the semantic gap between
the encoder and decoder path successfully lessen by the
CTrans module.
4.5.2 Cell (SegPC 2021)
Visual segmentation results presented in Figure 35 for
SegPC dataset. Due to the overlapping nature of multiple
myeloma and the spiky ground truth labels, segmenting is
laborious. To this end, besides the Dice score comparison in
Table 2b, the mIoU metric plays a critical role in voting for
the networks’ performance. It is worth mentioning that the
Transformer-based methods provide more softer contour
of segmentation maps than the CNN-based studies, which
in our opinion, reﬂects that global long-range contextual
information helped the network to perceive the actual shape
of cells. On the contrary, due to the locality of convolution
counterparts, the CNN-based modules are more error-prone
in boundaries. The multi-scale representation power of the
UCTransNet [45] once again shows the effectiveness of this
approach in generating precise segmentation maps for cells
with varying scales and backgrounds.
4.5.3 Multi organ (Synapse)
In Table 2c, we presented the quantitative results based on
the Dice score and Hausdorff distance metrics. In addition,
Figure 36 we depicted the visual qualitative results over
the synapse multi-organ dataset. Due to the increasing class
numbers and the multi-scale innate of the synapse dataset,
it is a challenging task. Overall, as a baseline method,
U-Net [7] performs well in comparison with parameters
number and a basic design but suffers from several visual
defects, e.g., miss-labeling, over-segmentation, and under-
segmentation. U-Net++ [67], MultiResUNet [15], and Resid-
ual U-Net [173] principally follow the same intuition within
creating rich semantic representations with dense connec-
tions and bigger convolution kernels for capturing con-
textual information to increase performance, but still, they
could not hit the target and depicted a minimal performance
boost in Dice score with respect to U-Net. Attention U-Net
[200] utilized an attention mechanism within skip connec-
tions to recalibrate the feature reusability and demonstrates
almost 1% improvement in Dice score compared with U-Net
and presents smoother segmentation boundaries over the
mentioned methods. Finally, Transformer-based methods
represent better results in mean Dice score with respect to
CNN-based studies. It is predominately in bond with ViT’s
advantage in capturing global dependencies that are very
important in multi-scale segmentation tasks. MISSFormer
[49], due to its hierarchical and multi-scale design, performs
as a SOTA strategy among our selected models. This result
suggests that in multi-scale segmentation tasks, the deter-
minative approach should follow the hierarchical design
besides leveraging contextual information for superior per-
formances.
4.6 Discussion
In this section, we analyze the models’ performances from
Section 4.5 in more detail. Observing the experimental re-
sults, we ﬁnd that the performance gain achieved by allthe extensions of U-Net models compared to the original
U-Net. This fact reveals the effectiveness of this contribu-
tion to the U-Net model. Although the U-Net acts as a
baseline method, in a binary segmentation task such as
skin lesion segmentation, it demonstrates a good perfor-
mance compared to its extensions. However, its perfor-
mance in multi-organ segmentation tasks, speciﬁcally the
overlapped objects, seems less promising, evidenced by the
over-segmentation or under-segmentation results presented
in the qualitative Figures (see Figures 34 to 36).
On the contrary, attention-based strategies like Attention
U-Net [70] performs well in the case of overlapped objects.
Furthermore, the hierarchy of the skip connections included
in the U-Net++ [67] model seems successful in boosting the
performance, which might explain the contribution of the
nested structure. In addition, a hierarchical attention mecha-
nism in Attention U-Net [70] helps the naive U-Net compen-
sate for the locality issue for more expansive capturing view
in feature extraction to perform accurate segmentation over
the multi-scale objects such as multi-organ segmentation.
Even though each extension of the U-Net model in a CNN-
based strategy aims to enhance the feature representation,
the locality nature of the convolution operation usually lim-
its the representation power for modeling global anatomical
and structural representation. Residual U-Net [173], even
with the Residual enhancements, is no exception to this rule.
On the other hand, Transformer models, e.g., MISSFormer
[49] (as a hybrid model), and UCTransNet [45] seem highly
capable of modeling the global representation as can be
witnessed from the quantitative results on Synapse dataset.
The computational complexity, more speciﬁcally, the
Giga Floating Point Operations (GFLOPS) and the number
of trainable parameters, is another critical aspect that needs
to be considered for the model assessment. In this respect,
we provided Table 3 to show the number of GFLOPS and
trainable parameters for each U-Net extension. Observing
Table 3, we realize that the modiﬁcations in naive U-Net
with the integration of CNN-based plug-and-play modules
increase the parameter numbers and GFLOPS remarkably.
In addition, the extra FLOPS rate further increases with
the Transformer-based models due to the quadratic com-
putational complexity. On the contrary, MISSFormer, as a
standalone Transfomer-based U-shaped network, beneﬁts
from the efﬁcient Transformer design, less affected by the
parameter numbers in comparison with TransUNet [38].
Overall, the underlying trade-off between performance and
efﬁciency needs to be considered for the practical use of
these methods. To this end, ﬁrstly, we deﬁne the normalized
computational efﬁciency of a particular network as follows:
Compexitynet= 1 GFLOPS (net)
max(GFLOPS(net)
;
s:t:net2Nets (27)
where the max function calculates the maximum number of
GFLOPS from all models to ﬁnd the upper bound, similarly,
we deﬁne the normalized memory efﬁciency as:

==== Page 30 ====
30
TABLE 2: Performance comparison on ISIC 2018 ,SegPC 2021 and Synapse datasets (best results are bolded).
(a)ISIC 2018
Methods AC PR SE SP Dice IoU
U-Net [7] 0.9446 0.8746 0.8603 0.9671 0.8674 0.8491
Att-UNet [70] 0.9516 0.9075 0.8579 0.9766 0.8820 0.8649
U-Net++ [11] 0.9517 0.9067 0.8590 0.9764 0.8822 0.8651
MultiResUNet [15] 0.9473 0.8765 0.8689 0.9704 0.8694 0.8537
Residual U-Net [173] 0.9468 0.8753 0.8659 0.9688 0.8689 0.8509
TransUNet [38] 0.9452 0.8823 0.8578 0.9653 0.8499 0.8365
UCTransNet [45] 0.9546 0.9100 0.8704 0.9770 0.8898 0.8729
MISSFormer [49] 0.9453 0.8964 0.8371 0.9742 0.8657 0.8484(b)SegPC 2021
Methods AC PR SE SP Dice IoU
U-Net [7] 0.9795 0.9084 0.8548 0.9916 0.8808 0.8824
Att-UNet [70] 0.9854 0.9360 0.8964 0.9940 0.9158 0.9144
U-Net++ [11] 0.9845 0.9328 0.8887 0.9938 0.9102 0.9092
MultiResUNet [15] 0.9753 0.8391 0.8925 0.9834 0.8649 0.8676
Residual U-Net [173] 0.9743 0.8920 0.8080 0.9905 0.8479 0.8541
TransUNet [38] 0.9702 0.8678 0.7831 0.9884 0.8233 0.8338
UCTransNet [45] 0.9857 0.9365 0.8991 0.9941 0.9174 0.9159
MISSFormer [49] 0.9663 0.8152 0.8014 0.9823 0.8082 0.8209
(c)Synapse
Methods DSC" HD# Aorta Gallbladder Kidney(L) Kidney(R) Liver Pancreas Spleen Stomach
U-Net [7] 76.85 39.70 89.07 69.72 77.77 68.60 93.43 53.98 86.67 75.58
Att-UNet [70] 77.77 36.02 89.55 68.88 77.98 71.11 93.57 58.04 87.30 75.75
U-Net++ [11] 76.91 36.93 88.19 65.89 81.76 74.27 93.01 58.20 83.44 70.52
MultiResUNet [15] 77.42 36.84 87.73 65.67 82.08 70.43 93.49 60.09 85.23 74.66
Residual U-Net [173] 76.95 38.44 87.06 66.05 83.43 76.83 93.99 51.86 85.25 70.13
TransUNet [38] 77.48 31.69 87.23 63.13 81.87 77.02 94.08 55.86 85.08 75.62
UCTransNet [45] 78.23 26.75 84.25 64.65 82.35 77.65 94.36 58.18 84.74 79.66
MISSFormer [49] 81.96 18.20 86.99 68.65 85.21 82.00 94.41 65.67 91.92 80.81
Input Image
 Target (GT)
 UNet
 UNet++
 AttUNet
 ResUNet
 MultiResUNet
 TransUNet
 MISSFormer
 UCTransNet
Fig. 34: Visual comparisons of different methods on the ISIC 2018 skin lesion segmentation dataset. Ground truth
boundaries are shown in green, and predicted boundaries are shown in blue.
TABLE 3: Comparison of the number of parameters in
Million (M) scale and Giga Floating-point Operations Per
Second (GFLOPS).
Methods # Parameters (M) GFLOPS
MISSFormer [49] 42.46 7.25
U-Net [7] 1.95 8.2
MultiResUNet [15] 7.82 15.74
U-Net++ [11] 9.16 26.72
UCTransNet [45] 66.43 32.99
Att-UNet [70] 34.88 51.02
Residual U-Net [173] 13.04 62.06
TransUNet [38] 105.28 80.68
Memorynet= 1 #Parameters (net)
max(#Parameters (net))
:
s:t:net2Nets (28)
Moreover, ﬁnally, we show the model’s performance on a
particular dataset using the dice score in Figure 37. The
computational efﬁciency along with the performance gain
demonstrated in Figure 37 can be a good source for analyz-
ing the trade-off between performance and efﬁciency and
ﬁnally choosing an appropriate clinically-applicable model.5 C HALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Over the past few years, deep-learning-based methods, es-
pecially the U-Net family, have been utilized considerably
in medical image ﬁelds to address clinical demands. In the
following, future perspectives associated with medical im-
age segmentation using the U-Net family will be introduced
in favor of improvement in this ﬁeld.
5.1 Memory Efﬁcient Models
The primary purpose of almost all the approaches men-
tioned in this paper was to identify the limitation of the
original U-Net model and design add-on modules to en-
hance feature reusability and enrich feature representation
to bring more performance boost. However, including more
parameters in the model usually results in large memory
requirements, which makes the model unsuitable for clin-
ical applications with limited computational devices [96].
To overcome this issue, one might consider the efﬁcient
design of the network or use a more efﬁcient way of re-
ducing unnecessary parameters. Deep model compression
techniques such as pruning [201], quantization [201], low-
rank approximation [202], knowledge distillation [203], and
neural architecture search [204] to new a few, is an area

==== Page 31 ====
31
Input Image
 Target (GT)
 UNet
 UNet++
 AttUNet
 ResUNet
 MultiResUNet
 TransUNet
 MISSFormer
 UCTransNet
Fig. 35: Visual comparisons of different methods on the SegPC 2021 cell segmentation dataset. Red region indicates the
Cytoplasm and blue denotes the Nucleus area of cell.
Ground Truth
 U-Net
 U-Net++
 Attention U-Net
 Residual U-Net
 MultiResUNet
 TransUNet
 MISSFormer
 UCTransNetaorta gallbladder left kidney right kidney liver pancreas spleen stomach
Fig. 36: Visual comparisons of different methods on the Synapse multi-organ segmentation dataset.
DiceSynapse
DiceSegP  C2021
Memory Eﬃciency Complexity EﬃciencyDiceISIC2018
0.20.40.60.81.0 U-Net
Att-UNet
U-Net++
MultiResUNet
Residual U-Net
TransUNet
UCTransNet
MISSFormer
Fig. 37: Comparison of experimental models with respect
to their Dice score over studied datasets, memory, and
complexity factors.
for advancement that researcher might consider in their
approach.5.2 Balance Between Accuracy and Efﬁciency
It is always appealing for the deep model to be accurate and
efﬁcient. However, model efﬁciency usually requires meet-
ing some restrictions (e.g., low computational constraint).
Such a scenario potentially leads to a poor network design
and consequently results in less accurate predictions. Hence,
there is always a trade-off between the model’s accuracy and
efﬁciency. From a clinical perspective, it is highly desirable
to take into account the balance between efﬁciency and ac-
curacy. Therefore, one might consider the trade-off between
the accuracy and efﬁciency of U-Net extension.
5.3 Model scaling and complexity
As mentioned in the previous sections, evident is the fact
that some parameters such as running time, computational
complexity, and memory are important for clinics with
limited computing resources. In addition to the memory
shortage, inference time and consequently computational
complexity also have key roles in real-time applications
that need to be considered. To do so, well-known metrics
evaluate the model’s complexity such as Model parameters,
Floating-Point Operations (FLOPS), Runtime, and Frame
Per Second (FPS) should be considered in the model as-
sessment. The two given metrics, model parameters, and
FLOPS are independent of the implementation environ-
ment. Hence, a larger value ends up with lower imple-
mentation efﬁciency. Metrics such as run-time and FPS may

==== Page 32 ====
32
seem to be less desirable compared to model parameters
and FLOPs, due to their reliance on hardware and imple-
mentation environment. However, these metrics are also
imperative for a real-world application and need to be taken
into account as well.
5.4 Interpretable Models
It is always a question for clinical, how deep learning mod-
els learns speciﬁc patterns to recognize certain cancer. From
a clinical point of view, understanding the object recognition
process by deep models is signiﬁcantly appropriate. As a
result, the radiologists can interpret the deep models (e.g.,
feature visualization), to ﬁnd out how the diagnosis process
happens inside the deep model and how they can include
prior knowledge (e.g., pathology assumption) to further
improve model performance. Hence, model interpretation
not only assists the radiologist to understand the hidden
markers in medical data but also provides a way to further
scrutinize the network architecture for possible improve-
ment with modeling clinical assumptions. In this respect,
future direction for U-Net extension might consider the
importance of interpretable characteristics in their network
design.
5.5 Federated Learning
In a medical domain data, privacy provides a set of reg-
ulations to conﬁrm data conﬁdentiality and security. In
most clinical applications, whole data acquisition usually
happens in one center, which limits the data diversity and
results in less generalizable deep neural networks. In con-
trast, a multi-central dataset with authorized data privacy
can provide a more realistic dataset for clinical purposes
[205]. The future network design might consider a federated
learning strategy in their optimization process to provide a
more generalizable model for clinical use.
5.6 Software Ecosystems
With the rapid development of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
systems, these methods are integrated and adapted in al-
most all domains to facilitate the data processing strategy
and provide assistive tools to meet consumer demands. A
software ecosystem coordinates this process by deﬁning a
set of actors (e.g., developers, users, etc.) in conjunction with
the appropriate interaction strategy to secure consumers’
demands. The software ecosystem can be considered as a
three-step pipeline (see Figure 5). The ﬁrst step (Figure 5) is
data acquisition and preparation. This step aims to recog-
nize the hardware requirements (e.g., MRI scan, metadata
processing) for the task-speciﬁc goal and prepare the data in
a standard format for the next step. The deep learning model
design and optimization process happens in the second
step to learn the task-speciﬁc objective. Finally, the last
step provides comprehensive tools to analyze and evaluate
the extracted results for the clinical applications. Several
software prototypes already exist in the literature, nnUNet
[98], Ivadomed [206], and etc., to provide open access code
for both clinical/research communities. Similarly, our open-
source software at GitHub2provides an implementation of
2. https://github.com/NITR098/Awesome-U-Netthe U-Net family for several public datasets. The future
research direction might consider contributing to an open-
source library to further support software development.
5.7 Data Driven Decisions
In a supervised learning task, the neural network uses the
ground truth mask to learn a discriminative space, which
enables the network to distinguish the target class from
the background regions (e.g., segmenting tumor regions
in bran images). All the extensions of the U-Net models
presented in this review were based on the supervised
learning paradigm. Such a training strategy imposes a mask
bias on the training process and prevents the network from
learning data-driven features. This might explain why su-
pervised trained networks have less capacity to generalize
for unseen objects. To address this issue, one might consider
including unsupervised data in their training process for
a richer data representation, like [207]. As it is clear from
the name, the unsupervised technique does not require any
annotation and gives the model more freedom to infer from
the data itself without imposing any prior knowledge (e.g.,
mask information). Although training and reasoning from
the image itself is a complex task, modeling such behavior
might open up new potential for the U-Net family to learn
more generic and data-representative features. The future
direction of the U-Net family might consider this point in
their potential design for a further performance boost.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this study, we presented a thorough review of the liter-
ature on U-Net and its variants, the emergence of which
has continued to rise in the medical image segmentation
ﬁeld over the years. We examined the area from its main
taxonomy, the extensions to the variants, and a benchmark
of performance and speed. To structure the wide variety
of U-Net extensions, the different extensions and variants
are grouped depending on which type of change was made
to the architecture. Adaptions to the skip connections are
presented in Section 3.1 and comprise methods that in-
crease the number of skip connections, apply additional
processing to the feature maps in the skip connections to
focus on the areas of interest and improve the fusion of
the encoder and decoder feature maps combined through
the skip connections. Section 3.2 introduces different types
of backbones used in the U-Net architecture e.g. deeper
network architectures, processing of 3D images or multi-
resolution feature extraction for high inter-patient variabil-
ity in terms of size of the object(s) of interest. A variety
of extensions of the bottleneck of the original U-Net is
examined in Section 3.3. The different approaches adapt the
bottleneck for multi-scale representation of the bottleneck
feature maps or position-wise attention to model spatial
dependencies between pixels in the bottleneck. The trans-
former variants of the U-Net architecture, introduced in
Section 3.4, enable the networks to capture inter-pixel long-
range dependencies and to compensate for the otherwise
limited receptive ﬁeld of the convolutions in the original U-
Net. Approaches presented in Section 3.5 adapt the U-Net
architecture to use information from multiple modalities

==== Page 33 ====
33
and/or multiple scales for a rich representation of features.
Finally, Section 3.6 presented to model the uncertainty in
annotations of medical data or out-of-distribution samples.
Furthermore, a detailed evaluation of several of the U-
Net variants on different medical datasets was conducted
in Section 4.5. In our accuracy and complexity experiments,
the transformer variants, the UCTransNet [190] and MISS-
Former [49] achieved superior performance (2% increases
in terms of dice scores) compared to the CNN extension
on all datasets. Eventually, our experimental results along
with the computational and memory complexity provided
a picture for the reader to consider a trade-off between
the performance and efﬁciency (e.g., MISSFormer [49] with
42M parameters and 0.81 DSC score on the Synapse dataset
against U-Net with 1.9M parameters but 0.79 DSC score) for
choosing the desired network for the problem at hand. We
hope our study can assist researchers in further extending
the U-Net model for both clinical and industry applications.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Antonelli, A. Reinke, S. Bakas, K. Farahani, A. Kopp-
Schneider, B. A. Landman, G. Litjens, B. Menze, O. Ronneberger,
R. M. Summers et al. , “The medical segmentation decathlon,”
Nature communications , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[2] S. Asgari Taghanaki, K. Abhishek, J. P . Cohen, J. Cohen-Adad,
and G. Hamarneh, “Deep semantic segmentation of natural and
medical images: a review,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review , vol. 54,
no. 1, pp. 137–178, 2021.
[3] S. Minaee, Y. Y. Boykov, F. Porikli, A. J. Plaza, N. Kehtarnavaz,
and D. Terzopoulos, “Image segmentation using deep learning:
A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
gence , 2021.
[4] E. Wu, K. Wu, R. Daneshjou, D. Ouyang, D. E. Ho, and J. Zou,
“How medical ai devices are evaluated: limitations and recom-
mendations from an analysis of fda approvals,” Nature Medicine ,
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 582–584, 2021.
[5] D. Ciresan, A. Giusti, L. Gambardella, and J. Schmidhuber,
“Deep neural networks segment neuronal membranes in electron
microscopy images,” Advances in neural information processing
systems , vol. 25, 2012.
[6] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional net-
works for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4038 ,
2014.
[7] O. Ronneberger, P . Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International
Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted inter-
vention . Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[8] Q. Huang, J. Sun, H. Ding, X. Wang, and G. Wang, “Robust liver
vessel extraction using 3d u-net with variant dice loss function,”
Computers in biology and medicine , vol. 101, pp. 153–162, 2018.
[9] W. Yu, B. Fang, Y. Liu, M. Gao, S. Zheng, and Y. Wang, “Liver
vessels segmentation based on 3d residual u-net,” in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) . IEEE, 2019,
pp. 250–254.
[10] A. Kazerouni, E. K. Aghdam, M. Heidari, R. Azad, M. Fayyaz,
I. Hacihaliloglu, and D. Merhof, “Diffusion models for med-
ical image analysis: A comprehensive survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.07804 , 2022.
[11] Z. Zhou, M. M. Rahman Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang,
“Unet++: A nested u-net architecture for medical image segmen-
tation,” in Deep learning in medical image analysis and multimodal
learning for clinical decision support . Springer, 2018, pp. 3–11.
[12] Z. Zhang, H. Fu, H. Dai, J. Shen, Y. Pang, and L. Shao, “Et-
net: A generic edge-attention guidance network for medical
image segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2019, pp.
442–450.
[13] W. Chen, B. Liu, S. Peng, J. Sun, and X. Qiao, “S3d-unet: separable
3d u-net for brain tumor segmentation,” in International MICCAI
Brainlesion Workshop . Springer, 2018, pp. 358–368.[14] Z. Zhang, C. Wu, S. Coleman, and D. Kerr, “Dense-inception
u-net for medical image segmentation,” Computer methods and
programs in biomedicine , vol. 192, p. 105395, 2020.
[15] N. Ibtehaz and M. S. Rahman, “Multiresunet: Rethinking the u-
net architecture for multimodal biomedical image segmentation,”
Neural Networks , vol. 121, pp. 74–87, 2020.
[16] H. Liu, X. Shen, F. Shang, F. Ge, and F. Wang, “Cu-net: Cascaded
u-net with loss weighted sampling for brain tumor segmenta-
tion,” in Multimodal Brain Image Analysis and Mathematical Foun-
dations of Computational Anatomy . Springer, 2019, pp. 102–111.
[17] M. Baldeon-Calisto and S. K. Lai-Yuen, “Adaresu-net: Multiob-
jective adaptive convolutional neural network for medical image
segmentation,” Neurocomputing , vol. 392, pp. 325–340, 2020.
[18] N. Abraham and N. M. Khan, “A novel focal tversky loss function
with improved attention u-net for lesion segmentation,” in 2019
IEEE 16th international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI
2019) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 683–687.
[19] H. Zhao and N. Sun, “Improved u-net model for nerve segmenta-
tion,” in International Conference on Image and Graphics . Springer,
2017, pp. 496–504.
[20] Q. Zhang, Z. Cui, X. Niu, S. Geng, and Y. Qiao, “Image seg-
mentation with pyramid dilated convolution based on resnet and
u-net,” in International conference on neural information processing .
Springer, 2017, pp. 364–372.
[21] M. Frid-Adar, A. Ben-Cohen, R. Amer, and H. Greenspan, “Im-
proving the segmentation of anatomical structures in chest ra-
diographs using u-net with an imagenet pre-trained encoder,”
inImage Analysis for Moving Organ, Breast, and Thoracic Images .
Springer, 2018, pp. 159–168.
[22] D. Waiker, P . D. Baghel, K. R. Varma, and S. P . Sahu, “Effec-
tive semantic segmentation of lung x-ray images using u-net
architecture,” in 2020 Fourth International Conference on Computing
Methodologies and Communication (ICCMC) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 603–
607.
[23] J. I. Orlando, P . Seeb ¨ock, H. Bogunovi ´c, S. Klimscha,
C. Grechenig, S. Waldstein, B. S. Gerendas, and U. Schmidt-
Erfurth, “U2-net: A bayesian u-net model with epistemic uncer-
tainty feedback for photoreceptor layer segmentation in patho-
logical oct scans,” in 2019 IEEE 16th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1441–1445.
[24] R. Asgari, S. Waldstein, F. Schlanitz, M. Baratsits, U. Schmidt-
Erfurth, and H. Bogunovi ´c, “U-net with spatial pyramid pool-
ing for drusen segmentation in optical coherence tomography,”
inInternational Workshop on Ophthalmic Medical Image Analysis .
Springer, 2019, pp. 77–85.
[25] Z. Zhong, Y. Kim, L. Zhou, K. Plichta, B. Allen, J. Buatti, and
X. Wu, “3d fully convolutional networks for co-segmentation
of tumors on pet-ct images,” in 2018 IEEE 15th International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018) . IEEE, 2018, pp.
228–231.
[26] H. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Wang, K. Li, G. Geng, F. Kang, and X. Cao,
“Ica-unet: An improved u-net network for brown adipose tissue
segmentation,” Journal of Innovative Optical Health Sciences , vol. 15,
no. 03, p. 2250018, 2022.
[27] R. Azad, N. Khosravi, M. Dehghanmanshadi, J. Cohen-Adad, and
D. Merhof, “Medical image segmentation on mri images with
missing modalities: A review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06217 ,
2022.
[28] P . Costa, A. Galdran, M. I. Meyer, M. D. Abramoff, M. Niemeijer,
A. M. Mendonc ¸a, and A. Campilho, “Towards adversarial retinal
image synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08974 , 2017.
[29] H. Wu, X. Jiang, and F. Jia, “Uc-gan for mr to ct image synthesis,”
inWorkshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Radiation Therapy . Springer,
2019, pp. 146–153.
[30] B. Sun, S. Jia, X. Jiang, and F. Jia, “Double u-net cyclegan for
3d mr to ct image synthesis,” International Journal of Computer
Assisted Radiology and Surgery , pp. 1–8, 2022.
[31] M. P . Reymann, T. W ¨urﬂ, P . Ritt, B. Stimpel, M. Cachovan, A. H.
Vija, and A. Maier, “U-net for spect image denoising,” in 2019
IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference
(NSS/MIC) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–2.
[32] S. Nasrin, M. Z. Alom, R. Burada, T. M. Taha, and V . K. Asari,
“Medical image denoising with recurrent residual u-net (r2u-
net) base auto-encoder,” in 2019 IEEE National Aerospace and
Electronics Conference (NAECON) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 345–350.
[33] S. Lee, M. Negishi, H. Urakubo, H. Kasai, and S. Ishii, “Mu-net:

==== Page 34 ====
34
Multi-scale u-net for two-photon microscopy image denoising
and restoration,” Neural Networks , vol. 125, pp. 92–103, 2020.
[34] S. Guan, K.-T. Hsu, M. Eyassu, and P . V . Chitnis, “Dense dilated
unet: deep learning for 3d photoacoustic tomography image
reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03130 , 2021.
[35] J. Feng, J. Deng, Z. Li, Z. Sun, H. Dou, and K. Jia, “End-to-end res-
unet based reconstruction algorithm for photoacoustic imaging,”
Biomedical optics express , vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 5321–5340, 2020.
[36] D. Qiu, Y. Cheng, and X. Wang, “Progressive u-net residual net-
work for computed tomography images super-resolution in the
screening of covid-19,” Journal of Radiation Research and Applied
Sciences , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 369–379, 2021.
[37] N. Siddique, S. Paheding, C. P . Elkin, and V . Devabhaktuni, “U-
net and its variants for medical image segmentation: A review of
theory and applications,” IEEE Access , 2021.
[38] J. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Yu, X. Luo, E. Adeli, Y. Wang, L. Lu, A. L. Yuille,
and Y. Zhou, “Transunet: Transformers make strong encoders
for medical image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04306 ,
2021.
[39] W. Wang, C. Chen, M. Ding, H. Yu, S. Zha, and J. Li, “Transbts:
Multimodal brain tumor segmentation using transformer,” in
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2021, pp. 109–119.
[40] Y. Li, S. Wang, J. Wang, G. Zeng, W. Liu, Q. Zhang, Q. Jin, and
Y. Wang, “Gt u-net: A u-net like group transformer network for
tooth root segmentation,” in International Workshop on Machine
Learning in Medical Imaging . Springer, 2021, pp. 386–395.
[41] Y. Xie, J. Zhang, C. Shen, and Y. Xia, “Cotr: Efﬁciently bridging
cnn and transformer for 3d medical image segmentation,” in
International conference on medical image computing and computer-
assisted intervention . Springer, 2021, pp. 171–180.
[42] A. Hatamizadeh, V . Nath, Y. Tang, D. Yang, H. R. Roth, and D. Xu,
“Swin unetr: Swin transformers for semantic segmentation of
brain tumors in mri images,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion
Workshop . Springer, 2022, pp. 272–284.
[43] H. Wang, S. Xie, L. Lin, Y. Iwamoto, X.-H. Han, Y.-W. Chen,
and R. Tong, “Mixed transformer u-net for medical image seg-
mentation,” in ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 2022, pp.
2390–2394.
[44] A. Reza, H. Moein, W. Yuli, and M. Dorit, “Contextual
attention network: Transformer meets u-net,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.01932 , 2022.
[45] H. Wang, P . Cao, J. Wang, and O. R. Zaiane, “Uctransnet: rethink-
ing the skip connections in u-net from a channel-wise perspective
with transformer,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence , vol. 36, no. 3, 2022, pp. 2441–2449.
[46] H. Huang, S. Xie, L. Lin, Y. Iwamoto, X. Han, Y.-W. Chen, and
R. Tong, “Scaleformer: Revisiting the transformer-based back-
bones from a scale-wise perspective for medical image segmen-
tation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.14552 , 2022.
[47] J. M. J. Valanarasu, P . Oza, I. Hacihaliloglu, and V . M. Patel,
“Medical transformer: Gated axial-attention for medical image
segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical Image Com-
puting and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2021, pp.
36–46.
[48] H. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Chen, D. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Tian, and
M. Wang, “Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for medical
image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05537 , 2021.
[49] X. Huang, Z. Deng, D. Li, and X. Yuan, “Missformer: An ef-
fective medical image segmentation transformer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.07162 , 2021.
[50] Y. Wu, K. Liao, J. Chen, D. Z. Chen, J. Wang, H. Gao, and J. Wu,
“D-former: A u-shaped dilated transformer for 3d medical image
segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00462 , 2022.
[51] M. Brudfors, Y. Balbastre, J. Ashburner, G. Rees, P . Nachev,
S. Ourselin, and M. J. Cardoso, “An mrf-unet product of experts
for image segmentation,” in Medical Imaging with Deep Learning .
PMLR, 2021, pp. 48–59.
[52] J. Klug, G. Leclerc, E. Dirren, M. G. Preti, D. V . D. Ville, and
E. Carrera, “Bayesian skip net: Building on prior information for
the prediction and segmentation of stroke lesions,” in Interna-
tional MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop . Springer, 2020, pp. 168–180.
[53] A. Myronenko, “3d mri brain tumor segmentation using au-
toencoder regularization,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion
Workshop . Springer, 2018, pp. 311–320.[54] S. Kohl, B. Romera-Paredes, C. Meyer, J. De Fauw, J. R. Ledsam,
K. Maier-Hein, S. Eslami, D. Jimenez Rezende, and O. Ron-
neberger, “A probabilistic u-net for segmentation of ambiguous
images,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 31,
2018.
[55] H. Fu, J. Cheng, Y. Xu, D. W. K. Wong, J. Liu, and X. Cao,
“Joint optic disc and cup segmentation based on multi-label deep
network and polar transformation,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging , vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 1597–1605, 2018.
[56] S. Moradi, M. G. Oghli, A. Alizadehasl, I. Shiri, N. Oveisi,
M. Oveisi, M. Maleki, and J. Dhooge, “Mfp-unet: A novel
deep learning based approach for left ventricle segmentation in
echocardiography,” Physica Medica , vol. 67, pp. 58–69, 2019.
[57] J. Dolz, I. Ben Ayed, and C. Desrosiers, “Dense multi-path u-net
for ischemic stroke lesion segmentation in multiple image modal-
ities,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop . Springer,
2018, pp. 271–282.
[58] D. Lachinov, E. Vasiliev, and V . Turlapov, “Glioma segmentation
with cascaded unet,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion Work-
shop. Springer, 2018, pp. 189–198.
[59] M. Islam, V . Vibashan, V . Jose, N. Wijethilake, U. Utkarsh, and
H. Ren, “Brain tumor segmentation and survival prediction using
3d attention unet,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop .
Springer, 2019, pp. 262–272.
[60] M. Drozdzal, E. Vorontsov, G. Chartrand, S. Kadoury, and C. Pal,
“The importance of skip connections in biomedical image seg-
mentation,” in Deep Learning and Data Labeling for Medical Ap-
plications . Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp.
179–187.
[61] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-net: Fully convo-
lutional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmen-
tation,” in 2016 fourth international conference on 3D vision (3DV) .
IEEE, 2016, pp. 565–571.
[62] X. Li, H. Chen, X. Qi, Q. Dou, C.-W. Fu, and P .-A. Heng, “H-
denseunet: hybrid densely connected unet for liver and tumor
segmentation from ct volumes,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging , vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 2663–2674, 2018.
[63] A. Karaali, R. Dahyot, and D. J. Sexton, “Dr-vnet: Retinal vessel
segmentation via dense residual unet,” in International Conference
on Pattern Recognition and Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Springer, 2022,
pp. 198–210.
[64] D. Jha, M. A. Riegler, D. Johansen, P . Halvorsen, and H. D.
Johansen, “Doubleu-net: A deep convolutional neural network
for medical image segmentation,” in 2020 IEEE 33rd International
symposium on computer-based medical systems (CBMS) . IEEE, 2020,
pp. 558–564.
[65] Q. Jin, Z. Meng, T. D. Pham, Q. Chen, L. Wei, and R. Su, “Dunet: A
deformable network for retinal vessel segmentation,” Knowledge-
Based Systems , vol. 178, pp. 149–162, 2019.
[66] C. Kou, W. Li, W. Liang, Z. Yu, and J. Hao, “Microaneurysms
segmentation with a u-net based on recurrent residual convolu-
tional neural network,” Journal of Medical Imaging , vol. 6, no. 2, p.
025008, 2019.
[67] Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang,
“Unet++: Redesigning skip connections to exploit multiscale
features in image segmentation,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging , vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1856–1867, 2019.
[68] H. Huang, L. Lin, R. Tong, H. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Iwamoto, X. Han,
Y.-W. Chen, and J. Wu, “Unet 3+: A full-scale connected unet
for medical image segmentation,” in ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 1055–1059.
[69] T. Xiang, C. Zhang, D. Liu, Y. Song, H. Huang, and W. Cai, “Bio-
net: learning recurrent bi-directional connections for encoder-
decoder architecture,” in International conference on medical image
computing and computer-assisted intervention . Springer, 2020, pp.
74–84.
[70] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L. L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Mi-
sawa, K. Mori, S. McDonagh, N. Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz et al. ,
“Attention u-net: Learning where to look for the pancreas,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.03999 , 2018.
[71] Q. Jin, Z. Meng, C. Sun, H. Cui, and R. Su, “Ra-unet: A hybrid
deep attention-aware network to extract liver and tumor in ct
scans,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology , p. 1471, 2020.
[72] C. Li, Y. Tan, W. Chen, X. Luo, Y. Gao, X. Jia, and Z. Wang,
“Attention unet++: A nested attention-aware u-net for liver ct

==== Page 35 ====
35
image segmentation,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 345–349.
[73] D. Lachinov, P . Seeb ¨ock, J. Mai, F. Goldbach, U. Schmidt-Erfurth,
and H. Bogunovic, “Projective skip-connections for segmentation
along a subset of dimensions in retinal oct,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted In-
tervention . Springer, 2021, pp. 431–441.
[74] R. Azad, M. Asadi-Aghbolaghi, M. Fathy, and S. Escalera, “Bi-
directional convlstm u-net with densley connected convolu-
tions,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision Workshops , 2019, pp. 0–0.
[75] H. Li, J. Fang, S. Liu, X. Liang, X. Yang, Z. Mai, M. T. Van, T. Wang,
Z. Chen, and D. Ni, “Cr-unet: A composite network for ovary
and follicle segmentation in ultrasound images,” IEEE journal of
biomedical and health informatics , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 974–983, 2019.
[76] T. Fan, G. Wang, Y. Li, and H. Wang, “Ma-net: A multi-scale at-
tention network for liver and tumor segmentation,” IEEE Access ,
vol. 8, pp. 179 656–179 665, 2020.
[77] C. Guo, M. Szemenyei, Y. Yi, W. Wang, B. Chen, and C. Fan, “Sa-
unet: Spatial attention u-net for retinal vessel segmentation,” in
2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) .
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1236–1242.
[78] Z. Zeng, W. Xie, Y. Zhang, and Y. Lu, “Ric-unet: An improved
neural network based on unet for nuclei segmentation in histol-
ogy images,” Ieee Access , vol. 7, pp. 21 420–21 428, 2019.
[79] R. Azad, A. Bozorgpour, M. Asadi-Aghbolaghi, D. Merhof, and
S. Escalera, “Deep frequency re-calibration u-net for medical
image segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision , 2021, pp. 3274–3283.
[80] R. Azad, N. Khosravi, and D. Merhof, “Smu-net: Style matching
u-net for brain tumor segmentation with missing modalities,” in
Medical Imaging with Deep Learning , 2022.
[81] J. Hai, K. Qiao, J. Chen, H. Tan, J. Xu, L. Zeng, D. Shi, and
B. Yan, “Fully convolutional densenet with multiscale context
for automated breast tumor segmentation,” Journal of healthcare
engineering , vol. 2019, 2019.
[82] G. Wang, X. Liu, C. Li, Z. Xu, J. Ruan, H. Zhu, T. Meng,
K. Li, N. Huang, and S. Zhang, “A noise-robust framework for
automatic segmentation of covid-19 pneumonia lesions from ct
images,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 39, no. 8, pp.
2653–2663, 2020.
[83] Y.-H. Wu, S.-H. Gao, J. Mei, J. Xu, D.-P . Fan, R.-G. Zhang, and
M.-M. Cheng, “Jcs: An explainable covid-19 diagnosis system by
joint classiﬁcation and segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing , vol. 30, pp. 3113–3126, 2021.
[84] N. O’Mahony, S. Campbell, A. Carvalho, S. Harapanahalli, G. V .
Hernandez, L. Krpalkova, D. Riordan, and J. Walsh, “Deep learn-
ing vs. traditional computer vision,” in Science and information
conference . Springer, 2019, pp. 128–144.
[85] M. A. Hedjazi, I. Kourbane, and Y. Genc, “On identifying leaves:
A comparison of cnn with classical ml methods,” in 2017 25th Sig-
nal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU) .
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[86] O. Ronneberger, P . Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1505.04597 , 2015.
[87] “Rsna 2022 cervical spine fracture detection.” [On-
line]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/
rsna-2022-cervical-spine-fracture-detection
[88] K. S. Mader, “Finding and measuring lungs in ct data,” Apr
2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/kmader/
ﬁnding-lungs-in-ct-data
[89] B. Landman, Z. Xu, J. Igelsias, M. Styner, T. Langerak, and
A. Klein, “Miccai multi-atlas labeling beyond the cranial vault–
workshop and challenge,” in Proc. MICCAI Multi-Atlas Labeling
Beyond Cranial Vault—Workshop Challenge , vol. 5, 2015, p. 12.
[90] A. L. Simpson, M. Antonelli, S. Bakas, M. Bilello, K. Farahani,
B. Van Ginneken, A. Kopp-Schneider, B. A. Landman, G. Litjens,
B. Menze et al. , “A large annotated medical image dataset for the
development and evaluation of segmentation algorithms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.09063 , 2019.
[91] B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. Fara-
hani, J. Kirby, Y. Burren, N. Porz, J. Slotboom, R. Wiest et al. ,
“The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark
(brats),” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , vol. 34, no. 10, pp.
1993–2024, 2014.[92] ¨O. C ¸ ic ¸ek, A. Abdulkadir, S. S. Lienkamp, T. Brox, and O. Ron-
neberger, “3d u-net: learning dense volumetric segmentation
from sparse annotation,” in International conference on medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention . Springer, 2016,
pp. 424–432.
[93] N. Heller, N. Sathianathen, A. Kalapara, E. Walczak, K. Moore,
H. Kaluzniak, J. Rosenberg, P . Blake, Z. Rengel, M. Oestreich et al. ,
“The kits19 challenge data: 300 kidney tumor cases with clini-
cal context, ct semantic segmentations, and surgical outcomes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.00445 , 2019.
[94] N. Heller, F. Isensee, K. H. Maier-Hein, X. Hou, C. Xie, F. Li,
Y. Nan, G. Mu, Z. Lin, M. Han et al. , “The state of the art in
kidney and kidney tumor segmentation in contrast-enhanced ct
imaging: Results of the kits19 challenge,” Medical image analysis ,
vol. 67, p. 101821, 2021.
[95] W. H. Organization, “The impact of covid-19 on health and care
workers: a closer look at deaths,” World Health Organization,
Technical documents, 2021.
[96] M. Fitzke, D. Whitley, W. Yau, F. Rodrigues Jr, V . Fadeev,
C. Bacmeister, C. Carter, J. Edwards, M. P . Lungren, and
M. Parkinson, “Oncopetnet: A deep learning based ai system
for mitotic ﬁgure counting on h&e stained whole slide digital
images in a large veterinary diagnostic lab setting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07856 , 2021.
[97] T. Falk, D. Mai, R. Bensch, ¨O. C ¸ ic ¸ek, A. Abdulkadir, Y. Marrakchi,
A. B ¨ohm, J. Deubner, Z. J ¨ackel, K. Seiwald et al. , “U-net: deep
learning for cell counting, detection, and morphometry,” Nature
methods , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 67–70, 2019.
[98] F. Isensee, P . F. Jaeger, S. A. Kohl, J. Petersen, and K. H. Maier-
Hein, “nnu-net: a self-conﬁguring method for deep learning-
based biomedical image segmentation,” Nature methods , vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 203–211, 2021.
[99] H. J. Aerts, E. R. Velazquez, R. T. Leijenaar, C. Parmar, P . Gross-
mann, S. Carvalho, J. Bussink, R. Monshouwer, B. Haibe-Kains,
D. Rietveld et al. , “Decoding tumour phenotype by noninvasive
imaging using a quantitative radiomics approach,” Nature com-
munications , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[100] J. De Fauw, J. R. Ledsam, B. Romera-Paredes, S. Nikolov,
N. Tomasev, S. Blackwell, H. Askham, X. Glorot, B. O’Donoghue,
D. Visentin et al. , “Clinically applicable deep learning for diagno-
sis and referral in retinal disease,” Nature medicine , vol. 24, no. 9,
pp. 1342–1350, 2018.
[101] O. Bernard, A. Lalande, C. Zotti, F. Cervenansky, X. Yang, P .-
A. Heng, I. Cetin, K. Lekadir, O. Camara, M. A. G. Ballester
et al. , “Deep learning techniques for automatic mri cardiac multi-
structures segmentation and diagnosis: is the problem solved?”
IEEE transactions on medical imaging , vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 2514–2525,
2018.
[102] S. Nikolov, S. Blackwell, A. Zverovitch, R. Mendes, M. Livne,
J. De Fauw, Y. Patel, C. Meyer, H. Askham, B. Romera-Paredes
et al. , “Deep learning to achieve clinically applicable segmenta-
tion of head and neck anatomy for radiotherapy,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.04430 , 2018.
[103] A. Mehrtash, M. Pesteie, J. Hetherington, P . A. Behringer, T. Ka-
pur, W. M. Wells III, R. Rohling, A. Fedorov, and P . Abolmaesumi,
“Deepinfer: Open-source deep learning deployment toolkit for
image-guided therapy,” in Medical Imaging 2017: Image-Guided
Procedures, Robotic Interventions, and Modeling , vol. 10135. SPIE,
2017, pp. 410–416.
[104] T. C. Hollon, B. Pandian, A. R. Adapa, E. Urias, A. V . Save, S. S. S.
Khalsa, D. G. Eichberg, R. S. D’Amico, Z. U. Farooq, S. Lewis
et al. , “Near real-time intraoperative brain tumor diagnosis using
stimulated raman histology and deep neural networks,” Nature
medicine , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 52–58, 2020.
[105] P . Kickingereder, F. Isensee, I. Tursunova, J. Petersen, U. Neu-
berger, D. Bonekamp, G. Brugnara, M. Schell, T. Kessler,
M. Foltyn et al. , “Automated quantitative tumour response as-
sessment of mri in neuro-oncology with artiﬁcial neural net-
works: a multicentre, retrospective study,” The Lancet Oncology ,
vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 728–740, 2019.
[106] M. Esmaeili, A. L. Stensjøen, E. M. Berntsen, O. Solheim, and
I. Reinertsen, “The direction of tumour growth in glioblastoma
patients,” Scientiﬁc reports , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2018.
[107] M. Tonutti, G. Gras, and G.-Z. Yang, “A machine learning ap-
proach for real-time modelling of tissue deformation in image-
guided neurosurgery,” Artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine , vol. 80,
pp. 39–47, 2017.

==== Page 36 ====
36
[108] L. Maier-Hein, M. Eisenmann, A. Reinke, S. Onogur,
M. Stankovic, P . Scholz, T. Arbel, H. Bogunovic, A. P . Bradley,
A. Carass et al. , “Why rankings of biomedical image analysis
competitions should be interpreted with care,” Nature commu-
nications , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2018.
[109] L. M. Prevedello, S. S. Halabi, G. Shih, C. C. Wu, M. D. Kohli,
F. H. Chokshi, B. J. Erickson, J. Kalpathy-Cramer, K. P . Andriole,
and A. E. Flanders, “Challenges related to artiﬁcial intelligence
research in medical imaging and the importance of image anal-
ysis competitions,” Radiology. Artiﬁcial intelligence , vol. 1, no. 1,
2019.
[110] C. M. Bishop and N. M. Nasrabadi, Pattern recognition and machine
learning . Springer, 2006, vol. 4, no. 4.
[111] S. Banerjee, J. Lyu, Z. Huang, F. H. Leung, T. Lee, D. Yang, S. Su,
Y. Zheng, and S. H. Ling, “Ultrasound spine image segmentation
using multi-scale feature fusion skip-inception u-net (siu-net),”
Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering , vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 341–
361, 2022.
[112] M. Asadi-Aghbolaghi, R. Azad, M. Fathy, and S. Escalera, “Multi-
level context gating of embedded collective knowledge for med-
ical image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05056 , 2020.
[113] T. Xiang, C. Zhang, D. Liu, Y. Song, H. Huang, and W. Cai, “Bio-
net: learning recurrent bi-directional connections for encoder-
decoder architecture,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00243 , 2020.
[114] B. Liefers, C. Gonz ´alez-Gonzalo, C. Klaver, B. van Ginneken, and
C. I. S ´anchez, “Dense segmentation in selected dimensions: appli-
cation to retinal optical coherence tomography,” in International
Conference on Medical Imaging with Deep Learning . PMLR, 2019,
pp. 337–346.
[115] D. Lachinov, P . Seeb ¨ock, J. Mai, F. Goldbach, U. Schmidt-Erfurth,
and H. Bogunovic, “Projective skip-connections for segmenta-
tion along a subset of dimensions in retinal oct,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.00831 , 2021.
[116] R. Azad, M. Asadi-Aghbolaghi, M. Fathy, and S. Escalera, “Bi-
directional convlstm u-net with densley connected convolu-
tions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00166 , 2019.
[117] D. Li, Y. Peng, Y. Guo, and J. Sun, “Mfaunet: Multiscale feature
attentive u-net for cardiac mri structural segmentation,” IET
Image Processing , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1227–1242, 2022.
[118] T. Nguyen, B.-S. Hua, and N. Le, “3d-ucaps: 3d capsules unet
for volumetric image segmentation,” in International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention .
Springer, 2021, pp. 548–558.
[119] W. Weng and X. Zhu, “Inet: convolutional networks for biomed-
ical image segmentation,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 16 591–16 603,
2021.
[120] R. LaLonde, Z. Xu, I. Irmakci, S. Jain, and U. Bagci, “Capsules for
biomedical image segmentation,” Medical image analysis , vol. 68,
p. 101889, 2021.
[121] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning
for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778.
[122] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-net: Fully convolu-
tional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmenta-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04797 , 2016.
[123] C. Szegedy, V . Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna,
“Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , 2016, pp. 2818–2826.
[124] N. Ibtehaz and M. S. Rahman, “Multiresunet: Rethinking the u-
net architecture for multimodal biomedical image segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04049 , 2019.
[125] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger,
“Densely connected convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2017,
pp. 4700–4708.
[126] J. Dai, H. Qi, Y. Xiong, Y. Li, G. Zhang, H. Hu, and Y. Wei,
“Deformable convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 764–773.
[127] M. Liang and X. Hu, “Recurrent convolutional neural network
for object recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , 2015, pp. 3367–3375.
[128] M. Z. Alom, C. Yakopcic, M. Hasan, T. M. Taha, and V . K. Asari,
“Recurrent residual u-net for medical image segmentation,” Jour-
nal of Medical Imaging , vol. 6, no. 1, p. 014006, 2019.
[129] B. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Ding, Z. Deng, L. Li, Z. Qin, Z. Ding,
L. Bian, and C. Yang, “Multi-scale feature pyramid fusion net-work for medical image segmentation,” International Journal of
Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery , pp. 1–13, 2022.
[130] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,”
inProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[131] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly
et al. , “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020.
[132] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
[133] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N.
Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”
Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[134] M. . M.-A. A. L. Challenge, “Synapse multi-organ segmenta-
tion dataset,” https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn3193805/
wiki/89480, 2015, accessed: 2022-04-20.
[135] S. Bakas, H. Akbari, A. Sotiras, M. Bilello, M. Rozycki, J. S. Kirby,
J. B. Freymann, K. Farahani, and C. Davatzikos, “Advancing the
cancer genome atlas glioma mri collections with expert segmen-
tation labels and radiomic features,” Scientiﬁc data , vol. 4, no. 1,
pp. 1–13, 2017.
[136] S. Bakas, M. Reyes, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, M. Rempﬂer, A. Crimi, R. T.
Shinohara, C. Berger, S. M. Ha, M. Rozycki et al. , “Identifying the
best machine learning algorithms for brain tumor segmentation,
progression assessment, and overall survival prediction in the
brats challenge,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.02629 , 2018.
[137] J. Staal, M. D. Abr `amoff, M. Niemeijer, M. A. Viergever, and
B. Van Ginneken, “Ridge-based vessel segmentation in color
images of the retina,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , vol. 23,
no. 4, pp. 501–509, 2004.
[138] X. Zhu, W. Su, L. Lu, B. Li, X. Wang, and J. Dai,
“Deformablefdetrg: Deformable transformers for end-to-
end object detection,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2021. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.
net/forum?id=gZ9hCDWe6ke
[139] A. Hatamizadeh, Y. Tang, V . Nath, D. Yang, A. Myronenko,
B. Landman, H. R. Roth, and D. Xu, “Unetr: Transformers for
3d medical image segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , 2022, pp. 574–
584.
[140] A. Gupta, P . Mallick, O. Sharma, R. Gupta, and R. Duggal, “Pcseg:
Color model driven probabilistic multiphase level set based tool
for plasma cell segmentation in multiple myeloma,” PloS one ,
vol. 13, no. 12, p. e0207908, 2018.
[141] S. Gehlot, A. Gupta, and R. Gupta, “Ednfc-net: Convolutional
neural network with nested feature concatenation for nuclei-
instance segmentation,” in ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) .
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1389–1393.
[142] A. Gupta, R. Duggal, S. Gehlot, R. Gupta, A. Mangal, L. Ku-
mar, N. Thakkar, and D. Satpathy, “Gcti-sn: Geometry-inspired
chemical and tissue invariant stain normalization of microscopic
medical images,” Medical Image Analysis , vol. 65, p. 101788, 2020.
[143] N. C. Codella, D. Gutman, M. E. Celebi, B. Helba, M. A.
Marchetti, S. W. Dusza, A. Kalloo, K. Liopyris, N. Mishra, H. Kit-
tler et al. , “Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection: A
challenge at the 2017 international symposium on biomedical
imaging (isbi), hosted by the international skin imaging col-
laboration (isic),” in 2018 IEEE 15th international symposium on
biomedical imaging (ISBI 2018) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 168–172.
[144] N. Codella, V . Rotemberg, P . Tschandl, M. E. Celebi, S. Dusza,
D. Gutman, B. Helba, A. Kalloo, K. Liopyris, M. Marchetti
et al. , “Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection 2018: A
challenge hosted by the international skin imaging collaboration
(isic),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.03368 , 2019.
[145] T. Mendonc ¸a, P . M. Ferreira, J. S. Marques, A. R. Marcal, and
J. Rozeira, “Ph 2-a dermoscopic image database for research and
benchmarking,” in 2013 35th annual international conference of the
IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC) . IEEE,
2013, pp. 5437–5440.
[146] H. Wang, P . Cao, J. Wang, and O. R. Zaiane, “Uctransnet: rethink-
ing the skip connections in u-net from a channel-wise perspective
with transformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04335 , 2021.
[147] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V . Lempitsky, “Instance normaliza-
tion: The missing ingredient for fast stylization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.08022 , 2016.

==== Page 37 ====
37
[148] K. Sirinukunwattana, J. P . Pluim, H. Chen, X. Qi, P .-A. Heng,
Y. B. Guo, L. Y. Wang, B. J. Matuszewski, E. Bruni, U. Sanchez
et al. , “Gland segmentation in colon histology images: The glas
challenge contest,” Medical image analysis , vol. 35, pp. 489–502,
2017.
[149] N. Kumar, R. Verma, S. Sharma, S. Bhargava, A. Vahadane, and
A. Sethi, “A dataset and a technique for generalized nuclear
segmentation for computational pathology,” IEEE transactions on
medical imaging , vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1550–1560, 2017.
[150] N. Kumar, R. Verma, D. Anand, Y. Zhou, O. F. Onder, E. Tsouge-
nis, H. Chen, P .-A. Heng, J. Li, Z. Hu et al. , “A multi-organ
nucleus segmentation challenge,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging , vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1380–1391, 2019.
[151] X. Yan, H. Tang, S. Sun, H. Ma, D. Kong, and X. Xie, “After-unet:
Axial fusion transformer unet for medical image segmentation,”
inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of
Computer Vision , 2022, pp. 3971–3981.
[152] J. Ho, N. Kalchbrenner, D. Weissenborn, and T. Salimans, “Ax-
ial attention in multidimensional transformers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.12180 , 2019.
[153] R. Azad, M. T. AL-Antary, M. Heidari, and D. Merhof,
“Transnorm: Transformer provides a strong spatial normaliza-
tion mechanism for a deep segmentation model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.13415 , 2022.
[154] B. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, G. Lu, and D. Zhang, “Transattunet:
Multi-level attention-guided u-net with transformer for medical
image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05274 , 2021.
[155] J. M. J. Valanarasu, P . Oza, I. Hacihaliloglu, and V . M. Patel,
“Medical transformer: Gated axial-attention for medical image
segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10662 , 2021.
[156] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo,
“Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted
windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision , 2021, pp. 10 012–10 022.
[157] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L.
Yuille, “Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convo-
lutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 40,
no. 4, pp. 834–848, 2017.
[158] H. Wang, Y. Zhu, B. Green, H. Adam, A. Yuille, and L.-C. Chen,
“Axial-deeplab: Stand-alone axial-attention for panoptic segmen-
tation,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2020,
pp. 108–126.
[159] J. M. J. Valanarasu, R. Yasarla, P . Wang, I. Hacihaliloglu, and V . M.
Patel, “Learning to segment brain anatomy from 2d ultrasound
with less data,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing ,
vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1221–1234, 2020.
[160] P . Wang, N. G. Cuccolo, R. Tyagi, I. Hacihaliloglu, and V . M.
Patel, “Automatic real-time cnn-based neonatal brain ventricles
segmentation,” in 2018 IEEE 15th International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 716–719.
[161] E. K. Aghdam, R. Azad, M. Zarvani, and D. Merhof, “Attention
swin u-net: Cross-contextual attention mechanism for skin lesion
segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.16898 , 2022.
[162] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, D. Bahri, and D. Metzler, “Efﬁcient trans-
formers: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , 2020.
[163] G. Varoquaux and V . Cheplygina, “Machine learning for medical
imaging: methodological failures and recommendations for the
future,” NPJ digital medicine , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2022.
[164] X. Chu, Z. Tian, B. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Wei, H. Xia, and C. Shen,
“Conditional positional encodings for vision transformers,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.10882 , 2021.
[165] Y. Li, K. Zhang, J. Cao, R. Timofte, and L. Van Gool, “Lo-
calvit: Bringing locality to vision transformers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.05707 , 2021.
[166] W. Wang, E. Xie, X. Li, D.-P . Fan, K. Song, D. Liang, T. Lu, P . Luo,
and L. Shao, “Pyramid vision transformer: A versatile backbone
for dense prediction without convolutions,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2021, pp.
568–578.
[167] W. Wang, E. Xie, X. Li, D.-P . Fan, K. Song, D. Liang, T. Lu, P . Luo,
and L. Shao, “Pvt v2: Improved baselines with pyramid vision
transformer,” Computational Visual Media , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 415–
424, 2022.
[168] Z. Wang, X. Cun, J. Bao, W. Zhou, J. Liu, and H. Li, “Uformer:
A general u-shaped transformer for image restoration,” in Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2022, pp. 17 683–17 693.
[169] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and
P . Luo, “Segformer: Simple and efﬁcient design for semantic
segmentation with transformers,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , vol. 34, pp. 12 077–12 090, 2021.
[170] A. Lin, B. Chen, J. Xu, Z. Zhang, and G. Lu, “Ds-transunet: Dual
swin transformer u-net for medical image segmentation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.06716 , 2021.
[171] J. Wang, P . Lv, H. Wang, and C. Shi, “Sar-u-net: squeeze-and-
excitation block and atrous spatial pyramid pooling based resid-
ual u-net for automatic liver segmentation in computed tomog-
raphy,” Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine , vol. 208, p.
106268, 2021.
[172] P . Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Fang, and S. Deng, “Scau-net: spatial-
channel attention u-net for gland segmentation,” Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology , vol. 8, p. 670, 2020.
[173] Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Road extraction by deep residual
u-net,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters , vol. 15, no. 5,
pp. 749–753, 2018.
[174] P . J. Burt and E. H. Adelson, “The laplacian pyramid as a compact
image code,” in Readings in computer vision . Elsevier, 1987, pp.
671–679.
[175] S. R. Hashemi, S. S. M. Salehi, D. Erdogmus, S. P . Prabhu,
S. K. Warﬁeld, and A. Gholipour, “Asymmetric loss functions
and deep densely-connected networks for highly-imbalanced
medical image segmentation: Application to multiple sclerosis
lesion detection,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 1721–1735, 2018.
[176] N. Abraham and N. M. Khan, “A novel focal tversky loss function
with improved attention u-net for lesion segmentation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.07842 , 2018.
[177] H. Fu, J. Cheng, Y. Xu, D. W. K. Wong, J. Liu, and X. Cao, “Joint
optic disc and cup segmentation based on multi-label deep net-
work and polar transformation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00926 ,
2018.
[178] S. Moradi, M. Ghelich-Oghli, A. Alizadehasl, I. Shiri, N. Oveisi,
M. Oveisi, M. Maleki, and J. Dhooge, “A novel deep learning
based approach for left ventricle segmentation in echocardiogra-
phy: Mfp-unet,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.10486 , 2019.
[179] J. Dolz, I. B. Ayed, and C. Desrosiers, “Dense multi-path u-
net for ischemic stroke lesion segmentation in multiple image
modalities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07003 , 2018.
[180] D. Lachinov, E. Vasiliev, and V . Turlapov, “Glioma segmentation
with cascaded unet,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04008 , 2018.
[181] M. Islam, V . VS, V . J. M. Jose, N. Wijethilake, U. Utkarsh, and
H. Ren, “Brain tumor segmentation and survival prediction using
3d attention unet,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00985 , 2021.
[182] S. Kohl, B. Romera-Paredes, C. Meyer, J. De Fauw, J. R. Ledsam,
K. Maier-Hein, S. Eslami, D. Jimenez Rezende, and O. Ron-
neberger, “A probabilistic u-net for segmentation of ambiguous
images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05034 , 2018.
[183] M. Brudfors, Y. Balbastre, J. Ashburner, G. Rees, P . Nachev,
S. Ourselin, and M. J. Cardoso, “An mrf-unet product of experts
for image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05495 , 2021.
[184] C. Savadikar, R. Kulhalli, and B. Garware, “Brain tumour seg-
mentation using probabilistic u-net,” in International MICCAI
Brainlesion Workshop . Springer, 2020, pp. 255–264.
[185] X. Chen, Y. Zhao, and C. Liu, “Medical image segmentation using
scalable functional variational bayesian neural networks with
gaussian processes,” Neurocomputing , 2022.
[186] F. Dubost, G. Bortsova, H. Adams, A. Ikram, W. J. Niessen,
M. Vernooij, and M. D. Bruijne, “Gp-unet: Lesion detection
from weak labels with a 3d regression network,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted In-
tervention . Springer, 2017, pp. 214–221.
[187] W. Alakwaa, M. Nassef, and A. Badr, “Lung cancer detection and
classiﬁcation with 3d convolutional neural network (3d-cnn),”
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications ,
vol. 8, no. 8, 2017.
[188] S. Guan, A. A. Khan, S. Sikdar, and P . V . Chitnis, “Fully dense
unet for 2-d sparse photoacoustic tomography artifact removal,”
IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics , vol. 24, no. 2, pp.
568–576, 2019.
[189] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison,
A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chil-
amkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch:

==== Page 38 ====
38
An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 . Curran
Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
[190] H. Wang, P . Cao, J. Wang, and O. R. Zaiane, “Uctransnet: Rethink-
ing the skip connections in u-net from a channel-wise perspective
with transformer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04335 , 2021.
[191] A. Bozorgpour, R. Azad, E. Showkatian, and A. Sulaiman,
“Multi-scale regional attention deeplab3+: Multiple myeloma
plasma cells segmentation in microscopic images,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.06238 , 2021.
[192] A. Gupta, S. Gehlot, S. Goswami, S. Motwani, R. Gupta, ´A. G.
Faura, D. ˇStepec, T. Martin ˇciˇc, R. Azad, D. Merhof et al. ,
“Segpc-2021: A challenge & dataset on segmentation of multiple
myeloma plasma cells from microscopic images,” Medical Image
Analysis , p. 102677, 2022.
[193] R. Azad, M. Asadi-Aghbolaghi, M. Fathy, and S. Escalera, “At-
tention deeplabv3+: Multi-level context attention mechanism for
skin lesion segmentation,” in European conference on computer
vision . Springer, 2020, pp. 251–266.
[194] R. L. Siegel, K. D. Miller, H. E. Fuchs, and A. Jemal, “Cancer
statistics, 2022,” Ca Cancer J Clin , vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 7–33, 2022.
[195] R. Azad, M. Heidari, M. Shariatnia, E. K. Aghdam, S. Karimija-
farbigloo, E. Adeli, and D. Merhof, “Transdeeplab: Convolution-
free transformer-based deeplab v3+ for medical image segmen-
tation,” in International Workshop on PRedictive Intelligence In
MEdicine . Springer, 2022, pp. 91–102.
[196] M. Heidari, A. Kazerouni, M. Soltany, R. Azad, E. K. Aghdam,
J. Cohen-Adad, and D. Merhof, “Hiformer: Hierarchical multi-
scale representations using transformers for medical image seg-
mentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08518 , 2022.
[197] Z. Zhang and M. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for
training deep neural networks with noisy labels,” Advances in
neural information processing systems , vol. 31, 2018.
[198] C. H. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, and M. Jorge Car-
doso, “Generalised dice overlap as a deep learning loss function
for highly unbalanced segmentations,” in Deep learning in medical
image analysis and multimodal learning for clinical decision support .
Springer, 2017, pp. 240–248.
[199] M. K. Hasan, L. Dahal, P . N. Samarakoon, F. I. Tushar, and
R. Mart ´ı, “Dsnet: Automatic dermoscopic skin lesion segmenta-
tion,” Computers in biology and medicine , vol. 120, p. 103738, 2020.
[200] O. Oktay, J. Schlemper, L. L. Folgoc, M. Lee, M. Heinrich, K. Mi-
sawa, K. Mori, S. McDonagh, N. Y. Hammerla, B. Kainz et al. ,
“Attention u-net: Learning where to look for the pancreas,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.03999 , 2018.
[201] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, “Deep compression: Compress-
ing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and
huffman coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149 , 2015.
[202] X. Yu, T. Liu, X. Wang, and D. Tao, “On compressing deep models
by low rank and sparse decomposition,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2017,
pp. 7370–7379.
[203] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation:
A survey,” International Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 129, no. 6,
pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
[204] M. Wistuba, A. Rawat, and T. Pedapati, “A survey on neural
architecture search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.01392 , 2019.
[205] N. Rieke, J. Hancox, W. Li, F. Milletari, H. R. Roth, S. Albarqouni,
S. Bakas, M. N. Galtier, B. A. Landman, K. Maier-Hein et al. ,
“The future of digital health with federated learning,” NPJ digital
medicine , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2020.
[206] C. Gros, A. Lemay, O. Vincent, L. Rouhier, A. Bucquet, J. P .
Cohen, and J. Cohen-Adad, “Ivadomed: A medical imaging deep
learning toolbox,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09984 , 2020.
[207] A. R. Feyjie, R. Azad, M. Pedersoli, C. Kauffman, I. B. Ayed, and
J. Dolz, “Semi-supervised few-shot learning for medical image
segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08462 , 2020.

