==== Page 1 ====
DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1 1
Meta-learning of Sequential Strategies
Pedro A. Ortega, Jane X. Wang, Mark Rowland, Tim Genewein, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Razvan Pascanu,
Nicolas Heess, Joel Veness, Alex Pritzel, Pablo Sprechmann, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Tom McGrath, Kevin
Miller, Mohammad Azar, Ian Osband, Neil Rabinowitz, András György, Silvia Chiappa, Simon Osindero,
Yee Whye Teh, Hado van Hasselt, Nando de Freitas, Matthew Botvinick, and Shane Legg
DeepMind
Abstract —In this report we review memory-based meta-
learning as a tool for building sample-efﬁcient strategies that
learn from past experience to adapt to any task within a target
class. Our goal is to equip the reader with the conceptual
foundations of this tool for building new, scalable agents that
operate on broad domains. To do so, we present basic algorithmic
templates for building near-optimal predictors and reinforcement
learners which behave as if they had a probabilistic model that
allowed them to efﬁciently exploit task structure. Furthermore,
we recast memory-based meta-learning within a Bayesian frame-
work, showing that the meta-learned strategies are near-optimal
because they amortize Bayes-ﬁltered data, where the adaptation
is implemented in the memory dynamics as a state-machine
of sufﬁcient statistics. Essentially, memory-based meta-learning
translates the hard problem of probabilistic sequential inference
into a regression problem.
Index Terms —meta-learning, generality, sample-efﬁciency,
memory, sufﬁcient statistics, Bayesian statistics, Thompson sam-
pling, Bayes-optimality.
I. I NTRODUCTION
How do we build agents that perform well over a wide
range of tasks? Achieving this generality (or universality) is
considered by many research agendas to be one of the core
challenges in artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) [Solomonoff, 1964,
Gottfredson, 1997, Hernandez-Orallo, 2000, Hutter, 2004].
Generality is at the heart of IQ tests [Spearman, 1904, Raven,
1936, Urbina, 2011] and the measure of intelligence suggested
by Legg and Hutter [2007].
Meta-learning is a practical machine learning approach to
building general AI systems such as classiﬁers, predictors, and
agents. Broadly speaking, meta-learning aims to produce ﬂex-
ible, data-efﬁcient learning systems through the acquisition of
inductive biases from data [Bengio et al., 1991, Schmidhuber
et al., 1996, Thrun and Pratt, 1998]. In contrast to systems
that build in such biases by design, in meta-learning they
are acquired by training on a distribution over tasks . For
example, an agent trained to ﬁnd rewards in one maze will
simply learn the solution to that maze, but an agent trained on
mazes drawn from a broad class will learn a general-purpose
strategy for exploring new mazes [Wang et al., 2016, Duan
et al., 2016]. Systems trained in this way are able to absorb
structure in the task distribution that allows them to adapt
efﬁciently and generalize to new tasks, effectively leveraging
past experience to speed up new learning. Therefore, a meta-
learner can be thought of as a primary learning system that
progressively improves the learning of a secondary system[Bengio et al., 1991, Schmidhuber et al., 1996, Thrun and
Pratt, 1998, Hochreiter et al., 2001].
This method has been shown to be remarkably effective in
practice, especially in combination with deep learning archi-
tectures. Recent years have brought a wealth of approaches
centered on meta-learning different aspects of the learn-
ing process, such as learning the optimizer [Andrychowicz
et al., 2016, Li and Malik, 2016, Ravi and Larochelle, 2016,
Wichrowska et al., 2017, Chen et al., 2018b], the metric space
[Vinyals et al., 2016, Snell et al., 2017], the initial network
parameters [Finn et al., 2017, Nichol and Schulman, 2018],
the learning targets [Xu et al., 2018], conditional distributions
[Wang et al., 2017, Garnelo et al., 2018, Gordon et al., 2018,
Zintgraf et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2018a], or even the entire
learning procedure using a memory-based architecture such as
a recurrent neural network [Santoro et al., 2016, Wang et al.,
2016, Duan et al., 2016, Denil et al., 2016, Mishra et al., 2018].
Some approaches have also taken advantage of modularity as
an inductive bias to learn modules to be re-used in transfer
tasks [Reed and De Freitas, 2015].
In this report we focus on this last class of memory-
based meta-learning methods , which aim to ﬁnd sequential
strategies that learn from experience. Speciﬁcally, we aim for
a theoretical understanding of such meta-learning methods by
recasting them within a Bayesian framework. Our goal is to
provide a basic algorithmic template to which various meta-
learning procedures conform, showing that learned strategies
are capable of performing near-optimally. We hope that this
deeper conceptual understanding will provide the foundations
for new, scalable models.
The signiﬁcance of memory-based meta-learning meth-
ods rests in their ability to build—in a scalable and data-
driven way—systems that behave as if they had a proba-
bilistic model of the future. Agents with probabilistic models
possess inductive biases that allow them to quickly draw
structured inferences based on experience. However, building
these agents is very challenging: typically, constructing them
involves specifying both the probabilistic models and their
inference procedures either by hand or through probabilistic
programming.
In contrast, meta-learning offers a simple alternative: to
precondition a system with training samples in order to ﬁx
the right inductive biases necessary at test time. The key
insight is that the meta-training process generates training
samples that are implicitly ﬁltered according to Bayes rule,
i.e. the samples are drawn directly from the posterior pre-arXiv:1905.03030v2  [cs.LG]  18 Jul 2019

==== Page 2 ====
2 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
dictive distribution . Combined with a suitably chosen cost
function, meta-learning can use these Bayes-ﬁltered samples
to regress an adaptive strategy that solves a task quickly by
implicitly performing Bayesian updates “under the hood”—
that is, without computing the (typically intractable) Bayesian
updates explicitly. In this way, memory-based meta-learning
agents can behave as if they possess a probabilistic model
[Orhan and Ma, 2017]. Moreover, the agents track, in their
memory dynamics, the Bayesian sufﬁcient statistics necessary
for estimating the uncertainties for solving the task. Note
that this conceptualization is distinct from but extends ideas
presented in Baxter [1998, 2000], which considered only the
supervised learning case, and Finn et al. [2017], Grant et al.
[2018], in which the inference step is built-in and constrained
to only a few gradient-descent steps.
This report is structured as follows. Throughout, we focus
on simple toy examples before moving on to discuss issues
with scaling and practical applications. Section II reviews
sequential predictions. This is the most basic application
of meta-learning of sequential strategies, as it only requires
regressing the statistics of the training samples. The analysis
of the sequential prediction case will also serve as a basis for
studying other applications and for investigating the structure
of the solutions found through meta-learning. Section III
reviews the sequential decision-making case. Here we show
how to combine the basic meta-learning scheme with a policy
improvement method. We illustrate this with two minimal
examples: one for building Thompson sampling agents, which
is the natural extension of the prediction case, and another for
building Bayes-optimal agents. Finally, Section IV discusses
the connection between meta-learning and Bayesian statis-
tics, the spontaneous emergence of meta-learned solutions in
(single-task) online learning, and future challenges.
II. S EQUENTIAL PREDICTION
We start our analysis with the problem of sequential pre-
diction, i.e. the task of forecasting the future based on past
experience. We use this case because sequential prediction
is the most basic application of meta-learning, and it will
lay down the basics for analyzing other applications such as
sequential decision-making.
Consider the following sequence prediction problems:
I) 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, ?
II) 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, ?
III) 1, 2, 3, 4, ?
What is the next number in the sequence? The answers are
given by :
I) 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1
II) 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36
III) 1, 2, 3, 4, 29
These are justiﬁed as follows. Sequence (I) is a unary encoding
of the natural numbers. (II) is the sequence of quadratic
numberss(t) =t2. Finally, (III) is the sequence s(t) =
t4 10t3+ 35t2 49t+ 24 . Intuitively however, 29 feels very
unlikely, as 5 (i.e. the next natural number) seems a far more
natural choice compared to the complex 4th-degree polynomial
[Hutter, 2004].In spite of the enormous number of possible explanations,
we were remarkably good at predicting the next element in the
sequence. Our prediction ability is at the same time general
and data-efﬁcient. We possess inductive biases that allowed
us to quickly narrow down the space of possible sequences to
just a few, even though there isn’t any obvious shared structure
among the three examples; furthermore, these biases permitted
us to judge the relative plausibilities of competing predictions
(such as “29” versus “5” in the previous example). Our
prediction strategy appears to follow two principles: we main-
tained every possible explanation/hypothesis we could think
of given resource constraints ( Epicurus’ principle ), and we
deemed simpler explanations as being more likely ( Occam’s
razor ). These are also the core principles underlying Bayesian
statistics, which is arguably the gold standard for computing
predictions given the inductive biases [Jaynes, 2003].
But where do these inductive biases come from? How does a
learner know what is most parsimonious? Here, meta-learning
provides a simple answer: a learner, through repeated exposure
to various tasks, effectively captures the statistics of the data,
which translate into the inductive biases necessary for future
predictions.
In the following we will brieﬂy review how to make
sequential predictions using Bayesian ideas. Then, we will
show how to numerically approximate this prediction strategy
using meta-learning.
A. Problem setup
We now formalize the setup for sequential prediction. For
convenience, we limit ourselves to ﬁnite observation spaces
and discrete time.1Outputs are distributions over ﬁnite spaces
unless stated otherwise.
Our goal is to set up a generative process over trajectories
(i.e. ﬁnite sequences of observations), where the trajectories
are drawn not from a single generator, but from a class
of generators. Each generator will correspond to a possible
“ground truth” that we want the system to consider as a
hypothesis. By deﬁning a loss function, we tell the system
what to do (i.e. the task to perform) or what to predict under
each situation. Training the system with this generative process
then encourages the system to adopt the different generators
as potential hypotheses.
1) Sequences: LetXbe a ﬁnite alphabet of observations.
The set of (ﬁnite) strings over Xis written asX, which
includes the empty string .X1denotes the set of one-way
inﬁnite sequences over X. For concreteness, we assume that
X:= [N] :=f1;2;:::;Ng, whereNcould be very large. For
strings, subindices correspond to (time) indices as in xt, and
we use obvious shorthands for substrings such as xt:t+k:=
xtxt+1:::xt+k, andx<t:=x1:t 1. If the length Tis implicit
from the context, then we also write strings of length Tsimply
as, from the word trajectory .
1Note however that this assumption comes with a loss of generality.
Extensions to e.g. continuous domains typically require additional (geometric)
assumptions which are beyond the scope of this report.

==== Page 3 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 3
2) Generators/Hypotheses: The domain of possible
(stochastic) generators will be modeled using a set of
generators , formalized as a class Pof distributions over
inﬁnite sequences in X1. These will become, after training,
theset of hypotheses of the system, and henceforth we will
use the terms “generator” and “hypotheses” interchangeably.
Speciﬁcally, we demand that for each distribution P2 P
over strings, the probability P(xtjx<t)of any next symbol
xtgiven any past x<tis speciﬁed.2The probability of
an observation string xtis then equal to the product
P(xt) =Qt
k=1P(xkjx<k). Deﬁning the conditionals also
uniquely determines the distribution over inﬁnite sequences.3
We will also index the distributions in Pby a countable
parameter set , so that each member is a distribution
P2P, where2.4To use a notation that ﬁts neatly the
Bayesian interpretation, we will write P(xtj;x<t)rather than
P(xtjx<t); that is, where the parameter 2is interpreted
as a conditional.
Finally we place prior probabilities P()over the members
in. This will play the role of our measure of simplicity (or
inductive bias) of a hypothesis, where a simpler one possesses
more prior mass.5
Example 1. (Dice roll prediction) In a dice roll prediction
problem, the set of hypotheses is given by a collection of
N-sided “dice” that generate i.i.d. rolls according to the
categorical distribution, that is (with a slight abuse of notation)
xP(x=ij) =i, whereiis thei-th element of the
probability vector 2([N]). If there arejjsuch dice,
then a possible prior distribution is the uniform P() =1
jj.
Indeed, this example can be generalized to the set of all
probability vectors in the simplex ([N]), with a uniform
prior density. In this case, the whole process (i.e. ﬁrst sampling
the parameter and then sampling the observation sequence
x1;x2;:::) is known as a Dirichlet-Categorical process .
Example 2. (Optional: Algorithmic sequence prediction) In
the introductory example we used sequences that are gener-
ated according to patterns. These patterns can be formalized
as algorithms.6Algorithmic information theory allows us to
formalize a well-known, very large hypothesis class [Vitanyi
and Li, 1997]. Take a universal Turing machine Uthat takes
a binary-encoded program 2f0;1gand produces a binary
sequenceU() =x1x2:::as a result.7Then we can generate
a random binary sequence by providing the universal Turing
2This requirement avoids the technical subtleties associated to conditioning
on pasts having probability zero.
3More precisely, a collection of consistent distributions may be deﬁned
over each of the spaces Xtfort2Nvia the conditionals speciﬁed above.
Kolmogorov’s extension theorem then states that there exists a distribution P
over inﬁnite sequences in X1(with respect to the sigma-algebra generated
by cylinder sets  wX1, where  wdenotes the set containing all one-way
inﬁnite sequences having a common preﬁx w2X) that is consistent with
the distributions over ﬁnite sequences deﬁned via conditionals.
4This choice of the cardinality of the set of parameters is for simplifying our
mathematical exposition. In practice, the extension to uncountable parameter
sets is straightforward (see the Dirichlet example below)
5Measuring “simplicity” in this way is justiﬁed by the implied description
length of the hypothesis under an optimal code, namely  log2P()bits.
6In fact, Example 1 is a special case of a collection of algorithms.
7We assume that the universal Turing machine is preﬁx-free, and that it
outputs trailing zeros after reaching a halting state.machineUwith fair coin ﬂips, and then running the machine
on this input.
In this case, each hypothesis is a (degenerate) distribution
over sequences, where P(xj) = 1 ifxis a preﬁx of U()and
zero otherwise. The prior distribution over binary programs is
P() = 2 l(), wherel()is the length of the program .8
The resulting distribution over sequences is known as the
algorithmic prior andSolomonoff’s prior .
3) Strategies: The system uses a strategy to solve a task.
In general, strategies can implement predictions (over obser-
vations) and/or policies (distributions over actions). In the
prediction case, we formally deﬁne a strategy as a distribu-
tionover strings inX1. This is probability distribution
that characterizes the system’s outputs, and it should not be
confused with the generators. Then, (xtjx<t)will denote a
prediction over the next symbol xtgiven the past x<t.9The
set of candidate strategies available to the agent is denoted as
.
4) Losses: We consider tasks that can be formalized as
the minimization of a loss function. A loss function is a
function`that maps a strategy 2and a trajectory
2Xinto a real-valued cost `(;)2R. Intuitively, this
captures the loss of using the strategy under the partial
observability of the parameter when the trajectory is . For
instance, in sequential predictions, a typical choice for the loss
function is the log-loss`(;) = log(), also known as
thecompression loss ; in sequential decision-making problems,
one typically chooses a negative utility, such as the negative
(discounted) cumulative sum of rewards.
5) Goal: The aim of the system is to minimize the expected
loss
E[`] =X
P()hX
P(j)`(;)i
; (1)
with respect to the strategy . That is, the objective is the
expected loss of a trajectory , but generated by a latent
hypothesis(i.e. the ground truth) randomly chosen according
to the desired inductive bias P(). This is the standard
objective in Bayesian decision-theory in which the system has
to choose in the face of (known) uncertainty [Savage, 1972].
Notice that this setup assumes the realizable case, that is, the
case in which the true generative distribution is a member of
the class of hypotheses pondered by the system.
B. Universality: Bayesian answer
We start by showing how to solve the prediction problem
from a purely Bayesian point of view. This brief digression is
necessary in order to fully understand the statistical properties
of the samples generated during meta-learning. It is worth
pointing out that the Bayesian solution is typically viewed
as following directly from an interpretation of probabilities as
degrees of belief rather than from an optimization problem
8Strictly speaking, this distribution might be un-normalized, and we refer
the reader to Vitanyi and Li [1997] for a detailed technical discussion.
9Throughpout the paper, for any distribution overX1, we deﬁne(xt)
as the marginal distribution over the ﬁrst tsymbols, i.e. (xt) =(fx02
X1:x0
t=xtg). Then,(xtjx<t)is deﬁned as (xtjx<t) =(xt)
(x<t).

==== Page 4 ====
4 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
[Jaynes, 2003]. This shouldn’t be a distraction however, as
we will later express the Bayesian solution in terms of the
compression loss in order to establish the connection to meta-
learning.
The classical Bayesian approach consists in using a predic-
torgiven by the mixture distribution
() =P() =X
P()P(j) (2)
in which the probability of given trajectory is given by com-
bining the probabilities predicted by the individual hypotheses
weighted by their prior probabilities. The prior probabilities
are the initial inductive biases.
The mixture distribution automatically implements an adap-
tiveprediction strategy, and not a static average predictor as a
naive reading of its deﬁnition might suggest. This is seen as
follows. The Bayes rule and (2) easily imply that given past
datax<t, we can predict the next observation xtusing the
posterior predictive distribution obtained by conditioning 
on the past:
(xtjx<t) =P(xtjx<t) =X
P(jx<t)P(xtj;x<t):(3)
As (3) shows, the prediction of xtis given by the average
prediction made by the different hypotheses, but weighted by
theposterior probabilities P(jx<t), i.e. the weights updated
by the data.
These predictions converge to the true distribution with
more data;10that is, with probability one,
 
(xtjx<t) P(xtj;x<t)
!0 (4)
whereis the latent parameter of the true generator [Hutter,
2004, Theorem 3.19] (In contrast, notice that the posterior
distribution P(jx<t)does notconverge in general). From
the standpoint of lossless compression , Bayesian prediction
is the optimal strategy. The rate of convergence in (4), or
more precisely, the convergence rate of the average excess
compression loss (a.k.a. regret) can easily be established (see,
e.g., Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi [2006]): for any ,tand
sequencext,
 1
tlog(xt) +1
tlogP(xtj)1
tlogP():
That is, depending on the task-prior P(), the average excess
compression loss converges to zero at an O(1=t)rate.
To prepare the ground for the next section on meta-learning,
we will characterize the construction of the mixture distri-
bution in terms of a solution to an optimization problem.
For this, we use a central result from information theory. As
suggested above, we can use the compression loss to regress
the statistics of the distribution over trajectories. Formally, we
choose`(;) = log(). Then, we optimize (1)
= arg min
nX
P()hX
P(j)`(;)io
(5)
= arg min
n
 X
P() log()o
:
10Notice however that in general the posterior probabilities (jx<t)do
not converge unless we impose stricter conditions.whereP() =P
P()P(j). The resulting expected pre-
diction loss is the cross-entropy of()from the marginal
P(), which implies the minimizer () =P(); that is,
precisely the desired Bayesian mixture distribution having the
optimal prediction properties [Dawid et al., 1999].
C. Universality: meta-learning answer
In a nutshell, meta-learning consists of ﬁnding a minimizer
for a Monte-Carlo approximation of the expected loss (1).
More precisely, consider a learning architecture (say, a deep
learning architecture trained by gradient descent) that imple-
ments a function class F, where each member f2F maps
a trajectory 2Xinto a probability f() =()of the
trajectory. Then, we can approximate the expected loss (1) as
E[`]1
NNX
n=1`(f;(n)); (6)
wheref(n)gnareNi.i.d. samples drawn from randomly
chosen generators as
(n)P()
(n)P(j(n)):
The goal of meta-learning is to ﬁnd a function f2 F
that minimizes (6). Since the loss depends on the sampled
trajectories(n)but not on the parameters (n), the Monte-
Carlo objective implicitly marginalizes over the generators.11
The computation graph is shown in Figure 1.
We assume that optimizing the Monte-Carlo estimate (6)
will give a minimizer fwith the property
f()()
for the most probable .12While this gives us a method
for modeling the probabilities of trajectories, for sequential
predictions we need to incorporate some additional structure
into the regression problem.
To do sequential predictions, i.e. implementing (xtjx<t),
the above optimization does not sufﬁce; instead, we have to
impose the correct functional interface constraints onto the
regression problem in order to get a system that can map his-
tories into predictions. This is done by setting up the target loss
so that the solution implements the required function interface.
Speciﬁcally, we seek a function f2F that maps histories
x<t2Xinto predictions f(x<t) =(xtjx<t)2(X)of
the next observation xt2X, thereby also respecting the causal
structure of the task. If we use a memory-based architecture,
such as a recurrent neural network [Elman, 1990, Jordan, 1997,
Hochreiter et al., 2001, Kolen and Kremer, 2001, Graves,
2012], then the function fconforms to the interface
(t;mt) =f(xt 1;mt 1); (7)
11The technique of sampling the parameters rather than marginalizing over
them explicitly was also called root-sampling in Silver and Veness [2010].
12We will avoid discussions of the approximation quality here. It sufﬁces
to say that this depends on the learning model used; in particular, on whether
the optimum is realizable, and on the smoothness properties of the model near
the optimum.

==== Page 5 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 5
value
sampled
value
function
loss
functionagent
generator
Figure 1. Basic computation graph for meta-learning a trajectory predictor.
The loss function depends only on the trajectory , not on the parameter .
Thus, the strategy must marginalize over the latent parameter .
wheret2(X)is the current prediction vector, mtand
mt 12 M are the preceding and current memory states
respectively, and xt 12 X is the preceding observation.
Furthermore, we ﬁx the initial state . This is a sufﬁcient
condition for the system to make predictions that marginalize
over the hypotheses. Obviously, since mtmust remember all
the necessary past information, the set of possible memory
statesMneeds to be sufﬁciently large for it to possess the
capacity for encoding the sufﬁcient statistics of the pasts
inX. See discussion below in Section II-D.
We need instantaneous predictions. The associated instan-
taneous loss function for this interface (7) is then
`t=`(t;xt) = logt(xt); (8)
so that the Monte-Carlo approximation of the expected loss (6)
becomes
1
NNX
n=1`(f;(n)) =1
NNX
n=1TX
t`(n)
t; (9)
where`(n)
tare Monte-Carlo samples of the instantaneous log-
loss. The computation graph is shown in Figure 2 and the
pseudo-code is listed in Algorithm 1.13Arguably the most
important result in the realizable setting is that,14ifNis large,
and the minimum of (9) is attained, then the minimizer f2F
implements a function
f(xt 1;mt 1) = 
t;mt
where, crucially, the instantaneous prediction tis
t(xt)(xtjx<t) =X
P(jx<t)P(xtj;x<t);(10)
13Note that one could separate learning and sampling in Algorithm 1 by
ﬁrst sampling Nmodels and corresponding observation sequences, and then
feed the corresponding observation in the "observe" step of the algorithm.
In later sections, however, the prediction of the agent will affect how the
observations evolve; we chose to present sampling and prediction/learning
in this interleaved way to have a more uniﬁed presentation style with
Algorithms 2 and 3, given in the next section.
14Realizable is when the minimizer fof the Monte-Carlo loss is in F.i.e. the optimal sequential prediction in which the Bayesian
update is automatically amortized (or pre-computed) [Ritchie
et al., 2016]. In practice, this means that we can use fwithout
updating the parameters of the model (say, changing the
weights of the neural network) to predict the future from the
past, as the prediction algorithm is automatically implemented
by the recursive function fwith the help of the memory
statemt. The next section discusses how this is implemented
in the solution.
generatoragent
Figure 2. Computation graph for meta-learning a sequential prediction
strategy. The agent function fgenerates a prediction tof the observation xt
based on the past, captured in the last observation xt 1and the state mt 1.
The top diagram illustrates the computation graph for a whole sequence (of
lengthT= 4), while the lower diagram shows a detailed view of a single
step computation.
Algorithm 1: Meta-learning a prediction strategy
Data: PriorP(), generators P(xtj;x<t), and initial
predictor f, memory state m, and observation x.
Result: Meta-learned predictor f.
f f (initialize function)
whilefnot converged do
L 0 (reset loss)
forn= 1;2;:::;N do (rollout batch)
(x0;m0) (x;m) (reset memory state)
P() (sample parameter)
fort= 1;2;:::;T do (perform rollout)
(t;mt) f(xt 1;mt 1) (predict)
xtP(xtj;x<t) (observe)
`t= logt(xt) (instantaneous loss)
L L+`t (accumulate total loss)
f MinimizationStep( f;L) (do an update step)
return f
D. Anatomy of meta-learned agents
How does the function f2F implement the sequential
strategy with amortized prediction (10)? In which sense does

==== Page 6 ====
6 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
this strategy rely on an internal model? First, let us review the
conditions:
1)Choice of loss function: The choice of the loss function
speciﬁes what solving the task means, i.e. what we want
the agent to do as a function of the data.
2)Functional interface: Since the agent is ultimately im-
plemented as a function, the choice of the interface
(e.g. mapping entire trajectories into probabilities versus
mapping pasts into predictions) is crucial. Obviously this
choice is implicit in the practice of any regression-based
machine learning technique. Nevertheless, we point this
out because it is especially important in sequential prob-
lems, as it determines how the agent is situated within
the task, that is, what informational (and ultimately
causal) constraints the agent is subject to for solving
a task.
3)Monte-Carlo marginalization: Marginalizing analyti-
cally over the generators is in general intractable, except
for special cases such as in some exponential families
[Koopman, 1936, Abramovich and Ritov, 2013]. Instead,
meta-learning performs a Monte-Carlo marginalization.
Furthermore, in the sequential setting, the marginaliza-
tion hides the identity of the generator, thereby forcing
the model to ﬁnd a function that uses the past experience
to improve on the loss. This, in turn, leads to the numer-
ical approximation of amortized Bayesian estimators, as
long as the ﬁrst state is ﬁxed across all the samples.
As a result, we obtain a function fthat performs the
following operations:
1)New prediction: ftakes the past input xt 1and
memory state mt 1to produce a new prediction t
minimizing the instantaneous loss `t.
2)New memory state: In order to perform the new pre-
diction,fcombines the past input xt 1and memory
statemt 1to produce a new memory state mtthat acts
as a sufﬁcient statistic of the entire past x<t. That is,
there exists a sufﬁcient statistic function extracting all
the necessary information from the past to predict the
future, i.e.
(xtjx<t) = 
xt(x<t)
;
and this function is related to fvia the equation
(x<t) =f(xt 1;mt 1).
That is, the recursive function fimplements a state machine
[Sipser, 2006] (or transducer) in which the states correspond to
memory states, the transitions are the changes of the memory
state caused by an input, and where the outputs are the
predictions. We can represent this state machine as a labeled
directed graph. Figure 3 shows a state machine predicted by
theory and Figure 4 shows a meta-learned state machine.
The state machine thus implements a dynamics driven by
the input, where the state captures the sufﬁcient statistics of
the past [Kolen and Kremer, 2001]. However, it is important
to note that the objective (9) does not enforce the minimality
of the state machine (at least not without post-processing
[Kolen, 1994]). Indeed, in practice this is often not the case,
implying that the states do not correspond to the minimal
(0,0)
(1,0) (0,1)
(2,0) (1,1) (0,2)
(0,3) (1,2) (2,1) (3,0)
(3,1) (2,2) (1,3)Figure 3. Minimal state machine for a predictor of coin tosses with a ﬁxed,
unknown bias. The hypothesis class can be modeled as a 2-sided coin (see
Example 1). Dark and light state transitions correspond to observing the
outcomes ‘Head’ and ‘Tail’ respectively, and the states are annotated with
(nH;nT), the number of times Head and Tail have been observed. The
predictions made from each state are shown in the stacked bar charts: the
probability of Head is P(xt=Hjx<t) =nH+1
t+2(which is how these
predictions are implemented in a computer program). Note how different
observations sequences can lead to the same state (e.g. HT and TH).
Figure 4. Meta-learned state machine for a predictor of coin tosses. The ﬁgure
shows the memory dynamics of a standard memory-based predictor projected
onto the ﬁrst two eigenvectors. Notice the striking similarity with Figure 3.
The predictor consists of 20 LSTM cells with softmax predictions, which was
trained using Algorithm 1 on 1000 batches of 100 rollouts, where rollouts were
of length 10. For training, we used the Adam optimization algorithm [Kingma
and Ba, 2014].

==== Page 7 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 7
sufﬁcient statistics and that optimization runs with different
initial conditions (e.g. random seeds) can produce different
state machines. Furthermore, as with any machine learning
method, the accuracy of the transitions of input-state pairs
(x;m)that never occurred during training depend on the
generalization ability of the function approximator. This is
especially the case for input sequences that are longer than
the lengthTof the trajectories seen during training.
State machines are important because they reﬂect symmetry
relations due to their intimate relation to semigroups [Krohn
et al., 1968]. If a node in the graph has two or more incoming
arrows, then there exist two past observation strings (1)and
(2), not necessarily of the same length, such that
 
((1))
= 
((2))
;
that is, they map onto the same sufﬁcient statistics [Diaco-
nis, 1988], and hence, all the trajectories that emanate from
those states are jointly amortized. Thus, analyzing the graph
structure can reveal the invariances of the data relative to the
task. In particular, a minimal state machine captures all the
invariances. For instance, an exchangeable stochastic sequence
(in which the sequence is generated i.i.d. conditional on the
hypothesis) leads to a state machine with lattice structure as
in Figure 3.
III. S EQUENTIAL DECISION -MAKING
We now describe two ways of constructing interactive
agents, i.e. agents that exchange actions and observations with
an external environment. Many of the lessons learned in the
sequential prediction case carry over. The main additional
difﬁculty is that, in the decision-making case, unlike in the
prediction case, the optimal policy (which is needed in order to
generate the trajectories using the right distribution for meta-
learning) is not available. Hence, we need to interleave two
processes : a meta-learning process that implicitly amortizes
the marginalization over the generators; and a policy improve-
ment process that anneals toward the optimal policy.
A. Thompson sampling
We can leverage the ideas from the sequential prediction
case to create an adaptive agent that acts according to proba-
bility matching—and more speciﬁcally, Thompson sampling
[Thompson, 1933]—to address the exploration-exploitation
problem [Sutton et al., 1998]. For this, we need generators
that not only produce observations, but also optimal actions
provided by experts, which are then used as teaching signals.
In particular, provided we know the expert policies, Thomp-
son sampling translates the reinforcement learning problem
into an inference problem. Hence, meta-training a Thompson
sampler is akin to meta-training a sequential predictor, with
the crucial difference that we want our system to predict
expert actions rather than observations. Due to this, Thompson
samplers are optimal in the compression sense (i.e. using
the log-loss), but not in the Bayes-optimal sense (see next
subsection).
Formally, this time we consider distributions P2P over
interaction sequences, that is, strings in (AO ), whereAandOare discrete sets of actions and observation respectively. We
underline symbols to glue them together, so aot:= (at;ot).
Then, a generator is a member P2P deﬁning a distribution
over strings
P(aoTj) =TY
tP(atj;ao<t)P(otj;ao<tat)
where the conditional probabilities
P(otj;ao<tat)andP(atj;ao<t)
are the probabilities of the next observation otand of the
next action atgiven the past, respectively. One can interpret
theP(atj;ao<t)as the desired (or optimal) policy provided
by an expert when the observations follow the statistics
P(otj;ao<tat). In addition, these probabilities must match
the causal structure of the interactions for our following
derivation to be correct.15
Thompson sampling can be characterized as sampling the
actions directly from the posterior predictive [Ortega and
Braun, 2010]. As in Bayesian prediction, consider the mixture
distribution
P(aoT) =X
P(aoTj)P():
Then we can generate actions by sampling them from the
posterior predictive
at+1P(at+1j^aot) =X
P(at+1j;aot)P(j^aot)
(11)
where the “hat” as in “ ^a” denotes a causal intervention and
whereP(j^aot)is recursively given by16
P(j^aot) =P(otj;ao<t)P(j^ao<t)P
0P(otj0;ao<t)P(0j^ao<t)(12)
In other words, we continuously condition on the past, treating
actions as interventions and observations as normal (Bayesian)
conditions. More precisely, unlike observations, past actions
were generated by the agent without knowledge of the un-
derlying parameter (hence the atandare independent
conditional on the past experience), and the causal intervention
mathematically accounts for this fact.
Meta-learning a Thompson sampling agent follows a
scheme analogous to sequential prediction. We seek a strat-
egythat amortizes the posterior predictive over ac-
tions (11):
(atjao<t)P(atj^ao<t) =X
P(atj;ao<t)P(j^ao<t):
This strategy conforms to the functional interface
(t;mt) =f(at 1;ot 1;mt 1); (13)
15In practice, this is achieved by enforcing a particular factorization of the
joint probability distribution over parameters and interactions into conditional
probabilities that reﬂect the causal structure—see Pearl [2009].
16See Pearl [2009] for a thorough deﬁnition of causal interventions.
Equations (11) and (12) are non-trivial and beyond the scope of this report; we
refer the reader to Ortega and Braun [2010] for their derivation. In particular,
note thatP(at+1j;aot)in (11) does not have interventions.

==== Page 8 ====
8 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
wheret2(A)is the current policy vector, mtandmt 12
Mare the preceding and current memory states respectively,
andaot 12AO is the preceding interaction.
Next we derive the loss function. As in Bayesian predic-
tion, Thompson sampling optimizes the compression of the
interaction sequence characterized by the expected log-loss.
This is easiest written recursively in terms of the instantaneous
expected log-loss as
E
 X
P(j^ao<t)hX
atP(atj;ao<t) log(atjao<t)i
(14)
for each action atgiven its past ao<t.17For a Monte-Carlo
approximation, we sample trajectories f(n)gnas
(n)P()
a(n)
t(atjao(n)
<t)for allt
o(n)
tP(otj(n);ao(n)
<ta(n)
t)for allt:9
>>=
>>;(15)
In particular, note how actions are drawn from the agent’s
policy, not from the generator. This ensures that the agent does
not use any privileged information about the generator’s iden-
tity, thus covering the support over all the trajectories that the
agent might explore. Then, we can choose the instantaneous
loss function as the cross-entropy
`t= X
atP(atj;ao<t) logt(at) (16)
evaluated on the sampled trajectories. This is known as (a
variant of) policy distillation [Rusu et al., 2015]. Again, this
only works if we have access to the ground-truth optimal
policy for each environment. The computation graph is shown
in Figure 5 and the pseudo-code is listed in Algorithm 2
Figure 5. Detail of the computation graph for meta-learning a Thompson
sampling agent. The actions atare generated from the agent’s policy t. The
expert policy 
tis only used for generating a loss signal `t.
Finally, we note that the above meta-training algorithm
is designed for ﬁnding agents that implicitly update their
posterior after each time step. However, this can lead to
unstable policies that change their behavior (i.e. expert policy)
in each time step. Such inconsistencies can be addressed by
updating the posterior only after experiencing longer interac-
tion sequences—for instance, only after an episode. We refer
17The expected log-loss for observations is omitted, as we only need to
regress the policy here.Algorithm 2: Meta-learning a Thompson sampler
Data: PriorP(), generators P(otj;ao<tat), and
policiesP(atj;ao<t); and initial predictor f,
memory state m, and interaction a;o.
Result: Meta-learned predictor f.
f f (initialize function)
whilefnot converged do
L 0 (reset loss)
forn= 1;2;:::;N do (rollout batch)
(a0;o0;m0) (a;o;m) (reset memory state)
P() (sample parameter)
fort= 1;2;:::;T do (perform rollout)
(t;mt) f(at 1;ot 1;mt 1) (policy)
att(at) (act)
otP(otj;ao<tat) (observe)
`t= P
atP(atjao<t) logt(at)(inst. loss)
L L+`t (accumulate total loss)
f MinimizationStep( f;L) (do an update step)
return f
the reader to [Russo et al., 2018, Osband and Van Roy, 2016,
Ouyang et al., 2017] for a detailed discussion.
B. Bayes-Optimality
Bayes-optimal sequential decision-making is the decision
strategy that follows from the theory of subjective expected
utility [Savage, 1972] and the method of dynamic program-
ming [Bellman, 1954]. Roughly, it consists in always picking
an action that maximizes the value , that is, the expected sum of
future rewards under the best future actions. Methodologically,
it requires solving a stochastic partial difference equation
modeling the value for given boundary conditions, where the
latter typically constrain the value to zero everywhere along
the planning horizon [Bertsekas, 2008]. Due to this, learning
a Bayes-optimal policy is far more challenging than learning
a Thompson sampling strategy. Here we also depart from the
log-loss, and use a reward function instead to characterize the
task goals.
In this case the generators are distributions P2P over
observation sequences conditioned on past interactions, where
each member P2P deﬁnes a conditional distribution
P(oTj;ao<tat) =TY
tP(otj;ao<tat):
However, unlike the Thompson sampling case, here we seek a
global optimal policy P(atjao<t)which is indirectly deﬁned
via a reward function as discussed later. This global policy will
by construction solve the exploration-exploitation problem in
a Bayes-optimal way, although it is tailored speciﬁcally to the
given task distribution.
Because the optimal policy is unknown, in practice during
training we only have access to trajectories that are drawn
from a distribution Pthat results from the interactions

==== Page 9 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 9
between the expected task and a custom policy .Pis given
by
P(aoT) =X
P()TY
t(atjao<t)P(otj;ao<tat);
that is, a distribution where actions are drawn from the
agent’s current strategy and where observations are drawn
from a randomly chosen generator as described in (15) from
Thompson sampling.
As mentioned above, we specify the agent’s objective with
a reward function. This is a global reward function rthat maps
every interaction aot2AO and pastao<t2(AO )into
a scalar value r(aotjao<t)2R, indicating the interaction’s
desirability. Furthermore, we deﬁne the action-value function
for a policy as the expected sum of rewards given a past,18
that is,
Q(atjao<t) =EhTX
k=tr(aokjao<k)ao<tati
(17)
where the expectation Edenotes an expectation w.r.t. the
distribution P. Notice that this deﬁnition implicitly equates
the rewards after the horizon Twith zero. An optimal policy
P(atjao<t)is deﬁned as any policy that maximizes (17) for
any pastao<t. Note that this is a recursive deﬁnition that can
be solved using dynamic programming.
Meta-learning a Bayes-optimal policy can be done in nu-
merous ways: here we settle on inferring the optimal policy
via estimating the action-values for concreteness, but other
methods (e.g. using policy gradients) work as well. We seek
amortizing the action-values using a vector qt2RjAj:
qt(at)Q(atjao<t):
The functional interface conforms to
(qt;mt) =f(at 1;ot 1;mt 1)
whereqt2RjAjis the current action-value vector used for
constructing the policy; mtandmt 12M are the preceding
and current memory states respectively; and aot 12AO
is the preceding interaction, which implicitly also provides the
reward.19
As the instantaneous loss-function `tfor regressing the
action-values, we can for instance use the TD-error
`t=n 
rt+qt+1(at+1)
 qt(at)o2
:
Crucially, this is only a function of the value qt(at)of the
current action. The target value 
rt+qt+1(at+1)
, given
by the sum of the current reward rt=r(aotjao<t)and
the valueqt+1(at+1)of the next action, is kept constant,
ensuring that the boundary conditions are propagated in the
right direction, namely backwards in time.
To regress the optimal policy, we use simulated annealing
[Kirkpatrick et al., 1983]. Speciﬁcally, we start from a random
policy and then slowly crystallize an optimal policy. To do so,
18For simplicity, we assume that rewards are undiscounted.
19If the reward is not a function of actions and observations, then it needs
to be passed explicitly alongside the last interaction.actions are drawn as att(at)from a policy built from the
action-values using e.g. the softmax function
t(at) =expfqt(at)gP
aexpfqt(a)g;
where the inverse temperature  >0is a parameter controlling
the stochasticity of the policy: 0yields a nearly uniform
policy and0a nearly deterministic one. During meta-
training, the inverse temperature is annealed (cooled), starting
from= 0 and ending in a large value for . This gives
the model time to regress the action-values by sampling sub-
optimal branches before committing to a speciﬁc policy. Good
cooling schedules are typically determined empirically [Mitra
et al., 1986, Nourani and Andresen, 1998]. The pseudo-code
is listed in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: Meta-learning a Bayes-optimal policy
Data: PriorP(), generators P(otj;ao<tat), and
reward function r(aotj;ao<t); and initial
predictor f, inverse temperature , memory state
m, and interaction a;o.
Result: Meta-learned predictor f.
f f (initialize function)
  (initialize inv. temp.)
whilefnot converged do
L 0 (reset loss)
forn= 1;2;:::;N do (rollout batch)
(a0;o0;m0) (a;o;m ) (reset memory state)
P() (sample parameter)
fort= 1;2;:::;T do (perform rollout)
(qt;mt) f(at 1;ot 1;mt 1) (Q-values)
t(at) exp(qt(at))P
aexp(qt(a))(policy)
att(at) (act)
otP(otj;ao<tat) (observe)
rt r(aotj;ao<tat) (reward)
ift 11then (compute previous loss)
qtarget Constant(rt 1+qt(at))
`t 1= 
qtarget qt 1(at 1)2
L L+`t 1 (accumulate total loss)
qtarget Constant(rT) (last target)
`T= 
qtarget qT(aT)2(last inst. loss)
L L+`T (accumulate total loss)
f MinimizationStep( f;L) (do an update step)
 CoolingSchedule( ) (update inv. temp.)
return f
IV. D ISCUSSION
A. Meta-learning and Bayesian statistics
Meta-learning is intimately connected to Bayesian statistics
regardless of the loss function, due to the statistics of the gen-

==== Page 10 ====
10 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
erated trajectories. When regressing a sequential strategy using
a Monte-Carlo estimation, we sample trajectories f(n)gnas20
(n)P()
x(n)
tP(xtj(n);x(n)
<t)for allt.
However, from the point of view of the system that has already
seen the past x<t, the transition xtlooks, on average, as if it
were sampled with probability
P(xtjx<t) =X
P(xtj;x<t)P(jx<t); (18)
that is, from the Bayesian posterior predictive distribution,
which in turn induces the (implicit) update of the hypothesis
P(jxt)/P(jx<t)P(xtj;x<t): (19)
Hence, (18) and (19) together show that the samples are
implicitly ﬁltered according to Bayes’ rule. It is precisely
this statistical property that is harvested through memory-
based meta-learning. As shown in Section II, meta-learning a
Bayesian sequence predictor corresponds to directly regressing
the statistics of the samples; due to this, it can be considered
the most basic form of meta-learning. In contrast, the two
sequential decision makers from Section III do not regress
the statistics directly but rather use their correspondence to a
Bayesian ﬁltration to build adaptive policies.
Conceptually, using a generative process to produce Bayes-
ﬁltered samples is an old idea. It is the rationale driving many
practical implementations of Bayesian models [Bishop, 2016],
and one of the key ideas in Monte-Carlo methods for Bayes-
optimal planning [Silver and Veness, 2010, Guez et al., 2012].
B. Sample complexity of strategies
Current model-free RL algorithms such as deep RL algo-
rithms (e.g. DQN [Mnih et al., 2013] or A3C [Mnih et al.,
2016]) are known to be sample inefﬁcient. The sample com-
plexity can potentially be improved by using a suitable model-
based approach with strong inductive biases. Full probabilistic
model-based approaches (i.e. those that do not work with
expectation models) can rely on hand-crafted probabilistic
models that possess little structure (e.g. Dirichlet priors over
state transitions) or have intractable (exact) posterior distribu-
tions. This can make such approaches unwieldy in practice.
More commonly, traditional approaches have used expec-
tation models [Sutton et al., 2012, Schmidhuber, 1990], or
deterministic abstract models [Watter et al., 2015, Silver et al.,
2016]. However, so far there has been limited success scaling
probabilistic modeling to improve sample efﬁciency in the
context of deep reinforcement learning.
Meta-learning addresses this problem in a conceptually
straightforward manner. It automates the synthesis of near-
optimal algorithms, by searching in algorithm space (or au-
tomata space) in order to ﬁnd a new reinforcement learning
algorithm that is tailored to a given class of tasks, exploiting
20For sequential-decision making problems, we assume that the policy
improvement steps have already converged. In this case, the actions are drawn
from the target distribution for meta-learning, and we can safely ignore the
distinction between actions and observations.the structure and using the desired inductive biases. The meta-
learned algorithms minimize the sample complexity at test time
because they directly minimize the expected loss averaged over
all generators. In the examples we have seen, meta-learning
ﬁnds sequential algorithms, which when deployed perform
near-optimally, minimizing the sample complexity. The ﬂip
side is that meta-learning can be very expensive at meta-
training time due to the slow convergence of the Monte-Carlo
approximation and the very large amount of data required by
current popular neural architectures during the meta-training
phase.
C. Spontaneous meta-learning
Meta-learning can also occur spontaneously in online re-
gression when the capacity of the agent is bounded and the
data is produced by a single generator . Unfortunately, the
downside is that we cannot easily control what will be meta-
learned. In particular, spontaneous meta-learning could lead to
undesirable emergent properties, which is considered an open
research problem in AI safety [Ortega et al., 2018]. To see
how meta-learning happens, consider the sequential prediction
case. All we need is to show how the conditions for meta-
learning occur naturally; that is, by identifying the Monte-
Carlo samples and their latent parameters.
LetMandZbe the agent’s and the generator’s set of
internal states respectively, and let Xbe the set of observa-
tions. Assume that the dynamics are deterministic (stochastic
dynamics can be modeled using pseudo-random transitions)
and implemented by functions f;g;h , so that the sequence of
observations x1;x2;:::2X , agent states m1;m2;:::2M ,
and generator states z1;z2;:::2Z are given by
xt=h(zt) (observations)
mt+1=f(xt;mt) (agent states)
zt+1=g(zt); (generator states)
(with arbitrary initial values z0,m0) as illustrated in Figure 6.
Furthermore, assume that MandZareﬁnite .21Then, for a
sufﬁciently long sequence there must exist a state m2M
that is visited inﬁnitely often when given an inﬁnite stream
of observations. We can use mto segment the sequence
of observations into (variable-length) trajectories (1);(2);:::
which we can identify as Monte-Carlo samples from a class of
generators as illustrated by the example in Table I. The n-th
trajectory(n)is deﬁned by the ﬁrst substring delimited by
then-th and (n+1)-th occurrence of m, and deﬁne y(n)
t2X
as thet-th observation of the n-th trajectory, e.g. y(2)
1=x5
because(2)=x5x6x7. Finally, the task parameter (n)of the
n-th trajectory is the state of the generator at the beginning of
the sequence.
Given this identiﬁcation, an online learning algorithm that
updatesfbased on a sufﬁciently large window of the past will
effectively perform batch updates based on a set of trajectories
sampled by different “generators”, thereby performing meta-
learning.
21This assumption can be relaxed to compact metric spaces using tools
from dynamical systems theory that are beyond the scope of this report.

==== Page 11 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 11
Table I
EXAMPLE SEGMENTATION OF AN INPUT SEQUENCE IN SPONTANEOUS META -LEARNING .
Input:x1x2x3x4x5x6x7x8x9x10
Agent State: m1mm3mm5m6mm8m7m
Generator State: z1z2z3z4z5z6z7z8z9z10
Trajectory: (na) (1)(2)(3)
Derived Input: (na) y(1)
1y(1)
2y(2)
1y(2)
2y(2)
3y(3)
1y(3)
2y(3)
3
Derived Parameter: (na) (1)=z2(2)=z4 (3)=z7
Figure 6. Dynamics of spontaneous meta-learning. The (pseudorandom)
generator with states in Zproduces observations in X, which drive the
agent’s memory state-transitions in M. A loop in the memory space with
endpoints equal m2M corresponds to a trajectory generated by a latent
parameter.
D. Capacity limitations
In our analysis, we have assumed that the solution found is
the minimizer of the meta-learning objective. This is a very
strong assumption. In practice, the difﬁculty of actually ﬁnding
a near-optimal solution depends on many factors.
The ﬁrst and most important factor is of course the model
used for regression. Properties such as e.g. the inductive
biases of the model implementing the function class F, the
smoothness of the loss landscape, the optimizer, and the
memory capacity, play fundamental roles in any machine
learning method, and meta-learning is no exception.
Another important factor is the task class, including both
the space of hypotheses and the loss function. Together they
shape the complexity of the strategy to regress via meta-
learning. In particular, the invariances in the state machine
(see Section II-D) reduce the number of distinct mappings
from past experiences x<tinXto instantaneous strategies
tinthe regressor has to learn. Conversely, in the worst
case when there are no invariances, the number of distinct
mappings grows exponentially in the maximum length Tof
the trajectories.
E. Selected future challenges
a) Task structure: Meta-learning crucially relies on the
skillful design of the class of tasks. Previous work has shown
that agents can meta-learn to perform a variety of task if
the task distributions have been designed accordingly, such
as learning to identify a best option [Denil et al., 2016, Wanget al., 2016] or learning to reason causally [Dasgupta et al.,
2019]
In each case, the practitioner must ask the question: if
the meta-learned strategy should have a capability X, what
property Y must the class of tasks posses? For instance, how
should we design the generators so that we can generalize
out-of-distribution and beyond the length of the trajectories
sampled during meta-learning?
Addressing questions like these entail further questions
regarding the structure of tasks; but to date, we are not aware
of an adequate language or formalism to conceptualize this
structure rigorously. In particular, we expect to gain: a better
understanding of the dynamical structure of solutions; predict
the structure of the sufﬁcient statistics that a class of tasks
gives rise to; and compare two tasks classes and determine if
they are equivalent (or similar) in some sense.
b) Beyond expected losses: In the basic meta-learning
scheme the strategies minimize the expected loss. Minimizing
an expectation disregards the higher-order moments of the loss
distribution (e.g. variance), leading to risk-insensitive strate-
gies that are brittle under model uncertainty. Going beyond
expected losses means that we have to change our certainty-
equivalent —that is, the way we aggregate uncertain losses into
a single value [Hansen and Sargent, 2008].
Changing the certainty-equivalent changes the attitude to-
wards risk. This has important applications ranging from safety
& robustness [van den Broek et al., 2010, Ortega and Legg,
2018] to games & multi-agent tasks [McKelvey and Palfrey,
1995, 1998, Littman, 1994]. For instance, if the agent is trained
on an imperfect simulator of the real-world, we would want
the agent to explore the world cautiously.
Risk-sensitive strategies can be meta-learned by tweaking
the statistics of the generative process. For instance, by chang-
ing the prior over generators as a function of the strategy’s per-
formance, we can meta-learn strategies that are risk-sensitive.
For games, it might be necessary to simultaneously meta-train
multiple agents in order to ﬁnd the equilibrium strategies.
c) Continual learning: The continual learning problem
asks an agent to learn sequentially, incorporating skills and
knowledge in a non-disruptive way. There are strong links
between the continual learning problem and the meta-learning
problem.
On one hand, the traditional meta-learning setting assumes
a ﬁxed distribution of tasks, which can be restrictive and
unrealistic. Allowing the distribution to change over time not
only would be crucial from a practical perspective, but could
also be used as a tool to reﬁne the task distribution in order to
induce the right properties in the learned solution. Continual or

==== Page 12 ====
12 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
incremental variants of the meta-learning problem is however
an under-explored topic (e.g. Nagabandi et al. [2019] touches
on this topic).
On the other hand, meta-learning can be seen as part of
the solution for the continual learning problem. In principle
continual learning is ill-deﬁned. Remembering a potentially
inﬁnite set of skills is unfeasible within a ﬁnite model.
While continual learning usually focuses on 0-shot transfer
[Goodfellow et al., 2014, Parisi et al., 2018, Kirkpatrick et al.,
2017], or how well the agent remembers a previously seen
task without any adaptation, this might be the wrong measure.
A relaxation of this approach, e.g. explored by Kaplanis
et al. [2018], would be to measure how fast one recovers
performance, which converts continual learning into a meta-
learning problem. The compression of all seen tasks becomes
the meta-learning algorithm that the agent needs to infer and
that can be exploited to recover the solution of the task.
However the tasks are not seen necessarily in an i.i.d. fashion.
So while the mechanism outlined in this work could describe
such a solution to a continual learning problem, it is unclear
how to approach the learning problem in practice.
F . Conclusions
Reinforcement learning algorithms based on probabilistic
models promise to address many of the shortcomings—in par-
ticular, the sample-inefﬁciency—of model-free reinforcement
learning approaches. However, the implementation of such
systems is very challenging and, more often than not, depends
on domain expertise, i.e. human knowledge, hand-crafted in
the form of probabilistic models that are either tractable but too
simple to be useful, or outright intractable. Such an approach
does not scale.
Memory-based meta-learning offers a conceptually simple
alternative for the construction of agents implicitly based
on probabilistic models that leverages data and large-scale
computation. In essence, meta-learning transforms the hard
problem of probabilistic inference into a curve ﬁtting problem.
Here we have provided three meta-learning templates: one for
building predictors, one for Thompson samplers, and one for
Bayes-optimal agents respectively. In all of them, the key idea
is to precondition a slow-learning system by exposing it to
a distribution over trajectories drawn from a broad class of
tasks, so that the meta-learned system ends up implementing
a general and fast sequential strategy—that is, a strategy with
the right inductive biases.
We have also shown why this approach works and how
the meta-learned strategies are implemented. Basically, the
resulting strategies are near-optimal by construction because
meta-learning directly trains on a Monte-Carlo approximation
of the expected cost over possible hypotheses. The sequential
data drawn during this Monte-Carlo approximation is implic-
itly Bayes-ﬁltered, and the Bayesian updates are amortized by
the meta-learned strategy. Moreover, we have shown that the
adaptation strategy is implemented as a state machine in the
agent’s memory dynamics, which is driven by the data the
agent experiences. A given memory state then represents the
agent’s information state, and, more precisely, the sufﬁcientstatistics for predicting its future interactions. The structure of
the transition graph encodes the symmetries in the task distri-
bution: paths that have the same initial and ﬁnal information
state are indistinguishable, and thus equivalent for the purposes
of modulating the future behavior of the agent.
Finally, we note that meta-learning also converts complex
probabilistic inference problems into regression problems in
one-shot settings, when meta-learning is applied without mem-
ory (e.g. Orhan and Ma 2017). A key distinction of the
sequential setting with memory is that meta-learning also
produces an update rule.
Our hope is that readers will ﬁnd these insights useful,
and that they will use the ideas presented here as a con-
ceptual starting point for the development of more advanced
algorithms and theoretical investigations. There are many
remaining challenges for the future, such as understanding task
structure, dealing with out-of-distribution generalization, and
continual learning (to mention some). Some of these can be
addressed through tweaking the basic meta-learning training
process and through designing hypothesis classes with special
properties.
More generally though, memory-based meta-learning illus-
trates a more powerful claim: a slow learning system, given
enough data and computation, can not only learn a model over
its environment, but an entire reasoning procedure . In a sense,
this suggests that rationality principles are not necessarily pre-
existent, but rather emerge over time as a consequence of
the situatedness of the system and its interaction with the
environment.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Shakir Mohamed for his very
thoughtful feedback on the manuscript.
Changes
V1.0: (08/05/2019) Original version.
V1.1: (18/07/2019) Added a new reference; corrected error
in Figure 3; added acknowledgements.
REFERENCES
Felix Abramovich and Ya’acov Ritov. Statistical theory: a
concise introduction . CRC Press, 2013.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez,
Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul, Brendan
Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn
by gradient descent by gradient descent. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3981–3989,
2016.
Jonathan Baxter. Theoretical models of learning to learn. In
Learning to learn , pages 71–94. Springer, 1998.
Jonathan Baxter. A model of inductive bias learning. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 12:149–198, 2000.
Richard Bellman. The theory of dynamic programming.
Technical report, RAND Corp Santa Monica CA, 1954.
Yoshua Bengio, Samy Bengio, Jocelyn Cloutier, and Jan
Gecsei. Learning a synaptic learning rule. pages II–A969,
1991.

==== Page 13 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 13
Dimitri P Bertsekas. Neuro-dynamic programming. In Ency-
clopedia of optimization , pages 2555–2560. Springer, 2008.
C.M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning .
Information Science and Statistics. Springer New York,
2016.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, learning,
and games . Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Yutian Chen, Yannis Assael, Brendan Shillingford, David
Budden, Scott Reed, Heiga Zen, Quan Wang, Luis C Cobo,
Andrew Trask, Ben Laurie, et al. Sample efﬁcient adaptive
text-to-speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10460 , 2018a.
Yutian Chen, Matthew W Hoffman, Sergio Gomez Col-
menarejo, Misha Denil, Timothy P Lillicrap, and Nando
de Freitas. Learning to learn for global optimization of
black box functions. 2018b.
Ishita Dasgupta, Jane Wang, Silvia Chiappa, Jovana Mitro-
vic, Pedro Ortega, David Raposo, Edward Hughes, Pe-
ter Battaglia, Matthew Botvinick, and Zeb Kurth-Nelson.
Causal reasoning from meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.08162 , 2019.
A Philip Dawid, Vladimir G V ovk, et al. Prequential proba-
bility: Principles and properties. Bernoulli , 5(1):125–162,
1999.
Misha Denil, Pulkit Agrawal, Tejas D Kulkarni, Tom Erez,
Peter Battaglia, and Nando de Freitas. Learning to perform
physics experiments via deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.01843 , 2016.
Persi Diaconis. Sufﬁciency as statistical symmetry. In
Proceedings of the AMS Centennial Symposium , pages 15–
26, 1988.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya
Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl2: Fast reinforcement
learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02779 , 2016.
Jeffrey L Elman. Finding structure in time. Cognitive science ,
14(2):179–211, 1990.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-
agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03400 , 2017.
Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago
Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh,
Danilo Rezende, and SM Ali Eslami. Conditional neural
processes. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 1690–1699, 2018.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, Xia Da, Aaron C. Courville,
and Yoshua Bengio. An empirical investigation of catas-
trophic forgeting in gradient-based neural networks. ICLR ,
2014.
Jonathan Gordon, John Bronskill, Matthias Bauer, Sebastian
Nowozin, and Richard Turner. Meta-learning probabilistic
inference for prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09921 ,
2018.
Linda S Gottfredson. Mainstream science on intelligence:
An editorial with 52 signatories, history, and bibliography,
1997.
Erin Grant, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, Trevor Darrell, and
Thomas Grifﬁths. Recasting gradient-based meta-learning
as hierarchical bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.08930 ,2018.
Alex Graves. Supervised sequence labelling. In Supervised
sequence labelling with recurrent neural networks , pages
5–13. Springer, 2012.
Arthur Guez, David Silver, and Peter Dayan. Efﬁcient bayes-
adaptive reinforcement learning using sample-based search.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pages 1025–1033, 2012.
Lars Peter Hansen and Thomas J Sargent. Robustness . Prince-
ton university press, 2008.
Jose Hernandez-Orallo. Beyond the turing test. Journal of
Logic, Language and Information , 9(4):447–466, 2000.
Sepp Hochreiter, A Steven Younger, and Peter R Conwell.
Learning to learn using gradient descent. In International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , pages 87–94.
Springer, 2001.
Marcus Hutter. Universal artiﬁcial intelligence: Sequential de-
cisions based on algorithmic probability . Springer Science
& Business Media, 2004.
Edwin T Jaynes. Probability theory: The logic of science .
Cambridge university press, 2003.
Michael I Jordan. Serial order: A parallel distributed pro-
cessing approach. In Advances in psychology , volume 121,
pages 471–495. Elsevier, 1997.
Christos Kaplanis, Murray Shanahan, and Claudia Clopath.
Continual reinforcement learning with complex synapses.
InProceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm,
Sweden, July 10-15, 2018 , pages 2502–2511, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 ,
2014.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Ve-
ness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan,
John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
Demis Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and
Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,
2017.
Scott Kirkpatrick, C Daniel Gelatt, and Mario P Vecchi.
Optimization by simulated annealing. science , 220(4598):
671–680, 1983.
John F Kolen. Fool’s gold: Extracting ﬁnite state machines
from recurrent network dynamics. In Advances in neural
information processing systems , pages 501–508, 1994.
John F Kolen and Stefan C Kremer. A ﬁeld guide to dynamical
recurrent networks . John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Bernard Osgood Koopman. On distributions admitting a sufﬁ-
cient statistic. Transactions of the American Mathematical
society , 39(3):399–409, 1936.
Kenneth Krohn, John L Rhodes, and Michael A Arbib. Al-
gebraic theory of machines, languages, and semigroups.
Technical report, Krohn-Rhodes Research Institute, 1968.
Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter. Universal intelligence: A
deﬁnition of machine intelligence. Minds and Machines ,
17(4):391–444, 2007.
Ke Li and Jitendra Malik. Learning to optimize. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01885 , 2016.

==== Page 14 ====
14 DEEPMIND TECH REPORT, JULY 22, 2019, V1.1
Michael L Littman. Markov games as a framework for
multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Machine Learning
Proceedings 1994 , pages 157–163. Elsevier, 1994.
Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal response
equilibria for normal form games. Games and economic
behavior , 10(1):6–38, 1995.
Richard D McKelvey and Thomas R Palfrey. Quantal re-
sponse equilibria for extensive form games. Experimental
economics , 1(1):9–41, 1998.
Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter
Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner. 2018.
Debasis Mitra, Fabio Romeo, and Alberto Sangiovanni-
Vincentelli. Convergence and ﬁnite-time behavior of sim-
ulated annealing. Advances in applied probability , 18(3):
747–771, 1986.
V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex
Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin
Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 , 2013.
V olodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza,
Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver,
and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep
reinforcement learning. In International conference on
machine learning , pages 1928–1937, 2016.
Anusha Nagabandi, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Deep
online learning via meta-learning: Continual adaptation for
model-based RL. In International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=HyxAfnA5tm.
Alex Nichol and John Schulman. Reptile: a scalable met-
alearning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999 ,
2018.
Yaghout Nourani and Bjarne Andresen. A comparison of
simulated annealing cooling strategies. Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and General , 31(41):8373, 1998.
A Emin Orhan and Wei Ji Ma. Efﬁcient probabilistic inference
in generic neural networks trained with non-probabilistic
feedback. Nature communications , 8(1):138, 2017.
Pedro A Ortega and Daniel A Braun. A minimum relative
entropy principle for learning and acting. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 38:475–511, 2010.
Pedro A Ortega and Shane Legg. Modeling friends and foes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.00196 , 2018.
Pedro A Ortega, Vishal Maini, and the DeepMind Safety
Team. Building safe artiﬁcial intelligence: speciﬁcation,
robustness, and assurance. DeepMind Safety Research Blog,
Medium , 2018.
Ian Osband and Benjamin Van Roy. Posterior sampling for
reinforcement learning without episodes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.02731 , 2016.
Yi Ouyang, Mukul Gagrani, Ashutosh Nayyar, and Rahul Jain.
Learning unknown markov decision processes: A thompson
sampling approach. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 1333–1342, 2017.
German I. Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L. Part, Christopher
Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual lifelong learning
with neural networks: A review, 2018.
Judea Pearl. Causality . Cambridge university press, 2009.John C Raven. Mental tests used in genetic, the performance
of related indiviuals on tests mainly educative and mainly
reproductive. MSC thesisUniv London , 1936.
Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model
for few-shot learning. 2016.
Scott Reed and Nando De Freitas. Neural programmer-
interpreters. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06279 , 2015.
Daniel Ritchie, Paul Horsfall, and Noah D Goodman. Deep
amortized inference for probabilistic programs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.05735 , 2016.
Daniel J Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian
Osband, Zheng Wen, et al. A tutorial on thompson sampling.
Foundations and Trends Rin Machine Learning , 11(1):1–
96, 2018.
Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre,
Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu,
V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell.
Policy distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06295 , 2015.
Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan
Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-learning with
memory-augmented neural networks. In International con-
ference on machine learning , pages 1842–1850, 2016.
Leonard J Savage. The foundations of statistics . Courier
Corporation, 1972.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Making the world differentiable: On
using self-supervised fully recurrent neural networks for
dynamic reinforcement learning and planning in non-
stationary environments. 1990.
Jurgen Schmidhuber, Jieyu Zhao, and Marco Wiering. Simple
principles of metalearning. Technical report, SEE, 1996.
David Silver and Joel Veness. Monte-carlo planning in large
pomdps. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 2164–2172, 2010.
David Silver, Hado van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, Tom Schaul,
Arthur Guez, Tim Harley, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, David
Reichert, Neil Rabinowitz, Andre Barreto, et al. The predic-
tron: End-to-end learning and planning. arXiv:1612.08810 ,
2016.
Michael Sipser. Introduction to the Theory of Computation ,
volume 2. Thomson Course Technology Boston, 2006.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical
networks for few-shot learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 4077–4087, 2017.
Ray J Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference.
part i. Information and control , 7(1):1–22, 1964.
Charles Spearman. "general intelligence," objectively deter-
mined and measured. The American Journal of Psychology ,
15(2):201–292, 1904.
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, Francis Bach, et al.
Reinforcement learning: An introduction . MIT press, 1998.
Richard S Sutton, Csaba Szepesvári, Alborz Geramifard, and
Michael P Bowling. Dyna-style planning with linear func-
tion approximation and prioritized sweeping. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1206.3285 , 2012.
William R Thompson. On the likelihood that one unknown
probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two
samples. Biometrika , 25(3/4):285–294, 1933.
Sebastian Thrun and Lorien Pratt. Learning to learn: Intro-

==== Page 15 ====
META-LEARNING OF SEQUENTIAL STRATEGIES 15
duction and overview. In Learning to learn , pages 3–17.
Springer, 1998.
Susana Urbina. Tests of intelligence. The Cambridge hand-
book of intelligence , pages 20–38, 2011.
Bart van den Broek, Wim Wiegerinck, and Bert Kappen. Risk
sensitive path integral control. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Sixth Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
pages 615–622. AUAI Press, 2010.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Tim Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra,
et al. Matching networks for one shot learning. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 3630–
3638, 2016.
Paul MB Vitanyi and Ming Li. An introduction to Kolmogorov
complexity and its applications , volume 34. Springer
Heidelberg, 1997.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert
Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos, Charles Blundell, Dhar-
shan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforce-
ment learn. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763 , 2016.
Ziyu Wang, Josh S Merel, Scott E Reed, Nando de Freitas,
Gregory Wayne, and Nicolas Heess. Robust imitation of
diverse behaviors. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pages 5320–5329, 2017.
Manuel Watter, Jost Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and
Martin Riedmiller. Embed to control: A locally linear latent
dynamics model for control from raw images. In Advances
in neural information processing systems , pages 2746–2754,
2015.
Olga Wichrowska, Niru Maheswaranathan, Matthew W Hoff-
man, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Misha Denil, Nando
de Freitas, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Learned optimizers
that scale and generalize. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04813 ,
2017.
Zhongwen Xu, Hado van Hasselt, and David Silver. Meta-
gradient reinforcement learning. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems , 2018.
Luisa M Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hof-
mann, and Shimon Whiteson. Caml: Fast context adaptation
via meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03642 , 2018.

