==== Page 1 ====
Meta-Learning Requires Meta-Augmentation
Janarthanan Rajendrany
University of Michigan
rjana@umich.eduAlex Irpan
Google Brain
alexirpan@google.comEric Jang
Google Brain
ejang@google.com
Abstract
Meta-learning algorithms aim to learn two components: a model that predicts
targets for a task, and a base learner that updates that model when given exam-
ples from a new task. This additional level of learning can be powerful, but it
also creates another potential source of overﬁtting, since we can now overﬁt in
either the model or the base learner. We describe both of these forms of meta-
learning overﬁtting, and demonstrate that they appear experimentally in common
meta-learning benchmarks. We introduce an information-theoretic framework of
meta-augmentation, whereby adding randomness discourages the base learner and
model from learning trivial solutions that do not generalize to new tasks. We
demonstrate that meta-augmentation produces large complementary beneﬁts to
recently proposed meta-regularization techniques.
1 Introduction
In several areas of machine learning, data augmentation is critical to achieving state-of-the-art per-
formance. In computer vision [ 31], speech recognition [ 17], and natural language processing [ 8],
augmentation strategies effectively increase the support of the training distribution, improving gener-
alization. Although data augmentation is often easy to implement, it has a large effect on performance.
For a ResNet-50 model [ 13] applied to the ILSVRC2012 object classiﬁcation benchmark [ 28], re-
moving randomly cropped images and color distorted images from the training data results in a
7% reduction in accuracy (see Appendix B). Recent work in reinforcement learning [ 18,21] also
demonstrate large increases in reward from applying image augmentations.
Meta-learning has emerged in recent years as a popular framework for learning new tasks in a
sample-efﬁcient way. The goal is to learn how to learn new tasks from a small number of examples,
by leveraging knowledge from learning other tasks [ 5,7,14,30,33]. Given that meta-learning adds
an additional level of model complexity to the learning problem, it is natural to suspect that data
augmentation plays an equally important - if not greater - role in helping meta-learners generalize to
new tasks. In classical machine learning, data augmentation turns one example into several examples.
In meta-learning, meta-augmentation turns one task into several tasks. Our key observation is that
given labeled examples (x;y), classical data augmentation adds noise to inputs xwithout changing y,
but for meta-learning we must do the opposite: add noise to labels y, without changing inputs x.
The main contributions of our paper are as follows: ﬁrst, we present a uniﬁed framework for meta-data
augmentation and an information theoretic view on how it prevents overﬁtting. Under this framework,
we interpret existing augmentation strategies and propose modiﬁcations to handle two forms of
overﬁtting: memorization overﬁtting , in which the model is able to overﬁt to the training set without
relying on the learner, and learner overﬁtting , in which the learner overﬁts to the training set and does
not generalize to the test set. Finally, we show the importance of meta-augmentation on a variety of
benchmarks and meta-learning algorithms.
Equal contribution.
yThis work was done when the author was an intern at Google Brain.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
xs,y s xqyq
Learner Meta-Train Meta-Test Meta-Train Meta-Test 
εMemorization Overﬁtting Base Learner Overﬁtting Meta-Data Augmentation 
Model Learner Model Learner Model Learner Model Learner Model 
xs,y s xqyq
xs,y s xqyq
xs,y s xqyq
xs,y s xqyqy’ q
xs,y’ s Xqyq
Learner Model 
zqxs,y sεInformation Bottleneck (a) (b) (c) (d) Figure 1: Meta-learning problems provide support inputs (xs;ys)to abase learner , which applies
an update to a model . Once applied, the model is given query input xq, and must learn to predict
query target yq.(a)Memorization overﬁtting occurs when the base learner and (xs;ys)does not
impact the model’s prediction of yq.(b)Learner overﬁtting occurs when the model and base learner
leverage both (xs;ys)andxqto predictyq, but fails to generalize to the meta-test set. (c)Yin et al.
[37] propose an information bottleneck constraint on the model capacity to reduce memorization
overﬁtting. (d)To tackle both forms of overﬁtting, we view meta-data augmentation as widening the
task distribution, by encoding additional random bits in(xs;ys)that must be decoded by the base
learner and model in order to predict a transformed y0
q.
2 Background and deﬁnitions
A standard supervised machine learning problem considers a set of training data (xi;yi)indexed
byiand sampled from a task T, where the goal is to learn a function x7!^y. In meta-learning,
we have a set of tasks fTig, where each taskTiis made of a support set(xs;ys), and a query set
(xq;yq). The grouped support and query sets are referred to as an episode . The training and test
sets of examples are replaced by meta-training andmeta-test sets of tasks, each of which consist of
episodes. The goal is to learn a base learner that ﬁrst observes support data (xs;ys)for a new task,
then outputs a model which yields correct predictions ^yqforxq. When applied to classiﬁcation, this is
commonly described as k-shot,N-way classiﬁcation, indicating kexamples in the support set, with
class labelsys;yq21;:::;N . Following Triantaﬁllou et al. [34], we rely mostly on meta-learning
centric nomenclature but borrow the terms “support”, “query”, and “episode” from the few-shot
learning literature.
Meta-learning has two levels of optimization: an inner-loop optimization and an outer-loop optimiza-
tion. The inner-loop optimization (the base learner) updates a model using (xs;ys). In the outer-loop ,
the updated model is used to predict ^yqfromxq. The outer-loop optimization updates the base learner
in order to improve how the inner-loop update is carried out. While many meta-learning benchmarks
design the support set (xs;ys)to have the same data type as the query set (xq;yq), the support need
not match the data type of the query and can be any arbitrary data. Some meta-learners utilize an
inner-loop objective that bears no resemblance to the objective computed on the query set [ 10,24].
Contextual meta-learners replace explicit inner-loop optimization with information extraction using
a neural network, which is then learnt jointly in the outer-loop optimization [ 11,29]. As shown in
Figure 1, meta-learners can be treated as black-box functions mapping two inputs to one output,
f: ((xs;ys);xq)!^yq. We denote our support and query sets as (xs;ys)and(xq;yq), as all of our
tasks have matching inner and outer-loop data types.
Overﬁtting in the classical machine learning sense occurs when the model has memorized the speciﬁc
instances of the training set at the expense of generalizing to new instances of the test set. In meta-
learning, there are two types of overﬁtting that can happen: 1) memorization overﬁtting and 2) learner
overﬁtting. We ﬁrst discuss memorization overﬁtting.
A set of tasks are said to be mutually-exclusive if a single model cannot solve them all at once.
For example, if task T1is “output 0 if the image is a dog, and 1 if it is a cat”, and task T2is
“output 0 if the image is a cat, and 1 if it is a dog”, then fT1;T2gare mutually-exclusive. A set
of tasks is non-mutually-exclusive if the opposite is true: one model can solve all tasks at once.
Yin et al. [37] identify the memorization problem in meta-learning that can happen when the set of
tasks are non-mutually-exclusive. A non-mutually-exclusive setting potentially leads to complete
meta-learning memorization , where the model memorizes the support set and predicts ^yqusing
onlyxq, without relying on the base learner (shown in Figure 1a). This is acceptable for training
2

==== Page 3 ====
performance, but results in poor generalization on the meta-test set, because the memorized model
does not have knowledge of test-time tasks and does not know how to use the base learner to learn the
new task. We refer to this as “memorization overﬁtting” for the remainder of the paper. For example,
in MAML [ 9], memorization overﬁtting happens when the learned initialization memorizes all the
training tasks and does not adapt its initialization for each task using (xs;ys). In CNP [ 11], it occurs
when the prediction does not depend on information extracted in the learned latent zfrom (xs;ys).
An mutually-exclusive set of tasks is less prone to memorization overﬁtting since the model must use
(xs;ys)to learn how to adapt to each task during training.
In ak-shot,N-way classiﬁcation problem, we repeatedly create random tasks by sampling Nclasses
from the pool of all classes. Viewing this as a meta-augmentation, we note this creates a mutually-
exclusive set of tasks, since class labels will conﬂict across tasks. For example, if we sampled T1
andT2from the earlier example, the label for dog images is either 0or1, depending on the task. Yin
et al. [37] argue it is not straightforward to replicate this recipe in tasks like regression. Yin et al.
[37] propose applying weight decay and an information bottleneck to the model (Figure 1c), which
restricts the information ﬂow from xqand the model to yq. They construct meta-regularized (MR)
variants of contextual (CNP [ 11]) and gradient-based (MAML [ 9]) meta-learners and demonstrate its
effectiveness on a novel non-mutually-exclusive pose regression dataset. In the proceeding sections,
we will show that an alternative randomized augmentation can be applied to this dataset, and other
such non-mutually-exclusive meta-learning problems.
Learner overﬁtting (shown in Figure 1b) happens when the base learner overﬁts to the training set
tasks and does not generalize to the test set tasks. The learned base learner is able to leverage (xs;ys)
successfully to help the model predict yqfor each episode in the meta-training set, coming from the
different training set tasks. But, the base learner is unable to do the same for novel episodes from the
meta-test set. Learner overﬁtting can happen both in non-mutually-exclusive and mutually-exclusive
task settings, and can be thought of as the meta-learning version of classical machine learning
overﬁtting.
3 Meta-augmentation
LetX;Y be random variables representing data from a task, from which we sample examples
(x;y). An augmentation is a process where a source of independent random bits , and a map-
pingf:;X;Y!X;Y , are combined to create new data X0;Y0=f(;X;Y ). We assume all
(x;y)2(X;Y )are also in (X0;Y0). An example is where U[0;2), andfrotates image xby,
givingX0=rotations (X);Y0=Y. We deﬁne an augmentation to be CE-preserving (conditional
entropy preserving) if conditional entropy H(Y0jX0) =H(YjX)is conserved; for instance, the
rotation augmentation is CE-preserving because rotations in X0do not affect the predictiveness of
the original or rotated image to the class label. CE-preserving augmentations are commonly used in
image-based problems [ 22,31,34]. Conversely, an augmentation is CE-increasing if it increases
conditional entropy, H(Y0jX0)>H(YjX). For example, if Yis continuous and U[ 1;1], then
f(;x;y ) = (x;y+)is CE-increasing, since (X0;Y0)will have two examples (x;y 1);(x;y 2)with
sharedxand different y, increasingH(Y0jX0). These are shown in Figure 2.
The information capacity of a learned channel is given by I(X;^Yj;D), the conditional mutual
information given model parameters and meta-training dataset D. Yin et al. [37] propose using a
Variational Information Bottleneck [ 2] to regularize the model by restricting the information ﬂow
betweenxqandyq. Correctly balancing regularization to prevent overﬁtting or underﬁtting can
be challenging, as the relationship between constraints on model capacity and generalization are
hard to predict. For example, overparameterized networks have been empirically shown to have
lower generalization error [ 25]. To corroborate the difﬁculty of understanding this relationship, in
Section 5.2 we show that weight decay limited the baseline performance of MAML on the Pascal3D
pose regression task, and when disabled it performs substantially better.
Rather than crippling the model by limiting its access to xq, we want to instead use data augmentation
to encourage the model to pay more attention to (xs;ys). A naive approach would augment in the
same way as classical machine learning methods, by applying a CE-preserving augmentation to each
task. However, the overﬁtting problem in meta-learning requires different augmentation. We wish to
couple (xs;ys);(xq;yq)together such that the model cannot minimize training loss using xqalone.
This can be done through CE-increasing augmentation. Labels ys;yqare encrypted to y0
s;y0
qwith the
3

==== Page 4 ====
Figure 2: Meta-augmentation: We introduce the notion of CE-preserving andCE-increasing
augmentations to explain why meta augmentation differs from standard data augmentation. Given
random variables X;Y and an external source of random bits , we augment with a mapping
f(;X;Y ) = (X0;Y0).Left: An augmentation is CE-preserving if it preserves conditional entropy
betweenx;y.Center: ACE-increasing augmentation increases H(Y0jX0).Right: Invertible CE-
increasing augmentations can be used to combat memorization overﬁtting: the model must rely on
the base learner to implicitly recover fromx0
s;y0
sin order to restore predictiveness between the
input and label.
same random key , in a way such that the base learner can only recover by associating xs!y0
s,
and doing so is necessary to associate xq!y0
q. See Figure 1d and Figure 2 for a diagram.
Although CE-increasing augmentations may use any f, within our experiments we only consider
CE-increasing augmentations where f(;x;y ) = (x;g(;y))andg:;Y!Yis invertible given y.
We do this because our aim is to increase task diversity. Given a single task T, such CE-increasing
augmentations create a distribution of tasks fTgindexed by, and assuming a ﬁxed noise source
, said distribution is widest when gis invertible. CE-increasing augmentations of this form raise
H(Y0
qjXq)byH(). We state this more formally below.
Theorem 1. Letbe a noise variable independent from X;Y , andg:;Y!Ybe the augmentation
function. Let y0=g(;y), and assume that (;x;y )7!(x;y0)is a one-to-one function. Then
H(Y0jX) =H(YjX) +H().
A proof is in Appendix A. In order to lower H(Y0
qjXq)to a level where the task can be solved, the
learner must extract at least H()bits from (xs;y0
s). This reduces memorization overﬁtting, since it
guarantees (xs;y0
s)has some information required to predict y0
q, even given the model and xq.
CE-increasing augmentations move the task setting from non-mutually-exclusive to mutually-
exclusive, as once the data is augmented, no single model can solve all tasks at once. In MAML, with
CE-increasing augmentation, the learned initialization can no longer memorize all the training tasks,
as for a given input xthere could be different correct outputs yin the training data. In CNPs, the
learned latent zcannot be ignored by the ﬁnal conditional decoder, again because each xcan have
several correct outputs ydepending on the task. In both cases, the model is forced to depend on the
support set (xs;y0
s)of each task every time during training to ﬁgure out the correct y0
qforxq, thereby
making the method less prone to memorization overﬁtting.
By adding new and different varieties of tasks to the meta-train set, CE-increasing augmentations
also help avoid learner overﬁtting and help the base learner generalize to test set tasks. This effect is
similar to the effect that data augmentation has in classical machine learning to avoid overﬁtting.
Few shot classiﬁcation benchmarks such as Mini-ImageNet [ 36] have meta-augmentation in them
by default. New tasks created by shufﬂing the class index yof previous tasks are added to the
training set. Here, y0=g(;y), whereis a permutation sampled uniformly from all permutations
SN. Thecan be viewed as an encryption key, which gapplies toyto gety0. This augmentation
is CE-increasing, since given any initial label distribution Y, augmenting with Y0=g(;Y)gives
a uniformY0jX. The uniform distribution has maximal conditional entropy, so CE must increase
unlessYjXwas already uniform. The information required to describe Y0jXhas now increased,
due to the unknown . Therefore, this makes the task setting mutually-exclusive, thereby reducing
memorization overﬁtting. This is accompanied by creation of new tasks through combining classes
from different tasks, adding more variation to the meta-train set. These added tasks help avoid learner
overﬁtting, and in Section 5.1 we analyze the size of this effect.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Our formulation generalizes to other forms of CE-increasing augmentation besides permuting class
labels for classiﬁcation. For multivariate regression tasks where the support set contains a regression
target, the dimensions of ys;yqcan be treated as class logits to be permuted. This reduces to an
identical setup to the classiﬁcation case. For scalar meta-learning regression tasks and situations
where output dimensions cannot be permuted, we show the CE-increasing augmentation of adding
uniform noise to the regression targets y0
s=ys+;y0
q=yq+generates enough new tasks to help
reduce overﬁtting.
4 Related work
Data augmentation has been applied to several domains with strong results, including image classiﬁ-
cation [ 19], speech recognition [ 17], reinforcement learning [ 18], and language learning [ 39]. Within
meta-learning, augmentation has been applied in several ways. Mehrotra and Dukkipati [23] train a
generator to generate new examples for one-shot learning problems. Santoro et al. [29] augmented
Omniglot using random translations and rotations to generate more examples within a task. Liu et al.
[22] applied similar transforms, but treated it as task augmentation by deﬁning each rotation as a
new task. These augmentations add more data and tasks, but do not turn non-mutually-exclusive
problems into mutually-exclusive ones, since the pairing between xs;ysis still consistent across
meta-learning episodes, leaving open the possibility of memorization overﬁtting. Antoniou and
Storkey [3]and Khodadadeh et al. [16] generate tasks by randomly selecting xsfrom an unsupervised
dataset, using data augmentation on xsto generate more examples for the random task. We instead
create a mutually-exclusive task setting by modifying ysto create more tasks with shared xs.
The large interest in the ﬁeld has spurred the creation of meta-learning benchmarks [ 20,27,34,36,38],
investigations into tuning few-shot models [ 4], and analysis of what these models learn [ 26]. For
overﬁtting in MAML in particular, regularization has been done by encouraging the model’s output
to be uniform before the base learner updates the model [ 15], limiting the updateable parameters [ 40],
or regularizing the gradient update based on cosine similarity or dropout [ 12,35]. Our work is
most closely related to Yin et al. [37], which identiﬁes the non-mutually-exclusive tasks problem,
and proposes an information bottleneck to address memorization overﬁtting. Our paper tackles this
problem through appropriately designed meta-augmentation.
5 Experiments
We ablate meta-augmentation across few-shot image classiﬁcation benchmarks in Section 5.1, demon-
strating the drop in performance when these benchmarks are made non-mutually-exclusive by
removing the meta-augmentation present in them. Section 5.2 then demonstrates gains achievable
from using CE-increasing augmentations on regression datasets.3
5.1 Few-shot image classiﬁcation (Omniglot, Mini-ImageNet, D’Claw)
We carry out our experiments on k-shotN-way classiﬁcation tasks where k= 1;N= 5. Common
few-shot image classiﬁcation benchmarks, like Omniglot and Mini-ImageNet, are already mutually-
exclusive by default through meta-augmentation. In order to study the effect of meta-augmentation
using task shufﬂing on various datasets, we turn these mutually-exclusive benchmarks into non-
mutually-exclusive versions of themselves by partitioning the classes into groups of Nclasses without
overlap. These groups form the meta-train tasks, and over all of training, class order is never changed.
Omniglot The Omniglot dataset [ 20] is a collection of 1623 different handwritten characters from
different alphabets. The task is to identify new characters given a few examples of that character.
We train a 1-shot, 5-way classiﬁcation model using MAML [ 9]. When early stopping is applied, all
our MAML models reached 98% test-set accuracy, including on non-mutually-exclusive task sets.
This suggests that although non-mutually-exclusive meta-learning problems allow for memorization
overﬁtting, it is still possible to learn models which do not overﬁt and generalizes to novel test-time
tasks if there is sufﬁcient training data. We therefore moved to more challenging datasets.
3Code and data available at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/
master/meta_augmentation .
5

==== Page 6 ====
Mini-ImageNet Mini-ImageNet [ 36] is a more complex few-shot dataset, based on the ILSVRC
object classiﬁcation dataset [ 6]. There are 100 classes in total, with 600 samples each. We train
1-shot, 5-way classiﬁcation models using MAML. We ran experiments in three variations, shown
in Figure 3. In non-mutually-exclusive , classes are partitioned into ordered tasks that keep the class
index consistent across epochs. In intershufﬂe , tasks are formed by sampling classes randomly, where
previously used classes can be resampled in later tasks. This is the default protocol for Mini-ImageNet.
Doing so ensures that over the course of training, a given image xqwill be assigned multiple different
class indices yq, making the task setting mutually-exclusive. This also creates more diverse groups of
classes / tasks compared to the previous partitioning method. To ablate whether diversity or mutual
exclusivity is more important, we devise the intrashufﬂe scheme, which shufﬂes class label order
within the partitions from the non-mutually-exclusive setup. This uses identical classes within each
task to non-mutually-exclusive, and the only difference is varying class order within those tasks. This
again gives a mutually-exclusive setting, but with less variety compared to intershufﬂe.
Table 1 (Mini-ImageNet (MAML)) shows that non-mutually-exclusive does worst, followed by
intrashufﬂe, then intershufﬂe. There is an increase in accuracy from 30% to 43% between non-
mutually-exclusive and intrashufﬂe, and only 43% to 46% between intrashufﬂe and intershufﬂe,
which indicates shufﬂed task order is the more important factor. The gap between intrashufﬂe and
intershufﬂe also indicates that fully randomizing the batches of tasks performs slightly better, as
each class is compared to more diverse sets of negative classes. We emphasize that if shufﬂing
is applicable to the problem, intershufﬂe is the recommended approach. Interestingly, Figure 4
shows that although all non-mutually-exclusive runs overﬁt at training time, whether they exhibit
memorization overﬁtting or learner overﬁtting depends on random seed. Both forms of overﬁtting are
avoided by meta-augmentation through intershufﬂe.
Figure 3: Non-mutually-exclusive, intrashufﬂe, and intershufﬂe. In this example, the dataset has
4 classes, and the model is a 2-way classiﬁer. In non-mutually-exclusive, the model always sees one
of 2 tasks. In intrashufﬂe, the model sees permutations of the classes in the non-mutually-exclusive
tasks, which changes class order. In intershufﬂe, the model sees 43 = 12 tasks.
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Training iterations0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyNon-Mutually-Exclusive
Memorization Overfitting
Train pre-update
Train post-update
Val pre-update
Val post-update
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Training iterations0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyNon-Mutually-Exclusive
Learner Overfitting
Train pre-update
Train post-update
Val pre-update
Val post-update
0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000
Training iterations0.00.20.40.60.81.0AccuracyMutually-Exclusive
Through Intershuffle Augmentation
Train pre-update
Train post-update
Val pre-update
Val post-update
Figure 4: Mini-ImageNet results with MAML. Left: In a non-mutually-exclusive setting, this model
exhibits memorization overﬁtting. Train-time performance is high, even before the base learner
updates the model based on (xs;ys), indicating the model pays little attention to (xs;ys). The model
fails to generalize to the held-out validation set. Center: This model exhibits learner overﬁtting. The
gap between train pre-update and train post-update indicates the model does pay attention to (xs;ys),
but the entire system overﬁts and does poorly on the validation set. The only difference between the
left and center plots is the random seed. Right: With intershufﬂe augmentation, the gap between
train pre-update and train post-update indicates the model pays attention to (xs;ys), and higher train
time performance lines up with better validation set performance, indicating less overﬁtting.
D’Claw dataset So far, we have only examined CE-increasing augmentations in existing datasets.
To verify the phenomenon applies to a newly generated dataset, we collected a small robotics-inspired
image classiﬁcation dataset using hardware designs from ROBEL [ 1]. Figure 5 shows a D’Claw
mounted inside a D’Lantern. An object is placed between the ﬁngers of the claw, and the task is to
6

==== Page 7 ====
Table 1: Few-shot image classiﬁcation test set results. Results use MAML unless otherwise stated.
All results are in 1-shot 5-way classiﬁcation, except for D’Claw which is 1-shot 2-way.
Problem setting Non-mutually-
exclusive accuracyIntrashufﬂe accuracy Intershufﬂe
accuracy
Omniglot 98.1% 98.5% 98.7%
Mini-ImageNet (MAML) 30.2% 42.7% 46.0%
Mini-ImageNet (Prototypical) 32.5% 32.5% 37.2%
Mini-ImageNet (Matching) 33.8% 33.8% 39.8%
D’Claw 72.5% 79.8% 83.1%
classify whether that object is in the proper orientation or not. A classiﬁer learned on this dataset could
be used to automatically annotate whether an autonomous robot has correctly manipulated an object.
Labels arey2f0;1g, where 0means wrong orientation and 1means correct orientation. The dataset
has 20 different classes of 35 images each, and the problem is set up as a 1-shot, 2-way classiﬁcation
problem. We see a change from 72:5%to83:1%for MAML between non-mutually-exclusive and
intershufﬂe, a gain consistent with the Mini-ImageNet results.
Figure 5: Example images from the D’Claw classiﬁcation task. An object is placed between the
ﬁngers of the claw. Each object has a target orientation, and the model must classify whether the
object is in the correct orientation or not.
Other Meta-Learners The problem of non-mutually-exclusive tasks is not just a problem for
MAML – it is a general problem for any algorithm that jointly trains a learning mechanism and
model. Applying the same non-mutually-exclusive Mini-ImageNet transform, we evaluate baseline
algorithms from Meta-Dataset [ 34], and show similar drops in performance for their implementation
of Matching Networks [ 36] and Prototypical Networks [ 32] (Table 1). For these methods, performance
is identical between non-mutually-exclusive and intrashufﬂe because they are nearest-neighbor based
models, which are permutation invariant by construction. We also consider CNP [ 11] in Section (5.2).
5.2 Regression tasks (Sinusoid, Pascal3D Pose Regression)
Our regression experiments use tasks with a scalar output, which are not well suited to shufﬂing. For
these tasks, we experiment with the CE-increasing augmentation of simply adding randomly sampled
noise to regression targets y0
s=ys+;y0
q=yq+.
Sinusoid We start with the toy 1D sine wave regression problem, where y=Asin(x ).
Amplitude Aand phase are sampled as AU[0:1;5:0]andU[0;]. To create
a non-mutually-exclusive version, domain [ 5;5]is subdivided into 10 disjoint intervals
[ 5; 4:5];[ 4; 3:5];:::; [4;4:5]. Each interval is assigned a different task (A;). The inputs x
are sampled from these disjoint intervals and (x;y)is generated based on the sine wave for the interval
xlies in. The 10 tasks are non-mutually-exclusive because the gaps between intervals means there is
a continuous function over [ 5;5]that exactly matches the piecewise function over the sub-intervals
where the piecewise function is deﬁned. The function is not unique outside the sub-intervals, but at
evaluation time xis always sampled within the sub-intervals.
To augment MAML, for each task A; and the corresponding xinterval, new tasks (x;y+)where
U[ 1;1]are added to the meta-train dataset. This is CE-increasing, since even given xand
thereby the interval it lies in, the model can no longer uniquely identify the task, thereby increasing
H(YjX). Figure 6a compares the performance of models that are 1) trained with supervised
regression on all the tasks 2) trained using MAML and 3) trained using MAML + augmentation.
7

==== Page 8 ====
We observe that MAML + augmentation performs best. Since the tasks are non-mutually-exclusive,
the baseline MAML model memorizes all the different training tasks (sine functions). The 1D sine
regression problem is simple enough that MAML can learn even test tasks to some extent with
a few gradient steps, but MAML + augmentation adapts better and more quickly because of less
memorization.
(a) Sinusoid
0.0 1e-05 0.0001 0.001 0.01
β0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4α
4.75 3.74 3.58 3.71 8.227.02 7.28 4.29 6.44 8.266.56 4.46 7.97 8.23 8.172.57 3.22 2.86 8.21 8.182.91 2.46 7.94 8.20 8.16
345678 (b) CNP
 (c) MAML
Figure 6: (a)We add CE-increasing noise to yqsuch that the noise must be inferred from the support
set, and show that it improves generalization on a sinusoid regression task. (b)Post-update MSE
on the meta-test set for MR-CNP, sweeping combinations of model regularization strength and
meta-data augmentation strength . Lower MSE is better. (c)Meta-Augmentation with noise sampled
from a discrete set 2f0;:25;:5;:75gprovides additional improvements on top of MR-MAML.
Pascal3D Pose Regression We show that for the regression problem introduced by Yin et al.
[37], it is still possible to reduce overﬁtting via meta augmentation. We extended the open-source
implementation provided by Yin et al. [37] of their proposed methods, MR-MAML and MR-CNP
and show that meta augmentation provides large improvements on top of IB regularization. Each task
is to take a 128x128 grayscale image of an object from the Pascal 3D dataset and predict its angular
orientationyq(normalized between 0 and 10) about the Z-axis, with respect to some unobserved
canonical pose speciﬁc to each object. The set of tasks is non-mutually-exclusive because each object
is visually distinct, allowing the model to overﬁt to the poses of training objects, neglecting the base
learner and (xs;ys). Unregularized models have poor task performance at test time, because the
model does not know the canonical poses of novel objects.
We use two different augmentation schemes: for CNP models, we added random uniform noise in
the range ( 10;10)to bothysandyq, with angular wraparound to the range (0;10). To study
the interaction effects between meta augmentation and the information bottleneck regularizer, we
did a grid search over noise scale 2f0;0:1;:::; 0:5gfrom our method and KL penalty weight
2f0;10 5;10 4;:::; 10 2gfrom [ 37]. Figure 6b shows that data augmentation’s beneﬁts are
complementary to model regularization. Adding uniform noise to MAML and MR-MAML resulted
in underﬁtting the data (Appendix C), so we chose a simpler CE-increasing augmentation where is
randomly sampled from a discrete set f0:;0:25;0:5;0:75g. This ﬁxed the problem of underﬁtting
while still providing regularization beneﬁts. Best results are obtained by applying augmentation to
MR-MAML without the IB bottleneck ( = 0, weights are still sampled stochastically).
Table 2 reports meta-test MSE scores from Yin et al. [37] along with our results, aggregated over 5
independent training runs. The baseline was underﬁtting due to excessive regularization; the existing
MAML implementation is improved by removing the weight decay (WD) penalty. See Appendix C
for further discussion.
6 Discussion and future work
Setting aside how “task” and “example” are deﬁned for a moment, the most general deﬁnition of a
meta-learner is a black box function f: ((xs;ys);xq)7!^yq. In this light, memorization overﬁtting
is just a classical machine learning problem in disguise: a function approximator pays too much
attention to one input xq, and not enough to the other input (xs;ys), when the former is sufﬁcient to
solve the task at training time. The two inputs could take many forms, such as different subsets of
pixels within the same image.
8

==== Page 9 ====
Table 2: Pascal3D pose prediction error (MSE) means and standard deviations. Removing weight
decay (WD) improves the MAML baseline and augmentation improves the MAML, MR-MAML,
CNP, MR-CNP results. Bracketed numbers copied from Yin et al. [37].
Method MAML
(WD=1e-3)MAML
(WD=0)MR-MAML
(=0.001)MR-MAML
(=0)CNP MR-CNP
No Aug [5:391:31] 3:74:64 2:41:04 2:8:73 [8:48:12] [2:89:18]
Aug 4:991:22 2 :34:66 1 :71:16 1 :61:06 2 :51:17 2 :51:20
By a similar analogy, learner overﬁtting corresponds to correct function approximation on input
examples ((xs;ys);xq)from the training set, and a systematic failure to generalize from those to
the test set. Although we have demonstrated that meta-augmentation is helpful, it is important to
emphasize it has its limitations. Distribution mismatch between train-time tasks and test-time tasks
can be lessened through augmentation, but augmentation may not entirely remove it.
One crucial distinction between data-augmentation in classical machine learning and meta-
augmentation in meta-learning is the importance of CE-increasing augmentations. For data-
augmentation in classical machine learning, the aim is to generate more varied examples , within a
single task. Meta-augmentation has the exact opposite aim: we wish to generate more varied tasks ,
for a single example , to force the learner to quickly learn a new task from feedback. Our experiments
exclusively focused on changing outputs ywithout changing inputs x, as these augmentations were
simpler and easier to study. However, given the usefulness of CE-preserving augmentations in
classical setups, it is likely that a combination of CE-preserving noise on xand CE-increasing noise
onywill do best. We leave this for future work.
Broader Impact
Our work discusses methods of improving meta-learning through meta-augmentation at the task level,
and does not target any speciﬁc application of meta-learning. The learning algorithms meta-learning
generates are ones learned from the data in train-time tasks. It is possible these approaches inject bias
into not only how models perform after training, but also inject bias into the training procedure itself .
Biased learners can result in biased model outcomes even when the support set presented at test time
is unbiased, and this may not be straightforward to detect because the behavior of the learner occurs
upstream of actual model predictions. We believe our work is a positive step towards mitigating bias
in meta-learning algorithms, by helping avoid overﬁtting to certain parts of the inputs.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
We thank Mingzhang Yin and George Tucker for discussion and help in reproducing experimental
results for pose regression experiments. We thank Chelsea Finn and Honglak Lee for early stage
project discussion, Erin Grant for help on the meta-dataset codebase, and Luke Metz, Jonathan
Tompson, Chelsea Finn, and Vincent Vanhoucke for reviewing publication drafts of the work.
During his internship at Google, Jana devised, implemented and ran MAML experiments for Om-
niglot, mini-Imagenet and Sinusoid regression. Along with Alex, he collected the ROBEL classi-
ﬁcation datasets. Alex advised Jana’s internship and re-ran Jana’s code post-internship to include
validation with early stopping. Eric advised Jana’s internship and ran experiments on pose prediction
and meta-dataset. All three authors interpreted results and contributed to paper writing.
References
[1]Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine,
and Vikash Kumar. ROBEL: RObotics BEnchmarks for Learning with low-cost robots. In
Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2019.
[2]Alex Alemi, Ian Fischer, Josh Dillon, and Kevin Murphy. Deep variational information
bottleneck. In ICLR , 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.00410 .
9

==== Page 10 ====
[3]Antreas Antoniou and Amos Storkey. Assume, augment and learn: Unsupervised few-shot
meta-learning via random labels and data augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09884 ,
2019.
[4]Antreas Antoniou, Harrison Edwards, and Amos Storkey. How to train your maml. In ICLR ,
2018.
[5]Y . Bengio, S. Bengio, and J. Cloutier. Learning a synaptic learning rule. In IJCNN-91-Seattle
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks , volume ii, pages 969 vol.2–, 1991.
[6]J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale
Hierarchical Image Database. In CVPR09 , 2009.
[7] Henry C Ellis. The transfer of learning. 1965.
[8]Marzieh Fadaee, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof Monz. Data augmentation for low-resource
neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 567–573, Vancouver, Canada, July
2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-2090.
[9]Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adap-
tation of deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
Learning-Volume 70 , pages 1126–1135. JMLR. org, 2017.
[10] Chelsea Finn, Tianhe Yu, Tianhao Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. One-shot visual
imitation learning via meta-learning. In Sergey Levine, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Ken Goldberg,
editors, Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning , volume 78 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 357–368. PMLR, 13–15 Nov 2017. URL http://
proceedings.mlr.press/v78/finn17a.html .
[11] Marta Garnelo, Dan Rosenbaum, Christopher Maddison, Tiago Ramalho, David Saxton, Murray
Shanahan, Yee Whye Teh, Danilo Rezende, and S. M. Ali Eslami. Conditional neural processes.
In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1704–1713,
Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.
mlr.press/v80/garnelo18a.html .
[12] Simon Guiroy, Vikas Verma, and Christopher Pal. Towards understanding generalization in
gradient-based meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07287 , 2019.
[13] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[14] Sepp Hochreiter, A Steven Younger, and Peter R Conwell. Learning to learn using gradient
descent. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , pages 87–94. Springer,
2001.
[15] Muhammad Abdullah Jamal and Guo-Jun Qi. Task agnostic meta-learning for few-shot learning.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
11719–11727, 2019.
[16] Siavash Khodadadeh, Ladislau Boloni, and Mubarak Shah. Unsupervised meta-learning for
few-shot image classiﬁcation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
10132–10142, 2019.
[17] Tom Ko, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. Audio augmentation for
speech recognition. In Sixteenth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication
Association , 2015.
[18] Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
deep reinforcement learning from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13649 , 2020.
[19] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages
1097–1105, 2012.
[20] Brenden M Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Human-level concept
learning through probabilistic program induction. Science , 350(6266):1332–1338, 2015.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[21] Michael Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas.
Reinforcement learning with augmented data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14990 , 2020.
[22] Jialin Liu, Fei Chao, and Chih-Min Lin. Task augmentation by rotating for meta-learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2003.00804 , 2020.
[23] Akshay Mehrotra and Ambedkar Dukkipati. Generative adversarial residual pairwise networks
for one shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.08033 , 2017.
[24] Luke Metz, Niru Maheswaranathan, Brian Cheung, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Meta-learning
update rules for unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00222 , 2018.
[25] Roman Novak, Yasaman Bahri, Daniel A Abolaﬁa, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha Sohl-
Dickstein. Sensitivity and generalization in neural networks: an empirical study. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.08760 , 2018.
[26] Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature
reuse? towards understanding the effectiveness of maml. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2020.
[27] Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model for few-shot learning. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2016.
[28] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
(IJCV) , 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s11263-015-0816-y.
[29] Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap.
Meta-learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In International conference on
machine learning , pages 1842–1850, 2016.
[30] Juergen Schmidhuber, Jieyu Zhao, and MA Wiering. Simple principles of metalearning.
Technical report Istituto Dalle Molle Di Studi Sull Intelligenza Artiﬁciale (IDSIA) , 69:1–23,
1996.
[31] Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. A survey on image data augmentation for deep
learning. Journal of Big Data , 6(1):60, 2019.
[32] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 4077–4087, 2017.
[33] Sebastian Thrun. Lifelong learning algorithms. In Learning to learn , pages 181–209. Springer,
1998.
[34] Eleni Triantaﬁllou, Tyler Zhu, Vincent Dumoulin, Pascal Lamblin, Utku Evci, Kelvin Xu, Ross
Goroshin, Carles Gelada, Kevin Swersky, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, and Hugo Larochelle.
Meta-dataset: A dataset of datasets for learning to learn from few examples. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2020.
[35] Hung-Yu Tseng, Yi-Wen Chen, Yi-Hsuan Tsai, Sifei Liu, Yen-Yu Lin, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
Regularizing meta-learning via gradient dropout, 2020.
[36] Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks
for one shot learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 3630–3638,
2016.
[37] Mingzhang Yin, George Tucker, Mingyuan Zhou, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-
learning without memorization. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2020.
[38] Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and
Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement
learning. In Conference on Robot Learning , pages 1094–1100, 2020.
[39] Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text
classiﬁcation. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 649–657, 2015.
[40] Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarli, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast
context adaptation via meta-learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages
7693–7702, 2019.
11

