==== Page 1 ====
Model-Centered Assurance
For Autonomous Systems
Susmit Jha, John Rushby, Natarajan Shankar
Computer Science Laboratory
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Avenue
Menlo Park, CA 94025 USA
Abstract. The functions of an autonomous system can generally be
partitioned into those concerned with perception and those con cerned
with action. Perception builds and maintains an internal mode l of the
world (i.e., the system’s environment) that is used to plan and execute
actions to accomplish a goal established by human supervisors .
Accordingly, assurance decomposes into two parts: a) ensuring t hat the
model is an accurate representation of the world as it changes thro ugh
time and b) ensuring that the actions are safe (and eﬀective), gi ven the
model. Both perception and action may employ AI, including ma chine
learning (ML), and these present challenges to assurance. Howe ver, it is
usually feasible to guard the actions with traditionally engin eered and
assured monitors, and thereby ensure safety, given the model. Thu s, the
model becomes the central focus for assurance.
We propose an architecture and methods to ensure the accuracy of mo d-
els derived from sensors whose interpretation uses AI and ML. Rathe r
than derive the model from sensors bottom-up, we reverse the process
and use the model to predict sensor interpretation. Small predic tion er-
rors indicate the world is evolving as expected and the model is u pdated
accordingly. Large prediction errors indicate surprise, which may b e due
to errors in sensing or interpretation, or unexpected changes in t he world
(e.g., a pedestrian steps into the road). The former initiate error masking
or recovery, while the latter requires revision to the model. High er-level
AI functions assist in diagnosis and execution of these tasks .
Although this two-level architecture where the lower level doe s “pre-
dictive processing” and the upper performs more reﬂective tasks, b oth
focused on maintenance of a world model, is derived by engineerin g con-
siderations, it also matches a widely accepted theory of human cognition.
1 Introduction
Autonomous systems—those, such as self-driving cars, that are capable of i nde-
pendent decision making—typically use software that employs method s of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) such as Machine Learning (ML) and time-const rained
best-eﬀorts deduction. It is generally impossible to predict the behavior of such
software in all cases, as it can diﬀer from case to case with little general ization.
Consequently, it is diﬃcult to provide assurance to justify conﬁ dence that an
autonomous system is ﬁt for use in critical contexts.

==== Page 2 ====
One primitive way to seek assurance is through a large number of realis -
tic tests. For self-driving cars, this is known as “collecting mil es” and involves
real and simulated driving through many scenarios and over large distance s [1].
However, studies including one by the RAND Corporation [2], show that th e
quantity of testing required to substantiate acceptable safety is i nfeasibly vast,
ranging from hundreds of millions to tens of billions of test miles.
An alternative that is endorsed for unmanned aircraft [3], for example, is to
use conventional software as a monitor1for autonomous functions. The monitor
is assured by conventional methods and overrides the autonomous softwar e when
it detects a potential safety violation and substitutes safe alternati ve behavior.
Monitors have their own diﬃculties, however, but to examine the m we ﬁrst need
to review the architecture of autonomous systems.
The functions of an autonomous system generally can be partitioned into
thoseconcernedwithperceptionandthoseconcernedwithaction.The purposeof
perception is to build a model of the system’s “world” (i.e., its e nvironment) that
is used for planning and executing actions to accomplish a goal establish ed by
human supervisors (e.g., the destination of a self-driving car) whi le maintaining
required invariants, such as safety. This is an instance of model-bas ed control,
where the novelty is that the model is built with the aid of percep tion functions
that employ AI and ML.
Theoverallcaseforsafetydependsonbothperception(howgoodisthe model
of the world?) and action (how safe are the selected actions, given the mo del of
the world?). Although AI and ML may be needed to construct an action plan,
conventional software can check its safety, given a model of the world. B ecause it
operates in uncertain environments (e.g., a self-driving car does not know what
other road users may do) the checking software needs to consider all pos sibilities.
Mobileye promote a safety model of this kind: “Responsibility-Sens itive Safety”
(RSS) requires that the action software, and hence its monitor, should not be the
cause of an accident no matter what other vehicles do [4]. With these in terpreta-
tions,theactionfunctionsofanautonomoussystemcanbecheckedormonitor ed
by conventional software that can be assured by conventional means. Howeve r,
the monitors also need a model of the environment and this complicates the
argument for their assurance.
One possibility is that a monitor builds its own model, which might be very
crude. For example, the monitor for a self-driving car might comprise a set of
functions similar to those of an “Advanced Driver Assistance System” (AD AS)
for human drivers, including “Forward Collision Warning,” “Automatic Eme r-
gency Braking,” “Blind Spot Warning,” and “Rear Cross Traﬃc Warning and
Rear Automatic Emergency Braking.” Here, the “models” are derived very di-
rectly from radar and other sensors. These “last second” protections work well
for human drivers but might be less eﬀective for the unpredictable failures of
autonomous systems. Furthermore, because they are unconnected to th e larger
plan constructed by action software, these protections may sometimes prove
counterproductive. For example, the primary system might choose t o give a cy-
1The terms “guard,” or “shield,” or “safety bag” are also used.
2

==== Page 3 ====
clist or pedestrian a wide berth, but a “lane keeping assist” ADAS-li ke function
operatingasamonitorcouldoverrideandsteerbacktowardthecyclist orwalker.
We can distinguish “independent” vs. “integrated” monitors at this poi nt.
An independent monitor uses its own sensing and decides whether or not to
intervene without much reference to the primary action system. I n addition to
“last second” protections, a second function of an independent monitor could be
to check whether the primary system is operating within speciﬁe d “Operational
Design Domains” (ODDs) [5]; these are circumstances, such as “on a free way,
in daylight,” for which the system was designed and is considered saf e. In both
cases, since it is performing diﬀerent functions than the primary , it is plausible
that such a monitor could provide strong protection using only assured conven-
tional software in its sensing and interpretation (i.e., model-bui lding) functions.
We endorse such monitors for “within ODD” and “last second” protection, b ut
prefer integrated monitors for overall assurance.
An integrated monitor evaluates the plan produced by action software, look -
ing several time units ahead. To do this, it needs a model of the worl d and this
model needs to resemble that of the primary system more than do the m odels
of independent monitors. If an integrated monitor builds its own mode l using
assured conventional software, then it seems this is likely to gener ate false alarms
as it will be less accurate than the ML-enabled model of the primary sys tem,
or else it invites the question why the primary could not also use conv entional
software. On the other hand, if the monitor itself uses AI and ML software then
we face the original problem of how this can be assured. And if the monitor d oes
use AI and ML software, then a case can be made that it should use some or all
of the same sensors and software as the primary system, because a redund ant
system will be expensive yet surely the recipient of less deve lopment and vali-
dation resources than the primary system, and therefore less capable an d less
trustworthy.
In the following, we will assume an integrated monitor that either uses the
same model as the primary system or uses much the same sensors and softw are
to build an alternative “shadow” model optimized for its diﬀerent fu nction. We
will refer to the model used by the monitor, whether it be the pri mary model or
its own specialized one, as the assured model because it is the focus for safety
and therefore the architecture of the system should be directed to ensuring its
accuracy. We call this “model-centered assurance” and it is the approac h that
we advocate. If the assured and primary models are separate, they both w ill be
constructed and maintained in the way we describe below, but the d etails will
be adjusted for their diﬀerent functions.
The next section develops the idea of model-centered assurance an d its key
components: predictive processing and the dual-process archite cture. Section 4
outlines the case for assurance, and Section 5 provides brief conclus ions. The
paper provides neither mathematics nor a case study. We are grateful t o the or-
ganizers and reviewers for allowing us to present a purely conceptu al paper. The
underlying mathematics is well known in other ﬁelds and we provid e references
later; we are working on a case study and hope to report soon.
3

==== Page 4 ====
2 Model-Centered Assurance
If a world model is to be the focus for assurance, we need to consider the proper-
ties needed for safety, and the hazards to these. The intuitive prop erty required
of the model is ﬁdelity to the real world, at least insofar as required t o plan safe
actions. In particular, if Mis a model of world W,then any actions planned
and shown to be safe using Mshould be safe when executed in W.The inverse
need not be true; that is, there can be safe actions in the real world that do
not appear so in the model. Thus, the model does not need to be a stri ctly
accurate representation of the world: it can be conservative or, as we say ,safely
approximate .
In the absence of monitors, the model could be expressed in the variab les of
some latent space discovered by ML. But monitors for assurance will sur ely be
expressed in naturalistic terms (“don’t hit a pedestrian”) and the m odel must
therefore represent these fairly directly. Hence, in model-ce ntered assurance, the
model must be a naturalistic one. Beyond that, the content of the model and
submodels constructed by perception functions will be determi ned by the system
and its purpose and goals. For a self-driving car, the overall model wil l represent
something like an annotated map of its surroundings: it will include th e layout of
thelocalroadsandjunctions,informationaboutnearbyvehiclesandpede strians,
locations of ﬁxed objects (e.g., mailboxes), road signs and their inter pretation,
traﬃc signals, and so on. It is a design choice whether there is one mode l or
a coordinated collection of submodels. A typical submodel is a list of detected
objects in the vicinity of the egovehicle, giving the location, size, velocity, type,
and inferred intent of each; another might be an occupancy grid (a discr etized
probabilistic 2D map, describing the occupancy of each “square”); and anot her
might be a representation of traﬃc lanes. Inputs from many diﬀerent se nsors
(e.g., GPS location and map data, odometry, lidar, radar, proximity sens ors,
cameras etc.) will be interpreted and fused to create the world mod el and its
submodels. All of these data sources present challenges in interpr etation but we
will focus on image data from cameras since this is the most widely stud ied and
discussed, and among the most challenging.
Lin and colleagues [6] outline a representative vision processing pip eline for
a self-driving car: image data from the cameras are fed in parallel to an obj ect
detector and a localizer; the object detector discovers the objec ts of interest
around the vehicle, such as other vehicles, pedestrians, and traﬃc s ignals; the
detected objects are then passed to an object tracker that associates ob jects with
their past movements and predicts the future trajectories of mov ing objects [7];
in parallel, the localizer determines the location of the egovehicle. Subsequently,
the object movement information from the object tracker and vehicle l ocation
information from the localizer are combined and projected onto the same 2 or 3
dimensional coordinate space by a sensor fusion engine to create the mo del used
by the action functions.
The object detector is usually based on (semi) supervised learning using a
convolutionalneuralnetwork.Thisisadeeplearningneuralnetworkar chitecture
that typically comprises some layers of artiﬁcial neurons arranged to pe rform
4

==== Page 5 ====
convolution, some to do pooling, and some fully connected. The number an d
arrangement of layers of each type are determined by experiment and con stitute
the developer’s “secret sauce.” During subsequent training, a vas t number of
images are fed to the network together with correct (human generated) dat a on
the objects they contain. During the training process, the weight s in the neural
network are adjusted until it detects objects with high accuracy and r eliability.
Now although deep neural networks such as those employed in object de-
tectors are astonishingly eﬀective at their tasks, we must heed Jude a Pearl’s
observation that at bottom all they are doing is extremely sophisticated c urve
ﬁtting [8]. We tune the network architecture and its weights so th at training
data is detected and classiﬁed with high accuracy and reliability (bu t without
“overﬁtting”) and we hope that live data is detected equally well. Thi s hope has
to rest on the assumption that real world data is smooth in a way that match es
the implicit curve of the neural network. But the lesson from safety -critical sys-
tems is that their failures are often associated with unanticipated c ases that are
discontinuous from their neighbors.
This concern is exempliﬁed by so-called “adversarial examples” [9]. T hese are
typicallyminormodiﬁcationstoaninputimagethatareindiscernible toahuman
observer but cause an image classiﬁer to change its output, often drastic ally
and inappropriately. Masks have been developed that will cause miscl assiﬁcation
when overlayed on any image input to a given classiﬁer, and there are un iversal
examples that will disrupt any classiﬁer [10]. Furthermore, there ar e patterns
that can be applied to real world artifacts (e.g., small images that can be st uck
to traﬃc signs) that will cause them to be misread by an object classiﬁe r [11].
There is much work on detection and defense against such attacks but the ir
eﬀectiveness is limited: for example, Carlini and Wagner [12] demonst rate that
ten diﬀerent methods for detecting adversarial examples are easily bypassed.
In our opinion these concerns and defenses miss the true signiﬁcance of ad-
versarial examples. Their signiﬁcance is not that a classiﬁer can be mi slead by
carefully manipulated inputs, but that they demonstrate that classi ﬁcations are
fragile: that is, for every correctly classiﬁed image, there may be se veral incor-
rectly classiﬁed ones just a few pixel changes away. And why wouldn’ t this be,
when all that the learning-enabled components are doing is curve ﬁttin g? Shamir
and colleagues present an analysis that conﬁrms and quantiﬁes this inter preta-
tion [13], while Kilburtus and colleagues argue that this kind of “anti-caus al”
learning via curve-ﬁtting has inherent challenges in achieving ge neralization [14].
The inevitable conclusion is that although many learning-enabled syste ms
driven by neural networks exhibit amazing performance, it is reckl ess to assume
this performance is robust. These systems will always exhibit mor e failures than
can be tolerated in safety-critical systems and this cannot be ﬁxed by adjust-
ments to the interpretation function because it derives from the f act that the
learning-enabled software is not interpreting the world in any meanin gful sense,
but merely applying statistical correlation to patterns of pixels. T he question
then is: can we locate these learning-enabled components in an archite cture or
context where their failures can be detected and masked or tolerated?
5

==== Page 6 ====
Some such methods attempt to assess “conﬁdence” in the quality of the
current learning-enabled judgment. One way to do this is to estim ate whether
the current input is similar to those encountered during trainin g. Pimentel et al
review methods for doing this [15]. A popular modern method uses a var iational
autoencoder [16] to learn the training data distribution and to compre ss it to
a smaller “latent” space, from which a decoder can reconstruct the ori ginal
input. In live operation, encoding and decoding the current inpu t will usually
result in an image close to the original if it is similar to the training d ata, and
distantifnot.Measuressuchas“Mahalanobisdistance”canbeusedtoasse ssthe
distance between an image and its reconstruction. Another approach attemp ts
to locate the portions of the input that most directly contribute to t he current
judgment and checks that these are related to the feature concerned [ 17]. We
consideritprudenttoemploymethodssuchasthesebut,aswithd efensesagainst
adversarial examples, we note that they can often be defeated by changes t o a
few pixels and do not contribute greatly to assurance.
A diﬀerent class of methods employs diversity and fault tolerance. All fault
tolerance is based on redundancy, but it requires more than mere repl ication.
For example, some of the best performing learning-enabled systems for image
and speech recognition employ “ensembles” in which several diﬀere nt systems
cooperate or compete to generate results [18]. However, while this appr oach can
improve already impressive behavior, it does not deliver assuranc e—because we
have no reason to suppose that failures of the component systems are ind epen-
dent, and no reason to trust any individual system.
However, although diverse interpretations of the same sensors may not f ail
independently, it is plausible that diﬀerent sensors, particul arly diﬀerent kinds
of sensors, may do so. Hence, sensor fusion over diﬀerent kinds of sen sor may be
able to detect or mask some failures, although this may not be straightforw ard
to achieve, as illustrated by the fatal accident between an Uber self- driving car
and a pedestrian in Arizona on 18th March 2018 [19]. The Uber car used three
sensor systems to build a simple object tracker model (recall Lin’ s vision process-
ing pipeline [6]): cameras, radars, and lidar. In each of these sensor sy stems, its
own object detector indicates the position of each detected object and attempts
to classify it as, for example, a vehicle, a pedestrian, a bicycle, or other. The
object tracker fuses these inputs using a “prioritization schema t hat promotes
certain tracking methods over others, and is also dependent on the r ecency of
the observation” [19, page 8]. In the case of the Arizona crash, this resulte d
in a “ﬂickering” identiﬁcation of the victim as the sensor systems’ o wn classi-
ﬁers changed their identiﬁcations, and as fusion performed by the obj ect tracker
preferred ﬁrst one sensor system, then another, as listed below [19, Table 1].
–5.6 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as vehicle, by radar
–5.2 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as other, by lidar
–4.2 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as vehicle, by lidar
–Between 3.8 and 2.7 seconds before impact,
classiﬁcation alternated between vehicleandother, by lidar
–2.6 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as bicycle, by lidar
6

==== Page 7 ====
–1.5 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as unknown , by lidar
–1.2 seconds before impact, victim classiﬁed as bicycle, by lidar
The deeper harm of this “ﬂickering” identiﬁcation is that “if the perc eption
system changes the classiﬁcation of a detected object, the tracking h istory of
that object is no longer considered when generating new trajectories ” [19, page
8]. Consequently, the object tracker never established a traject ory for the victim
and the vehicle collided with her even though she had been detected in some
form or other for several seconds.
There are two related problems here: one is that the object tracker mai ntains
a rather impoverished model of the world, the other is that its meth od of sensor
fusion and model update pays no attention to the prior state of the mode l. The
purpose of perception in autonomous systems is to build a model that acc urately
reﬂects the world; the model therefore encodes a lot more informati on than
does an individual sensor sample and we should be cautious about making lar ge
updates to the model on the basis of such an individual sample.
The tenet of Model-Centered Assurance is that the model is the foc us of
attention, and the goal of perception is to ensure that it is an accurate (or “s afely
approximate”) representation of the world. When a sensor samples the w orld,
its interpretation software delivers some representation and we nee d to decide
how to incorporate this into the world model. On the one hand, the inf ormation
from the sensor is new but, on the other, its interpretation is possib ly erroneous.
Furthermore, the model is the repository of much accumulated inform ation, so
the method of model update must maintain its overall accuracy and coher ence.
These considerations suggest a radical alternative to the traditional re lation-
ship between sensors and model: instead of operating “bottom up,” we in vert
this to derive a framework for perception known as predictive processing (PP).
2.1 Predictive Processing
The world causes the sense impressions that our sensors report, but s tandard
bottom-up methods of sensor interpretation attempt to reason backwards or
“anti-causally” from sense impressions to their causes. This is inh erently fraught
with diﬃculty because many diﬀerent conﬁgurations in the world can cau se the
same sense impressions. The idea of predictive processing is to reason causally: if
we have an accurate model of the world, we can use it to predict the imp ressions
that the world will cause our sensors to perceive. This is valuable f or several
reasons. The ﬁrst is that it assists the lower levels of sensor inter pretation (which
may still operate anti-causally) by telling them what to look for,
Consider the component of a car’s vision system concerned with detec ting
traﬃc lanes. This can be accomplished by a computer vision algorithm (e. g.,
based on the Hough Transform [20]) that looks for more-or-less straight lines
painted on the road. A bottom-up approach will perform this algorithm afresh
as each camera frame is processed. But this is ineﬃcient—the traﬃc l anes in the
current image frame are likely to be similar to those in the previous f ew frames
and we should surely use this to seed the search—and it is fragile, as mi ssing
or scuﬀed lane markers might cause lanes to go undetected where they c ould be
7

==== Page 8 ====
detected if we knew where to look, or could even be extrapolated from p revious
images. A better approach builds a model of the road and its traﬃc lanes and
projects this forward in time to guide the algorithm in its search for l anes in the
current image by predicting their location. The lanes found by the al gorithm
will generally be very close to those predicted by the model, so t he information
returned by the vision system to the system that maintains the mod el could be
just thediﬀerence between them: that is, the prediction error .
In general, there will be uncertainty in the world model. This migh t be repre-
sentedasacollectionofcandidatemodels:forexample,onemodelmight suppose
that a detected object is a bicycle, another that it is a pedestrian, and we will
favor the one that has the least prediction error (bicycles generally go in the
same direction as the traﬃc, while pedestrians tend to go across it, so the two
models will predict diﬀerent locations for the object in the next frame).
This is an example of “analysis by synthesis,” meaning that we formulate
hypotheses (i.e., candidate world models) and favor those whose (syn thesized)
predictions match the sensed data. Enabling this approach is the secon d reason
why PP is so valuable. In practical applications, we need to consider the level of
the predictions concerned: do we use the world model to synthesi ze the raw data
(e.g., pixels) that we predict the sensor will detect (which can b e done using
autoencoders), or do we target some higher level of its local interpre tation (e.g.,
detected objects)? The best choice is a topic for experimental res earch, but we
would expect a level of representation comparable to that produced by an object
detector to be suitable.
Rather than (or in addition to) multiple candidate models, we could use
probability distributions to represent uncertainty about model p arameters. Im-
plementations of this approach often employ Bayesian methods, although there
are many variations [21]. The component that maintains the model will then
send its predictions to the vision (or other sensor) component as a priordistri-
bution and the vision system will return a posterior one. This kind of Bayesian
inference typically generates intractable integrals, so implemen tations employ
methods known as Variational Bayes that turn the problem into iterative opti-
mization of the posterior models to minimize prediction error [16].
There is strong similarity between this approach and a Kalman Filter. As
here, a Kalman ﬁlter maintains a model of the system state, which is t he esti-
matedvalueofeachofitsstatevariablestogetherwiththeirestimatedac curacies,
and predicts their values at the next timestep. Sensors sample the se values, and
the state variables are updated in a way that favors their predicted v alues when
these are believed to have high accuracy, and the sensor values otherw ise.
In a further, and perhaps surprising similarity, the top-down app roach is
widely believed to be the way perception works in human (and other) brains,
as ﬁrst proposed by Helmholtz in the 1860s [22]. Predictive Processing [23], also
known as predictive coding[24] and predictive error minimization [25], posits
that the brain builds models of its environment and uses these to pr edict its
sensory input, and that much of its activity can be seen as (an approximat ion
to)iterativeBayesianoptimizationofitsmodelstominimizepredi ctionerror.PP
8

==== Page 9 ====
has prior “predictions” ﬂowing from models down to sense organs and Bay esian
“corrections” ﬂowing back up that cause the posterior models to track r eality.
(“Free Energy” [26] is a more all-encompassing theory that includes acti ons:
the brain “predicts” that the hand, say, is in a certain place and to mi nimize
prediction error the hand actually moves there.) This is consisten t with the fact
that the brain has more neural pathways going from upper to lower levels than
vice versa: models and predictions ﬂow down, and only corrections ﬂo w up.
As we noted, PP can be seen as extending the idea of Kalman ﬁltering from
classical representations of state (i.e., a set of continuous variables , as in control
theory) to more complex models, where we also have representations of object
“type” and “intent” and so on. Thus, ﬁelds as varied as neuroscience, con trol
theory, signal processing, and sensor fusion all employ methods simi lar to PP,
but under diﬀerent names and derived by diﬀerent histories.
action function action functionprimary monitor
overrideplanned actionsAI/ML sensorsensor
AI/ML sensor
interpretationsensor
interpretationsensor
interpretationAI/ML sensor
Level 1
model constructionmodel refinementLevel 2
assured model
primary model
actuatorsprediction errorspredictions
Fig.1.Primary/Monitor Two-Level Architecture with Predictive Process ing
The model-centered architecture is portrayed in Figure 1 (ignore the dark
pinkboxontherightlabeled“Level2modelreﬁnement”forthetimeb eing).The
black arrows from “Level 1 model construction” to sensors and their low -level
interpretation indicate the top-down predictions of PP (inverted in the picture),
while red arrows indicate prediction errors returned to model con struction. If the
9

==== Page 10 ====
assured model is separate from the primary model, then it and its mec hanisms
are indicated by the “shadows” behind the corresponding primaries.
The third and perhaps most crucial beneﬁt of PP in a model-centered ap-
proach to assured autonomy is that prediction error provides a continuou s as-
sessment of the accuracy of the model and a systematic purchase on situ ations
that warrant further investigation. Small prediction errors indicate that all is
proceeding satisfactorily (we will see later that this may not be so and we need
to separately verify the absence of systemic misinterpretations, but the basic
inference is correct). Large prediction errors constitute surprise and indicate
a failure of some kind, a ﬂaw in the model, or an unexpected developme nt in
the world. Prediction error thus provides a single, uniform metho d for runtime
veriﬁcation and failure detection, so that assurance for the autonomous sy stem
is itself autonomous. For example, disappearance of previously detecte d objects
because they are occluded by an overturned truck will trigger surp rise even if
our object detector fails to recognize the truck (cf. Tesla crash, Tai wan 1Jun20).
There are just three possible responses to surprise: we can adjust the sen-
sor(s), adjust the model, or adjust the world. Selection and coordinat ion among
these is best performed by a separate function that has access to know ledge and
more comprehensive methods for reasoning about the world, as we now des cribe.
2.2 Dual-Process Architecture
Suppose we are driving on a freeway when the object detector of a camer a
indicates a bicycle in front of us. In fact, what has been seen is a pic ture of a
bicycle painted on the rear of a van. The object detector has seen the van in
earlier frames and correctly labeled it but, now that we are closer, it is able to
resolve the picture and labels the object as a bicycle, or perhaps as a v an with
conﬁdence xand bicycle with conﬁdence y. PP will have predicted it is deﬁnitely
a van, so we have a large prediction error and need to decide how to pro ceed.
Now, we are on a freeway and the local “Laws and Rules of the Road”
specify that bicycles are not allowed on freeways (this is not always so, but we
will ignore special cases for the purpose of illustration). If our object detector
had access to this information it could make the inference that the det ected
object cannot be a bicycle and must be a van. Such knowledge and method s of
inferenceseemausefulaugmentationtomodel-centeredassurance —themorethe
system knows, the less it needs to sense—but pose the question ho w they should
be incorporated into the architecture. The capabilities seem too ge neral and
universal to be added to the interpretation functions of individual sensors, so it
seems they could be added to the model construction function. Howev er, we now
thinkofmodelconstructionasapredictiveprocessingloopthatse ndspredictions
to sensors and updates the model according to prediction errors. The higher
level knowledge and inferences that we now contemplate seem asynch ronous to
this loop and more focused on analysis and augmentation of the world model
and the response to surprise. Accordingly, we propose that these capabi lities—
essentially, the deductive AI functions of the system—are located i n a separate
“modelreﬁnement”functionthatisshownasdarkpinkinFigure1.Fur thermore,
we suggest that it is useful to think of the two methods of model updat e as
10

==== Page 11 ====
occurring on two levels: basic (PP) model construction at Level 1, and more
inferential reﬁnement at the higher Level 2.
Just as predictive processing has independent engineering jus tiﬁcation, but
also happens to coincide with a current theory of human cognition, so th e two-
level architecture coincides with a related “dual-process” theor y [27,28], re-
cently popularized by Kahneman as separate “fast and slow” systems of hum an
thought [29]. In human cognition, System 1 is unconscious, fast, and specialized
for routine tasks; System 2 is conscious, slow, easily fatigued, and capable of de-
liberation and reasoning—it is what we mean by “thinking.” These correspon d
to Levels 1 and 2 in the architecture of Figure 1.
We have implicitly suggested that Level 1 Model Construction maintai ns a
single assured world model (that may have several components) and that Level 2
ModelReﬁnementembellishesthis.However,itisbelievedth athumansmaintain
a hierarchy of models [24,26] and this seems a good approach for autonomous
systems as well. The idea is that a PP loop operates between each adjace nt pair
(in the hierarchy) of models, so that the lower level is like a sen sor for the upper
level, with priority and update frequency determined by the siz e of prediction
errors. We will not pursue this more elaborate architecture here, bu t it seems an
interesting prospect for future consideration.
In general, the purpose of Level 2 Model Reﬁnement is to respond to and
minimize “surprise” and one way to approach the latter is to augment the world
model with additional information that encodes “situation awareness.” This can
be the result of hypothetical and counterfactual reasoning, so that thin gs not
seen but “that might be there” are explicitly added to the model as “gh osts”
(objectswithlowprobability).Forexample,byreasoningaboutlines ofsightand
occluded vision, we could deduce that “we will be unable to see any ve hicle that
mightbebehindthattruck.”Wecouldthenaddaghostvehicletotheo ccupancy
grid location behind the truck and this will inﬂuence the action fun ctions. When
the truck no longer occludes our vision, sensors will conﬁrm or deny p resence of
the ghost, but neither outcome will constitute a surprise or a hazard b ecause the
action functions will not have committed to a choice that would be danger ous
for either outcome. Dually, we might determine that a detected veh icle may be
unable to see us because atruck is in the way, and this can be incorpor ated in the
model as increased uncertainty on the likely motions of the vehicle c oncerned.
In another example, detection of many brake lights up ahead can be used to
infer some kind of problem and this will be represented as increased uncertainty
in the world model. In this way, what might otherwise be the surpri sing mani-
festation of an unanticipated situation will instead develop as gradual chan ges
in uncertainty or the resolution of ghosts into real objects. Observe t hat these
reﬁnements to the world model make it more conservative: that is, th ey reduce
the options available to action functions, so that faults in this type of Level 2
reasoning cannot make the world model less safe.
Level 2 aims to minimize surprise but, when surprise happens, it must deal
with it. We noted earlier that there are three possible responses: w e can adjust
the sensors, the model, or the world (or a combination of these). When surprise
11

==== Page 12 ====
takes the form of a large prediction error from one sensor, or group of similar s en-
sors, it is reasonable to assume it is a temporary glich in sensing (e. g., reﬂections
confusing radar) or interpretation (e.g., adversarial-type inputs) an d to ignore
the aﬄicted sensor(s) for a while and trust to local continuity in th e world, or
diversity and redundancy among other sensors, to maintain an accurate mo del.
Alternatively, analysis may suggest that prediction errors are due to a persis-
tent cause in the external world, such as cameras dazzled by the sun. A suitable
response might then be to change lanes to get in the shade of a nearby truc k—in
other words, to make a change in the world (speciﬁcally, our location in i t).
If prediction errors persist, or aﬄict an entire class of sensor, then it may
be a hardware or system problem—in which case Level 2 may coordinate wi th
the fault tolerance functions of the underlying platform—or it may be some
environmental challenge, such as fog. In this situation, lane-detecti on by cameras
may fail, but Level 2 may be able to substitute some alternative meth od of
“sensing” for model update, such as inferring location of the traﬃc lane s from
the motions of neighboring cars as revealed by radar and proximity sensors .
When many sensors register large prediction errors, then the cause of t he
surprise is likely to be that the world did not evolve as the model pr edicted, and
the appropriate response is to make changes in the model so that it conf orms to
information from the sensors. In extreme cases, this may require re building the
model from scratch, using some frames of bottom-up anti-causal interpr etation.
We have motivated and introduced the two key aspects of our model-ce ntered
approach for autonomous systems: predictive processing and dual-proc ess archi-
tecture. We now develop an outline assurance argument.
3 Toward An Assurance Argument
In routine operation, an autonomous system employing our model-center ed ap-
proach will maintain a comprehensive naturalistic model of the world, possibly
comprised of several components including (e.g., for cars) a detecte d objects
list and an occupancy grid. The model is updated in an automated and regular
manner using predictive processing, which provides continuous feedback on the
quality of the model and available sensor data. For each sensor, the syste m will
generate a prediction for the interpretation of its next frame. This c an allow the
sensor to focus its resources and interpretation in the most produc tive manner.
Each sensor will report its prediction error; a small error indicates the model
is aligned with the world and will cause a modest update to the model; a large
error indicates a “surprise” that could be due to either a fault in th e sensor or its
interpretation, a ﬂaw in the model, or an unexpected development i n the world.
The most basic branch in an assurance case for this architecture is to be
sure that small prediction errors really do guarantee that the model is a safely
approximate representation of the world. The primary hazard to this cl aim is
that the system’s perception of the world could be systematically di storted—a
hallucination.Forexampleitcouldbeblindtoredcars:sensorswill reportnored
cars, leading to construction of a world model without red cars; this w ill generate
predictionslackingredcarsthatareconﬁrmedbythesensors.Soalls eemswell—
until we collide with a red car, or are otherwise surprised by their existence. We
12

==== Page 13 ====
refer to these perception faults as systemic and their characteristic is that they
occur in some signiﬁcant region of the input space and for signiﬁcant peri ods of
time, leading to misperception of the world. Other systemic fault s might concern
measurement rather than existence: for example, a sensor might disp lace objects
10 feet to the left or miscalculate bounding boxes by 10%; and others migh t
concern identiﬁcation, such as misreading stop signs as something els e.
Systemic faults must be excluded or eliminated during developme nt. A rea-
sonable way to detect residual systemic faults—and to provide evid ence for their
absence—is by testing, and a plausible way to perform this is in simu lation. We
generate a simulated model of the world and a rendering of it is presen ted to the
sensor interpretation and model construction functions under test ; the model
they construct is then compared to the original. A few million miles of simu-
lated travel through representative scenarios [1] with some injecti on of degrada-
tion (e.g., rain and fog) into the rendering, could provide reasonable ass urance
for the absence of systemic faults. Note that this is not the same as “collec ting
miles” as we are looking only for systemic faults, whereas those who col lect miles
are also seeking exceptionally rare “corner case” and “fat tail” failures.
Assumingadequateevidencethatsmallpredictionerrorsguaranteeth emodel
is safely approximate, the next major branch in the assurance case is t o show
thattheresponsestolargepredictionerrors(i.e.,surprise)main taintheproperty.
This divides into case analysis over the causes of surprise. First is a hardware
fault of some kind, and we assume that this is safely handled by the unde rlying
fault-tolerant platform (possibly in coordination with Level 2 model r eﬁnement).
Next is some fault in sensor interpretation or model construction that i s lo-
calized in space and time (i.e., not systemic); we call these localperception faults
and rely on assumed local continuity of the world to justify freezing or extrap-
olating aﬄicted values for a few frames; alternatively, if redundant s ensors are
available, we assume failure independence and favor these. Failure independence
seems a plausible assumption, especially for sensors using diﬀere nt phenomena.
When prediction errors persist for more than a few frames, or are shared by
multiple sensors, then we have a genuine surprise (the model is inaccurate, or
the world has not evolved as expected) and Level 2 functions will orches trate
repair or regeneration of the model, or take action in the world, as describ ed
in the previous section. We will not drive this sketch of an assurance case into
these details as they will be speciﬁc to each system. However, we note that
the primary purpose of the AI functions at Level 2 is to resolve uncertai nties
in sensor interpretation (e.g., the bicycle/van example mentioned e arlier), and
to reduce future surprise through augmentations to the model that ant icipate
its evolution and promote situation awareness. These activities all in crease the
conservatism of the model and can only enhance the safety of its approxim ation
to the real world.
This safety argument is quite diﬀerent than could be constructed for tra-
ditional bottom-up sensor interpretation and fusion: predictive pro cessing pro-
vides an intrinsic structure to the case analysis that suggests the ar gument can
be made deductive [30]. Of course, much remains to be investigated, i ncluding a
13

==== Page 14 ====
search for defeaters and quantiﬁable assessment of conﬁdence and risks . A crit-
ical next step will be to assess conﬁdence that surprises are always generated
when they should be, which might be done by fault injection (e.g., pe rturbing
interpretation of sensors, or the modeled world presented to them) in simulation.
4 Conclusion
We have described an architecture for autonomous systems that promotes their
safety and assurance. The focus of the architecture is the “safely appr oximate”
accuracy of an assured world model maintained by the perception functi ons.
Given this model, the action functions can be guarded by monitors driv en by
traditional software and assured in traditional ways.
In the proposed architecture, sensor interpretation is driven top- down from
themodel—thereverseoftheusualdirection—usingpredictivepr ocessing.Small
prediction errors conﬁrm accuracy of the model and sensor interpretat ion, given
that testing conﬁrms absence of systemic faults. Large prediction err ors indicate
either a fault in sensor interpretation, or a departure between the model and
the world (a surprise). The uniformity of prediction error as the si ngle basis for
runtimeassuranceandfaultdetectionmeansthatassuranceisitselfau tonomous.
AI functions located at a second level provide situation awareness and other
measures to reduce future surprise and to deal with it when it occ urs.
Although this dual-process architecture with predictive proces sing is derived
by engineering considerations, it corresponds with current theori es of human
cognition and suggests fruitful comparisons. Mathematical formulations of p re-
dictive processing are well-developed in cognitive science [26] an d in machine
learning,whereitisassociatedwith“generative”and“variational”meth ods[16].
In current work, we are performing experimental evaluations of the app roach
and plan to report our experience and propose key challenges.
Acknowledgments. We thank the reviewers for their constructive comments,
and Bev Littlewood of City, University of London, and Wilfried Steiner of TT-
TechViennafortheirchallengesanddiscussion.Theworkwasfundedb yDARPA
contract FA8750-19-C-0089. We would also like to acknowledge support from
the US Army Research Laboratory Cooperative Research Agreement W911NF-
17-2-0196, and National Science Foundation (NSF) grant 1740079. The views,
opinions and/or ﬁndings expressed are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the oﬃcial views or policies of the Dep artment of
Defense or the U.S. Government.
References
1. Thorn, E., Kimmel, S., Chaka, M.: A framework for automated drivi ng system
testable cases and scenarios. DOT HS 812 623, NHTSA, Washingto n DC (2018)
2. Kalra, N., Paddock, S.M.: Driving to safety: How many miles of d riving would it
take to demonstrate autonomous vehicle reliability? Transport ation Research Part
A: Policy and Practice 94(2016) 182–193
3. ASTM: Standard Practice for Methods to Safely Bound Flight Beh avior of Un-
manned Aircraft Systems Containing Complex Functions. (2017) ASTM F3269-17.
4. Shalev-Shwartz, S., Shammah, S., Shashua, A.: On a formal mod el of safe and
scalable self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06374 (201 7)
14

==== Page 15 ====
5. NHTSA: Automated driving systems 2.0: A vision for safety. DOT HS 812 442 ,
Washington DC (2018)
6. Lin, S.C., et al.: The architectural implications of autono mous driving: Constraints
and acceleration. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 53(2018) 751–766
7. Koller, D., Daniilidis, K., Thorhallson, T., Nagel, H.H.: Mod el-based object track-
ing in traﬃc scenes. In: European Conf. on Computer Vision (1992 ) 437–452
8. Pearl, J., Mackenzie, D.: The Book of Why: The New Science of C ause and Eﬀect.
Basic Books (2018)
9. Szegedy,C.,etal.: Intriguingpropertiesofneuralnetworks. arXiv:1312.6199(2013)
10. Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.M., Fawzi, A., Fawzi, O., Frossard, P.: Universal adversarial
perturbations. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Compute r Vision and
Pattern Recognition. (2017) 1765–1773
11. Brown, T.B., et al.: Adversarial patch. arXiv preprint arXiv:17 12.09665 (2017)
12. Carlini, N., Wagner, D.: Adversarial examples are not easily de tected: Bypassing
ten detection methods. In: Proc. 10th ACM W’shop on AI & Securit y (2017) 3–14
13. Shamir, A., Safran, I., Ronen, E., Dunkelman, O.: A simple exp lanation for the
existence of adversarial examples with small Hamming distanc e. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.10861 (2019)
14. Kilbertus, N., Parascandolo, G., Sch¨ olkopf, B.: Generaliz ation in anti-causal learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00524 (2018)
15. Pimentel, M.A.F., Clifton, D.A., Clifton, L., Tarassenko, L .: A review of novelty
detection. Signal Processing 99(2014) 215–249
16. Kingma, D.P., Welling, M.: Auto-encoding variational Bay es. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114 (2013)
17. Jha, S., Jang, U., Jha, S., Jalaian, B.: Detecting adversari al examples using data
manifolds. In: MILCOM 2018, IEEE 547–552
18. Ju, C., Bibaut, A., van der Laan, M.: The relative performance of ensemble meth-
ods with deep convolutional neural networks for image classiﬁc ation. Journal of
Applied Statistics 45(2018) 2800–2818
19. National Transportation Safety Board: Vehicle Automation R eport; Tempe, AZ.
(2019) HWY18MH010
20. Duda, R.O., Hart, P.E.: Use of the Hough transformation to dete ct lines and curves
in pictures. Communications of the ACM 15(1972) 11–15
21. Spratling, M.W.: A review of predictive coding algorithms. B rain and cognition
112(2017) 92–97
22. von Helmholtz, H.: Handbuch der Physiologischen Optik I II. Volume 9. Verlag
von Leopold Voss, Leipzig, Germany (1867)
23. Wiese, W., Metzinger, T.K.: Vanilla PP for philosophers: A p rimer on Predictive
Processing. MIND Group, Frankfurt am Main (2017). Many papers: https://
predictive-mind.net/papers
24. Clark, A.: Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agen ts, and the future of
cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36(2013) 181–204
25. Hohwy, J.: The Predictive Mind. Oxford University Press (2013 )
26. Friston, K.: The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? N ature Reviews
Neuroscience 11(2010) 127
27. Frankish, K.: Dual-process and dual-system theories of reaso ning. Philosophy
Compass 5(2010) 914–926
28. Evans, J.S.B.T., Stanovich, K.E.: Dual-process theories o f higher cognition: Ad-
vancing the debate. Perspectives on Psychological Science 8(2013) 223–241
29. Kahneman, D.: Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus and Girou x (2011)
30. Bloomﬁeld, R., Rushby, J.: Assurance 2.0. arXiv preprint arXi v:2004.10474 (2020)
15

