==== Page 1 ====
This document is downloaded from DR‑NTU (https://dr.ntu.edu.sg)
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Multifactorial evolutionary algorithm with online
transfer parameter estimation : MFEA‑II
Bali, Kavitesh Kumar; Ong, Yew‑Soon; Gupta, Abhishek; Tan, Puay Siew
2019
Bali, K. K., Ong, Y.‑S., Gupta, A., & Tan, P. S. (2020). Multifactorial evolutionary algorithm
with online transfer parameter estimation : MFEA‑II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, 24(1), 69‑83. doi:10.1109/tevc.2019.2906927
https://hdl.handle.net/10356/143194
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2019.2906927
© 2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be
obtaind for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing
this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for
resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this
work in other works. The published version is available at:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.2019.2906927.
Downloaded on 09 Feb 2025 23:00:26 SGT

==== Page 2 ====
1
Multifactorial Evolutionary Algorithm with Online
Transfer Parameter Estimation: MFEA-II
Kavitesh Kumar Bali,Yew-Soon Ong,yAbhishek Gupta,yPuay Siew Tan
School of Computing Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
ySingapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology (SIMTech),
A*STAR, Singapore.
Abstract —Humans rarely tackle every problem from scratch.
Given this observation, the motivation for the present work is to
improve optimization performance through adaptive knowledge
transfer across related problems. The scope for spontaneous
transfers under the simultaneous occurrence of multiple problems
unveils the beneﬁts of multitasking. Multitask optimization has
recently demonstrated competence in solving multiple (related)
optimization tasks concurrently. Notably, in the presence of
underlying relationships between problems, the transfer of high-
quality solutions across them has shown to facilitate superior
performance characteristics. However, in the absence of any prior
knowledge about the inter-task synergies (as is often the case
with general black-box optimization), the threat of predominantly
negative transfer prevails. Susceptibility to negative inter-task
interactions can impede the overall convergence behavior. To
allay such fears, in this paper, we propose a novel evolutionary
computation framework that enables online learning and ex-
ploitation of the similarities (and discrepancies) between distinct
tasks in multitask settings, for an enhanced optimization process.
Our proposal is based on principled theoretical arguments that
seek to minimize the tendency of harmful interactions between
tasks, based on a purely data-driven learning of relationships
among them. The efﬁcacy of our proposed method is validated
experimentally on a series of synthetic benchmarks, as well as
a practical study that provides insights into the behavior of the
method in the face of several tasks occurring at once.
Index Terms —Evolutionary Multitasking, multifactorial opti-
mization, inter-task synergies, online similarity learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In machine learning, the notion of knowledge transfer has
manifested in many guises, ranging from transfer learning [1–
5] to multitask learning [6]. Transfer learning leverages on a
pool of available data from various source tasks to improve
the learning efﬁcacy of a related target task. Interestingly,
while transfer learning mainly focuses on just the target task,
multitask learning, in contrast, learns all tasks simultaneously
by sharing information across the different tasks, in order
to improve the overall generalization performance. Simply
put: what is learned for each task can help other tasks be
learned better . Fueled by data abundance, the concepts of
knowledge transfer have mainly been prominent in the ﬁeld of
predictive analytics (e.g. classiﬁcation and regression). On the
other hand, attempts made to transfer knowledge in the context
ofoptimization problems (which typically start the search with
zero prior data) [7], have relatively been scarce, and received
little visibility.However, it is contended that real world optimization prob-
lems seldom occur in isolation. That is, the presence of la-
tent similarities, even between distinct black-box optimization
instances, are commonplace. This is particularly true when
we are working within a particular domain of application.
With this in mind, a plethora of information can potentially
be shared across related problems. Arguably, it may seem
unnecessarily laborious to isolate and solve any such related
optimization problems from scratch (i.e., from a zero-state
knowledge) [7]. Consequently, the existence of useful informa-
tion across complementing problems, opens doors for fruitful
knowledge transfer. In practical settings, leveraging on such
a rich pool of knowledge, can yield substantial cost-saving
beneﬁts [8, 9]. Thus, the ability to solve many tasks, with
the scope of knowledge exchange among them, has been a
longstanding goal of artiﬁcial intelligence systems targeting
improved problem-solving efﬁcacy [10].
Over the years, a handful of success stories have surfaced
in the relatively young ﬁeld of transfer optimization (TO),
encompassing sequential transfers [11–16] as well as multi-
tasking [17–24]. Similar to transfer learning, sequential trans-
fer optimization utilizes high quality solutions from various
source problems to solve a target optimization task. Therein,
the transfer of knowledge (from past optimization problems to
present) is conducted in a unidirectional fashion. That is, only
a single target task is optimized at a time; re-optimization
of the source task(s) is irrelevant. Solving multiple tasks
concurrently is thus, beyond the scope of sequential transfer
optimization techniques.
Multitasking effectively ﬁlls this void. Surprisingly, in spite
of the longevity of multitask learning , the idea has only re-
cently been introduced into the arena of optimization problem-
solving [17, 18]. To elaborate, multitask optimization aims to
facilitate efﬁcient resolution of multiple problems simultane-
ously, by promoting omnidirectional knowledge transfer for
greater synergistic search. Simply put, all the optimization
tasks can in principle mutually help each other.
Despite its practical implications, preliminary works have
indicated that the performance of multitask optimization is
sensitive to the degree of underlying inter-task similarities.
To elaborate, each optimization task may not always be
closely related to all other available tasks. In such scenarios,
assuming relatedness and solving (any) unrelated optimization
problems concurrently can potentially lead to performance

==== Page 3 ====
2
slowdowns [25]. Overlooking such inter-task discrepancies
and sharing knowledge across multiple diverse problems give
rise to a phenomenon known as negative transfer . In fact,
the threat of negative transfer has commonly been reported
in the machine learning literature [6, 26], thereby highlighting
a central pitfall of multitasking in general (i.e., be it in learning
or in optimization).
Based on the above facts, in this paper, we propose a novel
data-driven multitasking approach adept at online learning of
how much knowledge to transfer across distinct optimization
problems in multitask settings - without the need for any
human intervention. We focus on the use of evolutionary
algorithms (EAs) since they generally allow ﬂexible data
representations and have shown to combine well with prob-
abilistic modeling approaches [27] - which forms the crux
of our learning strategy. We ﬁrst describe an instantiation
of a multitasking evolutionary optimization framework from
a probabilistic modeling perspective. Thereafter, we unveil
how the principled integration of probabilistic models drawn
from different tasks can actualize knowledge transfers while
curbing negative inter-task interactions. It is noteworthy that
the ideas described herein directly encompass a previously
proposed multifactorial evolutionary algorithm (MFEA) for
multitasking [18]. In comparison to the MFEA, our main
contributions in this work are twofold:
While the mode of transfer remains the same as MFEA
(namely, crossover-based genetic transfer), the parameter
inducing the extent of transfers is modiﬁed to take the
the form of a symmetric matrix. This allows effective
multitasking across more than two tasks with possibly
diverse inter-task relationships.
The transfer parameter matrix is continuously learned
and adapted online based on the data generated during
the course of the multitasking search. As the result of a
theoretically principled learning paradigm, the need for
extensive manual parameter tuning is avoided.
With this, the novel algorithm put forward in this paper is
labeled as MFEA-II. We re-emphasize that in MFEA-II the
mode of communication between tasks is primarily through
crossover-based implicit genetic transfer . It is worth noting
that conceptually similar modes of transfer are often sought
in distinct domains such as genetic programming and deep
learning, where learned features (in the form of genetic
programming sub-trees, or multiple layers of feature detectors)
are reused across models trained on related datasets [5, 28, 29].
Importantly, this fast and scalable transfer mechanism is found
to be effective in general black-box optimization settings as
well, where we only have access to a ﬁnite set of solution-
ﬁtness pairs (without knowing their underlying relationship).
In such settings, while constructing more complex transforma-
tions between tasks may be considered (see [17]), the asso-
ciated learning algorithm consumes computational resources
beyond typical applications of evolutionary methods.
The organization of the rest of this paper is as follows. Sec-
tion II brieﬂy discusses the backgrounds of the most notable
approaches for multitask optimization, spanning Bayesian
and evolutionary methods. An overview of mixture modelsand subsequent theoretical developments in the context of
multitasking are contained in Section III. In Section IV, we
present an instantiation of a candidate evolutionary algorithm
for multitask optimization, namely the MFEA. The theoretical
foundations of the MFEA and its associated shortcomings are
analyzed. Thereafter, the proposed online parameter estimation
strategy for MFEA-II is presented in Section V. Experimental
results and analyses on a series of discrete and continuous
toy/benchmark examples are provided in Section VI. A prac-
tical case study on black-box neuroevolution-based controller
design is carried out in Section VI-D. In particular, this section
provides insights into the behavior of MFEA-II while tackling
many tasks at once; with each task being a distinct variant
of the popular double-pole balancing problem. Section VII
concludes the paper with a brief discussion of future work.
II. B ACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we present a brief review of recent strides in
the ﬁeld of multitask optimization. The purpose of this section
is to compare and contrast the outlined contributions of this
paper to those available in the literature.
Multitask Bayesian optimization has been a prominent
advancement in the context of bolstering hyperparameter
optimization for automatic machine learning [17]. Its prime
success is achieved by utilizing multitask Gaussian process
models [26] to adaptively learn inter-task dependencies and
improve the overall search of a Bayesian optimization algo-
rithm. However, Bayesian optimization is generally limited
to problems with fairly low or moderate dimensions. This is
because, as the dimensionality of the search space increases,
the number of data points required to ensure a good coverage
of the space (for learning accurate Gaussian process models)
increases exponentially (often referred to as the cold start
problem) [30]. Furthermore, the applications of Bayesian opti-
mization are primarily limited to continuous search spaces and
do not directly apply to combinatorial search spaces wherein
indeﬁnite kernels maybe difﬁcult to deal with [31].
In contrast, evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been
promising in bridging these gaps. EAs offer immense ﬂexibil-
ity in accommodating diverse data representations (be it con-
tinuous or combinatorial [32]), and scale fairly well to higher
dimensions [33, 34]. Recently, evolutionary multitasking, un-
der the label of multifactorial optimization [18], has demon-
strated various success stories in solving multiple optimization
problems simultaneously, encompassing discrete, continuous,
single-, as well as multi-objective optimization [18, 19, 35–
37]. Beyond this, evolutionary multitasking has also found
its way in the ﬁeld of machine learning; from training an
ensemble of decision trees [38] to feedforward neural networks
with modular knowledge representation [39].
Despite signiﬁcant progress, it must be noted that existing
evolutionary multitasking engines largely rely on prior as-
sumption of the existence of exploitable synergies between
tasks. In the absence of any knowledge about inter-task
relationships, susceptibility to negative transfers have been
highlighted [25, 40, 41]. Since the ﬁeld of evolutionary mul-
titasking is still in its infancy, efforts to identify inter-task

==== Page 4 ====
3
similarities and discrepancies online are currently under way.
With this in mind, this paper presents a novel evolutionary
multitasking approach for data-driven online learning of the
latent similarities across problems; in turn promoting fruitful
knowledge exchange between them. Our method generalizes
well to a range of optimization problem types, as shall be
showcased in the experimental study.
III. O VERVIEW OF MIXTURE MODELS IN THE CONTEXT OF
MULTITASK OPTIMIZATION
Herein, we present an overview of constructing and sam-
pling probabilistic mixture distributions–that combine search
distributions drawn from different tasks–as a way of initial-
izing knowledge exchange in a multitask setting. It must
be noted that for such a combination to be possible, all
distributions must be deﬁned in a common/shared space, which
we refer to as the uniﬁed search space .
A. Uniﬁed search space
The importance of search space uniﬁcation in multitasking
is to encompass all the individual search spaces of different
optimization tasks such that we have a shared platform on
which the transfer of knowledge can seamlessly take place [7,
19, 42]. For the sake of brevity, consider Kmaximization
tasksfT1;T2;:::;TKgto be solved concurrently. The search
space dimensionality of each of the optimization tasks is
given byD1;D2;:::;DKrespectively. In such a scenario, we
can deﬁne a uniﬁed space XXXof dimensionality Dunified =
maxfD1;D2;:::;DKg, such that there is sufﬁcient ﬂexibility
to encompass each task in the multitask setting. The mo-
tivation behind using such a uniﬁcation scheme, instead of
simply concatenating the Kdistinct search spaces such that
Dunified = (D1+D2+:::+DK), is two-fold:
Firstly, it helps circumvent the challenges associated with
the curse of dimensionality when solving several tasks
with multidimensional search spaces simultaneously.
Secondly, it is considered to be an effective means of
accessing the power of population-based search, promot-
ing the discovery and implicit transfer of useful genetic
materials from one task to another in an efﬁcient manner.
With this, we propose XXXto be limited to the range
[0;1]Dunified , which serves as a continuized uniﬁed space
into which all candidate solutions are mapped ( encoded ).
Accordingly, while tackling the kthtask, a subset of Dk
variables are extracted from a candidate solution x2XXX
and decoded (inverse of the mapping function) to a task-
speciﬁc solution representation for evaluation. For the case of
box-constrained continuous optimization problems, a simple
linear scaling offers a suitable one-to-one mapping between
the task-speciﬁc solution space and the uniﬁed space. On the
other hand, for the variety of discrete/combinatorial problems,
different encoding/decoding processes can be conceived -
readers are referred to [42] for a comprehensive overview.
B. Knowledge sharing via mixture distributions
Without loss of generality, for all k2f1;2;:::;Kg, let the
(sub)populations associated with the kthtask be denoted asPk. The corresponding objective function is denoted as fk
andf
k=fk(x)denotes the global maximum of the kth
task. Note that we assumed xto be a candidate solution
in the uniﬁed search space XXX. With this background, a
key assumption in the subsequent theoretical deductions of
multitasking is that for any task Tk, the Borel measure of
a setH=fxjx2XXX;fk(x)> f0
kgis positive for any
f0
k< f
k. In an evolutionary multitasking algorithm, let the
subpopulations associated with each of the Ktasks at time step
t >0originate from the underlying probability distributions
p1(x;t);p2(x;t);:::;pK(x;t)respectively. Accordingly, in the
process of facilitating inter-task interactions, the offspring
population generated for the kthtask at the tthiteration is
considered to be drawn from the following mixture distribu-
tion,
qk(x;t) =kpk(x;t) +X
j6=kjpj(x;t): (1)
The ﬁnite mixture qk(x;t)is a linear combination of all K
available distributions, with mixture coefﬁcients given by the
0s[43]. Note that k+P
j6=kj= 1, and0s0.
C. Actualizing knowledge transfers in multitasking
The onset of knowledge transfer in multitasking occurs
during subsequent sampling of candidate solutions from the
mixture distribution speciﬁed in Eq. (1) [8, 44]. The degree of
mixing (i.e., the amount of knowledge exchange) is mandated
by the mixture coefﬁcients 0s. It is noteworthy that in the
absence of prior knowledge about the inter-task relationships,
any inappropriate (blind) mixing of probability distributions
will pose a threat of predominantly negative transfers by
wrongly biasing the search distribution. To alleviate any such
issues, it is imperative to facilitate the optimal mixture of the
component densities by ensuring that the mixture coefﬁcients
(0s) are appropriately learned online .
D. Does Multitasking Prevent Global Convergence?
In this section, we highlight the effects of the mixture dis-
tribution on the global convergence behavior of multitasking.
In particular, we show that asymptotic global convergence
properties of probabilistic modeling based EAs continue to
be preserved. For mathematical convenience, the theoretical
study is carried out for large (sub)population sizes ( N), i.e.,
under the assumption that N! 1 . Although such an
assumption may not be completely practical, it is considered
a reasonable simpliﬁcation for developing the foundations of
our proposals. Subsequently, the practical implications of our
derived theoretical results are veriﬁed through experimental
studies in Section VI.
In the limit of large values of N, it follows from the
Glivenko-Cantelli theorem [45] that the empirical probability
density of the (sub)population Pkclosely approximates the
true underlying distribution pk(x). Further, we assume that for
the initial population, pk(x;t= 0) is positive and continuous
inXXXfor allk2f1;2;:::;Kg. With this background, asymp-
totic convergence to the global optimum(s) of each constitutive

==== Page 5 ====
4
taskkin a multitasking environment is said to occur if the
following relation is satisﬁed,
lim
t!1E[fk(x)] = lim
t!1Z
XXXfk(x)pk(x;t)dx=f
k;8k:(2)
Loosely speaking, as time goes on in the optimization
process, the distribution of the population must be gradually
concentrated on only those points of the uniﬁed space that
correspond to a global optimum.
For our theoretical deductions, we speciﬁcally consider
the evolutionary multitasking algorithm to follow a (;)
selection strategy whereby denotes the number of parents,
andrepresents the number of offspring. Under this selection
mechanism, the top individuals out of offspring (with
< ), are selected for each task and taken as parents for the
next iteration [46]. Note that the parent population of the kth
task is denoted as Pk. Further, the offspring population, of size
=N, is denoted as Pk
c. Recall that the distribution of Pk
cis
given byqk(x)as in Eq. (1). For now, no elitism is assumed to
strengthen the implications of our result - as randomized global
search algorithms with elitism trivially possess asymptotic
convergence properties.
To begin, let us deﬁne a parameter ==, such that
0<  < 1. Using the mixture distribution in Eq. (1), the
(;)parent selection scheme can be be modeled as [47],
pk(x;t+ 1) =(
qk(x;t)
if fk(x)k(t+ 1)
0otherwise(3)
wherek(t+ 1) represents a real number that satisﬁes,
Z
fk(x)k(t+1)qk(x;t)dx=: (4)
Thus, the transition from pk(x;t)topk(x;t+ 1) is based on
Eqs. (1), (3) and (4).
Theorem 1. Givenpk(x;0)is positive and continuous in
XXXfor allk, andN! 1 , the asymptotic convergence to
the global optimum(s) of each constitutive task is guaranteed
during multitasking if k> in Eq. (1).
Proof. Our deductions follow a similar style as [47]. At any
iterationt >0, theparent samples associated with task k
map to a set of objective values corresponding to fk. Let this
set be denoted as Fk(t), and the inﬁmum of the set as per Eq.
(3) isk(t), i.e.,k(t)= infFk(t). In other words, we have,
pk(x;t) = 0,fk(x)<k(t): (5)
This implies that a point is selected if and only if its objective
function is not less than k(t). We shall ﬁrst show that k(t)<
k(t+1). This condition provides the intuition that the spread
of the population must be contracting , gradually zooming in
on the most promising regions of the uniﬁed space.
Based on Eq. (4), while selecting parents Pk(t)from
offspringPk
c(t 1),k(t)satisﬁes,
Z
fk(x)k(t)qk(x;t 1)dx=: (6)Notice that if the following inequality holds,
Z
fk(x)k(t)qk(x;t)dx>Z
fk(x)k(t+1)qk(x;t)dx; (7)
thenk(t)<k(t+1). Invoking Eq. (1) for the left hand side
of Eq. (7), we have,
Z
fk(x)k(t)qk(x;t)dxZ
fk(x)k(t)kpk(x;t)dx:(8)
Moreover, Eq. (5) impliesR
fk(x)k(t)pk(x;t)dx= 1, which
on combining with Eq. (8) leads to the relation,
Z
fk(x)k(t)qk(x;t)dxk: (9)
Combining Eqs. (4), (7) and (9), we conclude that k(t)<
k(t+ 1) holds ifk> . The relation k(t)< k(t+ 1) ,
and the fact that kcan not be greater than f
kimplies that
there exists a limit limt!1k(t) =f0
ksuch thatf0
kf
k.
Hereafter, we present a proof that f0
k=f
kvia contradiction
by ﬁrst assuming,
f0
k<f
k: (10)
Based on the proposed transition procedure from pk(x;t)to
pk(x;t+ 1) and per Eqs. (1) and (3), note,
pk(x;t)pk(x;0)hk
it
8x:fk(x)>f0
k: (11)
LetH=fxjx2XXX;fk(x)>f0
kg. Sincepk(x;0)>0for any
x2XXX, and consideringk
>1, we have,
lim
t!1pk(x;t) = +1;8x2H: (12)
Noting that the Borel measure of His positive, and applying
Fatou’s lemma [48] to get,
lim
t!1Z
Hpk(x;t)dx= +1; (13)
it is clear that Eq. (13) contradicts the fact that pk(x;t)is a
probability density function. Thus, the contradiction implies
the conclusion,
lim
t!1k(t) =f
k: (14)
IV. T HE BASIC MULTIFACTORIAL EVOLUTIONARY
ALGORITHM
In this section, we present an overview of an instantiation of
a crossover and mutation based EA for multitask optimization.
Recently proposed, the so-called multifactorial evolutionary
algorithm (MFEA) [18] leverages on the implicit parallelism
of population-based search to solve multiple problems simul-
taneously with omnidirectional transfer of knowledge across
them. Under the relatively strong restriction of parent-centric
evolutionary operators, crossover and mutation based EAs can
be thought of as having resemblance to stochastic sampling-
based optimization algorithms [27]. To elaborate, parent-
centric operators tend to bias the offspring to be created nearer
to the parents with high probability [49]. In the literature, there
exists a family of operators that satisfy this assumption in

==== Page 6 ====
5
the context of real-coded EAs. Common examples include the
simulated binary crossover (SBX) [50], polynomial mutation
(PM) [51] and Gaussian mutation with small variance [52], to
name a few. In such settings, it is not unreasonable (as shown
below in Section IV-A) to consider that the empirical density
of the offspring population Pc(t)tends to closely approximate
that of the parent population P(t); which can be expressed as
pc(x;t)p(x;t). While such an assumption will not neces-
sarily hold under arbitrary evolutionary operators, it provides
sufﬁcient simpliﬁcation for an intuitive theoretical analysis that
builds on the result of Section III. The practical implications of
the same shall be demonstrated in the experimental sections.
A. Preservation of parent distribution under parent-centric
evolutionary operators
For simplicity, consider the probability distribution of a
parent population to follow a multivariate Gaussian with mean
mand covariance . Additionally, let the mean and covariance
of the offspring population be mcandcrespectively. It
is noteworthy that parent-centric crossover operators already
ensuremc=m[53]. In general, we may write pc(x;t) =
p(x;t)+m, wheremis a random vector with zero mean and
covariance. Restricting the evolutionary operators to treat
each variable independently (through variable-wise crossovers
and/or mutations), we may write c=+, whereis
a diagonal matrix of the form (i;i)=2
i. Here2
iis the
induced variance of the ithvariable during offspring creation.
The speciﬁed high probability of creating offspring near the
parents implies that 2
i<< (i;i). Therefore, c, which
suggests that the underlying distribution of the parent and
offspring populations remain largely unaltered under variable-
wise parent-centric operations.
B. Preliminaries of the MFEA
The MFEA employs a single population Pof individuals to
solveKoptimization tasks fT1;T2;:::;TKgsimultaneously,
where each task is seen as an added factor inﬂuencing the
evolution of the population. The subpopulation associated with
thekthtask is denoted as Pk. Given this background, certain
terminologies commonly encountered in the context of the
MFEA are as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Skill Factor ): The skill factoriof theith
individual is the one task, amongst all Ktasks in the
multitasking environment, with which the individual is
associated.
Deﬁnition 2 (Scalar Fitness ): The scalar ﬁtness of the
ithindividual in a multitasking environment is given by
'i= 1=ri
i, whereri
iis the rank of the ithindividual
on taski.
1) Overview of the MFEA: Algorithm 1 summarizes the
general work ﬂow of the present-day MFEA. The procedure
evolves a population of NKindividuals encoded in a uniﬁed
spaceXXX. Speciﬁcally, each of the Ktasks is allocated equal
resource of Nindividuals in its subpopulation. During the
evolutionary process, in addition to the standard intra-task
crossover between parents of the same skill factor, inter-
task crossover can also occur between candidate solutionsassociated with distinct optimization tasks, i.e., possessing
different skill factors. It is this simple feature that opens the
door for knowledge transfers through crossover-based genetic
exchanges across tasks.
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of a basic MFEA
1Randomly sample NKindividuals in XXXto form initial population P(0);
2for every individual piinP(0)do
3 Assign skill factor i= mod (i;K) + 1 , for the case of Ktasks ;
4 Evaluatepifor taskionly ;
5Sett= 1 ;
6while stopping conditions are not satisﬁed do
7P(t) Select topNK=2 (50%) of generated individuals (based on
scalar ﬁtness');
8 Conﬁgure offspring population Pc(t) =;;
9 while offspring generated for each task <N do
10 Sample two individuals uniformly at random (without replacement): xi
andxjfromP(t);
11 ifi==jthen
12 [xa;xb] Intra-task crossover betweenxiandxj;
13 Assign offspring xaandxbskill factori;
14 else if randrmp then
15 [xa;xb] Inter-task crossover betweenxiandxj;
16 Each offspring is randomly assigned skill factor iorj;
17 else
18 [xa] local variation (mutation) of xi;
19 Assign offspring xaskill factori;
20 [xb] local variation (mutation) of xj;
21 Assign offspring xbskill factorj;
22 Evaluate [xa;xb]for their assigned skill factors only;
23 Pc(t) =Pc(t)[[xa;xb]
24t=t+ 1;
The extent of knowledge transfer in the MFEA is governed
by a scalar (user-deﬁned) parameter labeled as the random
mating probability (rmp) . To elaborate on the role of the
rmp, we refer to Step 14in Algorithm 1. If two individuals
selected from the parent pool correspond to different tasks,
they can undergo crossover under a probability speciﬁed by
rmp2[0;1]. During inter-task crossover, the genetic material
created for one optimization task gets copied into the solution
chromosome of an individual associated with a different task.
As a result, implicit transfer of information is actualized across
tasks. Clearly, if rmpis large, the transfer is more frequent than
otherwise.
C. Theoretical Foundations of the MFEA
At any generation tof the MFEA, the probability density
functionp(x;t)of the parent population P(t)is essentially a
mixture ofKprobability densities pk(x;t)representing the
Ktasks in the multitask setting. Herein, the kthmixture
component corresponds to subpopulation Pk(t)P(t).
Importantly, while the overall offspring population distribution
may satisfy pc(x;t)p(x;t)under appropriate assumptions
on the evolutionary operators, the inter-task crossovers indicate
that distribution pk
c(x;t)need not necessarily be equivalent to
pk(x;t). In particular, we have the following result on the
mixture distribution occurring in the MFEA.
Lemma 2. Under the stated assumptions of parent-centric
evolutionary operators, the offspring mixture distribution
pk
c(x;t)of thekthtask in the MFEA can be expressed as,

==== Page 7 ====
6
pk
c(x;t) =
1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K
pk(x;t) +X
j6=k0:5rmp
Kpj(x;t):
(15)
Proof. Refer to supplemental material.
Note the resemblance between Eq. (15) and Eq. (1), with
pk
c(x;t)being analogous to qk(x;t).
1) Does the MFEA Converge?: Herein, we prove that the
MFEA asymptotically converges to the global optimum(s) of
each constitutive task regardless of the choice of rmp.
Theorem 3. Under the large population assumption (i.e.,
N! 1 ), the MFEA with parent-centric evolutionary op-
erators and (;)selection possesses asymptotic global con-
vergence properties across all tasks, given (==)0:5.
Proof. According to Theorem 1, for asymptotic global con-
vergence of the kthtask in the multitasking environment, it
sufﬁces to ensure that k> . With reference to Lemma 2,
the mixture coefﬁcient kcorresponds to,
k= 1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K: (16)
Since 0rmp1, it follows that 0:5< k1, and thus
kis indeed greater than . The above holds for all k.
D. Susceptibility to Negative Inter-Task Interactions in Evo-
lutionary Multitasking
As is clear from Algorithm 1, the performance of MFEA
relies on the choice of rmp. Given the lack of prior knowledge
about the inter-task relationships, tuning an appropriate rmp
(via trial and error) thus becomes burdensome. Essentially,
poor prescriptions of rmprisk the possibility of either predom-
inantly negative inter-task interactions, or the potential loss of
fruitful knowledge exchange.
In this section, we study the possible deleterious effects
of negative inter-task interactions in evolutionary multitask-
ing. In particular, we analyze the rate of convergence of
the MFEA under the adverse case of no complementarity
between constitutive tasks in a multitasking environment. A
direct approach in this regard is to measure the evolution of
thespread of subpopulations from generation ttot+ 1 as
k(t+1) k(t). Clearly, a large difference indicates a faster
rate of convergence.
1) Analyzing the Rate of Convergence of the MFEA:
Without loss of generality, we consider only the kthop-
timization task as the same arguments hold across all K
tasks. Given N! 1 , we simulate the adverse scenario
of no complementarity between constitutive tasks, at some
generationt(>0) of the MFEA, by assuming that wherever
pk(x;t)>0;we havepj(x;t) = 0;for allj6=k. By
extension, the following also holds,
fk(x)k(t))pj(x;t) = 0;for allj6=k: (17)
Qualitatively speaking, the optimum solution(s) of the kthtask
do not lie in the neighborhood of the optimum solution(s)
of any other task being optimized in the same multitasking
environment. With this, the effects of negative interactionsbetween optimization tasks can be analyzed by comparing the
expected progress (from generation ttot+ 1) of a traditional
single-tasking solver (denoted by ST) against its multitasking
counterpart. We make the simpliﬁcation that the population
distribution at the tthgeneration is identical for both solvers;
i.e.,pk;ST(x;t)pk(x;t)andk;ST(t)k(t).
Notably, due to the absence of inter-task crossovers in
single-tasking, the offspring distribution pk;ST
c(x;t)isnota
mixture model (unlike MFEA). Further, Section IV-A shows
that parent-centric operators result in pk;ST
c(x;t)pk(x;t).
Thus, for the (;)selection with 0:50,k;ST(t+ 1)
satisﬁes,
R
fk(x)k;ST(t+1)pk;ST
c(x;t)dx
Z
fk(x)k;ST(t+1)pk(x;t)dx=(= 0:5 ); where 2[0;0:5):
(18)
On the other hand, since k(t+ 1)>k(t)(Theorem 1), Eq.
(15) together with Eq. (17) imply that k(t+ 1) must satisfy,
R
fk(x)k(t+1)pk
c(x;t)dx=
Z
fk(x)k(t+1)
1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K
pk(x;t)dx= 0:5 :(19)
Forstrictly positive values of rmp, we have the inequality
0:5<[1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K]<1. Then, combining Eqs. (18)
and (19) leads to,
R
fk(x)k(t+1)pk(x;t)dx=
[0:5 ]
1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K 1
>Z
fk(x)k;ST(t+1)pk(x;t)dx;
(20)
which indicates k;ST(t+ 1)>k(t+ 1) . Therefore,
k;ST(t+ 1) k;ST(t)>k(t+ 1) k(t): (21)
Eq. (21) suggests that in the case where there is no com-
plementarity between tasks, single-tasking may lead to faster
convergence characteristics than multitasking. Further, the
result of Eq. (20) shows that the reduction in the convergence
rate of MFEA depends on the chosen rmp.
V. T RANSFER PARAMETER ESTIMATION VIA OPTIMAL
MIXTURE MODELING
In this section, we propose an online rmp estimation tech-
nique that theoretically guarantees to minimize the negative
(harmful) interactions between distinct optimization tasks.
From the convergence rate analysis of MFEA we infer that
negative transfers in multitasking can be suppressed by forcing
pk
c(x;t)to replicate pk(x;t)as closely as possible. Based
on Lemma 2, this can easily be accomplished by assigning
rmp= 0. However, such a naive strategy prohibits inter-task
crossovers and, as a result, prohibits any knowledge transfer
from occurring (see Algorithm 1). With this in mind, our pri-
mary goal is to put forward a strategy that promotes knowledge
transfer ( rmp>0), while simultaneously mitigating negative
inter-task interactions. To this end, we propose a novel data-
driven approach for online learning of rmp values that lead to
an optimal mixture distribution in Eq. (15).
It is worth mentioning that hereafter, RMP is no longer
a scalar parameter, but takes the form of a symmetric K

==== Page 8 ====
7
Kmatrix (givenKoptimization tasks) of pairwise values,
represented as,
RMP =2
64rmp 1;1rmp 1;2 
rmp 2;1rmp 2;2 
   
   3
75 (22)
wherermpj;k=rmpk;jcaptures the synergy (or the extent
of transfer) between the jthandkthtasks. Accordingly, it
is naturally enforced that rmpj;j= 1,8j.This enhancement
offers the distinct advantage that in many practical scenarios,
where the complementarity between tasks may not be uniform
across different task-pairs, our proposed method shall be
capable of capturing non-uniform inter-task synergies .
At generation t, considergk(x;t)to be a probabilistic
model (estimate) of the true distribution pk(x;t)of anykth
task of interest. Herein, gk(x;t)is built from the dataset of
subpopulation Pk(t). By replacing the true density functions
with the learned probabilistic models, and using the elements
of theRMP matrix instead of the scalar rmp, Eq. (15) can
be rewritten as,
gk
c(x;t) =2
41 0:5
KX
k6=jrmpk;j3
5gk(x;t) +0:5
KX
j6=krmpk;jgj(x;t):
(23)
whereingk
c(x;t)is a probabilistic mixture model approximat-
ing the distribution of the offspring population: pk
c(x;t).
Thus, in order to force pk
c(x;t)to closely replicate pk(x;t),
it is equivalent to learning the RMP matrix such that the
offspring probabilistic model gk
c(x;t)accurately models the
parent distribution pk(x;t), for allk2f1;2;:::;Kg.
A. Learning the RMP Matrix Online
The ﬁrst step is to build probabilistic models gk(x;t)on
each subpopulation Pk(t), for allk2f1;2;:::;Kg. From here
onwards, consider the parameter (==)to be 0:5. Then,
given theN=2parent solutions in each subpopulation Pk(t)
at some iteration t, we propose to learn the RMP matrix by
maximizing the following log-likelihood function:
maxRMPKX
k=1N=2X
i=1loggk
c(xik;t): (24)
wherexikis theithsample (individual) in the dataset of Pk(t).
We claim that the data-driven learning paradigm of Eq. (24)
serves to reduce the “gap” betweengk
c(x;t)andpk(x;t),
measured over all k. In this regard, we note that a commonly
encountered quantiﬁer of distribution gaps is the Kullback
Leibler ( KL) divergence [54]. Speciﬁcally, the KLdivergence
provides the amount of information lost when an arbitrary
density function gis used to approximate another density p.
The mathematical equation corresponding to this deﬁnition is,
KL(pjjg) =Z
XXXp(x)[logp(x) logg(x)]dx: (25)
In what follows, we prove our claim in the context of the KL
divergence.
Theorem 4. Maximizing the likelihood function in Eq. (24)
is equivalent to minimizing the gap between the probabil-
ity densities gk
c(x;t)andpk(x;t)averaged across all tasks
fT1;T2;:::;Tk;:::;TKg.Proof.PN=2
i=1loggk
c(xik;t)can also be written as,
(N=2)PN=2
i=1loggk
c(xik;t)
N=2=N
2E
loggk
c(xik;t)
:(26)
where E[]is the expected value. Under the assumption of
largeN, the empirical probability density function induced by
the samples in Pk(t)converges to the underlying probability
densitypk(x;t)[45]. Thus, we have,
E
loggk
c(x;t)
=Z
XXXpk(x;t)loggk
c(x;t)dx: (27)
Accordingly, we can restate the mathematical formulation of
Eq. (24) as,
maxRMPKX
k=1Z
XXXpk(x;t)loggk
c(x;t)dx: (28)
Note that maximizing Eq. (28) is equivalent to the following
minimization problem, given pk(x;t)to be ﬁxed,
minRMPKX
k=1Z
XXXpk(x;t)
logpk(x;t) loggk
c(x;t)
dx:
(29)
Referring to Eq. (25), we can express Eq. (29) in terms of the
KLdivergence as:
minRMPKX
k=1KL 
pk(x;t)jjgk
c(x;t)
: (30)
In other words, the mathematical program of Eq. (24) indeed
minimizes the gap (given by the KLdivergence) between
the mixture models gk
c(x;t)and the true density functions
pk(x;t), averaged across all Koptimization tasks.
Theorem 4 highlights that through the proposed data-driven
learning of the RMP matrix, the various tasks in a multitask
setting can be directly brought to bear upon one another,
while facilitating the suppression of negative transfers. In other
words, the method results in a theoretically principled adaptive
online transfer parameter estimation scheme.
With regard to the online learning paradigm, an impor-
tant matter of “practical” interest is the choice of proba-
bilistic model type for building gk(x;t), for allPk(t)2
fP1(t);P2(t);:::;PK(t)g. To this end, observe that choosing
a complex probabilistic model that may tend to overﬁt the
(in practice reasonably small) dataset Pk(t), potentially leads
to the cancellation of inter-task transfers. This is in fact a
well documented phenomenon even in the classical trans-
fer/multitask learning literature, which is typically overcome
by internal cross-validation steps or noise incorporation for
preventing overﬁtting [26, 55]. Along similar lines, in this
paper we propose to use simple and fast probabilistic modeling
approaches (e.g., univariate marginal distributions) to help
prevent the overﬁtting issue; which in turn allows the various
other models in the multitask setting to be mobilized for ﬁlling
in distribution gaps.

==== Page 9 ====
8
Unified Search Space X
Set t = 0 ;
Generate P(0) with randomly 
assigned skill factors τ 
Evaluate P(0) w.r.t. skill factors 
Pc (t) = Crossover + Mutate ( P(t), rmp) 
Evaluate Pc (t) w.r.t. skill factors 
Elitist selection of   P(t+1) from 
P(t) U Pc (t)
Set t = t+ 1; Assign skill factors to Pc (t) 
Terminate ? 
ExitMFEA MFEA-II 
Learn probabilistic model k (x,t) 
of  Pk (t) ∀ k
Pc (t) = Crossover + Mutate ( P(t), RMP ) Preset scalar rmp
YesNo
Fig. 1. Left: General framework of the existing MFEA. Notice that MFEA employs an ofﬂine scalar rmp assignment. Right: MFEA-II with the added online
RMP matrix learning module.
B. Main Ingredients of MFEA-II
This section introduces the enhanced MFEA-II incorporated
with the proposed online RMP matrix learning scheme.
Algorithm 2 provides the pseudocode of the RMP learning
procedure (Section V-A). The general steps associated with
MFEA-II are illustrated by Figure 1 (right side). As depicted,
the initial phases of MFEA-II are basically similar to the
existing MFEA. The distinguishing facet of the MFEA-II is
the incorporation of the online RMP learning module within
the overall optimization algorithm. It is important to highlight
that given built probabilistic models gk(x;t), the mathematical
problem of Eq. (24) is convex upward . As a result, it is found to
be solved to optimality at little computational overhead using
classical optimizers.
Algorithm 2: OnlineRMP learning
1Build simple and fast models gk(x;t)on each subpopulation Pk(t),8
k2f1;2;:::;Kg.
2Optimize mixture models: maxRMPPK
k=1PN=2
i=1loggk
c(xik;t):
To summarize, in MFEA-II, the offspring population Pc(t)
is generated based on the learned RMP matrix, which au-
tomatically ascertains the extent of genetic transfer across
distinct tasks. Note that the main modiﬁcation compared to
the original MFEA occurs during inter-task crossover in steps
14 21of Algorithm 1. The modiﬁed steps of MFEA-II are
summarized in Algorithm 3, wherein solutions correspondingto different tasks undergo crossover based on the learned
RMP matrix. Further, note that during inter-task crossovers, a
parent-centric operator (without additional uniform crossover-
like variable swap) is applied so as to ensure that this key
assumption of our theoretical deduction does indeed hold in
the present instantiation of MFEA-II. Each generated offspring
also undergoes small parent-centric mutation. It is worthwhile
to mention that if the learned RMP matrix is full of 0’s,
the MFEA-II works similar to multiple canonical EAs exe-
cuting single-tasking in parallel. The ability of the MFEA-
II to identify discrepancies and interpret similarities across
multiple tasks on the ﬂy is exempliﬁed through subsequent
experimental studies.
Algorithm 3: Inter-task crossover in MFEA-II
1Randomly sample two individuals xiandxjfromP(t);
2ifi6=jthen
3 ifrandrmpi;jthen
4 [xa;xb] Inter-task crossover betweenxiandxj;
5 Each offspring is randomly assigned skill factor iorj;
6 else
7 Randomly select x0
iwith skill factor i;
8 [xa] Intra-task crossover betweenxiandx0
i;
9 Assign offspring xaskill factori;
10 Randomly select x0
jwith skill factor j;
11 [xb] Intra-task crossover betweenxjandx0
j;
12 Assign offspring xbskill factorj;

==== Page 10 ====
9
VI. E XPERIMENTAL STUDY
In this section, numerical illustrations are presented that
showcase the efﬁcacy of the proposed online parameter es-
timation scheme of the MFEA-II. Herein, we conduct ex-
perimental studies on a variety of problems, ranging from
discrete to continuous benchmark optimization. In addition, we
investigate the practicality of our proposition on increasingly
challenging variants of the double-pole balancing controller
design task [56]. For rigorous analysis, the performance of the
MFEA-II is compared against a number of baseline solvers.
Firstly, we consider the basic counterparts, i.e, the present
day multifactorial evolutionary algorithm (denoted as MFEA-
I) [18] and the standalone canonical EA (CEA). Further,
for the case of continuous double-pole balancing problem,
two state-of-the-art variants of natural evolutionary strate-
gies (NES) [57] are considered as additional baselines for
comparison. These include the separable natural evolutionary
strategy (SNES) [58] and the exponential natural evolutionary
strategy (xNES) [59]. It is worthwhile to mention that NES
has garnered much recent attention as a powerful evolutionary
solver, with notable applications in OpenAI1projects on
reinforcement learning [60].
A. Experimental Conﬁguration
The experimental setup is outlined in what follows. The
population size N(per task) is kept the same for all algorithms,
ensuring consistency. Speciﬁcally, if a single-tasking algorithm
utilizes a population size Nfor each of the Ktasks, then a
multitasking algorithm tackling the same Ktasks is assigned
a population size of NK. The general algorithmic settings
for all the problems are:
1) Continuized uniﬁed representation with range
[0;1]Dunified ;
2) Evolutionary operators for MFEA-II, MFEA-I and CEA:
a) SBX crossover with probability ( pc) =1and dis-
tribution index c= 15 ;
b) Polynomial mutation with probability ( pm) =1=d
and distribution index m= 15 ;
3) Probabilistic model for MFEA-II: variable-wise
(marginal) normal distribution;
4) For the pedagogical case study:
a) Population size ( N):100;
b) Maximum function evaluations: 15;000;
5) For the synthetic continuous benchmark set:
a) Population size ( N):50
b) Maximum function evaluations: 500;000;
6) For the double-pole balancing problem:
a) Population size ( N):100;
b) Maximum function evaluations: 10;000;
7)rmp: Learned online for MFEA-II. For MFEA-I:
a)0:3for the pedagogical study and the synthetic
continuous benchmarks (as per [25]);
b)0:1for the double-pole balancing (tuned for best
performance).
1https://openai.com/Note that we utilize the SBX and polynomial mutation oper-
ators since they agree with the underlying assumptions of the
theoretical derivations in Section IV.
The implementations of the NES variants are obtained
from [61]. Based on [62], the optimized set of parameters
are found to be:
1) For SNES, the learning rates for the search parameters
mean and standard deviation are = 1 and=
0:1058 , respectively.
2) For xNES, the learning rates for the mean and covariance
components are = 1 and=B= 0:0017 .
We note that the aforementioned optimized NES parameters
are close to default settings. Both NES variants incorporate
rank based ﬁtness shaping, as was suggested in [57].
B. Pedagogical Case Study
We begin by considering a set of binary optimization
problems as toy examples. While decoding candidate solutions
from the continuous uniﬁed space (XXX= [0;1]Dunified )to the
discrete/binary space, a variable is assigned a value of 0if its
encoded counterpart is less than or equal to 0:5. Else, it is
assigned a value of 1.
For this particular study, three popular binary problems from
literature are studied, namely, onemax ,zeromax and the highly
deceptive trap-5 problem [63]. While the optimum of onemax
is the string of all 10s, that of zeromax is the string of all
00s. In trap- 5, the string is ﬁrst partitioned into consecutive
groups of 5non-overlapping bits. Further, a 5-bit trap function
is applied to each of the groups, and the contribution of each
group towards the combined objective function is given as
follows.
trap 5(u) =(
5 ifu= 5
(4 u)ifu<5(31)
whereuis the number of 10sin the group. Observe there exists
only one global optimum of the trap- 5problem, when all the
bits in theD dimensional input string are 10s, and ( 2d
5 1)
other local optima.
The rationale behind the choice of the above set of problems
is that they provide an ideal platform to showcase the poten-
tial advantages of the proposed online parameter estimation
scheme of MFEA-II. To elaborate, the optimum solution of
onemax is seen to intersect with the global optimum of trap-
5, implying that the crossover-based exchange of genetic
material across tasks is indeed a suitable mode of transfer.
However, due to the presence of a large number of local
optimum in trap- 5, it is deemed that the uninhibited inter-task
crossovers between the two tasks is unfavorable, since this can
potentially hinder the convergence characteristics of onemax.
Additionally, the zeromax problem is clearly conﬂicting with
onemax in terms of solution similarity, and by extension, with
the trap- 5problem as well. Nonetheless, the worst (highly
deceptive) local optimum of trap- 5corresponds to the global
optimum of zeromax. Therefore, it is contended that solving
the three tasks concurrently using the existing MFEA-I (with
manually speciﬁed scalar rmp), would be susceptible to neg-
ative transfers.

==== Page 11 ====
10
(a) learned inter-task rmp’s of MFEA-II
0 50 100 150
Generations80100120140160180200Average objective value
MFEA-II
MFEA-I
CEA (b) Convergence trends of trap 5
Fig. 2. Left: Pairwise rmp’s learned between distinct tasks over successive generations. The shaded regions span one half standard deviation on either side of
the mean. Right: Convergence trends (averaged over 30 independent runs) achieved by all the algorithms on the trap  5problem. As shown, both multitasking
variants are superior to CEA, with MFEA-II being the most dominant.
In this study, we solve dimensionality D= 200 variants of
each of the three problems. The multitasking variants MFEA-I
and MFEA-II tackle all the three tasks simultaneously, while
CEA solves each in isolation. A summary of the experimental
results averaged over 30independent runs are contained in
Figure 2. Note that a 33symmetrical RMP matrix is learned
for MFEA-II, capturing the pairwise inter-task similarities over
successive generations. The learned RMP matrix elements are
presented in Figure 2(a).
Figure 2(b) shows the convergence trends of the highly
deceptive trap- 5problem. For brevity, the convergence trends
of one-max and zero-max problems are omitted. In general,
it can be observed that the scope for genetic transfer in both
multitasking variants (MFEA-I and MFEA-II) has been ben-
eﬁcial, while the single-tasking CEA gets constantly trapped
in the deceptive local optimum. Further, upon a closer look at
Figure 2(b), it can be seen that the convergence behavior of
MFEA-I has been fairly inferior to that of MFEA-II. Notice
that MFEA-I does not always converge to the global optimum.
This is primarily due to the uninhabited exchange of genetic
materials in the MFEA-I, making it vulnerable to negative
transfers. However, this is clearly not the case with MFEA-II,
which exploits the relationships learned from task datasets to
optimally mandate knowledge transfers (at different stages of
the optimization phase). As is depicted by Figure 2(a), during
the initial stages, when the transfer across the three tasks is
unlikely to be helpful, the learned RMP matrix values are
indeed low. Progressively, once high quality genetic material
is available for transfer from onemax to the trap- 5problem
(around after 50generations), the online parameter estimation
scheme starts prescribing higher values of the corresponding
inter-task rmp. As indicated by the high rmp values, the
positive transfers from onemax guide the trap- 5to consistently
(and quickly) converge to the global optimum. We also note
that relatively low to medium rmp values are learned between
zeromax and trap- 5, implying that the search is to some extent
drawn towards the highly deceptive local optimum of trap-
5(under the inﬂuence of zeromax). In contrast, negligible(near zero) rmpvalues are learned between conﬂicting problem
pairs onemax and zeromax throughout the evolutionary search.
As a result, the MFEA-II successfully identiﬁes and exploits
positive transfer (when available), while circumventing the
negative exchanges plaguing MFEA-I; see Figure 2(b).
For further analysis of the performance of MFEA-II on
other toy examples, the reader is referred to the supplemental
material.
C. Synthetic continuous benchmark functions
In the next set of examples, we showcase the rmp learned
given known inter-task relationships between task pairs. To
this end, we utilize some of the CEC composite minimization
benchmark functions comprising of high, medium and low
inter-task similarities [25]. The inter-task similarity measure
TABLE I
BENCHMARK PROBLEM SETS [25]
Category Task D Landscape Rs
1CI+HSGriewank (T1) 50 multimodal, nonseparable1.0000Rastrigin (T2) 50 multimodal, nonseparable
2CI+MSAckley (T1) 50 multimodal, nonseparable0.2261Rastrigin (T2) 50 multimodal, nonseparable
3CI+LSAckley (T1) 50 multimodal, nonseparable0.0002Schwefel (T2) 50 multimodal, separable
4NI+HSRosenbrock (T1) 50 multimodal, nonseparable0.9434Rastrigin (T2) 50 multimodal, nonseparable
5NI+MSGriewank (T1) 50 multimodal, nonseparable0.3669Weierstrass (T2) 50 multimodal, nonseparable
between a pair of tasks ( Rs) is based on the Spearmans
rank correlation between their respective function landscapes.
Accordingly, the problem pairs with Rs<0:2are considered
to have low similarity (LS), problem pairs with 0:2Rs<
0:8are deﬁned as medium similarity (MS), and pairs with
Rs0:8imply high inter-task similarity (HS). Further,
the global optima of each of the task-pairs may completely
intersect in the uniﬁed search space, denoted as CI, or may
not intersect , denoted as NI. The dimensions of each of the
tasks is represented by Din Table I.

==== Page 12 ====
11
To begin with, we analyze Table II containing the numerical
results achieved by MFEA-II, MFEA-I and CEA on the com-
posite benchmark problems. A task is assumed to be solved
if it reaches an objective function value within a convergence
tolerance threshold of 1e 04, hence recorded as 0:00.
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF MFEA-II WITH MFEA-I AND CEA ON THE
CONTINUOUS MINIMIZATION BENCHMARK PROBLEM SETS . THE MEAN
AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF 30INDEPENDENT RUNS ARE PROVIDED .
BOLDFACE ENTRIES MARKED WITH *ARE BEST AND SIGNIFICANTLY THE
BEST (BYWILCOXON TEST WITH SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL 0.05). B EST BUT
NOT SIGNIFICANTLY THE BEST ENTRIES ARE ONLY BOLDFACE .
MFEA-II MFEA-I CEA
Problem set T1T2T1T2T1T2
1CI+HS0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 82.35
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.51
2CI+MS0.00 0.000.00 5.57 18.82 82.17
0.00 0.00 0.00 7.26 0.92 12.17
3CI+LS19.98 1.67E+0320.00 3.60e+03 20.01 1.94E+03
0.04 5.18E+02 0.002 7.26E+02 0.01 4.34E+02
4NI+HS55.42 4.0858.51 13.10 65.99 83.89
29.91 9.73 47.99 34.33 32.52 13.06
5NI+MS0.00 20.61 0.00 21.08 0.00 31.52
0.00 1.19 0.00 1.72 0.00 4.96
It is seen that MFEA-II demonstrates consistently supe-
rior performance overall. Not only has MFEA-II performed
generally better in the cases of high similarities, it has also
outperformed MFEA-I and CEA for the problem pair with low
inter-task similarity (CI+LS). In particular, it can be observed
that MFEA-II has improved the performance of MFEA-I on
T2of CI+LS. This is because the lack of inter-task similarities
makes the MFEA-I susceptible to predominantly negative
transfer of genetic materials. On the contrary, MFEA-II dy-
namically modulates the extent of genetic transfers in order to
minimize such harmful negative inter-task interactions. Most
importantly, the same performance beneﬁts continues to hold
for the no intersection (NI) cases as well.
In order to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of the online RMP
learning module, we analyze the learned pairwise rmp curves
of MFEA-II across various task-pairs characterized by differ-
ent degrees of similarities. Figure 3 reveals that the MFEA-
II successfully deciphers the underlying inter-task similarities
online . Notice from Figures 3(a) and 3(b) that high values
ofrmp are learned (close to 1) for problem sets CI+HS and
NI+HS that were known to have high inter-task similarities
(Rs1). Similarly, relatively lower rmp values are learned
for the problem pairs NI+MS and CI+LS with lower inter-
task similarity; see Figures 3(c) and 3(d). Intuitively, based
on the above observations, we conjecture that the online rmp
estimation scheme indeed captures synergies (and identiﬁes
differences) across diverse optimization tasks in multitask
settings.
To give a concrete example of the added beneﬁts of online
parameter estimation, we show the convergence behavior of
MFEA-II against its counterparts MFEA-I and CEA for the
CI+HS case. As is clear from Figure 4, MFEA-II is overall
superior to MFEA-I and CEA. It can be seen that MFEA-
II converges signiﬁcantly faster (within 100;000 FE’s) in
0 1 2 3 4 5
Function Evaluations ×10500.20.40.60.811.2learned rmp(a) CI+HS
0 1 2 3 4 5
Function Evaluations ×10500.20.40.60.811.2learned rmp (b) NI+HS
0 1 2 3 4 5
Function Evaluations ×105-0.200.20.40.60.811.2learned rmp
(c) NI+MS
0 1 2 3 4 5
Function Evaluations ×105-0.0500.050.10.150.2learned rmp (d) CI+LS
Fig. 3. Learned pairwise rmp values between pairs of tasks achieved by MFEA-II on
different problem sets characterized by different degrees of inter-task similarities. The
plots are averaged over 30independent runs with the shaded regions spanning one-half
standard deviation on either side of the mean.
Function Evaluations ×1050 1 2 3 4 5log(f*)
10-1510-1010-5100 MFEA-II
MFEA-I
CEA
(a) CI+HS - T1
Function Evaluations ×1050 1 2 3 4 5log(f*)
10-1510-1010-5100105 (b) CI+HS - T2
Fig. 4. Convergence trends (averaged over 30 independent runs) achieved by the three
tested algorithms on the problem set CI+HS with high degrees of inter-task similarity.
comparison to MFEA-I on both tasks, T1andT2. The rea-
son behind this accelerated convergence of MFEA-II can be
inferred from the learned rmp trend in Figure 3(a).
D. A Practical Case Study of Multitasking
In previous works, the applicability of multitasking in di-
verse real-world domains, including operations research [64],
engineering [19], machine learning [65], etc., has already been
demonstrated. Accordingly, in this section, our goal is more
towards analyzing the behavior of the newly proposed MFEA-
II in practical settings. We consider a neuroevolution-based
approach to simultaneously solving multiple variants of the
double-pole balancing controller design task. In particular, we
highlight that in a multitasking environment, not only can

==== Page 13 ====
12
complex tasks beneﬁt from simpler ones, but the reverse can
also hold (as a consequence of omnidirectional knowledge
transfer). Notably, this is a feature unique to multitasking that
is not available in sequential transfer procedures. We further
showcase the efﬁcacy of the MFEA-II in the face of many
tasks occurring at once.
In literature, the double-pole balancing problem (or inverted
pendulum system) has been a standard benchmark for artiﬁcial
learning systems [56, 66–69]. The problem involves balancing
two poles (of different lengths) hinged on a cart, using a neural
network controller, such that the poles do not fall beyond
a predeﬁned vertical angle and the cart remains within the
bounds of a horizontal track. Typically, the length of the longer
pole remains ﬁxed to 1:0mwhile the length of the shorter pole
lsmaybe varied. As substantiated in literature [56], the task
of balancing both the poles become progressively harder as
the poles assume similar lengths. In other words, the system
becomes difﬁcult to control as the length of the shorter pole
lsapproaches to 1:0m.
As such, it gets challenging (even for state-of-the-art opti-
mizers) to solve such difﬁcult control tasks from scratch (zero-
state knowledge). Accelerating the acquisition of grounded
knowledge by learning with many goals (tasks) has been a
promising approach in the domain of reinforcement learning
systems. It has been shown that while intentionally attempting
to solve the harder tasks, other simpler tasks can be implicitly
(unintentionally) solved [10]. Furthermore, in this study we
demonstrate that during multitasking, both simple and hard
tasks can mutually beneﬁt from one another as a unique
consequence of the omnidirectional transfer of knowledge.
In our experiments, we consider the Markovian case of the
double-pole task. To elaborate, all state variables, including,
the cart position- x, the cart velocity- _x, angle of longer pole-
1, angular velocity of longer pole- _1, angle of shorter pole-
2, and the angular velocity of shorter pole- _2, are available
as inputs to the neural network. The associated equations
of motions and experimental parameters are based on the
descriptions provided in [68, 70].
The dynamical system is evaluated using the fourth-order
Runge-Kutta numerical integration scheme with step size
= 0:01s. That is to say, this is a simulation-based black-
box optimization problem since the analytical form of the
objective function is unknown. A simple feedforward neural
network (FNN) controller, with 10 hidden neurons, is used.
The optimization problem is about automatically tuning the
weights of the FNN controller. Accordingly, the network
outputs a force between [ 10;10]Nevery 0:02seconds. This
force is then applied to the cart and the next state is updated,
which is reintroduced as the new input to the neural network.
The process continues until a failure occurs or the desired
control action has been performed for the required amount
of time. The amount of time before failure thus becomes the
measurable ﬁtness. The initial position of the longer pole is
set to1= 1and the shorter pole remains upright ( 2= 0).
The track was set to 4:8mlong. For the task to be solved,
the angles of the poles have to be in the speciﬁed range
[ 36;36]for105time steps, where each step corresponds to
0:02s. This is equivalent to over 30minutes of simulated time.1) Omnidirectional Transfer in Multitask Optimization:
In this particular study, we highlight the beneﬁts of omnidi-
rectional transfer in multitasking. As opposed to sequential
transfer methods which tackle one task at a time through
unidirectional knowledge transfers (from past to present),
multitasking offers the ﬂexibility of handling multiple tasks
concurrently. With this in mind, we demonstrate that the
omnidirectional genetic transfer regime of MFEA-II makes
it possible for all tasks to gain maximum beneﬁts from one
another. To showcase this facet of multitasking, we refer to the
numerical results contained in Table III. Therein, three tasks
of different short pole lengths ls(with increasing difﬁculty
levels) are considered. The percentage of successful runs (out
of30independent runs) is used as a performance measure to
compare MFEA-II against CEA.
TABLE III
PERCENTAGE SUCCESS RATE (OUT OF 30RUNS )OF THREE DIFFERENT
TASKS . THEY ARE EITHER SOLVED SEPARATELY (CEA), OR MERGED INTO
PAIRS OR A TRIPLET (MFEA-II).
Taskls CEAMFEA-II
(T1;T2) (T1;T3) (T2;T3) (T1;T2;T3)
T1 0:60m 27% 30% 30% - 47%
T2 0:65m 0% 27% - 27% 37%
T3 0:70m 0% - 7% 27% 17%
According to the results, it can be seen that by tackling
all the three tasks separately, the CEA can only solve task
T1(27%) and fails to ﬁnd suitable control strategies for the
more challenging variants T2andT3, within the allocated
computational budget. respectively. On the other hand, the
performance consistently improves if we tackle two distinct
tasks simultaneously using MFEA-II. The dash symbol ( -)
in Table III implies the absence of a particular task in the
MFEA-II. In addition to improving the success rate of task T1
(30%), multitasking also helps to improve the performance of
harder instances T2andT3when compared to single tasking.
Eventually, pooling all the three tasks together ( T1;T2;T3),
signiﬁcantly improves the overall performance of tasks T1
(47%) and T2(37%). This highlights the fact that genetic
transfers from complex tasks such as T3(ls= 0:70m), can
also help to boost the performance of simpler tasks T1andT2.
2) Some insights on Many Tasking: We extend our experi-
mental setup to a series of six different tasks of different short
pole lengths ls, ranging from 0:45mto0:70m. Further, two
state-of-the-art solvers SNES [58] and xNES [59] are included
as additional baselines for comparison. The percentage success
rate (out of 30runs) of each of the algorithms, on each task
is summarized in Table IV.
Overall, the numerical results reveal that the MFEA-II is
superior to other methods, on almost all the tasks under consid-
eration. While MFEA-I, SNES and xNES have demonstrated
competitive performance on the ﬁrst three tasks ( T1,T2,T3),
their performances rapidly drop as the length lsincreases.
Apart from MFEA-II, the success rate of all other methods
is signiﬁcantly low on the increasingly challenging variants

==== Page 14 ====
13
TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF VARIOUS METHODS ON DIFFERENT SHORT POLE
LENGTHS ls,FOR THE DOUBLE -POLE BALANCING PROBLEM . THETABLE
SHOWS THE PERCENTAGE SUCCESS RATE (%) OUT OF 30INDEPENDENT
RUNS . BEST ENTRIES ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD .
Success Rate (%)
Taskls MFEA-II MFEA-I SNES [58] xNES [59]
T1 0:45m 100% 80% 100% 97%
T2 0:50m 100% 80% 77% 97%
T3 0:55m 97% 60% 73% 100%
T4 0:60m 83% 50% 27% 43%
T5 0:65m 63% 20% 13% 10%
T6 0:70m 37% 10% 0% 0%
Fig. 5. Comparison of total number of function evaluations consumed by
each of the algorithms in solving all the six different tasks.
T5(ls=0:65m) andT6(ls=0:70m). MFEA-II has improved
the success for the last two more difﬁcult control tasks T5and
T6, with 63% and37% success respectively. On a closer look,
it can be observed that MFEA-I has also performed better than
the standalone solvers on the last two difﬁcult task instances.
In fact, SNES and xNES are found to be unsuccessful in
effectively balancing both the poles for T6withls=0:70m. As
an important aside, the total number of function evaluations
required by MFEA-II to solve all the six different tasks is
measurably less than the rest of the solvers, as shown by
Figure 5.
Further, Figure 6 shows the pairwise rmpj;kvalues learned
between distinct task-pairs TjandTk, during the course of the
optimization phase in MFEA-II. The curves highlight the ex-
istence of underlying inter-task synergies between 15possible
task-pairs of different short pole lengths ls. Accordingly, the
amount of transfers is regulated by the learned rmp’s in the
RMP matrix, which are seen to vary across different stages
of the optimization process. Recall that if rmp is high, the
frequency of transfer is high. In contrast, the frequency of
transfer in MFEA-I remains ﬁxed by the preset value of rmp.
Importantly, Figure 6 highlights that MFEA-II is able to
autonomously distinguish similar tasks from dissimilar ones.
To elaborate, it is worth noting that tasks with short poles of
similar lengths are intuitively expected to have more synergy.
(a) Set 1
 (b) Set 2
(c) Set 3
 (d) Set 4
Fig. 6. Pairwise rmp’s of MFEA-II, learned between constitutive tasks of different short
pole lengths. The plots are averaged over 30independent runs and the shaded regions
span one-half standard deviation on either side of the mean.
Accordingly, from Table IV, it can be said that T1is more
similar toT2than it is to T3=T4=T5=T6. Similarly,T2is more
similar toT3than it is to T4=T5=T6. Figure 6 shows that
MFEA-II precisely captures this trend. In other words, as the
expected inter-task similarity decreases, so do the learned rmp
values.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel online transfer parameter
estimation scheme for evolutionary multitasking, capable of
learning and exploitation of inter-task synergies on the ﬂy.
As a ﬁrst step to our proposition, we theoretically analyze
the shortcomings of the existing evolutionary multitasking
framework MFEA-I from the standpoint of its susceptibility
to negative transfers. Accordingly, we introduce the MFEA-
II, integrated with online transfer parameter estimation to
dynamically control the extent of knowledge exchange across
tasks. Speciﬁcally, the extent of transfer is adapted based on
the optimal blending (mixing) of probabilistic models in order
to capture inter-task similarities online in a purely data-driven
manner. The algorithmic contributions of MFEA-II can be
summarized from two perspectives:
The transfer parameter takes the form of a symmetric
matrix for effectively multitasking across more than two
tasks with possibly diverse inter-task relationships.
The transfer parameter matrix is learned and adapted
online during the course of the multitasking search.
The practicality of the MFEA-II was demonstrated ex-
perimentally on a series of synthetic as well as practical
optimization problems. Essentially, the experimental results
reveal that the algorithm is indeed adept at exploiting the

==== Page 15 ====
14
similarities and discrepancies between tasks during multitask
optimization, thereby allaying any fear of harmful inter-task
interactions. Notably, in the context of complex controller
design tasks, the utility of the online knowledge transfer
scheme is clearly revealed. Furthermore, our proposed method
is automatic, alleviates human intervention (for ascertaining
inter-task synergies), and yields consistently superior perfor-
mance in comparison to some state-of-the-art optimizers.
Looking into the future, emerging platforms such as cloud
computing and the internet of things will offer large-scale
data storage and seamless communication facilities, thereby
making it possible for embedded optimization solvers to take
advantage of the knowledge (data) made available by related
tasks. In such settings, the general principles of multitasking
are expected to play a key role in simultaneously solving mul-
tiple tasks (both more efﬁciently and effectively) by exploiting
recurring real-world patterns. This notion of multitasking lends
itself to a form of General Optimization Intelligence (GOI)
- characterized by universal machines capable of performing
varied tasks and learning with experience.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is partially supported by the Singapore Institute
of Manufacturing Technology-Nanyang Technological Uni-
versity (SIMTech-NTU) Joint Laboratory and Collaborative
research Programme on Complex Systems.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Thrun, “Is learning the n-th thing any easier than learning the
ﬁrst?” in Advances in neural information processing systems ,
1996, pp. 640–646.
[2] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE
Transactions on knowledge and data engineering , vol. 22,
no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, 2010.
[3] M. Iqbal, W. N. Browne, and M. Zhang, “Extracting and using
building blocks of knowledge in learning classiﬁer systems,”
inProceedings of the 14th annual conference on Genetic and
evolutionary computation . ACM, 2012, pp. 863–870.
[4] ——, “Reusing building blocks of extracted knowledge to solve
complex, large-scale boolean problems,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 465–480, 2014.
[5] M. Iqbal, B. Xue, H. Al-Sahaf, and M. Zhang, “Cross-domain
reuse of extracted knowledge in genetic programming for image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computa-
tion, 2017.
[6] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” in Learning to learn .
Springer, 1998, pp. 95–133.
[7] Y .-S. Ong and A. Gupta, “Evolutionary multitasking: a com-
puter science view of cognitive multitasking,” Cognitive Com-
putation , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 125–142, 2016.
[8] A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, and L. Feng, “Insights on transfer
optimization: Because experience is the best teacher,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence ,
p. In Press.
[9] A. Gupta and Y .-S. Ong, Memetic Computation: The Main-
spring of Knowledge Transfer in a Data-Driven Optimization
Era. Springer, 2019.
[10] S. Cabi, S. G. Colmenarejo, M. W. Hoffman, M. Denil, Z. Wang,
and N. de Freitas, “The intentional unintentional agent: Learn-
ing to solve many continuous control tasks simultaneously,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.03300 , 2017.
[11] P. Cunningham and B. Smyth, “Case-based reasoning in
scheduling: reusing solution components,” International Journal
of Production Research , vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 2947–2962, 1997.[12] M. Kaedi and N. Ghasem-Aghaee, “Biasing bayesian optimiza-
tion algorithm using case based reasoning,” Knowledge-Based
Systems , vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1245–1253, 2011.
[13] M. Pelikan, M. W. Hauschild, and P. L. Lanzi, “Transfer
learning, soft distance-based bias, and the hierarchical boa,”
inInternational Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from
Nature . Springer, 2012, pp. 173–183.
[14] L. Feng, Y .-S. Ong, A.-H. Tan, and I. W. Tsang, “Memes as
building blocks: a case study on evolutionary optimization+
transfer learning for routing problems,” Memetic Computing ,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 159–180, 2015.
[15] M. Jiang, Z. Huang, L. Qiu, W. Huang, and G. G. Yen,
“Transfer learning based dynamic multiobjective optimization
algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.06093 , 2016.
[16] B. Da, A. Gupta, and Y .-S. Ong, “Curbing negative inﬂuences
online for seamless transfer evolutionary optimization,” IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics , no. 99, pp. 1–14, 2018.
[17] K. Swersky, J. Snoek, and R. P. Adams, “Multi-task bayesian
optimization,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems , 2013, pp. 2004–2012.
[18] A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, and L. Feng, “Multifactorial evolution:
towards evolutionary multitasking,” IEEE Transactions on Evo-
lutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 343–357, 2016.
[19] A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, L. Feng, and K. C. Tan, “Multiobjective
multifactorial optimization in evolutionary multitasking,” IEEE
Transactions on cybernetics , 2017.
[20] L. Feng, L. Zhou, J. Zhong, A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, K.-C. Tan, and
A. Qin, “Evolutionary multitasking via explicit autoencoding,”
IEEE transactions on cybernetics , no. 99, pp. 1–14, 2018.
[21] A. Gupta and Y .-S. Ong, “Back to the roots: Multi-x evolution-
ary computation,” Cognitive Computation , pp. 1–17, 2019.
[22] J. Ding, C. Yang, Y . Jin, and T. Chai, “Generalized multi-
tasking for evolutionary optimization of expensive problems,”
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 2017.
[23] J. Tang, Y . Chen, Z. Deng, Y . Xiang, and C. P. Joy, “A
group-based approach to improve multifactorial evolutionary
algorithm.” in IJCAI , 2018, pp. 3870–3876.
[24] R.-T. Liaw and C.-K. Ting, “Evolutionary manytasking opti-
mization based on symbiosis in biocoenosis,” in Thirty-Third
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2019.
[25] B. Da, Y .-S. Ong, L. Feng, A. Qin, A. Gupta, Z. Zhu,
C.-K. Ting, K. Tang, and X. Yao, “Evolutionary multi-
tasking for single-objective continuous optimization: Bench-
mark problems, performance metric, and baseline results,”
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Tech. Rep.,
2016, http://www.cil.ntu.edu.sg/mfo/download.html.
[26] E. V . Bonilla, K. M. Chai, and C. Williams, “Multi-task gaussian
process prediction,” in Advances in neural information process-
ing systems , 2008, pp. 153–160.
[27] M. Pelikan, M. W. Hauschild, and F. G. Lobo, “Estimation
of distribution algorithms,” in Springer Handbook of Compu-
tational Intelligence . Springer, 2015, pp. 899–928.
[28] M. Oquab, L. Bottou, I. Laptev, and J. Sivic, “Learning and
transferring mid-level image representations using convolutional
neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , 2014, pp. 1717–1724.
[29] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y . Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How trans-
ferable are features in deep neural networks?” in Advances in
neural information processing systems , 2014, pp. 3320–3328.
[30] B. Shahriari, K. Swersky, Z. Wang, R. P. Adams, and N. de Fre-
itas, “Taking the human out of the loop: A review of bayesian
optimization,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 104, no. 1, pp.
148–175, 2016.
[31] M. Zaefferer and T. Bartz-Beielstein, “Efﬁcient global optimiza-
tion with indeﬁnite kernels,” in International Conference on
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature . Springer, 2016, pp.
69–79.
[32] H. M ¨uhlenbein, M. Gorges-Schleuter, and O. Kr ¨amer, “Evolu-
tion algorithms in combinatorial optimization,” Parallel Com-

==== Page 16 ====
15
puting , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 65–85, 1988.
[33] M. A. Potter and K. A. De Jong, “A cooperative coevolutionary
approach to function optimization,” in International Conference
on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature . Springer, 1994, pp.
249–257.
[34] M. N. Omidvar, X. Li, Y . Mei, and X. Yao, “Cooperative co-
evolution with differential grouping for large scale optimiza-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18,
no. 3, pp. 378–393, 2014.
[35] Q. Chen, X. Ma, Y . Sun, and Z. Zhu, “Adaptive memetic
algorithm based evolutionary multi-tasking single-objective op-
timization,” in Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Simulated Evolution
and Learning . Springer, 2017, pp. 462–472.
[36] R.-T. Liaw and C.-K. Ting, “Evolutionary many-tasking based
on biocoenosis through symbiosis: A framework and benchmark
problems,” in Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 2017 IEEE
Congress on . IEEE, 2017, pp. 2266–2273.
[37] Y .-W. Wen and C.-K. Ting, “Parting ways and reallocating
resources in evolutionary multitasking,” in Evolutionary Com-
putation (CEC), 2017 IEEE Congress on . IEEE, 2017, pp.
2404–2411.
[38] ——, “Learning ensemble of decision trees through multifacto-
rial genetic programming,” in Evolutionary Computation (CEC),
2016 IEEE Congress on . IEEE, 2016, pp. 5293–5300.
[39] R. Chandra, A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, and C.-K. Goh, “Evolutionary
multi-task learning for modular knowledge representation in
neural networks,” Neural Processing Letters , pp. 1–17, 2017.
[40] A. Gupta, Y . Ong, B. Da, L. Feng, and S. Handoko, “Measuring
complementarity between function landscapes in evolutionary
multitasking,” in 2016 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Com-
putation, accepted , 2016.
[41] K. K. Bali, A. Gupta, L. Feng, Y . S. Ong, and T. P. Siew,
“Linearized domain adaptation in evolutionary multitasking,”
inEvolutionary Computation (CEC), 2017 IEEE Congress on .
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1295–1302.
[42] A. Gupta, J. Ma ´ndziuk, and Y .-S. Ong, “Evolutionary multitask-
ing in bi-level optimization,” Complex & Intelligent Systems ,
vol. 1, no. 1-4, pp. 83–95, 2015.
[43] P. Smyth and D. Wolpert, “Stacked density estimation,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems , 1998, pp.
668–674.
[44] P. Larra ˜naga and J. A. Lozano, Estimation of distribution
algorithms: A new tool for evolutionary computation . Springer
Science & Business Media, 2001, vol. 2.
[45] L. D. L. Gyorﬁ, G. Lugosi, and L. Devroye, “A probabilistic
theory of pattern recognition,” 1996.
[46] H.-G. Beyer, The theory of evolution strategies . Springer
Science & Business Media, 2013.
[47] Q. Zhang and H. Muhlenbein, “On the convergence of a class
of estimation of distribution algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on
evolutionary computation , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 127–136, 2004.
[48] Y . Chow and H. Yeicher, “Probability theory, 3rd ed.” 1997.
[49] K. Deb, A. Anand, and D. Joshi, “A computationally efﬁcient
evolutionary algorithm for real-parameter optimization,” Evolu-
tionary computation , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 371–395, 2002.
[50] R. B. Agrawal, K. Deb, and R. Agrawal, “Simulated binary
crossover for continuous search space,” Complex systems , vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 115–148, 1995.
[51] K. Deb and M. Goyal, “A combined genetic adaptive search
(geneas) for engineering design,” Computer Science and infor-
matics , vol. 26, pp. 30–45, 1996.
[52] R. Hinterding, “Gaussian mutation and self-adaption for nu-
meric genetic algorithms,” in Evolutionary Computation, 1995.,
IEEE International Conference on , vol. 1. IEEE, 1995, p. 384.
[53] K. Deb, D. Joshi, and A. Anand, “Real-coded evolutionary
algorithms with parent-centric recombination,” in Evolutionary
Computation, 2002. CEC’02. Proceedings of the 2002 Congress
on, vol. 1. IEEE, 2002, pp. 61–66.
[54] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufﬁciency,”The annals of mathematical statistics , vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86,
1951.
[55] D. Pardoe and P. Stone, “Boosting for regression transfer,” in
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning . Omnipress, 2010, pp.
863–870.
[56] F. Gomez, J. Schmidhuber, and R. Miikkulainen, “Accelerated
neural evolution through cooperatively coevolved synapses,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 9, no. May, pp.
937–965, 2008.
[57] D. Wierstra, T. Schaul, T. Glasmachers, Y . Sun, J. Peters,
and J. Schmidhuber, “Natural evolution strategies.” Journal of
Machine Learning Research , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 949–980, 2014.
[58] T. Schaul, T. Glasmachers, and J. Schmidhuber, “High di-
mensions and heavy tails for natural evolution strategies,” in
Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and
evolutionary computation . ACM, 2011, pp. 845–852.
[59] T. Glasmachers, T. Schaul, S. Yi, D. Wierstra, and J. Schmidhu-
ber, “Exponential natural evolution strategies,” in Proceedings
of the 12th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary
computation . ACM, 2010, pp. 393–400.
[60] T. Salimans, J. Ho, X. Chen, and I. Sutskever, “Evolution
strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864 , 2017.
[61] T. Schaul, “Natural evolution strategies,” Nov. 2017. [Online].
Available: http://people.idsia.ch/tom/nes.html
[62] M. L ´opez-Ib ´anez, J. Dubois-Lacoste, T. St ¨utzle, and M. Bi-
rattari, “The irace package, iterated race for automatic algo-
rithm conﬁguration,” Technical Report TR/IRIDIA/2011-004,
IRIDIA, Universit ´e Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, Tech. Rep.,
2011.
[63] K. Sastry, D. E. Goldberg, and M. Pelikan, “Limits of scalabil-
ity of multiobjective estimation of distribution algorithms,” in
Evolutionary Computation, 2005. The 2005 IEEE Congress on ,
vol. 3. IEEE, 2005, pp. 2217–2224.
[64] Y . Yuan, Y .-S. Ong, A. Gupta, P. S. Tan, and H. Xu, “Evolution-
ary multitasking in permutation-based combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems: Realization with TSP, QAP, LOP, and JSP,” in
Region 10 Conference (TENCON), 2016 IEEE . IEEE, 2016,
pp. 3157–3164.
[65] R. Chandra, A. Gupta, Y .-S. Ong, and C.-K. Goh, “Evolutionary
multi-task learning for modular training of feedforward neural
networks,” in International Conference on Neural Information
Processing . Springer, 2016, pp. 37–46.
[66] R. S. Sutton, “Temporal credit assignment in reinforcement
learning,” 1984.
[67] F. J. Gomez and R. Miikkulainen, “Solving non-markovian
control tasks with neuroevolution,” in IJCAI , vol. 99, 1999, pp.
1356–1361.
[68] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolving neural networks
through augmenting topologies,” Evolutionary computation ,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 99–127, 2002.
[69] C. Igel, “Neuroevolution for reinforcement learning using evo-
lution strategies,” in Evolutionary Computation, 2003. CEC’03.
The 2003 Congress on , vol. 4. IEEE, 2003, pp. 2588–2595.
[70] A. P. Wieland, “Evolving neural network controllers for un-
stable systems,” in Neural Networks, 1991., IJCNN-91-Seattle
International Joint Conference on , vol. 2. IEEE, 1991, pp.
667–673.

==== Page 17 ====
16
Kavitesh Kumar BALI is currently a PhD student
in the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singa-
pore. Bali recieved his MSc degree in Computer Sci-
ence from the University of the South Paciﬁc (USP),
Fiji, in 2016. His current research interests are in
evolutionary computation, transfer optimization and
machine learning.
Yew-Soon ONG (M99-SM12-F18) received the
Ph.D. degree in artiﬁcial intelligence in complex
design from the University of Southampton, U.K.,
in 2003. He is currently a Professor at the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Tech-
nological University (NTU), Singapore, where he is
also Director of the Data Science and Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence Research Center and Singtel-NTU Cognitive
& Artiﬁcial Intelligence Corporate Laboratory. His
research interest in artiﬁcial intelligence spans across
memetic computing, optimization intelligence, and
machine learning. Dr. Ong is the founding Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, Technical
Editor-in-Chief of Memetic Computing and associate editor of the IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, the IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks & Learning Systems, the IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, and
others. He has received several IEEE outstanding paper awards and listed
as a Thomson Reuters highly cited researcher and among the World’s Most
Inﬂuential Scientiﬁc Minds.
Abhishek GUPTA received his PhD in Engineer-
ing Science from the University of Auckland, New
Zealand, in the year 2014. He graduated with a
Bachelor of Technology degree in the year 2010,
from the National Institute of Technology Rourkela,
India. He currently serves as a Scientist in the
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology
(SIMTech), Agency of Science, Technology and
Research (A*STAR), Singapore. He has diverse
research experience in the ﬁeld of computational
science, ranging from numerical methods in engi-
neering physics, to topics in computational intelligence. His recent research
interests are in the development of memetic computation as an approach for
automated knowledge extraction and transfer across problems in evolutionary
design.
Puay Siew TAN leads the Manufacturing Control
TowerTM(MCTTM) as the Programme Manager
which is responsible for the setup of Model Fac-
tory@SIMTech. Her research has been in the cross-
ﬁeld disciplines of Computer Science and Opera-
tions Research for cyber physical production system
(CPPS) collaboration, in particular sustainable com-
plex manufacturing and supply chain operations. To
this end, she has been active in using context-aware
and services techniques. Her present research inter-
ests include Complex Systems, speciﬁcally quantita-
tive techniques for understanding disruptions propagation in networked supply
chains and mitigation of risks caused by these disruptions.

==== Page 18 ====
1
Supplemental Material
I. P ROOF OF LEMMA 2
Proof. Let an offspring solution xabe assigned a skill factor
ki.e,a=k. Given the scope of parent-centric inter-task
crossover,xamay have been drawn from either of the densi-
tiesp1(x;t);p2(x;t);:::;:::;or;pk(x;t);:::;or;pK(x;t)corre-
sponding to Kdistinct tasks in the multitasking environment.
By Bayes’ theorem, the probability that xais drawn from
pk(x;t), denoted as xapk(x;t)is given by the following:
P(xapk(x;t)ja=k) =P(a=kjxapk(x;t))P(xapk(x;t))
P(a=k):
(1)
Considering the uniform allocation of resources to each of the
Koptimization tasks in the MFEA, we have,
P(xapk(x;t)) =P(a=k) =1
K: (2)
Hence, by further simpliﬁcation of Eq. 1, we have,
P(xapk(x;t)ja=k) =P(a=kjxapk(x;t)): (3)
The condition that xaoriginates from pk(x;t)implies that
at least one of its parents must also belong to pk(x;t). In
other words, at least one of its parent must have a skill factor
k. According to Algorithm 1, the probabilistic event P(a=
kjxapk(x;t))occurs under three possible scenarios given
as follows.
Scenario- 1:intra-task crossover occurs where the second
randomly chosen parent of xaalso has skill factor k. Accord-
ingly, the probability of the ﬁrst scenario is given by,
P(Scenario 1) =1
K: (4)
Scenario- 2:inter-task crossover with probability rmp, after
which andxais assigned skill factor kwith probability 0:5.
Thus, the probability of the second case is expressed as,
P(Scenario 2) =0:5(K 1)rmp
K: (5)
Scenario- 3:xais created by a small (local) variation of the
parent with skill factor k. The probability of the third case is
given by,
P(Scenario 3) =(K 1)(1 rmp)
K: (6)
Consequently we have,
P(a=kjxapk(x;t)) =3X
i=1P(Scenario i): (7)
Thus,
P(xapk(x;t)ja=k) = 1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K: (8)
Similarly, it can be shown that,
P(xapj(x;t)8j6=kja=k) =X
j 6=k0:5rmp
K: (9)Combining Eq. (8) and Eq (9), the overall mixture distribution
pk
c(x;t)can be expressed as,
pk
c(x;t) = [1 0:5(K 1)rmp
K]pk(x;t)+X
j 6=k0:5rmp
Kpj(x;t):(10)
II. V ISUALIZATION OF SYNTHETIC BENCHMARKS
A. Visualization of Complete Intersection (CI) Case in 1- D
For elaboration, the notion of complete intersection of
global optima is illustrated in Figure 1. The ﬁgure represents
a projection in the uniﬁed space, and shows that the global
optima of the two tasks T1andT2are located at the same
point in the uniﬁed search space.
Fig. 1. In the complete intersection case, the global optimum of all tasks
maps to the same point in the uniﬁed search space.
B. Visualization of No Intersection (NI) Case in 1- D
The notion of no intersection of global optima is illustrated
in Figure 2. From the ﬁgure, we see that the global optima of
the two tasks are no longer at the same point, but are separated
from each other, in the uniﬁed search space.
Fig. 2. In the no intersection case, the global optima of the two tasks T1and
T2are separated.

==== Page 19 ====
2
III. F URTHER EXPERIMENTS
Herein, we extend our experiments for the pedagogical case
study. In what follows, we provide numerical illustrations for
a series of binary optimization problems. For the purpose
of decoding candidate solutions from the continuous uniﬁed
space (XXX= [0;1]Dunified )to the respective discrete/binary
representations, a variable (of an encoded solution) is assigned
a value of 0if its value in the uniﬁed space is less than or
equal to 0:5. Else, it is assigned a value of 1. Unless otherwise
stated, the parameter settings for SBX crossover, polynomial
mutation, population size, etc., remain the same as in Section
VI-A of the paper.
A. Case 1: Trap-5 + hamming distance minimization (HDM)
problems
In this particular study, we conduct experiments to solve
the trap- 5problem alongside a series of hamming distance
minimization (HDM) binary problems using MFEA-II. Herein,
we generate a range of target strings for the HDM problems
by sampling them from a Bernoulli parameter , whereby a
single bit takes the value 1with probability (and the value
0with probability 1 ). For each successive experiment,
the Bernoulli parameter is gradually decremented from =
1:00to= 0:00. It is noteworthy that if is higher, the
HDM problems behave similar to the onemax problem and
thus bear higher degrees of intersection (overlap), in terms of
the global optimum, with the trap- 5problem. In contrast, if 
is lower, the HDM problems behave more like the zeromax
problem. Hence, the global optimum of these HDM problems
are further away from the global optimum of trap- 5. For this
set of experiments, we solve 100 dimensional variants of the
trap-5 and the HDM problems.
Generations0 50 100 150Average objective value
5060708090100
ρ=1.00
ρ=0.98
ρ=0.97
ρ=0.96
ρ=0.95
ρ=0.92
ρ=0.80
ρ=0.00
CEA
Fig. 3. Trap-5 convergence trends.
The convergence trends for trap-5 are shown in Figure 3 (re-
sults are averaged over 30 independent runs). From Figure 3,
it can be seen that the performance of MFEA-II is superior
to CEA when multitasked with HDM problems sampled from
higher’s (e.g.= 1:00to= 0:92). Under the positive in-
ﬂuence of genetic transfers from these HDM tasks, the MFEA-
II is unlikely to get trapped in the deceptive local optimum
of trap- 5. However, as decreases, the convergence trends ofMFEA-II gradually drops and approaches that of the CEA
(i.e., the MFEA-II performs identical to the single tasking
CEA). Most importantly, no negative transfer is observed even
in the extreme case of multitasking trap-5 alongside a HDM
problem with = 0:00. Further, the learned rmp trends in
Figures 4 and 5 reveal that MFEA-II is adept at capturing
the inter-task relationships online and adapts genetic transfers
in a manner that leverages on positive transfers between
overlapping tasks (dictated by higher ’s) while suppressing
any deleterious effects of negative exchanges otherwise. Notice
that for distant (unrelated) tasks (e.g. = 0:80), the rmpvalues
learned (throughout the multitasking search) are near zero,
implying that the amount of resources wasted in transferring
and evaluating solutions across unrelated tasks is negligible.
Fig. 4. Learned rmp trends across generations. The shaded regions span one-
half standard deviation on either side of the mean.
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Bernoulli parameter ρ00.20.40.60.81Average learned rmp
Fig. 5. Average learned rmp trend between trap- 5and a series of HDM
problems dictated by . The error bars span one-half standard deviation on
either side of the mean.
B. Case 2: Inverted trap-5 + HDM problems
In this case study, we invert the roles of zeros and ones
in the deﬁnition of the original trap-5 function such that the
global optimum is changed to a string of all zero bits. The
experimental setup is similar to Section III-A above.
In contrast to trap-5, the HDM problems sampled from
lower0s(e.g.= 0:00to= 0:08) would, herein, induce
(higher) positive inﬂuence towards improving the search of the
inverted trap-5 problem - showing greater potential for fruitful
genetic transfers as demonstrated by Figure 6. The extent of

==== Page 20 ====
3
0 50 100 150
Generations5060708090100Average objective valueρ=0.00
ρ=0.02
ρ=0.03
ρ=0.04
ρ=0.08
ρ=0.10
ρ=1.00
CEA
Fig. 6. Inverse trap- 5convergence trends.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
Bernoulli parameter ρ00.20.40.60.81Average learned rmp
Fig. 7. Average learned rmp trend between the inverse trap- 5and a series of
HDM problems dictated by . The error bars span one-half standard deviation
on either side of the mean.
genetic transfers between the inverted trap- 5problem and a
series of HDM problems (with varying 0s) is mandated by
the learned rmp trend in Figure 7.
C. Case 3: K randomly generated HDM tasks
In this study, we consider solving Ktasks, each minimizing
the hamming distance to a given target string generated at
random (= 0:5). Herein, we set K= 10 and the dimen-
sionality of each HDM task is set to D= 50 . Figure 8 shows
0 20 40 60 80 100
Generations00.050.10.150.20.250.3Average hamming distanceMFEA-II
MFEA-I
CEA
Fig. 8. Averaged performance of MFEA-II, MFEA-I and CEA on 10
randomly generated HDM tasks.
the convergence trends averaged across all the 10tasks. It canbe observed the MFEA-II and the single tasking CEA perform
identical to each other. This is primarily because the randomly
generated tasks tend to bear low degrees of intersection of
global optima. As such, their population datasets may not
overlap as the search progresses and genetic transfers could in
fact be detrimental. While MFEA-II prevents the harmful ex-
change of genetic material, we observe that MFEA-I is plagued
by signiﬁcant negative transfers. The convergence trend from
Figure 8 shows that the lack of an online transfer parameter
learning strategy in MFEA-I hampers its performance on the
10HDM tasks. The ability of MFEA-II to overcome this issue
marks the key contribution of the present paper.
Figure 9 shows a few representative rmp trends learned
between pairs of randomly generated tasks. As is revealed by
the relatively low (near zero) rmp trends, the learning module
of MFEA-II is able to ﬁgure out that there is no utility for
genetic transfers herein, thereby ensuring that the convergence
characteristics are not hampered due to harmful transfers.
Generations0 20 40 60 80 100learned rmp
00.050.10.150.20.25
Fig. 9. Few representative rmp curves between pairs of randomly generated
HDM tasks. Other inter-task rmp values showcase similar trends.
D. Case 4: LeadingOnes + TrailingOnes problem
For this particular study, we consider solving the Leadin-
gOnes and TrailingOnes problems simultaneously using
MFEA-II. The LeadingOnes problem essentially aims to maxi-
mize the number of consecutive 1-bits counting from the left of
a solution string. In contrast, the TrailingOnes problem starts
the search by scanning the solution from the right towards the
left. Both the problems share the same global optimum (i.e.,
the string with all 1’s). For this experimental study, we set the
problem dimensionality and the population size to D= 50
andN= 150 for each of the tasks, respectively.
Notably, while the problems do share a common global
optimum, transfers in the early stage of the optimization phase
is unlikely to be beneﬁcial since each of the tasks begin the
search from opposite ends of the search space. In particular,
Figure 10 demonstrates that MFEA-II is able to identify
this and prescribes lower (near zero) rmp values during the
initial stages. As the search progresses and the tasks becomes
more similar, MFEA-II gradually learns higher rmp values
in order to facilitate fruitful knowledge transfers. As shown
by Figure 11, the transfer adaptation strategy of MFEA-II
enables both the tasks to progress towards the common global
optimum. In contrast, the convergence trends of MFEA-I are

==== Page 21 ====
4
0 50 100 150 200
Generations00.10.20.30.40.50.6learned rmprmp
Fig. 10. Learned rmp trend between LeadingOnes and TrailingOnes problems
over successive generations. The shaded regions span one-half standard
deviation on either side of the mean.
Generations0 50 100 150 200Average objective value
101520253035404550
LeadingOnes : MFEA-II
TrailingOnes : MFEA-II
LeadingOnes : MFEA-I
TrailingOnes : MFEA-I
Fig. 11. Convergence trends of MFEA-II and MFEA-I.
signiﬁcantly hampered due to continuous (unregulated) inter-
task genetic transfers.

