==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)Artificial Intelligence Review (2022) 55:895–943
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-021-09996-w
1 3
Multi‑agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey
Sven Gronauer1  · Klaus Diepold1
Published online: 15 April 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
The advances in reinforcement learning have recorded sublime success in various domains. 
Although the multi-agent domain has been overshadowed by its single-agent counterpart 
during this progress, multi-agent reinforcement learning gains rapid traction, and the latest 
accomplishments address problems with real-world complexity. This article provides an 
overview of the current developments in the field of multi-agent deep reinforcement learn-
ing. We focus primarily on literature from recent years that combines deep reinforcement 
learning methods with a multi-agent scenario. To survey the works that constitute the con-
temporary landscape, the main contents are divided into three parts. First, we analyze the 
structure of training schemes that are applied to train multiple agents. Second, we consider 
the emergent patterns of agent behavior in cooperative, competitive and mixed scenarios. 
Third, we systematically enumerate challenges that exclusively arise in the multi-agent 
domain and review methods that are leveraged to cope with these challenges. To conclude 
this survey, we discuss advances, identify trends, and outline possible directions for future 
work in this research area.
Keywords Multi-agent systems · Multi-agent learning · Machine learning · Reinforcement 
learning · Deep learning · Survey
1 Introduction
A multi-agent system describes multiple distributed entities—so-called agents—which 
take decisions autonomously and interact within a shared environment (Weiss 1999). Each 
agent seeks to accomplish an assigned goal for which a broad set of skills might be required 
to build intelligent behavior. Depending on the task, an intricate interplay between agents 
can occur such that agents start to collaborate or act competitively to excel opponents. 
Specifying intelligent behavior a-priori through programming is a tough, if not impossible, 
task for complex systems. Therefore, agents require the ability to adapt and learn over time 
 * Sven Gronauer 
 sven.gronauer@tum.de
 Klaus Diepold 
 kldi@tum.de
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Munich (TUM), 
Arcisstr. 21, 80333 Munich, Germany

==== Page 2 ====
896 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
by themselves. The most common framework to address learning in an interactive environ-
ment is reinforcement learning (RL), which describes the change of behavior through a 
trial-and-error approach.
The field of reinforcement learning is currently thriving. Since the breakthrough of 
deep learning methods, works have been successful at mastering complex control tasks, 
e.g. in robotics (Levine et al. 2016; Lillicrap et al. 2016) and game playing (Mnih et al. 
2015; Silver et  al. 2016). The key to these results is based on learning techniques that 
employ neural networks as function approximators (Arulkumaran et  al. 2017). Despite 
these achievements, the majority of works investigated single-agent settings only, although 
many real-world applications naturally comprise multiple decision-makers that interact at 
the same time. The areas of application encompass the coordination of distributed systems 
(Cao et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2016b) such as autonomous vehicles (Shalev-Shwartz et al. 
2016) and multi-robot control (Matignon et  al. 2012a), the networking of communica-
tion packages (Luong et al. 2019), or the trading on financial markets (Lux and Marchesi 
1999). In these systems, each agent discovers a strategy alongside other entities in a com-
mon environment and adapts its policy in response to the behavioral changes of others. 
Carried by the advances of single-agent deep RL, the multi-agent reinforcement learning 
(MARL) community has been surged with new interest and a plethora of literature has 
emerged lately (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2019; Nguyen et al. 2020). The use of deep learning 
methods enabled the community to exceed the historically investigated tabular problems 
to challenging problems with real-world complexity (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; 
Jaderberg et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2019).
In this paper, we provide an extensive review of the recent advances in the area of multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL). Although multi-agent systems enjoy a rich 
history (Busoniu et al. 2008; Shoham et al. 2003; Stone and Veloso 2000; Tuyls and Weiss 
2012), this survey aims to shed light on the contemporary landscape of the literature in 
MADRL.
1.1  Related work
The intersection of multi-agent systems and reinforcement learning holds a long record of 
active research. As one of the first surveys in the field, Stone and Veloso (2000) analyzed 
multi-agent systems from a machine learning perspective and classified the reviewed lit-
erature according to heterogeneous and homogeneous agent structures as well as commu-
nication skills. The authors discussed issues associated with each classification. Shoham 
et al. (2003) criticized the ill-posed problem statement of MARL which is in the authors’ 
opinion unclear and called for more grounded research. They proposed a coherent research 
agenda which includes four directions for future research. Yang and Gu (2004) reviewed 
algorithms and pointed out that the main difficulty lies in the generalization to continuous 
action and state spaces and in the scaling to many agents. Similarly, Busoniu et al. (2008) 
presented selected algorithms and discussed benefits as well as challenges of MARL. Ben-
efits include computational speed-ups and the possibility of experience sharing between 
agents. In contrast, drawbacks are the specification of meaningful goals, the non-station-
arity of the environment, and the need for coherent coordination in cooperative games. In 
addition to that, they posed challenges such as the exponential increase of computational 
complexity with the number of agents and the alter-exploration problem where agents must 
gauge between the acquisition of new knowledge and the exploitation of current knowl-
edge. More specifically, Matignon et al. (2012b) identified challenges for the coordination 

==== Page 3 ====
897 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
of independent learners that arise in fully cooperative Markov Games such as non-station-
arity, stochasticity, and shadowed equilibria. Further, they analyzed conditions under which 
algorithms can address such coordination issues. Another work by Tuyls and Weiss (2012) 
accounted for the historical developments of MARL and evoked non-technical challenges. 
They criticized that the intersection of RL techniques and game theory dominates multi-
agent learning, which may render the scope of the field too narrow and investigations are 
limited to simplistic problems such as grid worlds. They claimed that the scalability to 
high numbers of agents and large and continuous spaces are the holy grail of this research 
domain.
Since the advent of deep learning methods and the breakthrough of deep RL, the field 
of MARL has attained new interest and a plethora of literature has emerged during the last 
years. Nguyen et al. (2020) presented five technical challenges including nonstationarity, 
partial observability, continuous spaces, training schemes, and transfer learning. They dis-
cussed possible solution approaches alongside their practical applications. Hernandez-Leal 
et al. (2019) concentrated on four categories including the analysis of emergent behaviors, 
learning communication, learning cooperation, and agent modeling. Further survey litera-
ture focuses on one particular sub-field of MADRL. Oroojlooyjadid and Hajinezhad (2019) 
reviewed recent works in the cooperative setting while Da  Silva and Costa (2019) and 
Da Silva et al. (2019) focused on knowledge reuse. Lazaridou and Baroni (2020) reviewed 
the emergence of language and connected two perspectives, which comprise the conditions 
under which language evolves in communities and the ability to solve problems through 
dynamic communication. Based on theoretical analysis, Zhang et  al. (2019) focused on 
MARL algorithms and presented challenges from a mathematical perspective.
1.2  Contribution and survey structure
The contribution of this paper is to present a comprehensive survey of the recent research 
directions pursued in the field of MADRL. We depict a holistic overview of current chal-
lenges that arise exclusively in the multi-agent domain of deep RL and discuss state-of-the-
art solutions that were proposed to address these challenges. In contrast to the surveys of 
Hernandez-Leal et al. (2019) and Nguyen et al. (2020), which focus on a subset of topics, 
we aim to provide a widened and more comprehensive overview of the current investiga-
tions conducted in the field of MADRL while recapitulating what has already been accom-
plished. We identify contemporary challenges and discuss literature that addresses such. 
We see our work complementary to the theoretical survey of Zhang et al. (2019).
We dedicate this paper to an audience who wants an excursion to the realm of MADRL. 
Readers shall gain insights about the historical roots of this still young field and its current 
developments, but also understand the open problems to be faced by future research. The 
contents of this paper are organized as follows. We begin with a formal introduction to 
both single-agent and multi-agent RL and reveal pathologies that are present in MARL in 
Sect.  2. We then continue with the main contents, which are categorized according to the 
three-fold taxonomy as illustrated in Fig. 1.
We analyze training architectures in Sect.  3, where we categorize approaches accord-
ing to a centralized or distributed training paradigm and additionally differentiate into 
execution schemes. Thereafter, we review literature that investigates emergent pat-
terns of agent behavior in Sect.  4. We classify works in terms of the reward structure 
(Sect.  4.1), the language between multiple agents (Sect.  4.2), and the social context 
(Sect.  4.3). In Sect.  5, we enumerate current challenges of the multi-agent domain, 

==== Page 4 ====
898 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
which include the non-stationarity of the environment due to simultaneously adapting 
learners (Sect.  5.1), the learning of meaningful communication protocols in coopera-
tive tasks (Sect.  5.2), the need for coherent coordination of agent actions (Sect.  5.3), the 
credit assignment problem (Sect.  5.4), the ability to scale to an arbitrary number of 
decision-makers (Sect.  5.5), and non-Markovian environments due to partial observa-
tions (Sect.  5.6). We discuss the matter of MADRL, pose trends that we identified in 
recent literature, and outline possible future work in Sect.  6. Finally, this survey con-
cludes in Sect. 7 .Sect. 3
Agent 1 Agent N
EnvironmentCentralized
DistributedTraining Paradigm Execution Scheme
Centralized
Decentralized
Sect. 5Sect. 4
Communication
Coordination
Partial ObservabilityNon-StationarityEmergent Patterns of
Agent Behavior
Credit AssignmentScaling
Fig. 1  Schematic structure of the main contents in this survey. In Sect.  3, we review schemes that are 
applied to train agent behavior in the multi-agent setting. The training of agents can be divided into two 
paradigms which are namely distributed (Sect.  3.1) and centralized (Sect.  3.2). In Sect.  4, we consider the 
emergent patterns of agent behavior with respect to the reward structure (Sect.  4.1), the language (Sect.  4.2) 
and the social context (Sect.  4.3). In Sect.  5, we enumerate current challenges of MADRL which include 
the non-stationarity of the environment due to co-adapting agents (Sect.  5.1), the learning of communica-
tion (Sect.  5.2), the need for a coherent coordination of actions (Sect.  5.3), the credit assignment problem 
(Sect.  5.4), the ability to scale to an arbitrary number of decision-makers (Sect.  5.5), and non-Markovian 
environments due to partial observations (Sect. 5.6)

==== Page 5 ====
899 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
2  Background
In this section, we provide a formal introduction into the concepts of RL. We start with 
the Markov decision process as a framework for single-agent learning in Sect.  2.1. We 
continue with the multi-agent case and introduce the Markov Game in Sect.  2.2. Finally, 
we pose pathologies that arise in the multi-agent domain such as the non-stationarity of 
the environment from the perspective of a single learner, relative over-generalization, and 
the credit assignment problem in Sect.  2.3. We provide the formal concepts behind these 
MARL pathologies in order to drive our discussion about the state-of-the-art approaches in 
Sect.  5. The scope of this background section is deliberately focusing on classical MARL 
works to reveal the roots of the domain and to give the reader insights into the early works 
on which modern MADRL approaches rest.
2.1  Single‑agent reinforcement learning
The traditional reinforcement learning problem (Sutton and Barto 1998) is concerned 
with learning a control policy that optimizes a numerical performance by making deci-
sions in stages. The decision-maker called agent interacts with an environment of unknown 
dynamics in a trial-and-error fashion and occasionally receives feedback upon which the 
agent wants to improve. The standard formulation for such sequential decision-making is 
the Markov decision process, which is defined as follows (Bellman 1957; Bertsekas 2012, 
2017; Kaelbling et al. 1996).
Definition 1  Markov decision process (MDP) A Markov decision process is formalized 
by the tuple (X ,U,P,R,/u1D6FE) where X and U are the state and action space, respectively, 
P∶X×U→P(X ) is the transition function describing the probability of a state transi-
tion, R∶X×U×X→ℝ is the reward function providing an immediate feedback to the 
agent, and /u1D6FE∈[0, 1) describes the discount factor.
The agent’s goal is to act in such a way as to maximize the expected performance on 
a long-term perspective with regard to an unknown transition function P . Therefore, the 
agent learns a behavior policy /u1D70B∶X→P(U)  that optimizes the expected performance 
J throughout learning. The performance is defined as the expected value of discounted 
rewards
 over the initial state distribution /u1D70C0 while selected actions are governed by the policy /u1D70B . 
Here, we regard the infinite-horizon problem where the interaction between agent and 
environment does not terminate after a countable number of steps. Note that the learning 
objective can also be formalized for finite-horizon problems (Bertsekas 2012, 2017). As an 
alternative to the policy performance, which describes the expected performance as a func-
tion of the policy, one can define the utility of being in a particular state in terms of a value 
function. The state-value function V/u1D70B∶X→ℝ describes the utility under policy /u1D70B when 
starting from state x, i.e.(1) J=/u1D53Cx0∼/u1D70C0,xt+1∼P,ut∼/u1D70B/bracketleft.s4∞/uni2211.s1
t=0/u1D6FEtR(xt,ut,xt+1)/bracketright.s4

==== Page 6 ====
900 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
 In a similar manner, the action-value function Q/u1D70B∶X×U→ℝ describes the utility of 
being in state x, performing action u, and following the policy /u1D70B thereafter, that is
 In the context of deep reinforcement learning, either the policy, a value function or both 
are represented by neural networks.
2.2  Multi‑agent reinforcement learning
When the sequential decision-making is extended to multiple agents, Markov Games1 are 
commonly applied as framework. The Markov Game was originally introduced by Littman 
(1994) to generalize MDPs to multiple agents that simultaneously interact within a shared 
environment and possibly with each other. The definition is formalized in a discrete-time 
setting and is denoted as follows (Littman 1994).
Definition 2  Markov Games (MG) The Markov Game is an extension to the MDP and 
is formalized by the tuple /parenleft.s1N,X,{Ui},P ,{Ri},/u1D6FE/parenright.s1 , where N={ 1,…,N} denotes the set 
of N>1 interacting agents and X is the set of states observed by all agents. The joint 
action space is denoted by U=U1×⋯×UN which is the collection of individual action 
spaces from agents i∈N . The transition probability function P∶X×U→P(X ) 
describes the chance of a state transition. Each agent owns an associated reward func-
tion Ri∶X×U×X→ℝ that provides an immediate feedback signal. Finally, /u1D6FE∈[0, 1) 
describes the discount factor.
At stage t, each agent i∈N selects and executes an action depending on the indi-
vidual policy /u1D70Bi∶X→P(Ui) . The system evolves from state xt under the joint action ut 
with respect to the transition probability function P to the next state xt+1 while each agent 
receives Ri as immediate feedback to the state transition. Akin to the single-agent problem, 
the aim of each agent is to change  its policy in such a way as to optimize the received 
rewards on a long-term perspective.
A special case of the MG is the stateless setting X=� called strategic-form game2. 
Strategic-form games describe one-shot interactions where all agents simultaneously 
execute an action and receive a reward based on the joint action after which the game 
ends. Significant progress within the  MARL community  has been accomplished by 
studying this simplified stateless setting, which  is still under active research to cope 
with several pathologies as discussed later in this section. These games are also known (2) V/u1D70B(x)=/u1D53Cxt+1∼P,ut∼/u1D70B/bracketleft.s4∞/uni2211.s1
t=0/u1D6FEtR(xt,ut,xt+1)∣x0=x/bracketright.s4
.
(3) Q𝜋(x,u)=/u1D53Cxt+1∼P,ut>0∼𝜋/bracketleft.s2∞/uni2211.s1
t=0𝛾tR(xt,ut,xt+1)∣x0=x,u0=u/bracketright.s2
.
1 Markov games are also known as Stochastic Games (Shapley 1953), but we continue to use the term 
Markov Game to draw a clear distinction between deterministic Markov Games and stochastic Markov 
Games.
2 The strategic-form game is also known as matrix game or normal-form game. The most commonly stud-
ied strategic-form game is the one with N=2 players, the so-called bi-matrix game.

==== Page 7 ====
901 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
as matrix games because the reward function is represented by an N×N matrix. The 
formalism which extends to multi-step sequential stages is called extensive-form game.
In contrast to the single-agent case, the value function Vi∶X→ℝ does not only 
depend on the individual policy of agent i  but also on the policies of other agents, i.e. 
the value function for agent i  is the expected sum
 when the agents behave according to the joint policy /u1D745 . We  denote the joint policy 
/u1D745∶X→P(U)  as the collection of all individual policies, i.e. /u1D745={/u1D70B1,…,/u1D70BN} . Further, 
we make use of the convention that −i denotes all agents except i, meaning for policies that 
/u1D745−i={/u1D70B1,…,/u1D70Bi−1,/u1D70Bi+1,…,/u1D70BN}.
The optimal policy is determined by the individual policy and the other agents’ strat-
egies. However, when other agents’ policies are fixed, the agent i  can maximize its own 
utility by finding the best response /u1D70Bi
∗ with respect to the other agents’ strategies.
Definition 3  Best response The agent’s i best response /u1D70Bi
∗∈Πi to the joint policy /u1D745−i of 
other agents is
for all states x∈X and policies /u1D70Bi∈Πi.
In general, when all agents learn simultaneously, the found best response may not be 
unique (Shoham and Leyton-Brown 2008). The concept of best response can be leveraged 
to describe the most influential solution concept from game theory: the Nash equilibrium.
Definition 4  Nash equilibrium A solution where each agent’s policy /u1D70B∗
i is the best 
response to the other agents’ policy /u1D745−i
∗ such that the following inequality
holds true for all states x∈X and all policies /u1D70Bi∈Πi∀i is called Nash equilibrium.
Intuitively spoken, a Nash equilibrium is a solution where one agent cannot improve 
when the policies of other agents are fixed, that is no agent can improve by unilaterally 
deviating from /u1D70B∗ . However, a Nash equilibrium may not be unique. Thus, the concept 
of Pareto-optimality might be useful (Matignon et al. 2012b).
Definition 5  Pareto-optimality A joint policy /u1D745 Pareto-dominates a second joint policy ̂/u1D745 
if and only if
A Nash equilibrium is regarded to be Pareto-optimal if no other has greater value 
and, thus, is not Pareto-dominated.
Classical MARL literature can be categorized according to different features, such as 
the type of task and the information available to agents. In the remainder of this section, (4) Vi
/u1D70Bi,/u1D745−i(x)=/u1D53Cxt+1∼P,ut∼/u1D745/bracketleft.s4∞/uni2211.s1
t=0/u1D6FEtRi(xt,ut,xt+1)∣x0=x/bracketright.s4
Vi
/u1D70Bi
∗,/u1D745−i(x)≥Vi
/u1D70Bi,/u1D745−i(x)
Vi
/u1D70Bi
∗,/u1D745−i
∗(x)≥Vi
/u1D70Bi,/u1D745−i
∗(x)
Vi
/u1D745(x)≥Vi
̂/u1D745(x)∀ i,∀x∈X and Vj
/u1D745(x)>Vj
̂/u1D745(x)∃ j,∃x∈X.

==== Page 8 ====
902 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
we introduce MARL concepts based on the taxonomy proposed in Busoniu et al. (2008). 
For one, the primary factor that influences the learned agent behavior is the type of task. 
Whether agents compete or cooperate is promoted by the designed reward structure.
(1) Fully cooperative setting All agents receive the same reward R=Ri=⋯=RN for 
state transitions. In such an equally-shared reward setting, agents are motivated to col-
laborate and try to avoid the failure of an individual to maximize the performance of the 
team. More generally, we talk about cooperative settings when agents are encouraged to 
collaborate but do not own an equally-shared reward.
(2) Fully competitive setting Such problem is described as a zero-sum  
Markov Game where the sum of rewards equals zero for any state transition, i.e. 
R=∑N
i=1Ri(x,u,x�)= 0 . Agents are prudent to maximize their own individual reward 
while minimizing the reward of the others. In a loose sense, we refer to competitive 
games when agents are encouraged to excel against opponents, but the sum of rewards 
does not equal zero.
(3) Mixed setting Also known as general-sum game, the mixed setting is neither fully 
cooperative nor fully competitive and, thus, does not incorporate restrictions on agent 
goals.
Beside the reward structure, other taxonomy may be used to differentiate between the 
information available to the agents. Claus and Boutilier (1998) distinguished between 
two types of learning, namely independent learners and joint-action learners. The former 
ignores the existence of other agents and cannot observe the rewards and selected actions 
of others as considered in Bowling and Veloso (2002) and Lauer and Riedmiller (2000). 
Joint-action learners, however, observe the taken actions of all other actions a-posteriori as 
shown in Hu and Wellman (2003) and Littman (2001).
2.3  Formal introduction to multi‑agent challenges
In the single-agent formalism, the agent is the only decision-instance that influences the 
state of the environment. State transitions can be clearly attributed to the agent, whereas 
everything outside the agent’s field of impact is regarded as part of the underlying system 
dynamics. Even though the environment may be stochastic, the learning problem remains 
stationary.
On the contrary, one of the fundamental problems in the multi-agent domain is that 
agents update their policies during the learning process simultaneously, such that the envi-
ronment appears non-stationary from the perspective of a single agent. Hence, the Markov 
assumption of an MDP no longer holds, and agents face—without further treatment—a 
moving target problem (Busoniu et al. 2008; Yang and Gu 2004).
Definition 6  Non-stationarity A single agent faces a moving target problem when the 
transition probability function changes
 due to the co-adaption 𝜋i≠̄𝜋i∃i∈N of agents.
Above, we have introduced the Nash equilibrium as a solution concept where each 
agent’s policy is the best response to the others. However, it has been shown that agents can 
converge, despite a high degree of randomness in action selection, to sub-optimal solutions P(x�/uni007C.varx,u,𝜋1,…,𝜋N)≠P(x�/uni007C.varx,u,̄𝜋1,…,̄𝜋N),

==== Page 9 ====
903 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
or can get stuck between different solutions (Wiegand 2004). Fulda and Ventura (2007) 
investigated such convergence to solutions and described a Pareto-selection problem called 
shadowed equilibrium.
Definition 7  Shadowed equilibrium A joint policy ̄/u1D745 is shadowed by another joint policy 
̂/u1D745 in a state x if and only if
An equilibrium is shadowed by another when at least one agent exists who, when uni-
laterally deviating from ̄/u1D745 , will see no better improvement than for deviating from ̂/u1D745 (Mat-
ignon et al. 2012b). As a form of shadowed equilibrium, the pathology of relative over-
generalization describes that a sub-optimal Nash equilibrium in the joint action space is 
preferred over an optimal solution. This phenomenon arises since each agent’s policy per -
forms relatively well when paired with arbitrary actions from other agents (Panait et al. 
2006; Wei and Luke 2016; Wiegand 2004).
In a Markov Game, we assumed that each agent observes a state x, which encodes all 
necessary information about the world. However for complex systems, complete infor -
mation might not be perceivable. In such partially observable settings, the agents do not 
observe  the whole state space but merely a subset Oi⊂X . Hence, the agents are con-
fronted to deal with sequential decision-making under uncertainty. The partially observable 
Markov Game (Hansen et al. 2004) is the generalization of both MG and MDP.
Definition 8  Partially observable Markov Games (POMG) The POMG is mathemati-
cally denoted by the tuple /parenleft.s1N,X,{Ui},{Oi},P ,{Ri},/u1D6FE/parenright.s1 , where N={ 1,…,N} denotes 
the set of N>1 interacting agents, X is the set of global but unobserved system states, and 
U is the set of individual action spaces Ui . The observation space O denotes the collection 
of individual observation spaces Oi . The transition probability function is denoted by P , 
the reward function associated with agent i by Ri , and the discount factor is /u1D6FE.
When agents face a cooperative task with a shared reward function, the POMG is then 
known as decentralized Partially Observable Markov decision process (dec-POMDP) 
(Bernstein et al. 2002; Oliehoek and Amato 2016). In partially observable domains, the 
inference of good policies is extended in complexity since the history of interactions 
becomes meaningful. Hence, the agents usually incorporate history-dependent policies 
𝜋i
t∶{Oi}t>0→P(Ui) , which map from a history of observations to a distribution over 
actions.
Definition 9  Credit assignment problem In the fully-cooperative setting with joint reward 
signals, an individual agent cannot conclude the impact of its own action towards the 
team’s success and, thus, faces a credit assignment problem.
In cooperative games, agents are encouraged to maximize a common goal through a 
joint reward signal. However, agents cannot ascertain their contribution to the eventual 
reward when they do not experience the taken joint action or deal with partial observa-
tions. Associating rewards to agents is known as the credit assignment problem (Chang 
et al. 2004; Weiß 1995; Wolpert and Tumer 1999).(5)V𝜋i,̄/u1D745−i(x)<min
j,𝜋jV𝜋j,̂/u1D745−j(x)∃ i,𝜋i.

==== Page 10 ====
904 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Some of the above-introduced pathologies occur in all cooperative, competitive, and 
mixed tasks, whereas some pathologies like relative over-generalization, credit assign-
ment, and miss-coordination are predominant issues in cooperative settings. To cope with 
these pathologies, still commonly studied settings are tabular worlds such as variations of 
the climbing game where solutions are not yet found, e.g. when the environment exhib-
its reward stochasticity (Claus and Boutilier 1998). Thus, simple worlds remain a fertile 
ground for further research, especially for problems like shadowed equilibria, non-sta-
tionarity or alter-exploration problems3 and continue to matter for modern deep learning 
approaches.
3  Analysis of training schemes
The training of multiple agents has long been a computational challenge (Becker et  al. 
2004; Nair et al. 2003). Since the complexity in the state and action space grows exponen-
tially with the number of agents, even modern deep learning approaches may reach their 
limits. In this section, we describe training schemes that are used in practice for learning 
agent policies in the multi-agent setting similar to the ones described in Bono et al. (2019). 
We denote training as the process during which agents acquire data to build up experience 
and optimize their behavior with respect to the received reward signals. In contrast, we 
refer test time4 to the step after the training when the learned policy is evaluated but is no 
further refined. The training of agents can be broadly divided into two paradigms, namely 
centralized and distributed (Weiß 1995). If the training of agents is applied in a centralized 
manner, policies are updated based on the mutual exchange of information during the train-
ing. This additional information is then usually removed at test time. In contrast to the cen-
tralized scheme, the training can also be handled in a distributed fashion where each agent 
performs updates on its own and develops an individual policy without utilizing foreign 
information.
In addition to the training paradigm, agents may deviate in the way of how they select 
actions. We recognize two execution schemes. Centralized execution describes that agents 
are guided from a centralized unit, which computes the joint actions for all agents. On 
the contrary, agents determine actions according to their individual policy for decentralized 
execution. An overview of the training schemes is depicted in Fig.  2 while Table  1 lists the 
reviewed literature of this section.
3.1  Distributed training
In distributed training schemes, agents learn independently of other agents and do not 
rely on explicit information exchange.
4 Note that test and execution time are often used interchangeably in recent literature. For clarity, we use 
the term test for the post-training evaluation and the term execution for the action selection with respect to 
some policy.3 The alter-exploration dilemma, also known as the exploration-exploitation problem, describes the trade-
off an agent faces to decide whether to choose actions that extend experience or take decisions that are 
already optimal according to the current knowledge.

==== Page 11 ====
905 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Definition 10  Distributed training decentralized execution (DTDE) Each agent i has an 
associated policy /u1D70Bi∶Oi→P(Ui) which maps local observations to a distribution over 
individual actions. No information is shared between agents such that each agent learns 
independently.
The fundamental drawback of the DTDE paradigm is that the environment appears 
non-stationary from a single agent’s viewpoint because agents neither have access to 
the knowledge of others, nor do they perceive the joint action. The first approaches in 
this training scheme were studied in tabular worlds. The work by Tan (1993) investi-
gated the question if independently learning agents can match with cooperating agents. 
The results showed that independent learners learn slower in tabular and deterministic 
worlds. Based on that, Claus and Boutilier (1998) examined both independent and joint-
action learners in cooperative stochastic-form games and empirically showed that both 
types of learning can converge to an equilibrium in deterministic games. Subsequent 
works elaborated on the DTDE scheme in discretized worlds (Hu and Wellman 1998; 
Lauer and Riedmiller 2000).
More recent works report that distributed training schemes  scale poorly with the 
number of agents due to the extra sample complexity, which is added to the learning 
problem. Gupta et al. (2017) showed that distributed methods have inferior performance 
compared to policies that are trained with a centralized training paradigm. Similarly, 
Foerster et  al. (2018b) showed that the speed of independently learning actor-critic 
methods is slower than using  centralized training. In further works, DTDE has been 
applied to cooperative navigation tasks (Chen et al. 2016; Strouse et al. 2018), to par -
tially observable  domains (Dobbe et  al. 2017; Nguyen et  al. 2017b; Srinivasan et  al. 
2018), and to social dilemmas (Leibo et al. 2017).
Due to limited information in the distributed setting, independent learners are con-
fronted with several pathologies (Matignon et al. 2012b). Besides non-stationarity, envi-
ronments may exhibit stochastic transitions or stochastic rewards, which further compli-
cates learning. In addition to that, the search for an optimal policy influences the other 
agents’ decision-making, which may lead to action shadowing and impacts the balance 
between exploration and knowledge exploitation.
A line of recent works expands independent learners with techniques to cope with 
the aforementioned MARL pathologies in cooperative domains. First, Omidshafiei et al. 
(2017) introduced a decentralized experience replay extension called Concurrent Experi-
ence Replay Trajectories (CERT) that enables independent learners to face a cooperative Env Env Env
Agent 1 Agent N Agent 1 Agent N Agent 1 Agent NInformation
Update
UpdateUpdate Update Update
Fig. 2  Training schemes in the multi-agent setting. (Left) CTCE holds a joint policy for all agents. (Middle) 
Each agent updates its own individual policy in DTDE. (Right) CTDE enables agents to exchange addi-
tional information during training which is then discarded at test time

==== Page 12 ====
906 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3Table 1  Overview of training schemes applied in recent MADRL works
Scheme Approach Literature
CTCE  Gupta et al. (2017) and Sunehag et al. (2018)
CTDE Parameter sharing  Ahilan and Dayan (2019), Chu and Ye (2017), Gupta et al. (2017), Peng et al. (2017), Sukhbaatar et al. 
(2016) and Sunehag et al. (2018)
Value-based  Castellini et al. (2019), Foerster et al. (2016), Jorge et al. (2016), Rashid et al. (2018), Son et al. (2019) and 
Sunehag et al. (2018)
Centralized critic  Bono et al. (2019), Das et al. (2019), Foerster et al. (2018b), Lowe et al. (2017), Iqbal and Sha (2019), Wei 
et al. (2018) and Wu et al. (2018)
Master-slave  Kong et al. (2017) and Kumar et al. (2017)
DTDE  Chen et al. (2016), Dobbe et al. (2017), Foerster et al. (2018b), Gupta et al. (2017), Jaderberg et al. (2019), 
Jaques et al. (2019), Leibo et al. (2017), Liu et al. (2019), Lyu and Amato (2020), Nguyen et al. (2017b), 
Omidshafiei et al. (2017), Palmer et al. (2018), Palmer et al. (2019), Srinivasan et al. (2018), Strouse 
et al. (2018) and Zheng et al. (2018a)

==== Page 13 ====
907 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
and partially observable setting by rendering samples more stable and efficient. Similarly, 
Palmer et al. (2018) extended the experience replay of Deep Q-Networks with leniency, 
which associates stored state-action pairs with decaying temperature values that govern 
the amount of applied leniency. They showed that this induces optimism in value func-
tion updates and can overcome relative over-generalization. Another work by Palmer et al. 
(2019) proposed negative update intervals double-DQN as an mechanism that identifies 
and removes generated data from the replay buffer that leads to mis-coordination. Alike, 
Lyu and Amato 2020 proposed decentralized quantile estimators which identify non-sta-
tionary transition samples based on the likelihood of returns. Another work that aims to 
improve upon independent learners can be found in Zheng et  al. (2018a) who used two 
auxiliary mechanisms, including a lenient reward approximation and a prioritized replay 
strategy.
A different research direction can be seen in  distributed population-based training 
schemes where agents are optimized through an online evolutionary process such that 
under-performing agents are substituted by mutated versions of better agents (Jaderberg 
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019).
3.2  Centralized training
The centralized training paradigm describes agent policies that are updated based on 
mutual information. While the sharing of mutual information between agents is enabled 
during the training, this additional information is then discarded at test time. The central-
ized training can be further differentiated into the centralized and decentralized execution 
scheme.
Definition 11  Centralized training centralized execution (CTCE) The CTCE scheme 
describes a centralized executor /u1D70B∶O→P(U) modeling the joint policy that maps the 
collection of distributed observations to a set of distributions over individual actions.
Some applications assume an unconstrained and instantaneous information exchange 
between agents. In such a setting, a centralized executor can be leveraged to learn the 
joint policy for all agents. The CTCE paradigm allows the straightforward employment 
of single-agent training methods such as actor-critics (Mnih et al. 2016) or policy gradi-
ent algorithms (Schulman et  al. 2017) to multi-agent problems. An obvious flaw is that 
state-action spaces grow exponentially by the number of agents. To address the so-called 
curse of dimensionality, the joint model can be factored into individual policies for each 
agent. Gupta et al. (2017) represented the centralized executor as a set of independent sub-
policies such that agents’ individual action distributions are captured rather than the joint 
action distribution of all agents, i.e. the joint action distribution P(U)=∏
iP(Ui) is fac-
tored into independent action distributions. Next to the policy, the value function can be 
factored so that the joint value is decomposed into a sum of local value functions, e.g. the 
joint action-value function can be expressed by Q/u1D70B(o1,…,oN,u1,…,un)=∑
iQi
/u1D70B(oi,ui) as 
shown in Russell and Zimdars (2003). A recent approach for the value function factoriza-
tion is investigated in Sunehag et al. (2018). However, a phenomenon called lazy agents 
may occur in the CTCE setting when one agent learns a good policy but a second agent has 
less incentive to learn a good policy, as his actions may hinder the first agent, resulting in a 
lower reward (Sunehag et al. 2018).

==== Page 14 ====
908 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Although CTCE regards the learning problem as a single-agent case, we include the 
paradigm in this paper because the training schemes presented in the subsequent sec-
tions occasionally use CTCE as performance baseline and conduct comparisons.
Definition 12  Centralized training decentralized execution (CTDE) Each agent i holds 
an individual policy /u1D70Bi∶Oi→P(Ui) which maps local observations to a distribution over 
individual actions. During training, agents are endowed with additional information, which 
is then discarded at test time.
The CTDE paradigm presents the state-of-the-art practice for learning with multiple 
agents (Kraemer and Banerjee 2016; Oliehoek et al. 2008). In classical MARL, such set-
ting was utilized as joint action learners which has the advantage that perceiving joint 
actions a-posteriori discards the non-stationarity in the environment (Claus and Boutilier 
1998). As of late, CTDE has been successful in MADRL approaches (Foerster et al. 2016; 
Jorge et al. 2016). Agents utilize shared computational facilities or other forms of com-
munication to exchange information during training. By sharing mutual information, the 
training process can be eased and the learning speed can become superior when matched 
against independently trained agents (Foerster et al. 2018b). Moreover, agents can bypass 
non-stationarity when extra information about the selected actions is available to all agents 
during training such that the consequences of actions can be attributed to the respective 
agents. In what follows, we classify the CTDE literature according to the agent structure.
Homogeneous agents exhibit a common structure or the same set of skills, e.g. the same 
learning model or share common goals. Owning the same structure, agents can share parts 
of their learning model or experience with other agents. These approaches can scale well 
with the number of agents and may allow an efficient learning of behaviors. Gupta et al. 
(2017) showed that policies based on parameter sharing can be trained more efficiently 
and, thus, can outperform independently learned ones. Although agents own the same 
policy network, different agent behaviors can emerge because each agent perceives differ -
ent observations at test time. It has been thoroughly demonstrated that parameter sharing 
can help to accelerate the learning progress (Ahilan and Dayan 2019; Chu and Ye 2017; 
Peng et  al. 2017; Sukhbaatar et  al. 2016; Sunehag et  al. 2018). Next to parameter shar -
ing, homogeneous agents can employ value-based methods where an approximation of the 
value function is learned based on mutual information. Agents profit from the joint actions 
and other agents’ policies that are available during training and incorporate this extra infor -
mation into centralized value functions (Foerster et al. 2016; Jorge et al. 2016). Such infor -
mation is then discarded at test time. Many approaches consider the decomposition of a 
joint value function into combinations of individual value functions (Castellini et al. 2019; 
Rashid et al. 2018; Son et al. 2019; Sunehag et al. 2018). Through decomposition, each 
agent faces a simplified sub-problem of the original problem. Sunehag et al. (2018) showed 
that agents learning on local sub-problems scale better with the number of agents than 
CTCE or independent learners. We elaborate on value function-based factorization more 
detailed in Sect. 5.4 as an effective approach to tackle credit assignment problems.
Heterogeneous agents, on the contrary, differ in structure and skill. An instance for het-
erogeneous policies can be seen in the extension of an actor-critic approach with a cen-
tralized critic, which allows information sharing to amplify the performance of individual 
agent policies. These methods can be distinguished from each other based on the repre-
sentation of the critic. Lowe et al. (2017) utilized one centralized critic for each agent that 
is augmented with additional information during training. The critics are provided with 

==== Page 15 ====
909 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
information about every agent’s policy, whereas the actors perceive only local observa-
tions. As a result, the agents do not depend on explicit communication and can overcome 
the non-stationarity in the environment. Likewise, Bono et  al. (2019) trained multiple 
agents with individual policies that share information with a centralized critic and demon-
strated that such setup might improve results on standard benchmarks. Besides the utiliza-
tion of one critic for each agent, Foerster et al. (2018b) applied one centralized critic for all 
agents to estimate a counterfactual baseline function that marginalizes out a single agent’s 
action. The critic is conditioned on the history of all agents’ observations or, if available, 
on the true global state. Typically, actor-critic methods underlie a variance in the critic 
estimation that is further exacerbated by the number of agents. Therefore, Wu et al. (2018) 
proposed an action-dependent baseline which includes  information from other agents to 
reduce the variance in the critic estimation function. Further works that incorporate one 
centralized critic for distributed policies can be found in Das et al. (2019), Iqbal and Sha 
(2019) and Wei et al. (2018).
Another way to perform decentralized execution is by employing a master-slave archi-
tecture, which can resolve coordination conflicts between multiple agents. Kong et  al. 
(2017) applied a centralized master executor which shares information with decentralized 
slaves. In each time step, the master receives local information from the slaves and shares 
its internal state in return. The slaves compute actions conditioned on their local obser -
vation and the master’s internal state. Similar approaches that make use of different lev -
els of abstraction are hierarchical methods (Kumar et  al. 2017) that  operate at different 
time scales or levels of abstraction. We elaborate on hierarchical methods in more detail in 
Sect. 5.3.
4  Emergent patterns of agent behavior
Agents adjust their policy to maximize the task success and react to the behavioral changes 
of other agents. The dynamic interaction between multiple decision-makers, which simul-
taneously affects the state of the environment, can cause the emergence of specific behavio-
ral patterns. An obvious way to influence the development of agent behavior is through the 
designed reward structure. By promoting incentives for cooperation, agents can learn team 
strategies where they try to collaborate and optimize upon a mutual goal. Agents support 
other agents since the cumulative reward for cooperation is greater than acting selfishly. 
On the contrary, if the appeals for maximizing the individual performance are larger than 
being cooperative, agents can learn greedy strategies and maximize their individual reward. 
Such competitive attitudes can yield high-level strategies like manipulating adversaries to 
gain an advantage. However, the boundaries between competition and cooperation can be 
blurred in the multi-agent setting. For instance, if one agent competes with other agents, it 
is sometimes useful to cooperate temporarily in order to receive a higher reward in the long 
run.
In this section, we review the literature that is interested in developed agent behaviors. 
We differentiate occurring behaviors according to the reward structure (Sect.  4.1), the lan-
guage between agents (Sect.  4.2), and the social context (Sect.  4.3). Table  2 summarizes 
the reviewed literature based on this classification. Note that we focus in this section not 
on works that introduce new methodologies but on literature that analyzes the emergent 
behavioral patterns.

==== Page 16 ====
910 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3Table 2  Overview of MADRL papers that investigate emergent patterns of agent behavior
Emergence Setting Literature
Reward structure Cooperative  Diallo et al. (2017), Leibo et al. (2017) and Tampuu et al. (2017)
Competitive  Bansal et al. (2018), Leibo et al. (2017), Liu et al. (2019) and Tampuu et al. (2017)
Intrinsic rewards  Baker et al. (2020), Hughes et al. (2018), Jaderberg et al. (2019), Jaques et al. (2019), Jaques et al. (2018), 
Peysakhovich and Lerer (2018), Sukhbaatar et al. (2017), Wang et al. (2019) and Wang et al. (2020b)
Language Referential games  Choi et al. (2018), Evtimova et al. (2018), Havrylov and Titov (2017), Jorge et al. (2016), Lazaridou et al. 
(2017), Lazaridou et al. (2018), Lee et al. (2017) and Mordatch and Abbeel (2018)
Dialogues  Cao et al. (2018), Das et al. (2017) and Lewis et al. (2017)
Social context Commons dilemmas  Foerster et al. (2018a), Jaques et al. (2018), Jaques et al. (2019), Leibo et al. (2017) and Lerer and Peysak -
hovich (2017)
Public good dilemmas  Pérolat et al. (2017), Hughes et al. (2018) and Zhu and Kirley (2019)

==== Page 17 ====
911 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
4.1  Reward structure
The primary factor that influences the emergence of agent behavior is the reward struc-
ture. If the reward for mutual cooperation is larger than individual reward maximization, 
agents tend to learn policies that seek to collaboratively solve the task. In particular, Leibo 
et al. (2017) compared the magnitude of the team reward in relation to the individual agent 
reward. They showed that the higher the numerical team reward is compared to the indi-
vidual reward, the greater is the willingness to collaborate with other agents. The work by 
Tampuu et al. (2017) demonstrated that punishing the whole team of agents for the failure 
of a single agent can also cause cooperation. Agents learn policies to avoid the malfunction 
of an individual, support other agents to prevent failure, and improve the performance of 
the whole team. Similarly, Diallo et al. (2017) used the Pong video game to investigate the 
coordination between agents and examined how developed behaviors change regarding the 
reward function. For a comprehensive review of learning in cooperative settings, one can 
consider the article by Panait and Luke (2005) for classical MARL and Oroojlooyjadid and 
Hajinezhad (2019) for recent MADRL.
In contrast to the cooperative scenario, one can value individual performance greater 
than the collaboration among agents. A competitive setting motivates agents to outperform 
their adversary counterparts. Tampuu et al. (2017) used the video game Pong and manipu-
lated the rewarding structure to examine the emergence of agent behavior. They showed 
that the higher the reward for competition, the more likely an agent tries to outplay its 
opponents by using techniques such as wall bouncing or faster ball speed. Employing such 
high-level strategies to overwhelm the adversary maximizes the individual reward. Simi-
larly, Bansal et al. (2018) investigated competitive scenarios, where agents competed in a 
3D world with simulated physics to learn locomotion skills such as running, blocking, or 
tackling other agents with arms and legs. They argued that adversarial training could help 
to learn more complex agent behaviors than the environment can exhibit. Likewise, the 
works of Leibo et al. (2017) and Liu et al. (2019) investigated the emergence of behaviors 
due to the reward structure in competitive scenarios.
If the rewards appear in sparse frequency, agents can be equipped with intrinsic reward 
functions that provide denser feedback signals and, thus, can overcome the sparsity or even 
the absence of external rewards. One way to realize this is with intrinsic motivation, which 
is based on the concept of maximizing an internal reinforcement signal by actively dis-
covering novel or surprising patterns (Chentanez et al. 2005; Oudeyer and Kaplan 2007; 
Schmidhuber 2010). Intrinsic motivation encourages agents to explore states that have been 
scarcely or never visited and to perform novel actions in those states. Most approaches of 
intrinsic motivation can be broadly divided into two categories (Pathak et al. 2017). First, 
agents are encouraged to explore unknown states where the novelty of states is measured by 
a model that captures the distribution of visited environment states (Bellemare et al. 2016). 
Second, agents can be motivated to reduce the uncertainty about the consequences of their 
own actions. The agent builds a model that learns the dynamics of the environment by 
lowering the prediction error of the follow-up states with respect to the taken actions. The 
uncertainty indicates the novelty of new experience since the model can only be accurate in 
states which it has already encountered or can generalize from previous knowledge (Hout-
hooft et al. 2016; Pathak et al. 2017). For a recent survey on intrinsic motivation in RL, 
one can regard the paper by Aubret et al. (2019). The concept of intrinsic motivation was 
transferred to the multi-agent domain by Sequeira et al. (2011), who studied the motiva-
tional impact on multiple agents. Investigations on the emergence of agent behavior based 

==== Page 18 ====
912 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
on intrinsic rewards have been abundantly conducted in Baker et al. (2020), Hughes et al. 
(2018), Jaderberg et al. (2019), Jaques et al. (2018), Jaques et al. (2019), Peysakhovich and 
Lerer (2018), Sukhbaatar et al. (2017), Wang et al. (2019) and Wang et al. (2020b).
4.2  Language
The development of language corpora and communication skills of autonomous agents 
attracts great attention within the community. For one, the behavior that emerges during the 
deployment of abstract language as well as the learned composition of multiple words to 
form meaningful contexts is of interest (Kirby 2002). Deep learning methods have widened 
the scope of computational methodologies for investigating the development of language 
between dynamic agents (Lazaridou and Baroni 2020). For building rich behaviors and 
complex reasoning, communication based on high-dimensional data like visual perception 
is a widespread practice (Antol et al. 2015). In the following, we focus on works that inves-
tigate the emergence of language and analyze behavior. Papers that propose new method-
ologies for developing communication protocols are discussed in Sect.  5.2. We classify the 
learning of language according to the performed task and the type of interaction the agents 
pursue. In particular, we differentiate between referential games and dialogues.
The former, referential games, describe cooperative games where the speaking agent 
communicates an objective via messages to another listening agent. Lazaridou et al. (2017) 
showed that agents could learn communication protocols solely through interaction. For 
a meaningful information exchange, agents evolved semantic properties in their language. 
A key element of the study was to analyze if the agents’ interactions are interpretable for 
humans, showing limited yet encouraging results. Likewise, Mordatch and Abbeel (2018) 
investigated the emergence of abstract language that arises through the interaction between 
agents in a physical environment. In their experiments, the agents should learn a discrete 
set of vocabulary by solving navigation tasks through communication. By involving more 
than three agents in the conversation and by penalizing an arbitrary size of vocabulary, 
agents agreed on a coherent set of vocabulary and discouraged ambiguous words. They 
also observed that agents learned a syntax structure in the communication protocol that 
is consistent in vocabulary usage. Another work by Li and Bowling (2019) found out that 
compositional languages are easier to communicate with other agents than languages with 
less structure. In addition, changing listening agents during the learning can promote the 
emergence of language grounded on a higher degree of structure. Many studies are con-
cerned with the development of communication in referential games grounded on visual 
perception as it can be found in Choi et al. (2018), Evtimova et al. (2018), Havrylov and 
Titov (2017), Jorge et  al. (2016), Lazaridou et  al. (2018) and Lee et  al. (2017). Further 
works consider the development of communication in social dilemmas (Jaques et al. 2018, 
2019).
As the second category, we describe the emergence of behavioral patterns in com-
munication while conducting dialogues. One type of dialogue are negotiations in which 
agents pursue to agree on decisions. In a study about negotiations with natural language, 
Lewis et  al. (2017) showed that agents could master linguistic and reasoning problems. 
Two agents were both shown a collection of items and were instructed to negotiate about 
how to divide the objects among both agents. Each agent was expected to maximize the 
value of the bargained objects. Eventually, the agents learned to use high-level strategies 
such as deception to accomplish higher rewards over their opponents. Similar studies con-
cerned with negotiations are covered in Cao et al. (2018) and He et al. (2018). Another 

==== Page 19 ====
913 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
type of dialogue are scenarios where the emergence of communication is investigated in 
a question-answering style as shown by Das et al. (2017). One agent received an image as 
input and was instructed to ask questions about the shown image while the second agent 
responded, both in natural language.
Many of the above-mentioned papers report that utilizing a communication channel can 
increase task performance in terms of the cumulative reward. However, numerical perfor -
mance measurements provide evidence but do not give insights about the communication 
abilities learned by the agents. Therefore, Lowe et al. (2019) surveyed metrics which are 
applied to assess the quality of learned communication protocols and provided recommen-
dations about the usage of such metrics. Based on that, Eccles et al. (2019) proposed to 
incorporate inductive bias into the learning objective of agents, which could promote the 
emergence of a meaningful communication. They showed that inductive bias could lead to 
improved results in terms of interpretability.
4.3  Social context
Next to the reward structure and language, the research community actively investigates the 
emerging agent behaviors in social contexts. Akin to humans, artificial agents can develop 
strategies that exploit patterns in complex problems and adapt behaviors in response to oth-
ers (Baker et al. 2020; Jaderberg et al. 2019). We differentiate the following literature along 
different dimensions, such as the type of social dilemma and the examined psychological 
variables.
Social dilemmas have long been studied as conflict scenario in which agents gauge 
between individualistic and collective profits (Crandall and Goodrich 2011; De Cote et al. 
2006). The tension between cooperation and defection is evaluated as an atomic decision 
according to the numerical values of a pay-off matrix. This pay-off matrix satisfies inequal-
ities in the reward function such that agents must decide between cooperation, to benefit as 
a whole team, or defection, to maximize selfish performance. To temporally extend matrix 
games, sequential social dilemmas have been introduced to investigate long-term strategic 
decisions of agent policies rather than short-term actions (Leibo et al. 2017). The arising 
behaviors in these dilemmas can be classified along psychological variables known from 
human interaction (Lange et al. 2013) such as the gain of individual benefits (Lerer and 
Peysakhovich 2017), the fear of future consequences (Pérolat et al. 2017), the assessment 
of the impact on another agent’s behavior (Jaques et  al. 2018, 2019), the trust between 
agents (Pinyol and Sabater-Mir 2013; Ramchurn et  al. 2004; Yu et  al. 2013), and the 
impact of emotions on the decision-making (Moerland et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2013).
Kollock (1998) divided social dilemmas into commons dilemmas and public goods 
dilemmas. The former, commons dilemmas describe the trade-off between individualistic 
short-term benefits and long-term common interests on a task that is shared by all agents. 
Recent works on the commons dilemma can be found in Foerster et  al. (2018a), Leibo 
et al. (2017) and Lerer and Peysakhovich (2017). In public goods dilemmas, agents face 
a scenario where common-pool resources are constrained and oblige a sustainable use of 
resources. The phenomenon called the tragedy of commons predicts that self-interested 
agents fail to find socially positive equilibria, which eventually results in the over-exploita-
tion of the common resources (Hardin 1968). Investigations on the trial-and-error learning 
in common-pool resource scenarios with multiple decision-makers are covered in Hughes 
et al. (2018), Pérolat et al. (2017) and Zhu and Kirley (2019).

==== Page 20 ====
914 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
5  Current challenges
In this section, we depict several challenges that arise in the multi-agent RL domain and, 
thus, are currently under active research. We approach the problem of non-stationarity 
(Sect.  5.1) due to the presence of multiple learners in a shared environment and review 
literature regarding the development of communication skills (Sect.  5.2). We further inves-
tigate the challenge of learning coordination (Sect.  5.3). Then, we survey the difficulty 
of attributing rewards to specific agents as the credit assignment problem (Sect.  5.4) and 
examine scalability issues (Sect.  5.5), which increase with the number of agents. Finally, 
we consider environments where states are only partially observable (Sect.  5.6). While 
some challenges are omnipresent in the MARL domain, such as non-stationarity or scal-
ability, others like the credit assignment problem or the learning of coordination and com-
munication are prevailing in the cooperative setting.
We aim to provide a holistic overview of the contemporary challenges that constitute 
the landscape in reinforcement learning with multiple agents and survey treatments that 
were suggested in recent works. In particular, we focus on those challenges which are cur -
rently under active research and where progress has been accomplished recently. There are 
still open problems that have not been or partially addressed so far. Such problems are dis-
cussed in Sect.  6. Deliberately, we do not regard challenges that also persist in the single-
agent domain, such as sparse rewards or the exploration-exploitation dilemma. We refer 
the interested reader for an overview of those topics to the articles of Arulkumaran et al. 
(2017) and Li (2018). Much of the surveyed literature cannot be assigned to one particular 
but rather to several of the proposed challenges. Hence, we associate the subsequent litera-
ture to the one challenge which we believe best addresses it (Table 3).
5.1  Non‑stationarity
One major problem resides in the presence of multiple agents that interact within a shared 
environment and learn simultaneously. Due to the co-adaption, the environment dynamics 
appear non-stationary from the perspective of a single agent. Thus, agents face a moving 
target problem if they are not provided with additional knowledge about other agents. As 
a result, the Markov assumption is violated, and the learning constitutes an inherently dif-
ficult problem (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2017; Laurent et al. 2011). The naïve approach is to 
neglect the adaptive behavior of agents. One can either ignore the existence of other agents 
(Matignon et al. 2012b) or discount the adaptive behavior by assuming the others’ behav -
ior to be static or optimal (Lauer and Riedmiller 2000). By making such assumptions, the 
agents are considered as independent learners, and traditional single-agent reinforcement 
algorithms can be applied. First attempts have been studied in Claus and Boutilier (1998) 
and Tan (1993), which showed that independent learners could perform well in simple 
deterministic environments. However, in complex or stochastic environments, independent 
learners often result in poor performance (Lowe et al. 2017; Matignon et al. 2012b). More-
over, Lanctot et al. (2017) argued that independent learners could over-fit to other agents’ 
policies during the training and, thus, may fail to generalize at test time.
In the following, we review literature, which addresses the non-stationarity in a multi-
agent environment, and categorize the approaches into those with experience replay, cen-
tralized units, and meta-learning. A similar categorization proposed Papoudakis et  al. 
(2019). We identify further approaches which cope with non-stationarity by establishing 

==== Page 21 ====
915 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3Table 3  Overview of MADRL challenges and approaches proposed in recent literature
Challenge Approach Literature
Non-stationarity Experience replay  Foerster et al. (2017), Palmer et al. (2018), Tang et al. (2018), and  Zheng et al. (2018a)
Centralized training  Bono et al. (2019), Foerster et al. (2016), Foerster et al. (2018b), Iqbal and Sha (2019), Jorge et al. (2016), 
Lowe et al. (2017), Rashid et al. (2018), and Wei et al. (2018)
Meta-learning  Al-Shedivat et al. (2018), and Rabinowitz et al. (2018)
Communication Broadcasting  Foerster et al. (2016), Peng et al. (2017), and Sukhbaatar et al. (2016)
Targeted  Das et al. (2019), Hoshen (2017), Jain et al. (2019), Jiang and Lu (2018), and Singh et al. (2019)
Networked  Chu et al. (2020), Chu et al. (2020), Qu et al. (2020), Zhang et al. (2018), and Zhang et al. (2019)
Extensions  Celikyilmaz et al. (2018), Jaques et al. (2018), Jaques et al. (2019), Kim et al. (2019), Li et al. (2019b), 
Singh et al. (2019), and Wang et al. (2020c)
Coordination Independent learners  Foerster et al. (2018b), Lyu and Amato (2020), Omidshafiei et al. (2017), Palmer et al. (2018), Palmer et al. 
(2019), Sunehag et al. (2018), and Zheng et al. (2018a)
Constructing models  Barde et al. (2019), Everett and Roberts (2018), Foerster et al. (2018a), Foerster et al. (2019), Grover et al. 
(2018), He et al. (2016), Hong et al. (2017), Hoshen (2017), Jaques et al. (2019), Le et al. (2017), Letcher 
et al. (2019), Raileanu et al. (2018), Tacchetti et al. (2019), Yang et al. (2018a), and Zheng et al. (2018b)
Hierarchical methods  Ahilan and Dayan (2019), Cai et al. (2013), Han et al. (2019), Jaderberg et al. (2019), Kumar et al. (2017), 
Lee et al. (2020), Ma and Wu (2020), Tang et al. (2018), and Vezhnevets et al. (2019)
Credit assignment Decomposition Castellini et al. (2019), Chen et al. (2018), Nguyen et al. (2017b), Rashid et al. (2018), Son et al. (2019), 
Sunehag et al. (2018), Wang et al. (2020a), Wang et al. (2020c), Yang et al. (2018b)
Marginalization  Foerster et al. (2018b), Nguyen et al. (2018), and Wu et al. (2018)
Inverse RL  Barrett et al. (2017), Le et al. (2017), Lin et al. (2018), Song et al. (2018), and Yu et al. (2019)
Scalability Knowledge Reuse  Baker et al. (2020), Da Silva et al. (2017), Da Silva and Costa (2017), Gupta et al. (2017), Hernandez-
Leal et al. (2019), Jiang and Lu (2018), Long et al. (2020), Luketina et al. (2019), Narvekar et al. (2016), 
Omidshafiei et al. (2019), Peng et al. (2017), Sukhbaatar et al. (2016), Sukhbaatar et al. (2017), Sunehag 
et al. (2018), and Svetlik et al. (2017)
Complexity reduction  Chen et al. (2018), Lin et al. (2018), Nguyen et al. (2017a), Nguyen et al. (2017b),  and Yang et al. (2018b)
Robustness  Baker et al. (2020), Bansal et al. (2018), Berner et al. (2019), Gleave et al. (2020), Heinrich and Silver 
(2016), Lanctot et al. (2017), Li et al. (2019a), Liu et al. (2020), Lowe et al. (2017), Pinto et al. (2017), 
Raghu et al. (2018), Silver et al. (2016), Silver et al. (2018), Spooner and Savani (2020), and Sukhbaatar 
et al. (2017)

==== Page 22 ====
916 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3Table 3  (continued)
Challenge Approach Literature
Partial observability Memory mechanism  Dibangoye and Buffet (2018), Foerster et al. (2018b), Foerster et al. (2019), Gupta et al. (2017), and Omid-
shafiei et al. (2017)

==== Page 23 ====
917 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
communication between agents (Sect.  5.2) or building models (Sect.  5.3). However, we 
discuss these topics separately in the respective sections.
Experience replay mechanism Recent successes with reinforcement learning methods 
such as deep Q-networks (Mnih et al. 2015) rest upon an experience replay mechanism. 
However, it is not straightforward to employ experience replays to the multi-agent setting 
because past experience becomes obsolete with the adaption of agent policies over time. To 
encounter this, Foerster et al. (2017) proposed two approaches. First, they decay outdated 
transition samples from the replay memory to stabilize targets and then use importance 
sampling to incorporate off-policy samples. Since the agents’ policies are known during 
the training, off-policy updates can be corrected with importance-weighted policy likeli-
hoods. Second, the state space of each agent is enhanced with estimates of the other agents’ 
policies, so-called fingerprints5, to prevent non-stationarity. The value functions can then 
be conditioned on a fingerprint, which clears the age of data sampled from the replay mem-
ory. Another extension for experience replays was proposed by Palmer et al. (2018) who 
applied leniency to every stored transition sample. Leniency associates each sample of the 
experience memory with a temperature value, which gradually decays by the number of 
state-action pair visits. Further utilization of the experience replay mechanism to cope with 
non-stationarity can be found in Tang et al. (2018) and Zheng et al. (2018a). Nevertheless, 
if the contemporary dynamics of the learners are neglected, algorithms can utilize short-
term buffers as applied in Baker et al. (2020) and Leibo et al. (2017).
Centralized Training Scheme As already discussed in Sect.  3.2, the CTDE paradigm can 
be leveraged to share mutual information between learners to ease training. The availability 
of information during the training can loosen the non-stationarity of the environment since 
agents are augmented with information about others. One approach is to enhance actor-
critic methods with centralized critics over which mutual information is shared between 
agents during the training (Bono et al. 2019; Iqbal and Sha 2019; Wei et al. 2018). Lowe 
et al. (2017) embedded each agent with one centralized critic that is augmented with all 
agents’ observations and actions. Based on this additional information, agents face a sta-
tionary environment during the training while acting decentralized on local observations at 
test time. Next to the equipment of one critic per agent, all agents can share one global cen-
tralized critic. Foerster et al. (2018b) applied one centralized critic conditioned on the joint 
action and observations of all agents. The critic computes an agent’s individual advantage 
through estimating the value of the joint action based on a counterfactual baseline, which 
marginalizes out single agents’ influence. Another approach to the CTDE scheme can be 
seen in value-based methods. Rashid et  al. (2018) learned a joint action-value function 
conditioned on the joint observation-action history. The joint action-value function is then 
divided into agent individual value functions based on monotonic non-linear composition. 
Foerster et al. (2016) used action-value functions that share information through a com-
munication channel during the training but then discarded it at test time. Similarly, Jorge 
et al. (2016) employed communication during training to promote information exchange 
for optimizing action-value functions.
Meta-Learning Sometimes, it can be useful to learn how to adapt to the behavioral 
changes of others. This learning-to-learn approach is known as meta-learning (Finn and 
Levine 2018; Schmidhuber et  al. 1996). Recent works in the single-agent domain have 
shown promising results (Duan et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2016a). Al-Shedivat et al. (2018) 
5 Fingerprints draw their inspiration from Tesauro (2004) who eluded non-stationarity by conditioning each 
agent’s policy on estimates of other agents’ policies.

==== Page 24 ====
918 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
transferred this approach to the multi-agent domain and developed a meta-learning based 
method to tackle the consecutive adaptation of agents in non-stationary environments. 
Regarding non-stationarity as a sequence of stationary tasks, agents learn to exploit 
dependencies between successive tasks and generalize over co-adapting agents at test time. 
They evaluated the resulting behaviors in a competitive multi-agent setting where agents 
fight in a simulated physics environment. Meta-learning can also be utilized to construct 
agent models (Rabinowitz et al. 2018). By learning how to model other agents and make 
inferences on them, agents learn to predict the other agent’s future action sequences. They 
embedded this principle into how one agent learns to capture the behavioral patterns of 
other agents efficiently.
5.2  Learning communication
Agents capable of developing communication and language corpora pose one of the vital 
challenges in machine intelligence (Kirby 2002). Intelligent agents must not only decide 
on what to communicate but also when and with whom. It is indispensable that the devel-
oped language is grounded on a common consensus such that all agents understand the 
spoken language, including its semantics. The research efforts in learning to communicate 
have intensified because many pathologies can be overcome by incorporating communi-
cation skills into agents, including non-stationarity, coherent coordination among agents, 
and partial observability. For instance, when an agent knows the actions taken by others, 
the learning problem becomes stationary again from a single agent’s perspective in a fully 
observable environment. Even partial observability can be loosened by messaging local 
observations to other participants through communication, which helps compensate for 
limited knowledge (Goldman and Zilberstein 2004).
The common framework to investigate communication is the dec-POMDP (Oliehoek 
and Amato 2016) which is a fully cooperative setting where agents perceive partial obser -
vations of the environment and try to improve upon an equally-shared reward. In such dis-
tributed systems, agents must not only learn how to cooperate but also how to communicate 
in order to optimize the mutual objective. Early MARL works investigated communication 
rooted in tabular worlds with limited observability (Kasai et al. 2008). Since the spring of 
deep learning methods, the research of learning communication has witnessed great atten-
tion because advanced computational methods provide new opportunities to study highly 
complex data.
In the following, we categorize the surveyed literature according to the message 
addressing. First, we describe the broadcasting scenario where sent messages are received 
by all agents. Second, we look into works that use targeted messages to decide on the 
recipients by using an attention mechanism. Third and last, we review communication in 
networked settings where agents communicate only with their local neighborhood instead 
of the whole population. Figure  3 shows a schematic illustration of this categorization. 
Another taxonomy may be based on the discrete or continuous nature of messages and the 
frequency of passed messages.
Broadcasting Messages are addressed to all participants of the communication channel. 
Foerster et al. (2016) studied how agents learn discrete communication protocols in dec-
POMDPs in order to accomplish a fully-cooperative task. Being in a CTDE setting, the 
communication is not restricted during the training but bandwidth-limited at test time. To 
discover meaningful communication protocols, they proposed two methods. The first, rein-
forced inter-agent learning (RIAL), is based on deep recurrent Q-networks combined with 

==== Page 25 ====
919 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
independent Q-learning where each agent learns an action-value function conditioned on 
the observation history as well as messages from other agents. Additionally, they applied 
parameter sharing so that all agents share and update common features from only one 
Q-network. The second method, differentiable inter-agent learning (DIAL), combines the 
centralized learning paradigm with deep Q-networks. Messages are delivered over discrete 
connections, which are based on a relaxation to become differentiable. In contrast, Sukh-
baatar et al. (2016) proposed CommNet as an architecture that allows the learning of com-
munication between agents purely based on continuous protocols. They showed that each 
agent learns the joint-action and a sparse communication protocol that encodes meaning-
ful information. The authors emphasized that the decreased observability of vicious states 
encourages the importance of communication between agents. To foster scalable commu-
nication protocols that also facilitate heterogeneous agents, Peng et al. (2017) introduced 
the bidirectionally-coordinated network (BiCNet) where agents learn in a vectorized actor-
critic framework to communicate. Through communication, they were able to coordinate 
heterogeneous agents in a combat game of StarCraft.
Targeted communication When agents are endowed with targeted communication pro-
tocols, they utilize an attention mechanism to determine when, what and with whom to 
communicate. Jiang and Lu (2018) introduced ATOC as an attentional communication 
model that enables agents to send messages dynamically and selectively so that commu-
nication takes place among a group of agents only when required. They argued that atten-
tion is essential for large-scale settings because agents learn to decide which information 
is most useful for decision-making. Selective communication is the reason why ATOC 
outperforms CommNet and BiCNet on the conducted navigation tasks. A similar conclu-
sion was drawn by Hoshen (2017) who introduced the vertex attention interaction network 
(VAIN) as an extension to the CommNet. The baseline approach is extended with an atten-
tion mechanism that increases performance due to the focus on only relevant agents. The 
work by Das et al. (2019) introduced targeted multi-agent communication (TarMAC) that 
uses attention to decide with whom and what to communicate by actively addressing other 
agents for message passing. Jain et al. (2019) proposed TBONE for visual navigation in 
cooperative tasks. In contrast to former works, which are limited to the fully-cooperative 
setting, Singh et al. (2019) considered mixed settings where each agent owns an individual Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of communication types. Unilateral arrows represent unidirectional messages, 
while bilateral arrows symbolize bidirectional message passing. (Left) In broadcasting, messages are sent to 
all participants of the communication channel. For better visualization, the broadcasting of only one agent 
is illustrated but each agent can broadcast messages to all other agents. (Middle) Agents can target the com-
munication through an attention mechanism that determines when, what and with whom to communicate. 
(Right) Networked communication describes the local connection to neighborhood agents

==== Page 26 ====
920 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
reward function. They proposed the individualized controlled continuous communication 
model (IC3Net), where agents learn when to exchange information using a gating mecha-
nism that blocks incoming communication requests if necessary.
Networked communication Another form of communication is a networked communica-
tion protocol where agents can exchange information with their neighborhood (Nedic and 
Ozdaglar 2009; Zhang et al. 2018). Agents act decentralized based on local observations 
and received messages from network neighbors. Zhang et al. (2018) used an actor-critic 
framework where agents share their critic information with their network neighbors to pro-
mote global optimality. Chu et al. (2020) introduced the neural communication protocol 
(NeurComm) to enhance communication efficiency by reducing queue length and intersec-
tion delay. Further, they showed that a spatial discount factor could stabilize training when 
only the local vicinity is regarded to perform policy updates. For theoretical contributions, 
one may consider the works of Qu et al. (2020), Zhang et al. (2018) and Zhang et al. (2019) 
whereas the paper of Chu et al. (2020) provides an application perspective in the domain of 
traffic light control.
Extensions Further methods approach the improvement of coordination skills by apply -
ing intrinsic motivation (Jaques et al. 2018, 2019), by making the communication protocol 
more robust or scalable (Kim et al. 2019; Singh et al. 2019), and maximizing the utility of 
the communication through efficient encoding (Celikyilmaz et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019b; 
Wang et al. 2020c).
The above-reviewed papers focus on new methodologies about communication proto-
cols. Besides that, a bulk of literature considers the analysis of emergent language and the 
occurrence of agent behavior, which we discuss in Sect. 4.2.
5.3  Coordination
Successful coordination in multi-agent systems requires agents to agree on a consensus 
(Wei Ren et  al. 2005). In particular, accomplishing a joint goal in cooperative settings 
demands a coherent action selection such that the joint action optimizes the mutual task 
performance. Cooperation among agents is complicated when stochasticity is present in 
system transitions and rewards or when agents observe only partial information of the envi-
ronment’s state. Mis-coordination may arise in the form of action shadowing when explor -
atory behavior influences the other agents’ search space during learning and, as a result, 
sub-optimal solutions are found.
Therefore, the agreement upon a mutual consensus necessitates the sharing and collec-
tion of information about other agents to derive optimal decisions. Finding such a consen-
sus in the decision-making may happen explicitly through communication or implicitly by 
constructing models of other agents. The former requires skills to communicate with others 
so that agents can express their purpose and align their coordination. For the latter, agents 
need the ability to observe other agents’ behavior and reason about their strategies to build 
a model. If the prediction model is accurate, an agent can learn the other agents’ behavioral 
patterns and direct actions towards a consensus, leading to coordinated behavior. Besides 
explicit communication and constructing agent models, the CTDE scheme can be lever -
aged to build different levels of abstraction, which are applied to learn high-level coordina-
tion while independent skills are trained at low-level.
In the remainder of this section, we focus on methods that solve coordination issues 
without establishing communication protocols between agents. Although communication 
may ease coordination, we discuss this topic separately in Sect. 5.2.

==== Page 27 ====
921 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Independent learners The naïve approach to handle multi-agent problems is to regard 
each agent individually such that other agents are perceived as part of the environment and, 
thus, are neglected during learning. Opposed to joint action learners, where agents expe-
rience the selected actions of others a-posteriori, independently learning agents face the 
main difficulty of coherently choosing actions such that the joint action becomes optimal 
concerning the mutual goal (Matignon et al. 2012b). During the learning of good policies, 
agents influence each other’s search space, which can lead to action shadowing. The notion 
of coordination among several autonomously and independently acting agents enjoys a 
long record, and a bulk of research was conducted in settings with non-communicative 
agents (Fulda and Ventura 2007; Matignon et al. 2012b). Early works investigated the con-
vergence of independent learners and showed that the convergence to solutions is feasi-
ble under certain conditions in deterministic games but fails in stochastic environments 
(Claus and Boutilier 1998; Lauer and Riedmiller 2000). Stochasticity, relative over-gener -
alization, and other pathologies such as non-stationarity and the alter-exploration problem 
led to new branches of research including hysteretic learning (Matignon et al. 2007) and 
leniency (Potter and De  Jong 1994). Hysteretic Q-learning was introduced to encounter 
the over-estimation of the value function evoked by stochasticity. Two learning rates are 
used to increase and decrease the value function updates while relying on an optimistic 
form of learning. A modern approach to hysteretic learning can be seen in Palmer et al. 
(2018) and Omidshafiei et al. (2017). An alternative method to adjust the degree of applied 
optimism during learning is leniency (Panait et al. 2006; Wei and Luke 2016). Leniency 
associates selected actions with decaying temperature values that govern the amount of 
applied leniency. Agents are optimistic during the early phase when exploration is still high 
but become less lenient for frequently visited state-action pairs over the training so that 
value estimations become more accurate towards the end of learning.
Further works expanded independent learners with enhanced techniques to cope with 
the MARL pathologies mentioned above. Extensions to the deep Q-network can be seen in 
additional mechanisms used for the experience replay (Palmer et al. 2019), the utilization 
of specialized estimators (Zheng et  al. 2018a) and the use of implicit quantile networks 
(Lyu and Amato 2020). Further literature investigated independent learners as benchmark 
reference but reported limited success in cooperative tasks of various domains when no 
other techniques are applied to alleviate the issue of independent learners (Foerster et al. 
2018b; Sunehag et al. 2018).
Constructing models An implicit way to achieve coordination among agents is to cap-
ture the behavior of others by constructing models. Models are functions that take past 
interaction data as input and output predictions about the agents of interest. This can be 
very important to render the learning process robust against the decision-making of other 
agents in the environment (Hu and Wellman 1998). The constructed models and the pre-
dicted behavior vary widely depending on the approaches and the assumptions being made 
(Albrecht and Stone 2018).
One of the first works based on deep learning methods was conducted by He et  al. 
(2016) in an adversarial setting. They proposed an architecture that utilizes two neural 
networks. One neural network captures the opponents’ strategies, and the second network 
estimates the opponents’ Q-values. These networks jointly learn models of opponents by 
encoding observations into a deep Q-network. Another work by Foerster et  al. (2018a) 
introduced a learning method where the policy updates rely on the impact on other agents. 
The opponent’s policy parameters can be inferred from the observed trajectory by using a 
maximum likelihood technique. The arising non-stationarity is tackled by accounting only 
recent data. An additional possibility is to address the information gain about other agents 

==== Page 28 ====
922 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
through Bayesian methods. Raileanu et al. (2018) employed a model where agents estimate 
the other agents’ hidden states and embed these estimations into their own policy. Inferring 
other agents’ hidden states from their behavior allows them to choose appropriate actions 
and promotes eventual coordination. Foerster et  al. (2019) used all publicly available 
observations in the environment to calculate a public belief over agents’ local information. 
Another work by Yang et al. (2018a) used Bayesian techniques to detect opponent strate-
gies in competitive games. A particular challenge is to learn agent models in the presence 
of fast adapting agents, which amplifies the problem of non-stationarity. As a countermeas-
ure, Everett and Roberts (2018) proposed the switching agent model (SAM), which learns 
a set of opponent models and a switching mechanism between models. By tracking and 
detecting the behavioral adaption of other agents, the switching mechanism learns to select 
the best response from the learned set of opponent models and, thus, showed superior per -
formance over single model learners.
Further works on constructing models can be found in cooperative tasks (Barde et al. 
2019; Tacchetti et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2018b) with imitation learning (Grover et al. 2018; 
Le et al. 2017), in social dilemmas (Jaques et al. 2019; Letcher et al. 2019), and by pre-
dicting behaviors from observations (Hong et al. 2017; Hoshen 2017). For a comprehen-
sive survey on constructing models in multi-agent systems, one may consider the work of 
Albrecht and Stone (2018).
Besides resolving the coordination problem, building models of other agents can cope 
with the non-stationarity in the environment. As soon as one agent has knowledge about 
others’ behavior, previously unexplainable transition dynamics can be attributed to the 
responsible agents, and the environment becomes stationary again from the viewpoint of 
an individual agent.
Hierarchical methods Learning to coordinate can be challenging if multiple decision-
makers are involved due to the increasing complexity (Bernstein et al. 2002). An approach 
to deal with the coordination problem is by abstracting low-level coordination to higher 
levels. The idea originated in the single-agent domain where hierarchies for temporal 
abstraction are employed to ease long-term reward assignments (Dayan and Hinton 1993; 
Sutton et  al. 1999). Lower levels entail only partial information of the higher levels so 
that the learning task becomes simpler the lower the level of abstraction. First attempts for 
hierarchical multi-agent RL can be found in the tabular case (Ghavamzadeh et al. 2006; 
Makar et al. 2001). A deep approach was proposed by Kumar et al. (2017), where a higher-
level controller guides the information exchange between decentralized agents. Grounded 
on the high-level controller, the agents communicate with only one other agent at each 
time step, which allows the exploration of distributed policies. Another work by Han et al. 
(2019) is built upon the options framework (Sutton et al. 1999) where they embedded a 
dynamic termination criterion for Q-learning. By adding a termination criterion, agents 
could flexibly quit the option execution and react to the behavioral changes of other agents. 
Related to the idea of feudal networks (Dayan and Hinton 1993), Ahilan and Dayan (2019) 
applied a two-level abstraction of agents to a cooperative multi-agent setting where, in con-
trast to other methods, the hierarchy relied on rewards instead of state goals. They showed 
that this approach could be well suited for decentralized control problems. Jaderberg et al. 
(2019) used hierarchical representations that allowed agents to reason at different time 
scales. The authors demonstrated that agents are capable of solving mixed cooperative and 
competitive tasks in simulated physics environments. Another work by Lee et al. (2020) 
proposed a hierarchical method to coordinate two agents on robotic manipulation and loco-
motion tasks to accomplish collaboration such as object pick and placement. They learned 
primitive skills on the low-level, which are guided by a higher-level policy. Further works 

==== Page 29 ====
923 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
cover hierarchical methods in cooperation tasks (Cai et al. 2013; Ma and Wu 2020; Tang 
et al. 2018) or social dilemmas (Vezhnevets et al. 2019). An open challenge for hierarchi-
cal methods is the autonomous creation and discovery of abstract goals from data (Schaul 
et al. 2015; Vezhnevets et al. 2017).
5.4  Credit assignment problem
In the fully-cooperative setting, agents are encouraged to maximize an equally-shared 
reward signal. Even in a fully-observable state space, it is difficult to determine which 
agents and actions contributed to the eventual reward outcome when agents do not have 
access to the joint action. Claus and Boutilier (1998) showed that independent learners 
could not differentiate between the teammate’s exploration and the stochasticity in the 
environment even in a simple bi-matrix game. This can render the learning problem dif-
ficult because agents should be ideally provided with feedback corresponding to the task 
performance to enable sufficient learning. Associating rewards to agents is known as the 
credit assignment problem (Weiß 1995; Wolpert and Tumer 1999). This problem is intensi-
fied by the sequential nature of reinforcement learning where agents must understand not 
only the impact of single actions but also the entire action sequences that eventually lead 
to the reward outcome (Sen and Weiss 1999). An additional challenge arises when agents 
have only access to local observations of the environment, which we discuss in Sect.  5.6. In 
the remainder of this section, we consider three actively investigated approaches that deal 
with how to determine the contribution of agents jointly-shared reward settings.
Decomposition Early works approached the credit assignment problem by applying fil-
ters (Chang et al. 2004) or modifying the reward function such as reward shaping (Ng et al. 
1999). Recent approaches focus on exploiting dependencies between agents to decompose 
the reward among the agents with respect to their actual contribution towards the global 
reward (Kok and Vlassis 2006). The learning problem is simplified by dividing the task 
into smaller and, hence, easier sub-problems through decomposition. Sunehag et al. (2018) 
introduced the value decomposition network (VDN) which factorizes the joint action-value 
function into a linear combination of individual action-value functions. The VDN learns 
how to optimally assign an individual reward according to the agent’s performance. The 
neural network helps to disambiguate the joint reward signal concerning the impact of the 
agent. Rashid et al. (2018) proposed QMIX as an improvement over VDN. QMIX learns 
a centralized action-value function that is decomposed into agent individual action-value 
functions through non-linear combinations. Under the assumption of monotonic relation-
ships between the  centralized Q-function and the  individual Q-functions, decentralized 
policies can be extracted by individual argmax operations. As an advancement over both 
VDN and QMIX, Son et al. (2019) proposed QTRAN, which discards the assumption of 
linearity and monotonicity in the factorization and allows any non-linear combination of 
value functions. Further approaches about the factorization of value functions can be found 
in Castellini et al. (2019), Chen et al. (2018), Nguyen et al. (2017b), Wang et al. (2020a), 
Wang et al. (2020c) and Yang et al. (2018b).
Marginalization Next to the decomposition into simpler sub-problems, one can apply 
an extra function that marginalizes out the effect of agent individual actions. Nguyen 
et al. (2018) introduced a mean collective actor-critic framework which marginalizes out 
the actions of agents by using an approximation of the critic and reduces the variance of 
the gradient estimation. Similarly, Foerster et  al. (2018b) marginalized out the individ-
ual actions of agents by applying a counterfactual baseline function. The counterfactual 

==== Page 30 ====
924 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
baseline function uses a centralized critic, which calculates the advantage of a single agent 
by comparing the estimated return of the current joint-action to the counterfactual baseline. 
The impact of a single agent’s action is determined and can be attributed to the agent itself. 
Another work by Wu et al. (2018) used a marginalized action-value function as a base-
line to reduce the variance of critic estimates. The marginalization approaches are closely 
related to the difference rewards proposed by Tumer and Wolpert (2004) who determine 
the impact of an agent’s individual action compared to the average reward of all agents.
Inverse reinforcement learning Credit assignment problems can be evoked by a bad 
design of the reinforcement learning problem. Misinterpretations of the agents can lead to 
failure because unintentional strategies are explored, e.g. if the reward function does not 
capture all important aspects of the underlying task (Amodei et al. 2016). Therefore, an 
important step in the problem design is the reward function. However, designing a reward 
function can be challenging for complex problems (Hadfield-Menell et  al. 2017) and 
becomes even more complicated for multi-agent systems since different agents may accom-
plish different goals. Another approach to address the credit assignment problem is by 
inverse reinforcement learning (Ng and Russell 2000) that describes how an agent learns a 
reward function that explains the demonstrated behavior of an expert without having access 
to the reward signal. The learned reward function can then be used to build strategies. The 
work of Lin et  al. (2018) applied the principle of inverse reinforcement learning to the 
multi-agent setting. They showed that multiple agents could recover reward functions that 
are correlated with the ground truths. Related to inverse RL, imitation learning can be used 
to learn from expert knowledge. Yu et al. (2019) imitated expert behaviors to learn high-
dimensional policies in both cooperative and competitive environments. They were able to 
recover the expert policies for each individual agent from the provided expert demonstra-
tions. Further works on imitation learning consider the fully cooperative setting (Barrett 
et al. 2017; Le et al. 2017) and Markov Games with mixed settings (Song et al. 2018).
5.5  Scalability
Training a large number of agents is inherently difficult. Every agent involved in the envi-
ronment adds extra complexity to the learning problem such that the computational effort 
grows exponentially by the number of agents. Besides complexity concerns, sufficient scal-
ing also demands agents to be robust towards the behavioral adaption of other agents. How -
ever, agents can leverage the benefit of distributed knowledge shared and reused between 
agents to accelerate the learning process. In the following, we review approaches that 
address the handling of many agents and discuss possible solutions. We broadly classify 
the surveyed works into those that apply some form of knowledge reuse, reduce the com-
plexity of the learning problem, and develop robustness against the policy adaptions of 
other agents.
Knowledge reuse The training of individual learning models does scale poorly with the 
increasing number of agents because the computational effort increases due to the combi-
natorial possibilities. Knowledge reuse strategies are employed to ease the learning pro-
cess and scale RL to complex problems by reutilizing previous knowledge into new tasks. 
Knowledge reuse can be applied in many facets (Silva et al. 2018).
First, agents can make use of a parameter sharing technique if they exhibit homogene-
ous structures, e.g. the weights in a neural network for sharing parts or the whole learn-
ing model with others. Sharing the parameters of a policy enables an efficient training pro-
cess that can scale up to an arbitrary number of agents and, thus, can boost the learning 

==== Page 31 ====
925 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
process (Gupta et al. 2017). Parameter sharing has proven to be useful in various appli-
cations such as learning to communicate (Foerster et al. 2016; Jiang and Lu 2018; Peng 
et al. 2017; Sukhbaatar et al. 2016), modeling agents (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2019), and in 
partially observable cooperative games (Sunehag et al. 2018). For a discussion on different 
parameter sharing strategies, one may consider the paper by Chu and Ye (2017).
As the second approach, knowledge reuse can be applied in form of transfer learning 
(Da Silva et al. 2019; Da Silva and Costa 2019). Experience obtained in learning to per -
form one task may also improve the performance in a related but different task (Taylor and 
Stone 2009). Da Silva and Costa (2017) used a knowledge database from which an agent 
can extract previous solutions of related tasks and embed such information into the cur -
rent task’s training. Likewise, Da Silva et al. (2017) applied expert demonstrations where 
the agents take the role of students that ask a teacher for advice. They demonstrated that 
simultaneously learning agents could advise each other through knowledge transfer. Fur -
ther works on transfer learning can be found in the cooperative multi-agent setting (Omid-
shafiei et al. 2019) and in natural language applications (Luketina et al. 2019). In general 
multi-agent systems, the works of (Boutsioukis et al. 2012; Taylor et al. 2013) substantiate 
that transfer learning can speed up the learning process.
Besides parameter sharing and transfer learning, curriculum learning may be applied 
for the scaling to many agents. Since tasks become more challenging to master and more 
time consuming to train as the number of agents increases, it is often challenging to learn 
from scratch. Curriculum learning starts with a small number of agents and then gradually 
enlarges the number of agents over the training course. Through the steady increase within 
the curriculum, trained policies can perform better than without a curriculum (Gupta et al. 
2017; Long et al. 2020; Narvekar et al. 2016). Curriculum learning schemes can also cause 
improved generalization and faster convergence of agent policies (Bengio et  al. 2009). 
Further works show that agents can generate learning curricula automatically (Sukhbaatar 
et al. 2017; Svetlik et al. 2017) or can create arms races in competitive settings (Baker et al. 
2020).
Complexity reduction Many real-world applications naturally encompass large numbers 
of simultaneously interacting agents (Nguyen et al. 2017a, b). As the quantity of agents 
increases, the requirement to contain the curse of dimensionality becomes inevitable. Yang 
et al. (2018b) addressed the issue of scalability with a mean-field method. The interactions 
between large numbers of agents are estimated by the impact of a single agent compared 
to the mean impact of the whole or local agent population. The complexity reduces as the 
problem is broken down into pairwise interactions between an agent and its neighborhood. 
Regarding the average effect to its neighbors, each agent learns the best response towards 
its proximity. Another approach to constrain the explosion in complexity is by factorizing 
the problem into smaller sub-problems (Guestrin et al. 2002). Chen et al. (2018) decom-
posed the joint action-value function into independent components and used pairwise inter -
actions between agents to render large-scale problems computationally tractable. Further 
works studied large-scale MADRL problems with graphical models (Nguyen et al. 2017a) 
and the CTDE paradigm (Lin et al. 2018).
Robustness Another desired property is the robustness of learned policies to perturba-
tions in the environment caused by other agents. Perturbations are fortified by the number 
of agents and the resulting growth of the state-action space. In supervised learning, a com-
mon problem is that models can over-fit to the data set. Similarly, over-fitting can occur 
in RL frameworks if environments provide little or no deviation (Bansal et al. 2018). To 
maintain robustness over the training process and to the other agents’ adaption, several 
methods have been proposed.

==== Page 32 ====
926 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
First, regularization techniques can be used to prevent over-fitting to other agents’ 
behavior. Examples can be seen in policies ensembles (Lowe et al. 2017), where a collec-
tion of different sub-policies is trained for each agent, or can be found in best responses to 
policy mixtures (Lanctot et al. 2017).
Second, adversarial training can be applied to mitigate the vulnerability of polices 
towards perturbations. Pinto et al. (2017) added an adversarial agent to the environment 
that applied targeted disturbances to the learning process. By hampering the training, the 
agents were compelled to encounter these disturbances and develop robust policies. Simi-
larly, Li et al. (2019a) used an adversarial setting to reduce the sensitivity of agents towards 
the environment. Bansal et  al. (2018) demonstrated that policies, which are trained in a 
competitive setting, could yield behaviors that are far more complex than the environment 
itself. From an application perspective, Spooner and Savani (2020) studied robust decision-
making in market making.
The observations from above are in accordance with the findings of related studies 
about the impact of self-play (Raghu et  al. 2018; Sukhbaatar et  al. 2017). Heinrich and 
Silver (2016) used self-play to learn approximate Nash equilibria of imperfect-information 
games and showed that self-play could be used to obtain better robustness in the learned 
policies. Similarly, self-play was used to compete with older versions of policies to ren-
der the learned behaviors more robust (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; Silver et al. 
2018). Silver et  al. (2016) adapted self-play as a regularization technique to prevent the 
policy network from over-fitting by playing against older versions of itself. However, 
Gleave et al. (2020) studied the existence of adversarial policies in competitive games and 
showed that complex policies could be fooled by comparably easy strategies. Although 
agents trained through self-play proved to be more robust, allegedly random and uncoordi-
nated strategies caused agents to fail at the task. They argued that the vulnerability towards 
adversarial attacks increases with the dimensionality of the observation space. A further 
research direction for addressing robustness is to render the learning representation invari-
ant towards permutations, as shown in Liu et al. (2020).
5.6  Partial observability
Outside an idealized setting, agents neither can observe  the global state of the environ-
ment, nor do they have access to the internal knowledge of other agents. By perceiving 
only partial observations, a single observation does not capture all relevant information 
about the environment and its history. Hence, the Markov property is not fulfilled, and the 
environment appears non-Markovian. An additional difficulty elicited by partial observ -
ability is the lazy agent problem which can occur in cooperative settings (Sunehag et al. 
2018). As introduced in Sect.  2.2, the common frameworks that deal with partial observ -
ability are POMPDs for general settings and dec-POMDPs for cooperative settings with 
a shared reward function. Dec-POMDPs are computationally challenging (Bernstein et al. 
2002) and still intractable when solving problems with real-world complexity (Amato et al. 
2015). However, recent work accomplished promising results in video games with imper -
fect information (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; Jaderberg et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 
2019).
A natural way to deal with non-Markovian environments is through information 
exchange between the decision-makers (Goldman and Zilberstein 2004). Agents that are 
able to communicate can compensate for their limited knowledge by propagating informa-
tion and fill the lack of knowledge about other agents or the environment (Foerster et al. 

==== Page 33 ====
927 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
2016). As we already discussed in Sect.  5.2, there are several ways to incorporate commu-
nication capabilities into agents. A primary example is Jiang and Lu (2018) who used an 
attention mechanism to establish communication under partial observations. Rather than 
having a fixed frequency for the information exchange, they learned to communicate on-
demand. Further approaches under partial observability have been investigated in coopera-
tive tasks (Das et al. 2019; Sukhbaatar et al. 2016) or mixed settings (Singh et al. 2019).
In the following, we review papers that cope with partial observability by incorporating 
a memory mechanism. Agents, which have the capability of memorizing past experiences, 
can compensate for the lack of information.
Memory mechanism A common way to tackle partial observability is the usage of deep 
recurrent neural networks, which equip agents with a memory mechanism to store informa-
tion that can be relevant in the future (Hausknecht and Stone 2015). However, long-term 
dependencies render the decision-making difficult since experiences that were observed in 
the further past may have been forgotten (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). Approaches 
involving recurrent neural networks to deal with partial observability can be realized with 
value-based approaches (Omidshafiei et al. 2017) or actor-critic methods (Dibangoye and 
Buffet 2018; Foerster et al. 2018b; Gupta et al. 2017). Foerster et al. (2019) used a Bayes-
ian method to tackle partial observability in cooperative settings. They used all publicly 
available features of the environment and agents to determine a public belief over the 
agents’ internal states. A severe concern in MADRL is that the memorization of past infor -
mation is exacerbated by the number of agents involved during the learning process.
6  Discussion
In this section, we discuss findings from previous sections. We enumerate trends that we 
have  identified in recent literature.  Since these  trends are useful for addressing current 
challenges, they may also be an avenue for upcoming research. To the end of our discus-
sion, we point out possible future work. We elaborate on problems where only a minority 
of research has been conducted and pose two problems which we find the toughest ones to 
overcome.
Despite the recent advances in many directions, many pathologies such as relative over-
generalization combined with reward stochasticity are not yet solved, even in allegedly 
simple tabular worlds. MADRL has taken profit from the history of MARL by scaling up 
the insights to more complex problems. Approaches where strong solutions exist in sim-
plified MARL settings may be transferable to the MADRL domain. Thus by enhancing 
older methods with new deep learning approaches, unsolved problems and concepts from 
MARL continue to matter in MADRL. An essential point for MADRL is that reproduc-
ibility is taken conscientiously. Well-known papers from the single-agent domain underline 
the significance of hyper-parameters, the number of independent random seeds, and cho-
sen code-base towards the eventual task performance (Henderson et al. 2018; Islam et al. 
2017). To maintain steady progress, the reporting of all used hyper-parameters and a trans-
parent conduction of experiments is crucial. We want to make the community aware that 
these findings may also be valid for the multi-agent domain. Therefore, it is inevitable that 
standardized frameworks are created in which different algorithms can be compared along 
with their merits and demerits. Many individual environments have been proposed which 
exhibit intricate structure and real-world complexity (Baker et al. 2020; Beattie et al. 2016; 
Johnson et al. 2016; Juliani et al. 2018; Song et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2017). However, 

==== Page 34 ====
928 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
no consistent benchmark yet exists that provides a unified interface and allows a fair com-
parison between different kinds of algorithms grounded on a great variety of tasks like the 
OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al. 2016) for single-agent problems.
6.1  Trends
Over  the last years, approaches in the multi-agent domain achieved successes based on 
recurring patterns of good practice. We have identified four trends in state-of-the-art litera-
ture that have been frequently applied to address current challenges (Table 4).
As the first trend, we observe curriculum learning as an approach to divide the learning 
process into stages to deal with scalability issues. By starting with a small quantity, the 
number of agents is gradually enlarged over the learning course so that large-scale train-
ing becomes feasible (Gupta et al. 2017; Long et al. 2020; Narvekar et al. 2016). Alterna-
tively, curricula can also be employed to create different stages of difficulty, where agents 
face relatively easy tasks at the beginning and gradually more complex tasks as their skills 
increase (Vinyals et al. 2019). Besides that, curriculum training is used to investigate the 
emergence of agent behavior. Curricula describe engineered changes in the dynamics of the 
environment. Agents adapt their behaviors over time in response to the strategic changes of 
others, which can yield arms races between agents. This process of continual adaption is 
referred to autocurricula (Leibo et al. 2019), which have been reported in several works 
(Baker et al. 2020; Sukhbaatar et al. 2017; Svetlik et al. 2017).
Second, we recognize a trend towards deep neural networks embedded with recurrent 
units to memorize experience. By having the ability to track the history of state transitions 
and the decisions of other agents, the non-stationarity of the environment due to multiple 
decision-makers and partially observable states can be addressed in small problems (Omid-
shafiei et al. 2017), and can be managed sufficiently well in complex problems (Baker et al. 
2020; Berner et al. 2019; Jaderberg et al. 2019).
Third, an active line of research is exploring the development of communication skills. 
Due to the rise of deep learning methods, new computational approaches are available to 
investigate the emergence of language between interactive agents (Lazaridou and Baroni 
2020). Despite the plethora of works that analyze emergent behaviors and semantics, 
many works propose methods that endow agents with communication skills. By express-
ing their intension, agents can align their coordination and find a consensus (Foerster et al. 
2016). The non-stationarity from the perspective of a single learner can be eluded when 
agents disclose their history. Moreover, agents can share their local information with others 
to alleviate partial observability (Foerster et al. 2018b; Omidshafiei et al. 2017).Table 4  Our identified trends in MADRL and the addressed challenges
Trend Addressed challenge(s)
Curriculum learning Scalability
Memory Non-stationarity, partial observability
Communication Non-stationarity, coordination, partial observability
CTDE Non-stationarity, coordination, partial observabil-
ity, credit assignment, scalability

==== Page 35 ====
929 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Fourth and last, we note a clear trend towards the CTDE paradigm that enables the sha-
ing of information during the training. Local information such as the observation-action 
history, function values, or policies can be made available to all agents during the train-
ing, which renders the environment stationary from the viewpoint of an individual agent 
and may diminish partial observability (Lowe et al. 2017). Further, the credit assignment 
problem can be addressed when information is available about all agents, and a centralized 
mechanism can attribute the individual contribution to the respective agent (Foerster et al. 
2018b). Further challenges that can be loosened are coordination and scalability when 
the lack of information of an individual agent is compensated, and the learning process is 
accelerated (Gupta et al. 2017).
6.2  Future work
Next to our identified trends, which are already under active research, we recognize areas 
that have not been sufficiently explored yet. One such area is multi-goal learning where 
each agent has an individually associated goal that needs to be optimized. However, global 
optimality can only be accomplished if agents also allow others to be successful in their 
task (Yang et al. 2020). Typical scenarios are cooperative tasks such as public good dilem-
mas, where agents are obliged to the sustainable use of limited resources, or autonomous 
driving, where agents have individual destinations and are supposed to coordinate the 
path-finding to avoid crashes. A similar direction is multi-task learning where agents are 
expected to perform well not only  on one single but  also on related  other tasks (Omid-
shafiei et  al. 2017; Taylor and Stone 2009). Besides multi-goal and multi-task learning, 
another avenue for future work is present in safe MADRL. Safety is a highly desired prop-
erty because autonomously acting agents are expected to ensure system performance while 
holding to safety guarantees during learning and employment (García et al. 2015). Several 
works in single-agent RL are concerned with safety concepts, but its applicability to mul-
tiple agents is limited and still in its infancy (Zhang and Bastani 2019; Zhu et al. 2020). 
Akin to the growing interest in learning to communicate, a similar effect may happen in 
the multi-agent domain, where deep learning methods open new paths. For an application 
perspective on safe autonomous driving, one can consider the article by Shalev-Shwartz 
et al. (2016). Another possible direction for future research offers the intersection between 
MADRL and evolutionary methodologies. Evolutionary algorithms have been used in ver -
satile contexts of multi-agent RL, e.g. for building intrinsic motivation (Wang et al. 2019), 
shaping rewards (Jaderberg et al. 2019), generating curricula (Long et al. 2020) and analyz-
ing dynamics (Bloembergen et al. 2015). Since evolution requires many entities to adapt, 
multi-agent RL is a natural playground for such algorithms.
Beyond the current challenges and reviewed literature of Sect.  5, we identify two prob-
lems that we regard as the most challenging problems to overcome by future work. We 
primarily choose these two problems since they are the ones that matter the most when 
it comes to the applicability of algorithms to real-world scenarios. Most research focuses 
on learning within homogeneous settings where agents share common interests and opti-
mize a mutual goal. For instance, the learning of communication is mainly studied in dec-
POMDPs, where agents are expected to optimize upon a joint reward signal. When agents 
share common interests, the CTDE paradigm is usually a beneficial choice to exchange 
information between agents, and problems like non-stationarity, partial observability, and 
coordination can be diminished. However, heterogeneity implies that agents may have 
their own interests and goals, individual experience and knowledge, or different skills and 

==== Page 36 ====
930 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
capabilities. Limited research has been conducted in heterogeneous scenarios, although 
many real-world problems naturally comprise a mixture of different entities. Under real-
world conditions, agents have only access to local and heterogeneous information on which 
decisions must be taken. The fundamental problem in the multi-agent domain is and ever 
has been the curse of dimensionality (Busoniu et al. 2008; Hernandez-Leal et al. 2019). 
The state-action space and the combinatorial possibilities of agent interactions increase 
exponentially by the number of agents, which renders sufficient exploration itself a difficult 
problem. This is intensified when agents have only access to partial observations of the 
environment or when the environment is of continuous nature. Although powerful function 
approximators like neural networks can cope with continuous spaces and generalize well 
over large spaces, open questions remain like how to explore large and complex spaces suf-
ficiently well and how to solve large combinatorial optimization problems.
7  Conclusion
Even though multi-agent reinforcement learning enjoys a long record, historical approaches 
hardly exceeded the complexity of discretized environments with a limited amount of 
states and actions (Busoniu et al. 2008; Tuyls and Weiss 2012). Since the breakthrough of 
deep learning methods, the field is undergoing a rapid transformation, and many previously 
unsolved problems have become step by step tractable. Latest advances showed that tasks 
with real-world complexity could be mastered (Baker et al. 2020; Berner et al. 2019; Jader -
berg et al. 2019; Vinyals et al. 2019). Still, MADRL is a young field which attracts growing 
interest, and the amount of published literature rises swiftly. In this article, we surveyed 
recent works that combine deep learning methods with multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing. We analyzed training schemes that are used to learn policies, and we reviewed patterns 
of agent behavior that emerge when multiple entities interact simultaneously. In addition, 
we systematically investigated challenges that are present in the multi-agent context and 
studied recent approaches that are under active research. Finally, we outlined trends which 
we have identified in state-of-the-art literature and proposed possible avenues for future 
work. With this contribution, we want to equip interested readers with the necessary tools 
to understand the contemporary challenges in MADRL by providing a more holistic over -
view of the recent approaches. We want to emphasize its potential and reveal opportunities 
as well as its limitations. In the foreseeable future, we expect an abundance of new litera-
ture to emanate and, hence, we want to encourage the community for further developments 
in this interesting and young field of research.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the editor and the three anonymous reviewers for providing 
their comprehensive feedback. Without their suggestions, this manuscript would not look as it does in this 
final version. We want to thank our colleagues and friends who read through earlier versions of this manu-
script. In particular, we appreciate the help of Matthias Kissel, Patrick Krämer, Anke Müller and Martin 
Gottwald.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 

==== Page 37 ====
931 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Ahilan S, Dayan P (2019) Feudal multi-agent hierarchies for cooperative reinforcement learning. CoRR 
arxiv: abs/1901.08492
Al-Shedivat M, Bansal T, Burda Y, Sutskever I, Mordatch I, Abbeel P (2018) Continuous adaptation via 
meta-learning in nonstationary and competitive environments. In: International conference on learn-
ing representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= Sk2u1g- 0-
Albrecht SV, Stone P (2018) Autonomous agents modelling other agents: a comprehensive survey and open 
problems. Artif Intell 258:66–95. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. artint. 2018. 01. 002. http:// www. scien cedir 
ect. com/ scien ce/ artic le/ pii/ S0004 37021 83002 49
Amato C, Konidaris G, Cruz G, Maynor CA, How JP, Kaelbling LP (2015) Planning for decentralized con-
trol of multiple robots under uncertainty. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on robotics and 
automation (ICRA), pp 1241–1248. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICRA. 2015. 71393 50
Amodei D, Olah C, Steinhardt J, Christiano PF, Schulman J, Mané D (2016) Concrete problems in AI 
safety. CoRR. arxiv: abs/1606.06565,
Antol S, Agrawal A, Lu J, Mitchell M, Batra D, Lawrence Zitnick C, Parikh D (2015) Vqa: Visual question 
answering. In: The IEEE international conference on computer vision (ICCV)
Arulkumaran K, Deisenroth MP, Brundage M, Bharath AA (2017) Deep reinforcement learning: a brief sur -
vey. IEEE Signal Process Mag 34(6):26–38. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ MSP. 2017. 27432 40
Aubret A, Matignon L, Hassas S (2019) A survey on intrinsic motivation in reinforcement learning. arXiv 
e-prints arXiv:1908.06976,
Baker B, Kanitscheider I, Markov T, Wu Y, Powell G, McGrew B, Mordatch I (2020) Emergent tool use 
from multi-agent autocurricula. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr 
eview. net/ forum? id= Skxpx JBKwS
Bansal T, Pachocki J, Sidor S, Sutskever I, Mordatch I (2018) Emergent complexity via multi-agent com-
petition. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= 
Sy0Gn UxCb
Barde P, Roy J, Harvey FG, Nowrouzezahrai D, Pal C (2019) Promoting coordination through policy regu-
larization in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1908.02269,
Barrett S, Rosenfeld A, Kraus S, Stone P (2017) Making friends on the fly: cooperating with new team-
mates. Artif Intell 242:132–171
Beattie C, Leibo JZ, Teplyashin D, Ward T, Wainwright M, Küttler H, Lefrancq A, Green S, Valdés V, 
Sadik A, Schrittwieser J, Anderson K, York S, Cant M, Cain A, Bolton A, Gaffney S, King H, Has-
sabis D, Legg S, Petersen S (2016) Deepmind lab. CoRR. arxiv: abs/1612.03801
Becker R, Zilberstein S, Lesser V, Goldman CV (2004) Solving transition independent decentralized 
Markov decision processes. J Artif Intell Res 22:423–455
Bellemare M, Srinivasan S, Ostrovski G, Schaul T, Saxton D, Munos R (2016) Unifying count-based explo-
ration and intrinsic motivation. In: Lee DD, Sugiyama M, Luxburg UV, Guyon I, Garnett R (eds) 
Advances in neural information processing systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 1471–1479. http:// 
papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 6383- unify ing- count- based- explo ration- and- intri nsic- motiv  ation. pdf
Bellman R (1957) A Markovian decision process. J Math Mechanics 6(5):679–684. http:// www. jstor. org/ 
stable/ 24900 506
Bengio Y, Louradour J, Collobert R, Weston J (2009) Curriculum learning. In: Proceedings of the 26th 
annual international conference on machine learning, ACM, New York, NY, USA, ICML ’09, pp 
41–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 15533 74. 15533 80,
Berner C, Brockman G, Chan B, Cheung V, Debiak P, Dennison C, Farhi D, Fischer Q, Hashme S, Hesse C, 
Józefowicz R, Gray S, Olsson C, Pachocki JW, Petrov M, de Oliveira Pinto HP, Raiman J, Salimans 
T, Schlatter J, Schneider J, Sidor S, Sutskever I, Tang J, Wolski F, Zhang S (2019) Dota 2 with large 
scale deep reinforcement learning. ArXiv arxiv: abs/1912.06680
Bernstein DS, Givan R, Immerman N, Zilberstein S (2002) The complexity of decentralized control of 
Markov decision processes. Math Oper Res 27(4):819–840. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1287/ moor. 27.4. 819. 
297

==== Page 38 ====
932 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Bertsekas DP (2012) Dynamic programming and optimal control, vol 2, 4th edn. Athena Scientific, 
Belmont
Bertsekas DP (2017) Dynamic programming and optimal control, vol 1, 4th edn. Athena Scientific, 
Belmont
Bloembergen D, Tuyls K, Hennes D, Kaisers M (2015) Evolutionary dynamics of multi-agent learning: 
a survey. J Artif Intell Res 53:659–697
Bono G, Dibangoye JS, Matignon L, Pereyron F, Simonin O (2019) Cooperative multi-agent policy gra-
dient. In: Berlingerio M, Bonchi F, Gärtner T, Hurley N, Ifrim G (eds) Machine learning and 
knowledge discovery in databases. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 459–476
Boutsioukis G, Partalas I, Vlahavas I (2012) Transfer learning in multi-agent reinforcement learning 
domains. In: Sanner S, Hutter M (eds) Recent advances in reinforcement learning. Springer, Ber -
lin, pp 249–260
Bowling M, Veloso M (2002) Multiagent learning using a variable learning rate. Artif Intell 136(2):215–250
Brockman G, Cheung V, Pettersson L, Schneider J, Schulman J, Tang J, Zaremba W (2016) Openai gym. 
arXiv:1606.01540
Busoniu L, Babuska R, De Schutter B (2008) A comprehensive survey of multiagent reinforcement 
learning. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern Part C (Appl Rev) 38(2):156–172. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/  
TSMCC. 2007. 913919
Cai Y, Yang SX, Xu X (2013) A combined hierarchical reinforcement learning based approach for multi-
robot cooperative target searching in complex unknown environments. In: 2013 IEEE symposium 
on adaptive dynamic programming and reinforcement learning (ADPRL), pp 52–59. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1109/ ADPRL. 2013. 66149 89
Cao K, Lazaridou A, Lanctot M, Leibo JZ, Tuyls K, Clark S (2018) Emergent communication through 
negotiation. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/  
forum? id= Hk6Wh agRW
Cao Y, Yu W, Ren W, Chen G (2013) An overview of recent progress in the study of distributed multi-agent 
coordination. IEEE Trans Industr Inf 9(1):427–438. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TII. 2012. 22190 61
Castellini J, Oliehoek FA, Savani R, Whiteson S (2019) The representational capacity of action-value 
networks for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the 18th international con-
ference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, international foundation for autonomous 
agents and multiagent systems, Richland, SC, AAMAS ’19, pp 1862–1864. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat  
ion. cfm? id= 33061 27. 33319 44
Celikyilmaz A, Bosselut A, He X, Choi Y (2018) Deep communicating agents for abstractive summari-
zation. CoRR arxiv: abs/1803.10357,
Chang Y, Ho T, Kaelbling LP (2004) All learning is local: Multi-agent learning in global reward games. 
In: Thrun S, Saul LK, Schölkopf B (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 16, 
MIT Press, pp 807–814. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 2476- all- learn ing- is- local- multi- agent- learn  
ing- in- global- reward- games. pdf
Chen Y, Zhou M, Wen Y, Yang Y, Su Y, Zhang W, Zhang D, Wang J, Liu H (2018) Factorized q-learn-
ing for large-scale multi-agent systems. CoRR arxiv: abs/1809.03738
Chen YF, Liu M, Everett M, How JP (2016) Decentralized non-communicating multiagent collision 
avoidance with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR. arxiv: abs/1609.07845,
Chentanez N, Barto AG, Singh SP (2005) Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning. In: Saul LK, 
Weiss Y, Bottou L (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 17, MIT Press, pp 
1281–1288. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 2552- intri nsica lly- motiv  ated- reinf  orcem ent- learn ing. pdf
Choi E, Lazaridou A, de  Freitas N (2018) Multi-agent compositional communication learning from 
raw visual input. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/  
forum? id= rknt2 Be0-
Chu T, Chinchali S, Katti S (2020) Multi-agent reinforcement learning for networked system control. In: 
International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= Syx7A 3NFvH
Chu T, Wang J, Codecà L, Li Z (2020) Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for large-scale traffic 
signal control. IEEE Trans Intell Transp Syst 21(3):1086–1095
Chu X, Ye H (2017) Parameter sharing deep deterministic policy gradient for cooperative multi-agent 
reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1710.00336
Claus C, Boutilier C (1998) The dynamics of reinforcement learning in cooperative multiagent systems. 
In: Proceedings of the fifteenth national conference on artificial intelligence and tenth innovative 
applications of artificial intelligence conference, AAAI 98, IAAI 98, July 26–30, 1998, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA, pp 746–752. http:// www. aaai. org/ Libra ry/ AAAI/ 1998/ aaai98- 106. php
Crandall JW, Goodrich MA (2011) Learning to compete, coordinate, and cooperate in repeated games using 
reinforcement learning. Mach Learn 82(3):281–314. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10994- 010- 5192-9

==== Page 39 ====
933 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Da Silva FL, Costa AHR (2017) Accelerating multiagent reinforcement learning through transfer learning. 
In: Proceedings of the thirty-first AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, AAAI Press, AAAI’17, 
pp 5034–5035. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 32978 63. 32979 88
Da Silva FL, Costa AHR (2019) A survey on transfer learning for multiagent reinforcement learning sys-
tems. J Artif Int Res 64(1):645–703. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1613/ jair.1. 11396
Da Silva FL, Glatt R, Costa AHR (2017) Simultaneously learning and advising in multiagent reinforcement 
learning. In: Proceedings of the 16th conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, inter -
national foundation for autonomous agents and multiagent systems, Richland, SC, AAMAS ’17, pp 
1100–1108. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 30912 10. 30912 80
Da Silva FL, Warnell G, Costa AHR, Stone P (2019) Agents teaching agents: a survey on inter-agent trans-
fer learning. Auton Agent Multi-Agent Syst 34(1):9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10458- 019- 09430-0
Das A, Kottur S, Moura JMF, Lee S, Batra D (2017) Learning cooperative visual dialog agents with deep 
reinforcement learning. In: The IEEE international conference on computer vision (ICCV)
Das A, Gervet T, Romoff J, Batra D, Parikh D, Rabbat M, Pineau J (2019) TarMAC: Targeted multi-agent 
communication. In: Chaudhuri K, Salakhutdinov R (eds) Proceedings of the 36th international con-
ference on machine learning, PMLR, Long Beach, California, USA, Proceedings of machine learning 
research, vol 97, pp 1538–1546. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v97/ das19a. html
Dayan P, Hinton GE (1993) Feudal reinforcement learning. In: Hanson SJ, Cowan JD, Giles CL (eds) 
Advances in neural information processing systems 5, Morgan-Kaufmann, pp 271–278. http:// papers. 
nips. cc/ paper/ 714- feudal- reinf  orcem ent- learn ing. pdf
De Cote EM, Lazaric A, Restelli M (2006) Learning to cooperate in multi-agent social dilemmas. In: Pro-
ceedings of the fifth international joint conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, AAMAS ’06, pp 783–785. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 11606 33. 11607 70
Diallo EAO, Sugiyama A, Sugawara T (2017) Learning to coordinate with deep reinforcement learning in 
doubles pong game. In: 2017 16th IEEE international conference on machine learning and applica-
tions (ICMLA), pp 14–19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ICMLA. 2017.0- 184
Dibangoye J, Buffet O (2018) Learning to act in decentralized partially observable MDPs. In: Dy J, Krause 
A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, Stockholms-
mässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol  80, pp 1233–1242. 
http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ diban goye1 8a. html
Dobbe R, Fridovich-Keil D, Tomlin C (2017) Fully decentralized policies for multi-agent systems: an infor -
mation theoretic approach. In: Guyon I, Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus R, Vishwanathan 
S, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 30, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 
2941–2950. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 6887- fully- decen trali zed- polic ies- for- multi- agent- syste ms- an- 
infor  mation- theor  etic- appro ach. pdf
Duan Y, Schulman J, Chen X, Bartlett PL, Sutskever I, Abbeel P (2016) Rl : fast reinforcement learning via 
slow reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1611.02779,
Eccles T, Bachrach Y, Lever G, Lazaridou A, Graepel T (2019) Biases for emergent communication in 
multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Wallach H, Larochelle H, Beygelzimer A, Alche-Buc F, Fox 
E, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 32, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 
13111–13121. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 9470- biases- for- emerg  ent- commu nicat ion- in- multi- agent- 
reinf orcem ent- learn ing. pdf
Everett R, Roberts S (2018) Learning against non-stationary agents with opponent modelling and deep rein-
forcement learning. In: 2018 AAAI Spring symposium series
Evtimova K, Drozdov A, Kiela D, Cho K (2018) Emergent communication in a multi-modal, multi-step ref-
erential game. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? 
id= rJGZq 6g0-
Finn C, Levine S (2018) Meta-learning and universality: deep representations and gradient descent can 
approximate any learning algorithm. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// 
openr  eview. net/ forum? id= HyjC5 yWCW
Foerster J, Assael IA, de Freitas N, Whiteson S (2016) Learning to communicate with deep multi-agent 
reinforcement learning. In: Lee DD, Sugiyama M, Luxburg UV, Guyon I, Garnett R (eds) Advances 
in neural information processing systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 2137–2145. http:// papers. 
nips. cc/ paper/ 6042- learn ing- to- commu nicate- with- deep- multi- agent- reinf  orcem ent- learn ing. pdf
Foerster J, Nardelli N, Farquhar G, Afouras T, Torr PHS, Kohli P, Whiteson S (2017) Stabilising experience 
replay for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Precup D, Teh YW (eds) Proceedings of the 
34th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, International Convention Centre, Sydney, 
Australia, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol 70, pp 1146–1155. http:// proce edings. mlr. 
press/ v70/ foers  ter17b. html

==== Page 40 ====
934 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Foerster J, Chen RY, Al-Shedivat M, Whiteson S, Abbeel P, Mordatch I (2018a) Learning with oppo-
nent-learning awareness. In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on autonomous 
agents and multiagent systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent 
Systems, Richland, SC, AAMAS ’18, pp 122–130. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 32373 83.  
32374 08
Foerster J, Farquhar G, Afouras T, Nardelli N, Whiteson S (2018b) Counterfactual multi-agent policy 
gradients. https:// aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ AAAI/ AAAI18/ paper/ view/ 17193
Foerster J, Song F, Hughes E, Burch N, Dunning I, Whiteson S, Botvinick M, Bowling M (2019) Bayes-
ian action decoder for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Chaudhuri K, Salakhutdinov R 
(eds) Proceedings of the 36th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, Long Beach, 
California, USA, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol 97, pp 1942–1951. http:// proce  
edings. mlr. press/ v97/ foers  ter19a. html
Fulda N, Ventura D (2007) Predicting and preventing coordination problems in cooperative q-learning 
systems. In: Proceedings of the 20th international joint conference on artifical intelligence, Mor -
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, IJCAI’07, pp 780–785
García J, Fern, o  Fernández (2015) A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning. J Mach 
Learn Res 16(42):1437–1480. http:// jmlr. org/ papers/ v16/ garci a15a. html
Ghavamzadeh M, Mahadevan S, Makar R (2006) Hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning. Auton 
Agent Multi-Agent Syst. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10458- 006- 7035-4
Gleave A, Dennis M, Wild C, Kant N, Levine S, Russell S (2020) Adversarial policies: Attacking deep 
reinforcement learning. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  
eview. net/ forum? id= HJgEM pVFwB
Goldman CV, Zilberstein S (2004) Decentralized control of cooperative systems: categorization and com-
plexity analysis. J Artif Int Res 22(1):143–174. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 16224 87. 16224 93
Grover A, Al-Shedivat M, Gupta J, Burda Y, Edwards H (2018) Learning policy representations in 
multiagent systems. In: Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international conference 
on machine learning, PMLR, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of Machine 
Learning Research, vol 80, pp 1802–1811. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ grove r18a. html
Guestrin C, Koller D, Parr R (2002) Multiagent planning with factored mdps. In: Dietterich TG, Becker 
S, Ghahramani Z (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 14, MIT Press, pp 
1523–1530. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 1941- multi agent- plann ing- with- facto red- mdps. pdf
Gupta JK, Egorov M, Kochenderfer M (2017) Cooperative multi-agent control using deep reinforcement 
learning. In: Sukthankar G, Rodriguez-Aguilar JA (eds) autonomous agents and multiagent sys-
tems. Springer, Cham, pp 66–83
Hadfield-Menell D, Milli S, Abbeel P, Russell SJ, Dragan A (2017) Inverse reward design. In: Guyon I, 
Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus R, Vishwanathan S, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems 30, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 6765–6774. http:// papers. nips.  
cc/ paper/ 7253- inver se- reward- design. pdf
Han D, Boehmer W, Wooldridge M, Rogers A (2019) Multi-agent hierarchical reinforcement learning with 
dynamic termination. In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference on autonomous agents and 
multiagent systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Rich-
land, SC, AAMAS ’19, pp 2006–2008. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 33061 27. 33319 92
Hansen EA, Bernstein D, Zilberstein S (2004) Dynamic programming for partially observable stochastic 
games. In: AAAI
Hardin G (1968) The tragedy of the commons. Science 162(3859):1243–1248
Hausknecht M, Stone P (2015) Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps. https:// www.  
aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ FSS/ FSS15/ paper/ view/ 11673
Havrylov S, Titov I (2017) Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to communicate 
with sequences of symbols. In: Guyon I, Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus R, Vishwana-
than S, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 30, Curran Associates, 
Inc., pp 2149–2159. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 6810- emerg  ence- of- langu age- with- multi- agent-  
games- learn ing- to- commu nicate- with- seque nces- of- symbo ls. pdf
He H, Boyd-Graber J, Kwok K, III HD (2016) Opponent modeling in deep reinforcement learning. In: 
Balcan MF, Weinberger KQ (eds) Proceedings of The 33rd international conference on machine 
learning, PMLR, New York, New York, USA, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol 48, 
pp 1804–1813. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v48/ he16. html
He H, Chen D, Balakrishnan A, Liang P (2018) Decoupling strategy and generation in negotiation dia-
logues. CoRR arxiv: abs/1808.09637,
Heinrich J, Silver D (2016) Deep reinforcement learning from self-play in imperfect-information games. 
CoRR arxiv: abs/1603.01121,

==== Page 41 ====
935 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Henderson P, Islam R, Bachman P, Pineau J, Precup D, Meger D (2018) Deep reinforcement learning that 
matters. https:// www. aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ AAAI/ AAAI18/ paper/ view/ 16669
Hernandez-Leal P, Kaisers M, Baarslag T, de Cote EM (2017) A survey of learning in multiagent environ-
ments: dealing with non-stationarity. CoRR arxiv: abs/1707.09183,
Hernandez-Leal P, Kartal B, Taylor ME (2019) Agent modeling as auxiliary task for deep reinforcement 
learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1907.09597,
Hernandez-Leal P, Kartal B, Taylor ME (2019) A survey and critique of multiagent deep reinforcement 
learning. Auton Agent Multi-Agent Syst 33(6):750–797. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10458- 019- 09421-1
Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory. Neural Comput 9(8):1735–1780. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1162/ neco. 1997.9. 8. 1735
Hong Z, Su S, Shann T, Chang Y, Lee C (2017) A deep policy inference q-network for multi-agent systems. 
CoRR arxiv: abs/1712.07893,
Hoshen Y (2017) Vain: Attentional multi-agent predictive modeling. In: Proceedings of the 31st interna-
tional conference on neural information processing systems, Curran Associates Inc., USA, NIPS’17, 
pp 2698–2708. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 32949 96. 32950 30
Houthooft R, Chen X, Chen X, Duan Y, Schulman J, De Turck F, Abbeel P (2016) Vime: variational infor -
mation maximizing exploration. In: Lee DD, Sugiyama M, Luxburg UV, Guyon I, Garnett R (eds) 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 1109–1117. 
http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 6591- vime- varia tional- infor  mation- maxim izing- explo ration. pdf
Hu J, Wellman MP (1998) Multiagent reinforcement learning: theoretical framework and an algorithm. In: 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Machine Learning, Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
lishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, ICML ’98, pp 242–250. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 645527. 
657296
Hu J, Wellman MP (2003) Nash q-learning for general-sum stochastic games. J Mach Learn Res 
4:1039–1069
Hughes E, Leibo JZ, Phillips M, Tuyls K, Dueñez Guzman E, García Castañeda A, Dunning I, Zhu T, 
McKee K, Koster R, Roff H, Graepel T (2018) Inequity aversion improves cooperation in intertempo-
ral social dilemmas. In: Bengio S, Wallach H, Larochelle H, Grauman K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett R 
(eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 31, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 3326–3336. 
http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7593- inequ ity- avers ion- impro  ves- coope ration- in- inter  tempo ral- social-  
dilem mas. pdf
Iqbal S, Sha F (2019) Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Chaudhuri K, 
Salakhutdinov R (eds) Proceedings of the 36th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, 
Long Beach, California, USA, Proceedings of machine learning research, vol  97, pp 2961–2970. 
http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v97/ iqbal 19a. html
Islam R, Henderson P, Gomrokchi M, Precup D (2017) Reproducibility of benchmarked deep reinforcement 
learning tasks for continuous control. CoRR arxiv: abs/1708.04133,
Jaderberg M, Czarnecki WM, Dunning I, Marris L, Lever G, Castañeda AG, Beattie C, Rabinowitz NC, 
Morcos AS, Ruderman A, Sonnerat N, Green T, Deason L, Leibo JZ, Silver D, Hassabis D, Kavukc-
uoglu K, Graepel T (2019) Human-level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based 
reinforcement learning. Science 364(6443):859–865
Jain U, Weihs L, Kolve E, Rastegari M, Lazebnik S, Farhadi A, Schwing AG, Kembhavi A (2019) Two 
body problem: Collaborative visual task completion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR)
Jaques N, Lazaridou A, Hughes E, Gülçehre Ç, Ortega PA, Strouse D, Leibo JZ, de Freitas N (2018) Intrin-
sic social motivation via causal influence in multi-agent RL. CoRR arxiv: abs/1810.08647,
Jaques N, Lazaridou A, Hughes E, Gulcehre C, Ortega P, Strouse D, Leibo JZ, De Freitas N (2019) Social 
influence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In: International confer -
ence on machine learning, pp 3040–3049
Jiang J, Lu Z (2018) Learning attentional communication for multi-agent cooperation. In: Bengio S, Wal-
lach H, Larochelle H, Grauman K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information 
processing systems 31, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 7254–7264. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7956- learn 
ing- atten tional- commu nicat ion- for- multi- agent- coope ration. pdf
Johnson M, Hofmann K, Hutton T, Bignell D (2016) The malmo platform for artificial intelligence experi-
mentation. In: Proceedings of the twenty-fifth international joint conference on artificial intelligence, 
AAAI Press, IJCAI’16, pp 4246–4247. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 30610 53. 30612 59
Jorge E, Kågebäck M, Gustavsson E (2016) Learning to play guess who? and inventing a grounded language 
as a consequence. CoRR arxiv: abs/1611.03218,
Juliani A, Berges V, Vckay E, Gao Y, Henry H, Mattar M, Lange D (2018) Unity: a general platform for 
intelligent agents. CoRR arxiv: abs/1809.02627,

==== Page 42 ====
936 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Kaelbling LP, Littman ML, Moore AW (1996) Reinforcement learning: a survey. J Artif Intell Res 
4(1):237–285. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 16227 37. 16227 48
Kasai T, Tenmoto H, Kamiya A (2008) Learning of communication codes in multi-agent reinforcement 
learning problem. In: 2008 IEEE conference on soft computing in industrial applications, pp 1–6
Kim W, Cho M, Sung Y (2019) Message-dropout: An efficient training method for multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence 
33(01):6079–6086
Kirby S (2002) Natural language from artificial life. Artif Life 8(2):185–215. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1162/  
10645 46023 20184 248
Kok JR, Vlassis N (2006) Collaborative multiagent reinforcement learning by payoff propagation. J 
Mach Learn Res 7:1789–1828. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 12485 47. 12486 12
Kollock P (1998) Social dilemmas: the anatomy of cooperation. Annu Rev Sociol 24(1):183–214. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1146/ annur  ev. soc. 24.1. 183
Kong X, Xin B, Liu F, Wang Y (2017) Revisiting the master-slave architecture in multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1712.07305,
Kraemer L, Banerjee B (2016) Multi-agent reinforcement learning as a rehearsal for decentralized plan-
ning. Neurocomputing 190:82–94
Kumar S, Shah P, Hakkani-Tür D, Heck LP (2017) Federated control with hierarchical multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1712.08266,
Lanctot M, Zambaldi V, Gruslys A, Lazaridou A, Tuyls K, Perolat J, Silver D, Graepel T (2017) A 
unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement learning. In: Guyon I, Luxburg UV, 
Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus R, Vishwanathan S, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information 
processing systems 30, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 4190–4203. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7007-
a- unifi ed- game- theor  etic- appro ach- to- multi agent- reinf  orcem ent- learn ing. pdf
Lange PAV, Joireman J, Parks CD, Dijk EV (2013) The psychology of social dilemmas: a review. Organ 
Behav Hum Decis Process 120(2):125–141
Lauer M, Riedmiller M (2000) An algorithm for distributed reinforcement learning in cooperative multi-
agent systems. In: In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, Morgan Kaufmann, pp 535–542
Laurent GJ, Matignon L, Fort-Piat NL (2011) The world of independent learners is not markovian. Int 
J Knowl-Based Intell Eng Syst 15(1):55–64. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 19718 86. 19718 87
Lazaridou A, Baroni M (2020) Emergent multi-agent communication in the deep learning era. ArXiv 
arxiv: abs/2006.02419
Lazaridou A, Peysakhovich A, Baroni M (2017) Multi-agent cooperation and the emergence of (natu-
ral) language. In: 5th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, 
France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id=  
Hk8N3 Sclg
Lazaridou A, Hermann KM, Tuyls K, Clark S (2018) Emergence of linguistic communication from ref-
erential games with symbolic and pixel input. In: International conference on learning representa-
tions. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= HJGv1Z-  AW
Le HM, Yue Y, Carr P, Lucey P (2017) Coordinated multi-agent imitation learning. In: Precup D, Teh 
YW (eds) Proceedings of the 34th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, Interna-
tional Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol 70, 
pp 1995–2003. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v70/ le17a. html
Lee J, Cho K, Weston J, Kiela D (2017) Emergent translation in multi-agent communication. CoRR 
arxiv: abs/1710.06922,
Lee Y, Yang J, Lim JJ (2020) Learning to coordinate manipulation skills via skill behavior diversifica-
tion. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id=  
ryxB2 lBtvH
Leibo JZ, Zambaldi V, Lanctot M, Marecki J, Graepel T (2017) Multi-agent reinforcement learning in 
sequential social dilemmas. In: Proceedings of the 16th conference on autonomous agents and 
multiagent systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 
Richland, SC, AAMAS ’17, pp 464–473. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 30911 25. 30911 94
Leibo JZ, Hughes E, Lanctot M, Graepel T (2019) Autocurricula and the emergence of innovation from 
social interaction: a manifesto for multi-agent intelligence research. CoRR arxiv: abs/1903.00742,
Lerer A, Peysakhovich A (2017) Maintaining cooperation in complex social dilemmas using deep rein-
forcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1707.01068,
Letcher A, Foerster J, Balduzzi D, Rocktäschel T, Whiteson S (2019) Stable opponent shaping in dif-
ferentiable games. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/  
forum? id= SyGjj sC5tQ

==== Page 43 ====
937 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
Levine S, Finn C, Darrell T, Abbeel P (2016) End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies. Jour -
nal of Machine Learning Research 17(1):1334–1373. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 29466 45.  
29466 84
Lewis M, Yarats D, Dauphin YN, Parikh D, Batra D (2017) Deal or no deal? end-to-end learning for 
negotiation dialogues. CoRR arxiv: abs/1706.05125,
Li F, Bowling M (2019) Ease-of-teaching and language structure from emergent communication. In: 
Wallach H, Larochelle H, Beygelzimer A, Alche-Buc F, Fox E, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural 
information processing systems 32, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 15851–15861. http:// papers. nips.  
cc/ paper/ 9714- ease- of- teach ing- and- langu age- struc ture- from- emerg  ent- commu nicat ion. pdf
Li S, Wu Y, Cui X, Dong H, Fang F, Russell S (2019a) Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via 
minimax deep deterministic policy gradient. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 33(01):4213–4220
Li X, Sun M, Li P (2019b) Multi-agent discussion mechanism for natural language generation. Proc 
AAAI Conf Artif Intell 33(01):6096–6103
Li Y (2018) Deep reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1810.06339,
Lillicrap TP, Hunt JJ, Pritzel A, Heess N, Erez T, Tassa Y, Silver D, Wierstra D (2016) Continuous con-
trol with deep reinforcement learning. In: ICLR (Poster). http:// arxiv. org/ arxiv:  abs/ 1509. 02971
Lin K, Zhao R, Xu Z, Zhou J (2018) Efficient large-scale fleet management via multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on 
knowledge discovery & data mining, ACM, New York, NY, USA, KDD ’18, pp 1774–1783. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 32198 19. 32199 93,
Lin X, Beling PA, Cogill R (2018) Multiagent inverse reinforcement learning for two-person zero-sum 
games. IEEE Trans Games 10(1):56–68. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TCIAIG. 2017. 26791 15
Littman M (2001) Value-function reinforcement learning in markov games. Cogn Syst Res 2:55–66
Littman ML (1994) Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Proceed-
ings of the eleventh international conference on international conference on machine learning, 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, ICML’94, pp 157–163. http:// dl.  
acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 30915 74. 30915 94
Liu IJ, Yeh RA, Schwing AG (2020) Pic: Permutation invariant critic for multi-agent deep reinforcement 
learning. In: PMLR, proceedings of machine learning research, vol 100, pp 590–602. http:// proce  
edings. mlr. press/ v100/ liu20a. html
Liu S, Lever G, Heess N, Merel J, Tunyasuvunakool S, Graepel T (2019) Emergent coordination through 
competition. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/  
forum? id= BkG8s jR5Km
Long Q, Zhou Z, Gupta A, Fang F, Wu Y, Wang X (2020) Evolutionary population curriculum for scal-
ing multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: International conference on learning representations. 
https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= SJxbH krKDH
Lowe R, WU Y, Tamar A, Harb J, Pieter Abbeel O, Mordatch I (2017) Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed 
cooperative-competitive environments. In: Guyon I, Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus 
R, Vishwanathan S, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 30, Cur -
ran Associates, Inc., pp 6379–6390. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7217- multi- agent- actor- critic- for-  
mixed- coope rative- compe  titive- envir  onmen ts. pdf
Lowe R, Foerster JN, Boureau Y, Pineau J, Dauphin YN (2019) On the pitfalls of measuring emergent 
communication. CoRR arxiv: abs/1903.05168,
Luketina J, Nardelli N, Farquhar G, Foerster JN, Andreas J, Grefenstette E, Whiteson S, Rocktäschel 
T (2019) A survey of reinforcement learning informed by natural language. CoRR arxiv: 
abs/1906.03926,
Luong NC, Hoang DT, Gong S, Niyato D, Wang P, Liang Y, Kim DI (2019) Applications of deep rein-
forcement learning in communications and networking: a survey. IEEE Communications Surveys 
Tutorials pp 1–1. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ COMST. 2019. 29165 83
Lux T, Marchesi M (1999) Scaling and criticality in a stochastic multi-agent model of a financial market. 
Nature 397(6719):498–500. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 17290
Lyu X, Amato C (2020) Likelihood quantile networks for coordinating multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing. In: Proceedings of the 19th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent 
systems, pp 798–806
Ma J, Wu F (2020) Feudal multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for traffic signal control. In: Segh-
rouchni AEF, Sukthankar G, An B, Yorke-Smith N (eds) Proceedings of the 19th international 
conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, AAMAS ’20, Auckland, New Zealand, 
May 9-13, 2020, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp 
816–824. https:// dl. acm. org/ doi/ arxiv:  abs/ 10. 5555/ 33987 61. 33988 58

==== Page 44 ====
938 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Makar R, Mahadevan S, Ghavamzadeh M (2001) Hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Pro-
ceedings of the fifth international conference on autonomous agents, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
AGENTS ’01, pp 246–253. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 375735. 376302,
Matignon L, Laurent GJ, Le Fort-Piat N (2007) Hysteretic q-learning : an algorithm for decentralized rein-
forcement learning in cooperative multi-agent teams. In: 2007 IEEE/RSJ international conference on 
intelligent robots and systems, pp 64–69
Matignon L, Jeanpierre L, Mouaddib AI (2012a) Coordinated multi-robot exploration under communica-
tion constraints using decentralized markov decision processes. https:// www. aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ 
AAAI/ AAAI12/ paper/ view/ 5038
Matignon L, Gj Laurent, Le fort piat N, (2012b) Review: independent reinforcement learners in cooperative 
markov games: a survey regarding coordination problems. Knowl Eng Rev 27(1):1–31. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1017/ S0269 88891 20000 57
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidje-
land AK, Ostrovski G, Petersen S, Beattie C, Sadik A, Antonoglou I, King H, Kumaran D, Wier -
stra D, Legg S, Hassabis D (2015) Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 
518:529 EP –. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ natur  e14236
Mnih V, Badia AP, Mirza M, Graves A, Lillicrap T, Harley T, Silver D, Kavukcuoglu K (2016) Asynchro-
nous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In: Balcan MF, Weinberger KQ (eds) Proceedings of 
The 33rd international conference on machine learning, PMLR, New York, New York, USA, Pro-
ceedings of machine learning research, vol 48, pp 1928–1937. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v48/ mniha 
16. html
Moerland TM, Broekens J, Jonker CM (2018) Emotion in reinforcement learning agents and robots: a sur -
vey. Mach Learn 107(2):443–480. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10994- 017- 5666-0
Mordatch I, Abbeel P (2018) Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent populations. 
https:// aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ AAAI/ AAAI18/ paper/ view/ 17007
Nair R, Tambe M, Yokoo M, Pynadath D, Marsella S (2003) Taming decentralized pomdps: towards effi-
cient policy computation for multiagent settings. In: Proceedings of the 18th international joint 
conference on artificial intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 
IJCAI’03, pp 705–711. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 16306 59. 16307 62
Narvekar S, Sinapov J, Leonetti M, Stone P (2016) Source task creation for curriculum learning. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 international conference on autonomous agents & multiagent systems, inter -
national foundation for autonomous agents and multiagent systems, Richland, SC, AAMAS ’16, pp 
566–574. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 29369 24. 29370 07
Nedic A, Ozdaglar A (2009) Distributed subgradient methods for multi-agent optimization. IEEE Trans 
Autom Control 54(1):48–61
Ng AY, Russell SJ (2000) Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings of the seventeenth 
international conference on machine learning, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, 
USA, ICML ’00, pp 663–670. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 645529. 657801
Ng AY, Harada D, Russell S (1999) Policy invariance under reward transformations: theory and application 
to reward shaping. In: In Proceedings of the sixteenth international conference on machine learning, 
Morgan Kaufmann, pp 278–287
Nguyen DT, Kumar A, Lau HC (2017a) Collective multiagent sequential decision making under uncer -
tainty. https:// aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ AAAI/ AAAI17/ paper/ view/ 14891
Nguyen DT, Kumar A, Lau HC (2017b) Policy gradient with value function approximation for collective 
multiagent planning. In: Guyon I, Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus R, Vishwanathan S, 
Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 30, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 
4319–4329. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7019- policy- gradi ent- with- value- funct ion- appro  ximat ion- for- 
colle ctive- multi agent- plann ing. pdf
Nguyen DT, Kumar A, Lau HC (2018) Credit assignment for collective multiagent rl with global rewards. 
In: Bengio S, Wallach H, Larochelle H, Grauman K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett R (eds) Advances in 
neural information processing systems 31, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 8102–8113. http:// papers. nips. 
cc/ paper/ 8033- credit- assig nment- for- colle ctive- multi agent- rl- with- global- rewar  ds. pdf
Nguyen TT, Nguyen ND, Nahavandi S (2020) Deep reinforcement learning for multiagent systems: a review 
of challenges, solutions, and applications. IEEE Trans Cybern 50(9):3826–3839
Oliehoek FA, Amato C (2016) A Concise Introduction to Decentralized POMDPs, 1st edn. Springer Pub-
lishing Company, Berlin
Oliehoek FA, Spaan MTJ, Vlassis N (2008) Optimal and approximate q-value functions for decentralized 
pomdps. J Artif Int Res 32(1):289–353. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 16226 73. 16226 80
Omidshafiei S, Pazis J, Amato C, How JP, Vian J (2017) Deep decentralized multi-task multi-agent rein-
forcement learning under partial observability. In: Precup D, Teh YW (eds) Proceedings of the 34th 

==== Page 45 ====
939 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
international conference on machine learning, PMLR, International Convention Centre, Sydney, Aus-
tralia, Proceedings of machine learning research, vol 70, pp 2681–2690. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ 
v70/ omids hafie i17a. html
Omidshafiei S, Kim DK, Liu M, Tesauro G, Riemer M, Amato C, Campbell M, How JP (2019) Learn-
ing to teach in cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning. Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intelli 
33(01):6128–6136
Oroojlooyjadid A, Hajinezhad D (2019) A review of cooperative multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. 
ArXiv arxiv: abs/1908.03963
Oudeyer PY, Kaplan F (2007) What is intrinsic motivation? A typology of computational approaches. Front 
Neurorobotics 1:6–6
Palmer G, Tuyls K, Bloembergen D, Savani R (2018) Lenient multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. 
In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, 
International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC, AAMAS 
’18, pp 443–451. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 32373 83. 32374 51
Palmer G, Savani R, Tuyls K (2019) Negative update intervals in deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. 
In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, 
pp 43–51
Panait L, Luke S (2005) Cooperative multi-agent learning: the state of the art. Auton Agent Multi-Agent 
Syst 11(3):387–434. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10458- 005- 2631-2
Panait L, Sullivan K, Luke S (2006) Lenient learners in cooperative multiagent systems. In: Proceedings 
of the fifth international joint conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, association 
for computing machinery, New York, NY, USA, AAMAS ’06, pp 801–803. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 
11606 33. 11607 76,
Papoudakis G, Christianos F, Rahman A, Albrecht SV (2019) Dealing with non-stationarity in multi-agent 
deep reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1906.04737,
Pathak D, Agrawal P, Efros AA, Darrell T (2017) Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised predic-
tion. In: Precup D, Teh YW (eds) Proceedings of the 34th international conference on machine learn-
ing, PMLR, International Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, Proceedings of Machine Learning 
Research, vol 70, pp 2778–2787. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v70/ patha k17a. html
Peng P, Yuan Q, Wen Y, Yang Y, Tang Z, Long H, Wang J (2017) Multiagent bidirectionally-coordinated 
nets for learning to play starcraft combat games. CoRR arxiv: abs/1703.10069,
Pérolat J, Leibo JZ, Zambaldi V, Beattie C, Tuyls K, Graepel T (2017) A multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing model of common-pool resource appropriation. In: Guyon I, Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, 
Fergus R, Vishwanathan S, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 30, 
Curran Associates, Inc., pp 3643–3652. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 6955-a- multi- agent- reinf  orcem 
ent- learn ing- model- of- common- pool- resou rce- appro priat ion. pdf
Peysakhovich A, Lerer A (2018) Prosocial learning agents solve generalized stag hunts better than self-
ish ones. In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent 
systems, international Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC, 
AAMAS ’18, pp 2043–2044. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 32373 83. 32380 65
Pinto L, Davidson J, Sukthankar R, Gupta A (2017) Robust adversarial reinforcement learning. In: Pre-
cup D, Teh YW (eds) Proceedings of the 34th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, 
International Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, Proceedings of machine learning research, 
vol 70, pp 2817–2826. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v70/ pinto 17a. html
Pinyol I, Sabater-Mir J (2013) Computational trust and reputation models for open multi-agent systems: a 
review. Artif Intell Rev 40(1):1–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10462- 011- 9277-z
Potter MA, De Jong KA (1994) A cooperative coevolutionary approach to function optimization. In: Davi-
dor Y, Schwefel HP, Männer R (eds) Parallel problem solving from nature - PPSN III. Springer, Ber -
lin, pp 249–257
Qu G, Wierman A, Li N (2020) Scalable reinforcement learning of localized policies for multi-agent net-
worked systems. PMLR, The Cloud, Proceedings of machine learning research, vol 120, pp 256–266. 
http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v120/ qu20a. html
Rabinowitz N, Perbet F, Song F, Zhang C, Eslami SMA, Botvinick M (2018) Machine theory of mind. In: 
Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, 
Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of machine learning research, vol 80, pp 4218–
4227. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ rabin owitz 18a. html
Raghu M, Irpan A, Andreas J, Kleinberg B, Le Q, Kleinberg J (2018) Can deep reinforcement learning 
solve Erdos-Selfridge-Spencer games? In: Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international 
conference on machine learning, PMLR, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of 
machine learning research, vol 80, pp 4238–4246. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ raghu 18a. html

==== Page 46 ====
940 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Raileanu R, Denton E, Szlam A, Fergus R (2018) Modeling others using oneself in multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning. In: Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international conference on machine 
learning, PMLR, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of machine learning research, 
vol 80, pp 4257–4266. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ raile anu18a. html
Ramchurn SD, Huynh D, Jennings NR (2004) Trust in multi-agent systems. Knowl Eng Rev 19(1):1–25. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S0269 88890 40001 16
Rashid T, Samvelyan M, Schroeder C, Farquhar G, Foerster J, Whiteson S (2018) QMIX: Monotonic value 
function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceed-
ings of the 35th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm 
Sweden, Proceedings of machine learning research, vol  80, pp 4295–4304. http:// proce edings. mlr. 
press/ v80/ rashi d18a. html
Russell S, Zimdars AL (2003) Q-decomposition for reinforcement learning agents. In: Proceedings of the 
twentieth international conference on international conference on machine learning, AAAI Press, 
ICML’03, pp 656–663. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 30418 38. 30419 21
Schaul T, Horgan D, Gregor K, Silver D (2015) Universal value function approximators. In: Proceedings 
of the 32nd international conference on international conference on machine learning - volume 37, 
JMLR.org, ICML’15, pp 1312–1320
Schmidhuber J (2010) Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation (1990–2010). IEEE Trans 
Auton Ment Dev 2(3):230–247. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ TAMD. 2010. 20563 68
Schmidhuber J, Zhao J, Wiering M (1996) Simple principles of metalearning. Tech. rep
Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, Radford A, Klimov O (2017) Proximal policy optimization algorithms. 
CoRR arxiv: abs/1707.06347,
Sen S, Weiss G (1999) Multiagent systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. 
cfm? id= 305606. 305612
Sequeira P, Melo FS, Prada R, Paiva A (2011) Emerging social awareness: exploring intrinsic motivation 
in multiagent learning. In: 2011 IEEE international conference on development and learning (ICDL), 
vol 2, pp 1–6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ DEVLRN. 2011. 60373 25
Shalev-Shwartz S, Shammah S, Shashua A (2016) Safe, multi-agent, reinforcement learning for autonomous 
driving. CoRR arxiv: abs/1610.03295,
Shapley LS (1953) Stochastic games. Proc Nat Acad Sci 39(10):1095–1100
Shoham Y, Leyton-Brown K (2008) Multiagent systems: algorithmic, game-theoretic, and logical founda-
tions. Cambridge University Press, USA
Shoham Y, Powers R, Grenager T (2003) Multi-agent reinforcement learning: a critical survey. Tech. rep
Silva FLD, Taylor ME, Costa AHR (2018) Autonomously reusing knowledge in multiagent reinforcement 
learning. In: Proceedings of the twenty-seventh international joint conference on artificial intelli-
gence, IJCAI-18, International joint conferences on artificial intelligence organization, pp 5487–5493. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 24963/ ijcai. 2018/ 774,
Silver D, Huang A, Maddison CJ, Guez A, Sifre L, van den Driessche G, Schrittwieser J, Antonoglou I, 
Panneershelvam V, Lanctot M, Dieleman S, Grewe D, Nham J, Kalchbrenner N, Sutskever I, Lillicrap 
T, Leach M, Kavukcuoglu K, Graepel T, Hassabis D (2016) Mastering the game of go with deep neu-
ral networks and tree search. Nature 529:484 EP –. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ natur  e16961
Silver D, Hubert T, Schrittwieser J, Antonoglou I, Lai M, Guez A, Lanctot M, Sifre L, Kumaran D, Graepel 
T, Lillicrap T, Simonyan K, Hassabis D (2018) A general reinforcement learning algorithm that mas-
ters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science 362(6419):1140–1144
Singh A, Jain T, Sukhbaatar S (2019) Learning when to communicate at scale in multiagent cooperative 
and competitive tasks. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. 
net/ forum? id= rye7k nCqK7
Son K, Kim D, Kang WJ, Hostallero DE, Yi Y (2019) Qtran: Learning to factorize with transformation for 
cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In: International conference on machine learning, pp 
5887–5896
Song J, Ren H, Sadigh D, Ermon S (2018) Multi-agent generative adversarial imitation learning. In: Bengio 
S, Wallach H, Larochelle H, Grauman K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural infor -
mation processing systems, Curran Associates, Inc., vol 31, pp 7461–7472. https:// proce edings. neuri 
ps. cc/ paper/ 2018/ file/ 240c9 45bb7 29801 30446 fc2b4 0fbb8 e0- Paper. pdf
Song Y, Wang J, Lukasiewicz T, Xu Z, Xu M, Ding Z, Wu L (2019) Arena: A general evaluation platform 
and building toolkit for multi-agent intelligence. CoRR arxiv: abs/1905.08085,
Spooner T, Savani R (2020) Robust market making via adversarial reinforcement learning. In: Proceedings 
of the 19th international conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp 2014–2016
Srinivasan S, Lanctot M, Zambaldi V, Perolat J, Tuyls K, Munos R, Bowling M (2018) Actor-critic policy 
optimization in partially observable multiagent environments. In: Bengio S, Wallach H, Larochelle 

==== Page 47 ====
941 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
H, Grauman K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 
31, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 3422–3435. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7602- actor- critic- policy- optim 
izati on- in- parti ally- obser  vable- multi agent- envir  onmen ts. pdf
Stone P, Veloso M (2000) Multiagent systems: a survey from a machine learning perspective. Auton Robots 
8(3):345–383. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1023/A: 10089 42012 299
Strouse D, Kleiman-Weiner M, Tenenbaum J, Botvinick M, Schwab DJ (2018) Learning to share and 
hide intentions using information regularization. In: Bengio S, Wallach H, Larochelle H, Grauman 
K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 31, Curran 
Associates, Inc., pp 10249–10259. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 8227- learn ing- to- share- and- hide- inten 
tions- using- infor  mation- regul ariza tion. pdf
Sukhbaatar S, szlam a, Fergus R (2016) Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation. In: Lee 
DD, Sugiyama M, Luxburg UV, Guyon I, Garnett R (eds) Advances in neural information processing 
systems 29, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 2244–2252. http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 6398- learn ing- multi 
agent- commu nicat ion- with- backp ropag  ation. pdf
Sukhbaatar S, Kostrikov I, Szlam A, Fergus R (2017) Intrinsic motivation and automatic curricula via asym-
metric self-play. CoRR arxiv: abs/1703.05407,
Sunehag P, Lever G, Gruslys A, Czarnecki WM, Zambaldi V, Jaderberg M, Lanctot M, Sonnerat N, Leibo 
JZ, Tuyls K, Graepel T (2018) Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-agent learning 
based on team reward. In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on autonomous agents and 
multiagent systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Rich-
land, SC, AAMAS ’18, pp 2085–2087. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 32373 83. 32380 80
Sutton RS, Barto AG (1998) Reinforcement learning: an introduction. Adaptive computation and machine 
learning, MIT Press. http:// www. world cat. org/ oclc/ 37293 240
Sutton RS, Precup D, Singh S (1999) Between mdps and semi-mdps: a framework for temporal abstraction 
in reinforcement learning. Artif Intell 112(1):181–211
Svetlik M, Leonetti M, Sinapov J, Shah R, Walker N, Stone P (2017) Automatic curriculum graph gen-
eration for reinforcement learning agents. https:// aaai. org/ ocs/ index. php/ AAAI/ AAAI17/ paper/ view/ 
14961
Tacchetti A, Song HF, Mediano PAM, Zambaldi V, Kramár J, Rabinowitz NC, Graepel T, Botvinick M, 
Battaglia PW (2019) Relational forward models for multi-agent learning. In: International conference 
on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= rJlEo jAqFm
Tampuu A, Matiisen T, Kodelja D, Kuzovkin I, Korjus K, Aru J, Aru J, Vicente R (2017) Multiagent coop-
eration and competition with deep reinforcement learning. PLoS ONE 12(4):1–15. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1371/ journ al. pone. 01723 95
Tan M (1993) Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In: In Proceedings of 
the tenth international conference on machine learning, Morgan Kaufmann, pp 330–337
Tang H, Hao J, Lv T, Chen Y, Zhang Z, Jia H, Ren C, Zheng Y, Fan C, Wang L (2018) Hierarchical deep 
multiagent reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1809.09332,
Taylor A, Dusparic I, Cahill V (2013) Transfer learning in multi-agent systems through parallel transfer. 
In: in Workshop on theoretically grounded transfer learning at the 30th international conference on 
machine learning (Poster
Taylor ME, Stone P (2009) Transfer learning for reinforcement learning domains: a survey. J Mach Learn 
Res 10:1633–1685. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm? id= 15770 69. 17558 39
Tesauro G (2004) Extending q-learning to general adaptive multi-agent systems. In: Thrun S, Saul LK, 
Schölkopf B (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 16, MIT Press, pp 871–878. 
http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 2503- exten ding-q- learn ing- to- gener  al- adapt ive- multi- agent- syste ms. pdf
Tumer K, Wolpert DH (2004) Collectives and the design of complex systems. Springer, Berlin
Tuyls K, Weiss G (2012) Multiagent learning: basics, challenges, and prospects. AI Mag 33(3):41
Vezhnevets AS, Osindero S, Schaul T, Heess N, Jaderberg M, Silver D, Kavukcuoglu K (2017) FeUdal 
networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In: Precup D, Teh YW (eds) Proceedings of the 
34th international conference on machine learning, PMLR, International Convention Centre, Sydney, 
Australia, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol 70, pp 3540–3549. http:// proce edings. mlr. 
press/ v70/ vezhn evets 17a. html
Vezhnevets AS, Wu Y, Leblond R, Leibo JZ (2019) Options as responses: grounding behavioural hierar -
chies in multi-agent RL. CoRR arxiv: abs/1906.01470,
Vinyals O, Ewalds T, Bartunov S, Georgiev P, Vezhnevets AS, Yeo M, Makhzani A, Küttler H, Agapiou J, 
Schrittwieser J, Quan J, Gaffney S, Petersen S, Simonyan K, Schaul T, van Hasselt H, Silver D, Lill-
icrap TP, Calderone K, Keet P, Brunasso A, Lawrence D, Ekermo A, Repp J, Tsing R (2017) Starcraft 
II: a new challenge for reinforcement learning. CoRR arxiv: abs/1708.04782,

==== Page 48 ====
942 S. Gronauer, K. Diepold 
1 3
Vinyals O, Babuschkin I, Czarnecki WM, Mathieu M, Dudzik A, Chung J, Choi DH, Powell R, Ewalds 
T, Georgiev P, Oh J, Horgan D, Kroiss M, Danihelka I, Huang A, Sifre L, Cai T, Agapiou JP, Jad-
erberg M, Vezhnevets AS, Leblond R, Pohlen T, Dalibard V, Budden D, Sulsky Y, Molloy J, Paine 
TL, Gulcehre C, Wang Z, Pfaff T, Wu Y, Ring R, Yogatama D, Wünsch D, McKinney K, Smith O, 
Schaul T, Lillicrap T, Kavukcuoglu K, Hassabis D, Apps C, Silver D (2019) Grandmaster level in 
starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature 575(7782):350–354. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1038/ s41586- 019- 1724-z
Wang JX, Kurth-Nelson Z, Tirumala D, Soyer H, Leibo JZ, Munos R, Blundell C, Kumaran D, Botvin-
ick M (2016a) Learning to reinforcement learn. CoRR arxiv: abs/1611.05763,
Wang JX, Hughes E, Fernando C, Czarnecki WM, Duéñez Guzmán EA, Leibo JZ (2019) Evolving 
intrinsic motivations for altruistic behavior. In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference 
on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, International Foundation for Autonomous Agents 
and Multiagent Systems, Richland, SC, AAMAS ’19, pp 683–692. http:// dl. acm. org/ citat ion. cfm?  
id= 33061 27. 33317 56
Wang S, Wan J, Zhang D, Li D, Zhang C (2016b) Towards smart factory for industry 4.0: a self-organ-
ized multi-agent system with big data based feedback and coordination. Comput Netw 101:158–
168. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. comnet. 2015. 12. 017. http:// www. scien cedir  ect. com/ scien ce/ artic le/  
pii/ S1389 12861 50050 46, industrial Technologies and Applications for the Internet of Things
Wang T, Dong H, Lesser VR, Zhang C (2020a) ROMA: multi-agent reinforcement learning with emer -
gent roles. CoRR arxiv: abs/2003.08039
Wang T, Wang J, Wu Y, Zhang C (2020b) Influence-based multi-agent exploration. In: International 
conference on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= BJgy9 6EYvr
Wang T, Wang J, Zheng C, Zhang C (2020c) Learning nearly decomposable value functions via com-
munication minimization. In: International conference on learning representations. https:// openr  
eview. net/ forum? id= HJx- 3grYDB
Wei E, Luke S (2016) Lenient learning in independent-learner stochastic cooperative games. J Mach 
Learn Res 17(84):1–42. http:// jmlr. org/ papers/ v17/ 15- 417. html
Wei E, Wicke D, Freelan D, Luke S (2018) Multiagent soft q-learning. https:// www. aaai. org/ ocs/ index.  
php/ SSS/ SSS18/ paper/ view/ 17508
Wei Ren, Beard RW, Atkins EM (2005) A survey of consensus problems in multi-agent coordination. In: 
Proceedings of the 2005, American control conference, 2005., pp 1859–1864 vol. 3. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1109/ ACC. 2005. 14702 39
Weiß G (1995) Distributed reinforcement learning. In: Steels L (ed) The biology and technology of 
intelligent autonomous agents. Springer, Berlin, pp 415–428
Weiss G (ed) (1999) Multiagent systems: a modern approach to distributed artificial intelligence. MIT 
Press, Cambridge
Wiegand RP (2004) An analysis of cooperative coevolutionary algorithms. PhD thesis, USA, 
aAI3108645
Wolpert DH, Tumer K (1999) An introduction to collective intelligence. CoRR cs.LG/9908014. http://  
arxiv. org/ arxiv:  abs/ cs. LG/ 99080 14
Wu C, Rajeswaran A, Duan Y, Kumar V, Bayen AM, Kakade S, Mordatch I, Abbeel P (2018) Variance 
reduction for policy gradient with action-dependent factorized baselines. In: International confer -
ence on learning representations. https:// openr  eview. net/ forum? id= H1tSsb-  AW
Yang E, Gu D (2004) Multiagent reinforcement learning for multi-robot systems: a survey. Tech. rep
Yang J, Nakhaei A, Isele D, Fujimura K, Zha H (2020) Cm3: Cooperative multi-goal multi-stage multi-
agent reinforcement learning. In: International conference on learning representations. https://  
openr  eview. net/ forum? id= S1lEX 04tPr
Yang T, Meng Z, Hao J, Zhang C, Zheng Y (2018a) Bayes-tomop: a fast detection and best response 
algorithm towards sophisticated opponents. CoRR arxiv: abs/1809.04240,
Yang Y, Luo R, Li M, Zhou M, Zhang W, Wang J (2018b) Mean field multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing. In: Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international conference on machine learn-
ing, PMLR, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of machine learning research, 
vol 80, pp 5571–5580. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ yang1 8d. html
Yu C, Zhang M, Ren F (2013) Emotional multiagent reinforcement learning in social dilemmas. In: 
Boella G, Elkind E, Savarimuthu BTR, Dignum F, Purvis MK (eds) PRIMA 2013: principles and 
practice of multi-agent systems. Springer, Berlin, pp 372–387
Yu H, Shen Z, Leung C, Miao C, Lesser VR (2013) A survey of multi-agent trust management systems. 
IEEE Access 1:35–50. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ ACCESS. 2013. 22598 92
Yu L, Song J, Ermon S (2019) Multi-agent adversarial inverse reinforcement learning. In: Chaudhuri 
K, Salakhutdinov R (eds) Proceedings of the 36th international conference on machine learning, 

==== Page 49 ====
943 Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey  
1 3
PMLR, Long Beach, California, USA, Proceedings of machine learning research, vol 97, pp 7194–
7201. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v97/ yu19e. html
Zhang K, Yang Z, Basar T (2018) Networked multi-agent reinforcement learning in continuous spaces. In: 
2018 IEEE conference on decision and control (CDC), pp 2771–2776
Zhang K, Yang Z, Liu H, Zhang T, Basar T (2018) Fully decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning 
with networked agents. In: Dy J, Krause A (eds) Proceedings of the 35th international conference on 
machine learning, PMLR, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, Proceedings of machine learning 
research, vol 80, pp 5872–5881. http:// proce edings. mlr. press/ v80/ zhang 18n. html
Zhang K, Yang Z, Başar T (2019) Multi-agent reinforcement learning: a selective overview of theories and 
algorithms. ArXiv arxiv: abs/1911.10635
Zhang W, Bastani O (2019) Mamps: Safe multi-agent reinforcement learning via model predictive shield-
ing. ArXiv arxiv: abs/1910.12639
Zheng Y, Meng Z, Hao J, Zhang Z (2018a) Weighted double deep multiagent reinforcement learning in 
stochastic cooperative environments. In: Geng X, Kang BH (eds) PRICAI 2018: trends in artificial 
intelligence. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 421–429
Zheng Y, Meng Z, Hao J, Zhang Z, Yang T, Fan C (2018b) A deep bayesian policy reuse approach against 
non-stationary agents. In: Bengio S, Wallach H, Larochelle H, Grauman K, Cesa-Bianchi N, Garnett 
R (eds) Advances in neural information processing systems 31, Curran Associates, Inc., pp 954–964. 
http:// papers. nips. cc/ paper/ 7374-a- deep- bayes ian- policy- reuse- appro ach- again st- non- stati onary-  
agents. pdf
Zhu H, Kirley M (2019) Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning in a common-pool resource system. In: 
2019 IEEE congress on evolutionary computation (CEC), pp 142–149. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1109/ CEC. 
2019. 87900 01
Zhu Z, Biyik E, Sadigh D (2020) Multi-agent safe planning with gaussian processes. ArXiv arxiv: 
abs/2008.04452
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

