==== Page 1 ====
1
Multi-Task Learning for Dense Prediction Tasks:
A Survey
Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, Wouter Van Gansbeke,
Marc Proesmans, Dengxin Dai and Luc Van Gool
Abstract —With the advent of deep learning, many dense prediction tasks, i.e. tasks that produce pixel-level predictions, have seen
signiﬁcant performance improvements. The typical approach is to learn these tasks in isolation, that is, a separate neural network is
trained for each individual task. Y et, recent multi-task learning (MTL) techniques have shown promising results w.r.t. performance,
computations and/or memory footprint, by jointly tackling multiple tasks through a learned shared representation. In this survey, we
provide a well-rounded view on state-of-the-art deep learning approaches for MTL in computer vision, explicitly emphasizing on dense
prediction tasks. Our contributions concern the following. First, we consider MTL from a network architecture point-of-view. We include
an extensive overview and discuss the advantages/disadvantages of recent popular MTL models. Second, we examine various
optimization methods to tackle the joint learning of multiple tasks. We summarize the qualitative elements of these works and explore
their commonalities and differences. Finally, we provide an extensive experimental evaluation across a variety of dense prediction
benchmarks to examine the pros and cons of the different methods, including both architectural and optimization based strategies.
Index Terms —Multi-Task Learning, Dense Prediction Tasks, Pixel-Level Tasks, Optimization, Convolutional Neural Networks.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
OVER the last decade, neural networks have shown
impressive results for a multitude of tasks, such as
semantic segmentation [1], instance segmentation [2] and
monocular depth estimation [3]. Traditionally, these tasks
are tackled in isolation, i.e. a separate neural network is
trained for each task. Yet, many real-world problems are
inherently multi-modal. For example, an autonomous car
should be able to segment the lane markings, detect all
instances in the scene, estimate their distance and trajectory,
etc., in order to safely navigate itself in its surroundings.
Similarly, an intelligent advertisement system should be
able to detect the presence of people in its viewpoint,
understand their gender and age group, analyze their ap-
pearance, track where they are looking at, etc., in order to
provide personalized content. At the same time, humans
are remarkably good at solving many tasks concurrently.
Biological data processing appears to follow a multi-tasking
strategy too: instead of separating tasks and tackling them
in isolation, different processes seem to share the same early
processing layers in the brain (see V1 in macaques [4]). The
aforementioned observations have motivated researchers to
develop generalized deep learning models that given an
Simon Vandenhende, Wouter Van Gansbeke and Marc
Proesmans are with the Center for Processing Speech and
Images, Department Electrical Engineering, KU Leuven. E-mail:
fsimon.vandenhende,wouter.vangansbeke,marc.proesmans g@kuleuven.be
Stamatios Georgoulis and Dengxin Dai are with the Computer
Vision Lab, Department Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich. E-mail:
fgeorgous,daidg@ee.ethz.ch
Luc Van Gool is with both the Center for Processing Speech and
Images, KU Leuven and the Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich. E-mail:
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch
Manuscript received September X, 2020input can infer all desired task outputs.
Multi-Task Learning (MTL) [30] aims to improve such
generalization by leveraging domain-speciﬁc information
contained in the training signals of related tasks. In the deep
learning era, MTL translates to designing networks capable
of learning shared representations from multi-task supervi-
sory signals. Compared to the single-task case, where each
individual task is solved separately by its own network,
such multi-task networks bring several advantages to the
table. First, due to their inherent layer sharing, the resulting
memory footprint is substantially reduced. Second, as they
explicitly avoid to repeatedly calculate the features in the
shared layers, once for every task, they show increased
inference speeds. Most importantly, they have the potential
for improved performance if the associated tasks share
complementary information, or act as a regularizer for one
another.
Scope. In this survey, we study deep learning approaches
for MTL in computer vision. We refer the interested reader
to [31] for an overview of MTL in other application domains,
such as natural language processing [32], speech recog-
nition [33], bioinformatics [34], etc. Most importantly, we
emphasize on solving multiple pixel-level ordense prediction
tasks , rather than multiple image-level classiﬁcation tasks, a
case that has been mostly under-explored in MTL. Tackling
multiple dense prediction tasks differs in several aspects
from solving multiple classiﬁcation tasks. First, as jointly
learning multiple dense prediction tasks is governed by the
use of different loss functions, unlike classiﬁcation tasks
that mostly use cross-entropy losses, additional consider-
ation is required to avoid a scenario where some tasks
overwhelm the others during training. Second, opposed
to image-level classiﬁcation tasks, dense prediction tasks
can not be directly predicted from a shared global image
representation [35], which renders the network design morearXiv:2004.13379v3  [cs.CV]  24 Jan 2021

==== Page 2 ====
2
Multi-Task Learning Methods
Deep Multi-Task
Architectures (Sec. 2)
Encoder-Focused
(Sec. 2.2)
MTL Baseline
Cross-Stitch Networks [5]
Sluice Networks [6]
NDDR-CNN [7]
MTAN [8]
Branched MTL [9], [10], [11], [12]Decoder-Focused
(Sec. 2.3)
PAD-Net [13]
PAP-Net [14]
JTRL [15]
MTI-Net [16]
PSD [17]Other
(Sec. 2.4)
ASTMT [18]Optimization Strategy
Methods (Sec. 3)
Task Balancing
(Sec. 3.1)
Fixed
Uncertainty [19]
GradNorm [20]
DWA [8]
DTP [21]
Multi-Objective Optim. [22], [23]Other
(Sec. 3.2)
Adversarial [18], [24], [25]
Modulation [26]
Heuristics [27], [28]
Gradient Sign Dropout [29]
Fig. 1: A taxonomy of deep learning approaches for jointly solving multiple dense prediction tasks.
difﬁcult. Third, pixel-level tasks in scene understanding
often have similar characteristics [14], and these similarities
can potentially be used to boost the performance under a
MTL setup. A popular example is semantic segmentation
and depth estimation [13].
Motivation. The abundant literature on MTL is rather frag-
mented. For example, we identify two main groups of works
on deep multi-task architectures in Section 2 that have been
considered largely independent from each other. Moreover,
there is limited agreement on the used evaluation metrics
and benchmarks. This paper aims to provide a more uniﬁed
view on the topic. Additionally, we provide a comprehen-
sive experimental study where different groups of works are
evaluated in an apples-to-apples comparison.
Related work. MTL has been the subject of several sur-
veys [30], [31], [36], [37]. In [30], Caruana showed that
MTL can be beneﬁcial as it allows for the acquisition of
inductive bias through the inclusion of related additional
tasks into the training pipeline. The author showcased the
use of MTL in artiﬁcial neural networks, decision trees and
k-nearest neighbors methods, but this study is placed in the
very early days of neural networks, rendering it outdated
in the deep learning era. Ruder [36] gave an overview
of recent MTL techniques (e.g. [5], [6], [9], [19]) applied
in deep neural networks. In the same vein, Zhang and
Yang [31] provided a survey that includes feature learning,
low-rank, task clustering, task relation learning, and decom-
position approaches for MTL. Yet, both works are literature
review studies without an empirical evaluation or compar-
ison of the presented techniques. Finally, Gong et al. [37]
benchmarked several optimization techniques (e.g. [8], [19])
across three MTL datasets. Still, the scope of this study is
rather limited, and explicitly focuses on the optimization
aspect. Most importantly, all prior studies provide a general
overview on MTL without giving speciﬁc attention to dense
prediction tasks that are of utmost importance in computer
vision.
Paper overview. In the following sections, we provide a
well-rounded view on state-of-the-art MTL techniques that
fall within the deﬁned scope. Section 2 considers different
deep multi-task architectures, categorizing them into two
main groups: encoder- and decoder-focused approaches.
Section 3 surveys various optimization techniques for bal-ancing the inﬂuence of the tasks when updating the net-
work’s weights. We consider the majority of task balancing,
adversarial and modulation techniques. In Section 4, we
provide an extensive experimental evaluation across differ-
ent datasets both within the scope of each group of methods
(e.g. encoder-focused approaches) as well as across groups
of methods (e.g. encoder- vs decoder-focused approaches).
Section 5 discusses the relations of MTL with other ﬁelds.
Section 6 concludes the paper.
Figure 1 shows a structured overview of the paper.
Our code is made publicly available to ease the adop-
tion of the reviewed MTL techniques: https://github.com/
SimonVandenhende/Multi-Task-Learning-PyTorch.
2 D EEPMULTI-TASKARCHITECTURES
In this section, we review deep multi-task architectures used
in computer vision. First, we give a brief historical overview
of MTL approaches, before introducing a novel taxonomy to
categorize different methods. Second, we discuss network
designs from different groups of works, and analyze their
advantages and disadvantages. An experimental compar-
ison is also provided later in Section 4. Note that, as a
detailed presentation of each architecture is beyond the
scope of this survey, in each case we refer the reader to the
corresponding paper for further details that complement the
following descriptions.
2.1 Historical Overview and Taxonomy
2.1.1 Non-Deep Learning Methods
Before the deep learning era, MTL works tried to model
the common information among tasks in the hope that
a joint task learning could result in better generalization
performance. To achieve this, they placed assumptions on
the task parameter space, such as: task parameters should
lie close to each other w.r.t. some distance metric [38], [39],
[40], [41], share a common probabilistic prior [42], [43], [44],
[45], [46], or reside in a low dimensional subspace [47],
[48], [49] or manifold [50]. These assumptions work well
when all tasks are related [38], [47], [51], [52], but can lead
to performance degradation if information sharing happens
between unrelated tasks. The latter is a known problem in

==== Page 3 ====
3
Task A Task B Task C
SharedTask
speciﬁc
(a) Hard parameter sharing
Task A Task B Task C
Cross-talk (b) Soft parameter sharing
Fig. 2: Historically multi-task learning using deep neu-
ral networks has been subdivided into soft- and hard-
parameter sharing schemes.
Task A Task B Task C
Shared Encoder
(Soft/Hard)(a) Encoder-focused model
Shared Encoder
(Soft/Hard)Task B Task C Task ATask A Task B Task C (b) Decoder-focused model
Fig. 3: In this work we discriminate between encoder-
and decoder-focused models depending on where the task
interactions take place.
MTL, referred to as negative transfer . To mitigate this prob-
lem, some of these works opted to cluster tasks into groups
based on prior beliefs about their similarity or relatedness.
2.1.2 Soft and Hard Parameter Sharing in Deep Learning
In the context of deep learning, MTL is performed by
learning shared representations from multi-task supervisory
signals. Historically, deep multi-task architectures were clas-
siﬁed into hard or soft parameter sharing techniques. In hard
parameter sharing , the parameter set is divided into shared
and task-speciﬁc parameters (see Figure 2a). MTL models
using hard parameter sharing typically consist of a shared
encoder that branches out into task-speciﬁc heads [19], [20],
[22], [53], [54]. In soft parameter sharing , each task is assigned
its own set of parameters and a feature sharing mechanism
handles the cross-task talk (see Figure 2b). We summarize
representative works for both groups of works below.
Hard Parameter Sharing. UberNet [55] was the ﬁrst hard-
parameter sharing model to jointly tackle a large number of
low-, mid-, and high-level vision tasks. The model featured
a multi-head design across different network layers and
scales. Still, the most characteristic hard parameter shar-
ing design consists of a shared encoder that branches out
into task-speciﬁc decoding heads [19], [20], [22], [53], [54].
Multilinear relationship networks [56] extended this design
by placing tensor normal priors on the parameter set of
the fully connected layers. In these works the branching
points in the network are determined ad hoc, which can
lead to suboptimal task groupings. To alleviate this issue,
several recent works [9], [10], [11], [12] proposed efﬁcient
design procedures that automatically decide where to share
or branch within the network. Similarly, stochastic ﬁlter
groups [57] re-purposed the convolution kernels in each
layer to support shared or task-speciﬁc behaviour.
Soft Parameter Sharing. Cross-stitch networks [5] intro-
duced soft-parameter sharing in deep MTL architectures.
The model uses a linear combination of the activations in
every layer of the task-speciﬁc networks as a means for soft
feature fusion. Sluice networks [6] extended this idea by
allowing to learn the selective sharing of layers, subspaces
and skip connections. NDDR-CNN [7] also incorporated
dimensionality reduction techniques into the feature fusion
layers. Differently, MTAN [8] used an attention mechanismto share a general feature pool amongst the task-speciﬁc net-
works. A concern with soft parameter sharing approaches
is scalability, as the size of the multi-task network tends to
grow linearly with the number of tasks.
2.1.3 Distilling Task Predictions in Deep Learning
All works presented in Section 2.1.2 follow a common
pattern: they directly predict all task outputs from the same
input in one processing cycle. In contrast, a few recent
works ﬁrst employed a multi-task network to make initial
task predictions, and then leveraged features from these
initial predictions to further improve each task output – in
a one-off or recursive manner. PAD-Net [13] proposed to
distill information from the initial task predictions of other
tasks, by means of spatial attention, before adding it as
a residual to the task of interest. JTRL [15] opted for se-
quentially predicting each task, with the intention to utilize
information from the past predictions of one task to reﬁne
the features of another task at each iteration. PAP-Net [14]
extended upon this idea, and used a recursive procedure
to propagate similar cross-task and task-speciﬁc patterns
found in the initial task predictions. To do so, they operated
on the afﬁnity matrices of the initial predictions, and not
on the features themselves, as was the case before [13], [15].
Zhou et al. [17] reﬁned the use of pixel afﬁnities to distill
the information by separating inter- and intra-task patterns
from each other. MTI-Net [16] adopted a multi-scale multi-
modal distillation procedure to explicitly model the unique
task interactions that happen at each individual scale.
2.1.4 A New Taxonomy of MTL Approaches
As explained in Section 2.1.2, multi-task networks have his-
torically been classiﬁed into soft or hard parameter sharing
techniques. However, several recent works took inspiration
from both groups of works to jointly solve multiple pixel-
level tasks. As a consequence, it is debatable whether the
soft vs hard parameter sharing paradigm should still be
used as the main framework for classifying MTL architec-
tures. In this survey, we propose an alternative taxonomy
that discriminates between different architectures on the
basis of where the task interactions take place, i.e. locations
in the network where information or features are exchanged
or shared between tasks. The impetus for this framework

==== Page 4 ====
4
Task A
Cross-Stitch Unit / NDDR-LayerTask B
Fig. 4: The architecture of
cross-stitch networks [5] and
NDDR-CNNs [7]. The activa-
tions from all single-task net-
works are fused across several
encoding layers. Different fea-
ture fusion mechanisms were
used in each case.
Shared Encoder
Task B
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention Module
Task A
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention ModuleFig. 5: The architecture of
MTAN [8]. Task-speciﬁc at-
tention modules select and
reﬁne features from several
layers of a shared encoder.
was given in Section 2.1.3. Based on the proposed criterion,
we distinguish between two types of models: encoder-focused
and decoder-focused architectures. The encoder-focused ar-
chitectures (see Figure 3a) only share information in the
encoder, using either hard- or soft-parameter sharing, before
decoding each task with an independent task-speciﬁc head.
Differently, the decoder-focused architectures (see Figure 3b)
also exchange information during the decoding stage. Fig-
ure 1 gives an overview of the proposed taxonomy, listing
representative works in each case.
2.2 Encoder-focused Architectures
Encoder-focused architectures (see Figure 3a) share the task
features in the encoding stage, before they process them
with a set of independent task-speciﬁc heads. A number
of works [19], [20], [22], [53], [54] followed an ad hoc
strategy by sharing an off-the-shelf backbone network in
combination with small task-speciﬁc heads (see Figure 2a).
This model relies on the encoder (i.e. backbone network)
to learn a generic representation of the scene. The features
from the encoder are then used by the task-speciﬁc heads to
get the predictions for every task. While this simple model
shares the full encoder amongst all tasks, recent works have
considered where and how the feature sharing should happen
in the encoder. We discuss such sharing strategies in the
following sections.
2.2.1 Cross-Stitch Networks
Cross-stitch networks [5] shared the activations amongst
all single-task networks in the encoder. Assume we are
given two activation maps xA;xBat a particular layer, that
belong to tasks AandBrespectively. A learnable linear
combination of these activation maps is applied, before
feeding the transformed result ~xA;~xBto the next layer in the
single-task networks. The transformation is parameterized
by learnable weights , and can be expressed as
~xA
~xB
=AAAB
BABBxA
xB
: (1)
As illustrated in Figure 4, this procedure is repeated at
multiple locations in the encoder. By learning the weights
, the network can decide the degree to which the featuresare shared between tasks. In practice, we are required to
pre-train the single-task networks, before stitching them
together, in order to maximize the performance. A disadvan-
tage of cross-stitch networks is that the size of the network
increases linearly with the number of tasks. Furthermore, it
is not clear where the cross-stitch units should be inserted
in order to maximize their effectiveness. Sluice networks [6]
extended this work by also supporting the selective sharing
of subspaces and skip connections.
2.2.2 Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction
Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction CNNs
(NDDR-CNNs) [7] used a similar architecture with cross-
stitch networks (see Figure 4). However, instead of utilizing
a linear combination to fuse the activations from all single-
task networks, a dimensionality reduction mechanism is
employed. First, features with the same spatial resolution
in the single-task networks are concatenated channel-wise.
Second, the number of channels is reduced by processing
the features with a 1 by 1 convolutional layer, before feeding
the result to the next layer. The convolutional layer allows
to fuse activations across all channels. Differently, cross-
stitch networks only allow to fuse activations from channels
that share the same index. The NDDR-CNN behaves as a
cross-stitch network when the non-diagonal elements in the
weight matrix of the convolutional layer are zero.
Due to their similarity with cross-stitch networks,
NDDR-CNNs are prone to the same problems. First, there
is a scalability concern when dealing with a large number
of tasks. Second, NDDR-CNNs involve additional design
choices, since we need to decide where to include the NDDR
layers. Finally, both cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs
only allow to use limited local information (i.e. small re-
ceptive ﬁeld) when fusing the activations from the different
single-task networks. We hypothesize that this is subopti-
mal because the use of sufﬁcient context is very important
during encoding – as already shown for the tasks of image
classiﬁcation [58] and semantic segmentation [59], [60], [61].
This is backed up by certain decoder-focused architectures
in Section 2.3 that overcome the limited receptive ﬁeld by
predicting the tasks at multiple scales and by sharing the
features repeatedly at every scale.
2.2.3 Multi-Task Attention Networks
Multi-Task Attention Networks (MTAN) [8] used a shared
backbone network in conjunction with task-speciﬁc atten-
tion modules in the encoder (see Figure 5). The shared back-
bone extracts a general pool of features. Then, each task-
speciﬁc attention module selects features from the general
pool by applying a soft attention mask. The attention mech-
anism is implemented using regular convolutional layers
and a sigmoid non-linearity. Since the attention modules
are small compared to the backbone network, the MTAN
model does not suffer as severely from the scalability issues
that are typically associated with cross-stitch networks and
NDDR-CNNs. However, similar to the fusion mechanism in
the latter works, the MTAN model can only use limited local
information to produce the attention mask.

==== Page 5 ====
5
2.2.4 Branched Multi-Task Learning Networks
The models presented in Sections 2.2.1-2.2.3 softly shared
the features amongst tasks during the encoding stage. Dif-
ferently, branched multi-task networks followed a hard-
parameter sharing scheme. Before presenting these meth-
ods, consider the following observation: deep neural net-
works tend to learn hierarchical image representations [62].
The early layers tend to focus on more general low-level
image features, such as edges, corners, etc., while the deeper
layers tend to extract high-level information that is more
task-speciﬁc. Motivated by this observation, branched MTL
networks opted to learn similar hierarchical encoding struc-
tures [9], [10], [11], [12]. These ramiﬁed networks typically
start with a number of shared layers, after which different
(groups of) tasks branch out into their own sequence of
layers. In doing so, the different branches gradually become
more task-speciﬁc as we move to the deeper layers. This
behaviour aligns well with the hierarchical representations
learned by deep neural nets. However, as the number of
possible network conﬁgurations is combinatorially large,
deciding what layers to share and where to branch out
becomes cumbersome. Several works have tried to automate
the procedure of hierarchically clustering the tasks to form
branched MTL networks given a speciﬁc computational
budget (e.g. number of parameters, FLOPS). We provide a
summary of existing works below.
Fully-Adaptive Feature Sharing (FAFS) [9] starts from
a network where tasks initially share all layers, and dynam-
ically grows the model in a greedy layer-by-layer fashion
during training. The task groupings are optimized to sep-
arate dissimilar tasks from each other, while minimizing
network complexity. The task relatedness is based on the
probability of concurrently ’simple’ or ’difﬁcult’ examples
across tasks. This strategy assumes that it is preferable
to solve two tasks in an isolated manner (i.e. different
branches) when the majority of examples are ’simple’ for
one task, but ’difﬁcult’ for the other.
Similar to FAFS, Vandenhende et al. [10] rely on pre-
computed task relatedness scores to decide the grouping of
tasks. In contrast to FAFS, they measure the task relatedness
based on feature afﬁnity scores, rather than sample difﬁ-
culty. The main assumption is that two tasks are strongly
related, if their single-task models rely on a similar set of
features. An efﬁcient method [63] is used to quantify this
property. An advantage over FAFS is that the task groupings
can be determined ofﬂine for the whole network, and not
online in a greedy layer-by-layer fashion [10]. This strategy
promotes task groupings that are optimal in a global, rather
than local, sense. Yet, a disadvantage is that the calculation
of the task afﬁnity scores requires a set of single-task net-
works to be pretrained ﬁrst.
Different from the previous works, Branched Multi-Task
Architecture Search (BMTAS) [11] and Learning To Branch
(LTB) [12] have directly optimized the network topology
without relying on pre-computed task relatedness scores.
More speciﬁcally, they rely on a tree-structured network
design space where the branching points are casted as a
Gumbel softmax operation. This strategy has the advan-
tage over [9], [10] that the task groupings can be directly
optimized end-to-end for the tasks under consideration.
Backbone
Multi-Modal
Distillation
Initial T ask
PredictionsFig. 6: The architecture in PAD-Net [13]. Features extracted
by a backbone network are passed to task-speciﬁc heads
to make initial task predictions. The task features from the
different heads are then combined through a distillation unit
to make the ﬁnal predictions. Note that, auxiliary tasks can
be used in this framework, i.e. tasks for which only the
initial predictions are generated, but not the ﬁnal ones.
Moreover, both methods can easily be applied to any set
of tasks, including both image classiﬁcation and per-pixel
prediction tasks. Similar to [9], [10], a compact network
topology can be obtained by including a resource-aware
loss term. In this case, the computational budget is jointly
optimized with the multi-task learning objective in an end-
to-end fashion.
2.3 Decoder-Focused Architectures
The encoder-focused architectures in Section 2.2 follow a
common pattern: they directly predict all task outputs from
the same input in one processing cycle (i.e. all predictions
are generated once, in parallel or sequentially, and are not
reﬁned afterwards). By doing so, they fail to capture com-
monalities and differences among tasks, that are likely fruit-
ful for one another (e.g. depth discontinuities are usually
aligned with semantic edges). Arguably, this might be the
reason for the moderate only performance improvements
achieved by the encoder-focused approaches to MTL (see
Section 4.3.1). To alleviate this issue, a few recent works
ﬁrst employed a multi-task network to make initial task
predictions, and then leveraged features from these initial
predictions in order to further improve each task output –
in an one-off or recursive manner. As these MTL approaches
also share or exchange information during the decoding
stage, we refer to them as decoder-focused architectures (see
Figure 3b).
2.3.1 PAD-Net
PAD-Net [13] was one of the ﬁrst decoder-focused architec-
tures. The model itself is visualized in Figure 6. As can be
seen, the input image is ﬁrst processed by an off-the-shelf
backbone network. The backbone features are further pro-
cessed by a set of task-speciﬁc heads that produce an initial
prediction for every task. These initial task predictions add
deep supervision to the network, but they can also be used

==== Page 6 ====
6
to exchange information between tasks, as will be explained
next. The task features in the last layer of the task-speciﬁc
heads contain a per-task feature representation of the scene.
PAD-Net proposed to re-combine them via a multi-modal
distillation unit, whose role is to extract cross-task informa-
tion, before producing the ﬁnal task predictions.
PAD-Net performs the multi-modal distillation by
means of a spatial attention mechanism. Particularly, the
output features Fo
kfor taskkare calculated as
Fo
k=Fi
k+X
l6=k Wk;lFi
lFi
l; (2)
where Wk;lFi
l
returns a spatial attention mask that is ap-
plied to the initial task features Fi
lfrom taskl. The attention
mask itself is found by applying a convolutional layer Wk;l
to extract local information from the initial task features.
Equation 2 assumes that the task interactions are location
dependent, i.e. tasks are not in a constant relationship across
the entire image. This can be understood from a simple ex-
ample. Consider two dense prediction tasks, e.g. monocular
depth prediction and semantic segmentation. Depth discon-
tinuities and semantic boundaries often coincide. However,
when we segment a ﬂat object, e.g. a magazine, from a ﬂat
surface, e.g. a table, we will still ﬁnd a semantic boundary
where the depth map is rather continuous. In this particular
case, the depth features provide no additional information
for the localization of the semantic boundaries. The use
of spatial attention explicitly allows the network to select
information from other tasks at locations where its useful.
The encoder-focused approaches in Section 2.2 shared
features amongst tasks using the intermediate representa-
tions in the encoder. Differently, PAD-Net models the task
interactions by applying a spatial attention layer to the
features in the task-speciﬁc heads. In contrast to the interme-
diate feature representations in the encoder, the task features
used by PAD-Net are already disentangled according to the
output task. We hypothesize that this makes it easier for
other tasks to distill the relevant information. This multi-
step decoding strategy from PAD-Net is applied and reﬁned
in other decoder-focused approaches.
2.3.2 Pattern-Afﬁnitive Propagation Networks
Pattern-Afﬁnitive Propagation Networks (PAP-Net) [14]
used an architecture similar to PAD-Net (see Figure 7), but
the multi-modal distillation in this work is performed in
a different manner. The authors argue that directly work-
ing on the task features space via the spatial attention
mechanism, as done in PAD-Net, might be a suboptimal
choice. As the optimization still happens at a different
space, i.e. the task label space, there is no guarantee that
the model will learn the desired task relationships. Instead,
they statistically observed that pixel afﬁnities tend to align
well with common local structures on the task label space.
Motivated by this observation, they proposed to leverage
pixel afﬁnities in order to perform multi-modal distillation.
To achieve this, the backbone features are ﬁrst processed
by a set of task-speciﬁc heads to get an initial prediction
for every task. Second, a per-task pixel afﬁnity matrix MTj
is calculated by estimating pixel-wise correlations upon the
task features coming from each head. Third, a cross-task
p BackboneC x H x WPer-T ask Pixel
Afﬁnity
Initial T ask
PredictionsAdaptive Combination
Diffusion
Multi-Modal DistillationDiffusion
Per-T ask Pixel
Afﬁnty
HW x HWFig. 7: The architecture in PAP-Net [14]. Features extracted
by a backbone network are passed to task-speciﬁc heads
to make initial task predictions. The task features from the
different heads are used to calculate a per-task pixel afﬁnity
matrix. The afﬁnity matrices are adaptively combined and
diffused back into the task features space to spread the cross-
task correlation information across the image. The reﬁned
features are used to make the ﬁnal task predictions.
information matrix ^MTjfor every task Tjis learned by
adaptively combining the afﬁnity matrices MTifor tasksTi
with learnable weights Tj
i
^MTj=X
TiTj
iMTi: (3)
Finally, the task features coming from each head jare
reﬁned using the cross-task information matrix ^MTj. In
particular, the cross-task information matrix is diffused into
the task features space to spread the correlation information
across the image. This effectively weakens or strengthens
the pixel correlations for task Tj, based on the pixel afﬁnities
from other tasks Ti. The reﬁned features are used to make
the ﬁnal predictions for every task.
All previously discussed methods only use limited local
information when fusing features from different tasks. For
example, cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs combine
the features in a channel-wise fashion, while PAD-Net only
uses the information from within a 3 by 3 pixels window
to construct the spatial attention mask. Differently, PAP-
Net also models the non-local relationships through pixel
afﬁnities measured across the entire image. Zhou et al. [17]
extended this idea to speciﬁcally mine and propagate both
inter- and intra- task patterns.
2.3.3 Joint Task-Recursive Learning
Joint Task-Recursive Learning (JTRL) [15] recursively pre-
dicts two tasks at increasingly higher scales in order to grad-
ually reﬁne the results based on past states. The architecture
is illustrated in Figure 8. Similarly to PAD-Net and PAP-Net,
a multi-modal distillation mechanism is used to combine
information from earlier task predictions, through which
later predictions are reﬁned. Differently, the JTRL model
predicts two tasks sequentially, rather than in parallel, and
in an intertwined manner. The main disadvantage of this
approach is that it is not straightforward, or even possible,
to extent this model to more than two tasks given the
intertwined manner at which task predictions are reﬁned.

==== Page 7 ====
7
Backbone
Step t - 1 Step t Step t + 1
Fig. 8: The architecture in Joint Task-Recursive Learn-
ing [15]. The features of two tasks are progressively reﬁned
in an intertwined manner based on past states.
2.3.4 Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks
In the decoder-focused architectures presented so far, the
multi-modal distillation was performed at a ﬁxed scale, i.e.
the features of the backbone’s last layer. This rests on the
assumption that all relevant task interactions can solely be
modeled through a single ﬁlter operation with a speciﬁc
receptive ﬁeld. However, Multi-Scale Task Interaction Net-
works (MTI-Net) [16] showed that this is a rather strict as-
sumption. In fact, tasks can inﬂuence each other differently
at different receptive ﬁelds.
To account for this restriction, MTI-Net explicitly took
into account task interactions at multiple scales. Its architec-
ture is illustrated in Figure 9. First, an off-the-shelf backbone
network extracts a multi-scale feature representation from
the input image. From the multi-scale feature representation
an initial prediction for every task is made at each scale. The
task predictions at a particular scale are found by applying
a task-speciﬁc head to the backbone features extracted at
that scale. Similarly to PAD-Net, the features in the last
layer of the task-speciﬁc heads are combined and reﬁned to
make the ﬁnal predictions. Differently, in MTI-Net the per-
task feature representations can be distilled at each scale
separately. This allows to have multiple task interactions,
each modeled within a speciﬁc receptive ﬁeld. The distilled
multi-scale features are upsampled to the highest scale and
concatenated, resulting in a ﬁnal feature representation for
every task. The ﬁnal task predictions are found by decoding
these ﬁnal feature representations in a task-speciﬁc manner
again. The performance was further improved by also prop-
agating information from the lower-resolution task features
to the higher-resolution ones using a Feature Propagation
Module.
The experimental evaluation in [16] shows that distilling
task information at multiple scales increases the multi-
tasking performance compared to PAD-Net where such
information is only distilled at a single scale. Furthermore,
since MTI-Net distills the features at multiple scales, i.e.
using different pixel dilations, it overcomes the issue of
using only limited local information to fuse the features,
which was already shown to be beneﬁcial in PAP-Net.
2.4 Other Approaches
A number of approaches that fall outside the aforemen-
tioned categories have been proposed in the literature. For
example, multilinear relationship networks [56] used tensor
normal priors to the parameter set of the task-speciﬁc heads
Backbone
Scale
1/32Distillation
Scale 1/32Scale
1/16Distillation
Scale 1/16Scale
1/8Distillation
Scale 1/8Scale
1/4 Initial T ask Predictions Distillation
Scale 1/4
Feature
Propagation Module
Feature
Propagation ModuleInitial T ask Predictions
Feature
Propagation ModuleInitial T ask PredictionsFeature
Aggregation
Feature
Aggregation 
Multi-Scale
Multi-Modal
DistillationFig. 9: The architecture in Multi-Scale Task Interaction Net-
works [16]. Starting from a backbone that extracts multi-
scale features, initial task predictions are made at each scale.
These task features are then distilled separately at every
scale, allowing the model to capture unique task interactions
at multiple scales, i.e. receptive ﬁelds. After distillation, the
distilled task features from all scales are aggregated to make
the ﬁnal task predictions. To boost performance, a feature
propagation module is included to pass information from
lower resolution task features to higher ones.
to allow interactions in the decoding stage. Different from
the standard parallel ordering scheme, where layers are
aligned and shared (e.g. [5], [7]), soft layer ordering [64]
proposed a ﬂexible sharing scheme across tasks and net-
work depths. Yang et al. [65] generalized matrix factorisa-
tion approaches to MTL in order to learn cross-task shar-
ing structures in every layer of the network. Routing net-
works [66] proposed a principled approach to determine the
connectivity of a network’s function blocks through routing.
Piggyback [67] showed how to adapt a single, ﬁxed neural
network to a multi-task network by learning binary masks.
Huang et al. [68] introduced a method rooted in Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) for the automated construction
of a tree-based multi-attribute learning network. Stochas-
tic ﬁlter groups [57] re-purposed the convolution kernels
in each layer of the network to support shared or task-
speciﬁc behaviour. In a similar vein, feature partitioning [69]
presented partitioning strategies to assign the convolution
kernels in each layer of the network into different tasks. In
general, these works have a different scope within MTL,
e.g. automate the network architecture design. Moreover,
they mostly focus on solving multiple (binary) classiﬁcation
tasks, rather than multiple dense predictions tasks. As a
result, they fall outside the scope of this survey, with one
notable exception that is discussed next.
Attentive Single-Tasking of Multiple Tasks (ASTMT) [18]
proposed to take a ’single-tasking’ route for the MTL prob-
lem. That is, within a multi-tasking framework they per-
formed separate forward passes, one for each task, that ac-
tivate shared responses among all tasks, plus some residual
responses that are task-speciﬁc. Furthermore, to suppress
the negative transfer issue they applied adversarial training
on the gradients level that enforces them to be statistically
indistinguishable across tasks. An advantage of this ap-

==== Page 8 ====
8
proach is that shared and task-speciﬁc information within
the network can be naturally disentangled. On the negative
side, however, the tasks can not be predicted altogether, but
only one after the other, which signiﬁcantly increases the
inference speed and somehow deﬁes the purpose of MTL.
3 O PTIMIZATION IN MTL
In the previous section, we discussed about the construction
of network architectures that are able to learn multiple tasks
concurrently. Still, a signiﬁcant challenge in MTL stems from
the optimization procedure itself. In particular, we need to
carefully balance the joint learning of all tasks to avoid a
scenario where one or more tasks have a dominant inﬂuence
in the network weights. In this section, we discuss several
methods that have considered this task balancing problem.
3.1 Task Balancing Approaches
Without loss of generality, the optimization objective in a
MTL problem, assuming task-speciﬁc weights wiand task-
speciﬁc loss functions Li, can be formulated as
LMTL =X
iwiLi: (4)
When using stochastic gradient descent to minimize the
objective from Equation 4, which is the standard approach
in the deep learning era, the network weights in the shared
layersWshare updated by the following rule
Wsh=Wsh X
iwi@Li
@Wsh: (5)
From Equation 5 we can draw the following conclusions.
First, the network weight update can be suboptimal when
the task gradients conﬂict, or dominated by one task when
its gradient magnitude is much higher w.r.t. the other tasks.
This motivated researchers [8], [19], [20], [21] to balance the
gradient magnitudes by setting the task-speciﬁc weights wi
in the loss. To this end, other works [22], [26], [70] have also
considered the inﬂuence of the direction of the task gradi-
ents. Second, each task’s inﬂuence on the network weight
update can be controlled, either indirectly by adapting the
task-speciﬁc weights wiin the loss, or directly by operating
on the task-speciﬁc gradients@Li
@Wsh. A number of methods
that tried to address these problems are discussed next.
3.1.1 Uncertainty Weighting
Kendall et al. [19] used the homoscedastic uncertainty to
balance the single-task losses. The homoscedastic uncer-
tainty or task-dependent uncertainty is not an output of the
model, but a quantity that remains constant for different
input examples of the same task. The optimization pro-
cedure is carried out to maximise a Gaussian likelihood
objective that accounts for the homoscedastic uncertainty.
In particular, they optimize the model weights Wand the
noise parameters 1,2to minimize the following objective
L(W; 1;2) =1
22
1L1(W) +1
22
2L2(W) + log12:(6)
The loss functions L1,L2belong to the ﬁrst and second
task respectively. By minimizing the loss Lw.r.t. the noiseparameters 1,2, one can essentially balance the task-
speciﬁc losses during training. The optimization objective in
Equation 6 can easily be extended to account for more than
two tasks too. The noise parameters are updated through
standard backpropagation during training.
Note that, increasing the noise parameter ireduces
the weight for task i. Consequently, the effect of task i
on the network weight update is smaller when the task’s
homoscedastic uncertainty is high. This is advantageous
when dealing with noisy annotations since the task-speciﬁc
weights will be lowered automatically for such tasks.
3.1.2 Gradient Normalization
Gradient normalization (GradNorm) [20] proposed to con-
trol the training of multi-task networks by stimulating the
task-speciﬁc gradients to be of similar magnitude. By doing
so, the network is encouraged to learn all tasks at an equal
pace. Before presenting this approach, we introduce the
necessary notations in the following paragraph.
We deﬁne the L2 norm of the gradient for the weighted
single-task loss wi(t)Li(t)at steptw.r.t. the weights W,
asGW
i(t). We additionally deﬁne the following quantities,
the mean task gradient GWaveraged across all task
gradientsGW
iw.r.t the weights Wat stept:GW(t) =
EtaskGW
i(t)
;
the inverse training rate ~Liof taskiat stept:~Li(t) =
Li(t)=Li(0);
the relative inverse training rate of task iat stept:
ri(t) =~Li(t)=Etaskh
~Li(t)i
.
GradNorm aims to balance two properties during the
training of a multi-task network. First, balancing the gra-
dient magnitudes GW
i. To achieve this, the mean gradient
GWis considered as a common basis from which the rel-
ative gradient sizes across tasks can be measured. Second,
balancing the pace at which different tasks are learned. The
relative inverse training rate ri(t)is used to this end. When
the relative inverse training rate ri(t)increases, the gradient
magnitude GW
i(t)for taskishould increase as well to
stimulate the task to train more quickly. GradNorm tackles
both objectives by minimizing the following loss
GW
i(t) GW(t)ri(t): (7)
Remember that, the gradient magnitude GW
i(t)for taski
depends on the weighted single-task loss wi(t)Li(t). As
a result, the objective in Equation 7 can be minimized by
adjusting the task-speciﬁc weights wi. In practice, during
training these task-speciﬁc weights are updated in every
iteration using backpropagation. After every update, the
task-speciﬁc weights wi(t)are re-normalized in order to
decouple the learning rate from the task-speciﬁc weights.
Note that, calculating the gradient magnitude GW
i(t)
requires a backward pass through the task-speciﬁc layers
of every task i. However, savings on computation time can
be achieved by considering the task gradient magnitudes
only w.r.t. the weights in the last shared layer.
Different from uncertainty weighting, GradNorm does
not take into account the task-dependent uncertainty to re-
weight the task-speciﬁc losses. Rather, GradNorm tries to
balance the pace at which tasks are learned, while avoiding
gradients of different magnitude.

==== Page 9 ====
9
3.1.3 Dynamic Weight Averaging
Similarly to GradNorm, Liu et al. [8] proposed a technique,
termed Dynamic Weight Averaging (DWA), to balance the
pace at which tasks are learned. Differently, DWA only
requires access to the task-speciﬁc loss values. This avoids
having to perform separate backward passes during train-
ing in order to obtain the task-speciﬁc gradients. In DWA,
the task-speciﬁc weight wifor taskiat steptis set as
wi(t) =Nexp (ri(t 1)=T)P
nexp (rn(t 1)=T);rn(t 1) =Ln(t 1)
Ln(t 2);
(8)
withNbeing the number of tasks. The scalars rn()estimate
the relative descending rate of the task-speciﬁc loss values
Ln. The temperature Tcontrols the softness of the task
weighting in the softmax operator. When the loss of a task
decreases at a slower rate compared to other tasks, the task-
speciﬁc weight in the loss is increased.
Note that, the task-speciﬁc weights wiare solely based
on the rate at which the task-speciﬁc losses change. Such
a strategy requires to balance the overall loss magnitudes
beforehand, else some tasks could still overwhelm the others
during training. GradNorm avoids this problem by balanc-
ing both the training rates and the gradient magnitudes
through a single objective (see Equation 7).
3.1.4 Dynamic Task Prioritization
The task balancing techniques in Sections 3.1.1-3.1.3 opted to
optimize the task-speciﬁc weights wias part of a Gaussian
likelihood objective [19], or in order to balance the pace at
which the different tasks are learned [8], [20]. In contrast,
Dynamic Task Prioritization (DTP) [21] opted to prioritize
the learning of ’difﬁcult’ tasks by assigning them a higher
task-speciﬁc weight. The motivation is that the network
should spend more effort to learn the ’difﬁcult’ tasks. Note
that, this is opposed to uncertainty weighting, where a
higher weight is assigned to the ’easy’ tasks. We hypothesize
that the two techniques do not necessarily conﬂict, but
uncertainty weighting seems better suited when tasks have
noisy labeled data, while DTP makes more sense when we
have access to clean ground-truth annotations.
To measure the task difﬁculty, one could consider the
progress on every task using the loss ratio ~Li(t)deﬁned
by GradNorm. However, since the loss ratio depends on
the initial loss Li(0), its value can be rather noisy and
initialization dependent. Furthermore, measuring the task
progress using the loss ratio might not accurately reﬂect the
progress on a task in terms of qualitative results. Therefore,
DTP proposes the use of key performance indicators (KPIs)
to quantify the difﬁculty of every task. In particular, a KPI
iis selected for every task i, with 0< i<1. The KPIs
are picked to have an intuitive meaning, e.g. accuracy for
classiﬁcation tasks. For regression tasks, the prediction error
can be thresholded to obtain a KPI that lies between 0 and
1. Further, we deﬁne a task-level focusing parameter i0
that allows to adjust the weight at which easy or hard tasks
are down-weighted. DTP sets the task-speciﬁc weight wifor
taskiat steptas
wi(t) = (1 i(t))ilogi(t): (9)Note that, Equation 9 employs a focal loss expression [71] to
down-weight the task-speciﬁc weights for the ’easy’ tasks.
In particular, as the value for the KPI iincreases, the weight
wifor taskiis being reduced.
DTP requires to carefully select the KPIs. For example,
consider choosing a threshold to measure the performance
on a regression task. Depending on the threshold’s value,
the task-speciﬁc weight will be higher or lower during
training. We conclude that the choice of the KPIs in DTP is
not determined in a straightforward manner. Furthermore,
similar to DWA, DTP requires to balance the overall magni-
tude of the loss values beforehand. After all, Equation 9 does
not take into account the loss magnitudes to calculate the
task-speciﬁc weights. As a result, DTP still involves manual
tuning to set the task-speciﬁc weights.
3.1.5 MTL as Multi-Objective Optimization
A global optimum for the multi-task optimization objective
in Equation 4 is hard to ﬁnd. Due to the complex nature
of this problem, a certain choice that improves the perfor-
mance for one task could lead to performance degradation
for another task. The task balancing methods discussed
beforehand try to tackle this problem by setting the task-
speciﬁc weights in the loss according to some heuristic.
Differently, Sener and Koltun [22] view MTL as a multi-
objective optimization problem, with the overall goal of
ﬁnding a Pareto optimal solution among all tasks.
In MTL, a Pareto optimal solution is found when the
following condition is satisﬁed: the loss for any task can be
decreased without increasing the loss on any of the other
tasks. A multiple gradient descent algorithm (MGDA) [72]
was proposed in [22] to ﬁnd a Pareto stationary point. In
particular, the shared network weights are updated by ﬁnd-
ing a common direction among the task-speciﬁc gradients.
As long as there is a common direction along which the
task-speciﬁc losses can be decreased, we have not reached
a Pareto optimal point yet. An advantage of this approach
is that since the shared network weights are only updated
along common directions of the task-speciﬁc gradients, con-
ﬂicting gradients are avoided in the weight update step.
Lin et al. [23] observed that MGDA only ﬁnds one
out of many Pareto optimal solutions. Moreover, it is not
guaranteed that the obtained solution will satisfy the users’
needs. To address this problem, they generalized MGDA to
generate a set of well-representative Pareto solutions from
which a preferred solution can be selected. So far, however,
the method was only applied to small-scale datasets (e.g.
Multi-MNIST).
3.1.6 Discussion
In Section 3.1, we described several methods for balanc-
ing the inﬂuence of each task when training a multi-task
network. Table 1 provides a qualitative comparison of the
described methods. We summarize some conclusions below.
(1) We ﬁnd discrepancies between these methods, e.g. un-
certainty weighting assigns a higher weight to the ’easy’
tasks, while DTP advocates the opposite. The latter can
be attributed to the experimental evaluation of the differ-
ent task balancing strategies that was often done in the
literature using different datasets or task dictionaries. We
suspect that an appropriate task balancing strategy should

==== Page 10 ====
10
TABLE 1: A qualitative comparison between task balancing techniques. First, we consider whether a method balances the
loss magnitudes ( Balance Magnitudes ) and/or the pace at which tasks are learned ( Balance Learning ). Second, we show
what tasks are prioritized during the training stage ( Prioritize ). Third, we show whether the method requires access to
the task-speciﬁc gradients ( Grads Required ). Fourth, we consider whether the tasks gradients are enforced to be non-
conﬂicting ( Non-Competing Grads ). Finally, we consider whether the proposed method requires additional tuning, e.g.
manually choosing the weights, KPIs, etc. ( No Extra T uning ). For a detailed description of each technique see Section 3.
Method Balance
MagnitudesBalance
LearningPrioritize Grads
RequiredNon-Competing
GradsNo Extra
T uningMotivation
Uncertainty [19] X Low Noise X Homoscedastic uncertainty
GradNorm [20] X X X X Balance learning and magnitudes
DWA [8] X Balance learning
DTP [21] Difﬁcult Prioritize difﬁcult tasks
MGDA [22] X X X X X Pareto Optimum
be decided for each case individually. (2) We also ﬁnd
commonalities between the described methods, e.g. uncer-
tainty weighting, GradNorm and MGDA opted to balance
the loss magnitudes as part of their learning strategy. In
Section 4.4, we provide extensive ablation studies under
more common datasets or task dictionaries to verify what
task balancing strategies are most useful to improve the
multi-tasking performance, and under which circumstances.
(3) A number of works (e.g. DWA, DTP) still require careful
manual tuning of the initial hyperparameters, which can
limit their applicability when dealing with a larger number
of tasks.
3.2 Other Approaches
The task balancing works in Section 3.1 can be plugged
into most existing multi-task architectures to regulate the
task learning. Another group of works also tried to regulate
the training of multi-task networks, albeit for more speciﬁc
setups. We touch upon several of these approaches here.
Note that, some of these concepts can be combined with
task balancing strategies too.
Zhao et al. [26] empirically found that tasks with gra-
dients pointing in the opposite direction can cause the
destructive interference of the gradient. This observation is
related to the update rule in Equation 5. They proposed to
add a modulation unit to the network in order to alleviate
the competing gradients issue during training.
Liu et al. [24] considered a speciﬁc multi-task architec-
ture where the feature space is split into a shared and a task-
speciﬁc part. They argue that the shared features should
contain more common information, and no information that
is speciﬁc to a particular task only. The network weights
are regularized by enforcing this prior. More speciﬁcally, an
adversarial approach is used to avoid task-speciﬁc features
from creeping into the shared representation. Similarly, [18],
[25] added an adversarial loss to the single-task gradients in
order to make them statistically indistinguishable from each
other in the shared parts of the network.
Chen et al. [29] proposed gradient sign dropout, a modu-
lar layer that can be plugged into any network with multiple
gradient signals. Following MGDA, the authors argue that
conﬂicts in the weight update arise when the gradient
values of the different learning signals have opposite signs.
Gradient sign dropout operates by choosing the sign of the
gradient based on the distribution of the gradient values,and masking out the gradient values with opposite sign. It
is shown that the method has several desirable properties,
and increases performance and robustness compared to
competing works.
Finally, some works relied on heuristics to balance the
tasks. Sanh et al. [27] trained the network by randomly
sampling a single task for the weight update during every
iteration. The sampling probabilities were set proportionally
to the available amount of training data for every task. Raffel
et al. [28] used temperature scaling to balance the tasks. So
far, however, both procedures were used in the context of
natural language processing.
4 E XPERIMENTS
This section provides an extensive comparison of the previ-
ously discussed methods. First, we describe the experimen-
tal setup in Section 4.1. We cover the used datasets, methods,
evaluation criteria and training setup, so the reader can
easily give interpretation to the obtained results. Section 4.2
presents a general overview of the results, allowing us to
identify several overall trends. Section 4.3 compares the
MTL architectures in more detail, while the task balancing
strategies are considered in Section 4.4. We refer the reader
to the supplementary materials for qualitative results.
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.1.1 Datasets
Our experiments were conducted on two popular dense-
labeling benchmarks, i.e. NYUD-v2 [73] and PASCAL [74].
We selected the datasets to provide us with a diverse pair
of settings, allowing us to scrutinize the advantages and
disadvantages of the methods under consideration. We ad-
ditionally took into account what datasets were used in the
original works. Both datasets are described in more detail
below.
The PASCAL dataset [74] is a popular benchmark for
dense prediction tasks. We use the split from PASCAL-
Context [75] which has annotations for semantic segmen-
tation, human part segmentation and semantic edge detec-
tion. Additionally, we consider the tasks of surface normals
prediction and saliency detection. The annotations were dis-
tilled by [18] using pre-trained state-of-the-art models [76],
[77]. The optimal dataset F-measure ( odsF ) [78] is used to

==== Page 11 ====
11
evaluate the edge detection task. The semantic segmen-
tation, saliency estimation and human part segmentation
tasks are evaluated using mean intersection over union
(mIoU ). We use the mean error ( mErr ) in the predicted angles
to evaluate the surface normals.
The NYUD-v2 dataset [73] considers indoor scene un-
derstanding. The dataset contains 795 train and 654 test
images annotated for semantic segmentation and monocular
depth estimation. Other works have also considered surface
normal prediction [13], [14], [18] and semantic edge detec-
tion [13], [18] on the NYUD-v2 dataset. The annotations for
these tasks can be directly derived from the semantic and
depth ground truth. In this work we focus on the semantic
segmentation and depth estimation tasks. We use the mean
intersection over union ( mIoU ) and root mean square error
(rmse ) to evaluate the semantic segmentation and depth
estimation task respectively.
Table 2 gives an overview of the used datasets. We
marked tasks for which the annotations were obtained
through distillation with an asterik.
4.1.2 Evaluation Criterion
In addition to reporting the performance on every individ-
ual task, we include a single-number performance metric
for the multi-task models. Following prior work [10], [11],
[16], [18], we deﬁne the multi-task performance MTL of a
multi-task learning model mas the average per-task drop in
performance w.r.t. the single-task baseline b:
MTL =1
TTX
i=1( 1)li(Mm;i Mb;i)=Mb;i; (10)
whereli= 1 if a lower value means better performance
for metricMiof taski, and 0 otherwise. The single-task
performance is measured for a fully-converged model that
uses the same backbone network only to perform that task.
To achieve a fair comparison, all results were obtained after
performing a grid search on the hyperparameters. This en-
sures that every model is trained with comparable amounts
of ﬁnetuning. We refer to Section 4.1.4 for more details on
our training setup.
The MTL performance metric does not account for the
variance when different hyperparameters are used. To ad-
dress this, we analyze the inﬂuence of the used hyperpa-
rameters on NYUD-v2 with performance proﬁles. Finally,
in addition to a performance evaluation, we also include
the model resources, i.e. number of parameters and FLOPS,
when comparing the multi-task architectures.
4.1.3 Compared Methods
Table 3 summarizes the models and task balancing strate-
gies used in our experiments. We consider the following
encoder-focused architectures from Section 2.2 on NYUD-
v2 and PASCAL: MTL baseline with shared encoder and
task-speciﬁc decoders, cross-stitch networks [5], NDDR-
CNN [7] and MTAN [8]. We do not include branched MTL
networks, since this collection of works is mainly situated
in the domain of Neural Architecture Search, and focuses
on ﬁnding a MTL solution that ﬁts a speciﬁc computational
budget constraint. We refer to the corresponding papers [9],
[10], [11], [12] for a concrete experimental analysis on thissubject. All compared models use a ResNet [79] encoder
with dilated convolutions [77]. We use the ResNet-50 vari-
ant for our experiments on NYUD-v2. On PASCAL, we
use the shallower ResNet-18 model due to GPU memory
constraints. The task-speciﬁc heads use an Atrous Spatial
Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) [77] module.
Furthermore, we cover the following decoder-focused
approaches from Section 2.3: JTRL [15], PAP-Net [14], PAD-
Net [13] and MTI-Net [16]. Note that a direct comparison
between all models is not straightforward. There are sev-
eral reasons behind this. First, MTI-Net operates on top
of a multi-scale feature representation of the input image,
which assumes a multi-scale backbone, unlike the other
approaches that were originally designed with a single-
scale backbone network in mind. Second, JTRL was strictly
designed for a pair of tasks, without any obvious extension
to the MTL setting. Finally, PAP-Net behaves similarly to
PAD-Net, but operates on the pixel afﬁnities to perform
the multi-modal distillation through a recursive diffusion
process.
Based on these observations, we organize the experi-
ments as follows. On NYUD-v2, we consider PAD-Net, PAP-
Net and JTRL in combination with a ResNet-50 backbone.
This facilitates an apples-to-apples comparison between the
encoder- and decoder-focused approaches that operate on
top of a single-scale feature extractor. We draw a separate
comparison between MTI-Net and PAD-Net on NYUD-v2
using a multi-scale HRNet-18 backbone [80]. Finally, we
repeat the comparison between PAD-Net and MTI-Net on
PASCAL using the multi-scale HRNet-18 backbone to verify
how well the decoder-focused approaches handle the larger
and more diverse task dictionary. In addition to the MTL ar-
chitectures, we also compare the task balancing techniques
from Section 3.1. We analyze the use of ﬁxed weights,
uncertainty weighting [19], GradNorm [20], DWA [8] and
MGDA [22]. We did not include DTP [21], as this technique
requires to deﬁne additional key performance indicators
(see Section 3.1.4). The task balancing methods are evaluated
in combination with the MTL baseline models that use a
single-scale ResNet backbone. We do not consider how the
task balancing techniques interact with other MTL architec-
tures. This choice stems from the following observations.
First, GradNorm and MGDA were speciﬁcally designed
with the vanilla hard parameter sharing model in mind (i.e.
MTL baseline). Second, uncertainty weighting and DWA re-
weigh the tasks based on the task-speciﬁc losses. Since the
loss values depend more on the used loss functions, and less
on the used architectures, we expect these methods to result
in similar task weights when plugging in a different model.
4.1.4 Training Setup
We reuse the loss functions and augmentation strategy
from [16]. The MTL models are trained with ﬁxed loss
weights obtained from [18], that optimized them through
a grid search. All experiments are performed using pre-
trained ImageNet weights. The optimizer, learning rate and
batch size are optimized with a grid search procedure to
ensure a fair comparison across all compared approaches.
More speciﬁcally, we test batches of size 6 and 12, and
Adam (LR=f1e-4, 5e-4g) vs stochastic gradient descent with
momentum 0.9 (LR= f1e-3,5e-3,1e-2,5e-2 g). This accounts for

==== Page 12 ====
12
TABLE 2: MTL benchmarks used in the experiments section. Distilled task labels are marked with *.
Dataset # Train # Test Segmentation Depth Human Parts Normals Saliency Edges
PASCAL [74] 10,581 1,449 X X X * X* X
NYUD-v2 [73] 795 654 X X
TABLE 3: Overview of our experiments on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL. We indicate the used backbones and optimization
strategies for every model.
Model Datasets Backbone Optimization
NYUD-v2 PASCAL NYUD-v2 PASCAL
MTL Baseline X X ResNet-50/HRNet-18 ResNet-18/HRNet-18 Uniform, Fixed (Grid Search), Uncertainty,
GradNorm, DWA, MGDA
Cross-Stitch X X ResNet-50 ResNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
NDDR-CNN X X ResNet-50 ResNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
MTAN X X ResNet-50 ResNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
JTRL X ResNet-50 - Fixed (Grid Search)
PAP-Net X ResNet-50 - Fixed (Grid Search)
PAD-Net X X ResNet-50/HRNet-18 HRNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
MTI-Net X X HRNet-18 HRNet-18 Fixed (Grid Search)
TABLE 4: Overview of the used hyperparameter settings in
our grid search procedure.
Optimizer Batch size Learning rate
SGD ( momentum = 0:9)f6, 12g f 1e-3, 5e-3, 1e-2, 5e-2 g
Adam f6, 12g f 1e-4, 5e-4g
12 hyperparameter settings in total (see overview in Table 4).
A poly learning rate scheduler is used. The number of total
epochs is set to 60 for PASCAL and 100 for NYUD-v2. We
include weight decay regularization of 1e-4. Any remaining
hyperparameters are set in accordance with the original
works.
4.2 Overview
Table 5 provides an overview of the results on NYUD-v2
and PASCAL. The MTL architectures are shown in Tables 5a
and 5b. A direct comparison can be made between architec-
tures that rely on the same backbone. The task balancing
strategies are analyzed in Tables 5c and 5d. We identify
several trends from the results.
Single-Task vs Multi-Task. We compare the encoder- and
decoder-focused MTL models against their single-task coun-
terparts on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL in Tables 5a- 5b. MTL
can offer several advantages relative to single-task learning,
that is, smaller memory footprint, reduced number of calcu-
lations, and improved performance. However, few models
are able to deliver on this potential to its full extent. For
example, JTRL improves the performance on the segmenta-
tion and depth estimation tasks on NYUD-v2, but requires
more resources. Differently, the processing happens more
efﬁciently when using the MTL baseline on PASCAL, but the
performance declines too. MTI-Net constitutes an exemp-
tion from this rule. In particular, the performance increases
on all tasks, except for normals, while the computational
overhead is limited. Note, in this speciﬁc case, the relative
increase in parameters and FLOPS can be attributed to the
use of a shallow backbone network.Inﬂuence of Task Dictionary. We study the inﬂuence of
the task dictionary (i.e. size and diversity) by comparing
the results on NYUD-v2 against PASCAL (see Table 5a vs
Table 5b). On NYUD-v2, we consider the tasks of semantic
segmentation and depth estimation. This pair of tasks is
strongly related [13], [14], [17], since both semantic segmen-
tation and depth estimation reveal similar characteristics
about a scene, such as the layout and object shapes or
boundaries. Differently, PASCAL includes a larger and more
diverse task dictionary.
On NYUD-v2, MTL proves an effective strategy for
jointly tackling segmentation and depth estimation. In par-
ticular, most MTL models outperform the set of single-task
networks (see Table 5a). Similar results have been reported
for other pairs of well-correlated tasks, e.g. depth and ﬂow
estimation [81], detection and classiﬁcation [82], [83], detec-
tion and segmentation [2], [84].
Differently, most existing models fail to outperform their
single-task equivalents on PASCAL (see Table 5b). For ex-
ample, the improvements reported by the encoder-focused
approaches are usually limited to a few isolated tasks, while
a decline in performance is observed for the other tasks.
Jointly tackling a large and diverse task dictionary proves
challenging, as also noted by [10], [18].
Architecture vs Optimization. The effect of designing a
better MTL architecture is compared against the use of a
better task balancing strategy (see Tables 5a-5b vs 5c-5d).
We ﬁnd that the use of a better MTL architecture is usually
more helpful to improve the performance in MTL. Similar
observations were made by prior works [8], [18].
Encoder- vs Decoder-Focused Models. We compare the
encoder-focused models against the decoder-focused mod-
els on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL in Tables 5a- 5b. First, we ﬁnd
that the decoder-focused architectures generally outperform
the encoder-focused ones in terms of multi-task perfor-
mance. We argue that each architecture paradigm serves dif-
ferent purposes. The encoder-focused architectures aim to
learn richer feature representations of the image by sharing
information during the encoding process. Differently, the

==== Page 13 ====
13
TABLE 5: Comparison of deep architectures and optimization strategies for MTL on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL. Models that
use the same backbone can be put in direct comparison with each other. MTL indicates the average relative improvement
over the single-task baselines (see Equation 10). For more details about the experimental setup visit Section 4.1.
(a) Comparison of deep MTL architectures for MTL on the NYUD-v2 validation set.
Backbone Model FLOPS (G) Params (M) Seg. (IoU) " Depth (rmse)#MTL (%)"
Single
TaskResNet-50 192 80 43.9 0.585 + 0.00
HRNet-18 11 8 35.3 0.648 + 0.00
Encoder
Focused
MTLResNet-50MTL Baseline 133 56 44.4 0.587 + 0.41
MTAN 197 72 45.0 0.584 + 1.32
Cross-Stitch 192 80 44.2 0.570 + 1.61
NDDR-CNN 207 102 44.2 0.573 + 1.38
HRNet-18 MTL Baseline 6 4 33.9 0.636 - 1.09
Decoder
Focused
MTLResNet-50JTRL 660 295 46.4 0.501 + 10.02
PAP-Net 4800 52 50.4 0.530 + 12.10
PAD-Net (Single-Scale) 256 52 50.2 0.582 + 7.43
HRNet-18P AD-Net (Multi-Scale) 82 12 36.0 0.630 + 2.38
MTI-Net 16 27 38.6 0.593 + 8.95
(b) Comparison of deep MTL architectures for MTL on the PASCAL validation set.
Backbone Model FLOPS Params Seg. H. Parts Norm. Sal. Edge MTL
(G) (M) (IoU) " (IoU)" (mErr)# (IoU)" (odsF)" (%)"
Single
TaskResNet-18 167 80 66.2 59.9 13.9 66.3 68.8 + 0.00
HRNet-18 24 20 59.5 61.4 14.0 67.3 72.6 + 0.00
Encoder
Focused
MTLResNet-18MTL Baseline 71 35 63.8 58.6 14.9 65.1 69.2 - 2.86
MTAN 80 37 63.7 58.9 14.8 65.4 69.6 - 2.39
Cross-Stitch 167 80 66.1 60.6 13.9 66.8 69.9 + 0.60
NDDR-CNN 187 88 65.4 60.5 13.9 66.8 69.8 + 0.39
HRNet-18 MTL Baseline 7 4 54.3 59.3 14.8 65.5 71.7 - 4.38
Decoder
Focused
MTLResNet-18 PAD-Net 36 32 63.2 59.3 15.2 64.3 60.2 - 5.62
HRNet-18P AD-Net 212 29 53.6 59.6 15.3 65.8 72.5 - 4.41
MTI-Net 15 24 64.3 62.1 14.8 68.0 73.4 + 1.13
(c) Comparison of optimization strategies for
MTL on the NYUD-v2 validation set. The MTL
baseline model with ResNet-50 backbone is used.
Method Seg. Depth MTL
(IoU)" (rmse)# (%)"
Single-Task 43.9 0.585 + 0.00
Fixed (Grid S.) 44.4 0.587 + 0.41
Uncertainty 44.0 0.590 - 0.23
DWA 44.1 0.591 - 0.28
GradNorm 44.2 0.581 + 1.45
MGDA 43.2 0.576 + 0.02(d) Comparison of optimization strategies for MTL on the PASCAL validation
set. The MTL baseline model with ResNet-18 backbone is used.
Method Seg. H. Parts Norm. Sal. Edge MTL
(IoU)" (IoU)" (mErr)# (IoU)" (odsF)" (%)"
Single-Task 66.2 59.9 13.9 66.3 68.8 + 0.00
Uniform 65.5 59.5 15.8 64.1 67.9 - 3.99
Fixed (Grid S.) 63.8 58.6 14.9 65.1 69.2 - 2.86
Uncertainty 65.4 59.2 16.5 65.6 68.6 - 4.60
DWA 63.4 58.9 14.9 65.1 69.1 - 2.94
GradNorm 64.7 59.0 15.4 64.5 67.0 - 3.97
MGDA 64.9 57.9 15.6 62.5 61.4 -6.81
decoder-focused ones focus on improving dense prediction
tasks by repeatedly reﬁning the predictions through cross-
task interactions. Since the interactions take place near the
output of the network, they allow for a better alignment
of common cross-task patterns, which in turn, greatly boost
the performance. Based on their complementary behavior,
we hope to see both paradigms integrated in future works.
Second, we focus on the encoder- and decoder-focused
models that use an identical ResNet-50 backbone on NYUD-
v2 in Table 5a. The decoder-focused models report higher
performance, but consume a large number of FLOPS. The
latter is due to repeatedly predicting the task outputs at high
resolution scales. On the other hand, except for JTRL, the
decoder-focused models have a smaller memory footprint
compared to the encoder-focused ones. We argue that the
decoder-focused approaches parameterize the task interac-
tions more efﬁciently. This can be understood as follows.The task features before the ﬁnal layer are disentangled
according to the structure of the output task. This allows
to distill the relevant cross-task patterns with a small num-
ber of ﬁlter operations. This situation is different for the
encoder-focused approaches, where tasks share information
in the intermediate layers of the encoder.
4.3 Architectures
We study the MTL architectures in more detail. Sec-
tion 4.3.1 compares the encoder-focused architectures, while
the decoder-focused ones are discussed in Section 4.3.2.
4.3.1 Encoder-Focused Architectures
NYUD-v2. We analyze the encoder-focused approaches on
NYUD-v2 in Table 5a. The MTL baseline performs on par
with the set of single-task networks, while it reduces the
number of parameters and FLOPS. In particular, we observe

==== Page 14 ====
14
Fig. 10: Performance proﬁle of MTL methods for the semantic segmentation and depth estimation tasks on NYUD-v2. We
show the results obtained with different hyperparameter settings in the same color. Bottom-right is better.
(a) Performance proﬁle of the encoder-
focused models.
(b) Performance proﬁle of the decoder-
focused models.
(c) Performance proﬁle of the task bal-
ancing techniques.
an increase in performance on the segmentation task ( +0:5
IoU), and a small decline in performance on the depth
estimation task ( +0:002rmse). Other encoder-focused archi-
tectures further improve over the MTL baseline in terms of
multi-task performance, but require more parameters and
FLOPS. Note that the observed performance gains are of
rather small magnitude. We conclude that sharing a ResNet
backbone in combination with strong task-speciﬁc head
units proves a strong baseline for solving a pair of well-
correlated dense prediction tasks, like semantic segmenta-
tion and depth estimation.
Furthermore, the cross-stitch network outperforms the
NDDR-CNN model both in terms of performance and com-
putational efﬁciency. Both models follow a similar design,
where features from the single-task networks are fused
across several encoding layers (see Section 2.2). The dif-
ference lies in the employed feature fusion mechanism:
NDDR-CNNs employ non-linear dimensionality reduction
to fuse the features, while cross-stitch networks opt for a
simple linear combination of the feature channels. Given
the more sophisticated feature fusion scheme employed by
NDDR-CNNs, one would expect the NDDR-CNN to obtain
higher performance. Yet, the opposite is observed in this
experiment. We conclude that the feature fusion scheme
employed by cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs could
beneﬁt from further investigation.
Finally, no encoder-focused model is signiﬁcantly out-
performing its competitors on the NYUD-v2 benchmark.
Therefore, in this case, Multi-Task Attention Networks seem
the most favorable choice given their efﬁcient design and
good performance.
PASCAL. We study again the encoder-focused approaches
on the PASCAL dataset in Table 5b. In contrast to the results
on NYUD-v2, both the MTL baseline and MTAN model
report lower performance when compared against the set of
single-task models (  2:86% and 2:39% ). There are several
possible explanations for this. First, we consider a larger task
dictionary. It has been shown [18], [55] that a diverse task
dictionary is more prone to task interference. Second, the
PASCAL dataset contains more labeled examples compared
to NYUD-v2. Prior work [37] observed that the multi-task
performance gains can be lower when more annotations
are available. Still both models are a useful strategy to
reduce the required amount of resources. Depending onthe performance requirements, the MTAN model is favored
over the MTL baseline or vice versa.
Furthermore, we observe that cross-stitch networks and
NDDR-CNNs can not handle the larger, more diverse task
dictionary: the performance improvements are negligible
when using these models, while the number of parame-
ters and FLOPS increases. Differently, the MTL baseline
and MTAN model are able to strike a better compromise
between the multi-task performance and the computation
resources that are required.
Hyperparameters. We evaluate the performance of the
encoder-focused models when trained with different sets
of hyperparameters (see Table 4). Figure 10a shows a per-
formance proﬁle for the semantic segmentation and depth
estimation tasks on NYUD-v2. Experiments that use the
same model, but a different set of hyperparameters, are
displayed in identical color. We make several observations
regarding the inﬂuence of the employed hyperparameters.
First, the performance gains reported by the encoder-
focused models are strongly dependent on how well the
single-task models were optimized. In particular, the MTL
performance gains are signiﬁcantly enlarged when using a
suboptimal set of hyperparameters vs the optimal ones to
train the single-task models. We emphasize the importance
of carefully training the single-task baselines in MTL.
Second, the encoder-focused models seem more robust
to the used hyperparameters compared to the single-task
models. More speciﬁcally, when using a less carefully tuned
set of hyperparameters, the performance of the single-task
models drops faster compared to the encoder-focused MTL
models. We will come to a similar conclusion when re-
peating this experiment for the optimization strategies. We
conclude that studying hyperparameter robustness under
a single- vs multi-task scenario could be an interesting
direction for future work.
Finally, the performance of cross-stitch networks and
NDDR-CNNs is less hyperparameter dependent compared
to the MTL baseline and MTAN. The latter pair of models
shows much larger performance differences across different
hyperparameter settings.
Discussion. We compared several encoder-focused archi-
tectures on NYUD-v2 and PASCAL. For speciﬁc pairs of
tasks, e.g. depth estimation and semantic segmentation, we
can boost the overall performance through encoder-focused

==== Page 15 ====
15
MTL models. However, when considering a large or diverse
task dictionary, the performance improvements are limited
to a few isolated tasks. In the latter case, MTL still provides
a useful strategy to reduce the required amount of compu-
tational resources. Notably, there was no encoder-focused
model that consistently outperformed the other architec-
tures. Instead, an appropriate MTL model should rather be
decided on a per case basis, also taking into account the
amount of available computational resources. For example,
when performance is crucial, it is advised to use a cross-
stitch network, while if the available resources are limited,
the MTAN model provides a more viable alternative.
4.3.2 Decoder-Focused Architectures
NYUD-v2. The results for the decoder-focused models
on NYUD-v2 can be found in Table 5a. All single-scale
decoder-focused architectures report signiﬁcant gains over
the single-task networks on NYUD-v2. PAP-Net achieves
the highest multi-task performance ( +12:10% ), but con-
sumes a large number of FLOPS. This is due to the use of
task-afﬁnity matrices, which require to calculate the feature
correlation between every pair of pixels in the image. A
similar improvement is seen for JTRL ( +10:02% ). JTRL re-
cursively predicts the two tasks at increasingly higher scales.
Therefore, a large number of ﬁlter operations is performed
on high resolution feature maps, leading to an increase in
the computational resources. Opposed to JTRL and PAP-
Net, PAD-Net does not come with a signiﬁcant increase
in the number of computations. Yet, we still observe a
relatively large improvement over the single-task networks
(+7:43% ).
Next, we consider the decoder-focused architectures that
used a multi-scale backbone, i.e. HRNet-18. Again, PAD-
Net outperforms the single-task networks ( +2:38% ), but
MTI-Net further improves the performance ( +8:95% ). We
conclude that it is beneﬁcial to distill task information at
a multitude of scales, instead of a single scale. MTI-Net
consumes slightly more parameters and FLOPS compared
to the single-task networks. This is due to the use of a rather
shallow backbone, i.e. HRNet-18, and a small number of
tasks. As a consequence, the overhead introduced by adding
the additional layers in MTI-Net is relatively large compared
to the resources used by the backbone. PAD-Net sees a large
increase in the number of FLOPS compared to MTI-Net. This
is due to the fact that PAD-Net performs the multi-modal
distillation at a single higher scale (1/4) with 4Cchannels,
Cbeing the number of backbone channels at a single scale.
Instead, MTI-Net performs most of the computations at
smaller scales (1/32, 1/16, 1/8), while operating on only
Cchannels at the higher scale (1/4).
PASCAL. We analyze the decoder-focused models on PAS-
CAL in Table 5b. We see that PAD-Net can not handle the
larger task dictionary. The low performance on the semantic
edge prediction task can be attributed to not using skip
connections in the implemented model. Differently, MTI-
Net improves the performance on all tasks, except normals,
while requiring fewer ﬂops when compared against the
single-task networks. The consistent ﬁndings in the larger
task dictionary backup our hypothesis about the importance
of performing the multi-modal distillation at a multitudeof scales (see multi-scale decoder-focused approaches on
NYUD-v2).
Hyperparameters. Figure 10b shows the performance pro-
ﬁle for PAD-Net and MTI-Net on NYUD-v2. We use the
same hyperparameters as before (see Table 4). The obtained
MTL solutions outperform training dedicated single-task
models. Furthermore, both PAD-Net and MTI-Net are ro-
bust against hyperparameter changes. Even when trained
with suboptimal hyperparameters, both models still outper-
form their single-task counterparts. Finally, we do not ob-
serve a signiﬁcant difference in hyperparameter robustness
between the single-task and multi-task models. When com-
pared against the ResNet-50 single-task models, the HRNet-
18 model seems to require less hyperparameter tuning to
tackle the semantic segmentation and depth estimation tasks
on NYUD-v2. We observe that the HRNet-18 model uses
fewer parameters compared to the ResNet-50 model. This
could explain why it is easier to train the single-task HRNet-
18 models.
Conclusion. We compared several decoder-focused archi-
tectures across two dense labeling datasets. On NYUD-v2,
the performance on both semantic segmentation and depth
estimation can be signiﬁcantly improved by employing one
of the decoder-focused models. However, both PAP-Net and
JTRL incur a large increase in the number of FLOPS. MTI-
Net and PAD-Net provide more viable alternatives when
we wish to limit the number of FLOPS. On PASCAL, a
multi-scale approach, like MTI-Net, seems better ﬁtted for
increasing the multi-scale performance while retaining the
computational resources low. We conclude that the decoder-
focused architectures obtain promising results on the MTL
problem.
4.4 Task Balancing
We revisit the task balancing strategies from Section 3.1.
NYUD-v2. Table 5c shows the results when training the
MTL baseline with a ResNet-50 backbone using different
task balancing strategies. On NYUD-v2, optimizing the loss
weights with a grid search procedure resulted in a uniform
loss weighting scheme. Therefore, in this case, the use of
ﬁxed uniform weights and the use of ﬁxed weights from a
grid search overlap.
The MTL baseline with ﬁxed weights improves over the
single-task networks ( +0:41% forMTL ). GradNorm can
further boost the performance by adjusting the task-speciﬁc
weights in the loss during training ( +1:45% ). We conclude
that uniform weights are suboptimal for training a multi-
task model when the tasks employ different loss functions.
Similar to GradNorm, DWA tries to balance the pace
at which tasks are learned, but does not equalize the gra-
dient magnitudes. From Table 5c, we conclude that the
latter is important as well (  0:28% with DWA vs +1:45%
with GradNorm). Uncertainty weighting results in reduced
performance compared to GradNorm (  0:23% vs1:45% ).
Uncertainty weighting assigns a smaller weight to noisy
or difﬁcult tasks. Since the annotations on NYUD-v2 were
not distilled, the noise levels are rather small. When we
have access to clean ground-truth annotations, it seems
better to balance the learning of tasks rather than lower
the weights for the difﬁcult tasks. Further, MGDA reports

==== Page 16 ====
16
lower performance compared to GradNorm ( +0:02% vs
+1:45% ). MGDA only updates the weights along directions
that are common among all task-speciﬁc gradients. The
results suggest that it is better to allow some competition
between the task-speciﬁc gradients in the shared layers, as
this could help to avoid local minima.
Finally, we conclude that the use of ﬁxed loss weights op-
timized with a grid search still outperforms several existing
task balancing methods. In particular, the solution obtained
with ﬁxed uniform weights outperforms the models trained
with uncertainty weighting, MGDA and DWA on both the
semantic segmentation and depth estimation tasks.
PASCAL. The task balancing techniques are compared on
PASCAL in Table 5d. We ﬁnd that a grid-search on the
weight space works better than the use of automated task
balancing procedures from Section 3. A similar observation
was made by [18]. We hypothesize that this is due to the
imbalance between the optimal parameters, e.g. the weight
for the edge detection loss is 100 times higher than for the
semantic segmentation loss. Uncertainty weighting reports
the highest performance losses on the distilled tasks, i.e.
normals and saliency. This is because uncertainty weighting
assigns a smaller weight to tasks with higher homoscedastic
uncertainty. Differently, MGDA fails to properly learn the
edge detection task. This is another indication (cf. NYUD-
v2 results) that avoiding competing gradients by only back
propagating along a common direction in the shared layers
does not necessarily improve performance. This is partic-
ularly the case for the edge detection task on PASCAL
because of two reasons. First, the edge detection loss has
a much smaller magnitude compared to the other tasks.
Second, when the edge annotations are converted into seg-
ments they provide an over-segmentation of the image. As
a consequence, the loss gradient of the edge detection task
often conﬂicts with other tasks since they have a smoother
gradient. Because of this, MGDA prefers to mask out the
gradient from the edge detection task by assigning it a
smaller weight. Finally, GradNorm does not report higher
performance when compared against uniform weighting.
We hypothesize that this is due to the re-normalization of
the loss weights during the optimization. The latter does
not work well when the optimal loss magnitudes are very
imbalanced.
Hyperparameters. We use the performance proﬁle from Fig-
ure 10c to analyze the hyperparameter sensitivity of the task
balancing methods on NYUD-v2. The used hyperparame-
ters are the same as deﬁned before (see Table 4). GradNorm
is the only technique that outperforms training a separate
model for each task. However, when less effort is spent to
tune the hyperparameters of the single-task models, all task
balancing techniques result in improved performance. This
observation explains the increased performance relative to
the single-task case reported by prior works [19], [20], [22].
Again, we stress the importance of carefully training the
single-task baselines.
Second, as before, the MTL models seem more robust
to hyperparameter changes compared to the single-task
networks. In particular, the performance drops slower when
using less optimal hyperparameter settings in the MTL case.
Finally, ﬁxed loss weighting and uncertainty weighting
are most robust against hyperparameter changes. Thesetechniques report high performance for a large number of
hyperparameter settings. For example, out of the top-20%
best models, 40% of those were trained with uncertainty
weighting.
Discussion. We evaluated the task balancing strategies from
Section 3.1 under different settings. The methods were
compared to selecting the loss weights by a grid-search
procedure. Surprisingly, in our case, we found that grid-
search is competitive or better compared to existing task
balancing techniques. Also, a number of techniques per-
formed worse than anticipated. Gong et al. [37] obtained
similar results with ours, albeit only for a few loss balancing
strategies. Also, Maninis et al. [18] found that performing a
grid search for the weights could outperform a state-of-the-
art loss balancing scheme. Based on these works and our
own ﬁndings, we argue that the optimization in MTL could
beneﬁt from further investigation (see also Section 3.1.6).
Still existing task balancing techniques can be useful to
train MTL networks. A grid search on the weight space
becomes intractable when tackling large number of tasks.
In this case, we can fallback to existing task balancing tech-
niques to set the task weights. Furthermore, when dealing
with noisy annotations, uncertainty weighting can help to
automatically readjust the weights on the noisy tasks.
4.5 Limitations
We performed an extensive comparison of different MTL
architectures and optimization strategies. This led to a num-
ber of important observations for each group of works.
Undoubtedly, there are several aspects of the problem that
fall outside the scope of our experimental analysis. We
brieﬂy discuss some of these limitations below.
Joint architecture and optimization exploration. The ar-
chitectures and optimization strategies have been studied
orthogonal to each other. However, the interaction between
these two design spaces could be further examined in order
to construct MTL systems at the level of a joint architecture-
optimizer space.
Inﬂuence data. The tasks and training examples themselves
play an important role in the optimization, e.g. uncertainty
weighting works well when there are tasks with higher ho-
moscedastic uncertainty. Thus, it would be useful to analyze
what properties of the data are most important for the MTL
setup. For example, such an analysis could be used to tune
the optimization scheme to the needs of a speciﬁc setting.
Hyperparameter robustness. The performance proﬁles
showed that the results strongly depend on the used hy-
perparameters. Interestingly, we found that some MTL al-
gorithms are more robust against changes in the hyperpa-
rameter settings than others. This behavior could be further
investigated.
5 R ELATED DOMAINS
So far, we focused on the application of MTL to jointly solve
multiple vision tasks under a fully-supervised setting. In
this section, we consider the MTL setup from a more gen-
eral point-of-view, and analyze its connection with several
related domains. The latter could potentially be combined
with the MTL setup and improve it, or vice versa.

==== Page 17 ====
17
5.1 Multi-Domain Learning
The methods considered so far were applied to solve mul-
tiple tasks on the same visual domain. However, there is
a growing interest in learning representations that perform
well for many visual domains simultaneously. For example,
Bilen and Vedaldi [85] learned a compact multi-domain rep-
resentation using domain-speciﬁc scaling parameters. This
idea was later extended to the use of residual adapters [86],
[87]. These works only explored multi-domain learning for
various classiﬁcation tasks. Future research should address
the problem when considering multiple dense prediction
tasks too.
5.2 Transfer Learning
Transfer learning [88] makes use of the knowledge obtained
when solving one task, and applies it to tackle another task.
Different from MTL, transfer learning does not consider
solving all tasks concurrently. An important question in
both transfer learning and MTL is whether visual tasks
have relationships, i.e. they are correlated. Ma et al. [89]
modeled the task relationships in a MTL network through
a Multi-gate Mixture-of-Experts model. Zamir et al. [90]
provided a taxonomy for task transfer learning to quantify
the task relationships. Similarly, Dwivedi and Roig [63]
used Representation Similarity Analysis to obtain a measure
of task afﬁnity, by computing correlations between mod-
els pretrained on different tasks. Vandenhende et al. [10]
then used these task relationships for the construction of a
branched MTL network. Standley et al. [91] also relied on
task relationships to deﬁne what tasks should be learned
together in a MTL setup.
5.3 Neural Architecture Search
The experimental results in Section 4 showed that the
success of MTL strongly depends on the use of a proper
network architecture. Typically, such architectures are hand-
crafted by human experts. However, given the size and com-
plexity of the problem, this manual architecture exploration
likely exceeds human design abilities. To automate the con-
struction of the network architecture, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) [92] has been proposed in the literature.
Yet, most existing NAS works are limited to task-speciﬁc
models [93], [94], [95], [96], [97]. This is to be expected as
using NAS for MTL assumes that layer sharing has to be
jointly optimized with the layers types, their connectivity,
etc., rendering the problem considerably expensive.
To alleviate the heavy computational burden associated
with NAS, several works have proposed to start from a
predeﬁned backbone network for which a cross-task layer
sharing scheme is automatically determined. For example,
Liang et al. [98] implemented an evolutionary architecture
search for MTL, while others explored alternatives like
branched MTL networks [9], [10], [11], [12], routing [66],
stochastic ﬁlter grouping [57], and feature partitioning [69].
So far, NAS for MTL focused on how to share features across
tasks in the encoder. We hypothesize that NAS could also be
applied for the discovery of decoder-focused MTL models.5.4 Other
MTL has been applied to other problems too. This includes
various domains, such as language [24], [99], [100], au-
dio[101], video [102], [103], and robotics [104], [105], as well
as with different learning paradigms, such as reinforcement
learning [106], [107], self-supervised learning [108], semi-
supervised learning [109], [110] and active learning [111],
[112]. Surprisingly, in the deep learning era, very few works
have considered MTL under the semi-supervised or active
learning setting. Nonetheless, we believe that these are
interesting directions for future research.
For example, a major limitation of the fully-supervised
MTL setting that we consider here is the requirement for all
samples to be annotated for every task. Prior work [113]
showed that the standard update rule from Equation 5
gives suboptimal results if we do not take precautions when
annotations are missing. To alleviate this problem, Kim
et al. [114] proposed to use an alternate learning scheme
by updating the network weights for a single task at a
time. A knowledge distillation term [115] is included, in
order to avoid loosing relevant information about the other
tasks. Differently, Nekrasov et al. [113] proposed to use
the predictions from an expert model as synthetic ground-
truth when annotations are missing. Although, these early
attempts have shown encouraging results, we believe that
this problem could beneﬁt from further investigation.
Finally, multi-task learning was recently shown to im-
prove robustness. For example, in [116] a multi-task learn-
ing strategy showed robustness against adversarial attacks,
while [117] found that applying cross-task consistency in
MTL improves generalization, and allows for domain shift
detection.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we reviewed recent methods for MTL within
the scope of deep neural networks. First, we presented an
extensive overview of both architectural and optimization
based strategies for MTL. For each method, we described
its key aspects, discussed the commonalities and differences
with related works, and presented the possible advantages
or disadvantages. Finally, we conducted an extensive ex-
perimental analysis of the described methods that led us to
several key ﬁndings. We summarize some of our conclu-
sions below, and present some possibilities for future work.
First, the performance of MTL strongly varies depending
on the task dictionary. Its size, task types, label sources,
etc., all affect the ﬁnal outcome. As a result, an appropri-
ate architecture and optimization strategy should better be
selected on a per case basis. Although we provided concrete
observations as to why some methods work better for
speciﬁc setups, MTL could generally beneﬁt from a deeper
theoretical understanding to maximize the expected gains
in every case. For example, these gains seem dependent on
a plurality of factors, e.g. amount of data, task relationships,
noise, etc. Future work should try to isolate and analyze the
inﬂuence of these different elements.
Second, when it comes to tackling multiple dense pre-
diction tasks using a single MTL model, decoder-focused
architectures currently offer more advantages in terms of
multi-task performance, and with limited computational

==== Page 18 ====
18
overhead compared to the encoder-focused ones. As ex-
plained, this is due to an alignment of common cross-task
patterns that decoder-focused architectures promote, which
naturally ﬁts well with dense prediction tasks. Encoder-
focused architectures still offer certain advantages within
the dense prediction task setting, but their inherent layer
sharing seems better ﬁtted to tackle multiple classiﬁcation
tasks.
Finally, we analyzed multiple task balancing strategies,
and isolated the elements that are most effective for balanc-
ing task learning, e.g. down-weighing noisy tasks, balancing
task gradients, etc. Yet, many optimization aspects still
remain poorly understood. For example, opposed to recent
works, our analysis indicates that avoiding gradient com-
petition between tasks can hurt performance. Furthermore,
our study revealed that some task balancing strategies still
suffer from shortcomings, and highlighted several discrep-
ancies between existing methods. We hope that this work
stimulates further research efforts into this problem.
Acknowledgment. The authors would like to acknowledge
support by Toyota via the TRACE project and MACCHINA
(KU Leuven, C14/18/065). This work is also sponsored by
the Flemish Government under the Flemish AI programme.
Finally, the authors would like to thank Shikun Liu, Wanli
Ouyang and the anonymous reviewers for useful feedback.
Simon Vandenhende received his MSE de-
gree in Electrical Engineering from the KU Leu-
ven, Belgium, in 2018. He is currently study-
ing towards a PhD degree at the Center for
Processing Speech and Images at KU Leuven.
His research focuses on multi-task learning and
self-supervised learning. He won a best paper
award at MVA’19. He co-organized the ﬁrst Com-
mands For Autonomous Vehicles workshop at
ECCV’20.
Stamatios Georgoulis is a post-doctoral re-
searcher at the Computer Vision Lab of ETH
Zurich. His current research interests include
multi-task learning, unsupervised learning, and
image generation. Before coming to Zurich, he
was a doctoral student at the PSI group of KU
Leuven, where he received his PhD under the
supervision of Prof. Van Gool and Prof. Tuyte-
laars, focusing on extracting surface characteris-
tics and lighting from images. Further back, he
received his diploma in Electrical and Computer
Engineering from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and partici-
pated in Microsoft’s Imagine Cup Software Design Competition. He reg-
ularly serves as a reviewer in Computer Vision and Machine Learning
conferences (CVPR, NeurIPS, ICCV, ECCV, etc.) with distinctions.
Wouter Van Gansbeke obtained his MSE de-
gree in Electrical Engineering, with a focus on
Information Technology, from the KU Leuven,
Belgium, in 2018. He is currently pursuing a
PhD degree at the Center for Processing Speech
and Images at KU Leuven. His main research
interests are self-supervised learning and multi-
task learning. His focus is leveraging visual sim-
ilarities, temporal information and multiple tasks
to learn rich representations with limited annota-
tions.
Marc Proesmans is a research associate at
the Center for Processing Speech and Images
at KU Leuven, where he leads the TRACE
team. He has an extensive research experience
on various aspects in image processing e.g.
early vision processes, 3D reconstruction, op-
tical ﬂow, stereo, structure from motion, recog-
nition. He has been involved in several Euro-
pean research projects, such as VANGUARD,
IMPROOFS, MESH, MURALE, EUROPA, ROV-
INA. From 2000-2011, he has been CTO for a
KU Leuven spin-off company specialized in special effects for the movie
and game industry. He won several prizes, Golden Egg, Tech-Art, a
European IST, tech. Oscar nomination, European seal of Excellence.
From 2015 he is leading the research on automotive driving as Research
expert, and co-founded TRACE vzw to drive the technology transfer
from academia to the real R&D environment for autonomous driving in
cooperation with Toyota.
Dengxin Dai is a Senior Scientist working with
the Computer Vision Lab at ETH Zurich. In 2016,
he obtained his PhD in Computer Vision at ETH
Zurich. Since then he is the Team Leader of
TRACE-Zurich, working on Autonomous Driv-
ing within the R&D project ”TRACE: Toyota Re-
search on Automated Cars in Europe”. His re-
search interests lie in autonomous driving, ro-
bust perception in adverse weather and illumi-
nation conditions, automotive sensors and com-
puter vision under limited supervision. He has
organized a CVPR Workshop series (’19, ’20) on Vision for All Seasons:
Bad Weather and Nighttime, and has organized an ICCV’19 workshop
on Autonomous Driving. He has been a program committee member
of several major computer vision conferences and received multiple
outstanding reviewer awards. He is guest editor for the IJCV special
issue Vision for All Seasons, area chair for WACV’20 and CVPR’21.
Luc Van Gool is a full professor for Computer
Vision at ETH Zurich and the KU Leuven. He
leads research and teaches at both places. He
has authored over 300 papers. Luc Van Gool
has been a program committee member of sev-
eral, major computer vision conferences (e.g.
Program Chair ICCV’05, Beijing, General Chair
of ICCV’11, Barcelona, and of ECCV’14, Zurich).
His main interests include 3D reconstruction and
modeling, object recognition, and autonomous
driving. He received several Best Paper awards
(eg. David Marr Prize ’98, Best Paper CVPR’07). He received the
Koenderink Award in 2016 and ‘Distinguished Researcher’ nomination
by the IEEE Computer Society in 2017. In 2015 he also received they
5-yearly Excellence Prize by the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Research.
He was the holder of an ERC Advanced Grant (VarCity). Currently, he
leads computer vision research for autonomous driving in the context of
the Toyota TRACE labs in Leuven and at ETH, and has an extensive col-
laboration with Huawei on the issue of image and video enhancement.

==== Page 19 ====
19
REFERENCES
[1] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional net-
works for semantic segmentation,” in CVPR , 2015.
[2] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P . Doll ´ar, and R. Girshick, “Mask r-cnn,” in
ICCV , 2017.
[3] D. Eigen, C. Puhrsch, and R. Fergus, “Depth map prediction from
a single image using a multi-scale deep network,” in NIPS , 2014.
[4] M. Gur and D. M. Snodderly, “Direction selectivity in v1 of alert
monkeys: evidence for parallel pathways for motion processing,”
The Journal of physiology , 2007.
[5] I. Misra, A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, and M. Hebert, “Cross-stitch
networks for multi-task learning,” in CVPR , 2016.
[6] S. Ruder, J. Bingel, I. Augenstein, and A. Søgaard, “Latent multi-
task architecture learning,” in AAAI , 2019.
[7] Y. Gao, J. Ma, M. Zhao, W. Liu, and A. L. Yuille, “Nddr-cnn: Lay-
erwise feature fusing in multi-task cnns by neural discriminative
dimensionality reduction,” in CVPR , 2019.
[8] S. Liu, E. Johns, and A. J. Davison, “End-to-end multi-task
learning with attention,” in CVPR , 2019.
[9] Y. Lu, A. Kumar, S. Zhai, Y. Cheng, T. Javidi, and R. Feris, “Fully-
adaptive feature sharing in multi-task networks with applica-
tions in person attribute classiﬁcation,” in CVPR , 2017.
[10] S. Vandenhende, S. Georgoulis, B. De Brabandere, and
L. Van Gool, “Branched multi-task networks: Deciding what
layers to share,” in BMVC , 2020.
[11] D. Bruggemann, M. Kanakis, S. Georgoulis, and L. V . Gool,
“Automated search for resource-efﬁcient branched multi-task
networks,” 2020.
[12] P . Guo, C.-Y. Lee, and D. Ulbricht, “Learning to branch for multi-
task learning,” in ICML , 2020.
[13] D. Xu, W. Ouyang, X. Wang, and N. Sebe, “Pad-net: Multi-
tasks guided prediction-and-distillation network for simultane-
ous depth estimation and scene parsing,” in CVPR , 2018.
[14] Z. Zhang, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Yan, N. Sebe, and J. Yang, “Pattern-
afﬁnitive propagation across depth, surface normal and semantic
segmentation,” in CVPR , 2019.
[15] Z. Zhang, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Z. Jie, X. Li, and J. Yang, “Joint task-
recursive learning for semantic segmentation and depth estima-
tion,” in ECCV , 2018.
[16] S. Vandenhende, S. Georgoulis, and L. Van Gool, “Mti-net: Multi-
scale task interaction networks for multi-task learning,” in ECCV ,
2020.
[17] L. Zhou, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, T. Zhang, and J. Yang,
“Pattern-structure diffusion for multi-task learning,” in CVPR ,
2020.
[18] K.-K. Maninis, I. Radosavovic, and I. Kokkinos, “Attentive single-
tasking of multiple tasks,” in CVPR , 2019.
[19] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using
uncertainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,”
inCVPR , 2018.
[20] Z. Chen, V . Badrinarayanan, C.-Y. Lee, and A. Rabinovich, “Grad-
norm: Gradient normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep
multitask networks,” in ICML , 2018.
[21] M. Guo, A. Haque, D.-A. Huang, S. Yeung, and L. Fei-Fei,
“Dynamic task prioritization for multitask learning,” in ECCV ,
2018.
[22] O. Sener and V . Koltun, “Multi-task learning as multi-objective
optimization,” in NIPS , 2018.
[23] X. Lin, H.-L. Zhen, Z. Li, Q.-F. Zhang, and S. Kwong, “Pareto
multi-task learning,” in NIPS , 2019.
[24] P . Liu, X. Qiu, and X. Huang, “Adversarial multi-task learning
for text classiﬁcation,” in ACL , 2017.
[25] A. Sinha, Z. Chen, V . Badrinarayanan, and A. Rabinovich, “Gra-
dient adversarial training of neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.08028 , 2018.
[26] X. Zhao, H. Li, X. Shen, X. Liang, and Y. Wu, “A modulation mod-
ule for multi-task learning with applications in image retrieval,”
inECCV , 2018.
[27] V . Sanh, T. Wolf, and S. Ruder, “A hierarchical multi-task ap-
proach for learning embeddings from semantic tasks,” in AAAI ,
2019.
[28] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena,
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P . J. Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer
learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019.[29] Z. Chen, J. Ngiam, Y. Huang, T. Luong, H. Kretzschmar, Y. Chai,
and D. Anguelov, “Just pick a sign: Optimizing deep multitask
models with gradient sign dropout,” NeurIPS , 2020.
[30] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Machine learning , 1997.
[31] Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “A survey on multi-task learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.08114 , 2017.
[32] A. Wang, A. Singh, J. Michael, F. Hill, O. Levy, and S. Bowman,
“Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural
language understanding,” in Workshop EMNLP , 2018.
[33] L. Deng, G. Hinton, and B. Kingsbury, “New types of deep neural
network learning for speech recognition and related applications:
An overview,” in 2013 IEEE international conference on acoustics,
speech and signal processing , 2013.
[34] C. Widmer, J. Leiva, Y. Altun, and G. R ¨atsch, “Leveraging se-
quence classiﬁcation by taxonomy-based multitask learning,”
inAnnual International Conference on Research in Computational
Molecular Biology , 2010.
[35] S. Bell, Y. Liu, S. Alsheikh, Y. Tang, E. Pizzi, M. Henning, K. Singh,
O. Parkhi, and F. Borisyuk, “Groknet: Uniﬁed computer vision
model trunk and embeddings for commerce,” in SIGKDD , 2020.
[36] S. Ruder, “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098 , 2017.
[37] T. Gong, T. Lee, C. Stephenson, V . Renduchintala, S. Padhy,
A. Ndirango, G. Keskin, and O. H. Elibol, “A comparison of
loss weighting strategies for multi task learning in deep neural
networks,” IEEE Access , 2019.
[38] T. Evgeniou and M. Pontil, “Regularized multi–task learning,” in
KDD , 2004.
[39] Y. Xue, X. Liao, L. Carin, and B. Krishnapuram, “Multi-task
learning for classiﬁcation with dirichlet process priors,” JMLR ,
2007.
[40] L. Jacob, J.-p. Vert, and F. R. Bach, “Clustered multi-task learning:
A convex formulation,” in NIPS , 2009.
[41] J. Zhou, J. Chen, and J. Ye, “Clustered multi-task learning via
alternating structure optimization,” in NIPS , 2011.
[42] B. Bakker and T. Heskes, “Task clustering and gating for bayesian
multitask learning,” JMLR , 2003.
[43] K. Yu, V . Tresp, and A. Schwaighofer, “Learning gaussian pro-
cesses from multiple tasks,” in ICML , 2005.
[44] S.-I. Lee, V . Chatalbashev, D. Vickrey, and D. Koller, “Learning
a meta-level prior for feature relevance from multiple related
tasks,” in ICML , 2007.
[45] H. Daum ´e III, “Bayesian multitask learning with latent hierar-
chies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:0907.0783 , 2009.
[46] A. Kumar and H. Daume III, “Learning task grouping and
overlap in multi-task learning,” in ICML , 2012.
[47] A. Argyriou, T. Evgeniou, and M. Pontil, “Convex multi-task
feature learning,” Machine learning , 2008.
[48] J. Liu, S. Ji, and J. Ye, “Multi-task feature learning via efﬁcient
l2, 1-norm minimization,” in Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
2009.
[49] A. Jalali, S. Sanghavi, C. Ruan, and P . K. Ravikumar, “A dirty
model for multi-task learning,” in NIPS , 2010.
[50] A. Agarwal, S. Gerber, and H. Daume, “Learning multiple tasks
using manifold regularization,” in NIPS , 2010.
[51] R. K. Ando and T. Zhang, “A framework for learning predictive
structures from multiple tasks and unlabeled data,” JMLR , 2005.
[52] P . Rai and H. Daum ´e III, “Inﬁnite predictor subspace models for
multitask learning,” in AISTATS , 2010.
[53] D. Neven, B. De Brabandere, S. Georgoulis, M. Proesmans, and
L. Van Gool, “Fast scene understanding for autonomous driv-
ing,” in IV Workshops , 2017.
[54] M. Teichmann, M. Weber, M. Zoellner, R. Cipolla, and R. Urtasun,
“Multinet: Real-time joint semantic reasoning for autonomous
driving,” in IV, 2018.
[55] I. Kokkinos, “Ubernet: Training a universal convolutional neural
network for low-, mid-, and high-level vision using diverse
datasets and limited memory,” in CVPR , 2017.
[56] M. Long, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and S. Y. Philip, “Learning multiple
tasks with multilinear relationship networks,” in NIPS , 2017.
[57] F. J. Bragman, R. Tanno, S. Ourselin, D. C. Alexander, and M. J.
Cardoso, “Stochastic ﬁlter groups for multi-task cnns: Learning
specialist and generalist convolution kernels,” in ICCV , 2019.
[58] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Spatial pyramid pooling
in deep convolutional networks for visual recognition,” TP AMI ,
2015.

==== Page 20 ====
20
[59] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L.
Yuille, “Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep con-
volutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,”
TP AMI , 2017.
[60] H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia, “Pyramid scene parsing
network,” in CVPR , 2017.
[61] Y. Yuan and J. Wang, “Ocnet: Object context network for scene
parsing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00916 , 2018.
[62] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable
are features in deep neural networks?” in NIPS , 2014.
[63] K. Dwivedi and G. Roig, “Representation similarity analysis for
efﬁcient task taxonomy & transfer learning,” in CVPR , 2019.
[64] E. Meyerson and R. Miikkulainen, “Beyond shared hierarchies:
Deep multitask learning through soft layer ordering,” in ICLR ,
2018.
[65] Y. Yang and T. Hospedales, “Deep multi-task representa-
tion learning: A tensor factorisation approach,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.06391 , 2016.
[66] C. Rosenbaum, T. Klinger, and M. Riemer, “Routing networks:
Adaptive selection of non-linear functions for multi-task learn-
ing,” in ICLR , 2018.
[67] A. Mallya, D. Davis, and S. Lazebnik, “Piggyback: Adapting a
single network to multiple tasks by learning to mask weights,”
inECCV , 2018.
[68] S. Huang, X. Li, Z. Cheng, A. Hauptmann et al. , “Gnas: A greedy
neural architecture search method for multi-attribute learning,”
inACMMM , 2018.
[69] A. Newell, L. Jiang, C. Wang, L.-J. Li, and J. Deng, “Feature
partitioning for efﬁcient multi-task architectures,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.04339 , 2019.
[70] M. Suteu and Y. Guo, “Regularizing deep multi-task networks us-
ing orthogonal gradients,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06844 , 2019.
[71] T.-Y. Lin, P . Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P . Doll ´ar, “Focal loss
for dense object detection,” in ICCV , 2017.
[72] J.-A. D ´esid ´eri, “Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for
multiobjective optimization,” Comptes Rendus Mathematique , 2012.
[73] N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, P . Kohli, and R. Fergus, “Indoor seg-
mentation and support inference from rgbd images,” in ECCV ,
2012.
[74] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn, and
A. Zisserman, “The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge,”
IJCV , 2010.
[75] X. Chen, R. Mottaghi, X. Liu, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun, and A. Yuille,
“Detect what you can: Detecting and representing objects using
holistic models and body parts,” in CVPR , 2014, pp. 1971–1978.
[76] A. Bansal, X. Chen, B. Russell, A. Gupta, and D. Ramanan,
“Pixelnet: Representation of the pixels, by the pixels, and for the
pixels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.06506 , 2017.
[77] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for seman-
tic image segmentation,” in ECCV , 2018.
[78] D. R. Martin, C. C. Fowlkes, and J. Malik, “Learning to detect nat-
ural image boundaries using local brightness, color, and texture
cues,” TP AMI , 2004.
[79] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in CVPR , 2016.
[80] K. Sun, B. Xiao, D. Liu, and J. Wang, “Deep high-resolution
representation learning for human pose estimation,” in CVPR ,
2019.
[81] Y. Zou, Z. Luo, and J.-B. Huang, “Df-net: Unsupervised joint
learning of depth and ﬂow using cross-task consistency,” in
ECCV , 2018.
[82] R. Girshick, “Fast r-cnn,” in ICCV , 2015.
[83] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-
time object detection with region proposal networks,” in NIPS ,
2015.
[84] N. Dvornik, K. Shmelkov, J. Mairal, and C. Schmid, “Blitznet: A
real-time deep network for scene understanding,” in ICCV , 2017.
[85] H. Bilen and A. Vedaldi, “Universal representations: The missing
link between faces, text, planktons, and cat breeds,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.07275 , 2017.
[86] S.-A. Rebufﬁ, H. Bilen, and A. Vedaldi, “Learning multiple visual
domains with residual adapters,” in NIPS , 2017.
[87] ——, “Efﬁcient parametrization of multi-domain deep neural
networks,” in CVPR , 2018.
[88] S. J. Pan, Q. Yang et al. , “A survey on transfer learning,” TKDE ,
2010.[89] J. Ma, Z. Zhao, X. Yi, J. Chen, L. Hong, and E. H. Chi, “Modeling
task relationships in multi-task learning with multi-gate mixture-
of-experts,” in KDD , 2018.
[90] A. R. Zamir, A. Sax, W. Shen, L. J. Guibas, J. Malik, and
S. Savarese, “Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning,”
inCVPR , 2018.
[91] T. Standley, A. R. Zamir, D. Chen, L. Guibas, J. Malik, and
S. Savarese, “Which tasks should be learned together in multi-
task learning?” ICML , 2020.
[92] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter, “Neural architecture search:
A survey.” JMLR , 2019.
[93] B. Zoph and Q. V . Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforce-
ment learning,” in ICLR , 2017.
[94] C. Liu, B. Zoph, M. Neumann, J. Shlens, W. Hua, L.-J. Li, L. Fei-
Fei, A. Yuille, J. Huang, and K. Murphy, “Progressive neural
architecture search,” in ECCV , 2018.
[95] H. Pham, M. Y. Guan, B. Zoph, Q. V . Le, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient
neural architecture search via parameter sharing,” in ICML , 2018.
[96] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang, “Darts: Differentiable architec-
ture search,” ICLR , 2018.
[97] E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y. Huang, and Q. V . Le, “Regularized
evolution for image classiﬁer architecture search,” in AAAI , 2019.
[98] J. Liang, E. Meyerson, and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolutionary archi-
tecture search for deep multitask networks,” in GECCO , 2018.
[99] D. Dong, H. Wu, W. He, D. Yu, and H. Wang, “Multi-task learning
for multiple language translation,” in ACL , 2015.
[100] B. McCann, N. S. Keskar, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “The natural
language decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08730 , 2018.
[101] A. Balajee Vasudevan, D. Dai, and L. Van Gool, “Semantic object
prediction and spatial sound prediction with binaural sounds,”
inECCV , 2020.
[102] A. Diba, M. Fayyaz, V . Sharma, M. Paluri, J. Gall, R. Stiefelhagen,
and L. Van Gool, “Holistic large scale video understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11451 , 2019.
[103] R. Pasunuru and M. Bansal, “Multi-task video captioning with
video and entailment generation,” in ACL , 2017.
[104] M. Wulfmeier, A. Abdolmaleki, R. Hafner, J. T. Springenberg,
M. Neunert, T. Hertweck, T. Lampe, N. Siegel, N. Heess, and
M. Riedmiller, “Regularized hierarchical policies for composi-
tional transfer in robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11228 , 2019.
[105] K. Hausman, J. T. Springenberg, Z. Wang, N. Heess, and M. Ried-
miller, “Learning an embedding space for transferable robot
skills,” in ICLR , 2018.
[106] L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V . Mnih, T. Ward,
Y. Doron, V . Firoiu, T. Harley, I. Dunning et al. , “Impala: Scal-
able distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures,” in ICML , 2018.
[107] A. Wilson, A. Fern, S. Ray, and P . Tadepalli, “Multi-task reinforce-
ment learning: a hierarchical bayesian approach,” in ICML , 2007.
[108] C. Doersch and A. Zisserman, “Multi-task self-supervised visual
learning,” in ICCV , 2017.
[109] Q. Liu, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Semi-supervised multitask learn-
ing,” in NIPS , 2008.
[110] Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Semi-supervised multi-task regres-
sion,” in KDD , 2009.
[111] A. Acharya, R. J. Mooney, and J. Ghosh, “Active multitask learn-
ing using both latent and supervised shared topics,” in ICDM ,
2014.
[112] R. Reichart, K. Tomanek, U. Hahn, and A. Rappoport, “Multi-task
active learning for linguistic annotations,” in ACL , 2008.
[113] V . Nekrasov, T. Dharmasiri, A. Spek, T. Drummond, C. Shen,
and I. Reid, “Real-time joint semantic segmentation and depth
estimation using asymmetric annotations,” in ICRA , 2019.
[114] D.-J. Kim, J. Choi, T.-H. Oh, Y. Yoon, and I. S. Kweon, “Dis-
joint multi-task learning between heterogeneous human-centric
tasks,” in WACV . IEEE, 2018.
[115] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in
a neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
[116] C. Mao, A. Gupta, V . Nitin, B. Ray, S. Song, J. Yang, and C. Von-
drick, “Multitask learning strengthens adversarial robustness,”
2020.
[117] A. R. Zamir, A. Sax, N. Cheerla, R. Suri, Z. Cao, J. Malik, and
L. J. Guibas, “Robust learning through cross-task consistency,” in
CVPR , 2020.

