==== Page 1 ====
MultiResUNet : Rethinking the U-Net Architecture
for Multimodal Biomedical Image Segmentation
Nabil Ibtehaz1and M. Sohel Rahman1,*
1Department of CSE, BUET,
ECE Building, West Palasi, Dhaka-1205, Bangladesh
*Corresponding author
1017052037@grad.cse.buet.ac.bd ,msrahman@cse.buet.ac.bd
February 12, 2019
Abstract
In recent years Deep Learning has brought about a breakthrough in Medical
Image Segmentation. U-Net is the most prominent deep network in this regard,
which has been the most popular architecture in the medical imaging community.
Despite outstanding overall performance in segmenting multimodal medical images,
from extensive experimentations on challenging datasets, we found out that the
classical U-Net architecture seems to be lacking in certain aspects. Therefore,
we propose some modications to improve upon the already state-of-the-art U-
Net model. Hence, following the modications we develop a novel architecture
MultiResUNet as the potential successor to the successful U-Net architecture. We
have compared our proposed architecture MultiResUNet with the classical U-Net
on a vast repertoire of multimodal medical images. Albeit slight improvements in
the cases of ideal images, a remarkable gain in performance has been attained for
challenging images. We have evaluated our model on ve dierent datasets, each
with their own unique challenges, and have obtained a relative improvement in
performance of 10.15%, 5.07%, 2.63%, 1.41%, and 0.62% respectively.
Index terms| Convolutional Neural Networks, Medical Imaging, Semantic Seg-
mentation, U-Net
1arXiv:1902.04049v1  [cs.CV]  11 Feb 2019

==== Page 2 ====
1 Introduction
Since the introduction of digital medical imaging equipments, signicant attention has
been drawn towards applying image processing techniques in analyzing medical images.
Multidisciplinary researchers have been working diligently for decades to develop auto-
mated diagnosis systems, and to this day it is one of the most active research areas [1].
The task of a computer aided medical image analysis tool is twofold: segmentation and
diagnosis. In the general Semantic Segmentation problem, the objective is partitioning
an image into a set of non-overlapping regions, which allows the homogeneous pixels to
be clustered together [2]. However, in the context of medical images the interest often
lies in distinguishing only some interesting areas of the image, like the tumor regions [3],
organs [4] etc. This enables the doctors to analyze only the signicant parts of the other-
wise incomprehensible multimodal medical images [5]. Furthermore, often the segmented
images are used to compute various features that may be leveraged in the diagnosis [6].
Therefore, image segmentation is of utmost importance and application in the domain of
Biomedical Engineering.
Owing to the profound signicance of medical image segmentation and the complexity
associated with manual segmentation, a vast number of automated medical image seg-
mentation methods have been developed, mostly focused on images of specic modalities.
In the early days, simple rule-based approaches were followed; however, those methods
failed to maintain robustness when tested on huge variety of data [7]. Consequently,
more adaptive algorithms were developed relying on geometric shape priors with tools
of soft-computing [8] and fuzzy algorithms [9]. Nevertheless, these methods suer from
human biases and can not deal with the amount of variance in real world data.
Recent advancements in deep learning [10] have shwon a lot of promises towards solv-
ing such issues. In this regard, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [11] have been the
most ground-breaking addition, which is dominating the eld of Computer Vision. CNNs
have been responsible for the phenomenal advancements in tasks like object classication
[12], object localization [13] etc., and the continuous improvements to CNN architectures
are bringing further radical progresses [14, 15, 16, 17]. Semantic Segmentation tasks have
also been revolutionalized by Convolutional Networks. Since CNNs are more intuitive
in performing object classication, Ciresan et al. [18] presented a sliding window based
pipeline to perform semantic segmentation using CNN. Long et al. [19] proposed a fully
convolutional network (FCN) to perform end-to-end image segmentation, which surpassed
the existing approaches. Badrinarayanan et al. [20] improved upon FCN, by developing
a novel architecture namely, SegNet. SegNet consists of a 13 layer deep encoder network
that extracts spatial features from the image, and a corresponding 13 layer deep decoder
network that upsamples the feature maps to predict the segmentation masks. Chen et al.
[21] presented DeepLap and performed semantic segmentation using atrous convolutions.
In spite of initiating a breakthrough in computer vision tasks, a major drawback of the
CNN architectures is that they require massive volumes of training data. Unfortunately,
in the context of medical images, not only the acquisition of images is expensive and
complicated, accurate annotation thereof adds even more to the complexity [22]. Never-
theless, CNNs have shown great promise in medical image segmentation in recent years
[22, 23], and most of the credit go to U-Net [24]. The structure of U-Net is quite similar
to SegNet, comprising an encoder and a decoder network. Furthermore, the correspond-
2

==== Page 3 ====
ing layers of the encoder and decoder network are connected by skip connections, prior
to a pooling and subsequent to a deconvolution operation respectively. U-Net has been
showing impressive potential in segmenting medical images, even with a scarce amount
of labeled training data, to an extent that it has become the de-facto standard in medical
image segmentation [22]. U-Net and U-Net like models have been successfully used in
segmenting biomedical images of neuronal structures [24], liver [25], skin lesion [26], colon
histology [27], kidney [28], vascular boundary [29], lung nodule [30], prostate [31], etc.
and the list goes on.
In this paper, in parallel to appreciating the capabilities of U-Net, the most popular
and successful deep learning model for biomedical image segmentation, we diligently
scrutinize the network architecture to discover some potential scopes of improvement.
We argue and hypothesize that the U-Net architecture may be lacking in certain criteria
and based on contemporary advancements in deep computer vision we propose some
alterations to it. In the sequel, we develop a novel model called MultiResUNet, an
enhanced version of U-Net, that we believe will signicantly advance the state of the art
in the domain of general multimodal biomedical image segmentation. We put our model
to test using a variety of medical images originating from dierent modalities, and even
with 3D medical images. From extensive experimentation with this diverse set of medical
images, it was found that MultiResUNet overshadows the classical U-Net model in all
the cases even with slightly less number of parameters.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
We analyze the U-Net model architecture in depth, and conjecture some potential
opportunities for further enhancements
Based on the probable scopes for improvement, we propose MultiResUNet, which
is an enhanced version of the standard U-Net architecture.
We experiment with dierent public medical image datasets of dierent modalities,
and MultiResUNet shows superior accuracy.
We also experiment with a 3D version of MultiResUNet, and it outperforms the
standard 3D U-Net as well.
Particularly, we examine some very challenging images and observe a signicant
improvement in using MultiResUNet over U-Net.
2 Overview of the UNet Architecture
Similar to FCN [19] and SegNet [20], U-Net [24] uses a network entirely of convolutional
layers to perform the task of semantic segmentation. The network architecture is sym-
metric, having an Encoder that extracts spatial features from the image, and a Decoder
that constructs the segmentation map from the encoded features. The Encoder follows
the typical formation of a convolutional network. It involves a sequence of two 3 3 con-
volution operations, which is followed by a max pooling operation with a pooling size of
22 and stride of 2. This sequence is repeated four times, and after each downsampling
3

==== Page 4 ====
the number of lters in the convolutional layers are doubled. Finally, a progression of
two 33 convolution operations connects the Encoder to the Decoder .
On the contrary, the Decoder rst up-samples the feature map using a 2 2 transposed
convolution operation [32], reducing the feature channels by half. Then again a sequence
of two 33 convolution operations is performed. Similar to the Encoder , this succession
of up-sampling and two convolution operations is repeated four times, halving the number
of lters in each stage. Finally, a 1 1 convolution operation is performed to generate the
nal segmentation map. All convolutional layers in this architecture except for the nal
one use the ReLU (Rectied Linear Unit) activation function [10]; the nal convolutional
layer uses a Sigmoid activation function.
Perhaps, the most ingenious aspect of the U-Net architecture is the introduction of
skip connections. In all the four levels, the output of the convolutional layer, prior to the
pooling operation of the Encoder is transfered to the Decoder . These feature maps are
then concatenated with the output of the upsampling operation, and the concatenated
feature map is propagated to the successive layers. These skip connections allow the
network to retrieve the spatial information lost by pooling operations [33]. The network
architecture is illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1: The U-Net Architecture. The model comprises an encoder and a decoder pathway, with skip
connections between the corresponding layers.
Subsequently, the U-Net architecture was extended through a few modications to 3D
U-Net for volumetric segmentation [28]. In particular, the two dimensional convolution,
max pooling, transposed convolution operations were replaced by their three dimensional
counterparts. However, in order to limit the number of parameters, the depth of the
network was reduced by one. Moreover, the number of lters were doubled before the
pooling layers to avoid bottlenecks [34]. The original U-Net [24] did not use batch nor-
malization [35], however, they were experimented with in the 3D U-Net and astonishingly
the results revealed that batch normalization may sometime even hurt the performance
[28].
3 Motivations and High Level Considerations
U-Net has been a remarkable and the most popular Deep Network Architecture in medical
imaging community, dening the state of the art in medical image segmentation [33].
4

==== Page 5 ====
However, thorough contemplation of the U-Net architecture and drawing some parallels
to the recent advancement of deep computer vision leads to some useful observations as
described in the following subsections.
3.1 Variation of Scale in Medical Images
In medical image segmentation, we are interested in segmenting cell necluei [36], organs
[4], tumors [3] etc. from images originating from various modalities. However, in most
cases these objects of interest are of irregular and dierent scales. For example, in Figure
2 we have demonstrated that the scale of skin lesions can greatly vary in dermoscopy
images. These situations frequently occur in dierent types medical image segmentation
tasks.
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
Figure 2: Variation of Scale in medical images. Fig. 2a, 2b, 2c are examples of dermoscopy images with
small, medium and large size of lesions respectively. The images have been taken from the ISIC-2018
dataset.
Therefore, a network should be robust enough to analyze objects at dierent scales.
Although this issue has been addressed in several deep computer vision works, to the best
of our knowledge, this issue is still not addressed properly in the domain of medical image
segmentation. Serre et al. [37] employed a sequence of xed Gabor lters of varying scales
to acknowledge the variation of scale in the image. Later on, the revolutionary Inception
architecture [15] introduced Inception blocks, that utilizes convolutional layers of varying
kernel sizes in parallel to inspect the points of interest in images from dierent scales.
These perceptions obtained at dierent scales are combined together and passed on deeper
into the network.
In the U-Net architecture, after each pooling layer and transposed convolutional layer
a sequence of two 3 3 convolutional layers are used. As explained in [34], this series
of two 33 convolutional operation actually resembles a 5 5 convolutional operation.
Therefore, following the approach of Inception network, the simplest way to augment
U-Net with multi-resolutional analysis is to incorporate 3 3, and 77 convolution
operations in parallel to the 5 5 convolution operation, as shown in Figure 3a.
Therefore, replacing the convolutional layers with Inception-like blocks should facil-
itate the U-Net architecture to reconcile the features learnt from the image at dierent
scales. Another possible option is to use strided convolutions [38], but in our experi-
ments it was overshadowed by U-Net using Inception-like blocks. Despite the gain in
performance, the introduction of additional convolutional layers in parallel extravagantly
5

==== Page 6 ====
increases the memory requirement. Therefore, we improvise with the following ideas bor-
rowed from [34]. We factorize the bigger, more demanding 5 5 and 77 convolutional
layers, using a sequence of smaller and lightweight 3 3 convolutional blocks, as shown
in Figure 3b. The outputs of the 2nd and 3rd 3 3 convolutional blocks eectively ap-
proximate the 55 and 77 convolution operations respectively. We hence take the
outputs from the three convolutional blocks and concatenate them together to extract
the spatial features from dierent scales. From our experiments, it was seen that the
results of this compact block closely resemble that of the memory intensive Inception-like
block decsribed earlier. This outcome is in line with the ndings of [34], as the adjacent
layers of a vision network are expected to be correlated.
Despite that this modication greatly reduces the memory requirement, it is still quite
demanding. This is mostly due to the fact that in a deep network if two convolutional
layers are present in a succession, then the number of lters in the rst one has a quadratic
eect over the memory [15]. Therefore, instead of keeping all the three consecutive
convolutional layers of equal number of lters, we gradually increase the lters in those
(from 1 to 3), to prevent the memory requirement of the earlier layers from exceedingly
propagating to the deeper part of the network. We also add a residual connection because
of their ecacy in biomedical image segmentaion [33], and for the introduction of the
11 convolutional layers, which may allow us to comprehend some additional spatial
information. We call this arrangement a ` MultiRes block ', as shown in Figure 3c.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Devolping the Proposed MultiRes block. We start with a simple Inception like block by using
33, 55 and 77 convolutional lters in parallel and concatenating the generated feature maps (Fig.
3a). This allows us to reconcile spatial features from dierent context size. Instead of using the 3 3,
55 and 77 lters in parallel, we factorize the bigger and more expensive 5 5 and 77 lters as a
succession of 33 lters (Fig. 3b) . Fig 3c illustrates the MultiRes block, where we have increased the
number of lters in the successive three layers gradually and added a residual connection (along with
11 lter for conserving dimensions).
3.2 Probable Semantic Gap between the Corresponding Levels
of Encoder-Decoder
An ingenious contribution of the U-Net architecture was the introduction of shortcut
connections between the corresponding layers before and after the max-pooling and the
deconvolution layers respectively. This enables the network to propagate from encoder
to decoder, the spatial information that gets lost during the pooling operation.
Despite preserving the dissipated spatial features, a aw of the skip connections may
be speculated as follows. For instance, the rst shortcut connection bridges the encoder
6

==== Page 7 ====
before the rst pooling with the decoder after the last deconvolution operation. Here,
the features coming from the encoder are supposed to be lower level features as they
are computed in the earlier layers of the network. On the contrary, the decoder features
are supposed to be of much more higher level, since they are computed at the very deep
layers of the network. Therefore, they go through more processing. Hence, we observe
a possible semantic gap between the two sets of features being merged. We conjecture
that the fusion of these two arguably incompatible sets of features could cause some
discrepancy throughout the learning and thus adversely aect the prediction procedure.
It may be noted that, the amount of discrepancy is likely to decrease gradually as we
move towards the succeeding shortcut connections. This can be attributed to the fact
that, not only the features from the encoder are going through more processing, but also
we are fusing them with decoder features of much juvenile layers.
Therefore, to alleviate the disparity between the encoder-decoder features, we propose
to incorporate some convolutional layers along the shortcut connections. Our hypothesis
is that these additional non-linear transformations on the features propagating from the
encoder stage should account for the further processing done during the by decoder
stage therein. Furthermore, instead of using the usual convolutional layers we introduce
residual connections to them as they make the learning easier [17] and is proven to be
having great potential in medical image analysis [33]. This idea is inspired from the
image to image conversion using convolutional neural networks [39], where pooling layers
are not favorable for the loss of information. Thus, instead of simply concatenating the
feature maps from the encoder stage to the decoder stage, we rst pass them through a
chain of convolutional layers with residual connections, and then concatenate with the
decoder features. We call this proposed shortcut path ` Res path ', illustrated in Fig. 4.
Specically, 33 lters are used in the convolutional layers and 1 1 lters accompany
the residual connections.
Figure 4: Proposed Respath. Instead of combining the the encoder feature maps with the decoder
feature in a straight-forward manner, we pass the encoder features through a sequence of convolutional
layers. These additional non-linear operations are expected to reduce the semantic gap between encoder
and decoder features. Furthermore, residual connections are also introduced as they make the learning
easier and are very useful in deep convolutional networks.
7

==== Page 8 ====
4 Proposed Architecture
In the MultiResUNet model, we replace the sequence of two convolutional layers with the
proposed MultiRes block as introduced in Section 3.2. For each of the MultiRes blocks,
we assign a parameter W, which controls the number of lters of the convolutional layers
inside that block. To maintain a comparable relation between the numbers of parameters
in original U-Net and the proposed model, we compute the value of Was follows:
W=U (1)
Here,Uis the number of lters in the corresponding layer of the U-Net and is a scaler
coecient. Decomposing WtoUandprovides a convenient way to both controlling
the number of parameters and keeping them comparable to U-Net. We compare our
proposed model with an U-Net, having # filters = [32;64;128;256;512] along the levels,
which are also the values of Uin our model. We selected = 1:67 as it keeps the number
of parameters in our model slightly below that of the U-Net.
In Section 3.2, we pointed out that it is benecial to gradually increase the number of
lters in the successive convolutional layers inside a MultiRes block, instead of keeping
them the same. Hence, we assignW
6
,W
3
andW
2
lters to the three successive
convolutional layers respectively, as this combination achieved the best results in our
experiments. Also it can be noted that similar to the U-Net architecture, after each
pooling or deconvolution operation the value of Wgets doubled.
In addition to introducing the MultiRes blocks, we also replace the ordinary shortcut
connections with the proposed Respaths. Therefore, we apply some convolution opera-
tions on the feature maps propagating from the encoder stage to the decoder stage. In
Section 3.1, we hypothesized that the intensity of the semantic gap between the encoder
and decoder feature maps are likely to decrease as we move towards the inner shortcut
paths. Therefore, we also gradually reduce the number of convolutional blocks used along
theRespaths. In particular, we use 4 ;3;2;1 convolutional blocks respectively along the
fourRes paths. Also, in order to account for the number of feature maps in encoder-
decoder, we use 32 ;64;128;256 lters in the blocks of the four Respaths respectively.
All the convolutional layers except for the output layer, used in this network is ac-
tivated by the ReLU (Rectied Linear Unit) activation function [10], and are batch-
normalized [35]. Similar to the U-Net model, the output layer is activated by a Sigmoid
activation function. We present a diagram of the proposed MultiResUNet model in Fig.
5. The architectural details are described in Table 1.
5 Datasets
Curation of medical imaging datasets are challenging compared to the traditional com-
puter vision datasets. Expensive imaging equipments, sophisticated image acquisition
pipelines, necessity of expert annotation, issues of privacy-all adds to the complexity of
developing medical imaging datasets [22]. As a result, only a few public medical imaging
benchmark datasets exist, and they only contain a handful of images each. In order to as-
sess the ecacy of the proposed architecture, we tried to evaluate it on a variety of image
modalities. More specically, we selected datasets that are as heterogeneous as possible
8

==== Page 9 ====
Figure 5: Proposed MultiResUNet architecture. We replace the sequences of two convolutional layers in
the U-Net architectures with the proposed MultiRes block. Furthermore, instead of using plain shortcut
connections, we use the proposed Respaths.
from each other. Also, each of these datasets poses a unique challenge of their own (more
details are given in Section 7 and Section 8). The datasets used in the experiments are
briey described below (also see Table 2 for an overview).
5.1 Fluorescence Microscopy Image
We used the uorescence microscopy image dataset developed by Murphy Lab [36]. This
dataset contains 97 uorescence microscopy images and a total of 4009 cells are contained
in these images. Half of the cells are U2OS cells and the other half comprises NIH3T3
cells. The nuclei were segmented manually by experts. The nuclei are irregular in terms
of brigtness and the imags often contain noticeable debris, making this a challenging
dataset of bright-eld microscopy images. The original resolution of the images range
from 13491030 to 13441024; they have been resized to 256 256 for computational
constraints.
5.2 Electron Microscopy Image
To observe the eectiveness of the architecture with electron microscopy images, we used
the dataset of the ISBI-2012 : 2D EM segmentation challenge [40, 41]. This dataset con-
tains only 30 images from a serial section Transmission Electron Microscopy (ssTEM) of
the Drosophila rst instar larva ventral nerve cord [41]. The images face slight alignment
errors, and are corrupted with noises. The resolution of the images is 512 512, but they
have been resized to 256 256 due to computational limitations.
5.3 Dermoscopy Image
We acquired the dermoscopy images from the ISIC-2018 : Lesion Boundary Segmentation
challenge dataset. The data for this challenge were extracted from the ISIC-2017 dataset
[3] and the HAM10000 dataset [42]. The compiled dataset contains a total of 2594 images
of dierent types of skin lesions with expert annotation. The images are of various
9

==== Page 10 ====
Table 1: MultiResUNet Architecture Details
MultiResUNet
Block Layer(lter size) #lters Path Layer(lter size) #lters
MultiRes Block 1
MultiRes Block 9Conv2D(3,3) 8
Res Path 1Conv2D(3,3) 32
Conv2D(3,3) 17 Conv2D(1,1) 32
Conv2D(3,3) 26 Conv2D(3,3) 32
Conv2D(1,1) 51 Conv2D(1,1) 32
MultiRes Block 2
MultiRes Block 8Conv2D(3,3) 17 Conv2D(3,3) 32
Conv2D(3,3) 35 Conv2D(1,1) 32
Conv2D(3,3) 53 Conv2D(3,3) 32
Conv2D(1,1) 105 Conv2D(1,1) 32
MultiRes Block 3
MultiRes Block 7Conv2D(3,3) 35
Res Path 2Conv2D(3,3) 64
Conv2D(3,3) 71 Conv2D(1,1) 64
Conv2D(3,3) 106 Conv2D(3,3) 64
Conv2D(1,1) 212 Conv2D(1,1) 64
MultiRes Block 4
MultiRes Block 6Conv2D(3,3) 71 Conv2D(3,3) 64
Conv2D(3,3) 142 Conv2D(1,1) 64
Conv2D(3,3) 213
ResPath 3Conv2D(3,3) 128
Conv2D(1,1) 426 Conv2D(1,1) 128
MultiRes Block 5Conv2D(3,3) 142 Conv2D(3,3) 128
Conv2D(3,3) 284 Conv2D(1,1) 128
Conv2D(3,3) 427Res Path 4Conv2D(3,3) 256
Conv2D(1,1) 853 Conv2D(1,1) 256
resolutions, but they have all been resized to 256 192, maintaining the average aspect
ratio, for computational purposes.
5.4 Endoscopy Image
We used the CVC-ClinicDB [43], a colonoscopy image database for our experiments
with endoscopy images. The images of this dataset were extracted from frames of 29
colonoscopy video sequences. Only the images with polyps were considered, resulting in
a total of 612 images. The images are originally of resolution 384 288, but have been
resized to 256192, maintaining the aspect ratio.
5.5 Magnetic Resonance Image
All the datasets described previously contains 2D medical images. In order to evaluate
our proposed architecture with 3D medical images, we used the magnetic resonance im-
ages (MRI) from the BraTS17 competition database [44, 45]. This dataset contains 210
glioblastoma (HGG) and 75 lower grade glioma (LGG) multimodal MRI scans. These
multimodal scans include native (T1), post-contrast T1-weighted (T1Gd), T2-weighted
(T2) and T2 Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) volumes, which were ac-
quired following dierent clinical protocols and various scanners from 19 institutions.
The images are of dimensions 240 240155 but have been resized to 80 8048 for
10

==== Page 11 ====
Table 2: Overview of the Datasets.
Modality Dataset No. of images Original Resolution Input Resolution
Fluorescence Microscopy Murphy Lab 97 Variable 256256
Electron Microscopy ISBI-2012 30 512512 256256
Dermoscopy ISIC-2018 2594 Variable 256192
Endoscopy CVC-ClinicDB 612 384288 256192
MRI BraTS17210 HGG +
75 LGG240240155 808048
computational ease. All the four modalities, namely, T1, T1Gd, T2 and FLAIR are used
as four dierent channels in evaluating the 3D variant of our model.
6 Experiments
We used Python, more specically Python3 programming language to conduct the ex-
periments [46]. The network models were implemented using Keras [47] with Tensorow
backend [48]. Our model implementation is available in the following github repository:
https://github.com/nibtehaz/MultiResUNet
The experimets were conducted in a desktop computer with intel core i7-7700 proces-
sor (3.6 GHz, 8 MB cache) CPU, 16 GB RAM, and NVIDIA TITAN Xp (12 GB, 1582
MHz) GPU.
6.1 Baseline Model
Since the proposed architecture, MultiResUNet, is targeted towards improving the state
of the art U-Net architecture for medical image segmentation, we compared its perfor-
mance with the U-Net architecture as the baseline. To keep the number of parameters
comparable to our proposed MultiResUNet, we implemented the original U-Net [20] hav-
ing ve layer deep encoder and decoder, with lter numbers of 32, 64, 128, 256, 512.
Also, as the baseline for 3D image segmentation we used the 3D counterpart of the
U-Net as described in the original paper [28]. The 3D version of the MultiResUNet
is constructed simply by substituting the 2D convolutional layers, pooling layers and
transposed convolution layers, with their 3D variants respectively, without any further
alterations.
The number of parameters of the models are presented in Table 3. In both the cases
the proposed networks require slightly lesser number of parameters.
Table 3: Models used in our experiments
2D 3D
Model Parameters Model Parameters
U-Net (baseline) 7,759,521 3D U-Net (baseline) 19,078,593
MultiResUNet (proposed) 7,262,750 MultiResUNet 3D (proposed) 18,657,689
11

==== Page 12 ====
6.2 Pre-processing / Post-processing
The objective of the experiments is to investigate the superiority of the proposed Mul-
tiResUNet architecture over the original U-Net as a general model. Therefore, no domain
specic pre-processing was performed. The only pre-processing the input images went
through was that they were resized to t into the GPU memory and the pixel values
were divided by 255 to bring them to the [0 :::1] range. Similarly, no application specic
post-processing was performed. Since, the nal layer is activated by a Sigmoid function,
it produces outputs in the range [0 :::1]. Therefore, we applied a threshold of 0.5 to
obtain the segmentation map of the input images.
6.3 Training Methodology
The task of semantic segmentation is to predict the individual pixels whether they repre-
sent a point of interest, or are merely a part of the background. Therefore, this problem
ultimately reduces to a pixel-wise binary classication problem. Hence, as the loss func-
tion of the network we simply took the binary cross-entropy function and minimized
it.
Let, for an image X, the ground truth segmentation mask is Y, and the segmentation
mask predicted by the model is ^Y. For a pixel px, the network predicts ^ ypx, whereas, the
ground truth value is ypx. The binay cross-entropy loss for that image is dened as:
Cross Entropy (X;Y; ^Y) =X
px2X (ypxlog(^ypx) + (1 ypx) log(1 ^ypx)) (2)
For a batch containing nimages the loss function Jbecomes,
J=1
nnX
i=1Cross Entropy (Xi;Yi;^Yi) (3)
We minimized the binary cross-entropy loss, hence trained the model using the Adam
optimizer [49]. Adam adaptively computes dierent learning rates for dierent parameters
from estimates of rst and second moments of the gradients. This idea, in fact combines
the advantages of both AdaGrad [50] and RMSProp [51]; therefore Adam has been often
used in benchmarking deep learning models as the default choice [52]. Adam has a number
of parameters including 1and2which control the decay of rst and second moment
respectively. However, in this work we used Adam with the parameters mentioned in
the original paper. The models were trained for 150 epochs using Adam optimizer. The
reason of selecting 150 as the number of epochs is due to the fact that after 150 epochs
neither of the models were showing any further improvements.
6.4 Evaluation Metric
In semantic segmentation, usually the points of interest comprise a small segment of the
entire image. Therefore, metrics like precision, recall are inadequate and often lead to
false sense of superiority, inated by the perfection of detecting the background. Hence,
Jaccard Index has been widely used to evaluate and benchmark image segmentation and
12

==== Page 13 ====
object localization algorithms [2]. Jaccard Index for two sets AandBare dened as the
ratio of the intersection and union of the two sets:
Jaccard Index =Intersection
Union=A\B
A[B(4)
In our case, the set Arepresents the ground truth binary segmentation mask Y, and
setBcorresponds to the predicted binary segmentation mask ^Y. Therefore, by taking
the Jaccard Index as the metric, we not only emphasize on precise segmentation, but also
penalize under-segmentation and over-segmentation.
6.5k-Fold Cross Validation
Cross-Validation tests estimate the general eectiveness of an algorithm on an indepen-
dent dataset, ensuring a balance between bias and variance. In a k-Fold cross-validation
test, the dataset Dis randomly split into kmutually exclusive subsets D1;D 2;;Dk
of equal or near equal size [53]. The algorithm is run ktimes subsequently, each time
taking one of the ksplits as the validation set and the rest as the training set. In order to
evaluate the segmentation accuracy of both the baseline U-Net and proposed MultiRe-
sUNet architecture, we performed 5-Fold Cross Validation tests on each of the dierent
datasets.
Since, this is a deep learning pipeline, the best performing result on the validation set
achieved through the total number of epochs (150 in our case) performed is recorded in
each run. Finally, combining the results of all the kruns gives an overall estimation of
the performance of the algorithm.
7 Results
7.1 MultiResUNet Consistently Outperforms U-Net
As described in Section 5 and Section 6 to evaluate the performance of the proposed
architecture, we performed experiments with diversied classes of medical images, each
with a unique challenge of its own. In particular, we have performed 5-fold cross validation
and observed the performance of our proposed MultiResUNet and the baseline, U-Net. In
each run the best results obtained on the validation set through the 150 epochs performed
was noted and they were summarised from the 5 runs to obtain the nal result.
The results of the 5-Fold Cross Validation for both the proposed MultiResUNet model
and baseline U-Net model on the dierent datasets are presented in Table 4. It should be
noted that for better readability the fractional Jaccard Index values have been converted
to percentage ratios (%).
From the table, It can be observed that our proposed model outperforms the U-Net
architecture in segmenting all dierent types of medical images. Most notably, remarkable
improvements are observed for Dermoscopy and Endoscopy images. These images tend to
be a bit less uniform and often they appear confusing even to a trained eye (more details
are discussed in a later section). Therefore, this improvement is of great signicance. For
Fluorescence Microscopy images our model also achieve a 2 :6326% relative improvement
over U-Net, and despite having a lesser number of parameters, still it achieves a relative
13

==== Page 14 ====
Table 4: Results of 5-fold cross validation. Here, we present the best obtained results in the ve folds,
of both U-Net and MultiResUNet, for all the datasets used. We also mention the relative improvement
of MultiResUNet over U-Net. It should be noted that, for better readability the fractional values of
Jaccard Index have been converted to percentage ratios (%).
Modality MultiResUNet (%) U-Net (%) Relative Improvement (%)
Dermoscopy 80.29880.3717 76.42774.5183 5.065
Endoscopy 82.05741.5953 74.49841.4704 10.1465
Fluorescence Microscopy 91.65370.9563 89.30272.1950 2.6326
Electron Microscopy 87.94770.7741 87.40920.7071 0.6161
MRI 78.19360.7868 77.10610.7768 1.4104
improvement of 1 :4104% for MRI images. Only for Electron Microscopy images U-Net
seems to be on par with our proposed model, yet in that case the latter obtains slightly
better results (relative improvement of 0 :6161%).
7.2 MultiResUNet can Obtain Better Results in Less Number
of Epochs
In addition to analyzing the best performing models from each run, we also monitored
how the model performance progressed with epochs. In Figure 6, the performance on the
validation data on each epoch is shown, for all the datasets. We have presented the band
of Jaccard Index values at a certain epoch in the 5-fold cross validation. It can be noted
that for all the cases our proposed model attains convergance much faster. This can
be attributed to the synergy between residual connections and batch normalization [33].
Moreover, apart from Fig. 6d in all other cases the MultiResUNet model consistently
outperformed the classical U-Net model. In spite of lagging behind the U-Net at the
beginning for the electron microscopy images (Fig. 6d), eventually the MultiResUNet
model converges at a better accuracy than U-Net. Another remarkable observation from
the experiments is that except for some minor actuations, the standard deviation of the
performance of the MultiResUNet is much smaller; this indicates the reliability and the
robustness of the proposed model.
These results, therefore, suggest that using the proposed MultiResUNet architecture,
we are likely to obtain superior results in less number of training epochs as compared to
the classical U-Net architecture.
7.3 MultiResUNet Delineates Faint Boundaries Better
Being the current state of the art model for medical image segmentation, U-Net has
demonstrated quite satisfactory results in our experiments. For instance, in Fig. 7, for
a polyp with clearly distinguishable boundary the U-Net model manages to segment it
with a high value of Jaccard Index; our proposed model however performs better albeit
only slightly.
But as we study more and more challenging images, especially with not so much
conspicuous boundaries, U-Net seems to be struggling a bit (Fig. 8). The colon polyp
images often suer from the lack of clear boundaries. On such cases, the U-Net model
14

==== Page 15 ====
(a) Dermatoscopy
 (b) Endoscopy
 (c) Fluorescence Microscopy
(d) Electron Microscopy
 (e) MRI
Figure 6: Progress of the validation performance with the number of epochs. We record the value of
Jacard Index on validation data after each epoch. It can be observed that not only MultiResUNet
outperforms the U-Net model, but also the standard deviation of MultiResUNet is much smaller.
Figure 7: Segmenting a polyp with clearly visiable boundary. U-Net manages to segment the polyp with
a high level of performance (J.I. = 0.9678). MultiResUNet segments just slightly better (J.I. = 0.9697)
either under-segmented (Fig. 8a) or over-segmented (Fig. 8b) the polyps. Our proposed
MultiResUNet, on the other hand, performed considerably better in both the cases.
However, there are some images where both the models faced complications, but in those
cases MultiResUNet's performance was superior(Fig. 8c). Dermoscopic images have
comparatively clearer dened boundaries; still in those cases MultiResUNet delineats
the boundaries better (Fig. 8d). Same was observed for other types of images. We
hypothesize that the use of multiple lter sizes allows MultiResUNet to perform better
pixel perfect segmentation.
7.4 MultiResUNet is More Immune to Perturbations
The core concept of semantic segmentation is to cluster the homologous regions of an
image together. However, often in real world medical images the homologous regions
get deviated due to various types of noises, artifacts and irregularities in general. This
15

==== Page 16 ====
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 8: Segmenting images with vague boundaries. This issue is more prominent for Colon Endoscopy
images. U-Net seems to either under-segment (8a), or over-segment (8b) the polyps. MultiResUNet
manages to segment polyps of such situation much better. However, some images are too problematic
even for MultiResUNet, but in those cases as well it performs beter than U-Net (8c). Even in dermoscopy
images, where there exists a clear boundary, U-Net sometimes produced some irregularities along the
boundaries, but MultiResUNet was much more robust (8d).
makes it challenging to distinguish between the region of interest and background in
medical images. As a result, instead of obtaining a continuous segmented region, we are
often left with a collection of fractured segmented regions. At the other extreme, due to
textures and perturbations the plain background sometimes appear similar to the region of
interest. These two cases lead to loss of information and false classications respectively.
Fortunately, the Dermatoscopy image dataset we have used contains images with such
confusing cases, allowing us to analyze and compare the behaviour and performance of
the two models.
In spite of segmenting the images with near consistent background and approximately
undeviating foreground with almost perfection, the baseline U-Net model seems to strug-
gle quite a bit in the presence of perturbations in images (Fig. 9). In images where the
foreground object tend to vary a bit therein, U-Net, was unable to segment the forground
as a continuous region. It rather predicted a set of scattered regions (Fig. 9a), confusing
the forground as background and thus caused the loss of some valuable information. On
the other hand, for images where the background is not uniform, the U-Net model seems
to make some false predictions (Fig. 9b). The more rough the background becomes, the
more false predictions are made (Fig. 9c). Furthermore, in some dreadfully adverse sit-
uations, where due to irregularity the dierence between background and forground are
too subtle, the U-Net model failed to make any predictions at all (Fig. 9d). Although in
such challenging cases the segmentation of MultiResUNet is not perfect, it performs far
superior than the classical U-Net model as shown in Fig. 9. It is worth noting here that
in the initial stages of our experiments, prior to using the ResPath s, our proposed model
was also being aected by such perturbations. Therefore, we conjecture that applying
additional non-linear operations on the encoder feature maps makes it robust against
perturbations.
7.5 MultiResUNet is More Reliable Against Outliers
Often in medical images some outliers are present, which in spite of being visually quite
similar, are dierent from what we are interested in segmenting. Particularly, in the
Fluorescence Microscopy image dataset, there exist some images with bright objects,
that are apparently almost indistinguishable from the actual nuclei. Such an example is
16

==== Page 17 ====
(a)
 (b)
 (c)
 (d)
Figure 9: Segmenting images with irregularities. For images where the foreground is not consistent
throughout, instead of segmenting it as a continuous region, U-Net seems to have predicted a set of
small regions (9a). For images with rough backgrounds U-Net classied them as the foreground (9b),
the more irregular the background, the more false predictions were made (9c). To the other extreme, for
images where dierence between foreground and background is too subtle, U-Net missed the foreground
completely (9d). Though the segmentations produced by MultiResUNet in these challenging cases are
not perfect, they were consistently better than that of the U-Net.
shown in Fig. 10.
Figure 10: Segmenting images containing outliers. In the uorescence microscopy images, the exist some
bright particles, visually very similar to the cell nuclei under analysis. Although MultiResUNet can
identify and reject those outliers, U-Net seems to have missclassied them.
It can be observed that the input image is infected with some small particles that
are not actual cell nuclei. However, if we study the segmentation mask generated from
U-Net, it turns out that U-Net has mistakenly predicted those outlier particles to be
cell nuclei. On the other hand, our proposed MultiResUNet seems to be able to reject
those outliers. Since the outliers are pretty tiny, false predictions made by the U-Net
model does not hurt the value of Jaccard Index that much (0 :9317 instead of 0 :9643,
when outliers are ltered out). Nevertheless, being able to segregate these outliers are
of substantial signicance. It can be noted that, similar types of visually similar outliers
were present in other datasets as well, and MultiResUNet was able to segment the images
reliably without making false predictions.
7.6 Note on Segmenting the Majority Class
The Electron Microscopy dataset we used in our experiments is quite interesting and
unorthodox as in this dataset the region of interest under consideration actually comprises
the majority of the images. This is a rare incident since usually the region of interest
consists of a small portion of the image. This brings a dierent type of challenge as in
such a case the models tend to over-segment the images unnecessarily to minimize the
losses during training. A relevant example is presented in Fig. 11.
17

==== Page 18 ====
Figure 11: Segmenting the Majority Class. Here we can observe that the region of interest comprises
most part of the image. Despite the values of Jacard Index for both U-Net and MultiResUNet are
quite similar, visually the segmentation mask are very dierent. It can be seen that segmentation mask
generated from MultiResUNet captures most of the ne separating lines, but U-Net tends to miss them.
Moreover, there are some clusters of background pixels which although are missed by U-Net, have been
roughly identied by MultiResUNet. Since the class being segmented is the majority class, the values of
Jacard Index are inated.
Here, it can be observed quite astonishingly that the majority of the image is actually
forground (Fig. 11b), with some narrow separations among them by the background, i.e.,
membranes in this context. If we analyze the segmentation predicted by U-Net, it appears
that those ne lines of separation have often been missed (Fig. 11d). MultiResUNet, on
the other hand, have managed to segment the regions with properly dened separations
among them (Fig. 11c). Also, it can be observed that there are some small clusters of
background pixels, which have been captured with some success in the segmentation mask
predicted by MultiResUNet, but are almost non-existent in the segmentation performed
by U-Net. Furthermore, the result generated by MultiResUNet seems to be more immune
to the noises present in the image.
Despite the two segmentations (i.e. the results of MultiResUNet and U-Net) are very
dierent from each other, the values of the respective Jaccard Index are quite alike (0 :8914
and 0:8841 as shown in Fig. 11). This is due to the fact that, the metric Jaccard Index has
been inated with the results of segmenting the majority class of the image. Therefore,
the value of Jaccard Index is not that much of a proper representative of accuracy while
segmenting the majority class. Despite predicting much inferior segmentations, for this
reason the Jaccard Index of U-Net are very close to that of MultiResUNet. Thus, among
all the dierent datasets, the improvement in terms of metric has been underwhelming
in this dataset but the predicted segmentations are more accurate visually.
8 Conclusion
In this work, we started by analyzing the U-Net architecture diligently, with the hope
of nding potential rooms for improvement. We anticipated some discrepancy between
the features passed from the encoder network and the features propagating through the
decoder network. To reconcile these two incompatible sets of features, we proposed Res
paths, that introduce some additional processing to make the two feature maps more ho-
mogeneous. Furthermore, to augment U-Net with the ability of multi-resolutiona analysis,
we proposed MultiRes blocks. We took inspirations from Inception blocks and formu-
lated a compact analogous structure, that was lightweight and demanded less memory.
Incorporating these modications, we developed a novel architecture, MultiResUNet.
Among the handful publicly available biomedical image datasets, we selected the ones
18

==== Page 19 ====
that were drastically dierent from each other. Additionally each of these datasets poses
a separate challenge of its own. The Murphy Lab Fluorescence Microscopy dataset is
possibly the simplest dataset for performing segmentation, having an acute dierence in
contrast between the forground, i.e., the cell nuclei and the background, but contains
some outliers. The CVC-ClinicDB dataset contains colon endoscopy images where the
boundaries between the polyps and the background are so vague that often it becomes
dicult to distinguish even for a trained operator. In addition, the polyps are diverse in
terms of shape, size, structure, orientation etc., making this dataset indeed a challenging
one. On the other hand, the dermoscopy dataset of ISIC-2018 competition contains
images of poor contrast to the extent that sometimes the skin lesions seem identical
to the background and vice versa. Moreover, various types of textures present in both
the background and the foreground make pattern recognition quite dicult. ISBI-2012
electron microscopy dataset presents a dierent type of challenge. In this dataset the
region being segmented covers the majority of the image; thus a tendency is observed
to over-segment the images. The BraTS17 MRI dataset, on the other hand contains
multimodal 3D images, which is a dierent problem alltogether.
For perfect or near perfect images U-Net manages to perform segmentation with
remarkable accuracy. Our proposed architecture performs only slightly better than U-
Net in those cases. However, for intricate images suering from noises, perturbations, lack
of clear boundaries etc., the gain in performance by MultiResUNet dramatically increases.
More specically, for the ve datasets a relative improvement in performance of 10.15%,
5.07%, 2.63%, 1.41%, and 0.62% were observed in using MultiResUNet over U-Net (Table
4). Not only the segmentations generated by MultiResUNet attain higher score in the
evaluation metric, they are also visually more similar to the ground truth. Furthermore,
on the very challenging images U-Net tended to over-segment, under-segment, make false
predictions and even miss the objects completely. On the contrary, in the experiments
MultiResUNet appeared to be more reliable and robust. MultiResUNet managed to
detect even the most subtle boundaries, was resilient in segmenting images with a lot
of perturbations, and was rejectable to the outliers. Even in segmenting the majority
class, where the U-Net tended to over-segment, MultiResUNet managed to capture the
ne details. Furthermore, the 3D adaptation of MultiResUNet performed better than
3D U-Net, which is not just a straightforward 3D implementation of the U-Net, but an
enhanced and improved version. It should be noted that, the segmentations generated by
the proposed MultiResUNet were not perfect, but in most of the cases it outperformed
the classical U-Net by a large margin.
Therefore, we believe our proposed MultiResUNet architecture can be the potential
successor to the classical U-Net architecture. The future direction of this research has
several branches. In this work, we have been motivated to keep the number of parameters
of our model comparable to that of the U-Net model. However, in future we wish to
conduct experiments to determine the best set of hyperparameters for the model more
exhaustively. Moreover, we would like to evaluate our model performance on medical
images originating from other modalities as well. Furthermore, we are interested in
experimenting by applying several domain and application specic pre-processing and
post-processing schemes to our model. We believe fusing our model to a domain specic
expert knowledge based pipeline, and coupling it with proper post-processing stages will
improve our model performance further, and allow us to develop better segmentation
19

==== Page 20 ====
methods for diversied applications.
Acknowledgements
The Titan Xp GPU used for this research was the generous donation of NVIDIA Corpo-
ration.
Supplementary information
Supplementary Material 1 : contains the links to the weights and parameters of the
best performing models in each fold for all the datasets.
Supplementary Material 2 : provides the random data splits of the datasets obtained
using standard methods of Scikit-learn [54].
Supplementary Material 3 : presents the detailed experimental results.
References
[1] Johannes Schindelin, Curtis T Rueden, Mark C Hiner, and Kevin W Eliceiri. The
imagej ecosystem: an open platform for biomedical image analysis. Molecular repro-
duction and development , 82(7-8):518{529, 2015.
[2] Kevin McGuinness and Noel E O'connor. A comparative evaluation of interactive
segmentation algorithms. Pattern Recognition , 43(2):434{444, 2010.
[3] Noel CF Codella, David Gutman, M Emre Celebi, Brian Helba, Michael A Marchetti,
Stephen W Dusza, Aadi Kalloo, Konstantinos Liopyris, Nabin Mishra, Harald Kit-
tler, et al. Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection: A challenge at the 2017
international symposium on biomedical imaging (isbi), hosted by the international
skin imaging collaboration (isic). In Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2018), 2018 IEEE
15th International Symposium on , pages 168{172. IEEE, 2018.
[4] Jinzhong Yang, Harini Veeraraghavan, Samuel G Armato III, Keyvan Farahani,
Justin S Kirby, Jayashree Kalpathy-Kramer, Wouter van Elmpt, Andre Dekker, Xiao
Han, Xue Feng, et al. Autosegmentation for thoracic radiation treatment planning:
A grand challenge at aapm 2017. Medical physics , 2018.
[5] Shivang Naik, Scott Doyle, Shannon Agner, Anant Madabhushi, Michael Feldman,
and John Tomaszewski. Automated gland and nuclei segmentation for grading of
prostate and breast cancer histopathology. In Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to
Macro, 2008. ISBI 2008. 5th IEEE International Symposium on , pages 284{287.
IEEE, 2008.
[6] Rahimeh Rouhi, Mehdi Jafari, Shohreh Kasaei, and Peiman Keshavarzian. Benign
and malignant breast tumors classication based on region growing and cnn segmen-
tation. Expert Systems with Applications , 42(3):990{1002, 2015.
20

==== Page 21 ====
[7] Dzung L Pham, Chenyang Xu, and Jerry L Prince. Current methods in medical
image segmentation. Annual review of biomedical engineering , 2(1):315{337, 2000.
[8] Pablo Mesejo, Andrea Valsecchi, Linda Marrakchi-Kacem, Stefano Cagnoni, and
Sergio Damas. Biomedical image segmentation using geometric deformable models
and metaheuristics. Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics , 43:167{178, 2015.
[9] Yuhui Zheng, Byeungwoo Jeon, Danhua Xu, QM Wu, and Hui Zhang. Image seg-
mentation by generalized hierarchical fuzzy c-means algorithm. Journal of Intelligent
& Fuzzy Systems , 28(2):961{973, 2015.
[10] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Georey Hinton. Deep learning. nature ,
521(7553):436, 2015.
[11] Yann LeCun, L eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haner. Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278{
2324, 1998.
[12] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Georey E Hinton. Imagenet classication with
deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 1097{1105, 2012.
[13] Pierre Sermanet, David Eigen, Xiang Zhang, Micha el Mathieu, Rob Fergus, and
Yann LeCun. Overfeat: Integrated recognition, localization and detection using
convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6229 , 2013.
[14] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[15] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir
Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going
deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pages 1{9, 2015.
[16] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pages 770{778, 2016.
[17] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander A Alemi.
Inception-v4, inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning.
InAAAI , volume 4, page 12, 2017.
[18] Dan Ciresan, Alessandro Giusti, Luca M Gambardella, and J urgen Schmidhuber.
Deep neural networks segment neuronal membranes in electron microscopy images.
InAdvances in neural information processing systems , pages 2843{2851, 2012.
[19] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pages 3431{3440, 2015.
21

==== Page 22 ====
[20] Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, and Roberto Cipolla. Segnet: A deep con-
volutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.00561 , 2015.
[21] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin Murphy, and
Alan L Yuille. Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets,
atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence , 40(4):834{848, 2018.
[22] Geert Litjens, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Arnaud Arindra Adiyoso
Setio, Francesco Ciompi, Mohsen Ghafoorian, Jeroen Awm Van Der Laak, Bram
Van Ginneken, and Clara I S anchez. A survey on deep learning in medical image
analysis. Medical image analysis , 42:60{88, 2017.
[23] Syed Muhammad Anwar, Muhammad Majid, Adnan Qayyum, Muhammad Awais,
Majdi Alnowami, and Muhammad Khurram Khan. Medical image analysis using
convolutional neural networks: a review. Journal of medical systems , 42(11):226,
2018.
[24] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234{241. Springer, 2015.
[25] Patrick Ferdinand Christ, Mohamed Ezzeldin A Elshaer, Florian Ettlinger, Sunil
Tatavarty, Marc Bickel, Patrick Bilic, Markus Remper, Marco Armbruster, Felix
Hofmann, Melvin D'Anastasi, et al. Automatic liver and lesion segmentation in ct
using cascaded fully convolutional neural networks and 3d conditional random elds.
InInternational Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention , pages 415{423. Springer, 2016.
[26] Bill S Lin, Kevin Michael, Shivam Kalra, and Hamid R Tizhoosh. Skin lesion segmen-
tation: U-nets versus clustering. In 2017 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational
Intelligence (SSCI) , pages 1{7. IEEE, 2017.
[27] Korsuk Sirinukunwattana, Josien PW Pluim, Hao Chen, Xiaojuan Qi, Pheng-Ann
Heng, Yun Bo Guo, Li Yang Wang, Bogdan J Matuszewski, Elia Bruni, Urko
Sanchez, et al. Gland segmentation in colon histology images: The glas challenge
contest. Medical image analysis , 35:489{502, 2017.
[28] Ozg un C  i cek, Ahmed Abdulkadir, Soeren S Lienkamp, Thomas Brox, and Olaf Ron-
neberger. 3d u-net: learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation.
InInternational Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention , pages 424{432. Springer, 2016.
[29] Jameson Merkow, Alison Marsden, David Kriegman, and Zhuowen Tu. Dense
volume-to-volume vascular boundary detection. In International Conference on Med-
ical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 371{379. Springer,
2016.
22

==== Page 23 ====
[30] Arnaud Arindra Adiyoso Setio, Alberto Traverso, Thomas De Bel, Moira SN Berens,
Cas van den Bogaard, Piergiorgio Cerello, Hao Chen, Qi Dou, Maria Evelina Fan-
tacci, Bram Geurts, et al. Validation, comparison, and combination of algorithms
for automatic detection of pulmonary nodules in computed tomography images: the
luna16 challenge. Medical image analysis , 42:1{13, 2017.
[31] Lequan Yu, Xin Yang, Hao Chen, Jing Qin, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Volumetric
convnets with mixed residual connections for automated prostate segmentation from
3d mr images. In AAAI , pages 66{72, 2017.
[32] M. D. Zeiler, D. Krishnan, G. W. Taylor, and R. Fergus. Deconvolutional networks.
In2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition , pages 2528{2535, June 2010.
[33] Michal Drozdzal, Eugene Vorontsov, Gabriel Chartrand, Samuel Kadoury, and Chris
Pal. The importance of skip connections in biomedical image segmentation. In Deep
Learning and Data Labeling for Medical Applications , pages 179{187. Springer, 2016.
[34] Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wo-
jna. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2818{2826,
2016.
[35] Sergey Ioe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network
training by reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167 , 2015.
[36] Lu s Pedro Coelho, Aabid Shari, and Robert F Murphy. Nuclear segmentation in
microscope cell images: a hand-segmented dataset and comparison of algorithms.
InBiomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2009. ISBI'09. IEEE International
Symposium on , pages 518{521. IEEE, 2009.
[37] Thomas Serre, Lior Wolf, Stanley Bileschi, Maximilian Riesenhuber, and Tomaso
Poggio. Robust object recognition with cortex-like mechanisms. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence , (3):411{426, 2007.
[38] Panqu Wang, Pengfei Chen, Ye Yuan, Ding Liu, Zehua Huang, Xiaodi Hou, and
Garrison Cottrell. Understanding convolution for semantic segmentation. In 2018
IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 1451{
1460. IEEE, 2018.
[39] Xiao-Jiao Mao, Chunhua Shen, and Yu-Bin Yang. Image restoration using
convolutional auto-encoders with symmetric skip connections. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.08921 , 2016.
[40] Ignacio Arganda-Carreras, Srinivas C Turaga, Daniel R Berger, Dan Cire san,
Alessandro Giusti, Luca M Gambardella, J urgen Schmidhuber, Dmitry Laptev,
Sarvesh Dwivedi, Joachim M Buhmann, et al. Crowdsourcing the creation of image
segmentation algorithms for connectomics. Frontiers in neuroanatomy , 9:142, 2015.
23

==== Page 24 ====
[41] Albert Cardona, Stephan Saalfeld, Stephan Preibisch, Benjamin Schmid, Anchi
Cheng, Jim Pulokas, Pavel Tomancak, and Volker Hartenstein. An integrated micro-
and macroarchitectural analysis of the drosophila brain by computer-assisted serial
section electron microscopy. PLoS biology , 8(10):e1000502, 2010.
[42] Philipp Tschandl, Cli Rosendahl, and Harald Kittler. The ham10000 dataset: A
large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin
lesions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10417 , 2018.
[43] Jorge Bernal, F Javier S anchez, Gloria Fern andez-Esparrach, Debora Gil, Cristina
Rodr guez, and Fernando Vilari~ no. Wm-dova maps for accurate polyp highlighting
in colonoscopy: Validation vs. saliency maps from physicians. Computerized Medical
Imaging and Graphics , 43:99{111, 2015.
[44] Bjoern H Menze, Andras Jakab, Stefan Bauer, Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Keyvan
Farahani, Justin Kirby, Yuliya Burren, Nicole Porz, Johannes Slotboom, Roland
Wiest, et al. The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (brats).
IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 34(10):1993, 2015.
[45] Spyridon Bakas, Hamed Akbari, Aristeidis Sotiras, Michel Bilello, Martin Rozycki,
Justin S Kirby, John B Freymann, Keyvan Farahani, and Christos Davatzikos. Ad-
vancing the cancer genome atlas glioma mri collections with expert segmentation
labels and radiomic features. Scientic data , 4:170117, 2017.
[46] Guido Van Rossum et al. Python programming language. In USENIX Annual
Technical Conference , volume 41, page 36, 2007.
[47] Fran cois Chollet et al. Keras, 2015.
[48] Mart n Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jerey
Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Georey Irving, Michael Isard, et al.
Tensorow: a system for large-scale machine learning. In OSDI , volume 16, pages
265{283, 2016.
[49] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[50] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for
online learning and stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
12(Jul):2121{2159, 2011.
[51] Tijmen Tieleman and Georey Hinton. Lecture 6.5-rmsprop: Divide the gradient
by a running average of its recent magnitude. COURSERA: Neural networks for
machine learning , 4(2):26{31, 2012.
[52] Sebastian Ruder. An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.04747 , 2016.
[53] Ron Kohavi et al. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation
and model selection. In Ijcai, volume 14, pages 1137{1145. Montreal, Canada, 1995.
24

==== Page 25 ====
[54] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blon-
del, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Courna-
peau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12:2825{2830, 2011.
25

