==== Page 1 ====
applied  
sciences 
Editorial
Multi-Agent Systems
Vicente Julian *,†
and Vicente Botti *,†
Departamento de Sistemas Informáticos y Computación, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia,
Camino de Vera s-n, 46980 Valencia, Spain
*Correspondence: vinglada@dsic.upv.es (V .J.); vbotti@dsic.upv.es (V .B.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received: 29 March 2019; Accepted: 29 March 2019; Published: 3 April 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: With the current advance of technology, agent-based applications are becoming a
standard in a great variety of domains such as e-commerce, logistics, supply chain management,
telecommunications, healthcare, and manufacturing. Another reason for the widespread interest in
multi-agent systems is that these systems are seen as a technology and a tool that helps in the analysis
and development of new models and theories in large-scale distributed systems or in human-centered
systems. This last aspect is currently of great interest due to the need for democratization in the use of
technology that allows people without technical preparation to interact with the devices in a simple
and coherent way. In this Special Issue, different interesting approaches that advance this research
discipline have been selected and presented.
Keywords: multi-agent systems; agent methodologies; agent-based simulation; ambient intelligence;
smart cities
1. Introduction
The concept of n intelligent agent is a concept that is born from the area of artiﬁcial intelligence;
in fact, a commonly-accepted deﬁnition relates the discipline of artiﬁcial intelligence with the analysis
and design of autonomous entities capable of exhibiting intelligent behavior. From that perspective,
it is assumed that an intelligent agent must be able to perceive its environment, reason about how
to achieve its objectives, act towards achieving them through the application of some principle of
rationality, and interact with other intelligent agents, being artiﬁcial or human [1].
Multi-agent systems are a particular case of a distributed system, and its particularity lies in
the fact that the components of the system are autonomous and selﬁsh, seeking to satisfy their own
objectives. In addition, these systems also stand out for being open systems without a centralized
design [ 2]. One main reason for the great interest and attention that multi-agent systems have received
is that they are seen as an enabling technology for complex applications that require distributed and
parallel processing of data and operate autonomously in complex and dynamic domains.
Research in the discipline of multi-agent systems (MAS) is based on the results of distributed
computing asking new questions about how agents must interact with each other in order to coordinate
their activities and solve complex problems. Most current research focuses on designing appropriate
coordination mechanisms for managing coalitions or teams of agents. The programming of intelligent
agents poses complex challenges to engineers because in addition to the complexity of designing
concurrent and distributed systems, there is the added complexity that the components must have
an architecture that includes aspects such as reactivity ,proactivity , and sociability . These properties are
not easy to program when the environment is dynamic and complex. In order to achieve real agent
programming, a multitude of proposals have been made, by many researchers, for agent architectures,
communication languages, and decision-making and coordination mechanisms. In the latter case,
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402; doi:10.3390/app9071402 www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

==== Page 2 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 2 of 7
the need arises that agents have to be able to reach agreements in order to be able to operate in a
multi-agent system. Here lies an important aspect of the programming complexity of intelligent agents.
This Special Issue attempts to advance the paradigm of multi-agent systems by proposing new
works in different areas of interest. In this way, works are proposed in the areas of agent-oriented
software engineering, multi-agent learning, agent based simulation, and agent applications in highly
topical domains such as smart cities and ambient intelligence. The following sections detail the selected
contributions in each of these areas.
2. MAS and Methodologies
Within the framework of artiﬁcial intelligence, multi-agent systems have been characterized by
offering a possible solution to the development of complex problems with distributed characteristics.
When approaching the development of multi-agent systems, there is undoubtedly a signiﬁcant increase
in complexity, as well as the need for adapting existing techniques, or in some situations, developing
new techniques and tools. In recent years, different works have appeared trying to propose new
processes and techniques for the development of multi-agent systems [3].
The construction of MAS integrates technologies from different areas of knowledge: software
engineering techniques to structure the development process; AI techniques to provide systems with
the capacity to deal with unexpected situations and to make decisions, and concurrent programming to
address task coordination executed on different machines under different scheduling policies. Due to
this mix of technologies, the development of MASis complicated. In this sense, during the last few
years, there have been different development platforms and tools that provide partial solutions for the
modeling and design of agent-based systems [4].
There is still much work to be done in this area. Thus, in this Special Issue, three works
related to agent-oriented software engineering have been included. The ﬁrst work [ 5] shows how
accountability plays a central role in MAS engineering. Accountability is a well-known key resource
inside human organizations, and the idea of this proposal is to propose the design of agent systems
where accountability is a property that is guaranteed by design. The authors proposed an interaction
protocol, called ADOPT, that allows the realization of accountable MAS organizations. The proposed
protocol has been implements using JaCaMo [ 6], allowing one to demonstrate how to develop agents
and the organization to which they belong, being mutually accountable.
The second work [ 7] proposed a new development methodology for the development of MAS
working in semantic web environments. The proposed methodology is based on a domain-speciﬁc
modeling language, called Semantic Web-Enabled Agent Modeling Language (SEA_ML) [ 8]. The study
was demonstrated using a case study implemented using the well-known JACKplatform (http://
aosgrp.com/products/jack/). The proposed example consists of a set of agents that exchange services
or goods of owners according to their preferences without using any currency. Finally, the third
work [ 9] introduced an agent development framework for mobile devices. The proposed framework
allows users to build intelligent agents with the typical agent-oriented attributes of social ability,
reactivity, proactivity, and autonomy. Actually, the main contribution is the linked data support of
the framework. Linked data support corresponds to the ability to supply the agent’s beliefs from
the linked data environment and to use those beliefs during the planning process. According to the
authors, these kinds of agent development frameworks, speciﬁcally addressed for mobile devices,
will be of great importance in domains such as cyber physical systems and the Internet of Things in
the near future.
3. MAS and Learning
Learning in MAS is a paradigm of great importance because a system capable of learning and
changing its way of acting dynamically provides great potential to face many problems for which we
do not know the behavior of other agents in the environment. This adds more levels of difﬁculty in

==== Page 3 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 3 of 7
tasks of consensus and coordination between agents, as they may be learning at all times and changing
their behavior.
Multi-Agent Learning (MAL) [ 10] allows us to design certain guidelines from which an agent
will be able to exploit the dynamics of its environment and use them to adapt to it. In a multi-agent
environment, learning is both more important and more difﬁcult, since the selection of actions has
to be done in the presence of other agents, who do not necessarily have to follow the rules of the
environment and can make non-deterministic decisions. These agents in turn will adapt their actions
to those previously carried out by the other agents. The problems seen in the MAL have a strong
relationship with the theory of games, in which an agent selects actions to maximize his/her advantage
over the rest.
In the area of MAS learning, this Special Issue contributes with two papers. The ﬁrst one [ 11] dealt
with the problem of coordinated control of multiple hovercrafts. To address this problem, the authors
proposed the design of coordinated control algorithms for multiple agents. For a single vehicle, they
proposed to use Radial Basis Function Neural Networks (RBFNNs) to improve the robustness of the
controller. For multiple vehicles, they considered the use of a directed topology, but considering that
communication among vehicles is continuous.
The second work [ 12] proposed an approach to learn behavior models as behavior trees for
autonomous agents. The main goal of the proposal is to facilitate behavior modeling for autonomous
agents in simulation and computer games. The experiments, carried out on the Pac-Man game
environment, showed the effectiveness of the proposal, although it is necessary to broaden the
applications of the proposed approach in more complex scenarios and conﬁgurations.
4. MAS in Ambient Intelligence
Ambient Intelligence (AmI) was built to respond to the technological call to monitor and act in
the homes of people with disabilities. Its aim was to create a nest of sensor systems that together
could provide more information than alone, thus transforming data into knowledge [ 13–15]. This is
achieved by incorporating digital environments that are sensitive to people’s needs, can respond to
their requirements, anticipate behaviors, and adjust the response accordingly. In the last few years,
several projects have been developed to attend to the needs of the AmI, being very recently under the
focus of the industry, a result of the advances of the sensor systems and their decrease of cost, as well
as the introduction into mobile devices. Furthermore, the advances of the Internet of Things (IoT) have
introduced a new hypothesis of communicating with the home appliances and, above all, introducing
them in the home network where they can be remotely controlled [16–18].
Over the last few years, MAS have been employed as a tool for the development of many AmI
frameworks. As examples, we can highlight the iGendaframework [ 19,20], which has as its main goal
providing intelligent event management, consisting of a platform that receives events from other users
and tries to schedule them according to its importance, having the ability to create, move, and delete
events. Moreover, aiming for the implementation of the active aging concept, it schedules ludic
activities in the users’ free time, adjusted to their medical conditions, user shared events being the last
implemented feature. Another example is ALZ-MAS [ 21], which consists of an Ambient Intelligence
framework based on multi-agent technology aimed at enhancing the assistance and health care for
Alzheimer patients.
In this Special Issue, three new contributions in this area have been presented. The ﬁrst one [ 22]
presented a tool, the goal of which is to assist in creating a work environment that is adapted to
the needs of people with disabilities. The tool measures the degree of accessibility in the place of
work and identiﬁes the architectural barriers of the environment by considering the activities carried
out by workers. A case study was conducted to assess the performance of the system, analyzing
the accessibility of the different jobs in a real company. Although the tool was initially conceived
of for the detection of accessibility problems in ofﬁce environments, it can be considered a valid

==== Page 4 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 4 of 7
tool for the simulation of any agent production process representing human beings in the ﬁeld of
ofﬁce environments.
The second contribution [ 23] explored the representation of user interaction levels using an
intelligent hybrid system approach with agents. The authors considered the use of an intelligent
hybrid approach to provide a decision-making system to an agent that self-evaluates interactions in
interactive modules in a museum exhibition. The main goal of this work was to provide a solution to
the problem of overcrowding in museums, making museums smart spaces with multi-user adaptive
interaction exhibitions. As a case study, the authors built software agents that represented a high-level
abstraction of a gallery, speciﬁcally an interactive exhibition module in a real museum in Mexico.
Finally, the third work [ 24] presented CogHelper, which is an orientation system for people with
cognitive disabilities. The main idea is that using this system, people with cognitive disabilities may
have a more active life, reducing the worry of getting lost both indoors and outdoors. CogHelper will
guide users taking into consideration his preferences. To achieve this behavior, the proposed system
applies a speculative computation module [ 25], which needs to be loaded by the traveling path before
its execution. For the moment, the system is just a prototype, and authors will test the entire system in
real case scenarios in the near future.
5. MAS and Simulation
Agent-based simulation is an approach to modeling systems, which focuses on the simulation
of complex technical systems that are distributed and involve complex interaction between humans
and machines [ 26]. It can be seen as a type of computational model that allows the simulation of
actions and interactions of autonomous individuals within an environment and allows determining
what effects they produce in the system as a whole. It combines elements of game theory, complex
systems, emergency, computational sociology, multi-agent systems, and evolutionary programming.
The models simulate the simultaneous operations of multiple entities (agents) in an attempt to recreate
and predict the actions of complex phenomena. It is an emergency process from the most elementary
level (micro) to the highest level (macro).
In this way, agent-based simulation can be seen as a powerful research method that allows dealing
in a simple way with the complexity, the emergency, and the non-linearity typical of many social,
political, and economic phenomena [ 27] through mechanisms that allude to the actions of agents and
the structure of the interaction between them.
In this Special Issue, the work proposed in [ 28] took into account the problem of the simulation
of Double Action (DA) markets [ 29]: both buyers and sellers submit their bids, and an auctioneer
determines resource allocation and prices on the basis of their bids. Recent works have not considered
the ﬂuctuating nature of perishable goods markets, where supply and demand change dynamically
and unpredictably. To solve the problem, the authors have developed an online DA market, in which
multiple buyers and sellers dynamically tender their bids for trading commodities before their due
dates. The experimental results using multi-agent simulation showed that the proposed DA mechanism
was effective at promoting the truthful behavior of traders for realizing the fair distribution of large
utilities between sellers and buyers. With this work, the authors hope to contribute to promoting
successful deployment of electronic markets for ﬁsheries and improve the welfare of people in the area
by attracting more traders online.
Moreover, the work presented in [ 22], mentioned in the previous section, can also be seen as a
simulation platform for a 3D environment, which is capable of modeling and enabling simulations in
ofﬁce environments.
6. MAS in Smart Cities
The concept of the smart city [ 30] arises from the need to ﬁnd a solution to rapid population
growth and the risks this entails for a city, economic risks such as unemployment or physical risks
such as over-pollution. To solve these problems, different technologies, among many others, have been

==== Page 5 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 5 of 7
applied in order to ﬁnd solutions in this area. Multi-agent systems together with the Internet of
Things [18] are traditionally the most employed.
Typically, these concepts come together, designing intercommunicated networks that responds to
the needs of citizens both individually and as a whole and also monitoring through sensors the levels
of pollution, trafﬁc, noise, etc. A smart city is a great intercommunicated organism that, together with
an intelligent government, seeks to improve the quality of life of its citizens [31].
Therefore, a smart city would be full of sensors constantly collecting information about actions
that happen in the city, humidity sensors, temperature sensors, noise, pollution, etc. All these sensors
are part of a data collection system that will be responsible for processing information quickly and
intelligently. It is for this point where the use of multi-agent systems make sense. The decentralized
control of an MAS offers the possibility of managing all available information in a distributed way and
also coordinating possible actions effectively over the city. Moreover, decision making processes, apart
from being coordinated, can execute in parallel actions at different points of the city, without a strong
centralized control, which gives greater ﬂexibility and adaptation to the whole system.
This Special Issue contributes with three works in the area of smart cities. The ﬁrst work [ 32]
proposed a multi-agent system that provides visualization and prediction tools for bike sharing systems.
The proposed MAS includes an agent that performs data collection and cleaning processes, and it is
also capable of creating demand forecasting models for each bicycle station. The authors included a
case study, which validated the proposed system, by implementing it in a public bicycle sharing system
in Salamanca, called SalenBici. In the proposed solution, the information collected was employed
by the agents who performed demand forecasting. Moreover, different regression algorithms have
also been employed in the process of bike demand prediction. Additionally, a statistical analysis has
been performed in order to show the differences in their performance and to determine the relevance
of results. The second approach presented in this Special Issue regarding smart cities is the work
done in [ 33], where a multi-agent system was proposed, in order to facilitate the analysis of different
possible placement conﬁgurations for electric vehicles charging stations in a city. The MAS proposed in
this paper integrates the information extracted from heterogeneous data sources as a starting point to
specify the areas where future charging stations could potentially be placed. To do this, the proposed
MAS integrates an optimization algorithm, which is in charge of the locating process. Finally, the third
contribution, presented in [ 34], analyzed the use of agreement technologies [ 35], which envisions
the next-generation of open distributed systems, where interactions between software components
are based on the concept of agreement. In this sense, the authors increased the coordination among
entities using agreement technologies in the domain of smart cities as a way to enable the development
of novel applications. Concretely, they proposed the use of these techniques in a speciﬁc domain
such as the coordination in emergency medical services, which includes many tasks that require
ﬂexible, on-demand negotiation, initiation, coordination, information exchange, and supervision
among different involved entities. All these aspects can be solved through the use of, as previously
mentioned, agreement technologies.
7. Conclusions
As it has been possible to observe throughout the analysis carried out on the accepted articles,
research on MAS continues to provide technological solutions in a wide variety of domains.
MAS researchers develop new advances that allow the development of more powerful, ﬂexible,
and adapted systems that allow predicting a fruitful future. This Special Issue of Applied Sciences
gives us a precise view of the area covering different hot topics.
The high number of submissions and the quality of the selected works gives us an idea of the
potential of the multi-agent systems area and their excellent health after more than two decades of
research. In this way , the main goal of this Special Issue is considered to be more than reached, which has
allowed us to extend it to new editions to continue disseminating high-quality works in this area.

==== Page 6 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 6 of 7
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The Guest Editors would like to thank all the authors that have participated in this Special
Issue and also the reference contact in MDPI, Daria Shi, for all the work dedicated to the success of this
Special Issue.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Russell, S.; Norvig, P . Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach , 3rd ed.; Prentice Hall Press: Upper Saddle River,
NJ, USA, 2009.
2. Wooldridge, M. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems , 2nd ed.; Wiley Publishing: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2009.
3. Shehory, O.; Sturm, A. Agent-Oriented Software Engineering: Reﬂections on Architectures, Methodologies,
Languages, and Frameworks ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014.
4. Kravari, K.; Bassiliades, N. A Survey of Agent Platforms. J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simul. 2015 ,18, 11. [CrossRef]
5. Baldoni, M.; Baroglio, C.; May, K.; Micalizio, R.; Tedeschi, S. Computational accountability in MAS
organizations with ADOPT. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 489. [CrossRef]
6. Boissier, O.; Bordini, R.H.; Hübner, J.F.; Ricci, A.; Santi, A. Multi-agent Oriented Programming with JaCaMo.
Sci. Comput. Program. 2013 ,78, 747–761. [CrossRef]
7. Challenger, M.; Tezel, B.; Alaca, O.; Tekinerdogan, B.; Kardas, G. Development of semantic web-enabled BDI
multi-agent systems using SEA ML: an electronic bartering case study. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 688. [CrossRef]
8. Challenger, M.; Demirkol, S.; Getir, S.; Mernik, M.; Kardas, G.; Kosar, T. On the Use of a Domain-specific
Modeling Language in the Development of Multiagent Systems. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2014 ,28, 111–141.
[CrossRef]
9. Boztepe, I.; Erdur, R. Linked Data Aware Agent Development Framework for Mobile Devices. Appl. Sci.
2018 ,8, 1831. [CrossRef]
10. Shoham, Y.; Powers, R.; Grenager, T. If Multi-agent Learning is the Answer, What is the Question? Artif. Intell.
2007 ,171, 365–377. [CrossRef]
11. Duan, K.; Fong, S.; Zhuang, Y.; Song, W. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks in Coordinated Control of Multiple
Hovercrafts with Unmodeled Terms. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 862. [CrossRef]
12. Zhang, Q.; Yao, J.; Yin, Q.; Zha, Y. Learning Behavior Trees for Autonomous Agents with Hybrid Constraints
Evolution. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 1077. [CrossRef]
13. Aarts, E.H.; Encarnação, J.L. True Visions: The Emergence of Ambient Intelligence ; Springer Science & Business
Media: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006.
14. Aarts, E.; Harwig, E.; Schuurmans, M. Ambient Intelligence. In The Invisible Future ; Denning, J.; Ed.;
McGraw-Hill, Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2001.
15. Cook, D.J.; Augusto, J.C.; Jakkula, V .R. Ambient intelligence: Technologies, applications, and opportunities.
Pervasive Mob. Comput. 2009 ,5, 277–298. [CrossRef]
16. Kranz, M.; Holleis, P .; Schmidt, A. Embedded interaction: Interacting with the internet of things.
IEEE Internet Comput. 2010 ,14, 46–53. [CrossRef]
17. Gershenfeld, N.; Krikorian, R.; Cohen, D. The internet of things. Sci. Am. 2004 ,291, 76–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Atzori, L.; Iera, A.; Morabito, G. The Internet of Things: A Survey . Comput. Netw. 2010 ,54, 2787–2805. [CrossRef]
19. Costa, Â.; Novais, P .; Corchado, J.M.; Neves, J. Increased performance and better patient attendance in an
hospital with the use of smart agendas. Log. J. IGPL 2011 ,20, 689–698. [CrossRef]
20. Costa, Â.; Novais, P . An intelligent multi-agent memory assistant. In Handbook of Digital Homecare ;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 192–221.
21. Tapia, D.I.; Corchado, J.M. An Ambient Intelligence Based Multi-Agent System for Alzheimer Health Care.
IJACI 2009 ,1, 15–26. [CrossRef]
22. Barriuso, A.; De la Prieta, F.; Villarrubia González, G.; De La Iglesia, D.; Lozano, Á. MOVICLOUD: Agent-Based
3D Platform for the Labor Integration of Disabled People. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 337. [CrossRef]
23. Rosales, R.; Castañón-Puga, M.; Lara-Rosano, F.; Flores-Parra, J.; Evans, R.; Osuna-Millan, N.;
Gaxiola-Pacheco, C. Modelling the Interaction Levels in HCI Using an Intelligent Hybrid System with
Interactive Agents: A Case Study of an Interactive Museum Exhibition Module in Mexico. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,
8, 446. [CrossRef]

==== Page 7 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1402 7 of 7
24. Ramos, J.; Oliveira, T.; Satoh, K.; Neves, J.; Novais, P . Cognitive Assistants—An Analysis and Future Trends
Based on Speculative Default Reasoning. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 742. [CrossRef]
25. Satoh, K. Speculative Computation and Abduction for an Autonomous Agent. IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. 2005 ,
E88-D , 2031–2038. [CrossRef]
26. Davidsson, P . Multi Agent Based Simulation: Beyond Social Simulation. In Proceedings of the Second
International Workshop on Multi-Agent-Based Simulation-Revised and Additional Papers ; Springer: London, UK,
2001; pp. 97–107.
27. Uhrmacher, A.M.; Weyns, D. Multi-Agent Systems: Simulation and Applications , 1st ed.; CRC Press, Inc.:
Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2009.
28. Miyashita, K. Incremental Design of Perishable Goods Markets through Multi-Agent Simulations. Appl. Sci.
2017 ,7, 1300. [CrossRef]
29. Friedman, D. The Double Auction Market: Institutions, Theories, and Evidence ; Routledge: Abingdon-on-Thames,
UK, 2018.
30. Albino, V .; Berardi, U.; Dangelico, R.M. Smart Cities: Deﬁnitions, Dimensions, Performance, and Initiatives.
J. Urban Technol. 2015 ,22, 3–21. [CrossRef]
31. Roscia, M.; Longo, M.; Lazaroiu, G.C. Smart City by multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 2013
International Conference on Renewable Energy Research and Applications (ICRERA), Madrid, Spain, 20–23
October 2013; pp. 371–376. [CrossRef]
32. Lozano, Á.; De Paz, J.; Villarrubia González, G.; Iglesia, D.; Bajo, J. Multi-agent system for demand prediction
and trip visualization in bike sharing systems. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 67. [CrossRef]
33. Jordán, J.; Palanca, J.; del Val, E.; Julian, V .; Botti, V . A Multi-Agent System for the Dynamic Emplacement of
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 313. [CrossRef]
34. Billhardt, H.; Fernández, A.; Lujak, M.; Ossowski, S. Agreement Technologies for Coordination in Smart
Cities. Appl. Sci. 2018 ,8, 816. [CrossRef]
35. Ossowski, S. Agreement Technologies ; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2012.
c2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

