==== Page 1 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization
CAN WANG, City University of Hong Kong
RUIXIANG JIANG, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
MENGLEI CHAI, Snap Inc.
MINGMING HE, Netflix
DONGDONG CHEN, Microsoft Cloud AI
JING LIAO∗,City University of Hong Kong
Source “Vincent van Gogh” “Tolkien Elf” “Fauvism” “Lord Voldemort” “Edvard Munch”
Source “Cubism Painting” “Pixar 3D Style” “Colorful Galaxy”
Fig. 1. NeRF-Art Results. OurNeRF-Art stylizes a pre-trained NeRF to match the desired style described by a text prompt. It modulates not only appearance
but also geometry of NeRF.
As a powerful representation of 3D scenes, the neural radiance field (NeRF)
enables high-quality novel view synthesis from multi-view images. Stylizing
NeRF, however, remains challenging, especially on simulating a text-guided
style with both the appearance and the geometry altered simultaneously. In
this paper, we present NeRF-Art , a text-guided NeRF stylization approach that
manipulates the style of a pre-trained NeRF model with a simple text prompt.
Unlike previous approaches that either lack sufficient geometry deformations
and texture details or require meshes to guide the stylization, our method
can shift a 3D scene to the target style characterized by desired geometry
and appearance variations without any mesh guidance. This is achieved by
introducing a novel global-local contrastive learning strategy, combined with
the directional constraint to simultaneously control both the trajectory and
the strength of the target style. Moreover, we adopt a weight regularization
*Corresponding Author.
Authors’ addresses: Can Wang, City University of Hong Kong, cwang355-c@my.cityu.
edu.hk; Ruixiang Jiang, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, cwang355-c@my.
cityu.edu.hk; Menglei Chai, Snap Inc. cmlatsim@gmail.com; Mingming He, Netflix,
hmm.lillian@gmail.com; Dongdong Chen, Microsoft Cloud AI, cddlyf@gmail.com; Jing
Liao∗, City University of Hong Kong, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk.method to effectively suppress cloudy artifacts and geometry noises which
arise easily when the density field is transformed during geometry stylization.
Through extensive experiments on various styles, we demonstrate that our
method is effective and robust regarding both single-view stylization quality
and cross-view consistency. The code and more results can be found in our
project page: https://cassiepython.github.io/nerfart/.
CCS Concepts: •Computing methodologies →Computer graphics .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Stylization, Neural Radiance Fields, CLIP
1 INTRODUCTION
Artistic works depict the world in various creative and imaginative
styles, evolving along with human progress. While primarily driven
by professionals, the generation of artistic content is now more
accessible to average users than ever before, empowered by the
recent research on visual artistic stylization. In the era of deep
learning, technical advances are gradually reshaping how peoplearXiv:2212.08070v1  [cs.CV]  15 Dec 2022

==== Page 2 ====
2 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
create, consume, and share art, from real-time entertainment to
concept design. Since neural style transfer [Chen et al .2017b; Gatys
et al .2016; Sheng et al .2018; Shu et al .2021; Zhao et al .2014]
shows the potential of encoding and changing visual styles via deep
neural networks, a significant amount of effort has been devoted
to effectively and efficiently migrating the style of an arbitrary
image [Gatys et al .2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Li et al .2017;
Liao et al .2017] or a specific domain [Lee et al .2020; Zhu et al .2017]
to the content image. Despite impressive results, these methods are
limited to stylizing a single view captured by the content image.
Motivated by the increasing demand for 3D asset creation, our
goal is to stylize 3D content from multi-view input , in contrast to
single-image stylization. In the domain of 3D representation, previ-
ous methods typically take explicit models (e.g., meshes [Han et al .
2021a; Höllein et al .2021; Kato et al .2018; Ye et al .2021; Zhang
et al.2020a], voxels [Guo et al .2021; Klehm et al .2014], and point
clouds [Cao et al .2020; Lin et al .2018]) followed by differentiable
rendering for multi-view stylization. These methods enable intu-
itive control over the geometry but suffer from the limited capacity
for modeling and rendering complex scenes. The recent implicit
representation of neural radiance field (NeRF) [Deng et al .2022;
Mildenhall et al .2020; Wang et al .2022; Yang et al .2022; Zhang et al .
2022b] significantly improves the quality of novel view synthesis,
satisfying our needs for a general representation of various scenes
and objects. However, while enjoying the superior scene reconstruc-
tion quality of NeRF, the curse of its highly implicit volumetric
representation of appearance and geometry, parameterized and en-
tangled by dense MLP networks, makes NeRF more challenging to
stylize through jointly transforming the encoded color and shape.
Very recently, pioneering NeRF stylization works [Chiang et al .
2022; Fan et al .2022] have made exhilarating progress on appear-
ance style transfer of 3D scenes. However, their style guidance is
limited to image reference, which, although being adopted as one
common way to specify the target style, is not always a perfect
solution for every scenario—obtaining appropriate style images that
both reflect the target style and match the source content might
not be easy or even possible in many cases. Therefore, finding an-
other simple, natural, and expressive form of guidance becomes an
attractive idea. Thanks to the parallel advances in language-vision
models, stylization with natural language is no longer a fantasy.
As demonstrated by recent text-guided stylization works [Gal et al .
2021; Hong et al .2022; Michel et al .2021; Wei et al .2021], com-
pared to image-guided approaches, short text prompts provide 1)
an extremely intuitive and user-friendly way to specify styles, 2) a
flexible control over various styles from abstract ones like a certain
concept to very concrete ones like a famous painting or character,
and 3) a view-independent representation that is free from content
alignment and naturally benefits cross-view consistency.
Yet, with the existing approaches, it is still challenging to styl-
ize the implicit representation of NeRF via a simple text prompt.
Learning a latent space helps constrain the geometry and texture
modulations [Wang et al .2021a], but it is often data-dependent and
laborious. Some efforts directly enforce style directions (Figure 3) be-
tween the rendered views of NeRF and the text in the CLIP [Radford
et al.2021] embedding space. In addition, background augmenta-
tion [Jain et al .2022] and mesh guidance [Hong et al .2022] havebeen proposed to improve the geometry and texture modulations.
However, they still suffer from insufficient geometry deformations
and texture details.
In this work, we propose NeRF-Art , a new text-driven NeRF styl-
ization method. Given a pre-trained NeRF model and a single text
prompt, our method enables consistent novel view synthesis with
both appearance and geometry transformed, adhering to the spec-
ified style. This is achieved by combining the recent large-scale
Language-Vision model (i.e., CLIP) with NeRF, which is non-trivial
due to several challenges. Directly applying the supervision from
CLIP to NeRF by constraining the similarity between the rendered
views and the text in the embedding space as [Gal et al .2021] is
insufficient to ensure the desired style strength. To tackle this prob-
lem, we design a CLIP-based contrastive loss to properly strengthen
the stylization, by bringing the results closer to the target style and
farther away from other styles pre-defined as negative samples. To
further ensure the uniformity of the style over the whole scene, we
extend our contrastive constraint to a hybrid global-local frame-
work to cover both global structures and local details. In addition,
to support geometry stylization jointly with appearance, we relax
the constraints on the density of the pre-trained NeRF and adopt
a weight regularization to effectively reduce cloudy artifacts and
geometry noises when altering the density field. In experiments,
we first evaluate text description selection for stylization and then
test our method on various styles and demonstrate text guidance’s
effectiveness and flexibility for NeRF stylization. Furthermore, we
conduct a user study to show that our method achieves the best
visual-pleasing results compared to related methods. We also extract
the mesh from the stylized NeRF to show the geometry modula-
tion ability of our method and integrate with different baselines
to demonstrate the generalization ability of our method to various
NeRF-like models.
2 RELATED WORK
Neural Style Transfer on Images and Videos. Artistic image
stylization is a long-standing research area. Traditional methods
use handcrafted features to simulate styles [Hertzmann 1998; Hertz-
mann et al .2001]. With the fast development of deep learning, neural
networks have been applied to style transfer from either an arbitrary
image [Gatys et al .2016; Huang and Belongie 2017; Johnson et al .
2016; Kolkin et al. 2019; Li et al. 2017; Liao et al. 2017] or a specific
domain [Huang et al .2021a, 2018; Lee et al .2020; Zhu et al .2017],
and achieved impressive results. By enforcing temporal smooth-
ness constraints defined on optical flows, neural style transfer has
been successfully extended to videos [Chen et al .2017a, 2020; Ruder
et al.2016]. However, both image and video stylization methods
are restricted to the given views. Simply combining the neural style
transfer and novel view synthesis methods without considering 3D
geometry will lead to blurriness or view inconsistencies.
Neural Stylization on Explicit 3D Representations. With the
increasing demand for 3D content, neural style transfer has been
extended to explicit 3D representations. The work [Chen et al .2018]
first considers the cross-view disparity consistency and applies style
transfer on stereoscopic images or videos. Later, considering the
voxel is the most compatible representation for CNNs, SKPN [Guo

==== Page 3 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •3
Reconstruc �on
Styliza �on
“Joker ”
“Human”
“Soft Makeup Look”,
“Monkey D. Luﬀy”,
“Pencil Drawing”, ...
Fig. 2. NeRF-Art Pipeline. In the reconstruction stage, our method first pre-trains the NeRF model ℱ𝑟𝑒𝑐of the target scene from multi-view input with
reconstruction loss ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑐. In the stylization stage, our method stylized NeRF model ℱ𝑟𝑒𝑐toℱ𝑠𝑡𝑦, guided by a text prompt 𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡, using a combination of relative
directional loss ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟and global-local contrastive loss ℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛in the CLIP embedding space, plus weight regularization loss ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔and perceptual loss ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟.
et al.2021] encodes volume using convolutional blocks and stylizes
it by deep features extracted from a reference image. As for mesh
stylization, differential rendering allows for backpropagating style
transfer objectives from rendered images to 3D meshes. According
to whether the geometry or texture are allowed to be optimized,
existing mesh style transfer methods achieve three different effects:
texture stylization [Höllein et al .2021; Mordvintsev et al .2018],
geometric stylization [Liu et al .2018], and joint stylization [Han
et al.2021b; Kato et al .2018; Yin et al .2021]. Another line of work
uses point clouds as the 3D proxy to guarantee 3D consistency in
stylizing novel views from either a single image [Mu et al .2021] or
multiple frames [Huang et al .2021b]. In these works, point-wise fea-
tures extracted from pre-trained PointNet [Qi et al .2017] or GCN [Li
et al.2021a] are stylized by feature transform algorithms, e.g., adap-
tive normalization, and then rendered to novel views. Despite the
successes, these 3D stylization methods are difficult to generalize to
complicated objects or scenes with dedicated structures, limited by
the expressiveness of explicit 3D representations.
Neural Stylization on NeRF. To address the inherent limitations
of explicit representations, implicit methods have recently received
much attention. NeRF is a seminal one that is able to represent
complex scenes by parameterizing the implicit function as MLP net-
works. A large number of follow-up works are presented to improve
its efficiency [Deng et al .2021; Garbin et al .2021; Lindell et al .2021;
Müller et al .2022; Reiser et al .2021; Yu et al .2021a], quality [Arand-
jelović and Zisserman 2021; Barron et al .2021; Ma et al .2021; Zhang
et al.2020b], controllablity [Liu et al .2021; Srinivasan et al .2021;
Wang et al .2021a; Zhang et al .2021], and generalization [Gao et al .
2021; Jain et al .2021; Li et al .2021b; Niemeyer et al .2021; Noguchiet al.2021; Park et al .2021a,b; Peng et al .2021; Pumarola et al .2021;
Tretschk et al .2021; Xian et al .2021; Yu et al .2021b]. Inspired by the
power of NeRF, three very recent works [Chiang et al .2022; Huang
et al.2022; Zhang et al .2022a] adopt it for 3D stylization. They design
the stylization network to predict color-related parameters in the
NeRF model based on a reference style. And the stylization network
is trained either by imposing the image style transfer losses [Gatys
et al.2016; Zhang et al .2022a] on rendered views [Chiang et al .
2022] or being supervised by a mutually learnt image stylization
network [Huang et al .2022]. These works have achieved consistent
results in novel-view stylization. However, their stylization is still
restricted to appearance only because they do not adjust density pa-
rameters in the NeRF model. In contrast, our method supports both
appearance and geometric stylization to better mimic the reference
style. Moreover, they rely on reference images for stylization, while
we seek to stylize the scenes via simple text prompts.
Text-Driven Stylization. Compared to image references, a natu-
ral language prompt is a more intuitive and user-friendly way to
specify the style. Therefore, a current line of works shifted away
from image reference towards text guidance, with the help of the
pre-trained CLIP [Radford et al .2021], which bridges texts and
images by jointly learning a shared latent space. The pioneering
work StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021] proposes a directional CLIP
loss for transferring the pre-trained StyleGAN2 model [Karras et al .
2020] to the target domain with the desired style described by a
textual prompt. However, it is an image-based method and will lead
to inconsistencies when applied to stylizing multiple views. In the
3D world, Text2Mesh [Michel et al .2021] uses CLIP to guide the
stylization of a given 3D mesh by learning a displacement map for

==== Page 4 ====
4 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
(a)ℒ𝑎
𝑑𝑖𝑟(b)ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟(c)ℒ𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛&ℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛
Fig. 3. CLIP-Guided Stylization Losses. (a) The absolute directional loss; (b) The relative directional loss; (c) The global and local contrastive loss.
geometry deformation and vertex colors for texture stylization. The
contemporary work AvatarCLIP [Hong et al .2022] further supports
driving a stylized human mesh using natural languages. Despite
their success, these methods are limited to mesh input. In contrast,
our method is able to stylize 3D scenes with better visual quality
and view consistency without any mesh input.
3 OVERVIEW
As illustrated in Figure 2, our approach is simply decomposed into
reconstruction and stylization stages. In what follows, after briefly
reviewing our 3D photography representation with NeRF (§ 3.1), we
focus on introducing our text-guided stylization method. Specifically,
we first formulate the directional CLIP loss for stylization, which
leverages the power of the pre-trained Language-Vision model
(§ 4.1). Then, we introduce our global-local contrastive learning
framework to cope with the stylization strength issue of the direc-
tional CLIP loss (§ 4.2). Next, we introduce a weight regularization
term to alleviate the cloudy artifacts caused and geometry noises
by the stylization process (§ 4.3). Finally, we conclude this section
with the overall training strategy of the entire pipeline (§ 4.4).
3.1 Preliminary on NeRF Scene Representation
We take NeRF as our 3D scene representation, which defines a
continuous volumetric field as implicit functions, parameterized by
MLP networks ℱ. Given a single spatial coordinate 𝒙=(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧)and
its corresponding view direction d=(𝜙,𝜃), the network predicts
the density𝜎and view-dependent radiance 𝒄=(𝑟,𝑔,𝑏), leading to
the final color 𝐶(𝒓)of the camera ray 𝒓(𝑡)=𝒐+𝑡dby accumulating
𝐾sample points along it, given the target view:
𝐶(𝒓)=∑︁𝐾
𝑘=1𝑇𝑘(1−𝜔𝑘)𝒄𝑘, (1)
where𝜔𝑘=exp(−𝜎𝑘(𝑑𝑘+1−𝑑𝑘))represents the transmittance of
the ray segment(𝑘,𝑘+1)and𝑇𝑘=Î𝑘−1
𝑖𝜔𝑖is the accumulated
transmittance from the origin to the sample 𝑘.
To train NeRF from a set of multi-view photos, a simple supervised
reconstruction loss is adopted between the ground-truth pixel colorsˆ𝐶(𝒓)from the training view and the NeRF prediction 𝐶(𝒓):
ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑐=∑︁
𝒓𝐶(𝒓)−ˆ𝐶(𝒓)2
2. (2)
4 TEXT-GUIDED NERF STYLIZATION
After optimizing the reconstructed NeRF model ℱ𝑟𝑒𝑐from the multi-
view input (§ 3.1), our goal is to train a stylized NeRF model ℱ𝑠𝑡𝑦,
which satisfies the style control of the target text prompt 𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡while
preserving the content from ℱ𝑟𝑒𝑐(Figure 2).
The CLIP model aligns the semantics of image and text in a joint
embedding space, by utilizing the image encoder ˆℰ𝑖(·)and the text
encoder ˆℰ𝑡(·). The semantic power of CLIP bridges the gap between
natural language prompts and synthesized image pixels, making it
possible to stylize NeRF scenes with text controls.
However, even with the powerful embedding space of CLIP, it
remains challenging to achieve text-guided NeRF stylization that 1)
preserves the original content from being washed away by the new
style, 2) reaches the target style with proper strength that satisfies
the semantics of the input text prompt, and 3) maintains cross-view
consistency and avoids artifacts in the final NeRF model.
4.1 Trajectory Control w/ Directional CLIP Loss
An intuitive strategy for text-guided NeRF stylization would be to
enforce the trajectory of the stylization in the CLIP space with an
absolute directional CLIP loss that measures the cosine similarity
(⟨·,·⟩) between the stylized NeRF rendering 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡and the target text
prompt 𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡(Figure 3(a)):
ℒ𝑎
𝑑𝑖𝑟=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡h
1−
ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡),ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡)i
, (3)
which guides NeRF rendering with a global direction of the target
text, not depending on any reference starting point. This loss is
first designed in StyleCLIP [Patashnik et al .2021] to guide face
image editing and further extended to generative NeRF editing in
CLIP-NeRF [Wang et al. 2021a].
However, as observed in StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021], this
global loss could easily mode-collapse the generator and hurt the
generation diversity of stylization. Therefore, a relative directional

==== Page 5 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •5
loss is proposed, which transfers the source image 𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐to the target
domain guided by the CLIP-space trajectory embedded by a pair of
text prompts(𝒕𝑠𝑟𝑐,𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡)instead of a single one (Figure 3(b)). This
relative directional CLIP loss for our NeRF stylization is defined as:
ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡h
1−
ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡)−ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐),ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡)−ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑠𝑟𝑐)i
.(4)
Different from the single-image setting of StyleGAN-NADA , here, the
training target 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡stands for an arbitrarily sampled view rendered
by the stylized NeRF of the same scene, and the source image 𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐
is produced by the pre-trained NeRF model and shares the identical
view as 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡. We will follow this convention hereinafter.
4.2 Strength Control w/ Glocal Contrastive Learning
As the directional CLIP loss (Equation (4)) works by measuring the
similarity between the normalized unit directions of the embedded
vectors, it can enforce the relative stylization trajectory. However,
it struggles with preserving enough stylization strength in altering
the pre-trained NeRF model.
To address this issue, we propose a contrastive learning strategy
to control the stylization strength (Figure 3(c)). Specifically, in the
framework of contrastive learning, with the rendered view 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡as
the query target, we set positive samples to the target text prompt
𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡with the desired style and construct negative samples 𝒕𝑛𝑒𝑔∈
𝒯𝑛𝑒𝑔by sampling a set of text prompts semantically irrelevant to
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡. In general, our contrastive loss in the CLIP space is defined as:
ℒ𝑐𝑜𝑛=−∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡log"
exp(𝒗·𝒗+/𝜏)
exp(𝒗·𝒗+/𝜏)+Í
𝒗−exp(𝒗·𝒗−/𝜏)#
,(5)
where{𝒗,𝒗+,𝒗−}are query, positive sample, and negative sample,
respectively, and temperature 𝜏is set to 0.07in all our experiments.
When defining the loss globally by treating the entire view 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡as
the query anchor, we have the global contrastive loss ℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛with
{𝒗=ˆℰ𝑖(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗+=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗−=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑛𝑒𝑔)}.
Ideally, this global contrastive loss cooperates with the direc-
tional CLIP loss, where the former defines the style trajectory that
aligns with the target text, and the latter, at the same time, en-
sures the proper stylization magnitude by pushing along the style
trajectory. However, the global contrastive loss still has trouble
achieving sufficient and uniform stylization on the entire NeRF
scene, leading to excessive stylization on certain parts and insuf-
ficient stylization in other regions. This may be attributed to the
fact that CLIP focuses more attention on local regions with dis-
tinguishable features than the entire scene. Thus, this global con-
trastive loss can deliver a small value even when the overall styl-
ization is insufficient or non-uniform. To achieve a more sufficient
and balanced stylization, enforced by a more locally-attended con-
trastive learning approach, inspired by PatchNCE loss [Park et al .
2020], we propose a complementary local contrastive loss ℒ𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛
which sets queries to random local patches 𝑷𝑡𝑔𝑡cropped from 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡:
{𝒗=ˆℰ𝑖(𝑷𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗+=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑡𝑔𝑡),𝒗−=ˆℰ𝑡(𝒕𝑛𝑒𝑔)}.
Overall, we combine the global and local terms as our final global-
local contrastive loss:
ℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛=𝜆𝑔ℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛+𝜆𝑙ℒ𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛. (6)4.3 Artifact Suppression w/ Weight Regularization
Our pipeline aims to change not only the color but also the density
of the pre-trained NeRF to achieve a joint stylization of appearance
and geometry. However, allowing the training process to alter the
density may lead to cloud-like semi-transparent artifacts near the
camera and geometry noises, even if the pre-trained NeRF is per-
fectly clean. To alleviate that, we adopt a weight regularization loss
to suppress geometric noises and encourage a more concentrated
density distribution that better resembles real-world scenes.
Based on our NeRF notations (Equation (1)), weight of each ray
sample is defined as the contribution to the final ray color: 𝑤𝑘=
𝑇𝑘(1−𝜔𝑘), whereÍ
𝑘𝑤𝑘≤1. Similar to the distortion loss in
mip-NeRF 360 [Barron et al .2022], the weight regularization loss is
defined as:
ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡∑︁
𝒓∑︁
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐾𝑤𝑖𝑤𝑗𝑑𝑖−𝑑𝑗, (7)
where for each ray 𝒓of a randomly sampled view 𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡, pairs of
samples(𝑖,𝑗)with distances∥𝑑𝑖−𝑑𝑗∥are sampled. But different
from mip-NeRF 360 [Barron et al .2022] that optimizes the distances,
we penalize those pairs with scattered large weights to suppress
noise peeks and aggregate weights to the correct object surface.
4.4 Training
During training, we finetune the pre-trained NeRF model for styl-
ization. The overall objective consists of three parts: text-guided
stylization losses (including directional CLIP loss and global-local
contrastive loss to control style trajectory and strength, respec-
tively), content-preservation loss (we adopt VGG-based perceptual
loss), and artifact suppression regularization loss:
ℒ=(ℒ𝑟
𝑑𝑖𝑟+ℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛)+𝜆𝑝ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟+𝜆𝑟ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔. (8)
Here we define the perceptual loss ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟between the original and
stylized NeRF renderings on certain pre-defined VGG layers 𝜓∈Ψ:
ℒ𝑝𝑒𝑟=∑︁
𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡∑︁
𝜓∈Ψ∥𝜓(𝑰𝑡𝑔𝑡)−𝜓(𝑰𝑠𝑟𝑐)∥2
2. (9)
It’s practically infeasible to train stylization on all rays due to
backward gradient propagation’s prohibitively huge memory con-
sumption. To address this issue, previous works either sample sparse
rays to obtain coarse images or patches [Chiang et al .2022; Hong
et al.2022; Jain et al .2021; Schwarz et al .2020] or render all rays to
low resolution and then upsample with CNN networks [Niemeyer
and Geiger 2021]. However, coarse renderings or patches lose style
details and semantic structures, while upsampling harms the cross-
view consistency. Instead, we adopt a much easier solution, which
first renders all rays to obtain the whole image of an arbitrary view,
calculates the stylization loss gradients in the forward process, and
then back-propagates the gradients through NeRF at the patch level.
This significantly reduces memory consumption and allows render-
ing high-resolution images for better stylization training.
5 EXPERIMENTS
5.1 Implementation Details
We implement our framework using Pytorch . In the reconstruction
training stage, we sample 192points for each ray and train our
model for 6epochs. We set the learning rate as 0.0005 and adopt

==== Page 6 ====
6 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
“Fauvism” “Fauvism painting”“painting, Fauvism
style”“painting, oil on
canvas, Fauvism
style”
“Lord Voldemort”“Head of Lord
Voldemort”“Head of Lord
Voldemort in fantasy
style”“Head of Lord
Voldemort in fantasy
style, Harry Potter
Film”
“Chinese Painting” “Chinese Ink Painting”
“Pixar Style” “3D Render in the Style of Pixar”
Fig. 4. Text Evaluation. We present descriptions at different detail levels
for a specific style.
the Adam optimizer. While in the stylization training stage, we
train our model for 4epochs with the learning rate of 0.001and
use the Adam optimizer. We set hyper-parameters 𝜆𝑔,𝜆𝑙,𝜆𝑝and
𝜆𝑟as0.2,0.1,2.0, and 0.1, respectively. To construct the negative
samples, we manually collect around 200 text descriptions from
Pinterest website, describing various styles, like “Zombie” ,“Tolkien
elf”, and “Self-Portrait by Van Gogh” . We set the patch size as the
1/10of the original input in the local contrastive loss. Without loss
of generality, we adopt VolSDF [Yariv et al .2021] as the basic NeRF
model for stylization.
5.2 Data Collection
Three self-portrait datasets are gathered under an in-the-wild con-
dition by asking three users to capture selfies video for around 10
seconds with the front-facing camera. We finally received six video
clips in around 10 seconds. After collecting these video clips under
different views and expressions, we extract 100 frames for eachSource “Joker” “Fernando Botero”
Source “Bear” “Vincent van Gogh”
StyleGAN-
NADAOursStyleGAN-
NADAOurs
Fig. 5. Comparisons. Comparisons with the text-guided image stylization
method StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al. 2021].
video clip using FFmpeg with 15 fps. Then these frames are resized
to 270×480. Then we estimate camera poses for these frames using
COLMAP [Schonberger and Frahm 2016] with rigid relative camera
pose constraints. We suppose frames in a video share the same in-
trinsics. We also reconstruct a lady from the H3DS dataset [Ramon
et al.2021]. We remove noise frames and obtain 31 sparse views.
Moreover, we use the image size with 256 ×256 for stylization. We
also adopt the Local Light Field Fusion (LLFF) dataset [Mildenhall
et al.2019] to stylize non-face scenes. LLFF dataset is composed of
forward-facing scenes, with around 20 to 60 images.
5.3 Text Evaluation
As CLIP [Park et al .2020] is sensitive to text prompts, we conduct
a text description evaluation in Figure 4. When a text description
refers to a style in general, not anyone in particular, the stylization

==== Page 7 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •7
“Vincent van Gogh” “Fauvism” “Vincent van Gogh” “Fauvism”
Source CLIP-NeRF Ours CLIP-NeRF Ours Source CLIP-NeRF Ours CLIP-NeRF Ours
“Checkerboard” “Mosaic Design”
Source CLIP-NeRF Ours Source CLIP-NeRF Ours
“Tolkien Elf” “Fauvism” “Bat Man” “Hulk”
Source DreamField Ours DreamField Ours Source DreamField Ours DreamField Ours
Fig. 6. Comparisons. Comparisons to text-guided NeRF stylization method CLIP-NeRF [Wang et al. 2021a] and DreamField [Jain et al. 2022].
can be insufficient. For example, “Fauvism” only induces stylization
around the mouth as it describes general meaning, like artists “Henri
Matisse” and “Kees van Dongen” or“Brutalist painting” . And the
same observations when comparing “Chinese Painting” and“Chinese
Ink Painting” . In contrast, when a text refers to a specific object orstyle, the language ambiguity will disappear. For example, “Lord
Voldemort” ,“Head of Lord Voldemort” , and “Head of Lord Voldemort
in fantasy style” reveals similar stylization results. We also see the
similar results concerning the Pixar style. In the interests of brevity,
we use “Fauvism” to represent “painting, oil on canvas, Fauvism

==== Page 8 ====
8 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
“Vincent van Gogh” “Edvard Munch” “Tolkien Elf” “Joker”
Source AvatarCLIP Ours AvatarCLIP Ours Source AvatarCLIP Ours AvatarCLIP Ours
“Pixar” “Lord Voldemort” “Iron Man” “Superman”
Source Text2Mesh Ours Text2Mesh Ours Source Text2Mesh Ours Text2Mesh Ours
Fig. 7. Comparisons. Comparisons to text-guided mesh-based stylization method Text2Mesh [Michel et al. 2021] and AvatarCLIP [Hong et al. 2022].
NeuS VolSDF
Source“Vincent van
Gogh”“Tolkien elf” “Fauvism”“Fernando
Botero”Source“Edvard
munch”“Joker” “Fauvism”“Fernando
Botero”
Fig. 8. Generalization Evaluation. Generalization evaluation on VolSDF and NeuS.
style” and“Vincent van Gogh” to represent “painting, oil on canvas, Vincent van Gogh self-portrait style” in other experiments. We also

==== Page 9 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •9
Source w/oℒ𝑔+𝑙
𝑐𝑜𝑛 w/oℒ𝑙𝑐𝑜𝑛 w/oℒ𝑔
𝑐𝑜𝑛 Full
Fig. 9. Ablations on CLIP-Guided Losses. Without our global-local con-
trastive losses, the results suffer from insufficient or non-uniform stylization.
The target prompts are “White Walker” and“Tolkien Elf” respectively.
use the same prompt augmentation strategy for other painting styles,
including “Edvard Munch” and“Fernando Botero” .
5.4 Comparisons
We compare with most related works following three categories: 1)
Text-driven image stylization: StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021]; 2)
Text-driven mesh-based stylization: Text2Mesh [Michel et al. 2021]
andAvatarCLIP [Hong et al .2022]; and 3) Text-driven NeRF styl-
ization: CLIP-NeRF [Wang et al .2021a] and DreamField [Jain et al .
2022]. To make fair comparisons with these methods, we adopt
author-released codes and accommodate the input to each method
as required. For StyleGAN-NADA , we follow its steps to first con-
duct a face alignment under the setting of FFHQ [Karras et al .2019]
and then invert these faces using e4e[Tov et al .2021] into latent
codes, before inputting them to StyleGAN-NADA . We have also tried
pSp[Richardson et al .2021] to invert latent codes but finally adopt
e4eto obtain better stylization results. Per the authors’ advice, we
trained 600 iterations and sampled faces present visual-pleasing
stylized results. We place final stylized faces back on the input im-
ages by inversing the face alignment process. As for Text2Mesh , the
input mesh of one example ( ‘Lady’ ) is provided by the H3DS [Ramon
et al.2021], while the input mesh of another example ( ‘Human’ )
is fetched from AvatarCLIP . Both meshes are normalized into -1
to 1, before inputting them to Text2Mesh . We follow the training
setting of Text2Mesh in stylizing the person object to stylize ‘Lady’
and‘Human’ . We compare to DreamField andAvatarCLIP following
the shape sculpting and texture generation process of AvatarCLIP .
Similar to AvatarCLIP , we also adopt prompt augmentations when
stylizing the ‘Human’ . For example, we use text prompts including
“Tolkien Elf” ,“the back of Tolkien Elf” , and “the face of Tolkien Elf”
for the detailed refinement.The visual comparisons are demonstrated in Figure 5, Figure 6,
and Figure 7. For video results, please see the supplementary mate-
rial.
Comparisons to text-driven image stylization. Compared to StyleGAN-
NADA , our method can better ensure the desired style strength
in all examples by introducing global-local contrastive learning.
StyleGAN-NADA achieves visual-pleasing results on sampled faces
but reflects a degradation for in-the-wild faces partly due to the
latent code inversion. Moreover, as a 3D stylization method, ours
can preserve view consistencies in the stylized results. In contrast,
StyleGAN-NADA stylizes each view independently, thus introducing
inconsistent shapes or textures to different views. This may lead to
flickering artifacts when applied to video applications. Moreover,
StyleGAN-NADA is less friendly to real faces as the input image
has to be inverted back to the StyleGAN latent space before styl-
ization, which will inevitably lead to some detail loss and identity
change. Unlike it, NeRF-Art is not constrained by any latent space
of pre-trained networks and does not need the inversion step.
Comparisons to text-driven NeRF stylization. Compared with
CLIP-NeRF , our advantages are two-fold. First, CLIP-NeRF stylizes
NeRF using the absolute directional loss, which does not put enough
stylizations. Moreover, it suffers from uneven stylizations. For ex-
ample, we only see enough stylizations on the nose and hair for
style “Fauvism” , but the man’s cheek has not been fully stylized.
In contrast, we design a global-local contrastive learning strategy
to ensure the desired style strength. Second, as no weight regu-
larization is used in CLIP-NeRF , its results may appear as severe
geometry noises. In contrast, our weight regularization suppresses
geometric noises by encouraging a more concentrated density dis-
tribution. DreamField also adopts the absolute directional loss to
stylize NeRF, which cannot guarantee sufficient and uniform styl-
ization. DreamField adopts a random background augmentation to
CLIP’s attention on the foreground, which requires view-consistent
masks, while ours does not. Moreover, our method consistently
outperforms DreamField in detailed cloth wrinkles, facial attributes,
and fine-grained geometry deformations, like muscle shapes and
antennas. In summary, our NeRF-Art outperforms these methods
by proposing a contrastive learning technique to achieve sufficient
and uniform stylization and designing a weight regularization to
remove cloudy artifacts and geometry noises.
Comparisons to text-driven mesh-based stylization. Text2Mesh
also supports geometry deformation and texture stylization of a 3D
model like ours. However, it assumes there exists a synergy between
the input 3D geometry and the target prompt and is more likely to
fail when stylizing a 3D mesh towards a less related prompt, such
as“Pixar” for the ‘Lady’ model in Figure 6. With carefully-designed
loss constraints, ours is more robust to different prompts, either
related to the 3D scenes or not. Moreover, limited by the expres-
sivity of the mesh representation, Text2Mesh fails most runs and
presents unstable stylization results, resulting in irregular deforma-
tions and indentations on the edge or surface. Authors of AvatarCLIP
also report similar results when comparing to Text2Mesh . Similar to
DreamField ,AvatarCLIP adopts a random background augmentation
to lead CLIP to focus on the foreground and prevents floating arti-
fact generations. Nevertheless, this process requires view-consistent
masks while ours does not. Moreover, AvatarCLIP adds an additional

==== Page 10 ====
10 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
NeuS VolSDF
Source “Lord Voldemort” “Tolkien Elf” “Pixar”
Fig. 10. Geometry Evaluation. Our method modulates the geometry and color simultaneously of a pre-trained NeRF to match the desired style described
by a text prompt.
“Disney 2D Superman”
“Groot, Guardians of the Galaxy”
w/oℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔 w/ℒ𝑟𝑒𝑔
Fig. 11. Ablations on Weight Regularization. The cloudy artifacts near
the corner or geometric noises are observed without the weight regulariza-
tion loss.
color network to constrain the general shape of the avatar as well
as introducing random shading and lighting augmentations on the
textured renderings to strengthen the stylization. Even with these
augmentations, AvatarCLIP still fails to produce satisfying texture
and geometry details. In contrast, ours reveals a fine-grained beard,
detailed wrinkles of garments, and clearer face attributes. Note-
worthy, our NeRF-Art supports stylizing in-the-wild faces, while
0 %50 %100 %
29.1
70.9
Ours StyleGAN -NADA20.9
79.1
Text2Mesh Avg.
CLIP -NeRF DreamField AvatarCLIP23.0
77.017.8
82.238.2
61.825.8
74.2Fig. 12. User Study. Our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
text-guided stylization methods on user preference rates (%).
AvatarCLIP requires a 3D mesh as input to conduct these augmen-
tations. Finally, AvatarCLIP can still generate random bumps in the
background and make the extracted surface noisy. This is because
AvatarCLIP sampled a sparse rays ( 112×112) to construct a coarse
renderings for CLIP constraints, due to OOM problem. We found
worse results with more noise when reducing sampled ray numbers.
In contrast, our method supports training stylization on all rays
by imposing a memory-saving technique. In conclusion, NeRF-Art
achieves better stylization using the proposed contrastive learning
strategies without any mesh guidance.
5.5 User Study
To evaluate stylization quality from human perception, we con-
ducted a user study. For each compared category, we used two
subjects. For each subject, we selected 5prompts from our text de-
scriptions dataset and finally obtained 10test cases for each category
and50in total. For every test case, we showed one sample of input

==== Page 11 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •11
frames, the textual prompt, and the results of different methods in
two views and random order. The participants were given unlimited
time to select the best stylization results by jointly considering three
aspects: preservation of the content, faithfulness to the style, and
view consistency. We finally collected 23questionnaires completed
by10male and 13Lady participants. Statistics of the user study
are shown in Figure 12. Our method outperforms StyleGAN-NADA ,
CLIP-NeRF ,Text2Mesh ,DreamField , and AvatarCLIP by achieving
much higher user preference rates.
5.6 Ablation Study
Why global-local contrastive learning? A straightforward way
to stylize NeRFs is to apply the directional CLIP loss proposed by
StyleGAN-NADA [Gal et al .2021] to the rendered views. Unfortu-
nately, the directional CLIP loss can enforce the right stylization
trajectory but struggles to reach a sufficient magnitude, as shown in
the 2nd column of Figure 9. This is because the loss only measures
the directional similarity between the normalized embedded vectors
but ignores their actual distances. In contrast, our global contrastive
loss (3rd column of Figure 9) can ensure the proper stylization mag-
nitude by pushing it as close as possible to the target. However,
the global contrastive loss still cannot guarantee a sufficient and
uniform stylization of the whole scene. The stylization shows excess
on certain parts and insufficiency on others, e.g., insufficient styl-
ized faces and excessively stylized eyes in the “Tolkien Elf” example
in the 3rd column of Figure 9. This may attribute to the fact that
CLIP focuses more attention on regions with distinguishable fea-
tures than on other regions. Our local contrastive loss helps achieve
more balanced stylized results by stylizing every local region of the
scene (4th column of Figure 9). However, this local contrastive loss
without global information may produce excessive facial attributes,
e.g., generating more eyes in the “White Walker” example and two
left ears in the “Tolkien Elf” example. This attributes to insufficient
semantics involved in a local patch. This problem can be avoided
by adding the global contrastive loss at the same time.
By combining both global and local contrastive loss with the
directional CLIP, our method successfully achieves uniform styliza-
tion with both correct stylization direction and sufficient magnitude
(5th column of Figure 9).
Why weight regularization? Altering the geometry of NeRF may
potentially cause cloudy artifacts. In Figure 11, we demonstrate
that the weight regularization loss can suppress cloudy artifacts
and geometric noises by encouraging a more concentrated density
distribution for stylization.
5.7 Generalization Evaluation
We conduct a generalization evaluation on VolSDF and NeuS in
Figure 8 to evaluate NeRF-Art ’s ability in adapting to different NeRF-
like models. As NeuS reconstructs a coarse result on our in-the-wild
data without a mask may due to inaccurate camera estimations,
we conduct a segmentation using RVM [Lin et al .2022] for better
reconstruction and dilate the mask using OpenCV with 3×3kernel
and two iterations to allow geometry variations. In Figure 8, our
method presents similar stylization results on VolSDF and NeuS,
Source “Digital painting” Source “Mouth Batman”
Fig. 13. Limitations. Linguistic ambiguity (left) or semantically meaning-
less words (right) may lead to unexpected results.
which demonstrates that our NeRF-Art has the ability to adapt to
different NeRF-like models.
5.8 Geometry Evaluation
To evaluate whether the geometry will be correctly modulated in
the stylization process, we show the geometry evaluation results
in Figure 10. We extract meshes using Marching Cubes [Lorensen
and Cline 1987] before and after the stylization for comparison and
report results on two widely-used NeRF-like models VolSDF [Yariv
et al.2021] and NeuS [Wang et al .2021b]. We clearly see geometry
changes by comparison with the source mesh. For example, “Lord
Voldemort” flattens the girl’s nose, “Tolkien Elf” sharpens the girl’s
ears, and “Pixar” rounds the jaw. Moreover, we find the same obser-
vations on both VolSDF and NeuS. In summary, we conclude that
our method can correctly modulate the geometry of NeRF to match
the desired style.
6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present NeRF-Art , the text-guided NeRF stylization
approach based on CLIP. Unlike existing approaches that require
the mesh guidance in the stylization process or traps in insufficient
geometry deformations and texture details in stylization, ours mod-
ulate its geometry and appearance simultaneously to match the
desired style and show visual-pleasing results of geometry deforma-
tions and texture details with only a text guidance. To achieve it, we
introduce a carefully-designed combination of directional constraint
to control the style trajectory and novel global-local contrastive loss
to enforce the proper style strength. Moreover, we propose a weight
regularization strategy to alleviate the cloudy artifacts and geom-
etry noises in deforming the geometry. Extensive experiments on
real faces and general scenes show that our method is effective and
robust in both stylization quality and view consistency.
Limitations. Despite the success in most cases, our method still
has some limitations. First, some text prompts are linguistically
ambiguous, like “Digital painting” , which describes a wide range of
styles, including oil paintings, pencil sketches, 3D rendering images,
cartoon drawings, etc. This ambiguity might confuse the CLIP and
make the final result unexpected, as shown in Figure 13. Semanti-
cally meaningless words cause another kind of unexpected result.
For example, if we combine the words “Mouth” and“Batman” as
a prompt, the result unexpectedly puts a bat shape on the mouth,
which may not be what the user desires. These are interesting prob-
lems worth exploring in the future.

==== Page 12 ====
12 •Can Wang, Ruixiang Jiang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao∗
REFERENCES
Relja Arandjelović and Andrew Zisserman. 2021. Nerf in detail: Learning to sample for
view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05264 (2021).
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-
Brualla, and Pratul P Srinivasan. 2021. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for
anti-aliasing neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision . 5855–5864.
Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P. Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman.
2022. Mip-NeRF 360: Unbounded Anti-Aliased Neural Radiance Fields. CVPR (2022).
Xu Cao, Weimin Wang, Katashi Nagao, and Ryosuke Nakamura. 2020. Psnet: A style
transfer network for point cloud stylization on geometry and color. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision . 3337–3345.
Dongdong Chen, Jing Liao, Lu Yuan, Nenghai Yu, and Gang Hua. 2017a. Coherent
online video style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision . 1105–1114.
Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, Jing Liao, Nenghai Yu, and Gang Hua. 2017b. Stylebank:
An explicit representation for neural image style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 1897–1906.
Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, Jing Liao, Nenghai Yu, and Gang Hua. 2018. Stereoscopic
neural style transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition . 6654–6663.
Xinghao Chen, Yiman Zhang, Yunhe Wang, Han Shu, Chunjing Xu, and Chang Xu.
2020. Optical flow distillation: Towards efficient and stable video style transfer. In
European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 614–630.
Pei-Ze Chiang, Meng-Shiun Tsai, Hung-Yu Tseng, Wei-Sheng Lai, and Wei-Chen Chiu.
2022. Stylizing 3D Scene via Implicit Representation and HyperNetwork. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision .
1475–1484.
Kangle Deng, Andrew Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Deva Ramanan. 2021. Depth-supervised
nerf: Fewer views and faster training for free. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02791 (2021).
Nianchen Deng, Zhenyi He, Jiannan Ye, Budmonde Duinkharjav, Praneeth
Chakravarthula, Xubo Yang, and Qi Sun. 2022. FoV-NeRF: Foveated Neural Ra-
diance Fields for Virtual Reality. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 28, 11 (2022), 3854–3864.
Zhiwen Fan, Yifan Jiang, Peihao Wang, Xinyu Gong, Dejia Xu, and Zhangyang Wang.
2022. Unified Implicit Neural Stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01943 (2022).
Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2021.
Stylegan-nada: Clip-guided domain adaptation of image generators. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.00946 (2021).
Chen Gao, Ayush Saraf, Johannes Kopf, and Jia-Bin Huang. 2021. Dynamic view syn-
thesis from dynamic monocular video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision . 5712–5721.
Stephan J Garbin, Marek Kowalski, Matthew Johnson, Jamie Shotton, and Julien Valentin.
2021. Fastnerf: High-fidelity neural rendering at 200fps. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 14346–14355.
Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. 2016. Image style transfer using
convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition . 2414–2423.
Jie Guo, Mengtian Li, Zijing Zong, Yuntao Liu, Jingwu He, Yanwen Guo, and Ling-
Qi Yan. 2021. Volumetric appearance stylization with stylizing kernel prediction
network. ACM Trans Graph 40 (2021), 1–15.
Fangzhou Han, Shuquan Ye, Mingming He, Menglei Chai, and Jing Liao. 2021a.
Exemplar-Based 3D Portrait Stylization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114308
Fangzhou Han, Shuquan Ye, Mingming He, Menglei Chai, and Jing Liao. 2021b.
Exemplar-based 3d portrait stylization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (2021).
Aaron Hertzmann. 1998. Painterly rendering with curved brush strokes of multiple sizes.
InProceedings of the 25th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques . 453–460.
Aaron Hertzmann, Charles E Jacobs, Nuria Oliver, Brian Curless, and David H Salesin.
2001. Image analogies. In Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques . 327–340.
Lukas Höllein, Justin Johnson, and Matthias Nießner. 2021. StyleMesh: Style Transfer
for Indoor 3D Scene Reconstructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01530 (2021).
Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
2022. AvatarCLIP: Zero-Shot Text-Driven Generation and Animation of 3D Avatars.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH .
Hsin-Ping Huang, Hung-Yu Tseng, Saurabh Saini, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan
Yang. 2021b. Learning to stylize novel views. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision . 13869–13878.
Jialu Huang, Jing Liao, and Sam Kwong. 2021a. Unsupervised image-to-image transla-
tion via pre-trained stylegan2 network. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 24 (2021),
1435–1448.
Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. 2017. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adap-
tive instance normalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference oncomputer vision . 1501–1510.
Xun Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, Serge Belongie, and Jan Kautz. 2018. Multimodal unsupervised
image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer
vision (ECCV) . 172–189.
Yi-Hua Huang, Yue He, Yu-Jie Yuan, Yu-Kun Lai, and Lin Gao. 2022. StylizedNeRF:
Consistent 3D Scene Stylization as Stylized NeRF via 2D-3D Mutual Learning. In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel, and Ben Poole. 2022.
Zero-shot text-guided object generation with dream fields. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 867–876.
Ajay Jain, Matthew Tancik, and Pieter Abbeel. 2021. Putting nerf on a diet: Semantically
consistent few-shot view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision . 5885–5894.
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. 2016. Perceptual losses for real-time
style transfer and super-resolution. In European conference on computer vision .
Springer, 694–711.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. 2019. A style-based generator architecture
for generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition . 4401–4410.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo
Aila. 2020. Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 8110–8119.
Hiroharu Kato, Yoshitaka Ushiku, and Tatsuya Harada. 2018. Neural 3d mesh renderer.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition .
3907–3916.
Oliver Klehm, Ivo Ihrke, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Elmar Eisemann. 2014. Property and
lighting manipulations for static volume stylization using a painting metaphor. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 20, 7 (2014), 983–995.
Nicholas Kolkin, Jason Salavon, and Gregory Shakhnarovich. 2019. Style transfer
by relaxed optimal transport and self-similarity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 10051–10060.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Qi Mao, Jia-Bin Huang, Yu-Ding Lu, Maneesh Singh,
and Ming-Hsuan Yang. 2020. Drit++: Diverse image-to-image translation via dis-
entangled representations. International Journal of Computer Vision 128, 10 (2020),
2402–2417.
Guohao Li, Matthias Müller, Guocheng Qian, Itzel Carolina Delgadillo Perez, Abd-
ulellah Abualshour, Ali Kassem Thabet, and Bernard Ghanem. 2021a. Deepgcns:
Making gcns go as deep as cnns. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence (2021).
Yijun Li, Chen Fang, Jimei Yang, Zhaowen Wang, Xin Lu, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. 2017.
Universal style transfer via feature transforms. Advances in neural information
processing systems 30 (2017).
Zhengqi Li, Simon Niklaus, Noah Snavely, and Oliver Wang. 2021b. Neural scene
flow fields for space-time view synthesis of dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 6498–6508.
Jing Liao, Yuan Yao, Lu Yuan, Gang Hua, and Sing Bing Kang. 2017. Visual attribute
transfer through deep image analogy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.01088 (2017).
Chen-Hsuan Lin, Chen Kong, and Simon Lucey. 2018. Learning efficient point cloud
generation for dense 3d object reconstruction. In proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 32.
Shanchuan Lin, Linjie Yang, Imran Saleemi, and Soumyadip Sengupta. 2022. Robust high-
resolution video matting with temporal guidance. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision . 238–247.
David B Lindell, Julien NP Martel, and Gordon Wetzstein. 2021. Autoint: Automatic inte-
gration for fast neural volume rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 14556–14565.
Hsueh-Ti Derek Liu, Michael Tao, and Alec Jacobson. 2018. Paparazzi: surface editing
by way of multi-view image processing. ACM Trans. Graph. 37, 6 (2018), 221–1.
Steven Liu, Xiuming Zhang, Zhoutong Zhang, Richard Zhang, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Bryan
Russell. 2021. Editing conditional radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision . 5773–5783.
William E Lorensen and Harvey E Cline. 1987. Marching cubes: A high resolution
3D surface construction algorithm. ACM siggraph computer graphics 21, 4 (1987),
163–169.
Li Ma, Xiaoyu Li, Jing Liao, Qi Zhang, Xuan Wang, Jue Wang, and Pedro V Sander.
2021. Deblur-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields from Blurry Images. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.14292 (2021).
Oscar Michel, Roi Bar-On, Richard Liu, Sagie Benaim, and Rana Hanocka.
2021. Text2Mesh: Text-Driven Neural Stylization for Meshes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.03221 (2021).
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Rodrigo Ortiz-Cayon, Nima Khademi Kalantari,
Ravi Ramamoorthi, Ren Ng, and Abhishek Kar. 2019. Local light field fusion: Practical
view synthesis with prescriptive sampling guidelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 38, 4 (2019), 1–14.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ra-
mamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2020. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields

==== Page 13 ====
NeRF-Art : Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization •13
for view synthesis. In European conference on computer vision . Springer, 405–421.
Alexander Mordvintsev, Nicola Pezzotti, Ludwig Schubert, and Chris Olah. 2018. Dif-
ferentiable image parameterizations. Distill 3, 7 (2018), e12.
Fangzhou Mu, Jian Wang, Yicheng Wu, and Yin Li. 2021. 3D Photo Stylization:
Learning to Generate Stylized Novel Views from a Single Image. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00169 (2021).
Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. 2022. Instant
Neural Graphics Primitives with a Multiresolution Hash Encoding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.05989 (2022).
Michael Niemeyer, Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Andreas
Geiger, and Noha Radwan. 2021. RegNeRF: Regularizing Neural Radiance Fields for
View Synthesis from Sparse Inputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00724 (2021).
Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. 2021. Giraffe: Representing scenes as composi-
tional generative neural feature fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 11453–11464.
Atsuhiro Noguchi, Xiao Sun, Stephen Lin, and Tatsuya Harada. 2021. Neural articulated
radiance field. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision . 5762–5772.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman,
Steven M Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. 2021a. Nerfies: Deformable neural
radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision . 5865–5874.
Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz,
Dan B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. 2021b. Hypernerf: A
higher-dimensional representation for topologically varying neural radiance fields.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13228 (2021).
Taesung Park, Alexei A Efros, Richard Zhang, and Jun-Yan Zhu. 2020. Contrastive learn-
ing for unpaired image-to-image translation. In European Conference on Computer
Vision . Springer, 319–345.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski.
2021. Styleclip: Text-driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 2085–2094.
Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei
Zhou, and Hujun Bao. 2021. Animatable neural radiance fields for modeling dynamic
human bodies. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision . 14314–14323.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. 2021.
D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 10318–10327.
Charles R Qi, Hao Su, Kaichun Mo, and Leonidas J Guibas. 2017. Pointnet: Deep
learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 652–660.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini
Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al .2021.
Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.00020 (2021).
Eduard Ramon, Gil Triginer, Janna Escur, Albert Pumarola, Jaime Garcia, Xavier Giro-i
Nieto, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. 2021. H3D-Net: Few-Shot High-Fidelity 3D
Head Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision . 5620–5629.
Christian Reiser, Songyou Peng, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas Geiger. 2021. Kilonerf: Speeding
up neural radiance fields with thousands of tiny mlps. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision . 14335–14345.
Elad Richardson, Yuval Alaluf, Or Patashnik, Yotam Nitzan, Yaniv Azar, Stav Shapiro,
and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2021. Encoding in style: a stylegan encoder for image-to-
image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition . 2287–2296.
Manuel Ruder, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Brox. 2016. Artistic style transfer for
videos. In German conference on pattern recognition . Springer, 26–36.
Johannes L Schonberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. 2016. Structure-from-motion revisited.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 4104–
4113.
Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas Geiger. 2020. Graf: Generative
radiance fields for 3d-aware image synthesis. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33 (2020), 20154–20166.
Bin Sheng, Ping Li, Chenhao Gao, and Kwan-Liu Ma. 2018. Deep neural representation
guided face sketch synthesis. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics
25, 12 (2018), 3216–3230.
Yezhi Shu, Ran Yi, Mengfei Xia, Zipeng Ye, Wang Zhao, Yang Chen, Yu-Kun Lai, and
Yong-Jin Liu. 2021. Gan-based multi-style photo cartoonization. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2021).
Pratul P Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Xiuming Zhang, Matthew Tancik, Ben Mildenhall,
and Jonathan T Barron. 2021. Nerv: Neural reflectance and visibility fields for
relighting and view synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition . 7495–7504.Omer Tov, Yuval Alaluf, Yotam Nitzan, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2021.
Designing an encoder for stylegan image manipulation. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021), 1–14.
Edgar Tretschk, Ayush Tewari, Vladislav Golyanik, Michael Zollhöfer, Christoph Lass-
ner, and Christian Theobalt. 2021. Non-rigid neural radiance fields: Reconstruction
and novel view synthesis of a dynamic scene from monocular video. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 12959–12970.
Can Wang, Menglei Chai, Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao. 2021a. CLIP-
NeRF: Text-and-Image Driven Manipulation of Neural Radiance Fields. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.05139 (2021).
Kangkan Wang, Sida Peng, Xiaowei Zhou, Jian Yang, and Guofeng Zhang. 2022. Ner-
fCap: Human Performance Capture With Dynamic Neural Radiance Fields. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2022).
Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping
Wang. 2021b. NeuS: Learning Neural Implicit Surfaces by Volume Rendering for
Multi-view Reconstruction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34
(2021), 27171–27183.
Tianyi Wei, Dongdong Chen, Wenbo Zhou, Jing Liao, Zhentao Tan, Lu Yuan, Weiming
Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. 2021. Hairclip: Design your hair by text and reference
image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05142 (2021).
Wenqi Xian, Jia-Bin Huang, Johannes Kopf, and Changil Kim. 2021. Space-time neural
irradiance fields for free-viewpoint video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 9421–9431.
Guo-Wei Yang, Wen-Yang Zhou, Hao-Yang Peng, Dun Liang, Tai-Jiang Mu, and Shi-
Min Hu. 2022. Recursive-NeRF: An efficient and dynamically growing NeRF. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2022).
Lior Yariv, Jiatao Gu, Yoni Kasten, and Yaron Lipman. 2021. Volume rendering of neural
implicit surfaces. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021),
4805–4815.
Zipeng Ye, Mengfei Xia, Yanan Sun, Ran Yi, Minjing Yu, Juyong Zhang, Yu-Kun Lai, and
Yong-Jin Liu. 2021. 3D-CariGAN: an end-to-end solution to 3D caricature generation
from normal face photos. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
(2021).
Kangxue Yin, Jun Gao, Maria Shugrina, Sameh Khamis, and Sanja Fidler. 2021.
3dstylenet: Creating 3d shapes with geometric and texture style variations. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 12456–
12465.
Alex Yu, Ruilong Li, Matthew Tancik, Hao Li, Ren Ng, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2021a.
Plenoctrees for real-time rendering of neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision . 5752–5761.
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2021b. pixelnerf: Neural
radiance fields from one or few images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 4578–4587.
He Zhang, Fan Li, Jianhui Zhao, Chao Tan, Dongming Shen, Yebin Liu, and Tao Yu.
2022b. Controllable Free Viewpoint Video Reconstruction Based on Neural Radiance
Fields and Motion Graphs. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
(2022).
Kai Zhang, Nick Kolkin, Sai Bi, Fujun Luan, Zexiang Xu, Eli Shechtman, and Noah
Snavely. 2022a. ARF: Artistic Radiance Fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06360 (2022).
Kai Zhang, Gernot Riegler, Noah Snavely, and Vladlen Koltun. 2020b. Nerf++: Analyzing
and improving neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07492 (2020).
Mohan Zhang, Jing Liao, and Jinhui Yu. 2020a. Deep Exemplar-based Color Transfer
for 3D Model. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2020).
Xiuming Zhang, Pratul P Srinivasan, Boyang Deng, Paul Debevec, William T Freeman,
and Jonathan T Barron. 2021. Nerfactor: Neural factorization of shape and reflectance
under an unknown illumination. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 6 (2021),
1–18.
Yandan Zhao, Xiaogang Jin, Yingqing Xu, Hanli Zhao, Meng Ai, and Kun Zhou. 2014.
Parallel style-aware image cloning for artworks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 21, 2 (2014), 229–240.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. 2017. Unpaired image-to-
image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision . 2223–2232.

