==== Page 1 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
Adam R. Kosiorek* 1Heiko Strathmann* 1Daniel Zoran1Pol Moreno1Rosalia Schneider1Soˇna Mokrá1
Danilo J. Rezende1
Abstract
We propose NeRF-VAE, a 3D scene generative
model that incorporates geometric structure via
Neural Radiance Fields ( NeRF) and differentiable
volume rendering. In contrast to NeRF, our model
takes into account shared structure across scenes,
and is able to infer the structure of a novel scene—
without the need to re-train—using amortized in-
ference. NeRF-VAE’s explicit 3D rendering pro-
cess further contrasts previous generative models
with convolution-based rendering which lacks ge-
ometric structure. Our model is a VAE that learns
a distribution over radiance ﬁelds by condition-
ing them on a latent scene representation. We
show that, once trained, NeRF-VAE is able to in-
fer and render geometrically-consistent scenes
from previously unseen 3D environments of syn-
thetic scenes using very few input images. We
further demonstrate that NeRF-VAE generalizes
well to out-of-distribution cameras, while convo-
lutional models do not. Finally, we introduce and
study an attention-based conditioning mechanism
ofNeRF-VAE’s decoder, which improves model
performance.
1 Introduction
The ability to infer the structure of scenes from visual inputs,
and to render high quality images from different viewpoints,
has vast implications for computer graphics and virtual real-
ity.
This problem has traditionally been tackled with 3D
reconstruction-based on matching visual keypoints, e. g.
Lowe (2004); Schönberger & Frahm (2016). While these
methods incorporate structure through multi-view geometry
(Hartley & Zisserman, 2003), very few existing methods
adopt learned scene-priors such as types of objects or statis-
*Equal contribution1DeepMind, London. Corre-
spondence to: ARK < adamrk@deepmind.com >, HS
<strathmann@deepmind.com >.
Proceedings of the 38thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).tics of the background. The resulting representations are
usually discrete: they consist of meshes (Dai et al., 2017),
point clouds (Engel et al., 2014), or discretized volumes
(Ulusoy et al., 2016), and are difﬁcult to integrate with
neural networks. An alternative approach to scene genera-
tion uses light-ﬁeld rendering (Levoy & Hanrahan, 1996;
Srinivasan et al., 2017) and multiplane image representa-
tions (Zhou et al., 2018; Mildenhall et al., 2019). While
these methods allow image-based rendering, they do not
estimate scene geometry. Hence, they are not directly useful
for the purpose of 3D scene understanding. More recent
deep-learning-based novel view synthesis methods have the
advantages of end-to-end training, and producing distributed
representations that can be easily used in other neural-net-
based downstream tasks. These models, however, often have
little embedded geometrical knowledge (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2014) and are either geometrically inconsistent (Nguyen-
Phuoc et al., 2020) or provide insufﬁcient visual quality
(Tatarchenko et al., 2015). Moreover, many of these meth-
ods are deterministic and cannot manage uncertainty in the
inputs (Sitzmann et al., 2019; Trevithick & Yang, 2021).
This work attempts to address these shortcomings. We
introduce NeRF-VAE—a deep generative model with the
knowledge of 3D geometry as well as complex scene priors.
Our work builds on Neural Radiance Fields ( NeRF, Milden-
hall et al. (2020)). Ne RFcombines implicit neural network
representations of radiance ﬁelds, or scene functions , with
a volumetric rendering process. NeRFneeds to undergo a
lengthy optimization process on many views of each single
scene separately and does not generalize to novel scenes.
In contrast, NeRF-VAE—a variational auto-encoder ( VAE)—
models multiple scenes, while its constant-time amortized
inference allows reasoning about novel scenes. Unlike NeRF,
our model is also generative, and therefore capable of han-
dling missing data and imagining completely new scenes. In
that, our work closely follows Generative Query Networks
(GQN, Eslami et al. (2018)). Like GQN,NeRF-VAE deﬁnes
a distribution over scene functions. Once sampled, a scene
function allows rendering arbitrary views of the underlying
scene. Where GQN relies on convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) with no knowledge of 3D geometry, leading to geo-
metrical inconsistencies, NeRF-VAEachieves consistency by
leveraging NeRF’s implicit representations and volumetric

==== Page 2 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
prior
conditional scene 
function 
image 
likelihood 
camera position/orientation context views 
set encoder approx. 
posterior 
 image 
position 
orientation 
inference 
inference generation training 
dataset  of scenes 
inference 
generation 
 context view(s) 
(a) During training , we embed common
scene properties (across the dataset) in
the parameters ;ofNeRF-VAE.(b) Once the model is trained, we can infer parameters
of a scene in constant time, even from a single view.(c) We can sample novel scenes from
NeRF-VAE generative model and ren-
der them from various viewpoints.
Figure 1: An overview of NeRF-VAE: a geometry-aware 3D scene generative model. NeRF-VAE is trained on a dataset of several views
(images and camera positions/orientations) from multiple synthetic scenes. Once trained, it allows for efﬁcient inference of scene
parameters (colours and geometry, including depth-maps) and sampling novel scenes from the prior.
rendering. We note that while these representations do not
model the scene geometry explicitly (as e. g. mesh-based
representations), the subsequent volumetric rendering pro-
cess explicitly uses 3D rays and 3D geometry to produce
output images.
NeRFrepresents a scene by the values of multilayer percep-
tron ( MLP) parameters. Being extremely high-dimensional,
this representation precludes using amortized inference. We
change NeRF’s formulation to a scene function shared be-
tween scenes, and conditioned on a per-scene latent vari-
able. Intuitively, the latent variable captures scene-speciﬁc
information (e. g. position and kind of objects, colours, light-
ing, etc.), while shared information (e. g. available textures
and shapes, properties of common elements, sky) is stored
in the parameters of the scene function. A prior over latent
variables (and therefore scene functions) allows sampling
novel scenes from the model, and rendering arbitrary view-
points within them. NeRF-VAEparameters are learned using
a collection of images from different scenes, with known
camera position and orientation. Since these parameters are
shared between scenes (unlike in NeRF),NeRF-VAE can in-
fer scene structure from very few views of an unseen scene.
This is in contrast to NeRF, where using few views results
in poor performance. A high level overview of NeRF-VAE
is depicted in Fig. 1.
In summary, NeRF-VAE introduces four key beneﬁts com-
pared to existing models. First, due to its amortized in-
ference, it removes the need for costly optimization from
scratch for every new scene. Second, as it learns shared
information between multiple scenes, it is able reconstruct
unobserved scenes from a much smaller number of input
views. Third, compared to existing convolutional generative
models for view synthesis, such as GQN, it generalizes much
better when evaluated on out-of-distribution camera views.
Finally, NeRF-VAE is the only amortized NeRFvariant that
uses compact scene representation in the form of a latent
variable and that can handle uncertainty in the inputs.2 Neural Radiance Fields ( NeRF)
NeRF’s scene function is represented as a 6D continuous
vector-valued function whose inputs are ray coordinates
(x;d)partitioned into position x2R3and orientation1
d2R3. Its outputs are an emitted colour (r;g;b )2R3
and a volume density 0. The scene function is approxi-
mated by a neural network F: (x;d)7!((r;g;b );)with
weights. In order to encourage multi-view consistency,
the architecture of this network is such that volume density
only depends on position while the emitted colour (r;g;b )
depends on both position and ray orientation.
V olumetric image rendering works by casting rays from the
camera’s image plane into the scene, one ray per pixel. The
colour that each ray produces is the weighted average of
colours along the ray, with weights given by their accumu-
lated volume densities. NeRF’s renderer uses a differentiable
approximation to this accumulation process. For details, we
refer to Mildenhall et al. (2020); Curless & Levoy (1996).
We denote the image rendering process whose inputs are a
camera c(position and orientation) and a scene function
F, and which outputs the rendered image2^I, by
^I=render (F();c): (1)
Note that computation of the camera’s image plane and cor-
responding rays for each pixel requires camera parameters
(e. g. ﬁeld of view, focal length, etc).
3 Ne RF-VAE
We build a generative model over scenes by introduc-
ing a view-independent latent variable zwith priorp(z)
and a conditional scene function G(;z) : (x;d)7!
((r;g;b );).Gis much like NeRF’sF, but is additionally
1It is also possible to parameterize orientation using two an-
gles, as e. g. done by Mildenhall et al. (2020), but we follow their
implementation in using a vector.
2Note that it is easily possible to compute depth estimates for
each rendered ray. We use this for visualization and evaluation
purposes.

==== Page 3 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
camera position/orientation image 
camera 
context views 
 prior
conditional scene 
function 
image 
likelihood 
set encoder approximate 
posterior 
inference 
(a) Inference in NeRF-VAE. (b) The generative model of NeRF-VAE.
Figure 2: Inference and generative model of NeRF-VAE. For inference, a set Cof context images Ictx
kand cameras ckfrom a scene are
encoded into an approximate posterior distribution over the latent variable z. This conditions a scene function G(;z), which is used by
theNeRFrenderer to reconstruct images from arbitrary cameras within the scene. We can sample novel scenes by sampling the latent z
from the prior. During training, the reconstruction MSE and the KLdivergence are used in a variational optimization objective to learn the
parametersof the conditional scene function and the parameters of the encoder.
conditioned on z, as will be detailed in Section 3.2.
It is now the latent variable zthat deﬁnes a speciﬁc scene,
out of all the scenes that Gis able to represent, where
are model parameters that capture shared structure
across scenes. The generative process of NeRF-VAE in-
volves sampling zp(z)and using the resulting con-
ditional scene function G(;z)to render an image ^I=
render (G(;z);c)from a camera cwith volumetric ren-
dering from Eq. (1).
The individual pixel colours ^I(i;j)are used to deﬁne the
mean parameter of a Gaussian image likelihood
p(Ijz;c) =Y
i;jN
I(i;j)j^I(i;j);2
lik
with ﬁxed or learned variance 2
lik, and we assume condi-
tional independence of individual pixels I(i;j)givenz.
Since the posterior over zis intractable, we approximate
it—we frame NeRF-VAE as a variational auto-encoder ( VAE,
Kingma & Welling (2014); Rezende et al. (2014)) with
conditional NeRFas its decoder.
3.1 Amortized Inference for NeRF-VAE
Estimating the scene function parameters in NeRFis done
separately for every scene, with no information sharing be-
tween scenes, which is time-consuming, compute-intensive,
and data-hungry.
In contrast, NeRF-VAE introduces an encoder network E
with parameters , which amortizes inference of the la-
tent variable z. Input for the encoder is a collection of
Nctxcontext views , where each view consists of an im-
ageIctx2RHW3and corresponding camera position
and orientation c. These views correspond to different
viewpoints of a particular scene, forming a context set
C:=fIctx
k;ckgNctx
k=1. Each context element (concatenated
camera ckwith image Ictx
k) is separately encoded using a
shared encoder—we use a ResNet adapted from Vahdat &
Kautz (2020), details in Appendix C. The resulting Nctxout-puts are subsequently averaged3and mapped to parameters
of the approximate posterior distribution q(zjC)over
the latent variable z. We use diagonal Gaussian posteriors.
We ﬁt the parameters f;gof the NeRF-VAE by maximiz-
ing the following evidence lower bound ( ELBO ) on images,
LNeRF-VAE(I;c;C;;) =
Ezq[logp(Ijz;c)] KL(q(zjC)jjp(z)):(2)
In practice, we approximate the ELBO by uniformly subsam-
pling pixels from each image, see Appendix E for details.
Iterative Amortized Inference Amortized inference suf-
fers from amortization gap (Cremer et al., 2018)—
contrasting the gradient-based learning in NeRF. To bridge
this gap, we employ iterative (amortized) inference (Kim
et al., 2018; Marino et al., 2018), which trades-off additional
compute for improved inference.
Iterative inference starts with an arbitrary guess for the
posterior parameters, e. g. 0=0, and iteratively reﬁnes
them. At each step t, a latent is sampled from the current
posterior zqt(zjC). The sample is then used to
render an image and to evaluate the gradient of the ELBO
in Eq. (2) w. r. t. t. The gradient is passed to a recurrent
reﬁnement network ( LSTM followed by a linear layer)4f,
which updates the posterior parameters tfor a given C:
ztqt(zjC);
t+1 t+f(E(C);rtLNeRF-VAE):
See Appendix C for further details.
We emphasize that NeRF-VAE’s decoder uses explicit ge-
ometric structure, which consequently is used by iterative
inference. While this is only in an implicit manner (through
ELBO gradients), it differs from a geometry-agnostic feed-
forward encoder typically used with VAEs.
3We choose this method for its conceptual simplicity and note
that more sophisticated options, such as attention-based mecha-
nisms, might lead to better results as in Trevithick & Yang (2021)—
exploration of which we leave for future work.
4Note that in this case, only contains parameters of the con-
text encoder Eas well as the reﬁnement network.

==== Page 4 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
circ(x) =0
BBBB@sin (20x)
cos (20x)
:::
sin (2L 1x)
cos (2L 1x)1
CCCCA
circ(x) =0
@circ(x1)
:::
circ(xN)1
A
Figure 3: Attention-based scene function. Input points (x;d),
along rays corresponding to each pixel in the camera plane, attend
to different locations of the spatial latent variable zof size [Hz
WzDz]using multi-head attention. The density part ( ) depends
only on the position xas in NeRF. Each attention block receives a
different slice of the latent along its channel dimension. The inputs
are projected to a lower-dimension space to save computation and
memory; is concatenation.
3.2 Conditioning the Scene Function
We now describe NeRF-VAE’s conditional scene function
G(;z), which is conditioned on the per-scene latent vari-
ablezand has additional across-scene parameters .
A simple way to condition NeRF’s scene function MLP is to
usezto shift and scale the inputs and activations at different
layers—this mechanism resembles AINof Dumoulin et al.
(2017); Brock et al. (2019) and is referred to as an MLP
scene function henceforth.
We further introduce an attention-based scene function,
see Fig. 3 for an overview. Attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
allows using a high-dimensional spatial [HzWzDz]with
latent variable over which inputs of the scene function can
attend. The spatial structure arises from removing the ﬁnal
average pooling across locations in the ResNet encoder.5
Since the scene function is evaluated many times (e. g. 256
in Mildenhall et al. (2020); 128 in our experiments) for
every pixel, it has to be computationally cheap with low
memory footprint. Consequently, we use only one linear
layer per attention block and no layer norm. Additionally,
our attention blocks are bottlenecks, i.e. keys, queries and
values are low dimensional c. f. Srinivas et al. (2021). We
ﬁnd that these choices are a good trade-off between com-
putation, memory and capacity, and used throughout our
experiments.
In order to model correlations between spatial locations,
otherwise unaccounted for by an independent prior p(z),
we apply a small CNN to the latent before it is fed into the
scene function, see Appendix C for further details.
5Since the feature maps are averaged over context elements,
locations in the latent do not necessarily correspond to parts of the
scene; we use Hz=Wz= 84 Related Work
NeRF-VAE is closely related to amortized neural rendering
approaches. Trevithick & Yang (2021); Yu et al. (2020) use
NeRFas their decoder but require projecting all rendered
points into the input space and thus do not formulate any
compact scene representation. Tancik et al. (2020) suffers
from a similar issue: it meta-learns good initializations for
NeRF, but requires updating all parameters before it can
render target observations. Sitzmann et al. (2019) uses se-
quential ray-marching instead of volumetric rendering, and
represents scenes using a hyper-network, which is in con-
trast to NeRF-VAE’s compact representation. NeRF-VAE has
many similarities with GQN of Eslami et al. (2018), with the
difference that GQN uses a CNN for rendering and is there-
fore not necessarily consistent across views. Mescheder et al.
(2019) show impressive single-image 3D reconstructions by
modelling space occupancy with an implicit representation,
though not modeling colours. Henderson & Lampert (2020)
describe an object-centric, voxel-based generative model
for videos that is able to segment scenes in 3D and produce
samples of novel scenes.
The above approaches work only when camera poses for
input images are known. This is not true for GANs, where it
is enough to approximate the marginal distribution of poses
in the training set if appropriate inductive biases are in
place (Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019)—an approach that also
scales to an explicit multi-object setting (Nguyen-Phuoc
et al., 2020). GRAF (Schwarz et al., 2020) and GIRAFFE
(Niemeyer & Geiger, 2020) reuse the same idea for single-
and multi-object settings, respectively, but use NeRFas the
generator, which improves multi-view consistency. Both
approaches are related to NeRF-VAE in the sense that they
use NeRFas a decoder which is conditioned on a latent
variable—although NeRF-VAE introduces a more advanced
conditioning mechanism. Finally, in contrast to the GAN ap-
proaches, NeRF-VAE has an associated inference procedure.
A limitation of NeRFis that it can only model static scenes
and does not support varying lighting conditions nor tran-
sient effects (e. g. moving objects) often visible in the real
world. NeRF-W(Martin-Brualla et al., 2020) addresses these
shortcomings by adding per-view latent variables. While
our model makes latent variables explicit, it maintains a
single latent per scene; an extension towards NERF -Wis
an interesting research direction. Pumarola et al. (2020);
Park et al. (2020); Du et al. (2020); Li et al. (2020); Xian
et al. (2020) further extend NeRFto dynamic scenes and
videos: they formulate ﬂow-ﬁelds that augment the original
radiance ﬁeld with a temporal component. This complicated
approach is necessary due to the high-dimensional nature
ofNeRF’s representation. Since NeRF-VAE introduce a la-
tent variable, it is possible to extend it to videos by simply
adding a latent dynamics model (e. g. Hafner et al. (2020)).

==== Page 5 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
We provide a tabular comparison of NeRF-VAE and dis-
cussed models in terms of desirable scene model properties
in Appendix A.
5 Experiments
To evaluate NeRF-VAE, we ﬁrst analyze its ability to re-
construct novel viewpoints given a small number of input
views, and contrast that with NeRF. Second, we compare our
model with a Generative Query Network-like autoregressive
convolutional model, (Eslami et al., 2018, GQN) and show
that while NeRF-VAE achieves comparably low reconstruc-
tions errors, it has a much improved generalization ability,
in particular when being evaluated on camera views not
seen during training. Third, we provide an ablation study
ofNeRF-VAE variants, with a focus on the conditioning
mechanisms of the scene function described in Section 3.2.
Finally, we showcase samples of NeRF-VAE.
5.1 Datasets
We use three datasets, each consisting of 64 64 coloured
images, along with camera position and orientation for each
image, and camera parameters used to extract ray position
and orientation for each pixel.
GQN (Eslami et al., 2018)6, consists of 200k scenes each
with 10 images of rooms with a variable number of objects.
Camera positions and orientations are randomly distributed
along a plane within the rooms, always facing the horizon.
Note that this dataset does not contain reﬂections or specu-
larities, which we discuss in Section 5.4
CLEVR We created a custom CLEVR dataset (Johnson
et al., 2017) with 100k scenes, each with 10 views. Each
scene consist of one to three randomly coloured and shaped
objects on a plane. Camera positions are randomly sampled
from a dome. Orientations are such that all objects are
always present, making inference from a limited number of
views easier than in the GQN data. The dataset is of higher
visual quality than GQN, e. g. it includes reﬂections.
Jaytracer In order to have more control over individual
aspects of the data (e. g. complexity, distribution of camera
views, etc.), we also created a custom raytraced dataset
which consists of 200k randomly generated scenes, each
with 10 views, with a ﬁxed number of objects in random
orientations on a plane. Shapes, colours, textures, and light
position are random, an example can be seen in Fig. 4.
For both CLEVR and Jaytracer, we generate 10 additional
6We use the rooms_free_camera_no_object_rotations variant
publicly available at https://github.com/deepmind/
gqn-datasetsscenes each with 200 views and ground-truth depth maps for
evaluation purposes and for training NeRF. See Appendix B
for more details.
5.2 Implementation Details
The conditional scene functions’ architecture follows NeRF,
ﬁrst processing position xto produce volume density and
then additionally receiving orientation dto produce the
output colours. Both position and orientation use circular
encoding whereby we augment the network input values
with a Fourier basis, c. f. Fig. 3.
We follow Mildenhall et al. (2020, Section 5.2) in using
hierarchical volume sampling in order to approximate the
colour of each pixel. This means we maintain a second
instance of the conditional scene function (conditioned on
the same latent z), which results in an additional likelihood
term in the model log-likelihood in Eq. (2).
We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and -annealing of the
KL term in Eq. (2). Full details can be found in Appendix C.
5.3 Comparison with Ne RF
NeRF-VAE, unlike NeRF, can infer scene structure without
re-training—through the introduction of a per-scene latent
variable and shared across-scene parameters. Our ﬁrst exper-
iment explores the following questions: 1. Can NeRF-VAE
leverage parameter sharing to infer novel scenes from very
few views? 2. Is NeRF-VAE’s capacity affected by having a
much smaller scene representation (a latent variable instead
of an MLP). 3. At what number of views do both models
reach comparable errors?
To focus on these conceptual differences between NeRF
and NeRF-VAE, we use NeRF-VAE with the simple MLP
scene function and without iterative inference. We train
NeRF-VAE on the Jaytracer data using Nctx= 4 context
images (with corresponding cameras). We evaluate on 10
held-out scenes, with an increasing number of context views
Ntest
ctx= 1;:::; 6.
We train a separate instance of NeRFon each of these same
10 evaluation scenes, with an increasing number of training
views 5;:::; 100. Both models are evaluated on images
of 100 unseen views from the 10 evaluation scenes. We
train and evaluate both models using 10 different seeds. See
Appendix F for further training details.
RESULTS
Fig. 4 (a) shows reconstruction MSEs (mean and 95% per-
centiles) across the 100 test views. NeRF-VAE achieves a
signiﬁcantly lower MSE and uniformly lower worst case er-
rors compared to NeRFtrained on less than 100 views. This
is despite NeRF-VAE’s amortized inference, which is many

==== Page 6 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
MSE0.00.10.20.40.5
AB C(b) MSE histogram, NeRF
5 views
20 views
100 views
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
MSE0.00.10.20.40.5(b) MSE histogram, NeRF-VAE
2 views
4 views
6 views
1 234610 203050100
Number of views0.00.20.50.81.0MSE [10−1]
(a) MSE
NeRF
NeRF-VAE
Predictions for NeRF error level A 
Ground truth NeRF NeRF-V AE Predictions for NeRF error level B 
Ground truth NeRF NeRF-V AE Predictions for NeRF error level C 
Ground truth NeRF NeRF-V AE 
Figure 4: Error analysis of NeRFand a minimalistic version (see text) of NeRF-VAE on Jaytracer data. (a):MSE decreases with increasing
number of training ( NeRF) and context ( NeRF-VAE) views. We show the mean and 95% percentiles across 100 test views averaged over
10 scenes and 10 seeds. Despite its minimal version, NeRF-VAE performs much better for fewer ( 6) views; NeRFneeds many more
views ( 100) to reach comparable error. (b, c) :MSEhistograms. Compared to NeRF-VAE,NeRFneeds a large number of training
views to consistently achieve low errors, and even then incurs a small number of larger errors. Bottom : An example scene, where views
correspond to three error levels, indicated in (b), of NeRFtrained on 100 views. NeRF’s predictions for level A are near perfect, but the
model fails catastrophically for level C—which regularly happens when training on fewer views, see (b). NeRF-VAE’s predictions are
more consistent, despite its simple decoder and inference.
orders of magnitude faster than running the full optimiza-
tion in NeRF.NeRFachieves lower MSE than our model
only when sufﬁcient training data is available (here = 100
views). We emphasize that while NeRF-VAE was trained
usingNctx= 4context views, the model generalizes well to
different numbers of context views at test time.
Taking a look at the distribution of errors and the corre-
sponding predictions in Fig. 4 (b, c), we see that NeRF’s
MSE distributions are extremely wide when trained on fewer
than 100 views. Even for 100 views, NeRFsuffers from
a long tail of large errors. NeRF-VAE’s errors concentrate
on a small positive value for all evaluated Ntest
ctx, with tails
comparable to NeRFwith 100 training views.
Fig. 4, bottom, shows predictions from both models on
an example scene, for views corresponding to error levels
attained by NeRFtrained on 100 views: near-perfect (A),
medium (B), and catastrophic (C), marked in Fig. 4 (b).
NeRF’s A-level predictions are near perfect, but signiﬁcantly
deteriorate in error levels B, C. As seen above, however,
NeRFconsistently (but not exclusively) attains level A only
when trained with 100 views. We stress that in these simple
scenes, this effect is not7due to incomplete scene coverage
from a limited number of views— NeRFis simply not able
to interpolate well between few training views. In contrast,
NeRF-VAE captures the scene structure well on all error
levels—though the simple version used here ( MLP scene
function, no iterative inference) misses high frequency de-
7Similar results, including catastrophic failures of NeRFtrained
with few views, can be obtained on CLEVR data where most of
the scene is visible in all views, see Appendix F.1.tails such as sharp object boundaries and textures. This
suggests that while amortized inference from few views is
possible, NeRF-VAE could beneﬁt from a more expressive
scene function and a better inference mechanism.
5.4 Comparison with a Convolution-Based
Generative Model
Our next set of experiments compares NeRF-VAEto a CONV -
AR-VAE—a model that is very closely related to GQN of
Eslami et al. (2018), but with slight modiﬁcations to make
it comparable to NeRF-VAE, see Appendix D for details.
Both NeRF-VAE and CONV -AR-VAE are able to infer novel
scenes from few input images, and to subsequently synthe-
size novel views within those scenes. The key difference
between the models is their decoder, responsible for render-
ing images given camera and latent scene representation:
convolutional for CONV -AR-VAE and geometry informed
forNeRF-VAE.
INTERPOLATIONS & G ENERALIZATION
We ﬁrst illustrate that NeRF-VAE’s explicit knowledge of 3D
geometry allows it to generalize well to out-of-distribution
camera positions and orientations compared to CONV -AR-
VAE.
We train both NeRF-VAE and CONV -AR-VAE on the GQN
dataset, using similar settings, which are detailed in Ap-
pendix F.2. For the this experiment, we restrict NeRF-VAE’s
scene function’s access to orientations, which we will moti-
vate below. For evaluation, we select a held-out scene and

==== Page 7 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
CONV -AR-V AE 
NeRF-V AE 
CONV -AR-V AE 
NeRF-V AE W ithin-distribution
Out-of-distribution
Figure 5: Generalization ability for interpolations along two trajectories. Top: the camera is moving parallel to the ground, facing the
horizon ( within-distribution (WD) , both models were trained using such views). While convolutional autoregressive VAE (CONV -AR-
VAE) predicts the room consistently, it is inconsistent regarding the presence of the blue object. In contrast, NeRF-VAE produces fully
consistent predictions, as further illustrated by visualizations of its inferred scene geometry. Bottom : the camera is further lifted off the
ground, along a quadratic curve, facing downwards ( out-of-distribution (OOD) ).CONV -AR-VAE fails to account for downward camera
orientations and outputs distorted colours, whereas NeRF-VAE produces plausible and consistent predictions and scene geometry.
let each model infer the latent representation given the same
Ntest
ctx= 4views. We pick two arbitrary views and generate
a sequence of camera positions and orientations that interpo-
lates between them8. We do this twice: once with a simple
linear interpolation across the plane, changing only the yaw
of the camera ( within-distribution (WD) views ), and once
with the camera lifting off the plane, along a quadratic curve,
and looking down, changing both pitch and yaw ( out-of-
distribution (OOD) views ); see Fig. 14 in Appendix F.2
for an illustration. We note that out-of-distribution here
means that these camera positions lie outside the support of
the training data distribution.
Fig. 5 shows each models’ outputs along the within-
distribution trajectories and out-of-distribution views trajec-
tories. Both models produce plausible within-distribution
interpolations, although CONV -AR-VAE has problems with
object persistency. When evaluated on out-of-distribution
views, CONV -AR-VAE completely fails to produce plausi-
ble outputs: ignoring the downward camera angle and in-
stead distorting colours of the scene. In contrast, NeRF-VAE
renders the inferred scene geometry properly from out-of-
distribution viewpoints. Fig. 5 further shows depth estimates
forNeRF-VAE’s outputs, revealing the inferred scene geom-
etry.
We now investigate generalization on CLEVR data, where
we again focus on out-of-distribution camera views, and
additionally investigate generalization across the number of
visible objects. We compare CONV -AR-VAE to variants of
NeRF-VAE, namely MLP,ATTN and II+ATTN .
We again see a clear advantage of NeRF-VAE. For instance,
Fig. 6 (left) shows almost perfect predictions when using
theii+attn model as the camera gets closer to the object,
8Note that the GQN dataset does not contain ground truth
images for these interpolated views.compared to CONV -AR-VAE.
When evaluated on scenes that contain more objects than
visible during training (here: 5 vs. 4, Fig. 6 (right) ), NeRF-
VAE using the attention-based scene function described in
Section 3.2 correctly reconstructs all objects in the scenes,
while the NeRF-VAE with the MLP scene function misses
objects. Appendix F.2 contains quantitative results for this
experiment.
Ground truth C-AR-V AE ITT+ATTN 
Ground truth MLP        ATTN 
Figure 6: Left: Generalization to out-of-distribution camera views.
While CONV -AR-VAE fails to produce plausible predictions, NeRF-
VAE generalizes well. Right: Generalization to larger number
of objects. The MLP scene function misses objects, while ATTN
captures all objects.
DEGENERATE ORIENTATIONS IN THE GQN DATA
Recall that camera views in the GQN data lie within a plane
parallel to the ground. Consequently, certain points in the
scene are only observed from orientations within this plane.
When trained on this degenerate data, evaluating a neural-
network-based scene function on different (e. g. when look-
ing down) orientations inputs leads to unpredictable outputs.
A simple way to circumvent the resulting rendering artifacts
is to remove orientations from the scene function’s inputs,
as done in the above interpolations. In the case of the GQN
data, which does not contain viewpoint dependent colours
(reﬂections or specularities), this restriction does not impair
visual output quality. We replicate the interpolations from

==== Page 8 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
Figure 7: Variants of NeRF-VAE compared with CONV -AR-VAE on
CLEVR and GQN datasets. We trained NeRF-VAE with a range
ofvalues to investigate reconstruction/ KLtrade-offs. Iterative
inference ( II) improves MLP-based scene functions, but has a small
effect on attentive ( ATT) ones.
Fig. 5 with orientation inputs in Appendix F.3.
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON & M ODEL ABLATIONS
Fig. 7 shows MSE and Kullback-Leibler ( KL)-divergence of
NeRF-VAE variants using amortized or iterative amortized
(II) inference and MLP or attentive ( ATT) scene functions,
and juxtaposes them against the CONV -AR-VAE. We focus
on CLEVR and GQN datasets. All NeRF-VAEs are trained
with increasing values of to trace out the available trade-
offs between MSE and KL.
CLEVR contains simple objects visible from every view-
point, and has no complicated textures. Consequently, the
MLP scene function achieves good MSE and KL. Iterative in-
ference further increases reconstruction performance while
decreasing KL. It is interesting that MLP-based models
tend to have lower KLvalues than attentive models while
still maintaining good reconstruction. However, attentive
models do obtain lower reconstruction errors in high- KL
regimes, which suggests that they have higher capacity to
model complicated data. CONV -AR-VAEis not able to model
the CLEVR data well—the model attains high KLvalues
despite manually setting a high MSE threshold.
The GQN dataset contains high-frequency textures and
rooms which are not fully visible from every view, caus-
ing both a more difﬁcult inference problem and more com-
plicated rendering compared to CLEVR. The MLP scene
function without iterative inference achieves low KLalbeit
generally higher MSE.ATT can achieve lower errors than
MLP at similar KLlevels, despite also reaching very large KL
values, indicating a peaked posterior for certain values of .
Using iterative inference helps both decoders, and allowsthe model to achieve both lowest KLand MSE. We note that
while CONV -AR-VAE achieves slightly lower MSE and KL
on this within-distribution evaluation, it fails to generalize
to out-of-distribution views as discussed above.
5.5 Samples & Uncertainty
We now demonstrate NeRF-VAE’s capability to learn an
unconditional prior over scenes (as opposed to images).
We ﬁrst sample the latent variable zp(z), and then
render a number of views of the induced scene function
G(;z). Samples from NeRF-VAE trained on the GQN
and CLEVR datasets are shown in Fig. 8. These samples
resemble the training data distribution to a high degree,
both in appearance and variability. Furthermore, the depth
estimates (example in last row) reveal a consistent geometric
structure of the sampled scene.
Fig. 9 shows an example where NeRF-VAE infers a scene
from a single context image containing a barely-visible pink
object. The model is able to accurately predict a view that
contains the full object. At the same time, the model main-
tains uncertainty about the exact shape (sphere vs. icosa-
hedron), as can be seen in the predictive variance of depth
estimate.
Figure 8: Sampled scenes from NeRF-VAE, trained on GQN (left)
and CLEVR (right). Each row shows interpolated views in a
different scene, corresponding to a sample of the latent variable.
The last row shows a rendered depth map of the images in the
above row (other depth maps omitted for space reasons).
Context image Ground truth Predictive mean Predictive variance Predictive mean 
Figure 9: An example of predictions under limited information in
the context view. We show colour and depth predictions. NeRF-
VAE is able to reconstruct a plausible explanation of the object
which is only marginally visible in the single context view. The
predictive variance of depth estimates (averaged over 100 samples
from the posterior over the latent variable) accounts for object
boundaries not clearly visible in the context.

==== Page 9 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
6 Discussion
We presented NeRF-VAE, a geometry-aware scene gener-
ative model that leverages NeRFas a decoder in a VAE-
framework. Thanks to an explicit rendering procedure,
NeRF-VAE is view-consistent and generalizes to out-of-
distribution cameras, unlike convolutional models such as
GQN . Additionally, the learned prior over scene functions
allows NeRF-VAE to infer scene structure from very few
views. This is in contrast to NeRF, where too few views
may result in contrived explanations of a scene that work
for some views but not for others. The combination of geo-
metric structure and a prior over scene functions, however,
is not a panacea: if the data is degenerate (e. g. cameras
restricted to a plane) and the model is overparameterized
(e. g. unnecessarily accounting for view-dependent colours),
NeRF-VAE might still explain the data in implausible ways.
One of the limitations of NeRF-VAE is its limited per-
scene expressivity. NeRFallocates allof its capacity to
a single scene, and is able to capture high levels of com-
plexity. NeRF-VAE, however, splits its capacity between
shared across-scene information (conditional scene func-
tion) and per-scene information (latent). In order to allow
for amortized inference, the capacity of the latent needs
to be limited—resulting in reduced per-scene expressivity
compared to NeRF.
At the same time, a low-dimensional latent variable opens
interesting possibilities for future work, e. g. interpolation
between scenes, extensions to dynamic scenes and videos,
and a latent representation that dynamically grows with
input complexity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Hyunjik Kim, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Karl Stelzner,
Adam Goli ´nski, Alex X. Lee, Theophane Weber, and the
anonymous reviewers for their comments on initial versions
of this paper. We also thank Jony Hudson, Bojan Vujatovic,
Yotam Doron, and Alex Goldin for their support throughout
the project.References
Brock, A., Donahue, J., and Simonyan, K. Large scale
gan training for high ﬁdelity natural image synthesis. In
International Conference on Representation Learning ,
2019.
Cremer, C., Li, X., and Duvenaud, D. Inference suboptimal-
ity in variational autoencoders. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , 2018. arXiv/1801.03558.
Curless, B. and Levoy, M. A volumetric method for building
complex models from range images. In Annual Confer-
ence on Computer graphics and Interactive Techniques ,
pp. 303–312, 1996.
Dai, A., Nießner, M., Zollöfer, M., Izadi, S., and Theobalt,
C. BundleFusion: Real-time globally consistent 3d re-
construction using on-the-ﬂy surface re-integration. ACM
Transactions on Graphics , 2017.
Dosovitskiy, A., Springenberg, J. T., Tatarchenko, M., and
Brox, T. Learning to generate chairs, tables and cars with
convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2014.
Du, Y ., Zhang, Y ., Yu, H.-X., Tenenbaum, J., and Wu, J.
Neural radiance ﬂow for 4d view synthesis and video
processing. arXiv/2012.09790 , 2020.
Dumoulin, V ., Shlens, J., and Kudlur, M. A learned repre-
sentation for artistic style. In International Conference
on Representation Learning , 2017. arXiv/1610.07629.
Engel, J., Schöps, T., and Cremers, D. LSD-SLAM: Large-
scale direct monocular slam. In European Conference on
Computer Vision , 2014.
Engelcke, M., Kosiorek, A. R., Jones, O. P., and Posner,
I. GENESIS: Generative scene inference and sampling
with object-centric latent representations. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2019.
Eslami, S. A., Rezende, D. J., Besse, F., Viola, F., Morcos,
A. S., Garnelo, M., Ruderman, A., Rusu, A. A., Dani-
helka, I., Gregor, K., et al. Neural scene representation
and rendering. Science , (6394):1204–1210, 2018. 360.
Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Ba, J., and Norouzi, M. Dream
to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In
International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2020. arXiv/1912.01603.
Hartley, R. and Zisserman, A. Multiple view geometry in
computer vision (2. ed.) . 2003.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Identity mappings
in deep residual networks. In European Conference on
Computer Vision , 2016. arXiv/1603.05027.

==== Page 10 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
Henderson, P. and Lampert, C. H. Unsupervised object-
centric video generation and decomposition in 3d. In
Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F.,
and Lin, H. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 33, pp. 3106–3117. Curran As-
sociates, Inc., 2020.
Hu, J., Shen, L., Albanie, S., Sun, G., and Wu, E. Squeeze-
and-excitation networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 42:2011–2023, 2020.
Johnson, J., Hariharan, B., van der Maaten, L., Fei-Fei, L.,
Lawrence Zitnick, C., and Girshick, R. CLEVR: A diag-
nostic dataset for compositional language and elementary
visual reasoning. In Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , July 2017.
Kim, Y ., Wiseman, S., Miller, A., Sontag, D., and Rush,
A. M. Semi-amortized variational autoencoders. In Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning , 2018.
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv/1412.6980 , 2014.
Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational
bayes. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations , 2014.
Levoy, M. and Hanrahan, P. Light ﬁeld rendering. In An-
nual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques , pp. 31–42, 1996.
Li, Z., Niklaus, S., Snavely, N., and Wang, O. Neural
scene ﬂow ﬁelds for space-time view synthesis of dy-
namic scenes. arXiv/2011.13084 , 2020.
Lowe, D. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant
keypoints. International Journal of Computer Vision , pp.
91–110, 2004. 60.
Marino, J., Yue, Y ., and Mandt, S. Iterative amortized
inference. arXiv/1807.09356 , 2018.
Martin-Brualla, R., Radwan, N., Sajjadi, M. S., Barron, J. T.,
Dosovitskiy, A., and Duckworth, D. NeRF in the Wild:
Neural radiance ﬁelds for unconstrained photo collections.
arXiv/2008.02268 , 2020.
Mescheder, L. M., Oechsle, M., Niemeyer, M., Nowozin, S.,
and Geiger, A. Occupancy networks: Learning 3d recon-
struction in function space. In Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 4455–4465, 2019.
Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P. P., Ortiz-Cayon, R., Kalantari,
N. K., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R., and Kar, A. Local light
ﬁeld fusion: Practical view synthesis with prescriptive
sampling guidelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,
2019.Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P. P., Tancik, M., Barron, J. T.,
Ramamoorthi, R., and Ng, R. NeRF: Representing scenes
as neural radiance ﬁelds for view synthesis. In European
Conference on Computer Vision , 2020.
Nguyen-Phuoc, T., Li, C., Theis, L., Richardt, C., and Yang,
Y . HoloGAN: Unsupervised learning of 3d representa-
tions from natural images. In International Conference
on Computer Vision , pp. 7587–7596, 2019.
Nguyen-Phuoc, T., Richardt, C., Mai, L., Yang, Y .,
and Mitra, N. BlockGAN: Learning 3d object-aware
scene representations from unlabelled images. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020.
arXiv/2002.08988.
Niemeyer, M. and Geiger, A. Giraffe: Representing
scenes as compositional generative neural feature ﬁelds.
arXiv/2011.12100 , 2020.
Park, K., Sinha, U., Barron, J., Bouaziz, S., Goldman, D.,
Seitz, S., and Brualla, R.-M. Deformable neural radiance
ﬁelds. arXiv/2011.12948 , 2020.
Pumarola, A., Corona, E., Pons-Moll, G., and Moreno-
Noguer, F. D-NeRF: Neural radiance ﬁelds for dynamic
scenes. arXiv/ 2011.13961 , 2020.
Rezende, D. J. and Viola, F. Generalized elbo with con-
strained optimization, geco. In NeurIPS Bayesian Deep
Learning Workshop , 2018.
Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., and Wierstra, D. Stochastic
backpropagation and approximate inference in deep gen-
erative models. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pp. 1278–1286, 2014.
Schönberger, J. L. and Frahm, J.-M. Structure-from-motion
revisited. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2016.
Schwarz, K., Liao, Y ., Niemeyer, M., and Geiger, A. GRAF:
Generative radiance ﬁelds for 3d-aware image synthesis.
arXiv/2007.02442 , 2020.
Sitzmann, V ., Zollhöfer, M., and Wetzstein, G. Scene repre-
sentation networks: Continuous 3d-structure-aware neu-
ral scene representations. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems , 2019. arXiv/1906.01618.
Srinivas, A., Lin, T.-Y ., Parmar, N., Shlens, J., Abbeel,
P., and Vaswani, A. Bottleneck transformers for visual
recognition. 2021.
Srinivasan, P. P., Wang, T., Sreelal, A., Ramamoorthi, R.,
and Ng, R. Learning to synthesize a 4d RGBD light
ﬁeld from a single image. In International Conference on
Computer Vision , 2017.

==== Page 11 ====
NeRF-V AE: A Geometry Aware 3D Scene Generative Model
Tancik, M., Mildenhall, B., Wang, T., Schmidt, D., Srini-
vasan, P. P., Barron, J., and Ng, R. Learned initializations
for optimizing coordinate-based neural representations.
arXiv/2012.02189 , 2020.
Tatarchenko, M., Dosovitskiy, A., and Brox, T. Single-
view to multi-view: Reconstructing unseen views with a
convolutional network. arXiv/1511.06702 , 2015.
Trevithick, A. and Yang, B. GRF: Learning a general radi-
ance ﬁeld for 3d scene representation and rendering. In
International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2021. arXiv/2010.04595.
Ulusoy, A. O., Black, M. J., and Geiger, A. Patches, planes
and probabilities: A non-local prior for volumetric 3d
reconstruction. In Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pp. 3280–3289, 2016.
Vahdat, A. and Kautz, J. NV AE: A deep hierarchical varia-
tional autoencoder. arXiv/2007.03898 , 2020.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Atten-
tion is all you need. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 5998–6008, 2017. 30.
Xian, W., Huang, J., Kopf, J., and Kim, C. Space-
time neural irradiance ﬁelds for free-viewpoint video.
arXiv/2011.12950 , 2020.
Yu, A., Ye, V ., Tancik, M., and Kanazawa, A. pixel-
NeRF: Neural radiance ﬁelds from one or few images.
arXiv/2012.02190 , 2020.
Zhou, T., Tucker, R., Flynn, J., Fyffe, G., and Snavely, N.
Stereo magniﬁcation: learning view synthesis using mul-
tiplane images. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 2018.

