==== Page 1 ====
Neuro-Symbolic AI: An Emerging Class of AI
Workloads and their Characterization
Zachary Susskind, Bryce Arden, Lizy K. John
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas
zsusskind, arden.bryce, ljohn@utexas.eduPatrick Stockton, Eugene B. John
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The University of Texas at San Antonio
San Antonio, Texas
patrick.stockton, eugene.john@utsa.edu
Abstract —Neuro-symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence is a novel area
of AI research which seeks to combine traditional rules-based
AI approaches with modern deep learning techniques. Neuro-
symbolic models have already demonstrated the capability to
outperform state-of-the-art deep learning models in domains such
as image and video reasoning. They have also been shown to
obtain high accuracy with signiﬁcantly less training data than
traditional models. Due to the recency of the ﬁeld’s emergence
and relative sparsity of published results, the performance char-
acteristics of these models are not well understood. In this paper,
we describe and analyze the performance characteristics of three
recent neuro-symbolic models. We ﬁnd that symbolic models have
less potential parallelism than traditional neural models due to
complex control ﬂow and low-operational-intensity operations,
such as scalar multiplication and tensor addition. However, the
neural aspect of computation dominates the symbolic part in
cases where they are clearly separable. We also ﬁnd that data
movement poses a potential bottleneck, as it does in many ML
workloads.
Index Terms —Neuro-Symbolic, Machine Learning, Perfor-
mance, Inference
I. I NTRODUCTION
Conventional neural networks, based on Deep Learning
(DL), have proven to be effective in solving problems in many
domains. Recently, there has been an increase in the diver-
sity of neural models, including those composed of multiple
independently-trained submodels, and those which integrate
symbolic reasoning concepts (neuro-symbolic models). At the
same time, there is growing interest in heterogeneous archi-
tectures. These architectures pose the challenge of efﬁciently
mapping problems to different resources. Even in a relatively
simple heterogeneous design, such as a CPU-GPU system, it is
necessary to determine which tasks should be mapped to which
device. In order to facilitate this mapping, it is important to
understand emerging AI applications.
Neural networks have traditionally been grey-box systems.
It’s trivial to observe the internal physical structure of a
network, since a model’s topology is explicitly deﬁned as
part of hyperparameter selection. However, mapping the high-
dimensional, abstract features which neural networks manipu-
late to concrete concepts which humans can understand has
proven to be difﬁcult. Such mappings are highly desirable
for safety-critical ﬁelds such as medicine and self-driving
cars, where we must be certain a model is learning thedesired dataset features rather than over-ﬁtting to data artifacts
[1]. Networks composed of independent submodels have an
advantage here, since each submodel was trained for a speciﬁc
purpose. Knowing the purpose of each submodel gives us some
information about the internal state of the top-level model.
Neuro-Symbolic AI (NSAI) is another emerging AI domain
that combines deep learning for feature extraction and rules-
based ”intuition” for manipulating those features. Rules-based,
or symbolic, approaches dominated the ﬁeld of AI until the
1980s [2]. Symbolic models had several advantages: they
required only a few input samples, generalized well to new
problems, and their internal functionality was conceptually
simple when compared to DL models. At the same time, they
required substantial hand-tuning, which made them difﬁcult to
create for complex problems. A far larger issue was that they
simply weren’t very accurate: in 1973, the entire ﬁeld of AI
was summarised as ”increasingly disappointing” [3], and by
the 1980s, research had spiraled into what became known as
the ”AI winter” [4].
NSAI is a hybrid between DL and symbolic approaches
which attempts to capture the strengths of both ﬁelds. Deep
learning has proven singularly successful in extracting com-
plex features from data in tasks such as object detection and
natural language processing. At the same time, symbolic AI is
good for formalizing human-like reasoning. The objective of
NSAI is extract features from data using DL approaches, then
manipulate these features using symbolic approaches. Neuro-
symbolic models have outperformed pure DL models on image
and video question answering tasks, and have proven to
converge far quicker, with as little as 1/10 of the training data
needed for accuracy. Figure 1 contrasts the NSCL, a neuro-
symbolic model for image reasoning [5], with two other pure-
DL models (TbD [6] and MAC [7]). While all three models
obtain similar ﬁnal accuracies with 100% of the training data,
the neuro-symbolic model dramatically outperforms the other
two when restricted to training on only 10% of the total data
(CLEVR dataset) [5]. Therefore, neuro-symbolic models are
a good choice for scenarios where the availability of training
data is limited, or when training time is prohibitive.
In this paper, we analyze the inference performance char-
acteristics of three separate neuro-symbolic models. Two of
the models, the Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner (NSCL) andarXiv:2109.06133v1  [cs.AI]  13 Sep 2021

==== Page 2 ====
Fig. 1. The neuro-symbolic model (NSCL [5]) achieves good accuracy
even when only trained with 10% of the data (CLEVR dataset) whereas the
accuracy of neural models (TbD [6] and MAC [7]) deteriorates when the
training set is small. Data is drawn from [5].
Neuro-Symbolic Dynamic Reasoning (NS-DR), are composed
of multiple independent ”submodels”, which extract problem
features before passing them as input to a ﬁnal symbolic sub-
model. The third, Neural Logic Machines (NLM), is an end-to-
end model without independent submodels. The NLM model
uses an object’s relations, properties, quantiﬁers, and logic
connectives in order to accomplish the task of generalization.
We provide an overview of all three models in Table I.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II outlines the space of neuro-symbolic learning, including the
progressive improvements to neuro-symbolic models. Section
III describes the three models that we are analyzing in this
paper in detail. Section IV describes our methodology for an-
alyzing the performance of these models, based on classifying
activity into eight distinct categories. Section V provides the
results of our analysis with breakdowns for each submodel
component. Section VI provides our takeaways on the behavior
and potential opportunities for acceleration of neuro-symbolic
models. Finally, in Section VII, we summarize our ﬁndings
and propose future work. We also provide direct links to the
repositories of the models cited in this paper as an appendix.
II. R ELATED WORK
A large portion of the research in NSAI to date has
been spearheaded by a collaborative effort between MIT and
IBM research groups [5], [10]. In 2019, the Neuro-Symbolic
Concept Learner proved the viability of combining symbolic
AI with deep learning techniques by parsing input questions
and scenes into symbolic programs [5]. The Concept Learner
demonstrated a novel technique for parsing input scenes
and questions into a semantic program, and introduced new
techniques for training this parsing at the same time as the
symbolic execution engine. The Concept Learner model was
followed the next year by the Visual Concept-Metaconcept
Learning (VCML) model, which used embeddings to learn
object properties with less supervision [10]. The VCML model
introduced the joint learning of concepts and metaconcepts
(e.g. the notion that two values describe the same propertyof objects), and the autonomous learning of new concepts
(e.g. color, shape, etc.). The VMCL obtained near-perfect
accuracy on the CLEVR image reasoning dataset. In early
2020, Chuang Gen et al. introduced the CLEVER dataset,
which pushed the boundaries of dynamic reasoning by using
videos instead of images, requiring models to learn both
physical and causal relationships [8]. The same paper also
introduced the Neuro-Symbolic Dynamic Reasoning (NS-DR)
model, which achieved state-of-the-art performance on the
CLEVRER dataset, dramatically outperforming traditional,
non-symbolic approaches to video reasoning. In early 2021,
the same MIT researchers released the Dynamic Concept
Learner (DCL) [11], which achieved a new state-of-the-art for
the CLEVRER dataset by adding learned features for object
behavior over time and using new training techniques. The
DCL has also been shown to generalize well to new datasets
for video question answering [11].
The neuro-symbolic Neural Logic Machine (NLM) re-
search was conducted by a collaboration between Google
Inc., ByteDance Inc., and Tsinghua University [9]. The re-
sulting NLM architecture provides a state-of-the-art method
for solving general application tasks such as array sorting,
critical path ﬁnding, and more complex tasks such as Blocks
World [12]. Blocks World is a classic symbolic reasoning
problem where the model is given a set number of blocks
and logical rules. Using the provided generalized rules, the
model will need to perform the available logical actions to
achieve the desired target result from the randomized starting
layout. Following the neuro-symbolic work from Jiayuan Mao
et al. introduced the concept learner for interpreting scenes,
words, and sentences from natural supervision (NS-CL) [13].
This NS-CL model utilized similar neuro-symbolic reasoning
modules to build an object-based scene for the system to infer.
The visual reasoning of the NS-CL model generalized tasks
using new object attributes and properties with scaling rule
sets which is supportive of the NLM work.
As mentioned in the introduction, the NS-DR and NSCL
models are composed of independent submodels. Many of
these are neural models similar to those already deployed
in data centers, covering tasks such as natural language and
image processing [14] [15]. While the approximate perfor-
mance proﬁles for some of these submodels is already known,
the renewed interest in symbolic AI is relatively recent,
and combining symbolic execution with neural networks is
quite novel. NLM takes a different approach, integrating its
symbolic and neural components, and does not contain any
submodels. The ﬁeld is still growing and evolving rapidly;
to the best of our knowledge, there is no prior work which
analyzes neuro-symbolic workloads.
III. M ODEL OVERVIEW
A. Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner
The Neuro-Symbolic Concept Learner (NSCL) was de-
signed for the CLEVR dataset [19]. CLEVR is a dataset for
”image reasoning”: images are presented to the model, along
with a set of related questions, and the model’s outputs are the

==== Page 3 ====
TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF THE THREE NEURO -SYMBOLIC MODELS DISCUSSED IN THIS PAPER
Workload Source Description Submodels
NSCL [5] MIT/IBM A model that learns visual concepts, words, and semantic
parsing of sentences without explicit supervision on any of
them. Model learns by simply looking at images and reading
paired questions and answers. The speciﬁc MIT model builds an
object-based scene representation and translates sentences into
executable, symbolic programs. Uses CLEVR dataset.Image Parser (Object detection/masking)
Question Parser (Natural Language Processing)
Symbolic Executor
NS-DR [8] MIT/IBM A neuro-symbolic model for the CLEVRER dataset. CLEVRER
includes 300,000 questions and answers related to the action
depicted in the videos. The questions fall into four different
categories: Descriptive: e.g. “What is the material of the last
object to collide with the cyan cylinder? Explanatory: e.g.
“What is responsible for the collision between rubber and metal
cylinders?” Predictive: e.g. “What will happen next? Counter-
factual: e.g. “What will happen without the cyan cylinder?”Video Frame Parser (Object detection/masking)
Question Parser (Natural Language Processing)
Dynamics Predictor (Learned physics)
Symbolic Executor
NLM [9] Google A neuro-symbolic architecture for both inductive learning and
logic reasoning. Exploits the power of both neural networks as
function approximators, and logic programming as a symbolic
processor for objects with properties, relations, logic connec-
tives, and quantiﬁers. After being trained on small-scale tasks
(such as sorting short arrays), NLM models can recover lifted
rules, and generalize to large-scale tasks (such as sorting longer
arrays than they were trained on)No Submodels
TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE SUBMODEL COMPONENTS OF THE NSCL AND NS-DR
Submodel Origin Type Description
Image/Video Frame Parser Detectron2 [16] Neural (CNN) Extracts object features (positions, shapes, materials, sizes, and colors) from
still images or video frames.
Question Parser OpenNMT [17] Neural (Transformer) Translates natural-language input questions into a purpose-designed ”language”
of tokens. Tokens may describe the properties of objects, or describe ﬁltering
and querying operations to be performed on the set of object features.
Dynamics Predictor PropNet [18] Neural Learned physics engine for modeling and predicting collisions between objects.
Is capable of accurately modeling complex collisions involving more than two
objects, as well as operating with partial information (allowing objects to enter
and leave the scene).
Symbolic Executor NSCL [5] Quasi-Symbolic Fixed-function model which sequentially applies parsed tokens to extracted
image features to answer input questions. Unlike a true symbolic model,
approximates non-differentiable functions using probabilistic approaches and
softmax, enabling backpropagation.
Symbolic Executor NS-DR [8] Symbolic Fixed-function model which applies parsed tokens to both extracted video frame
features and PropNet predicted features (collisions). A true symbolic model, it
largely performs arithmetic and boolean operations as well as table lookups and
queries.
answers to these questions. Image samples in CLEVR contain
cubes, cylinders, and spheres with different sizes, colors, and
materials. An example of a scene in the CLEVR dataset, with
several of its accompanying questions, is shown in Figure 2.
As described in Table I, the NSCL is internally composed
of three submodels. We describe each of these submodels in
more detail here.
1) Image Parser: The objective of the image parser is to
generate object ”masks”: pixel-accurate regions with annotated
colors, shapes, and materials. This is accomplished using a
Mask R-CNN model, which constructs object segmentation
masks and classiﬁcations in parallel [20]. While the addition
of object mask generation makes its structure somewhat more
complex than a traditional convolutional neural network, both
branches of computation are internally convolutional.
The implementation of Mask R-CNN originally used for
the NSCL proved challenging to run on modern hardware.Not only was no pretrained model provided, but the software
libraries required were obsolete and not compatible with
modern CUDA versions. Therefore, we decided to use a
more recent, pretrained Mask R-CNN model provided by
Facebook’s Detectron2 [16]. This also had the advantage of
giving us access to the proﬁling tools built into more recent
versions of the PyTorch framework.
2) Question Parser: Questions in the CLEVR dataset are in
the form of natural language, which presents the challenge of
translating them into a form usable by the model. The authors
of the NSCL accomplished this by deﬁning a domain-speciﬁc
language, including verbs, such as ”Filter” or ”Intersect”,
and concepts, such as ”Blue” or ”Left”. This effectively
converts the problem of question parsing into neural machine
translation (NMT). A bidirectional GRU [21] was used to
accomplish this task for the original NSDR. However, source

==== Page 4 ====
Fig. 2. A sample from the CLEVR image reasoning dataset with several
accompanying questions. Questions explore the properties of and relations
between objects in the scene.
code, a pretrained model, or any other information is not
available for this model. As such, we chose to proﬁle a small,
modern pretrained Transformer-based NMT model provided
by Harvard’s OpenNMT toolkit [17]. This provides similar
advantages to the Detectron2 image model: more recent library
versions and support for modern DL proﬁling tools. It also
provides a more realistic insight into what deployment of this
model would look like in a modern datacenter environment.
3) Symbolic Program Executor: The symbolic program
executor converts extracted image features and question to-
kenizations into predictions. Formally, this model is ”quasi-
symbolic”: unlike a true symbolic AI model, which performs
logical and boolean operations on data, the executor approx-
imates non-differentiable functions in a probabilistic manner.
The output of the NSCL is a vector in which the i’th element,
Mask i2[0;1], represents the probability of the corresponding
object in the scene being in the output set. This representation
is useful for two reasons. First, it allows for multiple correct
answers, which increases the complexity of the questions
the model can answer. Second, it makes the symbolic step
fully reversible, which allows back-propagation to occur. This
approach avoids the limitations of true Boolean circuits, which
are in general irreversible. In turn, this reversibility allows for
the learning of concept embedding vectors: representations of
object features which allow concepts (such as color, shape,
and material) to be learned without explicit labels [5].
B. Neuro-Symbolic Dynamic Reasoning
The Neuro-Symbolic Dynamic Reasoning (NS-DR) model
is a neuro-symbolic model for the CLEVRER video reasoning
dataset. CLEVRER builds on CLEVR by replacing images
with videos. Objects in CLEVRER may enter or exit the
scene throughout the course of a (5 second, 25 frame) video,
potentially colliding and rebounding with other objects. Usingvideos instead of images adds a new domain to the questions
in CLEVRER: that of causality. As described in Table I, causal
questions may range from the descriptive (”Which objects
collided?”) to more complex causal relations (”What caused
the objects to collide? Would the objects still have collided if
...”). Existing neural models were shown to perform poorly on
all but the simple descriptive questions in CLEVRER [8].
In order to account for causal relations, the NS-DR intro-
duces a new submodel: a neural dynamics predictor, which
is essentially a learned physics engine. The introduction of
the dynamics predictor brings the model up to a total of four
independent submodels. We discuss the structure below.
1) Video Frame Parser: The video frame parser treats each
frame of a video separately, using the same Mask R-CNN
approach as the NSCL. Thus, for each input video, inference
with this model must be run 25 times.
2) Question Parser: The original NS-DR model used a
more modern NMT model than the NSCL: Seq2Seq [22],
which was demonstrated to be more accurate on long inputs
than prior models. Once again, we opted to replace this model
with the OpenNMT transformer model.
3) Dynamics Predictor: The dynamics predictor, PropNet
[18], is a learned physics engine that can represent complex
collisions between objects. PropNet improves on prior work
in the domain by accurately modeling propagation of force
through multiple objects (such as in a Newton’s cradle),
and operating correctly in the presence of partial information
(where not all objects are visible). Functional correctness with
partial information is crucial, since all videos in CLEVRER
are taken from a ﬁxed camera angle, where objects are allowed
to enter and leave the scene. Dynamics prediction provides
the positions, trajectories, and collisions between objects for
the NS-DR model. The results of the dynamics predictor are
augmented with the properties identiﬁed by the video frame
parser to provide a complete record of what occurred during
the input video.
4) Symbolic Program Executor: The program executor of
the NS-DR is a true symbolic model: unlike the NSCL, it
uses non-differentiable operations to make predictions. The
disadvantage of non-differentiable operations is that it is not
possible to back-propagate error; therefore, this model can
not learn concept embeddings, so concepts must be learned
directly by the frame parser via supervised training. This is
an entirely ﬁxed-function model with no learned component;
internally, it behaves much like a programming language in-
terpreter, using tokens to apply ﬁlter and reduction operations
to the extracted video features.
The NS-DR program executor is single-threaded and CPU-
only. The sequential nature of its processing does not expose
any obvious opportunities for the sorts of coarse-grain par-
allelism typical of DL workloads: in general, processing the
nth token of a sequence will require the result of processing
the(n 1)th token. An example symbolic program, shown in
Figure 3, demonstrates how the symbolic program executor
uses tokens to ﬁlter and perform basic arithmetic on the
features extracted by the other submodels.

==== Page 5 ====
Fig. 3. An example of the tokenized representation of a question in
the CLEVRER dataset. ”Noun/Adjective” tokens - features - have white
backgrounds, while ”verb” tokens - actions - are shaded. Arrows show the
dependencies for token processing [8].
C. Neural Logic Machines
The Neural Logic Machine (NLM) is a neuro-symbolic
architecture that applies both inductive learning and logic
reasoning to an object’s relations, properties, quantiﬁers, and
logic connectives in order to accomplish the task of gener-
alization. Unlike most traditional networks, NLMs are able
to achieve perfect generalization in various tasks such as
family tree decisions, sorting of arrays, ﬁnding the shortest
path between points, or playing the Blocks World task. The
NLM architecture provides the ability to solve historically
challenging tasks that traditional neural network architectures
struggle to complete. The challenge of generalization of tasks
from small scale to large scale are proven to be overcome using
NLM. Figure 4 shows an illustration for the NLM framework.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
We used function-level proﬁling to capture statistics such
as runtimes, invocation counts and tensor sizes. We then
developed a post-processing tool to partition the proﬁling
results into eight dominant categories of operations.
A. Experimental Methodology
The characterization of all GPU workloads
was performed using the built-in PyTorch proﬁler
(torch.autograd.profiler ). This proﬁler collects
CPU and GPU runtimes at a per-function granularity,
differentiating between ”total” runtime (including sub-
functions) and ”self” runtime (excluding sub-functions). In
most cases, this proﬁling introduced some overhead, and in a
few cases, it appeared to capture its own post-run analysis as
overhead. We have compensated for this to the extent possible
by comparing runs with and without the proﬁler enabled.
Since the symbolic executor for the NS-DR is a ﬁxed-
function, CPU-only model, it can not be effectively analyzed
using the PyTorch proﬁler. Instead, we used Python’s cProﬁle
module to get per-function execution times. The cProﬁle
module has several limitations when compared to the PyTorch
proﬁler - for instance, it does not proﬁle GPU activity, and
does not report input tensor sizes. However, these limitations
have no impact on scalar, CPU-only code.Data collection was performed on a system with two In-
tel Xeon E5-2698 v3 processors (totaling 32 cores and 64
threads), 128GB of DDR4 memory at 2133MHz, and two
NVIDIA Tesla M40s. However, most models were only single-
threaded, and were only able to make efﬁcient use of a single
GPU for inference.
B. Workload Taxonomy
Since simply reporting per-function proﬁling results would
require us to discuss an overwhelming number of individual
functions, we devised a function classiﬁcation scheme to
partition the data into eight dominant categories of operations.
We drew inspiration for this classiﬁcation from the Berkeley
”seven dwarfs” [23]: a mid-2000s effort to identify what were
then the most crucial kernels for parallel computing. In fact,
some of our categories are identical to Berkeley ”dwarfs”, but
we identify several others that also appear highly relevant to
the workloads discussed in this paper and/or machine learning
more generally. Given the wide diversity of models in modern
AI research, we do not claim that our classiﬁcation scheme
is universally applicable. However, we do hope to show that
workload classiﬁcation schemes are valuable for exploring the
differences between models.
1) Dense Matrix Multiplication: Fast, efﬁcient dense matrix
multiplication (GEMM) remains a critical requirement for
large DL models. Fully-connected layers in neural networks
use GEMM as their primary mathematical operation, often
with very large input matrices.
Multiplication of large, dense matrices is very computation-
ally intensive: the work to multiply a mkmatrix with
akmmatrix W=O(mnk). At the same time, data
intensity only grows quadratically with input size: given the
two input matrices and mnoutput matrix, the data intensity
Q=O(mk+kn+mn) =O(max( mk; kn; mn )). This gives
an operational intensity of:
I=W
Q=O(mkn)
O(max( mk; kn; mn ))=O(min( m; k; n ))
When m,k, and nare all large, operational intensity can
be very high. Since there are no internal dependencies in
matrix multiplication (the multiply-and-add operations can be
performed in any order), the multiplication of large, roughly-
square matrices is highly parallelizable. The challenge emerges
when any one of the dimensions is small relative to the other
two; in this case, the operational intensity approaches O(1),
requiring highly efﬁcient data movement to avoid becoming
memory-bound. Such ”tall-and-skinny” matrices are difﬁcult
to process efﬁciently on GPUs [24]. While operational in-
tensity can sometimes be addressed by processing multiple
inputs simultaneously via batching, this may not be an option
for latency-sensitive inference operations where input must
be processed as soon as it is received. An extreme case of
tall-and-skinny GEMM is the multiplication of a matrix by
a vector, as an n-element vector can be viewed as an n1
matrix.

==== Page 6 ====
Fig. 4. An illustration of the NLM framework showing object properties and object relations as inputs, the concluding outputs of the objects properties and
relations, and the internal logical structure. Image originally from [9].
Fig. 5. Heatmap showing the proportion of each category of operation in each
model. Note that the neural models have different dominant components; the
NSCL executor and NLM models are dominated by element-wise operations.
See appendix for links to the model repositories.
2) Sparse Matrix Multiplication: Sparse matrices are those
in which the values of only some elements are speciﬁed;
all other elements are assumed to be some constant value,
typically 0. There are numerous ways to implement sparse
matrices; in general, there is a tradeoff between the generality
of the sparsity (how much structure is assumed) and how easy
it is to implement in hardware [25]. Sparse matrix multipli-
cation requires efﬁcient mechanisms to perform lookups into
the tables of non-zero values.
3) Convolution: Convolutions are another class of common,
computationally intensive operation. Unlike in GEMM, one ofthe inputs, the ﬁlter, is multiplied with a set of submatrices
of the other input. In theory, this should lead to excellent
operational intensity, since ﬁlter weights are reused for each
individual multiplication, and weights from the other matrix
are reused by overlapping submatrices. In practice, convolu-
tions have proven difﬁcult to parallelize, and are frequently
implemented using the im2col algorithm, which reduces the
problem to matrix multiplication. Performing im2col requires
substantial data movement and duplication, worsening the per-
formance and memory footprint of convolution. Recent efforts
have focused on performing convolution ”natively”, without
invoking im2col [26]. The more complex memory access
patterns of these approaches have their own considerations
for efﬁcient implementation. Whether im2col is used or not,
convolution presents a workload distinct from simple GEMM.
4) Element-wise Tensor Operations: Many operations in
deep learning are applied uniformly to all elements in a ten-
sor. These include activation, normalization, tensor addition,
Hadamard products, tensor-scalar operations, and relational
operations. All of these operations are ”embarrassingly par-
allel” in that they can be applied to every element of a
tensor simultaneously, but are challenging in that they have
poor operational intensity; each element of the input is only
operated on once.
5) Regional Operations: Some operations act on spatially
local regions of tensors. The best-known example of a regional
operation is pooling, which reduces the size of a tensor
in one or more dimensions by performing some reduction
operation (such as max or average) regionally. This is not
the only class of regional operation; other examples include
non-maximum suppression and region-of-interest alignment in
object detection networks. These operations are distinct from
element-wise operations in that they operate on potentially
overlapping regions rather than single elements and thus
have more complex access patterns; they are distinct from
convolution in that they operate on only a single tensor and
typically involve less computation.

==== Page 7 ====
6) Embedding Lookups: Embeddings are a way of trans-
forming data indices or high-dimensional one-hot vectors into
low-dimensional learned vectors. In practice, during inference,
embeddings function as lookup tables. The irregular memory
access patterns of embedding lookups and the large sizes of
embedding tables make acceleration a challenge. Tradition-
ally, embedding lookups are latency-sensitive, memory-bound
operations for inference [27].
7) Data Movement: Many types of operations require sub-
stantial data movement but little or no computation. This
primarily consists of host-device and device-host transfers;
we also include operations such as tensor duplication and
assignment.
8) Data Transformation: The last category of operations
we identify is data transformation: operations which reshape
or subsample data. This includes matrix transposes, tensor
reordering, and masked selection. We also include coalescing
in this category, which is a process in which duplicate entries
for the same coordinates in a sparse matrix are eliminated by
summing their associated values [28].
V. R ESULTS
In this section, we present and discuss results for the indi-
vidual submodels introduced in Section IV. We ﬁrst present
and discuss the performance characterizations of the individ-
ual submodels, then discuss the aggregate inference runtime
behavior of the NSCL, NS-DR, and NLM models.
A. Image and Video Frame Parser
Mask R-CNN, the video frame parser, has a well-studied
performance proﬁle that is dominated by convolution and
activation functions [20]. As mentioned in Section III, we
used Detectron2 due to difﬁculties bringing up the version of
Mask R-CNN used in the NS-DR paper. Mobile-optimized,
production ready implementations of Detectron2 models are
provided by the d2go project [29], which we used to collect re-
alistic performance measurements for Mask R-CNN inference
latency. The pretrained model we used was nottrained on the
CLEVR or CLEVRER dataset, as there is no pretrained model,
model source, or training instructions for CLEVRER, and we
wanted to use the same submodel for both the NSCL and
NS-DR. However, we do not anticipate that the performance
characteristics of the model would be any different if it were
trained for a different dataset, particularly since the runtime
of this model does not signiﬁcantly vary with the number of
objects in the input image.
Our analysis of Detectron2, as shown in Table III and
Figure 6, shows that Mask R-CNN spends the most execution
time on convolution and element-wise operations (such as
activation functions and normalization). This is not particularly
surprising, but serves as a simple example of our classiﬁcation
scheme. With an average 34.6ms inference time on our target
machine, a full 25-frame video requires 865ms of inference
time for the CLEVRER dataset. Thus, the NS-DR video frame
parser takes dramatically longer than the NSCL image parser.B. Question Parser
NLP models such as Seq2Seq, the original question parser
in the NS-DR, are a well-established family, having seen
datacenter deployments since at least 2016 [30]. However,
transformer-based attention models, such as the OpenNMT
model we proﬁled, typically outperform RNN-based models
such as Seq2Seq, and have seen wider adoption since 2017
[31].
The amount of computation required to perform inference
for an NMT model is dependent on the input sequence length.
Sentences in the CLEVR dataset have an average length of
18.4 words. The CLEVRER dataset is split between open-
ended questions with an average length of 10.9 words and
multiple-choice questions with an average length of 51.3
words (counting the answer choices), for an overall average
of 22.2 words.
Figure 6 shows that the performance of the transformer-
based OpenNMT model is dominated by dense matrix
multiplication and data movement. The OpenNMT model
performed inference in an average of 13.5ms per input
word/token. In practice, the runtime of a transformer model
asymptotically grows quadratically with input sequence length
[32], but we observed a linear relation on sample input
sentences. It is likely that, for the relatively short lengths
of the inputs we were observing, linear per-word operations
dominated the quadratic attention operations.
C. Dynamics Predictor
PropNet, the neural dynamics predictor, spends the majority
of its runtime on data movement. In fact, while analyzing
the behavior of this model using the nvidia-smi utility,
we noticed it was rarely able to exceed 50% utilization of
one GPU. The model also spends a substantial amount of
time on coalescing, which entails merging duplicate entries
in sparse tensors. It is unclear to what extent this coalescing
could be avoided through better-optimized code. A substantial
portion of the remaining runtime is spent on dense matrix
multiplication. This is because the workload involves the
multiplication of many very tall and skinny matrices, where m
andnare quite large, but kmay be as small as 1. As discussed
in Section IV, these types of matrices are challenging to
multiply efﬁciently.
Internally, this model consists of several smaller fully-
connected and convolutional networks. Some of these models
must be run multiple times for a single frame in order to
compute the propagation of forces. This contributes to this
model’s large amount of data movement and generally long
runtime. The data movement of this model could be reduced by
leveraging sparsity and weight reuse; since the same submodel
is used for inference many times, it is wasteful to move over
the weights for each inference.
Some tensor dimensions are input-dependent, corresponding
to the number of objects in the frame. We also observed sub-
stantial variation in inference runtimes. Across 400 samples,
the fastest inference ﬁnished in 1.8 seconds, and the slowest
in 5.3 seconds, with an average of 3.4 seconds.

==== Page 8 ====
TABLE III
RUNTIMES AND RUNTIME BREAKDOWNS FOR SINGLE INPUTS TO THE MODELS DISCUSSED IN THIS PAPER .
Model GEMM Sparse MM Conv Element-Wise Regional Embedding Data Move Data Transform Other Total
Image/Frame Parser 0.19ms 0ms 11.8ms 11.1ms 0.54ms 0ms 6.0ms 2.4ms 2.6ms 34.6ms
Question Parser 166ms 0ms 0ms 53.5ms 0ms 0.27ms 50.1ms 9.9ms 17.3ms 297ms
Dynamics Predictor 715ms 9.9ms 294ms 345ms 0ms 0ms 1300ms 403ms 125ms 3200ms
NSCL Executor 39.9us 0us 46.4us 122.4us 33.5us 0.0us 76.0us 20.5us 149.5us 488.3us
NS-DR Executor N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 12.9ms* 12.9ms
NLM Path 1.2s 0s 0s 4.7s 0s 0s 3.6s 1.5s 7.3s 18.3s
NLM Sort 2.6s 0s 0s 11.1s 0s 0s 7.5s 3.4s 17.1s 41.7s
NLM Blocks World 635ms 0ms 0ms 2100ms 0ms 0ms 1400ms 618ms 3100ms 7850ms
Fig. 6. Runtime breakdown for each of the three models, including submodels for NSCL and NS-DR and three distinct tasks for NLM. Note the differing
Y scales for the three models.
D. NSCL Symbolic Program Executor
The symbolic executor for the NSCL spends a large portion
of its execution time on element-wise operations, and a smaller
but still signiﬁcant amount of time on data movement. These
element-wise operations stem from its manipulation of vectors
of probabilities (with entries corresponding to the probabilities
of each object in the scene being a correct answer). In addition
to simple arithmetic, the model computes numerous softmax
functions over these vectors in order to isolate predictions.
Notably, not much time is spent on matrix-matrix operations
(GEMM and convolution), which would have better opera-
tional intensity and potential for parallelism than the scalar
and vector operations we see dominating.
E. NS-DR Symbolic Program Executor
The symbolic program executor for the NS-DR has an
average runtime of 12.9ms per sample. While this is not large
compared to the other models in the network, all other models
must ﬁnish before the executor can begin, and it therefore lies
on the critical path for inference.
Fig. 7. Breakdown of the NS-DR’s symbolic component (This model is
broken down separately since it is the only CPU-only component.)
Since the NS-DR executor is a CPU-only, scalar model,
it would not make sense to categorize it according to the
scheme we derived for the other workloads. Therefore, we

==== Page 9 ====
used Python’s built-in cProﬁle proﬁler to perform function-
level proﬁling and identiﬁed categories of similar functions.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 7. Note,
however, that the plurality of the runtime still falls into the
”Other” category. This is a consequence of there being many
miscellaneous functions which individually contribute little to
runtime, but collectively contribute more than any of the major
categories.
Much of the executor’s runtime is spent on querying the
set of extracted features. Examples of these queries include
ﬁnding the ID of an object with given properties, looking up
the properties of an object given its ID, and queries relating
multiple objects such as ﬁnding an object’s closest neighbor.
These queries look similar to standard database operations. For
a sufﬁciently large set of symbolic features, it is likely that
feature querying could be approached using existing work in
parallelizing SQL queries [33]. However, the feature set the
NS-DR extracts is relatively small, meaning that the overhead
which parallelism incurs would almost certainly overwhelm
the speedup for this model.
The next-largest category of execution time is spent on
scalar arithmetic operations, in particular summing large ar-
rays. In principle these sorts of operations can sometimes
beneﬁt from being spread across multiple CPU cores, but in
practice we again expect the small size of the feature set to
make this pointless.
The third-largest category of operation is in fact JSON pars-
ing. This is an unfortunate artifact of the way data is passed
in the NS-DR model: rather than an end-to-end integration, it
stores data in JSON ﬁles between submodels. This means that
the executor has to load in the questions and extracted features
from JSONs for each inference sample. This overhead turns
out to be substantial for the very short runtime of this model.
F . Neural Logic Machines
A characterization proﬁle was created for each of the NLM
tasks: Sort, Path, and Blocks World. Each task provided
ranging variations in the produced results. The largest category
of operation was the ”other” category, where a signiﬁcant
amount of overall time was spent. The percentage of time
spent in the other category can be determined as 40.9 percent
for the Sort task, 40.0 percent for the critical path task, and
45.1 percent for the Blocks World task. The amount of time
spent in the other category can be attributed to miscellaneous
internal querying and generation functions for the different
tasks.
Following the ”other” category, the element-wise category
contributed the second most to the task executions. The
Sort task resulted in the highest percentage of element-wise
functions related to the vector multiplication being performed
on the numerical task. The high percentage of element-wise
functions is also represented in the Path task, with approxi-
mately a third of the total runtime spent on element-wise tasks.
Data movement represents the third largest category that
was characterized during the task executions. The Sort task
and Path task shared the highest percentage of data movementwithin the model’s execution. This is predominantly due to the
frequent movement of numerical values in these general tasks.
Blocks World yielded the lowest data movement characteristic
which can be perceived by the more symbolic and logical ﬂow
of functions and it’s data.
VI. A NALYSIS
Figure 6 shows the execution time breakdowns for single
input samples for each of the three models in this paper. We
now discuss each model individually.
A. NSCL and NS-DR
The NSCL runs in an average of 375ms per sample, with
310ms of this coming just from the question parser. The
clear bottleneck for this workload, dominating the question
parser’s runtime, is dense matrix multiplication. This is another
case where a sparse version of the model could potentially
yield improvements to runtime. However, this is not the
only contributing factor to the question parser’s long runtime.
Although the ability to ask questions of a model using natural
language is convenient, it is worth keeping in mind that it
can add substantial overhead and complexity, and considering
whether a simpler, machine-readable input ”language” could
be used instead.
It is clear that the dynamics predictor dominates the in-
ference runtime of the NS-DR. The total inference time for
this model is 4.44 seconds. Since input videos are 5 seconds
long, this does in theory allow for real-time inference on
this system, but this would not hold true for low-power or
embedded platforms.
Some portions of the NS-DR and NSCL are more suited
for acceleration than others. The CNN-based video frame
parser and the transformer-based question parser model can
be accelerated with existing GPU or accelerator architectures
[34]. On the other hand, the NS-DR’s dynamics predictor is
severely data-movement-bound due to its many sparse and
small tensor operations, and also suffers from the difﬁculty
of multiplying ”tall-and-skinny” matrices. It is possible that
data movement could be reduced somewhat through code
optimization, but it is fundamentally difﬁcult to accelerate
workloads with poor operational intensity. There have also
been several approaches investigated for near-memory linear
algebra [35] [36], which would likely be beneﬁcial for PropNet
as the reduced time accessing memory would help compensate
for the poor operational intensity.
The symbolic executor of the NS-DR exhibits complex
control ﬂow and heterogeneous functionality. Overall, this
workload has very little of the coarse-grain parallelism typical
of deep learning workloads. However, there are still oppor-
tunities for ﬁne-grain parallelism in its database queries and
arithmetic operations. It is doubtful that a multicore CPU
implementation would give any speedup for this particular
workload, given the relatively small sizes of the feature sets,
but this could be a viable approach for larger symbolic models.
Our biggest takeaway from analyzing the performance of
the NSCL and NS-DR models is that these NSAI models

==== Page 10 ====
still perform largely the same work as other AI models that
have been previously studied, in large part due to the small
amount of time spent on symbolic execution. We were able to
largely classify the types of operations performed by the neural
dynamics predictor, the bottleneck in the NS-DR, into the
same primitive operations performed by other ML models in
different domains. Although the symbolic executor is currently
a small fraction of the inference runtime for both models,
it is likely that this component’s complexity will increase
over time as model developers seek to extract and manipulate
more complex relations between features. We believe that it is
possible to leverage work from similar program architectures,
such as relational databases, to reduce the impact of this.
B. NLM
The NLM showcased the ability for the architecture to
train a model on small scale tasks and generalize to solve
large scale tasks with lifted rules and added premises, which
shows the expressive power of the network. The ability to
scale the rule set from a small sized rule set to a large
sized rule set has proven to be difﬁcult for inductive logic
programming systems. The combination of using both symbols
and probabilities helps solve these issues. The NLM proves to
accomplish complex tasks by overcoming major challenges
that traditional neural networks and inductive logic reasoning
systems cannot solve alone. The tasks that were used involved
the graph-based path task, the general sort application task,
and the more complex Blocks World task. These different
problems presented variations in the system’s performance, as
each task involved different levels of logic rule set complexity.
In addition, the NLM architecture also solves the problem of
scalability with respect to the complexity of rules given to the
system. As the rules of the task scale up, the complexity of
the logic rules to be learned will also scale up exponentially.
This allows the NLM to adjust its trained rules based on uses
of a minimal set of prior examples. Using a minimum set of
prior data illustrates the ability for the NLM to effectively
improve as it learns. As these different tasks use a variation
of input data and parameters, the performance evaluation of
these exercises gives many opportunities for improvement.
VII. C ONCLUSION
While neuro-symbolic models with submodels look topo-
logically distinct from traditional deep learning models, our
analysis suggests that their performance characteristics can
be largely viewed as a combination of existing workloads.
Our analysis of the NSCL and NS-DR show that there are
relatively few opportunities for acceleration of symbolic com-
putation. The symbolic workloads of these two models have
low operational intensities, consisting of vector and/or scalar
operations, and exhibit complex control ﬂow. These factors
combined greatly limit the potential for parallelism. However,
the symbolic components do not make up large portions of
the execution times of either workload, and are therefore
unlikely to pose a bottleneck. On the other hand, the NLP,
dynamics predictor, and vision submodels exhibit differentdominant operation categories, including dense GEMM in the
question parser, data movement in the dynamics predictor, and
a co-dominance of convolution and element-wise operations in
the image and frame parser. NLM models require numerous
element-wise operations for inference, with the computational
demand increasing with the complexity of the task-speciﬁc
logical rule set.
The challenge of accelerating the low-operational-intensity,
element-wise computations of workloads such as NLM will
become increasingly important as this ﬁeld sees further devel-
opment.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported in part by Semiconductor Re-
search Corporation (SRC) Task 3015.001/3016.001 and Na-
tional Science Foundation grant number 1763848. Any opin-
ions, ﬁndings, conclusions or recommendations are those of
the authors and not of the funding agencies.
APPENDIX
Repository links for the models referenced in this paper:
NSCL https://github.com/vacancy/NSCL-PyTorch-Release
NS-DR https://github.com/chuangg/CLEVRER
Detectron2 (d2go) https://github.com/facebookresearch/d2go
OpenNMT https://github.com/OpenNMT/OpenNMT-py
Propnet https://github.com/YunzhuLi/PropNet
NLM https://github.com/google/neural-logic-machines
REFERENCES
[1] G. Montavon, W. Samek, and K.-R. M ¨uller, “Methods for interpreting
and understanding deep neural networks,” Digital Signal Processing ,
vol. 73, pp. 1–15, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1051200417302385
[2] M. Garnelo and M. Shanahan, “Reconciling deep learning with
symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence: representing objects and relations,”
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , vol. 29, pp. 17–23, 2019,
artiﬁcial Intelligence. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2352154618301943
[3] J. Lighthill, “Artiﬁcial intelligence: A general survey,” in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence: a paper symposium , 1973.
[4] J. Hendler, “Avoiding another ai winter,” IEEE Annals of the History of
Computing , vol. 23, no. 02, pp. 2–4, 2008.
[5] J. Mao, C. Gan, P. Kohli, J. B. Tenenbaum, and J. Wu, “The neuro-
symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from
natural supervision,” 2019.
[6] D. Mascharka, P. Tran, R. Soklaski, and A. Majumdar, “Transparency
by design: Closing the gap between performance and interpretability
in visual reasoning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1803.05268, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.05268
[7] D. A. Hudson and C. D. Manning, “Compositional attention networks
for machine reasoning,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2018. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=S1Euwz-Rb
[8] K. Yi, C. Gan, Y . Li, P. Kohli, J. Wu, A. Torralba, and J. B. Tenenbaum,
“Clevrer: Collision events for video representation and reasoning,” 2020.
[9] H. Dong, J. Mao, T. Lin, C. Wang, L. Li, and D. Zhou, “Neural
logic machines,” CoRR , vol. abs/1904.11694, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.11694
[10] C. Han, J. Mao, C. Gan, J. B. Tenenbaum, and J. Wu, “Visual concept-
metaconcept learning,” 2020.
[11] Z. Chen, J. Mao, J. Wu, K.-Y . K. Wong, J. B. Tenenbaum, and
C. Gan, “Grounding physical concepts of objects and events through
dynamic visual reasoning,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2021.
[12] N. J. Nilsson, “Principles of artiﬁcial intelligence,” in Principles
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence . Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1982,
pp. 1–476. [Online]. Available: https://www.springer.com/gp/book/
9783540113409

==== Page 11 ====
[13] J. Mao, C. Gan, P. Kohli, J. B. Tenenbaum, and J. Wu, “The
neuro-symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and
sentences from natural supervision,” in International Conference
on Learning Representations , 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=rJgMlhRctm
[14] P. Gao, L. Yu, Y . Wu, and J. Li, “Low latency rnn inference
with cellular batching,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys
Conference , ser. EuroSys ’18. New York, NY , USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3190508.3190541
[15] H. Li, A. Wu, W. Fang, Q. Zhang, M. Liu, Q. Liu, and W. Chen,
“Lightweight mask R-CNN for long-range wireless power transfer
systems,” CoRR , vol. abs/2004.08761, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.08761
[16] Y . Wu, A. Kirillov, F. Massa, W.-Y . Lo, and R. Girshick, “Detectron2,”
https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2, 2019.
[17] G. Klein, Y . Kim, Y . Deng, J. Senellart, and A. M. Rush, “Opennmt:
Open-source toolkit for neural machine translation,” 2017.
[18] Y . Li, J. Wu, J.-Y . Zhu, J. B. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, and R. Tedrake,
“Propagation networks for model-based control under partial observa-
tion,” in ICRA , 2019.
[19] J. Johnson, B. Hariharan, L. van der Maaten, L. Fei-Fei, C. L. Zitnick,
and R. B. Girshick, “CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for compositional
language and elementary visual reasoning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1612.06890,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1612.06890
[20] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Doll ´ar, and R. Girshick, “Mask r-cnn,” 2018.
[21] K. Cho, B. van Merri ¨enboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares,
H. Schwenk, and Y . Bengio, “Learning phrase representations
using RNN encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” in
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . Doha, Qatar: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2014, pp. 1724–1734. [Online].
Available: https://aclanthology.org/D14-1179
[22] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y . Bengio, “Neural machine translation by
jointly learning to align and translate,” 2016.
[23] K. Asanovic, R. Bodik, B. Catanzaro, J. Gebis, P. Husbands, K. Keutzer,
D. Patterson, W. Plishker, J. Shalf, S. Williams, and K. Yelick, “The
landscape of parallel computing research: A view from berkeley,” 12
2006.
[24] C. Rivera, J. Chen, N. Xiong, J. Zhang, S. L. Song, and D. Tao,
“Tsm2x: High-performance tall-and-skinny matrix–matrix multiplication
on gpus,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing , vol. 151, p.
70–85, May 2021. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.
2021.02.013
[25] A. Zhou, Y . Ma, J. Zhu, J. Liu, Z. Zhang, K. Yuan, W. Sun, and
H. Li, “Learning N: M ﬁne-grained structured sparse neural networks
from scratch,” CoRR , vol. abs/2102.04010, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.04010
[26] A. Vasudevan, A. Anderson, and D. Gregg, “Parallel multi channel
convolution using general matrix multiplication,” in 2017 IEEE 28th
International Conference on Application-speciﬁc Systems, Architectures
and Processors (ASAP) , 2017, pp. 19–24.
[27] L. Ke, U. Gupta, B. Y . Cho, D. Brooks, V . Chandra, U. Diril,
A. Firoozshahian, K. Hazelwood, B. Jia, H.-H. S. Lee, M. Li, B. Maher,
D. Mudigere, M. Naumov, M. Schatz, M. Smelyanskiy, X. Wang,
B. Reagen, C.-J. Wu, M. Hempstead, and X. Zhang, “Recnmp: Accel-
erating personalized recommendation with near-memory processing,” in
2020 ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture (ISCA) , 2020, pp. 790–803.
[28] “torch.sparse.” [Online]. Available: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/
sparse.html
[29] “D2go brings detectron2 to mobile,” https://ai.facebook.com/blog/
d2go-brings-detectron2-to-mobile/, accessed: 2021-05-09.
[30] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” 2014.
[31] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” 2017.
[32] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret, “Transformers
are rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2006.16236, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2006.16236
[33] T. Cruanes, B. Dageville, and B. Ghosh, “Parallel sql execution in
oracle 10g,” in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data , ser. SIGMOD ’04. New York,NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2004, p. 850–854.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1007568.1007666
[34] G. Henry, P. Palangpour, M. Thomson, J. S. Gardner, B. Arden, J. Don-
ahue, K. Houck, J. Johnson, K. O’Brien, S. Petersen, B. Seroussi, and
T. Walker, “High-performance deep-learning coprocessor integrated into
x86 soc with server-class cpus industrial product,” in 2020 ACM/IEEE
47th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) ,
2020, pp. 15–26.
[35] D. Fujiki, N. Chatterjee, D. Lee, and M. O’Connor, “Near-memory data
transformation for efﬁcient sparse matrix multi-vector multiplication,”
inProceedings of the International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , ser. SC ’19. New
York, NY , USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3295500.3356154
[36] X. Xie, Z. Liang, P. Gu, A. Basak, L. Deng, L. Liang, X. Hu, and
Y . Xie, “Spacea: Sparse matrix vector multiplication on processing-in-
memory accelerator,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on High-
Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) , 2021, pp. 570–583.

