==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:2006.05415v1  [cs.NE]  9 Jun 20201
Neuroevolution in Deep Neural Networks:
Current Trends and Future Challenges
Edgar Galv´ an and Peter Mooney
Abstract —A variety of methods have been applied to the archi-
tectural conﬁguration and learning or training of artiﬁcia l deep
neural networks (DNN). These methods play a crucial role in t he
success or failure of the DNN for most problems and applicati ons.
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) are gaining momentum as a
computationally feasible method for the automated optimis ation
and training of DNNs. Neuroevolution is a term which describ es
these processes of automated conﬁguration and training of
DNNs using EAs. While many works exist in the literature,
no comprehensive surveys currently exist focusing exclusi vely on
the strengths and limitations of using neuroevolution appr oaches
in DNNs. Prolonged absence of such surveys can lead to a
disjointed and fragmented ﬁeld preventing DNNs researcher s
potentially adopting neuroevolutionary methods in their o wn
research, resulting in lost opportunities for improving pe rfor-
mance and wider application within real-world deep learnin g
problems. This paper presents a comprehensive survey, disc ussion
and evaluation of the state-of-the-art works on using EAs fo r
architectural conﬁguration and training of DNNs. Based on t his
survey, the paper highlights the most pertinent current iss ues and
challenges in neuroevolution and identiﬁes multiple promi sing
future research directions.
Index Terms —Neuroevolution, Evolutionary Algorithms, Deep
Neural Networks, Deep Learning, Machine Learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
DEEP learning algorithms [51], [59], [83], a subset of
machine learning algorithms, are inspired by deep hier-
archical structures of human perception as well as producti on
systems. These algorithms have achieved extraordinary res ults
in different exciting areas including computer vision [17] ,
speech recognition [52], [102], board games [128] and video
games [101], to mention a few examples. The design of
deep neural networks (DNNs) architectures (along with the
optimisation of their hyperparameters) as well as their tra ining
plays a crucial part for their success or failure [93].
Architecture search is an area of growing interest as demon-
strated by the large number of scientiﬁc works published in
recent years. Broadly speaking these works can be classiﬁed
into one of two categories: evolution-based methods [5],
[32], sometimes referred as neuroevolution [38], [149], an d
reinforcement learning (RL) methods [142]. Other methods
falling outside these two categories have also been propose d
in the specialised literature including Monte Carlo-based sim-
ulations [106], random search [11] and random search with
weights prediction [14], hill-climbing [33], grid search [ 150],
Bayesian optimisation [12], [68].
Edgar Galv´ an and Peter Mooney are both with the Naturally In spired
Computation Research Group and with the Department of Compu ter Sci-
ence, Maynooth University, Ireland e-mails: edgar.galvan @mu.ie and pe-
ter.mooney@mu.ieRL architecture-search methods started gaining momentum
thanks to their impressive results [6], [16], [90], [154], [ 156],
[157], and more recently, EA architecture-search methods
started yielding impressive results in the automatic conﬁg ura-
tion of DNNs architectures [134], [91], [34]. Moreover, it h as
been reported that neuroevolution requires less computati onal
time compared to RL methods [101], [134], [139].
In their simplest terms a DNN is a feedforward artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN) with many hidden layers. Each of these
layers constitutes a non-linear information processing un it.
This simple description encapsulates the incredible capab ilities
of DNNs. Usually having two or more hidden layers in
an ANN qualiﬁes as a DNN. By adding more layers and
more units within a layer, a DNN can represent functions of
increasing complexity [51].
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) [5], [32], also known
as Evolutionary Computation systems, are nature-inspired
stochastic techniques that mimic basic principles of life. These
automatic algorithms have been with us for several decades
and are highly popular given that they have proven compet-
itive in the face of challenging problems’ features such as
discontinuities, multiple local optima, non-linear inter actions
between variables, among other characteristics [31]. They have
also proven to yield competitive results in multiple real-w orld
problems against other Artiﬁcial Intelligent methods as we ll
as results achieved by human experts [75], [77].
Finding a well-performing architecture is often a very
tedious and error-prone process for Deep Learning research ers.
Indeed, Lindauer and Hutter [89] remark that there are over
300 works published in the area of Neural Architecture
Search [89]. In this work, we focus our attention exclusivel y
in architecture EAs-based search methods in DNNs as well
EAs-based approaches in training DNNs. Particularly, this
work considers both landmark EAs, such as Genetic Al-
gorithms [60], Evolution Strategies [13], [118] and Geneti c
Programming [76]1as well as more recent EA variants,
such as Differential Evolution [114], NeuroEvolution of Au g-
menting Topologies [133] and Grammatical Evolution [121].
Furthermore, we consider the main deep learning architectu res,
as classiﬁed by Liu et al. [93], that have been used in
neuroevolution, including Autoencoders [24], Convolutio nal
Neural Networks [79], Deep Belief Networks [151], [152]
and Restricted Boltzmann Machines [93], [105]. Other deep
learning architectures considered in this study include Re cur-
rent Neural Networks [67] and Long Short Term Memory [46].
1Evolutionary Programming [39] is another landmark EA, but t o the best
of our knowledge, there are no neuroevolution works using th is paradigm.

==== Page 2 ====
2
Previous literature reviews in the area include those con-
ducted by Floreano et al. [38] and Yao [149], carried out more
than one and two decades ago, respectively. More recent work s
include Stanley et al. [132] and Darwish et al. [23]. The form er
work explains the inﬂuence of modern computational power
at scale in allowing the grand ambitions of neuroevolution
and deep learning from many years ago to be achieved and
fulﬁlled. The latter work delivers a broader and high-level
introduction and overview of swarm intelligence and EAs
in the optimisation of the hyperparameters and architectur e
for neural networks in the data analytics domain. In contras t
to these works, our paper provides a new contribution to
complement these studies by concentrating on the details
of conﬁguration and design of neuroevolution approaches in
deep learning. We carefully consider how EAs approaches
are applied in deep learning and in particular their speciﬁc
conﬁguration for this purpose.
The goal of our paper is to provide a timely and comprehen-
sive review in neuroevolution in DNNs. The work is aimed at
those researchers and practitioners that are either workin g in
the area or are eager to start working in this exciting growin g
research area. The conﬁguration and design of artiﬁcial dee p
neural networks is error prone, time consuming and difﬁcult .
Our paper will highlight the strengths of EAs as a competitiv e
approach to architecture design. We expect this article wil l
attract the attention of researchers in the DL and EA commu-
nities to further investigate effective and efﬁcient appro aches
to addressing new challenges in neuroevolution in DNNs.
Given the speciﬁc nature of this paper, an extensive litera-
ture review was undertaken. This involved searches in many
online databases using a combination of search strategies i n
order for this review to be methodologically sound. This
literature review aims to outline the state-of-the-art and current
practice in the domain of neuroevolution by critically eval uat-
ing and integrating the ﬁndings of all relevant and high-qua lity
individual studies we have found in this area. To establish
the extent of existing research and to conduct an exhaustive
search representative of all studies that have been conduct ed
on our topic of interest is a major challenge. As the topic
of Neuroevolution in Deep Neural Networks straddles severa l
important areas of research in Computer Science: Neural
Networks, Machine Learning, and Evolutionary Algorithms
there is a need to search widely in order to capture works
which appear in one or more of these research areas. We
used searches of Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital
Library, ScienceDirect, arXiv, Springer, Citeseer, the ar chive
of Proceedings of Neural Information Processing Systems,
and the archive of Proceedings of International Conference on
Machine Learning. We strongly believe our paper outlines ou r
estimation of the state-of-the-art in neuroevolution in DN Ns
at this point in time.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II pro-
vides some background to DL and EAs. Section III discusses
how the architectures of DNNs can be evolved efﬁciently usin g
EA approaches. This moves onto a discussion in Section IV on
the training of DNNs with EAs. Section V sets out some of the
major challenges and fertile avenues for future work. Final ly,
the paper closes with some concluding remarks in Section VI.II. B ACKGROUND
A. Deep Neural Networks
The concept of deep learning originated from the study
on artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs). An ANN consists of
multiple, simple, connected units denominated neurons, ea ch
producing a sequence of real-valued activations and, by car e-
fully adjusting the weights, the ANNs can behave as desired.
Depending on the problems and the way the neurons are
connected, the process of training an ANN may require “long
casual chains of computational stages” [124]. Deep learnin g
emerged as a concept from works such as Hinton et al. [59]
and has subsequently became a very active research area [93] .
A deep learning algorithm is a class of machine learning
algorithms using multiple layers to progressively extract higher
level features from the raw data input. The term deep then
refers speciﬁcally to the number of layers through which the
raw data is transformed. In deep learning, each subsequent
level attempts to learn in order to transform input data into
a progressively more abstract and composite representatio n.
Neuroevolution in DNNs has been applied to the development
of a wide range of ANNs including, but not limited to,
Convolutional Neural networks, Autoencoders, Deep Belief
Networks and Recurrent Neural Networks. In the next section s,
we summarise these.
1) Deep Learning Architecture: Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs): CNNs have shown impressive performance in
processing data with a grid-like topology. The deep network
consists of a set of layers each containing one or more planes .
Each unit in a plane receives input from a neighbourhood in
the planes of the previous layer. This idea of connecting uni ts
to receptive ﬁelds dates back to the 1960s with the perceptro n
and the animal visual cortex organisation discovered by Hub el
and Wiesel [63]. The input, such as an image, is convolved
with trainable kernels or ﬁlters at all offsets to produce fe ature
maps. These ﬁlters include a layer of connection weights.
Usually, four pixels in a feature map form a group and this
is passed through a function, such as sigmoid function or
hyperbolic tangent function. These pixels produce additio nal
feature maps in a layer. nplanes are normally used in each
layer so that nfeatures can be detected. These layers are
called convolutional layers. Once a feature is detected, it s exact
location is less important and convolutional layers are fol lowed
by another layer in charge of performing local averaging and
sub-sampling operation. Due to the high dimensionality of t he
inputs, a CNN classiﬁer may cause overﬁtting. This problem i s
addressed by using a pooling process, also called sub-sampl ing
or down-sampling, that reduces the overall size of the signa l.
Normally, the CNN is trained with the usual backpropagation
gradient-descent procedure proposed by Lecun et al. [84].
The learning attractive process of a CNN is determined
by three key elements: (i) sparse interaction that reduces t he
computational processing with kernels that are smaller tha n
the inputs, (ii) parameter sharing that refers to learn one s et
of parameters instead of learning one set at each location,
and ﬁnally, (iii) equivariance representation that means t hat
whenever the input changes, the output changes in the same
manner [51]. CNNs were the ﬁrst successful deep learning

==== Page 3 ====
3
architectures applied to face detection, handwriting recogni-
tion, image classiﬁcation, speech recognition, natural la nguage
processing and recommender systems.
The evolution of these CNN architectures has been slow
but remarkable. For example, LeNet [84] proposed in the late
1990s and AlexNet [79], proposed a decade later, are very
similar with two and ﬁve convolutional layers, respectivel y.
Moreover, they also used kernels with large receptive ﬁelds
in the layer close to the input and smaller ﬁlters closer to
the output. A major difference is that the latter used rectiﬁ ed
linear units as activation function, which became a standar d
in neuroevolution in designing CNNs. Since 2012, the use
of novel and deeper models took off. For example, in 2014,
Simonyan and Zisserman [129] won the Imagenet challenge
with their proposed 19-layer model known as VGG19. Other
networks have been proposed that not only are deeper but
use more complex building blocks. For example, in 2015,
Szegedy et al. [143] proposed GoogLeNet, also known as
Inception, which is a 22-layer network that used inception
blocks. In 2015, the ResNet architecture, consisting of the
so-called ResNet blocks, proposed by He et al. [58] won
the ImageNet challenge. Moreover, multiple CNNs variants
have been proposed such as combining convolutions with an
autoencoder [65], using RBMs in a CNN [29], to mention a
few examples. A description of the variants of this network
can be found in [93].
2) Deep Learning Architecture: Autoencoders (AEs):
Autoencoders are simple learning circuits which are design ed
to transform inputs into outputs with the minimum amount
of distortion. An autoencoder consists of a combination of a n
encoder function and a decoder function. The encoder functi on
converts the input data into a different representation and then
the decode function converts the new representation back to
the original form. AEs attempt to preserve as much infor-
mation as possible and they provide range-bounded outputs
which make them suitable for data pre-processing and iterat ive
architectures such as DNNs [80]. Despite this work appearin g
in2020 , the authors suggest that there is “still relatively little
work exploring the application (of evolutionary approache s to
neural architecture search) to autoencoders. In 2012 Baldi [7]
argued that while autoencoders “taken center stage in the
deep architecture approach” there was still very little the o-
retical understanding of autoencoders with deep architect ures
to date. Choosing an appropriate autoencoder architecture
in order to process a speciﬁc dataset will mean that the
autoencoder is capable of learning the optimal representat ion
of the data [18]. Encoding autoencoders within a chromosone
representation means that such an approach could be broad
enough to consider most autoencoder variations [18]. As an
unsupervised feature learning approach, autoencoders att empt
to learn a compact representation of the input data whilst
retaining the most important information of the representa tion.
This representation is expected to completely reconstruct the
original input. This makes initialisation of the autoencod er
critical [61]. Whilst autoencoders can induce very helpful and
useful representations of the input data they are only capab le
of handling a single sample and are not capable of modelling
the relationship between pairs of samples in the input data.3) Deep Learning Architecture: Deep Belief Networks
(DBNs): Deep Belief Networks can be implemented in a
number of ways including Restricted Boltzmann Machines
(see Section II-A4) and Autoencoders (see Section II-A2).
DBNs are well suited to the problem of feature extraction
and have drawn “tremendous attention recently” [152]. DBNs ,
like other traditional classiﬁers, have a very large number of
parameters and require a great deal of training time [19]. Wh en
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs) are stacked together
they are considered to be a DBN. The fundamental building
blocks of a DBN are RBMs consisting of one visible layer
and one hidden layer. When DBNs are applied to classiﬁcation
problems the feature vectors from data samples are used to se t
the values of the states of the visible variables of the lower
layer of the DBN. Then the DBN is trained to generate a
probability distribution over all possible labels of the in put
data. They offer a good solution to learn hierarchical featu re
representations from data.
4) Deep Learning Architecture: Other network types:
In this subsection we introduce some of other popular and
well-studied network architectures namely: Recurrent Neu ral
Networks (RNNs), Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs),
and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM).
RNNs : In the case of CNNs input is a ﬁxed-length vector
and eventually produce a ﬁxed-length vector as output. The
number of layers in the CNN determine the amount of com-
putational steps required. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN s)
are more ﬂexible and they allow operation across a sequence
of vectors. The connections between the units in the network
form a directed cycle and this creates an internal state of
the network allowing to exhibit dynamic temporal behaviour .
This internal hidden state allows the RNN to store a lot of
information about the past efﬁciently. RNNs are well suited
to sequential data prediction and this has seen them being
applied to areas such as statistical language modelling and
time-series prediction. However, the computational power of
RNNs make them very difﬁcult to train. The principal reasons
for this difﬁculty are mainly due to the exploding and the
vanishing gradient problems [67]. In theory RNNs can make
use of information in arbitrarily long sequences but in real ity
they are limited to considering look-back at only a few steps .
RBMs: A Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) is a
network of symmetrically connected neuron like units which
are designed to make stochastic decisions about whether to b e
on or off. They are an energy-based neural network. In a RBM
there are no connections between the hidden units and multip le
hidden layers. Learning occurs by considering the hidden
activities of a single RBM as the data for training a higher-
level RBM [122]. There is no communication or connection
between layers and this is where the restriction is introduced
to a Boltzmann machine. The RBMs are probabilistic models
using a layer of hidden binary variables or units to model the
distribution of a visible layer of variables. RBMs have been
successfully applied to problems involving high dimension al
data such as images and text [82]. As outlined by Fischer
and Igel [36], RBMs have been the subject of recent research
after being proposed as building blocks of multi-layer lear n-
ing architectures or DBNs. The concept here is that hidden

==== Page 4 ====
4
neurons extract relevant features from the data observatio ns.
These features can then serve as input to another RBM. By
this so-called stacking of RBMs in this fashion way, a networ k
can learn features from features with the goal of arriving at a
high level representation [102].
LSTM: Long-short-term memory (LSTM) networks are a
special type of recurrent neural networks capable of learni ng
long-term dependencies. They work incredibly well on a larg e
variety of problems and are currently widely used. LSTMs
are speciﬁcally designed to avoid the problem of long-term
dependencies. The basic unit within the hidden layer of an
LSTM network is called a memory block containing one or
more memory cells and a pair of adaptive, multiplicative gat ing
units which gate input and output to all cells in the block [46 ].
In LSTM networks, it was possible to circumvent the problem
of the vanishing error gradients in the network training pro cess
by method of error back propagation. An LSTM network is
usually controlled by recurrent gates called forgetting ga tes.
Errors are propagated back in time through a potentially
unlimited number of virtual layers. In this way, learning ta kes
place in LSTM, while preserving the memory of thousands
and even millions of time intervals in the past. Network
topologies such as LSTM can be developed in accordance with
the speciﬁcs of the task. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
with long short-term memory (LSTM) have emerged as an
effective and scalable model for several learning problems
related to sequential data [53]. Gers and Schmidhuber [47]
showed that standard RNNs fail to learn in the presence
of time lags exceeding as few as ﬁve to ten discrete-time
steps between relevant input events and target signals. LST M
are not affected by this problem and are capable of dealing
with minimal time lags in excess of 1000 discrete-time steps .
In studies such as those by Gers and Schmidhuber [47],
LSTM clearly outperforms previous RNNs not only on regular
language benchmarks (according to previous research) but a lso
on context-free languages benchmarks.
B. Evolutionary Algorithms
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) [5], [32] refer to a set
of stochastic optimisation bio-inspired algorithms that u se
evolutionary principles to build robust adaptive systems. The
ﬁeld has its origins in four landmark evolutionary methods:
Genetic Algorithms [60], [49], Evolution Strategies [119] ,
[125], Evolutionary Programming [39] and Genetic Program-
ming [76]. The key element of these algorithms is undoubtedl y
ﬂexibility allowing the practitioner to use elements from t wo
or more different EAs techniques. This is the reason why the
boundaries between these approaches are no longer distinct
allowing to have a more holistic EA framework [98] via [37].
EAs work with a population of µ-encoded potential solu-
tions to a particular problem. Each potential solution, com -
monly known as individual, represents a point in the search
space, where the optimum solution lies. The population is
evolved by means of genetic operators, over a number of
generations, to produce better results to the problem. Each
member of the population is evaluated using a ﬁtness functio n
to determine how good or bad the potential solution is inthe problem at hand. The ﬁtness value assigned to each
individual in the population probabilistically determine s how
successful the individual will be at propagating (part of) i ts
code to further generations. Better performing solutions w ill be
assigned higher values (for maximisation problems) or lowe r
values (for minimisation problems).
The evolutionary process is carried out by using genetic
operators. Most EAs include operators that select individu als
for reproduction, generate new individuals based on the se-
lected individuals and ultimately determine the compositi on
of the individuals in the population at the following gen-
eration. Selection, crossover and mutation are key genetic
operators used in most EAs paradigms. The selection operato r
is in charge of choosing one or more individuals from the
population based on their ﬁtness values. Multiple selectio n
operators have been proposed. One of the most popular
selection operators is tournament selection for its simpli city.
The idea is to select the best individual from a pool, normall y
of size =[2−7], from the population. The stochastic crossover,
also known as recombination, operator exchanges material
normally from two selected individuals. This operator is in
charge of exploiting the search space. The stochastic mutat ion
operator makes random changes to the genes of the individual .
This operator is in charge of exploring the search space. The
mutation operator is important to guarantee diversity in th e
population as well as recovering genetic material lost duri ng
evolution.
The evolutionary process explained before is repeated unti l a
condition is met. Normally, until a maximum number of gener-
ations has been executed. The population in the last generat ion
is the result of exploring and exploiting the search space ov er
a number of generations. It contains the best evolved potent ial
solutions to the problem and may also represent the global
optimum solution. Alg. 1 shows the general steps of a EA for
a deep CNN network design.
1) Evolutionary Algorithm: Genetic Algorithms (GAs):
This EA was introduced by Holland [60] in the 1970s and
highly popularised by Goldberg [49]. This was due to the
fact of achieving extraordinary results as well as reaching
multiple research communities including machine learning and
neural networks. GAs were frequently described as function
optimisers, but now the tendency is to consider GAs as search
algorithms able to ﬁnd near-optimal solutions. Multiple fo rms
of GAs have been proposed in the specialised literature.
The bitstring ﬁxed-length representation is one of the most
predominant encodings used in GAs. Crossover, as the main
genetic operator, and mutation as the secondary operator,
reproduce offspring over evolutionary search.
2) Evolutionary Algorithm: Genetic Programming (GP):
This EA is a subclass of GAs and was popularised by
Koza [76] in the 1990s. GP is a form of automated program-
ming. Individuals are randomly created by using functional
and terminal sets, that are required to solve the problem at
hand. Even though multiple types of GP have been proposed
in the specialised literature, the typical tree-like struc ture is
the predominant form of GP in EAs. Cartesian GP [100] is
another form of GP, which has been used in neuroevolution
in DNNs [135], [136].

==== Page 5 ====
5
Algorithm 1 A common EA process for network design. Adapted from [148]
1:Input: the reference dataset D, the number of generations T, the number of individuals in each generation N, the mutation
and crossover probabilities PmandPc;
2:Initialisation: generating a set of randomised individuals {M0,n}N
n=1, and computing their recognition accuracies;
3:fort= 1,2,···,Tdo
4: Selection: producing a new generation {M′
t,n}N
n=1with a Russian roulette process on {Mt−1,n}N
n=1;
5: Crossover: for each pair ({Mt,2n−1,Mt,2n)}[N/2]
n=1, performing crossover with probability Pc;
6: Mutation: for each non-crossover individual {Mt,n}N
n=1, performing mutation with probability Pm;
7: Fitness evaluation: computing the ﬁtness (e.g., recognition accuracy) for each new individual {Mt,n}N
n=1;
8:end for
9:Output: a set of individuals in the ﬁnal generation {MT,n}N
n=1with their ﬁtness values.
3) Evolutionary Algorithm: Evolution Strategies (ES):
These EAs were introduced in the 1960s by Rechenberg [119]
and Schwefel [125]. ES are generally applied to real-valued
representations of optimisation problems. In ES, mutation is
the main operator whereas crossover is the secondary, optio nal,
operator. Historically, there were two basic forms of ES,
known as the ( µ,λ)-ES and the ( µ+λ)-ES.µrefers to the
size of the parent population, whereas λrefers to the number
of offspring that are produced in the following generation
before selection is applied. In the former ES, the offspring
replace the parents whereas in the latter form of ES, selecti on
is applied to both offspring and parents to form the populati on
in the following generation. Nowadays, the Covariance Matr ix
Adaptation-ES, proposed in the 1990s by Hansen [55], [56],
[57], is the state of the art ES that adapts the full covarianc e
matrix of a normal search (mutation) distribution.
4) Evolutionary Algorithm: Evolutionary Programming
(EP): These EAs were proposed in the 1960s by Fogel,
Owens and Walsh [39] and very little differences are observe d
between ES and EP. The main difference, however, between
these two EAs paradigms is the lack of use of crossover in
EP whereas this genetic operator is secondary, and rarely us ed,
in ES. Another difference is that in EP, normally Mparents
produceMoffspring, whereas in ES the number of offspring
produced by genetic operators is higher than their parents.
5) Evolutionary Algorithm: Others: Multiple evolutionary-
based algorithms have been proposed in the specialised lite r-
ature. Relevant to this work are Differential Evolution (DE ),
Grammatical Evolution (GE) as well as NeuroEvolution of
Augmenting Topologies (NEAT).
DE: Differential Evolution (DE) was proposed by Price and
Storn [114] in the 1990s. The popularity of this EA is due to
the fact that has proven to be highly efﬁcient in continuous
search spaces and it is often reported to be more robust
as well as achieving a faster convergence speed compared
to other optimisation methods [115]. Unlike traditional EA s,
the DE-variants perturb the population members with the
scaled differences of randomly selected and distinct popul ation
members.
GE: Grammatical Evolution (GE) is a grammar-based EA
proposed by Ryan et al. [121] in the 1990s. A genotype-
phenotype mapping process is used to generate (genetic)
programs by using a binary string to select production rules
in a Backus-Naur form grammar deﬁnition. GE can be seenas a special form of GP, where one of the main differences is
that unlike GP, GE does not perform the evolutionary process
on the programs themselves.
NEAT: NeuroEvolution of Augmenting Topologies (NEAT)
is a form of EA proposed by Stanley and Miikkulainen [133]
in the 2000s. NEAT is a technique for evolving neural net-
works. Three elements are crucial for NEAT to work: (i)
historical marking, that allows solutions to be crossed ove r,
(ii) speciation, that allows for deﬁning niches and (iii) st arting
from minimal structure, that allows to incrementally ﬁnd be tter
solutions.
III. E VOLVING DNN SARCHITECTURES THROUGH
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS
A. The Motivation
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in methods
for neural architecture search. Broadly, they can be catego rised
in one of two areas: evolutionary algorithms or reinforceme nt
learning. Recently, EAs have stated gaining momentum for
designing deep neural networks architectures [34], [38], [ 74],
[91], [99], [116], [117], [133], [148]. The popularity of th ese
algorithms is due to the fact that they are gradient-free,
population-based methods that offer a parallelised mechan ism
to simultaneously explore multiple areas of the search spac e
while at the same time offering a mechanism to escape
from local optima. Moreover, the fact that the algorithm is
inherently suited to parallelisation means that more poten tial
solutions can be simultaneously computed within acceptabl e
wall-clock time. Steady increase in computing power, in-
cluding graphics processing units with thousands of cores,
will contribute to speed up the computational calculations of
population-based EAs.
B. The Critique
Despite the popularity of EAs for designing deep neural
network architectures, they have also been criticised in th e
light of being slow learners as well as being computationall y
expensive to evaluate [31]. For example, when using a small
population-based EA of 20 individuals (potential solution s)
and using a training set of 50,000 samples, one generation
alone (of hundreds, thousands or millions of generations) w ill
require one million evaluations through the use of a ﬁtness
function.

==== Page 6 ====
6
C. Deep Learning Architecture: Convolutional Neural Net-
works
Agapitos et al. [1] used a tree-based GP system to evolve
a hierarchical feature construction as well as a classiﬁcat ion
system with feedforward processing. Inspired by the work
carried out by Bengio et al. [10] where they empirically
demonstrated, using DBN, that greedy-unsupervised layer-
training strategy helps to optimise deep networks, Agapito s
et al. trained a new layer of CNN of image transformation
at the time with the goal to learn a stack of gradually better
representations. The authors attained good results using t he
MNIST dataset. Dufourq and Bassett [30] used a GA to evolve
CNN architectures. The encoding used by the authors also
allowed them to evolve the learning rate denoting the value
which is applied during the training optimisation. They use d
different operations and sizes of ﬁlters including one and t wo-
dimension convolution, one and two-dimension max pooling,
dropout, among others. They tested their approach in both
image classiﬁcation tasks as well as in sentiment analysis
tasks. Chromosomes using two-dimensional convolution wer e
penalised for a text sentiment problem. The authors used a
ﬁtness function with two aggregate elements, one denoting
the accuracy and the other the complexity of the solution
captured by the number of parameters used by a chromosome.
The authors reported competitive results compared to state -
of-the-art algorithms on the balanced-based and digit-bas ed
EMNIST dataset as well as in the Fashion dataset. Desell [28]
proposed an algorithm based on NEAT [133] to evolve CNN
architectures. Desell carried out some modiﬁcations to the
NEAT algorithm to evolve CNN architectures through selec-
tion, crossover and mutation. Whereas all operators played
an important role to produce well-behaved CNNs, it was
interesting to see how the use of mutation, involving 7 types
of operations, seemed to be crucial to the competitive resul ts
reported on the MNIST dataset.
Zoph et al. [157] proposed NASNet search space deﬁned
by a predetermined outer structure depicted in Fig. 1 with
the ultimate goal of enabling transferability. This struct ure is
composed of convolutional cells, called normal cell (colou red
in pink in Fig. 1 (a)) and reduction cell (coloured in grey),
repeated many times. The former type of cells returns a
feature map of the same dimensions whereas the latter return s
a feature map where its height and width is reduced by a
factor of two. All cells of the same type are constraint to
have the same architecture and it was found beneﬁcial that
architectures of normal cells were different to the archite ctures
of reduced cells. The goal of their architecture search proc ess
was to discover the architectures of these two types of cells ,
an example of this is denoted in Fig. 1 (b). In 2019, Real et
al. [116] proposed AmoebaNet-A to evolve an image classiﬁer
achieving superior accuracy over hand-designed methods fo r
the ﬁrst time. The authors used a population-based EA with
each ﬁxed length member encoding the architecture of CNNs.
To do so, they used the NASNet search space [157]. The goal
of their EA-based approach was to discover the architecture s
of the normal cells and the reductions cells as depicted in
Fig. 1 (a). Real et al. used a modiﬁed version of tournamentselection and two types of mutation as the two genetic op-
erators in charge of driving evolution. Tournament selecti on
(see Section II to read about how this works) was modiﬁed so
that the newest genotypes were chosen over older genotypes.
The mutation operator involved one of two operations taking
place once for each individual: the hidden state mutation an d
the op mutation. To execute any of these types of mutation,
ﬁrst a random cell is chosen, then a pairwise combination
is stochastically selected (see Fig. 1 (c)), and ﬁnally, one
of these two pairs is picked randomly. This hidden state is
replaced with another hidden state with the constraint that no
loop is formed. The op mutation differs only in modifying
the operation used within the selected hidden state. Fig. 1 ( d)
shows how these two mutation operations work. The authors
used the CIFAR-10 dataset to test their proposed AmoebaNet-
A and compared it against a reinforcement learning-based
method and random search, achieving better accuracy result s
as well as reducing the computational time required by their
algorithm compared to the other two methods. Moreover, the
authors used the ﬁttest chromosome found by their algorithm
and retrained it using the Imagenet dataset. With this, they also
reported encouraging accuracy results compared with other
architecture search methods.
In a different constraint setting, Xie et al. [148] proposed
Genetic CNN to automatically learn the structures of CNNs
with a limited number of layers as well as limited sizes and
operations of convolutional ﬁlters, to mention a few constr aints
adopted by them. The authors adopted a GA with binary ﬁxed-
length representation to represent parts of evolved networ k. In
their studies, each network is composed by various stages an d
each of these is composed of nodes that represent convolu-
tional operations. The binary encoding adopted by Xie et al.
represents the connection between a number of ordered nodes .
This representation allowed the authors to use crossover,
along with roulette selection and mutation. They deﬁned a
stage as the minimal unit to apply crossover and mutation.
This allowed them to maintain the ordered nodes deﬁned
in the genotype and produce valid potential solutions only.
Even with the restrictions adopted in their work, the author s
achieved competitive accuracy results using the CIFAR-10 a nd
MNIST datasets. They also demonstrated how their approach
can be generalised by using the learned architecture on the
ILSVRC2012 large-scale dataset. This was achieved because
their approach was able to produce chain-shaped networks
such as AlexNet [79], VGGNet [129], multiple-path networks
such as GoogLeNet [143] and highway networks such as Deep
ResNet [58], which have been reported to be beneﬁcial when
applied to computer vision problems.
Real et al. [117] used an EA to automatically optimise
CNN architectures. Individual architectures are encoded a s a
graph, where the vertices represent rank-3 tensors: two of t hese
represent the spatial coordinates of the image and the third is
the number of channels. Activation functions, such as batch -
normalisation [64] with rectiﬁed linear units (ReLus) or pl ain
linear units, are applied to the vertices. The authors prima rily
used 11 types of mutations falling into one of three differen t
categories including inserting layers, removing layers as well
as using a mutation to modify layers parameters. Although

==== Page 7 ====
7
Normal Cell
Reduction Cell
Normal Cell
Normal CellReduction Cell
Input ImageSoftmax
X N
X N
X NNormal Cell
Normal Cell
Normal Cell
Normal Cell
avg
3x3max
3x3+
noneavg
3x3+
00 0102 03sep
5x5sep
3x3+04
sep
3x3none+05avg
3x3sep
3x3+0607
sep
7x7avg
3x3
04+
02 0305
sep
7x7none
04+
02 0305     Op
Mutationsep
7x7avg
3x3
04+
02 0305
sep
7x7none
04+
02 0305blocks
(b) (c) (d)H1H2H3H4hidden state set
H4
conv
1 x 1H2
conv
3 x 3
add
H5H1H2H3hidden state set
H3
identityH2
conv
1 x 1
concat
H4H1H2hidden state set
H1
 pool 
3 x 3H2
conv
3 x 3
add
H3
(a)
Hidden State
   Mutation
Fig. 1. (a)NASNet Search Space [157]. (b)Scalable architecture for image classiﬁcation consist of t wo repeated motifs termed Normal Cell and Reduction
Cell. Left: the full outer structure (omitting skip inputs f or clarity) and Right: detailed view with the skip inputs. (c)Example of a cell, where the dotted red
circle demarcates a pairwise combination. (d)Examples of how the mutations are used. (a)and(b – d) redrawn from Zoph et al. [157] and Real et al. [116],
respectively.
they also conducted studies using three forms of crossover,
Real et al. indicated that none of these improved the results
yielded by mutation operators. The authors also indicated t hat
at the beginning of the search, the EA was susceptible to
becoming trapped at local optima. To this end, they applied
ﬁve mutations per reproduction and decreased this to one at a
later stage during evolution. Real et al. used back-propaga tion
to optimise the weights of the CNNs. Because training a
large model is incredible slow within their evolutionary se t-
ting, the authors partly addressed this by allowing childre n
to inherit their parents’ weights when layers had matching
shapes. They also used a high-computational setting (250
computers) to carry out their experiments. In their results , the
authors reported competitive average accuracy results ove r ﬁve
independent runs in the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets
compared to state-of-the-art algorithms including ResNet [58]
and DenseNet [62].
Suganuma et al. [136] used Cartesian GP [100] (CGP)
to automatically design CNN architectures. The genotype
encodes information on the type and connections of the nodes .
Fig. 2 (a) depicts this idea. These types include ConvBlock,
ResBlock, max pooling, average pooling, summation and
concatenation. ConvBlock consists of standard convolutio n
processing followed by batch normalisation and ReLU [105]
whereas ResBlock is a ConvBlock followed by tensor sum-mation. The CGP encoding scheme represents the program
as a directed acyclic graph in a two-dimensional grid of Nr
rows byNccolumns. Fig. 2 (b) provides an example of the
phenotype, obtained from Fig. 2 (a), in the case of a grid
deﬁned by Nr= 2 byNc= 3. The corresponding CNN
architecture is depicted in Fig. 2 (c). In their experiments , the
authors used the CIFAR-10 dataset as well as a portion of
this. As evaluating each of the CGP individuals is expensive ,
they adopted a simple (1+ λ) ES (see Section II). The authors’
approach achieved competitive results compared with well-
known methods including ResNet [58]. It is interesting to
see how the authors reported encouraging results using CGP
to automatically conﬁgure CNN architectures regardless of
the sample size used in their work. For example, the CNN
architecture produced by CGP for the small dataset scenario
is wider compared to the architecture yield by CGP for the
standard scenario.
Assunc ¸˜ ao et al. [3], [4] proposed DENSER, an hybrid
mechanism of GAs and (Dynamic Structured) Grammatical
Evolution (GE) [121], to evolve DNNs architectures. The
outer layer of their proposed approach is in charge of en-
coding the macro structure of the DNNs evolved by means
of GAs. Dynamic Structured GE is in charge of the inner
layer that encodes the parameters of the DNNs in a backus-
naur form. The authors used the typical genetic operators,

==== Page 8 ====
8
Softmax
 Conv
(32,3) Pool
(max) Conv
(64,5) Conv
(64,3)Max
Pooling+Summation
13
246
Genotype
PhenotypeC0  0  21
P1  0  02
C3  1  23
2 2C2  2  14
1P1  2  25
 S   3  46
Out  67
2nd input node number
1st input node number
Function ID not expressed in the phenotype0
sum  conv
(32, 3)
  pool
(max)  conv
(64, 5)
  conv
(64, 3)  pool
(max)
output input1
23
45
67 0
sum(a) (c)
(b)CNN Architecture7
Fig. 2. (a)Genetic representation of a cartesian genetic programming individual encoding a CNN architecture. (b)The phenotypic representation. (c)The
CNN architecture deﬁned by (a). Notice that the Gene No. 5, co loured with a black background in the genotype (a) is not expr essed in the phenotype. The
summation node in (c), highlighted with a light yellow backg round, performs max pooling to the left-hand side of the inpu t (Node no. 3) to get the same
input tensor sizes. Redrawn from Suganuma et al. [136].
including selection, two forms of crossovers (one-point an d
bit-mask) and three types of mutations (add, replicate and
remove unit) in the outer GA-based layer. Furthermore, they
used three types of mutations in the inner GE-based layer.
To test their approach, the authors used multiple datasets
including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, MNIST, Fashion-MNIST,
SVHN and Rectangles. Similarly to the works conducted by
Miikulainen et al. [99] and Suganuma et al. [136], Assunc ¸˜ a o
et al. performed only 10 epochs to train the DNNs due to the
high computational cost associated to this. The authors ran
10 runs and reported competitive results compared to state-
of-the-art algorithms including using other automatic CNN s
designing methods. It is interesting to note that when the
authors computed the average ﬁtness and the average number
of hidden layers across the entire population, they noticed that
these two trends were opposite. That is, as the ﬁtness increa ses
over time, the number of hidden layers decreases over time.
This would suggest that these two metrics are in conﬂict when
optimising CNNs architectures.
Sun et al. [141] proposed the use of a population-based
GA, of a ﬁxed-length encoding, to evolve, by means of
selection, crossover and mutation, unsupervised DNNs for
learning meaningful representations for computer vision t asks.
Their approach included two main parts (i) ﬁnding the optima l
architectures in DNNs, the desirable initialisation of wei ghts
as well as activation functions, and (ii) ﬁne-tuning all the
parameter values in connection weights from the desirable
initialisation. The ﬁrst was primarily achieved by using an
encoding, which was inspired by the work conducted by Zhang
et al. [153], who captured all of the elements described in (i ).
As one gene represents on average 1,000 parameters in this
encoding, the exploitation achieved by crossover is reduce d.To overcome this problem, Sun et al. used backpropagation in
Part (ii). By hand-crafting the various parts of their appro ach,
the authors demonstrated how the local search adopted in Par t
(i) was necessary in order to achieve promising results.
Recently, Sun et al. [140] proposed a GA, named Evolving
Deep CNNs, to automatically discover CNN architectures
and corresponding connection weight values. Inspired by th e
large computational resources reported in the work by Real
et al. [117] who used 250 high-end computers, Sun et al.
aimed to tackle the use of this resource intensive setting. T hey
proposed a cost-effective method to evaluate the ﬁtness of
the individuals in the population allowing them to execute 3 0
independent runs, as normally adopted by the EA community,
in each of the 9 datasets used in their experiments. Moreover ,
they also used the normal evolutionary operators from EAs,
including selection, mutation and crossover. The latter op erator
was not used in the studies carried out by Real et al. [117].
This was a limitation in Real’s work because crossover deals
with exploiting the search space. In Sun et al.’s approach
each variable-length chromosome encodes the convolutiona l
layer, the pooling layer and the full connection layer. Beca use
hundred of thousands connection weights may exist in one
convolutional or full connection layer these should not be
directly encoded into the chromosome. Thus, Sun et al. used
two statistical measures: the standard deviation and the av erage
value of the connection weights. By doing so, they were able
to efﬁciently evaluate each chromosome in the population.
They evaluated each individual by using the classiﬁcation
error as well the number of connection weights. To mitigate
the computational time required to evaluate the chromosome s
along with the normally CNN deep architectures the authors
restricted the training to a small number of epochs ( ≤10).

==== Page 9 ====
9
It is in the last epoch where the ﬁtness is computed for each
of the chromosomes in the population. Crossover was applied
by using unit alignment, which basically groups parts of the
same type, cross them over, and ﬁnally, use a restoring phase
to put the units back in their corresponding positions in the
chromosome. The authors reported highly encouraging resul ts
with many cases achieving better results compared to state- of-
the-art algorithms in the datasets commonly used by the deep
learning community.
van Wyk and Bosman [144] described and evaluated their
proposed neural architecture search (NAS) method to automa te
the process of ﬁnding an optimal CNN architecture for the tas k
of arbitrary image restoration. Their work demonstrates th e po-
tential feasibility for performing NAS under signiﬁcant me m-
ory and computational time constraints. The ImageNet64x64
dataset was chosen for evaluation. The training set was used
for gradient-based optimisation of the NNs performance on
unseen data. The authors ﬁnd that the human-based conﬁgured
architecture was heavily overparameterised while this was not
the case with the evolved NN which performed the tasks
with a signiﬁcantly lower number of total parameters. Sun
et al. [139] proposed an encoding strategy built on the state -
of-the-art blocks namely ResNet and DenseNet. The authors
used a variable length GA that allowed them to automatically
evolve CNNs architectures of unrestricted depth. Sun et al.
used selection, crossover and mutation to evolve candidate so-
lutions. Given the nature of the variable length encoding us ed
in their approach, the authors employed a repair mechanism
that allowed them to produce valid CNNs. The authors used
the CIFAR-10 and the CIFAR-100 datasets and compared their
results against 9 manually designed methods, 4 semi-automa tic
methods and 5 automatic methods. Interestingly their resul ts
outperformed all hand-crafted methods as well as all semi-
automatic methods in terms of the classiﬁcation error rate.
Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimisation [21], [22], [2 5],
explained in Section V-C, has been hardly used in the au-
tomatic conﬁguration of DNNs networks as well as in the
optimisation of their hyperparameters. Works on the latter
include the recent approach proposed by Kim et al. [71],
where the authors used speed and accuracy as two conﬂicting
objectives to be optimised by means of EMO through the use
of the Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-
II) [26]. The authors reported interesting results using th ree
classiﬁcation tasks, including the use of the MNIST, CIFAR-
10 and the Drowsy Behaviour Recognition datasets. Inspired
by the Kim et al. [71] study, Lu et al. [94] used the same
EMO with the same conﬂicting objectives. It is worth noting
that Lu et al. [94] empirically tested multiple computation al
complexity metrics to measure speed including number of
active nodes, number of active connections between nodes
and ﬂoating-point operations (FLOPs), to mention some. Lu
et al. indicated that the latter metric was more accurate and
used it as a second conﬂicting objective for optimisation.
Moreover, the authors used an ingenious bitstring encoding
in their genetic algorithm which allowed them to use com-
mon and robust genetic operators normally adopted in GAs,
including homogeneous crossover and bit-ﬂip mutation (at
most one change for each mutation operation). The authorstested their EMO approach with the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100 datasets achieving competitive results against state- of-
the-art algorithms, including reinforcement learning-ba sed ap-
proaches and human expert conﬁgurations.
Wang et al. [145] explored the ability of differential evo-
lution to automatically evolve the architecture and hyper-
parameters of deep CNNs. The method called DECNN uses
differential evolution where control of the evolution rate is
managed by the a differential value. The DECNN evolves
variable-length architectures for CNNs. An IP-based encod ing
strategy is implemented here to use a single IP address
to represent one layer of a DNN. This IP address is then
pushed into a sequence of interfaces corresponding to the sa me
order as the layers in DNNs. Six of the MNIST datasets are
used for benchmark testing and the DECNN performed very
competitively with 12 state-of-the-art competitors over t he six
benchmarks. Mart´ ın et al. [97] proposed EvoDeep which is
an EA designed to ﬁnd the best architecture and optimise the
necessary parameters to train a DNN. It uses a Finite-State
Machine model in order to determine the possible transition s
between different kind of layers, allowing EvoDeep to gener ate
valid sequences of layers, where the output of one layer ﬁts
the input requirements of the next layer. It is tested on the
benchmark MNIST datasets. The authors report that the high
commputational resources required to train the DNN means
that future work is needed to make the whole process more
computationally efﬁcient.
D. Deep Learning Architecture: AutoEncoders
Suganuma et al. [135] used Cartesian Genetic Program-
ming [100], adopting an ES (1+ λ) technique, and using
selection and mutation operators only, to optimise DNS arch i-
tectures for image restoration. To this end, the authors use d
convolutional autoencoders (CAEs) built upon convolution al
layers and skip connections. By optimising the network in
a conﬁned search space of symmetric CAEs, the authors
achieved competitive results against other methods withou t
the need of using adversarial training and sophisticated lo ss
functions, normally employed for image restoration tasks.
So et al. [130] evolved a transformer network to be used
in sequence-to-sequence language tasks. The encoding sear ch
space adopted by the authors was inspired by the NASNet
search space proposed by Zoph et al. [157], see Fig. 1 (a).
This was modiﬁed to express characteristics found in state- of-
the-art feed-forward seq2seq networks such as the transfor mer
network used in their work. The minimally tuned search
space helped them to seed the initial population using a
known transformer model. Because computing the ﬁtness of
the population, through the use of the negative log perplexi ty
of the validation set, is time consuming, So et al. proposed
Progressive Dynamic Hurdles. In essence, the latter allowe d
promising solutions to be trained using larger training dat asets
compared to poor potential solutions. The proposed mech-
anism, using selection and mutation operators only, yielde d
better results compared to transformer models in the langua ge
tasks used in their studies. Hajewski et al. [54] describe
an efﬁcient and scalable EA for neural network architecture

==== Page 10 ====
10
search with application to the evolution of deep encoders.
Lander and Shang [80] introduce EvoAE an evolutionary
algorithm for training autoencoders for DNNs. This propose d
methodology is aimed at improving the training time of
autoencoders for constructing DNNs. The EvoAE approach
searches in the network weight and network structure space o f
the autoencoders simultaneously allowing for dual optimal ity
searching. Large datasets are decomposed into smaller batc hes
to improve performance. The good performance on large
datasets distributed in cloud-based systems could be a majo r
advantage of this approach as a population of high quality
autoencoders can be created efﬁciently.
Luo et al. [95] propose a novel semi-supervised autoencoder
called a discriminant autoencoder for application in fault
diagnosis. Here, the proposed discriminant autoencoder ha s
a different training process and loss function from traditi onal
autoencoders. In the case of the discriminant autoencoder i t is
capable of extracting better representations from the raw d ata
provided. A completely different loss function is used and
the representations extracted by the discriminant autoenc oder
can generate bigger differences between the sample classes .
The discriminant autoencoder makes full use of labels and
feature variables to obtain the optimal representations, b ased
on which the centers of the groups of samples that can be
separated as much as possible. Ashfahani et al. [2] propose
DEVDAN as a deep evolving denoising autoencoder for
application in data stream analytics. DEVDAN demonstrates
a proposal of a denoising autoencoder which is a variant
of the traditional autoencoder but focused on retrieving th e
original input information from a noise pertubation. DEVDA N
features an open structure where it is capable of initiating
its own structure from the beginning without the presence
of a pre-conﬁgured network structure. DEVDAN can ﬁnd
competitive network architecture compared with state-of- the-
art methods on the classiﬁcation task using ten prominent
datasets (including MNIST).
E. Deep Learning Architecture: Deep Belief Networks
In the work by Chen et al. [19] the authors use DBNs to
automatically extract features from images. They propose t he
EFACV (Evolutionary Function Array Classiﬁer V oter) which
classiﬁes features from images extracted by a DBN (composed
of stacked RBMs). An evolutionary strategy is used to train t he
EFACV and is mainly used for binary classiﬁcation problems.
For multi-class classiﬁcation problems it is necessary to h ave
multiple EFACV . The EFACV shows fast computational speed
and a reduction in overall training time. Experiments are
performed on the MNIST dataset. Liu et al. [92] describe
structure learning for DNNs based on multiobjective optimi sa-
tion. They propose a multiobjective optimisation evolutio nary
algorithm (MOEA). The DBN and its learning procedure use
an RBM to pretain the DN layer by layer. It is necessary to
remove unimportant or unncessary connections in DNN and
move toward discovering optimal DNN connection structure
which is as sparse as possible without lost of representatio n.
Experiments based on the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets with
different training samples indicate that the MOEA approach
is effective.Zhang et al. [151] use DBNs for a prognostic health man-
agement system in aircraft and aerospace design. DBNs offer a
promising solution as they can learn powerful hierarchical fea-
ture representations from the data provided. The authors pr o-
pose MODBNE (multiobjective deep belief networks ensem-
ble) which is a powerful multiobjective evolutionary algor ithm
named MOEA based on decomposition. This is integrated into
the training of DBNs to evolve multiple DBNs simultaneously
with accuracy and diversity as two conﬂicting objectives in the
problem. The DBN is composed of stacked RBMs which are
trained in an unsupervised manner. MODBNE is evaluated
and compared against a prominent diagnostics benchmarking
problem with the NASA turbofan engine degradation problem.
In the proposed approach the structural parameters of the
DBN are strongly dependent on the complexity of the problem
and the number of training samples available. The approach
worked outstandingly well in compassion to other existing
approaches. GPU-based implementations will be tested in
the future for MODBNE to investigate the acceleration of
computational processing speed. Zhang et al. [152] conside r
the problem of cost-sensitive learning methods. The idea of
cost-sensitive learning is to assign misclassiﬁcation cos ts for
each class appropriately. While the authors report that the re are
very few studies on cost-sensitive DBNs these networks have
drawn a lot of attention by researchers recently. Imbalance s
in the classes in input data is a problem. If there is a
disproportionate number of class instances this can affect
the quality of the applied learning algorithms. Zhang et al.
argue that DBNs are very well placed to handled these type
of imbalanced data problems. The ECS-DBN (Evolutionary
Cost-Sensitive Deep Belief Network) is proposed to deal wit h
such problems by assigning differential misclassiﬁcation costs
to the data classes. The ECS-DBN is evaluated on 58 pop-
ular Knowledge Extraction-based on Evolutionary Learning
(KEEL) benchmark datasets.
F . Other networks: LSTM, RRN, RBM
Shinozaki and Watanabe [127] proposes an optimisation
strategy for DNN structure and parameters using an EA and a
GA. The DNN structure is parameterised by a directed acyclic
graph. Experiments are carried out on phoneme recognition
and spoken digit detection. All of the experiments were con-
ducted upon a massively parallel computing platform where
the experiments were ran using 62 general-purpose computin g
on graphics processing units (GPGPUs). RBMs are used in the
training phase. Ororbia et al. [108] develop an evolutionar y
algorithm called EXAMM (Evolutionay eXploration of Aug-
menting Models) which is designed to devolve recurrent neur al
networks (RNNs) using a selection of memory structures.
RNNs are particularly well suited to the task of performing
prediction of large-scale real-world time series data. EXA MM
was design to select from a large number of memory cell
structures and this allowed the evolutionary approach to yi eld
the best performing RNN architecture.
In Peng et al. [110] the authors propose the LSTM (long
short-term memory) neural network which is capable of
analysing time series over long time spans in order to make

==== Page 11 ====
11
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF EA REPRESENTATIONS ,GENETIC OPERATORS ,PARAMETERS AND ITS VALUES USED IN NEUROEVOLUTION IN THE DESI GN OF DNN S
ARCHITECTURES ,ALONG WITH THE DATASETS USED IN VARIOUS STUDIES WITH THEIR CO RRESPONDING COMPUTATIONAL EFFORT GIVEN IN GPU
DAYS . AUTOMATIC AND SEMI -AUTO (MATIC )REFER TO WORKS WHERE THE ARCHITECTURE HAS BEEN EVOLVED AUTOM ATICALLY OR BY USING A
SEMI -AUTOMATIC APPROACH ,SUCH AS USING A CONSTRAINED SEARCH SPACE ,RESPECTIVELY . THE DASH (–) SYMBOL INDICATES THAT THE
INFORMATION WAS NOT REPORTED OR IS NOT KNOWN TO US .
Study EA Representation Genetic Operators EAs Parameters’ values Computational Datasets GPU days Automatic/ DNNs
Method Cross Mut Selec Pop Gens Runs Resources per run Semi-auto
Agapitos et al. [1] GP Variable length 500, 1,000 100 30 – MNIST – Automatic CNN
Assunc ¸˜ ao et al. [3],
[4]GAs, GE Fixed and vari-
able length100 100 10 Titan X GPUs CIFAR-10, 3 MNIST
variants, Fashion, SVHN,
Rectangles, CIFAR-100– Automatic CNN
Charte et al. [18] GAs, ES, DE Variable length 150 20 – 1 NVidia RTX 619
2080 GPUCIFAR10, Delicious,
Fashion, Glass,
Ionosphere, MNIST,
Semeion, Sonar, SpectLimited to
24 hoursAutomatic AE
Chen et al. [19] EAs Fixed length ✕ 1 +λ,
λ=41500030 – MNIST – Automatic DBN
Desell [28] NEAT-based Variable length 100 10 4,500 volunteered
PCsMNIST – Semi-auto CNN
Goncalvez et
al. [50]GAs Fixed length ✕ 1 +λ λ
=4gens runs No GPUs 4 Binary Class datasets:
Cancer, Diabetes, Sonar,
Credit– Automatic CNN
Hajewski et al. [54] EAs Variable length µ+λ= 10
(λ,µnot
speciﬁed20 20-
40AWS ( Nvidia K80
GPU)STL10 – Automatic AE
Kim et al. [71] EAs – – – – 50, 40, 60 – – 60 Tesla M40 GPUs MNIST, CI FAR-10,
Drowsiness Recognition– Semi-auto CNN
Lander et al. [80] GAs Variable length 30 50 5 No GPU MINST - Automatic AE
Liu et al. [92] EAs Variable length 100 5000 30 – MINST, CIFAR-10 - Automatic AE,RBM
Lu et al. [94] GAs Fixed length 40 30 – 1 NVIDIA 1080Ti CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 8 in both Automati c CNN
Mart´ ın et al. [97]
evoDeepEAs Fixed Length λ+µ=
10 (λ,µ
=5)20 – MNIST Automatic – CNN
Peng et al. [110] EAs Fixed length 10 20 − – Electricity price - Automatic LSTM
Real et al. [116] GAs Variable length ✕ 100 – 5 450 K40 GPUs CIFAR-10, ImageNet 3150, 3150 Semi-auto C NN
Real et al. [117] GAs Variable length ✕ 1000 – 5 250 PCs CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 2750, 2750 Automatic CNN
Shinozaki and
Watanabe [127]GAs, ES Fixed length 62 30 – 62 GPUs AURORA2 Spoken Digits
Corpus2.58 Automatic RBM
So et al. [130] EAs Fixed length ✕ 100 – – 200 workers with 1
Google TPU V .2 chipWMT En-De, WMT En-
Fr, WMT En-Cs– Semi-auto AE
Suganuma et
al. [135]ES Fixed length ✕ 1+λ,λ=
{1,2,4,8,16}250 – 4 P100 GPUs Cars, CelebA, SVNH 12 (inpaint-
ing), 16 (de-
noising)Automatic AE
Suganuma et
al. [136]GP, ES Variable length ✕ 1+λ,λ=
2300,
500,
15003 Multiple PCs, 2
GPUs: GTX 1080,
Titan XCIFAR-10 (2 variants) 27, 27 Automatic CNN
Sun et al. [140] GAs Variable length 100 100 30 1 PC, 2 GTX 1080
GPUsFashion, Rectangle (2
variants), Convex Set,
MNIST (5 variants)8 (fashion), 5
(others)Automatic CNN
Sun et al. [139] GAs Variable length 20 20 5 3 GTX 1080 Ti GPUs CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 27, 36 Automatic CNN
Sun et al. [140] GAs Variable length 100 100 30 2 GTX1080 GPUs Fashion, Rectangle (2
variants), Convex Set,
MNIST (5 variants)8 (Fashion),
5 (others)Automatic CNN
Sun et al. [141] GAs Fixed length 50 – 30 – Fashion, Rectangle (2
variants), Convex Set,
MNIST (5 variants)
CIFAR-10-BW– Automatic CNN
van Wyk and
Bosman [144]EAs Fixed length 20 20000 1 1 GPU (GTX 1080) ImageNet64x64 Halted after
2 hrsAutomatic CNN
Wang et al. [145] EAs Variable length 30 20 30 – MNIST (5 variants) and
Convex Set– Automatic CNN
Xie et al. [148] GAs Fixed length 20 50 – 10 GPUs (type not
speciﬁed)CIFAR-10, MNIST,
ILSVRC2012, SHVN17 (CIFAR-
10), 2
(MNIST), 20
(ILSVRC2012),
– (SHNV)Semi-auto CNN
Zhang et al. [151] EAs Variable length ✕ 20 500 10 No GPUs NASA C-MAPSS
(Aircraft Engine
Simulator Datasets)– Automatic DBN
Zhang et al. [152] EAs Fixed Length – 30 10 1 NVIDIA GTX 980
GPU58 Knowledge Extraction
based on Evolutionary
Learning (KEEL) datasets– Automatic DBN
predictions and effectively tackle the vanishing gradient prob-
lem. Their study uses differential evolution (DE) to identi fy
the hyperparameters of the LSTM. DE approaches have been
shown to out perform other approaches such as particle swarm
optimisation and GAs. The authors claim that this is the ﬁrst
time that DE has been used to choose hyperparameters for
LSTM for forecasting applications. As forecasting involve s
complex continuous nonlinear functions, the DE approach is
well suited to these types of problems. Goncalvez et al. [50]
introduce a neuroevolution algorithm called the Semantic
Learning Machine (SLM) which has been shown to outperformother similar methods in a wide range of supervised learning
problems. SLM is described as a geometric semantic hill
climber approach for NNs following a 1 +λstrategy. In
the search for the best NN architecture conﬁguration this
allows the SLM to concentrate on the current best NN without
drawing any penalties for this. The crucial aspect of the SLM
approach is the geometric semantic mutation which takes a
parent NN and generates a child NN.

==== Page 12 ====
12
G. Final Comments
The use of evolution-based method in designing deep neural
networks is already a reality as discussed in this section. D if-
ferent EAs methods with different representations have bee n
used, ranging from landmark evolutionary methods includ-
ing Genetic Algorithms, Genetic Programming and Evolution
Strategies up to using hybrids combining, for example, the
use of Genetic Algorithms and Grammatical Evolution. In a
short period of time, we have observed both ingenious repre-
sentations and interesting approaches achieving extraord inary
results against human-based design networks [116] as well a s
state-of-the-art approaches, in some case employing hundr ed
of computers [117] to using just a few GPUs [140]. We have
also learnt that most of the neuroevolution studies has focu sed
their attention in designing deep CNNs. Other networks have
also been considered including AE, RBM, RNN, LSTM and
DBM, although there are just a few neuroevolution works
considering the use of these types of networks.
Table I contains extracted information from almost 30
selected papers in neuroevolution. We selected these paper s
in our own ad-hoc way in order to ﬁnd a selection of papers
which succinctly demonstrated the use of neuroevolution in
deep neural networks. The table is order in alphabetically
order of the lead-author surname and summarises: the EA
representation used, the representation of individuals, w hich
genetic operators are used, and the EA parameters. The table
also outlines the computational resources used in the corre -
sponding study by attempting to outline the number of GPUs
used. A calculation of the GPU days per run is approximated
in the same way as Sun et al. [139]. The table states which
benchmark datasets are used in the experimental analysis.
Finally, the table indicates if the neural network architec ture
has been evolved automatically or by using a semi-automated
approach whilst also indicating the target DNN architectur e.
Every selected paper does not report the same information
which some papers omitting details about the computation
resources used and others omitting information about the
number of runs performed. One of the very interesting output s
from this table is that there are numerous differences betwe en
the approaches used by all of the papers listed in the table.
We see crossover being omitted from several studies mostly
due to encoding adopted by various researchers. Population
size and selection strategies for the EAs change between
studies. While MNIST and CIFAR are clearly the most popular
benchmark datasets we can see many examples of studies
using benchmark datasets from speciﬁc application domains .
IV. T RAINING DEEPNEURAL NETWORKS THROUGH
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS
A. Motivation
Backpropagation has been one of the most successful and
dominant methods used in the training of ANNs over the past
number of decades [120]. This simple, effective and elegant
method applies Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to the
weights of the ANN where the goal is to keep the overall
error as low as possible. However, as remarked by Morse
and Stanley [104] the widely held belief, up to around 2006,was that backpropagation would suffer loss of its gradient
within DNNs. This turned out to be a false assumption and
it has subsequently been proved that backpropagation and
SGD are effective at optimising DNNs even when there
are millions of connections. Both backpropagation and SGD
beneﬁt from the availability of sufﬁcient training data and the
availability of computational power. In a problem space wit h
so many dimensions the success of using SGD in DNNs is
still surprising. Practically speaking, SGD should be high ly
susceptible to local optima [104]. EAs perform very well in
the presence of saddle points as was discussed in Section II.
B. The critique
As there are no guarantees of convergence the solutions
computed using EAs are usually classiﬁed as near optimal.
Population-based EAs are in effect an approximation of
the gradient as this is estimated from the individuals in a
population and their corresponding objectives. On the othe r
hand, SGD computes the exact gradient. As a result some
researchers may consider EAs unsuitable for DL tasks for
this reason. However, it has been demonstrated that the exac t
approximation obtained by SGD is not absolutely critical in
the overall success of DNNs using this approach. Lillicrap
et al. [88] demonstrated that breaking the precision of the
gradient calculation has no negative or detrimental effect on
learning. Indeed, Morse and Stanley [104] speculated that t he
reason for the lack of research focus on using evolutionary
computation in DNNs was not entirely related to concerns
around the gradient. It more than likely resulted from the be lief
that new approaches to DNN could emerge from outside of
SGD.
C. Deep Learning Architecture: Convolutional Neural Net-
works
Such et al. [134] proposed a gradient-free method to evolve
the weights of convolutional DNNs by using a simple GA,
with a population of chromosomes of ﬁxed length. The pro-
posed mechanism successfully evolved networks with over
four million free parameters. Some key elements in the study
conducted by Such et al. to successfully evolve these large
neural networks include (i) the use of the selection and
mutation genetic operators only (excluding the use of the
crossover operator), (ii) the use of a novel method to store
large parameter vectors compactly by representing each of
these as an initialisation seed plus the list of the random
seeds that produces the series of mutations that produced ea ch
parameter vector, (iii) the use of a state-of-the-art compu ta-
tional setting, including one modern computer with 4 GPUs
and 48 CPU cores as well as 720 CPU cores across dozens
of computers. Instead of using a reward-based optimisation
techniques by means of a ﬁtness function, Such et al. used
novelty search [86] that rewards new behaviours of individu als.
The authors used reinforcement learning benchmark problem s
including atari 2600 [9], [101], hard maze [87] and humanoid
locomotion [15]. They demonstrated how their proposed ap-
proach is competitive with state-of-the-art algorithms in these

==== Page 13 ====
13
problems including DQN [101], policy-gradient methods [12 6]
and ES [123].
Pawelczyk et al. [109] focused their attention in encoding
CNNs with random weights using a GA, with the main goal to
let the EA to learn the number of gradient learning iteration s
necessary to achieve a high accuracy error using the MNIST
dataset. It was interesting to observe that their EA-based
approach reported the best results with around 450 gradient
learnt iterations compared to 400 constant iterations whic h
yielded the best overall results.
D. Deep Learning Architecture: Autoencoders
David and Greental [24] used a GA of ﬁxed length to evolve
the weight values of an autoencoder DNN. Each chromosome
was evaluated by using the root mean squared error for the
training samples. In their experiments, the authors used on ly
10 individuals with a 50% elitism-policy. The weights of
these individuals were updated using backpropagation and
the other half of the population were randomly generated in
each generation. They tested their approach with the well-
known CIFAR-10 dataset. They compared their approach vs.
the traditional autoencoder using SVM, reporting a better c las-
siﬁcation error when using their proposed GA-assisted meth od
for the autocoder DNN (1.44% vs.1.85%). In their studies, the
authors indicated that the reason why their method produced
better results was because gradient descent methods such as
backpropagation are highly susceptible to being trapped at
local optima and their GA method helped to prevent this.
Fernando et al. [35] introduced a differentiable version of
the Compositional Pattern Producing Network (CPPN) called
the Differentiable Pattern Producing Network (DPPN). The
DPPN approach attemps to combine the advantages and results
of gradient-based learning in NN with the optimisation capa -
bilities of evolutionary approaches. The DPPN has demon-
strated superior results for the benchmark dataset MNIST.
A generic evolutionary algorithm is used in the optimisatio n
algorithm of DPPN. The results indicate that the DPPNs
and their associated learning algorithms have the ability t o
dramatically reduce the number of parameters of larger neur al
networks. The authors argue that this integration of evolu-
tionary and gradient-based learning allows the optimisati on to
avoid becoming stuck in local optima points or saddle points .
E. Other Relevant Works
Morse and Stanley [104] proposed an approached called
limited evaluation evolutionary algorithm (LEEA), that ef -
fectively used a population-based GA of ﬁxed length rep-
resentation to evolve, by means of crossover and mutation,
1000 weights of a ﬁxed-architecture network. The authors
took inspiration from SGD that can compute an error gradient
from a single (or small batch of) instance of the training
set. Thus, instead of computing the ﬁtness of each individua l
in the population using the whole training set, the ﬁtness
is computed using a small fraction. This results in an EA
that computationally similar to SGD. However, using such
approach is also one of the weakness in LEAA because it
does not generalise to whole training sample. To mitigatethis, the authors proposed two approaches: (i) the use of a
small batch of instances and (ii) the use of a ﬁtness function
that consider both the performance on the current mini-batc h
and the performance of individuals’ ancestors against thei r
mini-batches. To test their idea, the authors used a functio n
approximation task, a time series prediction task and a hous e
price prediction task and compared the results yield by thei r
approach against SGD and RMSProp. They showed how their
LEEA approach was competitive against the other approaches .
Even when the authors do not use DNNs, but a small artiﬁcial
NN, it is interesting to note how this can be used in a DNN
setting.
Khadka and Tumer [70] remark that Deep Reinforcement
Learning methods are “notoriously sensitive to the choice
of their hyperparamaters and often have brittle convergenc e
properties”. These methods are also challenged by long time
horizons where there are sparse rewards. EAs can respond
very positively to these challenges where the use of ﬁtness
metrics allows EAs to tolerate the sparse reward distributi on
and endure long time horizons. However, EAs can struggle
to perform well when optimisation of a large number of pa-
rameters is required. The authors introduce their Evolutio nary
Reinforcement Learning (ERL) algorithm. The EA is used to
evolve diverse experiences to train an RL agent. These agent s
are then subjected to mutation and crossover operators to
create the next generation of agents. From the results outli ned
in the paper this ERL can be described as a “population-drive n
guide” that guides or biases exploration towards states wit h
higher and better long-term returns, promoting diversity o f
explored policies, and introduces redundancies for stabil ity.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) (see Section II-A4)
incorporate memory into an NN by storing information from
the past within the hidden states network. In [69], Kahdka et
al. introduce a new memory-augmented network architecture
called the Modular Memory Unit (MMU). This MMU discon-
nects the memory and central computation operations withou t
requiring costly memory management strategies. Neuroevo-
lutionary methods are used to train the MMU architecture.
The performance of the MMU approach with both gradient
descent and neuroevolution are examined in the paper. The
authors ﬁnd that neuroevolution is more repeatable and gene r-
alizable across tasks. The MMU NN is designed to be highly
conﬁgurable and this characteristic is exploited by the the
neuroevolutionary algorithm to evolve the network. Popula tion
size is set to 100 with a fraction of elites set at 0.1. In
the fully differentiable version of the MMU gradient descen t
performs better for Sequence Recall tasks than neuroevolut ion.
However, neuroevolution performs signiﬁcantly better tha n
gradient descent in Sequence Classiﬁcation tasks.
F . Final Comments
In the early years of neuroevolution, it was thought that
evolution-based methods might exceed the capabilities of
backpropagation [149]. As ANNs, in general, and as DNNs, in
particular, increasingly adopted the use of stochastic gra dient
descent and backpropagation, the idea of using EAs for
training DNNs instead has been almost abandoned by the

==== Page 14 ====
14
TABLE II
SUMMARY ON EA REPRESENTATIONS ,GENETIC OPERATORS ,PARAMETERS AND ITS VALUES USED IN NEUROEVOLUTION IN THE TRAI NING OF DNN S,
ALONG WITH THE DATASETS USED IN VARIOUS STUDIES WITH THEIR CO RRESPONDING COMPUTATIONAL EFFORT GIVEN IN GPU DAYS . THE DASH (–)
SYMBOL INDICATES THAT THE INFORMATION WAS NOT REPORTED OR IS NOT KNOWN TO US .
Study EA Representation Genetic Operators EAs Parameters’ values Computational Datasets GPU days DNN
Method Cross Mut Selec Pop Gens Runs Resources per run
David and Green-
tal [24]GAs Fixed length 10 – – MNIST – AE
Dufourq and Bas-
sett [30]GAs Variable length ✕ 100 10 5 1 GTX1070 GPU CIFAR-10, MNIST, EM-
NIST (Balanced & Dig-
its), Fashion, IMDB, Elec-
tronics– CNN
Fernando et
al. [35]GAs – 50 – – – MNIST, Omniglot – AE
Khadka and
Tumer [70]EAs Variable length 10 ∞ 5 – 6 Mujoco (continuous
control) datasets– Read text
Khadka et al. [69] EAs Fixed length ✕ 100 1000
10000
15000– GPU used but not
speciﬁedSequence Recall,
Sequence Classiﬁcation– Read text
Morse and Stan-
ley [104]GAs Fixed length 1,000 – 10 – Function Approximation,
Time Series, California
Housing– Read text
Pawelczyk et
al. [109]GAs Fixed length 10 – – 1 GPU (Intel Core i7
7800X, 64GB RAM)MNIST – CNN
Such et al. [134] GAs Fixed length ✕ 1,000 (A ),
12,500 (H ),
20,000 (I )– 5 (A ),
10 (I )1 PC (4 GPUs, 48
CPUs) and 720 CPUs
across dozens of PCsAtari 2600, I mage Hard
maze, H umanoid locomo-
tion0.6 (Atari, 1
PC), 0.16 (Atari,
dozens of PCs)CNN
DNN research community. EAs are a “genuinely different
paradigm for specifying a search problem” [104] and provide
exciting opportunities for learning in DNNs. When comparin g
neuroevolutionary approaches to other approaches such as g ra-
dient descent, authors such as Khadka et al. [69] urge cautio n.
A generation in neuroevolution is not readily comparable to a
gradient descent epoch.
Despite the fact that it has been argued that EAs can
compete with gradient-based search in small problems as
well as using neural networks with a non-differentiable ac-
tivation function [96], the encouraging results achieved i n
the 1990s [48], [103], [113] have inspired recently some
researchers to carry out research in training DNNs includin g
the works conducted by David and Greental [24] and Fernando
et al. [35] both works using deep AE as well as the works
carried out by Pawelczyk et al. [109] and Such et al. [134],
both studies using deep CNNs.
Table II is structured in a similar way to Table I. As
with Table I, we selected these papers in our own ad-hoc
way in order to ﬁnd a selection of papers which succinctly
demonstrated the use of EAs in the training of DNNs. As
before we see mutation and selection used by all of the select ed
works with crossover omitted in certain situations. We see
greater diversity in the types of benchmark datasets used wi th
a greater focus on domain-speciﬁc datasets and problems.
V. F UTURE WORK ON NEUROEVOLUTION IN DEEP
NEURAL NETWORKS
A. Surrogate-assisted EAs in DNNs
EAs have successfully been used in automatically design-
ing artiﬁcial DNNs, as described throughout the paper, and
multiple state-of-the-art algorithms have been proposed i n
recent years including genetic CNN [148], large-scale evo-
lution [117], evolving deep CNN [140], hierarchical evolu-
tion [91], to mention but a few successful examples. Despite
their success in automatically conﬁguring DNNs architectu res,
a common limitation in all these methods is the training
time needed, ranging from days to weeks in order to achievecompetitive results. Surrogate-assisted, or meta-model b ased,
evolutionary computation uses efﬁcient models, also known as
meta-models or surrogates, for estimating the ﬁtness value s in
evolutionary algorithms [66]. Hence, a well-posed surroga te-
assisted EC considerably speeds up the evolutionary search by
reducing the number of ﬁtness evaluations while at the same
time correctly estimating the ﬁtness values of some potenti al
solutions.
The adoption of this surrogate-assisted EA is limited in
the research discussed in this paper and is dealt with in a
few limited exceptions. For example, in a recent work, Sun
et al. [137] demonstrated how meta-models, using ensemble
members, can be successfully used to correctly estimate the
accuracy of CNNs. They were able to considerably reduce the
training time, e.g., from 33 GPU days to 10 GPU days, while
still achieving competitive accuracy results compared to s tate-
of-the-art algorithms. A limitation in Sun et al.’s approac h
is the unknown number of training runs that is necessary to
achieve a good prediction performance.
B. Mutations and the neutral theory
We have seen that numerous studies have used selection
and mutation only to drive evolution in automatically ﬁndin g
a suitable DNN architecture (Section III) or to train a DNN
(Section IV). Tables I and II present a summary of the
genetic operators used by various researchers. Interestin gly, a
good number of researchers have reported highly encouragin g
results when using these two genetic operators, including t he
works conducted by Real et al. [116], [117] using GAs and
hundreds of GPUs as well as the work carried out by Sug-
anuma et al. [136] employing Cartesian Genetic Programming
and a using a few GPUs.
Kimura’s neutral theory of molecular evolution [72], [73]
states that the majority of evolutionary changes at molecul ar
level are the result of random ﬁxation of selectively neutral
mutations . A mutation from one gene to another is neutral
if it does not affect the phenotype. Thus, most mutations
that take place in natural evolution are neither advantageo us

==== Page 15 ====
15
nor disadvantageous for the survival of individuals. It is t hen
reasonable to extrapolate that, if this is how evolution has
managed to produce the amazing complexity and adaptations
seen in nature, then neutrality should aid also EAs. However ,
whether neutrality helps or hinders the search in EAs is
ill-posed and cannot be answered in general: one can only
answer this question within the context of a speciﬁc class of
problems, (neutral) representation and set of operators [4 0],
[41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [111], [112]. We are not aware
of any works in neuroevolution in DNN on neutrality, but
there are some interesting encodings adopted by researcher s
including Suganuma’s work [136] (see Fig. 2) that allow the
measurement of the level of neutrality present in evolution ary
search and indicate whether its presence is beneﬁcial or not in
certain problems and DNNs. If neutrality is beneﬁcial, taki ng
into consideration speciﬁc class of problems, representat ions
and genetic operators, this can also have an immediate posit ive
impact in the training time needed because the evaluation of
potential EA candidate solutions will not be necessary.
C. Multi-objective Optimisation
The vast majority of works reviewed in this paper have
focused their attention in the direct or indirect optimisat ion of
one objective only. For example, when training a CNN in a
computer vision supervised classiﬁcation task, the classi ﬁca-
tion error is normally adopted as a metric of performance for
this type of network. Perhaps, one of the reasons why taking
into account one objective has been the norm in the specialis ed
literature is because the optimisation of one objective has
been enough to yield extraordinary results (for example in
the application domain of route optimisation [8]). Another
potential reason could be due to the fact that two or more
objectives can be conﬂicting with each other making the
(optimisation) task very difﬁcult to accomplished [21], [2 2],
[25].
Multi-objective optimisation (MO) is concerned with the
simultaneous optimisation of more than one objective funct ion.
When such functions are in conﬂict, a set of trade-off soluti ons
among the objectives is sought as no single global optimum
exists. The optimal trade-offs are those solutions for whic h no
objective can be further improved without degrading one of t he
others. This idea is captured in the Pareto dominance relati on:
a solution xin the search space is said to Pareto-dominate
another solution yifxis at least as good as yon all objectives
and strictly better on at least one objective. This is an impo rtant
aspect in EMO (Evolutionary MO) [21], [22], [25] because it
allows solutions to be ranked according to their performanc e
on all objectives with respect to all solutions in the popula tion.
EMO is one of the most active research areas in EAs. Yet it is
surprising to see that EMO approaches have been scarcely use d
for the automatic conﬁguration of artiﬁcial DNNs architect ures
or learning in DNNs. Often, the conﬁguration of these artiﬁc ial
DNNs require simultaneously satisfying multiple objectiv es
such as reducing the computational calculation of these on
the training dataset while attaining high accuracy. EMO off ers
an elegant and efﬁcient framework to handle these conﬂictin g
objectives. We are aware of only a few works in the area
e.g., [71], [92], [94], [151], as summarised in Section III.D. Fitness Landscape Analysis of DNNs and Well-posed Ge-
netic Operators
As we have seen throughout the paper, all of the works
in neuroevolution in DNNs have used core genetic operators
including selection and mutation. Crossover has also been u sed
in most of these works. The use of these operators are sum-
marised in Tables I and II. The use of crossover, sometimes
referred as recombination, can sometimes be difﬁcult to ado pt
depending on the encoding used and some variants have been
proposed such as in the study carried out in [140]. Other
studies have adopted standard crossover operators such as
those discussed in [71]. There are, however, no works carrie d
out in the area of neuroevolution in DNNs that have focused
their attention in explaining why the adoption of a particul ar
genetic operator is well-suited for that particular proble m.
The notion of ﬁtness landscape [146] has been with us for
several decades. It is a non-mathematical aid that has prove n
to be very powerful in understanding evolutionary search.
Viewing the search space, deﬁned by the set of all potential
solutions, as as landscape, a heuristic algorithm such as an
EA, can be thought of as navigating through it to ﬁnd the best
solution (essentially the highest peak in the landscape). T he
height of a point in this search space, represents in an abstr act
way, the ﬁtness of the solution associated with that point.
The landscape is therefore a knowledge interface between th e
problem and the heuristic-based EA. This can help researche rs
and practitioners to deﬁne well-behaved genetic operators , in-
cluding mutation and crossover, over the connectivity stru cture
of the landscape.
E. Standardised Scientiﬁc Neuroevolution Studies in DNNs
As described in Section II, multiple DNNs architectures
have been proposed in the specialised literature including
CNNs, DBNs, RBMs and AEs. Each of these DNNs considers
multiple elements such as the activation function, type of
learning, to mention a few examples. As indicated previousl y,
EAs are incredible ﬂexible allowing researchers to use ele-
ments from two or more different EAs methods. Moreover,
multiple variants from each of these elements exists such as
having multiple options from where to chose to exploit and
explore the search space. Many of the research works reviewe d
in this paper have compared their results with those yield by
neuroevolution-based state-of-the-art algorithms. Howe ver, it
is unclear why some techniques are better than others. Is it
because of the type of operators used? Is it because of the
representation adopted in these studies or is it because of t he
type of learning employed during training? Due to the lack of
standardised studies in neuroevolution on DNNs, it is difﬁc ult
to draw ﬁnal conclusions that help us to identify what elemen ts
are promising in DNNs.
F . Diversifying the use of benchmark problems and DNNs
There is little argument that the availability of new and
large datasets combined with ever increasingly powerful co m-
putational resources have allowed DNNs to tackle and solve
hard problems in domains such as image classiﬁcation, speec h

==== Page 16 ====
16
TABLE III
COMMON DATASETS USED IN NEUROEVOLUTION IN DEEP NEURAL
NETWORKS .
Data set Number of examples Input RGB, B&W, No. of
Training Testing Size Grayscale classes
MNIST [85] 60,000 10,000 28 ×28 Grayscale 10
MNIST variants [81] 12,000 50,000 28 ×28 Grayscale 10
CIFAR-10 [78] 50,000 10,000 32 ×32 RGB 10
CIFAR-100 [78] 50,000 10,000 32 ×32 RGB 100
Fashion [147] 60,000 10,000 28 ×28 Grayscale 10
SVHN [107] 73,257 26,032 32 ×32 RGB 10
Rectangle [81] 1,000 50,000 28 ×28 B&W 2
Rectangle images [81] 10,000 50,000 28 ×28 Grayscale 2
Convex set [81] 6,000 50,000 28 ×28 B&W 2
ILSVRC2012 [27] 1.3M 150,000 224 ×224 RGB 1,000
GERMAN Trafﬁc Sign Recognition [131] 50,000 12,500 32 ×32 Grayscale 43
CelebFaces [138] – – 39 ×31 RGB 2
(No. of images of CelebFaces: 87,628)
Number of examples for the validation set is omitted from thi s table given that it is well-known in the ML community
that this is randomly split from the training data with the pr oportion of1
5.
processing and many others. Image classiﬁcation is certain ly
considered as the primary benchmark against which to evalua te
DNNs [155]. These benchmark datasets (many of which are
outlined in Table III) are used as a means of comparing
the computational results of experimental setups created b y
different research groups. We believe that the success of DN Ns
coupled with the need to tackle complex problems in other
domains sees a growing need for DNNs to expand to other
domains. In order to assess how successful DNNs are in
other domains and with other practical problems robust and
comprehensive benchmark datasets will be required. Indeed
we believe that without such benchmarks it may be difﬁcult
to make convincing arguments for the success and suitabilit y
of DNNs for problems in other domains beyond image clas-
siﬁcation, machine translation, and problems involving ob ject
recognition.
It is critical that benchmark datasets are available freely and
as open-data. Stallkamp et al. [131] argue that in a niche are a
such as trafﬁc sign recognition it can be difﬁcult to compare
published work because studies are based on different data o r
consider classiﬁcation in different ways. The use of propri etary
data in some cases, which is not publicly available, makes
comparison of results difﬁcult. Authors such as Zhang et
al. [151] access data from a prognostic benchmarking proble m
related to NASA and Aero-Propulsion systems. Speciﬁc prob-
lem domains outside of those of vision, speech recognition a nd
language also have benchmark datasets available but may be
less well-known. Zhang et al. [152] use datasets from KEEL
(Knowledge Extraction based on Evolutionary Learning) but
also use a real-world dataset from a manufacturing drilling
machine in order to obtain a practical evaluation. Chen and
Li [20] comment that as we see data getting bigger (so
called Big Data) deep learning will continue to play an ever
increasingly important role in providing big data predicti ve an-
alytics solutions, particularly with the availability of i ncreased
processing power and the advances in graphics processors.
However, while the potential of Big Data is without doubt,
new ways of thinking and novel algorithmic approaches will
be required to deal with the technical challenges. Algorith ms
that can learn from massive amounts of data are needed [20]
and this may make it difﬁcult to deﬁne benchmark datasets
within the Big Data domain.VI. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper has provided a comprehensive survey of neu-
roevolution approaches in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) and
has discussed the most important aspects of application of
Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) in deep learning. The target
audience of this paper is a broad spectrum of researchers
and practitioners from both the Evolutionary Computation a nd
Deep Learning (DL) communities. The paper highlights where
EAs are being used in DL and how DL is beneﬁting from this.
Readers with a background in EAs will ﬁnd this survey very
useful in determining the state-of-the-art in neural archi tecture
search methods in general. Additionally, readers from the D L
community will be encouraged to consider the application of
EAs approaches in their DNN work. Conﬁguration of DNNs
is not a trivial problem. Poorly or incorrectly conﬁgured
networks can lead to the failure or under-utilisation of DNN s
for many problems and applications. Finding well-performi ng
architectures is often a very tedious and error-prone proce ss.
EAs have been shown to be a competitive and successful
means of automatically creating and conﬁguring such net-
works. Consequently, neuroevolution has great potential t o
provide a strong and robust toolkit for the DL community in
future. The article has also outlined and discussed importa nt
issues and challenges in this area.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Agapitos, M. O’Neill, M. Nicolau, D. Fagan, A. Kattan,
A. Brabazon, and K. Curran. Deep evolution of image represen tations
for handwritten digit recognition. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation, CEC 2015, Sendai, Japan, May 25-28, 2015 , pages
2452–2459. IEEE, 2015.
[2] A. Ashfahani, M. Pratama, E. Lughofer, and Y .-S. Ong. Dev dan:
Deep evolving denoising autoencoder. Neurocomputing , 390:297 – 314,
2020.
[3] F. Assunc ¸˜ ao, N. Lourenc ¸o, P. Machado, and B. Ribeiro. Evolving
the topology of large scale deep neural networks. In M. Caste lli,
L. Sekanina, M. Zhang, S. Cagnoni, and P. Garc´ ıa-S´ anchez, editors,
Genetic Programming , pages 19–34, Cham, 2018. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing.
[4] F. Assunc ¸˜ ao, N. Lourenc ¸o, P. Machado, and B. Ribeiro. DENSER: deep
evolutionary network structured representation. Genetic Programming
and Evolvable Machines , 20(1):5–35, 2019.
[5] T. B¨ ack. Evolutionary Algorithms in Theory and Practice: Evolution
Strategies, Evolutionary Programming, Genetic Algorithm s. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, 1996.
[6] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar. Designing neur al network
architectures using reinforcement learning. CoRR , abs/1611.02167,
2016.
[7] P. Baldi. Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and dee p architectures.
In I. Guyon, G. Dror, V . Lemaire, G. Taylor, and D. Silver, edi tors,
Proceedings of ICML Workshop on Unsupervised and Transfer L earn-
ing, volume 27 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages
37–49, Bellevue, Washington, USA, 02 Jul 2012. PMLR.
[8] H. Bast, D. Delling, A. Goldberg, M. M¨ uller-Hannemann, T. Pajor,
P. Sanders, D. Wagner, and R. F. Werneck. Route Planning in Trans-
portation Networks , pages 19–80. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2016.
[9] M. G. Bellemare, Y . Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling. The arcade
learning environment: An evaluation platform for general a gents.
CoRR , abs/1207.4708, 2012.
[10] Y . Bengio, P. Lamblin, D. Popovici, and H. Larochelle. G reedy
layer-wise training of deep networks. In B. Sch¨ olkopf, J. C . Platt,
and T. Hoffman, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 19 , pages 153–160. MIT Press, 2007.
[11] J. Bergstra and Y . Bengio. Random search for hyper-para meter
optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 13:281–305, 2012.

==== Page 17 ====
17
[12] J. Bergstra, D. Yamins, and D. D. Cox. Making a science of
model search: Hyperparameter optimization in hundreds of d imensions
for vision architectures. In Proceedings of the 30th International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learnin g - Volume
28, ICML13, page I115I123. JMLR.org, 2013.
[13] H.-G. Beyer and H.-P. Schwefel. Evolution strategies a comprehensive
introduction. Natural Computing: An International Journal , 1(1):352,
May 2002.
[14] A. Brock, T. Lim, J. M. Ritchie, and N. Weston. SMASH:
one-shot model architecture search through hypernetworks .CoRR ,
abs/1708.05344, 2017.
[15] G. Brockman, V . Cheung, L. Pettersson, J. Schneider, J. Schulman,
J. Tang, and W. Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016. cite arxiv:1606.0 1540.
[16] H. Cai, T. Chen, W. Zhang, Y . Yu, and J. Wang. Efﬁcient arc hi-
tecture search by network transformation. In S. A. McIlrait h and
K. Q. Weinberger, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, (AAAI-18), the 30th innovative
Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI
Symposium on Educational Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligen ce (EAAI-
18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, February 2-7, 2018 , pages 2787–
2794. AAAI Press, 2018.
[17] T. Chan, K. Jia, S. Gao, J. Lu, Z. Zeng, and Y . Ma. Pcanet: A simple
deep learning baseline for image classiﬁcation? IEEE Transactions on
Image Processing , 24(12):5017–5032, 2015.
[18] F. Charte, A. J. Rivera, F. Martnez, and M. J. del Jesus. E voaaa: An
evolutionary methodology for automated neural autoencode r architec-
ture search. Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering , Pre-press(Pre-
press):1–21, 2020.
[19] S. Chen, G. Liu, C. Wu, Z. Jiang, and J. Chen. Image classi ﬁcation
with stacked restricted boltzmann machines and evolutiona ry function
array classiﬁcation voter. In 2016 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation (CEC) , pages 4599–4606, 2016.
[20] X. Chen and X. Lin. Big data deep learning: Challenges an d
perspectives. IEEE Access , 2(1):514–525, 2014.
[21] C. A. C. Coello. Evolutionary multi-objective optimiz ation: a historical
view of the ﬁeld. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine , 1(1):28–
36, Feb 2006.
[22] C. A. Coello Coello. A comprehensive survey of evolutio nary-based
multiobjective optimization techniques. Knowledge and Information
Systems , 1(3):269–308, 1999.
[23] A. Darwish, A. E. Hassanien, and S. Das. A survey of swarm
and evolutionary computing approaches for deep learning. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Review , pages 1–46, 2019.
[24] O. E. David and I. Greental. Genetic algorithms for evol ving deep
neural networks. In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the
2014 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computa tion,
GECCO Comp 14, page 14511452, New York, NY , USA, 2014.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[25] K. Deb. Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorit hms.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY , USA, 2001.
[26] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. A fast an d
elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation , 6:182–197, 2002.
[27] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L. Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 248–255, 2009.
[28] T. Desell. Large scale evolution of convolutional neur al networks
using volunteer computing. In P. A. N. Bosman, editor, Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference, Berlin, Germany, Ju ly 15-19,
2017, Companion Material Proceedings , pages 127–128. ACM, 2017.
[29] G. Desjardins and Y . Bengio. Empirical evaluation of co nvolutional
rbms for vision. Technical Report 1327, D´ epartement d’Inf ormatique
et de Recherche Op´ erationnelle, Universit´ e de Montr´ eal , 2008.
[30] E. Dufourq and B. A. Bassett. Eden: Evolutionary deep ne tworks for
efﬁcient machine learning. In 2017 Pattern Recognition Association
of South Africa and Robotics and Mechatronics (PRASA-RobMe ch),
pages 110–115, 2017.
[31] A. E. Eiben and J. Smith. From evolutionary computation to the
evolution of things. Nature , 521:476–482, 28 May 2015.
[32] A. E. Eiben and J. E. Smith. Introduction to Evolutionary Computing .
Springer Verlag, 2003.
[33] T. Elsken, J.-H. Metzen, and F. Hutter. Simple and efﬁci ent architecture
search for convolutional neural networks, 2017.
[34] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter. Neural Architecture Search ,
pages 63–77. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 201 9.[35] C. Fernando, D. Banarse, M. Reynolds, F. Besse, D. Pfau, M. Jaderberg,
M. Lanctot, and D. Wierstra. Convolution by evolution: Diff erentiable
pattern producing networks. In Proceedings of the Genetic and
Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016 , GECCO 16, page 109116,
New York, NY , USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machiner y.
[36] A. Fischer and C. Igel. An introduction to restricted bo ltzmann
machines. In L. Alvarez, M. Mejail, L. Gomez, and J. Jacobo, e ditors,
Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis, Computer Vision, and
Applications , pages 14–36, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
[37] P. Fleming and R. Purshouse. Evolutionary algorithms i n control sys-
tems engineering: a survey. Control Engineering Practice , 10(11):1223
– 1241, 2002.
[38] D. Floreano, P. D¨ urr, and C. Mattiussi. Neuroevolutio n: from architec-
tures to learning. Evolutionary Intelligence , 1(1):47–62, 2008.
[39] L. Fogel, A. Owens, and M. Walsh. Artiﬁcial intelligence through
simulated evolution . Wiley, Chichester, WS, UK, 1966.
[40] E. Galv´ an-L´ opez. An analysis of the effects of neutrality on problem
hardness for evolutionary algorithms . PhD thesis, University of Essex,
Colchester, UK, 2009.
[41] E. Galv´ an-L´ opez, S. Dignum, and R. Poli. The effects o f constant
neutrality on performance and problem hardness in GP. In M. O ’Neill,
L. Vanneschi, S. M. Gustafson, A. Esparcia-Alc´ azar, I. D. F alco,
A. D. Cioppa, and E. Tarantino, editors, Genetic Programming, 11th
European Conference, EuroGP 2008, Naples, Italy, March 26- 28, 2008.
Proceedings , volume 4971 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,
pages 312–324. Springer, 2008.
[42] E. Galv´ an-L´ opez and R. Poli. An empirical investigat ion of how and
why neutrality affects evolutionary search. In M. Cattolic o, editor,
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, GECCO 20 06,
Proceedings, Seattle, Washington, USA, July 8-12, 2006 , pages 1149–
1156. ACM, 2006.
[43] E. Galv´ an-L´ opez and R. Poli. Some steps towards under standing how
neutrality affects evolutionary search. In T. P. Runarsson , H. Beyer,
E. K. Burke, J. J. Merelo Guerv’os, L. D. Whitley, and X. Yao, e ditors,
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature - PPSN IX, 9th Internat ional
Conference, Reykjavik, Iceland, September 9-13, 2006, Pro cedings ,
volume 4193, pages 778–787. Springer, 2006.
[44] E. Galv´ an-L´ opez and R. Poli. An empirical investigat ion of how degree
neutrality affects GP search. In A. H. Aguirre, R. M. Borja, a nd
C. A. R. Garc´ ıa, editors, MICAI 2009: Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, 8th Mexican International Conference on Artiﬁcial I ntelligence,
Guanajuato, Mexico, November 9-13, 2009. Proceedings , volume 5845
ofLecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 728–739. Springer, 2009.
[45] E. Galv´ an-L´ opez, R. Poli, A. Kattan, M. O’Neill, and A . Brabazon.
Neutrality in evolutionary algorithms... what do we know? Evolving
Systems , 2(3):145–163, 2011.
[46] F. Gers. Learning to forget: continual prediction with lstm. IET
Conference Proceedings , pages 850–855(5), January 1999.
[47] F. A. Gers and E. Schmidhuber. Lstm recurrent networks l earn simple
context-free and context-sensitive languages. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks , 12(6):1333–1340, 2001.
[48] C. Goerick and T. Rodemann. Evolution strategies: An al ternative to
gradient based learning.
[49] D. E. Goldberg. Genetic Algorithms in Search Optimization and
Machine Learning . Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[50] I. Gonc ¸alves, M. Seca, and M. Castelli. Explorations of the Semantic
Learning Machine Neuroevolution Algorithm: Dynamic Train ing Data
Use, Ensemble Construction Methods, and Deep Learning Pers pectives ,
pages 39–62. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 202 0.
[51] I. Goodfellow, Y . Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning . MIT
Press, 2016.
[52] A. Graves, A. Mohamed, and G. Hinton. Speech recognitio n with deep
recurrent neural networks. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing , pages 6645–6649, 2013.
[53] K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutnk, B. R. Steunebrink , and J. Schmid-
huber. Lstm: A search space odyssey. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems , 28(10):2222–2232, 2017.
[54] J. Hajewski, S. Oliveira, and X. Xing. Distributed evol ution of deep
autoencoders, 2020.
[55] N. Hansen, S. D. Mller, and P. Koumoutsakos. Reducing th e time
complexity of the derandomized evolution strategy with cov ariance
matrix adaptation (cma-es). Evolutionary Computation , 11(1):1–18,
2003.
[56] N. Hansen and A. Ostermeier. Adapting arbitrary normal mutation
distributions in evolution strategies: the covariance mat rix adaptation.

==== Page 18 ====
18
InProceedings of IEEE International Conference on Evolution ary
Computation , pages 312–317, 1996.
[57] N. Hansen and A. Ostermeier. Completely derandomized s elf-
adaptation in evolution strategies. Evol. Comput. , 9(2):159195, June
2001.
[58] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learnin g for image
recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV , USA, June 27-30, 2016 , pages
770–778. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
[59] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y .-W. Teh. A fast learning algorithm
for deep belief nets. Neural Comput. , 18(7):15271554, July 2006.
[60] J. H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems: An Intro-
ductory Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1992.
[61] C. Hong, J. Yu, J. Wan, D. Tao, and M. Wang. Multimodal dee p
autoencoder for human pose recovery. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing , 24(12):5659–5670, 2015.
[62] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger. Densely
connected convolutional networks. In 2017 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 2261–2269,
2017.
[63] D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel. Receptive ﬁelds, binocular interaction
and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. The Journal of
Physiology , 160(1):106–154, 1962.
[64] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelera ting deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In F . R. Bach and
D. M. Blei, editors, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 201 5,
volume 37 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings , pages
448–456. JMLR.org, 2015.
[65] K. Jarrett, K. Kavukcuoglu, M. Ranzato, and Y . LeCun. Wh at is the
best multi-stage architecture for object recognition? In 2009 IEEE 12th
International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 2146–2153, 2009.
[66] Y . Jin. Surrogate-assisted evolutionary computation : Recent advances
and future challenges. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , 1(2):61
– 70, 2011.
[67] R. J´ ozefowicz, W. Zaremba, and I. Sutskever. An empiri cal exploration
of recurrent network architectures. In F. R. Bach and D. M. Bl ei,
editors, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machin e
Learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015 , volume 37
ofJMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings , pages 2342–2350.
JMLR.org, 2015.
[68] K. Kandasamy, W. Neiswanger, J. Schneider, B. P´ oczos, and E. P.
Xing. Neural architecture search with bayesian optimisati on and
optimal transport. In S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, H. Larochell e,
K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 31: Annual Confer ence
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 201 8, 3-8
December 2018, Montr´ eal, Canada , pages 2020–2029, 2018.
[69] S. Khadka, J. J. Chung, and K. Tumer. Neuroevolution of a modular
memory-augmented neural network for deep memory problems. Evol.
Comput. , 27(4):639–664, 2019.
[70] S. Khadka and K. Tumer. Evolution-guided policy gradie nt in
reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 32nd International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS18, page
11961208, Red Hook, NY , USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc.
[71] Y .-H. Kim, B. Reddy, S. Yun, and C. Seo. Nemo : Neuro-evol ution
with multiobjective optimization of deep neural network fo r speed and
accuracy. 2017.
[72] M. Kimura. Evolutionary rate at the molecular level. Nature , 217:624–
626, 1968.
[73] M. Kimura. The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution . Cambridge
University Press, 1983.
[74] H. Kitano. Designing neural networks using genetic alg orithms with
graph generation system. Complex Systems , 4, 1990.
[75] J. Koza, M. Keane, M. Streeter, W. Mydlowec, J. Yu, and G. Lanza.
Genetic programming iv: Routine human-competitive machin e intelli-
gence. 01 2003.
[76] J. R. Koza. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers
by Means of Natural Selection . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA,
1992.
[77] J. R. Koza. Human-competitive results produced by gene tic program-
ming. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines , 11(3/4):251–
284, Sept. 2010. Tenth Anniversary Issue: Progress in Genet ic
Programming and Evolvable Machines.
[78] A. Krizhevsky, V . Nair, and G. Hinton. Cifar-10 (canadi an institute for
advanced research).[79] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks. Commun. ACM , 60(6):8490,
May 2017.
[80] S. Lander and Y . Shang. Evoae – a new evolutionary method for
training autoencoders for deep learning networks. In 2015 IEEE 39th
Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference , volume 2,
pages 790–795, 2015.
[81] H. Larochelle, D. Erhan, A. Courville, J. Bergstra, and Y . Bengio. An
empirical evaluation of deep architectures on problems wit h many fac-
tors of variation. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
on Machine Learning , ICML 07, page 473480, New York, NY , USA,
2007. Association for Computing Machinery.
[82] H. Larochelle, M. Mandel, R. Pascanu, and Y . Bengio. Lea rning
algorithms for the classiﬁcation restricted boltzmann mac hine. Journal
of Machine Learning Research , 13(22):643–669, 2012.
[83] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. E. Hinton. Deep learning. Nature ,
521(7553):436–444, 2015.
[84] Y . Lecun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient -based learning
applied to document recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE , pages
2278–2324, 1998.
[85] Y . Lecun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient -based
learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
[86] J. Lehman and K. Stanley. Novelty Search and the Problem with
Objectives , pages 37–56. 11 2011.
[87] J. Lehman and K. O. Stanley. Abandoning objectives: Evo lution
through the search for novelty alone. Evol. Comput. , 19(2):189223,
June 2011.
[88] T. P. Lillicrap, D. Cownden, D. B. Tweed, and C. J. Akerma n. Random
feedback weights support learning in deep neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1411.0247 , 2014.
[89] M. Lindauer and F. Hutter. Best practices for scientiﬁc research on
neural architecture search, 2019.
[90] C. Liu, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, W. Hua, L. Li, L. Fei-Fei, A. L. Yuille,
J. Huang, and K. Murphy. Progressive neural architecture se arch.
CoRR , abs/1712.00559, 2017.
[91] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, C. Fernando, and K. Kavu kcuoglu.
Hierarchical representations for efﬁcient architecture s earch. In 6th
International Conference on Learning Representations, IC LR 2018,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Tra ck
Proceedings . OpenReview.net, 2018.
[92] J. Liu, M. Gong, Q. Miao, X. Wang, and H. Li. Structure lea rning
for deep neural networks based on multiobjective optimizat ion. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 29(6):2450–
2463, 2018.
[93] W. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Liu, N. Zeng, Y . Liu, and F. E. Alsaadi. A
survey of deep neural network architectures and their appli cations.
Neurocomputing , 234:11 – 26, 2017.
[94] Z. Lu, I. Whalen, V . Boddeti, Y . Dhebar, K. Deb, E. Goodma n, and
W. Banzhaf. Nsga-net: Neural architecture search using mul ti-objective
genetic algorithm. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference , GECCO 19, page 419427, New York, NY ,
USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[95] X. Luo, X. Li, Z. Wang, and J. Liang. Discriminant autoen coder for
feature extraction in fault diagnosis. Chemometrics and Intelligent
Laboratory Systems , 192:103814, 2019.
[96] M. Mandischer. A comparison of evolution strategies an d backpropa-
gation for neural network training. Neurocomputing , 42(1):87 – 117,
2002. Evolutionary neural systems.
[97] A. Martn, R. Lara-Cabrera, F. Fuentes-Hurtado, V . Nara njo, and D. Ca-
macho. Evodeep: A new evolutionary approach for automatic d eep
neural networks parametrisation. Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing , 117:180 – 191, 2018.
[98] Z. Michalewicz. How to Solve It: Modern Heuristics 2e . Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
[99] R. Miikkulainen, J. Z. Liang, E. Meyerson, A. Rawal, D. F ink,
O. Francon, B. Raju, H. Shahrzad, A. Navruzyan, N. Duffy, and
B. Hodjat. Evolving deep neural networks. CoRR , abs/1703.00548,
2017.
[100] J. F. Miller. Cartesian Genetic Programming , pages 17–34. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
[101] V . Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Anton oglou,
D. Wierstra, and M. A. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep re inforce-
ment learning. CoRR , abs/1312.5602, 2013.
[102] A. Mohamed, T. N. Sainath, G. Dahl, B. Ramabhadran, G. E . Hinton,
and M. A. Picheny. Deep belief networks using discriminativ e features
for phone recognition. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on

==== Page 19 ====
19
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 5060–5063,
2011.
[103] D. J. Montana and L. Davis. Training feedforward neura l networks
using genetic algorithms. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence - Volume 1 , IJCAI89, page
762767, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1989. Morgan Kaufmann Publi shers
Inc.
[104] G. Morse and K. O. Stanley. Simple evolutionary optimi zation can rival
stochastic gradient descent in neural networks. In Proceedings of the
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2016 , GECCO 16,
page 477484, New York, NY , USA, 2016. Association for Comput ing
Machinery.
[105] V . Nair and G. E. Hinton. Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted
boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the 27th International Con-
ference on International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML10,
page 807814, Madison, WI, USA, 2010. Omnipress.
[106] R. Negrinho and G. Gordon. Deeparchitect: Automatica lly designing
and training deep architectures, 2017.
[107] Y . Netzer, T. Wang, A. Coates, A. Bissacco, B. Wu, and A. Ng. Reading
digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learnin g.NIPS , 01
2011.
[108] A. Ororbia, A. ElSaid, and T. Desell. Investigating re current neural
network memory structures using neuro-evolution. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference , GECCO 19,
page 446455, New York, NY , USA, 2019. Association for Comput ing
Machinery.
[109] K. Pawełczyk, M. Kawulok, and J. Nalepa. Genetically- trained deep
neural networks. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference Companion , GECCO 18, page 6364, New
York, NY , USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[110] L. Peng, S. Liu, R. Liu, and L. Wang. Effective long shor t-term memory
with differential evolution algorithm for electricity pri ce prediction.
Energy , 162:1301 – 1314, 2018.
[111] R. Poli and E. Galv´ an-L´ opez. On the effects of bit-wi se neutrality
on ﬁtness distance correlation, phenotypic mutation rates and problem
hardness. In C. R. Stephens, M. Toussaint, D. Whitley, and P. F. Stadler,
editors, Foundations of Genetic Algorithms , pages 138–164, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[112] R. Poli and E. Galv´ an-L´ opez. The effects of constant and bit-
wise neutrality on problem hardness, ﬁtness distance corre lation and
phenotypic mutation rates. IEEE Trans. Evolutionary Computation ,
16(2):279–300, 2012.
[113] V . W. Porto, D. B. Fogel, and L. J. Fogel. Alternative ne ural
network training methods. IEEE Expert: Intelligent Systems and Their
Applications , 10(3):1622, June 1995.
[114] K. Price, R. Storn, and J. Lampinen. Differential Evolution-A Practical
Approach to Global Optimization , volume 141. 01 2005.
[115] S. Rahnamayan, H. R. Tizhoosh, and M. M. A. Salama. Oppo sition-
based differential evolution. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation , 12(1):64–79, 2008.
[116] E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y . Huang, and Q. V . Le. Regularize d evo-
lution for image classiﬁer architecture search. In The Thirty-Third
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AAAI 2019, The T hirty-
First Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence C onference,
IAAI 2019, The Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, EAAI 2019, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, January 27
- February 1, 2019 , pages 4780–4789. AAAI Press, 2019.
[117] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y . L. Suematsu, J . Tan, Q. V .
Le, and A. Kurakin. Large-scale evolution of image classiﬁe rs. In
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machin e Learning
- Volume 70 , ICML17, page 29022911. JMLR.org, 2017.
[118] I. Rechenberg. Evolutionsstrategien. In B. Schneide r and U. Ranft,
editors, Simulationsmethoden in der Medizin und Biologie , pages 83–
114, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1978. Springer Berlin Heidelberg .
[119] I. Rechenberg. Evolution strategy: Nature’s way of op timization. In
H. W. Bergmann, editor, Optimization: Methods and Applications,
Possibilities and Limitations , pages 106–126, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1989.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[120] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams. Learning Internal
Representations by Error Propagation , page 318362. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986.
[121] C. Ryan, J. Collins, and M. O. Neill. Grammatical evolu tion: Evolving
programs for an arbitrary language. In W. Banzhaf, R. Poli, M . Schoe-
nauer, and T. C. Fogarty, editors, Genetic Programming , pages 83–96,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[122] R. Salakhutdinov and G. Hinton. Deep boltzmann machin es. In
D. van Dyk and M. Welling, editors, Proceedings of the Twelth Inter-national Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statist ics, volume 5
ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 448–455, Hilton
Clearwater Beach Resort, Clearwater Beach, Florida USA, 16 –18 Apr
2009. PMLR.
[123] T. Salimans, J. Ho, X. Chen, S. Sidor, and I. Sutskever. Evolution
strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement lear ning, 2017.
[124] J. Schmidhuber. Deep learning in neural networks: An o verview.
Neural Networks , 61:85 – 117, 2015.
[125] H.-P. Schwefel. Numerical Optimization of Computer Models . John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., USA, 1981.
[126] F. Sehnke, C. Osendorfer, T. Rckstie, A. Graves, J. Pet ers, and
J. Schmidhuber. Parameter-exploring policy gradients. Neural Net-
works , 23(4):551 – 559, 2010. The 18th International Conference o n
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, ICANN 2008.
[127] T. Shinozaki and S. Watanabe. Structure discovery of d eep neural
network based on evolutionary algorithms. In 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICA SSP) ,
pages 4979–4983, 2015.
[128] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G . van den
Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V . Panneershe lvam,
M. Lanctot, S. Dieleman, D. Grewe, J. Nham, N. Kalchbrenner,
I. Sutskever, T. Lillicrap, M. Leach, K. Kavukcuoglu, T. Gra epel, and
D. Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networ ks
and tree search. Nature , 529(7587):484–489, Jan. 2016.
[129] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition. In Y . Bengio and Y . LeCun , editors,
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations , ICLR 2015,
San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedi ngs,
2015.
[130] D. R. So, Q. V . Le, and C. Liang. The evolved transformer . In
K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9 -15 June
2019, Long Beach, California, USA , volume 97 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research , pages 5877–5886. PMLR, 2019.
[131] J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, and C. Igel. Ma n vs. computer:
Benchmarking machine learning algorithms for trafﬁc sign r ecognition.
Neural Networks , 32:323 – 332, 2012. Selected Papers from IJCNN
2011.
[132] K. O. Stanley, J. Clune, J. Lehman, and R. Miikkulainen . Designing
neural networks through neuroevolution. Nature Machine Intelligence ,
1:24–35, 2019.
[133] K. O. Stanley and R. Miikkulainen. Evolving neural net works through
augmenting topologies. Evol. Comput. , 10(2):99127, June 2002.
[134] F. P. Such, V . Madhavan, E. Conti, J. Lehman, K. O. Stanl ey, and
J. Clune. Deep neuroevolution: Genetic algorithms are a com petitive
alternative for training deep neural networks for reinforc ement learning.
ArXiv , abs/1712.06567, 2017.
[135] M. Suganuma, M. Ozay, and T. Okatani. Exploiting the po tential of
standard convolutional autoencoders for image restoratio n by evolu-
tionary search. In J. G. Dy and A. Krause, editors, Proceedings of
the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICM L 2018,
Stockholmsm¨ assan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018 , volume 80 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 4778–4787. PMLR,
2018.
[136] M. Suganuma, S. Shirakawa, and T. Nagao. A genetic prog ramming
approach to designing convolutional neural network archit ectures. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Con ference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-18 , pages 5369–5373. International Joint
Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization, 7 201 8.
[137] Y . Sun, H. Wang, B. Xue, Y . Jin, G. G. Yen, and M. Zhang. Su rrogate-
assisted evolutionary deep learning using an end-to-end ra ndom forest-
based performance predictor. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation , 24(2):350–364, 2020.
[138] Y . Sun, X. Wang, and X. Tang. Hybrid deep learning for fa ce
veriﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence , 38(10):1997–2009, 2016.
[139] Y . Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, and G. G. Yen. Completely autom ated
cnn architecture design based on blocks. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems , 31(4):1242–1254, 2020.
[140] Y . Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, and G. G. Yen. Evolving deep con volutional
neural networks for image classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , 24(2):394–407, 2020.
[141] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi. Evolving unsupervised deep neural
networks for learning meaningful representations. IEEE Trans. Evolu-
tionary Computation , 23(1):89–103, 2019.
[142] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction .
A Bradford Book, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.

==== Page 20 ====
20
[143] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. E. Reed, D. An guelov,
D. Erhan, V . Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich. Going deeper with
convolutions. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2015, Boston, MA, USA, June 7-12, 2015 , pages
1–9. IEEE Computer Society, 2015.
[144] G. J. van Wyk and A. S. Bosman. Evolutionary neural arch itecture
search for image restoration. In 2019 International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 1–8, 2019.
[145] B. Wang, Y . Sun, B. Xue, and M. Zhang. A hybrid different ial evolution
approach to designing deep convolutional neural networks f or image
classiﬁcation. In T. Mitrovic, B. Xue, and X. Li, editors, AI 2018:
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence - 31st Australasian Joi nt Conference,
Wellington, New Zealand, December 11-14, 2018, Proceeding s, volume
11320 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 237–250. Springer,
2018.
[146] S. Wright. The role of mutation, inbreeding, crossbre eding and
selection in evolution. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Congress on Genetics , volume 1, page 356366, 1932.
[147] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. V ollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a no vel im-
age dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms. CoRR ,
abs/1708.07747, 2017.
[148] L. Xie and A. Yuille. Genetic cnn. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 1388–1397, 2017.
[149] X. Yao. Evolving artiﬁcial neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE ,
87(9):1423–1447, 1999.
[150] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis. Wide residual networks . In R. C.
Wilson, E. R. Hancock, and W. A. P. Smith, editors, Proceedings of
the British Machine Vision Conference 2016, BMVC 2016, York , UK,
September 19-22, 2016 . BMV A Press, 2016.
[151] C. Zhang, P. Lim, A. K. Qin, and K. C. Tan. Multiobjectiv e deep
belief networks ensemble for remaining useful life estimat ion in
prognostics. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems , 28(10):2306–2318, 2017.
[152] C. Zhang, K. C. Tan, H. Li, and G. S. Hong. A cost-sensiti ve deep belief
network for imbalanced classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks
Learn. Syst. , 30(1):109–122, 2019.
[153] Q. Zhao, D. Zhang, and H. Lu. A direct evolutionary feat ure extraction
algorithm for classifying high dimensional data. In Proceedings of
the 21st National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence - Vo lume 1 ,
AAAI06, page 561566. AAAI Press, 2006.
[154] Z. Zhong, J. Yan, and C. Liu. Practical network blocks d esign with
q-learning. CoRR , abs/1708.05552, 2017.
[155] H. Zhu, M. Akrout, B. Zheng, A. Pelegris, A. Jayarajan, A. Phan-
ishayee, B. Schroeder, and G. Pekhimenko. Benchmarking and
analyzing deep neural network training. In 2018 IEEE International
Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC) , pages 88–100,
2018.
[156] B. Zoph and Q. V . Le. Neural architecture search with re inforcement
learning. CoRR , abs/1611.01578, 2016.
[157] B. Zoph, V . Vasudevan, J. Shlens, and Q. V . Le. Learning transferable
architectures for scalable image recognition. CoRR , abs/1707.07012,
2018.

