==== Page 1 ====
              
City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: Garcez, A. D. & Lamb, L. C. (2023). Neurosymbolic AI: the 3rd wave. Artificial 
Intelligence Review, 56(11), pp. 12387-12406. doi: 10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w 
This is the accepted version of the paper. 
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version. 
Permanent repository link:  https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/32536/
Link to published version : https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w
Copyright: City Research Online aims to make research outputs of City, 
University of London available to a wider audience. Copyright and Moral Rights 
remain with the author(s) and/or copyright holders. URLs from City Research 
Online may be freely distributed and linked to.
Reuse: Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, 
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge. 
Provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a 
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is 
not changed in any way.  
City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/             publications@city.ac.ukCity Research Online


==== Page 2 ====
arXiv:2012.05876v2  [cs.AI]  16 Dec 2020Neurosymbolic AI: The 3rdWave
Artur d’Avila Garcez1and Lu´ıs C. Lamb2
1City, University of London, UK
a.garcez@city.ac.uk
2Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
luislamb@acm.org
December, 2020
Abstract
Current advancesin Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learn-
ing (ML) have achieved unprecedented impact across research co mmu-
nities and industry. Nevertheless, concerns about trust, safet y, inter-
pretability and accountability of AI were raised by inﬂuential thinker s.
Many have identiﬁed the need for well-founded knowledge represen ta-
tion and reasoning to be integrated with deep learning and for sound
explainability. Neural-symbolic computing has been an active area of
research for many years seeking to bring together robust learnin g in
neural networks with reasoning and explainability via symbolic rep-
resentations for network models. In this paper, we relate recent and
early research results in neurosymbolic AI with the objective of iden ti-
fying the key ingredients of the next wave of AI systems. We focus on
researchthatintegratesinaprincipledwayneuralnetwork-base dlearn-
ing with symbolic knowledgerepresentationand logicalreasoning. Th e
insights provided by 20 years of neural-symbolic computing are show n
to shed new light onto the increasingly prominent role of trust, safe ty,
interpretability and accountability of AI. We also identify promising
directions and challenges for the next decade of AI research from the
perspective of neural-symbolic systems.
Keywords : Neurosymbolic Computing; Machine Learning and Reasoning ;
Explainable AI; AI Fast and Slow; Deep Learning.
1

==== Page 3 ====
1 Introduction
Over the past decade, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and in particu lar deep learning
have attracted media attention, have become the focus of inc reasingly large
research endeavours, and have changed businesses. This led to inﬂuential
debates on the impact of AI both on academia and industry [52] , [66]. It
has been claimed that Deep Learning (DL) caused a paradigm sh ift not
only in AI, but in several Computer Science ﬁelds, including speech recogni-
tion, computer vision and image understanding, natural lan guage processing
(NLP) and machine translation [49]. The 2019 Montr´ eal AI De bate between
Yoshua Bengio and Gary Marcus, mediated by Vincent Boucher [ 52], and
the AAAI-2020 ﬁreside conversation with Economics Nobel La ureate Daniel
Kahneman, mediated by Francesca Rossi and including the 201 8 Turing
Award winners and DL pioneers Geoﬀrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio a nd Yann
LeCun, have pointedtonewperspectivesandconcernsonthef utureof AI.It
has now been argued eloquently that if the aim is to build a ric h AI system,
that is, a semantically sound, explainable and ultimately t rustworthy AI
system, one needs to include with it a sound reasoning layer i n combination
with deep learning. Kahneman corroborated this point at AAA I-2020 by
stating that ...as far as I’m concerned, System 1 certainly knows language ...
System 2 does involve certain manipulation of symbols [41]. Kahneman’s
comments at AAAI-2020 go to the heart of the matter, with para llels hav-
ing been drawn many times by AI researchers between Kahneman ’s research
on human reasoning and decision making - reﬂected in his book “Thinking,
Fast and Slow” [40] - and the so-called “AI systems 1 and 2”, wh ich would
in principle be modelled by deep learning and symbolic reaso ning, respec-
tively.1
In this paper, we place 20 years of research from the area of ne urosym-
bolic AI, known as neural-symbolic integration, in the cont ext of the recent
explosion of interest and excitement about the combination of deep learning
and symbolic reasoning. We revisit early theoretical resul ts of fundamental
relevance to shaping the latest research, and identify bott lenecks and the
most promising technical directions for the sound represen tation of learning
and reasoning in neural and symbolic systems.
1“Thinking Fast and Slow”, by Daniel Kahneman: New York: Farr ar, Straus and
Giroux, 2011, describes the author’s “... current understanding of judgement and deci-
sion making, which has been shaped by psychological discove ries of recent decades.” Of
course, the concepts of systems 1 and 2 derive from decades of research in Psychology and
Cognitive Science and a comprehensive explanation is beyon d the scope and aims of this
paper.
2

==== Page 4 ====
As well as pointing to the various related and promising tech niques
within AI, ML and Deep Learning, this article seeks to help or ganise some of
theterminology commonly usedaroundAI. Thisseems importa nt at thisex-
citing time when AI becomes popularized and more people from other areas
of Computer Science and from other ﬁelds altogether turn to A I: psychol-
ogy, cognitive science, economics, medicine, engineering and neuroscience to
name a few.
In Section 2, we position the current debate in the context of the nec-
essary and suﬃcient building blocks of AI and long-standing challenges of
variable grounding and commonsense reasoning. In Section 3 , we seek to
organise the debate, which can become vague if deﬁned around the concepts
ofneurons versus symbols , around the concepts of distributed and localist
representations. We argue for the importance of this focus o n representation
since representation precedes learning as well as reasonin g. We also analyse
a taxonomy for neurosymbolic AI proposed by Henry Kautz at AA AI-2020
from the angle of localist and distributed representations . In Section 4,
we delve deeper into a more technical discussion of current n eurosymbolic
systems and methods with their pros and cons. In Section 5, we identify
promisingapproaches and directions for neurosymbolic AI f rom the perspec-
tive of learning, reasoning and explainable AI. In Section 6 , we return to the
debate that was so present at AAAI-2020 to conclude the paper and identify
exciting challenges for the third wave of AI.
2 Neurons and Symbols: Context and Current
Debate
Deep learning researchers and AI companies have achieved gr oundbreaking
results in areas such as computer vision, game playing and na tural lan-
guage processing [49, 83] Despite the impressive results, d eep learning has
been criticised for brittleness (being susceptible to adve rsarial attacks), lack
of explainability (not having a formally deﬁned computatio nal semantics
or even intuitive explanation, leading to questions around the trustworthi-
ness of AI systems), and lack of parsimony (requiring far too much data,
computational power at training time or unacceptable level s of energy con-
sumption) [52]. Against this backdrop, leading entreprene urs and scientists
such as Bill Gates and the late Stephen Hawking have voiced co ncerns about
AI’s accountability, impact on humanity and the future of th e planet [74].
The need for a better understanding of the underlying princi ples of AI has
become generally accepted. A key question however is that of identifying
3

==== Page 5 ====
the necessary and suﬃcient building blocks of AI , and how systems
that evolve automatically based on machine learning can be d eveloped and
analysed in eﬀective ways that make AI trustworthy.
Turing award winner and machine learning theory pioneer Les lie Valiant
pointed out that a key challenge for Computer Science is the p rincipled
combination of reasoning and learning, building a rich sema ntics and robust
representation language for intelligent cognitive behavi our [92]. In Valiant’s
words:“The aim is to identify a way of looking at and manipulating com -
monsense knowledge that is consistent with and can support w hat we consider
to be the two most fundamental aspects of intelligent cognit ive behaviour: the
ability to learn from experience and the ability to reason fr om what has been
learned. We are therefore seeking a semantics of knowledge t hat can com-
putationally support the basic phenomena of intelligent be haviour.” Neural-
symbolic computing seeks to oﬀer such a principled way of stud ying AI
by establishing provable correspondences between neural m odels and logical
representations [4, 23, 16, 20, 12]. In neural-symbolic com putation, logic can
be seen as a language with which to compile a neural network, a s discussed
in more detail later in this paper.2
Thesuccess of deep learningalong with anumberof drawbacks identiﬁed
more recently such as a surprising lack of robustness [88] ha s prompted a
heated debate around the value of symbolic AI by contrast wit h neural
computation and deep learning. A key weakness, as Bengio et a l. state in a
recent article, isthat current machine learning methods seem weak when they
are required to generalize beyond the training distributio n, which is what is
often needed in practice [6]. In the recent AI debate between Yoshua Bengio
and Gary Marcus, Marcus argues the case for hybrid systems [5 2] and seeks
to deﬁne what makes an AI system eﬀectively hybrid:
“Many more drastic approaches might be pursued. Yoshua Ben-
gio, for example, has madea numberof sophisticated suggest ions
for signiﬁcantly broadening the toolkit of deep learning, i nclud-
ing developing techniques for statistically extracting ca usal re-
lationships through a sensitivity to distributional chang es and
techniques for automatically extracting modular structur e, both
2Over the years, the terminology “neural-symbolic” (integr ation, computing, system,
etc.) was used predominantly by the research community to in dicate a combination of
two paradigms: neural and symbolic AI, see e.g. [20] More rec ently, the more colloquial
terminology “neuro-symbolic” (AI, approach, system, etc) has become more commonly
used in publications and the printed press. In this paper, we use the term “neural-
symbolic” when referring to the combination of paradigms, a nd we introduce the term
“neurosymbolic” as a single word to symbolise the coming of a ge of a new area of research.
4

==== Page 6 ====
of which I am quite sympathetic to. But for reasons that will
become apparent, I worry that even these sorts of tools will n ot
suﬃce on their own for getting us to robust intelligence. Ins tead,
I will propose that in order to get to robust artiﬁcial intell igence,
we need to develop a framework for building systems that can
routinelyacquire, represent, andmanipulateabstractkno wledge,
with a focus on building systems that use that knowledge in th e
service of building, updating, and reasoning over complex, inter-
nal models of the external world.”
Key to the appreciation of the above statement by Marcus, als o advo-
cated in [46] and [28], is an understanding of the representa tional value of
the symbolic manipulation of variables in logic and the comp ositionality of
language. It is probably fair to assume that the next decade w ill be devoted
to researching speciﬁc methods and techniques which seek to address the
above issues of representation, robustness and extrapolat ion. Such tech-
niques will be drawn from a broader perspective of neurosymb olic machine
learning and AI which embraces hybrid systems, including:
(a) Variable Grounding and Symbol Manipulation: Embracing
hybrid systems requires the study of how symbols may emerge a nd become
useful in the context of what deep learning researchers have termeddisen-
tanglement . Once symbols emerge (which may happen at diﬀerent levels
of abstraction, ideally within a modular network architect ure), it may be
more productive from a computational perspective to refer t o such symbols
and manipulate (i.e. compute) them symbolically rather tha n numerically.
Once it becomes known that a complex neural network serves to calculate,
for example, the sum of two handwritten digits provided as in put images, or
equally that a complex neural network has learned the functi onf(x) =x,
then it is probably the case that one would prefer such a calcu lation to be
precise and to extrapolate well to any value of x. This is easily achieved
symbolically. Reasoning, in many cases too, is preferred to be precise and
not approximate, although there are cases where approximat e or human-like
reasoning become more eﬃcient than logical deduction [34].
(b) Commonsense and Combinatorial Reasoning: Another key
distinction that is worth making explicit refers to the diﬀer ence between
commonsense knowledge and expert knowledge. While the form er is ap-
proximate and diﬃcult to specify, the latter strives to be as precise as pos-
sible and to prove its properties. We believe that, once equi pped with a
solid understanding of the value of hybrid systems, variabl e manipulation
and reasoning, the debate will be allowed to progress from th e question of
5

==== Page 7 ====
symbols versus neurons to the research question:
How to compute and learn with symbols, inside or outside of a
neural network, and how eﬃciently computationally, in a pre cise
or approximate reasoning setting?
Foundational work about neurosymbolic models and systems s uch as
[16, 17, 20] will be relevant as we embark in this journey. In [ 20], corre-
spondences are shown between various logical-symbolic sys tems and neural
networkmodels. Thecurrentlimitsofneuralnetworksasess entially apropo-
sitional3system are also evaluated. In a nutshell, current neural net works
arecapable ofrepresentingpropositional logic, nonmonot oniclogic program-
ming, propositional modal logic and fragments of ﬁrst-orde r logic, but not
full ﬁrst-order or higher-order logic. This limitation has prompted the re-
cent work in the area of Logic Tensor Networks (LTN) [79, 53, 9 5] which, in
order to use the language of full ﬁrst-order logic with deep l earning, trans-
lates logical statements into the loss function rather than into the network
architecture. First-order logic statements are therefore mapped onto dif-
ferentiable real-valued constraints using a many-valued l ogic interpretation
in the interval [0,1]. The trained network and the logic beco me communi-
cating modules of a hybrid system, instead of the logic compu tation being
implemented by the network. This distinction between havin g neural and
symbolic modules that communicate in various ways and havin g transla-
tions from one representation to the other in a more integrat ive approach
to reasoning and learning should be at the centre of the debat e in the next
decade.4
3The current limitation of neural networks, which John McCar thy referred to as propo-
sitional ﬁxation , is of course based on the current simple models of neuron. Al though
this may be about to change through important work on underst anding the mind and
brain which may produce richer models of neural networks [30 ], one should note that the
recent state-of-the-art results obtained by deep networks using large amounts of data are
predicated on the notion of a simple neuron [49, 78].
4Having worked for two decades on integrative neurosymbolic AI and more recently on
hybrid neural-symbolic systems, we are acutely aware of the tension between principled
integration and practical value and application . Scientiﬁcally, there is obvious value in the
study of the limits of integration to improve our understand ing of the power of neural
networks using the well-studied structures and algebras of computer science logic. When
seeking to solve a speciﬁc problem, however, one may prefer t o take, for example, an
existing knowledge-base and ﬁnd the most eﬀective way of usi ng it alongside the tools
available from deep learning and software agents. As a case i n point, take the uniﬁcation
algorithm, which is an eﬃcient way of computing symbolic sub stitutions. It is notoriously
diﬃcult to implement in neural networks. One may, of course, wish to study how to
6

==== Page 8 ====
Among the recent neurosymbolic systems, one can identify qu ite a va-
riety in range from integrative to hybrid systems: [51] can b e seen as a
loosely-coupled hybrid approach whereimage classiﬁcatio n is combined with
reasoning from text data; [50] oﬀers further integration by a llowing a node
in the probabilistic inference tree of a symbolic ML system ( ProbLog) to be
replaced by a neural network; [79] takes another step toward s integration
by using a diﬀerentiable many-valued logic in the loss functi on of a neural
network (in LTN, theorem proving is left for the symbolic cou nterpart of
the system); [54] proposes to perform diﬀerentiable uniﬁcat ion and theorem
proving inside the neural network.
Out of the systems and techniques now available, some more in tegrative
others more loosely-coupled, a common question clearly eme rges:what are
the fundamental building blocks, the necessary and suﬃcient com-
ponents of neurosymbolic AI? For example, is the use of an attention
layer necessary [96] or can it be replaced by richer structur e such as graph
networks [47]? Is the explicit use of probability theory nec essary, and in
this case inside the network or at the symbolic level or both? Is there a real
computational gain in combinatorial problem solving by the orem proving
using neural networks or is this task better left to the devic es of a symbolic
system? One thing is now very clearer: there is great practic al value in the
use of gradient-based learning on distributed representat ions[45].
In this paper, we also seek to bring attention to another perh aps less
attractive but equally if not more relevant question of adop ting adistributed
versus a localist representation . In a localist representation the relevant
concepts have an associated identiﬁer. This is typically a d iscrete represen-
tation. By contrast, in a distributed representation, conc epts are denoted
by vectors with continuous values. This is therefore an issu e of which repre-
sentation is adequate or most appropriate. Symbolic machin e learning takes
a localist approach while neural networks are distributed, although neural
networks can also be localist [57]. The next section will be d evoted to the
pros and cons of distributed and localist representations.
Forms of Neurosymbolic Integration: WithinneurosymbolicAIone
may identify systems that translate and encode symbolic knowledge in the set
of weights of a network [27], orsystems that translate and encode symbolic
knowledge into the loss function of the network [79]. The neural-symbolic
cycletranslating symbolic knowledge into neural networks and vi ce-versa
perform logical uniﬁcation exactly or approximately using a neural network, although at
present the most practical way may be to adopt a hybrid approa ch whereby uniﬁcation is
computed symbolically.
7

==== Page 9 ====
oﬀers a kind of compiler for neural networks5, whereby prior knowledge is
translated into the network, and a decompiler whenever symb olic descrip-
tions are extracted from a trained network. The compiler can either set-up
the network’s initial weights akin to a one-shot learning al gorithm which
is guided by knowledge, or deﬁne a knowledge-based penalty o r constraint
which is added to the network’s loss function.
A third form of integration has been proposed in [6] which is b ased on
changing therepresentation of neuralnetworks intofactor graphs. Thevalue
of this particular representation deserves to be studied. C hange of repre-
sentation is a worthwhile endeavour on its own right in that i t may help
us understand the strengths and limitations of diﬀerent neur al models and
network architecture choices. This third form of integrati on, however, pro-
poses to create an intermediate representation with factor graphs in between
neural networks and logical representations.
A note about terminology: In [58], Turing award winner Judea Pearl
oﬀersacritiqueofmachinelearningwhich,unfortunately, c onﬂatestheterms
machine learning anddeep learning . Similarly, when Geoﬀrey Hinton refers
tosymbolic AI , the connotation of the term tends to be that of expert sys-
tems dispossessed of any ability to learn. The use of the term inology is in
need of clariﬁcation. Machine learning is not conﬁned to ass ociation rule
mining, c.f. the body of work on symbolic ML and relational le arning [55]
(the diﬀerences to deep learning being the choice of represen tation, localist
logical rather than distributed, and the non-use of gradien t-based learning
algorithms). Equally, symbolic AI is not just about product ion rules written
by hand. A proper deﬁnition of AI concerns knowledge represe ntation and
reasoning, autonomous multi-agent systems, planning and a rgumentation,
as well as learning. In what follows, we elaborate on the abov e misunder-
standings one at a turn.
Symbolic Machine Learning and Deep Learning: In [58], Pearl
proposes a hierarchy consisting of three levels: associati on, intervention and
counterfactual reasoning, and claims that ML is only capabl e of achieving
association. A neurosymbolic or purely symbolic ML system s hould be ca-
pable of satisfying the requirements of all three of Pearl’s levels, e.g. by
mapping the neural networks onto symbolic descriptions. It is fair to say in
relation to Pearl’s top level in the hierarchy - counterfact ual reasoning - that
5In the study of programming languages it is accepted that diﬀ erent levels of abstrac-
tion and diﬀerent representations are needed - e.g. java byt ecode and a java program -
for the purpose of eﬃciency, system maintenance, user inter action and veriﬁcation. We
argue that in AI, neural-symbolic systems will provide equa lly important forms of abstract
representation.
8

==== Page 10 ====
progress has only been made recently and that much research i s still needed,
although good progress is being made towards the extraction of local, mea-
surable counterfactual explanations from black box ML syst ems [99]. Once
a neural network has been endowed with a symbolic interpreta tion, one has
no reason to doubt the ability of a neural system to ask what ifquestions.
In fact, the very algorithm for extracting symbolic logic de scriptions of the
formA→Bfrom trained neural networks [15] uses a form of interrogati on
of the network akin to the intervention of Bayesian models ad vocated by
Pearl. We argue therefore that a more important question is r epresenta-
tional: which representation is most eﬀective, deep network s or Bayesian
networks? While attempting to answer this question, as well as consider-
ing the demands of the practical applications, it is importa nt to recognise
that neural networks oﬀer a concrete model of computation, on e which can
be implemented eﬃciently by message passing or propagation of activation,
diﬀerently from Bayesian networks, and trained by diﬀerentia ble learning
algorithms. A limitation of having such a concrete computat ional model,
however, may be a diﬃculty of pure neural networks at modelli ng rich forms
of abstraction which are not dependent on the data (images, a udio, etc.)
but which exist instead at a higher conceptual level. We shal l return to this
challenge later in the paper.
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning in AI: Complex prob-
lem solving using AI requires a much richer language than tha t of expert
systems as suggested by Hinton [36]. AI requires a language t hat can go
well beyond Horn clauses to include relational knowledge, t ime and other
modalities, negation by failure, variable substitution an d quantiﬁcation, etc.
In statistical relational learning, the use of ﬁrst-order l ogic does not require
instantiating (or grounding) all possible combinations of the values of the
variables (e.g. XandYin a relation R(X,Y)). Inrelational reasoning
with neural networks, borrowing from the ﬁeld of relational databases, it is
typically the grounded (and therefore propositional rathe r than ﬁrst-order)
representation that is learned and reasoned about. For the a voidance of
confusion, we would term this latter task relationship learning . Two other
equally important attributes of a rich language for complex problem solving
arecompositionality , in the sense of the compositionality of the semantics
of a logical language, and modularity. It is worth noting tha t in the original
paper about deep learning [37], before much of the attention turned to con-
volutional networks, modularity was a main objective of the proposed semi-
supervised greedy learning of stacks of restricted Boltzma nn machines. The
recently-proposed stacked capsule autoencoders [44] and n eural-symbolic
approaches such as Logic Tensor Networks [79] as well as othe r weakly-
9

==== Page 11 ====
supervised approaches revive the important stance of modul arity in neural
computation. Earlier eﬀorts towards modularity in neurosym bolicAI can be
traced back to the system for Connectionist Modal and Intuit ionistic Logics
[18, 19]. Modal logics with a possible-world semantics have been shown to
oﬀer a natural approach to modularity in neural computation [ 20].
With AI understood as a superset of ML which in turn is a supers et
of DL, we shall argue for the combination of statistical mach ine learning,
knowledge representation (KR) and logical reasoning. By lo gical reasoning,
weshallmeannotonlyclassical logicreasoningwiththetra ditionaltrue-false
interpretation, but non-classical reasoning including no nmonotonic, modal
and many-valued logics. In the study of the interplay betwee n learning and
reasoning and how best to implement it (e.g. in a continuous o r discrete
system), it shall become clear that universal quantiﬁcatio n is easy to reason
about and hard to learn using neural networks; existential q uantiﬁcation is
easy to learn and harder to reason about in a symbolic system. Such lim-
itations on either side of the spectrum will dictate a few pra ctical design
decisions to be discussed in this paper. In a nutshell, we claim that neu-
rosymbolic AI is well placed to address concerns of computat ional eﬃciency,
modularity, KR + ML and even causal inference . More researchers than
ever on both sides of the connectionist-symbolic AI divide a re now open to
studying and learning about each others’ tools and techniqu es. This was not
the case until very recently. The use of diﬀerent terminology alongside some
preconceived opinion or perhaps idleness, fuelled by the wa y that science
normally rewards research that is carried out in silos, have prevented earlier
progress. The fact that this is now changing will lead to fast er progress in
the overall ﬁeld of AI. It is reassuring to see it happening in this way: the
neural information processing community have shown the val ue of neural
computation in practice, which has attracted the curiosity of great minds
from symbolic AI. We hope that further collaboration in neur osymbolic AI
will help solve many of the issues which are still outstandin g.
3 Distributed and Localist Representation
Theintegration oflearningandreasoningthroughneurosym bolicsystemsre-
quiresabridgebetween localist anddistributedrepresent ations. Thesuccess
of deep learning indicates that distributed representatio ns with gradient-
based methods are more adequate than localist ones for learn ing and opti-
mization. At the same time, the diﬃculty of neural networks a t extrapola-
tion, explainability and goal-directed reasoning point to the need of a bridge
10

==== Page 12 ====
between distributed and localist representations for reas oning.
Neural-symbolic computing has been an active area of resear ch seeking
to establish such a bridge for several years [4, 26, 16, 20, 35 , 43, 80, 93].
In neural-symbolic computation, knowledge learned by a neu ral network
can be represented symbolically. Reasoning takes place eit her symbolically
or within the network in distributed form. Despite their diﬀe rences, both
the symbolic and connectionist paradigms share common char acteristics,
oﬀering beneﬁts when put together in a principled way (see e.g . [17, 20, 84,
93]). Change of representation also oﬀers a way of making sens e of the value
of diﬀerent neural models and architectures with respect to w hat is a more
formal and better understood area of research: symbolic log ic.
Neural network-based learning and inference under uncerta inty have
been expected to address the brittleness and computational complexity
of symbolic systems. Symbolism has been expected to provide additional
knowledge in the form of constraints for learning [23, 32], w hich amelio-
rate neural network’s well-known catastrophic forgetting or diﬃculty with
extrapolation in unbounded domains or with out-of-distrib ution data. The
integration of neural models with logic-based symbolism is expected there-
fore to provide an AI system capable of explainability, tran sfer learning and
a bridge between lower-level information processing (for e ﬃcient perception
and pattern recognition) and higher-level abstract knowle dge (for reasoning,
extrapolation and planning).
Suppose that a complex neural network learns a function f(x). Once
this function is known, or more precisely a simpliﬁed descri ption of f(x)
is known, computationally it makes sense to use such a repres entation, not
least for the sake of extrapolation, as exempliﬁed earlier w ith thef(x) =x
function. One could argue that at this point the neural netwo rk has become
superﬂuous. Symbol manipulation (once symbols have been di scovered) is
key to further learning at new levels of abstraction. This is exempliﬁed well
in [52] with the use of the concept of a container which may be learned from
images.
Among the most promising recent approaches to neural-symbo lic inte-
gration, so-called embedding techniques seek to transform symbolic repre-
sentations into vector spaces where reasoning can take plac e through matrix
computations over distance functions [7, 85, 87, 80, 75, 11, 26, 100, 24, 70].
In such systems, learning of an embedding is carried out usin g backpropa-
gation [98, 73]. Most of the research in this area is focused o n the art of
representing relational knowledge such as P(X,Y) in a distributed neural
network. Thelogical predicate Prelatingvariables XandYcouldbeusedto
denote, for example, the container relation between two objects in an image
11

==== Page 13 ====
such as a violin and its case, which are in turndescribed by th eir embedding.
This process is known as relational embedding [7, 75, 85, 87] . For represent-
ing more complex logical structures such as ﬁrst order-logi c formulas, e.g.
∀X,Y,Z: (P(X,Y)→Q(Y,Z)), a system named Logic Tensor Networks
(LTN) [80] was proposed by extending Neural Tensor Networks (NTN) [85],
a state-of-the-art relational embedding method. Related i deas are discussed
formally in the context of constraint-based learning and re asoning in [32].
Two powerful concepts of LTN are (1) the grounding of logical concepts
onto tensors with the use of logical statements which act as c onstraints
on the vector space to help learning of an adequate embedding , and (2)
the modular and diﬀerentiable organisation of knowledge wit hin the neural
network which allows querying and interaction with the syst em. Any user-
deﬁned statement in ﬁrst-order logic can be queried in LTN wh ich checks
if that knowledge is satisﬁed by the trained neural network. With such
a tool, a user can decide when to keep using a distributed conn ectionist
representation or switch to a localist symbolic representa tion. This last
aspect brings the question of the emergence of symbols and th eir meaning
in neural networks to the fore: recent work using the weakly s upervision of
auto-encoders and ideas borrowed from disentanglement hav e been showing
promise in the direction of learning relevant concepts whic h can in turn be
re-used symbolically [10]. Related work seeking to explore the advantages of
distributed representations of logic include [11], which i s based on stochastic
logic programs, [26, 100, 24], with a focus on inductive prog ramming, and
[70], based on diﬀerentiable theorem proving.
A taxonomy for neurosymbolic AI: with an understanding of the
role of localist and distributed approaches, we now provide an analysis of
Henry Kautz’s taxonomy for neurosymbolic AI [42], which was introduced
at AAAI 2020: In Kautz’s taxonomy, a Type 1neural-symbolic integration
is standard deep learning, which some may argue is a stretch, but which is
included by Kautz to note that the inputand outputof aneural network can
be made of symbols, e.g. text in the case of language translat ion or question
answering applications. Type 2are hybrid systems such as DeepMind’s Al-
phaGo and other systems where the core neural network is loos ely-coupled
with a symbolic problem solver such as Monte Carlo tree searc h.Type 3
is also a hybrid system whereby a neural network focusing on o ne task (e.g.
object detection) interacts via its input and output with a s ymbolic system
specialising in a complementary task (e.g. query answering ). Examples in-
clude the neuro-symbolic concept learner [51] and deepProb Log [50]. In a
Type 4 neural-symbolic system, symbolic knowledge is compiled in to the
training set of a neural network. Kautz oﬀers [48] as an exampl e (to be
12

==== Page 14 ====
read alongside the critique in [21]). An approach to learn an d reason over
mathematical constructions is proposed in [2], and in [1] a l earning archi-
tecture that extrapolates to harder symbolic maths reasoni ng problems is
introduced. We would also include in Type 4 other tightly-coupled but lo-
calist neural-symbolic systems where various forms of symb olic knowledge,
not restricted to if-thenrules, is translated into the initial architecture and
set of weights of a neural network, in some cases with guarant ees of correct-
ness [20], as well as Logical Neural Networks, where the key c oncept is to
create a 1-to-1 correspondence between neurons and the elem ents of logical
formulas [69]. Type 5 are those tightly-coupled but distributed neural-
symbolic systems where a symbolic logic rule is mapped onto a n embedding
which acts as a soft-constraint (a regularizer) on the netwo rk’s loss function.
Examples of these include Logic Tensor Networks [79] and Ten sor Product
Representations [39], referred to in [13] as tensorization methods. Finally,
aType 6 system should be capable, according to Kautz, of true symbolic
reasoning inside a neural engine . This is what one could refer to as a fully-
integrated system. Early work in neural-symbolic computin g has achieved
this (see [20] for a historical overview). Some Type 4 systems are also ca-
pable of it, but using a localist rather than a distributed re presentation and
using much simpler forms of embedding than Type 5 systems. Kautz adds
that aType 6 system should be capable of combinatorial reasoning , possi-
bly by using an attention schema to achieve it eﬀectively. Rec ent eﬀorts in
this direction include [8, 47, 63], although a fully-ﬂedged Type 6system for
combinatorial reasoning does not exist yet.
Further research into Type 5 systems will likely focus on the provision
of rich embeddings and the study of the extent to which such em beddings
may correspondeither to pre-deﬁnedpriorknowledge or to le arned attention
mechanisms. Further research onto Type 6systems is highly relevant to the
theory of neural-symbolic computing, as discussed in more d etail in the next
section. In practical terms, a tension exists between eﬀecti ve learning and
sound reasoning, which may prescribe the use of a more hybrid approach
ofTypes 3 to 5 , or variations thereof such as the use of attention with
tensorization. Orthogonal to the above taxonomy, but mostl y associated
thus far with Type 4, is the study of the limits of reasoning within neural
networks, which was already of interest since the ﬁrst eﬀorts by Valiant at
providing a foundation for computational learning [91]. Re cently, this has
beenthefocusofexperimental analysesofdeeplearningins ymbolicdomains
[89], and it should include the study of ﬁrst-order logic, hi gher-order, many-
valued and non-classical logic.
13

==== Page 15 ====
4 Neurosymbolic Computing Systems: Technical
Aspects
In symbolic ML, symbols are manipulated as part of a discrete search for
the best representation to solve a given classiﬁcation or re gression task.
The most well-known form of symbolic ML are decision trees, b ut richer
forms of representation exist, in particular relational re presentations us-
ing ﬁrst-order logic to denote concepts ranging over variab lesX,Y,Z...
within a (possibly inﬁnite) domain, e.g. ∀X,Y,Z:grandfather (X,Y)←
(father(X,Z)∧mother(Z,Y)) (the father of someone’s mother is that per-
son’s grandfather). Probabilistic extensions of this appr oach seek to learn
probability distributions for such logical rules (or funct ional programs) as
a way of accounting for uncertainty in the training data. Wor k in these
areas is probably best characterised by the conference seri es on Inductive
Logic Programming [65, 56], Statistical Relational Learni ng [68, 25, 3, 81]
and Probabilistic or Inductive Programming [77].
All of the excitement and industrial interest in the past 10 y ears sur-
rounding AI and Machine Learning, though, have come from an e ntirely
separate type of ML: deep learning. Deep learning uses neura l networks
and stochastic gradient descent to search through a continu ous space, also
to solve a given classiﬁcation or regression task, but creat ing vector-based,
distributed representations, rather than logical or symbo lic ones. For this
reason, such systems are called sub-symbolic.
Whilst it is clear now that AI will not be achieved by building expert
systems by hand from scratch (GOFAI), but by learning from la rge collec-
tions of data, one would be misguided to conﬂate all of machin e learning
or dismiss the role of symbolic logic, which remains the most powerful and
adequate representation for the analysis of computational systems. As put
simply by Moshe Vardi “Logic is the Calculus of Computer Science” and,
diﬀerently fromstatistics, machinelearningcan onlyexist withinthecontext
of a computational system.
Speciﬁcally, deep neural networks will require a language f or description,
as also advocated by Leslie Valiant. Neural network-based AI is distributed
and continuous , deals well withlarge-scale multimodalnoisyperceptuald ata
such as text and audio, handles symbol grounding better than symbolic sys-
tems since concepts are grounded on feature vectors, and is b y deﬁnition a
computational model, frequently implemented eﬃciently us ing propagation
of activation and tensor processing units.6Symbolic AI is generally localist
6Contrast with Bayesian networks which may be ineﬃcient as a c omputational model
14

==== Page 16 ====
and discrete, capable of sophisticated reasoning , including temporal, epis-
temic and nonmonotonic reasoning, planning, extrapolatio n and reasoning
by analogy. Neurosymbolic AI has shown that non-classical l ogics, in par-
ticular many-valued logics, oﬀer an adequate language for de scribing neural
networks [79, 69]. As the ﬁeld of AI moves towards agreement o n the need
for combining the strengths of neural and symbolic AI, it sho uld turn next
to the question: what is the best representation for neurosymbolic
AI?
To answer this question, one shouldseek to beinformed by dev elopments
in neural-symbolic computing of the past 20 years, and to eva luate in a pre-
cise manner the methods, algorithms and applications of neu rosymbolic AI.
For instance, it is known that current recurrent neural netw orks are capable
of computing thelogical consequences of propositional mod al logic programs
and other forms of non-classical reasoning and fragment of ﬁ rst order logic
programs [5, 20]. Obtaining results for full ﬁrst-order log ic has not been
possible thus far, which reinforces John McCarthy’s claim t hat neural net-
worksareessentially propositional. Intermsofapplicati ons ofAI,thesehave
been largely focused on perceptual or pattern matching task s such as image
and audio classiﬁcation. Recent eﬀorts at question answerin g and language
translation as well as protein folding classiﬁcation have h ighlighted the im-
portance of the neurosymbolic approach. The ideal type of ap plication for a
neurosymbolic system, however, should be that where abstra ct information
is required to be reasoned about at diﬀerent levels beyond tha t what can
be perceived from data alone, such as complex concept learni ng whereby
simpler concepts are required to be organised systematical ly as part of the
deﬁnition of a higher concept. Such a conceptual structure, which is still to
be discovered using data, also requires knowledge which is g overned by gen-
eral rules and exceptions to the rules , allowing for sound generalization in
the face of uncertainty but also capable of handling speciﬁc cases (the many
exceptions, which may be important for the sake of robustnes s although
not necessarily statistically relevant). Similarly, it se ems hard to achieve
true relational learning using only neural networks. A usef ul but simple
example can be borrowed from the area of Inductive Logic Prog ramming:
learning the concept of ancestor from a few examples of the mother,father
andgrandparent relations. Groundingthe entire knowledge-base in this cas e
would not be productive since the chain of reasoning to deriv e the concept
ofancestor may be arbitrarily large depending on the data available. In
this case, one is better oﬀ learning certain relations by jumping to conclu-
frequently requiring simpliﬁcation of graphs into tree-ba sed representations.
15

==== Page 17 ====
sions, such as e.g.∀X,Y:father(X,Y)→ancestor (X,Y), from relatively
few examples and using similarity measures to infer new rela tions, at the
same time deriving symbolic descriptions which can be used f or reasoning
beyond the distribution of the data, allowing in turn for ext rapolation. In
this example, once a description for ancestor is obtained, one should be able
to reason about arbitrarily long chains of family relations hips. Notice that
key to this process is the ability to revise the conclusion ta ken once new
evidence to the contrary of what has been inferred is made ava ilable from
the data. In other words, the reasoning here is nonmonotonic [14].
In summary, at least two options exist for neurosymbolic AI .
In Option 1, symbols are translated into a neural network and one seeks to
perform reasoning within the network. In Option 2, a more hyb rid approach
is taken wherebythenetwork interacts with asymbolicsyste m forreasoning.
A third option, which would not require a neurosymbolic appr oach, exists
when expert knowledge is made available, rather than learne d from data,
and one is interested in achieving precise sound reasoning a s opposed to
approximate reasoning. We discuss each option brieﬂy next.
In Option 1, it is desirable still to produce a symbolic descr iption of the
network for the sake of improving explainability (discusse d later) or trust,
or for the purpose of communication and interaction with the system. In
Option 2, by deﬁnition, a neurosymbolic interface is needed . This may
be the best option in practice given the need for combining re asoning and
learning in AI, and the apparent diﬀerent nature of both tasks (discrete
and exact versus continuous and approximate). However, the value of dis-
tributed approximate reasoning using neural networks is on ly starting to be
investigated as in the case of diﬀerentiable neural computer s [33] and neural
theorem proving [97], although early eﬀorts did not prove to b e promising
in terms of practical eﬃciency [62, 38, 82]. In Option 3, a rea sonable re-
quirement nowadays would beto compare results with deep lea rning and the
other options. This is warranted by the latest practical res ults of deep learn-
ing showing that neural networks can oﬀer, at least from a comp utational
perspective, better results than purely symbolic systems.
Inpractice, thechoice betweenOptions1and2abovemay depe ndonthe
application at hand and the availability of quality data and knowledge. A
comparatively small number of scientists will continue to s eek to make sense
of the strengths and limitations of both neural and symbolic approaches.
On this front, the research advances faster on the symbolic s ide due to the
clear hierarchy of semantics and language expressiveness a nd rigour that
exists at the foundation of the area. By contrast, little is k nown about the
expressiveness of the latest deep learning models in relati on to established
16

==== Page 18 ====
neural models beyond data-driven comparative empirical ev aluations. As
advocated by Paul Smolensky, neurosymbolic computing can h elp map the
latest neural models into existing symbolic hierarchies, t hus helpingorganise
the extensively ad-hoc body of work in neural computation.
5 Challenges for the Principled Combination of
Reasoning and Learning
For a combined perspective on reasoning and learning, it is u seful to note
that reasoning systems may have diﬃculties computationall y when reason-
ing with existential quantiﬁers and function symbols, such as∃xP(f(x)).
Eﬃcient logic-based programming languages such as Prolog, for example,
assume that every logical statement is universally quantiﬁ ed. By contrast,
learning systems may have diﬃculty when adopting universal quantiﬁcation
over variables. To be able to learn a universally quantiﬁed s tatement such
as∀xP(x), a learning systems needs in theory to be exposed to all poss i-
ble instances of x. This simple duality points to a possible complementary
nature of the strengths of learning and reasoning systems. T o learn eﬃ-
ciently∀xP(x), a learning system needs to jump to conclusions , extrapolat-
ing∀xP(x) given an adequate amount of evidence (the number of example s
or instances of x). Such conclusions may obviously need to be revised over
time in the presence of new evidence, as in the case of nonmono tonic logic.
In this case, a statement of the form ∀xP(x) becomes a data-dependent gen-
eralization, which is not to be assumed equivalent to a state ment∀yP(y), as
done in classical logic. Such statements may have been learn ed from diﬀer-
ent samplesof theoverall potentially inﬁnitepopulation. Ontheother hand,
a statement of the form ∃xP(x) is trivial to learn from data by identifying
at least one case P(a), although reasoning from ∃xP(x) is more involved,
requiring the adoption of an arbitrary constant bsuch that P(b) holds.
It is now accepted that learning takes place on a continuous s earch space
of (sub)diﬀerentiablefunctions; reasoningtakes placeing eneral onadiscrete
space as in the case of goal-directed theorem proving. The mo st immediate
way of beneﬁting from the combination of reasoning and learn ing, there-
fore, is to adopt a hybrid approach whereby a neural network t akes care of
the continuous search space and learning of probabilities, while a symbolic
system consisting of logical descriptions of the network us es discrete search
to achieve extrapolation and goal-directed reasoning.7As hinted already in
7The investigation of continuous reasoning or discrete lear ning approaches is of course
worth pursuing too. There have been a number of recent develo pments with relevant
17

==== Page 19 ====
this paper, a property of early deep learning may hold the key to the above
hybrid perspective: modularity. In the original paper on de ep learning [37],
a modular system is proposed consisting of a stack of restric ted Boltzmann
machines (RBMs). The extraction of symbolic descriptions f rom each RBM
is thus made considerably easier [90]. Each RBM learns a join t probability
distribution while their symbolic description reﬂects the result of learning
without manipulating probabilities explicitly, thus avoi ding the complexity
of probabilistic inference found in symbolic AI.
In [90], an eﬃcient algorithm is presented that extracts pro positional
rules enriched with conﬁdence values from RBMs, similar to w hat was pro-
posed with Penalty Logic for Hopﬁeld networks in [62]. When R BMs are
stacked onto a deep belief network, however, the modular ext raction of com-
positional rules may be accompanied by a compounding loss of accuracy, in-
dicating that knowledge learned by the neural network might not have been
as modular as one would have wished. Systems that impose a mor e explicit
separation of modules may hold the answer to this problem, in particular
systems where unsupervised learning is combined with weakl y-supervised
classiﬁcation at distinct levels of abstraction, such as wi th the use of varia-
tional auto-encoders [86] or generative adversarial netwo rks [31]. In the area
of Reinforcement Learning too, deep learning systems combi ned with sym-
bolic rules were ﬁrst proposed in [29], and there is promise o f considerable
progress with the use of neurosymbolic approaches especial ly in the case of
model-based Reinforcement Learning.
We therefore do not advocate the adoption of monoblock networks with
millions of parameters. Even though this may be how the human brain
works, loss of modularity seems to be, at least at present fro m a compu-
tational perspective, a price that is too high to pay. Modula rity remains a
fundamentally relevant property of any computing system.
Applications of Neurosymbolic AI: One major way of driving ad-
vances in AI continues to bethrough challenging applicatio ns, beit language
translation, computer games or protein folding competitio ns. Language un-
derstanding in the broadest sense of the term, including que stion-answering
that requires commonsense reasoning, oﬀers probably the mos t complete
application area for neurosymbolic AI. As an example, consi der this ques-
tion and its commonsense answer from the COPA data set [72]: I t got dark
outside. What happened as a result? (a) Snowﬂakes began to fa ll from
results in both of these directions [71, 50, 100, 64]. Comput ational complexity issues
remain a challenge though for the combination of ﬁrst-order logic and probabilities in
symbolic AI.
18

==== Page 20 ====
the sky; (b) The moon became visible in the sky. Another very r elevant
application domain is planning, which requires learning an d reasoning over
time, as in this example adapted from [76]: Daniel picks up th e milk; Daniel
goes to the bedroom; Daniel places the milk on the table; Dani el goes to
the bathroom. Where is the milk? Finally, an area where machi ne learning
and knowledge representation and reasoning have complemen tary strengths
isknowledge engineering , including knowledge-base completion and data-
driven ontology learning. In this area of application, rich and large-scale
symbolic representations exist alongside data, including knowledge graphs
to be combined with neural networks such as graph neural netw orks.
A commonthreadacross theabove examples andapplications i stheneed
for modelling cause and eﬀect with the use of implicit information. This
requires learning of general rules and exceptions to the rul es that evolve
over time. In such cases, deep learning alone fails when pres ented with
examples from outside the distribution of the training data . This motivated
Judea Pearl’s critique of Machine Learning [58] which we sha ll address in
some detail next.
In Pearl’s 3-level causal hierarchy (association, interve ntion and coun-
terfactuals), association involves purely statistical re lationships. In Pearl’s
words,observing a customer who buys toothpaste makes it more likel y that
this customer will also buy ﬂoss. Such associations can be in ferred directly
from the observed data using standard conditional probabil ities and condi-
tional expectation or other standard non-probabilistic ML model. Questions
asked at this level require no causal information and, for th is reason, this
layer is placed at the bottom of the hierarchy. Answering suc h questions is
the hallmark of current machine learning methods . Pearl’s hierarchy may
unintentionally give the impression that machine learning is conﬁned to this
bottom layer, since no reference is made in [58] to the body of work on
symbolic machine learning which is unequivocally not conﬁn ed to associ-
ation rules [55, 70]. Pearl continues: the second level, intervention, ranks
higher than association because it involves not just seeing what is but chang-
ing what we see. A typical question at this level would be: wha t will happen
if we double the price? Such a question cannot be answered fro m sales data
alone, as it involves a change in customers’ choices in react ion to the new
pricing. These choices may diﬀer substantially from those ta ken in previous
price-raising situations, unless we replicate precisely t he market conditions
that existed when the price reached double its current value . At this level
there is a need for inference that can reach beyond the data di stribution.
Finally, the top level invokes counterfactuals, a mode of re asoning that re-
verts to the philosophers David Hume and John Stuart Mill and that has
19

==== Page 21 ====
beengiven computational semantics in thepasttwo decades. A typical ques-
tion in the counterfactual category is: what if I had acted diﬀerently? , thus
necessitating retrospective reasoning.
As noted earlier in the paper, neural-symbolic computing ca n implement
all three of Pearl’s levels. Once a symbolic description of t he formif A then
Bhas been associated with a neural network, surely the idea of intervention
[9] and counterfactual reasoning become possible, c.f. for example, [99] on
the measurement and extraction of counterfactual knowledg e from trained
neural networks.
Our conclusion from the above discussion is that in neurosym-
bolic AI :
•Knowledgeshouldbegroundedontovector representations f or eﬃcient
learning from data based on message passing in neural networ ks as an
eﬃcient computational model.
•Symbolsshouldbecomeavailableasaresultofqueryingandk nowledge
extraction from trained networks, and oﬀer a rich descriptio n language
at an adequate level of abstraction, enabling inﬁnite uses of ﬁnite
means, but also compositional discrete reasoning at the symbolic level
allowing for extrapolation beyond the data distribution.
•The combination of learning and reasoning should oﬀer an impo rtant
alternative to the problem of combinatorial reasoning by le arning to
reduce the number of eﬀective combinations, thus producing s impler
symbolic descriptions as part of the neurosymbolic cycle.
As an example, consider an Autoencoder which learns in unsup ervised
fashion to maximise mutual information between pixel input s and a latent
code or some other embeddingconsisting of fewer relevant fe atures than pix-
els. Suppose that this neural network has learned to ﬁnd regu larities such
as e.g.when it sees features of type A, it also sees features of type B but
not features of type C . At this point, such regularities can be converted into
symbols:∀xA(x)→(∃yB(y)∧¬∃zC(z)). As a result of the use of variables
x,y,zat the symbolic level, one can extrapolate the above regular ity to any
features of type A,BorC.8A symbolic description is also a constraint
on the neurosymbolic cycle. It is generalised from data duri ng learning and
8As another example, consider a neural network trained to cla ssify graphs into those
which contain a Hamiltonian cycle and those which do not, giv en a ﬁxed range of available
graph sizes as training examples. Contrast this network wit h a symbolic description of
the deﬁnition of Hamiltonian cycle which therefore applies to graphs of any size.
20

==== Page 22 ====
it certainly includes an ability to ask what-if questions. R easoning about
what has been learned allows for extrapolation beyond the da ta distribu-
tion, and ﬁnally the symbolic description can serve as prior knowledge (as
a constraint) for further learning in the presence of more da ta, which in-
cludes the case of knowledge-based transfer learning [90]. Further training
can now take place at the perceptual or sub-symbolic level, o r at the con-
ceptual or symbolic level. This is when having a distributed (sub-symbolic)
and a localist (symbolic or sub-symbolic) representation b ecomes relevant.
Assuming that probabilities are dealt with at the sub-symbo lic distributed
level (as in RBMs) and that the symbolic level is used for a mor e qualitative
representation of uncertainty in the form of general rules w ith exceptions,
we avoid the complications of having to deal simultaneously with discrete
and continuous learning of rules and probabilities.
A Note about Explainable AI (XAI): Knowledge extraction is an
integral part of neural-symbolic integration and a major in gredient towards
explainability of black-box AI systems. The main diﬃculty i n XAI is the
eﬃcient extraction of compact and yet correct and complete k nowledge. It
can be argued that a large knowledge-base is not more explain able than a
large neural network.9Although this may be true at the level of the entire
model explainability, in the case of local explanations, i. e. explanations
of individual cases, a knowledge-base is certainly more exp lainable than
a neural network because it oﬀers a trace (a proof history) sho wing why
an outcome was obtained, as opposed to simply showing how pro pagation
of activation through the network has led to that outcome. It is a main
goal of knowledge extraction algorithms to seek to derive co mpact relevant
representations from large complex networks. This is not al ways possible
to achieve eﬃciently, in which case one may need to resort to h aving local
explanations only.
Many aspects of XAI are being investigated at present. Some o f the
research questions include: Is the explanation intended fo r an expert or lay
person? Is an explanation required because one does not trus t the system,
expected a diﬀerent outcome/would like to induce a diﬀerent ou tcome, or
would like to question the normative system that has led to th e outcome?
Is an explanation intended to try and improve system perform ance, reduce
bias/increase fairness, or is it the case that one would simp ly like to be able
tounderstandthedecisionprocess? Theanswerstotheseque stionsarelikely
9The now apparent lack of explainability of Random Forests, w hich amount to a collec-
tion of Decision Trees and therefore propositional logic fo rmulas with probabilities, serves
as a good reminder that XAI is not conﬁned to neural networks.
21

==== Page 23 ====
to be application and user speciﬁc. While some stakeholders may be happy
without an explanation, as in the case of a patient faced with a medical
diagnosis, in most cases some form of explanation is needed t o improve
system performance or trust. In some cases, producing an exp lanation is in
fact the main goal of the system as in the application of ML to r esponsible
gambling in [59, 60].
Early eﬀorts at knowledge extraction in neurosymbolic AI as a form of
explanation were always evaluated w.r.t. ﬁdelity: a measur e of the accuracy
of the extracted knowledge in relation to the neural network rather than
the data, or in today’s terminology, a measure of the accurac y of the stu-
dentmodel w.r.t. the teachermodel. High ﬁdelity is therefore fundamental
whenever a student model is to be claimed to oﬀer a good explana tion for
a (more complex) teacher model. Unfortunately, many recent XAI meth-
ods have abandoned ﬁdelity as a measure of the quality of an ex planation,
making it easier for an apparently excellent explanation to be simply wrong,
in that it may not be at all an explanation of the ML model in que stion.
This is particularly problematic for very popular local XAI methods such
as LIME [67]. Local explanation systems currently in use by c onsultancy
ﬁrms and available in many AI toolboxes can be shown to achiev e very low
levels of ﬁdelity. Without high ﬁdelity results, an apparen tly perfectly good
explanation produced by an XAI system is likely not to be an ex planation of
the underlying ML system which it is expected to explain. In [ 99] a way of
measuring ﬁdelity of local methods was introduced which we a rgue should
be adopted by all XAI methods. The same paper exempliﬁes how L IME’s
explanations may achieve very low ﬁdelity.
Even better than ﬁdelity, if an XAI method can be shown to be so und
[15] then it will provably converge to a high-ﬁdelity. Sound ness however is
normally associated with exponential complexity and so in p ractice a mea-
sure of ﬁdelity may be all that is available. Knowledge extra ction should
also allow communication between users and the ML system. Cu rrent in-
teractive ML is insuﬃcient to the extent that it proposes to r eplace sound
statistical evaluation by subjective user evaluation. Com munication with
the system implies an ability to ask questions (query the sys tem) and check
one’s understanding (obtain a rationale for the outcome). T he user can
then either agree with the outcome and the rationale, agree w ith the out-
come but not the rationale, or disagree with the outcome, thu s providing
usefulfeedback ordirect intervention tochange thesystem andits outcomes,
probably through the system’s symbolic description langua ge in the case of
neurosymbolic AI.
Knowledge extraction also oﬀers a way of identifying and corr ecting for
22

==== Page 24 ====
bias in the ML system, which is a serious and present problem [ 25]. As a
result of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), ma ny companies
have decided as a precaution to remove protected variables s uch as gender
and race from their ML system. It is well known, however, that proxies exist
in the data which will continue to bias the outcome so that the removal of
such variables may serve only to hide a bias that otherwise co uld have been
revealed via knowledge extraction [61]. Current AI-based d ecision support
systems process very large amounts of data which humans cann ot possibly
evaluate in a timely fashion. Thus, even with a so-called hum an-in-the-loop
approach where technology domain experts or end-users may b ecome ac-
countable to the decisions, domain experts or end-users are likely to quickly
feel progressively less capable of over-riding recommenda tions which were
deemed accurate and based on so much more data than they can ha ndle.
Even when such AI systems are portrayed as decision support s ystems, the
current reality is that in order to function well with Big Dat a, the system
must execute a form of triage of the data to be presented to the expert, thus
only oﬀering partial information to the decision maker. With out knowledge
extraction and a capacity for system communication, the dec ision maker
will, by the very nature of the automated data triage, not be i n control.
Finally, the simple extraction of rules from trained networ ks may be insuﬃ-
cient. Onemay needtoextractalso conﬁdence values soastobeabletorank
extracted rules. This oﬀers a system that knows when it does not know . As
a simple example, consider a typical neural network trained to classify the
well-known MNIST hand-written digits from 0 to 9. Faced with an image
of an obvious non-digit such as an image of a cat, this system m ust surely
provide a very low conﬁdence value to any of the outcomes 0 to 9 . The use
of adversarial approaches alongside knowledge extraction for robustness has
a contribution to make here. In summary, for the many reasons discussed
above, neurosymbolic AI with a measurable form of knowledge extraction is
a fundamental part of XAI.
6 AAAI 2020, a Turning Point
We now return to the debate around System 1 and System 2 that mo tivated
the introduction of this paper and provide a short summary of the AAAI
2020 conference. Not only did the AAAI 2020 conference conta ined a larger
than usual number of papers proposing to combine neural netw orks and
symbolic AI, there were a number of keynote addresses and deb ates directly
relevant to neural-symbolic computing, notably:
23

==== Page 25 ====
(1) Fireside conversation between 2019 Turing award winner s, Francesca
Rossi, and Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman on thinking fast a nd slow and
its relation to neural networks and symbol manipulation;
(2) The Third AI Summer, Henry Kautz’s AAAI 2020 Robert S. Eng elmore
Memorial Award Lecture, which introduced a taxonomy for neu rosymbolic
computing;
(3)TheDirectorofMIT/IBMWatsonAIlaboratoryDavidCoxIA AIkeynote
address, which focused on neurosymbolic AI and application s on vision and
language understanding, machine commonsense, question an swering, argu-
mentation and XAI.
At the Turing award session and ﬁreside conversation with Da niel Kah-
neman, there was a clear convergence towards integrating sy mbolic reason-
ing and deep learning. Kahneman made his point clear by stati ng that on
top of deep learning, a System 2 symbolic layer is needed. Thi s is reassur-
ing for neurosymbolic AI going forward as a single more cohes ive research
community that can agree about deﬁnitions and terminology, rather than a
community divided as AI has been up to now.
AI is still in its infancy, so perhaps some of the early disput es can be un-
derstood. The debate around symbols versus neurons is unlikely to produce
concrete results unless it prompts researchers on either si de of the divide to
learn about each others’ methods and techniques. As the sayi ng goes, “all
vectors are symbols, but not all symbols are vectors”.
Kahneman made the point that System 1 (S1) and System 2 (S2) ar e
terms not coined by him which have a long history in psycholog y research
[40], andthathepreferstouse implicitversusexplicitthinkingandreasoning
[41]. He argued that S1 (as the intuitive parallel system) is capable of
understanding language, in contradiction with Yoshua Beng io’s account of
deep learning’s S1 and S2. Kahneman also stated that S2 (as th e sequential
deliberative system) is most probably performing symbol ma nipulation as
argued by Gary Marcus in [52]. In his “next decade of AI” paper , Marcus
arguesstronglyinfavour ofhybridsystems, andseekstodeﬁ newhatmakes a
systemhybrid. Marcus’sdeﬁnitionisimportantinasmuchas amainproblem
of deep learning is a lack of deﬁnition. By contrast, Yann LeC un’s recent
attempt at deﬁning deep learning, also presented at the AAAI 2020 debate
[41], falls short of what is a useful formal deﬁnition. For ex ample, LeCun’s
deﬁnition fails to distinguish deep and shallow networks. A ll attempts to
create suchabridgebetween S1andS2areat thispoint useful andshouldbe
commended given our state of lack of understandingof how the brain works.
For example, attempts to create diﬀerentiable reasoning are useful, although
we would require an important distinction be made, whether t he purpose
24

==== Page 26 ====
is to achieve brain-like systems or to create robust AI. It is possible that
these two goals may soon lead into two quite separate researc h directions:
those who seek to understand and model the brain and those who seek to
achieve or improve AI. Maybe from that perspective the ﬁeld i s too broad
andwillrequirefurtherspecialization. Acommonchalleng e thatwillpersist,
however, is embodied in the question: how symbolic meaning emerges
from large networks of neurons?
Perhaps an important choice for neurosymbolic AI is the choi ce between
combinatorial (exact) reasoning and commonsense, approxi mate reasoning.
While learning is always approximate, reasoning can be appr oximate or pre-
cise. In a neurosymbolic system, it is possible to envisage t he combination
of eﬃcient approximate reasoning (jumping to conclusions) with more delib-
erative and precise or normative symbolic reasoning [94]. C onclusions may
be revised through learning from new observations and via co mmunication
with the system through knowledge extraction and precise re asoning. One
might expect commonsense to emerge as a result of this proces s of reason-
ing and learning, although the modelling and computing of co mmonsense
knowledge continues to be another challenge.
From a practical perspective, a recipe for neurosymbolic AI might be:
learning is carried out from data by neural networks which us e gradient-
descent optimization; eﬃcient forms of propositional reas oning can also be
carried out by the network, c.f. neural-symbolic cognitive reasoning [20];
rich ﬁrst-order logic reasoning and extrapolation needs to be done symbol-
ically from descriptions extracted from the trained networ k; once symbolic
meaning has emerged from the trained network, symbols can be manipu-
lated easily by the current computer and can serve as constra ints for further
learning from data as done in [79]; this establishes a practi cal form of neu-
rosymboliccycle for learningandreasoningwhichis feasib lewiththecurrent
technology.
Ingredients of neurosymbolic AI: Narrow AI based on neural net-
works is already successful and useful in practice with big d ata. There is
obvious value in this as shown by the ﬂourishing of the Machin e Learning
community and the growing NeurIPS conference community. Da ta scien-
tists will do this work. In this paper, however, we have been d iscussing
the science of what constitutes the fundamental ingredient s of an intelligent
system [92]. One such ingredient, current results show, is g radient-based op-
timization used by deep learning to handle large amounts of d ata, but other
ingredients are surely needed. At the AAAI-2020 ﬁreside con versation, a
question was asked about the beauty and value of abstract com pact sym-
bolic representations such as F=maore=mc2. Yoshua Bengio’s answer
25

==== Page 27 ====
was to point out that these must have come out of someone’s bra in, Isaac
Newton and Albert Einstein to be precise. As Stephen Mugglet on noted at
another debate on the future of AI, his goal is to shorten the w ait for the
next Newton or Einstein, or Alan Turing. Muggleton’s bet is o n the use
of higher-order logic representations and meta-interpret ive learning.10With
this example we seek to illustrate that among highly respect ed researchers
the choice of ingredients may vary widely, from the need for m uch more
realistic models of the brain to the need for ever more sophis ticated forms
of higher-order computation. With the neural-symbolic met hodology, the
goal is to develop neural network models with a symbolic inte rpretation.
The key is how to learn representations neurally and make the m available
for use symbolically (as for example when an AI system is aske d to explain
itself). In this paper, we have argued for modularity as an im portant ingre-
dient, allowing one to refer to large parts of the network by t he composition
of symbols and relations among them. Having an adequate lang uage for
describing knowledge encoded in such networks is another im portant ingre-
dient. We have argued for the use of ﬁrst-order logic as this l anguage, as a
canonical form of representation, but also other forms of no n-classical rep-
resentation such as nonmonotonic and modal logic and logic p rogramming.
Onceacomplexnetworkcanbedescribedsymbolically, ideal lyinanabstract
compact form as in e=mc2, any style of deductive reasoning becomes pos-
sible. Reasoning is obviously another fundamental ingredi ent, either within
or outside the network, exact or approximate. Finally, symb olic meaning
can serve to improve performanceof S1. In other words, symbo ls which have
been learned, derived or even invented can act as constraint s on the large
network and help improve learning performance as part of a po sitive cycle
of learning and reasoning. Constraint satisfaction as part of the interplay
between learning and reasoning is therefore another ingred ient.
Summary and Future Directions: With the above ﬁve ingredients of
neurosymbolic AI - gradient-based optimization, modulari ty, symbolic lan-
guage, reasoningandconstraint satisfaction -thereaderw illnotbesurprised
to know that there are many outstanding challenges for neuro symbolic AI.
First, no agreement exists on the best way of achieving the ab ove combina-
tion of language and structure, of knowledge acquired by age nts acting in an
environment andthecorrespondingreasoning that an agent m ustimplement
to achieve its goals. It is highly desirable, though, that th e study of how to
10In a recent paper, Pedro Domingos has shown that gradient des cent achieves in eﬀect
a superposition of the training examples, similar to a data- dependent form of kernel [22],
which in our view highlights the importance of the structure of neural networks, and not
just their function.
26

==== Page 28 ====
achieve the combination of (symbolic) language and (neural ) structure be
principled, in that both language and structure should be fo rmally speciﬁed
with theorems proven about their correspondence or lack the reof. As done
in the case of Noam Chomsky’s language hierarchy, proofs are needed of
the capability of diﬀerent neural architectures at represen ting various log-
ical languages. Proofs of correspondence have been shown be tween neural
networks and propositional, nonmonotonic, modal, epistem ic and temporal
logic in [20]. Similar proofs are required for ﬁrst-order an d higher-order
logic.
Henry Kautz spoke of 6 types of neurosymbolic AI and said that what
is important next is to work out which speciﬁc technique is be st [42]. Kautz
made a distinction between expert knowledge and commonsens e knowledge
and noted that one should not necessarily want to backpropagate through
expert knowledge . Inthiscase, exactreasoningisneeded ` a laneural-symbolic
computing with knowledge extraction. An equally valid argu ment exists for
diﬀerentiable reasoning in the case of commonsense knowledg e. The use
of probabilistic languages or higher-order (functional or logical) languages
may also have a central role in the technical debate, includi ng on the best
place for probability theory: in S1 or S2 or both? In the meant ime, we
say: translate back and forth between representations, tak e a principled
approach, adopt a language as a constraint on the structure, seek to provide
explanations, combine reasoning and learning, and repeat.
We also set out three immediate challenges for neurosymboli c AI, each
capable of spinning out multiple research strands which may become area
deﬁning in the next decade:
•Challenge 1: First-order logic and higher-order knowledge extraction
from very large networks that is provably sound and yet eﬃcie nt, ex-
plains the entire model and local network interactions and a ccounts
for diﬀerent levels of abstraction.
•Challenge 2: Goal-directed commonsense and eﬃcient combin atorial
reasoning about what has been learned by a complex deep netwo rk
trained on large amounts of multimodal data.
•Challenge 3: Human-network communication as part of a multi -agent
system that promotes communication and argumentation prot ocols
between the user and an agent that can ask questions and check her
understanding.
Whether or not an AI system truly understands what it does is another
27

==== Page 29 ====
recurring theme in the current debate. A point made recently by Geoﬀ Hin-
ton on this issue was that: “the goal posts keep changing. Bef ore, if an AI
system could translate a text, it would have been deemed as ha ving under-
stood the text, or if the system could sustain a conversation or describe the
scene on an image. Now, none of these count as proper understa nding”.
One may argue that it is the very deﬁnition of AI and the recent success of
deep learning itself that have been responsible for this sit uation. Perhaps,
instead of proper “understanding”, a more forgiving approa ch might be to
specify comprehensibility tests of the kind used in schools to evaluate the
performance of students on various subjects, including e.g . foreign language
comprehensibility tests, as proposed by Stephen Muggleton . Neurosymbolic
AI is in need of standard benchmarks and associated comprehe nsibility tests
whichcouldinaprincipledwayoﬀerafaircomparativeevalua tionwithother
approaches with a focus on learning from fewer data, reasoni ng about ex-
trapolation, computational complexity and energy consump tion. Justas the
ﬁeld of AI progressed when challenging applications were se t such as chess
playing, roboticfootball, self-drivingvehicles andprot ein folding, neurosym-
bolic AI should beneﬁt from a similar challenge and benchmar k being set
by the AI community speciﬁcally for the next decade.
References
[1] F. Arabshahi, Z. Lu, S. Singh, and A. Anandkumar. Memory a ug-
mented recursive neural networks. CoRR, abs/1911.01545, 2019.
[2] F. Arabshahi, S. Singh, and A. Anandkumar. Combining sym bolic
expressions and black-box function evaluations in neural p rograms. In
ICLR, 2018.
[3] S.H. Bach, M. Broecheler, B. Huang, and L. Getoor. Hinge- loss markov
random ﬁelds and probabilistic soft logic. CoRR, abs/1505.04406, 2015.
[4] S. Bader and P. Hitzler. Dimensions of neural-symbolic i ntegration:
a structured survey. In S. Artemov, H. Barringer, A. d’Avila Garcez,
L. Lamb, and J. Woods, editors, We Will Show Them! Essays in Hon-
our of Dov Gabbay , 2005.
[5] S. Bader, P. Hitzler, S. H¨ olldobler, and A. Witzel. The c ore method:
Connectionist model generation for ﬁrst-order logic progr ams. In
B. Hammer and P. Hitzler, editors, Perspectives of Neural-Symbolic
28

==== Page 30 ====
Integration , volume 77 of Studies in Computational Intelligence , pages
205–232. Springer, 2007.
[6] Y. Bengio, T. Deleu, N. Rahaman, N.R. Ke, S. Lachapelle, O . Bila-
niuk, A. Goyal, and C.J. Pal. A meta-transfer objective for l earning to
disentangle causal mechanisms. CoRR, abs/1901.10912, 2019.
[7] A. Bordes, J.Weston, R. Collobert, andY. Bengio. Learni ngstructured
embeddings of knowledge bases. In AAAI’11 , 2011.
[8] C. Cameron, R. Chen, J. Hartford, and K. Leyton-Brown. Pr edicting
propositional satisﬁability via end-to-end learning. In AAAI, 2020.
[9] R. Caruana, Y. Lou, J. Gehrke, P. Koch, M. Sturm, and N. Elh adad.
Intelligible models for healthcare: Predicting pneumonia risk and hos-
pital 30-day readmission. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGKDD ,
pages 1721–1730. ACM, 2015.
[10] J. Chen and K. Batmanghelich. Weakly supervised disent anglement by
pairwise similarities. CoRR, abs/1906.01044, 2019.
[11] W.W. Cohen, F. Yang, and K. Mazaitis. Tensorlog: Deep le arning
meets probabilistic dbs. CoRR, abs/1707.05390, 2017.
[12] A.S. d’Avila Garcez, T. Besold, L. de Raedt, P. F¨ oldi´ a k, P. Hitzler,
T. Icard, K. K¨ uhnberger, L.C. Lamb, R. Miikkulainen, and D. Silver.
Neural-symbolic learning and reasoning: Contributions an d challenges.
InAAAI Spring Symposia , 2015.
[13] A.S. d’Avila Garcez, M. Gori, L. Lamb, L. Seraﬁni, M. Spr anger,
and S. Tran. Neural-symbolic computing: An eﬀective methodo logy
for principled integration of machine learning and reasoni ng.FLAP,
6(4):611–632, 2019.
[14] A.S. d’Avila Garcez and G. Zaverucha. The connectionis t inductive
learningandlogicprogrammingsystem. Appl. Intelligence , 11(1):59–77,
1999.
[15] A.S. d’Avila Garcez, K. Broda, and D.M. Gabbay. Symboli c knowledge
extraction from trained neural networks: A sound approach. Artif.
Intell., 125(1-2):155–207, 2001.
[16] A.S. d’Avila Garcez, K. Broda, and D.M. Gabbay. Neural-Symbolic
Learning Systems: Foundations and Applications . Springer, 2002.
29

==== Page 31 ====
[17] A.S. d’Avila Garcez and L.C. Lamb. Reasoning about time and knowl-
edge in neural symbolic learning systems. In NIPS, pages 921–928,
2003.
[18] A.S. d’AvilaGarcez, L.C.Lamb, andD.M. Gabbay. Connec tionist com-
putations of intuitionistic reasoning. Theor. Comput. Sci. , 358(1):34–
55, 2006.
[19] A.S. d’Avila Garcez, L.C. Lamb, and D.M. Gabbay. Connec tionist
modal logic: Representing modalities in neural networks. Theoretical
Computer Science , 371(1-2):34–53, 2007.
[20] A.S. d’Avila Garcez, L.C. Lamb, and D.M. Gabbay. Neural-Symbolic
Cognitive Reasoning . Springer, 2009.
[21] E. Davis. The use of deep learning for symbolic integrat ion: A review
of (Lample and Charton, 2019). CoRR, abs/1912.05752, 2019.
[22] P. Domingos. Everymodellearnedbygradient descent is approximately
a kernel machine, 2020.
[23] I. Donadello, L. Seraﬁni, and A. S. d’Avila Garcez. Logi c tensor net-
worksforsemanticimageinterpretation. In IJCAI-17 , pages1596–1602,
2017.
[24] H. Dong, J. Mao, T. Lin, C. Wang, L. Li, and D. Zhou. Neural logic
machines. 2019.
[25] V. Eubanks. Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Proﬁle, Po-
lice, and Punish the Poor . St. Martin’s Press, Inc., USA, 2018.
[26] R. Evans and E. Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rul es from noisy
data.JAIR, 61:1–64, 2018.
[27] M. Fran¸ ca, G. Zaverucha, and A.S. d’Avila Garcez. Fast relational
learning using bottom clause propositionalization with ar tiﬁcial neural
networks. Mach. Learning , 94(1):81–104, 2014.
[28] M. Garnelo and M. Shanahan. Reconciling deep learning w ith sym-
bolic artiﬁcial intelligence: representing objects and re lations.Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences , 29:17 – 23, 2019.
[29] M. Garnelo, K. Arulkumaran, and M. Shanahan. Towards de ep sym-
bolic reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1609.05518, 2016.
30

==== Page 32 ====
[30] A. Gidon, T. Zolnik, P. Fidzinski, F. Bolduan, A. Papout si, P. Poirazi,
M. Holtkamp, I. Vida, and M.E. Larkum. Dendritic action pote n-
tials and computation in human layer 2/3 cortical neurons. Science,
367(6473):83–87, 2020.
[31] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. War de-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio. Generative adversari al nets. In
Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K. Q. W ein-
berger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 27, pages 2672–2680. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
[32] M. Gori. Machine Learning: A Constraint-Based Approach . Morgan
Kaufmann, 1st edition, 2018.
[33] A. Graves, G. Wayne, M. Reynolds, T. Harley, I. Danihelk a,
A. Grabska-Barwinska, S.G. Colmenarejo, E. Grefenstette, T. Ra-
malho, J. Agapiou, A. Puigdom` enech Badia, K.M. Hermann, Y. Zwols,
G. Ostrovski, A. Cain, H. King, C. Summerﬁeld, P. Blunsom,
K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Hassabis. Hybrid computing using a ne ural
network with dynamic external memory. Nature, 538(7626):471–476,
2016.
[34] J.Y. Halpern. Reasoning about uncertainty . MIT Press, 2005.
[35] B. Hammer and P. Hitzler, editors. Perspectives of Neural-Symbolic
Integration . Springer, 2007.
[36] G.E. Hinton. Connectionist symbol processing - prefac e.Artif. Intell. ,
46(1-2):1–4, 1990.
[37] G.E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y. Teh. A fast learning alg orithm for
deep belief nets. Neural Comput. , 18(7):1527–1554, July 2006.
[38] S. H¨ olldobler and F.J. Kurfess. CHCL - A connectionist inference sys-
tem. InBertramFronh¨ oferandGrahamWrightson, editors, Paralleliza-
tion in Inference Systems, International Workshop, Dagstuhl Castle,
Germany, December 17-18, 1990, Proceedings , volume 590 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 318–342. Springer, 1990.
[39] Q.Huang, P.Smolensky, X.He, L.Deng, andD.Wu. Aneural -symbolic
approach to natural language tasks. CoRR, abs/1710.11475, 2017.
[40] D. Kahneman. Thinking, Fast and Slow . Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
New York, 2011.
31

==== Page 33 ====
[41] D. Kahneman, G. Hinton, Y. Bengio, Y. LeCun, and
F. Rossi. AAAI-20 ﬁreside chat with Daniel Kahneman.
https://vimeo.com/390814190?ref=tw-share , 2020. Accessed:
2020-11-20.
[42] H. Kautz. The Third AI Summer, AAAI Robert S. En-
gelmore Memorial Lecture, Thirty-fourth AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, New York, NY, February 10, 2020.
https://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/kautz/talks/Kautz%20 Engelmore%20Lecture.pdf .
Accessed: 2020-11-15.
[43] R. Khardon and D. Roth. Learning to reason. J. ACM, 44(5), 1997.
[44] A.R. Kosiorek, S. Sabour, Y.W. Teh, and G.E. Hinton. Sta cked capsule
autoencoders. In NeurIPS 2019 , pages 15486–15496, 2019.
[45] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G.E. Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks. Commun. ACM , 60(6):84–90,
May 2017.
[46] B.M. Lake, T.D. Ullman, J.B. Tenenbaum, and S.J. Gershm an. Build-
ing machines that learn and think like people. CoRR, abs/1604.00289,
2016.
[47] L.C. Lamb, A.S. d’Avila Garcez, M. Gori, M. Prates, P. Av elar, and
M.Y. Vardi. Graph neural networks meet neural-symbolic com puting:
A survey and perspective. In IJCAI 2020 , pages 4877–4884, 2020.
[48] G. Lample and F. Charton. Deep learning for symbolic mat hematics.
InICLR, 2020.
[49] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton. Deep learning. Nature,
521(7553):436–444, 2015.
[50] R. Manhaeve, S. Dumancic, A. Kimmig, T. Demeester, and
L. De Raedt. Deepproblog: Neural probabilistic logic progr amming.
InNIPS. 2018.
[51] J. Mao, C. Gan., P. Kohli, J. Tenenbaum, and J. Wu. The Neu ro-
Symbolic Concept Learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences
from natural supervision. ICLR, 2019.
[52] G. Marcus. The next decade in AI: Four steps towards robu st artiﬁcial
intelligence. CoRR, abs/1801.00631, 2020.
32

==== Page 34 ====
[53] G. Marra, F. Giannini, M. Diligenti, and M. Gori. Lyrics : A general
interface layer to integrate logic inference and deep learn ing. InJoint
European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Disco very
in Databases , pages 283–298. Springer, 2019.
[54] P. Minervini, M. Bosnjak, T. Rockt¨ aschel, S. Riedel, a nd E. Grefen-
stette. Diﬀerentiable reasoning on large knowledge bases an d natural
language. CoRR, abs/1912.10824, 2019.
[55] S. Muggleton. Inductive logic programming. New Generation Comput-
ing, 8(4):295–318, 1991.
[56] S. Muggleton and D. Lin. Meta-interpretive learning of higher-order
dyadic datalog: Predicate invention revisited. In IJCAI, pages 1551–
1557, 2013.
[57] M. Page. Connectionist modelling in psychology: A loca list manifesto.
BBS, 23(4):443–512, 2000.
[58] J.Pearl. Theseven toolsof causal inference, withreﬂe ctionsonmachine
learning. Commun. ACM , 62(3):54–60, February 2019.
[59] C. Percy, A.S. d’Avila Garcez, S. Dragicevic, M. Fran¸ c a, G. Slabaugh,
and T. Weyde. The need for knowledge extraction: Understand ing
harmful gambling behavior with neural networks. In ECAI 2016 , pages
974–981.
[60] C. Percy, A.S. d’Avila Garcez, S. Dragicevic, and S. Sar kar. Lessons
learned from problem gambling classiﬁcation: Indirect dis crimination
and algorithmic fairness. In Proc. AAAI Fall Symposium, AI for Social
Good, Washington DC, USA , November, 2020.
[61] D. Pessach and E. Shmueli. Algorithmic fairness. CoRR,
abs/2001.09784, 2020.
[62] G. Pinkas. Reasoning, nonmonotonicity and learning in connection-
ist networks that capture propositional knowledge. Artif. Intell. ,
77(2):203–247, 1995.
[63] M.O.R. Prates, P.H.C. Avelar, H. Lemos, L.C. Lamb, and M .Y. Vardi.
Learning to Solve NP-Complete Problems: A Graph Neural Netw ork
for Decision TSP. In AAAI, 2019.
33

==== Page 35 ====
[64] L. De Raedt, S. Dumanˇ ci´ c, R. Manhaeve, and G. Marra. Fr om statisti-
cal relational to neuro-symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence. InIJCAI, pages
4943–4950, 2020.
[65] L. De Raedt, K. Kersting, S. Natarajan, and D. Poole. Statistical Rela-
tional Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Logic, Probability, and Comp utation. Syn-
thesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence andMachine Lear ning. Morgan
& Claypool, 2016.
[66] S. Raghavan. 2020 AI predictions from IBM research.
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2019/12/2020-ai- predictions/ ,
2019. Accessed: 2020-09-20.
[67] M.T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin. “Why Should I Tr ust
You?”: Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proc. 22nd ACM
SIGKDD , pages 1135–1144. ACM, 2016.
[68] M. Richardson and P. Domingos. Markov logic networks. Mach. Learn. ,
62(1-2):107–136, 2006.
[69] R. Riegel, A.G. Gray, F.P.S. Luus, N. Khan, N. Makondo, I .Y.
Akhalwaya, H. Qian, R. Fagin, F. Barahona, U. Sharma, S. Ikba l,
H. Karanam, S. Neelam, A. Likhyani, and S.K. Srivastava. Log ical
neural networks. CoRR, abs/2006.13155, 2020.
[70] T. Rockt¨ aschel and S. Riedel. Learning knowledge base inference with
neural theorem provers. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Au-
tomated Knowledge Base Construction , pages 45–50, San Diego, CA,
June 2016. ACL.
[71] T. Rockt¨ aschel andS.Riedel. End-to-enddiﬀerentiabl e proving. CoRR,
abs/1705.11040, 2017.
[72] M. Roemmele, C.A. Bejan, and A.S. Gordon. Choice of Plau sible Alter-
natives: An Evaluation of Commonsense Causal Reasoning. In AAAI
Spring Symposium on Logical Formalizations of Commonsense R eason-
ing, Stanford University, March 2011.
[73] D.E. Rumelhart, G.E. Hinton, and R.J. Williams. Learni ng Represen-
tations by Back-propagating Errors. Nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[74] S.J. Russell, S. Hauert, R. Altman, and M. Veloso. Ethic s of artiﬁcial
intelligence: Four leading researchers share their concer ns and solutions
34

==== Page 36 ====
for reducing societal risks from intelligent machines. Nature, 521:415–
418, 2015.
[75] A. Santoro, D. Raposo, D. Barrett, M. Malinowski, R. Pas canu,
P. Battaglia, and T. Lillicrap. A simple neural network modu le for
relational reasoning. In NIPS, 2017.
[76] I. Schlag and J. Schmidhuber. Learning to reason with th ird-order
tensor products. CoRR, abs/1811.12143, 2018.
[77] U. Schmid, S.H. Muggleton, andR. Singh. Approachesand applications
of inductive programming (Dagstuhl seminar 17382). Dagstuhl Reports ,
7(9):86–108, 2017.
[78] J.Schmidhuber. Deeplearninginneuralnetworks: Anov erview.Neural
Networks , 61:85–117, 2015.
[79] L. Seraﬁni and A.S. d’Avila Garcez. Logic tensor networ ks: Deep
learning and logical reasoning from data and knowledge. CoRR,
abs/1606.04422, 2016.
[80] L. Seraﬁni and A.S. d’Avila Garcez. Learning and reason ing with logic
tensor networks. In AI*IA, pages 334–348, 2016.
[81] X. Shao, A. Molina, A. Vergari, K. Stelzner, R. Peharz, T . Liebig, and
K. Kersting. Conditional sum-product networks: Imposing s tructure
on deep probabilistic architectures. CoRR, abs/1905.08550, 2019.
[82] L. Shastri. SHRUTI: A neurally motivated architecture for rapid, scal-
able inference. In B. Hammer and P. Hitzler, editors, Perspectives
of Neural-Symbolic Integration , Studies in Computational Intelligence,
pages 183–203. Springer, 2007.
[83] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglo u, A. Huang,
A. Guez, T. Hubert, L. Baker, M. Lai, A. Bolton, Y. Chen, T. Lil licrap,
F. Hui, L. Sifre, G. van den Driessche, T. Graepel, and D. Hass abis.
Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. Nature, 550(354),
2017.
[84] P. Smolensky. Constituent structure and explanation i n an integrated
connectionist/symbolic cognitive architecture. In C. Mac Donald and
G. MacDonald, editors, Connectionism: Debates on Psychological Ex-
planation . Blackwell, 1995.
35

==== Page 37 ====
[85] R. Socher, D. Chen, C. Manning, and A. Ng. Reasoning with neural
tensor networks for knowledge base completion. In NIPS, pages 926–
934. 2013.
[86] H. Stroemfelt, L. Dickens, A.S. d’Avila Garcez, and A. R usso. On
the transferability of VAE embeddings using relational kno wledge with
semi-supervision, arXiv:2011.07137 [cs.LG], 2020.
[87] I. Sutskever and G. Hinton. Using matrices to model symb olic relation-
ship. In NIPS. 2009.
[88] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan , I. Good-
fellow, and R. Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural netw orks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2014.
[89] A.R. Tavares, P.H.C. Avelar, J.M. Flach, M. Nicolau, L. C. Lamb, and
M.Y. Vardi. Understanding boolean function learnability o n deep neu-
ral networks. CoRR, abs/2009.05908, 2020.
[90] S. Tran and A.S. d’Avila Garcez. Deep logic networks: In serting and
extracting knowledge from deep belief networks. IEEE T. Neur. Net.
Learning Syst. , (29):246–258, 2018.
[91] L.G. Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Commun. ACM , 27(11):1134–
1142, November 1984.
[92] L.G. Valiant. Three problems in computer science. J. ACM, 50(1):96–
99, 2003.
[93] L.G. Valiant. Knowledge infusion. In AAAI, 2006.
[94] L.G. Valiant. Probably Approximately Correct: Nature’s Algorithms for
Learning and Prospering in a Complex World . Basic Books, New York,
2013.
[95] E. vanKrieken, E.Acar, andF. vanHarmelen. AnalyzingD iﬀerentiable
Fuzzy Implications. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning , pages 893–
903, 2020.
[96] A.Vaswani, N.Shazeer, N.Parmar, J.Uszkoreit, L.Jone s, A.N.Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, pages
5998–6008. 2017.
36

==== Page 38 ====
[97] L. Weber, P. Minervini, J. M¨ unchmeyer, U. Leser, and T. Rockt¨ aschel.
NLProlog: Reasoning with weak uniﬁcation for question answ ering in
natural language. In ACL 2019 , pages 6151–6161, 2019.
[98] P. J. Werbos. Beyond Regression: New Tools for Prediction and Anal-
ysis in the Behavioral Sciences . PhD thesis, Harvard University, 1974.
[99] A. White and A.S. d’Avila Garcez. Measurable counterfa ctual local
explanations for any classiﬁer. CoRR, abs/1908.03020, 2019.
[100] F. Yang, Z. Yang, and W.W Cohen. Diﬀerentiable learning of logical
rules for knowledge base reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 30 , pages 2319–2328, 2017.
37

