==== Page 1 ====
On Hyperparameter Optimization of Machine Learning
Algorithms: Theory and Practice
Li Yang and Abdallah Shami
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Western Ontario,
1151 Richmond St, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7
Abstract
Machine learning algorithms have been used widely in various applications
and areas. To t a machine learning model into dierent problems, its hyper-
parameters must be tuned. Selecting the best hyper-parameter conguration
for machine learning models has a direct impact on the model's performance.
It often requires deep knowledge of machine learning algorithms and appro-
priate hyper-parameter optimization techniques. Although several automatic
optimization techniques exist, they have dierent strengths and drawbacks
when applied to dierent types of problems. In this paper, optimizing the
hyper-parameters of common machine learning models is studied. We in-
troduce several state-of-the-art optimization techniques and discuss how to
apply them to machine learning algorithms. Many available libraries and
frameworks developed for hyper-parameter optimization problems are pro-
vided, and some open challenges of hyper-parameter optimization research
are also discussed in this paper. Moreover, experiments are conducted on
benchmark datasets to compare the performance of dierent optimization
methods and provide practical examples of hyper-parameter optimization.
This survey paper will help industrial users, data analysts, and researchers
to better develop machine learning models by identifying the proper hyper-
parameter congurations eectively.1
Keywords: Hyper-parameter optimization, machine learning, Bayesian
Email address: {lyang339, abdallah.shami}@uwo.ca (Li Yang and Abdallah
Shami)
1General Hyperparameter Optimization Code and Tutorials: https://github.com/
LiYangHart/Hyperparameter-Optimization-of-Machine-Learning-Algorithms
Preprint submitted to Neurocomputing October 6, 2022arXiv:2007.15745v3  [cs.LG]  5 Oct 2022

==== Page 2 ====
optimization, particle swarm optimization, genetic algorithm, grid search.
1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) algorithms have been widely used in many appli-
cations domains, including advertising, recommendation systems, computer
vision, natural language processing, and user behavior analytics [1]. This
is because they are generic and demonstrate high performance in data ana-
lytics problems. Dierent ML algorithms are suitable for dierent types of
problems or datasets [2]. In general, building an eective machine learning
model is a complex and time-consuming process that involves determining
the appropriate algorithm and obtaining an optimal model architecture by
tuning its hyper-parameters (HPs) [3].
Two types of parameters exist in machine learning models: one that
can be initialized and updated through the data learning process ( e.g., the
weights of neurons in neural networks), named model parameters; while
the other, named hyper-parameters, cannot be directly estimated from data
learning and must be set before training a ML model because they dene the
architecture of a ML model [4]. Hyper-parameters are the parameters that
are used to either congure a ML model ( e.g., the penalty parameter Cin a
support vector machine, and the learning rate to train a neural network) or
to specify the algorithm used to minimize the loss function ( e.g., the activa-
tion function and optimizer types in a neural network, and the kernel type
in a support vector machine) [5].
To build an optimal ML model, a range of possibilities must be ex-
plored. The process of designing the ideal model architecture with an opti-
mal hyper-parameter conguration is named hyper-parameter tuning. Tun-
ing hyper-parameters is considered a key component of building an eective
ML model, especially for tree-based ML models and deep neural networks,
which have many hyper-parameters [6]. Hyper-parameter tuning process is
dierent among dierent ML algorithms due to their dierent types of hyper-
parameters, including categorical, discrete, and continuous hyper-parameters
[7]. Manual testing is a traditional way to tune hyper-parameters and is still
prevalent in graduate student research, although it requires a deep under-
standing of the used ML algorithms and their hyper-parameter value settings
[8]. However, manual tuning is ineective for many problems due to certain
factors, including a large number of hyper-parameters, complex models, time-
consuming model evaluations, and non-linear hyper-parameter interactions.
2

==== Page 3 ====
These factors have inspired increased research in techniques for automatic
optimization of hyper-parameters; so-called hyper-parameter optimization
(HPO) [9]. The main aim of HPO is to automate hyper-parameter tuning
process and make it possible for users to apply machine learning models to
practical problems eectively [3]. The optimal model architecture of a ML
model is expected to be obtained after a HPO process. Some important
reasons for applying HPO techniques to ML models are as follows [6]:
1. It reduces the human eort required, since many ML developers spend
considerable time tuning the hyper-parameters, especially for large
datasets or complex ML algorithms with a large number of hyper-
parameters.
2. It improves the performance of ML models. Many ML hyper-parameters
have dierent optimums to achieve best performance in dierent datasets
or problems.
3. It makes the models and research more reproducible. Only when the
same level of hyper-parameter tuning process is implemented can dif-
ferent ML algorithms be compared fairly; hence, using a same HPO
method on dierent ML algorithms also helps to determine the most
suitable ML model for a specic problem.
It is crucial to select an appropriate optimization technique to detect
optimal hyper-parameters. Traditional optimization techniques may be un-
suitable for HPO problems, since many HPO problems are non-convex or
non-dierentiable optimization problems, and may result in a local instead
of a global optimum [10]. Gradient descent-based methods are a common
type of traditional optimization algorithm that can be used to tune con-
tinuous hyper-parameters by calculating their gradients [11]. For example,
the learning rate in a neural network can be optimized by a gradient-based
method.
Compared with traditional optimization methods like gradient descent,
many other optimization techniques are more suitable for HPO problems, in-
cluding decision-theoretic approaches, Bayesian optimization models, multi-
delity optimization techniques, and metaheuristics algorithms [7]. Apart
from detecting continuous hyper-parameters, many of these algorithms also
have the capacity to eectively identify discrete, categorical, and conditional
hyper-parameters.
Decision-theoretic methods are based on the concept of dening a hyper-
parameter search space and then detecting the hyper-parameter combina-
3

==== Page 4 ====
tions in the search space, ultimately selecting the best-performing hyper-
parameter combination. Grid search (GS) [12] is a decision-theoretic ap-
proach that involves exhaustively searching for a xed domain of hyper-
parameter values. Random search (RS) [13] is another decision-theoretic
method that randomly selects hyper-parameter combinations in the search
space, given limited execution time and resources. In GS and RS, each hyper-
parameter conguration is treated independently.
Unlike GS and RS, Bayesian optimization (BO) [14] models determine the
next hyper-parameter value based on the previous results of tested hyper-
parameter values, which avoids many unnecessary evaluations; thus, BO can
detect the optimal hyper-parameter combination within fewer iterations than
GS and RS. To be applied to dierent problems, BO can model the distribu-
tion of the objective function using dierent models as the surrogate function,
including Gaussian process (GP), random forest (RF), and tree-structured
Parzen estimators (TPE) models [15]. BO-RF and BO-TPE can retain the
conditionality of variables [15]. Thus, they can be used to optimize condi-
tional hyper-parameters, like the kernel type and the penalty parameter Cin
a support vector machine (SVM). However, since BO models work sequen-
tially to balance the exploration of unexplored areas and the exploitation of
currently-tested regions, it is dicult to parallelize them.
Training a ML model often takes considerable time and space. Multi-
delity optimization algorithms are developed to tackle problems with lim-
ited resources, and the most common ones being bandit-based algorithms.
Hyperband [16] is a popular bandit-based optimization technique that can be
considered an improved version of RS. It generates small versions of datasets
and allocates a same budget to each hyper-parameter combination. In each
iteration of Hyperband, poorly-performing hyper-parameter congurations
are eliminated to save time and resources.
Metaheuristic algorithms are a set of techniques used to solve complex,
large search space and non-convex optimization problems to which HPO
problems belong [17]. Among all metaheuristic methods, genetic algorithm
(GA) [18] and particle swarm optimization (PSO) [19] are the two most
prevalent metaheuristic algorithms used for HPO problems. Genetic algo-
rithms detect well-performing hyper-parameter combinations in each gener-
ation, and pass them to the next generation until the best-performing com-
bination is identied. In PSO algorithms, each particle communicates with
other particles to detect and update the current global optimum in each it-
eration until the nal optimum is detected. Metaheuristics can eciently
4

==== Page 5 ====
explore the search space to detect optimal or near-optimal solutions. Hence,
they are particularly suitable for the HPO problems with large conguration
space due to their high eciency. For instance, they can be used in deep neu-
ral networks (DNNs) which have a large conguration space with multiple
hyper-parameters, including the activation and optimizer types, the learning
rate, drop-out rate, etc.
Although using HPO algorithms to tune the hyper-parameters of ML
models greatly improves the model performance, certain other aspects, like
their computational complexity, still have much room for improvement. On
the other hand, since dierent HPO models have their own advantages and
suitable problems, overviewing them is necessary for proper optimization
algorithm selection in terms of dierent types of ML models and problems.
This paper makes the following contributions:
1. It reviews common ML algorithms and their important hyper-parameters.
2. It analyzes common HPO techniques, including their benets and draw-
backs, to help apply them to dierent ML models by appropriate algo-
rithm selection in practical problems.
3. It surveys common HPO libraries and frameworks for practical use.
4. It discusses the open challenges and research directions of the HPO
research domain.
In this survey paper, we begin with a comprehensive introduction of the
common optimization techniques used in ML hyper-parameter tuning prob-
lems. Section 2 introduces the main concepts of mathematical optimization
and hyper-parameter optimization, as well as the general HPO process. In
Section 3, we discuss the key hyper-parameters of common ML models that
need to be tuned. Section 4 covers the various state-of-the-art optimization
approaches that have been proposed for tackling HPO problems. In Section
5, we analyze dierent HPO methods and discuss how they can be applied
to ML algorithms. In Section 6, we provide an introduction to various public
libraries and frameworks that are developed to implement HPO. Section 7
presents and discusses the experimental results of using HPO on benchmark
datasets for HPO method comparison and practical use case demonstration.
In Section 8, we discuss several research directions and open challenges that
should be considered to improve current HPO models or develop new HPO
approaches. We conclude the paper in Section 9.
5

==== Page 6 ====
2. Mathematical Optimization and Hyper-parameter Optimization
Problems
The key process of machine learning is to solve optimization problems.
To build a ML model, its weight parameters are initialized and optimized by
an optimization method until the objective function approaches a minimum
value or the accuracy approaches a maximum value [20]. Similarly, hyper-
parameter optimization methods aim to optimize the architecture of a ML
model by detecting the optimal hyper-parameter congurations. In this sec-
tion, the main concepts of mathematical optimization and hyper-parameter
optimization for machine learning models are discussed.
2.1. Mathematical Optimization
Mathematical optimization is the process of nding the best solution from
a set of available candidates to maximize or minimize the objective function
[20]. Generally, optimization problems can be classied as constrained or
unconstrained optimization problems based on whether they have constraints
for the decision variables or the solution variables.
In unconstrained optimization problems, a decision variable, x, can take
any values from the one-dimensional space of all real numbers, R. An un-
constrained optimization problem can be denoted by [21]:
min
x2Rf(x); (1)
wheref(x) is the objective function.
On the other hand, most real-life optimization problems are constrained
optimization problems. The decision variable xfor constrained optimization
problems should be subject to certain constraints which could be mathemat-
ical equalities or inequalities. Therefore, constrained optimization problems
or general optimization problems can be expressed as [21]:
min
xf(x)
subject to
gi(x)0;i= 1;2;;m;
hj(x) = 0;j= 1;2;;p;
x2X;(2)
wheregi(x);i= 1;2;;m;are the inequality constraint functions; hj(x);j=
1;2;;p;are the equality constraint function; and Xis the domain of x.
6

==== Page 7 ====
The role of constraints is to limit the possible values of the optimal so-
lution to certain areas of the search space, named the feasible region [21].
Thus, the feasible region Dofxcan be represented by:
D=fx2Xjgi(x)0;hj(x) = 0g: (3)
To conclude, an optimization problem consists of three major compo-
nents: a set of decision variables x, an objective function f(x) to be either
minimized or maximized, and a set of constraints that allow the variables to
take on values in certain ranges (if it is a constrained optimization problem).
Therefore, the goal of optimization tasks is to obtain the set of variable val-
ues that minimize or maximize the objective function while satisfying any
applicable constraints.
Regarding ML models, many HPO problems have certain constraints,
like the feasible domain of the number of clusters in k-means, as well as time
and space constraints. Therefore, constrained optimization techniques are
widely-used in HPO problems [3].
For optimization problems, in many cases, only a local instead of a global
optimum can be obtained. For example, to obtain the minimum of a problem,
assumingDis the feasible region of a decision variable x, a global minimum
is the point x2Dsatisfyingf(x)f(x)8x2D, while a local minimum
is a pointx2Din a neighborhood Nsatisfyingf(x)f(x)8x2N\D
[21] . Thus, the local optimum may only be an optimum in a small range
instead of being the optimal solution in the entire feasible region.
A local optimum is only guaranteed to be the global optimum in con-
vex functions [22]. Convex functions are the functions that only have one
optimum. Therefore, continuing to search along the direction in which the
objective function decreases can detect the global minimum value. A function
f(x) is a convex function if for 8x1;x22X;8t2[0;1],
f(tx1+ (1 t)x2)tf(x1) + (1 t)f(x2); (4)
whereXis the domain of decision variables, and tis a coecient in the range
of [0,1].
An optimization problem is a convex optimization problem only when the
objective function f(x) is a convex function and the feasible region Cis a
convex set, denoted by [22]:
min
xf(x)
subject to x2C:(5)
7

==== Page 8 ====
On the other hand, nonconvex functions have multiple local optimums,
but only one of these optimums is the global optimum. Most ML and HPO
problems are nonconvex optimization problems. Thus, utilizing inappro-
priate optimization methods may only result in a local instead of a global
optimum.
There are many traditional methods that can be used to solve opti-
mization problems, including gradient descent, Newton's method, conjugate
gradient, and heuristic optimization methods [20]. Gradient descent is a
commonly-used optimization method that uses the negative gradient direc-
tion as the search direction to move towards the optimum. However, gradient
descent cannot guarantee to detect the global optimum unless the objective
function is a convex function. Newton's method uses the inverse matrix of
the Hessian matrix to obtain the optimum. Newton's method has faster con-
vergence speed than gradient descent, but often requires more time and larger
space than gradient descent to store and calculate the Hessian matrix. Con-
jugate gradient searches along the conjugated directions constructed by the
gradient of known data points to detect the optimum. Conjugate gradient
has faster convergence speed than gradient descent, but its calculation of con-
jugate gradient is more complex. Unlike other traditional methods, heuristic
methods use empirical rules to solve the optimization problems instead of
following systematical steps to obtain the solution. Heuristic methods can
often detect the approximate global optimum within a few iterations, but
cannot guarantee to detect the global optimum [20].
2.2. Hyper-parameter Optimization Problem Statement
During the design process of ML models, eectively searching the hyper-
parameters' space using optimization techniques can identify the optimal
hyper-parameters for the models. The hyper-parameter optimization process
consists of four main components: an estimator (a regressor or a classier)
with its objective function, a search space (conguration space), a search
or optimization method used to nd hyper-parameter combinations, and an
evaluation function to compare the performance of dierent hyper-parameter
congurations.
The domain of a hyper-parameter can be continuous ( e.g., learning rate),
discrete ( e.g., number of clusters), binary ( e.g., whether to use early stopping
or not), or categorical ( e.g., type of optimizer). Therefore, hyper-parameters
are classied as continuous, discrete, and categorical hyper-parameters. For
continuous and discrete hyper-parameters, their domains are usually bounded
8

==== Page 9 ====
in practical applications [12] [23]. On the other hand, the hyper-parameter
conguration space sometimes contains conditionality. A hyper-parameter
may need to be used or tuned depending on the value of another hyper-
parameter, called a conditional hyper-parameter [10]. For instance, in SVM,
the degree of the polynomial kernel function only needs to be tuned when
the kernel type is chosen to be polynomial.
In simple cases, all hyper-parameters can take unrestricted real values,
and the feasible set Xof hyper-parameters can be a real-valued n-dimensional
vector space. However, in most cases, the hyper-parameters of a ML model
often take on values from dierent domains and have dierent constraints,
so their optimization problems are often complex constrained optimization
problems [24]. For instance, the number of considered features in a decision
tree should be in the range of 0 to the number of features, and the number
of clusters in k-means should not be larger than the size of data points.
Additionally, categorical features can often only take several certain values,
like the limited choices of the activation function and the optimizer of a
neural network. Therefore, the feasible domain of Xoften has a complex
structure, which increases the problems' complexity [24].
In general, for a hyper-parameter optimization problem, the aim is to
obtain [19]:
x= arg min
x2Xf(x); (6)
wheref(x) is the objective function to be minimized, such as the error rate or
the root mean squared error (RMSE); xis the hyper-parameter conguration
that produces the optimum value of f(x); and a hyper-parameter xcan take
any value in the search space X.
The aim of HPO is to achieve optimal or near-optimal model performance
by tuning hyper-parameters within the given budgets [3]. The mathemati-
cal expression of the function fvaries, depending on the objective function
of the chosen ML algorithm and the performance metric function. Model
performance can be evaluated by various metrics, like accuracy, RMSE, F1-
score, and false alarm rate. On the other hand, in practice, time budgets are
an essential constraint for optimizing HPO models and must be considered.
It often requires a massive amount of time to optimize the objective function
of a ML model with a reasonable number of hyper-parameter congurations.
Every time a hyper-parameter value is tested, the entire ML model needs to
be retrained, and the validation set needs to be processed to generate a score
that reects the model performance.
9

==== Page 10 ====
The main process of HPO is as follows [10]:
1. Select the objective function and the performance metrics;
2. Select the hyper-parameters that require tuning, summarize their types,
and determine the appropriate optimization technique;
3. Train the ML model using the default hyper-parameter conguration
or common values as the baseline model;
4. Start the optimization process with a large search space as the hyper-
parameter feasible domain determined by manual testing and/or do-
main knowledge;
5. Narrow the search space based on the regions of currently-tested well-
performing hyper-parameter values, or explore new search spaces if
necessary.
6. Return the best-performing hyper-parameter conguration as the nal
solution.
However, most traditional optimization techniques [25] are unsuitable
for HPO, since HPO problems are dierent from traditional optimization
problems in the following aspects [10]:
1. The optimization target, the objective function of ML models, is usu-
ally a non-convex and non-dierentiable function. Therefore, many
traditional optimization methods designed to solve convex or dieren-
tiable optimization problems are often unsuitable for HPO problems,
since these methods may return a local optimum instead of a global op-
timum. Additionally, an optimization target lacking smoothness makes
certain traditional derivative-free optimization models perform poorly
for HPO problems [26].
2. The hyper-parameters of ML models include continuous, discrete, cat-
egorical, and conditional hyper-parameters. Thus, many traditional
numerical optimization methods [27] that only aim to tackle numerical
or continuous variables are unsuitable for HPO problems.
3. It is often computationally expensive to train a ML model on a large-
scale dataset. HPO techniques sometimes use data sampling to obtain
approximate values of the objective function. Thus, eective optimiza-
tion techniques for HPO problems should be able to use these approx-
imate values. However, function evaluation time is often ignored in
many black-box optimization (BBO) models, so they often require ex-
act instead of approximate objective function values. Consequently,
10

==== Page 11 ====
many BBO algorithms are often unsuitable for HPO problems with
limited time and resource budgets.
Therefore, appropriate optimization algorithms should be applied to HPO
problems to identify optimal hyper-parameter congurations for ML models.
3. Hyper-parameters in Machine Learning Models
To boost ML models by HPO, rstly, we need to nd out what the key
hyper-parameters are that people need to tune to t the ML models into
specic problems or datasets.
In general, ML models can be classied as supervised and unsupervised
learning algorithms, based on whether they are built to model labeled or
unlabeled datasets [28]. Supervised learning algorithms are a set of machine
learning algorithms that map input features to a target by training on labeled
data, and mainly include linear models, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support
vector machines (SVM), na ve Bayes (NB), decision-tree-based models, and
deep learning (DL) algorithms [29]. Unsupervised learning algorithms are
used to nd patterns from unlabeled data and can be divided into clus-
tering and dimensionality reduction algorithms based on their aims. Clus-
tering methods mainly include k-means, density-based spatial clustering of
applications with noise (DBSCAN), hierarchical clustering, and expectation-
maximization (EM); while two common dimensionality reduction algorithms
are principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) [30]. Moreover, there are several ensemble learning methods that com-
bine dierent singular models to further improve model performance, like vot-
ing, bagging, and AdaBoost. In this paper, the important hyper-parameters
of common ML models are studied based on their names in Python libraries,
including scikit-learn (sklearn) [31], XGBoost [32], and Keras[33].
3.1. Supervised Learning Algorithms
In supervised learning, both the input xand the output yare available,
and the goal is to obtain an optimal predictive model function fto minimize
the cost function L(f(x);y) that models the error between the estimated
output and ground-truth labels. The predictive model function fvaries
based on its model structure. With limited model architectures determined
by dierent hyper-parameter congurations, the domain of the ML model
11

==== Page 12 ====
functionfis restricted to a set of functions F. Thus, the optimal predictive
modelfcan be obtained by [34]:
f= arg min
f2F1
nnX
i=1L(f(xi);yi) (7)
wherenis the number of training data points, xiis the feature vector of
thei-th instance, yiis the corresponding actual output, and Lis the cost
function value of each sample.
Many dierent loss functions exist in supervised learning algorithms, in-
cluding the square of Euclidean distance, cross-entropy, information gain, etc.
[34]. On the other hand, dierent ML algorithms generate dierent predic-
tive model architectures based on dierent hyper-parameter congurations,
which will be discussed in detail in this subsection.
3.1.1. Linear Models
In general, supervised learning models can be classied as regression and
classication techniques when used to predict continuous or discrete target
variables, respectively. Linear regression [35] is a typical regression model
that predicts a target yby the following equation:
^y(w;x) =w0+w1x1+:::+wpxp; (8)
where the target variable yis expected to be a linear combination of pinput
features x= (x1;xp), and ^yis the predicted value. The weight vector
w= (w1;wp) is designated as an attribute 'coef ', andw0is dened as
another attribute 'intercept ' in the linear model of sklearn. Usually, no
hyper-parameter needs to be tuned in linear regression. A linear model's
performance mainly depends on how well the problem or data follows a linear
distribution.
To improve the original linear regression models, ridge regression was
proposed in [36]. Ridge regression imposes a penalty on the coecients, and
aims to minimize the objective function [37]:
kwk2
2+pX
i=1(yi wixi)2; (9)
wherekwk2is theL2-norm of the coecient vector, and is the regularization
strength. A larger value of indicates a larger amount of shrinkage; thus,
the coecients are also more robust to collinearity.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Lasso regression [38] is another linear model used to estimate sparse co-
ecients, consisting of a linear model with an L1priori added regularization
term. It aims to minimize the objective function [37]:
kwk1+pX
i=1(yi wixi)2; (10)
whereis the regularization strength and kwk1is theL1-norm of the coef-
cient vector. Therefore, the regularization strength is an crucial hyper-
parameter of both ridge and lasso regression models.
Logistic regression (LR) [39] is a linear model used for classication prob-
lems. In LR, its cost function may be dierent, depending on the regular-
ization method chosen for the penalization. There are three main types of
regularization methods in LR: L1-norm,L2-norm, and elastic-net regulariza-
tion [40].
Therefore, the rst hyper-parameter that needs to be tuned in LR is to
the regularization method used in the penalization, 'l1', 'l2', 'elasticnet' or
'none', which is called 'penalty' in sklearn. The coecient, ' C', is another
essential hyper-parameter that determines the regularization strength of the
model. In addition, the 'solver' type, representing the optimization algorithm
type, can be set to 'newton-cg', 'lbfgs', 'liblinear', 'sag', or 'saga' in LR. The
'solver' type has correlations with 'penalty' and ' C', so they are conditional
hyper-parameters.
3.1.2. KNN
K-nearest neighbor (KNN) is a simple ML algorithm that is used to clas-
sify data points by calculating the distances between dierent data points.
In KNN, the predicted class of each test sample is set to the class to which
most of its k-nearest neighbors in the training set belong.
Assuming the training set T=f(x1;y1);(x2;y2);;(xn;yn)g,xiis the
feature vector of an instance, and yi2fc1;c2;;cmgis the class of the
instance,i= (1;2;n), for a test instance x, its classycan be denoted by
[41]:
y= arg max
cjX
xi2Nk(x)I(yi=cj);i= 1;2;;n;j= 1;2;;m; (11)
whereI(x) is an indicator function, I= 1 whenyi=cj, otherwise I= 0;
Nk(x) is the eld involving the k-nearest neighbors of x.
13

==== Page 14 ====
In KNN, the number of considered nearest neighbors, k, is the most
crucial hyper-parameter [42]. If kis too small, the model will be under-tting;
ifkis too large, the model will be over-tting and require high computational
time. In addition, the weighted function used in the prediction can also be
chosen from 'uniform' (points are weighted equally) or 'distance' (points are
weighted by the inverse of their distance), depending on specic problems.
The distance metric and the power parameter of the Minkowski metric can
also be tuned as it can result in minor improvement. Lastly, the 'algorithm'
used to compute the nearest neighbors can also be chosen from a ball tree, a
k-dimensional (KD) tree, or a brute force search. Typically, the model can
determine the most appropriate algorithm itself by setting the 'algorithm' to
'auto' in sklearn [31].
3.1.3. SVM
A support vector machines (SVM) [43] is a supervised learning algorithm
that can be used for both classication and regression problems. SVM algo-
rithms are based on the concept of mapping data points from low-dimensional
into high-dimensional space to make them linearly separable; a hyperplane
is then generated as the classication boundary to partition data points [44].
Assuming there are ndata points, the objective function of SVM is [45]:
arg min
w(
1
nnX
i=1maxf0;1 yif(xi)g+CwTw)
; (12)
where wis a normalization vector; Cis the penalty parameter of the error
term, which is an important hyper-parameter of all SVM models.
The kernel function f(x), which is used to measure the similarity between
two data points xiandxj, can be chosen from multiple types of kernels in
SVM models. Therefore, the kernel type would be a vital hyper-parameter to
be tuned. Common kernel types in SVM include linear kernels, radial basis
function (RBF), polynomial kernels, and sigmoid kernels.
The dierent kernel functions can be denoted as follows [46]:
1. Linear kernel:
f(x) =xT
ixj; (13)
2. Polynomial kernel:
f(x) = 
xT
ixj+rd; (14)
14

==== Page 15 ====
3. RBF kernel:
f(x) = exp
 kx x0k2
; (15)
4. Sigmoid kernel:
f(x) = 
tanh 
xT
ixj+r
; (16)
As shown in the kernel function equations, a few other dierent hyper-
parameters need to be tuned after a kernel type is chosen. The coecient
, denoted by 'gamma' in sklearn, is the conditional hyper-parameter of
the 'kernel type' hyper-parameter when it is set to polynomial, RBF, or
sigmoid;r, specied by 'coef0' in sklearn, is the conditional hyper-parameter
of polynomial and sigmoid kernels. Moreover, the polynomial kernel has
an additional conditional hyper-parameter drepresenting the 'degree' of the
polynomial kernel function. In support vector regression (SVR) models, there
is another hyper-parameter, 'epsilon', indicating the distance error to of its
loss function [31].
3.1.4. Na ve Bayes
Na ve Bayes (NB) [47] algorithms are supervised learning algorithms
based on Bayes' theorem. Assuming there are ndependent features x1;xn
and a target variable y, the objective function of na ve Bayes can be denoted
by:
^y= arg max
yP(y)nY
i=1P(xijy); (17)
whereP(y) is the probability of a value y, andP(xijy) is the posterior prob-
abilities of xigiven the values of y. Regarding the dierent assumptions of
the distribution of P(xijy), there are dierent types of na ve Bayes classi-
ers. The four main types of NB models are: Bernoulli NB, Gaussian NB,
multinomial NB, and complement NB [48].
For Gaussian NB [49], the likelihood of features is assumed to follow a
Gaussian distribution:
P(xijy) =1p22
yexp 
 (xi y)2
22
y!
: (18)
The maximum likelihood method is used to calculate the mean value, y,
and the variance, 2
y. Normally, there is not any hyper-parameter that needs
to be tuned for Gaussian NB. The performance of a Gaussian NB model
mainly depends on how well the dataset follows Gaussian distributions.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Multinomial NB [50] is designed for multinomially-distributed data based
on the na ve Bayes algorithm. Assuming there are nfeatures, and yiis the
distribution of each value of the target variable y, which equals the condi-
tional probability P(xijy) when a feature value iis involved in a data point
belonging to the class y. Based on the concept of relative frequency counting,
ycan be estimated by a smoothed version of yi[31]:
^yi=Nyi+
Ny+n; (19)
whereNyiis the number of times when feature iis in a data point belonging
to classy, andNyis the sum of all Nyi(i= 0;1;2;;n). The smoothing
priors0 are used for features that are not in the learning samples. When
= 1, it is called Laplace smoothing; when  < 1, it is called Lidstone
smoothing.
Complement NB [51] is an improved version of the standard multino-
mial NB algorithm and is suitable for processing imbalanced data, while
Bernoulli NB [52] requires samples to have binary-valued feature vectors so
that the data can follow multivariate Bernoulli distributions. They both
have the additive (Laplace/Lidstone) smoothing parameter, , as the main
hyper-parameter that needs tuning. To conclude, for na ve Bayes algorithms,
developers often do not need to tune hyper-parameters or only need to tune
the smoothing parameter , which is a continuous hyper-parameter.
3.1.5. Tree-based Models
Decision tree (DT) [53] is a common classication method that uses a
tree-structure to model decisions and possible consequences by summarizing
a set of classication rules from the data. A DT has three main components:
a root node representing the entire data; multiple decision nodes indicating
decision tests and sub-node splits over each feature; and several leaf nodes
representing the result classes [54]. DT algorithms recursively split the train-
ing set with better feature values to achieve good decisions on each subset.
Pruning, which means removing some of the sub-nodes of decision nodes,
is used in DT to avoid over-tting. Since a deeper tree has more sub-trees
to make more accurate decisions, the maximum tree depth, 'max depth', is
an essential hyper-parameter that controls the complexity of DT algorithms
[55].
There are many other important HPs to be tuned to build eective DT
models [56]. Firstly, the quality of splits can be measured by setting a mea-
16

==== Page 17 ====
suring function, denoted by 'criterion' in sklearn. Gini impurity and informa-
tion gain are the two main types of measuring functions. The split selection
method, 'splitter', can also be set to 'best' to choose the best split, or 'ran-
dom' to select a random split. The number of considered features to generate
the best split, 'max features', can also be tuned as a feature selection process.
Moreover, there are several discrete hyper-parameters related to the splitting
process: the minimum number of data points to split a decision node or to
obtain a leaf node, denoted by 'min samples split' and 'min samples leaf',
respectively; the 'max leafnodes', indicating the maximum number of leaf
nodes, and the 'min weight fraction leaf' that means the minimum weighted
fraction of the total weights, can also be tuned to improve model performance
[31] [56].
Based on the concept of DT models, many decision-tree-based ensemble
algorithms have been proposed to improve model performance by combin-
ing multiple decision trees, including random forest (RF), extra trees (ET),
and extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) models. RF [57] is an ensemble
learning method that uses the bagging method to combine multiple decision
trees. In RF, basic DTs are built on many randomly-generated subsets, and
the class with the majority voting will be selected to be the nal classication
result [58]. ET [59] is another tree-based ensemble learning method that is
similar to RF, but it uses all samples to build DTs and randomly selects the
feature sets. In addition, RF optimizes splits on DTs while ET randomly
makes the splits. XGBoost [32] is a popular tree-based ensemble model de-
signed for speed and performance improvement, which uses the boosting and
gradient descent methods to combine basic DTs. In XGBoost, the next input
sample of a new DT will be related to the results of previous DTs. XGBoost
aims to minimize the following objective function [55]:
Obj= 1
2tX
j=1G2
j
Hj++t; (20)
wheretis the number of leaves in a decision tree, GandHare the sums of
the rst and second order gradient statistics of the cost function, and
are the penalty coecients.
Since tree-based ensemble models are built with decision trees as base
learners, they have the same hyper-parameters as DT models, as described in
this subsection. Apart from these hyper-parameters, RF, ET, and XGBoost
all have another crucial hyper-parameter to be tuned, which is the number of
17

==== Page 18 ====
decision trees to be combined, denoted by 'n estimators' in sklearn. XGBoost
has several additional hyper-parameters, including [60]: 'min child weight'
which means the minimum sum of weights in a child node; 'subsample' and
'colsample bytree' used to control the subsampling ratio of instances and
features, respectively; and four continuous hyper-parameters | 'gamma',
'alpha', 'lambda', and 'learning rate' | indicating the minimum loss reduc-
tion for a split, L1, andL2regularization term on weights, and the learning
rate, respectively.
3.1.6. Ensemble Learning Algorithms
Apart from tree-based ensemble models, there are several other generic
ensemble learning methods that combine multiple singular ML models to
achieve better model performance than any singular algorithms alone. Three
common ensemble learning models | voting, bagging, and AdaBoost | are
introduced in this subsection [61].
Voting [61] is a basic ensemble learning algorithm that uses the majority
voting rule to combine singular estimators and generate a comprehensive es-
timator with improved accuracy. In sklearn, the voting method can be set
to be 'hard' or 'soft', indicating whether to use majority voting or averaged
predicted probabilities to determine the classication result. The list of se-
lected single ML estimators and their weights can also be tuned in certain
cases. For instance, a higher weight can be assigned to a better-performing
singular ML model in a voting model.
Bootstrap aggregating [61], also named bagging, trains multiple base esti-
mators on dierent randomly-extracted subsets to construct a nal predictor
[62]. When using bagging methods, the rst consideration should be the type
and number of base estimators in the ensemble, denoted by 'base estimator'
and 'n estimators', respectively. Then, the 'max samples' and 'max features',
indicating the sample size and feature size to generate dierent subsets, can
also be tuned.
AdaBoost [61], short for adaptive boosting, is an ensemble learning method
that trains multiple base learners consecutively (weak learners), and later
learners emphasize the mis-classied samples of previous learners; ultimately,
a nal strong learner is obtained. During this process, incorrectly-classied
instances are retrained with other new instances, and their weights are ad-
justed so that the subsequent classiers focus more on dicult cases, thereby
gradually building a stronger classier. In AdaBoost, the type of base esti-
mator, 'base estimator', can be set to a decision tree or other methods. In
18

==== Page 19 ====
addition, the maximum number of estimators at which boosting is termi-
nated, 'n estimators', and the learning rate that shrinks the contribution of
each classier, should also be tuned to achieve a trade-o between these two
hyper-parameters.
3.1.7. Deep Learning Models
Deep learning (DL) algorithms are widely applied to various areas | like
computer vision, natural language processing, and machine translation |
since they have had great success solving many types of problems. DL mod-
els are based on the theory of articial neural networks (ANNs). Common
types of DL architectures include deep neural networks (DNNs), feedforward
neural networks (FFNNs), deep belief networks (DBNs), convolutional neu-
ral networks (CNNs), recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and many more
[63]. All these DL models have similar hyper-parameters since they have
similar underlying neural network architecture. Compared with other ML
models, DL models benet more from HPO since they often have many
hyper-parameters that require tuning.
The rst set of hyper-parameters is related to the construction of a DL
model; hence, named model design hyper-parameters. Since all neural net-
work models have an input layer and an output layer, the complexity of a
deep learning model mainly depends on the number of hidden layers and the
number of neurons in each layer, which are two main hyper-parameters to
build DL models [64]. These two hyper-parameters are set and tuned accord-
ing to the complexity of the datasets or the problems. DL models need to
have enough capacity to model objective functions (or prediction tasks) while
avoiding over-tting. At the next stage, certain function types need to be set
or tuned. The rst function type to congure is the loss function type, which
is chosen mainly based on the problem type ( e.g., binary cross-entropy for bi-
nary classication problems, multi-class cross-entropy for multi-classication
problems, and RMSE for regression problems). Another important hyper-
parameter is the activation function type used to model non-linear functions,
which be set to 'softmax', 'rectied linear unit (ReLU)', 'sigmoid', 'tanh', or
'softsign'. Lastly, the optimizer type can be set to stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), adaptive moment estimation (Adam), root mean square propagation
(RMSprop), etc. [65].
On the other hand, some other hyper-parameters are related to the opti-
mization and training process of DL models; hence, categorized as optimizer
hyper-parameters. The learning rate is one of the most important hyper-
19

==== Page 20 ====
parameters in DL models [66]. It determines the step size at each iteration,
which enables the objective function to converge. A large learning rate speeds
up the learning process, but the gradient may oscillate around a local min-
imum value or even cannot converge. On the other hand, a small learning
rate converges smoothly, but will largely increase model training time by re-
quiring more training epochs. An appropriate learning rate should enable the
objective function to converge to a global minimum in a reasonable amount
of time. Another common hyper-parameter is the drop-out rate. Drop-out
is a standard regularization method for DL models proposed to reduce over-
tting. In drop-out, a proportion of neurons are randomly removed, and the
percentage of neurons to be removed should be tuned.
Mini-batch size and the number of epochs are the other two DL hyper-
parameters that represent the number of processed samples before updating
the model, and the number of complete passes through the entire training
set, respectively [67]. Mini-batch size is aected by the resource require-
ments of the training process and the number of iterations. The number
of epochs depends on the size of the training set and should be tuned by
slowly increasing its value until validation accuracy starts to decrease, which
indicates over-tting. On the other hand, DL models often converge within
a few epochs, and the following epochs may lead to unnecessary additional
execution time and over-tting, which can be avoided by the early stopping
method. Early stopping is a form of regularization whereby model training
stops in advance when validation accuracy does not increase after a certain
number of consecutive epochs. The number of waiting epochs, called early
stop patience, can also be tuned to reduce model training time.
Apart from traditional DL models, transfer learning (TL) is a technology
that obtains a pre-trained model on the data in a related domain and transfers
it to other target tasks [68]. To transfer a DL model from one problem to
another problem, a certain number of top layers are frozen, and only the
remaining layers are retrained to t the new problem. Therefore, the number
of frozen layers is a vital hyper-parameter to tune if TL is used.
3.2. Unsupervised Learning Algorithms
Unsupervised learning algorithms are a set of ML algorithms used to iden-
tify unknown patterns in unlabeled datasets. Clustering and dimensionality-
reduction algorithms are the two main types of unsupervised learning meth-
ods. Clustering methods include k-means, DBSCAN, EM, hierarchical clus-
tering, etc.; while PCA and LDA are two commonly-used dimensionality
20

==== Page 21 ====
reduction algorithms [30].
3.2.1. Clustering Algorithms
In most clustering algorithms | including k-means, EM, and hierarchical
clustering | the number of clusters is the most important hyper-parameter
to tune [69].
The k-means algorithm [70] uses kprototypes, indicating the centroids
of clusters, to cluster data. In k-means algorithms, the number of clusters,
'nclusters', must be specied, and is determined by minimizing the sum of
squared errors [70]:
nkX
i=0min
uj2Ck(xi uj)2; (21)
where ( x1;;xn) is the data matrix; uj, also called the centroid of the
clusterCk, is the mean of the samples in the cluster; and nkis the number
of sample points in the cluster Ck.
To tune k-means, 'n clusters' is the most crucial hyper-parameter. Be-
sides this, the method for centroid initialization, 'init', could be set to 'k-
means++', 'random' or a human-dened array, which slightly aects model
performance. In addition, 'n init', denoting the number of times that the
k-means algorithm will be executed with dierent centroid seeds, and the
'max iter', the maximum number of iterations in a single execution of k-
means, also have slight impacts on model performance [31].
The expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm [71] is an iterative al-
gorithm used to detect the maximum likelihood estimation of parameters.
Gaussian Mixture model is a clustering method that uses a mixture of Gaus-
sian distributions to model data by implementing the EM method. Simi-
lar to k-means, its major hyper-parameter to be tuned is 'n components',
indicating the number of clusters or Gaussian distributions. Additionally,
dierent methods can be chosen to constrain the covariance of the estimated
classes in Gaussian mixture models, including 'full covariance', 'tied', 'diago-
nal' or 'spherical' [72]. Other hyper-parameters could also be tuned, including
'max iter' and 'tol', representing the number of EM iterations to perform and
the convergence threshold, respectively [31].
Hierarchical clustering [73] methods build clusters by continuously merg-
ing or splitting the built-in clusters. The hierarchy of clusters is represented
by a tree-structure; its root indicates the unique cluster gathering all samples,
and its leaves represent the clusters with only one sample [73]. In sklearn, the
21

==== Page 22 ====
function 'AgglomerativeClustering' is a common type of hierarchical cluster-
ing. In agglomerative clustering, the linkage criteria, 'linkage', determines
the distance between sets of observations and can be set to 'ward', 'com-
plete', 'average', or 'single', indicating whether to minimize the variance of
the all clusters, or use the maximum, average, or minimum distance between
every two clusters, respectively. Like other clustering methods, its main
hyper-parameter is the number of clusters, 'n clusters'. However, 'n clusters'
cannot be set if we choose to set the 'distance threshold', the linkage distance
threshold for merging clusters, since if so, 'n clusters' will be determined au-
tomatically.
DBSCAN [74] is a density-based clustering method that determines the
clusters by dividing data into clusters with suciently high density. Unlike
other clustering models, the number of clusters does not need to be con-
gured before training. Instead, DBSCAN has two signicant conditional
hyper-parameters | the scan radius represented by 'eps', and the mini-
mum number of considered neighbor points represented by 'min samples' |
which dene the cluster density together [75]. DBSCAN works by starting
with an unvisited point and detecting all its neighbor points within a pre-
dened distance 'eps'. If the number of neighbor points reaches the value of
'min samples', this unvisited point and all its neighbors are dened as a clus-
ter. The procedures are executed recursively until all data points have been
visited. A higher 'min samples' or a lower 'eps' indicates a higher density to
form a cluster.
3.2.2. Dimensionality Reduction Algorithms
The increasing amount of collected data provides ample information, but
also increases problem complexity. In real-world applications, many features
are irrelevant or redundant to predict target variables. Dimensionality re-
duction algorithms often serve as feature engineering methods to extract
important features and eliminate insignicant or redundant features. Two
common dimensionality-reduction algorithms are principal component anal-
ysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). In PCA and LDA, the
number of features to be extracted, represented by 'n components' in sklearn,
is the main hyper-parameter to be tuned.
Principal component analysis (PCA) [76] is a widely used linear dimen-
sionality reduction method. PCA is based on the concept of mapping the
originaln-dimensional features into k-dimension features as the new orthog-
onal features, also called the principal components. PCA works by calculat-
22

==== Page 23 ====
ing the covariance matrix of the data matrix to obtain the eigenvectors of
the covariance matrix. The matrix comprises the eigenvectors of kfeatures
with the largest eigenvalues ( i.e., the largest variance). Consequently, the
data matrix can be transformed into a new space with reduced dimension-
ality. Singular value decomposition (SVD) [77] is a popular method used
to obtain the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of PCA.
Therefore, in addition to 'n components', the SVD solver type is another
hyper-parameter of PCA to be tuned, which can be assigned to 'auto', 'full',
'arpack' or 'randomized' [31].
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) [78] is another common dimensional-
ity reduction method that projects the features onto the most discriminative
directions. Unlike PCA, which obtains the direction with the largest variance
as the principal component, LDA optimizes the feature subspace of classica-
tion. The objective of LDA is to minimize the variance inside each class and
maximize the variance between dierent classes after projection. Thus, the
projection points in each class should be as close as possible, and the distance
between the center points of dierent classes should be as large as possible.
Similar to PCA, the number of features to be extracted, 'n components',
should be tuned in LDA models. Additionally, the solver type of LDA can
also be set to 'svd' for SVD, 'lsqr' for least-squares solution, or 'eigen' for
eigenvalue decomposition [79]. LDA also has a conditional hyper-parameter,
the shrinkage parameter, 'shrinkage', which can be set to a oat value along
with 'lsqr' and 'eigen' solvers.
4. Hyper-parameter Optimization Techniques
4.1. Model-free Algorithms
4.1.1. Babysitting
Babysitting, also called 'Trial and Error' or grad student descent (GSD),
is a basic hyper-parameter tuning method [8]. This method is implemented
by 100% manual tuning and widely used by students and researchers. The
workow is simple: after building a ML model, a student tests many possible
hyper-parameter values based on experience, guessing, or the analysis of
previously-evaluated results; the process is repeated until this student runs
out of time (often reaching a deadline) or is satised with the results. As such,
this approach requires a sucient amount of prior knowledge and experience
to identify optimal hyper-parameter values with limited time.
23

==== Page 24 ====
Manual tuning is infeasible for many problems due to several factors, like
a large number of hyper-parameters, complex models, time-consuming model
evaluations, and non-linear hyper-parameter interactions [9]. These factors
inspired increased research into techniques for the automatic optimization of
hyper-parameters [80].
4.1.2. Grid Search
Grid search (GS) is one of the most commonly-used methods to explore
hyper-parameter conguration space [81]. GS can be considered an exhaus-
tive search or a brute-force method that evaluates all the hyper-parameter
combinations given to the grid of congurations [82]. GS works by evaluating
the Cartesian product of a user-specied nite set of values [6].
GS cannot exploit the well-performing regions further by itself. There-
fore, to identify the global optimums, the following procedure needs to be
performed manually [2]:
1. Start with a large search space and step size.
2. Narrow the search space and step size based on the previous results of
well-performing hyper-parameter congurations.
3. Repeat step 2 multiple times until an optimum is reached.
GS can be easily implemented and parallelized. However, the main draw-
back of GS is its ineciency for high-dimensionality hyper-parameter con-
guration space, since the number of evaluations increases exponentially as
the number of hyper-parameters grows. This exponential growth is referred
to as the curse of dimensionality [83]. For GS, assuming that there are k
parameters, and each of them has ndistinct values, its computational com-
plexity increases exponentially at a rate of O(nk) [19]. Thus, only when the
hyper-parameter conguration space is small can GS be an eective HPO
method.
4.1.3. Random Search
To overcome certain limitations of GS, random search (RS) was proposed
in [13]. RS is similar to GS; but, instead of testing all values in the search
space, RS randomly selects a pre-dened number of samples between the
upper and lower bounds as candidate hyper-parameter values, and then trains
these candidates until the dened budget is exhausted. The theoretical basis
of RS is that if the conguration space is large enough, then the global
24

==== Page 25 ====
optimums, or at least their approximations, can be detected. With a limited
budget, RS is able to explore a larger search space than GS [13].
The main advantage of RS is that it is easily parallelized and resource-
allocated since each evaluation is independent. Unlike GS, RS samples a xed
number of parameter combinations from the specied distribution, which
improves system eciency by reducing the probability of wasting much time
on a small poor-performing region. Since the number of total evaluations
in RS is set to a xed value nbefore the optimization process starts, the
computational complexity of RS is O(n) [84]. In addition, RS can detect the
global optimum or the near-global optimum when given enough budgets [6].
Although RS is more ecient than GS for large search spaces, there are
still a large number of unnecessary function evaluations since it does not
exploit the previously well-performing regions [2].
To conclude, the main limitation of both RS and GS is that every eval-
uation in their iterations is independent of previous evaluations; thus, they
waste massive time evaluating poorly-performing areas of the search space.
This issue can be solved by other optimization methods, like Bayesian opti-
mization that uses previous evaluation records to determine the next evalu-
ation [14].
4.2. Gradient-based Optimization
Gradient descent [85] is a traditional optimization technique that calcu-
lates the gradient of variables to identify the promising direction and moves
towards the optimum. After randomly selecting a data point, the technique
moves towards the opposite direction of the largest gradient to locate the
next data point. Therefore, a local optimum can be reached after conver-
gence. The local optimum is also the global optimum for convex functions.
Gradient-based algorithms have a time complexity of O(nk) for optimizing k
hyper-parameters [86].
For specic machine learning algorithms, the gradient of certain hyper-
parameters can be calculated, and then the gradient descent can be used
to optimize these hyper-parameters. Although gradient-based algorithms
have a faster convergence speed to reach local optimum than the previously-
presented methods in Section 4.1, they have several limitations. Firstly, they
can only be used to optimize continuous hyper-parameters because other
types of hyper-parameters, like categorical hyper-parameters, do not have
gradient directions. Secondly, they are only ecient for convex functions
because the local instead of a global optimum may be reached for non-convex
25

==== Page 26 ====
functions [2]. Therefore, the gradient-based algorithms can only be used in
some cases where it is possible to obtain the gradient of hyper-parameters;
e.g., optimizing the learning rate in neural networks (NN) [11]. Still, it is not
guaranteed for ML algorithms to identify global optimums using gradient-
based optimization techniques.
4.3. Bayesian Optimization
Bayesian optimization (BO) [87] is an iterative algorithm that is popu-
larly used for HPO problems. Unlike GS and RS, BO determines the future
evaluation points based on the previously-obtained results. To determine the
next hyper-parameter conguration, BO uses two key components: a surro-
gate model and an acquisition function [57]. The surrogate model aims to
t all the currently-observed points into the objective function. After ob-
taining the predictive distribution of the probabilistic surrogate model, the
acquisition function determines the usage of dierent points by balancing the
trade-o between exploration and exploitation. Exploration is to sample the
instances in the areas that have not been sampled, while exploitation is to
sample in the currently promising regions where the global optimum is most
likely to occur, based on the posterior distribution. BO models balance the
exploration and the exploitation processes to detect the current most likely
optimal regions and avoid missing better congurations in the unexplored
areas [88].
The basic procedures of BO are as follows [87]:
1. Build a probabilistic surrogate model of the objective function.
2. Detect the optimal hyper-parameter values on the surrogate model.
3. Apply these hyper-parameter values to the real objective function to
evaluate them.
4. Update the surrogate model with new results.
5. Repeat steps 2 - 4 until the maximum number of iterations is reached.
Thus, BO works by updating the surrogate model after each evaluation on
the objective function. BO is more ecient than GS and RS since it can de-
tect the optimal hyper-parameter combinations by analyzing the previously-
tested values, and running a surrogate model is often much cheaper than
running the entire objective function.
However, since Bayesian optimization models are executed based on the
previously-tested values, they belong to sequential methods that are di-
26

==== Page 27 ====
cult to parallelize; but they can usually detect near-optimal hyper-parameter
combinations within a few iterations [7].
Common surrogate models for BO include Gaussian process (GP) [89],
random forest (RF) [90], and the tree Parzen estimator (TPE) [12]. There-
fore, there are three main types of BO algorithms based on their surrogate
models: BO-GP, BO-RF, BO-TPE. An alternative name for BO-RF is se-
quential model-based algorithm conguration (SMAC) [90].
4.3.1. BO-GP
Gaussian process (GP) is a standard surrogate model for objective func-
tion modeling in BO [87]. Assuming that the function fwith a mean 
and a covariance 2is a realization of a GP, the predictions follow a normal
distribution [91]:
p(yjx;D) =N 
yj^;^2
; (22)
whereDis the conguration space of hyper-parameters, and y=f(x) is
the evaluation result of each hyper-parameter value x. After obtaining a
set of predictions, the points to be evaluated next are then selected from the
condence intervals generated by the BO-GP model. Each newly-tested data
point is added to the sample records, and the BO-GP model is re-built with
the new information. This procedure is repeated until termination.
Applying a BO-GP to a size ndataset has a time complexity of O(n3)
and space complexity of O(n2) [92]. One main limitation of BO-GP is that
the cubic complexity to the number of instances limits the capacity for paral-
lelization [3]. Additionally, it is mainly used to optimize continuous variables.
4.3.2. SMAC
Random forest (RF) is another popular surrogate function for BO to
model the objective function using an ensemble of regression trees. BO using
RF as the surrogate model is also called SMAC [90].
Assuming that there is a Gaussian model N(yj^;^2), and ^and ^2are
the mean and variance of the regression function r(x), respectively, then [90]:
^=1
jBjX
r2Br(x); (23)
^2=1
jBj 1X
r2B(r(x) ^)2; (24)
27

==== Page 28 ====
whereBis a set of regression trees in the forest. The major procedures of
SMAC are as follows [3]:
1. RF starts with building Bregression trees, each constructed by sam-
plingninstances from the training set with replacement.
2. A split node is selected from dhyper-parameters for each tree.
3. To maintain a low computational cost, both the minimum number of
instances considered for further split and the number of trees to grow
are set to a certain value.
4. Finally, the mean and variance for each new conguration are estimated
by RF.
Compared with BO-GP, the main advantage of SMAC is its support for all
types of variables, including continuous, discrete, categorical, and conditional
hyper-parameters [91]. The time complexities of using SMAC to t and
predict variances are O(nlogn ) andO(logn), respectively, which are much
lower than the complexities of BO-GP [3].
4.3.3. BO-TPE
Tree-structured Parzen estimator (TPE) [12] is another common surro-
gate model for BO. Instead of dening a predictive distribution used in BO-
GP, BO-TPE creates two density functions, l(x) andg(x), to act as the
generative models for all domain variables [3]. To apply TPE, the observa-
tion results are divided into good results and poor results by a pre-dened
percentiley, and the two sets of results are modeled by simple Parzen win-
dows [12]:
p(xjy;D) =l(x); if y<y
g(x); if y>y: (25)
After that, the expected improvement in the acquisition function is re-
ected by the ratio between the two density functions, which is used to
determine the new congurations for evaluation. The Parzen estimators are
organized in a tree structure, so the specied conditional dependencies are
retained. Therefore, TPE naturally supports specied conditional hyper-
parameters [91]. The time complexity of BO-TPE is O(nlogn ), which is
lower than the complexity of BO-GP [3].
BO methods are eective for many HPO problems, even if the objective
functionfis stochastic, non-convex, or non-continuous. However, the main
drawback of BO models is that, if they fail to achieve the balance between
28

==== Page 29 ====
exploration and exploitation, they might only reach a local instead of a global
optimum. RS does not have this limitation since it does not focus on any
specic area. Additionally, it is dicult to parallelize BO models since their
intermediate results are dependent on each other [7].
4.4. Multi-delity Optimization Algorithms
One major issue with HPO is the long execution time, which increases
with a larger hyper-parameter conguration space and larger datasets. The
execution time may be several hours, several days, or even more [93]. Multi-
delity optimization techniques are common approaches to solve the con-
straint of limited time and resources. To save time, people can use a subset
of the original dataset or a subset of the features [94]. Multi-delity involves
low-delity and high-delity evaluations and combines them for practical
applications [95]. In low-delity evaluations, a relatively small subset is eval-
uated at a low cost but with poor generalization performance. In high-delity
evaluations, a relatively large subset is evaluated with better generalization
performance but at a higher cost than low-delity evaluations. In multi-
delity optimization algorithms, poorly-performing congurations are dis-
carded after each round of hyper-parameter evaluation on generated subsets,
and only well-performing hyper-parameter congurations will be evaluated
on the entire training set.
Bandit-based algorithms categorized to multi-delity optimization algo-
rithms have shown success dealing with deep learning optimization problems
[3]. Two common bandit-based techniques are successive halving [96] and
Hyperband [16].
4.4.1. Successive Halving
Theoretically speaking, exhaustive methods are able to identify the opti-
mal hyper-parameter combination by evaluating all the given combinations.
However, many factors, including limited time and resources, should be con-
sidered in practical applications. These factors are called budgets ( B). To
overcome the limitations of GS and RS and to improve eciency, successive
halving algorithms were proposed in [96].
The main process of using successive halving algorithms for HPO is as
follows. Firstly, it is presumed that there are nsets of hyper-parameter
combinations, and that they are evaluated with uniformly-allocated budgets
(b=B=n). Then, according to the evaluation results for each iteration, half
of the poorly-performing hyper-parameter congurations are eliminated, and
29

==== Page 30 ====
the better-performing half is passed to the next iteration with double budgets
(bi+1= 2bi). The above process is repeated until the nal optimal hyper-
parameter combination is detected.
Successive halving is more ecient than RS, but is aected by the trade-
o between the number of hyper-parameter congurations and the budgets
allocated to each conguration [6]. Thus, the main concern of successive
halving is how to allocate the budget and how to determine whether to test
fewer congurations with a higher budget for each or to test more congura-
tions with a lower budget for each [2].
4.4.2. Hyperband
Hyperband [16] is then proposed to solve the dilemma of successive halv-
ing algorithms by dynamically choosing a reasonable number of congura-
tions. It aims to achieve a trade-o between the number of hyper-parameter
congurations ( n) and their allocated budgets by dividing the total budgets
(B) intonpieces and allocating these pieces to each conguration ( b=B=n).
Successive halving serves as a subroutine on each set of random congura-
tions to eliminate the poorly-performing hyper-parameter congurations and
improve eciency. The main steps of Hyperband algorithms are shown in
Algorithm 1 [2].
Algorithm 1 Hyperband
Input:bmax,bmin
1:smax= log
bmax
bmin
2:fors2fbmax;bmin 1;:::; 0gdo
3:n=DetermineBudget (s)
4:=SampleConfigurations (n)
5:SuccessiveHalving ()
6:end for
7:return The best conguration so far.
Firstly, the budget constraints bminandbmaxare determined by the total
number of data points, the minimum number of instances required to train a
sensible model, and the available budgets. After that, the number of cong-
urationsnand the budget size allocated to each conguration are calculated
based onbminandbmaxin steps 2-3 of Algorithm 1. The congurations are
sampled based on nandb, and then passed to the successive halving model
30

==== Page 31 ====
demonstrated in steps 4-5. The successive halving algorithm discards the
identied poorly-performing congurations and passes the well-performing
congurations on to the next iteration. This process is repeated until the
nal optimal hyper-parameter conguration is identied. By involving the
successive halving searching method, Hyperband has a computational com-
plexity ofO(nlogn ) [16].
4.4.3. BOHB
Bayesian Optimization HyperBand (BOHB) [97] is a state-of-the-art HPO
technique that combines Bayesian optimization and Hyperband to incorpo-
rate the advantages of both while avoiding their drawbacks. The original
Hyperband uses a random search to search the hyper-parameter congura-
tion space, which has a low eciency. BOHB replaces the RS method by
BO to achieve both high performance as well as low execution time by ef-
fectively using parallel resources to optimize all types of hyper-parameters.
In BOHB, TPE is the standard surrogate model for BO, but it uses multidi-
mensional kernel density estimators. Therefore, the complexity of BOHB is
alsoO(nlogn ) [97].
It has been shown that BOHB outperforms many other optimization tech-
niques when tuning SVM and DL models [97]. The only limitation of BOHB
is that it requires the evaluations on subsets with small budgets to be rep-
resentative of evaluations on the entire training set; otherwise, BOHB may
have a slower convergence speed than standard BO models.
4.5. Metaheuristic Algorithms
Metaheuristic algorithms [98] are a set of algorithms mainly inspired by
biological theories and widely used for optimization problems. Unlike many
traditional optimization methods, metaheuristics have the capacity to solve
non-convex, non-continuous, and non-smooth optimization problems.
Population-based optimization algorithms (POAs) are a major type of
metaheuristic algorithm, including genetic algorithms (GAs), evolutionary
algorithms, evolutionary strategies, and particle swarm optimization (PSO).
POAs start by creating and updating a population as each generation; each
individual in every generation is then evaluated until the global optimum is
identied [14]. The main dierences between dierent POAs are the methods
used to generate and select populations [17]. POAs can be easily parallelized
since a population of Nindividuals can be evaluated on at most Nthreads or
31

==== Page 32 ====
machines in parallel [6]. Genetic algorithms and particle swarm optimization
are the two main POAs that are popularly-used for HPO problems.
4.5.1. Genetic Algorithm
Genetic algorithm (GA) [18] is one of the common metaheuristic algo-
rithms based on the evolutionary theory that individuals with the best sur-
vival capability and adaptability to the environment are more likely to survive
and pass on their capabilities to future generations. The next generation will
also inherit their parents' characteristics and may involve better and worse
individuals. Better individuals will be more likely to survive and have more
capable ospring, while the worse individuals will gradually disappear. After
several generations, the individual with the best adaptability will be identi-
ed as the global optimum [99].
To apply GA to HPO problems, each chromosome or individual represents
a hyper-parameter, and its decimal value is the actual input value of the
hyper-parameter in each evaluation. Every chromosome has several genes,
which are binary digits; and then crossover and mutation operations are
performed on the genes of this chromosome. The population involves all
possible values within the initialized chromosome/parameter ranges, while
the tness function characterizes the evaluation metrics of the parameters
[99].
Since the randomly-initialized parameter values often do not include the
optimal parameter values, several operations, including selection, crossover,
and mutation operations, must be performed on the well-performing chromo-
somes to identify the optimums [18]. Chromosome selection is implemented
by selecting those chromosomes with good tness function values. To keep
the population size unchanged, the chromosomes with good tness function
values are passed to the next generation with higher probability, where they
generate new chromosomes with the parents' best characteristics. Chromo-
some selection ensures that good characteristics of each generation can be
passed to later generations. Crossover is used to generate new chromosomes
by exchanging a proportion of genes in dierent chromosomes. Mutation
operations are also used to generate new chromosomes by randomly altering
one or more genes of a chromosome. Crossover and mutation operations en-
able later generations to have dierent characteristics and reduce the chance
of missing good characteristics [3].
The main procedures of GA are as follows [98]:
1. Randomly initialize the population, chromosomes, and genes, which
32

==== Page 33 ====
represent the entire search space, hyper-parameters, and hyper-parameter
values, respectively.
2. Evaluate the performance of each individual in the current generation
by calculating the tness function, which indicates the objective func-
tion of a ML model.
3. Perform selection, crossover, and mutation operations on the chromo-
somes to produce a new generation involving the next hyper-parameter
congurations to be evaluated.
4. Repeat steps 2 & 3 until the termination condition is met.
5. Terminate and output the optimal hyper-parameter conguration.
Among the above steps, the population initialization step is an impor-
tant step of GA and PSO since it provides an initial guess of the optimal
values. Although the initialized values will be iteratively improved in the
optimization process, a suitable population initialization method can signif-
icantly improve the convergence speed and performance of POAs. A good
initial population of hyper-parameters should involve individuals that are
close to global optimums by covering the promising regions and should not
be localized to an unpromising region of the search space [100].
To generate hyper-parameter conguration candidates for the initial pop-
ulation, random initialization that simply creates the initial population with
random values in the given search space is often used in GA [101]. Thus,
GA is easily implemented and does not necessitate good initializations, be-
cause its selection, crossover, and mutation operations lower the possibility
of missing the global optimum.
Hence, it is useful when the data analyst does not have much experi-
ence determining a potential appropriate initial search space for the hyper-
parameters. The main limitation of GA is that the algorithm itself introduces
additional hyper-parameters to be congured, including the tness function
type, population size, crossover rate, and mutation rate. Moreover, GA is a
sequential execution algorithm, making it dicult to parallelize. The time
complexity of GA is O(n2) [102]. As a result, sometimes, GA may be ine-
cient due to its low convergence speed.
4.5.2. Particle Swarm Optimization
Particle swarm optimization (PSO) [103] is another set of evolutionary
algorithms that are commonly used for optimization problems. PSO algo-
rithms are inspired by biological populations that exhibit both individual and
33

==== Page 34 ====
social behaviors [17]. PSO works by enabling a group of particles (swarm)
to traverse the search space in a semi-random manner [9]. PSO algorithms
identify the optimal solution through cooperation and information sharing
among individual particles in a group.
In PSO, there are a group of nparticles in a swarm S[2]:
S= (S1;S2;;Sn); (26)
and each particle Siis represented by a vector:
Si=<  !xi;  !vi;  !pi>; (27)
where  !xiis the current position,  !viis the current velocity, and  !piis the
known best position of the particle so far.
After initializing the position and velocity of each particle,very particle
evaluates the current position and records the position with its performance
score. In the next iteration, the velocity  !viof each particle is changed based
on the previous position  !piand the current global optimal position  !p:
  !vi:=  !vi+U(0;'1) (  !pi   !xi) +U(0;'2) (  !p   !xi); (28)
whereU(0;') is the continuous uniform distributions based on the accelera-
tion constants '1and'2.
After that, the particles move based on their new velocity vectors:
  !xi:=  !xi+  !vi: (29)
The above procedures are repeated until convergence or termination con-
straints are reached.
Compared with GA, it is easier to implement PSO, since PSO does not
have certain additional operations like crossover and mutation. In GA, all
chromosomes share information with each other, so the entire population
moves uniformly toward the optimal region; while in PSO, only information
on the individual best particle and the global best particle is transmitted
to others, which is a one-way ow of information sharing, and the entire
search process follows the direction of the current optimal solution [2]. The
computational complexity of PSO algorithm is O(nlogn ) [104]. In most cases,
the convergence speed of PSO is faster than of GA. In addition, particles in
PSO operate independently and only need to share information with each
34

==== Page 35 ====
other after each iteration, so this process is easily parallelized to improve
model eciency [9].
The main limitation of PSO is that it requires proper population initial-
ization; otherwise, it might only reach a local instead of a global optimum, es-
pecially for discrete hyper-parameters [105]. Proper population initialization
requires developers' prior experience or using population initialization tech-
niques. Many population initialization techniques have been proposed to im-
prove the performance of evolutionary algorithms, like the opposition-based
optimization algorithm [101] and the space transformation search method
[106]. Involving additional population initialization techniques will require
more execution time and resources.
5. Applying Optimization Techniques to Machine Learning Algo-
rithms
5.1. Optimization Techniques Analysis
Grid search (GS) is a simple method, its major limitation being that it is
time-consuming and impacted by the curse of dimensionality [83]. Thus, it is
unsuitable for a large number of hyper-parameters. Moreover, GS is often not
able to detect the global optimum of continuous parameters, since it requires
a pre-dened, nite set of hyper-parameter values. It is also unrealistic for
GS to be used to identify integer and continuous hyper-parameter optimums
with limited time and resources. Therefore, compared with other techniques,
GS is only ecient for a small number of categorical hyper-parameters.
Random search is more ecient than GS and supports all types of hyper-
parameters. In practical applications, using RS to evaluate the randomly-
selected hyper-parameter values helps analysts to explore a large search
space. However, since RS does not consider previously-tested results, it may
involve many unnecessary evaluations, which decrease its eciency [13].
Hyperband can be considered an improved version of RS, and they both
support parallel executions. Hyperband balances model performance and
resource usage, so it is more ecient than RS, especially with limited time
and resources [15]. However, GS, RS, and Hyperband all have a major con-
straint in that they treat each hyper-parameter independently and do not
consider hyper-parameter correlations [107]. Thus, they will be inecient
for ML algorithms with conditional hyper-parameters, like SVM, DBSCAN,
and logistic regression.
35

==== Page 36 ====
Gradient-based algorithms are not a prevalent choice for hyper-parameter
optimization, since they only support continuous hyper-parameters and can
only detect a local instead of a global optimum for non-convex HPO problems
[2]. Therefore, gradient-based algorithms can only be used to optimize certain
hyper-parameters, like the learning rate in DL models.
Bayesian optimization models are divided into three dierent models |
BO-GP, SMAC, and BO-TPE | based on their surrogate models. BO algo-
rithms determine the next hyper-parameter value based on the previously-
evaluated results to reduce unnecessary evaluations and improve eciency.
BO-GP mainly supports continuous and discrete hyper-parameters (by round-
ing them), but does not support conditional hyper-parameters [14]; while
SMAC and BO-TPE are both able to handle categorical, discrete, continu-
ous, and conditional hyper-parameters. SMAC performs better when there
are many categorical and conditional parameters, or cross-validation is used,
while BO-GP performs better for only a few continuous parameters [15].
BO-TPE preserves the specied conditional relationships, so one advantage
of BO-TPE over BO-GP is its innate support for specied conditional hyper-
parameters [14].
Metaheuristic algorithms, including GA and PSO, are more complicated
than many other HPO algorithms, but often perform well for complex op-
timization problems. They support all types of hyper-parameters and are
particularly ecient for large conguration spaces, since they can obtain the
near-optimal solutions even within very few iterations. However, GA and
PSO have their own advantages and disadvantages in practical use. PSO
is able to support large-scale parallelization, and is particularly suitable for
continuous and conditional HPO problems [19]; on the other hand, GA is
executed sequentially, making it dicult to be parallelized. Therefore, PSO
often executes faster than GA, especially for large conguration spaces and
large datasets. However, an appropriate population initialization is crucial
for PSO; otherwise, it may converge slowly or only identify a local instead of
a global optimum. Yet, the impact of proper population initialization is not
as signicant for GA as for PSO [108]. Another limitation of GA is that it
introduces additional hyper-parameters, like its crossover and mutation rates
[18].
The strengths and limitations of the hyper-parameter optimization algo-
rithms involved in this paper are summarized in Table 1.
36

==== Page 37 ====
Table 1: The comparison of common HPO algorithms ( nis the number of hyper-parameter
values and kis the number of hyper-parameters)
HPO
MethodStrengths Limitations Time
Com-
plexity
GS ·Simple.·Time-consuming,
·Only ecient with categorical
HPs.O(nk)
RS·More ecient than GS.
·Enable parallelization.·Not consider previous results.
·Not ecient with conditional
HPs.O(n)
Gradient-
based
models·Fast convergence speed for con-
tinuous HPs.·Only support continuous HPs.
·May only detect local optimums.O(nk)
BO-GP·Fast convergence speed for con-
tinuous HPs.·Poor capacity for parallelization.
·Not ecient with conditional
HPs.O(n3)
SMAC ·Ecient with all types of HPs. ·Poor capacity for parallelization. O(nlogn )
BO-TPE·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Keep conditional dependencies.·Poor capacity for parallelization. O(nlogn )
Hyperband ·Enable parallelization.·Not ecient with conditional
HPs.
·Require subsets with small bud-
gets to be representative.O(nlogn )
BOHB·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Enable parallelization.·Require subsets with small bud-
gets to be representative.O(nlogn )
GA·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Not require good initialization.·Poor capacity for parallelization. O(n2)
PSO·Ecient with all types of HPs.
·Enable parallelization.·Require proper initialization. O(nlogn )
5.2. Apply HPO Algorithms to ML Models
Since there are many dierent HPO methods for dierent use cases, it
is crucial to select the appropriate optimization techniques for dierent ML
models.
Firstly, if we have access to multiple delities, which means that it is able
to dene meaningful budgets: the performance rankings of hyper-parameter
congurations evaluated on small budgets should be the same as or simi-
lar to the conguration rankings on the full budget (the original dataset);
BOHB would be the best choice, since it has the advantages of both BO and
Hyperband [6] [97].
On the other hand, if multiple delities are not applicable, which means
that using the subsets of the original dataset or the subsets of original features
is misleading or too noisy to reect the performance of the entire dataset,
BOHB may perform poorly with higher time complexity than standard BO
37

==== Page 38 ====
models, then choosing other HPO algorithms would be more ecient [97].
ML algorithms can be classied by the characteristics of their hyper-
parameter congurations. Appropriate optimization algorithms can be cho-
sen to optimize the hyper-parameters based on these characteristics.
5.2.1. One Discrete Hyper-parameter
Commonly for some ML algorithms, like certain neighbor-based, clus-
tering, and dimensionality reduction algorithms, only one discrete hyper-
parameter needs to be tuned. For KNN, the major hyper-parameter is k,
the number of considered neighbors. The most essential hyper-parameter of
k-means, hierarchical clustering, and EM is the number of clusters. Similarly,
for dimensionality reduction algorithms, including PCA and LDA, their basic
hyper-parameter is 'n components', the number of features to be extracted.
In these situations, Bayesian optimization is the best choice, and the
three surrogates could be tested to nd the best one. Hyperband is another
good choice, which may have a fast execution speed due to its capacity for
parallelization. In some cases, people may want to ne-tune the ML model by
considering other less important hyper-parameters, like the distance metric
of KNN and the SVD solver type of PCA; so BO-TPE, GA, or PSO could
be chosen for these situations.
5.2.2. One Continuous Hyper-parameter
Some linear models, including ridge and lasso algorithms, and some na ve
Bayes algorithms, involving multinomial NB, Bernoulli NB, and complement
NB, generally only have one vital continuous hyper-parameter to be tuned.
In ridge and lasso algorithms, the continuous hyper-parameter is 'alpha', the
regularization strength. In the three NB algorithms mentioned above, the
critical hyper-parameter is also named 'alpha', but it represents the additive
(Laplace/Lidstone) smoothing parameter. In terms of these ML algorithms,
BO-GP is the best choice, since it is good at optimizing a small number of
continuous hyper-parameters. Gradient-based algorithms can also be used,
but might only detect local optimums, so they are less eective than BO-GP.
5.2.3. A Few Conditional Hyper-parameters
It is noticeable that many ML algorithms have conditional hyper-parameters,
like SVM, LR, and DBSCAN. LR has three correlated hyper-parameters,
'penalty', 'C', and the solver type. Similarly, DBSCAN has 'eps' and 'min samples'
that must be tuned in conjunction. SVM is more complex, since after setting
38

==== Page 39 ====
a dierent kernel type, there is a separate set of conditional hyper-parameters
that need to be tuned next, as described in Section 3.1.3. Hence, some HPO
methods that cannot eectively optimize conditional hyper-parameters, in-
cluding GS, RS, BO-GP, and Hyperband, are not suitable for ML models
with conditional hyper-parameters. For these ML methods, BO-TPE is the
best choice if we have pre-dened relationships among the hyper-parameters.
SMAC is also a good choice, since it also performs well for tuning conditional
hyper-parameters. GA and PSO can be used, as well.
5.2.4. A Large Hyper-parameter Conguration Space with Multiple Types of
Hyper-parameters
Tree-based algorithms, including DT, RF, ET, and XGBoost, as well
as DL algorithms, like DNN, CNN, RNN, are the most complex types of
ML algorithms to bed tuned, since they have many hyper-parameters with
various, dierent types. For these ML models, PSO is the best choice since it
enables parallel executions to improve eciency, particularly for DL models
that often require massive training time. Some other techniques, like GA,
BO-TPE, and SMAC can also be used, but they may cost more time than
PSO, since it is dicult to parallelize these techniques.
5.2.5. Categorical Hyper-parameters
This category of hyper-parameters is mainly for ensemble learning algo-
rithms, since their major hyper-parameter is a categorical hyper-parameter.
For bagging and AdaBoost, the categorical hyper-parameter is 'base estimator',
which is set to be a singular ML model. For voting, it is 'estimators', in-
dicating a list of ML singular models to be combined. The voting method
has another categorical hyper-parameter, 'voting', which is used to choose
whether to use a hard or soft voting method. If we only consider these cate-
gorical hyper-parameters, GS would be sucient to detect their suitable base
machine learners. On the other hand, in many cases, other hyper-parameters
need to be considered, like 'n estimators', 'max samples', and 'max features'
in bagging, as well as 'n estimators' and 'learning rate' in AdaBoost; conse-
quently, BO algorithms would be a better choice to optimize these continuous
or discrete hyper-parameters.
In conclusion, when tuning a ML model to achieve high model perfor-
mance and low computational costs, the most suitable HPO algorithm should
be selected based on the properties of its hyper-parameters.
39

==== Page 40 ====
6. Existing HPO Frameworks
To tackle HPO problems, many open-source libraries exist to apply theory
into practice and lower the threshold for ML developers. In this section,
we provide a brief introduction to some popular open-source HPO libraries
or frameworks mainly for Python programming. The principles behind the
involved optimization algorithms are provided in Section 4.
6.1. Sklearn
In sklearn [31], 'GridSearchCV' can be implemented to detect the optimal
hyper-parameters using the GS algorithm. Each hyper-parameter value in
the human-dened conguration space is evaluated by the program, with
its performance evaluated using cross-validation. When all the instances in
the conguration space have been evaluated, the optimal hyper-parameter
combination in the dened search space with its performance score will be
returned.
'RandomizedSearchCV' is also provided in sklearn to implement a RS
method. It evaluates a pre-dened number of randomly-selected hyper-
parameter values in parallel. Cross-validation is conducted to eectively
evaluate the performance of each conguration.
6.2. Spearmint
Spearmint [87] is a library using Bayesian optimization with the Gaussian
process as the surrogate model. Spearmint's primary deciency is that it is
not very ecient for categorical and conditional hyper-parameters.
6.3. BayesOpt
Bayesian Optimization (BayesOpt) [109] is a Python library employed
to solve HPO problems using BO. BayesOpt uses a Gaussian process as its
surrogate model to calculate the objective function based on past evaluations
and utilizes an acquisition function to determine the next values.
6.4. Hyperopt
Hyperopt [110] is a HPO framework that involves RS and BO-TPE as
the optimization algorithms. Unlike some of the other libraries that only
support a single model, Hyperopt is able to use multiple models to model
hierarchical hyper-parameters. In addition, Hyperopt is parallelizable since
it uses MongoDb as the central database to store the hyper-parameter combi-
nations. Hyperopt-sklearn [111] and hyperas [112] are the two libraries that
can apply Hyperopt to scikit-learn and Keras libraries.
40

==== Page 41 ====
6.5. SMAC
SMAC [90][113] is another library that uses BO with random forest as the
surrogate model. It supports categorical, continuous, and discrete variables.
6.6. BOHB
BOHB framework [97] is a combination of Bayesian optimization and Hy-
perband [15]. It overcomes one limitation of Hyperband, in that it randomly
generates the test congurations, by replacing this procedure by BO. TPE
is used as the surrogate model to store and model function evaluations. Us-
ing BOHB to evaluate the instance can achieve a trade-o between model
performance and the current budget.
6.7. Optunity
Optunity [83] is a popular HPO framework that provides several optimiza-
tion techniques, including GS, RS, PSO, and BO-TPE. In Optunity, categori-
cal hyper-parameters are converted to discrete hyper-parameters by indexing,
and discrete hyper-parameters are processed as continuous hyper-parameters
by rounding them; as such, it supports all types of hyper-parameters.
6.8. Skopt
Skopt (scikit-optimize) [114] is a HPO library that is built on top of
the scikit-learn [31] library. It implements several sequential model-based
optimization models, including RS and BO-GP. The methods exhibit good
performance with small search space and proper initialization.
6.9. GpFlowOpt
GpFlowOpt [115] is a Python library for BO using GP as the surrogate
model. It supports running BO-GP on GPU using the Tensorow library.
Therefore, GpFlowOpt is a good choice if BO is used in deep learning models
with GPU resources available.
6.10. Talos
Talos [116] is a Python package designed for hyper-parameter optimiza-
tion with Keras models. Talos can be fully deployed into any Keras models
and implemented easily without learning any new syntax. Several optimiza-
tion techniques, including GS, RS, and probabilistic reduction, can be im-
plemented using Talos.
41

==== Page 42 ====
6.11. Sherpa
Sherpa [117] is a Python package used for HPO problems. It can be used
with other ML libraries, including sklearn [31], Tensorow[118], and Keras
[33]. It supports parallel computations and has several optimization methods,
including GS, RS, BO-GP (via GPyOpt), Hyperband, and population-based
training (PBT).
6.12. Osprey
Osprey [119] is a Python library designed to optimize hyper-parameters.
Several HPO strategies are available in Osprey, including GS, RS, BO-TPE
(via Hyperopt), and BO-GP (via GPyOpt).
6.13. FAR-HO
FAR-HO [120] is a hyper-parameter optimization package that employs
gradient-based algorithms with TensorFlow. FAR-HO contains a few gradient-
based optimizers, like reverse hyper-gradient and forward hyper-gradient
methods. This library is designed to build access to the gradient-based hyper-
parameter optimizers in TensorFlow, allowing deep learning model training
and hyper-parameter optimization in GPU or other tensor-optimized com-
puting environments.
6.14. Hyperband
Hyperband [16] is a Python package for tuning hyper-parameters by Hy-
perband, a bandit-based approach. Similar to 'GridSearchCV' and 'Random-
izedSearchCV' in scikit-learn, there is a class named 'HyperbandSearchCV'
in Hyperband that can be combined with sklearn and used for HPO problems.
In 'HyperbandSearchCV' method, cross-validation is used for evaluation.
6.15. DEAP
DEAP [121] is a novel evolutionary computation package for Python that
contains several evolutionary algorithms like GA and PSO. It integrates with
parallelization mechanisms like multiprocessing, and machine learning pack-
ages like sklearn.
42

==== Page 43 ====
6.16. TPOT
TPOT [122] is a Python tool for auto-ML that uses genetic programming
to optimize ML pipelines. TPOT is built on top of sklearn, so it is easy to
implement TPOT on ML models. 'TPOTClassier' is its principal function,
and several additional hyper-parameters of GA must be set to t specic
problems.
6.17. Nevergrad
Nevergrad [123] is an open-source Python library that includes a wide
range of optimizers, like fast-GA and PSO. In ML, Nevergrad can be used
to tune all types of hyper-parameters, including discrete, continuous, and
categorical hyper-parameters, by choosing dierent optimizers.
7. Experiments
To summarize the content of Sections 3 to 6, a comprehensive overview
of applying hyper-parameter optimization techniques to ML models is shown
in Table 2. It provides a summary of common ML algorithms, their hyper-
parameters, suitable optimization methods, and available Python libraries;
thus, data analysts and researchers can look up this table and select suitable
optimization algorithms as well as libraries for practical use.
To put theory into practice, several experiments have been conducted
based on Table 2. This section provides the experiments of applying eight
dierent HPO techniques to three common and representative ML algorithms
on two benchmark datasets. In the rst part of this section, the experimental
setup and the main process of HPO are discussed. In the second part, the
results of utilizing dierent HPO methods are compared and analyzed. The
sample code of the experiments has been published in [124] to illustrate the
process of applying hyper-parameter optimization to ML models.
7.1. Experimental Setup
Based on the steps to optimize hyper-parameters discussed in Section
2.2, several steps were completed before the actual optimization experiments
start.
Firstly, two standard benchmarking datasets provided by the sklearn li-
brary [31], namely, the Modied National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology dataset (MNIST) and the Boston housing dataset, are selected as
43

==== Page 44 ====
Table 2: A comprehensive overview of common ML models, their hyper-parameters, suit-
able optimization techniques, and available Python libraries
ML Algorithm Main HPs Optional HPs HPO methods Libraries
Linear regression - - - -
Ridge & lasso alpha - BO-GP Skpot
Logistic regressionpenalty,
c,
solver-BO-TPE,
SMACHyperopt,
SMAC
KNN nneighborsweights,
p,
algorithmBOs,
HyperbandSkpot,
Hyperopt,
SMAC,
Hyperband
SVMC,
kernel,
epsilon (for SVR)gamma,
coef0,
degreeBO-TPE,
SMAC,
BOHBHyperopt,
SMAC,
BOHB
NB alpha - BO-GP Skpot
DTcriterion,
max depth,
minsamples split,
minsamples leaf,
max featuressplitter,
minweight fraction leaf,
max leafnodesGA,
PSO,
BO-TPE,
SMAC,
BOHBTPOT,
Optunity,
SMAC,
BOHB
RF & ETnestimators
max depth,
criterion,
minsamples split,
minsamples leaf,
max featuressplitter,
minweight fraction leaf,
max leafnodesGA,
PSO,
BO-TPE,
SMAC,
BOHBTPOT,
Optunity,
SMAC,
BOHB
XGBoostnestimators,
max depth,
learning rate,
subsample,
colsample bytree,minchild weight,
gamma,
alpha,
lambdaGA,
PSO,
BO-TPE,
SMAC,
BOHBTPOT,
Optunity,
SMAC,
BOHB
Votingestimators,
votingweights GS sklearn
Baggingbase estimator,
nestimatorsmax samples,
max featuresGS,
BOssklearn,
Skpot,
Hyperopt,
SMAC
AdaBoostbase estimator,
nestimators,
learning rate-BO-TPE,
SMACHyperopt,
SMAC
Deep learningnumber of hidden layers,
`units' per layer,
loss,
optimizer,
Activation,
learning rate,
dropout rate,
epochs,
batch size,
early stop patiencenumber of frozen layers
(if transfer learning
is used)PSO,
BOHBOptunity,
BOHB
K-means nclustersinit,
ninit,
max iterBOs,
HyperbandSkpot,
Hyperopt,
SMAC,
Hyperband
Hierarchical clusteringnclusters,
distance thresholdlinkageBOs,
HyperbandSkpot,
Hyperopt,
SMAC,
Hyperband
DBSCANeps,
minsamples-BO-TPE,
SMAC,
BOHBHyperopt,
SMAC,
BOHB
Gaussian mixture ncomponentscovariance type,
max iter,
tolBO-GP Skpot
PCA ncomponents svdsolverBOs,
HyperbandSkpot,
Hyperopt,
SMAC,
Hyperband
LDA ncomponentssolver,
shrinkageBOs,
HyperbandSkpot,
Hyperopt,
SMAC,
Hyperband
44

==== Page 45 ====
the benchmark datasets for HPO method evaluation on data analytics prob-
lems. MNIST is a hand-written digit recognition dataset used as a multi-
classication problem, while the Boston housing dataset contains information
about the price of houses in various places in the city of Boston and can be
used as a regression dataset to predict the housing prices.
At the next stage, the ML models with their objective function need to be
congured. In Section 5.2, all common ML models are divided into ve cat-
egories based on their hyper-parameter types. Among those ML categories,
"one discrete hyper-parameter", "a few conditional hyper-parameters", and
"a large hyper-parameter conguration space with multiple types of hyper-
parameters" are the three most common cases. Thus, three ML algorithms,
KNN, SVM, and RF, are selected as the target models to be optimized, since
their hyper-parameter types represent the three most common HPO cases:
KNN has one important hyper-parameter, the number of considered near-
est neighbors for each sample; SVM has a few conditional hyper-parameters,
like the kernel type and the penalty parameter C; RF has multiple hyper-
parameters of dierent types, as discussed in Section 3.1.5. Moreover, KNN,
SVM, and RF can all be applied to solve both classication and regression
problems.
In the next step, the performance metrics and evaluation methods are
congured. For each experiment on the selected two datasets, 3-fold cross
validation is implemented to evaluate the involved HPO methods. The two
most commonly-used performance metrics are used in our experiments. For
classication models, accuracy is used as the classier performance metric,
which is the proportion of correctly classied data; while for regression mod-
els, the mean squared error (MSE) is used as the regressor performance
metric, which measures the average squared dierence between the predicted
values and the actual values. Additionally, the computational time (CT) ,
the total time needed to complete a HPO process with 3-fold cross-validation,
is also used as the model eciency metric [55]. In each experiment, the op-
timized ML model architecture that has the highest accuracy or the lowest
MSE and the optimal hyper-parameter conguration will be returned.
After that, to fairly compare dierent optimization algorithms and frame-
works, certain constraints should be satised. Firstly, we compare dierent
HPO methods using the same hyper-parameter conguration space. For
KNN, the only hyper-parameter to be optimized, 'n neighbors', is set to be
in the same range of 1 to 20 for each optimization method evaluation. The
hyper-parameters of SVM and RF models for classication and regression
45

==== Page 46 ====
Table 3: Conguration space for the hyper-parameters of tested ML models
ML Model Hyper-parameter Type Search Space
RF Classiernestimators Discrete [10,100]
max depth Discrete [5,50]
minsamples split Discrete [2,11]
minsamples leaf Discrete [1,11]
criterion Categorical ['gini', 'entropy']
max features Discrete [1,64]
SVM ClassierC Continuous [0.1,50]
kernel Categorical ['linear', 'poly', 'rbf', 'sigmoid']
KNN Classier nneighbors Discrete [1,20]
RF Regressornestimators Discrete [10,100]
max depth Discrete [5,50]
minsamples split Discrete [2,11]
minsamples leaf Discrete [1,11]
criterion Categorical ['mse', 'mae']
max features Discrete [1,13]
SVM RegressorC Continuous [0.1,50]
kernel Categorical ['linear', 'poly', 'rbf', 'sigmoid']
epsilon Continuous [0.001,1]
KNN Regressor nneighbors Discrete [1,20]
problems are also set to be in the same conguration space for each type of
problem. The specics of the conguration space for ML models are shown
in Table 3. The selected hyper-parameters and their search space are deter-
mined based on the concepts in Section 3, domain knowledge, and manual
testings [81]. The hyper-parameter types of each ML algorithm are also
summarized in Table 3.
On the other hand, to fairly compare the performance metrics of opti-
mization techniques, the maximum number of iterations for all HPO methods
is set to 50 for RF and SVM model optimizations, and 10 for KNN model
optimization based on manual testings and domain knowledge. Moreover,
to avoid the impacts of randomness, all experiments are repeated ten times
with dierent random seeds, and results are averaged for regression problems
or given the majority vote for classication problems.
In Section 4, more than ten HPO methods are introduced. In our exper-
iments, eight representative HPO approaches are selected for performance
comparison, including GS, RS, BO-GP, BO-TPE, Hyperband, BOHB, GA,
and PSO. After setting up the fair experimental environments for each HPO
method, the HPO experiments are implemented based on the steps discussed
in Section 2.2.
All experiments were conducted using Python 3.5 on a machine with
46

==== Page 47 ====
Table 4: Performance evaluation of applying HPO methods to the RF classier on the
MNIST dataset
Optimization
AlgorithmAccuracy
(%)CT(s)
Default HPs 90.65 0.09
GS 93.32 48.62
RS 93.38 16.73
BO-GP 93.38 20.60
BO-TPE 93.88 12.58
Hyperband 93.38 8.89
BOHB 93.38 9.45
GA 93.83 19.19
PSO 93.73 12.43
6 Core i7-8700 processor and 16 gigabytes (GB) of memory. The involved
ML and HPO algorithms are evaluated using multiple open-source Python li-
braries and frameworks introduced in Section 6, including sklearn [31], Skopt
[114], Hyperopt [110], Optunity [83], Hyperband [16], BOHB [97], and TPOT
[122].
7.2. Performance Comparison
The experiments of applying eight dierent HPO methods to ML models
are summarized in Tables 4 to 9. Tables 4 to 6 provide the performance
of each optimization algorithm when applied to RF, SVM, and KNN classi-
ers evaluated on the MNIST dataset after a complete optimization process;
while Tables 7 to 9 demonstrate the performance of each HPO method when
applied to RF, SVM, and KNN regressors evaluated on the Boston-housing
dataset. In the rst step, each ML model with its default hyper-parameter
conguration is trained and evaluated as the baseline model. After that, each
HPO algorithm is implemented on the ML models to evaluate and compare
their accuracies for classication problems, or MSEs for regression problems,
as well as their computational time (CT).
From Tables 4 to 9, we can see that using the default HP congurations
do not yield the best model performance in our experiments, which empha-
sizes the importance of utilizing HPO methods. GS and RS can be seen as
baseline models for HPO problems. From the results in Tables 4 to 9, it is
shown that the computational time of GS is often much higher than other
optimization methods. With the same search space size, RS is faster than
GS, but both of them cannot guarantee to detect the near-optimal hyper-
parameter congurations of ML models, especially for RF and SVM models
47

==== Page 48 ====
Table 5: Performance evaluation of applying HPO methods to the SVM classier on the
MNIST dataset
Optimization
AlgorithmAccuracy
(%)CT(s)
Default HPs 97.05 0.29
GS 97.44 32.90
RS 97.35 12.48
BO-GP 97.50 17.56
BO-TPE 97.44 3.02
Hyperband 97.44 11.37
BOHB 97.44 8.18
GA 97.44 16.89
PSO 97.44 8.33
Table 6: Performance evaluation of applying HPO methods to the KNN classier on the
MNIST dataset
Optimization
AlgorithmAccuracy
(%)CT(s)
Default HPs 96.27 0.24
GS 96.22 7.86
RS 96.33 6.44
BO-GP 96.83 1.12
BO-TPE 96.83 2.33
Hyperband 96.22 4.54
BOHB 97.44 3.84
GA 96.83 2.34
PSO 96.83 1.73
Table 7: Performance evaluation of applying HPO methods to the RF regressor on the
Boston-housing dataset
Optimization
AlgorithmMSE CT(s)
Default HPs 31.26 0.08
GS 29.02 4.64
RS 27.92 3.42
BO-GP 26.79 17.94
BO-TPE 25.42 1.53
Hyperband 26.14 2.56
BOHB 25.56 1.88
GA 26.95 4.73
PSO 25.69 3.20
48

==== Page 49 ====
Table 8: Performance evaluation of applying HPO methods to the SVM regressor on the
Boston-housing dataset
Optimization
AlgorithmMSE CT(s)
Default HPs 77.43 0.02
GS 67.07 1.33
RS 61.40 0.48
BO-GP 61.27 5.87
BO-TPE 59.40 0.33
Hyperband 73.44 0.32
BOHB 59.67 0.31
GA 60.17 1.12
PSO 58.72 0.53
Table 9: Performance evaluation of applying HPO methods to the KNN regressor on the
Boston-housing dataset
Optimization
AlgorithmMSE CT(s)
Default HPs 81.48 0.004
GS 81.53 0.12
RS 80.77 0.11
BO-GP 80.77 0.49
BO-TPE 80.83 0.08
Hyperband 80.87 0.10
BOHB 80.77 0.09
GA 80.77 0.33
PSO 80.74 0.19
49

==== Page 50 ====
which have a larger search space than KNN.
The performance of BO and multi-delity models is much better than GS
and RS. The computation time of BO-GP is often higher than other HPO
methods due to its cubic time complexity, but it can obtain better perfor-
mance metrics for ML models with small-size continuous hyper-parameter
space, like KNN. Conversely, hyperband is often not able to obtain the
highest accuracy or the lowest MSE among the optimization methods, but
their computational time is low because it works on the small-sized subsets.
The performance of BO-TPE and BOHB is often better than others, since
they can detect the optimal or near-optimal hyper-parameter congurations
within a short computational time.
For metaheuristics methods, GA and PSO, their accuracies are often
higher than other HPO methods for classication problems, and their MSEs
are often lower than other optimization techniques. However, their computa-
tional time is often higher than BO-TPE and multi-delity models, especially
for GA, which does not support parallel executions.
To summarize, it is simple to implement GS and RS, but they often can-
not detect the optimal hyper-parameter congurations or cost much compu-
tational time. BO-GP and GA also cost more computational time than many
other HPO methods, but BO-GP works well on small conguration space,
while GA is eective for large conguration space. Hyperband's computa-
tional time is low, but it cannot guarantee to detect the global optimums.
For ML models with large conguration space, BO-TPE, BOHB, and PSO
often work well.
8. Open Issues, Challenges, and Future Research Directions
Although there have been many existing HPO algorithms and practical
frameworks, some issues still need to be addressed, and several aspects in this
domain could be improved. In this section, we discuss the open challenges,
current research questions, and potential research directions in the future.
They can be classied as model complexity challenges and model performance
challenges, as summarized in Table 10.
8.1. Model Complexity
8.1.1. Costly Objective Function Evaluations
To evaluate the performance of a ML model with dierent hyper-parameter
congurations, its objective function must be minimized in each evaluation.
50

==== Page 51 ====
Table 10: The open challenges and future directions of HPO research
Category Challenges & Future Re-
quirementsBrief Description
Model complexityCostly objective function eval-
uationsHPO methods should reduce evaluation time
on large datasets.
Complex search space HPO methods should reduce execution time on
high dimensionalities (large hyper-parameter
search space).
Model performanceStrong anytime performance HPO methods should be able to detect the op-
timal or near-optimal HPs even with a very
limited budget.
Strong nal performance HPO methods should be able to detect the
global optimum when given a sucient bud-
get.
Comparability There should exist a standard set of bench-
marks to fairly evaluate and compare dierent
optimization algorithms.
Over-tting and generalization The optimal HPs detected by HPO methods
should have generalizability to build ecient
models on unseen data.
Randomness HPO methods should reduce randomness on
the obtained results.
Scalability HPO methods should be scalable to multi-
ple libraries or platforms ( e.g., distributed ML
platforms).
Continuous updating capabil-
ityHPO methods should consider their capacity
to detect and update optimal HP combinations
on continuously-updated data.
Depending on the scale of data, the model complexity, and available compu-
tational resources, the evaluation of each hyper-parameter conguration may
cost several minutes, hours, days, or even more [93]. Additionally, the values
of certain hyper-parameters have a direct impact on the execution time, like
the number of considered neighbors in KNN, the number of basic decision
trees in RF, and the number of hidden layers in deep neural networks [125].
To solve this problem by HPO algorithms, BO models reduce the to-
tal number of evaluations by spending time choosing the next evaluating
point instead of simply evaluating all possible hyper-parameter congura-
tions; however, they still require much execution time due to their poor
capacity for parallelization. On the other hand, although multi-delity opti-
mization methods, like Hyperband, have had some success dealing with HPO
problems with limited budgets, there are still some problems that cannot be
eectively solved by HPO due to the complexity of models or the scale of
datasets [6]. For example, the ImageNet [126] challenge is a very popular
problem in the image processing domain, but there has not been any re-
51

==== Page 52 ====
search or work on eciently optimizing hyper-parameters for the ImageNet
challenge yet, due to its huge scale and the complexity of CNN models used
on ImageNet.
8.1.2. Complex Search Space
In many problems to which ML algorithms are applied, only a few hyper-
parameters have signicant eects on model performance, and they are the
main hyper-parameters that require tuning. However, certain other unimpor-
tant hyper-parameters may still aect the performance slightly and may be
considered to optimize the ML model further, which increases the dimension-
ality of hyper-parameter search space. As the number of hyper-parameters
and congurations increase, they exponentially increase the dimensionality of
the search space and the complexity of the problems, and the total objective
function evaluation time will also increase exponentially [7]. Therefore, it is
necessary to reduce the inuence of large search spaces on execution time by
improving existing HPO methods.
8.2. Model Performance
8.2.1. Strong Anytime Performance and Final Performance
HPO techniques are often expensive and sometimes require extreme re-
sources, especially for massive datasets or complex ML models. One exam-
ple of a resource-intensive model is deep learning models, since they view
objective function evaluations as black-box functions and do not consider
their complexity. However, the overall budget is often very limited for most
practical situations, so HPO algorithms should be able to prioritize objective
function evaluations and have a strong anytime performance, which indicates
the capacity to detect optimal or near-optimal congurations even with a very
limited budget [97]. For instance, an ecient HPO method should have a
high convergence speed so that there would not be a huge dierence between
the results before and after model convergence, and should avoid random
results even if time and resources are limited, like RS methods cannot.
On the other hand, if conditions permit and an adequate budget is given,
HPO approaches should be able to identify the global optimal hyper-parameter
conguration, named a strong nal performance [97].
8.2.2. Comparability of HPO Methods
To optimize the hyper-parameters of ML models, dierent optimization
algorithms can be applied to each ML framework. Dierent optimization
52

==== Page 53 ====
techniques have their own strengths and drawbacks in dierent cases, and
currently, there is no single optimization approach that outperforms all other
approaches when processing dierent datasets with various metrics and hyper-
parameter types [3]. In this paper, we have analyzed the strengths and weak-
nesses of common hyper-parameter optimization techniques based on their
principles and their performance in practical applications; but this topic
could be extended more comprehensively.
To solve this problem, a standard set of benchmarks could be designed
and agreed on by the community for a better comparison of dierent HPO
algorithms. For example, there is a platform called COCO (Comparing Con-
tinuous Optimizers) [127] that provides benchmarks and analyzes common
continuous optimizers. However, there is, to date, not any reliable platform
that provides benchmarks and analysis of all common hyper-parameter opti-
mization approaches. It would be easier for people to choose HPO algorithms
in practical applications if a platform like COCO exists for HPO problems.
In addition, a unied metric can also improve the comparability of dier-
ent HPO algorithms, since dierent metrics are currently used in dierent
practical problems [6].
On the other hand, based on the comparison of dierent HPO algorithms,
a way to further improve HPO is to combine existing models or propose new
models that contain as many benets as possible and are more suitable for
practical problems than existing singular models. For example, the BOHB
method [97] has had some success dealing with HPO problems by combining
Bayesian optimization and Hyperband. In addition, future research should
consider both model performance and time budgets to develop HPO algo-
rithms that suit real-world applications.
8.2.3. Over-tting and Generalization
Generalization is another issue with HPO models. Since hyper-parameter
evaluations are done with a nite number of evaluations in datasets, the
optimal hyper-parameter values detected by HPO approaches might not be
the same optimums on previously-unseen data. This is similar to over-tting
issues with ML models that occur when a model is closely t to a nite
number of known data points but is unt to unseen data [128]. Generalization
is also a common concern for multi-delity algorithms, like Hyperband and
BOHB, since they need to extract subsets to represent the entire dataset.
One solution to reduce or avoid over-tting is to use cross-validation to
identify a stable optimum that performs best in all or most of the subsets
53

==== Page 54 ====
instead of a sharp optimum that only performs well in a singular validation
set [6]. However, cross-validation increases the execution time several-fold. It
would be benecial if methods can better deal with overtting and improve
generalization in future research.
8.2.4. Randomness
There are stochastic components in the objective function of ML algo-
rithms; thus, in some cases, the optimal hyper-parameter conguration might
be dierent after each run. This randomness could be due to various pro-
cedures of certain ML models, like neural network initialization, or dierent
sampled subsets in a bagging model [93]; or due to certain procedures of
HPO algorithms, like crossover and mutation operations in GA. In addition,
it is often dicult for HPO methods to identify the global optimums, due to
the fact that HPO problems are mainly NP-hard problems. Many existing
HPO algorithms can only collect several dierent near-optimal values, which
is caused by randomness. Thus, the existing HPO models can be further
improved to reduce the impact of randomness. One possible solution is to
run a HPO method multiple times and select the hyper-parameter value that
occurs most as the nal optimum.
8.2.5. Scalability
In practice, one main limitation of many existing HPO frameworks is that
they are tightly integrated with one or a couple of machine learning libraries,
like sklearn and Keras, which restricts them to only work with a single node
instead of large data volumes [3]. To tackle large datasets, some distributed
machine learning platforms, like Apache SystemML [129] and Spark MLib
[130], have been developed; however, only very few HPO frameworks exist
that support distributed ML. Therefore, more research eorts and scalable
HPO frameworks, like the ones supporting distributed ML platforms, should
be developed to support more libraries.
On the other hand, future practical HPO algorithms should have the
scalability to eciently optimize hyper-parameters from a small size to a
large size, irrespective of whether they are continuous, discrete, categorical,
or conditional hyper-parameters.
8.2.6. Continuous Updating Capability
In practice, many datasets are not stationary and are constantly updated
by adding new data and deleting old data. Correspondingly, the optimal
54

==== Page 55 ====
hyper-parameter values or combinations may also change with the changes
in data. Currently, developing HPO methods with the capacity to continu-
ously tune hyper-parameter values as the data changes has not drawn much
attention, since researchers and data analysts often do not alter the ML
model after achieving a currently optimal performance [3]. However, since
their optimal hyper-parameter values would change as data changes, proper
approaches should be proposed to achieve continuous updating capability.
9. Conclusion
Machine learning has become the primary strategy for tackling data-
related problems and has been widely used in various applications. To apply
ML models to practical problems, their hyper-parameters need to be tuned to
t specic datasets. However, since the scale of produced data is greatly in-
creased in real-life, and manually tuning hyper-parameters is extremely com-
putationally expensive, it has become crucial to optimize hyper-parameters
by an automatic process. In this survey paper, we have comprehensively dis-
cussed the state-of-the-art research into the domain of hyper-parameter opti-
mization as well as how to apply them to dierent ML models by theory and
practical experiments. To apply optimization methods to ML models, the
hyper-parameter types in a ML model is the main concern for HPO method
selection. To summarize, BOHB is the recommended choice for optimizing a
ML model, if randomly selected subsets are highly-representative of the given
dataset, since it can eciently optimize all types of hyper-parameters; other-
wise, BO models are recommended for small hyper-parameter conguration
space, while PSO is usually the best choice for large conguration space.
Moreover, some existing useful HPO tools and frameworks, open challenges,
and potential research directions are also provided and highlighted for prac-
tical use and future research purposes. We hope that our survey paper serves
as a useful resource for ML users, developers, data analysts, and researchers
to use and tune ML models utilizing proper HPO techniques and frameworks.
We also hope that it helps to enhance understanding of the challenges that
still exist within the HPO domain, and thereby further advancing HPO and
ML applications in future research.
References
[1] M.I. Jordan, T.M. Mitchell, Machine learning: Trends,
perspectives, and prospects, Science 349 (2015) 255{260.
55

==== Page 56 ====
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa8415.
[2] M.-A. Z oller and M. F. Huber, Benchmark and Survey of Auto-
mated Machine Learning Frameworks, arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12054,
(2019). https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.12054.
[3] R. E. Shawi, M. Maher, S. Sakr, Automated machine learning: State-
of-the-art and open challenges, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02287, (2019).
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02287.
[4] M. Kuhn and K. Johnson, Applied Predictive Modeling, Springer (2013)
ISBN: 9781461468493.
[5] G.I. Diaz, A. Fokoue-Nkoutche, G. Nannicini, H. Samu-
lowitz, An eective algorithm for hyperparameter optimiza-
tion of neural networks, IBM J. Res. Dev. 61 (2017) 1{20.
https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2017.2709578.
[6] F. Hutter, L. Kottho, and J. Vanschoren, Eds., Automatic Ma-
chine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges, Springer (2019) ISBN:
9783030053185.
[7] N. Decastro-Garc a, A. L. Mu~ noz Casta~ neda, D. Escudero Garc a, and
M. V. Carriegos, Eect of the Sampling of a Dataset in the Hyperparam-
eter Optimization Phase over the Eciency of a Machine Learning Algo-
rithm, Complexity 2019 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/6278908.
[8] S. Abreu, Automated Architecture Design for Deep Neu-
ral Networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10714, (2019).
http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10714.
[9] O. S. Steinholtz, A Comparative Study of Black-box Optimization Algo-
rithms for Tuning of Hyper-parameters in Deep Neural Networks, M.S.
thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng., Lule a Univ. Technol., (2018).
[10] G. Luo, A review of automatic selection methods for machine learn-
ing algorithms and hyper-parameter values, Netw. Model. Anal. Heal.
Informatics Bioinforma. 5 (2016) 1{16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13721-
016-0125-6.
56

==== Page 57 ====
[11] D. Maclaurin, D. Duvenaud, R.P. Adams, Gradient-based Hyper-
parameter Optimization through Reversible Learning, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1502.03492, (2015). http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03492.
[12] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. K egl, Algorithms for hyper-
parameter optimization, Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., (2011)
2546{2554.
[13] B. James and B. Yoshua, Random Search for Hyper-Parameter Opti-
mization, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 13 (1) (2012) 281{305.
[14] K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, F. Hutter, J. Bergstra, J. Snoek, H.
Hoos, K. Leyton-Brown, Towards an Empirical Foundation for Assess-
ing Bayesian Optimization of Hyperparameters, BayesOpt Work. (2013)
1{5.
[15] K. Eggensperger, F. Hutter, H.H. Hoos, K. Leyton-Brown, Ecient
benchmarking of hyperparameter optimizers via surrogates, Proc. Natl.
Conf. Artif. Intell. 2 (2015) 1114{1120.
[16] L. Li, K. Jamieson, G. DeSalvo, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar,
Hyperband: A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter opti-
mization, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 18 (2012) 1{52.
[17] Q. Yao et al. , Taking Human out of Learning Applications: A Survey on
Automated Machine Learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13306, (2018).
http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.13306.
[18] S. Lessmann, R. Stahlbock, S.F. Crone, Optimizing hyperparameters of
support vector machines by genetic algorithms, Proc. 2005 Int. Conf.
Artif. Intell. ICAI'05. 1 (2005) 74{80.
[19] P. R. Lorenzo, J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok, L. S. Ramos, and J. R. Paster,
Particle swarm optimization for hyper-parameter selection in deep neu-
ral networks, Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Genet. Evol. Comput., (2017)
481{488.
[20] S. Sun, Z. Cao, H. Zhu, J. Zhao, A Survey of Optimization Methods
from a Machine Learning Perspective, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06821,
(2019). https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.06821.
57

==== Page 58 ====
[21] T.M. S. Bradley, A. Hax, Applied Mathematical Programming,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts. (1977).
[22] S. Bubeck, Convex optimization: Algorithms and com-
plexity, Found. Trends Mach. Learn. 8 (2015) 231{357.
https://doi.org/10.1561/2200000050.
[23] B. Shahriari, A. Bouchard-C^ ot e, and N. de Freitas, \Unbounded
Bayesian optimization via regularization," Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist.,
(2016) 1168{1176.
[24] G.I. Diaz, A. Fokoue-Nkoutche, G. Nannicini, H. Samu-
lowitz, An eective algorithm for hyperparameter optimiza-
tion of neural networks, IBM J. Res. Dev. 61 (2017) 1{20.
https://doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2017.2709578.
[25] C. Gambella, B. Ghaddar, and J. Naoum-Sawaya, Optimization Mod-
els for Machine Learning: A Survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05331,
(2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.05331.
[26] E. R. Sparks, A. Talwalkar, D. Haas, M. J. Franklin, M. I. Jordan, and
T. Kraska, Automating model search for large scale machine learning,
Proc. 6th ACM Symp. Cloud Comput., (2015) 368{380.
[27] J. Nocedal and S. Wright, Numerical Optimization, (2006) Springer-
Verlag, ISBN: 978-0-387-40065-5.
[28] A. Moubayed, M. Injadat, A. Shami, H. Lutyya, DNS Typo-Squatting
Domain Detection: A Data Analytics & Machine Learning Based Ap-
proach, 2018 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. GLOBECOM 2018 - Proc.
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOM.2018.8647679.
[29] R. Caruana, A. Niculescu-Mizil, An empirical comparison of super-
vised learning algorithms, ACM Int. Conf. Proceeding Ser. 148 (2006)
161{168. https://doi.org/10.1145/1143844.1143865.
[30] O. Kramer, Scikit-Learn, in Machine Learning for Evolution Strategies.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, (2016) 45{53.
[31] F. Pedregosa et al. , Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python, J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 12 (2011) 2825{2830.
58

==== Page 59 ====
[32] T.Chen, C.Guestrin, XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.02754, (2016). http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.02754.
[33] F. Chollet, Keras, 2015. https://github.com/fchollet/keras.
[34] C. Gambella, B. Ghaddar, J. Naoum-Sawaya, Optimiza-
tion Models for Machine Learning: A Survey, (2019) 1{40.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.05331
[35] C.M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. (2006)
Springer, ISBN: 978-0-387-31073-2.
[36] A.E. Hoerl, R.W. Kennard, Ridge Regression: Applications
to Nonorthogonal Problems, Technometrics. 12 (1970) 69{82.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1970.10488635.
[37] L.E. Melkumova, S.Y. Shatskikh, Comparing Ridge and LASSO
estimators for data analysis, Procedia Eng. 201 (2017) 746{755.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.09.615.
[38] R. Tibshirani, Regression Shrinkage and Selection Via the Lasso, J. R.
Stat. Soc. Ser. B. 58 (1996) 267{288. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-
6161.1996.tb02080.x.
[39] D.W. Hosmer Jr, S. Lemeshow, Applied logistic regression, Technomet-
rics, 34 (1) (2013), 358-359.
[40] J.O. Ogutu, T. Schulz-Streeck, H.P. Piepho, Genomic selection using
regularized linear regression models: ridge regression, lasso, elastic net
and their extensions, BMC Proceedings. BioMed Cent. 6 (2012).
[41] J.M. Keller, M.R. Gray, A Fuzzy K-Nearest Neighbor Algo-
rithm, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. SMC-15 (1985) 580{585.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.1985.6313426.
[42] W. Zuo, D. Zhang, K. Wang, On kernel dierence-weighted k-
nearest neighbor classication, Pattern Anal. Appl. 11 (2008) 247{257.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10044-007-0100-z.
[43] A. Smola, V. Vapnik, Support vector regression machines, Adv. Neural
Inf. Process. Syst. 9 (1997) 155-161.
59

==== Page 60 ====
[44] L. Yang, R. Muresan, A. Al-Dweik, L.J. Hadjileontiadis,
Image-Based Visibility Estimation Algorithm for Intelligent
Transportation Systems, IEEE Access. 6 (2018) 76728{76740.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2884225.
[45] L. Yang, Comprehensive Visibility Indicator Algorithm for Adaptable
Speed Limit Control in Intelligent Transportation Systems, M.A.Sc. the-
sis, University of Guelph, 2018.
[46] O.S. Soliman, A.S. Mahmoud, A classication system for remote sensing
satellite images using support vector machine with non-linear kernel
functions, 2012 8th Int. Conf. Informatics Syst. INFOS 2012. (2012)
BIO-181-BIO-187.
[47] I. Rish, An empirical study of the naive Bayes classier, IJCAI 2001
Work. Empir. methods Artif. Intell., (2001), 41-46.
[48] J.N. Sulzmann, J. F urnkranz, E. H ullermeier, On pairwise naive bayes
classiers, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (Including Subser. Lect. Notes
Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics). 4701 LNAI (2007) 371{381.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-74958-5 35.
[49] C. Bustamante, L. Garrido, R. Soto, Comparing fuzzy Naive
Bayes and Gaussian Naive Bayes for decision making in RoboCup
3D, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (Including Subser. Lect. Notes Ar-
tif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics). 4293 LNAI (2006) 237{247.
https://doi.org/10.1007/11925231 23.
[50] A.M. Kibriya, E. Frank, B. Pfahringer, G. Holmes, Multinomial naive
bayes for text categorization revisited, Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. (Sub-
series Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 3339 (2004) 488{499.
[51] J.D.M. Rennie, L. Shih, J. Teevan, D.R. Karger Tackling the poor as-
sumptions of Naive Bayes text classiers, Proc. Twent. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn. ICML (2003), 616-623.
[52] V. Narayanan, I. Arora, and A. Bhatia, Fast and accurate sentiment
classication using an enhanced na ve Bayes model, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1305.6143, (2013). https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.6143.
60

==== Page 61 ====
[53] S. Rasoul, L. David, A Survey of Decision Tree Classier Methodology,
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern. 21 (1991) 660{674.
[54] D.M. Manias, M. Jammal, H. Hawilo, A. Shami, P. Heidari,
A. Larabi, R. Brunner, Machine Learning for Performance-
aware Virtual Network Function Placement, 2019 IEEE Glob.
Commun. Conf. GLOBECOM 2019 - Proc. (2019) 12{17.
https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOBECOM38437.2019.9013246.
[55] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, I. Hamieh, A. Shami, Tree-based in-
telligent intrusion detection system in internet of vehicles, 2019
IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. GLOBECOM 2019 - Proc. (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOBECOM38437.2019.9013892.
[56] S. Sanders, C. Giraud-Carrier, Informing the use of hyper-
parameter optimization through metalearning, Proc. - IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, ICDM. 2017-Novem (2017) 1051{1056.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM.2017.137.
[57] M. Injadat, F. Salo, A.B. Nassif, A. Essex, A. Shami, Bayesian
Optimization with Machine Learning Algorithms Towards
Anomaly Detection, 2018 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. (2018) 1{6.
https://doi.org/10.1109/glocom.2018.8647714.
[58] F. Salo, M.N. Injadat, A. Moubayed, A.B. Nassif, A. Essex, Clustering
Enabled Classication using Ensemble Feature Selection for Intrusion
Detection, 2019 Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. ICNC 2019. (2019)
276{281. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCNC.2019.8685636.
[59] K. Arjunan, C.N. Modi, An enhanced intrusion detection frame-
work for securing network layer of cloud computing, ISEA
Asia Secur. Priv. Conf. 2017, ISEASP 2017. (2017) 1{10.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISEASP.2017.7976988.
[60] Y. Xia, C. Liu, Y.Y. Li, N. Liu, A boosted decision tree approach using
Bayesian hyper-parameter optimization for credit scoring, Expert Syst.
Appl. 78 (2017) 225{241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.02.017.
[61] T. G. Dietterich, Ensemble methods in machine learning, Mult. Classif.
Syst., 1857 (2000), 1-15.
61

==== Page 62 ====
[62] A. Moubayed, E. Aqeeli, A. Shami, Ensemble-based Feature Selection
and Classication Model for DNS Typo-squatting Detection, in: 2020
IEEE Can. Conf. Electr. Comput. Eng., 2020.
[63] W. Yin, K. Kann, M. Yu, and H. Sch utze, Comparative Study
of CNN and RNN for Natural Language Processing, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.01923, (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs1702.01923
[64] A. Koutsoukas, K.J. Monaghan, X. Li, J. Huan, Deep-learning: In-
vestigating deep neural networks hyper-parameters and comparison of
performance to shallow methods for modeling bioactivity data, J. Chem-
inform. 9 (2017) 1{13. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-017-0226-y.
[65] T. Domhan, J.T. Springenberg, F. Hutter, Speeding up automatic hy-
perparameter optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of
learning curves, IJCAI Int. Jt. Conf. Artif. Intell. 2015-January (2015)
3460{3468.
[66] Y. Ozaki, M. Yano, M. Onishi, Eective hyperparameter optimization
using Nelder-Mead method in deep learning, IPSJ Trans. Comput. Vis.
Appl. 9 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41074-017-0030-7.
[67] F.C. Soon, H.Y. Khaw, J.H. Chuah, J. Kanesan, Hyper-parameters op-
timisation of deep CNN architecture for vehicle logo recognition, IET
Intell. Transp. Syst. 12 (2018) 939{946. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-
its.2018.5127.
[68] D. Han, Q. Liu, W. Fan, A new image classication method using CNN
transfer learning and web data augmentation, Expert Syst. Appl. 95
(2018) 43{56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.11.028.
[69] C. Di Francescomarino, M. Dumas, M. Federici, C. Ghidini, F.M. Maggi,
W. Rizzi, L. Simonetto, Genetic algorithms for hyperparameter opti-
mization in predictive business process monitoring, Inf. Syst. 74 (2018)
67{83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2018.01.003.
[70] A. Moubayed, M. Injadat, A. Shami, H. Lutyya, Stu-
dent Engagement Level in e-Learning Environment: Cluster-
ing Using K-means, Am. J. Distance Educ. 34 (2020) 1{20.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08923647.2020.1696140.
62

==== Page 63 ====
[71] T. K. Moon, The expectation-maximization algorithm, IEEE Signal
Process. Mag. 13 (6) (1996) 47{60.
[72] S. Brahim-Belhouari, A. Bermak, M. Shi, P.C.H. Chan, Fast and Ro-
bust gas identication system using an integrated gas sensor technol-
ogy and Gaussian mixture models, IEEE Sens. J. 5 (2005) 1433{1444.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2005.858926.
[73] Z. Y., K. G., Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms for Document Dataset,
Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 10 (2005) 141{168.
[74] K. Khan, S.U. Rehman, K. Aziz, S. Fong, S. Sarasvady, A.
Vishwa, DBSCAN: Past, present and future, 5th Int. Conf.
Appl. Digit. Inf. Web Technol. ICADIWT 2014. (2014) 232{238.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICADIWT.2014.6814687.
[75] H. Zhou, P. Wang, H. Li, Research on adaptive parameters determina-
tion in DBSCAN algorithm, J. Inf. Comput. Sci. 9 (2012) 1967{1973.
[76] J. Shlens, A Tutorial on Principal Component Analysis, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1404.1100, (2014). https://arxiv.org/abs1404.1100
[77] N. Halko, P. Martinsson, J. Tropp, Finding structure with randomness:
probabilistic algorithms for constructing approximate matrix decompo-
sitions, SIAM Rev. 53 (2) (2011), pp. 217-288
[78] M. Loog, Conditional linear discriminant analysis,
Proc. - Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. 2 (2006) 387{390.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPR.2006.402.
[79] P. Howland, J. Wang, H. Park, Solving the small sample size problem in
face recognition using generalized discriminant analysis, Pattern Recog-
nit. 39 (2006) 277{287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2005.06.013.
[80] I. Ilievski, T. Akhtar, J. Feng, C.A. Shoemaker, Ecient hyperparam-
eter optimization of deep learning algorithms using deterministic RBF
surrogates, 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. AAAI 2017. (2017) 822{829.
[81] M.N. Injadat, A. Moubayed, A.B. Nassif, A. Shami, Sys-
tematic Ensemble Model Selection Approach for Educational
Data Mining, Knowledge-Based Syst. 200 (2020) 105992.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.105992.
63

==== Page 64 ====
[82] M. Injadat, A. Moubayed, A.B. Nassif, A. Shami, Multi-split Optimized
Bagging Ensemble Model Selection for Multi-class Educational Data
Mining, Springer's Appl. Intell. (2020).
[83] M. Claesen, J. Simm, D. Popovic, Y. Moreau, and B. De Moor, Easy Hy-
perparameter Search Using Optunity, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1114,
(2014). https://arxiv.org/abs1412.1114.
[84] C. Witt, Worst-case and average-case approximations by simple random-
ized search heuristics, in: Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Symposium
on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS'05, Stuttgart, Ger-
many, 2005, pp. 44{56.
[85] Y. Bengio, Gradient-based optimization of hyperparameters, Neural
Comput. 12 (8) (2000) 1889-1900.
[86] H. H. Yang and S. I. Amari, Complexity Issues in Natural Gradient
Descent Method for Training Multilayer Perceptrons, Neural Comput.
10 (8) (1998) 2137{2157.
[87] J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, R. Adams Practical Bayesian optimization of
machine learning algorithms Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 4 (2012),
2951-2959.
[88] E. Hazan, A. Klivans, and Y. Yuan, Hyperparameter optimiza-
tion: a spectral approach, arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00764, (2017).
https://arxiv.org/abs1706.00764.
[89] M. Seeger, Gaussian processes for machine learning, Int. J. Neural Syst.,
14 (2004), 69-106.
[90] F. Hutter, H. H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown, Sequential model-based
optimization for general algorithm conguration, Proc. LION 5, (2011)
507-523.
[91] I. Dewancker, M. McCourt, S. Clark, Bayesian Optimization Primer,
(2015) URL: https://sigopt.com/static/pdf/SigOpt Bayesian Optimiza-
tion Primer.pdf
[92] J. Hensman, N. Fusi, and N. D. Lawrence, Gaussian pro-
cesses for big data, arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.6835, (2013).
https://arxiv.org/abs/1309.6835.
64

==== Page 65 ====
[93] M. Claesen and B. De Moor, Hyperparameter Search in
Machine Learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02127, (2015).
https://arxiv.org/abs1502.02127.
[94] L. Bottou, Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient de-
scent, Proceedings of the COMPSTAT, Springer (2010) 177-186.
[95] S. Zhang, J. Xu, E. Huang, C.H. Chen, A new optimal sam-
pling rule for multi-delity optimization via ordinal transformation,
IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Sci. Eng. 2016-Novem (2016) 670{674.
https://doi.org/10.1109/COASE.2016.7743467.
[96] Z. Karnin, T. Koren, O. Somekh, Almost optimal exploration in multi-
armed bandits, 30th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. ICML 2013. 28 (2013)
2275{2283.
[97] S. Falkner, A. Klein, F. Hutter, BOHB: Robust and Ecient Hyper-
parameter Optimization at Scale, 35th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. ICML
2018. 4 (2018) 2323{2341.
[98] A. Gogna, A. Tayal, Metaheuristics: Review and appli-
cation, J. Exp. Theor. Artif. Intell. 25 (2013) 503{526.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0952813X.2013.782347.
[99] F. Itano, M.A. De Abreu De Sousa, E. Del-Moral-Hernandez, Extend-
ing MLP ANN hyper-parameters Optimization by using Genetic Al-
gorithm, Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Neural Networks. 2018-July (2018) 1{8.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2018.8489520.
[100] B. Kazimipour, X. Li, A.K. Qin, A Review of Population Initialization
Techniques for Evolutionary Algorithms, 2014 IEEE Congr. Evol. Com-
put. (2014) 2585{2592. https://doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2014.6900618.
[101] S. Rahnamayan, H.R. Tizhoosh, M.M.A. Salama, A novel pop-
ulation initialization method for accelerating evolutionary al-
gorithms, Comput. Math. with Appl. 53 (2007) 1605{1614.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2006.07.013.
[102] F. G. Lobo, D. E. Goldberg, and M. Pelikan, Time complexity of ge-
netic algorithms on exponentially scaled problems, Proc. Genet. Evol.
Comput. Conf., (2000) 151-158.
65

==== Page 66 ====
[103] Y. Shi, R.C. Eberhart, Parameter Selection in Particle Swarm Opti-
mization, Evolutionary Programming VII, Springer (1998) 591-600.
[104] X. Yan, F. He, Y. Chen, A Novel Hardware / Software Parti-
tioning Method Based on Position Disturbed Particle Swarm Op-
timization with Invasive Weed Optimization, 32 (2017) 340{355.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11390-017-1714-2.
[105] M.Y. Cheng, K.Y. Huang, M. Hutomo, Multiobjective Dynamic-
Guiding PSO for Optimizing Work Shift Schedules, J. Constr.
Eng. Manag. 144 (2018) 1{7. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-
7862.0001548.
[106] H. Wang, Z. Wu, J. Wang, X. Dong, S. Yu, G. Chen, A
new population initialization method based on space transformation
search, 5th Int. Conf. Nat. Comput. ICNC 2009. 5 (2009) 332{336.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNC.2009.371.
[107] J. Wang, J. Xu, and X. Wang, Combination of Hyper-
band and Bayesian Optimization for Hyperparameter Optimiza-
tion in Deep Learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01596, (2018).
https://arxiv.org/abs1801.01596.
[108] P. Cazzaniga, M.S. Nobile, D. Besozzi, The impact of particles initial-
ization in PSO: Parameter estimation as a case in point, 2015 IEEE
Conf. Comput. Intell. Bioinforma. Comput. Biol. CIBCB 2015. (2015)
1{8. https://doi.org/10.1109/CIBCB.2015.7300288.
[109] R. Martinez-Cantin, BayesOpt: A Bayesian optimization library for
nonlinear optimization, experimental design and bandits, J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 15 (2015) 3735{3739.
[110] J. Bergstra, B. Komer, C. Eliasmith, D. Yamins, D.D. Cox, Hyper-
opt: A Python library for model selection and hyperparameter opti-
mization, Comput. Sci. Discov. 8 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1088/1749-
4699/8/1/014008.
[111] B. Komer, J. Bergstra, and C. Eliasmith, Hyperopt-sklearn: Automatic
hyperparameter conguration for scikit-learn, Proc. ICML Workshop
AutoML, (2014) 34{40.
66

==== Page 67 ====
[112] M. Pumperla, Hyperas, 2019. http://maxpumperla.com/hyperas/.
[113] M. Lindauer, K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, S. Falkner, A. Biedenkapp,
and F. Hutter, Smac v3: Algorithm conguration in python, 2017.
https://github.com/automl/SMAC3.
[114] Tim Head, MechCoder, Gilles Louppe, et al. , scikitoptimize/scikit-
optimize: v0.5.2, 2018. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1207017.
[115] N. Knudde, J. van der Herten, T. Dhaene, and I. Couckuyt,
GPowOpt: A Bayesian Optimization Library using TensorFlow, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.03845, (2017). https://arxiv.org/abs1711.03845.
[116] Autonomio Talos [Computer software], 2019.
http://github.com/autonomio/talos.
[117] L. Hertel, P. Sadowski, J. Collado, P. Baldi, Sherpa: Hyperparameter
Optimization for Machine Learning Models, Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst. (2018).
[118] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro,
et al. , TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heteroge-
neous Distributed Systems, arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467, (2016).
https://arxiv.org/abs1603.04467.
[119] J. Grandgirard, D. Poinsot, L. Krespi, J.P. N enon, A.M. Cortesero, Os-
prey: Hyperparameter Optimization for Machine Learning, 103 (2002)
239{248. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00034.
[120] L. Franceschi, M. Donini, P. Frasconi, and M. Pontil, Forward and
reverse gradient-based hyperparameter optimization, 34th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. ICML 2017, 70 (2017) 1165-1173.
[121] F.A. Fortin, F.M. De Rainville, M.A. Gardner, M. Parizeau, C. Gag ne,
DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made easy, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 13
(2012) 2171{2175.
[122] R. S. Olson and J. H. Moore, TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization
tool for automating machine learning, Auto Mach. Learn. (2019) 151-
160. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05318-5 8
67

==== Page 68 ====
[123] J. Rapin and O. Teytaud, Nevergrad - A gradient-free optimization
platform, 2018. https://GitHub.com/FacebookResearch/Nevergrad.
[124] L. Yang and A. Shami, Hyperparameter Opti-
mization of Machine Learning Algorithms, 2020.
https://github.com/LiYangHart/Hyperparameter-Optimization-of-
Machine-Learning-Algorithms.
[125] C.M. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, Oxford Uni-
versity Press (1995).
[126] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G.E. Hinton, Imagenet classication with
deep convolutional neural networks, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25
(2012) 1097-1105
[127] N. Hansen, A. Auger, O. Mersmann, T. Tusar, and D. Brock-
ho, COCO: A Platform for Comparing Continuous Optimizers
in a Black-Box Setting, arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08785, (2016).
https://arxiv.org/abs1603.08785.
[128] G.C. Cawley, N.L.C. Talbot, On over-tting in model selection and
subsequent selection bias in performance evaluation, J. Mach. Learn.
Res. 11 (2010) 2079{2107.
[129] M. Boehm, A. Surve, S. Tatikonda, et al. , SystemML: declarative
machine learning on spark, Proc. VLDB Endow. 9 (2016) 1425{1436.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3007263.3007279.
[130] X. Meng, J. Bradley, B. Yavuz, et al. , Mllib: machine learning in apache
spark, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 17 (1) (2016) 1235-1241.
68

==== Page 69 ====
Li Yang received his Ph.D. in Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering from Western University, London,
Canada, in August 2022, his MASc. degree in Engineer-
ing from the University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada, 2018,
and his B.E. degree in Computer Science from Wuhan
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in
2016. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Associate and Ses-
sional Lecturer in the Optimized Computing and Commu-
nications (OC2) Lab at Western University. His research
interests include cybersecurity, machine learning, AutoML, deep learning,
network data analytics, Internet of Things (IoT), anomaly detection, online
learning, concept drift, and time series data analytics.
Abdallah Shami is currently a Professor in the Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering Department and the
Acting Associate Dean (Research) of the Faculty of Engi-
neering, Western University, London, ON, Canada, where
he is also the Director of the Optimized Computing and
Communications Laboratory. Dr. Shami has chaired key
symposia for the IEEE GLOBECOM, IEEE International
Conference on Communications, and IEEE International
Conference on Computing, Networking and Communica-
tions. He was the elected Chair for the IEEE Communica-
tions Society Technical Committee on Communications Software from 2016
to 2017 and the IEEE London Ontario Section Chair from 2016 to 2018. He
is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Mobile Com-
puting, IEEE Internet of Things, and IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials journals.
69

