==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)Philosophy & Technology (2023) 36:28
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-023-00635-6
1 3
RESEARCH ARTICLE
On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning
David S. Watson1 
Received: 9 September 2022 / Accepted: 6 April 2023 / Published online: 21 April 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Unsupervised learning algorithms are widely used for many important statistical 
tasks with numerous applications in science and industry. Yet despite their preva-
lence, they have attracted remarkably little philosophical scrutiny to date. This 
stands in stark contrast to supervised and reinforcement learning algorithms, which 
have been widely studied and critically evaluated, often with an emphasis on ethical 
concerns. In this article, I analyze three canonical unsupervised learning problems: 
clustering, abstraction, and generative modeling. I argue that these methods raise 
unique epistemological and ontological questions, providing data-driven tools for 
discovering natural kinds and distinguishing essence from contingency. This analy -
sis goes some way toward filling the lacuna in contemporary philosophical discourse 
on unsupervised learning, as well as bringing conceptual unity to a heterogeneous 
field more often described by what it is not  (i.e., supervised or reinforcement learn-
ing) than by what it is. I submit that unsupervised learning is not just a legitimate 
subject of philosophical inquiry but perhaps the most fundamental branch of all AI. 
However, an uncritical overreliance on unsupervised methods poses major epistemic 
and ethical risks. I conclude by advocating for a pragmatic, error-statistical approach 
that embraces the opportunities and mitigates the challenges posed by this powerful 
class of algorithms.
Keywords Machine learning · Metaphysics · Epistemology · Clustering · 
Abstraction · Generative modeling
1 Introduction
Machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly integrated into every aspect 
of our lives. Whether it is recommending movies, diagnosing diseases, or defend-
ing against cyberattacks, ML has emerged as one of the dominant technologies of 
our age, powering countless advances in diverse fields such as robotics, particle 
 * David S. Watson 
 david.watson@kcl.ac.uk
1 Department of Informatics, King’s College London, London, UK

==== Page 2 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 2 of 26
physics, and personal finance. Practitioners typically distinguish between three main 
branches of ML: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning.1 The first 
pertains to prediction problems, e.g., labeling images. The third pertains to policy 
optimization, e.g., learning boardgames. The subject of this article is the second 
branch, for which pithy descriptions are not nearly so straightforward.
To the extent that contemporary philosophers have engaged with ML at all, the 
focus has overwhelmingly been on supervised and reinforcement learning. For 
instance, many ethicists have critically evaluated the social, economic, and political 
impact of automated decision systems, typically identified with supervised learn-
ing models for scoring, ranking, and classification (Gabriel, 2020; Mittelstadt et al., 
2016; Tsamados et al., 2021; Zimmermann & Lee-Stronach, 2021). Philosophers of 
science have exploited the mathematical guarantees of supervised and reinforcement 
learning to defend or refine favored theories of knowledge and complexity (Corfield 
et  al., 2009; Harman & Kulkarni, 2007; Schurz, 2019; Sterkenburg & Grünwald, 
2021). Reinforcement learning has become a popular tool in evolutionary game the-
ory, social epistemology, and other settings where interactions between agents and 
environments can lead to unexpected results (Barrett et  al., 2019; LaCroix, 2020; 
Mayo-Wilson & Zollman, 2021; Skyrms, 2010). This sampling is no doubt imper -
fect and incomplete, but it serves to capture general trends and highlight an obvious 
lacuna.
Unsupervised learning is simply not a mainstream subject of contemporary phil-
osophical discourse. Exceptions to the trend are notable primarily for their scarcity. 
Clustering algorithms have inspired some theoretical analyses (Ackerman & Ben-
David, 2009; Hennig, 2015), primarily among practicing statisticians and com-
puter scientists—more on this in Section  2. A class of generative models known as 
“deepfakes” has attracted understandable concern among ethicists (de Ruiter, 2021; 
Öhman, 2022), as well as reflections on the nature of synthetic media (Millière, 
2022)—more on this in Sections. 4 –5. The success of adversarial methods, which 
fool high-performance classifiers by adding strategic perturbations to input data, 
has led some to speculate that these tools can detect genuine features of our real-
ity that are beyond human understanding (Buckner, 2020), an intriguing but so far 
underdeveloped proposal. In a recent article by Pääkkönen and Ylikoski (2021), 
the authors argue that topic modeling—an unsupervised learning algorithm for text 
mining—can help ground hermeneutic interpretation in objective evidence. Their 
analysis is limited to text data, with a focus on social scientific applications. Sev -
eral recent bibliometric studies have used topic modeling to analyze large corpora 
of philosophical publications (Kinney, 2022; Malaterre et al., 2021; Noichl, 2021). 
Though unsupervised learning methods are used in these works, they are not them-
selves the subject of inquiry. Unsupervised learning has received some attention 
in cognitive science and philosophy of mind, but even here the subject tends to get 
1 These categories are not mutually exclusive. Semi-supervised and self-supervised methods fall some-
where between the first two, for example. The so-called foundation models that have attracted particular 
attention in recent years (e.g., ChatGPT and DALL-E2) are examples of self-supervised learning. Such 
hybrids are beyond the scope of this article. See Bommasani et al. (2022).

==== Page 3 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 3 of 26 28
short shrift. For instance, proponents of predictive processing have suggested that 
their framework may accommodate unsupervised learning under certain conditions 
(Clark, 2017; Hohwy, 2020). This claim is typically made in passing, with little or 
no evidence, followed by copious supervised and reinforcement learning examples.
It is unclear why unsupervised learning algorithms have been so philosophically 
neglected, especially given their widespread use and impressive performance. Such 
technologies underlie popular models for fraud detection, machine translation, can-
cer subtyping, image compression, and countless more applications across various 
domains. One possible reason for their silence is that philosophers are generally par -
tial to well-defined concepts and clear success criteria, neither of which are imme-
diately forthcoming in this subfield. By far the least cohesive branch of ML, unsu-
pervised learning is a heterogeneous mix of methods left over after we have defined 
away the neater areas of supervised and reinforcement learning. According to the 
authors of one famous ML textbook, the field is characterized by “learning with-
out a teacher….The goal is to directly infer the properties of [a] probability density 
without the help of a supervisor…providing correct answers or degree-of-error for 
each observation” (Hastie et al., 2009, p. 486). In other words, unsupervised learn-
ing algorithms seek to find structure in data without recourse to labels (as in super -
vised learning) or reward signals (as in reinforcement learning). Just what “struc-
ture” amounts to, and how we should determine better or worse structures without 
any external feedback, are problems that each unsupervised learning algorithm must 
resolve in its own way.
I shall argue that unsupervised learning poses profound philosophical questions 
that are distinct from those raised by alternative branches of ML. These questions 
pertain to how and whether we can identify natural kinds, infer essential and contin-
gent properties, and imagine unrealized possibilities—all in a fully adaptive, data-
driven manner that eschews supervision. I examine three canonical unsupervised 
learning tasks—clustering (Section  2), abstraction (Section  3), and generative mod-
eling (Section  4)—and show how each forms a metaphysical hypothesis about its 
training data, and by extension the target system. I submit that unsupervised learn-
ing is ontologically fundamental—more so, at any rate, than supervised or reinforce-
ment learning algorithms, which necessarily presume some a priori division of the 
world into endogenous inputs (features) and exogenous outputs (errors/rewards). 
Following this critical exegesis, I examine the ethical implications and epistemolog-
ical limits of unsupervised learning (Section  5). I argue that the risk of self-delusion 
is especially acute with these algorithms, since their “fully automated” nature may 
seduce us into believing strange, potentially dangerous conclusions. I close with a 
summary and proposals for future research (Section 6).
Before going any further, I must make a few brief comments on notation. Though 
I will strive to keep statistical jargon to a minimum, I am afraid some formalisms 
are unavoidable. Unsupervised learning generally begins with a matrix of training 
data X, consisting of n samples and d features. A single observation is represented 
by a vector xi,i∈{1,…,n} , which can be considered a point in d-dimensional 
space. Features Xj,j∈{ 1,…,d}, may in principle be continuous or discrete. Since 
mixed covariates pose challenges for the methods below—challenges that are far 
from insurmountable but frankly irrelevant for our purposes—we will assume for 

==== Page 4 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 4 of 26
simplicity that all features are continuous. The domain of Xj is denoted with cal-
ligraphic Xj , while the complete domain is X=X1×⋯×Xd . Data are distributed 
according to some distribution P with probability density function p. Though some 
unsupervised learning tasks (e.g., density ratio estimation) explicitly assume that 
data are generating according to several distinct processes, we will simplify matters 
by assuming that samples are independent and identically distributed.
2  Clustering
Clustering is a basic statistical task with a historical pedigree that long predates 
the latest AI hype cycle. However, just as supervised learning outgrew its ori-
gins in linear regression through advances in computing and statistics, clustering 
has undergone a revolution of sorts in the last 10–20 years. This is partly due to 
technological developments—it is possible now to efficiently cluster enormous 
datasets in high dimensions with massively parallel processing, as well as to resa-
mple data for greater cluster stability—but also to theoretical progress. Inferen-
tial techniques for data clustering have put the field on firmer footing (Tibshirani 
et al., 2001; John et al., 2020), while approximate solutions have led to dramatic 
speedups (Abboud et al., 2019; Cohen-Addad et al., 2019). Meanwhile, impossi-
bility results have strictly delimited what such algorithms can and cannot achieve 
(Kleinberg, 2002; Ben-David & Ackerman, 2008; Cohen-Addad et al., 2018).
The basic goal of any clustering algorithm is to identify meaningful subgroups 
in a collection of data. These may correspond to different hand-written digits, sub-
species of iris plant, or any other grouping of interest. As a running example, let 
us say that X is a large collection of photographs, each depicting either a cat or a 
dog. Unlike a supervised classifier, which learns to label new datapoints based on 
observed instances (“This is a cat, that is a dog”), clustering algorithms must learn 
the categories themselves (“There are two different animals here, let’s call them cat 
and dog.”). Though many variants exist, I will focus on two popular algorithms that 
hopefully convey the basic logic behind clustering analysis and give some sense of 
the diversity among such methods: k-means and hierarchical clustering.
The k-means algorithm takes as input the data matrix X and some target num-
ber of clusters k . The goal is to find k  representative d -length vectors called cent-
ers, where the j th coordinate is the mean value of the variable Xj among samples 
in the corresponding cluster. Each center can be thought of as a sort of proto-
type, exemplifying the traits we most associate with a given cluster. For exam-
ple, these may describe the most feline cat or the most canine dog. Note that, 
because each coordinate in the center is given by a groupwise mean, it is likely 
that the resulting prototype is not identical to any observed sample. Instead, the 
center describes a hypothetical datapoint, a sort of Platonic ideal against which 
all others are compared. These centers are computed so as to minimize the sum 
of squared distances from each sample to its nearest center, i.e., the within-
cluster variance. This problem is NP-hard and thus exact solutions are generally 
infeasible. However, iterative approximations work well in practice and tend to 
converge on local optima in reasonable time (Hartigan, 1975; Lloyd, 1982). See 

==== Page 5 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 5 of 26 28
Fig.  1 for a visual summary. Typically, we try out some range of values for k  and 
evaluate the fit by means of one or several scoring metrics, potentially including 
a penalty for large k .
Hierarchical clustering differs from k -means in several respects. First, it trans-
forms the input data X  intro a symmetric n×n matrix /u1D403 , where entry /u1D403ij rep-
resents the dissimilarity between samples xi and xj . This determines the geom-
etry of the problem, which may differ substantially from that of k -means if we 
use a non-Euclidean distance measure. Second, as the name suggests, the method 
assumes a nested structure among the clusters. For instance, in our running exam-
ple, the optimal cutoff for k  = 2 should clearly distinguish cats from dogs. But say 
our dataset includes two distinct breeds of each animal. Then, the optimal value 
of k may in fact be 4, although each smaller cluster is a proper subset of one of 
the larger ones. Unlike k -means, hierarchical clustering algorithms do not take k 
as input but instead compute the full solution path for k∈{ 2,…,n} , recursively 
partitioning the remaining samples as k  increases. Results are typically visualized 
as a dendrogram, with the full dataset included at the root and individual observa-
tions in the leaves (see Fig. 2 ). Optimal tree height is determined either visually or 
via some scoring heuristic. Hierarchical clustering arguably stretches our notion 
Fig. 1  Visual overview of the k-means algorithm. Random centers are selected in the first step (A), in 
this case with k = 3. Clusters are formed by associating each point with its nearest center (B). A new 
center is calculated for the resulting cluster (C). Steps (B) and (C) are repeated until convergence (D). 
From Wikipedia (2022)
Fig. 2  Example dendrogram trained on Fisher’s iris dataset, with colors corresponding to the best three-
partition

==== Page 6 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 6 of 26
of optimality, since it can be informative to know which samples are co-clustered 
at varying resolutions. Results for our pet example with k  = 2 and k = 4 are both 
“right” at different levels of granularity. While k -means can in principle also 
return these same clusters at k  = 2 and k = 4, there is no guarantee that its assign-
ments form a recursive partition since the algorithm starts anew at each value of 
k. Thus, hierarchical clustering automatically imposes a sort of consistency condi-
tion that is generally violated by k -means.
The question of how to divide the world into proper units—to “carve nature at 
the joints,” in Socrates’s immortal words—is an ancient philosophical problem, 
better known today as the problem of natural kinds. The literature on this topic is 
enormous and varied—for a good overview, see Bird and Tobin (2022)—but two 
clear strands have emerged. One is focused on the ontological question: What is a 
natural kind? The other seeks to answer the epistemological question: How can we 
learn to identify natural kinds? I shall argue that clustering algorithms offer practical 
answers to both, although the two are not equally convincing.
Take the epistemological question first, as the solution here is more direct. 
Consider the following reply:
EC: We learn to identify natural kinds via clustering algorithms, or something 
very much like them.
Whether such algorithms are implemented via computer chips or human brains is 
irrelevant, as functionalists have long argued.2 Both strategies described above—
clustering by prototypes or by recursive partitioning—are common and legitimate in 
different domains. For instance, grouping by prototypes is an example of case-based 
reasoning, in which we reduce a collection to an ideal type that represents the whole. 
This approach is widely used in areas including clinical medicine, law, and sociol-
ogy (Kolodner, 1993). Meanwhile, the method of recursive partitioning is familiar to 
anyone who has ever scanned a phylogenetic tree, where diverse evolutionary line-
ages are traced back to common ancestors. Creating and debating these taxonomies 
is an ancient tradition, going back at least as far as Plato’s method of collection and 
division. The practice was later popularized by Linnaeus as a strategy for sorting 
biological species, and served as an inspiration for Darwin’s theory of natural selec-
tion. These examples help delimit the scope of EC, as they remind us that natural 
kinds (if indeed anything corresponds to the name) should permit inductive infer -
ences and participate in natural laws. Of course, clustering algorithms on their own 
cannot guarantee this. However, they can offer data-driven strategies for forming 
hypotheses that can subsequently be tested through standard scientific methods.
This analysis suggests one plausible reply to the ontological question.
OC: Natural kinds are what clustering algorithms ought to find under ideal 
conditions.
2 Functionalism comes in many forms; for an introduction, see Bickle (2020) and Levin (2021). I have in 
mind here something like the classic multiple realizability thesis originally advanced by Putnam (1967) 
and later extended by Block and Fodor (1972) and Fodor (1974).

==== Page 7 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 7 of 26 28
OC does little to resolve substantive issues around natural kindhood without fur -
ther elaboration—the modal “ought” smuggles in all manner of normative baggage, 
while “ideal conditions” are underspecified and potentially question-begging—but 
the basic strategy is familiar. Much like how Turing (1950) famously replaced a met-
aphysical question (“Can machines think?”) with a methodological one (“How can 
we tell?”), clustering algorithms reduce murky debates about identity and essence 
to formal procedures for grouping elements together based on precise notions of 
similarity and difference. If two people disagree on whether some elements form a 
natural kind, it may well be that they are applying different clustering algorithms, or 
perhaps the same algorithm with different inputs. Computational methods can make 
underlying assumptions explicit, thereby promoting critical discussion and hopefully 
greater consensus.
This reductive move is tempting and often successful. However, OC fails in gen-
eral unless we impose some further ad hoc restrictions on natural kinds to guaran-
tee their effective computability.3 Perhaps the relevant notions of distance are hope-
lessly imprecise, or the complexity of the requisite clustering procedure is so great 
that it will not complete before the heat death of the universe. Even under a generous 
interpretation of “ideal conditions,” some natural kinds may remain unidentifiable 
due to their intrinsic ineffability, or perhaps some fundamental limitation that pre-
vents us from gathering and processing the evidence required to discover them. For 
this reason, I judge EC to be more convincing than OC. Clustering algorithms can 
help us find natural kinds, but the purported methodological reduction carries little 
or no ontological weight.
I will revisit issues concerning the reliability and testability of unsupervised 
learning algorithms in Section  5. For now, I will simply point out that this proposed 
reduction by no means entails some radical brand of constructivism. The claim is 
not that natural kinds come into being if and only if some agent happens to imple-
ment a particular computational process. Just as the mathematical realist insists that 
two plus two equaled four long before anyone was around to add numbers together, 
we may readily acknowledge that natural kinds, if they exist at all, surely predate any 
actual clustering method. But this is a mere historical coincidence. The algorithm 
itself is an abstraction, a sequence of steps which, when applied, produces some out-
put. OC merely suggests that learnability via clustering is a necessary condition for 
natural kindhood, regardless of whether such learning ever in fact takes place. Yet 
there is no a priori reason to believe that all natural kinds are effectively computable 
via clustering algorithms, even ones that have yet to be devised. In arguing against 
OC, I conclude that identifiability via clustering algorithms is not a necessary condi-
tion for natural kindhood.
But is it sufficient? Any affirmative answer must provide further details on the 
purported “ideal conditions” requirement of OC, which will no doubt strike skep-
tics as inherently subjective. Ideal for whom? Toward what end? A full treatment of 
these issues is beyond the scope of this article, but I can sketch one possible direc-
tion. I take a broadly pragmatic view of natural kinds that is liable to disappoint the 
3 I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for raising this point.

==== Page 8 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 8 of 26
realist every bit as much as it does the antirealist. Any grouping of elements into 
kinds is undertaken within some context and for some purpose. That is why cluster -
ing algorithms may succeed at varying levels of abstraction, e.g., grouping species 
together at k = 2 and breeds at k = 4. Each solution is the right answer to a different 
question. Of course, this does not mean that any context and purpose will do. For 
starters, the “natural” in “natural kinds” places a nontrivial constraint on candidate 
inputs (pianos and laptops do not form natural kinds). This goes back to the afore-
mentioned criterion that natural kinds should permit inductive inferences and par -
ticipate in natural laws. However, the granularity and scope of such inferences and 
laws is itself a function of context and purpose.4 It may be possible to describe, say, 
the migratory patterns of birds in terms of atoms and electrons, but such a Herculean 
feat would be profoundly unilluminating. The task of the statistician is to ensure that 
inputs align with analytical goals, giving the clustering algorithm the best chance 
to discover what it is we want to know. In this way, natural kinds and clustering 
algorithms may even be co-constitutive. This accords with a sort of Kantian meta-
physics, in which the world gains meaning only through mental (or computational) 
representation.
I will go to no great lengths defending this brand of pragmatism or debating the 
proper interpretation of transcendental idealism, matters which, despite their evident 
interest, are clearly exogenous to the present discussion. I merely raise them to illus-
trate how fluid the borders become between metaphysical and methodological mat-
ters once we begin to seriously reflect on the mechanics of unsupervised learning. 
No matter one’s position on these issues, there seems little question that cluster -
ing is a basic function of human thought and language. This is a claim not about 
how infants come to learn nouns—that is more accurately described by supervised 
or reinforcement learning—but about how language itself came into being in the 
first place. Dividing one’s perceptual field into a collection of things with names 
that persist under some range of conditions was a key step in the development of 
complex concepts for individuals and collaborative communication for groups. If 
we accept Chomsky’s contention that the subject-predicate structure is part of the 
so-called universal grammar (Cook & Newson, 2007), then some capacity for clus-
tering may be literally hardwired into human brains. For better or worse, clustering 
is inescapable.
3  Abstraction
I confess that my nomenclature in this section is somewhat unorthodox. Abstrac-
tion has a different meaning in the formal methods literature (Wang & Tepfen-
hart, 2019), while the algorithms I describe below go by various other names in 
ML (e.g., embedding, autoencoding, projection, coarsening). I refer to them col-
lectively as abstraction algorithms to avoid the specific assumptions and problem 
4 For more on granularity and explanatory depth, see Clarke (2017), Floridi (2012), Franklin-Hall 
(2014), Kinney (2018), Strevens (2008), Weslake (2010), and Woodward (2016).

==== Page 9 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 9 of 26 28
setups associated with those terms, as well as to highlight the connections between 
these techniques and related subjects in philosophy. This usage has roots in Floridi’s 
(2008) levels of abstraction. More recently, Buckner (2018) has studied how deep 
convolutional neural networks operationalize modes of transformational abstraction 
that were originally conceived (but never fully explained) by classical empiricists 
such as Locke and Hume. The operative notion of abstract is the following, from 
Merriam Webster’s: “to consider apart from application to or association with a 
particular instance.” Simply put, abstraction algorithms (as I shall use the term) are 
a family of methods for learning simplified representations of data. These may be 
latent variables defined via transformations of input features, or coarse-grained vari-
ables forged by some data-driven discretization process. In either case, the result is 
typically a dimensionality reduction of the input space.5 In classical statistics, this 
was achieved via parametric methods such as principal component analysis (Jolliffe, 
2002). More recently, the area has been dominated by adaptive alternatives, espe-
cially those based on deep neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2016). 
The most straightforward introduction to abstraction comes from information the-
ory.6 Consider the images depicted in Fig.  3. Each is made by the same data generat-
ing process, with varying degrees of additive noise. In each case, the dataset consists 
of a 20×20 matrix of 1 ’s and 0’s, i.e., 400 bits. But more efficient encodings are 
possible. Rather than spell out the values of each cell in the matrix, we could exploit 
the evident checkerboard pattern to obtain a lossless compression of Fig.  3A with a 
suitably digitized version of “Alternating 5×5 patches of 1 ’s and 0’s,” resulting in 
a 16-bit compression. The result is an abstraction—a description of the high-level 
pattern, rather than the low-level details. The same high-level pattern can in prin-
ciple be used to describe Fig.  3B—but notice that if we use the same encoding in 
this case, the reconstruction is no longer lossless, for it fails to account for the noise. 
Thus, the deviations that distinguish Fig.  3A from Fig.  3B would be lost in such a 
compression. In some applications, we may not care about such errors. In fact, if we 
are more interested in patterns than pixels; then, we may prefer the abstraction to the 
original. In other settings, details matter a great deal. The tradeoff between compres-
sion efficiency and resulting error rates is unavoidable in information theory, and 
the optimal balance is inevitably context-dependent. A similar tradeoff is evident in 
supervised learning, where we must strike some balance between accuracy (mini-
mizing bias) and complexity (minimizing variance).7
One approach to abstraction in ML is based on coarsening. This is a con-
ceptually simple procedure in which we describe the data in larger units, e.g., 
molecules instead of atoms or cities instead of neighborhoods. Techniques for 
5 Strictly speaking, this is not a necessary condition for abstraction. For instance, kernel methods map 
inputs to an infinite-dimensional codomain. For simplicity, I will limit the discussion here to reductive 
abstractions.
6 This example is adapted from a similar one in Dennett (1991).
7 For more on the curve-fitting problem in philosophy of statistics, see Forster and Sober’s (1994) influ-
ential paper, as well as the numerous responses it inspired (Bandyopadhyay & Boik, 1999; DeVito, 1997; 
Kieseppä, 1997; Mulaik, 2001; Spanos, 2007).

==== Page 10 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 10 of 26
learning such partitions are typically based on clustering algorithms of the sort 
described in Section  2. Popular examples include superpixels (Stutz et al., 2018), 
which segment images into contiguous patches. The approach has special appeal 
in cases where macro-objects may be more meaningful or useful for practitioners 
than micro-objects. This is the case, for instance, in some causal modeling tasks, 
where our ability to measure complex systems in fine detail exceeds the precision 
of possible interventions. Just because we can observe RNA abundance at the sin-
gle-cell level does not mean we can reliably stimulate individual transcripts. On 
the contrary, drug therapies are often messy affairs, activating and deactivating 
regulatory pathways in a complex, unpredictable cascade. Causal feature learn-
ing is an unsupervised data coarsening technique aimed at recovering high-level 
variables more amenable to intervention than low-level data (Beckers et al., 2019; 
Chalupka et al., 2017; Kinney & Watson, 2020). Such abstractions have obvious 
appeal for planning and design. Indeed, the merits of abstraction are well-appre-
ciated in the sciences, where modeling complex systems always involves a degree 
of idealization (Potochnik, 2017).
Neural networks take an entirely different approach to the problem of abstrac-
tion, most famously through a family of unsupervised learning algorithms called 
autoencoders. First, an input layer of data /u1D417 is mapped to an internal layer with 
fewer nodes. In deep autoencoders, a sequence of such mappings compresses the 
data still further. The result is a dense matrix /u1D419∈ℝn×dz , with dz<d. This object is 
called an embedding or a representation. So far, this more or less tracks the archi-
tecture of a supervised network, where internal layers are optimized to predict some 
outcome variable. In autoencoders, by contrast, the goal is to reconstruct the original 
data. In other words, we have two functions: an encoder f∶X↦Z and a decoder 
g∶Z↦X , which together form a sort of hourglass structure. With linear activa-
tions and a fully connected architecture, autoencoders instantiate a form of classical 
principal component analysis; with nonlinear activations, autoencoders can capture 
a far richer set of complex interactions. When models are successful, simple geo-
metric or arithmetic operations in the latent space often have clear semantics at the 
Fig. 3  Binary grids implementing noiseless (A) and noisy (B) patterns, respectively

==== Page 11 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 11 of 26 28
input level. To cite a famous example, word embeddings—mathematical representa-
tions of text data—have been known to capture analogical relations (Mikolov et al., 
2013). This results in equations of the sort “king” − “man” + “woman” ≈ “queen,” 
where the words are replaced with their latent vector representations as learned by 
the autoencoder.
Though originally conceived for generic statistical tasks, autoencoders and other 
latent variable methods have been repurposed for causal discovery and inference. 
Early work in this area includes the LiNGAM algorithm, which uses a form of inde-
pendent component analysis to learn a graphical model over observed covariates 
(Shimizu et al., 2006). More recently, causal representation learning has become a 
major research area, with ML practitioners increasingly acknowledging the utility 
of causal tools for transfer and generalization (Schölkopf et al., 2021). The strategy 
here is very different to coarsening, where we simply chunk the space into larger 
buckets. Instead, causal disentanglement algorithms such as /u1D6FD-VAE aim to learn 
latent factors that correspond to independent axes of variation, e.g., the style and 
content of an image (Higgins et al., 2017; von Kügelgen et al., 2021). In scientific 
applications, such embeddings may help to design interventions or estimate treat-
ment effects when randomized control trials are impossible.
The success of autoencoders has sparked a great deal of discussion—and per -
haps a bit of wonderment—among researchers. How can they be so effective with 
no supervision? One suggestion is the manifold hypothesis, which states that even in 
seemingly complex, high-dimensional domains such as text and genomics, data typi-
cally lie on a low-dimensional manifold that is far simpler than the original observa-
tions suggest. This hypothesis has received theoretical and empirical support (Fef-
ferman et al., 2016). If true, it may go some way toward explaining the unreasonable 
effectiveness of autoencoders. By learning the most efficient and accurate compres-
sion, we essentially approximate the true target manifold. That is why, for example, 
two-dimensional projections of transcriptomic profiles (with typical input dimen-
sions of about 40,000) are often sufficient to linearly separate disease and healthy 
samples in cancer studies. With the proper encoding scheme, information loss is 
minimal even under such dense compression.
The nearest analog to the manifold hypothesis in the philosophical canon is Pla-
to’s cave. Just as the prisoners in that famous allegory are forced to stare at shadows, 
limiting their reality to a dark, confusing jumble, so we are deceived into believing 
that the world is far more complex and chaotic than it really is. In fact, our observa-
tions are little more than distorted reflections of a relatively parsimonious reality that 
lies just beyond our powers of perception. In this analogy, abstraction algorithms 
serve the function of philosophers, providing us with tools to access the luminous 
substrata that explain the vagaries of our phenomenal experience. (Fortunately, in 
this version, we are not compelled to murder anyone.) For Plato, the hidden light 
corresponds to the Forms, immaterial essences that animate the imperfect imitations 
we find in the material realm. We need not follow Plato quite so far out of the cave 
to acknowledge a categorical distinction between essential and contingent proper -
ties, i.e., those that an object must have and those it could do without, respectively. 
Modern essentialism comes in many forms—see Robertson and Atkins (2020) for a 
good overview—but realists about essences (e.g., Kripke (1980), Ellis (2001), and 

==== Page 12 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 12 of 26
Williamson (2013)) are unified in their belief that some such distinction obtains. For 
instance, I could have long or short hair depending on my taste. I could not, how -
ever, fail to be human. This is because my hairstyle is contingent, while my human-
ity is not—a non-human version of me would simply not be me.
I submit that abstraction algorithms can and often do help to infer essential prop-
erties. Just as with the discussion of natural kinds in Section  2, this claim has both 
epistemological and ontological dimensions. Specifically, we have the following 
thesis:
EA: We learn to identify essential properties via abstraction algorithms, or some-
thing very much like them.
It is worth reiterating that I take a functionalist view of computation on which the 
details of physical implementation are basically irrelevant. A pragmatic interpreta-
tion of constituent terms once again avoids the Scylla of antirealism and the Cha-
rybdis of realism. That said, proponents of each camp may find something to like 
in these theses—the former by arguing that essential properties are co-constituted 
by certain methods of abstraction, the latter by arguing that essences not only exist 
but may be learned from data. If any object has essential properties, then there must 
be some simplified representation thereof—stripping away the details and focusing 
instead on form, e.g., by ignoring irrelevant distinctions (coarsening) or reducing 
the whole to some relatively small set of independent components (projection). This 
procedure, however it is carried out, amounts to an abstraction algorithm.
But does this license an ontological reduction? Consider the claim:
OA: Essential properties are what abstraction algorithms ought to find under 
ideal conditions.
This thesis may seem attractive to those eager to supplant metaphysics with methodol-
ogy. However, OA fails in general for the same reason that OC fails. Even if we could 
identify satisfactory, noncircular “ideal conditions” for this problem, there can be no 
guarantee that all essential properties are effectively computable. Just because there 
is light behind the shadows does not mean that we will always find it. On the con-
trary, some objects may defy all efforts to reduce them to their essential form. This is 
a claim not about the limits of our cognition or technology but about the limits of our 
world. Abstraction algorithms may be sufficient to identify some essential properties, 
but essential properties are not necessarily identifiable via abstraction algorithms.
Though nothing in the mechanics of thought or language commits us to any 
particular theory of essence and contingency, an ability to appreciate a plurality 
of grammatical moods—to understand that though the world is this way, it might 
have been some other way—is a hallmark of intelligent behavior. Planning and other 
forms of higher order cognition require predication within and across modalities, 
skills that are inconceivable without some capacity for abstraction. The question 
of whether efficient and accurate encodings can in fact be learned—i.e., whether 
the manifold hypothesis applies—is clearly an empirical matter that must be evalu-
ated on a case-by-case basis. It certainly appears to hold in many important areas 
of interest, though it would be naïve to assume that this entails some universal law. 

==== Page 13 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 13 of 26 28
In summary, abstraction algorithms raise much the same philosophical issues for 
essentialism that clustering algorithms raise for natural kinds.
4  Generative Models
Generative models create synthetic data that should, ideally, be indistinguishable 
from the real thing. Such methods can be used for data imputation or augmenta-
tion in supervised, reinforcement, or self-supervised learning tasks. They can also 
be used for deceptive purposes, as in adversarial attacks or  so-called deepfakes. 
The former occurs when samples are generated with the express intent of fooling 
another model, e.g., by adding noise to an image in order to trick a classifier into 
mislabeling samples. The latter refers to a class of models designed to output highly 
realistic image, audio, or video data of people saying and doing things they never in 
fact said or did. I defer a discussion of the ethical aspects of this technology to Sec-
tion 5. For now, the point to emphasize is that generative models are a powerful and 
relatively novel innovation in ML research. Though density estimation procedures 
have been in use for decades, methods were far too crude for realistic data synthesis 
in high dimensions until quite recently. Current models, by contrast, can make con-
vincing forgeries of landscapes in the style of Cezanne or photorealistic portraits of 
nonexistent people (see Fig.  4). I will focus in particular on generative adversarial 
networks (GANs) and tree-based approaches.
GANs are a popular class of deep learning algorithms originally proposed by 
Goodfellow et al. (2014). Many variations exist—for overviews, see Creswell et al. 
(2018) and Gui et al. (2021)—but the unifying idea behind them all is a zero-sum 
game between two networks, a generator f and a discriminator g. First, f samples 
some synthetic data, typically just noise to start. This fake data is then fed along 
with real data to g, whose job is to classify samples as genuine or synthetic. In the 
early rounds, f’s attempted forgeries are poor, and g has no trouble distinguishing 
between samples. However, network weights are updated after each round, resulting 
in improved performance for the generator f. Meanwhile, the discriminator g updates 
its weights to try and keep up with its opponent. With sufficient network capacity, 
the forgeries will continue improving until g can do no better than random guessing. 
Fig. 4  Synthetic portraits created by StyleGAN. From Karras et al. (2019)

==== Page 14 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 14 of 26
At this point, we say that f has learned the true data distribution, and the competitors 
have converged on the game’s Nash equilibrium.
Another class of generative models is based on classification and regression trees. 
These are the so-called weak learners, which split the input data X at some value of 
a (potentially random) feature Xj according to an optimization objective, e.g., vari-
ance minimization. A sequence of such splits results in a partition of the input space 
into relatively small nodes called leaves. Though individual trees tend to be poor 
predictors for complex datasets, forest models—i.e., ensembles of trees—are among 
the most popular and effective of all ML algorithms. When trees are grown indepen-
dently on perturbed datasets, results may be aggregated via averaging to create a ran-
dom forest (Breiman, 2001). Alternatively, trees can be grown iteratively to improve 
upon the predictions of the previous tree, in a method known as boosting (Friedman, 
2001). These algorithms are widely used for supervised learning, although they also 
have applications to unsupervised tasks. Generative models based on random forests 
go back at least a decade (Criminisi et al., 2012), with several more recent propos-
als showing strong results (Correia et al., 2020; Watson et al., 2023). Conditional 
density estimation is especially common with trees, as shown by numerous popu-
lar methods for data imputation and related tasks (Lundberg et al., 2020; Stekhoven 
& Bühlmann, 2012; Tang & Ishwaran, 2017). Forests can be readily compiled into 
probabilistic circuits (Choi et al., 2020), a large and well-studied family of computa-
tional graphs for generative modeling and inference.
The logic behind GANs and forests is entirely different. The former effectively 
turns the problem into a reinforcement learning task, with the discriminator net-
work g providing a sort of inadvertent reward signal to the generator f .8 The more 
uncertain g is about the provenance of some sample, the better f  has done creating 
realistic data. This is akin to a forger honing his craft by seeing what does and does 
not evade detection by the authorities; or, to take a less criminal example, a child 
learning to play an instrument by mimicking a melody until a blindfolded listener 
cannot distinguish between their version and a professional recording. Confounding 
a would-be discriminator is a familiar method in computer science, with origins 
in the Turing test. Crucially, in that case, the discriminating agent is human. But 
for many purposes, artificial agents do just as well. The idea has applications in 
statistics as well, where a generic form of the classic two-sample test is achieved by 
evaluating whether a classifier can distinguish between the generating distributions 
(Kim et al., 2021).
Forests, by contrast, take a more impressionistic approach to data synthesis. 
They break the input space down into a collection of subregions, effectively solving 
many simple problems instead of one hard problem. By sampling from the fitted 
densities in each leaf of the tree, we may approximate distributions of arbitrary 
complexity. The visual effect is not unlike a pointillist painting, where structure 
gradually emerges from a plurality of tiny uniformities. However, whereas the 
works of Georges Seurat have a distinctive fuzziness owing to deliberate pixelation, 
8 Deep connections between GANs and classic reinforcement learning techniques such as actor-critic 
algorithms have been established. See Pfau and Vinyals (2016).

==== Page 15 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 15 of 26 28
forest algorithms aim instead for maximal realism in their outputs. In this sense, 
they are less Seurat and more Chuck Close, who created massive, high-resolution 
portraits by laying a fine grid over a photograph and painstakingly recreating every 
cell (see Fig.  5). Because trees are independent in a random forest, the entire pro-
cess can be efficiently computed with parallel processing. (Close, on the other 
hand, would routinely spend over a year on a single portrait.) It is worth noting that 
these visual analogies are merely illustrative. GANs and forests are by no means 
limited to image data.
Generative modeling is a uniquely creative task for AI. It pushes beyond the com-
mon goals of prediction and optimization into something more like imagination 
and fantasy. These are vital aspects of human cognitive development, as children 
learn to circumscribe the realm of the possible by recombining past experiences in 
novel ways. The gains do not end in childhood. Imagination is a key part of the 
methodological toolkit for physicists and philosophers, who often reason by way of 
thought experiment (Stuart et al., 2018). It can inspire artistic works of genius, or 
simply random doodles. Both styles of imagination described above—the top-down 
approach of GANs, which requires some abstraction as a basis, and the bottom-up 
approach of forests, which focuses instead on the particulars—are evident in human 
creativity. The former is clearest in dreaming or game play, where whole scenes 
unfold with few explicit rules but clear thematic unity. The latter is found not just in 
the visual arts, as described above, but also in literature, where an author may start 
with an outline that breaks the narrative down into a collection of scenes, working 
separately on each and only merging them into a single structure once the individual 
components are complete.
In one sense, it may seem that data synthesis is simpler than classical supervised 
learning. After all, there is a single right answer to the question of what output we 
should expect for a given input (subject to some irreducible uncertainty, itself pre-
cisely quantifiable), whereas many datasets could be plausible samples from a given 
distribution. Yet uniqueness is a poor heuristic for complexity, especially when there 
are so many more ways for the generative model to err. This should be apparent as 
Fig. 5  Georges Seurat’s “A Sunday on La Grande Jatte” (A) and Chuck Close’s “Big Self-Portrait” (B). 
Both artists implemented techniques similar to the tree-based generative modeling approach

==== Page 16 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 16 of 26
soon as we consider the difference between (a) classifying images of cats and dogs, 
and (b) painting realistic images of cats and dogs. Small children can execute (a) 
with 100% accuracy; only devoted artists with years of training could possibly per -
form (b) with sufficient skill to convince viewers the result may be a photograph.
The difficulty goes back again to the subtle task of distinguishing essence 
from contingency. A properly trained generator network f  has not only learned an 
abstraction /u1D419 that approximates the target manifold; it has also learned how to 
project that low-dimensional representation back to the high-dimensional realm 
in novel, realistic ways. In other words, it has not just captured the essence of a 
domain, but additionally modeled its contingencies. To return to the allegory of 
the cave, generative algorithms must both capture the light and sample the shad-
ows. These are dual tasks, just as necessity and possibility are dual operators in 
modal logic. However, whereas logic deals in binary evaluations, generative mod-
els must learn a probability distribution over the space of features that make up 
a possible world. In so doing, they delimit a horizon of possibility that consti-
tutes a form of knowledge unto itself. This is what Williamson (2016) refers to as 
“knowing by imagining,” a capacity he argues serves clear evolutionary purpose 
as it helps agents to plan, empathize, and avoid unnecessary risks. If generative 
models can successfully imagine unrealized possibilities, then their achievement 
is both metaphysical, insomuch as the algorithm models probable contingencies 
in the world, and epistemological, insomuch as imagination is itself a form of 
knowledge.
These points can be spelled out in a pair of theses with a now familiar structure. 
First, consider the epistemic claim:
EG: We identify unrealized possibilities via generative models, or something 
very much like them.
It is difficult to imagine how the skeptic might rebut EG, short of taking a hard 
actualist line and simply denying that there are any such things as unrealized pos-
sibilities. If there are, however, then any method for reasoning about them, rightly 
or wrongly, must rely on some sort of mental representation of the relevant circum-
stances. On the functionalist philosophy of cognition that I have espoused through-
out, this mental act requires a generative model more or less by definition. Of course, 
some models will be better than others—people err in their assumptions about pos-
sibilia all the time, just as some GANs may overfit or underperform, producing 
unconvincing samples that are noticeably synthetic. But even false judgments about 
unrealized possibilities require some generative reasoning to get off the ground.
Next, consider the ontological thesis:
OG: Unrealized possibilities are what generative models ought to learn under 
ideal conditions.
The attentive reader will likely anticipate my skepticism about OG, which cannot 
be affirmed without making the vaguely fantastical assumption that all unrealized 
possibilities are effectively computable. However, the methodological reductionist 
may insist that only effectively computable possibilities are true possibilities, the 

==== Page 17 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 17 of 26 28
rest being mere whimsy or idle speculation. This move appears ad hoc and circular. 
It also runs into certain hard physical limits, given that faithful simulations of suba-
tomic events require sophisticated quantum computing techniques that may prove 
intractable beyond relatively small-scale phenomena.
5  Discussion
In the preceding sections, I introduced a variety of unsupervised learning algo-
rithms. My aim was not only to give some sense of the diversity of the field, 
but also to underscore the philosophical significance of these approaches, which 
provide data-driven methods for discovering natural kinds, learning essences, and 
sampling contingencies. Deep connections with ancient debates, not to mention 
basic functions of human language and cognition, substantiate my contention 
that unsupervised learning is not just some hodgepodge of statistical methods left 
over after we have analyzed the more substantive domains of supervised and rein-
forcement learning. On the contrary, unsupervised methods are fundamental and 
important, if chronically overlooked.
However, we should not be too sanguine about what these algorithms can 
achieve. Along with their distinctive metaphysical implications, unsupervised 
learning methods raise unique epistemological and ethical risks that merit closer 
inspection. It can be tempting to assume that the results of an unsupervised learn-
ing analysis are somehow “objective,” since they are untainted by human biases. 
For instance, if a clustering algorithm trained on gene expression data separates 
treated from untreated subjects, then this is arguably better evidence that the 
treatment causes transcriptomic effects than a supervised analysis that explicitly 
aimed to distinguish between the two classes. The hypothesis of genomic stratifi-
cation is baked into the latter model, whereas the former has no such preconcep-
tions. The point is valid, as far as it goes. However, any claims the algorithm may 
have to “objectivity” are conditioned upon user-supplied inputs and mediated by 
user-interpreted outputs. There is nothing automatic about the model’s data or 
hyperparameters, which inevitably encode certain assumptions and biases. More-
over, the reasoning behind algorithmic outputs is often opaque and inscrutable, 
raising major issues of trust and reliability.
Take hyperparameters first. As discussed above, clustering algorithms do not 
generally estimate the optimal number of clusters k . Some (like k -means) require 
this value upfront; others (like hierarchical clustering) compute results for all pos-
sible k. In both cases, biases can enter in. For k -means, issues may arise ex ante, as 
users neglect to test a sufficient range of values for k ; for hierarchical clustering, the 
danger is primarily post hoc, as users more or less eyeball what they deem a rea-
sonable cut point for the resulting dendrogram. A range of other hyperparameters 
may also influence results (e.g., maximum iterations or preferred distance meas-
ure). Moreover, since clustering algorithms do not test against the null hypothesis 
(i.e., k = 1), they may produce false positives, indicating cluster structure when in 

==== Page 18 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 18 of 26
fact there is none. Some post-processing methods are designed to mitigate against 
this (Tibshirani et al., 2001), but heuristic alternatives are still common.
Similar concerns apply for abstraction algorithms and generative models, both 
of which require users to fix hyperparameters that govern network architecture, 
batch size, regularization penalties, split rules, stopping criteria, and various 
other components. There is no way to know how sensitive results are to these 
configurations without extensive trial and error. In practice, hyperparameters are 
often left at arbitrary defaults, or else chosen via grid search over some bounded 
set of candidates, which may themselves be arbitrary defaults. Interpretation is 
especially difficult for abstraction algorithms and generative models when the 
input space is relatively unstructured, as with generic tabular data. Whereas 
humans have a decent grasp of how to evaluate “right” and “wrong” patterns in 
text and images, the task becomes much harder in, say, chemometrics, where our 
understanding of the relevant laws is limited and intuition is a poor guide. This 
ties into more general concerns regarding model opacity, as the logic behind par -
ticular cluster assignments, abstractions, or generative sampling procedures may 
be too complex for users to understand or interrogate.
Another source of potential bias lies in the data itself. There is nothing “objec-
tive” about how datasets are collected, maintained, or disseminated. On the contrary, 
they are the product of individuals and groups with certain goals and beliefs oper -
ating in particular contexts. To borrow Leonelli’s (2016) memorable phrase, they 
take idiosyncratic “data journeys” through time and space, often under the aegis of 
large institutions working in their own interests. Whether the topic is economics, cli-
mate science, or particle physics, all datasets are selective in scope. When access is 
restricted, we cannot use the data without submitting to some external authority, fur -
ther obscuring claims of objectivity under a dense web of social relations and power 
dynamics. Matters are no better when datasets are simulated, for then the sufficient 
statistics that govern the generating distribution are either arbitrary, in which case 
the previous objections regarding algorithmic hyperparameters apply, or derived 
from some prior dataset(s), in which case the present concerns over provenance and 
access remain. In short, pragmatic exigencies and contingent social arrangements 
permeate every stage of the modeling pipeline.
An extreme takeaway from these observations would be to conclude that unsu-
pervised learning algorithms are simply inference engines for our own assumptions 
and biases. According to this view, these methods are basically vacuous, since they 
do little more than spell out the statistical consequences of our own choices—they 
do not, strictly speaking, add anything new. To this critique, three replies are in 
order. First, the speed and scalability of unsupervised learning algorithms are suffi-
ciently great that it would be a mistake to suggest that they merely amplify preexist-
ing beliefs. On the contrary, they represent a step change in our analytical capacity, 
enabling large-scale data mining procedures that can reveal unexpected patterns and 
generate novel hypotheses. To object that these conclusions could in principle have 
been deduced with pen and paper is akin to dismissing the printing press as essen-
tially redundant, since all those bibles might just as well have been handwritten.
Second, the claim that “anything goes” when it comes to unsupervised learning 
is either false (if we restrict attention to actual practice) or irrelevant (if we consider 

==== Page 19 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 19 of 26 28
exotic algorithms as a speculative exercise). Take clustering, for instance. The skep-
tic is right to point out that users may design distance functions that guarantee any 
arbitrary partition of the data. But is this a serious concern? Baroque and overly 
convenient feature mappings are a sure sign of statistical malpractice, and any criti-
cal investigation of the procedure will reveal this. Perhaps that is why practitioners 
generally stick with a small handful of common, simple distance measures. This still 
permits a plurality of plausible clusterings for any given dataset, but far short of 
the combinatorial explosion we would expect in a fully unrestricted setting. Among 
these choices, rational agents may disagree on which best reflects the true structure 
of the data. The same is true of many scientific problems, where competing models 
provide comparable fit to the evidence. In such cases, we must either suspend judg-
ment, in true Popperian fashion, or rely on alternative criteria (e.g., parsimony or 
consistency with auxiliary facts).
This raises a third and final reply to the vacuity objection—unsupervised learning 
models do not generally work in isolation. Instead, they are used in conjunction with 
a range of other methods to build evidence for or against particular conclusions. 
For instance, in the cancer subtyping literature, the clusters output by algorithms 
like k-means are often validated by comparing survival curves for the hypothesized 
groups via a log-rank test (Kleinbaum & Klein, 2012). Significant differences are 
interpreted as evidence in favor of the purported subtypes; insignificant differences 
suggest the clusters may have overfit. In this way, the assumptions and biases that 
drive individual model results can be independently corroborated. By incorporating 
unsupervised learning into the discovery pipeline, along with supervised methods 
and classical inference procedures, we can protect against allegations of ostensible 
vacuity.
These epistemological concerns take on ethical significance when unsupervised 
learning algorithms are applied in socially sensitive contexts. Marginalized groups 
cannot benefit from the purported advantages of these technologies if they are not 
represented in the data. To take one prominent example, autoencoders are widely 
used for dimensionality reduction in genome-wide association studies (GWAS). 
If the resulting abstractions in fact capture some essential properties of the human 
genome, they could advance our biological understanding and pave the way for 
major medical breakthroughs. However, genome banks do not represent a random 
sample of humanity. Some 80% of all GWAS subjects are individuals of white Euro-
pean ancestry, even though this group represents just 16% of the global population 
(Martin et al., 2019). Such disparities raise legitimate concerns that the advances of 
precision medicine will only exacerbate existing health inequalities.
Unsupervised learning algorithms threaten to do more than just amplify exist-
ing problems, however. They may create new ones all their own. Insisting on the 
objectivity of these models is like claiming that the invention of the camera makes it 
impossible for journalism to mislead. On the contrary, photography creates entirely 
new risks that were inconceivable before the medium was invented, since doctored 
photographs can be far more convincing than a mere rumor. This danger arguably 
reaches its apotheosis in deepfakes, which could be used for slander, blackmail, sab-
otage, propaganda, or other nefarious purposes. In an extreme scenario, deepfakes 
could potentially erode trust in all visual and audio evidence, making it vastly more 

==== Page 20 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 20 of 26
difficult to hold bad actors to account. These concerns have attracted considerable 
scholarly and media attention, and justifiably so.
By the same token, a myopic focus on ethical risks can blind us to ethical opportu-
nities. For example, generative modeling techniques offer a creative solution to thorny 
problems surrounding data privacy. Policies for handling sensitive data are notori-
ously (and understandably) onerous. For their landmark study on geographic factors 
of social mobility, a team from UC Berkeley had to practically join the Internal Rev -
enue Service in order to access the tax records of some 40 million Americans (Chetty 
et al., 2014). They submitted to fingerprinting and background checks while agreeing 
to conduct all data analysis on an air gapped machine at the Treasury Department 
headquarters in Washington, DC. Generative models can make such arrangements 
obsolete. With sufficient capacity, these algorithms can synthesize highly realistic 
data of a potentially sensitive nature for mass dissemination without infringing on 
the privacy of any real-world data subjects. Global properties would be preserved, 
allowing for legitimate research findings, while local details may vary unpredictably. 
Expanding access to sensitive data could accelerate important discoveries in medi-
cine, economics, and beyond. Generative models can in principle provide a secure 
way to manage such an expansion while respecting privacy rights. However, research 
has shown that synthetic data is not necessarily immune to membership inference 
attacks, so the privacy-utility tradeoff remains delicate (Stadler et al., 2022).
The issues raised in this section—hyperparameter optimality, data quality, model 
opacity, and opportunities for (mis)use—echo similar debates in supervised learn-
ing, where an unjustified confidence in results can also lead to grave harms. Existing 
frameworks for the ethical use of ML can and should therefore be expanded to cover 
unsupervised learning tasks, even if this is not always obvious. For example, con-
cerns over the reliability of inputs can be addressed with classical tools of statistical 
inference such as sensitivity analysis and hypothesis testing. Mayo’s (1996, 2018) 
emphasis on severity is especially instructive in this regard. According to Mayo, our 
belief in some hypothesis h is justified only to the extent that h has passed severe 
tests, i.e., tests that should detect flaws or discrepancies from h with high probabil-
ity. Practitioners rarely bother to subject unsupervised learning models to the same 
scrutiny as their supervised or reinforcement learning counterparts, as standards 
for such tests are not well developed. While familiar ML notions such as “loss” or 
“regret” may not apply in these settings, alternative desiderata such as stability and 
generalization do. More importantly, they are testable. Resampling procedures like 
bootstrapping and subsampling provide readymade tools for evaluating the robust-
ness of clusters and abstractions (Fisher et al., 2016; Monti et al., 2003). Supervised 
learning methods can also be of service. For example, stable clusters should general-
ize to unseen data, a hypothesis that can be evaluated with the aid of standard ML 
classifiers (Dudoit & Fridlyand, 2002; Tibshirani & Walther, 2005).
When generative models provide explicit densities, their performance can be eval-
uated via out-of-sample log-likelihoods. This is the case, for instance, with tree-based 
models. Systematic evaluation is more difficult for GANs, however, which do not 
provide densities by default. Once again, supervised learning methods can help. One 
standard pipeline for scoring GANs is to train one or several models to predict some 
outcome on the input data /u1D417 (picking some random Xj as the dependent variable), 

==== Page 21 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 21 of 26 28
then build another set of models for the same task on synthetic data /uni0303.s1/u1D417 (Ravuri & 
Vinyals, 2019). If sample sizes match, then performance on /u1D417 represents the upper 
bound of possible performance on /uni0303.s1/u1D417 (up to some sampling error). The best genera-
tive models should produce synthetic datasets that closely approximate the mutual 
information structure of the original data, as evaluated by the predictive performance 
of supervised learning algorithm(s). Error-statistical reasoning can therefore help to 
improve standards for unsupervised learning and ensure more reliable results, even in 
the face of legitimate concerns over hyperparameters and data quality.
Model opacity can be addressed through methods from explainable AI (XAI), 
a fast-evolving if somewhat controversial research area devoted to making the pre-
dictions of supervised learning models more intelligible for end users.9 Leading 
examples include feature attributions, which explain model predictions as a sum of 
input features, and rule lists, which do so through a sequence of if–then statements. 
The applicability of such methods is perhaps most obvious in the case of clustering, 
which is similar in principle to classification and therefore amenable to the same 
XAI techniques developed for that domain. However, recent work has extended the 
logic of feature attributions to more general abstraction tasks (Crabbé & van der 
Schaar, 2022), an approach that could in principle be applied to generative models 
with an explicit embedding step.
Issues surrounding potential misuse are more complicated, for they raise larger 
questions of algorithmic governance. How should policymakers respond to rapid 
improvements in generative AI, which can be used for beneficial or diabolical pur -
poses? This is a classic conundrum in the philosophy of technology, perhaps most 
salient in the debates on nuclear energy, which could either represent humanity’s sal-
vation (in the form of a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels) or devastation (through 
apocalyptic weaponry delivered via intercontinental ballistic missiles). History offers 
no simple solutions to such dilemmas. In the present case, it is hard to see how regu-
latory measures could limit the proliferation of generative models. However, punitive 
sanctions could be implemented to disincentivize the creation or knowing dissemina-
tion of malicious deepfakes or other forms of misinformation. Meanwhile, techni-
cal solutions designed for algorithmic content moderation could be extended to cover 
such material (Gorwa et  al., 2020). These are admittedly imperfect tools, but they 
may make potential violators think twice before deployment. Regulatory and enforce-
ment mechanisms will no doubt continue to evolve as generative models improve.
6  Conclusion
Unsupervised learning algorithms are widely used in practice but rarely discussed in 
philosophy. In an effort to stimulate more critical reflection on this neglected branch 
of ML, I examined three common classes of unsupervised learning algorithms: clus-
tering, abstraction, and generative models. I argued that these technologies raise 
9 For an overview of XAI methods, see Adadi and Berrada (2018), Guidotti et al. (2018), Murdoch et al. 
(2019), and Rudin et al. (2021). For a discussion of some philosophical challenges surrounding the field, 
see Krishnan (2020), Sullivan (2020), Watson (2022), Watson and Floridi (2021), and Zednik (2019).

==== Page 22 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 22 of 26
distinctive metaphysical questions pertaining to natural kinds, modal ascriptions, 
and the limits of imagination. I showed how unsupervised learning can add clarity 
and precision to potentially muddled debates, replacing ontological speculation with 
methodological hypotheses that can be efficiently computed and severely tested.
However, we must be careful not to overstate the power of these algorithms. I 
cautioned against the temptation to believe that unsupervised learning produces 
results that are somehow “objective” or otherwise privileged. These tools require 
input data and hyperparameters that are inevitably selected and evaluated by humans 
with finite resources. Their internal operations are often opaque. Questions of pur -
pose and context cannot be ignored without incurring major epistemic and ethi-
cal risks. However, this does not license the antithetical extreme that unsupervised 
learning is a vacuous reflection of user biases. On the contrary, these algorithms 
can reveal structural insights and generate novel hypotheses as part of complex dis-
covery pipelines. The solution, I submit, is a pragmatic approach that acknowledges 
unavoidable limitations while simultaneously demanding high standards of statisti-
cal rigor and algorithmic transparency. Too often, unsupervised learning methods 
are exempted from the critical scrutiny traditionally applied to supervised and rein-
forcement learning models. The time for a reevaluation is long overdue.
Acknowledgements This research was presented at workshops hosted by the University of Oxford, the 
University of Cambridge, and Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich. I am grateful to audience mem-
bers at those events for their insightful comments and questions. I would also like to thank the anonymous 
referees for their valuable feedback, which greatly improved the manuscript.
Author Contribution This work was conceived and executed by DSW.
Declarations 
Ethics Approval N/A.
Consent to Participate N/A.
Consent for Publication N/A.
Competing Interests The author declares no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Abboud, A., Cohen-Addad, V., & Houdrouge, H. (2019). Subquadratic high-dimensional hierarchical 
clustering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Vol. 32).

==== Page 23 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 23 of 26 28
Ackerman, M. & Ben-David, S. (2009). Clusterability: A theoretical analysis. In Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
Adadi, A., & Berrada, M. (2018). Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable artificial intel-
ligence (XAI). IEEE Access, 6, 52138–52160.
Bandyopadhyay, P. S., & Boik, R. J. (1999). The curve fitting problem: A Bayesian rejoinder. Philosophy 
of Science, 66(S3), S390–S402.
Barrett, J. A., Skyrms, B., & Mohseni, A. (2019). Self-assembling networks. The British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, 70(1), 301–325.
Beckers, S., Eberhardt, F., & Halpern, J. Y. (2019). Approximate causal abstraction. Proceedings of the 
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 210.
Ben-David, S. & Ackerman, M. (2008). Measures of clustering quality: A working set of axioms for clus-
tering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Bickle, J. (2020). Multiple realizability. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Bird, A., & Tobin, E. (2022). Natural kinds. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
phy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Block, N. J., & Fodor, J. A. (1972). What psychological states are not. The Philosophical Review, 81(2), 
159–181.
Bommasani, R., Hudson, D., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., …, & Wang, W. (2022). On 
the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint, 2108.07258.
Breiman, L. (2001). Random Forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 1–33.
Buckner, C. (2018). Empiricism without magic: Transformational abstraction in deep convolutional neu-
ral networks. Synthese, 195, 5339–5372.
Buckner, C. (2020). Understanding adversarial examples requires a theory of artefacts for deep learning. 
Nature Machine Intelligence, 2(12), 731–736.
Chalupka, K., Eberhardt, F., & Perona, P. (2017). Causal feature learning: An overview. Behaviormetrika, 
44(1), 137–164.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P., & Saez, E. (2014). Where is the land of opportunity? The geography 
of intergenerational mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4), 
1553–1623.
Choi, Y., Vergari, A., & Van den Broeck, G. (2020). Probabilistic circuits: A unifying framework for trac-
table probabilistic models. Technical Report, University of California, Los Angeles.
Clark, A. (2017). Busting out: Predictive brains, embodied minds, and the puzzle of the evidentiary veil. 
Noûs, 51(4), 727–753.
Clarke, C. (2017). How to define levels of explanation and evaluate their indispensability. Synthese, 
194(6), 2211–2231.
Cohen-Addad, V., Klein, P. N., & Mathieu, C. (2019). Local search yields approximation schemes for 
k-means and k-median in Euclidean and minor-free metrics. SIAM Journal on Computing, 48(2), 
644–667.
Cohen-Addad, V., Kanade, V., & Mallmann-Trenn, F. (2018). Clustering redemption: Beyond the impos-
sibility of Kleinberg’s axioms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (Vol. 31).
Cook, V. J., & Newson, M. (2007). Chomsky’s universal grammar (Third Edit). Oxford: Blackwell.
Corfield, D., Schölkopf, B., & Vapnik, V. (2009). Falsificationism and statistical learning theory: Com-
paring the Popper and Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimensions. Journal for General Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 40(1), 51–58.
Correia, A., Peharz, R., & de Campos, C. P. (2020). Joints in random forests. Advances in Neural Infor -
mation Processing Systems, 33, 11404–11415.
Crabbé, J., & van der Schaar, M. (2022). Label-free explainability for unsupervised models. Proceedings 
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Creswell, A., White, T., Dumoulin, V., Arulkumaran, K., Sengupta, B., & Bharath, A. A. (2018). Genera-
tive adversarial networks: An overview. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 35(1), 53–65.
Criminisi, A., Shotton, J., & Konukoglu, E. (2012). Decision forests: A unified framework for classi-
fication, regression, density estimation, manifold, learning and semi-supervised learning. Now 
Publishers.
de Ruiter, A. (2021). The distinct wrong of deepfakes. Philos. Technol., 34(4), 1311–1332.
Dennett, D. (1991). Real patterns. The Journal of Philosophy, 88(1), 27–51.
DeVito, S. (1997). A gruesome problem for the curve-fitting solution. The British Journal for the Phi-
losophy of Science, 48(3), 391–396.

==== Page 24 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 24 of 26
Dudoit, S., & Fridlyand, J. (2002). A prediction-based resampling method for estimating the number of 
clusters in a dataset. Genome Biology, 3(7).
Ellis, B. (2001). Scientific essentialism. Cambridge University Press.
Fefferman, C., Mitter, S., & Narayanan, H. (2016). Testing the manifold hypothesis. Journal of the Amer -
ican Mathematical Society, 29(4), 983–1049.
Fisher, A., Caffo, B., Schwartz, B., & Zipunnikov, V. (2016). Fast, exact bootstrap principal component 
analysis for p > 1 million. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 111(514), 846–860.
Floridi, L. (2012). Semantic information and the network theory of account. Synthese, 184(3), 431–454.
Floridi, L. (2008). The method of levels of abstraction. Minds and Machines, 18(3), 303–329.
Fodor, J. A. (1974). Special sciences (or: The disunity of science as a working hypothesis). Synthese, 
28(2), 97–115.
Forster, M., & Sober, E. (1994). How to tell when simpler, more unified, or less ad hoc theories will 
provide more accurate predictions. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 45(1), 1–35.
Franklin-Hall, L. R. (2014). High-level explanation and the interventionist’s ‘variables problem.’ The 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 67(2), 553–577.
Friedman, J. H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. The Annals of 
Statistics, 29(5), 1189–1232.
Gabriel, I. (2020). Artificial intelligence, values, and alignment. Minds and Machines, 30(3), 411–437.
Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Ben-
gio, Y. (2014). Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 
(vol. 27).
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. MIT Press.
Gorwa, R., Binns, R., & Katzenbach, C. (2020). Algorithmic content moderation: Technical and 
political challenges in the automation of platform governance. Big Data & Society, 7(1), 
2053951719897945.
Gui, J., Sun, Z., Wen, Y., Tao, D., & Ye, J. (2021). A review on generative adversarial networks: Algo-
rithms, theory, and applications. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 35(4), 
3313–3332.
Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Ruggieri, S., Turini, F., Giannotti, F., & Pedreschi, D. (2018). A survey of 
methods for explaining black box models. ACM Computing Surveys, 51(5), 1–42.
Harman, G., & Kulkarni, S. (2007). Reliable reasoning: Induction and statistical learning theory. Cam-
bridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Hartigan, J. A. (1975). Clustering algorithms. New York: Wiley.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2009). The elements of statistical learning: Data mining, infer -
ence, and prediction. New York: Springer.
Hennig, C. (2015). What are the true clusters? Pattern Recognition Letters, 64, 53–62.
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X., Botvinick, M., … Lechner, A. (2017). beta-
VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Hohwy, J. (2020). New directions in predictive processing. Mind & Language, 35(2), 209–223.
John, C. R., Watson, D., Russ, D., Goldmann, K., Ehrenstein, M., Pitzalis, C., … Barnes, M. (2020). 
M3C: Monte Carlo reference-based consensus clustering. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1816.
Jolliffe, I. T. (2002). Principal component analysis. New York: Springer.
Karras, T., Laine, S., & Aila, T. (2019). A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial 
networks. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Kieseppä, I. A. (1997). Akaike information criterion, curve-fitting, and the philosophical problem of sim-
plicity. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 48(1), 21–48.
Kim, I., Ramdas, A., Singh, A., & Wasserman, L. (2021). Classification accuracy as a proxy for two-
sample testing. The Annals of Statistics, 49(1), 411–434.
Kinney, D. (2018). On the explanatory depth and pragmatic value of coarse-grained, probabilistic, causal 
explanations. Philosophy of Science, 86(1), 145–167.
Kinney, D. (2022). Diachronic trends in the topic distributions of formal epistemology abstracts. Syn-
these, 200(1), 10.
Kinney, D., & Watson, D. (2020). Causal feature learning for utility-maximizing agents. In M. Jaeger & 
T. D. Nielsen (Eds.), International Conference on Probabilistic Graphical Models (pp. 257–268). 
Skørping, Denmark: PMLR.
Kleinbaum, D.G., & Klein, M. (2012). Kaplan-Meier survival curves and the log-rank test. In: Survival 
analysis. Statistics for Biology and Health. New York: Springer.

==== Page 25 ====
1 3On the Philosophy of Unsupervised Learning  Page 25 of 26 28
Kleinberg, J. (2002). An impossibility theorem for clustering. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 15, 463–470. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press.
Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-based reasoning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Krishnan, M. (2020). Against interpretability: A critical examination of the interpretability problem in 
machine learning. Philosophy & Technology, 33(3), 487–502.
LaCroix, T. (2020). Using logic to evolve more logic: Composing logical operators via self-assembly. The 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 73(2), 407–437.
Leonelli, S. (2016). Data-centric biology: A philosophical study. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Levin, J. (2021). Functionalism. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ({W}inter 
2). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Lloyd, S. (1982). Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 28(2), 
129–137.
Lundberg, S. M., Erion, G., Chen, H., DeGrave, A., Prutkin, J. M., Nair, B., … Lee, S.-I. (2020). From 
local explanations to global understanding with explainable AI for trees. Nature Machine Intel-
ligence, 2(1), 56–67.
Malaterre, C., Lareau, F., Pulizzotto, D., & St-Onge, J. (2021). Eight journals over eight decades: A 
computational topic-modeling approach to contemporary philosophy of science. Synthese, 199(1), 
2883–2923.
Martin, A. R., Kanai, M., Kamatani, Y., Okada, Y., Neale, B. M., & Daly, M. J. (2019). Clinical use of 
current polygenic risk scores may exacerbate health disparities. Nature Genetics, 51(4), 584–591.
Mayo, D. (1996). Error and the growth of experimental knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Mayo, D. (2018). Statistical inference as severe testing: How to get beyond the statistics wars. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Mayo-Wilson, C., & Zollman, K. J. S. (2021). The computational philosophy: Simulation as a core philo-
sophical method. Synthese, 199(1), 3647–3673.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word representations in 
vector space. International Conference on Learning Representations.
Millière, R. (2022). Deep learning and synthetic media. Synthese, 200(4), 231.
Mittelstadt, B. D., Allo, P., Taddeo, M., Wachter, S., & Floridi, L. (2016). The ethics of algorithms: Map-
ping the debate. Big Data & Society.
Monti, S., Tamayo, P., Mesirov, J., & Golub, T. (2003). Consensus clustering: A resampling-based 
method for class discovery and visualization of gene expression microarray data. Machine Learn-
ing, 52(1–2), 91–118.
Mulaik, S. A. (2001). The curve-fitting problem: An objectivist view. Philosophy of Science, 68(2), 
218–241.
Murdoch, W. J., Singh, C., Kumbier, K., Abbasi-Asl, R., & Yu, B. (2019). Definitions, methods, and 
applications in interpretable machine learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
116(44), 22071–22080.
Noichl, M. (2021). Modeling the structure of recent philosophy. Synthese, 198(6), 5089–5100.
Öhman, C. (2022). The identification game: Deepfakes and the epistemic limits of identity. Synthese, 
200(4), 319.
Pääkkönen, J., & Ylikoski, P. (2021). Humanistic interpretation and machine learning. Synthese, 199(1), 
1461–1497.
Pfau, D., & Vinyals, O. (2016). Connecting generative adversarial networks and actor-critic methods. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29.
Potochnik, A. (2017). Idealization and the aims of science. University of Chicago Press.
Putnam, H. (1967). Psychological predicates. In W. H. Capitan & D. D. Merrill (Eds.), Art, mind, and 
religion (pp. 37–48). University of Pittsburgh Press.
Ravuri, S., & Vinyals, O. (2019). Classification accuracy score for conditional generative models. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32.
Robertson, T.I. & Atkins, P. (2020). Essential vs. accidental properties. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
Rudin, C., Chen, C., Chen, Z., Huang, H., Semenova, L., & Zhong, C. (2021). Interpretable machine 
learning: Fundamental principles and 10 grand challenges. Stat. Surv., 16, 1–85.
Schölkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., Kalchbrenner, N., Goyal, A., & Bengio, Y. (2021). 
Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5), 612–634.

==== Page 26 ====
 D. S. Watson 
1 328 Page 26 of 26
Schurz, G. (2019). Hume’s problem solved: The optimality of meta-induction. The MIT Press.
Shimizu, S., Hoyer, P. O., Hyvärinen, A., & Kerminen, A. (2006). A linear non-Gaussian acyclic model 
for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(72), 2003–2030.
Skyrms, B. (2010). Signals: Evolution, learning, and information. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spanos, A. (2007). Curve fitting, the reliability of inductive inference, and the error-statistical approach. 
Philosophy of Science, 74(5), 1046–1066.
Stadler, T., Oprisanu, B., & Troncoso, C. (2022). Synthetic data - Anonymisation groundhog day. In 31st 
USENIX Security Symposium, 1451–1468.
Stekhoven, D. J., & Bühlmann, P. (2012). MissForest—Non-parametric missing value imputation for 
mixed-type data. Bioinformatics, 28(1), 112–118.
Sterkenburg, T. F., & Grünwald, P. D. (2021). The no-free-lunch theorems of supervised learning. Syn-
these, 199(3), 9979–10015.
Strevens, M. (2008). Depth: An account of scientific explanation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Stuart, M. T., Fehige, Y., & Brown, J. R. (Eds.). (2018). The Routledge companion to thought experi-
ments. London: Routledge.
Stutz, D., Hermans, A., & Leibe, B. (2018). Superpixels: An evaluation of the state-of-the-art. Computer 
Vision and Image Understanding, 166, 1–27.
Sullivan, E. (2020). Understanding from machine learning models. The British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science, 73(1), 109–133.
Tang, F., & Ishwaran, H. (2017). Random forest missing data algorithms. Statistical Analysis and Data 
Mining, 10(6), 363–377.
Tibshirani, R., & Walther, G. (2005). Cluster validation by prediction strength. Journal of Computational 
and Graphical Statistics, 14(3), 511–528.
Tibshirani, R., Walther, G., & Hastie, T. (2001). Estimating the number of clusters in a data set via the 
gap statistic. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 63(2), 411–423.
Tsamados, A., Aggarwal, N., Cowls, J., Morley, J., Roberts, H., Taddeo, M., & Floridi, L. (2021). The 
ethics of algorithms: Key problems and solutions. AI & SOCIETY.
Turing, A. (1950). Computing machinery and intelligence. Mind, LIX(236), 433–460.
von Kügelgen, J., Sharma, Y., Gresele, L., Brendel, W., Schölkopf, B., Besserve, M., & Locatello, F. 
(2021). Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably isolates content from style. 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 16451–16467.
Wang, J., & Tepfenhart, W. (2019). Formal methods in computer science. Boca Raton, FL: Chapman and 
Hall/CRC.
Watson, D. (2022). Conceptual challenges for interpretable machine learning. Synthese, 200(2), 65–98.
Watson, D., & Floridi, L. (2021). The explanation game: A formal framework for interpretable machine 
learning. Synthese, 198(10), 9211–9242.
Watson, D., Blesch, K., Kapar, J., & Wright, M. (2023). Adversarial random forests for density estimation 
and generative modeling. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence and Statistics. Valencia, Spain.
Weslake, B. (2010). Explanatory depth. Philosophy of Science, 77(2), 273–294.
Wikipedia. (2022). K-means clustering. In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved September 7, 
2022 from. https:// en. wikip edia. org/w/ index. php? title=K- means_ clust ering & oldid= 11007 54774.
Williamson, T. (2013). Modal logic as metaphysics. Oxford University Press.
Williamson, T. (2016). Knowing by imagining (A. Kind & P. Kung, Eds.). Knowledge Through Imagina-
tion, pp. 113–123.
Woodward, J. (2016). The problem of variable choice. Synthese, 193(4), 1047–1072.
Zednik, C. (2019). Solving the black box problem: A normative framework for explainable artificial intel-
ligence. Philosophy & Technology, 34, 265–288.
Zimmermann, A., & Lee-Stronach, C. (2021). Proceed with caution. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 
52(1), 6–25.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.

