==== Page 1 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Chelsea Finn*1Aravind Rajeswaran*2Sham Kakade2Sergey Levine1
Abstract
A central capability of intelligent systems is the
ability to continuously build upon previous expe-
riences to speed up and enhance learning of new
tasks. Two distinct research paradigms have stud-
ied this question. Meta-learning views this prob-
lem as learning a prior over model parameters that
is amenable for fast adaptation on a new task, but
typically assumes the tasks are available together
as a batch. In contrast, online (regret based) learn-
ing considers a setting where tasks are revealed
one after the other, but conventionally trains a sin-
gle model without task-speciﬁc adaptation. This
work introduces an online meta-learning setting,
which merges ideas from both paradigms to better
capture the spirit and practice of continual lifelong
learning. We propose the follow the meta leader
(FTML) algorithm which extends the MAML al-
gorithm to this setting. Theoretically, this work
provides an O(log T)regret guarantee with one
additional higher order smoothness assumption
(in comparison to the standard online setting). Our
experimental evaluation on three different large-
scale problems suggest that the proposed algo-
rithm signiﬁcantly outperforms alternatives based
on traditional online learning approaches.
1. Introduction
Two distinct research paradigms have studied how prior
tasks or experiences can be used by an agent to inform future
learning. Meta-learning ( Schmidhuber ,1987 ;Santoro et al. ,
2016 ;Finn et al. ,2017 ) casts this as the problem of learning
to learn , where past experience is used to acquire a prior
over model parameters or a learning procedure, and typically
studies a setting where meta-training tasks are made avail-
able together upfront. In contrast, online learning ( Hannan ,
1957 ;Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi ,2006 ) considers a sequential
*Equal contribution1UC Berkeley2University of Washington.
Correspondence to: Chelsea Finn < cbfinn@stanford.edu >,
Aravind Rajeswaran < aravraj@cs.washington.edu >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).setting where tasks are revealed one after another, but aims
to attain zero-shot generalization without any task-speciﬁc
adaptation. We argue that neither setting is ideal for studying
continual lifelong learning. Meta-learning deals with learn-
ing to learn, but neglects the sequential and non-stationary
aspects of the problem. Online learning offers an appealing
theoretical framework, but does not generally consider how
past experience can accelerate adaptation to a new task. In
this work, we motivate and present the online meta-learning
problem setting, where the agent simultaneously uses past
experiences in a sequential setting to learn good priors, and
also adapt quickly to the current task at hand.
As an example, Figure 1shows a family of sinusoids. Imag-
ine that each task is a regression problem from xtoycorre-
sponding to onesinusoid. When presented with data from a
large collection of such tasks, a naïve approach that does not
consider the task structure would collectively use all the data,
and learn a prior that corresponds to the model y=0. An
algorithm that understands the underlying structure would
recognize that each curve in the family is a sinusoid, and
would therefore attempt to identify, for a new batch of data,
which sinusoid it corresponds to. As another example where
joint training fails, Figure 1also shows colored MNIST dig-
its with different backgrounds. Suppose we’ve seen MNIST
digits with various colored backgrounds, and then observe
a “7” on a new color. We might conclude from training
on all of the data seen so far that all digits with that color
must all be “7.” In fact, this is an optimal conclusion from a
purely statistical standpoint. However, if we understand that
the data is divided into different tasks, and take note of the
fact that each task has a different color, a better conclusion
is that the color is irrelevant. Training on all of the data
together, or only on the new data, does not achieve this goal.
Meta-learning offers an appealing solution: by learning how
to learn from past tasks, we can make use of task structure
Figure 1. (left) sinusoid functions and (right) colored MNIST

==== Page 2 ====
Online Meta-Learning
and extract information from the data that both allows us
to succeed on the current task and adapt to new tasks more
quickly. However, typical meta learning approaches assume
that a sufﬁciently large set of tasks are made available up-
front for meta-training. In the real world, tasks are likely
available only sequentially, as the agent is learning in the
world, and also from a non-stationary distribution. By re-
casting meta-learning in a sequential or online setting, that
does not make strong distributional assumptions, we can
enable faster learning on new tasks as they are presented.
Our contributions: In this work, we formulate the online
meta-learning problem setting and present the follow the
meta-leader (FTML) algorithm. This extends the MAML
algorithm to the online meta-learning setting, and is anal-
ogous to follow the leader in online learning. We analyze
FTML and show that it enjoys a O(log T)regret guarantee
when competing with the best meta-learner in hindsight.
In this endeavor, we also provide the ﬁrst set of results
(under any assumptions) where MAML-like objective func-
tions can be provably and efﬁciently optimized. We also
develop a practical form of FTML that can be used effec-
tively with deep neural networks on large scale tasks, and
show that it signiﬁcantly outperforms prior methods. The
experiments involve vision-based sequential learning tasks
with the MNIST, CIFAR-100, and PASCAL 3D+ datasets.
2. Foundations
Before introducing online meta-learning, we brieﬂy summa-
rize the foundations of meta-learning, the model-agnostic
meta-learning (MAML) algorithm, and online learning. To
illustrate the differences in setting and algorithms, we will
use the running example of few-shot learning, which we
describe below ﬁrst. We emphasize that online learning,
MAML, and the online meta-learning formulations have a
broader scope than few-shot supervised learning.
2.1. Few-Shot Learning
In few-shot supervised learning ( Santoro et al. ,2016 ), we
are interested in a family of tasks, where each task Tis asso-
ciated with a notional and inﬁnite-size population of input-
output pairs. Our goal is to learn a new task Tiwhile access-
ing only a small, ﬁnite-size labeled dataset Di:={xi,yi}
corresponding Ti. If we have a predictive model, h(·;w),
with parameters w, the population risk of the model is
fi(w):=E(x,y)≥Ti[¸(x,y,w)],
where the expectation is deﬁned over the task population
and¸is a loss function, such as the square loss or cross-
entropy between the model prediction and the correct label.
An example of ¸corresponding to squared error loss is
¸(x,y,w)=||y≠h(x;w)||2.
LetL(Di,w)represent the average loss on the dataset Di.
Effectively minimizing fi(w)is likely hard if we rely onlyonDidue to the small size of the dataset. However, meta-
learning algorithms aim to perform better by drawing upon
data from many tasks from the family, as we discuss next.
2.2. Meta-Learning and MAML
Meta-learning, or learning to learn, aims to bootstrap from
a set of tasks to learn faster on a new task. Tasks are as-
sumed to be drawn from a ﬁxed distribution, T≥P(T). At
meta-training time, Mtasks {Ti}M
i=1are drawn from this
distribution and datasets corresponding to them are made
available to the agent. At deployment time, we are faced
with a new test task Tj≥P(T), for which we are again pre-
sented with a small dataset Dj:={xj,yj}. Meta-learning
algorithms attempt to ﬁnd a model using the Mtraining
tasks, such that when Djis revealed from the test task, the
model can be quickly updated to minimize fj(w).
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) ( Finn et al. ,2017 )
does so by learning an initial set of parameters wMAML,
such that performing a few steps of gradient descent from
wMAML using Djminimizes fj(·). To get such an initial-
ization, MAML solves the optimization problem:
wMAML := arg min
w1
MMÿ
i=1fi!
w≠–Òˆfi(w)"
.(1)
The inner gradient Òˆfi(w)is based on a small mini-batch
from Di. Hence, MAML optimizes for few-shot generaliza-
tion. Finn et al. (2017 ) show that gradient-based methods
can be used to optimize Eq. 1with existing automatic dif-
ferentiation libraries. Stochastic gradient methods are used
since the population risk is not known. At meta-test time, the
solution is ﬁne-tuned as: wjΩwMAML ≠–Òˆfj(wMAML)
with the gradient obtained using Dj. MAML and other
meta-learning algorithms (see Section 7) are not directly
applicable to sequential settings, as they assume a ﬁxed
ﬁxed task distribution and have two distinct-phases, meta-
training and meta-testing. We instead would like to develop
algorithms that work in continuous learning settings with
non-stationary task distributions.
2.3. Online Learning
In online learning, an agent faces a sequence of loss func-
tions {ft}Œ
t=1, one in each round t. These functions need not
be drawn from a ﬁxed distribution, and could even be cho-
sen adversarially over time. The learner must sequentially
decide on model parameters {wt}Œ
t=1that perform well on
the loss sequence. In particular, the goal is to minimize
some notion of regret deﬁned as the difference between
the learner’s loss,qT
t=1ft(wt), and the best performance
achievable by some family of methods (comparator class).
The most standard notion of regret is to compare to the
cumulative loss of the best ﬁxed model in hindsight:
RegretT=Tÿ
t=1ft(wt)≠min
wTÿ
t=1ft(w). (2)

==== Page 3 ====
Online Meta-Learning
We would like algorithms for which this regret grows with
Tas slowly as possible. An algorithm whose regret grows
sub-linearly in Tis non-trivially learning and adapting. One
of the simplest algorithms in this setting is follow the leader
(FTL) ( Hannan ,1957 ), which computes parameters as:
wt+1= arg min
wtÿ
k=1fk(w).
FTL enjoys strong performance guarantees depending on the
properties of the loss function. For the few-shot supervised
learning example, FTL would consolidate all the data from
the prior stream of tasks into a single large dataset and ﬁt a
single model to this dataset. As alluded to in Section 1, and
as we ﬁnd in our empirical evaluation in Section 6, such a
“joint training” approach may not learn effective models. To
overcome this issue, we may desire a more adaptive notion
of a comparator class, and algorithms that have low regret
against such a comparator, as we will discuss next.
3. The Online Meta-Learning Problem
We consider a sequential setting where an agent is faced
with tasks one after another. Each task corresponds to a
round , denoted by t. In each round, the goal of the learner
is to determine model parameters wtthat perform well for
the corresponding task at that round. This is monitored by
ft:wœWæ R, which we would like to be minimized.
Crucially, we consider a setting where the agent can perform
some local task-speciﬁc updates to the model before it is
deployed and evaluated in each round. This is realized
through an update procedure, which at round t, is a mapping
Ut:wœWæ ˜wœW. This procedure takes as input w
and returns ˜wthat performs better on ft. One example
forUtis a step of gradient descent ( Finn et al. ,2017 ):
Ut(w)=w≠–Òˆft(w).As speciﬁed in Section 2.2,Òˆft
is potentially an approximate gradient of ft, e.g. obtained
using a mini-batch of data from the task at round t. The
overall protocol is as follows:
1.At round t, the agent chooses a model deﬁned by wt.
2.The world simultaneously chooses task deﬁned by ft.
3.The agent obtains access to the update procedure Ut,
and uses it to update parameters as ˜wt=Ut(wt).
4.The agent incurs loss ft(˜wt). Advance to round t+1.
The goal for the agent is to minimize regret over the rounds.
A highly ambitious comparator is the best meta-learned
model in hindsight. Let {wt}T
t=1be the sequence of models
generated by the algorithm. Then, the regret we consider is:
RegretT=Tÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(wt)"
≠min
wTÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(w)"
.(3)
Notice that we allow the comparator to adapt locally to each
task at hand; thus the comparator has strictly more capabil-
ities than the learning agent, since it is presented with allthe task functions in batch mode. Here, again, achieving
sublinear regret suggests that the agent is improving over
time and is competitive with the best meta-learner in hind-
sight. As discussed earlier, in the batch setting, when faced
with multiple tasks, meta-learning performs signiﬁcantly
better than training a single model for all the tasks. Thus,
we may hope that learning sequentially, but still being com-
petitive with the best meta-learner in hindsight, provides a
signiﬁcant leap in continual learning.
4. Algorithm and Analysis
In this section, we outline the follow the meta leader (FTML)
algorithm and provide an analysis of its behavior.
4.1. Follow the Meta Leader
Taking inspiration from the form of the follow the leader
algorithm ( Hannan ,1957 ;Kalai & Vempala ,2005 ), we
propose the FTML algorithm template which updates model
parameters as:
wt+1= arg min
wtÿ
k=1fk!
Uk(w)"
. (4)
This can be interpreted as the agent playing the best meta-
learner in hindsight if the learning process were to stop at
round t. In the remainder of this section, we will show
that under standard assumptions on the losses, and just
one additional assumption on higher order smoothness, this
algorithm has strong regret guarantees. In practice, we
may not have full access to fk(·), such as when it is the
population risk and we only have a ﬁnite size dataset. In
such cases, we will draw upon stochastic approximation
algorithms to solve the optimization problem in Eq. ( 4).
4.2. Assumptions
We make the following assumptions about each loss function
in the learning problem for all t. Let ◊and„represent two
arbitrary choices of model parameters .
Assumption 1. (C2-smoothness)
1.(Lipschitz in function value) fhas gradients bounded by
G, i.e. ||Òf(◊)|| ÆG’◊. This is equivalent to fbeing
G≠Lipschitz.
2.(Lipschitz gradient) fis—≠smooth, i.e.
||Òf(◊)≠Òf(„)|| Æ—||◊≠„|| ’(◊,„).
3.(Lipschitz Hessian) fhasﬂ≠Lipschitz Hessians, i.e.
||Ò2f(◊)≠Ò2f(„)|| Æﬂ||◊≠„|| ’(◊,„).
Assumption 2. (Strong convexity) Suppose that fis con-
vex. Furthermore, suppose fisµ≠strongly convex, i.e.
||Òf(◊)≠Òf(„)|| Øµ||◊≠„||.
These assumptions are largely standard in online learn-
ing (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi ,2006 ), except 1.3. Examples
where these assumptions hold include logistic regression

==== Page 4 ====
Online Meta-Learning
andL2regression over a bounded domain. Assumption 1.3
is a statement about the higher order smoothness of func-
tions which is common in non-convex analysis ( Nesterov
& Polyak ,2006 ;Jin et al. ,2017 ). In our setting, it allows
us to characterize the landscape of the MAML function,
which has a gradient step embedded within it. Importantly,
these assumptions do not trivialize the meta-learning setting.
We can observe a clear difference in performance between
meta-learning and joint training even when fiare quadratic
functions, which correspond to the simplest strongly convex
setting. See Appendix Afor an example illustration.
4.3. Analysis
We analyze the FTML algorithm when the update procedure
is a single step of gradient descent, as in the formulation
of MAML. Concretely, the update procedure we consider
isUt(w)=w≠–Òˆft(w).For this update rule, we ﬁrst
state our main theorem below.
Theorem 1. Suppose fand ˆf:RdæRsatisfy assump-
tions 1 and 2. Let ˜fbe the function evaluated after a one
step gradient update procedure, i.e.
˜f(w):=f!
w≠–Òˆf(w)"
.
If the step size is selected as –Æmin{1
2—,µ
8ﬂG}, then ˜f
is convex. Furthermore, it is also ˜—=9—/8smooth and
˜µ=µ/8strongly convex.
For the proof, see Appendix B. The following corollary is
now immediate.
Corollary 1. (inherited convexity for the MAML objective)
If{fi,ˆfi}K
i=1satisfy assumptions 1 and 2, then the MAML
optimization problem,
minimize
w1
MMÿ
i=1fi!
w≠–Òˆfi(w)"
,
with –Æmin{1
2—,µ
8ﬂG}is convex. Furthermore, it is 9—/8-
smooth and µ/8-strongly convex.
Since the objective function is convex, we may expect ﬁrst-
order optimization methods to be effective, since gradients
can be efﬁciently computed with standard automatic differ-
entiation libraries (as discussed in Finn et al. (2017 )). In
fact, this work provides the ﬁrst set of results (under any as-
sumptions) under which MAML-like objective function can
be provably and efﬁciently optimized. Another immediate
corollary of our main theorem is that FTML now enjoys the
same regret guarantees (up to constant factors) as FTL does
in the comparable setting (with strongly convex losses).
Corollary 2. (inherited regret bound for FTML) Suppose
that for all t,ftand ˆftsatisfy assumptions 1 and 2. Suppose
that the update procedure in FTML (Eq. 4) is chosen as
Ut(w)=w≠–Òˆft(w)with –Æmin{1
2—,µ
8ﬂG}. Then,
FTML enjoys the following regret guarantee
Tÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(wt)"
≠min
wTÿ
t=1ft!
Ut(w)"
=O332G2
µlogT4See Appendix Cfor a proof. More generally, our main
theorem implies that there exists a large family of online
meta-learning algorithms that enjoy sub-linear regret, based
on the inherited smoothness and strong convexity of ˜f(·).
SeeHazan (2016 );Shalev-Shwartz (2012 );Shalev-Shwartz
& Kakade (2008 ) for algorithmic templates to derive sub-
linear regret based algorithms.
5. Practical Online Meta-Learning Algorithm
In the previous section, we derived a theoretically principled
algorithm for convex losses. Many practical problems have
non-convex loss landscales. However, methods developed
for convex losses, such as AdaGrad ( Duchi et al. ,2011 ), of-
ten perform well in non-convex settings. Taking inspiration
from these successes, we describe a practical instantiation
of FTML, and evaluate its performance in Section 6.
The main considerations when adapting the FTML algo-
rithm to few-shot supervised learning with high capacity
neural network models are: (a) the optimization problem
in Eq. ( 4) has no closed form solution, and (b) we do not
have access to the population risk ftbut only a subset of
the data. To overcome both these limitations, we can use
iterative stochastic optimization algorithms. Speciﬁcally,
by adapting the MAML algorithm ( Finn et al. ,2017 ), we
can use stochastic gradient descent with a minibatch Dtr
k
as the update rule, and stochastic gradient descent with an
independently-sampled minibatch Dval
kto optimize the pa-
rameters. The gradient computation is described below:
gt(w)=ÒwEk≥‹tL!
Dval
k,Uk(w)"
,where
Uk(w)©w≠–ÒwL!
Dtr
k,w" (5)
Here, ‹t(·)denotes a sampling distribution for the previ-
ously seen tasks T1,. . . ,Tt. In our experiments, we use the
uniform distribution, ‹t©P(k)=1 /t’k={1,2,...t},
but other sampling distributions can be used if required. Re-
call that L(D,w)is the loss function (e.g. cross-entropy)
averaged over the datapoints (x,y)œDfor the model with
parameters w. Using independently sampled minibatches
DtrandDvalminimizes interaction between the inner gradi-
ent update Utand the outer optimization (Eq. 4), which is
performed using the gradient above ( gt) in conjunction with
Adam ( Kingma & Ba ,2015 ). While Utin Eq. 5includes
only one gradient step, we observed that it is beneﬁcial to
take multiple gradient steps in the inner loop (i.e., in Ut),
which is consistent with prior works ( Finn et al. ,2017 ;Grant
et al.,2018 ;Antoniou et al. ,2018 ;Shaban et al. ,2018 ).
Now that we have derived the gradient, the overall algorithm
proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst initialize a task buffer B=[] .
When presented with a new task at round t, we add task Tt
toBand initialize a task-speciﬁc dataset Dt=[] , which is
appended to as data incrementally arrives for task Tt. As
new data arrives for task Tt, we iteratively compute and

==== Page 5 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Algorithm 1 Online Meta-Learning with FTML
1:Input: Performance threshold of proﬁciency, “
2:randomly initialize w1
3:initialize the task buffer as empty, BΩ[]
4:fort=1,... do
5: initialize Dt=ÿ
6: Add BΩB +[Tt]
7: while |DTt|<N do
8: Append batch of nnew datapoints {(x,y)}toDt
9: wtΩMeta-Update (wt,B,t)
10: ˜wtΩUpdate-Procedure (wt,Dt)
11: ifL(Dtest
t,˜wt)<“then
12: Record efﬁciency for task Ttas|Dt|datapoints
13: end if
14: end while
15: Record ﬁnal performance of ˜wton test set Dtest
tfor task t.
16: wt+1Ωwt
17:end forAlgorithm 2 FTML Subroutines
1:Input: Hyperparameters parameters –, ÷
2:function Meta-Update (w,B,t)
3: fornm=1,...,N metasteps do
4: Sample task Tk:k≥‹t(·)// (or a minibatch of tasks)
5: Sample minibatches Dtr
k,Dval
kuniformly from Dk
6: Compute gradient gtusing Dtr
k,Dval
k, and Eq. 5
7: Update parameters wΩw≠÷gt// (or use Adam)
8: end for
9: Return w
10:end function
11:function Update-Procedure (w,D)
12: Initialize ˜wΩw
13: forng=1,...,N gradsteps do
14: ˜wΩ˜w≠–ÒL(D,˜w)
15: end for
16: Return ˜w
17:end function
apply the gradient in Eq. 5, which uses data from all tasks
seen so far. Once all of the data (ﬁnite-size) has arrived for
Tt, we move on to task Tt+1. This procedure is detailed in
Alg. 1, including the evaluation, which we discuss next.
To evaluate performance of the model at any point within
a particular round t, we ﬁrst update the model as using all
of the data ( Dt) seen so far within round t. This is outlined
in the Update-Procedure subroutine of Algorithm 2.
Note that this is different from the update Utused within the
meta-optimization, which uses a ﬁxed-size minibatch since
many-shot meta-learning is computationally expensive and
memory intensive. In practice, we meta-train with update
minibatches of size at-most 25, whereas evaluation may use
hundreds of datapoints for some tasks. After the model is
updated, we measure the performance using held-out data
Dtest
tfrom task Tt. This data is not revealed to the online
meta-learner at any time. Further, we also evaluate task
learning efﬁciency, which corresponds to the size of Dt
required to achieve a speciﬁed performance threshold “,
e.g.“= 90% classiﬁcation accuracy or “corresponds to
a certain loss value. If less data is sufﬁcient to reach the
threshold, then priors learned from previous tasks are being
useful and we have achieved positive transfer.
6. Experimental Evaluation
Our experimental evaluation studies the practical FTML
algorithm (Section 5) in the context of vision-based online
learning problems. These problems include synthetic modiﬁ-
cations of the MNIST dataset, pose detection with synthetic
images based on PASCAL3D+ models ( Xiang et al. ,2014 ),
and online classiﬁcation with the CIFAR-100 dataset. The
aim of our experimental evaluation is to study the following
questions: (1) can online meta-learning (speciﬁcally FTML)
be successfully applied to multiple non-stationary learning
problems? and (2) does online meta-learning (FTML) pro-vide empirical beneﬁts over prior methods? To this end, we
compare to the following: (a) Train on everything ( TOE )
jointly trains a single predictve model on all available data
so far (including Dtat round t). (b) Train from scratch ini-
tializes wtrandomly and trains using Dt. (c) Joint training
with ﬁne-tuning, which at round t, trains jointly until round
t≠1, and then ﬁnetunes it speciﬁcally to round tusing
only Dt. This corresponds to the standard FTL approach,
followed by task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning.
We note that TOE is a very strong point of comparison, capa-
ble of reusing representations across tasks, as has been pro-
posed in a number of prior continual learning works ( Rusu
et al. ,2016 ;Aljundi et al. ,2017 ;Wang et al. ,2017 ). How-
ever, unlike FTML, TOE does not explicitly learn the struc-
ture across tasks. Thus, it may not be able to fully utilize the
information present in the data, and hence may not be able
to learn new tasks with only a few examples. Further, the
model might incur negative transfer if the new task differs
substantially from previous ones, as has been observed in
prior work ( Parisotto et al. ,2016 ). Training on each task
from scratch avoids negative transfer, but also precludes any
reuse between tasks. When the amount of data for a given
task is large, we may expect training from scratch to perform
well since it can avoid negative transfer and can learn specif-
ically for the particular task. Finally, FTL with ﬁne-tuning
represents a natural online learning comparison, which in
principle should combine the best parts of learning from
scratch and TOE, since this approach adapts speciﬁcally to
each task andbeneﬁts from prior data. However, in contrast
to FTML, this method does not explicitly meta-learn and
hence may not fully utilize any structure in the tasks.
6.1. Rainbow MNIST
In this experiment, we create a sequence of tasks based
on the MNIST dataset. We transform the digits in a num-

==== Page 6 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Figure 2. Illustration of three tasks for Rainbow MNIST (top) and pose prediction (bottom). CIFAR images not shown. Rainbow MNIST
includes different rotations, scales, and background colors. For pose prediction, the goal is to predict the global pose of the object on the
table. Cross-task variation includes 50 object models within 9 object classes, varying object scales, and different camera viewpoints.
Figure 3. Rainbow MNIST results. Left: amount of data needed to learn each new task. Center: task performance after 100 datapoints on
the current task. Right: The task performance after all 900 datapoints for the current task have been received. Lower is better for all plots,
while shaded regions show standard error over three random seeds. FTML can learn new tasks more and more efﬁciently as each new task
is received, demonstrating effective forward transfer.
ber of ways to create different tasks, including 7 colored
backgrounds, 2 scales (half size and original size), and 4
rotations of 90 degree intervals. As illustrated in Fig. 2,a
task involves correctly classifying digits with a randomly
sampled background, scale, and rotation. This leads to 56
total tasks. We partitioned the MNIST training dataset into
56 batches of examples, each with 900 images and applied
the corresponding task transformation to each batch of im-
ages. The ordering of tasks was selected at random and we
set90% classiﬁcation accuracy as the proﬁciency threshold.
Learning curves in Fig. 3show that FTML learns tasks
more and more quickly, with each new task added. We
also ﬁnd that FTML substantially outperforms the alterna-
tive approaches in both efﬁciency and ﬁnal performance.
FTL performs better than TOE since it uses task-speciﬁc
adaptation, but its performance is still inferior to FTML.
We hypothesize that, while the prior methods improve in
efﬁciency over the course of learning as they see more tasks,
they struggle to prevent negative transfer on each new task.
Lastly, training from scratch does not learn efﬁciently com-
pared to models that incorporate data from other tasks; but,
their ﬁnal performance with 900datapoints is similar.
6.2. Five-Way CIFAR-100
In this experiment, we create a sequence of 5-way classiﬁca-
tion tasks based on the CIFAR-100 dataset, which contains
more challenging and realistic RGB images than MNIST.
Each classiﬁcation problem involves a newly-introducedclass from the 100 classes in CIFAR-100. Thus, different
tasks correspond to different labels spaces. The ordering of
tasks is selected at random, and we measure performance
using classiﬁcation accuracy. Since it is less clear what
the proﬁciency threshold should be for this task, we eval-
uate the accuracy on each task after varying numbers of
datapoints have been seen. Since these tasks are mutually
exclusive (as label space is changing), it makes sense to
train the TOE model with a different ﬁnal layer for each
task. An extremely similar approach to this is to use our
meta-learning approach but to only allow the ﬁnal layer
parameters to be adapted to each task. Further, such a meta-
learning approach is a more direct comparison to our full
FTML method, and the comparison can provide insight into
whether online meta-learning is simply learning features
and performing training on the last layer, or if it is adapting
the features to each task. Thus, we compare to this last layer
online meta-learning approach instead of TOE with multiple
heads. The results (see Figure 4) indicate that FTML learns
more efﬁciently than independent models and a model with
a shared feature space. The results on the right indicate
that training from scratch achieves good performance with
2000 datapoints, reaching similar performance to FTML.
However, the last layer variant of FTML seems to not have
the capacity to reach good performance on all tasks.

==== Page 7 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Figure 4. Online CIFAR-100 results, evaluating task performance after seeing 50, 250, and 2000 datapoints for each task. FTML learns
each task much more efﬁciently than models trained from scratch, while both achieve similar asymptotic performance after 2000 datapoints.
FTML beneﬁts from adapting all layers rather than learning a shared feature space across tasks while adapting only the last layer.
Figure 5. Object pose prediction results. Left: we observe that online meta-learning leads to faster learning as more and more tasks are
introduced, learning with only tens of datapoints for many of the tasks. Center & right, we see that meta-learning enables transfer not
just for faster learning but also for more effective performance when 60and400datapoints of each task are available. The task order is
randomized, leading to spikes when more difﬁcult tasks are introduced. Shaded regions show standard error across three random seeds
6.3. Sequential Object Pose Prediction
In our ﬁnal experiment, we study a 3D pose prediction prob-
lem. Each task involves learning to predict the global posi-
tion and orientation of an object in an image. We construct
a dataset of synthetic images using 50object models from 9
different object classes in the PASCAL3D+ dataset ( Xiang
et al.,2014 ), rendering the objects on a table using the ren-
derer accompanying the MuJoCo physics engine ( Todorov
et al. ,2012 ) (see Figure 2). To place an object on the ta-
ble, we select a random 2D location, as well as a random
azimuthal angle. Each task corresponds to a different ob-
ject with a randomly sampled camera angle. We place a
red dot on one corner of the table to provide a global refer-
ence point for the position. Using this setup, we construct
90 tasks (with an average of about 2 camera viewpoints
per object), with 1000 datapoints per task. All models are
trained to regress to the global 2D position and the sine and
cosine of the azimuthal angle (the angle of rotation along
the z-axis). For the loss functions, we use mean-squared
error, and set the proﬁciency threshold to an error of 0.05.
We show the results of this experiment in Figure 5. The
results demonstrate that meta-learning can improve both
efﬁciency and performance of new tasks over the course of
learning, solving many of the tasks with only 10datapoints.
Unlike the previous settings, TOE substantially outperforms
training from scratch, indicating that it can effectively makeuse of the previous data from other tasks, likely due to the
greater structural similarity between the pose detection tasks.
However, the performance of FTML suggests that even bet-
ter transfer can be accomplished by explicitly optimizing
for the ability to quickly and effectively learn new tasks.
Finally, we ﬁnd that FTL performs comparably or worse
than TOE, indicating that task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning can lead
to overﬁtting when the model is not explicitly trained for
the ability to ﬁne-tune effectively.
7. Connections to Related Work
Meta-learning: Our work proposes to use meta-learning or
learning to learn ( Thrun & Pratt ,1998 ;Schmidhuber ,1987 ;
Naik & Mammone ,1992 ), in the context of online (regret-
based) learning. Prior works have proposed learning update
rules, selective copying of weights, or optimizers ( Hochre-
iter et al. ,2001 ;Bengio et al. ,1992 ;Andrychowicz et al. ,
2016 ;Li & Malik ,2017 ;Ravi & Larochelle ,2017 ;Schmid-
huber ,2002 ), as well as recurrent models that learn by in-
gesting datasets directly ( Santoro et al. ,2016 ;Duan et al. ,
2016 ;Wang et al. ,2016 ;Munkhdalai & Yu ,2017 ;Mishra
et al. ,2017 ). Some meta-learning works have considered
online learning at meta-test time (Santoro et al. ,2016 ;Al-
Shedivat et al. ,2017 ;Nagabandi et al. ,2018 ). However,
with the exception of work on online hyperparameter adap-
tation ( Elfwing et al. ,2017 ;Meier et al. ,2017 ;Baydin et al. ,

==== Page 8 ====
Online Meta-Learning
2017 ), nearly all prior meta-learning algorithms assume
that the meta-training tasks come from a stationary distri-
bution, and does not consider tasks that are presented as a
continuous stream. In contrast, we consider a more ﬂex-
ible approach that allows for adapting all of the model’s
parameters during online meta-training. Recent work has
also considered meta-training with non-stationary distribu-
tions using Dirichlet process mixture models over parame-
ters ( Grant et al. ,2019 ). In contrast, we introduce a simple
extension onto the MAML algorithm without mixtures over
parameters, and provide theoretical guarantees.
Continual learning: Our problem setting is related to con-
tinual, or lifelong learning ( Thrun ,1998 ;Zhao & Schmidhu-
ber,1996 ). A number of papers in this area have focused on
avoiding forgetting or negative backward transfer ( Goodfel-
low et al. ,2013 ;Kirkpatrick et al. ,2017 ;Zenke et al. ,2017 ;
Rebufﬁ et al. ,2017 ;Shin et al. ,2017 ;Shmelkov et al. ,2017 ;
Lopez-Paz et al. ,2017 ;Nguyen et al. ,2017 ;Schmidhuber ,
2013 ), and maintaining a small model capacity as new tasks
are added ( Lee et al. ,2017 ;Mallya & Lazebnik ,2017 ). In
this paper, we sidestep the problem of catastrophic forget-
ting by maintaining a buffer of all the observed data ( Isele
& Cosgun ,2018 ), and instead focus on maximizing the
efﬁciency of learning new tasks within a non-stationary
meta-learning setting. Furthermore, unlike prior works ( Ru-
volo & Eaton ,2013 ;Rusu et al. ,2016 ;Aljundi et al. ,2017 ;
Wang et al. ,2017 ), we focus on the setting where there are
several tens or hundreds of tasks, and therefore more infor-
mation that can be transferred from previous tasks to enable
few-shot acquisition of new concepts.
Online learning: Similar to continual learning, online
learning considers a sequential setting with streaming tasks.
Much of the prior work in this area has focused on com-
putationally cheap algorithms that do not iterate over past
data multiple times ( Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi ,2006 ;Hazan
et al.,2006 ;Zinkevich ,2003 ;Shalev-Shwartz ,2012 ). Again,
we sidestep computational considerations to ﬁrst study the
meta-learning analog of FTL. For this, we derived the FTML
algorithm which has low regret when compared to a power-
ful adaptive comparator class, and demonstrated empirical
gains over strong baselines.
Adaptive notions of regret have been considered in prior
work to overcome limitations of a ﬁxed comparator. In the
dynamic regret setting ( Herbster & Warmuth ,1995 ;Yang
et al.,2016 ;Besbes et al. ,2015 ), the online learner is com-
pared with the sequence of optimal solutions corresponding
to each loss function. Unfortunately, lower bounds ( Yang
et al.,2016 ) suggest that the comparator class is too power-
ful and may not provide for any non-trivial learning in the
general case. To overcome this challenge, prior work has
placed restrictions on how quickly the loss functions or com-
parator model can change ( Hazan & Comandur ,2009 ;Hall& Willett ,2015 ;Herbster & Warmuth ,1995 ). In contrast,
we develop a new notion of adaptive regret where the learner
and comparator both have access to an update procedure.
The update procedures allow the comparator to produce dif-
ferent models for different loss functions, thereby serving
as a powerful comparator class (in comparison to a ﬁxed
model in hindsight). In this setting, we derived sublinear
regret algorithms without placing restrictions on the loss
functions. Concurrent work has also studied algorithms re-
lated to ﬁrst order variants of MAML using theoretical tools
from online learning ( Alquier et al. ,2016 ;Denevi et al. ,
2019 ;Khodak et al. ,2019 ). These works also derive re-
gret and generalization bounds, but the algorithms have not
yet been empirically studied in large scale domains or non-
stationary settings. We believe that our online meta-learning
setting captures the spirit and practice of continual lifelong
learning, and also shows promising empirical results.
8. Discussion and Future Work
We introduced the online meta-learning setting, which pro-
vides a natural perspective on the ideal real-world learning
procedure: an intelligent agent interacting with a constantly
changing environment should utilize streaming experience
to both master the task at hand, and become more proﬁcient
at learning new tasks in the future. We proposed and ana-
lyzed the FTML algorithm to derive regret bounds, and il-
lustrated how FTML can be adapted to a practical algorithm.
Our experiments demonstrate that FTML outperforms prior
methods, learing new tasks more and more efﬁciently over
time. We next outline avenues for future work.
More powerful update procedures. We analyzed the case
where the update Utis one gradient step. However, in
practice, MAML is often used with multiple gradient steps.
Analyzing this case, and potentially higher order update
rules, will make for exciting future work.
Memory and computational constraints. In this work, we
primarily aimed to discern if it is possible to meta-learn in a
sequential setting. As discussed in Section 7, the cost of FTL
(and FTML) grows over time as new tasks and loss functions
are accumulated. Further, in many practical online learn-
ing problems, it is challenging to store all datapoints from
previous tasks. While we showed that our method can effec-
tively learn nearly 100 tasks in sequence without signiﬁcant
burdens on compute or memory, scalability remains a con-
cern. Can a more streaming algorithm like mirror descent
that does not store all the past experiences be successful as
well? Our main theoretical results (Section 4.3) suggests
that there exist a large family of online meta-learning algo-
rithms that enjoy sublinear regret. Tapping into the large
body of work in online learning, particularly mirror descent,
to develop computationally cheaper algorithms would make
for exciting future work.

==== Page 9 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Acknowledgements
Aravind Rajeswaran thanks Emo Todorov for valuable dis-
cussions on the problem formulation. This work was sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation via IIS-1651843,
Google, Amazon, and NVIDIA. Sham Kakade acknowl-
edges funding from the Washington Research Foundation
Fund for Innovation in Data-Intensive Discovery and the
NSF CCF 1740551 award.
References
Al-Shedivat, M., Bansal, T., Burda, Y., Sutskever, I., Mor-
datch, I., and Abbeel, P. Continuous adaptation via meta-
learning in nonstationary and competitive environments.
CoRR , abs/1710.03641, 2017.
Aljundi, R., Chakravarty, P., and Tuytelaars, T. Expert
gate: Lifelong learning with a network of experts. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2017.
Alquier, P., Mai, T. T., and Pontil, M. Regret bounds for
lifelong learning. In AISTATS , 2016.
Andrychowicz, M., Denil, M., Gomez, S., Hoffman, M. W.,
Pfau, D., Schaul, T., and de Freitas, N. Learning to
learn by gradient descent by gradient descent. In Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2016.
Antoniou, A., Edwards, H., and Storkey, A. How to train
your maml. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.09502 , 2018.
Baydin, A. G., Cornish, R., Rubio, D. M., Schmidt, M., and
Wood, F. Online learning rate adaptation with hypergra-
dient descent. arXiv:1703.04782 , 2017.
Bengio, S., Bengio, Y., Cloutier, J., and Gecsei, J. On the
optimization of a synaptic learning rule. In Optimality in
Artiﬁcial and Biological Neural Networks , 1992.
Besbes, O., Gur, Y ., and Zeevi, A. J. Non-stationary stochas-
tic optimization. Operations Research , 63:1227–1244,
2015.
Cesa-Bianchi, N. and Lugosi, G. Prediction, learning, and
games. 2006.
Denevi, G., Ciliberto, C., Grazzi, R., and Pontil, M.
Learning-to-learn stochastic gradient descent with biased
regularization. CoRR , abs/1903.10399, 2019.
Duan, Y ., Schulman, J., Chen, X., Bartlett, P. L., Sutskever,
I., and Abbeel, P. Rl2: Fast reinforcement learning via
slow reinforcement learning. arXiv:1611.02779 , 2016.
Duchi, J., Hazan, E., and Singer, Y. Adaptive subgradient
methods for online learning and stochastic optimization.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 2011.Elfwing, S., Uchibe, E., and Doya, K. Online meta-learning
by parallel algorithm competition. arXiv:1702.07490 ,
2017.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017.
Goodfellow, I. J., Mirza, M., Xiao, D., Courville, A.,
and Bengio, Y. An empirical investigation of catas-
trophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks.
arXiv:1312.6211 , 2013.
Grant, E., Finn, C., Levine, S., Darrell, T., and Grifﬁths, T.
Recasting gradient-based meta-learning as hierarchical
bayes. International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR) , 2018.
Grant, E., Jerfel, G., Heller, K., and Grifﬁths, T. L. Mod-
ulating transfer between tasks in gradient-based meta-
learning, 2019.
Hall, E. C. and Willett, R. M. Online convex optimization in
dynamic environments. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Signal Processing , 9:647–662, 2015.
Hannan, J. Approximation to bayes risk in repeated play.
Contributions to the Theory of Games , 1957.
Hazan, E. Introduction to online convex optimization. 2016.
Hazan, E. and Comandur, S. Efﬁcient learning algorithms
for changing environments. In ICML , 2009.
Hazan, E., Kalai, A. T., Kale, S., and Agarwal, A. Loga-
rithmic regret algorithms for online convex optimization.
Machine Learning , 69:169–192, 2006.
Herbster, M. and Warmuth, M. K. Tracking the best expert.
Machine Learning , 32:151–178, 1995.
Hochreiter, S., Younger, A. S., and Conwell, P. R. Learning
to learn using gradient descent. In International Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks , 2001.
Isele, D. and Cosgun, A. Selective experience replay for
lifelong learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10269 , 2018.
Jin, C., Ge, R., Netrapalli, P., Kakade, S. M., and Jordan,
M. I. How to escape saddle points efﬁciently. In ICML ,
2017.
Kalai, A. T. and Vempala, S. Efﬁcient algorithms for online
decision problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 71:291–307,
2005.
Khodak, M., Balcan, M.-F., and Talwalkar, A. S. Prov-
able guarantees for gradient-based meta-learning. CoRR ,
abs/1902.10644, 2019.

==== Page 10 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Kingma, D. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR) , 2015.
Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J.,
Desjardins, G., Rusu, A. A., Milan, K., Quan, J., Ra-
malho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A., et al. Overcoming
catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences , 2017.
Lee, J., Yun, J., Hwang, S., and Yang, E. Life-
long learning with dynamically expandable networks.
arXiv:1708.01547 , 2017.
Levine, S., Finn, C., Darrell, T., and Abbeel, P. End-to-
end training of deep visuomotor policies. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 2016.
Li, K. and Malik, J. Learning to optimize. International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017.
Lopez-Paz, D. et al. Gradient episodic memory for continual
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 2017.
Mallya, A. and Lazebnik, S. Packnet: Adding mul-
tiple tasks to a single network by iterative pruning.
arXiv:1711.05769 , 2017.
Meier, F., Kappler, D., and Schaal, S. Online learning of a
memory for learning rates. arXiv:1709.06709 , 2017.
Mishra, N., Rohaninejad, M., Chen, X., and Abbeel, P.
Meta-learning with temporal convolutions. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.03141 , 2017.
Munkhdalai, T. and Yu, H. Meta networks. International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2017.
Nagabandi, A., Finn, C., and Levine, S. Deep online learn-
ing via meta-learning: Continual adaptation for model-
based rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.07671 , 2018.
Naik, D. K. and Mammone, R. Meta-neural networks that
learn by learning. In International Joint Conference on
Neural Netowrks (IJCNN) , 1992.
Nesterov, Y . and Polyak, B. T. Cubic regularization of new-
ton method and its global performance. Math. Program. ,
108:177–205, 2006.
Nguyen, C. V., Li, Y., Bui, T. D., and Turner, R. E. Varia-
tional continual learning. arXiv:1710.10628 , 2017.
Parisotto, E., Ba, J. L., and Salakhutdinov, R. Actor-mimic:
Deep multitask and transfer reinforcement learning. Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,
2016.Ravi, S. and Larochelle, H. Optimization as a model for few-
shot learning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) , 2017.
Rebufﬁ, S.-A., Kolesnikov, A., and Lampert, C. H. icarl:
Incremental classiﬁer and representation learning. In
Proc. CVPR , 2017.
Rusu, A. A., Rabinowitz, N. C., Desjardins, G., Soyer, H.,
Kirkpatrick, J., Kavukcuoglu, K., Pascanu, R., and Had-
sell, R. Progressive neural networks. arXiv:1606.04671 ,
2016.
Ruvolo, P. and Eaton, E. Ella: An efﬁcient lifelong learn-
ing algorithm. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pp. 507–515, 2013.
Santoro, A., Bartunov, S., Botvinick, M., Wierstra, D., and
Lillicrap, T. Meta-learning with memory-augmented neu-
ral networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML) , 2016.
Schmidhuber, J. Evolutionary principles in self-referential
learning. Diploma thesis, Institut f. Informatik, Tech. Univ.
Munich , 1987.
Schmidhuber, J. Optimal ordered problem solver. Machine
Learning , 54:211–254, 2002.
Schmidhuber, J. Powerplay: Training an increasingly gen-
eral problem solver by continually searching for the sim-
plest still unsolvable problem. In Front. Psychol. , 2013.
Shaban, A., Cheng, C.-A., Hirschey, O., and Boots, B. Trun-
cated back-propagation for bilevel optimization. CoRR ,
abs/1810.10667, 2018.
Shalev-Shwartz, S. Online learning and online convex op-
timization. "Foundations and Trends in Machine Learn-
ing", 2012.
Shalev-Shwartz, S. and Kakade, S. M. Mind the duality gap:
Logarithmic regret algorithms for online optimization. In
NIPS , 2008.
Shin, H., Lee, J. K., Kim, J., and Kim, J. Continual learn-
ing with deep generative replay. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 2017.
Shmelkov, K., Schmid, C., and Alahari, K. Incremental
learning of object detectors without catastrophic forget-
ting. arXiv:1708.06977 , 2017.
Singh, A., Yang, L., and Levine, S. Gplac: Generalizing
vision-based robotic skills using weakly labeled images.
arXiv:1708.02313 , 2017.

==== Page 11 ====
Online Meta-Learning
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V ., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wojna,
Z. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
vision. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) , 2016.
Thrun, S. Lifelong learning algorithms. In Learning to
learn . Springer, 1998.
Thrun, S. and Pratt, L. Learning to learn . Springer Science
& Business Media, 1998.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. Mujoco: A physics
engine for model-based control. In International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2012.
Wang, J. X., Kurth-Nelson, Z., Tirumala, D., Soyer, H.,
Leibo, J. Z., Munos, R., Blundell, C., Kumaran, D.,
and Botvinick, M. Learning to reinforcement learn.
arXiv:1611.05763 , 2016.
Wang, Y.-X., Ramanan, D., and Hebert, M. Growing a
brain: Fine-tuning by increasing model capacity. In IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017.
Xiang, Y., Mottaghi, R., and Savarese, S. Beyond pascal:
A benchmark for 3d object detection in the wild. In
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) ,
2014.
Yang, T., Zhang, L., Jin, R., and Yi, J. Tracking slowly
moving clairvoyant: Optimal dynamic regret of online
learning with true and noisy gradient. In ICML , 2016.
Zenke, F., Poole, B., and Ganguli, S. Continual learning
through synaptic intelligence. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning , 2017.
Zhao, J. and Schmidhuber, J. Incremental self-improvement
for life-time multi-agent reinforcement learning. In From
Animals to Animats 4: International Conference on Simu-
lation of Adaptive Behavior , 1996.
Zinkevich, M. Online convex programming and generalized
inﬁnitesimal gradient ascent. In ICML , 2003.

