==== Page 1 ====
Open World Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Massimiliano Mancini1∗, Muhammad Ferjad Naeem1,2∗, Yongqin Xian3, Zeynep Akata1,3,4
1University of T ¨ubingen2TU M ¨unchen3MPI for Informatics4MPI for Intelligent Systems
Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot learning (CZSL) requires to
recognize state-object compositions unseen during training.
In this work, instead of assuming prior knowledge about the
unseen compositions, we operate in the open world setting,
where the search space includes a large number of unseen
compositions some of which might be unfeasible. In this set-
ting, we start from the cosine similarity between visual fea-
tures and compositional embeddings. After estimating the
feasibility score of each composition, we use these scores
to either directly mask the output space or as a margin for
the cosine similarity between visual features and compo-
sitional embeddings during training. Our experiments on
two standard CZSL benchmarks show that all the meth-
ods suffer severe performance degradation when applied
in the open world setting. While our simple CZSL model
achieves state-of-the-art performances in the closed world
scenario, our feasibility scores boost the performance of
our approach in the open world setting, clearly outper-
forming the previous state of the art. Code is available at:
https://github.com/ExplainableML/czsl .
1. Introduction
The appearance of an object in the visual world is deter-
mined by its state. A pureed tomato looks different from a
wet tomato despite the shared object, and a wet tomato looks
different from a wet dog despite the shared state. In Com-
positional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) [ 20,21,27,17] the
goal is to learn a set of states and objects while generalizing
to unseen compositions.
Current benchmarks in CZSL study this problem in a
closed space, assuming the knowledge of unseen compo-
sitions that might arise at test time. For example, the widely
adopted MIT states dataset [ 13] contains 28175 possible
compositions (in total 115 states and 245 objects), but the
test time search space is limited to 1662 compositions (1262
seen and 400 unseen), covering less than 6% of the whole
compositional space. This restriction on the output space is
a fundamental limitation of current CZSL methods.
1First and second author contributed equally.
dogwetripe
tomatowet 
dogripe 
tomato
wet  
tomato
ripe 
dogwet 
tomatofeasibility scores
wet 
dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomatoshared embedding space
ripe  
dogClosed WorldOpen World
wet 
dogripe
dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomato
wet  tomato
dry dogUnseen Test 
Compositions
wet dog
pureed  
tomatoripe 
tomatohairy  dogTraining 
CompositionsUnfeasible 
Compositions
hairy  
tomatoripe  
dog
Figure 1. In closed world CZSL, the search space is assumed to be
known a priori ,i.e. seen (yellow) and unseen (purple) composi-
tions are available during training/test. In our open world scenario,
no limit on the search space is imposed. Hence, the model has to
ﬁgure out implausible compositions (pink) and discard them.
In this work, we propose the more realistic Open World
CZSL (OW-CZSL) task (see Figure 1), where we impose
no constraint on the test time search space, causing the
current state-of-the-art approaches to suffer severe perfor-
mance degradation. To tackle this new task, we propose
Compositional Cosine Logits (CompCos), a model where
we embed both images and compositional representations
into a shared embedding space and compute scores for each
composition with the cosine similarity. Moreover, we treat
less feasible compositions ( e.g.ripe dog ) asdistractors that
a model needs to eliminate. For this purpose, we use simi-
larities among primitives to assign a feasibility score to each
unseen composition. We then use these scores as margins
in a cross-entropy loss, showing how the feasibility scores
enforce a shared embedding space where unfeasible distrac-
tors are discarded, while visual and compositional domains
are aligned. Despite its simplicity, our model surpasses
the previous state-of-the-art methods on the standard CZSL
benchmark as well as in the challenging OW-CZSL task.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) A novel problem
formulation, Open World Compositional Zero-Shot learn-
ing (OW-CZSL) with the most ﬂexible search space in terms
of seen/unseen compositions; (2) CompCos, a novel model
to solve the OW-CZSL task based on cosine logits and a
5222


==== Page 2 ====
projection of learned primitive embeddings with an inte-
grated feasibility estimation mechanism; (3) A signiﬁcantly
improved state-of-the-art performance on MIT states [ 13]
and UT Zappos [ 34,35] both on the existing benchmarks
and the newly proposed OW-CZSL setting.
2. Related works
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning. Early vision works
encode compositionality with hierarchical part-based mod-
els, to learn robust and scalable object representations
[24,23,6,38,25,28]. More recently, compositionality has
been widely considered in multiple tasks such as composi-
tional reasoning for visual question answering [ 14,16,12]
and modular image generation [ 37,30,26].
In this work, we focus on Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning (CZSL) [ 20]. Given a training set containing a set
of state-object compositions, the goal of CZSL is to recog-
nize unseen compositions of these states and objects at test
time. Some approaches address this task by learning ob-
jects and states classiﬁer in isolation and composing them to
build the ﬁnal recognition model. In this context, [ 4] trains
an SVM classiﬁer for seen compositions and infers class
weights for new compositions through a Bayesian frame-
work. LabelEmbed [ 20] learns a transformation network on
top of pretrained state and object classiﬁers. [ 21] proposes
to encode objects as vectors and states as linear operators
that change this vector. Similarly, [ 17] enforces symmetries
in the representation of objects given their state transfor-
mations. Recently, [ 27] proposed a modular network where
states and objects are simultaneously encoded. The network
blocks are then selectively activated by a gating function,
taking as input an object-state composition.
All of these works assume that the training and test-
time compositions are known a priori. We show that re-
moving this assumption causes severe performance degra-
dation. Furthermore, we propose the ﬁrst approach for
Open World CZSL. There are some similarities between
our model and [ 20] (i.e. primitive representations are con-
catenated and projected in a shared visual-semantic space).
However, our loss formulation leads to signiﬁcant improve-
ments in the Open World CZSL results. More importantly,
our approach is the ﬁrst to estimate the feasibility of each
composition and exploits this information to isolate/remove
possible distractors in the shared output space.
Open World Recognition. In our open world setting, all
the combinations of states and objects can form a valid com-
positional class. This is different from an alternate def-
inition of Open World Recognition (OWR) [ 2] where the
goal is to dynamically update a model trained on a subset
of classes to recognize increasingly more concepts as new
data arrives. Our deﬁnition of open world is related to the
open set zero-shot learning (ZSL) [ 33] scenario in [ 7,8],proposing to expand the output space to include a very large
vocabulary of semantic concepts.
Our problem formulation and approach are close in spirit
to that of [ 8] since both works consider the lack of con-
straints in the output space for unseen concepts as a require-
ment for practical (compositional) ZSL methods. However,
there are fundamental differences between our work and
[8]. Since we consider the problem of CZSL, we have ac-
cess to images of all primitives during training but not all
their possible compositions. This implies that we can use
the knowledge obtained from the visual world to model the
feasibility of compositions and modifying the representa-
tions in the shared visual-compositional embedding space.
We explicitly model the feasibility of each unseen compo-
sition, incorporating this knowledge into training and test.
3. Compositional Cosine Logits
3.1. (OW)­CZSL Task Deﬁnition
Compositional zero-shot learning (CZSL) aims to pre-
dict a composition of multiple semantic concepts in images.
Let us denote with Sthe set of possible states, with Othe
set of possible objects, and with C=S × O the set of all
their possible compositions. T={(xi,ci)}N
i=1is a training
set where xi∈ X is a sample in the input (image) space X
andci∈ Csis a composition in the subset Cs⊂ C.Tis
used to train a model f:X → Ctpredicting combinations
in a space Ct⊆ C whereCtmay include compositions that
are not present in Cs(i.e.∃c∈ Ct∧c /∈ Cs).
The CZSL task entails different challenges depending on
the extent of the target set Ct. IfCtis a subset of Cand
Ct∩Cs≡ ∅, the task deﬁnition is of [ 20], where the model
needs to predict only unseen compositions at test time. In
caseCs⊂ Ctwe are in the generalized CZSL scenario, and
the output space of the model contains both seen and unseen
compositions. Similarly to the standard generalized zero-
shot learning [ 33], this scenario is more challenging due to
the natural prediction bias of the model in Cs, seen during
training. Most recents works on CZSL consider the gener-
alized scenario [ 27,17], and the set of unseen compositions
inCtis assumed to be known a priori, with Ct⊂ C.
In this work, we take a step further, analyzing the case
where the output space of the model is the whole set of
possible compositions Ct≡ C, i.e. Open World Composi-
tional Zero-shot Learning (OW-CZSL). Note that this task
presents the same challenges of the generalized case while
being far more difﬁcult since i) |Ct| ≫ |Cs|, thus it is hard
to generalize from a small set of seen to a very large set
of unseen compositions; and ii) there are a large number of
distractor compositions in Ct,i.e. compositions predicted
by the model but not present in the actual test set that can
be close to other unseen compositions, hampering their dis-
criminability. We highlight that, despite being similar to
5223


==== Page 3 ====
object 
embeddingsstate embeddings
training compositions
dogwet
ripe
tomato
wet 
dogripe 
tomato
wet  
tomato
wet 
dogripe
 dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomato
ripe 
dogwet 
tomato
feasibility scores
 wet 
dog
hard masking
training
wet 
dogripe
 dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomatowet 
dogripe
 dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomato
wet 
dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomatowet 
dogripe
 dog
wet 
tomatoripe 
tomatovisual 
embeddingshared embedding space
composition 
embeddingcosine
similarity
margin masking
ripe
 tomatoripe  
dog
Closed World Open World
Figure 2. Compositional Cosine Logits (CompCos). Our approach embeds an image (top) and state-object compositions (bottom) into a
shared semantic space deﬁned by the cosine-similarity between image features and composition embeddings. In the open world model, we
estimate a feasibility score for each of the unseen compositions, using the relation between states, objects, and the training compositions.
The feasibility scores are injected to the model either by removing less feasible compositions ( e.g.ripe dog ) from the output space (bottom,
black slice) or by adding a bias to the cosine similarities computed during training (top, purple slices).
Open Set Zero-shot Learning [ 8], we do not only consider
objects but also states. Therefore, this knowledge can be ex-
ploited to identify unfeasible distractor compositions ( e.g.
rusty pie ) and isolate them. Figure 2shows an overview of
our approach for both closed and open world scenarios.
3.2. CompCos: A Closed World Model
In this section, we focus on the closed world setting,
whereCs⊂ Ct⊂ C. Since in this scenario |Ct| ≪ |C|
and the number of unseen compositions is usually lower
than the number of seen ones, this problem presents several
challenges. In particular, while learning a mapping from
the visual to the compositional space, the model needs to
avoid being overly biased toward seen class predictions. In-
spired by incremental learning [ 11] and generalized few-
shot learning [ 9], we reduce this problem by replacing the
logits of the classiﬁcation layer with cosine similarities be-
tween the image features and the composition embeddings
in the shared embedding space:
f(x) = argmax
c∈Ctcos(ω(x),φ(c)) (1)
whereω:X → Z is the mapping from the image space to
the shared embedding space Z ∈Rdandφ:C → Z em-
beds a composition to the same space. cos(y,z) =y⊺z
||y||||z||
is the cosine similarity among the two embeddings. As
sketched Figure 2(left), the visual embedding ω(green
block) maps an image to the shared embedding space, while
states (red) and objects (blue) embeddings, are embedded to
the shared space by φ(purple block).
Visual embedding. We use a standard deep neural network,
e.g. ResNet-18 [ 10], with an additional embedding function
ωmapping, the feature extracted from the backbone to Z.The embedding function is a simple 2-layer MLP, where
dropout [ 29], LayerNorm [ 1] and a ReLU non-linearity [ 22]
are applied after the ﬁrst layer. During training, we freeze
the main backbone, updating only the ﬁnal MLP.
Composition embedding. The function ϕ:S ∪O → Rd
maps the primitives, i.e. objects and states, into their cor-
responding embedding vectors. The embedding of a given
composition c= (s,o)is a simple linear projection of the
embeddings of its primitives:
φ(c) = [ϕ(s)ϕ(o)]⊤W
withW∈R2d×d, where we consider Z ∈Rdfor simplic-
ity. We chose a linear embedding function since we found
it works well in practice. Moreover, it applies a strong con-
straint to the compositional space, making the embedding
less prone to overﬁtting and more suitable for generalizing
in a scenario where we might have |Ct| ≫ |Cs|. During
training, we update both the embedding matrix Wand the
atomic embeddings of ϕ, after initializing the latter with
word embeddings.
Objective function. We deﬁne a cross-entropy loss on top
of the cosine logits:
L=−1
|T |/summationdisplay
(x,c)∈Tloge1
T·p(x,c)
/summationtext
y∈Cse1
T·p(x,y)(2)
whereTis a temperature value that balances the prob-
abilities for the cross-entropy loss [ 36] andp(x,c) =
cos(φ(x),ω(c)). In the following we discuss how to extend
our Compositional Cosine Logits (CompCos) model from
the closed to the more challenging open world scenario.
5224


==== Page 4 ====
3.3. CompCos: from Closed to Open World
Although CompCos is an effective CZSL algorithm in
the standard closed world scenario, performing well on the
OW-CZSL requires tackling different challenges, such as
avoiding distractors. We consider distractors as less-likely
concepts, e.g. pureed dog ,hairy tomato , and argue that the
similarity among objects and states can be used as a proxy
to estimate the feasibility of each composition. The least
feasible compositions can then be successfully isolated, im-
proving the representations of the feasible ones.
Estimating Compositional Feasibility. Let us consider
two objects, namely catanddog. We know, from our train-
ing set, that cats can be small anddogs can be wetsince
we have at least one image for each of these compositions.
However, the training set may not contain images for wet
cats andsmall dogs , which we know are feasible in real-
ity. We conjecture, that similar objects share similar states
while dissimilar ones do not. Hence, it is safe to assume that
the states of catscan be transferred to dogs and vice-versa.
With this idea in mind, given a composition c= (s,o)
we deﬁne its feasibility score with respect to the object oas:
ρobj(s,o) = max
ˆo∈Oscos(ϕ(o),ϕ(ˆo)) (3)
withOsbeing the set of objects associated with state sin
the training set Cs,i.e.Os={o|(s,o)∈ Cs}. Note, that
the score is computed as the cosine similarity between the
object embedding and the most similar other object with the
target state, thus the score is bounded in [−1,1]. Training
compositions get assigned the score of 1. Similarly, we de-
ﬁne the score with respect to the state sas:
ρstate(s,o) = max
ˆs∈Socos(ϕ(s),ϕ(ˆs)) (4)
withSobeing the set of states associated with the object o
in the training set Cs,i.e.So={s|(s,o)∈ Cs}.
The feasibility score for a composition c= (s,o)is then:
ρ(c) =ρ(s,o) =g(ρstate(s,o),ρobj(s,o)) (5)
wheregis a mixing function, e.g. max operation ( g(x,y) =
max(x,y)) or the average ( g(x,y) = (x+y)/2), keeping
the feasibility score bounded in [−1,1]. Note that, while we
focus on extracting feasibility from the visual information,
external knowledge ( e.g. knowledge bases [ 18], language
models [ 31]) can be complementary resources.
Exploiting Compositional Feasibility. A ﬁrst simple strat-
egy is applying a threshold on the feasibility scores, con-
sidering all compositions above the threshold as valid and
others as distractors (e.g. ripe dog , as shown in the black
pie slice of Figure 2):
fHARD(x) = argmax
c∈Ct,ρ(c)>τcos(ω(x),φ(c)) (6)whereτis the threshold, tuned on a validation set. While
this strategy is effective, it might be too restrictive in prac-
tice. For instance, tomatoes anddogs being far in the em-
bedding space does not mean that a state for dog, e.g. wet,
cannot be applied to a tomato . Therefore, considering the
feasibility scores as the golden standard may lead to exclud-
ing valid compositions. To sidestep this issue, we propose
to inject the feasibility scores directly into the training pro-
cedure. We argue that doing so can enforce separation be-
tween most and least feasible unseen compositions in the
shared embedding space.
To inject the feasibility scores ρ(c)directly within our
objective function, we can deﬁne:
Lf=−1
|T |/summationdisplay
(x,c)∈Tloge1
T·pf(x,c)
/summationtext
y∈Ce1
T·pf(x,y)(7)
with:
pf(x,c) =/braceleftBigg
cos(ω(x),φ(c)) ifc∈ Cs
cos(ω(x),φ(c))−αρ(c)otherwise(8)
whereρ(c)are used as margins for the cosine similarities,
andα >0is a scalar factor. With Eq. ( 7) we include the full
compositional space while training with the seen composi-
tions data to raise awareness of the margins between seen
and unseen compositions directly during training.
Note that, since ρ(ci)/ne}ationslash=ρ(cj)ifci/ne}ationslash=cjandci,cj/∈ Cs,
we have a different margin, i.e. −αρ(c), for each unseen
composition c. This is because most feasible compositions
should be closer to the seen ones (to which the visual em-
bedding network is biased) than less feasible ones. By do-
ing that, we force the network to push the representation of
less feasible compositions away from the representation of
compositions in CsinZ. On the other hand, the less pe-
nalized feasible compositions beneﬁt from the updates pro-
duced for seen training compositions containing the same
primitives. More feasible compositions will then be more
likely to be predicted by the model, even without being
present in the training set. As an example (Figure 2, top
part), the unfeasible composition ripe dog is more penal-
ized than the feasible wet tomato during training, with the
outcome that the optimization procedure does not force the
model to reduce the region of wet tomato , while reducing
the one of ripe dog (top-right pie).
We highlight that in this stage we do not explicitly bound
the revised score pf(c)to[−1,1]. Instead, we let the net-
work implicitly adjust the cosine similarity scores during
training. We also found it beneﬁcial to linearly increase α
till a maximum value as the training progresses, rather than
keeping it ﬁxed. This permits us to gradually introduce the
feasibility margins within our objective while exploiting im-
proved primitive embeddings to compute them.
5225


==== Page 5 ====
4. Experiments
Datasets. We experiment with two standard CZSL bench-
mark datasets. MIT states [ 13] contains 53K images of
245 objects in 115 possible states. We adopt the standard
split from [ 27]. For the closed world experiments, the out-
put space contains 1262 seen and 300/400 unseen (valida-
tion/test) compositions. For the open world scenario, we
consider all possible 28175 compositions as present in the
search space. Note, that 26114 out of 28175 ( ∼93%) are
not present in any splits of the dataset but are included in
our open world setting.
UT Zappos [ 34,35] contains 12 different shoe types (ob-
jects) and 16 different materials (states). In the closed world
setting, the output space is constrained to the 83 seen and to
additional 15 and 18 unseen compositions for validation and
test respectively. Although 76 out of 192 possible composi-
tions (∼40%) are not in any of the splits of the dataset, we
consider them in our open world setting.
Metrics. For the primitives, we report the object and state
classiﬁcation accuracies. Since we focus on the generalized
scenario and the model has an inherent bias for seen com-
positions, we follow the evaluation protocol from [ 27]. We
consider the performance of the model with different bias
factors for the unseen compositions, reporting the results as
best accuracy on only images of seen compositions ( best
seen), best accuracy on only unseen compositions ( best un-
seen), best harmonic mean ( best HM ) and Area Under the
Curve (AUC) for seen and unseen accuracies at bias values.
Benchmark and Implementation Details. As in [ 27,17]
our image features are extracted from a ResNet18 pre-
trained on ImageNet [ 5] and we learn the visual embedding
moduleωon top of these features. We initialize the em-
bedding function ϕwith 300-dimensional word2vec [ 19]
embeddings for UT Zappos and with 600-dimensional
word2vec+fastext [ 3] embeddings for MIT states, follow-
ing [ 32], keeping the same dimensions for the shared em-
bedding space Z. We train both ω(ϕandW) andφusing
Adam [ 15] optimizer with a learning rate and a weight de-
cay set to 5·10−5. The margin factor αand the temperature
Tare set to 0.4and0.05respectively for MIT states and
1.0and0.02for UT Zappos. We linearly increase αfrom
0 to the previous values during training, reaching the val-
ues after 15 epochs. We consider the mixing function gas
the average to merge state and object feasibility scores and
fHARD as predictor for OW-CZSL, unless otherwise stated.
We compare with four state-of-the-art methods, At-
tribute as Operators (AOP) [ 21], considering objects as vec-
tors and states as matrices modifying them [ 21]; LabelEm-
bed+ (LE+) [ 20,21] training a classiﬁer merging state and
object embeddings with an MLP; Task-Modular Neural
Networks (TMN) [ 27], modifying the classiﬁer through a
gating function receiving as input the queried stat-object
composition; and SymNet [ 17], learning object embeddingsshowing symmetry under different state-based transforma-
tions. We train each model with their default hyperparame-
ters, reporting the closed and open world results of the mod-
els with the best AUC on the validation set.
4.1. Comparing with the State of the Art
We compare CompCos and the state of the art in the stan-
dard closed world and the proposed open world setting.
Closed World Results. The results analyzing the perfor-
mance of CompCos in the standard closed world scenario
are reported on the left side of Table 1for the MIT states and
UT Zappos test sets. Although being a substantially sim-
ple approach, our CompCos achieves remarkable results.
On MIT states our model either outperforms or is compa-
rable to all competitors in all metrics. In particular, while
obtaining a comparable best harmonic mean with SymNet,
it achieves 4.5 AUC, which is a signiﬁcant improvement
over 3.0 from SymNet. This highlights how our model is
more robust to the bias on unseen test compositions. Com-
pared to the closest method to ours, LabelEmbed+ (LE+),
CompCos shows clear advantages for all metrics (from 2 to
4.5 AUC, and from 10.7% to 16.4% on the best harmonic
mean), underlying the impact of our embedding functions
and the cross-entropy loss on cosine logits.
On UT Zappos, our model is superior to almost all meth-
ods (except TMN in two cases). It is particularly interest-
ing how CompCos surpasses AoP, LE+, and SymNet with
more than 2%on best harmonic mean and at least by 2.8
in AUC. In comparison with TMN, while achieving a lower
best harmonic mean (-1.9%) and a slightly lower AUC (-
0.6), it achieves the best unseen accuracy (+2.5%) and im-
proves of 4%the accuracy in recognizing each primitive in
isolation. These results show that CompCos is less sensitive
to the value of the bias applied to the unseen compositions
in the generalized scenario, thanks to the use of cosine sim-
ilarity as prediction score. We would like to highlight that
our model uses a magnitude lower trainable parameters, e.g.
0.8M vs 2.3M for TMN, to achieve these results.
Open World Results. The results on the challenging OW-
CZSL setting are reported on the right side of Table 1. As
expected, the ﬁrst clear outcome is the severe decrease in
performance of every method. In fact, the OW-CZSL per-
formances ( e.g. best unseen, best HM, and AUC) are less
than half of CZSL performances in MIT states. The largest
decrease in performance is on the best unseen metric, due
to the presence of a large number of distractors. As an ex-
ample, LE+ goes from 20.1% to 2.5% of best unseen accu-
racy and even the previous state of the art, SymNet, loses
18.2%, conﬁrming that the open world scenario is signiﬁ-
cantly more challenging than the closed world setting.
In the OW-CZSL setting, our model (CompCos) is more
robust to the distractors, due to the injected feasibility-based
margins which shape the shared embedding space during
5226


==== Page 6 ====
MethodClosed World Open World
MIT states UT Zappos MIT states UT Zappos
Sta. Obj. S U HM auc Sta. Obj. S U HM auc Sta. Obj. S U HM auc Sta. Obj. S U HM auc
AoP[ 21] 21.1 23.6 14.3 17.4 9.9 1.6 38.9 69.9 59.8 54.2 40.8 25.9 15.4 20.0 16.6 5.7 4.7 0.7 25.7 61.3 50.9 34.2 29.4 13.7
LE+[ 20] 23.5 26.3 15.0 20.1 10.7 2.0 41.2 69.3 53.0 61.9 41.0 25.7 10.9 21.5 14.2 2.5 2.7 0.3 38.1 68.2 60.4 36.5 30.5 16.3
TMN[ 27]23.3 26.5 20.2 20.1 13.0 2.9 40.8 69.5 58.7 60.0 45.0 29.3 6.1 15.9 12.6 0.9 1.2 0.1 14.6 61.5 55.9 18.1 21.7 8.4
SymNet[ 17]26.3 28.3 24.2 25.2 16.1 3.0 41.3 68.6 49.8 57.4 40.4 23.4 17.0 26.3 21.4 7.0 5.8 0.8 33.2 70.0 53.3 44.6 34.5 18.5
CompCos 27.9 31.8 25.3 24.6 16.4 4.5 44.7 73.5 59.8 62.5 43.1 28.7 18.8 27.7 25.4 10.0 8.9 1.6 35.1 72.4 59.3 46.8 36.9 21.3
Table 1. Closed and Open World CZSL results on MIT states and UT Zappos. We measure states (Sta.) and objects (Obj.) accuracy on the
primitives, best seen (S) and unseen accuracy (U), best harmonic mean (HM), and area under the curve (auc) on the compositions.
Effect of the Margins Seen Unseen HM AUC
CompCosCW28.0 6.0 7.0 1.2
CompCos α= 0 25.4 10.0 9.7 1.7
+α >0 27.0 10.9 10.5 2.0
+ warmup α 27.1 11.0 10.8 2.1
Effect of Primitives Seen Unseen HM AUC
CompCosρstate 26.6 10.2 10.2 1.9
ρobj 27.2 10.0 9.9 1.9
max(ρstate,ρobj)27.2 10.1 10.1 2.0
(ρstate+ρobj)/227.1 11.0 10.8 2.1
Table 2. Results on MIT states validation set for different ways of
applying the margins (top) and different ways of computing the
feasibility scores (bottom) for CompCos with fas predictor.
training. This is clear in MIT states, where CompCos out-
performs the state of the art for all metrics. Remarkably,
it obtains double the AUC of the best competitor, SymNet,
going from 0.8 to 1.6 with a 3.1% improvement on the best
HM and3.0%on best unseen accuracy.
In UT Zappos the performance gap with the other ap-
proaches is more nuanced. This is because the vast majority
of compositions in UTZappos are feasible, thus it is hard to
see a clear gain from injecting the feasibility scores into the
training procedure. Nevertheless, CompCos improves by
2.8 in AUC and 2.4 in best unseen accuracy over SymNet,
showing the highest results according to all compositional
metrics but the seen accuracy, where it performs compara-
bly to LE+. This is expected, since the output space of all
previous works is limited to seen classes during training,
thus the models are discriminative for seen compositions.
4.2. Ablation studies
We investigate the impact of the feasibility-based mar-
gins, how we obtain them (without fHARD ), and the ben-
eﬁts of limiting the output space during inference using
fHARD . We perform our analyses on MIT states’ validation
set. Note that, in the tables, CompCosCWis the closed world
CompCos model, as described in Sec. 3.2.
Importance of the feasibility-based margins. We check
the impact of including all compositions in the objectivefunction (without any margin) and of including the feasibil-
ity margin but without any warmup strategy for α.
As the results in Table 2(Top) shows, including all un-
seen compositions in the cross-entropy loss without any
margin ( i.e.α= 0 ) increases the best unseen accuracy
by 4% and the AUC by 0.5. This is a consequence of the
training procedure: since we have no positive examples for
unseen compositions, including unseen compositions dur-
ing training makes the network push their representation far
from seen ones in the shared embedding space. This strat-
egy regularizes the model in presence of a large number of
unseen compositions in the output space. Note, that this
problem is peculiar in the open world scenario since in the
closed world the number of seen compositions is usually
larger than the unseen ones. The CompCos ( α= 0) model
performs worse than CompCosCWon seen compositions,
as the loss treats all unseen compositions equally.
Results increase if we include the feasibility scores dur-
ing training ( i.e.α >0). The AUC goes from 1.7 to 2.0,
with consistent improvements over the best seen and unseen
accuracy. This is a direct consequence of using the feasibil-
ity to separate the unseen compositions from the unlikely
ones. In particular, this brings a large improvement on Seen
and moderate improvements on both Unseen and HM.
Finally, linearly increasing α(i.e. warmup α) further im-
proves the harmonic mean due to both the i) improved mar-
gins that CompCos estimates from the updated primitive
embeddings and ii) the gradual inclusion of these margins in
the objective. This strategy improves the bias between seen
and unseen classes (as for the better on harmonic mean)
while slightly enhancing the discriminability on seen and
unseen compositions in isolation.
Effect of Primitives We can either use objects as in Eq. ( 3),
states as in Eq. ( 4)) or both as in Eq. ( 5) to estimate the fea-
sibility score for each unseen composition. Here we con-
sider all these choices, showing their impact on the results
in Table 2(Bottom), with fas predictor.
The results show that computing feasibility on the prim-
itives alone is already beneﬁcial (achieving an AUC of 1.9)
since the dominant states like caramelized and objects like
dogprovide enough information to transfer knowledge. In
5227


==== Page 7 ====
Mask Seen Unseen HM AUC
LE+ 14.83.1 3.2 0.3
✓ 5.0 4.6 0.5
TMN 15.91.3 1.7 0.1
✓ 4.1 4.1 0.4
SymNet 23.67.9 7.6 1.2
✓ 7.9 7.7 1.2
CompCosCW28.06.0 7.0 1.2
✓ 8.1 8.7 1.6
CompCos 27.111.0 10.8 2.1
✓ 11.2 11.0 2.2
Table 3. Results on MIT states validation set for applying our
feasibility-based binary masks ( fHARD ) on different models.
particular, computing the scores starting from state informa-
tion (ρstate) brings good best unseen and HM results while
under-performing on the best seen accuracy. On the other
hand, using similarities among objects ( ρobj) performs well
on the seen classes while achieving slightly lower perfor-
mances on unseen ones and HM.
Nevertheless introducing both states and objects give the
best result at AUC of 2.1 as it combines the best of both.
Merging objects and states scores through their maximum
(ρmax) maintains the higher seen accuracy of the object-
based scores, with a trade-off between the two on unseen
compositions. However, merging objects and states scores
through their average brings to the best performance over-
all, with a signiﬁcant improvement on unseen compositions
(almost 1%) as well as the harmonic mean. We ascribe this
behavior to the fact that, with the average, the model is less-
prone to assign either too low or too high feasibility scores
for the unseen compositions, smoothing their scores. As a
consequence, more meaningful margins are used in Eq. ( 7)
and thus the network achieves a better trade-off between
discrimination capability on the seen compositions and bet-
ter separating them from unseen compositions (and distrac-
tors) in the shared embedding space.
Effect of Masking. We consider mainly two ways of us-
ing the feasibility scores: during training as margins and/or
during inference as masks on the predictions. We analyze
the impact of applying the mask during inference, i.e. using
as prediction function Eq. ( 6) in place of Eq. ( 1), with the
threshold τcomputed empirically. We run this study on our
closed world model CompCosCW, our full model CompCos
and three CZSL baselines, LE+, TMN, and SymNet. Note
that, since seen compositions are not masked, best seen per-
formances are shared across a single model.
As shown in Table 3, if we apply binary masks on top
of CompCosCWthe AUC increases by 0.5, best harmonic
mean by 1.7%, and best unseen accuracy by 2.1%. This is
because our masks ﬁlter out the less feasible compositions,rather than just restricting the output space. At the same
time, the improvements are not as pronounced for the full
CompCos model. Indeed, including the feasibility scores
as margins during training makes the model already robust
to the distractors. The hard masking still provides a slight
beneﬁt over all compositional metrics, with an 11% on ac-
curacy on unseen compositions. This conﬁrms the impor-
tance of restricting the search space under a criterion taking
into account the probability of a composition of being a dis-
tractor, such as our feasibility scores.
An interesting observation is that applying our
feasibility-based binary masks on top of other approaches
(i.e. LE+, TMN, and SymNet) is beneﬁcial. SymNet, mod-
eling states and objects separately, sees a minor increase in
performance in HM while maintaining the AUC and unseen
accuracy. However, LE+ and TMN, which learn a joint
compatibility between compositions and images, see a big
increase in performance with the introduction of feasibility.
TMN improves from 0.1 to 0.4 in the AUC while seeing
a big increase in the HM from 1.7 to 4.1. Similarly, LE+
improves from 0.3 AUC to 0.5 with a signiﬁcant increase
in the HM, from 3.2 to 4.6.
4.3. Qualitative results
We show example composition predictions for a set of
images of our CompCosCWand our CompCos in the open
world setting. Furthermore, we show examples of most-
and least-feasible compositions determined by our model.
Compositions Corrected due to Feasibility Scores. We
qualitatively analyze the reasons for the improvements of
CompCos over CompCosCW, by looking at the example
predictions of both models on simple sample images of
MIT states. We compare predictions on samples where the
closed world model is “distracted” by a distractor while the
open world model is able to predict the correct class label.
As shown in Figure 3, the closed world model is gener-
ally not capable of dealing with the presence of distractors.
For instance, there are cases where the object prediction
is correct ( e.g.broken dog ,molten chicken ,unripe boul-
der,mossy bear ,rusty pie ) but the associated state is not
only wrong but also making the compositions unfeasible.
In other cases, the state prediction is almost correct ( e.g.
cracked fan ,barren wave ,inﬂated eggs ) but the associated
object is unrelated, making the composition unfeasible. All
these problems are less severe in our full CompCos model
since our feasibility-driven objective helps in isolating the
implausible distractors in the shared embedding space, re-
ducing the possibility to predict them.
Discovered Most and Least Feasible Compositions. The
most crucial advantage of our method is its ability to esti-
mate the feasibility of each unseen composition, to later in-
ject these estimates into the learning process. Our assump-
tion is that our procedure described in Section 3.3is robust
5228


==== Page 8 ====
CompCosCW   
CompCos
broken  dog
small  dogrusty  pie
browned  piebarren  wave
windblown  sandmossy  bear
large  bearcracked  fan
broken  mirrorinflated  eggs
huge  balloonmolten  chicken
cooked  chickenunripe  boulder
mossy  boulder
CompCosCW   
CompCosbroken  laptop
old laptopfresh  beach
sunny  beachpeeled  copper
thick  necklaceburnt  iguana
weathered  concretecoiled  bread
sliced  breadfrozen  gemstone
melted  plasticengraved  cable
engraved  swordsteaming  shoes
crumpled  bagFigure 3. Examples correct predictions of CompCos in the OW-CZSL scenario when the CompCosCWfails. The ﬁrst row shows the
predictions of the closed world model, the bottom row shows the results of CompCos. The images are randomly selected.
Compositions
Most Feasible (Top-1) Least Feasible (Bottom-1)
browned tomato short lead
caramelized potato cloudy gemstone
thawed meat standing vegetable
small dog full nut
large animal blunt milk
Objects States
Most Feasible (Top-3) Least Feasible (Bottom-3)
tomato browned, peeled, diced tight, full, standing
dog small, old, young fallen, toppled, standing
cat wrinkled, huge, large viscous, smooth, runny
laptop small, shattered, modern cloudy, sunny, dull
camera tiny, huge, broken diced, caramelized, cloudy
Table 4. Unseen compositions wrt their feasibility scores (Top:
Top-5 compositions on the left, Least-5 on the right; Bottom: Top-
3 highest and Bottom-3 lowest feasible state per object.
enough to model which compositions should be more fea-
sible in the compositional space and which should not, iso-
lating the latter in the shared embedding space. We would
like to highlight that here we are focusing mainly on visual
information to extract the relationships. This information
can in principle be coupled with knowledge bases ( i.e. [18])
and language models ( i.e. [31]) to further reﬁne the scores.
Table 4(Top) shows qualitative examples of the most and
least feasible compositions discovered by CompCos. As an
example, it correctly ranks browned tomato andsmall dog
as one of the most feasible compositions, while full nut and
blunt milk among the least feasible ones. Since the dataset
has a lot of food classes, we see that the top and bottom are
mostly populated by them. However, the presence of rele-
vant and irrelevant states with these objects is promising and
shows the potential of our feasibility estimation strategy.Table 4(Bottom) shows the top-3 most feasible compo-
sitions and bottom-3 least feasible compositions given ﬁve
randomly selected objects. These objects speciﬁc results
show a tendency of the model to relate feasibility scores
to the subgroups of classes. For instance, cooking states
are considered as unfeasible for standard objects ( e.g.diced
camera ) as well as atmospheric conditions ( e.g.sunny lap-
top). Similarly, states usually associated with substances
are considered unfeasible for animals ( e.g.runny cat ). At
the same time, size and ages are mostly linked with animals
(e.g.young dog ) while cooking states are correctly associ-
ated with food ( e.g.diced tomato ). Interestingly, the top
states for catare all present with dogas seen compositions,
thus the similarities between the two classes has been used
to transfer these states from dogtocat, following Eq. ( 3).
5. Conclusions
In this work, we propose a new benchmark for CZSL
that extends the problem from the closed world to an open
world where all the combinations of states and objects could
potentially exist. We show that state-of-the-art methods fall
short in this setting as the number of unseen compositions
signiﬁcantly increases. We argue that not all combinations
are valid classes but it is unrealistic to assume that test set
pairs are the only valid compositions. We propose a way to
model the feasibility of a state-object composition by using
the visual information available in the training set. This fea-
sibility is independent of an external knowledge base and
can be directly incorporated in the optimization process.
We propose a novel model, CompCos, that incorporates this
feasibility and achieves state-of-the-art performance in both
closed and open world on two real-world datasets.
Acknowledgments This work has been partially funded by
the ERC (853489 - DEXIM) and by the DFG (2064/1 –
Project number 390727645).
5229


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hin-
ton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 ,
2016. 3
[2] Abhijit Bendale and Terrance Boult. Towards open world
recognition. In CVPR , 2015. 2
[3] Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and
Tomas Mikolov. Enriching word vectors with subword in-
formation. ACL, 2017. 5
[4] Chao-Yeh Chen and Kristen Grauman. Inferring analogous
attributes. In CVPR , 2014. 2
[5] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In CVPR , 2009. 5
[6] Sanja Fidler and Ales Leonardis. Towards scalable represen-
tations of object categories: Learning a hierarchy of parts. In
CVPR , 2007. 2
[7] Yanwei Fu and Leonid Sigal. Semi-supervised vocabulary-
informed learning. In CVPR , 2016. 2
[8] Yanwei Fu, Xiaomei Wang, Hanze Dong, Yu-Gang Jiang,
Meng Wang, Xiangyang Xue, and Leonid Sigal. V ocabulary-
informed zero-shot and open-set learning. IEEE T-PAMI ,
2019. 2,3
[9] Spyros Gidaris and Nikos Komodakis. Dynamic few-shot
visual learning without forgetting. In CVPR , 2018. 3
[10] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR ,
2016. 3
[11] Saihui Hou, Xinyu Pan, Chen Change Loy, Zilei Wang, and
Dahua Lin. Learning a uniﬁed classiﬁer incrementally via
rebalancing. In CVPR , 2019. 3
[12] Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Compositional
attention networks for machine reasoning. In ICLR , 2018. 2
[13] Phillip Isola, Joseph J Lim, and Edward H Adelson. Dis-
covering states and transformations in image collections. In
CVPR , 2015. 1,2,5
[14] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten,
Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Ross Girshick. Clevr:
A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elemen-
tary visual reasoning. In CVPR , 2017. 2
[15] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. ICLR , 2015. 5
[16] Jayanth Koushik, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Devendra Singh
Sachan. Compositional reasoning for visual question an-
swering. In ICML , 2017. 2
[17] Yong-Lu Li, Yue Xu, Xiaohan Mao, and Cewu Lu. Sym-
metry and group in attribute-object compositions. In CVPR ,
2020. 1,2,5,6
[18] Hugo Liu and Push Singh. Conceptnet—a practical com-
monsense reasoning tool-kit. BT technology journal ,
22(4):211–226, 2004. 4,8
[19] Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado,
and Jeffrey Dean. Distributed representations of words and
phrases and their compositionality. In NeurIPS , 2013. 5
[20] Ishan Misra, Abhinav Gupta, and Martial Hebert. From red
wine to red tomato: Composition with context. In CVPR ,
2017. 1,2,5,6[21] Tushar Nagarajan and Kristen Grauman. Attributes as op-
erators: factorizing unseen attribute-object compositions. In
ECCV , 2018. 1,2,5,6
[22] Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectiﬁed linear units
improve restricted boltzmann machines. In ICML , 2010. 3
[23] Bjorn Ommer and Joachim Buhmann. Learning the com-
positional nature of visual object categories for recognition.
IEEE T-PAMI , 32(3):501–516, 2009. 2
[24] Bjorn Ommer and Joachim M Buhmann. Learning the com-
positional nature of visual objects. In CVPR , 2007. 2
[25] Patrick Ott and Mark Everingham. Shared parts for de-
formable part-based models. In CVPR , 2011. 2
[26] Dim P Papadopoulos, Youssef Tamaazousti, Ferda Oﬂi, In-
gmar Weber, and Antonio Torralba. How to make a pizza:
Learning a compositional layer-based gan model. In CVPR ,
2019. 2
[27] Senthil Purushwalkam, Maximilian Nickel, Abhinav Gupta,
and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Task-driven modular networks
for zero-shot compositional learning. In ICCV , 2019. 1,2,
5,6
[28] Zhangzhang Si and Song-Chun Zhu. Learning and-or tem-
plates for object recognition and detection. IEEE T-PAMI ,
35(9):2189–2205, 2013. 2
[29] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: a simple
way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting. JMLR ,
15(1):1929–1958, 2014. 3
[30] Fuwen Tan, Song Feng, and Vicente Ordonez. Text2scene:
Generating compositional scenes from textual descriptions.
InCVPR , 2019. 2
[31] Chenguang Wang, Mu Li, and Alexander J Smola. Language
models with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09408 ,
2019. 4,8
[32] Yongqin Xian, Subhabrata Choudhury, Yang He, Bernt
Schiele, and Zeynep Akata. Semantic projection network for
zero-and few-label semantic segmentation. In CVPR , 2019.
5
[33] Yongqin Xian, Christoph H Lampert, Bernt Schiele, and
Zeynep Akata. Zero-shot learning—a comprehensive eval-
uation of the good, the bad and the ugly. IEEE T-PAMI ,
41(9):2251–2265, 2018. 2
[34] Aron Yu and Kristen Grauman. Fine-grained visual compar-
isons with local learning. In CVPR , 2014. 2,5
[35] Aron Yu and Kristen Grauman. Semantic jitter: Dense su-
pervision for visual comparisons via synthetic images. In
CVPR , 2017. 2,5
[36] Xiao Zhang, Rui Zhao, Yu Qiao, Xiaogang Wang, and Hong-
sheng Li. Adacos: Adaptively scaling cosine logits for effec-
tively learning deep face representations. In CVPR , 2019. 3
[37] Bo Zhao, Bo Chang, Zequn Jie, and Leonid Sigal. Modular
generative adversarial networks. In ECCV , pages 150–165,
2018. 2
[38] Long Leo Zhu, Yuanhao Chen, Antonio Torralba, William
Freeman, and Alan Yuille. Part and appearance sharing:
Recursive compositional models for multi-view multi-object
detection. In CVPR , 2010. 2
5230


