==== Page 1 ====
STATE OF THE ART
Optimizing Data Stream Representation: An Extensive Survey
on Stream Clustering Algorithms
Matthias Carnein •Heike Trautmann
Received: 20 June 2018 / Accepted: 13 November 2018 / Published online: 21 January 2019
/C211Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, ein Teil von Springer Nature 2019
Abstract Analyzing data streams has received consider-
able attention over the past decades due to the widespread
usage of sensors, social media and other streaming data
sources. A core research area in this ﬁeld is stream clus-
tering which aims to recognize patterns in an unordered,
inﬁnite and evolving stream of observations. Clustering can
be a crucial support in decision making, since it aims for an
optimized aggregated representation of a continuous data
stream over time and allows to identify patterns in large
and high-dimensional data. A multitude of algorithms and
approaches has been developed that are able to ﬁnd and
maintain clusters over time in the challenging streaming
scenario. This survey explores, summarizes and categorizes
a total of 51 stream clustering algorithms and identiﬁes
core research threads over the past decades. In particular, it
identiﬁes categories of algorithms based on distance
thresholds, density grids and statistical models as well as
algorithms for high dimensional data. Furthermore, it dis-
cusses applications scenarios, available software and how
to conﬁgure stream clustering algorithms. This survey is
considerably more extensive than comparable studies,
more up-to-date and highlights how concepts are interre-
lated and have been developed over time.
Keywords Stream clustering /C1Data streams /C1Online
clustering /C1Pattern recognition /C1Decision support /C1Data
representation1 Introduction
Cluster analysis is an unsupervised learning technique
which aims to ﬁnd groups of similar objects. It is a com-
mon tool to support decision makers by structuring the
large and high-dimensional data into manageable groups
and thus generating an optimized data representation.
Common application scenarios include identifying prof-
itable market segments, anomaly and fraud detection or
sensor analysis. Most clustering algorithms require a ﬁxed
set of data and evaluate each point multiple times to gen-
erate the clusters. In practice, however, many systems are
continuously generating new observations. As an example,
sensors generate thousands of observations each second
and countless of interactions happen every day in social
networks. In order to account for new data points and the
possible shift in cluster structures, classical clustering
algorithms need to be run periodically. This is computa-
tionally expensive and requires that all relevant data is
stored for periodic re-evaluation. A more suitable approach
is to update existing clusters and integrate new observa-
tions into the existing model by identifying emerging
structures and removing outdated structures incrementally.
This is the goal of stream clustering where data points are
assumed to arrive as a continuous stream of new obser-
vations where the order cannot be inﬂuenced. This stream
is possibly unbounded which makes unlimited storage and
re-evaluation of data points infeasible (Silva et al. 2013 ).
In this scenario, the main task is to optimize the number
and location of clusters in order to represent the underlying
data best and to extract the relevant information from a
stream without storing and re-evaluating all observations.
The underlying optimization task of these algorithms is
to ﬁnd clusters such that the within-cluster similarity is
high. At the same time, similarity between-clusterAccepted after one revision by the editors of the special issue.
M. Carnein ( &)/C1H. Trautmann
Information Systems and Statistics, University of Mu ¨nster,
Leonardo-Campus 3, 48149 Mu ¨nster, Germany
e-mail: matthias.carnein@uni-muenster.de
123Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-019-00576-5

==== Page 2 ====
similarity should be low. In the stream clustering scenario,
these two optimization tasks are subject to restrictions with
regard to the availability, order, speed and volume of the
data as well as limitation regarding available memory andcomputational power. In the following we discuss algo-
rithms which are able to deal with these restrictions. The
main contribution of our survey is as follows: We providean overview of available algorithms for stream clustering.
Our survey is much more extensive and up-to-date than
comparable studies and includes all algorithms applicable
to numerical data that we are aware of. The only category
which we consider out of scope for this paper are streamclustering algorithms for textual data since they usually
rely on considerably different approaches. In addition, we
identify different research threads and highlight interrela-tions between algorithms making it easier to understand
how the ﬁeld developed and what kind of trends exist.
Furthermore, we discuss problems when applying streamclustering in practice. In particular, we see that most
algorithms require numerous parameters which are unin-
tuitive and difﬁcult to choose appropriately. We discussautomatic algorithm conﬁguration as one approach on how
to tackle this problem. As an accompanying document to
this paper we also provide a website
1which compiles
relevant information about stream clustering such as
common datasets, available implementations and a curated
list of algorithms and corresponding publications in theﬁeld.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Sect. 2introduces the basic concepts of stream clustering.
Then, Sect. 3gives an overview of related work and
introduces a number of related surveys. Next, four different
categories of algorithms are identiﬁed and a total of 51algorithms presented. First, Sect. 4introduces algorithms
that use a distance threshold to build clusters. Next, Sect. 5
presents algorithms that utilize density-grids to mapobservations into a discrete space. Then, Sect. 6presents
algorithms that rely on statistical models and Sect. 7dis-
cusses algorithms that deal with high dimensional datastreams. Section 8presents available software tools and
implementations of the algorithms and also discusses
common problems during application and how to over-come them. Finally, Sect. 9concludes with a summary of
the ﬁndings.
2 Methodological Background
In this section, we introduce the basics of stream clustering.
Most importantly, we describe how data streams are typi-
cally aggregated and how algorithms adapt to changes overtime. For a consistent notation, we denote vectors by
boldface symbols and formally deﬁne a data stream as an
inﬁnite sequence X¼ðx
1;x1;...;xNÞwhere xtis a single
observation with ddimensions at time t. To calculate the
distance between clusters, an appropriate distance measure
needs to be used. For numerical data, the Euclidean dis-
tance between the centroids of the clusters is common.However, for binary, ordinal, nominal or text data, appro-
priate distance measures such as the Jaccard index, simple
matching coefﬁcient or Cosine similarity could be used.
In general, ﬁnding a good clustering solution is deﬁned
as an optimization task. The underlying goal is to maxi-mize intra-cluster homogeneity while simultaneously
maximizing inter-cluster heterogeneity. This ensures that
objects within the same cluster are similar but differentclusters are well separated. There are various strategies that
aim to achieve this task. Popular strategies include mini-
mizing intra-cluster distances, minimizing radii of clustersor ﬁnding maximum likelihood estimates. A popular
example is the k-means algorithm which minimizes the
within-cluster sum of squares, i.e., the distance from datapoints to their cluster centroids.
In a streaming scenario, these optimization objectives
are subject to several restrictions regarding availability andorder of the data as well as resource and time limitations.
For example, the large volume of data makes it undesirable
or infeasible to store all observations of the stream. Typi-cally, observations can only evaluated once and are dis-
carded afterwards. This requires to extract sufﬁcient
information from observations before discarding them.Similarly, the order of observations cannot be inﬂuenced.
As an illustrative example, let us consider the case of eye
tracking which is typically used in order to analyze howpeople perceive content such as websites or advertise-
ments. It records the movement of the eye and detects
where a person is looking. An example of a stream of eyetracking data is visualized in Fig. 1, showing the pupil
positions at three different points in times (grey points) (-
Steil et al. 2018 ). In this context, stream clustering can be
applied in order to ﬁnd the areas of interest or subjects that
the person is looking at.
Throughout this paper, we discuss common strategies
that can be used to identify clusters under the streaming
restrictions. For example, we could use similarity thresh-
olds in order to decide whether an observation ﬁts into anexisting cluster (Fig. 2a). Alternatively, we could split the
data space into a grid and only store the location of densely
populated cells (Fig. 2b). Other approaches include ﬁtting
a model to represent the observed data (Fig. 2c) or pro-
jecting high-dimensional data to a lower dimensional space
(Fig. 2d).
Generally, these strategies allow to capture the location
of dense areas in the data space. These regions can be
1http://www.matthias-carnein.de/streamClustering .
123278 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 3 ====
considered clusters and they can even be merged when they
become too similar over time. However, it is not possible to
ever split a clusters again since the underlying data was
discarded and only the centre of the dense region wasstored (Aggarwal 2007 ). To avoid this problem, many
stream clustering algorithms divide the process in two
phases: an online and an ofﬂine component (Aggarwalet al. 2003 ).
2.1 Two-Phase ClusteringIn the two-phase clustering approach, an online component
evaluates arriving data points in real time and captures
relevant summary statistics as outlined above. The result is
a number of micro-clusters that represent a large number of
preliminary clusters in the stream (Circles in Fig. 1). The
number of micro-clusters is much smaller than the number
of data points in the stream but larger than the ﬁnal numberof clusters. This gives sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to merge or split
clusters, without the need to store all observations. Note
that some publications refrain from using the term micro-clusters for grid-based approaches to highlight the different
type of information that is maintained.
Upon request, an ofﬂine component then ‘reclusters’ the
micro-clusters to derive a ﬁnal set of macro-clusters
(Crosses in Fig. 1). This process is usually not considered
time-critical which allows to use variants of existingclustering algorithms. While most algorithms explicitlyspecify an ofﬂine component, the online and ofﬂine steps
can usually be combined arbitrarily. The two-phase clus-
tering approach is visualized in Fig. 3by summarizing the
data in a grid-structure. While the vast majority of algo-rithms apply such a two-phase process, some rely on
incremental approaches where macro-clusters are gener-
ated incrementally without an intermediate step.
2.2 Time Window ModelsAs shown in our eye tracking example, the underlying
distribution of the stream will often change over time. Thisis also known as drift or concept-shift. To handle this,
algorithms can employ time window models. This
approach aims to ‘forget’ older data to avoid that historicdata is biasing the analysis to outdated patterns. There exist
four main types of time window models (Fig. 4) (Silva
et al. 2013 ; Nguyen et al. 2015 ).(a) (b) (c)Fig. 1 Stream of eye tracking
data (Steil et al. 2018 ) at three
different points in time. Grey
points denote the normalized
pupil centers and their opacityand size is relative to their
recency. Circles mark the
centers of micro-clusters andcrosses the centers of macro-clusters. Both are scaled relative
to the number of observations
assigned to them
(a) (b) (c) (d)Fig. 2 Categories of stream
clustering algorithms
Fig. 3 Exemplary two-phase stream clustering using a grid-based
approach (Carnein et al. 2017a )
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 279

==== Page 4 ====
The damped time window assigns a weight to each
micro-cluster based on the number of observations
assigned to it. In each iteration, the weight is faded by a
factor such as 2/C0k, where decay factor kinﬂuences the rate
of decay. Since fading the weight in every iteration is
computationally costly, the weight can either be updated in
ﬁxed time intervals (Cao et al. 2006 ) or whenever a cluster
is updated (Chen and Tu 2007 ). In this case, the fading can
be performed with respect to the elapsed time
xðDtÞ¼2/C0kDt(Cao et al. 2006 ), where Dtdenotes the
time since the cluster was last updated. In Fig. 1,w e
applied the same fading function to reduce the size and
opacity of older data. In some cases, clusters are implicitlydecayed over time by considering their weight relative to
the total number of observations (Gao et al. 2005 ; Amini
et al. 2012 ).
An alternative is the sliding time window which only
considers the most recent observations or micro-clusters in
the stream. This is usually based on a First-In-First-Out(FIFO) principle, where the oldest data point in the window
is removed once a new data point becomes available. The
size of this window can be of ﬁxed or variable length.While a small window size can adapt quickly to concept
drift, a larger window size considers more observations and
can be more accurate for stable streams.
In addition, a landmark time window is a very simple
approach which separates the data stream into disjunct
chunks based on events. Landmarks can either be deﬁnedbased on the passed time or other occurrences. The land-
mark time window summarizes all data points that arrive
after the landmark. Whenever a new landmark occurs, allthe data in the window is removed and new data is cap-
tured. This category also includes algorithms that do not
speciﬁcally consider changes over time and thereforerequire the user to regularly restart the clustering.
Finally, the pyramidal time model (Aggarwal et al.
2003 )o r tilted time window (Nguyen et al. 2015 ) uses
different granularity levels based on the recency of data.
This approach summarizes recent data more accuratelywhereas older data is gradually aggregated.3 Related Work
Due to the increasing relevance of stream clustering, a
number of survey papers began to summarize and structurethe ﬁeld. Most notably Amini et al. ( 2014b ) provide an
overview of the two largest research threads, namely dis-
tance-based and grid-based algorithms. In total, the authorsdiscuss ten distance-based approaches, mostly extensions
ofDenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ), and nine grid-based
approaches, mostly extensions of D-Stream (Chen and
Tu2007 ; Tu and Chen 2009 ). The authors describe the
algorithms, name input parameters and also empirically
evaluate some of the algorithms. In addition, the authorshighlight interrelations between the algorithms in a time-
line. We utilize this timeline and extend it with more
algorithms and additional categories. However, their paperfocusses only on distance and grid-based algorithms while
we have taken more categories and more algorithms into
account.
Additionally, Silva et al. ( 2013 ) introduced a taxonomy
that allows to categorize stream clustering algorithms, e.g.,
regarding the reclustering algorithm or used time windowmodel. The authors describe a total of 13 stream clustering
algorithms and categorize them according to their taxon-
omy. In addition, application scenarios, data sources andavailable toolsets are presented. However, a drawback is
that many of the discussed algorithms are one-pass clus-
tering algorithms that need extensions to suit the streaming
case.
In Ghesmoune et al. ( 2016 ) the authors discuss 19
algorithms and are among the ﬁrst to highlight the research
area of Neural Gas (NG) for stream clustering. However,
only a single grid-based algorithm is discussed and otherpopular algorithms are missing. Further, the authors in
Nguyen et al. ( 2015 ) focus on stream clustering and stream
classiﬁcation and present a total of 17 algorithms. Con-siderably shorter overviews are also provided in Mousavi
et al. ( 2015 ), Ma ( 2014 ), Amini and Wah ( 2011 ,2012 ) and
Amini et al. ( 2011 ).
In this survey, we cover a total of 51 different stream
clustering algorithms. This makes our survey much more
exhaustive than all comparable studies. In addition, ourpaper identiﬁes four common work streams and how they(a) (b) (c) (d)Fig. 4 Overview of time
window models (Zhu andShasha 2002 ; Silva et al. 2013 )
123280 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 5 ====
developed over time. We also focus on common problems
when applying stream clustering. As an example, we pointto a total of 26 available algorithm implementations, as
well as three different frameworks for data stream clus-
tering. Furthermore, we address the problem of conﬁguringstream clustering algorithms and present automatic algo-
rithm conﬁguration as an approach to address this problem.
Table 1brieﬂy summarizes the relevant dimensions of our
survey.
In previous work (Carnein et al. 2017a ), we have also
performed a rigorous empirical comparison of the most
popular stream clustering algorithms. In total, we evaluatedten algorithms on four synthetic and three real-world data
sets. In order to obtain the best results, we performed
extensive parameter conﬁguration. Our results have shown
thatDBSTREAM (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ) produces the
highest cluster quality and is able to detect arbitrarily
shaped clusters. However, it is sensitive to the insertion
order and has many parameters which makes it difﬁcult toapply in practice. As an alternative, D-Stream (Chen and
Tu2007 ; Tu and Chen 2009 ) can produce competitive
results, but often requires more micro-clusters due to its
grid based approach.
4 Distance-Based Approaches
Many approaches in stream clustering are distance-based .
These algorithms typically threshold the distance of a new
observation to existing micro-clusters and either insert it orinitialize a new cluster. The main challenge for algorithmsTable 1 Overview of relevant characteristics of this survey
Number of algorithms 51
Years 1987–2018Algorithm categories 4Algorithm implementations 26Software frameworks 3
Table 2 Overview of distance-based stream clustering algorithms
Algorithm Year Time window model Ofﬂine clustering
BIRCH (Zhang et al. 1996 ) 1996 Landmark Hierarchical clustering
ScaleKM (Bradley et al. 1998 ) 1998 Landmark –
Single-pass k-means (Farnstrom et al. 2000 ) 2000 Landmark –
STREAM (O’Callaghan et al. 2002 ) 2002 Landmark k-median
CluStream (Aggarwal et al. 2003 ) 2003 Pyramidal k-means
HCluStream (Yang and Zhou 2006 ) 2006 Pyramidal k-means
DenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ) 2006 Damped DBSCAN
E-Stream (Udommanetanakit et al. 2007 ) 2007 Damped –
SWClustering (Zhou et al. 2007a ) 2007 Pyramidal k-means
Olindda (Spinosa et al. 2007 ) 2007 Landmark k-means
RepStream (Lu¨hr and Lazarescu 2009 ) 2008 Sliding –
C-DenStream (Ruiz et al. 2009 ) 2009 Damped C-DBSCAN (Ruiz et al. 2007 )
rDenStream (Liu et al. 2009 ) 2009 Damped DBSCAN
HDenStream (Lin and Lin 2009 ) 2009 Damped DBSCAN
SDStream (Ren and Ma 2009 ) 2009 Pyramidal DBSCAN
ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ) 2009 Damped Not speciﬁed
LiarTree (Hassani et al. 2011 ) 2011 Damped Not speciﬁed
HUE-Stream (Meesuksabai et al. 2011 ) 2011 Damped –
SOStream (Isaksson et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped –
StreamKM ?? (Ackermann et al. 2012 ) 2012 Pyramidal k-means
FlockStream (Forestiero et al. 2013 ) 2013 Damped –
BICO (Fichtenberger et al. 2013 ) 2013 Landmark k-means
LeaDen-Stream (Amini and Wah 2013 ) 2013 Damped DBSCAN
G-Stream (Ghesmoune et al. 2014 ) 2014 Damped –
Improved BIRCH (Ismael et al. 2014 ) 2014 Landmark Hierarchical clustering
DBSTREAM (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ) 2016 Damped Shared density
A-BIRCH (Lorbeer et al. 2017 ) 2017 Landmark Hierarchical clustering
evoStream (Carnein and Trautmann 2018 ) 2018 Damped Evolutionary algorithm
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 281

==== Page 6 ====
in this category is to summarize and maintain clusters over
time without storing each individual observation. Common
strategies include the use of a synopsis data structure which
allows to calculate location and radius. Alternatively, thecentroids or representatives of clusters can be maintained
directly. More recently also competitive learning strategies
became popular which can update the centers of clustersover time. Table 2gives an overview of 28 popular dis-
tance-based stream clustering algorithms. In the following,
each algorithm and its clustering strategy is discussed inmore detail. In addition, Fig. 5highlights the relationship
between the algorithms and shows how concepts have been
reﬁned and improved over time. It becomes obvious that
the vast majority of algorithms use concepts introduced by
BIRCH ,CluStream orDenStream .
4.1 Clustering Feature
BIRCH (Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using
Hierarchies) (Zhang et al. 1996 ,1997 ) is one of the earliest
algorithms applicable to stream clustering. It reduces the
information maintained about a cluster to only a few
summary statistics stored in a so called Clustering Feature(CF). The CF consists of three components: ðn;LS;SSÞ,where nis the number of data points in the cluster, LSis a
d-dimensional vector that contains the linear sum of all
data points for each dimension and SSis a scalar that
contains the sum of squares for all data points over alldimensions. Some variations of this concept also store the
sum of squares per dimension, i.e., as a vector SS.AC F
provides sufﬁcient information to calculate the centroidLS=nand also a radius, i.e., a measure of deviation from
the centroid. In addition, a CF can be easily updated and
merged with another CF by summing the individualcomponents.
To maintain the CFs, BIRCH incrementally builds a
balanced-tree as illustrated in Fig. 6, where each node can
contain a ﬁxed number of CFs. Each new observation
descends the tree by following the child of its closest CFFig. 5 Development of
distance-based stream clusteringalgorithms
Fig. 6 Structure of a CF tree with at most 2 Clustering Features per
node
123282 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 7 ====
until a leaf node is reached. The observation is either
merged with its closest leaf-CF or used to create a new
leaf-CF. For reclustering, all leaf-CF can be used as an
input to a traditional algorithm such as k-means or hierar-
chical clustering.
Improved BIRCH (Ismael et al. 2014 ) is an extension
which uses different distance thresholds per CF which areincreased based on entries close to the radius boundary.
Similarly, A-BIRCH (Lorbeer et al. 2017 ) estimates the
threshold parameters by using the Gap Statistics (Tibshi-
rani et al. 2001 ) on a sample of the stream.
ScaleKM (Bradley et al. 1998 ) is an incremental
algorithm to cluster large databases which uses the concept
of CFs. The algorithm ﬁlls a buffer with initial points and
initializes kclusters as with standard k-means. The algo-
rithm then decides for every point whether to discard,
summarize or retain it. First, based on a distance threshold
to the cluster centers and by creating a worst case pertur-bation of cluster centers, the algorithm identiﬁes points that
are unlikely to ever change their cluster assignments. These
points are summarised in a CF per cluster and then dis-carded. Second, the remaining points are used to identify a
larger number of micro-clusters by applying k-means and
merging clusters using agglomerative hierarchical cluster-ing. Each cluster is again summarised using a CF. All
remaining points are kept as individual points. The freed
space in the buffer is then ﬁlled with new points to repeatthe process.
Single pass k-means (Farnstrom et al. 2000 )i sa
simpliﬁed version of scaleKM where the algorithm dis-
cards all data points with every iteration and only the kCFs
are maintained.
4.2 Extended Clustering Feature
CluStream (Aggarwal et al. 2003 ) extends the CF from
BIRCH which allows to perform clustering over different
time-horizons rather than the entire data stream. The
extended CF is deﬁned as ðLS;SS;LS
ðtÞ;SSðtÞ;nÞ, where
LSðtÞand SSðtÞare the linear and squared sum of all
timestamps of a cluster. The online algorithm is initialized
by collecting a chunk of data and using the k-means
algorithm to create qclusters. When a new data point
arrives, it is absorbed by its closest micro-cluster if it lieswithin an adaptive radius threshold. Otherwise, it is used to
create a new cluster. In order to keep the number of micro-
clusters constant, outdated clusters are removed based on a
threshold on their average time stamp. If this is not pos-sible, the two closest micro-clusters are merged.
To support different time-horizons, the algorithm regu-
larly stores snapshots of the current CFs following apyramidal scheme. While some snapshots are regularly
updated, others are less frequently updated to maintain
information about historic data. A desired portion of the
stream can be approximated by subtracting the current CFs
from a stored snapshot of previous CFs. The extractedmicro-clusters are then used to run a variant of k-means to
generate the macro-clusters.
HCluStream (Yang and Zhou 2006 ) extends Clu-
Stream for categorical data by storing the frequency of
attribute-levels for all categorical features. Based on this, it
deﬁnes a separate categorical distance measure which iscombined with the traditional distance measure for con-
tinuous attributes.
SWClustering (Zhou et al. 2007a ) uses the extended
CF and pyramidal time window from CluStream . The
algorithm maintains CFs in an Exponential Histogram of
Cluster Features (EHCF) which stores data in differentlevels of granularity, depending on their recency. While the
most recent observation is always stored individually, older
observations are grouped and summarized. In particular,this step is organized in granularity levels. Once more than
1=/C15þ1 CFs of a granularity level exist, the next CF con-
tains twice as many entries (cf. Fig. 7). A new observation
is either inserted into its closest CF or used to initialize a
new one based on a radius threshold, similar to BIRCH .I f
the initialization creates too many individual CFs, theoldest two individual CFs are merged and this process
cascades down the different granularity levels. An old CF
is removed if its time-stamp is older than the last Nob-
served time stamps. To generate the ﬁnal clustering all CFs
are used for reclustering, similar to BIRCH .
SDStream (Ren and Ma 2009 ) combines the EHCF
from SWClustering to represent the potential core and
outlier micro-clusters from DenStream . The algorithm
also enforces an upper limit on the number of micro-clusters by either merging the two most similar micro-
clusters or deleting outlier micro-clusters. The ofﬂine
x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 x10
CF 1 CF 2 CF 3 CF 4 CF 5
Fig. 7 Granularity levels in an EHCF with /C15¼1. Recent observations are stored individually, whereas older data points are iteratively
summarized
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 283

==== Page 8 ====
component applies DBSCAN to the centers of the potential
core-micro clusters.
4.3 Time-Faded Clustering FeatureDenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ) presents a temporal
extension of the CFs from BIRCH . It maintains two types
of clusters: Potential core micro-clusters are stable struc-
tures that are denoted using a time-faded CF
LS
ðxÞ;SSðxÞ;nðxÞ/C0/C1
. The superscript ðxÞdenotes that each
entry of the CF is decayed over time using a decay function
xðDtÞ¼b/C0kDt. In addition, their weight nðxÞis required to
be greater than a threshold value. Outlier micro-clusters are
unstable structures whose weight is less than the thresholdand they additionally maintain their creation time.
At ﬁrst, DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996 ) is used to initialize
a set of potential core micro-clusters. Similar to BIRCH ,a
new observation is assigned to its closest potential core
micro-cluster if the addition does not increase the radius
beyond a threshold. If it does, the same attempt is made forthe closest outlier-cluster and the outlier-cluster is pro-
moted to a potential core if it satisﬁes the weight threshold.
If both cannot absorb the point, a new outlier-cluster isinitialized. In regular intervals, the weight of all micro-
clusters is evaluated. Potential core-micro clusters that no
longer have enough weight are degraded to outlier micro-clusters and outlier micro-clusters that decayed below a
threshold based on their creation time are removed. Macro-
clusters are generated by applying a variant of DBSCA-
N(Ester et al. 1996 ) to potential core micro-clusters.
C-DenStream (Ruiz et al. 2009 ) is an extension of
DenStream which allows to include domain knowledge
in the form of instance-level constraints into the clustering
process. Instance-level constraints describe observations
that must or cannot belong to the same cluster.
Another extension is rDenStream (Liu et al. 2009 ).
Instead of discarding outlier micro-clusters which cannot
be converted into potential core micro-clusters, the algo-rithm temporarily stores them away in an outlier buffer.
After the ofﬂine component, the algorithm attempts to
relearn the data points that have been cached in the bufferin order to reﬁne the clustering.
HDenStream (Lin and Lin 2009 ) combines D-
Stream with the categorical distance measure of
HCluStream to make it applicable to categorical
features.
E-Stream (Udommanetanakit et al. 2007 ) uses the
time-faded CF from DenStream in combination with a
histogram which bins the data points. New observations are
either added to their closest cluster or used to initialize anew one. Existing clusters are split if one of the dimensions
shows a signiﬁcant valley in their histogram. When acluster is split along a dimension, the other dimensions are
weighted by the size of the split. Additionally, clusters can
be merged if they move into close proximity.
HUE-Stream (Meesuksabai et al. 2011 ) is an exten-
sion of E-Stream which also supports categorical data
and can also handle uncertain data streams. To model
uncertainty, each observation is assumed to follow aprobability distribution. In this case, the vectors of linear
and squared sum become the sum of expectation, faded
over time.
ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ,2011a ) uses the time-
faded CF and applies it to the tree structure of BIRCH .
Additionally, it allows to handle data streams where entries
arrive faster than they can be processed. A new entry
descends into its closest leaf where it is inserted as a newCF. Whenever a node is full, it is split and its entries
combined in two groups such that the intra-cluster distance
is minimized. However, if a new observation arrives beforea node could be split, the new entry is merged with its
closest CFs instead. If a new observation arrives while an
entry descends the tree, that entry is temporarily stored in abuffer at its current location. It remains there until another
entry descends into the same branch and is then carried
further down the tree as a ‘hitchhiker’. Again, the leafs canbe used as an input to a traditional algorithm to generate
the macro-clusters.
LiarTree (Kranen et al. 2011b ; Hassani et al. 2011
)
is an extension of ClusTree with better noise and nov-
elty handling. It does so by adding a time-weighted CF to
each node of the tree which serves as a buffer for noise.Data points are considered noise with respect to a node
based on a threshold on their distance to the node’s mean,
relative to the node’s standard deviation. The noise bufferis promoted to a regular cluster when its density is com-
parable to other CFs in the node.
FlockStream (Forestiero et al. 2013 ) employs a
ﬂocking behavior inspired by nature to identify emerging
ﬂocks and swarms of objects. Similar to DenStream , the
algorithm distinguishes between potential core and outliermicro-clusters and uses a time-faded CF. It projects a batch
of data onto a two-dimensional grid where each data point
is represented by a basic agent . Each agent then makes
movement decisions solely based on other agents in close
proximity. The movement of agents is similar to the
behavior of a ﬂock of birds in ﬂight: (1) Agents steer in thesame direction as their neighbors; (2) Agents steer towards
the location of their neighbors; (3) Agents avoid collisions
with neighbors. When agents meet, they can be mergeddepending on a distance or radius threshold. After a num-
ber of ﬂocking steps, the next batch of data is used to ﬁll
the grid with new agents in order to repeat the process.
LeaDen-Stream (Amini and Wah 2013 ) (Leader
Density-based clustering algorithm over evolving data
123284 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 9 ====
Stream) can choose multiple representatives per cluster to
increase accuracy when clusters are not uniformly dis-
tributed. To do so, the algorithm maintains two different
granularity levels. First, Micro Leader Clusters (MLC)correspond to the concept of traditional micro-clusters.
However, they maintain a list of more ﬁne granular
information in the form of Mini Micro Leader Clusters(MMLC). These mini micro-clusters contain more detailed
information and are represented by a time-faded CF. For
new observations, the algorithm ﬁnds the closest MLC
using the Mahalanobis distance. If the distance is within a
threshold, the closest MMLC within the MLC is identiﬁed.If it is also within a distance threshold, the point is added to
the MMLC. If one of the thresholds is violated, a new MLC
or MMLC is created respectively. For reclustering allselected leaders are used to run DBSCAN .
4.4 MedoidsAn alternative to storing Clustering Features is to maintain
medoids of clusters, i.e., representatives. RepStream
(Lu¨hr and Lazarescu 2008 ,2009 ), for example, incre-
mentally updates a graph of nearest neighbors to identify
suitable cluster representatives. New observations areinserted as a new node in the graph and edges are inserted
between the node and its nearest-neighbors. The point is
assigned to an existing cluster if it is mutually connected toa representative of that cluster. Otherwise it is used as a
representative to initialize a new cluster. Representatives
are also inserted in a separate representative graph whichmaintains the nearest neighbors only between representa-
tives. To split and merge existing clusters, the distance
between them is compared to the average distance to theirnearest neighbors in the representative graph. In order to
reduce space requirements, non-representative points are
discarded using a sliding time window. In addition, if anew representative is found but space limitations prevent it
from being added to the representative graph, it can replace
an existing representative depending on its age and numberof nearest neighbors.
streamKM ?? (Ackermann et al. 2012 ) is a variant of
k-means ?? (Arthur and Vassilvitskii 2007 ) which com-
putes a small weighted sample that represents the data
called coreset . The coreset is constructed in a binary tree
by using a divisive clustering approach. The tree is ini-tialized by selecting a random representative point from the
data. To split an existing cluster, the algorithm starts at the
root node and iteratively chooses a child node relative totheir weights until a leaf is reached. From the selected leaf,
a data point is chosen as a second centre based on its
distance to the initial centre of the cluster. Finally, thecluster is split by assigning each data point to the closest of
the two centers.To handle data streams, the algorithm uses a similar
approach as SWClustering (see Sect. 4.2). First, new
observations are inserted into a coreset tree. Once the tree
is full, all its points are moved to the next tree. If the nexttree already contains points, the coreset between the points
in both trees is computed. This cascades further until an
empty tree is found. For reclustering, the union of all pointsis used to compute a coreset and the representatives are
used to apply the k-means ?? algorithm (Arthur and
Vassilvitskii 2007 ).
BICO (Fichtenberger et al. 2013 ) combines the data
structure of BIRCH (see Sect. 4.1) with the coreset of
streamKM ??.BICO maintains the coreset in a tree
structure where each node represents one CF. The algo-
rithm is initialized by using the ﬁrst data point in the streamto open a CF on the ﬁrst level of the empty tree and the data
point is kept as a representative for the CF. For every
consecutive point, the algorithm attempts to insert it into anexisting CF, starting on the ﬁrst level. The insertion fails if
the distance of the new point to the representative of its
closest CF is larger than a threshold. In this case, a new CFis opened on the same level, using the new point as the
reference point. Additionally, the insertion fails if the
cluster’s deviation from the mean would grow beyond athreshold. In this case the algorithm attempts to insert the
point into the children of the closest CF. The ﬁnal clus-
tering is generated by applying k-means
?? to the repre-
sentatives of the leafs.
4.5 CentroidsA simpler approach to maintain clusters is to store their
centroids directly. However, this makes it generally moredifﬁcult to update clusters over time. As an example,
STREAM (O’Callaghan et al. 2002 ; Guha et al. 2003 ) only
stores the centroids of kclusters. Its core idea is to treat the
k-Median clustering problem as a facility planning prob-
lem. To do so, distances from data points to their closest
cluster have associated costs. This reduces the clusteringtask to a cost minimization problem in order to ﬁnd the
number and position of facilities that yield the lowest costs.
In order to generate a certain number of clusters, thealgorithm adjusts the facility costs in each iteration by
using a binary search for the costs that yield the desired
number of centers k.
To deal with streaming data, the algorithm processes the
stream in chunks and solves the k-Median problem for each
chunk individually. Assuming ndifferent chunks, a total of
nkclusters are created. To generate the ﬁnal clustering or if
available storage is exceeded, these intermediate clusters
are again clustered using the same approach.
OLINDDA (Spinosa et al. 2007 ) (Online Novelty and
Drift Detection Algorithm) relies on cluster centroids to
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 285

==== Page 10 ====
identify new and drifting clusters in a data stream. Initially,
k-means is used to generate a set of clusters. For each
cluster the distance from its centre to its furthest observa-
tion is considered a boundary. Points that do not fall intothe boundary of any cluster are considered as an unknown
concept and kept in a buffer. This buffer is regularly
scanned for emerging structures using k-means. If an
emerging cluster is of similar variance as the existing
cluster, it is considered valid. To distinguish a new cluster
from a drifting cluster, the algorithm assumes that drifts
occur close to the existing clusters whereas new clusters
form further away from the existing model.
4.6 Competitive Learning
More recently, algorithms also use competitive learning
strategies in order to adapt the centroids of clusters over
time. This is inspired by Self-Organizing Maps(SOMs) (Kohonen 1982 ) where clusters compete to rep-
resent an observation, typically by moving cluster centers
towards new observations based on their proximity.SOStream (Isaksson et al. 2012 ) (Self Organizing density
based clustering over data Stream) combines DBSCA-
N(Ester et al. 1996 ) with Self-Organizing Maps
(SOMs) (Kohonen 1982 ) for stream clustering. It stores a
time-faded weight, radius and centre for the cluster
directly. A new observation is merged into its closestcluster if it lies within its radius. Following the idea of
competitive learning, the algorithm also moves the k-
nearest neighbors of the absorbing cluster in its direction. Ifclusters move into close proximity during this step, they
are also merged.
DBSTREAM (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ) (Density-based
Stream Clustering) is based on SOStream (see Sect. 4.6)
but uses the shared density between two micro-clusters in
order to decide whether micro-clusters belong to the samemacro-cluster. A new observation xis merged into micro-
clusters if it falls within the radius from their centre.
Subsequently, the centers of all clusters that absorb theobservation are updated by moving the centre towards x.I f
no cluster absorbs the point, it is used to initialize a new
micro-cluster. Additionally, the algorithm maintains theshared density between two micro-clusters as the density of
points in the intersection of their radii, relative to the size
of the intersection area. In regular intervals it removesmicro-clusters and shared densities whose weight decayed
below a respective threshold. In the ofﬂine component,
micro-clusters with high shared density are merged into thesame cluster.
evoStream (Carnein and Trautmann 2018 ) (Evolu-
tionary Stream Clustering) makes use of an evolutionaryalgorithm in order to bridge the gap between the online and
ofﬂine component. Evolutionary algorithms are inspired bynatural evolution where promising solutions are combined
and slightly modiﬁed to create offsprings which can yield
an improved solution. By iteratively selecting the best
solutions, an evolutionary pressure is created whichimproves the result over time. evoStream uses this
concept in order to iteratively improve the macro-clusters
through recombinations and small variations. Since macro-clusters are created incrementally, the evolutionary steps
can be performed while the online components waits for
new observations, i.e., when the algorithm would usually
idle. As a result, the computational overhead of the ofﬂine
component is removed and clusters are available at anytime. The online component is similar to DBSTREAM but
does not maintain a shared-density since it is not necessary
for reclustering.
G-Stream (Ghesmoune et al. 2014 ,2015 ) (Growing
Neural Gas over Data Streams) utilizes the concept of
Neural Gas (Martinetz et al. 1991 ) for data streams. The
algorithm maintains a graph where each node represents a
cluster. Nodes that share similar data points are connected
by edges. Each edge has an associated age and nodes
maintain an error term denoting the cluster’s deviation. For
a new observation xthe two nearest clusters C1andC2are
identiﬁed. If xdoes not ﬁt into the radius of its closest
cluster C1, it is temporarily stored away and later re-in-
serted. Otherwise, it is inserted into C1. Additionally, the
centre of C1and all its connected neighbors are moved in
the direction of x. Next, the age of all outgoing edges of C1
are incremented and an edge from C1toC2is either
inserted or its weight is reset to zero. The age of edgesserves a similar purpose as a fading function. Edges who
have grown too old, are removed as they contain outdated
information. In regular intervals, the algorithm inserts newnodes between the node with the largest deviation and its
neighbor with the largest deviation.
4.7 Summary
Distance-based algorithms are by far the most common and
popular approaches in stream clustering. They allow to
create accurate summaries of the entire stream with rather
simple insertion rules. Since it is infeasible to store allobservations within the clusters, distance-based algorithms
usually summarize the observations associated with a
cluster. A popular example of this are Clustering Featureswhich only store the information required to calculate the
location and radius of a cluster. Alternatively, some algo-
rithms maintain medoids, i.e., representatives of clusters orstore the cluster centroids directly. In order to update
cluster centroids over time, some algorithms also make use
of competitive learning strategies, similar to Self-Orga-nizing Maps (SOM) (Kohonen 1982 ). Generally, distance-
based algorithms are computationally inexpensive and will
123286 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 11 ====
suit the majority of stream clustering scenarios well.
However, they often rely on many parameters such as
distance and weight thresholds, radii or cleanup intervals.
This makes it more difﬁcult to apply them in practice andrequires either expert knowledge or extensive parameter
conﬁguration. Another common issue is that distance-
based algorithms can often only ﬁnd spherical clusters.However, this is usually due to the choice of ofﬂine com-
ponent which can be easily replaced by other approaches
that can detect arbitrary clusters such as DBSCAN or hier-
archical clustering with single linkage. While the popular
algorithms BIRCH ,CluStream andDenStream face
many problems, either due to lack of fading or complicated
maintenance steps, we ﬁnd newer algorithms such as
DBSTREAM particularly interesting due to their simpler
design.
5 Grid-Based Approaches
An alternative to distance-based approaches is to capture
the density of observations in a grid. A grid separates the
data space along all dimensions into intervals to create a
number of grid-cells. By mapping data points to the cells, adensity estimate can be maintained. Macro-clusters are
typically found by grouping adjacent dense cells. The main
challenge for algorithms of this category is how to con-struct the grid-cells, i.e., how often cells are partitioned and
how to choose the size of cells. Table 3gives an overview
of the 13 approaches that are discussed in the following. Inaddition, Fig. 8shows how density-based algorithms
developed over time. By far the most popular andinﬂuential algorithm of this category has been D-
Stream (Chen and Tu 2007 ).
5.1 One-Time Partitioning
DUCstream (Gao et al. 2005 ) (Dense Units Clustering for
data streams) is one of the earliest grid-based algorithms. It
partitions the data space once into grid-cells of ﬁxed size.
To initialize the clustering, the algorithm processes a ﬁrst
chunk of data and maintains all cells with sufﬁcient den-
sity. The density of cells is calculated relative to the totalnumber of observations. All dense cells that are connected
by common faces are placed in the same macro-cluster.
This initial result is then updated incrementally as morechunks are processed and new dense cells arise while
others fade. Each new dense cell is absorbed by a macro-
cluster if it shares a face with a cell in that cluster. Addi-tionally, if it shares faces with cells in different clusters,
those clusters are merged. Finally, if it does not share any
faces, it is used to create a new cluster. Each removeddense cell is also removed from its corresponding cluster. If
this leaves the cluster empty, the cluster is deleted. Alter-
natively, if this disconnects two cells in the same cluster,the cluster is split.
D-Stream (Chen and Tu 2007 ) is among the most
popular stream clustering algorithms and uses a ﬁxed gridstructure. The algorithm distinguishes between three types
of cells: dense cells, sparse cells and transitional cells
whose weight lies between the other two types. The algo-rithm maps new data points to its respective cell and is
initialized by assigning all dense cells to individual clus-
ters. These clusters are extended with all neighboring
Table 3 Overview of density-based stream clustering algorithms. Macro-clusters are typically generated from neighboring dense cells
Algorithm Year Time window model Partitioning Grid size
Fractal Clustering (Barbara ´and Chen 2000 ) 2000 Landmark One-time Fixed
Stats-Grid (Park and Lee 2004 ) 2004 Landmark Recursive Dynamic
DUCstream (Gao et al. 2005 ) 2005 Damped One-time Fixed
D-Stream (Chen and Tu 2007 ) 2007 Damped One-time Fixed
Cell-Tree (Park and Lee 2007a ) 2007 Damped Recursive Fixed
ExCC (Bhatnagar and Kaur 2007 ) 2007 Landmark One-time Fixed
DDStream (Jia et al. 2008 ) 2008 Damped One-time Fixed
MR-Stream (Wan et al. 2009 ) 2009 Damped Recursive Fixed
PKSStream (Ren et al. 2011 ) 2011 Damped Recursive Fixed
DCUStream (Yang et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped One-time Fixed
DENGRIS-Stream (Amini et al. 2012 ) 2012 Sliding One-time Fixed
HDCStream (Amini et al. 2014a ) 2014 Damped One-time Fixed
MuDi-Stream (Amini et al. 2016 ) 2016 Damped One-time Fixed
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 287

==== Page 12 ====
transitional grids or are merged with the clusters of
neighboring dense cells. In regular intervals, the clustering
evaluates the weight of each cell and incorporates the
changes in cell types into the clustering.
In Tu and Chen ( 2009 ), the authors extended their
concept by a measure of attraction that incorporates posi-
tional information of data within a grid-cell. This variantonly merges neighboring cells if they share many points at
the cell border.
DD-Stream (Jia et al. 2008 ) is a small extension on
how to handle points that lie exactly on the grid bound-
aries. For such a point, the distance to adjacent cell centers
is computed and the point is assigned to its closest cell. Ifthe observation has the same distance to multiple cells, it is
assigned to the one with higher density. If this also does not
break the tie, it is inserted into cell that has been updatedmore recently.
ExCC (Bhatnagar and Kaur 2007 ; Bhatnagar et al.
2014 ) (Exclusive and Complete Clustering) constructs a
grid where the number of cells and grid boundaries are
chosen by the user. This allows to handle categorical data,
where the number of cells is chosen to be equal to thenumber of attribute levels. Clusters are identiﬁed as
neighboring dense cells. Cells of numeric variables are
considered neighbors if they share a common vertex. Cellsof categorical variables employ a threshold on a similarity
function between the attribute levels. To form macro-clusters, the algorithm iteratively chooses an unvisited
dense cell and initializes a new cluster. Each neighboring
grid-cell is then placed in the same cluster. This is repeated
until all cells have been visited.
DCUStream (Yang et al. 2012 ) (Density-based Clus-
tering algorithm of Uncertain data Stream) aims to handle
uncertain data streams, similar to HUE-Stream (see
Sect. 4.3), where each observation is assumed to have an
existence probability. The algorithm is initialized by col-
lecting a batch of data and mapping it to a grid of ﬁxedsize. The density of a cell is deﬁned as the sum of all
existence probabilities faded over time. A grid is consid-
ered dense when its density is above a dynamic threshold.To generate a clustering, the algorithm selects the dense-
cell with highest density and assigns all its neighboring
cells to the same cluster. neighboring sparse-cells areconsidered the boundary of a cluster. This is repeated for
all dense cells.
DENGRIS-Stream (Amini et al. 2012 ) (Density Grid-
based algorithm for clustering data streams over Sliding
window) is a grid-based algorithm that uses a sliding
window model. New observations are mapped into a ﬁxedsize grid and the cell’s densities are maintained. Densities
are implicitly decayed by considering them relative to the
total number of observations in the stream. In regularintervals, cells whose density decayed below a threshold or
cells that are no longer inside the sliding window areFig. 8 Development of density-
based stream clusteringalgorithms
123288 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 13 ====
removed. Macro-clusters are formed by grouping neigh-
boring dense cells into the same cluster.
Fractal Clustering (Barbara ´ and Chen
2000 ,2003 ) follows an usual grid-based approach. It uses
the concept of fractal dimensions (Theiler 1990 )a sa
measure of size for a set of points. A common way to
calculate the fractal dimension is by dividing the space intogrid-cells of size /C15and counting the number of cells that are
occupied by points in the data N(r). Then, the fractal
dimension can be calculated as:
D¼lim
/C15!0logNð/C15Þ
log1
/C15: ð1Þ
Fractal Clustering is ﬁrst initialized with a sample
by recursively placing close points into the same cluster
(similar to DBSCAN ). For a new observation, the algorithm
then evaluates which inﬂuence in fractal dimension the
addition of the point would have for each cluster. It then
inserts the point into the cluster whose fractal dimensionchanges the least. However, if the change in fractal
dimension is too large, the observation is considered noise
instead.
5.2 Recursive Partitioning
Stats-Grid (Park and Lee 2004 ) is an early algorithm
which recursively partitions grid-cells. The algorithm
begins by splitting the data into grid-cells of ﬁxed size.Each cell maintains its density, mean and standard devia-
tion. The algorithm then recursively partitions grid-cells
until cells become sufﬁciently small unit cells . The aim is
to ﬁnd adjacent unit cells with large density which can be
used to form macro-clusters. The algorithm splits a cell in
two subcells whenever it has reached sufﬁcient density.The size of the subcells is dynamically adapted based on
the distribution of data within the cell. The authors propose
three separate splitting strategies, for example choosing thedimension where the cell’s standard deviation is the largest
and splitting at the mean. Since the weight of cells is cal-
culated relative to the total number of observations, out-dated cells can be removed and their statistics returned to
the parent cell.
Cell-Tree (Park and Lee 2007a ) is an extension of
Stats-Grid which also tries to ﬁnd adjacent unit cells
of sufﬁcient density. In contrast to Stats-Grid , subcells
are not dynamically sized based on the distribution of thecell. Instead, they are split into a pre-deﬁned number of
evenly sized subcells. The summary statistics of the sub-
cells are initialized by distributing the statistics of theparent cell following the normal distribution. To efﬁciently
maintain the cells, the authors propose a siblings list. The
siblings list is a linear list where each node contains anumber of grid-cells along one dimension as well as a link
to the next node. Whenever a cell is split, the created
subcells replace their parent cell in its node. To maintain a
siblings list over multiple dimensions, a ﬁrst-child/next-sibling tree can be used where subsequent dimensions are
added as children of the list-nodes.
The splitting strategy of MR-Stream (Wan et al. 2009 )
is similar but splits each dimension in half, effectively
creating a tree of cells as shown in Fig. 9. New observa-
tions start at the root cell and are recursively assigned to
the appropriate child-cell. If a child does not exist yet, it is
created until a maximum depth is reached. If the insertioncauses a parent to only contain children of high density, the
children are discarded since the parent node is able to
represent this information already. Additionally, the tree isregularly pruned by removing leafs with insufﬁcient weight
and removing children of nodes that only contain dense or
only sparse children. To generate the macro-clusters, theuser can choose a desired height of the tree. For every
unclustered cell, the algorithm initializes a new macro-
cluster and adds all neighboring dense cells. If the size andweight of the cluster is too low, it is considered noise.
PKSStream (Ren et al. 2011 ) is similar to MR-
Stream but does not require a subcell on all heights of the
tree. It only maintains intermediate nodes when there are
more than K/C01 non-empty children. Each observation is
iteratively descended down the tree until either a leaf isreached or the child does not exist. In the latter case a new
cell is initialized. In regular intervals, the algorithm eval-
uates all leaf nodes and removes those with insufﬁcientweight. The ofﬂine component is the same as in MR-
Stream for the leafs of the tree.
5.3 Hybrid Grid-Approaches
HDCStream (Amini et al. 2014a ) (hybrid density-based
clustering for data stream) ﬁrst combined grid-based
algorithms with the concept of distance-based algorithms.
In particular, it maintains a grid where dense cells can bepromoted to become micro-clusters as known from dis-
tanced-based algorithms (see Sect. 4). Each observation in
Fig. 9 Tree structure in MR-Stream
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 289

==== Page 14 ====
the stream is assigned to its closest micro-cluster if it lies
within a radius threshold. Otherwise, it is inserted into the
grid instead. Once a grid-cell has accumulated sufﬁcient
density, its points are used to initialize a new micro-cluster.Finally, the cell is no longer maintained, as its information
has been transferred to the micro-cluster. In regular inter-
vals, all micro-clusters and cells are evaluated and removedif their density decayed below a respective threshold.
Whenever a clustering request arrives, the micro-clusters
are considered virtual points in order to apply DBSCAN .
Mudi-Stream (Amini et al. 2016 ) (Multi Density
Data Stream) is an extension of HDCStream that can
handle varying degrees of density within the same data
stream. It uses the same insertion strategy as HDCStream
with both, grid-cells and micro-clusters. However, theofﬂine component applies a variant of DBSCAN (Ester
et al. 1996 ) called M-DBSCAN to all micro-clusters. M-
DBSCAN only requires a MinPts parameter and then esti-
mates the /C15parameter from the mean and standard devia-
tion around the centre.
5.4 Summary
Grid-based approaches are a popular alternative to density-
based algorithms due to their simple design and support for
arbitrarily shaped clusters. While many distance-based
algorithms are only able to detect spherical clusters, almostall grid-based algorithms can identify cluster of arbitrary
shape. This is mostly because the grid-structure allows an
easy design of an ofﬂine-component where dense cells withcommon faces form clusters. The majority of grid-based
algorithms partition the data space once into cells of ﬁxed
size. However, some algorithms do this recursively tocreate a more adaptive grid. Less common are algorithms
where the size of cells is determined dynamically, mostly
because of the increased computational costs. Lastly, somealgorithms employ a hybrid strategy where a grid is used to
establish distance-based approaches. Generally, the grid
structure is less efﬁcient than distance-based approachesdue to its inﬂexible structure. For this reason, grid-based
approaches often have higher memory requirements and
need more micro-clusters to achieve the same quality asdistance-based approaches. Empirical evidence (Carnein
et al. 2017a ) has also shown this to be true for the most
popular grid-based algorithm D-Stream .
6 Model-Based Approaches
A different approach to stream clustering is to summarize
the data stream as a statistical model. Common areas ofresearch are based on the Expectation Maximization (EM)
algorithm. Table 4gives an overview of 6 model-basedalgorithms. This class of algorithms is highly diverse and
few interdependencies exist between the presented
algorithms.
CluDistream (Zhou et al. 2007b ) uses the EM
algorithm to process distributed data streams. At each
location, it maintains a number of Gaussian mixture dis-tributions and a coordinator node is used to combine the
distributions. For each location, the stream is processed in
chunks and the ﬁrst chunk is used to initialize a newclustering using EM. For subsequent chunks, the algorithm
checks whether the current models can represent the chunk
sufﬁciently well. This is done by calculating the differencebetween the average log-likelihood of the existing model
and the average log-likelihood of the chunk under the
existing model. If the difference is less than a threshold, theweight of the model is incremented. Else, the current model
is stored and a new model is initialized by applying EM to
the current chunk. Whenever the weight of a model isupdated or a new model is initialized, the coordinator
receives the update and incorporates the new information
into a global model by merging or splitting the Gaussiandistributions.
SWEM (Dang et al. 2009a ,b) (Sliding Window with
Expectation Maximization) applies the EM to chunks ofdata. Starting with random initial parameters, a set of
mdistributions is calculated for the ﬁrst chunk and points
are assigned to their most likely cluster. Each cluster isthen summarized using a CF and kmacro-cluster are
generated by applying EM again. For a new chunk, the
algorithm sets the initial values to the converged values ofthe previous chunk and incrementally applies EM to gen-
erate mnew distributions. If a cluster grows too large or too
small during this phase, the corresponding distributions can
be split or merged. Finally the mnew clusters are sum-
marized in CFs and used with the existing kclusters to
apply EM again.
COBWEB (Fisher 1987 ) maintains a classiﬁcation tree
where each node describes a cluster. The tree is built
incrementally by descending a new entry xfrom the root to
a leaf. On each level the algorithm makes one of four
clustering decisions that yields the highest clusteringTable 4 Overview of model-based stream clustering algorithms
Algorithm Year Time window model
COBWEB (Fisher 1987 ) 1987 Landmark
ICFR (Motoyoshi et al. 2004 ) 2004 Damped
WStream (Tasoulis et al. 2006 ) 2006 Damped
CluDistream (Zhou et al. 2007b ) 2007 Landmark
SWEM (Dang et al. 2009a ) 2009 Sliding
SVStream (Wang et al. 2013 ) 2013 Damped
123290 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 15 ====
quality: (1) Insert xinto most ﬁtting child, (2) Create a new
cluster for x, (3) Combine the two nodes that can best
absorb xand add existing nodes as children of the new
node, (4) Split the two nodes that can best absorb xand
move its children up one level. The quality of each decision
is evaluated using a measure called Category Utility (CU)
which deﬁnes a trade-off between intra-class similarity andinter-class distance.
ICFR (Motoyoshi et al. 2004 ) (Incremental Clustering
using F-value by Regression analysis) uses concepts from
linear regression in order to cluster data streams. The
algorithm assigns points to existing clusters based on theircosine similarity. To merge clusters the algorithm ﬁnds the
two closest clusters based on the Mahalanobis distance. If
the merged clusters yield a greater F-value than the sum of
individual F-values, the clusters are merged. The F-value is
a measure of model validity in linear regressions. If the
clusters cannot be merged, the next closest two clusters areevaluated until the closest pair exceeds a distance
threshold.
WStream (Tasoulis et al. 2006 ) uses multivariate ker-
nel density estimates to maintain a number of rectangular
windows in the data space. The idea is to use local maxima
of a density estimate as cluster centers and the local min-ima as cluster boundaries. WStream transfers this
approach to data streams. New data points are either
assigned to an existing window and their centre is movedtowards the new point or it is used to initialize a new
window of default size. Windows can enlarge or contract
depending on the ratio of points close to their centre andclose to their border.
SVStream (Wang et al. 2013 ) (Support Vector based
Stream Clustering) is based on Support Vector Cluster-ing(SVC) (Ben-Hur et al. 2001 ). SVC transforms the data
into a higher dimensional space and identiﬁes the smallest
sphere that encloses most points. When mapping the sphereback to the input space, the sphere forms a number of
contour lines that represent clusters. SVStream iteratively
maintains a number of spheres. The stream is processed inchunks and the ﬁrst chunk is used to run SVC. For each
subsequent chunk, the algorithm evaluates what portion of
the chunk does not fall into the radius of existing spheres.If too many do not ﬁt the current spheres, these values areused to initialize a new sphere. The remaining values are
used to update the existing spheres.
6.1 SummaryModel-based stream clustering algorithms are far less
common than distance-based and grid-based approaches.Typically strategies try to ﬁnd a mixture of distributions
that ﬁts the data stream, e.g. CluDiStream orSWEM .
Unfortunately, no implementation of model-based algo-
rithms is readily available which limits their usefulness in
practice. In addition, they are often more computationallycomplex than comparable algorithms from the other
categories.
7 Projected Approaches
A special category of stream clustering algorithms deals
with high dimensional data streams. These types of algo-
rithms address the curse of dimensionality (Beyer et al.1999 ), i.e., the problem that almost all points have an equal
distance in very high dimensional space. In such scenarios,
clusters are deﬁned according to a subset of dimensionswhere each cluster has an associated set of dimensions in
which it exists. Even though these algorithms often use
concepts from distance and grid-based algorithms theirapplication scenarios and strategies are unique and deserve
their own category. Table 5summarizes 4 projected clus-
tering algorithms and Fig. 10shows the relationship
between the algorithms. Despite their similarity,
HDDStream andPreDeConStream have been devel-
oped independently.
HPStream (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ) (High-dimensional
Projected Stream clustering) is an extension of
Clu-
Stream (see Sect. 4.2) for high dimensional data. The
algorithm uses a time-faded CF with an additional bit
vector that denotes the associated dimensions of a cluster.
The algorithm normalizes each dimension by regularlysampling the current standard deviation and adjusting the
existing clusters accordingly. The algorithm initializes with
k-means and associates each cluster with the ldimensions
in which it has the smallest radius. The cluster assignment
Table 5 Overview of projected stream clustering algorithms
Algorithm Year Time window model Ofﬂine clustering
HPStream (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ) 2004 Damped k-means
SiblingTree (Park and Lee 2007b ) 2007 Damped –
HDDStream (Ntoutsi et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped PreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 )
PreDeConStream (Hassani et al. 2012 ) 2012 Damped PreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 )
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 291

==== Page 16 ====
is then updated by only considering the associated
dimensions for each cluster. Finally, the process is repeated
until the cluster and dimensions converge. A new data
point is tentatively added to each cluster to update thedimension association and added to its closest cluster if it
does not increase the cluster radius above a threshold.
SiblingTree (Park and Lee 2007b ) is an extension
ofCellTree (Park and Lee 2007a ) (see Sect. 5.2). It
uses the same tree-structure but allows for subspace clus-
ters. To do so, the algorithm creates a siblings list for eachdimension as children of the root. New data points are
recursively assigned to the grid-cells using a depth ﬁrst
approach. If a cell’s density increases beyond a threshold, itis split as in CellTree . If a unit cell’s density increases
beyond a threshold, new sibling lists for each remaining
dimension are created as children of the cell. Additionally,if a cell’s density decays below a density threshold, its
children are removed and it is merged with consecutive
sparse cells. Clusters in the tree are deﬁned as adjacentunit-grid-cells with enough density.
HDDStream (Ntoutsi et al. 2012 ) (Density-based Pro-
jected Clustering over High Dimensional Data Streams) isinitialized by collecting a batch of observations and
applying PreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 ).PreDeCon can
be considered a subspace version of DBSCAN . The update
procedure is similar to DenStream (see Sect. 4.3): A new
observation is assigned to its closest potential core micro-
cluster if its projected radius does not increase beyond athreshold. Else, the same attempt is made for the closest
outlier-cluster. If both cannot absorb the observation, a new
cluster is initialized. Periodically, the algorithm down-grades potential core micro clusters if their weight is too
low or if the number of associated dimensions is too large.
Outlier-clusters are removed as in DenStream . To gen-
erate the macro-clusters a variant of PreDeCon (Bohm
et al. 2004 ) is used.
PreDeConStream (Hassani et al. 2012 ) (Subspace
Preference weighted Density Connected clustering of
Streaming data) was developed simultaneously to
HDDStream (see Sect. 7) and both share many concepts.
The algorithm is also initialized using thePreDeCon (Bohm et al. 2004 ) algorithm and the insertion
strategy is the same as in DenStream (see Sect. 4.3).
Additionally, the algorithm adjusts the clustering in regular
intervals using a modiﬁed part of the PreDeCon algo-
rithm on the micro-clusters that were changed during the
online phase.
7.1 Summary
Projected stream clustering algorithms serve a niche for
high dimensional data streams where it is not possible to
perform prior feature selection in order to reduce thedimensionality. In general, these algorithms have added
complexity associated with the selection of subspaces for
each cluster. In return, they can identify clusters in veryhigh dimensional space and can gracefully handle the curse
of dimensionality (Beyer et al. 1999 ). The most inﬂuential
and popular algorithm of this category has beenHPStream .
8 Application and Software
An increasing number of physical devices these days is
interconnected. This trend is generally described as the
Internet of Things (IoT) where every-day devices are col-
lecting and exchanging data. Popular examples of this areSmart Refrigerators that remind you to restock or Smart
Home devices such as thermostats, locks or speakers which
can remote control your home. Due to this, many modernapplications produce large and fast amounts of data as a
continuous stream. Stream Clustering is a way to analyze
this data and extract relevant information from it. Theresulting clusters can help decision makers to understand
the different groups. For example, IoT enables Predictive
Maintenance where necessary maintenance tasks are pre-dicted from the sensors of the devices. Clustering can help
to ﬁnd a cluster of devices that are likely to fail next. This
can help to prevent machine failures but also reduceunnecessary maintenance tasks. Additionally, stream clus-
tering could be applied for market or customer segmenta-
tion where customers that have similar preference orbehavior are identiﬁed from a stream of transactions. These
segments can be engaged differently using appropriate
marketing strategies. Stream clustering has also been suc-cessfully applied to mine conversational topics from chat
data (Carnein et al. 2017b ) or analyze user behavior based
on web click-streams (Wang et al. 2016 ). In addition, it
was used to analyze transactional data in order to detect
fraudulent plastic card transactions (Tasoulis et al. 2008 )
and to detect malicious network connections from com-puter network data (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ; Acker-
mann et al. 2012 ; Amini et al. 2016 ; Guha et al. 2003 ).Fig. 10 Development of projected stream clustering algorithms
123292 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 17 ====
Further, it was used to analyze sensor readings (Hahsler
and Bolan ˜os2016 ), social network data (Gao et al. 2015 ),
weather monitoring (Motoyoshi et al. 2004 ), telecommu-
nication data (Ali et al. 2011 ), stock prices (Kontaki et al.
2008 ) or the monitoring of automated grid computing, e.g.
for anomaly detection (Zhang et al. 2010 ; Zhang and
Wang 2010 ). Other application scenarios include social
media analysis or the analysis of eye tracking data as in our
initial example.
Unfortunately, there is not a single solutions that can ﬁt
all application scenarios and problems. For this reason, the
choice of algorithm depends on the characteristics andrequirements of the stream. An important characteristic is
the speed of the stream. For very fast streams, more efﬁ-
cient algorithms are required. In particular, anytime algo-rithms such as ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 )o r
evoStream (Carnein and Trautmann 2018 ) are able to
output a clustering result at anytime during the stream andhandle faster streams better. On the other hand, some
algorithms store additional positional information along-
side micro-clusters. While this often helps to achieve betterclustering results, it makes algorithms such as LeaDen-
Stream (Amini and Wah 2013 ),D-Stream with
attraction (Tu and Chen 2009 ) and DBSTREAM less suit-
able for faster streams.
Another important characteristic is the desired or
expected shape of clusters. For example, many algorithmscan only recognize compact clusters, as shown in Fig. 11a.
This type of clusters often corresponds to our natural
understanding of a cluster and is usually well recognised bydistance-based approaches such as BICO (Fichtenberger
et al. 2013 )o r ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ). Some
streams, however, consists of mostly long and stragglyclusters as shown in Fig. 11b. These clusters are generally
easier to detect for grid-based approaches where clusters of
arbitrary shape are formed by dense neighboring cells.Nevertheless, distance-based approaches can also detect
these clusters when using a reclustering algorithm that can
identify arbitrary shapes, e.g., as used byDBSTREAM (Hahsler and Bolan ˜os2016 ). In addition,
clusters may be of different density as as shown in
Fig. 11c. This is a niche problem and only MuDi-
Stream (Amini et al. 2016 ) currently addresses it.Furthermore, the dimensionality of the problem plays an
important role. Generally, faster algorithms are desirable as
the dimensionality increases. However, for very high-di-
mensional data, projected approaches such asHPStream (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ) are necessary in order
to ﬁnd meaningful clusters.
Finally, the expected amount of concept-shift of the
stream is important. If the structure of clusters changes
regularly, an algorithm that applies a damped time-window
model should be used. This includes algorithms such as
DenStream (Cao et al. 2006 ),D-Stream (Chen and Tu
2007 ),ClusTree (Kranen et al. 2009 ) and many more.
For streams without concept-shift, most algorithms are
applicable. For example, algorithms using a damped time
window model can set the fading factor k¼0. Note,
however, that algorithms such as DenStream rely on the
fading mechanism in order to remove noise (Bolan ˜os et al.
2014 ).
8.1 Software
An important aspect to apply stream clustering in practice
is available software and tools. In general, availability of
stream clustering implementations is rather scarce and onlythe most prominent algorithms are available. Only few
authors provide reference implementations for their algo-
rithms. As an example, C,C?? orRimplementations are
available for BIRCH (Zhang et al. 1997 ),STREAM (Guha
et al. 2003 ; Ackermann et al. 2012 ),
streamKM ?? (Ackermann et al. 2012 ),BICO (Fichten-
berger et al. 2013 ) and evoStream (Carnein and Traut-
mann 2018 ). Previously, also an implementation of
RepStream (Lu¨hr and Lazarescu 2009 ) was available.
More recently, several projects aim to create uniﬁed
frameworks for stream data mining, including implemen-
tations for stream clustering. The most popular frameworkfor data stream mining is the Massive Online Analysis
(MOA) (Bifet et al. 2010 ) framework. It is implemented in
Java and provides the stream clustering algorithms Cob-
Web,D-Stream ,DenStream ,ClusTree ,Clu-
Stream ,streamKM ?? andBICO .
For faster prototyping there also exists the stream
package (Hahsler et al. 2018 ) for the statistical program-
ming language R. It contains general methods for working
with data streams and also implements the D-Stream ,
DBSTREAM ,BICO ,BIRCH andevoStream algorithm.
There is also an extension package streamMOA (Hahsler
et al. 2015 ) which interfaces the MOA implementations of
DenStream ,ClusTree andCluStream .
For working with data in high-dimensional space, the
Subspace MOA framework (Hassani et al. 2013 ) provides
Java implementations for HDDStream andPreDeCon-
Stream . Again, the R-package subspaceMOA (Hassani(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 11 Visualisation of different cluster types
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 293

==== Page 18 ====
et al. 2016 ) interfaces both methods to make them acces-
sible with the stream package.
Alternatively, the streamDM (Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
2015 ) project provides methods for data mining with Spark
Streaming which is an extension for the Spark engine.
Currently it implements the CluStream and
streamKM ??algorithms with plans to extend the project
with more stream clustering algorithms.
8.2 Algorithm ConﬁgurationStreaming data in general (Bifet et al. 2018 ) pose consid-
erable challenges for respective algorithms, especially due
to the requirement of real-time capability, the high proba-
bility of non-stationary data and the lack of availability ofthe original data over time. Moreover, many clustering
approaches in general require standardized data. In order to
standardize a data stream which evolves over time, onecould either estimate the values for centering and scaling
from an initial portion of the stream (Hahsler et al. 2018 ).
Alternatively, in a more sophisticated manner, CF basedapproaches can also incrementally adapt the values for
scaling and update the existing micro-clusters accord-
ingly (Aggarwal et al. 2004 ).
Speciﬁcally, as we have seen throughout the discussion
of available stream clustering algorithms, most of them
require a multitude of parameters to be set by the usera-priori. These settings control the behavior and perfor-
mance of the algorithm over time. Usually, density-based
algorithms require at least a distance or radius thresholdand grid-based algorithms need the grid’s size. The same
applies to their extensions for projected stream clustering
and model-based algorithms mostly make use of a simi-larity-threshold. In practice, such parameters are often
unintuitive to choose appropriately even with expert
knowledge. As an example, it might be possible to ﬁndappropriate distance thresholds for a given scenario but
choosing appropriate weight thresholds or cleanup intervals
tends to be very difﬁcult for a users, especially consideringpossible drift of the stream. A notable exception from this
problem is the ClusTree (see Sect. 4.3) algorithm which
at least makes an effort to be parameter-free.
Therefore, a systematic online approach for automated
parameter conﬁguration is required. However, state-of-the
art automated parameter conﬁguration approaches such asirace (Lo´pez-Iba ´n˜ez et al. 2016 ),ParamILS (Hutter
et al. 2007 ,2009 )o rSMAC (Hutter et al. 2011 ) are not
perfectly suited for the streaming data scenario. First of all,they are mostly set-based, thus not focussed on online
learning on single, speciﬁc data. Moreover, they require
static and stationary data so that they can only be applied ina prequential manner, i.e. in regular intervals or on an
initial sample of the stream in order to determine and adjustappropriate settings over time which does not really meet
the efﬁciency requirement of the real-time capability.
However, an initial approach on conﬁguring and
benchmarking stream clustering approaches based onirace (Lo´pez-Iba ´n˜ez et al. 2016 ) has been presented
by Carnein et al. ( 2017a ). Very promising are ensemble-
based approaches, both for algorithm selection and con-ﬁguration on data streams, which have successfully been
applied in the context of classiﬁcation algorithms
already (van Rijn et al. 2014 ,2018
).
9 Conclusion
Analyzing data streams is becoming extremely important
as most applications today create a continuous ﬂow of new
observations. An interesting aspect of analyzing streaming
data is clustering, where homogeneous groups are identi-ﬁed. It supports decision making in large and possibly
unstructured data by identifying manageable groups of
similar observations. Possible application scenarios includethe analysis of sensor data, click stream data, network data
or identifying market segments in customer relationship
management applications (Wedel and Kamakura 2000 ).
Stream clustering aims to ﬁnd clusters within an evolving
data stream without the need to revisit or store all obser-
vations. It has been a very active research topic over thepast decades and has produced a multitude of algorithms
following different approaches. Most algorithms rely on a
two-phase approach where an online component extractsrelevant information from the stream. An ofﬂine compo-
nent then uses this information to derive a ﬁnal set of
clusters. The underlying optimization task needs to build asuitable summary of the stream. The interplay between the
online and ofﬂine component is then crucial for decision
making since it helps to reveal hidden structures anddependencies within the data streams. In this paper we
summarized and reviewed a total of 51 available algo-
rithms. To the best of our knowledge our survey is the mostextensive and thorough study of its kind, discussing almost
every available stream clustering algorithm. This paper is
supported by our website
2which serves as a repository for
algorithms, literature and data sets in the ﬁeld of data
stream clustering.
In addition, we identiﬁed categories of algorithms and
research threads. First, we identify algorithms that used
density-threshold and either assign new observations to the
closest cluster or use it to initialize a new cluster. Amilestone algorithm in this area is BIRCH which proposed
to store summary statistics of a cluster. These can be
incrementally updated and allow to calculate location and
2http://www.matthias-carnein.de/streamClustering .
123294 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 19 ====
deviation of a cluster. CluStream andDenStream have
reﬁned this concept to account for concept drift of a data
stream. Next, density-based algorithms use grids to identify
dense regions. The grid-cells are typically of ﬁxed size butcan also be dynamically calculated. The most important
algorithm employing this strategy is D-Stream . A third
category is based on statistical models. Many algorithmsutilize the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm to ﬁt
a mixture of distributions to the data. Lastly, we identiﬁed
subspace clustering algorithms aimed at high dimensional
data streams.
A crucial challenge when applying stream clustering
algorithms is the appropriate choice of parameter settings.
Systematic automated algorithm conﬁguration is required
but the streaming data scenario is very challenging, evenstate-of-the art conﬁguration approaches are not perfectly
suited as they require an appropriate learning phase and
would have to be able to deal with drifts or structuralchanges of the stream.
Future work should systematically benchmark and
conﬁgure prominent stream clustering algorithms anddetermine respective strengths and weaknesses, e.g.,
regarding cluster structure, computational complexity and
clustering quality. We have already published experimentalresults for the most popular algorithms (Carnein et al.
2017a ). In addition, real-life use cases and application
examples should be highlighted and compared to tradi-tional approaches in the same scenario.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank for the support
provided by Karsten Kraume and the ERCIS Omni-Channel Lab –
powered by Arvato ( https://omni-channel.ercis.org/ ).
References
Ackermann MR, Ma ¨rtens M, Raupach C, Swierkot K, Lammersen C,
Sohler C (2012) StreamKM ??: a clustering algorithm for data
streams. J Exp Algorithmics 17:2.4:2.1–2.4:2.30
Aggarwal CC (2007) Data streams: models and algorithms, vol 31.
Springer, Berlin
Aggarwal CC, Han J, Wang J, Yu PS (2003) A framework for
clustering evolving data streams. In: Proceedings of the 29thinternational conference on very large data bases, volume 29 ofVLDB ’03, VLDB Endowment, Berlin, pp 81–92
Aggarwal CC, Han J, Wang J, Yu PS (2004) A framework for
projected clustering of high dimensional data streams. In:Proceedings of the thirtieth international conference on verylarge data bases, volume 30 of VLDB ’04, VLDB Endowment,
Toronto, pp 852–863
Ali MH, Sundus A, Qaiser W, Ahmed Z, Halim Z (2011) Applicative
implementation of D-stream clustering algorithm for the real-
time data of telecom sector. In: International conference on
computer networks and information technology, pp 293–297
Amini A, Wah TY (2011) Density micro-clustering algorithms on
data streams: a review. In: Proceeding of the international
multiconference of engineers and computer scientists (IMECS)Amini A, Wah TY (2012) A comparative study of density-based
clustering algorithms on data streams: micro-clustering
approaches. Springer, US, Boston, pp 275–287
Amini A, Wah TY (2013) LeaDen-Stream: a leader density-based
clustering algorithm over evolving data stream. J Comput
Commun 01(05):26–31
Amini A, Wah TY, Saybani MR, Yazdi SRAS (2011) A study of
density-grid based clustering algorithms on data streams. In:
Eighth international conference on fuzzy systems and knowledge
discovery (FSKD) 3:1652–1656
Amini A, Wah TY, Teh YW (2012) DENGRIS-Stream: a density-grid
based clustering algorithm for evolving data streams over sliding
window. In: Proceedings of the international conference on data
mining and computer engineering, pp 206–210
Amini A, Saboohi H, Wah TY, Herawan T (2014a) A fast density-
based clustering algorithm for real-time internet of things stream.
Sci World J 2014:1–11
Amini A, Wah TY, Saboohi H (2014b) On density-based data streams
clustering algorithms: a survey. J Comput Sci Technol
29(1):116–141
Amini A, Saboohi H, Herawan T, Wah TY (2016) MuDi-Stream: a
multi density clustering algorithm for evolving data stream.J Netw Comput Appl 59:370–385
Arthur D, Vassilvitskii S (2007) K-means ??: the advantages of
careful seeding. In: Proceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on discrete algorithms, SODA ’07, Societyfor Industrial and Applied Mathematics, New Orleans,
pp 1027–1035
Barbara ´D, Chen P (2000) Using the fractal dimension to cluster
datasets. In: Proceedings of the sixth ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,
KDD ’00, ACM, Boston, pp 260–264
Barbara ´D, Chen P (2003) Using self-similarity to cluster large data
sets. Data Min Knowl Discov 7(2):123–152
Ben-Hur A, Horn D, Siegelmann HT, Vapnik V (2001) Support
vector clustering. J Mach Learn Res 2:125–137
Beyer K, Goldstein J, Ramakrishnan R, Shaft U (1999) When is
‘‘nearest neighbor’’ meaningful? Springer, Berlin, pp 217–235
Bhatnagar V, Kaur S (2007) Exclusive and complete clustering of
streams. Springer, Berlin, pp 629–638
Bhatnagar V, Kaur S, Chakravarthy S (2014) Clustering data streams
using grid-based synopsis. Knowl Inf Syst 41(1):127–152
Bifet A, Holmes G, Kirkby R, Pfahringer B (2010) MOA: massive
online analysis. J Mach Learn Res 11:1601–1604
Bifet A, Gavalda `R, Holmes G, Pfahringer B (2018) Machine learning
for data streams with practical examples in MOA. MIT Press,
Cambridge
Bohm C, Kailing K, Kriegel H-P, Kroger P (2004) Density connected
clustering with local subspace preferences. In: Proceedings of
the fourth IEEE international conference on data mining, ICDM
’04, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, pp 27–34
Bolan ˜os M, Forrest J, Hahsler M (2014) Clustering large datasets
using data stream clustering techniques. In: Spiliopoulou M,
Schmidt-Thieme L, Janning R (eds) Data analysis, machine
learning and knowledge discovery, studies in classiﬁcation, dataanalysis, and knowledge organization. Springer, Berlin,
pp 135–143
Bradley PS, Fayyad U, Reina C (1998) Scaling clustering algorithms
to large databases. In: Proceedings of the 4th internationalconference on knowledge discovery and data mining (KDD’98).
AAAI Press, pp 9–15
Cao F, Ester M, Qian W, Zhou A (2006) Density-based clustering
over an evolving data stream with noise. In: Conference on datamining (SIAM ’06), pp 328–339
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 295

==== Page 20 ====
Carnein M, Trautmann H (2018) evoStream—evolutionary stream
clustering utilizing idle times. Big Data Res 14:101–111. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bdr.2018.05.005
Carnein M, Assenmacher D, Trautmann H (2017a) An empirical
comparison of stream clustering algorithms. In: Proceedings of
the ACM international conference on computing frontiers (CF’17). ACM, pp 361–365
Carnein M, Assenmacher D, Trautmann H (2017b) Stream clustering
of chat messages with applications to twitch streams. In
Proceedings of the 36th international conference on conceptualmodeling (ER’17). Springer International Publishing, pp 79–88
Chen Y, Tu L (2007) Density-based clustering for real-time stream
data. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, KDD ’07,ACM, San Jose, pp 133–142
Dang XH, Lee V, Ng WK, Ciptadi A, Ong KL (2009a) An EM-based
algorithm for clustering data streams in sliding windows. In:
Zhou X, Yokota H, Deng K, Liu Q (eds) Proceedings of the 14thinternational conference on database systems for advanced
applications (DASFAA 2009). Springer, Berlin, pp 230–235
Dang XH, Lee VCS, Ng WK, Ong KL (2009b) Incremental and
adaptive clustering stream data over sliding window. Springer,Berlin, pp 660–674
Ester M, Kriegel H-P, Sander J, Xu X (1996) A density-based
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases withnoise. In: Proceedings of the 2nd international conference onknowledge discovery and data mining. AAAI Press, pp 226–231
Farnstrom F, Lewis J, Elkan C (2000) Scalability for clustering
algorithms revisited. SIGKDD Explor Newsl 2(1):51–57
Fichtenberger H, Gille ´M, Schmidt M, Schwiegelshohn C, Sohler C
(2013) BICO: BIRCH meets coresets for k-means clustering. In:
Algorithms - ESA 2013—Proceedings of 21st annual Europeansymposium, Sophia Antipolis, pp 481–492. http://ls2-www.cs.tu-
dortmund.de/grav/de/bico . Accessed 27 Dec 2018
Fisher DH (1987) Knowledge acquisition via incremental conceptual
clustering. Mach Learn 2(2):139–172
Forestiero A, Pizzuti C, Spezzano G (2013) A single pass algorithm
for clustering evolving data streams based on swarm intelli-
gence. Data Min Knowl Discov 26(1):1–26
Gao J, Li J, Zhang Z, Tan P-N (2005) An incremental data stream
clustering algorithm based on dense units detection. Springer,Berlin, pp 420–425
Gao X, Ferrara E, Qiu J (2015) Parallel clustering of high-
dimensional social media data streams. arXiv:1502.00316
Ghesmoune M, Azzag H, Lebbah M (2014) G-Stream: growing
neural gas over data stream. In: Loo CK, Siah YK, Wong KW,
Jin AT, Huang K (eds) Proceedings of neural informationprocessing: 21st international conference, ICONIP 2014, Kuch-ing, Malaysia, November 3–6, 2014, Part I. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, pp 207–214
Ghesmoune M, Lebbah M, Azzag H (2015) Clustering over data streams
based on growing neural gas. Springer, Berlin, pp 134–145
Ghesmoune M, Lebbah M, Azzag H (2016) State-of-the-art on
clustering data streams. Big Data Anal 1(1):13
Guha S, Meyerson A, Mishra N, Motwani R, O’Callaghan L (2003)
Clustering data streams: theory and practice. IEEE Trans Knowl
Data Eng 15(3):515–528
Hahsler M, Bolan ˜os M (2016) Clustering data streams based on
shared density between micro-clusters. IEEE Trans Knowl DataEng 28(6):1449–1461
Hahsler M, Bolanos M, Forrest J (2015) streamMOA: interface for
MOA stream clustering algorithms. https://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/streamMOA/ . Accessed 27 Dec 2018
Hahsler M, Bolanos M, Forrest J, Carnein M, Assenmacher D (2018)
stream: infrastructure for data stream mining. https://cran.r-
project.org/web/packages/stream/ . Accessed 27 Dec 2018Hassani M, Kranen P, Seidl T (2011) Precise anytime clustering of
noisy sensor data with logarithmic complexity. In: Proceedings
of 5th international workshop on knowledge discovery fromsensor data (SensorKDD 2011) in conjunction with 17th ACM
SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining
(KDD 2011), ACM, San Diego, pp 52–60
Hassani M, Spaus P, Gaber MM, Seidl T (2012) Density-based
projected clustering of data streams. Springer, Berlin,
pp 311–324
Hassani M, Kim Y, Seidl T (2013) Subspace MOA: subspace stream
clustering evaluation using the MOA framework. Springer,Berlin, pp 446–449
Hassani M, Hansen M, Kim Y, Seidl T (2016) subspaceMOA:
interface to ’subspaceMOA’. https://cran.r-project.org/web/
packages/subspaceMOA/ . Accessed 27 Dec 2018
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab (2015). streamDM. http://huawei-noah.
github.io/streamDM/ . Accessed 27 Dec 2018
Hutter F, Hoos HH, Stu ¨tzle T (2007) Automatic algorithm conﬁgu-
ration based on local search. In: Proceedings of the twenty-
second conference on artiﬁcal intelligence (AAAI ’07),
pp 1152–1157
Hutter F, Hoos HH, Leyton-Brown K, Stu ¨tzle T (2009) ParamILS: an
automatic algorithm conﬁguration framework. J Artif Intell Res
36:267–306
Hutter F, Hoos HH, Leyton-Brown K (2011) Sequential model-based
optimization for general algorithm conﬁguration. In: Proceed-ings of LION-5, pp 507–523
Isaksson C, Dunham MH, Hahsler M (2012) SOStream: self
organizing density-based clustering over data stream. Springer,Berlin, pp 264–278
Ismael N, Alzaalan M, Ashour W (2014) Improved multi threshold
birch clustering algorithm 2(1):1–10.
https://doi.org/10.14257/
ijaiasd.2014.2.1.01
Jia C, Tan C, Yong A (2008) A grid and density-based clustering
algorithm for processing data stream. In: Second international
conference on genetic and evolutionary computing (WGEC ’08),pp 517–521
Kohonen T (1982) Self-organized formation of topologically correct
feature maps. Biol Cybern 43(1):59–69
Kontaki M, Papadopoulos AN, Manolopoulos Y (2008) Continuous
trend-based clustering in data streams. Springer, Berlin,pp 251–262
Kranen P, Assent I, Baldauf C, Seidl T (2009) Self-adaptive anytime
stream clustering. In: 9th IEEE international conference on datamining (ICDM ’09), pp 249–258
Kranen P, Assent I, Baldauf C, Seidl T (2011a) The ClusTree:
indexing micro-clusters for anytime stream mining. In: Knowl-edge and information systems journal (Springer KAIS), Vol 29,Issue 2. Springer, London, pp 249–272
Kranen P, Reidl F, Villaamil FS, Seidl T (2011b) Hierarchical
clustering for real-time stream data with noise. Springer, Berlin,pp 405–413
Lin J, Lin H (2009) A density-based clustering over evolving
heterogeneous data stream. In: 2009 ISECS international collo-
quium on computing, communication, control, and management,vol 4, pp 275–277
Liu LX, Huang H, Guo YF, Chen FC (2009) rDenStream, a clustering
algorithm over an evolving data stream. In: 2009 internationalconference on information engineering and computer science,pp 1–4
Lo´pez-Iba ´n˜ez M, Dubois-Lacoste J, Ca ´ceres LP, Stu ¨tzle T, Birattari
M (2016) The irace package: iterated racing for automaticalgorithm conﬁguration. Oper Res Perspect 3:43–58
Lorbeer B, Kosareva A, Deva B, Softic ´D, Ruppel P, Ku ¨pper A
(2017) A-BIRCH: automatic threshold estimation for the BIRCH
clustering algorithm. Springer, Berlin, pp 169–178
123296 M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019)

==== Page 21 ====
Lu¨hr S, Lazarescu M (2008) Connectivity based stream clustering
using localised density exemplars. Springer, Berlin, pp 662–672
Lu¨hr S, Lazarescu M (2009) Incremental clustering of dynamic data
streams using connectivity based representative points. Data
Knowl Eng 68(1):1–27
Ma WH (2014) Survey on data streams clustering techniques. In:
Manufacture engineering, quality and production system III,volume 933 of Advanced Materials Research. Trans Tech
Publications, pp 768–773
Martinetz T, Schulten K et al (1991) A ‘‘neural-gas’’ network learns
topologies. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Meesuksabai W, Kangkachit T, Waiyamai K (2011) Hue-Stream:
evolution-based clustering technique for heterogeneous data
streams with uncertainty. In: Tang J, King I, Chen L, Wang J(eds) ADMA, volume 7121 of Lecture Notes in ComputerScience. Springer, pp 27–40
Motoyoshi M, Miura T, Shioya I (2004) Clustering stream data by
regression analysis. In: Proceedings of the second workshop onAustralasian information security, data mining and web intelli-
gence, and software internationalisation, volume 32 of ACSW
Frontiers ’04, Australian Computer Society, Darlinghurst,pp 115–120
Mousavi M, Bakar AA, Vakilian M (2015) Data stream clustering
algorithms: a review. Int J Adv Soft Comput Appl 7:1–15
Nguyen H-L, Woon Y-K, Ng W-K (2015) A survey on data stream
clustering and classiﬁcation. Knowl Inf Syst 45(3):535–569
Ntoutsi I, Zimek A, Palpanas T, Kro ¨ger P, Kriegel H-P (2012)
Density-based projected clustering over high dimensional data
streams. In: Proceedings of the 2012 SIAM internationalconference on data mining, pp 987–998
O’Callaghan L, Mishra N, Meyerson A, Guha S, Motwani R (2002)
Streaming-data algorithms for high-quality clustering. In: Pro-ceedings of the 18th international conference on data engineer-ing (ICDE), pp 685–694
Park NH, Lee WS (2004) Statistical Grid-based clustering over data
streams. SIGMOD Rec 33(1):32–37
Park NH, Lee WS (2007a) Cell trees: an adaptive synopsis structure
for clustering multi-dimensional on-line data streams. Data
Knowl Eng 63(2):528–549
Park NH, Lee WS (2007b) Grid-based subspace clustering over data
streams. In: Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM conference onconference on information and knowledge management, ACM,
New York, pp 801–810
Ren J, Ma R (2009) Density-based data streams clustering over
sliding windows. In: 2009 Sixth international conference on
fuzzy systems and knowledge discovery, volume 5, pp 248–252
Ren J, Cai B, Hu C (2011) Clustering over data streams based on grid
density and index tree. J Converg Inf Technol 6(1):83–93
Ruiz C, Spiliopoulou M, Menasalvas E (2007) C-DBSCAN: density-
based clustering with constraints. Springer, Berlin, pp 216–223
Ruiz C, Menasalvas E, Spiliopoulou M (2009) C-DenStream: using
domain knowledge on a data stream. Springer, Berlin, pp 287–301
Silva JA, Faria ER, Barros RC, Hruschka ER, de Carvalho AC, Gama
J (2013) Data stream clustering: a survey. ACM Comput Surv
46(1):13:1–13:31
Spinosa EJ, de Leon F de Carvalho AP, Gama J (2007) Olindda: a
cluster-based approach for detecting novelty and concept drift in
data streams. In: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM symposium onapplied computing. ACM, pp 448–452
Steil J, Huang MX, Bulling A (2018) Fixation detection for head-
mounted eye tracking based on visual similarity of gaze targets.
In: Proceedings of international symposium on eye trackingresearch and applications (ETRA), pp 23:1–23:9
Tasoulis DK, Adams NM, Hand DJ (2006) Unsupervised clustering in
streaming data. In: Sixth IEEE international conference on data
mining–workshops (ICDMW’06), pp 638–642Tasoulis D, Adams N, Weston DJ, Hand DJ (2008) Mining
information from plastic card transaction streams. In: Proceed-
ings in computational statistics: 18th symposium (COMPSTAT2008), volume 2, pp 315–322
Theiler J (1990) Estimating fractal dimension. J Opt Soc Am A
7(6):1055–1073
Tibshirani R, Walther G, Hastie T (2001) Estimating the number of
clusters in a data set via the gap statistic. J R Stat Soc Ser B (Stat
Methodol) 63(2):411–423
Tu L, Chen Y (2009) Stream data clustering based on grid density and
attraction. ACM Trans Knowl Discov Data 3(3):12:1–12:27
Udommanetanakit K, Rakthanmanon T, Waiyamai K (2007)
E-Stream: evolution-based technique for stream clustering.
Springer, Berlin, pp 605–615
van Rijn JN, Holmes G, Pfahringer B, Vanschoren J (2014) Algorithm
selection on data streams. In: Dz ˇeroski S, Panov P, Kocev D,
Todorovski L (eds) Proceedings of the 17th international
conference on discovery science (DS), volume 8777 of lecturenotes in computer science (LNCS). Springer, pp 325–336
van Rijn J, Nicolaas GH, Pfahringer B, Vanschoren J (2018) The
online performance estimation framework: heterogeneousensemble learning for data streams. Mach Learn 107(1):149–176
Wan L, Ng WK, Dang XH, Yu PS, Zhang K (2009) Density-based
clustering of data streams at multiple resolutions. ACM Trans
Knowl Discov Data 3(3):14:1–14:28
Wang CD, Lai JH, Huang D, Zheng WS (2013) SVStream: a support
vector-based algorithm for clustering data streams. IEEE Trans
Knowl Data Eng 25(6):1410–1424
Wang G, Zhang X, Tang S, Zheng H, Zhao BY (2016) Unsupervised
clickstream clustering for user behavior analysis. In: Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI conference on human factors in computing
systems, ACM, New York, pp 225–236
Wedel M, Kamakura WA (2000) Market segmentation, 2nd edn.
Springer, US
Yang C, Zhou J (2006) HClustream: a novel approach for clustering
evolving heterogeneous data stream. In: Sixth IEEE internationalconference on data mining—workshops (ICDMW’06),pp 682–688
Yang Y, Liu Z, Zhang Jp, Yang J (2012) Dynamic density-based
clustering algorithm over uncertain data streams. In: 2012 9thinternational conference on fuzzy systems and knowledgediscovery, pp 2664–2670
Zhang X, Wang W (2010) Self-adaptive change detection in
streaming data with non-stationary distribution. Springer, Berlin,pp 334–345
Zhang T, Ramakrishnan R, Livny M (1996) BIRCH: an efﬁcient data
clustering method for very large databases. In: Proceedings of
the 1996 ACM SIGMOD international conference on manage-ment of data, ACM, Montreal, pp 103–114
Zhang T, Ramakrishnan R, Livny M (1997) BIRCH: a new data
clustering algorithm and its applications. Data Mini KnowlDiscov 1(2):141–182
Zhang X, Germain C, Sebag M (2010) Adaptively detecting changes
in autonomic grid computing. In: 2010 11th IEEE/ACM
international conference on grid computing, pp 387–392
Zhou A, Cao F, Qian W, Jin C (2007a) Tracking clusters in evolving
data streams over sliding windows. Knowl Inf Syst
15(2):181–214
Zhou A, Cao F, Yan Y, Sha C, He X (2007b) Distributed data stream
clustering: a fast EM-based approach. In: 2007 IEEE 23rd
international conference on data engineering, pp 736–745
Zhu Y, Shasha D (2002) StatStream: statistical monitoring of
thousands of data streams in real time. In: Proceedings of the28th international conference on very large data bases, VLDB
Endowment, Hong Kong, pp 358–369
123M. Carnein, H. Trautmann: Optimizing Data Stream Representation, Bus Inf Syst Eng 61(3):277–297 (2019) 297

