==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1808.01053v1  [cs.NI]  3 Aug 2018IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 1
Optimizing Space-Air-Ground Integrated Networks
by Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Nei Kato, Fellow, IEEE , Zubair Md. Fadlullah, Senior Member, IEEE, Fengxiao Tang, Student Member, IEEE,
Bomin Mao, Student Member, IEEE, Shigenori Tani, Member, IEEE, Atsushi Okamura, Senior Member, IEEE,
Jiajia Liu, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —It is widely acknowledged that the development of
traditional terrestrial communication technologies cann ot provide
all users with fair and high quality services due to the scarc e
network resource and limited coverage areas. To complement
the terrestrial connection, especially for users in rural, disaster-
stricken, or other difﬁcult-to-serve areas, satellites, u nmanned
aerial vehicles (UA Vs), and balloons have been utilized to r elay
the communication signals. On the basis, Space-Air-Ground
Integrated Networks (SAGINs) have been proposed to improve
the users’ Quality of Experience (QoE). However, compared
with existing networks such as ad hoc networks and cellular
networks, the SAGINs are much more complex due to the various
characteristics of three network segments. To improve the p erfor-
mance of SAGINs, researchers are facing many unprecedented
challenges. In this paper, we propose the Artiﬁcial Intelli gence
(AI) technique to optimize the SAGINs, as the AI technique ha s
shown its predominant advantages in many applications. We ﬁ rst
analyze several main challenges of SAGINs and explain how th ese
problems can be solved by AI. Then, we consider the satellite
trafﬁc balance as an example and propose a deep learning base d
method to improve the trafﬁc control performance. Simulati on
results evaluate that the deep learning technique can be an
efﬁcient tool to improve the performance of SAGINs.
Index Terms —Space-Air-Ground Integrated Networks, Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, network performance optimization.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN recent years, signiﬁcant achievements have been
achieved in terrestrial communication systems to offer
users Internet access with much higher data rate and lower
latency [1]. The next generation wireless system, 5G, is
announced 20 times faster than 4G with ultra-densely deploy ed
base stations. However, this does not mean that all users can
enjoy such kind of high quality Internet services at any time
due to the limited network capacities and coverage areas. Fo r
instance, in rural areas which lack the terrestrial high-sp eed
broadband infrastructure because of the high expense, user s
still suffer the narrow-band network access [2]. Moreover,
users in a stadium or participating concerts cannot enjoy st able
Internet service. To address these problems, industry have
Nei Kato, Zubair Md. Fadlullah, Fengxiao Tang, and Bomin Mao
are with the Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohok u
University, Sendai, Japan. Emails: {kato, zubair, fengxia o.tang, and
bomin.mao}@it.is.tohoku.ac.jp
Shigenori Tani and Atsushi Okamura are with Information Tec hnology
R&D center, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Kamakura, Ja pan. Emails:
{Tani.Shigenori@eb, Okamura.Atsushi@bc}.MitsubishiEl ectric.co.jp
Jiajia Liu is with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Ser vices Networks,
School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 7100 71, China. Email:
liujiajia@xidian.edu.cnmade many endeavors, such as the Google’s Project Loon
and Facebook’s Aquila, which provide Internet access throu gh
balloons and drones located in the air, respectively [3]. As
shown in Fig. 1, compared with the ground segment, the air
and space communication systems have much larger coverage,
which have been utilized to provide Internet service to isla nds,
isolated mountainous areas, as well as the disaster areas.
However, different from the ground networks, the air net-
works and space networks have their own shortcomings.
Users of satellite communication systems have to tolerate
the long propagation latency, while the air networks have
limited capacity and unstable links. Moreover, both the two
networks are of high mobility. On the other hand, the terrest rial
networks have the highest throughput and most resource. As
the three networks at different altitudes can complement ea ch
other, researchers proposed the integrated network termed
Space-Air-Ground Integrated Network (SAGIN) as shown in
Fig. 1 to provide users with improved and ﬂexible end to end
services [4]. It can be found that the SAGIN is a hierarchical
network, with the satellites at the top, the unmanned aerial
vehicles (UA Vs), balloons, and airships in the air, and the
ground segment. Notice that the space segment consists of
the satellites, constellations, as well as the correspondi ng
terrestrial infrastructures, such as the ground stations a nd the
control centers.
Aided by the air and space segments, the SAGIN in
Fig.1 enables the packets generated by the ground nodes to
be transmitted to destinations via multiple paths of variou s
quality. Therefore, the three heterogeneous networks can o f-
fer differential packet transmissions to meet various serv ice
requirements, which is extremely important for the Interne t
of Things (IoT) network. Moreover, the multi-layered satel lite
communication systems which consists of the Geostationary
Earth Orbit (GEO) satellites, the Medium Earth Orbit (MEO)
satellites, and the Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites, can
utilize the multi-cast and broadcast techniques to improve
the network capacity, which can signiﬁcantly alleviate the
growing trafﬁc burden [2], [4]. However, the network design
and optimization in SAGIN are facing lots of challenges due t o
the inherent characteristics of heterogeneity, self-orga nization,
and time-variability [4]. To improve the end to end Quality o f
Experience (QoE), it would happen frequently that research ers
have to conduct the analysis from all three parts since many
transmission in SAGINs are collaboratively conducted by
the base stations in the ground, the UA Vs in the air, and
the satellites in the space. In such case, more factors have

==== Page 2 ====
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 2
Inter-satellite 
link 
Space-to-ground 
link Space-to-air 
link 
Inter-UAV 
link 
Ground link (wired) 
Ground link (wireless) 
Ground link (Device-to-Device 
(D2D)) 
UAV 
 balloon 
Cellular base station 
Core router (terrestrial) 
Ground node (user) LEO Satellite 
 e
 Ground station Space 
segment 
Air segment 
Ground 
segment 
MEO Satellite 
 e GEO Satellite 
Air-to-ground link Legends 
Fig. 1: The architecture of the Satellite-Air-Ground Integ rated Network.
to be considered [4] compared with the same problem in
conventional ground communication systems.
Since the SAGIN is more complex than the current terres-
trial networks, we need to consider more efﬁcient technique s
to optimize the SAGIN performance. The Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (AI) technique has always been a hot topic due to
its predominant performance in both industry and academia.
In recent years, the rapid development of deep learning re-
freshes human beings’ realization of AI technique. Google’ s
Alphago and Alphago Zero force humans to realize the fact
that current AI technology can not only master the board
game go even though the complex game is concerned with
2×10170legal positions, but also beat human beings [5].
Besides the excellent performance in games, deep learning h as
also shown overwhelming advantages over human beings in
various industrial applications, such as the disease diagn ose,
automatic drive, and industrial control. Moreover, the dee p
learning technique has also been utilized in satellites for
many applications, such as the image processing. Furthermo re,
researchers have conducted lots of research on the utilizat ion
of deep learning to improve the network performance [5], [6] .
The deep learning technique is demonstrated to outperform
conventional methods. It should also be noted that current
hardware development has also enabled the deep learning
technique to run successfully on communication infrastruc -
tures [7]. Considering all these factors and examples, it is a
perspective direction to adopt the deep learning technique to
optimize the network performance of SAGIN.
In this paper, we consider the deep learning technique to
optimize the performance of SAGIN. We ﬁrst analyze several
urgent problems and challenges which are most related to
the SAGIN performance. Then, we introduce some existing
research on the applications of deep learning. After that, w egive an example to illustrate how to adopt the deep learning
technique to choose paths for the satellite networks. We the n
discuss the future directions about the application of deep
learning in SAGINs. Finally, we conclude the whole paper.
II. C HALLENGES
It has been widely acknowledged that current ground net-
works are facing exponentially increasing trafﬁc generate d by
various things connected to the network [7]. The advent of SA -
GIN can signiﬁcantly alleviate the challenge and provide us ers
with more choices. Since recent developments in the industr y
such as SpaceX and the next generation of GEO ﬁxed satellite
systems, have considerably decreased the communication co st
and increased the available capacity [4], it can be imagined
that the future earth will be surrounded by large volumes of
satellites. Due to the three dimensions and the high mobilit y
of space segment as well as the air segment, the SAGIN is
much more complex than current ground networks. In this
section, we discuss some challenges which is deeply related
to the SAGIN performance.
Network Control: The control manner of the SAGIN is
one of the most important factors which affect the network
performance directly. The distributed management can redu ce
the possibility of bottleneck and response time, while the
cooperative operation among devices increases the network
complexity. On the other hand, the centralized control mann er
can simplify the network structure, whilst the response del ay
signiﬁcantly affects the network performance. It is reason able
to assume that both two control manners will be cooperativel y
utilized in future SAGIN to increase the network tolerance t o
different mistakes. Then, the different control manners le ad to
the diversity in other network management algorithms, whic h
further complicates the network management. Moreover, sin ce

==== Page 3 ====
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 3
Hidden 
Layers Output 
Layer Input 
Layer 
State Network Q-value 1 
Q-value 2 
Q-value n …
Neural 
networks 
x0h0
Neural 
networks 
x1h1
Neural 
networks 
x2h2
Neural 
networks 
xtht
…(a) Deep Belief Architecture (DBA) (b) Deep Q-networks 
(d) Long Short-Term Memory architecture (LSTM) Input Convolution Convolution Pooling Fully 
connected Fully 
connected Ouptut 
Prediction Pooling 
(c) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) 
Fig. 2: The commonly utilized deep learning architectures.
the SAGIN consists of heterogenous networks which are
composed various infrastructure, the network integration sig-
niﬁcantly affects the QoE. Due to the inherent heterogeneit y
as well as the high mobility, the management of SAGIN is
exposed to extreme difﬁculties [4].
Spectrum Management: As we know, the quality of wire-
less communication is affected by the propagation medium.
Compared with terrestrial networks, the propagation mediu m
in SAGIN is much more diverse since it is highly variant in
time, frequency, and space. Due to the different impacts of
the propagation medium as well as transmission requirement s,
multiple frequency bands are cooperatively utilized in SAG IN
to improve the network performance. Since the propagation
medium of SAGIN is distinctly different from the well studie d
terrestrial communication systems and the high variance le ads
to the frequent changes, it still needs more endeavors to
manage the spectrum in the SAGIN [4]. Moreover, the channel
resource allocation is still one of the most important facto rs
to affect the network performance despite of the abundant
research on this topic for ground networks. As mentioned
above, the earth will be surrounded by massive satellites as
well as aerial infrastructure in large volume. As the freque ncy
bands are already congested, Internet Service Providers (I SPs)
have to consider sharing the same frequency bands for many
different types of communications. For instance, L-band is
extensively utilized for space-ground, space-air, and air -ground
communications. Then, the mutual interference caused by
different communication process utilizing the same channe ls
or adjacent channels should be considered when optimizing t he
SAGIN performance [8]. However, the inherent heterogeneit y
and high mobility of SAGIN make the problem more complex,meaning that more efﬁcient techniques should be considered
compared with that of terrestrial networks.
Energy Management: Different from some devices in the
ground which can be charged or connected to the power at
any time, the aerial and space infrastructure as well as some
IoT sensors cannot be connected to a power station. These
devices are powered by the solar or battery. For instance,
current satellites have solar cells to absorb and convert th e
solar energy, and then utilize batteries to save the energy f or
usage when moving to the shadow area. To improve the energy
efﬁciency can increase the usage time of the satellites sinc e
the total times of complete charge of battery cells are limit ed.
However, different from the ground segment which usually ju st
improves communication mechanisms to save the energy, the
totally different propagation medium, the intense radiati on, and
space-variant temperature also affect the energy consumpt ions
of satellite segments [9]. For the aerial infrastructure, o ptimiz-
ing the energy efﬁciency is more critical than conventional
terrestrial communication system. Moreover, while the pow er
consumption in terrestrial communication systems are main ly
related to the communication related functions, the majori ty
power consumption for the aerial segments are to maintain th e
aloft and support their mobility [10]. Therefore, the energ y
management is a critical but challenging topic for SAGIN.
Routing and Handover Management: Since the SAGIN
is a multi-layer network, there exists multiple paths for mo st
source and destination pairs. On the one hand, the multiple
paths can be utilized for different types of trafﬁc transmis sion
for meeting the diverse service requirements. On the other
hand, this increases the difﬁculty in routing strategy desi gn
since the network researchers need to consider the service

==== Page 4 ====
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 4
TABLE I. Some existing networking research based on deep lea rning
Purpose StrategyDeep learning
architectureTraining
mannerTraining
timeChallenges for SAGIN
Trafﬁc
controlRouting DBASupervised
learningOfﬂine Each individual segment has its inherent
requirements and tailored techniques and
protocols to cater to those requirements.
Hence, the deep learning based conventional
applications for the individual segments
cannot provide a smart, holistic solution.
Therefore, in this article, we aim to investigate
how to leverage deep learning for the integrated
space, air, and gound networks.Resource
allocationCache
allocationDeep
Q-networkReinforcement
learningOfﬂine
Channel
assignmentDBA,
CNNSupervised
learning
SecurityAnomoly
detectionLSTMUnsupervised
learningOnline
requirements and the performance of paths in terms of packet
loss rate, end-to-end delay, and throughput [11]. Another c hal-
lenge for routing design is the high mobility of SAGIN which
leads to uncertainties in locations of mobile devices. More over,
the high mobility also results in the frequent handover, whi ch
is a challenge for ensuring the seamless transmissions. As t he
SAGIN consists of heterogeneous components and different
segments have various coverage areas, different handover
schemes should be proposed with the properties of corre-
sponding segments considered. For instance, the handover i n
UA V-based communication systems should consider the work
states of UA Vs since they are often shutdown to save power.
Furthermore, efﬁcient prediction algorithms are also requ ired
due to the location uncertainties [4].
Security Guarantee: As a cooperative network with open
links and dynamic topologies, SAGIN are facing many securit y
threatens. Even though the SAGIN is required to offer reliab le
and secure communications due to the large amount of sensi-
tive data, it is still difﬁcult to provide high security leve l, for
which the main reasons are multi-fold. First, the conventio nal
communication protocols, e.g. TCP/IP, have been revised to
integrate diverse technologies for performance improveme nt,
which leads to new problems in IP security mechanism. Sec-
ond, the encryption operations often results in more proces sing
delay and transmission delay, which may hamper the real-tim e
communications. And the higher the security level, the more
time it costs. Third, the high mobility of the SAGIN produces
many challenges to the network security. For instance, the
frequent handover makes the secure routing more difﬁcult
to be realized. And the SAGIN becomes more vulnerable to
jamming, which is difﬁcult to be addressed because of the
large coverage area [4].
III. R ELATED RESEARCH ON AIBASED NETWORKING
OPTIMIZATIONS
Similar to the SAGIN, current terrestrial networks also
have the above-mentioned but less complex problems. To
address these problems, the deep learning technique has bee n
a perspective direction to optimize the network performanc e
in recent years. And the results have evaluated the advantag es
of the deep learning over traditional strategies. In this se ction,
we make some analysis about the existing research and thendiscuss the necessary modiﬁcations for adoption in the SA-
GIN. It should be noted that even though existing proposals
cannot be applied in SAGIN directly, they can provide a solid
foundation for future research.
A. Intelligent Trafﬁc Control
As the network trafﬁc is exponentially increasing, trafﬁc
control is a hot research topic. Our previous work [6] propos ed
a deep learning based routing strategy which utilizes the De ep
Belief Architecture (DBA) as shown in Fig. 2(a) to predict th e
paths. In the proposal, the input and output of the DBA are the
trafﬁc patterns and the next node, respectively. The simula tion
results show that the proposal can signiﬁcantly improve the
network throughput and reduce the average delay per hop. To
enable the deployment of the proposed deep learning based
routing strategy, in [7], we analyzed the Graphics Processi ng
Unit (GPU) accelerated Software Deﬁned Routers (SDRs).
Theoretical analysis shows that time cost for training and
running the strategy with GPU is much lower than that with
CPU. Moreover, the SDR architecture also provides more
opportunities to improve the ﬂexibility. Besides the next n ode
prediction, the deep learning technique is also utilized fo r the
trafﬁc forecast, which can be adopted for routing design and
following resource allocation [12].
B. Intelligent Resource Allocation
Resource allocation is an important factor which directly
impacts on the network performance. In current terrestrial
networks, the network resource allocation is usually conce rned
with two types of resource: the communication resource in-
cluding channels and bandwidth, and the computation resour ce
which consists of the processing power and memory. The
authors of [13] discussed the balance between two conﬂictin g
factors: the network cost and users’ mean opinion score
(MOS) to improve the network QoE. In this paper, authors
utilized the deep reinforcement learning technique to chan ge
the cache location of content. Speciﬁcally, the network sta tes
which consists of the transmission rates and cache conditio n
are utilized as the input of the deep Q-networks shown in
Fig. 2(b). Then, the agent can choose the best action accordi ng
to the output Q-values of different actions. Simulation res ults

==== Page 5 ====
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 5
GEO 
MEO 
LEO 
UAV G1 G2
M1M2
M3M4 M5
M6
Source nodes Destination nodes 
Fig. 3: The utilized network topology in the simulation.
demonstrate the agent can ﬁnd the best decision to optimize
the proposed reward function after trial and error. As we
mentioned above, the trafﬁc prediction is usually conducte d
for many network management tasks. Our previous work [12]
proposed a deep learning based partially overlapped channe l
assignment strategy for the IoT network. The proposal consi sts
of two steps: utilize the DBA as shown in Fig. 2(a) to
predict the network trafﬁc in next time interval, then adopt
the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) shown in Fig. 2(c)
to choose the suitable channels according to the predicted
trafﬁc. Since the input of the DBA considers the properties
of the IoT trafﬁc, the prediction accuracy is much higher
than conventional methods, which leads to the performance
improvement of channel assignment.
C. Smart Anomaly Detection
Since future IoT network will be abounded with a large
volume of users’ data, it is critically important to increas e the
security and privacy level of corresponding network servic es.
In existing ground networks, deep learning has also been
studied for improving the network security level. In [14], t he
authors proposed a deep learning based approach to detect
anomalous network activity. In the paper, the deep neural
network (DNN) is adopted to extract the features of users’
activities from the system logs. Then, the feature vectors a re
input to the long short-term memory (LSTM) as shown in
Fig. 2(d) to measure the anomaly score. Since the users’ ac-
tivities are often unpredictable over seconds to hours, aut hors
in this paper utilized an online unsupervised training fash ion to
train the deep learning architectures, by which the models c an
adapt to the changing patterns in the data. Simulation resul ts
show that the proposed strategy has very high accuracy rate
and can signiﬁcantly reduce the analyst workloads.
After discussing the deep learning based strategies to solv e
various problems in current terrestrial networks, it can be
clearly found that the deep learning technique can be utiliz ed
to optimize the network performance. As shown in Table. I,
we can ﬁnd that the various deep learning architectures as
well as the different training manners enable this techniqu e to
be ﬂexibly adopted in heterogeneous scenarios. On the other
hand, current research is all concentrated on the terrestri al
networks and does not consider the characteristics of futur eTABLE II. The values of main parameters utilized in the
simulation
GEO/
MEOFrequency band of
connected linksKa band
Channel capacity 1Gbps
LEODownlink L band
Channel capacity 120Mbps
CNN#Convolutional layers 3
#Fully connected layers 3
SAGIN. The heterogeneity of different segments in SAGIN
is an important factor to impact on the network performance
which also leads to more complexity. The inherent require-
ments of each individual segment as well as the tailored
techniques need to be considered when desinging the deep
learning based algorithms for SAGIN.
IV. C ASE STUDY ON DEEPLEARNING AIDED SAGIN
In this section, we take the routing problem as an example
to show how the deep learning can be utilized to optimized
the SAGIN performance. Due to the huge scale of SAGIN as
well as some uncertainties of future aerial and space segmen ts’
structures, in this paper, we just use a simpliﬁed network
structure shown in Fig. 3 as the considered scenario. In the
ﬁgure, we can ﬁnd the hierarchical structure consists of 5
layers. In the space segment, there are 2 GEOs, 6 MEOs,
and 12 LEOs, respectively. The aerial segment is composed of
120 UA Vs which get the most applications. Since researchers
have spent most energy in studying the ground segment, the
terrestrial communication technologies are relatively ma ture.
In this paper, we simplify the ground segments and only
consider the connections between the ground nodes and the
UA Vs. And if the ground nodes need to transmit the packets
via the space segments, they will ﬁrst upload the packets to t he
UA Vs. The total number of ground nodes are 3,200 and they
are evenly distributed. Due to the inherent heterogeneity o f the
three segments, it is reasonable to consider that the routin g
design follows different strategies in different segments . As
the deep learning technique has been studied to improve the
terrestrial and air segments, in this paper, we focus on the
performance optimization of the satellite network with dee p
learning. Since the simulation platform is a workstation wi th
Intel Core i7-6900K CPU, 64GB Random Access Memory
(RAM), and Nvidia Geforce Titan X GPU, it is reasonable to
just consider the inter-layer links in the layers of GEO and
MEO as well as the links connecting adjacent layers, which
can still demonstrate the advantages of our proposed proof-
of-concept. The values of main parameters in the considered
topology are given in Table II.
In Fig. 3, the network can be separated into two parts: the
left part and the right part covered by G1 and G2, respectivel y.
Even though there are lots of simultaneous communication
process in the SAGIN, we only focus on the packets generated
by the ground nodes in the left part and destined for the groun d
nodes in the right part via the satellite networks. Therefor e,
the ground nodes are evenly separated into two groups: 1,600

==== Page 6 ====
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 6
 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6
 600  700  800  900 1000  1100  1200  1300  1400  1500  1600Network throughput (Gbps)
Number of source nodesOur proposal
Conventional strategy
(a) Comparison of network throughput for conventional rout ing
strategy and our proposal. 0 10 20 30 40 50
 600  700  800  900  1000  1100  1200  1300  1400  1500  1600Packet loss rate (%)
Number of source nodesOur proposal
Conventional strategy
(b) Comparison of network packet loss rate for conventional
routing strategy and our proposal.
Fig. 4: The performance of our proposal in terms of network th roughput and packet loss rate compared with the conventiona l
routing strategy.
source nodes in the left part and 1,600 destination nodes in
the right part. We consider various number of source nodes
which need to transmit packets to the destination nodes to
change the trafﬁc load of the space segment. For each source
node communicating with the destination nodes, its packet
generation rate is 2Mbps. According to Fig. 3, the inter-
layer connections in the MEO and GEO satellites enable
these packets to be transmitted to the right part via multipl e
paths. For instance, the packets in M1destined for M5can be
transmitted via M2andM4, or via G1andG2. As the long
propagation delay caused by the distances among satellites
deteriorates the performance seriously, the physical dist ance
is one of the most important metrics impacting on the routing
design. Therefore, according to the conventional shortest path
(SP) algorithm, the path via the MEO satellites usually has
higher priority over that through the GEO satellites due to t he
less distance. However, this actually does not lead to bette r
performance, especially when M1,M2, and M3all have heavy
trafﬁc towards the right section. If we consider the periodi cal
bursty trafﬁc as shown in [15], the MEO satellites connectin g
two parts, M2,M3,M4, and M6, will be congested frequently.
On the other hand, if the satellites can learn the rules accor ding
to the trafﬁc patterns, the MEO satellites can transfer some
trafﬁc to GEO satellites for the trafﬁc balance. Here, we
consider the deep learning technique to reach this goal.
We consider the origin-destination (OD) pair which consist s
of a MEO satellite in the left part and right part denoting
the origin and destination, respectively. Since multiple p aths
exist for every OD pair, we consider the path combinations,
C, each of which consists of one path for every OD pair. We
utilize CNN ito represent the path combination CNN iand the
output of CNN imeans that the path combination should be
chosen or not. Speciﬁcally, the input of a CNN is the trafﬁc
pattern and the remaining buffer size of MEO satellites and
GEO satellites. The output is a vector composed of two binary
elements, where (1,0)represents the path combination should
be chosen, otherwise (0,1)means not. We utilize the online
training method to train the considered CNNs [15]. The main
parameters of the utilized CNN are shown in Table II.
Figs. 4 give the results of our proposal and the conventional
SP method in terms of network throughput and packet lossrate. In Fig. 4a, we can ﬁnd the throughput of our proposal
linearly increases with the growth of the source nodes’ numb er
when the number of source nodes is less than 1,200. For
the conventional SP strategy, the value of network throughp ut
is nearly the same as that of our proposal and also linearly
increases at the beginning. However, when the number of
source nodes is above 800, the network throughput of con-
ventional strategy increases gradually slowly and nearly k eeps
a constant value after the source nodes are more than 1,000.
Therefore, we can ﬁnd our proposal can achieve much higher
throughput than the conventional strategy when the source
nodes’ number is more than 800. Fig. 4b shows the packet
loss rate of two networks. It can be easily found that the two
strategies nearly have the same performance when the source
nodes are less than 700. However, after that, the packet loss
rate of conventional strategy increases very fast, which me ans
that the network running conventional strategy is congeste d
when there are more than 700 source nodes and the congestion
becomes more seriously with the growth of source nodes.
For the deep learning based routing strategy, the network
can still transfer all the packets to destinations before th e
number of source nodes increases above 1,100. After that,
our proposal also lose some packets. We can conclude that
compared with the conventional strategy, our proposal can
signiﬁcantly improve the network performance. The reason f or
improvement of our proposal is that the utilized deep learni ng
architecture can learn the experiences from trafﬁc pattern s and
transfer some packets via GEO satellites when some MEO
satellites are nearly congested. On the other hand, in the
network running conventional strategy, the MEO satellites are
always ﬁrst chosen for packet transmission, which leads to
frequent trafﬁc congestion in the MEO satellites.
V. F UTURE DIRECTIONS
Deep learning is a promising technique to optimize the
SAGIN performance since its efﬁciency and ﬂexibility enabl e
it to be a prospective paradigm to promote the SAGIN to
a higher level. On the basis of current achievements, future
research can be conducted in following four aspects.
Architecture Construction: When designing the deep learn-
ing based proposal, the ﬁrst challenge is to construct the de ep

==== Page 7 ====
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, JULY 2018 7
learning architecture. As there are so many deep learning
architectures of which each can be utilized for different
applications, it is still tough even for an experienced rese archer
to choose the suitable structure. Moreover, the input and ou tput
design of the architecture is deeply concerned with the stud ied
problems and impacts on the prediction accuracy as well as
the computation overhead. Considering more factors usuall y
means not only much higher accuracy rate but also the in-
creased training and running time. Furthermore, as the SAGI N
is a multi-dimensional network which is more complex than
current terrestrial networks, how to design the correspond ing
deep learning architectures still needs more consideratio n.
Proposal Deployment: As we mentioned above, the long
latency of the space communication system is a serious
shortcoming for the SAGIN. When we deploy deep learning
based proposals, if we consider the centralized control man -
ner, the computation time cost as well as the transmission
latency between the controller and the controlled devices w ill
deteriorate the network performance. However, the distrib uted
control is not always a good choice for any scenario, especia lly
when the input of deep learning architecture is concerned wi th
the whole network. Therefore, the distributed control mann er
often means increased signaling overhead caused by necessa ry
information exchange. Moreover, the device computation re -
quirement in the distributed network is much higher because
every device needs to run the deep learning based method.
Computation Efﬁciency: Since the deep learning tech-
nique is usually concerned with much more computation
consumption than conventional methods, when considering
the deep learning technique to optimize the SAGIN perfor-
mance, it is necessary to improve the computation efﬁciency .
The computation efﬁciency is concerned with many factors,
such as the required accuracy rate, the training strategy, t he
computation hardware, and so on. In most cases, increasing
the number of layers can improve the accuracy rate, but
also leads to increased computation consumption. Therefor e,
when designing the deep learning architectures, we need
to consider the accuracy requirement and try our best to
simplify the architectures. Many other techniques to impro ve
the computation efﬁciency should also be considered, such a s
utilizing the parameters of existing deep learning archite ctures
for initialization. Furthermore, the ofﬂine training mann er
can reduce the computation overhead during running phase,
while the online training fashion enables the deep learning
architecture to easily adapt to the changing patterns.
Hardware Design: To deploy the deep learning based
strategies, we also need to make some modiﬁcations on curren t
communication hardware. It is common that the GPU is more
suitable for deep learning computation since it can efﬁcien tly
handle the matrix computations. Thus, if we adopt the deep
learning technique to optimize the SAGIN performance, it is
important to equip enough GPU resource in current network
infrastructure. At the same time, the cooperation among the
different computation resource as well as the computation t ask
scheduling also need to be studied. Moreover, the hardware
expense should be also considered to improve the cost perfor -
mance ratio, especially for the space communication system s.VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the deep learning technique to
optimize the SAGIN performance. Firstly, we discuss severa l
challenges which directly impact on the network performanc e.
Then, we give some analysis about existing deep learning
based research to improve the terrestrial network performa nce
and also explain the shortcomings of these proposals for fut ure
SAGIN. To show how the deep learning technique can improve
the SAGIN performance, we give an example which utilizes
the CNN to choose the path combinations for the satellite
communication system. Since applying the AI technique in
SAGIN is still a new topic, we also discuss some future
promising directions.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Zhang, P. Yang, J. Ren, D. Chen, L. Yu, and X. Shen, “Syne rgy of
Big Data and 5G Wireless Networks: Opportunities, Approach es, and
Challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 25, pp. 12–18, Feb.
2018.
[2] C. Niephaus, M. Kretschmer, and G. Ghinea, “QoS Provisio ning in
Converged Satellite and Terrestrial Networks: A Survey of t he State-of-
the-Art,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 18, pp. 2415–
2441, Fourthquarter 2016.
[3] “The Flight to Own the Stratosphere: Google’s Project Lo on vs
Facebook’s Aquila.” https://www.yaabot.com/29834/batt ling-it-out-for-
internet-access-from-the-skies-googles-project-loon -versus-facebooks-
aquila/, (accessed Jun. 2018).
[4] J. Liu, Y . Shi, Y . Shi, Z. M. Fadlullah, and N. Kato, “Space -Air-
Ground Integrated Network: A Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials , 2018, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2018.2841996.
[5] Z. M. Fadlullah, F. Tang, B. Mao, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue,
and K. Mizutani, “State-of-the-Art Deep Learning: Evolvin g Machine
Intelligence Toward Tomorrow’s Intelligent Network Trafﬁ c Control
Systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials , vol. 19, pp. 2432–
2455, Fourthquarter 2017.
[6] N. Kato, Z. M. Fadlullah, B. Mao, F. Tang, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue, and
K. Mizutani, “The Deep Learning Vision for Heterogeneous Ne twork
Trafﬁc Control: Proposal, Challenges, and Future Perspect ive,” IEEE
Wireless Communications , vol. 24, pp. 146–153, Dec. 2017.
[7] B. Mao, Z. M. Fadlullah, F. Tang, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. Ino ue, and
K. Mizutani, “Routing or Computing? The Paradigm Shift Towa rds
Intelligent Computer Network Packet Transmission Based on Deep
Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Computers , vol. 66, pp. 1946–1960,
Nov. 2017.
[8] T. Pelzmann, T. Jost, M. Schwinzerl, F. PÃl’rez-FontÃ ˛ a n, M. SchÃ˝ unhu-
ber, and N. Floury, “Airborne Measurements Enhancing the Sa tellite-to-
aircraft Channel Model in L-band,” in 2016 10th European Conference
on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP) , pp. 1–5, Apr. 2016.
[9] Y . Yang, M. Xu, D. Wang, and Y . Wang, “Towards Energy-Efﬁc ient
Routing in Satellite Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications , vol. 34, pp. 3869–3886, Dec. 2016.
[10] Y . Zeng and R. Zhang, “Energy-Efﬁcient UA V Communicati on With
Trajectory Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
tions , vol. 16, pp. 3747–3760, Jun. 2017.
[11] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun, “Survey of Important I ssues in UA V
Communication Networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials ,
vol. 18, pp. 1123–1152, Secondquarter 2016.
[12] F. Tang, Z. M. Fadlullah, B. Mao, and N. Kato, “An Intelli gent
Trafﬁc Load Prediction Based Adaptive Channel Assignment A lgorithm
in SDN-IoT: A Deep Learning Approach,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal , online, 2018.
[13] X. He, K. Wang, H. Huang, T. Miyazaki, Y . Wang, and S. Guo, “Green
Resource Allocation based on Deep Reinforcement Learning i n Content-
Centric IoT,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing ,
online, 2018.
[14] A. Tuor, S. Kaplan, B. Hutchinson, N. Nichols, and S. Rob inson,
“Deep Learning for Unsupervised Insider Threat Detection i n Structured
Cybersecurity Data Streams,” CoRR , vol. abs/1710.00811, 2017.
[15] F. Tang, B. Mao, Z. M. Fadlullah, N. Kato, O. Akashi, T. In oue, and
K. Mizutani, “On Removing Routing Protocol from Future Wire less
Networks: A Real-time Deep Learning Approach for Intellige nt Trafﬁc
Control,” IEEE Wireless Communications , vol. 25, pp. 154–160, Feb.
2018.

