==== Page 1 ====
sensors
Review
Optimized Clustering Algorithms for Large Wireless
Sensor Networks: A Review
Damien Wohwe Sambo1,*
, Blaise Omer Yenke2, Anna Förster3
and Paul Dayang1
1Faculty of Science, University of Ngaound éré, 454 Ngaound éré, Cameroon; piusday@gmail.com
2LASE Laboratory, University of Ngaound éré, 454 Ngaound éré, Cameroon; byenke@yahoo.com
3ComNets, University of Bremen, 28334 Bremen, Germany; anna.foerster@comnets.uni-bremen.de
*Correspondence: wsdamieno@gmail.com; Tel.: +237-694-584-538
Received: 27 November 2018; Accepted: 7 January 2019; Published: 15 January 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: During the past few years, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have become widely used
due to their large amount of applications. The use of WSNs is an imperative necessity for future
revolutionary areas like ecological ﬁelds or smart cities in which more than hundreds or thousands
of sensor nodes are deployed. In those large scale WSNs, hierarchical approaches improve the
performance of the network and increase its lifetime. Hierarchy inside a WSN consists in cutting
the whole network into sub-networks called clusters which are led by Cluster Heads. In spite of the
advantages of the clustering on large WSNs, it remains a non-deterministic polynomial hard problem
which is not solved efﬁciently by traditional clustering. The recent researches conducted on Machine
Learning, Computational Intelligence, and WSNs bring out the optimized clustering algorithms
for WSNs. These kinds of clustering are based on environmental behaviors and outperform the
traditional clustering algorithms. However, due to the diversity of WSN applications, the choice of an
appropriate paradigm for a clustering solution remains a problem. In this paper, we conduct a wide
review of proposed optimized clustering solutions nowadays. In order to evaluate them, we consider
10 parameters. Based on these parameters, we propose a comparison of these optimized clustering
approaches. From the analysis, we observe that centralized clustering solutions based on the Swarm
Intelligence paradigm are more adapted for applications with low energy consumption, high data
delivery rate, or high scalability than algorithms based on the other presented paradigms. Moreover,
when an application does not need a large amount of nodes within a ﬁeld, the Fuzzy Logic based
solution are suitable.
Keywords: large wireless sensor networks; clustering; metaheuristic; computational intelligence;
machine learning
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Smart technologies are widely used in ﬁelds like building, health, ecological monitoring, security,
home, vehicles, planes, or shipboard. However, smart environments rely ﬁrst on sensory data from
the real world like it is done by sentient organisms. Smart environments are possible due to the
recent evolution of wireless communication technologies, digital electronics, and MEMS technology
which have seen the apparition of sensors. They are small in size and are able to collect information
on its environment like temperature, pressure, humidity, water content, gas presence, or luminosity.
In spite of the large amount of applications offered by WSN, sensor nodes are designed with resources
constraints such as a restricted computing capacity, reduced memory size and storage, weak range of
communication, low bandwidth, and a limited amount of energy. To efﬁciently cover areas, a single
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322; doi:10.3390/s19020322 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

==== Page 2 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 2 of 27
sensor is not sufﬁcient due to its limited communication range. In order to cover a more consequent
space, several sensors are deployed and connected to each other, thereby forming a Wireless Sensor
Network (WSN) [1].
By designing a WSN, the most important parameter to be taken into account is the energy
consumption because it deﬁnes the lifetime of a sensor node and thereafter the lifetime of the whole
network [ 2]. A trade-off between the energy restriction and the resources constraints of sensors is
imperative for the performance of the network. Nevertheless, when the amount of nodes within the
network is extensive, the usual direct routing consumes more energy and may reduce the network
lifetime considerably [ 3]. From the original wireline networks, hierarchical or cluster-based routing are
widely used for large WSNs because they are techniques with advantages related to scalability, efﬁcient
communication, and fault tolerance [ 4]. In hierarchical architectures, the whole network is divided
into sub-networks called clusters. Each cluster is led by a special node named Cluster Head (CH)
which is responsible for gathering or fusion data from nodes that belong to the same cluster [ 5]. In this
kind of routing technique, the inter-cluster and intra-cluster communications may act in a multihop
manner. Thus, a sensor node communicates only with its nearest neighbor in order to preserve its
remaining energy and not to waste its energy by trying to communicate with a neighbor which is far
away [ 4]. Other clustering approaches aim at ﬁnding a trade-off between the reliability of sensing and
communication overhead based on unsupervised learning process [6].
Meanwhile, traditional hierarchical based algorithms are mostly probabilistic clustering
approaches [ 7]. However, like the authors of [ 8], for example, the clustering on WSN remains a
Non-deterministic Polynomial (NP) hard optimization problem which cannot be solved efﬁciently
by traditional approaches. Thus, a more accurate resolution of the NP optimization of the clustering
is made possible by using approaches based on recent research on Computational Intelligence
(CI) and Machine Learning (ML). These recent clustering paradigms are known as optimized
clustering algorithms.
The clustering solutions based on CI or ML consider environmental and biological behaviors
and outperform most of the traditional clustering solutions in terms of scalability, reliability, fault
tolerance, amount of data delivered, energy consumption, better coverage of the experimental ﬁeld,
and the increase of the network lifetime [ 7–11]. Meanwhile, according to the type of application,
the choice of the appropriate approach is very important both on the cost of the network deployment
and its lifetime.
1.2. Author’s Contributions
The main goal of this paper is to give a quick overview to a beginner or senior in the research
ﬁeld about clustering approaches based on ML and CI, it also helps readers in choosing a clustering
technique adapted to the speciﬁcations of their application. To achieve it, we conducted a large review
of the recent optimized clustering solutions. They are classiﬁed by the ML/CI implemented; thus,
several performance parameters are used to compare and to evaluate them. It is then easy to have an
overview of MI/CI based approaches according to the requirements of WSN’s applications. In short,
our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
 Wide review of recent intelligent clustering approaches for WSN;
 Classiﬁcation of algorithms in terms of the CI or ML used;
 Intensive evaluation and comparison of the selected algorithms according to 10 parameters.
1.3. Paper’s Organization
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 shows the principal routing techniques
used in WSN; in Section 3, a wide presentation of the optimized clustering based on ML and CI
are given; a comparison between several optimized clustering approaches is provided in Section 4;
conclusion and directions for future work are presented in Section 5.

==== Page 3 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 3 of 27
2. Routing on Wireless Sensor Networks
The main goal of routing in WSN is to carry out data communication when trying at the same time
to prolong the network lifetime and provide high quality of service during data delivery [ 12]. Based on
the network structure, routing on WSN can be classiﬁed as data centric based routing, location based
routing, group-based routing, or as hierarchical based routing.
2.1. Data Centric Based
In several sensor networks, it is not obvious to assign an identiﬁer to each node because of
the large number of nodes deployed. Besides the problem of identiﬁcation of nodes, the random
deployment of nodes makes it difﬁcult to select a speciﬁc node during the routing of data through
the network. Nevertheless, since data are usually transmitted from each node within the deployment
region, the redundancy of these data can be signiﬁcant then waste a lot of energy.
The resolution of redundant data during routing has led to the data centric approach, which is
different from the traditional address-based routing where routes are created between addressable
nodes [ 12–14]. In data centric based routing, before data have to be sent by nodes in a selected region,
the sink node should send queries to a selected region and wait for the incoming data [ 12]. The ﬁrst
and the most popular data centric protocol is the Sensor Protocols for Information via Negotiation
(SPIN), in which negotiation between nodes is considered in order to eliminate redundant data and
reduce the energy consumption. There are several kinds of data centric based routing like Directed
Diffusion [15], Energy-aware routing, Rumor routing, or Gradient-Based Routing [13,15].
2.2. Location Based Routing
The position of sensor node is required in applications like military tracking, ecology monitoring,
or health care. Contrary to data centric based routing where the position of a node can be unknown,
the location-based protocols are very interesting since they can signiﬁcantly decrease the complexity of
ﬁnding best routes through the network. The distance between two neighbor nodes can be therefore
estimated by the Received Signal Strength (RSS) [ 12]. When the study area is well known in advance,
using the location of sensors will eliminate the number of transmissions signiﬁcantly because the
queries would be assigned only to a particular region at a particular time [ 12]. However, information
about a position can be done through the use of a GPS (Global Positioning System) module on the sensor.
Since the one goal when designing a sensor network is low cost and energy management, the use of
GPS by sensors on a large scale network is quite expensive and energy consuming [ 16]. An example
of location-based protocol is the Minimum Energy Communication Network (MECN), it reduces
the energy consumption into the network by using a low power GPS module on each sensor node.
Meanwhile, it is best applicable to sensor networks, which are not mobile [ 12]. Another well-known
location-based algorithm is the Geographic Adaptive Fidelity (GAF) designed initially for mobile ad
hoc networks. Presentations of location-based protocols are conducted in [3,17].
2.3. Group Based Routing
Having the location of each node within a ﬁeld is not easy when the amount of sensors increases
considerably. A more easy approach consists of deploying sensor nodes in groups. In this kind of
routing, nodes in the same group are most of the time closed to each other [ 18,19]. In group-based
routing solutions, each group is able to perform its own application independently. Take, for example,
the measurement of the environmental impact of an area made up of a small forest, a sandy place, and
a marine reef. In this example, three groups can be deployed according to the measurements of each
application (forest, sand, underwater). However, the deployment of group-based protocol within the
study ﬁeld needs to be meticulous. As explained by Donggang et al. [ 19], in a group-based solution,
each sensor node is assigned to its group before the deployment. There are several algorithms based
on group routing. Lloret et al. [ 18] proposed the Group-Based Protocol for Large Wireless Ad Hoc and

==== Page 4 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 4 of 27
Sensor Networks called GBP-WAHSN. Another group-based algorithm is called Group based Mobile
Agent Routing (GMAR) [20], which uses a mobile agent in order to aggregate data in each group.
2.4. Hierarchical Based Routing
Clustering is an efﬁcient topology control approach for maximizing the lifetime and scalability of
WSNs. The hierarchical based routing is a part of the group-based routing and consists of creating
a virtual hierarchy among the nodes of the sensor network [ 21]. This class of routing techniques is
generally designed for large scale networks and aims to efﬁciently maintain the energy consumption
of sensor nodes and increase the network lifetime by cutting the whole network into clusters [ 14].
Each cluster is led by a node called Cluster Head (CH) which receives data from nodes within the
cluster. CHs communicate each other in order to ﬁnd a better route up to the sink node or the BS.
This is done in order to reduce the energy consumption of sensor nodes by reducing the number
of transmitted/received messages to the sink node. In addition to CH election, a second special
node called Vice Cluster Head (VCH) can be elected in order to improve the lifetime of the CH as
shown in [ 22]. Mechanisms like multihop communication, data aggregation, and data fusion are
performed so that the energy is efﬁciently used within the cluster [ 12,13]. The most popular clustering
algorithm is the Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH), it uses probability computing
and the received signal strengths to locally select the CHs which have to serve as router of the data
up to the BS. In LEACH, local data fusion and aggregation are performed by local CH [ 3]. For a
large scale network, LEACH is able to increase the network lifetime [ 21]. However, due to its single
hop conﬁguration, the CH on LEACH is assumed to have a long communication range. Thus, the
data sent by the CH has to reach the BS directly. Another approach subdivides the problem into
two layers: an organization layer to manage communications and a distribution layer made up of
cluster members [ 23].Many hierarchical based routing algorithms are proposed in the literature,
such as the PEGASIS, TEEN, EEHC, PEACH, or HEED. Authors of [ 4,6,16,18,19] present several
classical hierarchical algorithms and show how the scalability, the energy efﬁciency, network lifetime,
data delivery, and the fault tolerance are greatly improved on large scale sensor network.
Except for the network structure, protocols in WSN ﬁeld can also be classiﬁed according to the
path establishment (proactive, reactive, hybrid); the protocol operations (multipath-based, query-based,
negotiation-based, delivery-based, QoS-based, coherent-based); the next hop selection (broadcast,
location, comment, probabilistic). Figure 1 gives a global overview of this classiﬁcation. More details
about each category can be found in [4,24–27].
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 27 
 algorithm is called Group based Mobile Agent Routing (GMAR) [20], which uses a mobile agent in 
order to aggregate data in each group. 
2.4. Hierarchical Based Routing 
Clustering is an efficient topology control appr oach for maximizing the lifetime and scalability 
of WSNs. The hierarchical based routing is a part of the group-based routing and consists of creating a virtual hierarchy among the nodes of the sensor network [21]. This class of routing techniques is generally designed for large scale networks and aims  to efficiently maintain the energy consumption 
of sensor nodes and increase the network lifetime by cutting the whole network into clusters [14]. 
Each cluster is led by a node called Cluster Head (CH) which receives data from nodes within the cluster. CHs communicate each other in order to fi nd a better route up to the sink node or the BS. 
This is done in order to reduce the energy consumption of sensor nodes by reducing the number of 
transmitted/received messages to the sink node. In  addition to CH election, a second special node 
called Vice Cluster Head (VCH) ca n be elected in order to improve the lifetime of the CH as shown 
in [22]. Mechanisms like multihop communication, data aggregation, and data fusion are performed so that the energy is efficiently used within the cl uster [12,13]. The most popular clustering algorithm 
is the Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH), it uses probability computing and the received signal strengths to locally select the CHs wh ich have to serve as router of the data up to the 
BS. In LEACH, local data fusion and aggregation are performed by local CH [3]. For a large scale 
network, LEACH is able to increase the network lifetime [21]. However, due to its single hop configuration, the CH on LEACH is assumed to ha ve a long communication range. Thus, the data 
sent by the CH has to reach the BS directly. Anothe r approach subdivides the problem into two layers: 
an organization layer to manage  communications and a distributi on layer made up of cluster 
members [23]. Many hierarchical based routing algori thms are proposed in the literature, such as the 
PEGASIS, TEEN, EEHC, PEACH, or HEED. Authors of [4,6,16,18,19] present several classical 
hierarchical algorithms and show how the scalabilit y, the energy efficiency, network lifetime, data 
delivery, and the fault tolerance are greatly improved on large scale sensor network. 
Except for the network structure, protocols in WS N field can also be classified according to the 
path establishment (proactive, reactive, hybrid); the protocol operations (multipath-based, query-
based, negotiation-based, delive ry-based, QoS-based, coherent-b ased); the next hop selection 
(broadcast, location, comment, probabilistic). Figure 1 gives a global overview of this classification. 
More details about each category can be found in [4,24–27]. 
 
Figure 1. Classification of routing protocol in a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN).  
Figure 1. Classiﬁcation of routing protocol in a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN).

==== Page 5 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 5 of 27
3. Optimized Hierarchical Based Routing Protocols
The optimization problem of traditional hierarchical based routing has conducted to intelligent
clustering strategies commonly known as optimized hierarchical based protocols [ 4]. The optimized
clustering strategies are more recent and aim to be intelligent algorithms which improve the lifetime of
a sensor network and make them energy efﬁcient. For that, they are based on a recent development
of ML/CI which is deﬁned by [ 8] as an intelligent computational methodology that uses heuristic
algorithms to obtain approximate solutions to NP hard problems efﬁciently. Several ML/CI paradigms
used in clustering in WSNs can be classiﬁed as follows: Fuzzy Logic, Genetic Algorithm, Neural
Network, Reinforcement Learning, and Swarm Intelligence paradigms [ 7,8,20,21,28–30]. Figure 2
presents the classiﬁcation of optimized clustering algorithm for WSNs.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 27 
 3. Optimized Hierarchical Based Routing Protocols  
The optimization problem of traditional hierarchical based routing  has conducted to intelligent 
clustering strategies commonly known as optimized hierarchical based protoc ols [4]. The optimized 
clustering strategies are more recent and aim to be  intelligent algorithms which improve the lifetime 
of a sensor network and make them energy efficient . For that, they are based on a recent development 
of ML/CI which is defined by [8] as an intelligent computational methodology that uses heuristic algorithms to obtain approximate solutions to NP hard problems efficiently. Several ML/CI 
paradigms used in clustering in WSNs can be classified as follows: Fuzzy Logic, Genetic Algorithm, Neural Network, Reinforcement Learning, and Sw arm Intelligence paradigms [7,8,20,21,28–30]. 
Figure 2 presents the classification of optimized clustering algorithm for WSNs. 
 
Figure 2. Classification of optimized clustering algorithms according to the Computational 
Intelligence (CI). 
3.1. Fuzzy Logic 
The Fuzzy Logic (FL) is a mathematical disc ipline invented to express approximate human 
reasoning. Contrary to the classical set theory whic h enable elements to belo ng or not to a set, FL 
allows a measure of imprecision or uncertainly which is marked by the use of linguistic variables like most, many, frequently through rules within a set ca lled fuzzy set [9]. An example of a fuzzy set used 
for input variables of the distance between a node and the BS is presented in Figure 3. From the figure, 
the distance to BS is classified in  close, medium, or far. Many wo rks on optimized clustering based 
on FL are conducted in literature. 
 
Figure 3. Fuzzy set for input variables of the di stance between node and the BS (40). 
3.1.1. FCH  
The Cluster-head Election using Fuzzy Logic (FCH ) is presented in [31] . It integrates a FL 
approach for the election of the CH based on the energy, node concentration, and centrality during 
Figure 2. Classiﬁcation of optimized clustering algorithms according to the Computational Intelligence
(CI).
3.1. Fuzzy Logic
The Fuzzy Logic (FL) is a mathematical discipline invented to express approximate human
reasoning. Contrary to the classical set theory which enable elements to belong or not to a set,
FL allows a measure of imprecision or uncertainly which is marked by the use of linguistic variables
like most, many, frequently through rules within a set called fuzzy set [ 9]. An example of a fuzzy set
used for input variables of the distance between a node and the BS is presented in Figure 3. From the
ﬁgure, the distance to BS is classiﬁed in close, medium, or far. Many works on optimized clustering
based on FL are conducted in literature.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 27 
 3. Optimized Hierarchical Based Routing Protocols  
The optimization problem of traditional hierarchical based routing  has conducted to intelligent 
clustering strategies commonly known as optimized hierarchical based protoc ols [4]. The optimized 
clustering strategies are more recent and aim to be  intelligent algorithms which improve the lifetime 
of a sensor network and make them energy efficient . For that, they are based on a recent development 
of ML/CI which is defined by [8] as an intelligent computational methodology that uses heuristic algorithms to obtain approximate solutions to NP hard problems efficiently. Several ML/CI 
paradigms used in clustering in WSNs can be classified as follows: Fuzzy Logic, Genetic Algorithm, Neural Network, Reinforcement Learning, and Sw arm Intelligence paradigms [7,8,20,21,28–30]. 
Figure 2 presents the classification of optimized clustering algorithm for WSNs. 
 
Figure 2. Classification of optimized clustering algorithms according to the Computational 
Intelligence (CI). 
3.1. Fuzzy Logic 
The Fuzzy Logic (FL) is a mathematical disc ipline invented to express approximate human 
reasoning. Contrary to the classical set theory whic h enable elements to belo ng or not to a set, FL 
allows a measure of imprecision or uncertainly which is marked by the use of linguistic variables like most, many, frequently through rules within a set ca lled fuzzy set [9]. An example of a fuzzy set used 
for input variables of the distance between a node and the BS is presented in Figure 3. From the figure, 
the distance to BS is classified in  close, medium, or far. Many wo rks on optimized clustering based 
on FL are conducted in literature. 
 
Figure 3. Fuzzy set for input variables of the di stance between node and the BS (40). 
3.1.1. FCH  
The Cluster-head Election using Fuzzy Logic (FCH ) is presented in [31] . It integrates a FL 
approach for the election of the CH based on the energy, node concentration, and centrality during 
Figure 3. Fuzzy set for input variables of the distance between node and the BS (40).

==== Page 6 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 6 of 27
3.1.1. FCH
The Cluster-head Election using Fuzzy Logic (FCH) is presented in [ 31]. It integrates a FL
approach for the election of the CH based on the energy, node concentration, and centrality during
computation. CH is elected by the BS in each round by deﬁning the chance each node has to become
the CH, helped by the fuzzy descriptors (energy, concentration, and centrality). The model of FL
consists in four steps: fuzziﬁcation for the input descriptors, rule evaluation, aggregation of rules, and
the defuzziﬁcation. LCH is compared to the famous LEACH protocol, it ameliorates the FND better
than in LEACH and then increases the network lifetime in relation to LEACH.
3.1.2. CHEF
Kim et al. [ 32] proposed the Cluster Head Election mechanism based on the Fuzzy logic (CHEF).
Contrary to LEACH, CHEF uses the distance to the BS and the remaining energy of node for the CH
selection. At each round, a node generates a random value between 0 and 1, and thereafter compares
the obtained value with a threshold, Popt. If the random value is smaller than Popt, the chance value is
calculated by using fuzzy IF-THEN rules. Thus, the node sends a message called Candidate_Message
with the calculated chance. The Candidate_Message sent by the node means that it is a candidate
for being a CH with the value of its chance. The node which sent a Candidate Message, waits for
Candidate Messages and appropriate chance values from its neighbors. If its own chance is bigger than
every chance from other nodes, the sensor node notiﬁes the network with a CH-Message which means
that the sensor node itself is elected as the CH. If a node which is not a CH receives the CH-message,
the node selects the closest CH as its CH and joins a cluster by sending a Cluster Join Message to the
CH. For the evaluation of CHEF, the authors consider 400 nodes randomly distributed in the area and
the BS is not located within the experimental ﬁeld. The comparison between LEACH and CHEF has
shown that the cluster formation on CHEF was more efﬁcient than on LEACH. Thus, CHs are not as
closed with the proposed algorithm as with LEACH; there are too many nodes within a cluster that
may rapidly decrease the energy of the CH. The results of experimentations have also shown that
the lifetime of the network on CHEF is 22.7%, which is better than the lifetime of the network with
LEACH according to the FND.
3.1.3. LEACH-FL
LEACH-FL is an improved version of LEACH using FL [ 33]. It has a similar mechanism with
LCH but the variables (parameters) used are battery level, distance from sink, and the node density.
Election of CH is centralized on the sink, which has to calculate the chance of nodes becoming
the CH like in LCH. LEACH-FL has three main parts: fuzziﬁcation module (four functions), an
inference engine, and a defuzziﬁcation module. The authors of [ 33] compare LEACH-FL and LEACH,
the experimentations have shown that the proposed algorithm has a lower energy consumption rate
than LEACH. The network lifetime of the network using LEACH-FL outperforms the network lifetime
when using LEACH.
3.1.4. ICT2TSK
ICT2TSK is an improved clustering algorithm which uses a type-2 Takagi-Sugeno-Kang (TSK)
as FL system [ 34]. ICT2TSK is used to elect the CH and to choose the one which can deal with the
rule uncertainties better than a type-1 TSK FL system. It balances the network load by introducing a
ﬁxed competition radius for each CH so that energy is improved efﬁciency. When the network starts
to work, all nodes use the LEACH protocol to send information about their location and their residual
energy. ICT2TSK is centralized and uses the BS to select CHs. The FL system ICT2TSK is used to
calculate the probability for each node to become a CH according to its residual energy, distance to the
BS, and number of neighbor nodes.

==== Page 7 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 7 of 27
3.1.5. SEP-FL
SEP-FL is a FL approach improving election of CH within heterogeneous WSN [ 35], it is an
improved version of SEP which is based on the election of CH by balancing the probabilities on
the residual energy for each node. SEP-FL provides a longer stability period and a lower instability
period and increases the lifetime of nodes. The approach is based on the distance from the BS and the
residual energy level of each node type. The fuzzy system is divided into two Fuzzy Inference Systems
(FIS); one for each type of nodes (advanced and normal nodes). SEP-FL is compared with LEACH,
LEACH-LF, and the original algorithm SEP , the results show that SEP-FL increases the network lifetime
and reduces the energy consumption better than the other three algorithms.
3.1.6. EAUCF
Authors of [ 36] have proposed a fuzzy based algorithm for the energy-aware in unequal clustering
called EAUCF. It aims to reduce the energy consumption of CHs within clusters since they are either
close to the BS or may have low remaining battery power. The FL implemented in EAUCF uses an
if-then mapping rules to handle doubts in CH radius estimation. Moreover, the algorithm also uses
a probabilistic model which is employed for electing tentative CHs. In each clustering round, every
sensor node has to generate a random number between 0 and 1 and compares it with the predeﬁned
threshold. If the random number is more than the threshold, the node becomes a tentative CH, for
electing the ﬁnal CH, EAUCF take into account the residual energy and the distance to the BS before
calculating the competition radius. EAUCF has a better performance compared to LEACH, CHEF, and
EEUC in terms of the death of ﬁrst node, the half nodes alive, and the energy consumption.
3.1.7. DFLC
DFLC (Distributed Fuzzy Logic-Based Clustering) is a clustering algorithm based on the fuzzy
logic which is executed on a distributed manner by nodes within the network [ 37]. DFLC considers
the network as a tree in which a node can be sink (BS), root (CH), member (node within a cluster),
parent or child node. A parent node is an intermediate node and receives data sent by a child node
to the root. In order to efﬁciently select the CH, each node runs the fuzzy logic engine with ﬁve
input parameters: the residual energy, the distance of a node to the other nodes in the tree (centrality),
the distance to the BS, the number of hops, and the number of neighbor nodes of a node (node density).
During the execution of the fuzzy logic engine only necessary nodes that have a higher probability
of being selected as a new root node are considered. DFLC avoids the crash of the network when
sensor nodes may not perform their responsibilities due to the energy depletion. When a node receives
a Discovery message during the set-up phase, it stores the id of the sender node and denotes this
node as a closest neighbor node to the sink node, thus if the network crashes, an alternative path can
be used to adapt the system to failures without delays. DFLC is implemented in NS2 simulator to
test and compare its performances in terms of the energy consumption, the number of nodes alive,
the network lifetime, and the amount of received messages within ﬁve networks (100, 200, 300, 400,
and 500 nodes). The proposed algorithm is compared to LEACH, ACAWT [ 38], FCH, and CHEF. The
results of experimentations shown that DFLC outperforms the others algorithms in terms of all the
experimental metrics.
3.1.8. SIF
SIF is a Swarm Intelligence protocol based on FL routing and considers the residual energy [ 39], the
distance to the sink, and the distance from the cluster center to select appropriate CHs. SIF uses a Fuzzy
C-Means (FCM) clustering algorithm to cluster all sensor nodes into balanced clusters, the appropriate
CHs are selected via the Mamdani fuzzy inference system. SIF integrates a hybrid swarm intelligence
called FA-SA. FA-SA is based on the ﬁreﬂy behaviors algorithm (FA) and the powerful local search
algorithm SA, both are used to optimize the fuzzy rule base table of the fuzzy system. Authors have

==== Page 8 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 8 of 27
shown that SIF is energy efﬁcient in terms of forming balanced clusters, minimizing the intra-cluster
distances, prolonging the network lifetime, and maximizing the total number of data packets received
in the sink. The comparison of SIF against protocols LEACH, LEACH-DT, ASLPR, and LEACH-FL
shows that the proposed protocol signiﬁcantly increases the network lifetime (by increasing the ﬁrst
node dies FND, the half node die HND, and last node dies LND). The results obtained also show that
the amount of data received by the sink node on SIF is better than the others protocols according to the
FND, the HND, and the LND.
3.1.9. FBUC
FBUC or Fuzzy Based Unequal Clustering is an improved version of EAUCF [ 40]. Additionally,
to EAUCF, FBUC uses a probabilistic threshold value instead of a predeﬁned threshold value and
adds a fuzzy variable called node degree used for the election of the CH during competition of radius.
The members join the CH based on distance and the CH degree in order to efﬁciently use the energy
and then increase the network lifetime. FBUC is compared with protocols LEACH and EAUC in
two scenarios, WSN#1 (sink node inside the sensor ﬁeld) and WSN#2. FBUC shows a better energy
consumption and a better network lifetime than the other two algorithms according to the FND and
the LND on the different scenarios.
3.1.10. EEDCF
The authors of [ 41] propose an energy-efﬁcient distributed clustering algorithm based on fuzzy
called EEDCF. The proposed approach deﬁnes four (04) different states for each node: the initial state,
the competing CH state, the elected CH state, and the member node state. During the ﬁrst phase,
each node has to build its own information table which contains the node ID, its residual energy,
the neighbors’ ID, and their corresponding remaining energy. After each round, the node updates
its information helped by the packet Node_MSG, which classiﬁes the proximity of neighbors from
itself. At the second phase, the node performs the fuzzy logic analysis based on its residual energy,
the number of neighbor’s nodes within its communication radius (node degree) and the average
residual energy of its neighbors. At the end of this step, each node turns into compete CH state and
sends its output to all neighbor nodes within its communication radius. Where the output is obtained
through IF-THEN rules in accordance with the mechanism of the TSK fuzzy model, the node with
the lesser output turns into the member node state, and waits for joining a suitable cluster after CH
election. However, the node with higher output turns into the elected CH state as well. Based on the
RSSI, nodes join appropriate CH and thereafter build clusters. In order to evaluate EEDCF, authors
have considered two scenarios with the same area size and the same location of the BS. The ﬁrst
scenario deploys 100 nodes whereas the second scenario uses 150 nodes within the study ﬁeld. The
experimentations shown that EEDCF outperforms the distributed algorithm for the energy-efﬁcient
data gathering protocol based on cluster structure called EADEEG [ 42] and DFLC. The lifetime of the
network on EEDCF is better than on EADEEFG and on DFLC and has the best value of FND, HND,
and LND in both scenarios. The results have also shown that the proposed approach had a better data
delivery rate than EADEEG and DFLC.
3.2. Genetic Algorithm
The Genetic Algorithm (GA) is an adaptive heuristic approach based on biological genetic
evolution for intelligent search and optimization. GA models the natural evolution by performing
ﬁtness tests on new structures to choose the best population [ 9]. With GA approaches, a population
is made up of a group of chromosomes where a chromosome represents a complete solution to a
relevant problem, and ﬁtness shows the quality of a chromosome in function of concrete needs [ 28].
This kind of optimized algorithm is used for randomized search and optimization during routing of
data. GA showed ﬂexibility in solving dynamic problems and has been successfully applied within

==== Page 9 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 9 of 27
many NP-hard problems which include the clustering problem on WSN [ 7,8,20]. An example of the
GA model is presented in Figure 4. Some clustering approaches based on GA are presented below.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 27 
 cluster. Each relay node has to transmit data either  to a simple node or another relay node or the BS. 
The chromosome is represented here by a specific routing protocol as a string of the node numbers 
where the length of each chromosome is equal to the number of relay nodes. The proposed routing 
algorithm is compared to two models of routing: the traditional Multi-Hop Data Transmission Model 
(MHDTM) and the Minimum Transmission Energy Model (MTEM). MHDTM finds the optimal path 
until the BS, whereas in MTEM, each relay node i transmits to its nearest neighbor j if this last is closer 
to the BS than the relay node i. Applied on large scale network the proposed GA approach 
significantly extends the lifetime of the network than the other two models. 
 
Figure 4. Presentation of the Genetic Algorithm model. 
3.2.2. Hussain et al. [44] 
The proposed technique uses a GA to build an initial set of clusters. In the beginning, the 
proposed GA uses all nodes in order to create clus ters; however, during computation only alive nodes 
are used to create clusters so th at the early death of some nodes du e to data transfer is prevented. 
This approach is centralized because the formation of clusters is done by the BS. The chromosome 
presented by Hussain et al. [44] is designed to minimize the energy consumption and increase the 
network lifetime. The parameters used here are the distance to the BS, the cluster distance, the energy 
level, and the data transfer. The algorithm proposed in [44] is compared to LEACH, HCR-1, and HCR-2. The results obtained show that the approach  increases the network lifetime by improving the 
number of alive nodes than the other algorithms. 
3.2.3. LEACH-GA  
LEACH-GA is an improved version of LEACH based on a GA [45]. In addition to the set-up and 
the steady-state of LEACH, LEACH-GA has a prep aration phase where nodes initially perform the 
selection of the CH and determine whether or not ea ch node should be a candidate CH (CCH). During 
the preparation phase, information like node status, IDs, and the location are sent until the BS. LEACH-GA is also a centralized protocol since the BS receives messages sent from all nodes and 
performs GA operations in order to determine the optimal arrangement which shall minimize the 
energy consumption in each round. The proposed  algorithm determines the optimal threshold 
probability for the formation of a cluster. Result s have shown that LEACH-GA improves the network 
lifetime than LEACH by increasing th e number of nodes alive per round. 
3.2.4. GABEEC  
GABEEC is a GA based for energy efficient clusters  in WSN proposed in [46] in order to improve 
the network lifetime. Contrary to LEACH-GA, GABEEC  has only two states: set-up and steady-state. 
In the first phase, all clusters are created statica lly one time, but CHs within a cluster are changing 
dynamically based on the residual energy. GABEEC uses a binary representation of the network 
where each sensor node is a bit in which “1” corresp ond to a CH and “0” to a simple node. An instance 
of the network represents a specific chromosome, the GA evaluates each chromosome and selects the 
b e s t  p r o f ile  s o  t h at  t h e  e n e r g y  is  e ff ic ie n t ly  u s ed then increases the network lifetime. GABEEC is 
Figure 4. Presentation of the Genetic Algorithm model.
3.2.1. Wazed et al. [43]
Authors of [ 43] have proposed a Genetic Algorithm in extending the lifetime of two-tiered sensor
networks. It schedules the data gathering of relay nodes and can signiﬁcantly extend the lifetime
of the relay node. A relay node acts as a CH and receives data from nodes which belong to its own
cluster. Each relay node has to transmit data either to a simple node or another relay node or the BS.
The chromosome is represented here by a speciﬁc routing protocol as a string of the node numbers
where the length of each chromosome is equal to the number of relay nodes. The proposed routing
algorithm is compared to two models of routing: the traditional Multi-Hop Data Transmission Model
(MHDTM) and the Minimum Transmission Energy Model (MTEM). MHDTM ﬁnds the optimal path
until the BS, whereas in MTEM, each relay node itransmits to its nearest neighbor jif this last is closer
to the BS than the relay node i. Applied on large scale network the proposed GA approach signiﬁcantly
extends the lifetime of the network than the other two models.
3.2.2. Hussain et al. [44]
The proposed technique uses a GA to build an initial set of clusters. In the beginning, the proposed
GA uses all nodes in order to create clusters; however, during computation only alive nodes are used
to create clusters so that the early death of some nodes due to data transfer is prevented. This approach
is centralized because the formation of clusters is done by the BS. The chromosome presented by
Hussain et al. [ 44] is designed to minimize the energy consumption and increase the network lifetime.
The parameters used here are the distance to the BS, the cluster distance, the energy level, and the
data transfer. The algorithm proposed in [ 44] is compared to LEACH, HCR-1, and HCR-2. The results
obtained show that the approach increases the network lifetime by improving the number of alive
nodes than the other algorithms.
3.2.3. LEACH-GA
LEACH-GA is an improved version of LEACH based on a GA [ 45]. In addition to the set-up
and the steady-state of LEACH, LEACH-GA has a preparation phase where nodes initially perform
the selection of the CH and determine whether or not each node should be a candidate CH (CCH).
During the preparation phase, information like node status, IDs, and the location are sent until the
BS. LEACH-GA is also a centralized protocol since the BS receives messages sent from all nodes
and performs GA operations in order to determine the optimal arrangement which shall minimize
the energy consumption in each round. The proposed algorithm determines the optimal threshold
probability for the formation of a cluster. Results have shown that LEACH-GA improves the network
lifetime than LEACH by increasing the number of nodes alive per round.

==== Page 10 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 10 of 27
3.2.4. GABEEC
GABEEC is a GA based for energy efﬁcient clusters in WSN proposed in [ 46] in order to improve
the network lifetime. Contrary to LEACH-GA, GABEEC has only two states: set-up and steady-state.
In the ﬁrst phase, all clusters are created statically one time, but CHs within a cluster are changing
dynamically based on the residual energy. GABEEC uses a binary representation of the network where
each sensor node is a bit in which “1” correspond to a CH and “0” to a simple node. An instance
of the network represents a speciﬁc chromosome, the GA evaluates each chromosome and selects
the best proﬁle so that the energy is efﬁciently used then increases the network lifetime. GABEEC is
compared at ﬁrst to LEACH (100 homogenous nodes), afterwards to HCR and the algorithm proposed
in [44] (200 nodes used). The results show that GABEEC has a better percentage of alive nodes in
both simulations.
3.3. Neural Network
Neural Networks (NNs) are mathematical models inspired from biological networks of neurons.
Similar to a large and dense network, each neuron is connected to many other neurons. A NN consists
of a network of neurons organized in input, hidden, and output layers where the NN learns the
different paths and determine their interrelationships [ 20,47]. Figure 5 below presents a simple model
of NN. The NNs are used for solving the problems of sensor fusion, data mining, and clustering.
Some NNs solutions for clustering are presented below.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 27 
 compared at first to LEACH (100 homogenous nodes), afterwards to HCR and the algorithm 
proposed in [44] (200 nodes used). The results show that GABEEC has a better percentage of alive 
nodes in both simulations. 
3.3. Neural Network 
Neural Networks (NNs) are mathematical models in spired from biological networks of neurons. 
Similar to a large and dense network, each neuron is  connected to many other neurons. A NN consists 
of a network of neurons organized in input, hidde n, and output layers where the NN learns the 
different paths and determine their interrelationships  [20,47]. Figure 5 below presents a simple model 
of NN. The NNs are used for solving the problems of sensor fusion, data mining, and clustering. 
Some NNs solutions for clustering are presented below. 
 
Figure 5. A simple Neural Network model. 
3.3.1. Cordina & Debono [48] 
The algorithm proposed in [48] presents a novel a pproach of clustering ba sed on Self Organizing 
Map (SOM) neural networks. It aims to optimize the network by cutting it efficiently into clusters so 
that the energy consumption is minimized and the power needed by each node is reduced. It 
performs mechanisms which include a minimum se paration distance from the CH. A SOM strategy 
is used for CH election, a system of CH rotation an d a load balancing of helps by cost functions. Each 
round starts with a set-up phase in which the cluste rs are organized. During the transmission phase, 
data from nodes are transferred or not to the CH depending on scenarios. Data received from nodes 
of a cluster by the CH are aggregated and relayed to  the BS. The election of the CHs is carried out by 
SOM using a 4-input, 16-output neuron mapping, bu t nodes and CHs which have a residual energy 
less than critical energy, send a “ Node dead ”/”CH dead ” message directly to the BS. The results of 
comparison have shown that the st rategy presented in [48] increase s the network lifetime (FND and 
HND is better) than the traditional LEACH. The pr esented protocol also has an amount of data 
delivered which is better than on LEACH. 
3.3.2. Kumar et al. [49] 
The algorithm presented in [49] is a NN based for energy efficient clustering and routing, which 
aims to optimize the network lifetime. It uses an  LP formulation where the objective is to choose a 
number of nodes with higher leve ls of residual energy to form an  optimal route, while minimizing 
the total routing cost. The CH election is conducted by using adaptive learning in NN joined by 
routing and data transmission. Contrary to [48], th e proposed strategy is defined in three phases: set-
up, routing, and data transmission phase. The set-up phase allows the election of CHs taken into the set of CHs nodes based on a cost metric. During  the routing and data transmission phase, the 
proposed protocol scans all routes (store in R) an d finds the best route to reach the BS. A source will 
then select the route that is the most energy effici ent so that it maximizes the network lifetime. The 
Figure 5. A simple Neural Network model.
3.3.1. Cordina & Debono [48]
The algorithm proposed in [ 48] presents a novel approach of clustering based on Self Organizing
Map (SOM) neural networks. It aims to optimize the network by cutting it efﬁciently into clusters so
that the energy consumption is minimized and the power needed by each node is reduced. It performs
mechanisms which include a minimum separation distance from the CH. A SOM strategy is used for
CH election, a system of CH rotation and a load balancing of helps by cost functions. Each round starts
with a set-up phase in which the clusters are organized. During the transmission phase, data from
nodes are transferred or not to the CH depending on scenarios. Data received from nodes of a cluster
by the CH are aggregated and relayed to the BS. The election of the CHs is carried out by SOM using a
4-input, 16-output neuron mapping, but nodes and CHs which have a residual energy less than critical
energy, send a “ Node dead ”/”CH dead ” message directly to the BS. The results of comparison have
shown that the strategy presented in [ 48] increases the network lifetime (FND and HND is better) than
the traditional LEACH. The presented protocol also has an amount of data delivered which is better
than on LEACH.

==== Page 11 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 11 of 27
3.3.2. Kumar et al. [49]
The algorithm presented in [ 49] is a NN based for energy efﬁcient clustering and routing,
which aims to optimize the network lifetime. It uses an LP formulation where the objective is to
choose a number of nodes with higher levels of residual energy to form an optimal route, while
minimizing the total routing cost. The CH election is conducted by using adaptive learning in NN
joined by routing and data transmission. Contrary to [ 48], the proposed strategy is deﬁned in three
phases: set-up, routing, and data transmission phase. The set-up phase allows the election of CHs
taken into the set of CHs nodes based on a cost metric. During the routing and data transmission
phase, the proposed protocol scans all routes (store in R) and ﬁnds the best route to reach the BS. A
source will then select the route that is the most energy efﬁcient so that it maximizes the network
lifetime. The Strategy proposed in [ 49] is compared to PEACH and results show that the proposed
algorithm performs better by increasing the percentage of alive nodes.
3.4. Reinforcement Learning
The Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a sub-domain of ML which teaches an agent on what to do
and how to assign situations to particular actions so as to be intelligent [ 10]. The agent would try
several actions, and learns from its experience the best action it has to choose in order to optimize the
network performance [ 8–10,20]. Most of the RL based protocols are used in some clustering algorithms
in WSN ﬁnding optimal paths and prolonging network lifetime [11].
3.4.1. CLIQUE
CLIQUE is a role free clustering which use a RL algorithm called Q-Learning [ 50]. On the proposed
algorithm, nodes should know the identity of the cluster to which they belong. Contrary to traditional
clustering approaches, CLIQUE does not have a conventional phase to select CHs by nodes within
a cluster, but rather uses a Q-Learning strategy. The RL used on CLIQUE allows nodes to learn and
independently decide whether or not to act as a CH. CH would be the cluster node which has the best
routing cost to all sinks. CLIQUE assigns Q-values to each possible action; the learning process allows
the agent (node) to select and execute an action (routing) and receives afterwards the corresponding
reward used to update the Q-value. CLIQUE is compared to the Traditional Random Cluster head
Assignment (TRC) which uses an a-priori probability at each node to decide whether or not to become
a CH. The results obtained after simulations have shown that CLIQUE has a better performance than
TRC in terms of energy consumption (FND), data delivery, and communication overhead.
3.4.2. Ramli et al. [51]
Authors of [ 51] propose a cooperative algorithm based on RL for energy efﬁcient dual hop
clustered networks. The major contribution of the proposed strategy is to allow cluster members
to exchange channel historical information in order to facilitate learning. It allows each cluster to
adapt the number of required preferred channel size depending on the local area density and trafﬁc.
The proposed cooperative RL assumes two phases: the exploration and exploitation phases. During
the exploration phase, for each successful transfer by a cluster member, its CH updates the weight on a
channel. Meanwhile, during the exploitation stage, a cluster member used a channel when it had a
weight of more than the threshold value.
3.5. Swarm Intelligence
The Swarm Intelligence (SI) is deﬁned in [ 52] as “any attempt to design algorithms or distributed
problem-solving devices inspired by the collective behavior of social insects and other animal societies”.
Most of the proposed are based on the social behaviors of ﬂocks of birds, schools of ﬁshes, and insect
cooperation like ants, bees, butterﬂies, etc. which have limited resources like sensor nodes used in WSN.
SI approaches can be classify into Particle Swarm, Ant Colony, and Bee Colony Optimizations [ 8,11,43].

==== Page 12 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 12 of 27
3.5.1. Particle Swarm Intelligence
The Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is an evolutionary computation technique and is related
to the bird ﬂocking, ﬁshing schooling, and swarm theory. Like the other evolutionary computation
techniques, PSO is a population-based search algorithm and is initialized with a population of random
solutions, called particles. A particle will have a ﬁtness value, which will be evaluated by a ﬁtness
function to be optimized in each generation [ 53,54]. In order to increase the performances of WSNs,
clustering strategies using PSO are proposed nowadays.
PSO-C
An energy-aware clustering approach for WSN using PSO is proposed in [ 55]. The authors
presented a distance based and centralized approach which takes into account the maximum distance
between the non-cluster head node and its CH, and the remaining energy of CH candidates in the
CH selection. In the beginning, during the setup phase, all nodes send information about their
residual energy and positions to the BS. To ensure that only nodes with a sufﬁcient energy are selected
as CHs, the nodes with an energy more than the average are eligible to be a CCH for each round.
The PSO algorithms are executed at the BS to determine the best k-CHs which can minimize the cost
during routing. PSO-C is compared to the traditional clustering LEACH and its amelioration version
LEACH-C on two different scenarios. In the ﬁrst scenario, the BS is located within the sensor ﬁeld,
whereas in the second scenario the BS is located outside the sensor ﬁeld. The results after simulations
have shown that PSO-C improves the amount of data delivered to the BS to 101%, 25% better than
LEACH and LEACH-C, respectively, for the ﬁrst scenario and 60%, 50% for the second scenario. PSO-C
also increases the network lifetime by improving the number of alive nodes in both scenario.
Kuila & Jana [56]
Authors propose an energy efﬁcient clustering and routing algorithms for WSN based on the
PSO paradigm. The routing algorithm is developed on an efﬁcient particle encoding scheme with a
trade-off between transmission distance and multi-objective ﬁtness function. Meanwhile, the clustering
algorithm is presented by considering energy conservation of the nodes through the load balancing
strategy. At the beginning (network setup), the protocol performs three phases: bootstrapping (each
gateway and node are assigned unique IDs); route setup; and the clustering phase. The gateways can
collect the IDs of the sensor nodes and the other gateways that are within their communication range
and ﬁnally send the information to the BS. All the CHs which are heavily used as next hop relay nodes
in data forwarding are assigned a lesser number of sensor nodes. Thus the energy consumption of the
CHs is signiﬁcantly balanced and the lifetime of the network is improved. The algorithms are based
on the derivation of efﬁcient particle encoding scheme and ﬁtness function for routing and clustering
separately. The algorithm is evaluated using two network scenarios WSN#1 (BS is located outside the
sensor ﬁeld) and WSN#2 (BS is located in the center of the sensor ﬁeld). The proposed algorithm is
compared to GA-based approach and the two clustering strategies GLBCA and LDC. Results show
that the proposed PSO-based approach increase signiﬁcantly the network lifetime (First Gateway Die
FGD and Last Gateway Die LGD) on both scenarios than the other three algorithms. Results have also
shown that the PSO-based approach increases the data delivered to the BS and reduces the number of
hops until the BS than the other strategies.
PSO-HC
The PSO-HC is a hierarchical clustering based on the PSO paradigm [ 57] to maximize the network
lifetime by minimizing the number of active CHs and to maximize the network scalability by using
two-hop communication between the sensor nodes and their respective CHs. PSO-HC has also two
phases per round: the set-up and the steady phases. During the set-up phase, each node updates its
neighbor table with the RSSI value and sends it to add to ID and residual energy until the BS using the

==== Page 13 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 13 of 27
ﬂooding method. The BS ﬁnds the average energy level of all nodes and only nodes with an energy
level above the average are eligible to be a CCH. After, the BS runs the PSO algorithm to ﬁnd the best
k-CHs where a particle is represented as a sequence of candidate CHs ID’s. For the formation of the
cluster, the BS constructs the ﬁrst clusters tier by assigning each non-CH node to a CH according to the
RSSI value for the link between them. However, during the steady phase, each member node uses
its Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) schedule like on LEACH to transmit its data to the next
hop. When a simple node ﬁnishes its data transmission slot, it enters the sleep state to save its energy.
PSO-HC is compared to clustering algorithms LEACH, LEACH-C, and PSO-C. The obtained results
show that the average energy consumption per node of PSO-HC is less than the other algorithms.
The results also reveal that the link quality when using PSO-HC is better than the other because it has
the highest throughput among all.
MPSICA
MPSICA is an intelligent and fast routing recovery scheme based on PSO [ 58]. It was performed
for heterogeneous WSN and should maintain K disjoint paths from each source node to the nearest
super-node (CH) and the available path from super-nodes to the sink. MPSICA is highly fault tolerant
to the failure of ordinary node paths or CHs paths, since traditional retransmissions can be decreased
and the reliability can be improved with lower energy consumption and longer lifetime. In order
to efﬁciently use the energy consumption, MPSICA is centralized and is performed by each of the
super-nodes which have higher resources than simple nodes. Each node on MPSICA represents
a particle where some nodes can form a particle sequence corresponding to a path until the sink.
The proposed algorithm then optimizes for each node’s particle sequence the optimal path by using
an optimal ﬁtness function on the super-node. MPSICA is compared to the clustering algorithm
EEHC and the fault tolerant protocol for Inter-Cluster Communication (ICE). The results obtained
have shown that MPSICA has the minimum ratio of energy depletion (the higher ratio of alive nodes)
compared to the other two protocols. The results also showed that the proposed protocol presents a
smaller delay of packet delivery.
TPSO-CR
Elhabyan & Yagoub [ 59], proposed a two-tier PSO protocol for the Two-tier Particle Swarm
Optimization for Clustering and Routing protocol (TPSO-CR) in WSNs. The proposed algorithm used
a clustering algorithm which ﬁnds the optimal set of CHs in order to efﬁciently use the energy, and
maximize the transmission reliability and the network coverage. Meanwhile, its routing algorithm is
developed with a novel particle encoding scheme and ﬁtness function which ﬁnds the optimal routing
tree that connects these CHs to the BS. TPSO-CR is similar to PSO-HC in the sense that it is centralized
and based on the information received by the BS. After the computation of the average energy level
of nodes by the BS, only nodes with an energy level above the average are eligible to be CCHs for
each round to ensure that only nodes with sufﬁcient energy are selected as CHs. Next, the BS runs
the ﬁrst-tier algorithm (clustering algorithm) which ﬁnd the best K-CHs. The second-tier algorithm
(routing algorithm) is performed after the ﬁrst-tier and is responsible for constructing the optimal
routing tree. In order to evaluate TPSO-CR, the authors have used two different scenarios WSN#1 and
WSN#2 which use, respectively, homogeneous and heterogeneous nodes. The PSO-based approach
is compared with the well-known protocols LEACH, EHE-LEACH, EEHC, LEACH-C, PSO-C, and
GA-C. The results have shown that TPSO-CR has a smaller number of non-clustered nodes than other
protocols on both scenarios WSN#1 and WSN#2. The results have also revealed that TPSO-CR has
the highest throughput, its energy consumption is less than energy consumption of LEACH, EEHC,
EHE-LEACH but is slightly similar to the consumed energy of protocols LEACH-C, PSO-C, and GA-C.

==== Page 14 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 14 of 27
PSO-ECHS
Srinivasa Rao et al. [ 60] proposed an energy efﬁcient CH selection algorithm based on PSO called
PSO-ECHS. It consists in two phases: the CH election and the cluster formation. The CH election phase
is based on PSO and considers the residual energy of nodes and their distance with the BS. Initially,
nodes send their location and residual energy to the BS which executes the PSO algorithm. For the
CH selection in PSO-ECHS, a particle represents optimal positions of the CHs by representing the
coordinates of the sensor nodes to be selected as CH. Contrary to algorithms where non-CH sensor
nodes simply join a cluster by considering only the distance with the CH, in PSO-ECHS, the non-CH
sensor nodes join a CH depending on the weight function called CH_Weight which consider the
distance, the remaining energy, and the node degree of CHs. The evaluation of PSO-ECHS consists of
three different scenarios on the position of the BS: at the ﬁrst scenario, the BS is located in the center of
the study ﬁeld; the second scenario considers the BS located at the top right corner of the ﬁeld; and
the last scenario assumes the BS is located outside the ﬁeld. Experimentations are conducted on these
scenarios by varying the number of nodes on four networks (300, 400, 500, and 700). The proposed
algorithm is compared to LEACH, E-LEACH, LEACH-C, PSO-C, and the Least Distance Clustering
algorithm (LDC) [ 61]. The results show that PSO-ECHS outperforms the others algorithms in terms of
the energy consumption and thereafter has the best network lifetime. The results have also shown that
PSO-ECHS had the highest packets received by the BS in the different scenarios with network which
consist of 300, 400, 500, or 700 nodes.
3.5.2. Ant Colony Optimization
The Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) is deﬁned by [ 62] as a novel nature-inspired metaheuristic
for the solution of hard combinatorial optimization problems. The ACO algorithm originates from the
behavior of ants which communicate with each other by using chemical deposits called pheromones.
When ants move, they lay pheromones on the ground, and they receive the current strength of
pheromone [ 29]. Figure 6 below presents the simple ACO functioning in which ants ﬁnd the best
path between a food source and the nest. The main idea of the ACO metaheuristic is to model the
problem as a search for the best path by constructing a path-graph that represents the states of the
problem [9]. Many works in the WSN ﬁeld used clustering algorithms based on the ACO to improve
the performance of sensor networks.
1 
  
Figure 6. Presentation of the Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) model.

==== Page 15 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 15 of 27
T-ANT
T-ANT is a clustered data dissemination strategy based on the ant swarm behavior [ 63].
It promotes a uniform distribution of CHs, which subsequently enables substantial energy savings.
The cluster formation is achieved by exploiting two swarm behaviors: foraging and brood sorting.
During the cluster setup (CS) phase, a node checks to see whether or not it possesses an ant when
the timer expires. If the node has an ant, it becomes CH and advertises its neighbors by broadcasting
a message with its node ID. During the set-up phase, the election of CHs uses a swarm of ants in
which an ant corresponds to a control message. The ant could travel into the network up to the
sink as deep as restricted by its time-to-live (TTL) ﬁeld. When an ant arrives at a node, the next
node is randomly chosen. In order to evaluate the performance of T-ANT, comparison with The
Time-Controlled Clustering Algorithm (TCCA) and a multihop version of LEACH called m-LEACH is
achieved. The obtained results have shown that the average energy consumed per round in T-ANT is
slightly better the other two protocols. However, concerning the number of alive nodes, T-ANT highly
achieves the best number of alive nodes.
EBAB
The Energy Balanced Ant-Based Routing Protocol (EBAB) [ 64] is a new adaptive dynamic routing
algorithm based on simple biological ants that explore the network and ﬁnd routes. EBAB produces
clusters of unequal sizes to balance energy consumption. Clusters closer to the BS have smaller cluster
sizes in order to maximize the lifetime of the network. According to the signal sent by the BS, all the
nodes calculate their distance from the BS based on the RSSI, and then nodes decide to compete if
necessary to be the unique CH when they are in the same area. In order to form clusters, each CH
sends message in a range to tell the other nodes. The nodes send “ACK” message to join the cluster.
However, if the node receives more than one message, it will choose the optimal CH according the
distance and the energy. The inter-cluster communications are performed by an ameliorated version of
ACO in which CH generates initially a Forward Ants (FA). If the FA is not on the BS, it continues to
the next step, nevertheless, if it is on the BS, it then activates the backward ants which will increase the
pheromone value. The proposed algorithm EBAB is compared to the traditional clustering LEACH
in terms of the network lifetime and the amount of data received by the BS. Results have shown that
the lifetime of EBAB (number of alive nodes) is longer than the network of LEACH because of the
balanced model of the proposed algorithm. Results have also revealed that the amount of data received
by EBAB is 1.7 times higher than LEACH.
ACO-C
The authors of [ 65] proposed an energy aware protocol called Ant Colony Optimization for
Clustering (ACO-C). ACO algorithms have been used for clustering problems in which N objects
are assigned to K clusters based on the distance between each object and the middle of the cluster.
ACO-C is centralized, BS selects only nodes with the residual energy above the average energy of the
network as possible CHs and uses the ACO algorithm to ﬁnd the best solution according to a cost
function. After ﬁnding the best route, the BS informs each node about its CHs and cluster it belongs to.
Each CH has to coordinate the transmission of data in their corresponding clusters by using a simple
TDMA schedule. At the end of each round, the CH aggregates data it received from its members, and
sends the aggregated data to the BS. The algorithm ACO-C is evaluated in two network scenarios;
each one contains 100 nodes with unequal initial energy. On the ﬁrst scenario the BS is located in the
middle of the network whereas on the second scenario it is located outside the sensor ﬁeld. ACO-C is
compared with LEACH, LEACH-C, and PSO-C in both scenarios. The obtained results have shown
that ACO-C performs the best number of alive nodes through the time, and thus increases the network
lifetime better than the three other algorithms. The issues also reveal that ACO-C outperforms LEACH,
LEACH-C, and PSO-C in terms of the number of data received by the BS.

==== Page 16 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 16 of 27
ACA-LEACH
The ACA-LEACH algorithm proposed in [ 66] is an improved version of LEACH which
performs the Ant Colony Algorithm (ACA) into inter-cluster routing mechanism to reduce the energy
consumption of CHs and ﬁnally prolong the lifetime of networks. ACA-LEACH also considers the
node residual energy and the distance between the nodes and CHs for the selection of CHs. When the
distance between two CHs is less than the threshold distance, ACA-LEACH compares the energy
value between the two, and then chooses the CH with more energy as the new CH but with less as the
member node. Due to the random choice of CHs, the phenomenon of relative concentration of CHs
may exist. kants are placed on each CH and set a matrix which is used to store and record the generated
path, ACA selects the optimal path between each CH and the sink helps by the value of pheromones.
Afterwards, the kants in each CH are transferred to the next accessible CH with a possibility pof each
adjacent CHs being selected as the next hop of adjacent clusters. The kants in each CH should select
the shortest path with the lowest energy consumption. In order to evaluate ACA-LEACH, the authors
have used 200 nodes randomly deployed in a squared sensor ﬁeld. ACA-LEACH is compared to
traditional LEACH and results have shown that the proposed algorithm has a lower average energy
consumption than LEACH and its number of alive nodes is better than in the other algorithm.
MRP
MRP is a Multipath Routing Protocol for clustering based on Ant Colony Optimization for
WSNs [ 67]. MRP adopts a dynamic clustering algorithm and is divided into three main phases: cluster
formation, multipath construction, and data transmission. During the cluster formation, only a node
with higher residual energy, more neighbors and stronger RSSI (more than a threshold) has more
opportunity of becoming a CH. An improved version of ACO algorithm is used in order to establish
multiple paths with minimal energy cost. Three types of ants are used in MRP: search ants (SANTs )
which have to ﬁnd paths and gather information along these paths until the sink; backward ants (BANTs )
which are used to evaluate the cost of each path discovered by the SANTs ; and the abnormal ants
(AANTs ), which are used to avoid the failure of the protocol. When the residual energy of the current
CH is 50% lower than the average energy of all nodes in the cluster, a new CH will be elected. The CH
will initiate a new route discovery process when the number of multiple paths is less than two, which
means the reliability of path decreased signiﬁcantly. The evaluation of MRP is conducted by the used
of comparisons metrics like average energy, energy consumption, the deviation of energy and the
network lifetime on a network with a population varying from 100 to 500 nodes. Based on these
parameters, MRP is compared to the clustering algorithm TEEN and the multipath algorithms MP [ 68]
and MACS [ 69]. The results have shown that MRP has the best average energy and the lowest energy
consumption. The standard deviation of energy in MRP is slightly lower than in TEEN and results
have also revealed that the proposed ACO-based improves the network lifetime signiﬁcantly more
than the other three protocols.
3.5.3. Bee Colony Optimization
The Bee Colony Optimization (BCO) protocols are inspired from honeybees foraging behaviors.
Insects are capable of individual proactive abilities and self-organizing capacity [ 13]. Honeybees can be
grouped into a colony and living within a hive, and show impressive auto-solving problem capabilities.
Scout bees explore the surrounding of the hive in order to detect possible sources of food, when a
ﬂower (food) is discovered, the scout bee returns back to the hive to recruit the forager bees through
a special dance called waggle dance [ 70]. The BCO are widely used to solve the clustering NP hard
problems efﬁciently.

==== Page 17 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 17 of 27
ABC-C
ABC-C is a novel energy efﬁcient clustering mechanism, based on the Artiﬁcial Bee Colony
(ABC) algorithm [ 71]. ABC simulates the intelligent foraging behavior of honeybee swarms and has
been successfully implemented in clustering techniques. Three bees’ groups in ABC are performed:
onlookers to choose a food source, scouts which perform randomly search, and employed bees which
go to the food source visited by another bee. The clustering mechanism of the ABC-C is based on
the clustering technique of LEACH protocol where CHs perform data aggregation processes of their
clusters. For intra-cluster communication, CHs perform TDMA with the BS. The election of CHs is
performed by ABC algorithm at the BS which is a node with unlimited energy supply. Sensor nodes are
assigned to the clusters by using the shortest distances until the CHs. After receiving and calculating
cross-distance values, the nodes send these values to the BS in order to be used during the selection
process. To evaluate ABC-C, the authors considered a network which contains 100 nodes randomly
placed. The performance of ABC-C is compared to that of LEACH and PSO-C about the network
lifetime (number of alive nodes), amount of received signals and the energy consumption. The results
have shown that ABC-C improves the network lifetime (highest number of alive nodes) than the other
algorithms. The proposed algorithm also outperforms LEACH and PSO-C in terms of energy use and
of the number of received signals.
Bee-Sensor-C
Bee-Sensor-C is an energy-aware and scalable multipath routing protocol based on dynamic
cluster and foraging behavior of bees swarm [ 70]. It adopts an enhanced multipath construction
strategy so that it achieves the balance of energy consumption within the network, reduces overheads
of routing, improves the network scalability and performance, then its lifetime. The event-driven of
Bee-Sensor-C allow to perform a dynamic clustering scheme near an event. During the ﬁrst phase of
Bee-Sensor-C (clusters formation), the HiveHeader into the bee-hive claims to be a CH node when it
detects an event within an event area. Nodes nearby the event will become activated and measure
the speciﬁc perceived attribute, then the nodes having information about the event will join the
cluster. The second phase (multipath construction) occurs when CH needs to send data until the
sink node. The CH looks whether there are appropriate foragers of any nodes in the cluster for the
existing multipath. The last phase consists in the transmission and occurs when the backward scout
with unique path ID arrives at the CH and recruits foragers using the waggle dance. For evaluated
Bee-Sensor-C, two different scenarios are considered and the number of nodes varies until 500 (ﬁrst
scenario). In the ﬁrst scenario, there is only one event that occurred in the network whereas in the
second scenario several events (at least 2) can be detected. The proposed algorithm is compared to
the bee-inspired routing protocol BeeSensor [ 72], IEEABR [ 73], and the ﬂood forward ant routing
FF-Ant [ 74]. The obtained results have revealed that Bee-Sensor-C consumes less energy but has the
highest packet delivery rate compared to the three other protocols.
BeeSwarm
Mann et al. [ 75] proposed a CI based metaheuristic for energy efﬁcient hierarchical routing
named BeeSwarm. It is made up of three phases: BeeCluster, BeeSearch, and BeeCarrier. During
the set-up phase (BeeCluster), a similar approach of the ABC is used for the formation of optimal
clusters known as Bee Zones (BZs) and the selection of a corresponding CH known as Zonal Head
(ZH). To form a BZ, BeeSwarm applies an agglomerative hierarchal clustering, in which two clusters
separated by a short distance are combined to obtain the optimal cluster in order to minimize the
energy consumption. After clustering of nodes, ZHs are elected for each BZ based on the residual
energy and the distance between the BS. The BeeSearch phase occurs after the BeeCluster and consists
in the discovery of routes by scout bees. The BeeSearch performs the forward-search to explore the
network and the backward-search which maintains different routes between BS and nodes. Meanwhile,

==== Page 18 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 18 of 27
once nodes are registered to speciﬁc ZHs, ZH prepares a TDMA schedule and transmits this schedule
to its registered nodes in the cluster, BeeSwarm uses a LP in other to optimize the transmission. The
proposed BeeSwarm approach is evaluated and is compared to routing protocols MRP and to the
evolutionary algorithm ERP [ 76] on several performance parameters. The results have shown that
BeeWarm slightly outperforms the other routing protocols in terms of the total number of packet
delivered and the packet delivery ratio. It is also observed that BeeSwarm consumes less energy than
the two other protocols, thus increases the network lifetime.
ABC-SD [24]
ABC- SD is a power efﬁcient cluster-based routing algorithm for WSNs. The proposed approach
is also based on the ABC algorithm for efﬁcient searching features. ABC-SD is a semi-distributed
approach in which the clustering process is achieved at the BS using the residual energy and the
position of nodes and their neighbors. Nevertheless, the data routing is realized by all nodes in a
distributed manner. During the set-up phase, the BS which is responsible for built clusters and selected
their CHs starts by the construction of the set of candidate’s CHs based on position between BS and
the residual energy. After the construction of sets, ABC algorithm is executed in order to assign
nodes to CH and formed clusters. During the steady-phase a multi-hop TDMA based on a B-MAC
which implements a sleep/wake-up mechanism is performed to transmit the gathered data to its
corresponding CH, either in a single-hop or in a multi-hop manner, depending on the density of the
cluster and the location of the CH. When the clustering process is completed, each cluster member
starts a route discovery in order to construct a pre-determined path toward its CH. To evaluate the
performance of ABC-SD, authors have compared the proposed algorithm with LEACH, LEACH-C,
PSO-C, PSO-HC, and ABC-C. The observations of the results have revealed that ABC-SD has the lowest
average energy consumed by nodes and a higher energy efﬁciency than the other algorithms. It is also
observed that ABC-SD minimizes the number of non-clustered nodes, improves the throughput, and
maximizes the data delivery compared to the ﬁve other approaches.
4. Comparison of the Optimized Clustering Approaches
In this section, we present a summary of some optimized clustering algorithms. They are
compared and classiﬁed according to the ML/CI used, the data delivery rate, the energy consumption
which takes in account the network lifetime, the scalability of the algorithms, the type of the approach
which can be centralized or distributed, the integration or not of a data aggregation technique, and the
homogeneity of nodes.
 The data delivery rate concerns the amount of data received by the BS or a receiver node according
to the number of sent data by another node. This metric is very important because it helps to have
an overview of the data loss during transfers and reliability during communication.
 The energy consumption metric here is the most important parameter to take into account to
evaluate a clustering algorithm. The energy consumed by a sensor node across the time is strongly
related to its lifetime that can affect to the lifetime of the whole network. Then a node with a lower
energy consumption would have a longer lifetime than another node consuming more energy.
 Since our study is focused on large scale WSNs, we examine the scalability of the presented
algorithm. The scalability here aims to classify the proposed solutions by the number of nodes
present in the sensor ﬁeld. Algorithms with more than 500 nodes are more interesting for our
study because they manage more efﬁciently the amount of communication between nodes than
other with less than 100 or 200 nodes within the sensor ﬁeld.
 Approaches used to implement clustering algorithm can be either centralized or distributed.
On centralized clustering approaches, important decision making and most of the operations are
done at the BS, which is not usually limited by its resources. On these approaches, the MI/CI
is implemented by the BS, each node has to send their necessary information (its location,

==== Page 19 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 19 of 27
remaining energy, etc.) for computations by the BS. In distributed approaches, the decision
and the computation are made by the nodes themselves. The BS receive results of computations
or decisions, in some case the BS is replaced by the sink node.
 Another metric considered in this study is the homogeneity of nodes within the ﬁeld. The network
is said to be homogeneous when all the nodes have the same characteristics (performance
of the microcontroller, available memory, communication range, energy level, etc.); however,
it is heterogeneous when the algorithm considers one or more special nodes with extended
performance compared to other normal nodes. In this last case, these special nodes are mostly
set as CHs due to their performance and the number of clusters mostly depend of the number of
these special nodes.
 In order to evaluate the amount of energy consume by each node within the ﬁeld, clustering
approach integrate a radio model which has to be as accurate as possible to real behavior.
This parameter is important because most of the energy dissipated by a sensor is caused by
transmitting and receiving data through the transceiver. The type of radio model also allows
you to know whether or not the implementation in real environment can be similar to the
simulation context.
 For our analysis, we evaluate if the presented algorithms are based or not on multihop
communication between nodes. The multihop ability assumes that a node can send a data to
another far node out of reach but helps by an intermediate node within its communication range.
 To consider the fault tolerance of the presented algorithms, we set the multipath metric.
Algorithms that implement multipath are more fault tolerance than others that do not use it,
if a route to a BS is not available anymore, it is possible to access the BS by a secondary path.
This parameter allows an algorithm to avoid the entire network failure caused by nodes crash.
Table 1 presents the crosstab between the ML/CI and the energy consumption. We observe that
the approaches which consume the most the energy are based on FL or GA. However, the solutions
based on the BCO, PSO, and FL have a lower energy consumption than the others paradigms. Thus,
we may say that algorithms based on SI and on FL consume less energy that GA, NN, and RL based
algorithms. This can be explained knowing that clustering algorithms based on GA and NN are mostly
complex to implement and need more node computations. Due to their limited resources, nodes would
waste their energy faster.
Table 1. Comparison of CI’s approaches according to the energy consumption.
ML/CIEnergy Consumption
Total
Low Average High
FL 3 3 3 9
FL/SI 1 0 0 1
GA 1 2 1 4
NN 0 2 0 2
RL 1 1 0 2
PSO 1 4 1 6
ACO 0 4 1 5
BCO 1 3 0 4
Total 8 19 6 33
Table 2 compare the scalability of the presented algorithms by the CI-ML used. We note that
the optimized strategies based on FL, NN, or GA have less scalability than the others do. However,
solutions which used SI are the best in terms of the scalability. The higher scalability of the SI based
approaches is due to the fact that the SI considers the collaboration between a large amount of agents
in a population. However, on FL, NN, and GA when the number of node increases, the complexity of

==== Page 20 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 20 of 27
algorithms increases, the computations made by the nodes or the BS require more time and resources
(microcontroller, memory, etc.).
Table 2. Comparison of CI’s approaches according to the scalability.
ML/CIScalability
Total
Low Medium High
FL 6 3 0 9
FL/SI 0 1 0 1
GA 2 2 0 4
NN 2 0 0 2
RL 1 1 0 2
PSO 1 0 5 6
ACO 2 1 2 5
BCO 0 2 2 4
Total 14 10 9 33
The data delivery rate which ﬁxes the amount of data received by the BS is an important parameter.
From Table 3 below, we observe optimized clustering approaches based on BCO, ACO, and PSO have
the better data delivery rate than the others CI, it proofs then that solutions based on SI are more adapt
for applications design on the amount of data to be delivered at the BS. This difference of data delivery
rate can show how the approaches based on the GA, NN, or RL lose data than SI based paradigms
which can be considered as more reliable.
Table 3. Comparison of CI’s approaches according to the data delivery rate.
ML/CIData Delivery Rate
Total
Low Average High
FL 1 1 0 2
FL/SI 0 1 0 1
NN 0 1 0 1
RL 0 1 0 1
PSO 0 3 2 5
ACO 1 0 1 2
BCO 0 0 4 4
Total 2 7 7 16
Since the main advantage of using the clustering approach is its high scalability, however, it varies
in function of the CI approaches.
Tables 4–6 present respectively the comparison between the approaches which can be either
centralized or distributed in terms of the energy consumption, the data delivery rate, and the scalability.
From these tables, optimized clustering which has a centralized approach outperform solutions with a
distributed skeleton. Most of the centralized optimized clustering algorithms consume less energy
than the distributed strategies. However, for an average consumption, both have approximately the
same energy consumption. Centralized algorithms outperform distributed algorithms because the
major part of the operations are done at the BS in centralized approaches, each node within the sensor
ﬁeld usually sends only the necessary elements (its position, remaining energy, sensed data, etc.) to
the BS most of the time without any additional computing.

==== Page 21 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 21 of 27
Table 4. Comparison of the energy consumption according to the nature of the approach.
ML/CIEnergy Consumption
Total
Low Average High
Centralized 28.6% 57.1% 14.3% 14
Distributed 21.1% 57.9% 21.1% 19
Total8 19 6 33
24.2% 57.6% 18.2% 100%
Table 5. Comparison of the data delivery rate according to the nature of the approach.
ML/CIData Delivery Rate
Total
Low Average High
Centralized 0.0% 37.5% 62.5% 8
Distributed 25.0% 50.0% 25.0% 8
Total2 7 7 16
12.5% 43.8% 43.8% 100%
Table 6. Comparison of CI’s approaches according to the nature of the approach.
ML/CIScalability
Total
Low Medium High
Centralized 35.7% 28.6% 35.7% 14
Distributed 47.4% 31.6% 21.1% 19
Total14 10 9 33
42.4% 30.3% 27.3% 100%
From our analysis, we observe that must of the presented algorithms uses the ﬁrst order as
radio/energy model. The ﬁrst order radio model is widely used because it is simple to implement
and considers only the energy spent during the transmission and the reception per bit. The energy
consumed during the transmission of k-bit over a distance dis presented in (1), where etis the energy
dissipated by a bit during its transmission and (edd2)the energy consumed for transmitting a single
bit over a distance d.
Etx(k,d)=
et+ed.d2
.k (1)
The energy required for successfully receive k-bit is given in (2), where errepresents the energy
needed to receive a single bit
Erx(k)=er.k (2)
Other algorithms used either the radio model based on the real transceiver CC2420. According
to this choice, we can assume that clustering algorithms which implement the CC2420 radio model
(data transfer rate, path loss, energy consumption during transmitting and receiving of data) are more
accurate for a real environment deployment. However, the used of ﬁrst order or CC2420 models are
only suitable for terrestrial WSN applications, if the sensor ﬁeld is different from the ground surface,
these radio models will not be appropriate.
Table 7 presents the summary of the comparison between the presented optimized
clustering approaches.

==== Page 22 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 22 of 27
Table 7. Comparison of the optimized clustering algorithms.
CI/MLData Delivery
RateData
AggregationEnergy
ConsumptionScalability Nature Network Radio Model Multihop Multipath
FCH [31] FL - no high low centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order no no
CHEF [32] FL - yes high medium distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order no -
LEACH-FL [33] FL - - high low centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order no yes
ICT2TSK [34] FL - - low medium centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order no yes
SEP-FL [35] FL - - average low centralized heterogeneous ﬁrst order - -
EAUCF [36] FL - yes low low distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
DFLC [37] FL low - average medium distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
SIF [39] FL/SI average no low medium centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
FBUC [40] FL - - low low distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order - yes
EEDCF [41] FL average - average low distributed heterogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
[43] GA - no average medium centralized heterogeneous ﬁrst order yes -
[44] GA - yes average medium distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order - -
LEACH-GA [46] GA - yes high low distributed homogeneous ﬁrst-order no yes
GABEEC [46] GA - yes low low distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order - -
[48] NN average yes average low distributed homogeneous - - -
[49] NN - - average low distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
CLIQUE [50] RL average yes low medium distributed homogeneous - yes yes
[51] RL - - average low distributed homogeneous - - -
PSO-C [57] PSO average yes average low centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order no no
[56] PSO average yes average high centralized heterogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
PSO-HC [57] PSO - - average high centralized homogeneous CC2420 yes -
MPSICA [58] PSO average yes high high distributed heterogeneous - yes yes
TPSO-CR [59] PSO high yes average high centralizedhomogeneous/
heterogeneousCC2420 yes yes
PSO-ECHS [60] PSO high no low high centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order - -
T-ANT [63] ACO - yes average low distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes -

==== Page 23 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 23 of 27
Table 7. Cont .
CI/MLData Delivery
RateData
AggregationEnergy
ConsumptionScalability Nature Network Radio Model Multihop Multipath
EBAB [64] ACO low - average high distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
ACO-C [65] ACO high yes average low centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order no yes
ACA-LEACH [66] ACO - - high medium distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
MRP [67] ACO - - average high distributed homogeneous ﬁrst order yes yes
ABC-C [71] BCO high - average medium centralized homogeneous ﬁrst order yes (2 hops) yes
Bee-Sensor-C [70] BCO high yes average high distributed homogeneous - yes yes
BeeSwarm [75] BCO high yes average medium distributed homogeneous - yes yes
ABC-SD [24] BCO high yes low high centralized homogeneous CC2420 yes yes

==== Page 24 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 24 of 27
5. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we conducted a wide review of the recent hierarchical approaches based on CI
or ML. To achieve this, we classiﬁed these algorithms in terms of the CI used which can be FL, GA,
NN, RL or SI. In order to evaluate and to compare them, we consider 10 parameters: CI used; the
data delivery rate (depend of the amount of data received by the BS); data aggregation; the energy
consumption that characterize the network lifetime; the scalability of the algorithm when increasing
the number of nodes; the approach of the algorithm which can be centralized or either distributed;
homogeneity or the heterogeneity of the network that considers whether sensors have or not the same
performance; the radio model used by the optimized algorithms which represent the model of energy;
multihop to identify if an optimized solution considers or not multihop communications; multipath
for the fault tolerance of algorithms. The tables of comparison show that optimized clustering based
on SI are more recent and outperforms the other algorithms in terms of scalability, energy consumption
and the amount of data delivered to the BS.
As future works, we plan to classify the optimized clustering in terms of WSN types. We would
talk about clustering parameters used to WSNs which locations are non-terrestrial or not above the
ground but rather under the water or under the ground. In addition to future work, we would discuss
about the spectrum-awareness or spectrum-efﬁcient clustering studies in practical large wireless
sensor networks.
Author Contributions: The presented work in this paper is the collaborative development of all authors. D.W.S.
conducted the review and the evaluation of the algorithms. B.O.Y. and A.F. help at designing and comparing in
terms of clustering and Machine Learning/Computational Intelligence the presented algorithms. P .D. gave a
formal overview and the organization of the paper.
Funding: This research received no external funding. The APC is funded by the University of Bremen in
partnership with the University of Ngaound éré.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the editor and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
comments and remarks that lead to improvement of the content and presentation of the paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Dargie, W.; Poellabauer, C. Fundamentals of Wireless Sensor Networks ; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.: Chichester, UK,
2010; ISBN 9780470666388.
2. Yenke, B.O.; Wohwe Sambo, D.; Adamo Ado, A.A.; Gueroui, A. MMEDD: Multithreading Model for an
Efﬁcient Data Delivery in wireless sensor networks. Int. J. Commun. Netw. Inf. Secur. 2016 ,8, 179–186.
3. Boukerche, A.; Ahmad, M.Z.; Turgut, B.; Turgut, D. A Taxonomy of Routing Protocols in Sensor Networks.
InAlgorithms and Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2008;
pp. 129–160. ISBN 9780470396360.
4. Sabor, N.; Sasaki, S.; Abo-Zahhad, M.; Ahmed, S.M. A Comprehensive Survey on Hierarchical-Based Routing
Protocols for Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks: Review, Taxonomy, and Future Directions. Wirel. Commun.
Mob. Comput. 2017 ,2017 , 1–23. [CrossRef]
5. Avril, F.; Bernard, T.; Bui, A.; Sohier, D. Clustering and communications scheduling in wsns using mixed
integer linear programming. J. Commun. Netw. 2014 ,16, 421–429. [CrossRef]
6. Ding, G.; Wu, Q.; Song, F.; Wang, J. Decentralized Sensor Selection for Cooperative Spectrum Sensing
Based on Unsupervised Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Communications,
Ottawa, ON, Canada, 10–15 June 2012.
7. Sirsikar, S.; Wankhede, K. Comparison of clustering algorithms to design new clustering approach. Procedia
Comput. Sci. 2015 ,49, 147–154. [CrossRef]
8. Solaiman, B.; Sheta, A. Computational Intelligence for Wireless Sensor Networks: Applications and
Clustering Algorithms. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2013 ,73, 1–8. [CrossRef]
9. Kulkarni, R.V .; Förster, A.; Venayagamoorthy, G.K. Computational intelligence in wireless sensor networks:
A survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2011 ,13, 68–96. [CrossRef]

==== Page 25 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 25 of 27
10. Bhanderi, M.; Shah, H. Machine Learning for Wireless Sensor Network: A Review, Challenges and
Applications. Adv. Electron. Electr. Eng. 2014 ,4, 475–486.
11. Arya, A.; Malik, A.; Garg, R. Reinforcement Learning based Routing Protocols in WSNs: A Survey. Int. J.
Comput. Sci. Eng. Technol. 2013 ,4, 1401–1404. [CrossRef]
12. Akkaya, K.; Younis, M. A survey on routing protocols for wireless sensor networks. Ad Hoc Netw. 2005 ,3,
325–349. [CrossRef]
13. Jeevan, K.; Sachin, T. A survey on routing protocols for wireless sensor networks using swarm intelligence.
Int. J. Internet Technol. Secur. Trans. 2016 ,6, 79–102.
14. Adamou Ado, A.A.; Abdelhak, G.; Labraoui, N.; Omer, B. Concepts and Evolution of Research in the Field
of Wireless Sensor Networks. Int. J. Comput. Netw. Commun. 2015 ,7, 81–98.
15. Chalermek, I.; Ramesh, G.; Deborah, E. Directed diffusion: A scalable and robust communication paradigm
for sensor networks. Algorithmica 2005 ,43, 5–15.
16. Jin, Z.; Jian-Ping, Y.; Si-Wang, Z.; Ya-Ping, L.; Guang, L. A Survey on Position-Based Routing Algorithms in
Wireless Sensor Networks. Algorithms 2009 ,2, 158–182. [CrossRef]
17. Kumar, A.G.G.; Thiyagarajan, R.; Sripriya, N. Data Centric Based Routing Protocols for Wireless Sensor
Networks: A Survey. Int. J. Sci. Res. Publ. 2014 ,4, 1–5.
18. Lloret, J.; Garcia, M.; Tom ás, J.; Boronat, F. GBP-WAHSN: A group-based protocol for large wireless ad hoc
and sensor networks. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 2008 ,23, 461–480. [CrossRef]
19. Liu, D.; Ning, P .; Du, W. Group-Based Key Pre-Distribution in Wireless Sensor Networks. In Proceedings of
the 4th ACM Workshop on Wireless Security, Cologne, Germany, 2 September 2005.
20. Wu, G.; Li, H.; Yao, L. A group-based mobile agent routing protocol for multitype wireless sensor networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Green Computing and Communications &
International Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, Hangzhou, China, 18–20 December
2010.
21. Liu, X. A survey on clustering routing protocols in wireless sensor networks. Sensors (Switzerland) 2012 ,12,
11113–11153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Mehmood, A.; Lloret, J.; Noman, M.; Song, H. Improvement of the wireless sensor network lifetime using
LEACH with vice-cluster head. Ad-Hoc Sens. Wirel. Netw. 2015 ,28, 1–17.
23. Lloret, J.; Garcia, M.; Bri, D.; Diaz, J.R. A cluster-based architecture to structure the topology of parallel
wireless sensor networks. Sensors 2009 ,9, 10513–10544. [CrossRef]
24. Adamou Abba Ari, A.; Omer Yenke, B.; Labraoui, N.; Damakoa, I.; Gueroui, A. A power efﬁcient
cluster-based routing algorithm for wireless sensor networks: Honeybees swarm intelligence based approach.
J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2016 ,69, 77–97. [CrossRef]
25. Vyas, P .; Chouhan, M. Survey on Clustering Techniques in Wireless Sensor Network. Int. J. Comput. Sci.
Inf. Technol. 2014 ,5, 6614–6619.
26. Al-Karaki, J.N.; Kamal, A.E. Routing techniques in wireless sensor networks: A survey. IEEE Wirel. Commun.
2004 ,11, 6–28. [CrossRef]
27. Singh, S.P .; Sharma, S.C. A Survey on Cluster Based Routing Protocols in Wireless Sensor Networks. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Computing Technologies ans Applications,
Mumbai, Maharashtra, 26–27 March 2015.
28. Abdullah, M.; Ehsan, A. Routing Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks: Classiﬁcations and Challenges.
J. Electron. Commun. Eng. Res. 2015 ,2, 5–15.
29. Munot, H.; Kulkarni, P .H. Survey on Computational Intelligence Based Routing Protocols in WSN. Int. Res.
J. Eng. Technol. 2016 ,3, 122–127.
30. Forster, A. Teaching Networks How to Learn. Reinforcement Learning for Data Dissemination in Wireless Sensor
Networks ; University of Lugano: Lugano, Switzerland, 2009.
31. Gupta, I.; Riordan, D.; Sampalli, S. Cluster-head election using fuzzy logic for wireless sensor networks.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Communication Networks and Services Research Conference, Halifax, NS,
Canada, 16–18 May 2005.
32. Kim, J.S.; Park, Y.; Han, T.C. CHEF: Cluster Head Election mechanism using Fuzzy logic in Wireless Sensor
Networks. Adv. Commun. Technol. ICACT 2008 ,654–659 , 17–20.
33. Ran, G.; Zhang, H.; Shulan, G. Improving on LEACH Protocol of Wireless Sensor using Fuzzy Logic.
Inf. Comput. Sci. 2010 ,3, 767–775. [CrossRef]

==== Page 26 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 26 of 27
34. Zhang, F.; Zhang, Q.-Y.; Sun, Z.-M. ICT2TSK: An improved clustering algorithm for WSN using a type-2
Takagi-Sugeno-Kang Fuzzy Logic System. IEEE Symp. Wirel. Technol. Appl. ISWTA 2013 , 153–158. [CrossRef]
35. Mostafa, B.; Saad, C.; Abderrahmane, H. Fuzzy logic approach to improving stable election protocol for
clustered heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 2014 ,14, 112–116.
36. Bagci, H.; Yazici, A. An energy aware fuzzy approach to unequal clustering in wireless sensor networks.
Appl. Soft Comput. J. 2013 ,13, 1741–1749. [CrossRef]
37. Alaybeyoglu, A. A distributed fuzzy logic-based root selection algorithm for wireless sensor networks.
Comput. Electr. Eng. 2015 ,41, 216–225. [CrossRef]
38. Wen, C.; Sethares, W.A. Adaptive Decentralized Re-Clustering for Wireless Sensor Networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Taipei, Taiwan, 8–11 October 2006.
39. Molay, Z.; Akbari, R.; Shokouhifar, M.; Safaei, F. Swarm intelligence based fuzzy routing protocol for
clustered wireless sensor networks. Expert Syst. Appl. 2016 ,55, 313–328. [CrossRef]
40. Logambigai, R.; Kannan, A. Fuzzy logic based unequal clustering for wireless sensor networks. Wirel. Netw.
2016 ,22, 945–957. [CrossRef]
41. Zhang, Y.; Wang, J.; Han, D.; Wu, H.; Zhou, R. Fuzzy-Logic Based Distributed Energy-Efﬁcient Clustering
Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks. Sensors 2017 ,17, 1554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Liu, M.; Zheng, Y.; Cao, J.; Chen, G.; Chen, L.; Gong, H. An energy-aware protocol for data gathering
applications in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Communications, Glasgow, UK, 24–28 June 2007.
43. Wazed, S.; Bari, A.; Jaekel, A.; Bandyopadhyay, S. Genetic algorithm based approach for extending the
lifetime of two-tiered sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Wireless
Pervasive Computing, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 5–7 February 2007.
44. Hussain, S.; Matin, A.W.; Islam, O. Genetic algorithm for hierarchical wireless sensor networks. J. Netw.
2007 ,2, 87–97. [CrossRef]
45. Liu, J.; Ravishankar, C. V LEACH-GA: Genetic Algorithm-Based Energy-Efﬁcient Adaptive Clustering
Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks. Int. J. Mach. Learn. Comput. 2011 ,1, 79–85. [CrossRef]
46. Bayrakli, S.; Erdogan, S.Z. Genetic algorithm based energy efﬁcient clusters (GABEEC) in Wireless Sensor
Networks. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2012 ,10, 247–254. [CrossRef]
47. Hosseingholizadeh, A.; Abhari, A. A Neural Network approach for Wireless sensor network power
management. In Proceedings of the 28th IEEE International Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems,
Niagara Falls, NY, USA, 27–30 September 2009.
48. Cordina, M.; Debono, C.J. Increasing wireless sensor network lifetime through the application of SOM neural
networks. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on Communications, Control and Signal
Process, Rhodes, Greece, 12–14 March 2008.
49. Kumar, N.; Kumar, M.; Patel, R.B. Neural network based energy efﬁcient clustering and routing in wireless
sensor networks. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Networks Communications,
Melbourne, Australia, 14–16 December 2009.
50. Förster, A.; Murphy, A.L. CLIQUE: Role-free clustering with Q-learning for wireless sensor networks.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada,
22–26 June 2009.
51. Ramli, A.; Basarudin, Y.; Sulaiman, M. Cooperative and Reinforcement Learning in Energy Efﬁcient Dual
Hop Clustered Networks. Sindh Univ. 2016 ,48, 445–448.
52. Saleem, M.; Di Caro, G.A.; Farooq, M. Swarm intelligence based routing protocol for wireless sensor
networks: Survey and future directions. Inf. Sci. (NY) 2011 ,181, 4597–4624. [CrossRef]
53. Gui, T.; Ma, C.; Wang, F.; Wilkins, D.E. Survey On Swarm Intelligence based Routing Protocols for Wireless
Sensor Networks: An Extensive Study. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, 14–17 March 2016.
54. Poli, R.; Kennedy, J.; Blackwell, T. Particle swarm optimization. Swarm Intell. 2007 ,1, 33–57. [CrossRef]
55. Latiff, N.M.A.; Tsimenidis, C.C.; Sharif, B.S.; Kingdom, U. Energy-Aware Clustering for Wireless
Sensor Networks Using Particle Swarm Optimization. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual IEEE
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Montreal, QC, Canada,
3–7 September 2007.

==== Page 27 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 322 27 of 27
56. Kuila, P .; Jana, P .K. Energy efﬁcient clustering and routing algorithms for wireless sensor networks: Particle
swarm optimization approach. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2014 ,33, 127–140. [CrossRef]
57. Elhabyan, R.S.; Yagoub, M.C.E. PSO-HC: Particle swarm optimization protocol for hierarchical clustering in
Wireless Sensor Networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Collaborative Computing:
Networking, Applications and Worksharing, Miami, FL, USA, 22–25 October 2014.
58. Ding, Y.; Hu, Y.; Hao, K.; Cheng, L. MPSICA: An intelligent routing recovery scheme for heterogeneous
wireless sensor networks. Inf. Sci. (NY) 2015 ,308, 49–60. [CrossRef]
59. Elhabyan, R.S.Y.; Yagoub, M.C.E. Two-tier particle swarm optimization protocol for clustering and routing
in wireless sensor network. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2015 ,52, 116–128. [CrossRef]
60. Rao, P .C.S.; Jana, P .K.; Banka, H. A particle swarm optimization based energy efﬁcient cluster head selection
algorithm for wireless sensor networks. Wirel. Netw. 2017 ,23, 2005–2020. [CrossRef]
61. Bari, A.; Jaekel, A.; Bandyopadhyay, S. Clustering strategies for improving the lifetime of two-tiered sensor
networks. Comput. Commun. 2008 ,31, 3451–3459. [CrossRef]
62. Dorigo, M.; Blum, C. Ant colony optimization theory: A survey. Theor. Comput. Sci. 2005 ,344, 243–278.
[CrossRef]
63. Selvakennedy, S.; Sinnappan, S.; Shang, Y. T-ANT: A nature-inspired data gathering protocol for wireless
sensor networks. J. Commun. 2006 ,1, 22–29. [CrossRef]
64. Wang, L.; Zhang, R.; Model, A.N. An Energy-Balanced Ant-Based Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor
Networks. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking
and Mobile Computing, Beijing, China, 24–26 September 2009.
65. Ziyadi, M.; Yasami, K.; Abolhassani, B. Adaptive Clustering for Energy Efﬁcient Wireless Sensor Networks
Based on Ant Colony Optimization. In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Communication Networks and
Services Research Conference, Moncton, NB, Canada, 11–13 May 2009.
66. Wang, G.; Wang, Y.; Tao, X. An Ant Colony Clustering Routing Algorithm for Wireless Sensor Networks.
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computing, Guilin,
China, 14–17 October 2009.
67. Yang, J.; Xu, M.; Zhao, W.; Xu, B. A multipath routing protocol based on clustering and ant colony
optimization for wireless sensor networks. Sensors 2010 ,10, 4521–4540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Ganesan, D.; Govindan, R.; Shenker, S.; Estrin, D. Highly-resilient, energy-efﬁcient multipath routing in
wireless sensor networks. Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev. 2002 ,5, 10–24. [CrossRef]
69. Tu, Z.; Wang, Q.; Shen, Y. Optimal Mobile Agent Routing for Data Fusion in Distributed Sensor Networks
Using Improved Ant Colony Algorithm. In Proceedings of the IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement
Technology Conference, Victoria, BC, Canada, 12–15 May 2008.
70. Cai, X.; Duan, Y.; He, Y.; Yang, J.; Li, C. Bee-sensor-C: An energy-efﬁcient and scalable multipath routing
protocol for wireless sensor networks. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw. 2015 ,2015 . [CrossRef]
71. Karaboga, D.; Okdem, S.; Ozturk, C. Cluster based wireless sensor network routing using artiﬁcial bee
colony algorithm. Wirel. Netw. 2012 ,18, 847–860. [CrossRef]
72. Saleem, M.; Farooq, M. BeeSensor: A Bee-Inspired Power Aware Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor
Networks. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 2007 , 81–90. [CrossRef]
73. Camilo, T.; Carreto, C.; Silva, J.S.; Boavida, F. An Energy-Efﬁcient Ant-Based Routing Algorithm for Wireless
Sensor Networks. Ant Colony Optim. Swarm Intell. 2006 , 49–59. [CrossRef]
74. Zhang, Y.; Kuhn, L.D.; Fromherz, M.P .J. Improvements on Ant Routing for Sensor Networks. Networks 2004 ,
154–165. [CrossRef]
75. Mann, P .S.; Singh, S.; Kumar, A. Computational Intelligence based metaheuristic for energy-efﬁcient routing
in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC),
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 24–29 July 2016.
76. Attea, B.A.; Khalil, E.A. A new evolutionary based routing protocol for clustered heterogeneous wireless
sensor networks. Appl. Soft Comput. 2012 ,12, 1950–1957. [CrossRef]
©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

