==== Page 1 ====
ARTICLE OPEN
Patient apprehensions about the use of arti ﬁcial intelligence in
healthcare
Jordan P . Richardson1, Cambray Smith1, Susan Curtis1, Sara Watson1, Xuan Zhu2, Barbara Barry2and Richard R. Sharp1✉
While there is signi ﬁcant enthusiasm in the medical community about the use of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) technologies in
healthcare, few research studies have sought to assess patient perspectives on these technologies. We conducted 15 focus groups
examining patient views of diverse applications of AI in healthcare. Our results indicate that patients have multiple concerns,including concerns related to the safety of AI, threats to patient choice, potential increases in healthcare costs, data-source bias, and
data security. We also found that patient acceptance of AI is contingent on mitigating these possible harms. Our results highlight an
array of patient concerns that may limit enthusiasm for applications of AI in healthcare. Proactively addressing these concerns iscritical for the ﬂourishing of ethical innovation and ensuring the long-term success of AI applications in healthcare.
npj Digital Medicine           (2021) 4:140 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00509-1
INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), the ability of computers to perform tasks
typically associated with human intelligence
1, has the capacity to
impact millions of patients by changing the way medicine ispracticed. Enthusiasm for applications of AI in healthcare hascontinued to grow, with early successes involving ChatBots,
diagnostic tools, and radiological image analysis
2–5. While there is
considerable excitement about these emerging technologies,prospective analyses of how AI technologies might be imple-mented responsibly into clinical practice has been limited.Importantly, to date there has been very little engagement withpatients who will be impacted by applications of AI in healthcare.This is troubling since patient concerns about AI could be asigni ﬁcant barrier to the dissemination and use of these tools.
Studies of nonmedical applications of AI have shown that thepublic tends to view nonmedical AI in highly variable ways
6, with
factors such as media coverage and early experiences playing keyroles in shaping public opinion. These considerations highlight theimportance of patient engagement to ensure that these
technologies are integrated into healthcare in a manner that
fosters public trust
7,8and mitigates widespread patient concerns
that might result in another “AI Winter ”9.
Moreover, since patients are the intended bene ﬁciaries of many
of these AI innovations, more carefully characterizing their needs,
values, and priorities is important for ensuring that these advancesare not just well-received but are developed and implemented inan ethical way that improves patient care. Even in situationswhere patients do not interface directly with AI technologies,patients still bear the largest risk should implementation be done
incorrectly or unethically
10. To the extent that patients will be
asked to accept the potential risks associated with novelapplications of AI in healthcare, there is an ethical obligation toensure that patient values and needs are incorporated intoimplementation plans. As in other areas of medical innovation,proactive patient engagement is an essential component ofimplementing healthcare AI in an ethical manner
11.
Applications of AI in medicine take advantage of unprece-
dented volumes of clinical data and computing power to informevidence-based decision making3. This raises new ethical ques-
tions related to the transparency of data use, accountability for
data stewardship, and potential inequities in the deployment ofAI
12. Currently, very little research has been done characterizing
patient and other stakeholder perspectives on applications of AI in
healthcare. Additionally, the few studies that have assessed
patient perspectives have focused on a narrow array of AI tools,
which limits their utility as a guide in anticipating patientengagement with other AI applications in healthcare
13,14. While
engaging patients around speci ﬁc applications of AI is a crucial
step in the research and development process, engagement at
this level of speci ﬁcity does not facilitate analysis of broader public
perspectives on AI and its application in healthcare, which is muchneeded for health policy development, innovation priority setting,
and implementation design.
The aim of the research study we report was to understand how
patients view the use of AI in their healthcare. To clarify sources of
patient excitement and concern about healthcare AI, we used
focus groups and case-study discussions to characterize the rangeof patient opinions about emerging AI applications in healthcare.
This approach allowed us to make AI technologies more accessible
to patients, while also engaging across diverse cases to promote
broader re ﬂection on the potential technological, societal, and
medical impacts of AI. The results we report highlight a range ofpatient concerns about applications of AI in healthcare. We hope
AI developers and healthcare institutions seeking to deploy new
AI technologies ﬁnd these results useful as they consider how best
to integrate AI technologies into healthcare and create govern-
ance structures that promote patient safety and foster the trust ofthe patients they serve.
RESULTS
We conducted 15 focus groups with 87 participants between
November 2019 and February 2020. Each focus group had
between three and seven participants and lasted 90 min.
Approximately half of our participants were female (49.4%) andthe average age of participants was 53.5 years old. A majority of
1Biomedical Ethics Research Program, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rocheste, MN 55905-0002, USA.2Kern Center for the Science of Healthcare Delivery, Mayo Clinic Rochester,
Rocheste, MN 55905-0002, USA.✉email: Sharp.Richard@mayo.eduwww.nature.com/npjdigitalmed
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;

==== Page 2 ====
participants were white (93.1%) and non-Hispanic/Latino (94.3%).
Most participants had an education level higher than a high
school degree (87.3%). Approximately one in ﬁve participants had
experience working in technology or computer science (19.5%) for
an average of 17.6 years. Nearly half of our participants had
experience working in healthcare or health science (44.8%) for an
average of 17.1 years. No participants reported any prior
experience with AI impacting their healthcare. A detailed
description of these and other participant characteristics is
presented in Table 1.
In what follows, we describe several major themes that
emerged during focus-group discussions of healthcare AI. Thesethemes re ﬂect multiple sources of patient concern and excitement
about applications of AI in medicine. We found that, while patients
are generally enthusiastic about the possibility of AI improvingtheir care, they are also concerned about the safety and oversight
of healthcare AI. We describe these concerns about AI safety, the
importance of patient choice, concerns about rising healthcarecosts, questions about data quality, and view of the security of AIsystems below.
Participants were excited about healthcare AI but wanted
assurances about safety
In general, participants reported enthusiasm about the ability of AI
to be a positive force in medicine. They felt healthcare AI was
compatible with the goals of medicine: to heal as many patients aspossible. Participants were supportive of developing AI tools for a
variety of different healthcare applications.
I feel good about it. I think it has the ability to be better. I mean,
it’s not a human. It ’s got more data, so probably. …[I]t probably has
more intelligence; it just has more information to work with to try tocome up with a proper diagnosis. …I don ’t think you will cure a lot
of diseases without that advanced intellect. Obviously, we ’ve come along way with the human brain, but we could probably go a lot
farther and speed the process with AI. (FG14) .
Our participants also reported being aware that healthcare AI
was still an emerging technology. As such, participants felt that itstill had potential to be used in many different creative andpositive ways.
This was often expressed as a sentiment of hopefulness,
coupled with an acknowledgment that these bene ﬁts could only
be realized through thoughtful implementation.
I feel like the future of AI just depends on how we choose to use it.
The impact will be what we choose it to be. …Because it ’s moldable,
it’s not going to do anything that we don ’t allow it to do. (FG7).
Participants urged caution in developing and implementing AI
tools. They reported a need for a careful transition period to
ensure that any AI tool used in their care is well-tested andaccurate.
So when this intelligence is built we have to test it, right? We have
to test it to make sure that it ’s helping correctly, and that to me
represents a big challenge and one we don ’t wanna jump into and
see what happens. We ’ve gotta be very careful there. (FG4).
Participants also called for oversight and regulatory protections
against potential harms. While participants often could notarticulate what these regulations should include or who should
enact them, they felt additional protections were necessary for
AI tools.
It’s gonna do what it ’s gonna do. I think that I look forward with
excitement …but I agree that there ’sd eﬁnitely some ﬂaws, and there
deﬁnitely needs to be some markers in there, at least right now, that
can also protect people. But it ’
s going to be positive if we can get
those safe markers in. (FG11).
Patients expect their clinicians to ensure AI safety
Participants reported that they felt their clinicians should act as a
safeguard to buffer patients from the potential harms that mightresult from mistakes made by healthcare AI. One way this wascommonly expressed was in terms of their healthcare providers
retaining ﬁnal discretion over treatment plans and maintaining
responsibility for patient care.
I believe the doctor always has the responsibility to be checking for
you, and you ’re his responsibility, you know? The AI is not
responsible; that ’s just a tool. (FG13).
Other participants were comfortable extending more authority
to AI tools, but still calling for their providers to provide “checks
and balances ”or“second opinions ”on recommendations
generated by healthcare AI. Most participants felt strongly thatan AI algorithm should not have the ability to act autonomously in
a clinical setting, stressing that both treatment decisions and the
monitoring of ongoing care should be done by a human provider.
I’d be okay with them telling a doctor what to do, but I don ’t know
that I ’d want a machine doing the treatment, especially depending
on what it is. Aiding, sure, they already do that with robotics and CTscans and all that, but I want a human there making sure that it ’s
doing what it ’s supposed to. (FG13).
Participants also noted the uniqueness of each patient, and
commented on the resultant individuality required in approachingmedical decision making. They viewed the providers ’role in using
AI as one of adapting AI recommendations to the patient ’s unique
personal situation, ensuring that they are not harmed and thatpatients follow through with clinical recommendations.
[I]t’s important to take into account that people, depending on
what the AI comes out with, people might not be willing to go withwhat that is, they might need alternates. And also just the questionof creativity, like what if the solution were actually something where
you would have to think outside the box? …What if it ’s something
they haven ’t encountered before? (FG13).Table 1. Characteristics of 87 patients who participated in focus
groups examining attitudes about the use of AI in healthcare.
N(%)
Sex
Male 44 (50.6)
Female 43 (49.4)
Ethnicity
Not Hispanic 82 (94.3)Choose not to Answer 5 (5.7)
Race (select all that apply)
White 81 (93.1)Black or African American 3 (3.4)American Indian or Alaska Native 2 (2.3)
Asian 1 (1.1)
Choose not to Answer 2 (2.3)
Age (Mean 53.5 years; Range 18 –91)
Age 18 –40 24 (27.6)
Age 41 –60 29 (33.3)
Age 61 + 34 (39.1)
Education
Less than HS Grad 1 (1.1)
Grade 12 or GED 10 (11.5)
College 1 –3 years 31 (35.6)
College 4 years or more 23 (26.4)Graduate school 22 (25.3)J.P. Richardson et al.
2
npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital1234567890():,;

==== Page 3 ====
Preservation of patient choice and autonomy
Participants reported that the preservation of choice was an
important factor in their overall comfort with applications of AI in
healthcare. They felt that patients should have the right to chooseto have an AI tool used in their care and be able to opt-out of AI
involvement if they felt strongly.
I think it all comes back to choice, though, I think everybody ’s
getting the mentality that, and maybe I ’m wrong, but that an AI is
being pushed, but at the end of the day, our choice is still our choice,
and it ’s not being taken away. (FG 15).
In addition to the ability to choose whether an AI tool is used or
not, participants wanted to have the ability to dispute the
recommendations of an AI algorithm, or correct those recom-
mendations if they believed they were in error. Participants were
uncomfortable relying solely on recommendations made by an AI
without being able to evaluate the rationale for those recom-
mendations directly themselves.
So I’d rather know what they ’re observing and, if it ’s [AI] wrong, I
would [want to] be able to correct it rather than have them just
collect data and make assumptions. (FG 13).
Concerns about healthcare costs and insurance coverage
Participants also voiced concerns that AI tools might increase
healthcare costs and that those costs might be passed on to
patients. While participants acknowledged that AI might make the
delivery of some healthcare services more ef ﬁcient, they
anticipated high development and deployment costs. They felt
that adding another advanced technology would likely increase
the cost of their healthcare.
So it sounds expensive, and health care is already fairly expensive.
To go on his note, a lot of times you can get something that works
just as well for a lot less or you could get something super fancy, that
makes you think, hey I got this big fancy thing, but it really doesn ’t
do any better than the original cheaper version. (FG 9).
Additionally, participants worried about the impact that AI
recommendations could have on what types of treatment their
insurance providers would cover. For example, some participants
were concerned that an AI algorithm might recommend a
treatment that they could not afford. Similarly, others worried
that insurance companies might chose to cover only thosetreatments that are supported by AI recommendations, thereby
taking away some of the discretion traditionally reserved for
physicians.
Is insurance only gonna cover what the machine says it is and not
look for anything else? There is no reason for further diagnostics
because the machine already did it? I mean we already have a
situation in our healthcare system where money comes into play fordiagnosing things. (FG 9).
Participants recognized how the ability of AI to draw connec-
tions and make highly accurate predictions from images or
complex symptoms could be very helpful. However, they were
concerned that new types of predictions could result in new forms
of discrimination. Participants were especially worried that
insurance companies would use AI to discover otherwiseunknown medical information that could be used to deny
coverage or increase premiums.
I mean, …that information is wonderful, but who ’s gonna get it
after the doctors look at it is my big thing. Is the insurance company
gonna take it, and now all of a sudden …my premium doubles for
health insurance? (FG1).
Ensuring data integrity
Participants considered the impact of data quality on AI tools and
their recommendations, and had several concerns related to theway healthcare AI might be developed using ﬂawed datasets,
potentially resulting in harm to patients. They felt data from theelectronic health record was not accurate enough to be reliable in
teaching healthcare AI, citing personal experiences with errors
they had found in their own health records.
There ’s a lot of discrepancies in the medical record I must say,
especially now that you can see your portal. I know I ’ve seen things
saying that certain things were done or about myself and procedures
that were totally not true. So I ’ve had a lot of different things in my
medical chart that are inaccurate, very inaccurate, so if they ’re training
an arti ﬁ
cial intelligence that this is facts, it ’s like, well no. (FG 4).
Participants were also concerned about the possibility that AI
tools might reinforce existing biases in healthcare datasets. They
explained that this could happen as a result of an inherently
biased learning dataset or from developers unintentionallyincorporating their own bias into an AI algorithm.
Prejudices that people can have, like it could absorb those or it
could be taught to work against them, like a lot of people who are
overweight have said that their providers assume that that ’s the
cause and ignore doing other tests or pursuing other avenues, and if
an AI wasn ’t going to make the assumption that that was what was
the problem, then that would be good, but if it was learning from
people around it that it should make that assumption, then it wouldperpetuate the problem. (FG 13).
Risks of technology-dependent systems
Participants also expressed concerns about technological systems
that might be highly dependent on new AI technologies and
worried that some risks might be exacerbated if AI were to be
widely deployed in medicine. One such concern was a worry
about a systems-level crash or mass technological failure, and the
impact this might have on a clinical system that is heavily reliant
on AI tools.
I have some background in electronics, and one thing you can
guarantee with electronics is they will fail. Might not be now, might
never happen in 10, 20 years. The way things are made, ‘cause I ’ve
actually worked in the industry of making medical equipment, it ’s all
about using the cheapest method to get the end result. Well,
electronics fail. They just do. (FG9).
Additionally, participants brought up examples of bad actors
hacking into AI systems and manipulating these tools for nefarious
purposes.
I was just gonna say another concern that I think I would have,
just because of the way our world is evolving and revolving, is canthat arti ﬁcial intelligence be hacked? Who can control that? …I don ’t
know. Because any time you have a computerized program, I don ’t
care what anybody says, it can and it will get hacked because there ’s
always somebody that ’s out there just to do evil rather than good.
(FG15).
These concerns were compounded by the perception that
healthcare providers could easily become overly dependent on AI
tools, and over time might not be able to provide high-quality
care if access to those healthcare AI tools was unavailable.
If they were to get hacked or a system goes down …like what ’s
the contingency plan, but what is the contingency plan? If you have
all these doctors who are so used to having this arti ﬁcial intelligence
read all these, and they don ’t have the skill of reading it, then what
happens? (FG6).
DISCUSSION
The patients we consulted shared a variety of concerns that will
shape their perceptions of future AI applications in healthcare.
While they envisioned AI having a generally positive impact on
healthcare, this view was contingent on proactive oversight that
mitigates potential harms resulting from AI. While participants
were able to appreciate the widereaching impact of AI on
healthcare, their concerns centered on speci ﬁc ways in which AI
might result in harm to them personally, or to those they careJ.P. Richardson et al.
3
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 

==== Page 4 ====
about. This ﬁnding contrasts with much of the existing literature
examining the potential implications of AI for healthcare, which
tends to take a more abstract approach that is not connected to
the practical concerns that patients and families may have, such as
the potential for AI to limit access to a preferred medication or
increase healthcare costs12,15. Participants expected to be
protected from these harms and felt that physician oversight
would be critical. Translational researchers and clinical implemen-
tation teams deploying new AI tools must be aware of these
expectations if they hope to ensure the successful integration of
AI into healthcare systems.
A subset of the concerns voiced by our participants are
reminiscent of concerns raised about prior medical advances,
including worries about higher costs, discriminatory uses, andfewer choices available to patients and providers. Both personal
and national healthcare expenditures have been rising steadily for
decades
16, and many interventions that promise to increase
efﬁciency have not delivered on their promise to decrease
healthcare costs17,18. Similarly, respect for patient autonomy is
one of the core principles of medical ethics19, and participants
were clear that they wanted to be able to choose whether or not
to have AI tools as a component of their care. To the extent that AI
tools could operate surreptitiously in the background, patients
who do not want AI used in their care may not know it is being
used, which could result in signi ﬁcant breaches of public trust
should this approach to AI deployment be discovered by those
patients. Similarly, while concerns about discrimination based on
predictive analytics are reminiscent of concerns about genetic
information20, it is unclear if legislators will recognize these
similarities and develop special protections that apply to AI-
enabled medical predictions. Here too, these considerations
highlight the value of proactive engagement with patients, both
to understand their concerns but also to consider what effective
policy responses might entail.
Other patient apprehensions about AI applications in healthcare
did not have obvious parallels to concerns about prior healthcare
technologies. These concerns mirror some of the most con-
tentious debates about the impact that AI may have on medicine.
For example, participants stressed the role of physicians as safety
monitors. A similar conversation is re ﬂected in contemporary
literature advocating for the necessity of the physician in AI-driven
healthcare systems21–25. Academics and patients alike seem to feel
that the physician must be at the center of medical decision-
making to preserve patient safety22,26. Participants were also
concerned about the future of healthcare systems, as they
become increasingly dependent on digital tools. The multiple
challenges of ensuring source-data quality, algorithmic reliability,
and unbiased AI outcomes have been recognized as a substantial
ethical and technological barrier to successful clinical implemen-
tation by bioethicists and AI developers alike15.
Addressing patient apprehensions about healthcare AI will
require creative solutions that incorporate systems-level trust
building, proactive technological innovation, and a recognition of
the complex social forces at work. Those advocating for clinical
uses of AI tools should support the development of transparent
oversight mechanisms that promote stakeholder engagement at
each step of AI development and implementation —from the
curation of healthcare datasets to widespread clinical usage27.
Importantly, our results show that patients recognize and are
beginning to grapple with the many nuanced issues raised by
applications of AI in healthcare. Despite the abstractness of
machine learning, and lack of personal experience with AI,
participants were quickly able to appreciate how they and their
families could be impacted (and potentially harmed) by healthcare
AI without appropriate oversight. Those concerns could easily
evolve into a deep skepticism about the promise of AI without
consistent and deliberate patient engagement.A limitation of this study is the racial and ethnic diversity of our
sample, which was limited by our recruitment methods, which
involved contacting primary care patients at a large health system
in the upper Midwest. Additionally, many participants hadpersonal or familial connections to healthcare occupations, whichlikely in ﬂuenced their perceptions of medical innovation. The
education level of participants and their insurance coverage was
higher than typical, which also may have impacted theirengagement with topics related to healthcare. These limitations
suggest caution in generalizing the ﬁndings we report to other
clinical settings and patient populations.
While use of focus-group methods was a strength of the study,
allowing us to explore a wide range of patient perspectives onhealthcare AI, use of speci ﬁc case studies to structure focus-group
discussions may have in ﬂuenced our results by encouraging
participants to focus on more familiar applications of AI in
healthcare. Additionally, the technical complexity of the AI toolswe examined may have resulted in inaccurate participant under-standings of those technologies and their potential impact.
While this research study provides important insights into
patient apprehensions about applications of AI in healthcare, the
limitations above highlight a clear need for additional research. Of
note, patient-centered research involving underrepresented orhistorically disadvantaged populations is crucial for ensuring
equitable and just applications of AI in healthcare. Additionally,
future research studies should seek to characterize the frequencyand potential impact of various patient concerns, using surveymethods and behavioral models of technology acceptance.
Patient engagement around real-world AI tools at various stages
of implementation are also critical for ensuring that AI innovationis responsive to patient concerns. Finally, patient perspectives onhealthcare AI are only one important factor in the ecosystem of
responsible AI development and implementation. Future research
should also examine systems-level readiness for healthcare AI andengage other stakeholders, including healthcare providers, payers,
and administrators.
Addressing patient concerns relating to AI applications in
healthcare is essential for effective clinical implementation. While
participants in our study may not have had a complete under-standing of AI algorithms or their capabilities, they were able toengage with core concepts relating to healthcare AI and could
readily express their expectations and apprehensions. Our results
clarify several potential sources of patient concern aboutapplications of AI in healthcare and highlight patients ’desire for
physician-led oversight of these technologies. If this expectation is
not met, it is possible that we could see a third “AI Winter ”in
which fears of patient harm lead to widespread rejection ofhealthcare AI by patients and their providers
9. To avoid that
possibility, it is critical that AI developers engage the public in
dialogue about both the potential bene ﬁts and harms of
applications of AI in healthcare28.
METHODS
Participant recruitment
We contacted 946 patients who visited a Mayo Clinic primary care facility
in Minnesota or Wisconsin between November 19, 2019 and February 25,
2020. Potential research participants were recruited by phone. Study
inclusion criteria included being conversant in English and being 18 yearsor older. Participants received $50 for their participation. This study was
approved by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board (protocol #19-
010128). We did not solicit personal health information from participants,and oral consent was obtained for all participants at the beginning of each
focus group before data collection began in accordance with the IRB
recommendations.J.P. Richardson et al.
4
npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

==== Page 5 ====
Data collection
We selected a focus group design for this study because we anticipated
participants having limited prior knowledge of the subject area. Focus
groups encourage participants to react to each other ’s comments and
questions, revealing more nuanced views. Focus groups also allow for amore accessible and open discussion for individuals with varying levels of
familiarity with the topics discussed. This approach allowed us to capture
diverse opinions generated through the discussion and re ﬂection process
29.
Focus groups were co-facilitated by three research team members, with
one person serving as the primary moderator, and the other two takingﬁeld notes and asking follow-up questions to clarify critical points
30,31.
Participants were ﬁrst asked a series of general questions about AI to
gauge their knowledge and familiarity such as “What does AI mean to you ”
or“What comes to mind when you think about AI and medicine? ”. The
moderators then offered a brief de ﬁnition of AI, along with examples of
nonmedical applications of AI. The explanation of AI given during the focus
group was speci ﬁc to machine learning, a method of providing data to
algorithms without explicit programming, allowing the algorithms tooptimize mapping connections between input and output data points
32.
Case studies of speci ﬁc uses of AI in medicine were then presented to
participants for discussion and re ﬂection, followed by questions about
participants ’comfort with and concerns about each case study33such as
“What are your initial thoughts or reactions to this AI tool? ”or“How would
you feel about this technology being used for you or your loved one? ”
Some cases also had speci ﬁc probes about data use, preferred situations,
or relationships with providers. The focus group concluded with a broaddiscussion of AI applications in healthcare, including general concerns,sources of enthusiasm, and comparisons of perspectives across the
different case studies including questions such as “What tradeoffs do you
see with AI in healthcare and how do you balance them? ”.
The case studies were selected to be representative of emerging
applications of AI in healthcare, as determined by a review of the literature
on AI technologies
2–4. Each case was based on a speci ﬁc type of tool,
which allowed participants to engage with the tools in a way that was bothgeneralizable but grounded in reality. Focus groups 1 –6 used three case
studies: an image analysis tool, a ChatBot for asking questions about a
medical procedure, and a risk prediction tool that analyzed and ﬂagged
patients at risk of developing a preventable condition. (These case studiesare available from the authors upon request.) Focus groups 7 –15 used
three different cases: a complex diagnostic tool, a well-person visit
involving a ChatBot, and a tool for monitoring patients in an intensive care
unit (ICU). After each focus group, the research team met to debrief aboutthe session. Each team member generated a ﬁeld note summarizing the
discussion and describing general themes. A fourth team member thencombined the memos from the three team members who were present at
the focus group to generate a consensus memo for that focus group
34,35.
The moderator guide was also re ﬁned throughout data collection to
improve its clarity and effectiveness.
Participants were asked to complete a short questionnaire at the
beginning of the focus group to collect demographic data, which included:
age, gender, race, ethnicity, and educational attainment. The questionnairealso included two questions related to participant ’s work experiences; one
question examined work experience in a technology or computer-science
ﬁeld, and a second question examined experience working in healthcare or
the health sciences. These questions were included to assess the extent towhich our sample included persons whose work might be impacted moredirectly by applications of AI in healthcare, which we hypothesized would
impact participants ’familiarity and engagement with the topics discussed.
Data analysis
After the ﬁrst six focus groups, a synthesized memo was generated for
each of the cases, summarizing preliminary ﬁndings and emerging
themes34,35. A second set of case studies was designed using this
preliminary analysis, resulting in three completely new cases. The same
memoing process was done for the second set of case studies after theremaining focus groups were completed. Data collection, memoing, andpreliminary data analysis continued until the study team agreed that
thematic saturation had been reached
36. Each focus group was audio
recorded, with recordings sent to a transcription service and transcribedverbatim. All recordings were deidenti ﬁed and reviewed for accuracy by
the study team.
Transcripts were analyzed using a modi ﬁed inductive approach which
employed constant comparison analysis
37–39. The qualitative analysis team
consisted of one primary coder (J.P.R.) and two secondary coders (C.S., S.C.).A preliminary codebook was generated using the memos that were written
and synthesized during data collection34. All three analysis team members
then applied the codebook to three transcripts from different points in datacollection, revised the codebook based on those experiences, and
generated a ﬁnal codebook that was used to examine the entire dataset
40.
Each transcript was coded independently by two coders. The two codersthen met to discuss code any discrepancies until consensus was reached.All coding was done using NVivo 11 Software. Data available upon request.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature ResearchReporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
Additional supporting data available upon request to authors
Received: 18 February 2021; Accepted: 23 August 2021;
REFERENCES
1. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A. & Bengio, Y. Deep learning . 1 (MIT press
Cambridge, 2016).
2. Matheny, M., Israni, S. T., Ahmed, M. & Whicher, D. Arti ﬁcial intelligence in health
care: The hope, the hype, the promise, the peril. Natl Acad Med ,9 4–97 (2020).
3. Topol, E. J. High-performance medicine: the convergence of human and arti ﬁcial
intelligence. Nat. Med. 25,4 4–56 (2019).
4. He, J. X. et al. The practical implementation of arti ﬁcial intelligence technologies
in medicine. Nat. Med. 25,3 0–36 (2019).
5. Gómez González, E. & Gómez Gutiérrez, E. Arti ﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine and
Healthcare: applications, availability and societal impact. (2020).
6. Fast, E. & Horvitz, E. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence 963–969 (AAAI Press, 2017).
7. Concannon, T. W. et al. A systematic review of stakeholder engagement in
comparative effectiveness and patient-centered outcomes research. J. Gen.
Intern. Med. 29, 1692 –1701, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-014-2878-x (2014).
8. Holzer, J. K., Ellis, L. & Merritt, M. W. Why we need community engagement in
medical research. J. Investig. Med. 62, 851 –855 (2014).
9. Muthukrishnan, N. et al. Brief history of arti ﬁcial intelligence. Neuroimaging Clin.
N. Am. 30, 393 (2020). +.
10. Yarborough, M. et al. Relationships hold the key to trustworthy and productive
translational science: recommendations for expanding community engagement
in biomedical research. Clin. Transl. Sci. 6, 310 –313 (2013).
11. Borry, P., Schotsmans, P. & Dierickx, K. What is the role of empirical research in
bioethical re ﬂection and decision-making? An ethical analysis. Med Health Care
Philos. 7,4 1–53 (2004).
12. Morley, J. et al. The ethics of AI in health care: a mapping review. Soc. Sci. Med
260, 113172 (2020).
13. Stai, B. et al. Public Perceptions of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics in Medicine.
J. Endourol .https://doi.org/10.1089/end.2020.0137 (2020).
14. Juravle, G., Boudouraki, A., Terziyska, M. & Rezlescu, C. Trust in arti ﬁcial intelli-
gence for medical diagnoses. Prog. Brain Res 253, 263 –282 (2020).
15. Matheny, M. E., Whicher, D. & Thadaney Israni, S. Arti ﬁcial intelligence in health
care: a report from the national academy of medicine. JAMA 323, 509 –510 (2020).
16. National Health Expenditure Data: Historical. (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services, 2019).
17. Callahan, D. What Kind of Life?: The Limits of Medical Progress . (Georgetown
University Press, 1995).
18. Moraros, J., Lemstra, M. & Nwankwo, C. Lean interventions in healthcare: do they
actually work? A systematic literature review. Int. J. Qual. Health Care 28, 150 –165
(2016).
19. Childress, J. F. & Beauchamp, T. L. Principles of biomedical ethics . (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2001).
20. Holtzman, N. A. & Shapiro, D. Genetic testing and public policy. BMJ316, 852 –856
(1998).
21. Liu, X., Keane, P. A. & Denniston, A. K. Time to regenerate: the doctor in the age of
artiﬁcial intelligence. J. R. Soc. Med. 111, 113 –116 (2018).
22. Verghese, A., Shah, N. H. & Harrington, R. A. What This Computer Needs Is a
Physician: Humanism and Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. JAMA 319,1 9–20 (2018).
23. Obermeyer, Z. & Lee, T. H. Lost in Thought —The Limits of the Human Mind and
the Future of Medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 1209 –1211 (2017).J.P. Richardson et al.
5
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 

==== Page 6 ====
24. Wartman, S. A. & Combs, C. D. Reimagining Medical Education in the Age of AI.
AMA J. ethics 21, E146 –E152 (2019).
25. Johnston, S. C. Anticipating and Training the Physician of the Future: The
Importance of Caring in an Age of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. Academic Med. 93,
1105 –1106 (2018).
26. Johnston, S. C. Anticipating and Training the Physician of the Future: The Importance
of Caring in an Age of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. Acad. Med 93, 1105 –1106 (2018).
27. Flinterman, F., Broerse, J., & Bunders, J. The experiential knowledge of patients: a
new resource for biomedical research? Soc. Sci. Med. 60, 2575 –2584 (2005).
28. Ahmed, S. M. & Palermo, A. G. S. Community engagement in research: frame-
works for education and peer review. Am. J. Public Health 100, 1380 –1387 (2010).
29. McLafferty, I. Focus group interviews as a data collecting strategy. J. Adv. Nurs. 48,
187–194 (2004).
30. Wilkinson, S. Focus group methodology: a review. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 1,
181–203 (1998).
31. Morrison-Beedy, D., Côté-Arsenault, D. & Feinstein, N. F. Maximizing results with
focus groups: moderator and analysis issues. Appl Nurs. Res 14,4 8–53 (2001).
32. Deo, R. C. Machine learning in medicine. Circulation 132, 1920 –1930 (2015).
33. Hughes, R. Using vignettes in qualitative research. Socio. Health Illn. 20, 381 –400
(1998).
34. Lempert, L. B. Asking questions of the data: Memo writing in the grounded. The
Sage handbook of grounded theory, 245 –264 (2007).
35. Birks, M., Chapman, Y. & Francis, K. Memoing in qualitative research: Probing data
and processes. J. Res. Nurs. 13,6 8–75 (2008).
36. Guest, G., Namey, E. & McKenna, K. How Many Focus Groups Are Enough?
Building an Evidence Base for Nonprobability Sample Sizes. Field Methods 29,
3–22 (2017).
37. Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures
for developing grounded theory (Sage publications, 2014).
38. Donovan, J. The process of analysis during a grounded theory study of men
during their partners ’pregnancies. J. Adv. Nurs. 21, 708 –715 (1995).
39. Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Dickinson, W. B., Leech, N. L. & Zoran, A. G. A qualitative
framework for collecting and analyzing data in focus group research. Int. J.
Qualitative Methods 8,1–21 (2009).
40. MacQueen, K. M., McLellan, E., Kay, K. & Milstein, B. Codebook development for
team-based qualitative analysis. CAM J. 10,3 1–36 (1998).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was funded by the Mayo Clinic Biomedical Ethics Research Program. No
external funding was associated with the work described. The authors thank JoelPacyna for his help with study recruitment.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.P.R. contributed to study design, data collection, analysis, and writing. C.S.contributed to data collection, analysis, and writing. S.C. contributed to data
collection, analysis, and writing. S.W. contributed to data collection and writing. X.Z.
contributed to analysis and writing. B.B. contributed to analysis and writing. R.R.S.contributed to study design, analysis, and writing.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-021-00509-1 .
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Richard R. Sharp.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2021J.P. Richardson et al.
6
npj Digital Medicine (2021)   140 Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital

