==== Page 1 ====
REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Danyang Li1,2and Minghua Wu1,2
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) are a class of receptors that can directly recognize the speci ﬁc molecular structures on the surface
of pathogens, apoptotic host cells, and damaged senescent cells. PRRs bridge nonspeci ﬁc immunity and speci ﬁc immunity. Through
the recognition and binding of ligands, PRRs can produce nonspeci ﬁc anti-infection, antitumor, and other immunoprotective effects.
Most PRRs in the innate immune system of vertebrates can be classi ﬁed into the following ﬁve types based on protein domain
homology: Toll-like receptors (TLRs), nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene-I(RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), and absent in melanoma-2 (AIM2)-like receptors (ALRs). PRRs are basically
composed of ligand recognition domains, intermediate domains, and effector domains. PRRs recognize and bind their respective
ligands and recruit adaptor molecules with the same structure through their effector domains, initiating downstream signalingpathways to exert effects. In recent years, the increased researches on the recognition and binding of PRRs and their ligands havegreatly promoted the understanding of different PRRs signaling pathways and provided ideas for the treatment of immune-related
diseases and even tumors. This review describes in detail the history, the structural characteristics, ligand recognition mechanism, the
signaling pathway, the related disease, new drugs in clinical trials and clinical therapy of different types of PRRs, and discusses thesigniﬁcance of the research on pattern recognition mechanism for the treatment of PRR-related diseases.
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-021-00687-0
INTRODUCTION
Theﬁrst line of defense against pathogens that gradually evolved
in organisms is innate immunity,
1which is divided into two levels:
ﬁrst, the skin, mucosal tissue, blood –brain barrier, and chemical
barrier (e.g. fatty acid, pH, enzyme, and complement system) of
the host can effectively resist the invasion of general pathogenic
microorganisms;2–4second, the innate immune system of
vertebrates protects the organism through nonspeci ﬁc immune
defense and surveillance by innate immune cells. Innate immune
cells mainly include monocytes, neutrophils, macrophages,
dendritic cells, natural killer (NK) cells, mast cells, eosinophils,and basophils.5,6Unlike T cells and B cells, which have high
speci ﬁcity, innate immune cells do not express speci ﬁc antigen
recognition receptors. Through the recognition and binding of
some common molecules on the surface of pathogens, apoptotichost cells, and damaged senescent cells, pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs) induce immunoprotective effects, such as anti-
infection and antitumor effects, and participate in the initiationand effect process of speci ﬁc immune response.
7–9
In the 1990s, the hypothesis of pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) and PRRs that recognize PAMPs was proposed
by Janeway, which was of epoch-making signi ﬁcance and
changed research on innate immunity.10The main point of this
hypothesis is the connection between the innate immune signal
and the initiation of the adaptive immune response. Some unique
and conserved components of pathogenic microorganisms caninduce the second signal required to activate T cells, so as tocontrol the adaptive immunity from being activated under normal
conditions.
11,12In addition, there are a class of receptors in thehost that can recognize pathogenic microorganisms and activate
the second signal in time, which are independent of gene
rearrangement. In vertebrates, innate immunity recognizes
pathogenic microorganisms and assists in the activation andexpression of second signals that activate the adaptive
immunity.13
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are one of the earliest PRRs discovered
in the innate immune system, which plays an important role ininﬂammatory responses.14,15Therefore, here is a brief description
of the development history of PRRs with TLRs as a representative.
TLRs were ﬁrst found in Drosophila in the form of genes in 1994.
Studies have shown that the function of this gene is related to theformation of the dorsal –ventral axis during the embryonic
development of Drosophila.16In 1988, Hashimoto et al. discovered
that the Toll gene encodes a transmembrane protein and clari ﬁed
the structure of the Toll protein.17In 1991, Gay et al. found that
Toll protein had structural homology with interleukin-1 (IL-1), a
natural immune molecule in mammals, suggesting that thefunction of Toll may be related to immunity.18In 1996, Hoffmann
team found that Toll plays a role in the resistance of Drosophila to
fungal infection. Toll-activated mutants persistently express
antifungal peptides, while Toll-deletion mutants, on the contrary,lose their ability to arrest fungal infection. It has been found thatToll can recognize spatzle (an important protein in the develop-
ment of the dorsal and abdomen of Drosophila) and initiate a
series of signal transduction to activate the expression ofantifungal peptide.
19In 1997, Janeway et al. cloned human
TLR4. TLR4 can induce the activation of nuclear factor (NF)- κB and
the expression of the co-stimulatory molecule CD80. This proves
Received: 1 September 2020 Revised: 23 May 2021 Accepted: 22 June 2021
1Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital and the Af ﬁliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya Medical School, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China and2The Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis of the Chinese Ministry of Health, The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of the Chinese Ministry of Education, Can cer Research Institute,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, ChinaCorrespondence: Minghua Wu (wuminghua554@aliyun.com)www.nature.com/sigtrans Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
©The Author(s) 20211234567890();,:

==== Page 2 ====
that innate immunity recognizes pathogenic microorganisms and
activates the expression of the second signal, which is indis-
pensable for the activation of adaptive immunity.20Since the
discovery of TLR4, many PRRs and their corresponding ligandshave been discovered. PRRs can be divided into the following ﬁve
types based on protein domain homology: TLRs, nucleotideoligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), retinoic acid-
inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), C-type lectin recep-
tors (CLRs), and absent in melanoma-2 (AIM2)-like receptors (ALRs)
(Table 1).21PRRs are representative of immune receptors in innate
immunity and exist in various forms. PRRs are not only expressedon the cell membrane but also widely distributed in intracellularTable 1. Common PRRs in innate immunity
Items PRR Domains Cellular
distributionPAMP Sources Signaling pathways
Toll-like
receptors (TLRs)TLR1
(TLR1 –TLR2)LRR
domain –transmembrane
domain –TIR domain
(extracellular tointracellular)Mo, DC,
Ma, Eo, BaTriacyl lipopeptide Bacteria Most TLRs: MyD88-
dependent pathways;
TLR3: TRIF-dependent
pathways; TLR4: MyD88-dependent pathways andTRIF-dependent pathwaysTLR2
(TLR1 –TLR2,
TLR2 –TLR6)Mo, DC,
Ma, Eo, BaLipoteichoic acid Bacteria
Arabinomannan MycobacteriumPeptidoglycan BacteriaZymosan FungiLipoprotein MycoplasmaPore protein Neisseria
TLR3 M φ, DC, IEC dsRNA Virus
TLR4 (MD-2/
CD14)Mφ,
DC, Ma, EoLipopolysaccharides Bacteria
Heat-shock proteins Host
TLR5 IEC Flagellin BacteriaTLR6
(TLR2 –TLR6)Mo, DC,
Ma, Eo, BaLipoteichoic acid Bacteria
Peptidoglycan Bacteria
TLR7 pDC,
Mφ,E ossRNA Virus
Imidazoquinoline Arti ﬁcially
synthesized
TLR8 M φ, N ssRNA Virus
TLR9 pDC, Eo, Ba Non-methylated
CpG DNABacteria, Virus
TLR10
(human)pDC, Eo, Ba dsRNA Virus
TLR11
(mouse)Mφ,D C P r o ﬁlin and related
proteinsToxoplasma
gondii
TLR12
(mouse)DC Pro ﬁlin and related
proteinsToxoplasma
gondii
TLR13
(mouse)Unknown 23s ribosomal RNA Bacteria
Nucleotide-
bindingoligomerizationdomain-likereceptors (NLRs)NOD1 LRR domain –NBD –effector
domains
IEC, cytosolof M φiE-DAP Gram negative
bacteriaRIP2-TAK1-NF- κB pathways
NOD2 MDP Gram-negative
bacteria, Gram-positive bacteria
RIG-I-like
receptors (RLRs)RIG-I (RD)-CTD-DexD/H helicase
domain –CARDCytosol 5 ’-triphosphorylated
RNA, short-chain dsRNAVirus MAVS-TRAF6-NF- κB/TBK1
pathways
MDA5 poly IC, long-
chain dsRNAVirus
LGP2 dsRNA Virus
C-type lectin
receptors (CLRs)Dectin-1 CTLD –ITAM DC, M φβ -Glucan Fungus Tyrosine kinase-dependent
and non-tyrosine kinase-dependent pathwaysDectin-2 α-Mannan Fungus
Absent in
melanoma-2-like
receptors (ALRs)ALRs HIN-200-PYD Cytosol dsDNA Bacteria In ﬂammasome –pyroptosis
LRRleucine-rich repeat, TIRToll/IL-1R domain, NBD nucleotide-binding domain, RDrepressor domain, CTD C-terminal domain, CARD caspase activation and
recruitment domain, CTLD C-type lectin-like domains, ITAM immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif, PYD pyrin domain, Momonocyte, DCdendritic
cell, Mamastocyte, Eoeosinophils, Babasophils, pDC plasmacytoid dendritic cell, IECintestinal epithelial cell, Nneutrophil, dsRNA double-stranded RNA, ssRNA
single-stranded RNA, iE-DAP γ-D-glu-meso-diaminopimelic acid, MDP muramyl dipeptide, MyD88 myeloid differentiation factor 88, TRIF TIR domain-containing
adaptor protein-inducing interferon β,RIP2 receptor-interacting serine –threonine protein 2, TAK1 transforming growth factor- β-activated kinase 1, NF-κB
nuclear factor κB,MAVS mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein, TRAF6 tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor, TBK1 TANK-binding kinase 1Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
2
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 3 ====
compartment membranes and the cytoplasm.22Membrane-
bound PRRs and PRRs in the cytoplasm are basically composed
of ligand recognition domains, intermediate domains, and effectordomains.23,24PRRs activate downstream signaling pathways
through recognition of their ligands. The activation of down-
stream signaling pathways can produce many effects: recruiting
and releasing cytokines, chemokines, hormones, and growthfactors; inducing chronic in ﬂammation; forming an in ﬂammatory
microenvironment; initiating innate immune killing and subse-
quent acquired immune response,9maintaining the balance of
host microecology; and eliminating dead or mutated cells.
PAMPs are the speci ﬁc and highly conserved molecular
structures shared by the same kind of pathogenic microorgan-
isms,25,26including lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, such as
lipopolysaccharides (LPS), lipoteichoic acid (LTA), and bacterialDNA.27,28PAMPs are essential for pathogen survival and usually
have unique molecular or subcellular characteristics that are not
found in host cells. Therefore, innate immune cells can recognizePAMPs via PRRs, distinguish “self”and “non-self, ”29and respond to
pathogens and their products. However, the host will produce
some proteins and metabolites after being stimulated by its own
tissue damage, cell necrosis, and other factors.30These molecules
are called damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP).31PRRs
can also recognize such molecules, activate natural immunity, and
cause in ﬂammation.32
With advances in research on PRRs structure and distribution at
different levels, the role of PRRs in the innate immune regulatory
network has become clearer. The recognition and binding of PRRs
to their ligands is critical in initiating the innate immune response.Therefore, the study of PRR-mediated pattern recognitionmechanisms will help to elucidate the signaling pathways and
mechanisms of disease and provide new targets and methods for
the treatment of diseases. In this review, we describe the structuralcharacteristics, ligand recognition mechanism, the signalingpathway, the related disease, new drugs in clinical trials, and
clinical therapy of different types of PRRs in detail. We focus on the
different domains and ligand recognition mechanisms betweenPRRs, which can not only provide new ideas for the de ﬁnition, role,
and clinical application of PRRs but also promote the study of the
role of the innate immune system in related diseases and eventumors.PRRS AND LIGAND-RECOGNITION MECHANISMS
Toll-like receptors
TLRs are membrane-bound signal receptors and are importantPRRs in the innate immune system of vertebrates.
15,33Such
receptor molecules usually have two functions, one is to bind
speci ﬁcally to the ligand, and the other is to transmit signals. The
corresponding signal transduction will amplify the effect of anti-pathogen infection, so that the immune cells active in theinﬂammatory response can be activated through the transcription
of genes, and produce and secrete a variety of pro-in ﬂammatory
and antiviral factors.
34–36Up to now, 10 functional TLRs (TLR1 –10)
have been found in humans and 12 (TLR1 –9 and TLR11 –13) in
mice.37–41TLR10 in mice is not functional due to the insertion of
reverse transcriptase.42TLRs recognize PAMPs in different
subcellular structures. The cellular localization of TLRs determinesthe types of ligands and the recognition mechanism. Some TLRs
(TLR1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10) are expressed on the surface of immune cells
in the form of heterodimers or homodimers, mainly recognizingthe membrane components of pathogenic microorganisms, suchas lipids, lipoproteins, and proteins; others (TLR3, 7, 8, 9) are
expressed in the form of homodimers, which mainly recognize the
nucleic acids of microorganisms (Fig. 1).
43
TLRs are type I transmembrane glycoproteins and are com-
posed of an extracellular region, a transmembrane region, and an
intracellular region.44The extracellular region contains leucine-rich
repeats (LRRs), which are responsible for the recognition ofspeci ﬁc ligands and perform extracellular pattern recognition. The
intracellular domain contains the same Toll/IL-1R (TIR) domain as
IL-1R, which plays a role in signal transduction. The extracellularregion of TLRs contains LRRs, which mediate the patternrecognition of TLRs (Fig. 1).
45In 2007, researchers used X-ray
crystal diffraction to analyze and determine the structure of the
TLR–ligand complex,46which provided a deeper understanding of
the LRR domain. The LRR domain is shaped like a horseshoe, andeach module consists of a conserved leucine motif and a variable
region. The “LxxLxLxxN (L leucine, x any amino acid, N
asparagine) ”motif is composed of 20 –30 amino acids and is on
the concave surface of the horseshoe-like structure.47–50The
horseshoe-shaped N-terminus and C-terminus contain disul ﬁde
bridges formed by cysteine clusters51,52to protect the hydro-
phobic core. After TLRs recognize and bind the corresponding
Fig. 1 The signal transduction pathways and structure of TLR-binding ligand complex. TLRs can recognize one or more PAMPs through LRR
domain. They usually dimerize themselves and recruit adaptor molecules with the same TIR domain to transmit signalsPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
3
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 4 ====
PAMPs and endogenous ligands, the TIR domains conduct signals
by binding to different receptor adaptor proteins in thecytoplasmic region.53,54The TIR domain has three conserved
amino acid sequences, which are called 1,2,3 cassettes. Depending
on the different adaptor proteins, TLRs signaling can be divided
into myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88)-dependent andMyD88-independent pathways (Fig. 1).55,56
Exploring the pattern recognition mechanisms of TLRs is very
valuable for understanding innate immunity and some tumor-
igenesis mechanisms. Therefore, researchers used X-ray crystaldiffraction to determine the crystallographic structure of the
extracellular domain of TLRs and the ligand complex. Although
the ligand complexes have different structures, all thesecomplexes have similar M-type crystal structures (Fig. 2).
50,51
TLR1 or TLR6 can form TLR1/TLR2 and TLR6/TLR2 heterodimers
with TLR2 to recognize tri-acylated lipopeptide and di-acylated
lipopeptide,57respectively. After recognizing the appropriate
ligands, TLR2 can form an M-type structure with the extracellularregion of TLR1 and TLR6, and the pocket structure formed binds to
the ligand.58–61The crystal structure of TLR1 –TLR2 –tri-acylated
lipopeptide complex is similar to that of TLR2 –TLR6 –di-acylated
lipopeptide complex, but there are important structural differ-
ences between TLR1 and TLR6 in the ligand-binding site and
dimerization surface. The ligand-binding pocket of TLR1 –TLR2 is
located in the interface between the central and C-terminaldomain, and TLR1 –TLR2 –tri-acylated lipopeptide is stabilized by
non-covalent bonds such as hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic
interactions, and ionic interactions near the ligand-bindingpocket.
62In TLR6, the side chains of amino acid residues block
the ligand-binding pocket, resulting in a pocket less than half the
length of TLR1. In addition, the TLR2 –TLR6 heterodimer is mainly
regulated by the surface exposed residues of the LRR11 –14module (Fig. 2a, b).63Researches on the structure of ligand
complexes can signi ﬁcantly promote the discovery of small
molecule agonists/antagonists targeting PRRs. A recent studyrevealed the activation mechanism of atypical agonists for
TLR1 –TLR2. Diprovocim is a recently found small molecule
activator for TLR1 –TLR2, but it has no structural similarity with
the tri-acylated lipopeptide complex. It also interacts withTLR1 –TLR2 in the same binding pocket as typical lipopeptide
ligand.
64Crystal structure analysis revealed that double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA) binds to the LRR domains of the N-terminus and C-terminus of TLR3.65,66Different from the way that other TLRs
directly recognize ligands,67–69TLR4 speci ﬁcally recognizes LPS in
combination with two auxiliary molecules, myeloid differentiationfactor 2 (MD2) and the LRR structural protein CD14. LPS istransported by LPS-binding protein to CD14 on the cell membrane
of monocytes and macrophages to form a complex and then
interacts with TLR4/MD2.
70After LPS binds with the TLR4/MD2
complex, the hydrophobic pocket of MD2 is used to bridge thetwo TLR4 –MD2 –LPS complexes to form a spatially symmetrical M-
type TLR4 –MD2 –LPS dimer,71and then conformational changes
affect their respective functional domains and transmit signals(Fig. 2c). In addition to binding to LPS, TLR4 is also involved in the
recognition of natural products (carnosic acid, paclitaxel) and
pneumolysin.72–74TLR5 is the most conserved and important PRR,
which is usually stimulated by bacterial ﬂagellin. In the form of
homodimer, TLR5 plays a major role in the primary defense of
invasive pathogens and immune homeostasis regulation.75
Although the heterodimeric structure of TLR5a –TLR5b in zebra ﬁsh
and the crystallographic structure of TLR5 –ﬂagellin complex has
been clearly reported, the lack of biochemical and structural
information of ﬁsh TLR hinders the understanding of ﬂagellin-
based therapies. In the future, experimental TLR5 –ﬂagellin
Fig. 2 Crystal structure of TLRs with ligands. aCrystal structure of the TLR1 –TLR2 heterodimer induced by binding of a tri-acylated
lipopeptide (PDB 2Z7X). TLR2 initiates immune responses by recognizing di-acylated and tri-acylated lipopeptides. The ligand speci ﬁcity of
TLR2 is controlled by whether it heterodimerizes with TLR1 or TLR6. Binding of the tri-acylated lipopeptide (red) induced the formation of M-type crystal structures of the TLR1 (pale yellow) and TLR2 (slate) ectodomains. bCrystal structure of TLR2 –TLR6 –Pam2CSK4 complex (PDB
3A79). Binding of the di-acylated lipopeptide, Pam2CSK4 (red), induced the formation of M-type crystal structures of the TLR2 (slate) and TLR6
(pale green) ectodomains. cCrystal structure of mouse TLR4/MD2/LPS complex (PDB 3VQ2). After LPS (red) binds with the TLR4 (yellow)/MD2
(gray) complex, the hydrophobic pocket of MD2 is used to bridge the two TLR4 –MD2 –LPS complexes to form a spatially symmetrical M-type
structure. Mouse TLR4/MD2/LPS exhibited an complex similar to the human TLR4/MD2/LPS complex. dCrystal structure of the N-terminal
fragment of zebra ﬁsh TLR5 in complex with Salmonella ﬂagellin (PDB 3V47). Two TLR5 (cyan) –ﬂagellin ( ﬁrebrick) 1:1 heterodimers assemble
into a 2:2 tail-to-tail signaling complex to functionPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
4
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 5 ====
complex structure modeling and computational simulation should
be used to study ﬂagellin-mediated interactions between various
pathogens and host immune receptors (Fig. 2d).76It has been
reported that TLR1 –6 each exist as monomers in solution, and
dimerization occurs only when the ligand is bound; in contrast,
TLR8 and TLR9 exist as preformed dimers, and the binding ofligands induces conformational changes in preformed dimers (Fig.1).
49,77,78Lee revealed that TLR10 binds dsRNA in vitro at
endosomal pH, indicating that dsRNA is a ligand of TLR10. The
recognition of dsRNA by TLR10 recruits MyD88, thereby transdu-cing signals and inhibiting interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-dependent type I interferon (IFN) production.
79In mice, TLR11 and
TLR12 are the main effector molecules to recognize Toxoplasma
gondii . The recognition of T. gondii proﬁlin by TLR11 depends on
the parasite-speci ﬁc, surface-exposed motif in TgPRF consisting of
an acidic loop and a β-hairpin.80–82
NOD-like receptors
The growth cycle of some pathogenic microorganisms involves
infection of the cytoplasm. For example, viral genes are often
transcribed and translated in the cytoplasm, and virus particles areassembled. In addition, some bacteria and parasites have a seriesof escape mechanisms, such as making holes in the phagosome
membrane and entering the cytoplasm. Therefore, pathogens and
their components, as well as other components produced byinfection and injury, will appear in the cytoplasm,
83which requires
the recognition of PRRs in the body. NLRs are intracellular PRRs,
composed of three domains:84,85one is the central nucleotide-
binding domain (NBD), also known as the NACHT domain(synthesized by the abbreviations of the following four kinds of
NLR members: NAIP, CIITA, HETE, TP1), which is shared by the NLR
family and is very important for nucleic acid binding andoligomerization of NLRs (Fig. 3); LRRs at the C-terminus, which
are used to identify ligands; and the N-terminal effector domain,
which is the protein interaction domain, such as the caspase
activation and recruitment domain (CARD) or the pyrin domain(PYD).
86–89According to the different N-terminal effector domains,
the NLRs family can be divided into ﬁve subfamilies: the NLRC
subfamily, which contain CARDs; the NLRP subfamily, whichcontain PYDs; the NLRB subfamily, which contain baculovirusinhibitor of apoptosis protein repeats; the NLRA subfamily, which
contain acidic activation domains; and the NLRX subfamily
containing other NLR effector domains.
85
Among the NLRs family, the most in-depth study has focused
on NOD1 and NOD2 proteins. NOD1 mainly recognizes the
diaminopimelic acid ( γ-D-glu-meso-diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP))
of the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria.90,91In addition to
recognizing muramyl dipeptide (MDP) in all bacterial cell walls,NOD2 can also recognize single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) of the virus,but it must be a complete viral ssRNA.92The basic process of
NOD2 activation and signal transduction is as follows: after
pathogenic bacteria are phagocytosed by macrophages, they ﬁrst
form phagosomes, and then fuse with lysosomes to becomephagolysosomes. Under the action of lysosomal enzymes,bacterial cell wall components are decomposed into peptidogly-
can, which can be degraded into a cell wall peptide with
immunomodulatory activity and enter the cytosol, therebyactivating NOD2.
93In general, the LRR domain of the NLR
molecule folds to form a U-shaped con ﬁguration with the central
NACHT domain, which inhibits its multimerization and makes the
NLRs inactive.94Once PAMPs directly or indirectly bind to
the LRRs, the NLR molecule change their conformation, exposingthe NACHT oligomerization domain, which triggers oligomeriza-
tion, and the NLR molecule is activated.95At the same time, the N-
terminal effector domain is exposed, and through homotypicinteractions, downstream adaptor molecules and signaling
proteins with the same structure are recruited to initiate the
corresponding signal transduction (Fig. 3).96Although NOD1 and
NOD2 do not have transmembrane domains, studies have shownthat they are recruited into the plasma membrane and endosomal
membrane, which is necessary for signal transduction.97In this
process, palmitoylation plays a vital role. The modi ﬁcation of
NOD1/2 protein under the action of palmitoyltransferase ZDHHC5,which makes NOD1/2, possess the characteristics of rapid and
reversible localization changes, which is necessary for membrane
recruitment and in ﬂammatory signal transduction.98This study
gives us a good enlightenment that the modi ﬁcation of PRRs may
play a key role in the regulation of host innate immune signal.
RIG-I-like receptors
RLRs are also intracellular PRRs. In innate antiviral immunity, in
addition to the recognition of viral nucleic acids by TLR7 and TLR9,
most other types of cells recognize viral nucleic acids throughRLRs to induce antiviral immune responses.99,100The currently
discovered RLR family members mainly include three: RIG-I,
melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), and labora-
tory of genetics and physiology 2 (LGP2) (Fig. 4).101
RIG-I was ﬁrst discovered in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells
induced by retinoic acid. In 2004, it was found that RIG-I could
induce the expression of a reporter gene in the IFN- βpromoter
region, which con ﬁrmed its antiviral activity.102The structure of
the RIG-I protein consists of three parts.103–105The middle part is
the DexD/H helicase domain, which is the common domain of the
RLR family, and has ATPase and helicase activities.106–108The N-
terminus of the RIG-I protein is composed of two caspaseactivation and recruitment domains in series,109which are
responsible for transmitting signals downstream.110The C-
terminus is composed of the repressor domain (RD) and the C-terminal domain (CTD), which can regulate its own state.106,111The
former can inhibit the activation of the receptor, and the latter is
responsible for the recognition of viral RNA.112,113In the resting
state, CARD, CTD, and the helicase domain are folded, and RIG-I isin a self-inhibited state. During viral infection, the CTD of RIG-I
recognizes viral RNA and undergoes a conformational change.114
RIG-I uses ATP hydrolase activity to expose and activate the CARD
and multimerize, thereby recruiting downstream signaling linkermolecules (Fig. 4).115–117
The structure and functions of MDA5 are similar to those of RIG-I,
with the DexD/H helicase domain in the middle, two CARD at theN-terminus, and a CTD at the C-terminus; however, MDA5 lacks theRD, and so it does not have self-inhibitory functions. In contrast to
other RLRs, LGP2 does not have CARD,
118,119and so it cannot
recruit molecules of the same structure to transmit signals, but itcan regulate the recognition of viral nucleic acids by RIG-I and
MDA5, thereby preventing RLR-mediated resistance.120–123LGP2
can negatively regulate RIG-I-mediated recognition of viral dsRNA,reduce the production of IFNs and in ﬂammatory factors, and
Fig. 3 The ligand recognition mechanism of NLRs. The combination
of PAMP and LRR changes the conformation of NLRs from self-inhibition to activationPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
5
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 6 ====
ultimately inhibit the antiviral innate immune response.124LGP2 is
also critical in the antiviral response mediated by MDA5.125LGP2
exhibits a concentration-dependent conversion between MDA5-
speci ﬁc enhancement and interference.126The latest research
revealed a mechanistic basis for LGP2-mediated regulation ofMDA5 antiviral innate immune responses. LGP2 facilitates MDA5ﬁber assembly and is incorporated into the ﬁbers, forming hetero-
oligomers with MDA5.
127In addition, LGP2 can signi ﬁcantly induce
the exposure of the CARD domain of MDA5.128Under bacterial
infection of the Indian major carp Labeo rohita , LGP2 gene
expression was signi ﬁcantly increased after dsRNA and various
PAMPs were stimulated, indicating that LGP2 can act as an antiviral
and antibacterial cytoplasmic receptor.129
Although the RLR family members have similar structures, they
recognize the RNA of different viruses through ligand-recognition
domains.130Both RIG-I and MDA5 can recognize viral dsRNA, but
their recognition depends on the length of the dsRNA.131RIG-I
mainly recognizes viruses with relatively short dsRNA (<1000 bp),
while MDA5 tends to recognize long-chain dsRNA (>1000 bp).132
Additionally, RIG-I mediates the antiviral response by recognizing
the 5 ’-triphosphate RNA of viruses.133The 5 ’-terminal triphosphate
group can be recognized by RIG-I as a non-self component, but
after posttranslational modi ﬁcation, this molecule cannot be
recognized by RIG-I.134Because host cell RNA needs to undergo
different degrees of processing and modi ﬁcation after synthesis in
the nucleus, these results indicate that RIG-I can distinguish viral
dsRNA from endogenous RNA. In the cell, RIG-I mainly recognizesinﬂuenza virus,135vesicular stomatitis virus,136Sendai virus, and
Japanese encephalitis virus,137,138while MDA5 mainly recognizes
small RNA viruses, such as poliovirus.139,140MDA5 also participates
in the synthesis of the dsRNA analog polycytidylic acid (poly I:C).Previous studies have shown that ﬁlamentous ﬁbers are formed
during the recognition of ligands by RIG-I and MDA5, and
signaling pathways are initiated from the tail and inside of the
viral dsRNA, respectively.141
Although it is mentioned in the “Toll-like receptors ”section that
TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 speci ﬁcally recognize virus-derived
nucleic acid molecules and bacterial nuclear components, theymainly appear in the endosomal membrane. RLRs can not only beexpressed in cells infected by various viruses but also can directly
recognize and perceive the virus products and virus particles that
exist in the cytosol. Its antiviral signi ﬁcance cannot be ignored.
142C-type lectin receptors
CLRs, which belong to phagocytic PRRs, are also a popular type ofreceptor under study.143The function of phagocytic receptor is
different from the receptor that activates cells by signal
transduction. It recognizes and binds to PAMPs through PRRsand places pathogens in cytoplasmic vesicles for direct digestionand elimination to control infection.
144CLRs are a class of
receptors that recognize carbohydrates on the surface of
pathogenic microorganisms with the participation of Ca+.145It is
expressed on macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), and certaintissue cells. The ability of CLRs to recognize carbohydrates existing
on self and non-self structures is mediated by carbohydrate
recognition domain (CRD).146The CRD of CLRs is a compact
spherical structure, and this region is called C-type lectin-like
domain (CTLD).147,148Depending on the location of the protein on
the cell membrane, CLRs are divided into transmembranereceptors and secretory receptors.146,149,150The main representa-
tive of secretory receptors is collagen lectin family (under the
“Extracellular pattern recognition molecules ”).151Transmembrane
receptors can be divided into type I and type II according to theirtopological structure.152,153The N-terminal of type I receptors
points to extracellular and contains multiple CRDs, while the N-
terminal of type II receptors points to intracellular and contains
only one CRD.154,155It has been shown that the vast majority of
CLRs are involved in the presentation of antigens as active
membrane-associated receptors, and CLRs are mainly expressed
on antigen-presenting cells such as DCs and macrophages.145
CLRs are circular structures connected by two disul ﬁde bonds.156
CLRs contain at least one CTLD outside the cell, while the
intracellular domain is different.
Mannose receptors (MRs) belong to membrane CLRs, which are
single-chain transmembrane molecules.157–159The extracellular
segment of MR consists of two parts: one is the proximal membrane
end with eight consecutive CTLDs, which is responsible for the
endocytosis and transport of the ligand; the other is the distalmembrane end of the cysteine-rich lectin domain, which recognizes
sulfation of carbohydrate conjugates.160The endogenous ligands of
MR are lysosomal hydrolase and myeloperoxidase, as well as themannan-rich structure expressed by pathogens.161,162
Dendritic cell-associated C-type lectin (Dectin)-1 and Dectin-2
are typical representatives of the CLR family.163,164Dectin-1 is a
type II transmembrane protein expressed in DCs, macrophages,
Fig. 4 Structural features and ligand recognition mechanism of RLRs. The structure and functions of MDA5 are similar to those of RIG-I.
However, MDA5 lacks the repressor domain, so it does not have self-inhibitory functions. LGP2 does not have CARD, and so it cannot transmit
signals. The combination of viral RNA and CTD changes the conformation of RLRsPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
6
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 7 ====
neutrophils, and monocytes.165The extracellular region is a CTLD.
The intracellular tail is connected to an immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based activation motif (ITAM),166indicating that the receptor also
has a signal transduction function. Dectin-1 can identify a varietyof fungi,167including yeast,168Candida albicans ,169,170Pneumo-
cystis carinii ,171,172Cryptococcus,173,174and Aspergillus.175,176The
ligand of Dectin-1 is β-1,3-glucan, which can activate downstream
signals through tyrosine kinase-dependent and tyrosine kinase-independent pathways after recognition and binding of theligand.
177,178Glycosylation is an important modi ﬁcation of the
posttranslational modi ﬁcation of proteins (including antibo-
dies),179which can signi ﬁcantly change the structure and function
of proteins or antibodies, so it is also a key mechanism for theimmune system to regulate biological activity.180Abnormal
glycosylation is usually associated with malignant tumors.179
Therefore, the identi ﬁcation of molecules that bind glycosylated
glycans can provide a new way for the treatment of human
infectious and malignant diseases. Studies have found that Dectin-
1 can recognize aromatic amino acids adjacent to the N-terminalasparagine at the glycosylation site as well as the core fucose onIgG antibodies, which do not compete for the same protein
binding site for β-glucan, so Dectin-1 can regulate the immune
response induced by IgG by combining with core fucose.
181
Dectin-2, which is different from Dectin-1, does not contain the
ITAM sequence and has no signal transduction function.182Dectin-
2 mainly recognizes α-mannan in the fungal cell wall and
recognizes the Schistosoma mansoni egg antigen.183,184The
molecular mechanism by which Dectin-2 recognizes the binding
ligand has always been the focus of research. Decout et al.185
found that the stimulation of Dectin-2 by puri ﬁedMycobacterium
tuberculosis mannose-capped lipoarabinomannan requires the
(α1→2)-linked mannosides forming the cap. Besides, Dectin-2
can also recognize lipoglycans from other bacterial species.185,186
From the perspective of the relationship between the structure
and function of the above two ligands, dimannoside caps andmultivalent interaction are necessary for Dectin-2 to recognize
binding ligands and conduct signals.187
AIM2-like receptors
ALRs are a new type of PRRs that can recognize intracellular
DNA.188,189The C-terminus is the DNA-binding domain HIN-200,
and the N-terminus is the PYD.189–192The HIN-200 domain
recognizes double-stranded DNA and binds to it. The N-terminal
PYD binds to the PYD of apoptosis-associated speck-like protein
containing CARD (ASC),193,194thereby promoting the formation of
inﬂammasomes and the maturation and release of IL-1 βand IL-
18.195Both the DNA-binding af ﬁnity of AIM2 and the activity of its
inﬂammasome depend on dsDNA, and it can assemble into
ﬁlamentous structures along dsDNA. However, without dsDNA, it
can also form ﬁlaments at high protein concentrations.196–198ALRs
can not only participate in the innate immune response but also
regulate apoptosis, which is related to the occurrence and
development of tumors.199
Extracellular soluble pattern recognition moleculesThe initiation of the innate immune response depends on therecognition of PAMPs by pattern recognition molecules (PRMs),including cell PRRs and extracellular soluble PRMs. They are a class
of free receptors that can play an antibacterial effect in serum.
200
Although the pattern recognition of innate immunity does not
have the antigen speci ﬁcity of the adaptive immune response,
some PRMs produced by the body after infection by pathogenic
microorganisms will exist in the serum. Once the new pathogens
invade, they can also bind to the pathogen like an antibacterialmolecule and play an effective function. Unlike cell-related PRRs,
extracellular soluble PRMs are an important part of non-speci ﬁc
humoral immunity.201Extracellular soluble PRMs are composed of
different molecular families, mainly including pentraxin,202collectin, and ﬁcolin.203They generally function in two ways:
one is that they recognize various pathogenic factors and
eliminate them through complement activation,204,205opsoniza-
tion,206aggregation, and neutralization of in ﬂammatory regula-
tion; the other is that they interact with cell-related PRRs andregulate their functions to jointly regulate innate immune
response.207
Pentraxin is characterized by the aggregation of ﬁve molecules
and is highly conserved in evolution, including two families ofshort molecules and long molecules.208–211The family of short
molecules is called acute phase proteins, which is represented by
C-reactive protein (CRP)212–214and serum amyloid P compo-
nent215,216in humans and mice, respectively. These molecules are
mainly produced by the liver under the stimulation of in ﬂamma-
tory signals and interleukins. They are non-speci ﬁc proteins that
reﬂect the systemic in ﬂammatory response. Serum levels increase
rapidly after the body is infected or injured. CRP generally binds to
phosphocholine expressed on the surface of pathogenic micro-
organisms in a Ca+-dependent manner.217SAA can bind to the
outer membrane protein A of bacteria and interact withTLRs.218,219In clinic, SAA and CRP are usually used as auxiliary
diagnostic indicators for infectious diseases, but studies have
shown that they also have diagnostic value in non-infectiousdiseases and can be used as disease classi ﬁcation markers.220,221
The representative of the pentraxin long molecule family is
PTX3,222which is unique in that it has a long N-terminal domain.
PTX3 is produced by dendritic cells, monocyte macrophages,epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells (SMCs), and endothelial cells
under the regulation of a variety of in ﬂammatory factors.223PTX3
is involved in the defense of selected pathogens and theregulation of in ﬂammation.224–226Due to its expression increases
sharply under the conditions of in ﬂammatory stimulation, PTX3
can become a biomarker of general acute in ﬂammation and a
variety of tumors.227In coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
patients, circulating and lung bone marrow monocytes andendothelial cells express high levels of PTX3, and PTX3 plasma
concentration can serve as an independent strong prognostic
indicator of short-term mortality in COVID-19.228,229
Collectin mainly includes mannose-binding lectin (MBL) and
surfactant protein (SP).151,230MBL is formed by connecting
multiple homotrimers. Each component of the trimer includes a
CRD, an alpha helix, and a main stem formed by spirals ofcollagen.231,232The main stem of collagen gathers each trimer into
bundles. MBL is composed of six CRDs.151The end of CRD can
identify the sugar structure on the surface of various pathogens,such as mannose, fucose, glucose, etc.233–235The pathogens
involved include yeast, parasites, Gram bacteria, and so on.236–240
When the distance of each CRD between the same trimer or
adjacent trimers is 45 Å, it is most conducive to ligand binding.241
The other family members include A and D,242which exist on the
surface of the alveoli and are important innate immune defense
molecules in the lungs. Both of them are composed of N-terminal
region, CRD, neck region, collagen-like region, and other parts.243
CRD recognizes and binds glycosyl groups. The biological
signi ﬁcance is that they can selectively identify microbial
carbohydrate structures that are harmful to themselves.244,245
The domain of ﬁcolin is similar to collectin, but it recognizes a
variety of bacteria with a ﬁbrinogen-type carbohydrate recogni-
tion structure.246,247Its ligands are N-acetylglucosamine and LTA, a
cell wall component of Gram-positive bacteria.248,249
SIGNALING PATHWAYS OF PRRS
There are three main types of molecules involved in signaltransduction: protein kinases, adaptor proteins, and transcription
factors. Although PRRs are activated by their respective ligands in
different subcellular structures with different mechanisms, thethree main types of molecules involved in signal transductionPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
7
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 8 ====
have similar structures and functions, and the signals they
transmit are cross-talking, which can converge into several
common signaling pathways.
The NF- κB signaling
The transcription factor NF- κB is named after it was ﬁrst
discovered to be involved in the transcription of B cell κchain
genes.250NF-κB is a heterodimer composed of two molecules, p50
and p65, and is inactive due to binding to the inhibitory protein
IκB under normal conditions. NF- κB plays a key role in the process
of cellular in ﬂammation and immune response,251,252and its
mediated signal pathways are commonly seen in the activation ofvarious immune cells, including signal transduction initiated by
PRRs in innate immunity (Fig. 5).253
In the signal transduction initiated by TLRs,45after TLRs
recognize and bind the corresponding PAMPs and DAMPs, theTIR domains conduct signals by binding to different receptor
adaptor proteins in the cytoplasmic region.254,255Depending on
the different adaptor proteins, TLR signaling can be divided intoMyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent pathways.256MyD88
has a TIR domain at the C-terminus and a death domain at the N-
terminus and is the linker molecule in most TLR signal transductionpathways.257The current research indicated that, in the MyD88-
dependent pathway, MyD88 signaling mainly leads to the
production of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis
factor (TNF), IL-6, IL-1, and chemokines.258–260The C-terminus of
MyD88 binds to the intracellular TIR domain of TLRs, and the N-terminus of MyD88 recruits IL-1R-related kinase 4 (IRAK4)261and
activates IRAK1 and IRAK2 through autophosphorylation of its
central kinase domain. Then ubiquitin ligase TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is recruited to form a complex with
transforming growth factor (TGF)- β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and
two TAK-binding proteins (TAB1 and TAB4). TRAF6 is degraded dueto its own ubiquitination.
262,263The TAK1 –TAB1 –TAB4 complex
activates the I κB kinase (IKK) complex through phosphorylation.
The latter phosphorylates I κB and degrades itself by ubiquitination.
NF-κB is released and translocated to the nucleus, thereby
regulating the transcription of in ﬂammatory genes.264,265
In the signal pathway mediated by NLRs, when the bacterial
component invades the cell, NOD1 and NOD2 recognize the
bacterial iE-DAP and MDP, respectively.266,267And then NOD-likereceptors are activated, self-dimerize, and recruit downstream
receptor-interacting serine –threonine protein 2 (RIP2) through its
CARD.268Activated RIP2 gathers downstream TAK1, TAK1-binding
protein 1, and the NF- κB essential modulator/IKK α/IKKβcomplex,
and the former activates IKK α/IKKβ,269thereby activating the
transcription of NF- κB and promoting the release of pro-
inﬂammatory factors.
When virus invades cells, RIG-I and MDA5 recognize the
corresponding viral RNA through the CTD and undergo con-
formation changes.270Activated RIG-I and MDA-5 induce down-
stream signal transduction by binding with mitochondrial antiviralsignaling protein (MAVS). MAVS is an important adaptor proteinfor downstream signal transduction. The N-terminus contains a
CARD-like domain, which binds to RIG-I and MDA-5 through the
CARD –CARD interaction.
271,272The proline-enriched domain in
MAVS can interact with a series of downstream signalingmolecules, such as TRAF3 and 6,273and activate the protein
kinase IKK, which causes phosphorylation of I κB,265and then I κBi s
ubiquitinated and degraded by proteases, activating the NF- κB
pathway.274
Different from other typical PRR-mediated signaling pathways,
spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) can be activated by associating withthe phosphorylated ITAM motif of CLRs.275In the Dectin-1/Syk
pathway, Syk activates protein kinase C- δ, which mediates the
phosphorylation of CARD9.276This allows CARD9 to bind to B cell
lymphoma 10277and para-aspase mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue lymphoma translocation protein 1, forming a threemolecular structure that can typically activate NF- κB.278
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
MAPK is a group of serine –threonine protein kinases that can be
activated by different extracellular stimuli,279such as cytokines,
neurotransmitters, hormones, cell stress, and cell adhesion. TheMAPK pathway is one of the common intersections of signaltransduction pathways, such as cell proliferation, stress, in ﬂamma-
tion, differentiation, functional synchronization, transformation,
and apoptosis.
280,281It is an important transmitter of signals from
the cell surface to the inside of the nucleus.
In the MyD88-dependent pathway of TLRs, IRAK-1 is activated
by phosphorylation and interacts with TRAF6. In addition to
activating the IKK complex, it can also cause the activation of
Fig. 5 Pattern recognition receptor-mediated NF- κB signaling. The NF- κB protein can regulate gene expression and affect various biological
processes, including innate and adaptive immunity, in ﬂammation, stress response, B cell development, and lymphoid organ formation. TLRs,
NLRs, RLRs, and CLRs can generally phosphorylate I κB protein, which inhibits the activation of NF- κB protein, thereby promoting the
transcription and activation of in ﬂammatory genesPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
8
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 9 ====
MAPKs (c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), p38 MAPK).282In addition,
when bacterial components invade cells, NLRs are activated,recruiting downstream CARD9, thereby activating p38, JNK, and
ﬁnally activating the MAPK pathway283to promote the release of
pro-in ﬂammatory factors.
The TBK1 –IRF-3 signaling
IRF-3 is a key transcription factor that promotes the synthesis of
type I IFN and plays an important role in the antiviral innateimmune response.284IRF-3 can be activated through two innate
immune antiviral signal pathways, TLR3/TLR4-TIR domain-
containing adaptor protein-inducing interferon β(TRIF) and RIG-
I-MAVS,285and then dimerize and merge into the nucleus to work
(Fig. 6).286
The adaptor protein in the MyD88-independent pathway is TRIF.
The TRIF axis mainly induces the expression of type I IFNs.287After
the receptor is recognized and combined with the ligand, thepathway is activated by TRIF and TRAF3, leading to the
recruitment of IKK ε/TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1),288phosphor-
ylation of IRF3, and the activation of type I IFN genes, whichpromotes the expression of IFN- αand IFN- β, and exerts antiviral
effects (Fig. 6).289–291
RLRs such as RIG-I and MDA5 can detect viral nucleic acid.
MDA5 and RIG-I will interact with the shared caspase recruit-ment domain to induce MAVS to dimerize and bind to
TRAF3.134,140,292In turn, TRAF3 recruits the adaptor proteins
TANK, NAP1, and SINTBAD. TANK connects upstream RLR signaltransduction to TBK1, which induces phosphorylation of IRF-3.IRF-3 phosphorylation and subsequent dimerization induce IRF-
3 nuclear translocation, leading to type I IFN gene expression(Fig. 6).
192,293,294
The in ﬂammasome signaling
Inﬂammasome is the multi-protein complex assembled by PRRs in
the cytoplasm and is an important part of the innate immune
system.295The in ﬂammasome can recognize PAMPs or DAMPs
and recruit and activate Caspase-1. The activated Caspase-1spliced proIL-1 β/proIL-18 into the corresponding mature cyto-
kine.193,296There are ﬁve main types of in ﬂammasomes that have
been discovered, namely, NLRP1 in ﬂammasome,297NLRP3 in ﬂam-
masome,298NLRC4 in ﬂammasome,299,300IPAF in ﬂammasome, and
AIM2 in ﬂammasome.301Known in ﬂammasomes generally contain
ASC, caspase protease, and a protein of the NLR family (e.g.,
NLRP3) or HIN-200 family protein (e.g., AIM2). Taking NLRP3 as anexample,302the dimerization of NLRP3 under the action of
intracellular PAMPs or DAMPs makes the two PYDs to polymerize.
With the help of homotype interaction, NLRP3 binds and activates
the ASC complex with both PYD and CARD domains, whichreactivates the effector complex composed of CARD and caspase-
1. In this way, NLRP3 (LRR +NACHT +PYD), ASC (PYD +CARD),
and the effector complex (CARD +Caspase-1) together constitute
the in ﬂammasome, which produces important pro-in ﬂammatory
factors.303–305After AIM2 recognizes cytoplasmic dsDNA, it also
uses in ﬂammasomes to produce IL-1 βand IL-18. After AIM2
recognizes cytoplasmic dsDNA, it also produces IL-1 βand IL-18
through the in ﬂammasome pathway (Fig. 7).306
Fig. 6 Pattern recognition receptor-mediated TBK1-IRF-3 signaling. Intracellular induction of pathogens is carried out through the detection
of foreign molecular components (including cytoplasmic viral and bacterial nucleic acids). Once detected, the innate immune system inducestype I interferon (IFN) production through the TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1)-interferon regulatory factor-3/7 (IRF-3/7) pathway. IRF-3/7 can beactivated through two innate immune antiviral signal pathways, TLR3/TLR4-TIR domain-containing adaptor protein-inducing interferon β
(TRIF) and RIG-I-MAVS, and then dimerize and merge into the nucleus to workPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
9
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 10 ====
Innate immunity not only plays a role in controlling the
infection and spread of pathogens in the early stage of infectionbut also plays an important role in initiating and regulatingadaptive immunity.
12,307Innate immune cells produce different
types of cytokines through signal transduction initiated after PRRs
recognize PAMPs, which directly affect the differentiation of Thelper type 1 (Th1), Th2, Th17, and other subgroups in adaptiveimmunity.
15For example, pathogenic microorganisms activate
macrophages to secrete IL-6, TGF- β, IL-23, and other cytokines,
which promote Th17 response, leading to excessive immune-inﬂammatory effects and tissue damage, or activate NK cells to
secrete IFN- γ, and then activate macrophages to secrete IL-12,
promote the differentiation of Th0 into Th1, promote cellularimmune response, and effectively eliminate viral infections.
13,308
Therefore, the immune system is a system of mutual in ﬂuence.
Any anti-infection process is completed by mutually activating or
inhibiting of different components. These components are assmall as each cytokine and as large as the immune system.
PRR-RELATED DISEASES
PRRs and cancers
The in ﬂammatory microenvironment of tumor constitutes the
b a r r i e rf o rt u m o rg r o w t h ,w h i c hi s conducive to tumor formation
and development.309PRRs are widely expressed in a variety of
tumor tissues, such as colon cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer,
gastric cancer, melanoma, and so on.310,311The activation of
PRRs on the surface of tumor cells can induce the expression ofa large number of cytokines, chemokines, hormones, and
vascular-promoting factors, which is one of the important
factors to induce the formation of tumor in ﬂammatory micro-
environment and promote the development of tumor.312,313At
the same time, the activation of PRRs on immune cells caninduce antigen-presenting cells including DCs, tumor-associated
macrophages, and B cells to activate tumor-speci ﬁcTc e l l
responses or enhance the antitumor effects of phagocytes.These also indicate that the role of PRRs in immunotherapy
against tumors is very important and might represent a new
strategy for patients with tumors.
314,315We can see from the data in GEPIA316(http://gepia.cancer-pku.
cn/) that TLR level is signi ﬁcantly increased in tumors, including
glioblastoma multiforme, brain lower-grade glioma, kidney renalclear cell carcinoma, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD). NOD1/2 are highly expressed
in AML and PAAD, while RLRs are highly expressed in AML, PAAD,diffuse large B cell lymphoma, head and neck squamous cellcarcinoma, and thymoma.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) . CRC, including colon cancer and rectal
cancer, is one of the most common gastrointestinal malignancies
in clinical practice, and it is also one of the cancers that seriously
endanger human health.
317,318Intestinal mucosal epithelial cells
and immune cells recognize intestinal microorganisms and theirproducts through TLRs.319–322TLR2 can recognize peptidoglycans
and lipopeptides that infect intestinal epithelial bacteria and
produce anti-infection and other immune-protective effects.323
Studies have shown that the expression level of TLR2 protein incolon cancer is signi ﬁcantly upregulated compared with normal
epithelial tissues,324and the use of TLR2 agonists signi ﬁcantly
enhances the proliferation, migration, and invasion capabilities ofcolon cancer cells.325TLR4 is highly expressed on the surface of
colon cancer cells. After stimulation and activation, it can induce a
variety of immunosuppressive factors, thus promoting theproliferation and immune escape of colon cancer cells.326First,
TLR4 can produce trophic factors and vascular growth factors
through the TLR4/MyD88/NF- κB signaling pathway, thereby
promoting tumor cell invasion.327,328Second, TLR4 can promote
tumor proliferation through TLR4/Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). PGE2 is an important cell growth and
regulatory factor. After binding to speci ﬁc receptors, it plays a key
role in mediating a series of cell activities, such as cell proliferation,differentiation, and apoptosis, and has immunosuppressive andanti-in ﬂammatory effects. COX2 is the rate-limiting enzyme of
prostaglandin synthesis, and it is also highly expressed in
inﬂammation, tumor, and other pathological states.
329Hsu
et al.330found that knocking out the mouse TLR4 gene
signi ﬁcantly reduced the expression of COX2 and PGE2 in the
intestinal mucosa; after administration of PGE2, the expression of
Fig. 7 Pattern recognition receptor-mediated in ﬂammasome signaling. One way for pathogenic microorganisms to induce in ﬂammation is by
activating in ﬂammasomes, which are multi-protein complexes assembled by PRRs in the cytoplasm and activate caspase-1 and subsequent
activation of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines IL-1 βand IL-18. The in ﬂammasome complex usually contains cytoplasmic PRRs, adaptor protein
(ASC), and pro-caspase-1. Many different in ﬂammasome complexes have been detected, each with unique PRRs and activation triggersPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
10
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 11 ====
COX2 in the intestinal mucosa increased signi ﬁcantly and
promoted the occurrence of intestinal tumors. After administra-
tion of PGE2, the expression of COX2 in the intestinal mucosa
increased signi ﬁcantly and promoted the occurrence of intestinal
tumors. At the same time, it has also been found to promote theexpression of amphiregulin and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) in the intestinal mucosa. Finally, the study showed that the
abnormal expression of TLR4 in CRC caused by chronic in ﬂamma-
tion of the intestine can signi ﬁcantly enhance the expression of
PGE2, the upregulation of COX2, and the phosphorylation of EGFR
in intestinal mucosal cells, thereby positive feedback promotes the
proliferation of tumor cells. TLR5 also plays an important role intumor immunotherapy.
331In mouse xenograft models of human
colon cancer, ﬂagellin around the tumor activates TLR5 to inhibit
tumor growth and promote tumor apoptosis.332In addition,
TLR9 is expressed on the surface of the mesentery, whichmaintains intestinal homeostasis and repairs intestinal damage
by generating an immune response.333TLR9 relies on the MyD88
pathway to induce downstream signals to recruit many in ﬂam-
matory factors, such as IL-8, TGF- β, PGE2, and other immunosup-
pressive molecules,334leading to the continuous development of
inﬂammation, resulting in immune escape, and promoting the
unlimited proliferation of tumor cells. After TLR9 recognizes theexogenous ligand, it upregulates the expression of NF- κB signaling
factor. Once this pathway is opened, it may induce the secretion
of matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) and the activation of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1, thus promoting the metastasisof tumor cells.
335,336At the same time, the metastatic tumor cells
are better adapted and combined with the cell matrix at the
metastasis, and the stability of tumor cell metastasis is enhanced.Although TLRs have been shown to enhance colon cancermetastasis, inhibiting these receptors cannot completely hinder
tumor progression. Surprisingly, NOD1 is highly expressed in
human CRC and its cell lines. After being activated by C12-iE-DAP,it mainly enhances the adhesion, migration, and metastasis of CRCcells through the p38 MAPK pathway.
337
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) . HCC is the most common type of
primary liver cancer. Among its many in ﬂuencing factors,
inﬂammation is one of the main reasons that induce liver
cancer.338The expression of TLR2 in liver cancer tissues is
signiﬁcantly higher than that in normal liver tissues, and the
expression of TLR2 protein is related to some mutant genes that
lead to the occurrence of HCC, such as p53, PIK3CA, and
β-catenin.339–342In addition, Chew et al. revealed that the
expression of TLR3 has independent effects on tumor parenchymaand in ﬁltrating NK cells, and the expression of these two parts is
related to inhibiting tumor cell proliferation, promoting tumor cell
death, and prolonging the survival rate of patients.343This
indicates that TLR3 may directly act on tumor parenchymal cells,promote the recruitment and activation of NK cells, and exert
antitumor effects. More and more evidences show that LPS plays a
role in the development of HCC. Zhou et al.344found that LPS
activates the TLR4 –AKT–SOX2 signaling pathway of liver cancer cell
lines to improve the ability of cancer stem cells; Lin et al.345found
that there is a positive feedback loop of COX-2/PGE2/signaltransducer and activator of transcription factor 3 (STAT3) activatedby LPS in liver cancer cells, which regulates the expression of genes
related to tumor proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In the
latest research on the treatment of liver cancer, it is found that theantitumor effect of TLR9 agonist combined with anti-PD-1 antibodyor anti-PD-L1 is signi ﬁcantly better than single-agent therapy.
346
The activation of TLR9 inherent in liver cancer cells regulates the
autoarylation and ubiquitination of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1and the phosphorylation of STAT3, which together upregulate the
expression of PD-L1 and eventually induce immune escape.
Although TLRs have been reported to be associated with chronicinﬂammation of the liver, whether they promote the developmentof HCC remains uncertain. Song et al.
347found that the de ﬁciency
of TLR4, TLR9, and their downstream molecule MyD88 in a mouse
model characterized by hepatic deletion of TAK1 could block the
liver in ﬂammation –ﬁbrosis –cancer axis and reduce liver injury and
tumor growth. For TLR3, the downregulation of TLR3 in HCCpatients leads to poor prognosis (e.g., defective immune cell
recruitment and lack of killing of transformed hepatocytes), leading
to protection of transformed hepatocytes from apoptosis, therebypromoting the occurrence of liver cancer.
348Therefore, the
expression of TLR3 may become a useful clinical treatment
monitoring marker.
In addition to the above reasons, there is now more and more
evidence that the imbalance of the gut –hepatic axis may also play
a role in the occurrence of HCC.349Zhou et al.350discovered that
NOD2 acts as a bacterial sensor, linking gut-derived microorgan-
isms to the occurrence of HCC through a known mechanism and anewly discovered mechanism. The known mechanism is that
NOD2 activates NF- κB, JAK2/STAT3, and MAPK pathways in a RIP2-
dependent manner, leading to liver in ﬂammation.351It is worth
noting that activated NOD2 can also act as the initiator of thenuclear autophagy pathway that does not depend on RIP2, thereby
promoting the degradation of the nuclear component lamin A/C,
leading to damage to DNA damage repair mechanisms andincreased genomic instability, which eventually leads to theoccurrence of HCC.
350Meanwhile, the study found that the
expression of ALRs was negatively correlated with tumor volume,
stage, and metastasis of HCC patients. The researchers proposedthat overexpression of ALRs in HCC cells could increase the
expression of caspase-1 and IL-1a, and the release of lactate
dehydrogenase was also observed,352which was a marker of the
initiation of apoptosis. Thus, ALRs may play an antitumor role bypromoting tumor cell apoptosis.
Breast cancer . Breast cancer is one of the most common
malignant tumors in the female population. It has a strong abilityto invade and metastasize.
353It can metastasize to the liver, lung,
brain, bone, and other organs, forming complications and
increasing the dif ﬁculty of treatment. Studies have shown that
the promotion of the TLR2 signaling pathway on the metastasisand invasion ability of human breast cancer cells is achieved by
upregulating the secretion of in ﬂammatory cytokines.354LTA, a
TLR2 speci ﬁc ligand, can signi ﬁcantly promote the secretion of
tumor metastasis-related factors IL-6, TGF- β, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in breast cancer cells,355thereby
promoting the proliferation and metastatic invasion of breastcancer cells, and this promotion is related to the level of TLR2expression.
356,357In addition, the activation of TLR4 can increase
the secretion of IL-6 and IL-10 of cancer cells and induce the
production of more MMP-2, MMP-9, and VEGF,358,359which can
signi ﬁcantly enhance the invasion ability of breast cancer. It has
been reported that activation of TLR4 on metastatic breast cancer
cells can regulate the expression of integrin, which can promote
its adhesion and invasion.360
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Squamous cell carci-
noma, also known as epidermal carcinoma, is a malignant tumoroccurring in the epidermis or adnexal cells.361,362It is more
common in the parts covered by squamous epithelium, such as
skin, mouth, lip, esophagus, cervix, vagina, etc.363,364TLR2, TLR4,
and TLR9 are expressed in primary tumors, neck metastases, andrecurrent tumors of oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma(OTSCC), and their expression varies from the tumor surface to
the invasive front, which may be one of the important factors to
promote the invasion of OTSCC.
365,366NOD1 and NOD2 genes are
expressed in the human oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
line YD-10B, and they may trigger immune responses through the
MAPK pathway. Surprisingly, the study revealed that stimulationby the NOD2 agonist MDP can inhibit cell growth by inducingPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
11
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 12 ====
apoptosis. These ﬁndings provide the potential value of MDP as a
new candidate for OSCC antitumor drugs.367
Respiratory diseasesAspergillus fumigatus is a fungus widely distributed in nature. It can
easily invade the respiratory tract and cause bronchitis and
pneumonia in patients.368,369For the allergic lung in ﬂammation
caused by Aspergillus, the recognition of PAMPs by the body ’s
dendritic cells is mainly negatively regulated through the TLR2-MyD88 pathway. The results showed that PAMPs recognized by
TLR2 upregulated IL-10 and decreased the recruitment of
pulmonary eosinophils, thus downregulating Th2 response.370,371
In allergic asthma, TLR9 –IL-2 affects the Th2 response by
regulating the expression of IL-17A, so small molecule inhibitors
targeting TLR9 may become a new treatment strategy.372
Nervous diseasesThe connection between innate immunity and nervous system is
becoming more and more complex and close.373–375Studies have
shown that NOD1/NOD2 may be a new target for the treatment ofstress-related gut –brain diseases.376The gut –b r a i na x i si sa
biochemical signal of the digestive tract and central nervous system,
which affects all events from brain development to the progressionof neurological diseases. The hypothalamic –pituitary –adrenal axis
(HPA) is one of the main pathways of gut –brain axis signal
transmission.377It has been reported that the immune system plays
a key role in brain function and stress response. NLRs are PRRsexpressed in the gut and brain. The lack of NOD1 and NOD2 affects
the serotonergic signaling of gut and brain, the proliferation of
hippocampal cells, and the matur ation of neurons, which makes the
mice lacking both of them vulnerable to HPA overactivation understimulation, thus showing anxiety, cognitive impairment, and
depression.
378–380TLR4 is very important in the process of
neuropathic pain caused by infection and sterile neuronal injury.TLR4 exerts its effects through the act ivation and nuclear localization
of NF- κB and the production of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines, which
can activate pain receptors to cause neuropathic pain.381,382Relevant
studies have revealed for the ﬁr s tt i m et h a tl y s o z y m ea c t sa sa n
endogenous ligand for activating TLR 4 in sterile nerve injury, thereby
promoting neuronal excitement and neuropathic pain.383The
identi ﬁcation of lysozyme as DAMPs has improved our under-
standing of neuroin ﬂammation and opened up prospects for the
treatment of neuropathic pain.
Digestive diseases
Newborns with chronic obstructive jaundice make their liversprone to cholestatic liver disease, and biliary atresia (BA) accounts
for half of the cases.384Viruses have always been considered as
the causative pathogen of this disease, and the role of TLRs in thepathogenesis and progression of BA has been determined.385
Subsequent studies have shown that activation of TLR7 can
induce type 1 IFN signal transduction, apoptosis, and dysplasia of
the neonatal liver and biliary system. This new discovery revealsthe pathogenesis of neonatal cholestatic liver disease.386
The expression of TLR5 is closely related to various infectious
diseases caused by bacteria.387,388The lack of TLR5 can cause
changes in the intestinal ﬂora and cause colitis.389The
protein –protein interaction between TLR5 and ﬂagellin plays an
important role in pathogen defense, immune diseases, and
tumors. 4-((4-benzyl-5-(pyridin4yl)-4H-1,2,4-triazol-3-yl)thio)pyrido[3’,2’:4,5]thieno[3,2-d] Pyrimidine (TH1020) is a small molecule
inhibitor identi ﬁed through high-throughput screening, which can
disrupt the association between TLR5 and ﬂagellin, and provides a
lead compound for new therapies against TLR5.390,391
Alcoholic liver disease is a liver disease caused by long-term
heavy drinking. The initial stage usually manifests as fatty liver,
which can then develop into alcoholic hepatitis, liver ﬁbrosis, and
cirrhosis.392,393Patients with advanced alcoholic cirrhosis are moresusceptible to infection.394This phenomenon is related to multiple
organ failure and immunode ﬁciency and is usually manifested as
insuf ﬁcient antibacterial activity of neutrophils.395The neutrophil
function to resist microbial infections needs to generate reactiveoxygen species through NADPH oxidase 2. Rolas et al. found that,in patients with alcoholic liver cirrhosis, the lack of catalytic core
ﬂavocytochrome b558 (gp91phox, p22phox) and p47phox of the
NADPH enzyme may be a new factor that patients are susceptibleto infection. What is surprising is that the activation of TLR7/8 canreverse the expression and activity of the de ﬁcient gp91phox,
which provides a direction for restoring the antibacterial response
of immunode ﬁciency patients.
396,397
Cardiovascular diseases
Atherosclerosis is a chronic in ﬂammatory disease caused by
plaques composed of lipids, cholesterol, calcium, and othersubstances in blood vessels.398,399It has been reported that TLRs
are extensively and deeply involved in the process of athero-
sclerosis.400,401TLR7 has been identi ﬁed as a good prognosis
marker for patients with severe atherosclerosis. TLR7 in theplaque produced in atheroscleroti c lesions will secrete IL-10 and
TNF- αafter being stimulated by ligand. Studies have found that
TLR7 may regulate in ﬂammation in atherosclerosis by inhibiting
the effects of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines.402In addition to the
production of plaque, cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is also released in
atherosclerotic lesions. TLR9 recognizes cfDNA and plays a key
role in the development of vascular in ﬂammation and athero-
sclerosis by promoting the pro-in ﬂammatory activation of
macrophages.403The formation of initial a therosclerotic plaques
is caused by the interaction of macrophages and endothelialcells, macrophage in ﬁltration, and other factors that lead to an
increase in neointima.404,405It is worth noting that studies have
shown that TLR5-mediated activation of NADPH oxidase 4
(Nox4) can regulate the migration of SMCs and promote theexpression of pro-in ﬂammatory cytokines, which may contribute
to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques. This indicates that
the ﬂagellin –TLR5 –Nox4 cascade is of great signi ﬁcance in
atherosclerotic intimal hyperplasia.406,407In addition, TLR2
activates p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 signals, thereby upregulating IL-6-mediated receptor activator
of NF- κB ligand and downregulating osteoprotegerin. These will
make the cartilage formation of vascular SMC transdifferentiate,leading to vascular calci ﬁcation.
408The expression of TLR3 is
reduced in the lung tissue and endothelial cells of patients with
pulmonary hypertension, and its de ﬁciency increases the
susceptibility to apoptosis and pulmonary hypertension.409In
addition to TLRs, the lack of NOD1 and NOD2 can lead to lipid
deposition of atherosclerotic plaques and the reduction of
inﬂammatory cell in ﬁltration, so it has been identi ﬁed as pre-
disease factors.410
Human brain pericytes (HBPs) are an important component of
the microvascular wall and contribute to the integrity of the
blood –brain barrier (BBB).411It has been found that TLR4 and
NOD1 are expressed in HBP, which also reveals that HBP has the
ability to sense systemic infection or blood-borne PAMPs. HBP can
perceive Gram-negative bacteria to protect BBB through differentpathways mediated by TLR4 and NOD1, or it can trigger paracrinesignaling pathways by releasing chemokines and cytokines,
leading to the destruction of BBB.
412,413These are all new insights
that PRRs are involved in the body ’si nﬂammatory response and
may have an impact on the treatment of diseases.
Endocrine diseases
In order to adapt to the constantly changing internal and externalenvironment and maintain the relative stability of the internal
environment, the human body must rely on the cooperation and
regulation of the nervous, endocrine, and immune systems,414,415
so that the activities of various organs and systems arePattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
12
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 13 ====
coordinated, and jointly shoulder all the life phenomena of the
body. The immune system is not only regulated by the other two
systems but also affects them through chemical information
molecules and receptors.416,417
In patients with autoimmune thyroid disease, the expression
and activation of TLR2, 3, and 9 are signi ﬁcantly increased.418,419In
addition, it has been reported that TLR9 negatively regulates
pancreatic islet development and βcell differentiation, providing
new directions for diabetes prevention and treatment strate-gies.420In diet-induced obesity, TLR2 and TLR4 inhibit the
replication of βcells and affect the nuclear abundance of the
cell cycle regulators cyclin D2 and Cdk4. Therefore, targetingTLR2 –TLR4 may alleviate the failure of βcells in diabetic
patients.421
One of the most common complications of diabetes is diabetic
foot ulcers, and the reason why it is not easy to get better is theinﬂammation of the wound.422,423Singh et al. believe that
changes in the expression level of intracellular TLRs may be one
of the reasons for the continuous in ﬂammation of chronic
wounds, such as diabetic foot ulcers, and may hinder woundhealing in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).424The
basis of these pro-in ﬂammatory effects is that intracellular TLRs
activate dendritic cells and B cells to produce IFN I and III,aggravating the in ﬂammatory response.425–427The in ﬂammatory
phase of the wound healing cascade is the decisive stage of
wound development, and studies have found that certain
members of innate immunity play an important role in thepathogenesis of chronic wound healing abnormalities.428,429The
signaling pathway of intracellular TLRs is shown to be involved in
some chronic in ﬂammatory diseases, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), multiple sclerosis, hepatitis, and T2DM.430
Skeletal diseasesThe expression level of NOD2 in human osteoarthritis (OA)cartilage is signi ﬁcantly higher than that of normal cartilage, and
its combined action with TLR2 contributes to the pro-catabolic
gene expression induced by 29-kDa amino terminal (matrix
degradation product in synovial ﬂuid of patients with OA) in
human chondrocytes.
431,432This indicates that the NOD2 and TLR2
cross-regulatory pathway may be a target to prevent the
development of arthritis. More and more evidences indicate that
the interaction between different signal pathways may be a newway for the occurrence and development of diseases. The latest
research combines three biological processes in skeletal muscle
during exercise, innate immune response, autophagy proteinhomeostasis, and adenosine monophosphate-activated proteinkinase (AMPK) activation, revealing that TLR9 can regulate the
energy metabolism of skeletal muscle during exercise, and TLR9
regulates exercise-induced skeletal muscle AMPK activation byinteracting with the core autophagy protein beclin1.
433,434
CLINICAL THERAPY OF PRRS
Based on the important role that PRRs play in innate immunity,
they have received extensive attention in the ﬁelds of immunol-
ogy and drug research.310,435There are many types of PRRs and a
wide range of ligands. They can be used as drug targets for tumor,inﬂammation, autoimmune disease, pathogenic microbial infec-
tion, and other diseases, which are important entry points for
immunotherapy.314The activation of PRRs brings double-sided
effects: on the one hand, it stimulates innate immunity andadaptive immunity to resist pathogenic microorganisms; on the
other hand, it promotes the expression of a large number of
cytokines, forms an in ﬂammatory microenvironment, and causes
tissue damage.29,436Therefore, the treatment strategy targeting
PRRs is mainly to use ligand analogs to activate PRRs,435use
antagonists to inhibit their activation, or use antibodies and smallmolecules to inhibit PRR signaling pathways.437It is reported thatmost of the agonists and antagonists of TLRs are only in the
clinical development stage, which are studied comprehensively in
PRRs (Table 2). In addition, microRNA (miRNA), exosomes, and
combination therapy also have certain potential in this ﬁeld.438,439
PRR agonists for therapy
Imiquimod is the ﬁrst targeted drug for TLRs. It is a speci ﬁc agonist
of the TLR7 receptor. It can induce the production of IFN- α, IL-6,
and TNF- αto achieve the purpose of regulating immunity and
treating tumors.440Selgantolimod, a novel TLR8 agonist, can
activate TLR8 and elicit cytokine responses in patients with
chronic hepatitis B infection.441,442Further studies with longer
durations of selgantolimod treatment are required to evaluateefﬁcacy. The ligand of TLR9 is unmethylated DNA, and CpG
oligodinucleotide (CpG ODN) that mimics this structure has good
antitumor potential (e.g., IMO-2055, MGN-1703, MGN-1704).443
The research of MGN-1703 on the treatment of advanced CRC is in
phase III. MGN-1703 can induce a potent type I IFN response in the
intestine, which is related to the subtle changes of intestinalﬂora.444Clinically, PRR agonists can be potentially used not only as
therapeutic agents to treat but also as adjuvants in conjunction
with other immunotherapies.445,446Due to the instability and drug
resistance of existing drugs, some adjuvants targeting PRRsemerge as the times require. A TLR3-speci ﬁc adjuvant, ARNAX,
can enhance DC priming and CTL proliferation without cytokine
toxicity.447And the conjugated STING and TLR1/2 agonist
Pam 3CSK 4-CDGSFcan be used as an effective adjuvant for
constructing vaccines to enhance antitumor immunotherapy.448
NLR agonists can promote the processing and secretion of IL-1 β,
which is very important for activating many immune cells.449,450
Therefore, NLR agonists can be served as effective components of
vaccines and immune stimulants.
The class II major histocompatibility complex transactivator
(CIITA) is a single member of the NLRA subfamily.451As the main
regulator of major histocompatibility complex II, its ownmodi ﬁcation is very important in the occurrence and development
of tumors. Both the deacetylation of histones and the demethyla-
tion of DNA will downregulate the transcription of CIITA.452
Decitabine (5-aza-2 ’-deoxycytidine), Entinostat (MS-275), and
Trichostatin A target CIITA to promote its expression recovery in
tumors. In addition, andrographolide, arglabin, formononetin,
mangiferin, and other botanicals can be used to treat tumors byinhibiting NLRP3 in ﬂammasome.453–457Representative NLR ago-
nists like Mifamurtide have been approved for clinical trials of non-
metastatic sarcoma.
RLRs are involved in the recognition of viral infection by the
innate immune system, and their agonists include poly I:C.99Studies
have revealed the link between energy metabolism and innate
immunity, indicating that lactate may act as a natural inhibitor ofRLR signal transduction by targeting the adaptor protein MAVS.458
The latest research shows that activating RIG-I before diffusing
alpha-emitting radiation therapy for metastatic and low immuno-
genic tumors is a more effective combination therapy techniquethat can inhibit tumor growth and metastasis.459
PRR antagonists for therapyPRR antagonists belong to immunosuppressants, which are mainlyused to inhibit the function of receptors and block the connection
between receptors and ligands.
460They can be used to treat
diseases with abnormal activation of the immune system. Theabnormal activation of TLR7, 8, and 9 contributes to the onset andmaintenance of in ﬂammatory diseases.
461,462The inhibitors IMO-
3100 and IMO-8400 targeting them can signi ﬁcantly reduce the
expression of IL-17A induced by IL-23, which has a potential role inthe in ﬂammatory cascade.463,464In addition, inhibition of TLR7 and
TLR9 with IRS-954 or chloroquine may be a new treatment for
HCC.465In addition to the immune inhibitory oligonucleotides that
can be used as TLR inhibitors, CPG-52364, a derivative of the smallPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
13
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 14 ====
Table 2. Clinical trials investigating the use of TLR agonists and antagonists in diseases
Drug Phase Target Application Treatment NCT number Status
Agonists
MGN1703 II TLR9 Human immunode ﬁciency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Monotherapy NCT02443935 Completed
gp100 II TLRs Melanoma Combination with resiquimod (R848) NCT00960752 CompletedMAGE-3 II TLRs Melanoma Combination with resiquimod (R848) NCT00960752 CompletedInsulin II TLRs Insulin resistance Monotherapy NCT01151605 UnknownEMD 1201081 II TLR9 Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck cancer Combination with cetuximab NCT01040832 CompletedResiquimod I TLR7/8 In ﬂuenza vaccination in seniors Monotherapy NCT01737580 Completed
CPG 7909 II TLR9 HIV infections TLR-9 adjuvanted pneumococcal NCT00562939 Completed
DSP-0509 II TLR7 Advanced solid tumors Monotherapy and combination with
PembrolizumabNCT03416335 Recruiting
SD-101 I TLR9 Chronic hepatitis C Monotherapy and combination with ribavirin NCT00823862 Completed
Imiquimod II TLR7 Breast cancer (for chest wall recurrences or metastases to
the skin), breast neoplasmsMonotherapy NCT00899574 Completed
Imiquimod II TLR7 Breast cancer, metastatic breast cancer, recurrent
breast cancerMonotherapy and combination with
cyclophosphamide (CTX) and radiotherapy (RT)NCT01421017 Completed
GSK1795091 I TLR4 Cancer Monotherapy NCT02798978 Completed
GSK2245035 II TLR7 Mild asthma and allergic rhinitis Monotherapy NCT01788813 CompletedSD-101 I TLR9 Metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma, refractory
pancreatic adenocarcinoma, stage IV pancreatic cancer,AJCC v8Combination with nivolumab and radiation therapy NCT04050085 Recruiting
Motolimod II TLR8 Ovarian cancer Chemoimmunotherapy with anti-PD-L1 antibody
MEDI4736NCT02431559 Active, not
recruiting
VTX-2337 I TLR8 Locally advanced, recurrent, or metastatic squamous cell
cancer of the head and neck (SCCHN)Combination with cetuximab NCT01334177 Completed
CPG 7909 II TLR9 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, mycosis fungoides Monotherapy NCT00185965 Completed
PolyICLC I/II TLR3 Melanoma Adjuvants NCT04364230 Recruiting
Antagonist
IMO 8400 II TLR7,
TLR8, TLR9Plaque psoriasis Monotherapy NCT01899729 Completed
OPN-305 II TLR2 Delayed graft function Monotherapy NCT01794663 Completed
Hydroxychloroquine III TLR7, TLR9 Autoimmune diseases, Sjogren ’s syndrome, dry eye Monotherapy NCT01601028 Completed
Eritoran II TLR4 Insulin sensitivity Monotherapy NCT02321111 Completed
Limited clinical studies have been carried out investigating PRR agonists and antagonists in related research to date. Most of the agonists and antag onists of TLRs are only in clinical development stage, which
are studied comprehensively in PRRsPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
14
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 15 ====
molecular weight chemical compound quinazoline, can also block
ligand-induced activation of TLR7, 8, and 9.462FP7 is a synthetic
glycolipid, which can be used as TLR4 inhibitor to treat septic
shock.466Studies have found that inhibitory ODN-containing
phosphorothioate modi ﬁcations of the backbone have potential
therapeutic effects for SLE and rheumatoid arthritis. ODN1411
directly binds to the extracellular domain of TLR8 and competi-
tively inhibits its signal transduction.467
In the NLR family, the NLRP3 in ﬂammasome is closely related to
the pathophysiology of a variety of in ﬂammatory diseases, so it is
usually used as an inhibitor target.298,304,305MCC950 is a speci ﬁc
NLRP3 antagonist, which can prevent its activation or maintain itsactivation state.468β-Carotene has been shown to directly bind to
the PYD of NLRP3, thereby blocking the association between
NLRP3 and its adaptor protein and ultimately inhibiting the
activation of NLRP3 in ﬂammasomes.469This result further
complements the new pharmacological strategy to prevent NLRP3
inﬂammasome-driven gouty arthritis. The development of small
molecule inhibitors for NLRP3 has been in full swing.470,471Dai
et al. reported a series of tetrahydroquinoline inhibitors. In furtherstudies in vitro, it was found that compound 6 directly binds to the
NACHT domain of NLRP3 but not to the PYD or LRR domains,
which inhibits the assembly and activation of NLRP3 in ﬂamma-
somes. In vivo, compound 6 can signi ﬁcantly inhibit the
expression of IL-1 βand alleviate the symptoms of colitis.472
Agarwal et al. identi ﬁed alkenyl sulfonylurea derivatives as a novel,
oral, and biologically effective NLRP3 inhibitor. Compound 7 ofalkenyl sulfonylurea derivatives has good pharmacokinetic char-
acteristics and high oral bioavailability.473
Other potential therapies via PRRs
Emerging evidence suggests that the interaction between miRNA
and PRR pathway and immunoregulation are intimately inter-
woven.438The interaction between the two is particularly
signi ﬁcant in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).474,475
RA is a common autoimmune disease, which is characterized by
synovial hyperplasia and irreversible bone destruction caused by
chronic synovitis. Rheumatoid arthritis synovial ﬁbroblast (RASF)
plays a central role in this process.476–478The expression of miR-
146a and miR-155 is upregulated in RASF. miR-146a inhibits the
expression of TRAF-6 and IRAK-1 in the TLR signaling pathway,
thereby inhibiting the production of key adaptor moleculesdownstream of TLRs in RA.479And miR-155 negatively regulates
the activation of TLRs/IL-1R in ﬂammatory pathway. Both of them
will eventually reduce RA in ﬂammation.480In addition, miR19a/b,
miR-20a, and miR-10a are downregulated in RASF. DownregulatedmiR19a/b directly targets TLR2 to increase its expression481; miR-
20a inhibits the expression of ASK1, a key component of the TLR4
pathway482; miR-10a targets IRAK4 and TAK1 to accelerate I κB
degradation and NF- κB activation.483These effects promote the
inﬂammatory response of RA. All these evidences indicate that
miRNAs can surpass their conventional functions and act as
physiological ligands for TLRs, thereby regulating the expressionof cytokines in the in ﬂammatory response. miRNA can also target
other PRRs. miR-485 can target RIG-I mRNA for degradation,
leading to enhancement of virus replication and inhibition ofantiviral response.
484miRNA-155 can aggravate the brain tissue
inﬂammation in neonatal rats with hypoxia and ischemia by
regulating the NOD1/NF- κB signaling pathway, thereby causing
hypoxia and ischemic brain damage in neonatal rats.485,486
In addition, exosomes are also involved in the complex immune
regulatory network of miRNA and PRRs.487Exosomes are small
membrane vesicles containing complex RNA and protein. A
variety of cells can secrete exosomes under normal andpathological conditions.488,489There is evidence that exosomes
can regulate innate immunity by combining with TLRs, which
provides a new method for the body to resist pathogens and treatdiseases.487Brain exosomes are rich in amyloid-beta (A β), themain component of neuritic plaques, which can activate TLR2,
TLR4, and TLR9 signaling, thus alleviating the early symptoms of
Alzheimer ’s disease.490It was found that the expression of miR-
216a-5p in the plasma of patients with syphilis is negativelycorrelated with the expression of in ﬂammatory cytokines.
Exosomes containing miR-216a-5p inhibit the in ﬂammatory
response induced by recombinant Tp17 by targeting the
TLR4 –MyD88 pathway.491Melphalan, a genotoxic agent, can
enhance the ability of multiple myeloma (MM) cells to releaseexosomes in MM. Hsp70 on the surface of MM-derived exosomes
activates TLR2 in NK cells, thereby inducing the production of
INFγ.492This enlightens us that exosomes with signi ﬁcant
exposure to DAMPs can link chemotherapy with antitumor innateimmune response.
However, whether they are therapeutic agents, adjuvants, or
others, it still needs a long time to further improve the researchin vitro and in vivo before clinical application in tumor
treatment.
493
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVESThe innate immune system has multiple recognition mechanisms
in different cell types with different subcellular structures.Recently, great progress has been made in the study of theinteraction between PRRs and ligands. A preliminary under-
standing of the crystal structure of some PRRs and the
commonalities and differences in the structural composition ofdifferent types of PRRs has been made. We understand the
existing forms of PRRs alone in solution and after binding to
ligands, as well as the molecules involved in the process of PRRidenti ﬁcation and ligand binding. As the initiation step of the
innate immune response and antiviral response, PRR recognition
and binding of ligands is critical. PRRs recognize targets through
their respective ligand-recognition domains: LRRs, CTDs, CTLDs,and a variety of DNA- or RNA-binding domains. Ligand bindinginduces activation and transmission of the signal, which is
transmitted through cascade ampli ﬁcation by their respective
domains —TIR domain, protein interaction domain, CARD, ITAM,
and PYD. In some cases, one kind of PRRs can recognize multiplePAMPs, and one kind of PAMPs can also be recognized by
different PRRs, which can induce an in ﬂammatory response and
adaptive immune response in a synergistic manner.
494
PRRs that are dif ﬁcult to ﬁnd and identify and complex ligand-
recognition mechanisms have hindered the study of the role of
the innate immune system in related diseases and even tumors. Inprevious studies, computational modeling and mutational analysisof human TLR10 showed that the structure of TLR10 was modeled
with the explicit inclusion of TLR2 and lipopeptide structures.
495
Recently, RRGPredictor, a tool mainly based on text mining and set
theory to predict new plant PRRs, makes the identi ﬁcation of PRRs
more effective, speci ﬁc, and sensitive than other available tools.496
And a random forest-based method was proposed to identify
PRRs, which is superior to other machine learning methods forPRRs. This method constructs a benchmark database, uses the
amino acid composition and the composition transition distribu-
tion to formulate the sequences in the dataset, and then uses themaximum relevance maximum distance to select the bestfeatures. However, due to the small amount of data and the low
sensitivity of the method, the identi ﬁcation results for PRRs are still
unsatisfactory.
497Therefore, the ability to develop a vertebrate
PRR predictor based on protein domain similarity and homologymodeling is becoming an important part of this story. In addition,
the future studies on the how membrane PRRs are secreted into
body ﬂuids and act as soluble PRRs will undoubtedly further our
understandings of their roles in antimicrobial immune defense
and autoimmune and autoin ﬂammatory disorders. Therefore, the
study of PRR-mediated pattern recognition mechanisms will helpto elucidate the signaling pathways and mechanisms of disease,Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
15
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 16 ====
provide new targets and methods for the treatment of diseases,
and promote the development of immunology and oncology
research and improvements in their theoretical systems.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(82073096), Key Research and Development Plan of Hunan Province (2020SK2053).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.W. and D.L. conceived the paper, collected the related papers, and ﬁnished the
manuscript and ﬁgures. M.W. provided constructive guidance and made critical
revisions. Both authors have read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Takeda, K. & Akira, S. Toll-like receptors. Curr. Protoc. Immunol. 109,
14.12.11 –14.12.10 (2015).
2. Thaiss, C. A., Zmora, N., Levy, M. & Elinav, E. The microbiome and innate
immunity. Nature 535,5–74 (2016).
3. Riera Romo, M., Pérez-Martínez, D., Castillo & Ferrer, C. Innate immunity in
vertebrates: an overview. Immunology 148, 125 –139 (2016).
4. Demaria, O. et al. Harnessing innate immunity in cancer therapy. Nature 574,
45–56 (2019).
5. Kaur, B. P. & Secord, E. Innate Immunity. Pediatr. Clin. North Am. 66, 905 –911
(2019).
6. Taguchi, T. & Mukai, K. Innate immunity signalling and membrane traf ﬁcking.
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 59,1–7 (2019).
7. Ou, C.-L., Sun, Z.-Q. & Li, X.-L. Role of Toll-like receptors in nonresolving
inﬂammation-related cancer. Cancer Cell Res .1,7 6–82 (2014).
8. Yan, G. & Tao, C.-X. Recent progress in the research on pattern recognition receptors
and tumor microenvironment. Chin. J. Cancer Biother. 22,1 4 3 –150 (2015).
9. Gajewski, T. F., Schreiber, H. & Fu, Y.-X. Innate and adaptive immune cells in the
tumor microenvironment. Nat. Immunol. 14, 1014 –1022 (2013).
10. Janeway, C. A. Jr Approaching the asymptote? Evolution and revolution in
immunology. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 54,1–13 (1989).
11. Netea, M. G. et al. Trained immunity: a program of innate immune memory in
health and disease. Science 352, aaf1098 (2016).
12.Černý, J. & St říž, I. Adaptive innate immunity or innate adaptive immunity? Clin.
Sci.133, 1549 –1565 (2019).
13. Sonnenberg, G. F. & Hepworth, M. R. Functional interactions between innate
lymphoid cells and adaptive immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 599 –613 (2019).
14. Iwasaki, A. & Medzhitov, R. Regulation of adaptive immunity by the innate
immune system. Science 327, 291 –295 (2010).
15. Fitzgerald, K. A. & Kagan, J. C. Toll-like receptors and the control of immunity.
Cell180, 1044 –1066 (2020).
16. Schneider, D. S., Jin, Y., Morisato, D. & Anderson, K. V. A processed form of the
Spätzle protein de ﬁnes dorsal-ventral polarity in the Drosophila embryo.
Development 120, 1243 –1250 (1994).
17. Hashimoto, C., Hudson, K. L. & Anderson, K. V. The Toll gene of Drosophila,
required for dorsal-ventral embryonic polarity, appears to encode a trans-
membrane protein. Cell52, 269 –279 (1988).
18. Gay, N. J. & Keith, F. J. Drosophila Toll and IL-1 receptor. Nature 351, 355 –356
(1991).
19. Lemaitre, B., Nicolas, E., Michaut, L., Reichhart, J. M. & Hoffmann, J. A. The
dorsoventral regulatory gene cassette spätzle/Toll/cactus controls the potentantifungal response in Drosophila adults. Cell86, 973 –983 (1996).
20. Medzhitov, R., Preston-Hurlburt, P. & Janeway, C. A. Jr. A human homologue of
the Drosophila Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity. Nature 388,
394–397 (1997).
21. He, S. P. & H., J. Research advancement of innate immunity and pattern
recognition receptors. Chin. J. Anim. Nutr. 29, 3844 –3851 (2017).
22. Mortaz, E. et al. Pattern recognitions receptors in immunode ﬁciency disorders.
Eur. J. Pharmacol. 808,4 9–56 (2017).
23. Park, B. S. & Lee, J. O. Recognition of lipopolysaccharide pattern by TLR4
complexes. Exp. Mol. Med. 45, e66 (2013).
24. Yang, X., Lin, G., Han, Z. & Chai, J. Structural biology of NOD-like receptors. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 1172 , 119 –141 (2019).25. Zindel, J. & Kubes, P. DAMPs, PAMPs, and LAMPs in immunity and sterile
inﬂammation. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 15, 493 –518 (2020).
26. Herwald, H. & Egesten, A. On PAMPs and DAMPs. J. Innate Immun. 8, 427 –428
(2016).
27. Saïd-Sadier, N. & Ojcius, D. M. Alarmins in ﬂammasomes and immunity. Biomed. J.
35, 437 –449 (2012).
28. Saijo, Y., Loo, E. P. & Yasuda, S. Pattern recognition receptors and signaling in
plant-microbe interactions. Plant J. 93, 592 –613 (2018).
29. Brubaker, S. W., Bonham, K. S., Zanoni, I. & Kagan, J. C. Innate immune pattern
recognition: a cell biological perspective. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 33, 257 –290
(2015).
30. Gong, T., Liu, L., Jiang, W. & Zhou, R. DAMP-sensing receptors in sterile
inﬂammation and in ﬂammatory diseases. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 20,9 5–112 (2020).
31. Pandol ﬁ, F., Altamura, S., Frosali, S. & Conti, P. Key role of DAMP in in ﬂammation,
cancer, and tissue repair. Clin. Ther. 38, 1017 –1028 (2016).
32. Akira, S., Uematsu, S. & Takeuchi, O. Pathogen recognition and innate immunity.
Cell124, 783 –801 (2006).
33. Takeda, K. & Akira, S. Toll-like receptors in innate immunity. Int. Immunol. 17,
1–14 (2005).
34. Kumar, H., Kawai, T. & Akira, S. Toll-like receptors and innate immunity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 388, 621 –625 (2009).
35. Lacagnina, M. J., Watkins, L. R. & Grace, P. M. Toll-like receptors and their role in
persistent pain. Pharmacol. Ther. 184, 145 –158 (2018).
36. De Nardo, D. Toll-like receptors: activation, signalling and transcriptional mod-
ulation. Cytokine 74, 181 –189 (2015).
37. Temperley, N. D., Berlin, S., Paton, I. R., Grif ﬁn, D. K. & Burt, D. W. Evolution of the
chicken Toll-like receptor gene family: a story of gene gain and gene loss. BMC
Genomics. 9, 62 (2008).
38. Lauw, F. N., Caffrey, D. R. & Golenbock, D. T. Of mice and man: TLR11 ( ﬁnally)
ﬁnds pro ﬁlin.Trends Immunol. 26, 509 –511 (2005).
39. Mathur, R., Zeng, W., Hayden, M. S. & Ghosh, S. Mice lacking TLR11 exhibit
variable Salmonella typhi susceptibility. Cell164, 829 –830 (2016).
40. Andrade, W. A. et al. Combined action of nucleic acid-sensing Toll-like receptors
and TLR11/TLR12 heterodimers imparts resistance to Toxoplasma gondii in mice.
Cell Host Microbe 13,4 2–53 (2013).
41. Palti, Y. Toll-like receptors in bony ﬁsh: from genomics to function. Dev. Comp.
Immunol. 35, 1263 –1272 (2011).
42. Chuang, T. & Ulevitch, R. J. Identi ﬁcation of hTLR10: a novel human Toll-like
receptor preferentially expressed in immune cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1518 ,
157–161 (2001).
43. Chuenchor, W., Jin, T., Ravilious, G. & Xiao, T. S. Structures of pattern recognition
receptors reveal molecular mechanisms of autoinhibition, ligand recognition
and oligomerization. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 26,1 4–20 (2014).
44. Kawai, T. & Akira, S. The role of pattern-recognition receptors in innate immu-
nity: update on Toll-like receptors. Nat. Immunol. 11, 373 –384 (2010).
45. Brennan, J. J. & Gilmore, T. D. Evolutionary origins of Toll-like receptor signaling.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 35, 1576 –1587 (2018).
46. Kim, H. M. et al. Crystal structure of the TLR4-MD-2complex with bound endo-
toxin antagonist Eritoran. Cell130, 906 –917 (2007).
47. Gay, N. J. & Gangloff, M. Structure and function of Toll receptors andtheir
ligands. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76, 141 –165 (2007).
48. Armant, M. A. & Fenton, M. J. Toll-like receptors: a family of pattern-recognition
receptors in mammals. Genome Biol. 3, REVIEWS3011 (2002).
49. Botos, I., Segal, D. M. & Davies, D. R. The structural biology of Toll-like receptors.
Structure 19, 447 –459 (2011).
50. Gao, D. & Li, W. Structures and recognition modes of Toll-like receptors. Proteins
85,3–9 (2017).
51. Enkhbayar, P., Kamiya, M., Osaki, M., Matsumoto, T. & Matsushima, N. Structural
principles of leucine-rich repeat (LRR) proteins. Proteins 54, 394 –403 (2004).
52. Matsushima, N. et al. Comparative sequence analysis of leucine-rich repeats
(LRRs) within vertebrate toll-like receptors. BMC Genomics 8, 124 (2007).
53. Xu, Y. et al. Structural basis for signal transduction by the Toll/interleukin-1
receptor domains. Nature 408, 111 –115 (2000).
54. Netea, M. G., van Deuren, M., Kullberg, B. J., Cavaillon, J. M. & Van der Meer, J. W.
Does the shape of lipid A determine the interaction of LPS with Toll-likereceptors? Trends Immunol.
23, 135 –139 (2002).
55. Barton, G. M. & Medzhitov, R. Toll-like receptor signaling pathways. Science 300,
1524 –1525 (2003).
56. Shimizu, T. Structural insights into ligand recognition and regulation of nucleic
acid-sensing Toll-like receptors. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 47,5 2–59 (2017).
57. Farhat, K. et al. Heterodimerization of TLR2 with TLR1 or TLR6 expands the
ligand spectrum but does not lead to differential signaling. J. Leukoc. Biol. 83,
692–701 (2008).
58. Cheng, K. et al. Speci ﬁc activation of the TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer by small-
molecule agonists. Sci. Adv. 1, e1400139 (2015).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
16
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 17 ====
59. Kaur, A. et al. TLR2 agonistic small molecules: detailed structure-activity rela-
tionship, applications, and future prospects. J. Med. Chem. 64, 233 –278 (2021).
60. Omueti, K. O., Beyer, J. M., Johnson, C. M., Lyle, E. A. & Tapping, R. I. Domain
exchange between human toll-like receptors 1 and 6 reveals a region required
for lipopeptide discrimination. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 36616 –36625 (2005).
61. Natala, S. R. et al. Structure based design and synthesis of novel Toll-like
Receptor 2 (TLR 2) lipid antagonists. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 40, 127861 (2021).
62. Jin, M. S. et al. Crystal structure of the TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer induced by
binding of a tri-acylated lipopeptide. Cell130, 1071 –1082 (2007).
63. Kang, J. Y. et al. Recognition of lipopeptide patternsby Toll-like receptor 2-Toll-
like receptor 6 heterodimer. Immunity 31, 873 –884 (2009).
64. Su, L. et al. Structural basis of TLR2/TLR1 activation by the synthetic agonist
diprovocim. J. Med. Chem. 62, 2938 –2949 (2019).
65. Liu, L. et al. Structural basis of toll-like receptor 3 signaling with double-stranded
RNA. Science 320, 379 –381 (2008).
66. Matsumoto, M. & Seya, T. TLR3: interferon induction by double-stranded RNA
including poly(I:C). Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 60, 805 –812 (2008).
67. Vidya, M. K. et al. Toll-like receptors: signi ﬁcance, ligands, signaling pathways,
and functions in mammals. Int. Rev. Immunol. 37,2 0–36 (2018).
68. Qing, Z., Lu, H. & Qiang, Z. Z. The research progress of Toll-like receptors in
innate immune system. J. Biol. 33,8 3–87 (2016).
69. Anderson, K. V., Rgens, J. G. & Sslein-Volhard, N. C. Establish- ment of dorsal-
ventral polarity in the Drosophila embryo: genetic studies on the role of the Toll
gene product. Cell42, 779 –789 (1985).
70. Miyake, K. Innate immune sensing of pathogens and danger signals by cell
surface Toll-like receptors. Semin Immunol. 19,3–10 (2007).
71. Park, B. S. et al. The structural basis of li- popolysaccharide recognition by the
TLR4-MD-2 complex. Nature 458, 1191 –1195 (2009).
72. Zhang, S. et al. Carnosic acid alleviates bdl-induced liver ﬁbrosis through miR-
29b-3p-mediated inhibition of the high-mobility group box 1/Toll-like receptor
4 signaling pathway in rats. Front. Pharmacol. 8, 976 (2018).
73. Nguyen, C. T., Kim, E. H., Luong, T. T., Pyo, S. & Rhee, D. K. TLR4 mediates
pneumolysin-induced ATF3 expression through the JNK/p38 pathway in Strep-
tococcus pneumoniae -infected RAW 264.7 cells. Mol. Cells 38,5 8–64 (2015).
74. Chiu, F. F. et al. Domain 4 of pneumolysin from Streptococcus pneumoniae is a
multifunctional domain contributing TLR4 activating and hemolytic activity.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 517, 596 –602 (2019).
75. Yoon, S. I. et al. Structural basis of TLR5- ﬂagellin recognition and signaling.
Science 335, 859 –864 (2012).
76. Rout, A. K. et al. Insights into structure and dynamics of extracellular domain of
Toll-like receptor 5 in Cirrhinus mrigala (mrigala): a molecular dynamics simu-
lation approach. PLoS ONE 16, e0245358 (2021).
77. Maeda, K. & Akira, S. TLR7 structure: cut in Z-loop. Immunity 45, 705 –707 (2016).
78. Song, D. H. & Lee, J. O. Sensing of microbial molecular patterns by Toll-like
receptors. Immunol. Rev. 250, 216 –229 (2012).
79. Lee, S. M. et al. Recognition of double-stranded RNA and regulation of interferon
pathway by Toll-like receptor 10. Front. Immunol. 9, 516 (2018).
80. Hedhli, D. et al. The antigen-speci ﬁc response to Toxoplasma gondii proﬁlin, a
TLR11/12 ligand, depends on its intrinsic adjuvant properties. Med. Microbiol.
Immunol. 205, 345 –352 (2016).
81. Raetz, M. et al. Cooperation of TLR12 and TLR11 in the IRF8-dependent IL-12
response to Toxoplasma gondii pro ﬁlin.J. Immunol. 191, 4818 –4827 (2013).
82. Kucera, K. et al. Structure-based analysis of Toxoplasma gondii proﬁlin: a
parasite-speci ﬁc motif is required for recognition by Toll-like receptor 11. J. Mol.
Biol.403, 616 –629 (2010).
83. Motta, V., Soares, F., Sun, T. & Philpott, D. J. NOD-like receptors: versatile cyto-
solic sentinels. Physiol. Rev. 95, 149 –178 (2015).
84. Inohara, N. & Nuñez, G. NODs: intracellular proteins involved in in ﬂammation
and apoptosis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 3, 371 –382 (2003).
85. Fritz, J. H. et al. Nod-like proteins in immunity, in ﬂammation and disease. Nat.
Immunol. 7, 1250 –1257 (2006).
86. Barbé, F., Douglas, T. & Saleh, M. Advances in Nod-like receptors (NLR) biology.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 25, 681 –697 (2014).
87. Kim, Y. K., Shin, J. S. & Nahm, M. H. NOD-like receptors in infection, immunity,
and diseases. Yonsei Med. J. 57,5–14 (2016).
88. Meunier, E. & Broz, P. Evolutionary convergence and divergence in NLR function
and structure. Trends Immunol. 38, 744 –757 (2017).
89. Álvarez, C. A. et al. Insights into the diversity of NOD-like receptors: identi ﬁcation
and expression analysis of NLRC3, NLRC5 and NLRX1 in rainbow trout. Mol.
Immunol. 87, 102 –113 (2017).
90. Pashenkov, M. V., Dagil, Y. A. & Pinegin, B. V. NOD1 and NOD2: molecular targets
in prevention and treatment of infectious diseases. Int. Immunopharmacol. 54,
385–400 (2018).91. Chamaillard, M. et al. An essential role for NOD1 in host recognition of bacterial
peptidoglycan containing diaminopimelic acid. Nat. Immunol. 4, 702 –707
(2003).
92. Girardin, S. E. et al. Nod2 is a general sensor of peptidoglycan through muramyl
dipeptide (MDP) detection. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 8869 –8872 (2003).
93. Caruso, R., Warner, N., Inohara, N. & Núñez, G. NOD1 and NOD2: signaling, host
defense, and in ﬂammatory disease. Immunity 41, 898 –908 (2014).
94. Hu, Z. et al. Crystal structure of NLRC4 reveals its autoinhibition mechanism.
Science 341, 172 –175 (2013).
95. Le, H. T. & Harton, J. A. Pyrin- and CARD-only proteins as regulators of NLR
functions. Front. Immunol. 4, 275 (2013).
96. Wang, J. et al. Reconstitution and structure of a plant NLR resistosome con-
ferring immunity. Science 364, eaav5870 (2019).
97. Yuan, M. et al. Pattern-recognition receptors are required for NLR-mediated
plant immunity. Nature 592, 105 –109 (2021).
98. Lu, Y. et al. Palmitoylation of NOD1 and NOD2 is required for bacterial sensing.
Science 366, 460 –467 (2019).
99. Rehwinkel, J. & Gack, M. U. RIG-I-like receptors: their regulation and roles in RNA
sensing. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 20, 537 –551 (2020).
100. Yoneyama, M., Onomoto, K., Jogi, M., Akaboshi, T. & Fujita, T. Viral RNA detection
by RIG-I-like receptors. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 32,4 8–53 (2015).
101. Barral, P. M. et al. Functions of the cytoplasmic RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA-5:
key regulators of innate immunity. Pharmacol. Ther. 124, 219 –234 (2009).
102. Yoneyama, M. et al. The RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential function in double-
stranded RNA-induced innate antiviral responses. Nat. Immunol. 5, 730 –737
(2004).
103. Vajjhala, P. R., Ve, T., Bentham, A., Stacey, K. J. & Kobe, B. The molecular
mechanisms of signaling by cooperative assembly formation in innate immunitypathways. Mol. Immunol. 86,2 3–37 (2017).
104. Lässig, C. & Hopfner, K. P. RIG-I-like receptors: one STrEP forward. Trends
Microbiol. 24, 517 –519 (2016).
105. Saito, T. et al. Regulation of innate antiviral defenses through a shared repressor
domain in RIG-I and LGP2. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 582 –587 (2007).
106. Cui, S. et al. The C-terminal regulatory domain is the RNA 5 ’-triphosphate sensor
of RIG-I. Mol. Cell 29, 169 –179 (2008).
107. Leung, D. W. & Amarasinghe, G. K. Structural insights into RNA recognition and
activation of RIG-I-like receptors. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 22, 297 –303 (2012).
108. Kowalinski, E. et al. Structural basis for the activation of innate immune pattern-
recognition receptor RIG-I by viral RNA. Cell147, 423 –435 (2011).
109. Gee, P. et al. Essential role of the N-terminal domain in the regulation of RIG-I
ATPase activity. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 9488 –9496 (2008).
110. Jiang, F. et al. Structural basis of RNA recognition and activation by innate
immune receptor RIG-I. Nature 479, 423 –427 (2011).
111. Chang, M. et al. Expression and functional characterization of the RIG-I-like
receptors MDA5 and LGP2 in Rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ).J. Virol. 85,
8403 –8412 (2011).
112. Luo, D. et al. Structural insights into RNA recognition by RIG-I. Cell147, 409 –422
(2011).
113. Xu, X. X. et al. RIG-I: a multifunctional protein beyond a pattern recognition
receptor. Protein Cell 9, 246 –253 (2018).
114. Fan, X. & Jin, T. Structures of RIG-I-like receptors and insights into viral RNA
sensing. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1172 , 157 –188 (2019).
115. Chow, K. T., Gale, M. Jr & Loo, Y. M. RIG-I and other RNA sensors in antiviral
immunity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 36, 667 –694 (2018).
116. Lässig, C. & Hopfner, K. P. Discrimination of cytosolic self and non-self RNA by
RIG-I-like receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 9000 –9009 (2017).
117. Patel, J. R. et al. ATPase-driven oligomerization of RIG-I on RNA allows optimal
activation of type-I interferon. EMBO Rep. 14, 780 –787 (2013).
118. Kang, D. C. et al. mda-5: An interferon-inducible putative RNA helicase with
double-stranded RNA-dependent ATPase activity and melanoma growth-suppressive properties. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 637 –642 (2002).
119. Brisse, M. & Ly, H. Comparative structure and function analysis of the RIG-I-like
receptors: RIG-I and MDA5. Front Immunol. 10, 1586 (2019).
120. Liu, G. & Gack, M. U. Distinct and orchestrated functions of RNA sensors in innate
immunity. Immunity 53,2 6–42 (2020).
121. Crowl, J. T., Gray, E. E., Pestal, K., Volkman, H. E. & Stetson, D. B. Intracellular
nucleic acid detection in autoimmunity. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35, 313 –336
(2017).
122. Hei, L. & Zhong, J. Laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 (LGP2) plays an
essential role in hepatitis C virus infection-induced interferon responses.Hepatology 65, 1478 –1491 (2017).
123. Li, Q., Li, X. & Feng, R. Research progress of LGP2 participating in antiviral natural
immune response. J. Virol. 35, 313 –317 (2019).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
17
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 18 ====
124. Bruns, A. M., Leser, G. P., Lamb, R. A. & Horvath, C. M. The innate immune sensor
LGP2 activates antiviral signaling by regulating MDA5-RNA interaction andﬁlament assembly. Mol. Cell 55, 771 –781 (2014).
125. Bruns, A. M. & Horvath, C. M. LGP2 synergy with MDA5 in RLR-mediated RNA
recognition and antiviral signaling. Cytokine 74, 198 –206 (2015).
126. Huo, H., Zhao, L., Wang, D., Chen, X. & Chen, H. LGP2 plays a critical role in
MDA5-mediated antiviral activity against duck enteritis virus. Mol. Immunol. 116,
160–166 (2019).
127. Duic, I. et al. Viral RNA recognition by LGP2 and MDA5, and activation of sig-
naling through step-by-step conformational changes. Nucleic Acids Res. 48,
11664 –11674 (2020).
128. Onomoto, K., Onoguchi, K. & Yoneyama, M. Regulation of RIG-I-like receptor-
mediated signaling: interaction between host and viral factors. Cell. Mol.
Immunol. 18, 539 –555 (2021).
129. Mohanty, A., Sadangi, S., Paichha, M. & Samanta, M. Molecular characterization
and expressional quanti ﬁcation of lgp2, a modulatory co-receptor of RLR-
signalling pathway in the Indian major carp Labeo rohita following pathogenic
challenges and PAMP stimulations. J. Fish. Biol. 96, 1399 –1410 (2020).
130. Kato, K. et al. Structural analysis of RIG-I-like receptors reveals ancient rules of
engagement between diverse RNA helicases and TRIM ubiquitin ligases. Mol.
Cell81, 599 –613.e8 (2021).
131. Kato, H. et al. Length-dependent recognition of double-stranded ribonucleic
acids by retinoic acid-inducible gene-I and melanoma differentiation-associated
gene 5. J. Exp. Med. 205, 1601 –1610 (2008).
132. Zou, J. et al. Poly IC triggers a cathepsin D- and IPS-1-dependent pathway to
enhance cytokine production and mediate dendritic cell necroptosis. Immunity
38, 717 –728 (2013).
133. Wang, Y. et al. Structural and functional insights into 5 ’-ppp RNA pattern
recognition by the innate immune receptor RIG-I. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17,
781–787 (2010).
134. Kato, H. et al. Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-1 helicases in the recognition of
RNA viruses. Nature 441, 101 –105 (2006).
135. Wei, W. et al. Screening of antiviral components of Ma Huang Tang and
investigation on the ephedra alkaloids ef ﬁcacy on in ﬂuenza virus type A. Front.
Pharmacol. 10
, 961 (2019).
136. Tomczyk, T. et al. Immune consequences of in vitro infection of human per-
ipheral blood leukocytes with vesicular stomatitis virus. J. Innate Immun. 10,
131–144 (2018).
137. Yu, S. P., Ong, K. C., Perera, D. & Wong, K. T. Neuronal transcriptomic responses
to Japanese encephalitis virus infection with a special focus on chemokineCXCL11 and pattern recognition receptors RIG-1 and MDA5. Virology 527,
107–115 (2019).
138. Uchikawa, E. et al. Structural analysis of dsRNA binding to anti-viral pattern
recognition receptors LGP2 and MDA5. Mol. Cell 62, 586 –602 (2016).
139. Walton, R. W., Brown, M. C., Sacco, M. T. & Gromeier, M. Engineered oncolytic
poliovirus PVSRIPO subverts MDA5-dependent innate immune responses incancer cells. J. Virol. 92, e00879-18 (2018).
140. Brown, M. C. et al. Viral infection of cells within the tumor microenvironment
mediates antitumor immunotherapy via selective TBK1-IRF3 signaling. Nat.
Commun. 12, 1858 (2021).
141. Peisley, A., Wu, B., Yao, H., Walz, T. & Hur, S. RIG-I forms signaling-competent
ﬁlaments in an ATP-dependent, ubiquitin-independent manner. Mol. Cell 51,
573–583 (2013).
142. Chan, Y. K. & Gack, M. U. Viral evasion of intracellular DNA and RNA sensing. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 14, 360 –373 (2016).
143. Dambuza, I. M. & Brown, G. D. C-type lectins in immunity: recent developments.
Curr. Opin. Immunol. 32,2 1–27 (2015).
144. Freeman, S. A. & Grinstein, S. Phagocytosis: receptors, signal integration, and the
cytoskeleton. Immunol. Rev. 262, 193 –215 (2014).
145. Ebner, S., Sharon, N. & Ben-Tal, N. Evolutionary analysis reveals collective
properties and speci ﬁcity in the C-type lectin and lectin-like domain super-
family. Proteins 53,4 4–55 (2003).
146. Dam, T. K. & Brewer, C. F. Lectins as pattern recognition molecules: the effects of
epitope density in innate immunity. Glycobiology 20, 270 –279 (2010).
147. Lepenies, B., Lee, J. & Sonkaria, S. Targeting C-type lectin receptors with
multivalent carbo hydrate ligands. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 65, 1271 –1281
(2013).
148. Lan, T. et al. A four-CRD C-type lectin from razor clam Sinonovacula constricta
mediates agglutination and phagocytosis. Gene 728, 144287 (2020).
149. Sancho, D., & Reis e Sousa, C. Signaling by myeloid C-type lectin receptors in
immunity and homeostasis. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 491
–529 (2012).
150. Zelensky, A. N. & Gready, J. E. Comparative analysis of structural properties of
the C-type-lectin-like domain (CTLD). Proteins 52, 466 –477 (2003).
151. Murugaiah, V., Tsolaki, A. G. & Kishore, U. Collectins: innate immune pattern
recognition molecules. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1204 ,7 5–127 (2020).152. Hou, H. et al. C-type lectin receptor: old friend and new player. Med. Chem. 13,
536–543 (2017).
153. Mnich, M. E., van Dalen, R. & van Sorge, N. M. C-type lectin receptors in host
defense against bacterial pathogens. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10, 309 (2020).
154. Brown, G. D., Willment, J. A. & Whitehead, L. C-type lectins in immunity and
homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 18, 374 –389 (2018).
155. Li, K. & Underhill, D. M. C-type lectin receptors in phagocytosis. Curr. Top.
Microbiol. Immunol. 429,1–18 (2020).
156. Robinson, M. J., Sancho, D. & Slack, E. C. Myeloid C-type lectins in innate
immunity. Nat. Immunol. 7, 1258 –1265 (2006).
157. Martinez-Pomares, L. The mannose receptor. J. Leukoc. Biol. 92, 1177 –1186
(2012).
158. Stein, M., Keshav, S., Harris, N. & Gordon, S. Interleukin 4 potently enhances
murine macrophage mannose receptor activity: a marker of alternative immu-nologic macrophage activation. J. Exp. Med. 176, 287 –292 (1992).
159. Bravo, M. F. et al. Synthesis and binding of mannose-speci ﬁc synthetic carbo-
hydrate receptors. Chemistry 26, 11782 –11795 (2020).
160. Jaynes, J. M. et al. Mannose receptor (CD206) activation in tumor-associated
macrophages enhances adaptive and innate antitumor immune responses. Sci.
Transl. Med. 12, eaax6337 (2020).
161. Garcia-Aguilar, T., Espinosa-Cueto, P., Magallanes-Puebla, A. & Mancilla, R. The
mannose receptor is involved in the phagocytosis of mycobacteria-inducedapoptotic cells. J. Immunol. Res. 2016 , 3845247 (2016).
162. Lee, S. J. et al. Mannose receptor-mediated regulation of serum glycoprotein
homeostasis. Science 295, 1898 –1901 (2002).
163. Kaisar, M. M. M. et al. Dectin-1/2-induced autocrine PGE2 signaling licenses
dendritic cells to prime Th2 responses. PLoS Biol. 16, e2005504 (2018).
164. Yamaguchi, K. et al. Distinct roles for Dectin-1 and Dectin-2 in skin wound
healing and neutrophilic in ﬂammatory responses. J. Invest. Dermatol. 141
,
164–176.e8 (2021).
165. de Quaglia, E. et al. Involvement of the Dectin-1 receptor upon the effector
mechanisms of human phagocytic cells against Paracoccidioides brasiliensis .J.
Immunol. Res. 2019 , 1529189 (2019).
166. Liu, B. Y., Li, P. & Yang, G. L. The Immunomodulatory Role of C-type Lectin
Receptors in Parasitic Infection. Chin. J. Parasitol. Parasit. Dis. 33, 228 –232 (2015).
167. Saijo, S. & Iwakura, Y. Dectin-1 and Dectin-2 in innate immunity against fungi.
Int. Immunol. 23, 467 –472 (2011).
168. Taylor, P. R. et al. Dectin-1 is required for beta-glucan recognition and control of
fungal infection. Nat. Immunol. 8,3 1–38 (2007).
169. Cao, M. et al. Dectin-1-induced RIPK1 and RIPK3 activation protects host against
Candida albicans infection. Cell Death Differ. 26, 2622 –2636 (2019).
170. Gow, N. A. et al. Immune recognition of Candida albicans beta-glucan by dectin-
1.J. Infect. Dis. 196, 1565 –1571 (2007).
171. Saijo, S. et al. Dectin-1 is required for host defense against Pneumocystis carinii
but not against Candida albicans .Nat. Immunol. 8,3 9–46 (2007).
172. Steele, C. et al. Alveolar macrophage-mediated killing of Pneumocystis carinii f.
sp. muris involves molecular recognition by the Dectin-1 beta-glucan receptor.J. Exp. Med. 198, 1677 –1688 (2003).
173. Ambati, S. et al. Dectin-1-targeted antifungal liposomes exhibit enhanced ef ﬁ-
cacy. mSphere 4, e00025-19 (2019).
174. Walsh, N. M., Wuthrich, M., Wang, H., Klein, B. & Hull, C. M. Characterization of C-
type lectins reveals an unexpectedly limited interaction between Cryptococcus
neoformans spores and Dectin-1. PLoS ONE 12, e0173866 (2017).
175. Yuan, K. et al. Dectin-1 is essential for IL-1 βproduction through JNK activation
and apoptosis in Aspergillus fumigatus keratitis. Int. Immunopharmacol. 52,
168–175 (2017).
176. Fan, Y. et al. Perillaldehyde ameliorates Aspergillus fumigatus keratitis by acti-
vating the Nrf2/HO-1 signaling pathway and inhibiting Dectin-1-mediatedinﬂammation. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci.
61, 51 (2020).
177. Ning, Y. Y., Yuan, X. Y., Shan, L. & Song, L. X. Research progress on role of C-type
lectin receptors in tumor immunotherapy. Chin. J. Immunol. 35, 1139 –1142
(2019).
178. Zhou, M. N. et al. N-Carboxyanhydride Polymerization Of Glycopolypeptides
That Activate Antigen-presenting Cells Through Dectin-1 and Dectin-2. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 57, 3137 –3142 (2018).
179. Cadena, A. P., Cushman, T. R. & Welsh, J. W. Glycosylation and Antitumor
Immunity. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 343, 111 –127 (2019).
180. Mereiter, S., Balmaña, M., Campos, D., Gomes, J. & Reis, C. A. Glycosylation in the
era of cancer-targeted therapy: where are we heading? Cancer Cell 36,6–16
(2019).
181. Manabe, Y. et al. The core fucose on an IgG Antibody Is An Endogenous Ligand
of Dectin-1. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 58, 18697 –18702 (2019).
182. Saijo, S. et al. Dectin-2 recognition of alpha-mannans and induction of Th17 cell
differentiation is essential for host defense against Candida albicans .Immunity
32, 681 –691 (2010).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
18
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 19 ====
183. Ambati, S. et al. Dectin-2-targeted antifungal liposomes exhibit enhanced ef ﬁ-
cacy. mSphere 4, e00715-19 (2019).
184. Ritter, M. et al. Schistosoma mansoni triggers Dectin-2, which activates the Nlrp3
inﬂammasome and alters adaptive immune responses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
107, 20459 –20464 (2010).
185. Feinberg, H. et al. Mechanism of pathogen recognition by human dectin-2. J.
Biol. Chem. 292, 13402 –13414 (2017).
186. Wittmann, A. et al. Dectin-2 recognizes mannosylated O-antigens of human
opportunistic pathogens and augments lipopolysaccharide activation of mye-loid cells. J. Biol. Chem. 291, 17629 –17638 (2016).
187. Decout, A. et al. Deciphering the molecular basis of mycobacteria and lipogly-
can recognition by the C-type lectin Dectin-2. Sci. Rep. 8, 16840 (2018).
188. Feng, S. et al. Absent in melanoma 2 in ﬂammasome is required for host defence
against Streptococcus pneumoniae infection. Innate Immun. 25, 412 –419 (2019).
189. Zhang, Z., Dong, X.-Q. & He, S.-B. Research advances of absent in melanoma 2 in
the development of cancer. J. Postgrad. Med. 30, 542 –545 (2017).
190. Liu, Y. S. & Hu, R. Role of absent in melanoma 2 in development of in ﬂammation,
immunity and cancer. Pharm. Biotechnol. 25, 354 –358 (2018).
191. Man, S. M., Karki, R. & Kanneganti, T. D. AIM2 in ﬂammasome in infection, cancer,
and autoimmunity: role in DNA sensing, in ﬂammation, and innate immunity.
Eur. J. Immunol. 46, 269 –280 (2016).
192. Hornung, V. et al. AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-
activating in ﬂammasome with ASC. Nature 458, 514 –518 (2009).
193. Man, S. M. & Kanneganti, T. D. Regulation of in ﬂammasome activation. Immunol.
Rev.265,6–21 (2015).
194. Wang, B., Tian, Y. & Yin, Q. AIM2 in ﬂammasome assembly and signaling. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 1172 , 143 –155 (2019).
195. Gray, E. E. et al. The AIM2-like receptors are dispensable for the interferon
response to intracellular DNA. Immunity 45, 255 –266 (2016).
196. Cadena, C. & Hur, S. Filament-like assemblies of intracellular nucleic acid sensors:
commonalities and differences. Mol. Cell 76, 243 –254 (2019).
197. Caneparo, V., Landolfo, S., Gariglio, M. & De Andrea, M. The absent in melanoma
2-like receptor IFN-inducible protein 16 as an in ﬂammasome regulator in sys-
temic lupus erythematosus: the dark side of sensing microbes. Front. Immunol.
9, 1180 (2018).
198. Morrone, S. R. et al. Assembly-driven activation of the AIM2 foreign-dsDNA
sensor provides a polymerization template for downstream ASC. Nat. Commun.
6, 7827 (2015).
199. Chen, P. A. et al. Absent in melanoma 2 regulates tumor cell proliferation in
glioblastoma multiforme. J. Neurooncol. 144, 265 –273 (2019).
200. Zhang, P., Liu, X. & Cao, X. Extracellular pattern recognition molecules in health
and diseases. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 12, 255 –257 (2015).
201. Presta, M., Camozzi, M., Salvatori, G. & Rusnati, M. Role of the soluble pattern
recognition receptor PTX3 in vascular biology. J. Cell Mol. Med 11, 723 –738
(2007).
202. Mantovani, A., Garlanda, C., Doni, A. & Bottazzi, B. Pentraxins in innate immunity:
from C-reactive protein to the long pentraxin PTX3. J. Clin. Immunol. 28,1–13 (2008).
203. Holmskov, U., Thiel, S. & Jensenius, J. C. Collections and ﬁcolins: humoral lectins
of the innate immune defense. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21, 547 –578 (2003).
204. Reis, E. S., Mastellos, D. C., Hajishengallis, G. & Lambris, J. D. New insights into the
immune functions of complement. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 19, 503 –516 (2019).
205. Tang, Y. et al. Macrophage scavenger receptor 1 contributes to pathogenesis of
fulminant hepatitis via neutrophil-mediated complement activation. J. Hepatol.
68, 733 –743 (2018).
206. Jun, J. I. & Lau, L. F. CCN1 is an opsonin for bacterial clearance and a direct
activator of Toll-like receptor signaling. Nat. Commun. 11, 1242 (2020).
207. Takeuchi, O. & Akira, S. Pattern recognition receptors and in ﬂammation. Cell
140, 805 –820 (2010).
208. Schlimgen, A. K., Helms, J. A., Vogel, H. & Perin, M. S. Neuronal pentraxin, a
secreted protein with homology to acute phase proteins of the immune system.Neuron 14, 519 –526 (1995).
209. Daigo, K. et al. Pentraxins in the activation and regulation of innate immunity.
Immunol. Rev. 274, 202
–217 (2016).
210. Muczynski, V. et al. Complex formation with pentraxin-2 regulates factor X
plasma levels and macrophage interactions. Blood 129, 2443 –2454 (2017).
211. Ma, Y. J. & Garred, P. Pentraxins in complement activation and regulation. Front.
Immunol. 9, 3046 (2018).
212. Pathak, A. & Agrawal, A. Evolution of C-reactive protein. Front. Immunol. 10, 943
(2019).
213. Sproston, N. R. & Ashworth, J. J. Role of C-reactive protein at sites of in ﬂam-
mation and infection. Front. Immunol. 9, 754 (2018).
214. Moutachakkir, M., Lamrani Hanchi, A., Baraou, A., Boukhira, A. & Chellak, S.
Immunoanalytical characteristics of C-reactive protein and high sensitivity C-reactive protein. Ann. Biol. Clin. 75, 225 –229 (2017).215. Pilling, D. & Gomer, R. H. The development of serum amyloid P as a possible
therapeutic. Front. Immunol. 9, 2328 (2018).
216. Behrens, N. E., Lipke, P. N., Pilling, D., Gomer, R. H. & Klotz, S. A. Serum amyloid P
component binds fungal surface amyloid and decreases human macrophage
phagocytosis and secretion of in ﬂammatory cytokines. mBio 10, e00218-19
(2019).
217. Ngwa, D. N. & Agrawal, A. Structure-function relationships of C-reactive protein
in bacterial infection. Front. Immunol. 10, 166 (2019).
218. Hari-Dass, R., Shah, C., Meyer, D. J. & Raynes, J. G. Serum amyloid A protein binds
to outer membrane protein A of Gram-negative bacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 280,
18562 –18567 (2005).
219. Shah, C., Hari-Dass, R. & Raynes, J. G. Serum amyloid A is an innate immune
opsonin for Gram-negative bacteria. Blood 108, 1751 –1757 (2006).
220. Christensen, M. B. et al. Comparison of serum amyloid A and C-reactive protein
as diagnostic markers of systemic in ﬂammation in dogs. Can. Vet. J. 55, 161 –168
(2014).
221. Wang, W. et al. Diabetic foot disease: grading in ﬂammation by apolipoprotein A-
I, C-reactive protein and serum amyloid A. Clin. Lab. 60, 1951 –1959 (2014).
222. Alles, V. V. et al. Inducible expression of PTX3, a new member of the pentraxin
family, in human mononuclear phagocytes. Blood 84, 3483 –3493 (1994).
223. Garlanda, C., Bottazzi, B., Magrini, E., Inforzato, A. & Mantovani, A. P. T. X. 3 PTX3,
a humoral pattern recognition molecule, in innate immunity, tissue repair, andcancer. Physiol. Rev. 98, 623 –639 (2018).
224. Bottazzi, B. et al. The pentraxins PTX3 and SAP in innate immunity, regulation of
inﬂammation and tissue remodelling. J. Hepatol. 64, 1416 –1427 (2016).
225. Balhara, J. et al. Pentraxin 3 deletion aggravates allergic in ﬂammation through a
TH17-dominant phenotype and enhanced CD4 T-cell survival. J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol. 139, 950 –963.e9 (2017).
226. Chorny, A. et al. The soluble pattern recognition receptor PTX3 links humoral
innate and adaptive immune responses by helping marginal zone B cells. J. Exp.
Med. 213, 2167 –2185 (2016).
227. Perea, L. et al. Pentraxin-3 modulates lipopolysaccharide-induced in ﬂammatory
response and attenuates liver injury. Hepatology 66, 953 –968 (2017).
228. Brunetta, E. et al. Macrophage expression and prognostic signi ﬁcance of the
long pentraxin PTX3 in COVID-19. Nat. Immunol. 22,1 9–24 (2021).
229. Hickman-Davis, J. M. et al. Lung surfactant and reactive oxygen-nitrogen spe-
cies: antimicrobial activity and host-pathogen interactions. Am. J. Physiol. Lung
Cell. Mol. Physiol. 281, L517 –L523 (2001).
230. Vasta, G. R. et al. Animal lectins as self/non-self recognition molecules. Bio-
chemical and genetic approaches to understanding their biological roles andevolution. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 712,5 5–73 (1994).
231. Garred, P. et al. A journey through the lectin pathway of complement-MBL and
beyond. Immunol. Rev. 274,7 4–97 (2016).
232. Singh, S. S., Cheung, R. C., Wong, J. H. & Ng, T. B. Mannose binding lectin: a
potential biomarker for many human diseases. Curr. Med. Chem. 23, 3847 –3860
(2016).
233. Turner, M. W. The role of mannose-binding lectin in health and disease. Mol.
Immunol. 40, 423 –429 (2003).
234. Bouwman, L. H., Roep, B. O. & Roos, A. Mannose-binding lectin: clinical impli-
cations for infection, transplantation, and autoimmunity. Hum. Immunol. 67,
247–256 (2006).
235. Skjoedt, M. O. et al. Crystal structure and functional characterization of the
complement regulator mannose-binding lectin (MBL)/ ﬁcolin-associated protein-
1 (MAP-1). J. Biol. Chem. 287, 32913 –32921 (2012).
236. Jack, D. L., Klein, N. J. & Turner, M. W. Mannose-binding lectin: targeting the
microbial world for complement attack and opsonophagocytosis.
Immunol. Rev.
180,8 6–99 (2001).
237. Kilpatrick, D. C. Mannan-binding lectin and its role in innate immunity. Transfus.
Med. 12, 335 –352 (2002).
238. Neglia, L. et al. Mannose-binding lectin has a direct deleterious effect on
ischemic brain microvascular endothelial cells. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 40,
1608 –1620 (2020).
239. Dos Santos Silva, P. M. et al. Insights into anti-pathogenic activities of mannose
lectins. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 140, 234 –244 (2019).
240. Fortpied, J., Vertommen, D. & Van Schaftingen, E. Binding of mannose-
binding lectin to fructosamines: a potential link between hyperglycaemiaand complement activation in diabetes. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 26,
254–260 (2010).
241. Veldhuizen, E. J., van Eijk, M. & Haagsman, H. P. The carbohydrate recognition
domain of collectins. FEBS J. 278, 3930 –3941 (2011).
242. Kishore, U. et al. Surfactant proteins SP-A and SP-D: structure, function and
receptors. Mol. Immunol. 43, 1293 –1315 (2006).
243. Casals, C., García-Fojeda, B. & Minutti, C. M. Soluble defense collagens: sweeping
up immune threats. Mol. Immunol. 112, 291 –304 (2019).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
19
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 20 ====
244. Watson, A., Madsen, J. & Clark, H. W. SP-A and SP-D: dual functioning immune
molecules with antiviral and immunomodulatory properties. Front. Immunol. 11,
622598 (2021).
245. Carreto-Binaghi, L. E., Aliouat el, M. & Taylor, M. L. Surfactant proteins, SP-A and
SP-D, in respiratory fungal infections: their role in the in ﬂammatory response.
Respir. Res. 17, 66 (2016).
246. Endo, Y., Matsushita, M. & Fujita, T. New insights into the role of ﬁcolins in the
lectin pathway of innate immunity. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 316,4 9–110 (2015).
247. Vassal-Stermann, E. et al. Human L- ﬁcolin recognizes phosphocholine moieties
of pneumococcal teichoic acid. J. Immunol. 193, 5699 –5708 (2014).
248. Katayama, M. et al. Ficolin-1 is a promising therapeutic target for autoimmune
diseases. Int. Immunol. 31,2 3–32 (2019).
249. Ding, Q. et al. Ficolin-2 triggers antitumor effect by activating macrophages and
CD8+T cells. Clin. Immunol. 183, 145 –157 (2017).
250. Lawrence, T. The nuclear factor NF-kappaB pathway in in ﬂammation. Cold
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 1, a001651 (2009).
251. Karin, M. Nuclear factor-kappaB in cancer development and progression. Nature
441, 431 –436 (2006).
252. DiDonato, J. A., Mercurio, F. & Karin, M. NF- κB and the link between in ﬂam-
mation and cancer. Immunol. Rev. 246, 379 –400 (2012).
253. Mitchell, S., Vargas, J. & Hoffmann, A. Signaling via the NF κB system. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 8, 227 –241 (2016).
254. Satoh, T. & Akira, S. Toll-like receptor signaling and its inducible proteins.
Microbiol. Spectr. 4, 10.1128 (2016).
255. Anthoney, N., Foldi, I. & Hidalgo, A. Toll and Toll-like receptor signalling in
development. Development 145, dev156018 (2018).
256. O ’Neill, L. A. & Bowie, A. G. The family of ﬁve: TIR-domain-containing adaptors in
Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 353 –364 (2007).
257. von Bernuth, H. et al. Pyogenic bacterial infections in humans with MyD88
deﬁciency. Science 321, 691 –696 (2008).
258. Huai, X. et al. Advances in Toll receptor 4 signaling pathway in colorectal cancer.
Bachu Med. J. 3, 125 –128 (2020).
259. Gay, N. J. et al. Assembly and localizationof Toll-like receptor signalling com-
plexes. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 546 –558 (2014).
260. Kawai, T. & Akira, S. Toll-like receptors and their crosstalk with other innate
receptors in infection and immunity. Immunity 34, 637 –650 (2011).
261. De Nardo, D. et al. Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) plays a dual
role in myddosome formation and Toll-like receptor signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 293,
15195 –15207 (2018).
262. Häcker, H. et al. Speci ﬁcity in Toll-like receptor signalling through distinct
effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. Nature 439, 204 –207 (2006).
263. Verstak, B. et al. MyD88 adapter-like (Mal)/TIRAP interaction with TRAF6 is critical
for TLR2- and TLR4-mediated NF-kappaB proin ﬂammatory responses. J. Biol.
Chem. 284, 24192 –24203 (2009).
264. Kawai, T. et al. Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a
direct interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6. Nat. Immunol. 5, 1061 –1068
(2004).
265. Cohen, P. & Strickson, S. The role of hybrid ubiquitin chains in the MyD88 and
other innate immune signalling pathways. Cell Death Differ. 24, 1153 –1159
(2017).
266. Wei, L.-Q., Si, Z. & Qi, L.-W. Research progress of NOD-like signaling pathways
and the relationship between NOD and tumor. Chin. Oncol. 29, 223 –228 (2019).
267. Platnich, J. M. & Muruve, D. A. NOD-like receptors and in ﬂammasomes: a review
of their canonical and non-canonical signaling pathways. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.
670,4–14 (2019).
268. Park, J. H. et al. RICK/RIP2 mediates innate immune responses induced through
Nod1 and Nod2 but not TLRs. J. Immunol. 178, 2380 –2386 (2007).
269. Hasegawa, M. et al. A critical role of RICK/RIP2 polyubiquitination in Nod-
induced NF-kappaB activation. EMBO J. 27, 373 –383 (2008).
270. Zevini, A., Olagnier, D. & Hiscott, J. Crosstalk between cytoplasmic RIG-I and
STING sensing pathways. Trends Immunol. 38, 194 –205 (2017).
271. Hou, P. et al. A novel selective autophagy receptor, CCDC50, delivers K63
polyubiquitination-activated RIG-I/MDA5 for degradation during viral infection.
Cell Res. 31,6 2–79 (2021).
272. Quicke, K. M., Diamond, M. S. & Suthar, M. S. Negative regulators of the RIG-I-like
receptor signaling pathway. Eur. J. Immunol. 47, 615 –628 (2017).
273. Chattopadhyay, S. & Sen, G. C. RIG-I-like receptor-induced IRF3 mediated
pathway of apoptosis (RIPA): a new antiviral pathway. Protein Cell 8, 165 –168
(2017).
274. Eisenächer, K. & Krug, A. Regulation of RLR-mediated innate immune
signaling –it is all about keeping the balance. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 91,3 6–47
(2012).
275. Rogers, N. C. et al. Syk-dependent cytokine induction by Dectin-1 reveals a novel
pattern recognition pathway for C type lectins. Immunity 22, 507 –517 (2005).276. Leibundgut-Landmann, S., Osorio, F., Brown, G. D., & Reis e Sousa, C. Stimulation
of dendritic cells via the dectin-1/Syk pathway allows priming of cytotoxic T-cellresponses. Blood 112, 4971 –4980 (2008).
277. Wagener, M., Hoving, J. C., Ndlovu, H. & Marakalala, M. J. Dectin-1-Syk-CARD9
signaling pathway in TB immunity. Front. Immunol. 9, 225 (2018).
278. Ye, X. C. et al. Dectin-1/Syk signaling triggers neuroin ﬂammation after ischemic
stroke in mice. J. Neuroin ﬂammation 17, 17 (2020).
279. Johnson, G. L. & Lapadat, R. Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways medi-
ated by ERK, JNK, and p38 protein kinases. Science 298, 1911 –1912 (2002).
280. Sakurai, K. et al. Cutaneous p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation
triggers psoriatic dermatitis. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 144, 1036 –1049 (2019).
281. Khorasanizadeh, M., Eskian, M., Gelfand, E. W. & Rezaei, N. Mitogen-activated
protein kinases as therapeutic targets for asthma. Pharmacol. Ther. 174,
112–126 (2017).
282. Alexopoulou, L., Holt, A. C., Medzhitov, R. & Flavell, R. A. Recognition of double-
stranded RNA and activation of NF-kappaB by Toll-like receptor 3. Nature 413,
732–738 (2001).
283. Hsu, Y. M. et al. The adaptor protein CARD9 is required for innate immune
responses to intracellular pathogens. Nat. Immunol. 8
, 198 –205 (2007).
284. Ysebrant de Lendonck, L., Martinet, V. & Goriely, S. Interferon regulatory factor 3
in adaptive immune responses. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 71, 3873 –3883 (2014).
285. Liu, S. et al. Phosphorylation of innate immune adaptor proteins MAVS, STING,
and TRIF induces IRF3 activation. Science 347, aaa2630 (2015).
286. King, K. R. et al. IRF3 and type I interferons fuel a fatal response to myocardial
infarction. Nat. Med. 23, 1481 –1487 (2017).
287. Yamamoto, M. et al. Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent toll-like
receptor signaling pathway. Science 301, 640 –643 (2003).
288. Samie, M. et al. Selective autophagy of the adaptor TRIF regulates innate
inﬂammatory signaling. Nat. Immunol. 19, 246 –254 (2018).
289. Wu, X. et al. Regulation of TRIF-mediated innate immune response by K27-
linked polyubiquitination and deubiquitination. Nat. Commun. 10, 4115 (2019).
290. Shalaby, K. H. et al. The TLR4-TRIF pathway can protect against the development
of experimental allergic asthma. Immunology 152, 138 –149 (2017).
291. Yamamoto, M. et al. TRAM is speci ﬁcally involved in the Toll-like receptor 4-
mediated MyD88-independent signaling pathway. Nat. Immunol. 4, 1144 –1150
(2003).
292. Banoth, B. & Cassel, S. L. Mitochondria in innate immune signaling. Transl. Res.
202,5 2–68 (2018).
293. Liu, X. Y., Wei, B., Shi, H. X., Shan, Y. F. & Wang, C. Tom70 mediates activation of
interferon regulatory factor 3 on mitochondria. Cell Res. 20, 994 –1011 (2010).
294. Zhou, R., Zhang, Q. & Xu, P. T. B. K. 1 a central kinase in innate immune sensing
of nucleic acids and beyond. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. 52, 757 –767 (2020).
295. Rathinam, V. A. & Fitzgerald, K. A. In ﬂammasome complexes: emerging
mechanisms and effector functions. Cell165, 792 –800 (2016).
296. Schroder, K. & Tschopp, J. The in ﬂammasomes. Cell140, 821 –832 (2010).
297. Mitchell, P. S., Sandstrom, A. & Vance, R. E. The NLRP1 in ﬂammasome: new
mechanistic insights and unresolved mysteries. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 60,3 7–45
(2019).
298. Kelley, N., Jeltema, D., Duan, Y. & He, Y. The NLRP3 in ﬂammasome: an overview
of mechanisms of activation and regulation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 3328 (2019).
299. Duncan, J. A. & Canna, S. W. The NLRC4 in ﬂammasome. Immunol. Rev. 281,
115–123 (2018).
300. Karki, R. et al. IRF8 regulates transcription of Naips for NLRC4 in ﬂammasome
activation. Cell173, 920 –933 (2018).
301. Lugrin, J. & Martinon, F. The AIM2 in ﬂammasome: sensor of pathogens and
cellular perturbations. Immunol. Rev. 281,9 9–114 (2018).
302. Malik, A. & Kanneganti, T. D. In ﬂammasome activation and assembly at a glance.
J. Cell Sci. 130, 3955 –3963 (2017).
303. Elliott, E. I. & Sutterwala, F. S. Initiation and perpetuation of NLRP3 in ﬂamma-
some activation and assembly. Immunol. Rev. 265,3 5–52 (2015).
304. Yang, Y., Wang, H., Kouadir, M., Song, H. & Shi, F. Recent advances in the
mechanisms of NLRP3 in ﬂammasome activation and its inhibitors. Cell Death
Dis.10, 128 (2019).
305. Zhao, C. & Zhao, W. NLRP3 in ﬂammasome-a key player in antiviral responses.
Front. Immunol. 11, 211 (2020).
306. Wang, B. & Yin, Q. AIM2 in ﬂammasome activation and regulation: a structural
perspective. J. Struct. Biol. 200, 279 –282 (2017).
307. Vesely, M. D., Kershaw, M. H., Schreiber, R. D. & Smyth, M. J. Natural innate and
adaptive immunity to cancer. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 29, 235 –271 (2011).
308. Netea, M. G., Schlitzer, A., Placek, K., Joosten, L. A. B. & Schultze, J. L. Innate and
adaptive immune memory: an evolutionary continuum in the host ’s response to
pathogens. Cell Host Microbe 25,1 3–26 (2019).
309. Greten, F. R. & Grivennikov, S. I. In ﬂammation and cancer: triggers, mechanisms,
and consequences. Immunity 51,2 7–41 (2019).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
20
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 21 ====
310. Żeromski, J. et al. Signi ﬁcance and role of pattern recognition receptors in
malignancy. Arch. Immunol. Ther. Exp. 67, 133 –141 (2019).
311. Hopcraft, S. E. & Damania, B. Tumour viruses and innate immunity. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 372, 20160267 (2017).
312. Burn, O. K., Prasit, K. K. & Hermans, I. F. Modulating the tumour microenviron-
ment by intratumoural injection of pattern recognition receptor agonists.Cancers 12, 3824 (2020).
313. Hangai, S., Kimura, Y., Taniguchi, T. & Yanai, H. Signal-transducing innate receptors
in tumor immunity. Cancer Sci .https://doi.org/10.1111/cas.14848 (2021).
314. Shekarian, T. et al. Pattern recognition receptors: immune targets to enhance
cancer immunotherapy. Ann. Oncol. 28, 1756 –1766 (2017).
315. Rameshbabu, S., Labadie, B. W., Argulian, A. & Patnaik, A. Targeting innate
immunity in cancer therapy. Vaccines 9, 138 (2021).
316. Tang, Z. et al. GEPIA: a web server for cancer and normal gene expression
proﬁling and interactive analyses. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, W98 –W102 (2017).
317. Weitz, J. et al. Colorectal cancer. Lancet 365, 153 –165 (2005).
318. Thanikachalam, K. & Khan, G. Colorectal cancer and nutrition. Nutrients 11, 164
(2019).
319. Janney, A., Powrie, F. & Mann, E. H. Host-microbiota maladaptation in colorectal
cancer. Nature 585, 509 –517 (2020).
320. Tilg, H., Adolph, T. E., Gerner, R. R. & Moschen, A. R. The intestinal microbiota in
colorectal cancer. Cancer Cell 33, 954 –964 (2018).
321. Hennessy, C., O ’Connell, S., Egan, L. J. & McKernan, D. P. Inhibition of anti-viral
responses in intestinal epithelial cells by epigenetic modifying drugs is medi-
ated by a reduction in viral pattern recognition receptor expression and activity.Immunopharmacol. Immunotoxicol. 41, 527 –537 (2019).
322. Magalhães, D., Soares-da-Silva, P. & Magro, F. The effect of PRR ligands on the
membrane potential of intestinal epithelial cells. Pharmacol. Rep. 69, 978 –984
(2017).
323. Abreu, M. T. Toll-like receptor signalling in the intestinal epithelium: how bac-
terial recognition shapes intestinal function. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10, 131 –144
(2010).
324. Kuugbee, E. D. et al. Structural change in microbiota by a probiotic cocktail
enhances the gut barrier and reduces cancer via TLR2 signaling in a rat model ofcolon cancer. Dig. Dis. Sci. 61
, 2908 –2920 (2016).
325. Meng, S. et al. Effect of TLR2 on the proliferation of in ﬂammation-related col-
orectal cancer and sporadic colorectal cancer. Cancer Cell Int. 20, 95 (2020).
326. Fukata, M. et al. Toll-like receptor-4 promotes the development of colitis-
associated colorectal tumors. Gastroenterology 133, 1869 –1881 (2007).
327. Cario, E. The human TLR4 variant D299G mediates in ﬂammation-associated
cancer progression in the intestinal epithelium. Oncoimmunology 2, e24890
(2013).
328. Yesudhas, D., Gosu, V., Anwar, M. A. & Choi, S. Multiple roles of Toll-like receptor
4 in colorectal cancer. Front. Immunol. 5, 334 (2014).
329. Liu, S. et al. FOXP3 inhibits cancer stem cell self-renewal via transcriptional
repression of COX2 in colorectal cancer cells. Oncotarget 8, 44694 –44704 (2017).
330. Hsu, H. H. et al. Prostaglandin E2-induced COX-2 expressions via EP2 and
EP4 signaling pathways in human LoVo colon cancer cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18,
1132 (2017).
331. Brackett, C. M. et al. Toll-like receptor-5 agonist, entolimod, suppresses metas-
tasis and induces immunity by stimulating an NK-dendritic-CD8 +T-cell axis.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E874 –E883 (2016).
332. Moradi-Marjaneh, R. et al. Toll like receptor signaling pathway as a potential
therapeutic target in colorectal cancer. J. Cell. Physiol. 233, 5613 –5622 (2018).
333. Gao, C. et al. TLR9 signaling activation at different stages in colorectal cancer
and NF-kappaB expression. Onco Targets Ther. 11, 5963 –5971 (2018).
334. Alvarez-Arellano, L. et al. TLR9 and NF- κB are partially involved in activation of
human neutrophils by Helicobacter pylori and its puri ﬁed DNA. PLoS ONE 9,
e101342 (2014).
335. Merrell, M. A. et al. Toll-like receptor 9 agonists promote cellular invasion by
increasing matrix metalloproteinase activity. Mol. Cancer Res. 4, 437 –447 (2006).
336. Rath, T. et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-13 is regulated by toll-like receptor-9 in
colorectal cancer cells and mediates cellular migration. Oncol. Lett. 2, 483 –488
(2011).
337. Jiang, H. Y. et al. Activation of the pattern recognition receptor NOD1 augments
colon cancer metastasis. Protein Cell 11, 187 –201 (2020).
338. Tarao, K. et al. In ﬂammation in background cirrhosis evokes malignant pro-
gression in HCC development from HCV-associated liver cirrhosis. Scand. J.
Gastroenterol. 48, 729 –735 (2013).
339. Li, H. et al. Expressions of TLR2 and TLR4 protein and their relationship tomu-
tations in genes in hepatocellular carcinoma. Chin J. Cancer Prev. Treat. 21,
401–406 (2014).
340. Junjie, X. et al. The association between Toll-like receptor 2 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms and hepatocellular carcinoma susceptibility. BMC Cancer 12,5 7
(2012).341. Nischalke, H. D. et al. The Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) -196 to -174 del/ins poly-
morphism affects viral loads and susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma inchronic hepatitis C. Int. J. Cancer 130, 1470 –1475 (2012).
342. Kairaluoma, V., Kemi, N., Huhta, H., Pohjanen, V. M. & Helminen, O. Prognostic
role of TLR4 and TLR2 in hepatocellular carcinoma. Acta Oncol. 60, 554 –558
(2021).
343. Chew, V. et al. Toll-like receptor 3 expressing tumor parenchyma and in ﬁltrating
natural killer cells in hepatocellular carcinoma patients. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 104,
1796 –1807 (2012).
344. Zhou, S. et al. TLR4 increases the stemness and is highly expressed in relapsed
human hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Med. 8, 2325 –2337 (2019).
345. Lin, A. et al. TLR4 signaling promotes a COX-2/PGE2/STAT3 positive feedback
loop in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. Oncoimmunology 5, e1074376
(2015).
346. Zhou, B. et al. Hepatoma cell-intrinsic TLR9 activation induces immune escape
through PD-L1 upregulation in hepatocellular carcinoma. Theranostics 10,
6530 –6543 (2020).
347. Song, I. J. et al. The contribution of toll-like receptor signaling to the develop-
ment of liver ﬁbrosis and cancer in hepatocyte-speci ﬁc TAK1-deleted mice. Int. J.
Cancer 142,8 1–91 (2018).
348. Bonnin, M. et al. Toll-like receptor 3 downregulation is an escape mechanism
from apoptosis during hepatocarcinogenesis J. Hepatol. 71, 763 –772 (2019);
corrigendum 72, 594 (2020).
349. Yu, L. X. & Schwabe, R. F. The gut microbiome and liver cancer: mechanisms and
clinical translation. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 14, 527 –539 (2017).
350. Zhou, Y. et al. Hepatic NOD2 promotes hepatocarcinogenesis via a RIP2-
mediated proin ﬂ
ammatory response and a novel nuclear autophagy-mediated
DNA damage mechanism. J. Hematol. Oncol. 14, 9 (2021).
351. Caruso, R., Warner, N., Inohara, N. & Núñez, G. NOD1 and NOD2: signaling, host
defense, and in ﬂammatory disease. Immunity 41, 898 –908 (2014).
352. Faloppi, L. et al. Lactate dehydrogenase in hepatocellular carcinoma: something
old, something new. Biomed. Res. Int. 2016 , 7196280 (2016).
353. Woolston, C. Breast cancer. Nature 527, S101 (2015).
354. Bhatelia, K., Singh, K. & Singh, R. TLRs: linking in ﬂammation and breast cancer.
Cell. Signal. 26, 2350 –2357 (2014).
355. Hummell, D. S. & Winkelstein, J. A. Bacterial lipoteichoic acid sensitizes host cells
for destruction by autologous complement. J. Clin. Investig. 77, 1533 –1538
(1986).
356. Schröder, N. W. et al. Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) of Streptococcus pneumoniae and
Staphylococcus aureus activates immune cells via Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2,
lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), and CD14, whereas TLR-4 and MD-2are not involved. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 15587 –15594 (2003).
357. Schafer, Z. T. & Brugge, J. S. IL-6 involvement in epithelial cancers. J. Clin.
Investig. 117, 3660 –3663 (2007).
358. Sansone, P. et al. IL-6 triggers malignant features in mammospheres from
human ductal breast carcinoma and normal mammary gland. J. Clin. Investig.
117, 3988 –4002 (2007).
359. Di Domenico, M., Ricciardi, C., Fusco, A. & Pierantoni, G. M. Anti-VEGF therapy in
breast and lung mouse models of cancers. J. Biomed. Biotechnol. 2011 , 947928
(2011).
360. Liao, S. J. et al. Triggering of Toll-like receptor 4 on metastatic breast cancer cells
promotes αvβ3-mediated adhesion and invasive migration. Breast Cancer Res.
Treat. 133, 853 –863 (2012).
361. Moskovitz, J., Moy, J. & Ferris, R. L. Immunotherapy for head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma. Curr. Oncol. Rep. 20, 22 (2018).
362. Solomon, B., Young, R. J. & Rischin, D. Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma:
Genomics and emerging biomarkers for immunomodulatory cancer treatments.Semin. Cancer Biol. 52, 228 –240 (2018).
363. Oliva, M. et al. Immune biomarkers of response to immune-checkpoint inhibi-
tors in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Ann. Oncol. 30,5 7–67 (2019).
364. Waldman, A. & Schmults, C. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.
Hematol.
Oncol. Clin. North Am. 33,1–12 (2019).
365. Mäkinen, L. K. et al. Toll-like receptors 2, 4, and 9 in primary, metastasized, and
recurrent oral tongue squamous cell carcinomas. J. Oral. Pathol. Med. 45,
338–345 (2016).
366. Mäkinen, L. K. et al. Predictive role of Toll-like receptors 2, 4, and 9 in oral tongue
squamous cell carcinoma. Oral. Oncol. 51,9 6–102 (2015).
367. Yoon, H. E. et al. Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) activa-
tion induces apoptosis of human oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. J. Oral.
Pathol. Med. 45, 262 –267 (2016).
368. van de Veerdonk, F. L., Gresnigt, M. S., Romani, L., Netea, M. G. & Latgé, J. P.
Aspergillus fumigatus morphology and dynamic host interactions. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 15, 661 –674 (2017).
369. Latgé, J. P. & Chamilos, G. Aspergillus fumigatus and Aspergillosis in 2019. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 33, e00140 –18 (2019).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
21
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 22 ====
370. Zhang, P. P. et al. Toll-like receptor 2 and dectin-1 function as promising bio-
marker for Aspergillus fumigatus infection. Exp. Ther. Med. 14, 3836 –3840 (2017).
371. Percier, P. et al. Aspergillus fumigatus recognition by dendritic cells negatively
regulates allergic lung in ﬂammation through a TLR2/MyD88 pathway. Am. J.
Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 64,3 9–49 (2021).
372. Murakami, Y. et al. TLR9-IL-2 axis exacerbates allergic asthma by preventing IL-
17A hyperproduction. Sci. Rep. 10, 18110 (2020).
373. Ransohoff, R. M. & Brown, M. A. Innate immunity in the central nervous system.
J. Clin. Investig. 122, 1164 –1171 (2012).
374. Klein, R. S., Garber, C. & Howard, N. Infectious immunity in the central nervous
system and brain function. Nat. Immunol. 18, 132 –141 (2017).
375. Kipnis, J. Multifaceted interactions between adaptive immunity and the central
nervous system. Science 353, 766 –771 (2016).
376. Keogh, C. E., Rude, K. M. & Gareau, M. G. Role of pattern recognition receptors
and the microbiota in neurological disorders. J. Physiol. 599, 1379 –1389 (2021).
377. Dick, A. & Provencal, N. Central neuroepigenetic regulation of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis. Prog. Mol. Biol. Transl. Sci. 158, 105 –127 (2018).
378. Pusceddu, M. M. et al. Nod-like receptors are critical for gut-brain axis signalling
in mice. J. Physiol. 597, 5777 –5797 (2019).
379. Pariante, C. M. Neuroscience, mental health and the immune system: overcoming
the brain-mind-body trichotomy. Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci. 25, 101 –105 (2016).
380. Hill, A. S., Sahay, A. & Hen, R. Increasing adult hippocampal neurogenesis is
sufﬁcient to reduce anxiety and depression-like behaviors. Neuropsycho-
pharmacology 40, 2368 –2378 (2015).
381. Yadav, S. & Surolia, A. Lysozyme elicits pain during nerve injury by neuronal Toll-
like receptor 4 activation and has therapeutic potential in neuropathic pain. Sci.
Transl. Med. 11, eaav4176 (2019).
382. Tanga, F. Y., Nutile-McMenemy, N. & DeLeo, J. A. The CNS role of Toll-like
receptor 4 in innate neuroimmunity and painful neuropathy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA102, 5856 –5861 (2005).
383. Guo, L. H. & Schluesener, H. J. The innate immunity of the central nervous
system in chronic pain: the role of Toll-like receptors. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 64,
1128 –1136 (2007).
384. Poddar, U. et al. Neonatal cholestasis: differentiation of biliary atresia from
neonatal hepatitis in a developing country. Acta Paediatr. 98, 1260 –1264 (2009).
385. Huang, Y. H. et al. Expression of toll-like receptors and type 1 interferon speci ﬁc
protein MxA in biliary atresia. Lab. Invest. 87,6 6–74 (2007).
386. Huang, Y. H. et al. Toll-like receptor 7 agonist induces hypoplasia of the biliary
system in a neonatal mouse model. J. Microbiol. Immunol. Infect. 51, 166 –173 (2018).
387. Price, A. E. et al. A map of toll-like receptor expression in the intestinal epi-
thelium reveals distinct spatial, cell type-speci ﬁc, and temporal patterns.
Immunity 49, 560 –575 (2018).
388. Zhang, B. et al. Viral infection. Prevention and cure of rotavirus infection via
TLR5/NLRC4-mediated production of IL-22 and IL-18. Science 346, 861 –865
(2014).
389. Vijay-Kumar, M. et al. Deletion of TLR5 results in spontaneous colitis in mice. J.
Clin. Investig. 117, 3909 –3921 (2007).
390. Yan, L. et al. Pyrimidine triazole thioether derivatives as toll-like receptor 5
(TLR5)/ ﬂagellin complex inhibitors. ChemMedChem 11, 822 –826 (2016).
391. Zhou, Z. et al. Exogenous activation of Toll-like receptor 5 signaling mitigates
acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity in mice. Toxicol. Lett. 342,5 8–72 (2021).
392. Jalan, R. et al. Acute-on chronic liver failure. J. Hepatol. 57, 1336 –1348 (2012).
393. Gustot, T. et al. Clinical course of acute-on-chronic liver failure syndrome and
effects on prognosis. Hepatology 62, 243 –252 (2015).
394. Singal, A. K., Bataller, R., Ahn, J., Kamath, P. S. & Shah, V. H. ACG clinical guideline:
alcoholic liver disease. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 113, 175 –194 (2018).
395. Boussif, A. et al. Impaired intracellular signaling, myeloperoxidase release and
bactericidal activity of neutrophils from patients with alcoholic cirrhosis. J.
Hepatol. 64, 1041 –1048 (2016).
396. Rolas, L. et al. NADPH oxidase depletion in neutrophils from patients with cir-
rhosis and restoration via toll-like receptor 7/8 activation. Gut67, 1505 –1516
(2018).
397. Bajaj, J. S. Alcohol, liver disease and the gut microbiota. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 16, 235 –246 (2019).
398. Lin, J., Kakkar, V. & Lu, X. Essential roles of Toll-like receptors in atherosclerosis.
Curr. Med. Chem. 23, 431 –454 (2016).
399. Falck-Hansen, M., Kassiteridi, C. & Monaco, C. Toll-like receptors in athero-
sclerosis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 14, 14008 –14023 (2013).
400. Li, B., Xia, Y. & Hu, B. Infection and atherosclerosis: TLR-dependent pathways.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 77, 2751 –2769 (2020).
401. Wolf, D. & Ley, K. Immunity and in ﬂammation in atherosclerosis. Circ. Res. 124,
315–327 (2019).
402. Karadimou, G. et al. Low TLR7 gene expression in atherosclerotic plaques is
associated with major adverse cardio- and cerebrovascular events. Cardiovasc.
Res.113,3 0–39 (2017).403. Fukuda, D. et al. Toll-like receptor 9 plays a pivotal role in angiotensin II-induced
atherosclerosis. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 8, e010860 (2019).
404. Libby, P., Ridker, P. M., Hansson, G. K. & Ather, L. T. N. In ﬂammation in athero-
sclerosis from pathophysiology to practice. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 54, 2129 –2138
(2009).
405. Gisterå, A. & Hansson, G. K. The immunology of atherosclerosis. Nat. Rev.
Nephrol. 13, 368 –380 (2017).
406. Kim, J., Seo, M., Kim, S. K. & Bae, Y. S. Flagellin-induced NADPH oxidase 4
activation is involved in atherosclerosis. Sci. Rep. 6, 25437 (2016).
407. Kim, J. et al. The ﬂagellin-TLR5-Nox4 axis promotes the migration of smooth
muscle cells in atherosclerosis. Exp. Mol. Med. 51,1–13 (2019).
408. Lee, G. L. et al. TLR2 promotes vascular smooth muscle cell chondrogenic dif-
ferentiation and consequent calci ﬁcation via the concerted actions of osteo-
protegerin suppression and IL-6-mediated RANKL induction. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 39, 432 –445 (2019).
409. Farkas, D. et al. Toll-like receptor 3 is a therapeutic target for pulmonary
hypertension. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 199, 199 –210 (2019).
410. Vlacil, A. K. et al. De ﬁciency of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-
containing proteins (NOD) 1 and 2 reduces atherosclerosis. Basic Res. Cardiol.
115, 47 (2020).
411. Armulik, A., Genové, G. & Betsholtz, C. Pericytes: developmental, physiological,
and pathological perspectives, problems, and promises. Dev. Cell 21, 193 –215
(2011).
412. Nyúl-Tóth, Á. et al. Expression of pattern recognition receptors and activation of
the non-canonical in ﬂammasome pathway in brain pericytes. Brain Behav.
Immun. 64, 220 –231 (2017).
413. Navarro, R. et al. Role of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 1 (NOD1) in
pericyte-mediated vascular in ﬂammation. J. Cell Mol. Med. 20, 980 –986 (2016).
414. Mravec, B., Gidron, Y. & Hulin, I. Neurobiology of cancer: interactions between
nervous, endocrine and immune systems as a base for monitoring and mod-
ulating the tumorigenesis by the brain. Semin. Cancer Biol. 18, 150 –163 (2008).
415. Del Rey, A. & Besedovsky, H. O. Immune-neuro-endocrine re ﬂexes, circuits, and
networks: physiologic and evolutionary implications. Front. Horm. Res. 48,1–18
(2017).
416. Glaser, R. & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. Stress-induced immune dysfunction: implications
for health. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 243 –251 (2005).
417. Renner, U., Sapochnik, M., Lucia, K., Stalla, G. K. & Arzt, E. Intrahypophyseal
immune-endocrine interactions: endocrine integration of the in ﬂammatory
inputs. Front. Horm. Res. 48,3 7–47 (2017).
418. Peng, S. et al. Increased Toll-like receptors activity and TLR ligands in patients
with autoimmune thyroid diseases. Front. Immunol .7, 578 (2016); correction 8,
551 (2017).
419. Dvornikova, K. A., Bystrova, E. Y., Platonova, O. N. & Churilov, L. P. Polymorphism
of Toll-like receptor genes and autoimmune endocrine diseases. Autoimmun.
Rev.19, 102496 (2020).
420. Liu, M. et al. Toll-like receptor 9 negatively regulates pancreatic islet beta cell
growth and function in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 61,
2333 –2343 (2018).
421. Ji, Y. et al. Toll-like receptors TLR2 and TLR4 block the replication of pancreatic β
cells in diet-induced obesity. Nat. Immunol. 20, 677 –686 (2019).
422. Grennan, D. Diabetic foot ulcers. JAMA 321, 114 (2019).
423. Armstrong, D. G., Boulton, A. J. M. & Bus, S. A. Diabetic foot ulcers and their
recurrence. N. Engl. J. Med. 376, 2367 –2375 (2017).
424. Singh, K. et al. Increased expression of endosomal members of toll-like receptor
family abrogates wound healing in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int.
Wound J. 13, 927 –935 (2016).
425. Guiducci, C. et al. Autoimmune skin in ﬂammation is dependent on plasmacytoid
dendritic cell activation by nucleic acids via TLR7 and TLR9. J. Exp. Med. 207,
2931 –2942 (2010).
426. McKelvey, K. J., Highton, J. & Hessian, P. A. Cell-speci ﬁc expression of TLR9
isoforms in in ﬂammation. J. Autoimmun. 36,7 6–86 (2011).
427. Marshak-Rothstein, A. & Rifkin, I. R. Immunologically active autoantigens: the
role of toll-like receptors in the development of chronic in ﬂammatory disease.
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 25, 419 –441 (2007).
428. Pellicoro, A., Ramachandran, P., Iredale, J. P. & Fallow ﬁeld, J. A. Liver ﬁbrosis and
repair: immune regulation of wound healing in a solid organ. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
14, 181 –194 (2014).
429. Han, G. & Ceilley, R. Chronic wound healing: a review of current management
and treatments. Adv. Ther. 34, 599 –610 (2017).
430. Cavalcante, P. et al. Increased expression of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9 in
myasthenia gravis thymus characterized by active Epstein-Barr virus infection.Immunobiology 221, 516 –527 (2016).
431. Hwang, H. S., Lee, M. H., Choi, M. H. & Kim, H. A. NOD2 signaling pathway is
involved in ﬁbronectin fragment-induced pro-catabolic factor expressions in
human articular chondrocytes. BMB Rep. 52, 373 –378 (2019).Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
22
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 23 ====
432. Hwang, H. S., Park, S. J., Cheon, E. J., Lee, M. H. & Kim, H. A. Fibronectin fragment-
induced expression of matrix metalloproteinases is mediated by MyD88-dependent TLR-2 signaling pathway in human chondrocytes. Arthritis Res. Ther.
17, 320 (2015).
433. Hoffman, N. J. et al. Global phosphoproteomic analysis of human skeletal
muscle reveals a network of exercise-regulated kinases and AMPK substrates.Cell Metab. 22, 922 –935 (2015).
434. Liu, Y. et al. TLR9 and beclin 1 crosstalk regulates muscle AMPK activation in
exercise. Nature 578, 605 –609 (2020).
435. Aleynick, M., Svensson-Arvelund, J., Flowers, C. R., Marabelle, A. & Brody, J. D.
Pathogen molecular pattern receptor agonists: treating cancer by mimicking
infection. Clin. Cancer Res. 25, 6283 –6294 (2019).
436. Cao, X. Self-regulation and cross-regulation of pattern-recognition receptor
signalling in health and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16,3 5–50 (2016).
437. Pizzolla, A., Smith, J. M., Brooks, A. G. & Reading, P. C. Pattern recognition
receptor immunomodulation of innate immunity as a strategy to limit the
impact of in ﬂuenza virus. J. Leukoc. Biol. 101, 851 –861 (2017).
438. Fabbri, M. TLRs as miRNA receptors. Cancer Res. 72, 6333 –6337 (2012).
439. Nabet, B. Y. et al. Exosome RNA unshielding couples stromal activation to
pattern recognition receptor signaling in cancer. Cell170, 352.e13 –366.e13
(2017).
440. Hemmi, H. et al. Small anti-viral compounds activate immune cells via the TLR7
MyD88-dependent signaling pathway. Nat. Immunol. 3, 196 –200 (2002).
441. Gane, E. J. et al. Safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of the oral
TLR8 agonist selgantolimod in chronic hepatitis B. Hepatology https://doi.org/
10.1002/hep.31795 (2021).
442. Amin, O. E. et al. Therapeutic potential of TLR8 agonist GS-9688 (selgantolimod)
in chronic hepatitis B: re-modelling of antiviral and regulatory mediators.Hepatology https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.31695 (2020).
443. Smith, D. A. et al. Antitumor activity and safety of combination therapy with the
Toll-like receptor 9 agonist IMO-2055, erlotinib, and bevacizumab in advancedor metastatic non-small cell lung cancer patients who have progressed fol-lowing chemotherapy. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 63, 787 –796 (2014).
444. Krarup, A. R. et al. The TLR9 agonist MGN1703 triggers a potent type I interferon
response in the sigmoid colon. Mucosal Immunol. 11, 449 –461 (2018).
445. Owen, A. M., Fults, J. B., Patil, N. K., Hernandez, A. & Bohannon, J. K. TLR agonists
as mediators of trained immunity: mechanistic insight and immunotherapeutic
potential to combat infection. Front. Immunol. 11, 622614 (2021).
446. Cui, L., Wang, X. & Zhang, D. TLRs as a promise target along with immune
checkpoint against gastric cancer. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8, 611444 (2021).
447. Takeda, Y. et al. A TLR3-speci ﬁ
c adjuvant relieves innate resistance to PD-L1
blockade without cytokine toxicity in tumor vaccine immunotherapy. Cell Rep.
19, 1874 –1887 (2017).
448. Hu, H. G., Wu, J. J., Zhang, B. D., Li, W. H. & Li, Y. M. Pam 3CSK 4-CDGSFaugments
antitumor immunotherapy by synergistically activating TLR1/2 and STING. Bio-
conjug. Chem. 31, 2499 –2503 (2020).
449. He, Y., Hara, H., & Núñez, G. Mechanism and regulation of NLRP3 in ﬂammasome
activation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 41, 1012 –1021 (2016).
450. Liu, P. et al. NOD-like receptor signaling in in ﬂammation-associated cancers:
from functions to targeted therapies. Phytomedicine 64, 152925 (2019).
451. Londhe, P., Zhu, B., Abraham, J., Keller, C. & Davie, J. CIITA is silenced by epi-
genetic mechanisms that prevent the recruitment of transactivating factors inrhabdomyosarcoma cells. Int. J. Cancer 131, E437 –E448 (2012).
452. Cycon, K. A., Mulvaney, K., Rimsza, L. M., Persky, D. & Murphy, S. P. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors activate CIITA and MHC class II antigen expression in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Immunology 140, 259 –272 (2013).
453. Lee, J. et al. Sulforaphane attenuates activation of NLRP3 and NLRC4 in ﬂam-
masomes but not AIM2 in ﬂammasome. Cell Immunol. 306-307 ,5 3–60 (2016).
454. Guo, W. et al. Small molecule-driven mitophagy-mediated NLRP3 in ﬂamma-
some inhibition is responsible for the prevention of colitis-associated cancer.Autophagy 10, 972 –985 (2014).
455. Zhao, Y. et al. Small molecule GL-V9 protects against colitis-associated colorectal
cancer by limiting NLRP3 in ﬂammasome through autophagy. Oncoimmunology
7, e1375640 (2017).
456. Abderrazak, A. et al. Anti-in ﬂammatory and antiatherogenic effects of the NLRP3
inﬂammasome inhibitor arglabin in ApoE2.Ki mice fed a high-fat diet. Circulation
131, 1061 –1070 (2015).
457. Wu, D. et al. Formononetin administration ameliorates dextran sulfate sodium-
induced acute colitis by inhibiting NLRP3 in ﬂammasome signaling pathway.
Mediators In ﬂamm. 2018 , 3048532 (2018).
458. Zhang, W. et al. Lactate is a natural suppressor of RLR signaling by targeting
MAVS. Cell178, 176 –189.e15 (2019).
459. Domankevich, V. et al. RIG-1-like receptor activation synergizes with intratu-
moral alpha radiation to induce pancreatic tumor rejection, triple-negativebreast metastases clearance, and antitumor immune memory in mice. Front.
Oncol. 10, 990 (2020).
460. Patra, M. C. & Choi, S. Recent progress in the development of Toll-like receptor
(TLR) antagonists.
Expert Opin. Ther. Pat. 26, 719 –730 (2016).
461. Balak, D. M. et al. IMO-8400, a toll-like receptor 7, 8, and 9 antagonist,
demonstrates clinical activity in a phase 2a, randomized, placebo-controlled trialin patients with moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis. Clin. Immunol. 174,6 3–72
(2017).
462. Lai, C. Y., Su, Y. W., Lin, K. I., Hsu, L. C. & Chuang, T. H. Natural modulators of
endosomal Toll-like receptor-mediated psoriatic skin in ﬂammation. J. Immunol.
Res.2017 , 7807313 (2017).
463. Calore, F. et al. The TLR7/8/9 antagonist IMO-8503 inhibits cancer-induced
cachexia. Cancer Res. 78, 6680 –6690 (2018).
464. Suárez-Fariñas, M. et al. Suppression of molecular in ﬂammatory pathways by
Toll-like receptor 7, 8, and 9 antagonists in a model of IL-23-induced skininﬂammation. PLoS ONE 8, e84634 (2013).
465. Mohamed, F. E. et al. Effect of toll-like receptor 7 and 9 targeted therapy to
prevent the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Liver Int. 35, 1063 –1076
(2015).
466. Li, C., Wang, J., Zhao, M., Zhang, S. & Zhang, Y. Toll-like receptor 4 antagonist FP7
alleviates lipopolysaccharide-induced septic shock via NF-kB signaling pathway.Chem. Biol. Drug Des. https://doi.org/10.1111/cbdd.13837 (2021).
467. Sacre, S. et al. Oligodeoxynucleotide inhibition of Toll-like receptors 3, 7, 8, and
9 suppresses cytokine production in a human rheumatoid arthritis model. Eur. J.
Immunol. 46, 772 –781 (2016).
468. Yaw, A. C. K., Chan, E. W. L., Yap, J. K. Y. & Mai, C. W. The effects of NLRP3
inﬂammasome inhibition by MCC950 on LPS-induced pancreatic adenocarci-
noma in ﬂammation. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 146, 2219 –2229 (2020).
469. Yang, G. et al. Direct binding to NLRP3 pyrin domain as a novel strategy to
prevent NLRP3-driven in ﬂammation and gouty arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 72,
1192 –1202 (2020).
470. Zhang, X. et al. Development of small molecule inhibitors targeting NLRP3
inﬂammasome pathway for in ﬂammatory diseases. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 185,
111822 (2020).
471. Coll, R. C. et al. A small-molecule inhibitor of the NLRP3 in ﬂammasome for the
treatment of in ﬂammatory diseases. Nat. Med. 21, 248 –255 (2015).
472. Dai, Z. et al. Development of novel tetrahydroquinoline inhibitors of NLRP3
inﬂammasome for potential treatment of DSS-induced mouse colitis. J. Med.
Chem. 64, 871 –889 (2021).
473. Agarwal, S. et al. Identi ﬁcation of a novel orally bioavailable NLRP3 in ﬂamma-
some inhibitor. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 30, 127571 (2020).
474. Sparks, J. A. Rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Intern. Med. 170, ITC1 –ITC16 (2019).
475. Burmester, G. R. & Pope, J. E. Novel treatment strategies in rheumatoid arthritis.
Lancet 389, 2338 –2348 (2017).
476. Nygaard, G. & Firestein, G. S. Restoring synovial homeostasis in rheumatoid
arthritis by targeting ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 16,
316–333 (2020).
477. Zhang, F. et al. De ﬁning in ﬂammatory cell states in rheumatoid arthritis joint
synovial tissues by integrating single-cell transcriptomics and mass cytometry.
Nat. Immunol. 20, 928 –942 (2019).
478. Croft, A. P. et al. Distinct ﬁbroblast subsets drive in ﬂammation and damage in
arthritis. Nature 570, 246 –251 (2019).
479. Taganov, K. D., Boldin, M. P., Chang, K. J. & Baltimore, D. NF-kappaB-
dependent induction of microRNA miR-14 6, an inhibitor targeted to signaling
proteins of innate immune responses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103,
12481 –12486 (2006).
480. Ceppi, M. et al. MicroRNA-155 modulates the interleukin-1 signaling pathway in
activated human monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106,
2735 –2740 (2009).
481. Li, Z., Cai, J. & Cao, X. MiR-19 suppresses ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes cytokine
release by targeting toll like receptor 2 in rheumatoid arthritis. Am. J. Transl. Res.
8, 5512 –5518 (2016).
482. Philippe, L. et al. MiR-20a regulates ASK1 expression and TLR4-dependent
cytokine release in rheumatoid ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 72,
1071 –1079 (2013).
483. Mu, N. et al. A novel NF- κB/YY1/microRNA-10a regulatory circuit in ﬁbroblast-
like synoviocytes regulates in ﬂammation in rheumatoid arthritis. Sci. Rep. 6,
20059 (2016).
484. Ingle, H. et al. The microRNA miR-485 targets host and in ﬂuenza virus transcripts to
regulate antiviral immunity and restrict viral replication. Sci. Signal. 8, ra126 (2015).
485. Lukiw, W. J. & Pogue, A. I. Vesicular transport of encapsulated microRNA
between glial and neuronal cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 5078 (2020).
486. Alexandrov, P., Zhai, Y., Li, W. & Lukiw, W. Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated, NF-kB-,
miRNA-146a- and miRNA-155-mediated molecular-genetic communicationPattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
23
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

==== Page 24 ====
between the human gastrointestinal tract microbiome and the brain. Folia
Neuropathol. 57, 211 –219 (2019).
487. Guo, H. Y., Cheng, A. C., Wang, M. S., Yin, Z. Q. & Jia, R. Y. Exosomes: potential
therapies for disease via regulating TLRs. Mediators In ﬂamm. 2020 , 2319616 (2020).
488. Pegtel, D. M. & Gould, S. J. Exosomes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 88, 487 –514 (2019).
489. Kalluri, R. & LeBleu, V. S. The biology, function, and biomedical applications of
exosomes. Science 367, eaau6977 (2020).
490. Yuyama, K. et al. Decreased amyloid- βpathologies by intracerebral loading of
glycosphingolipid-enriched exosomes in Alzheimer model mice. J. Biol. Chem.
289, 24488 –24498 (2014).
491. Peng, R. R., Shang, S. X., Zhao, L. S. & Long, F. Q. MiR-216a-5p-containing exo-
somes suppress rTp17-induced in ﬂammatory response by targeting TLR4. Biosci.
Rep.39, BSR20190686 (2019).
492. Vulpis, E. et al. Genotoxic stress modulates the release of exosomes from
multiple myeloma cells capable of activating NK cell cytokine production: role ofHSP70/TLR2/NF-kB axis. Oncoimmunology 6, e1279372 (2017).
493. Banstola, A., Jeong, J. H. & Yook, S. Immunoadjuvants for cancer immunother-
apy: a review of recent developments. Acta Biomater. 114,1 6–30 (2020).
494. Tartey, S. & Takeuchi, O. Pathogen recognition and Toll-like receptor targeted
therapeutics in innate immune cells. Int. Rev. Immunol. 36,5 7–73 (2017).
495. Guan, Y. et al. Human TLRs 10 and 1 share common mechanisms of innate
immune sensing but not signaling. J. Immunol. 184, 5094 –5103 (2010).496. Santana Silva, R. J. & Micheli, F. RRGPredictor, a set-theory-based tool for pre-
dicting pathogen-associated molecular pattern receptors (PRRs) and resistance(R) proteins from plants. Genomics 112, 2666 –2676 (2020).
497. Feng, P. & Feng, L. Sequence based prediction of pattern recognition
receptors by using feature selection technique. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 162,
931–934 (2020).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2021Pattern recognition receptors in health and diseases
Li and Wu
24
Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy           (2021) 6:291 

