==== Page 1 ====
Practical Analysis on Architecture of EfﬁcientNet
Van-Thanh Hoang
Faculty of Engineering-Technology
Quang Binh University
Quang Binh, Vietnam
Email: thanhhv@qbu.edu.vn
ORCID: 0000-0003-3478-9954Kang-Hyun Jo
School of Electrical Engineering
University of Ulsan
Ulsan, Korea
Email: acejo@ulsan.ac.kr
ORCID: 0000-0001-8317-6092
Abstract —Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown
signiﬁcant performance in solving various artiﬁcial intelligence
tasks in recent years. However, the increasing model size has
raised challenges in adopting them in limited-resource appli-
cations. Recently, many research works try to build efﬁcient
networks which are as small as possible while still have acceptable
performance. The state-of-the-art architecture is EfﬁcientNet. On
the ImageNet challenge, with a much fewer parameter calculation
load, EfﬁcientNet could take its place among the state-of-the-
art. EfﬁcientNet can be considered a group of convolutional
neural network models. But given some of its subtleties, it is
actually more efﬁcient than most of its predecessors. It uses the
inverted bottleneck residual blocks of MobileNetV2, in addition
to squeeze-and-excitation modules (SE modules). This paper
investigates the effect of SE modules on the performance of
EfﬁcientNet-B0, the basic network model in the EfﬁcientNets
series, by repositioning/removing the SE modules.
Index Terms —CNN architecture, efﬁcientnet, SE module
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown
signiﬁcant performance in many computer vision tasks in
recent years. The primary trend for solving major tasks is
building deeper and larger CNNs [2], [12]. The most accurate
CNNs usually have hundreds of layers and thousands of
channels [2], [5], [13], [16]. Many real-world applications need
to be performed in real-time and/or on limited-resource mobile
devices. Thereby, the model should be compact and should
have low computational cost. The model compression work
is actually investigating the trade-off between efﬁciency and
accuracy.
Recently, many research works focus on the ﬁeld of design-
ing efﬁcient architecture. Inspired by the architecture proposed
in [7], the Inception module is proposed in GoogLeNet [12]
to build deeper networks without increase model size and
computational cost. Then it is further improved in [13] through
factorizing convolution. The Depthwise Separable Convolu-
tion (DWConvolution) generalized the factorization idea and
decomposed the standard Convolution into a depthwise convo-
lution followed by a pointwise 1×1convolution. EfﬁcientNets
[15], a family of efﬁciently scaled convolutional neural nets,
have recently emerged as state-of-the-art models for image
classiﬁcation tasks. EfﬁcientNets optimize for accuracy as
well as efﬁciency by reducing model size and ﬂoating point
operations executed while still maintaining model quality. Thebasic network architecture of the model is designed by using
neural architecture search. By enlarging the basic model of
EfﬁcientNets, a series of EfﬁcientNets models are obtained.
This series of models defeated all previous convolutional
neural network models in terms of efﬁciency and accuracy. In
particular, EfﬁcientNet-B7 obtained top-1 accuracy of 84.4%
and top-5 accuracy of 97.1% on the ImageNet dataset. And
compared with other models with the highest accuracy at the
time, the size was reduced by 8.4 times and the efﬁciency
was increased by 6.1 times. And through transfer learning,
EfﬁcientNets reached the most advanced level at the time on
multiple well-known data sets.
This paper investigates the EfﬁcientNet-B0, the basic net-
work model in the EfﬁcientNets series. The core structure
of the network is the mobile inverted bottleneck convolu-
tion (MBConv) module, which also introduces the attention
thought of the compression and excitation network (Squeeze-
and-Excitation Network, SENet) [4]. We create some varia-
tions of EfﬁcientNet-B0 by repositioning/removing SE mod-
ules. All variants are then trained on ImageNet dataset [10]
to know the effect of SE modules on the performance of
EfﬁcientNet-B0.
II. R ELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
A. Related Work
Recently, there are many studies focus on the designing
efﬁcient architectures approach [3], [5], [11], [17], [18]. They
have explored efﬁcient CNNs that can be trained end-to-end.
MobileNetV1 [3] introduced depthwise separable convolu-
tions as an efﬁcient replacement for traditional convolution
layers. Depthwise separable convolutions effectively factorize
traditional convolution by separating spatial ﬁltering from the
feature generation mechanism. It consists of two separated
layers. The ﬁrst layer uses a light weight depthwise convolu-
tion operator. It applies a single convolutional ﬁlter per input
channel to capture the spatial information in each channel.
Then the second layer employs a pointwise convolution, means
a heavier 1×1convolution, to capture the cross-channel
information for feature generation.
MobileNetV2 [11] introduced the linear bottleneck and
inverted residual structure in order to make even more efﬁcient
layer structures by leveraging the low rank nature of the
problem. This structure is shown in Figure 1a and is deﬁned

==== Page 2 ====
by a1×1expansion convolution followed by depthwise
convolutions and a 1×1projection layer. The input and output
are connected with a residual connection if and only if they
have the same number of channels and spatial sizes. This
structure maintains a compact representation at the input and
the output while expanding to a higher-dimensional feature
space internally to increase the expressiveness of nonlinear
perchannel transformations.
EfﬁcientNets [15], a family of efﬁciently scaled convolu-
tional neural nets, have recently emerged as state-of-the-art
models for image classiﬁcation tasks. EfﬁcientNets optimize
for accuracy as well as efﬁciency by reducing model size
and ﬂoating point operations executed while still maintaining
model quality.
The architecture of EfﬁcientNet was designed by performing
the neural architecture search, a technique for automating the
design of neural networks. It optimizes both the accuracy
and efﬁciency as measured on the ﬂoating-point operations
per second (FLOPS) basis. This developed architecture uses
the mobile inverted bottleneck convolution (MBConv). The
researchers then scaled up this baseline network to obtain
a family of deep learning models, called EfﬁcientNets. The
architecture of EfﬁcientNet-B0, the basic network model in
the EfﬁcientNets series, is given in the Table I.
The efﬁciency is the utmost important problem for mobile-
size convolution model. The efﬁcient operations have been
extensively studied in the MobileNet family [11], [14]. Spare
depthwise convolution and the inverted bottleneck block are
the core ideas for efﬁcient mobile size network. MnasNet [14]
and EfﬁcientNet [15] takes a step further to develop MBConv
operation based on the mobile inverted bottleneck in [11].
EfﬁcientNet shows that the models with MBConv operations
not only achieving the state-of-the-art in ImageNet challenge
but also very efﬁcient.
B. Squeeze-and-Excitation Block
Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks [4] introduce a building
module for CNNs that improves channel interdependencies at
almost no computational cost. CNNs use their convolutional
ﬁlters to extract hierarchal information from images. Lower
layers ﬁnd trivial pieces of context like edges or high frequen-
cies, while upper layers can detect faces, text or other complex
geometrical shapes. They extract whatever is necessary to
solve a task efﬁciently.
All of this works by fusing the spatial and channel infor-
mation of an image. The different ﬁlters will ﬁrst ﬁnd spatial
features in each input channel before adding the information
across all available output channels.
All you need to understand for now is that the network
weights each of its channels equally when creating the output
feature maps. SENets are all about changing this by adding a
content aware mechanism to weight each channel adaptively.
In it’s most basic form this could mean adding a single
parameter to each channel and giving it a linear scalar how
relevant each one is.TABLE I
EFFICIENT NET-B0 B ODY ARCHITECTURE .MBC ONV : M OBILE INVERTED
BOTTLENECK CONVOLUTION ,THE FOLLOWING NUMBER IS THE
EXPANDED FACTOR .
Stage Operator Resolution #Channels #Blocks
i ˆFiˆHi×ˆWiˆCiˆLi
1 Conv3x3 224×224 32 1
2 MBConv1, k3x3 112×112 16 1
3 MBConv6, k3x3 112×112 24 2
4 MBConv6, k5x5 56×56 40 2
5 MBConv6, k3x3 28×28 80 3
6 MBConv6, k5x5 14×14 112 3
7 MBConv6, k5x5 14×14 192 4
8 MBConv6, k3x3 7×7 320 1
9 Conv1x1 & Pooling 7×7 1280 1
10 FC 1×1 1000 1
However, the authors push it a little further. First, they get a
global understanding of each channel by squeezing the feature
maps to a single numeric value. This results in a vector of size
n, wherenis equal to the number of convolutional channels.
Afterwards, it is fed through a two-layer neural network, which
outputs a vector of the same size. These nvalues can now be
used as weights on the original features maps, scaling each
channel based on its importance.
Speciﬁctly, at ﬁrst, they squeeze each channel to a single
numeric value using average pooling. Then, a fully connected
layer followed by a ReLU function adds the necessary non-
linearity. It’s output channel complexity is also reduced by
a certain ratio. After that, a second fully connected layer
followed by a Sigmoid activation gives each channel a smooth
gating function. At last, they weight each feature map of the
convolutional block based on the result of the side network.
These four steps add almost no additional computing cost (less
than 1%) and can be added to any model.
The authors show that by adding SE modules to ResNet-
50 you can expect almost the same accuracy as ResNet-101
delivers. This is impressive for a model requiring only half of
the computational costs. The paper further investigates other
architectures like Inception, Inception-ResNet and ResNeXt.
The latter leads them to a modiﬁed version that shows a top-5
error of 3.79% on ImageNet.
III. N ETWORK ARCHITECTURE
A. Architecture of EfﬁcientNet-B0
EfﬁcientNet-B0 is the basic network model in the Efﬁ-
cientNets series. The core structure of the network is the
mobile inverted bottleneck convolution (MBConv) module,
which also introduces the attention thought of the compression
and excitation module [4]. Its architecture is shown in Table I.
All layers are followed by a batchnorm and ReLU nonlinearity
activation with the exception of the ﬁnal fully connected
layer which has no nonlinearity and feeds into a softmax
layer for classiﬁcation. Down sampling is handled with strided
convolution in the depthwise convolutions of ﬁrst block in each
stage, as well as in the ﬁrst layer. A ﬁnal average pooling
reduces the spatial resolution to 1 before the fully connected
layer.

==== Page 3 ====
DWConv
1x1 Conv1x1 Conv(a)
DWConv
1x1 Conv1x1 Conv
SE Block (b)
DWConv
1x1 Conv1x1 Conv
SE Block (c)
FC
SigmoidGlobal Pooling
FC (d)
Fig. 1. Architecture of building block. a) The inverted residual block of MobileNetV2 [11] (which without SE module); b) The inverted residual block with
SE module behind the main Depthwise Convolution of EfﬁcientNet [15]. c) The inverted residual block with SE module after the 1×1Conv. d) The SE
module. The down sampling will be in the DWConv layer. There is no shortcut connection if the sizes of input and output features are different. Conv :
Convolution layer. DWCon : Depthwise Convolution layer.
B. Mobile Inverted Bottleneck Convolution Block
The basic mobile inverted bottleneck convolution is ob-
tained through the neural network architecture search. The
module structure is similar to the depthwise separable con-
volution, as can be seen in Fig. 1a. The mobile inverted
bottleneck convolution ﬁrst performs a 1×1point-by-point
convolution on the input and based on the expansion ratio
(expand ratio) to change the output channel dimension (for
example, when the expansion ratio is 3, the channel dimension
will be increased by 3 times. But if the expansion ratio is
1, then directly omit the 1×1point-by-point convolution
and subsequent batch normalization and activation functions).
Then proceed to the depthwise convolution of k×k. Then
restore the original channel dimension at the end of 1x1
point-by-point convolution. Finally, the drop connect and skip
connection of the input are performed.
When the SE module is attached, the operations will be
performed after the depthwise convolution k×k, as shown
in Fig. 1b. This architecture is default for EfﬁcientNet-B0, as
well as the EfﬁcientNet series.
This paper also investigates the performance of EfﬁcientNet-
B0 when the SE module is moved behind the last 1×1
convolution layer. The architecture of this block is shown in
Fig. 1c.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
This paper evaluates the variants of EfﬁcientNet-B0 on
ImageNet dataset [10] and compare them in term of Top-1
error.
A. Dataset
The ILSVRC 2012 classiﬁcation dataset [10] consists 1.2
million images for training, and 50,000 for validation, from
1,000classes. This paper adopts the same data augmentationscheme for training images as in [15], and apply a single-crop
with size 224×224at test time. Following [15], we report the
Top-1 classiﬁcation errors on the validation set.
B. Implementation Details
This paper implements all variants of EfﬁcientNet-B0 on
Tensorﬂow. The training procedure follows the schema pro-
posed in [15]. All models are trained using back-propagation
[6] by Stochastic Gradient Descent [9] with Nesterov mo-
mentum [8] (NAG) optimizer implemented by Tensorﬂow for
350 epochs. At the ﬁrst 5 epochs, the learning rate increases
linearly from 0 to 0.4. Then, its value will be decayed with
a cosine shape (the learning rate of epoch t≤300 is set to
0.5×lr×(cos(π×t/300)+1) ). The parameters are initialized
by Xavier’s initializer [1]. The other settings are: weight decay
of 0.0001, momentum of 0.9, and batch size of 2048.
All networks were trained on Google Colab service with
TPU environment.
C. Performance Evaluation
Table II shows the comparison on Top-1 error of vari-
ants of EfﬁcientNet-B0 when the SE modules are reposi-
tioned/removed.
It’s easy to see that if we do the change (re-positioning or
removing) on noskip blocks, the accuracy slightly drops with
just 0.1% while the number of parameters decreases at 3%.
But if we do the same change on hasskip blocks, the accuracy
drops a little bit larger at 0.7% while the number of parameters
decreases at 8%. If all blocks are applied, the accuracy drops
much at 1% and 1.4% compared to 12% drop for number of
parameters.
One note here is if we reposition the SE modules on only
noskip-blocks or hasskip-blocks, the performance is similar to
the removing case. It means the affect of SE modules when
it’s at the end almost is absent. However, when the change is

==== Page 4 ====
TABLE II
TOP-1ERROR RATES (%) VARIANTS OF EFFICIENT NET ON IMAGE NET DATASETS .SEend MEANS SE MODULES ARE REPOSITIONED TO THE END OF
MBC ONV BLOCKS .noSE MEANS THERE IS NO SE MODULES INSIDE THE MBC ONV BLOCKS .noskip MEANS THE CHANGES ARE APPLIED TO MBC ONV
BLOCKS WHICH HAVE NO SKIP -CONNECTION .hasskip MEANS THE CHANGES ARE APPLIED TO MBC ONV BLOCKS WHICH HAVE SKIP -CONNECTION .
Model Block Arch. #Params Top-1 Top-5
EfﬁcienNet-B0 Fig. 1b 5.29M 77.2 93.4
EfﬁcienNet-B0-SEend@ noskip
Fig. 1c5.16M 77.1 93.3
EfﬁcienNet-B0-SEend@ hasskip 4.91M 76.5 93.2
EfﬁcienNet-B0-SEend@ all 4.78M 76.2 92.9
EfﬁcienNet-B0-noSE@ noskip
Fig. 1a5.11M 77.1 93.4
EfﬁcienNet-B0-noSE@ hasskip 4.83M 76.6 93.0
EfﬁcienNet-B0-noSE@ all 4.65M 75.8 92.7
applied to all blocks, the variant with SE blocks has higher
accuracy, 76.2% vs 75.8%. This shows that SE modules still
can improve the accuracy for EfﬁcientNet-B0, but we don’t
need to use SE modules for all MBConv blocks.
V. C ONCLUSION
This paper investigates the effect of SE modules on the
performance of EfﬁcientNet-B0, the basic network model in
the EfﬁcientNets series, by repositioning/removing the SE
modules. The experiments show that repositioning SE module
to the end of block is not a good idea. And we don’t need
to use SE module for all MBConv blocks, there is a trade off
need to be further studied to have a more efﬁcient network.
In the future, it is necessary to modify the architecture of
EfﬁcientNet and MBConv block to make them more efﬁcient.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Research Founda-
tion of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the government (MSIT).
(No.2020R1A2C200897212)
REFERENCES
[1] X. Glorot and Y . Bengio, “Understanding the difﬁculty of training
deep feedforward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2010, pp. 249–256.
[2] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778.
[3] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang, T. Weyand,
M. Andreetto, and H. Adam, “Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convolutional
neural networks for mobile vision applications,” 2017, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04861.
[4] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[5] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. V . D. Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely con-
nected convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[6] Y . LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard,
W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, “Backpropagation applied to handwritten
zip code recognition,” Neural Computation , vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 541–551,
1989.
[7] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” in Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2014.
[8] Y . E. Nesterov, “A method for solving the convex programming problem
with convergence rate o (1/kˆ 2),” in Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR , vol. 269,
1983, pp. 543–547.
[9] H. Robbins and S. Monro, “A stochastic approximation method,” The
annals of mathematical statistics , pp. 400–407, 1951.[10] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma,
Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-
Fei, “Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge,” International
Journal of Computer Vision , vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, 2015.
[11] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen,
“Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
2018, pp. 4510–4520.
[12] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V . Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,”
inProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2015, pp. 1–9.
[13] C. Szegedy, V . Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking
the inception architecture for computer vision,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2016,
pp. 2818–2826.
[14] M. Tan, B. Chen, R. Pang, V . Vasudevan, M. Sandler, A. Howard,
and Q. V . Le, “Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for
mobile,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2019, pp. 2820–2828.
[15] M. Tan and Q. Le, “Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolu-
tional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Machine Learning , 2019, pp. 6105–6114.
[16] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide residual networks,” in Proceed-
ings of the British Machine Vision Conference , 2016.
[17] X. Zhang, X. Zhou, M. Lin, and J. Sun, “Shufﬂenet: An extremely efﬁ-
cient convolutional neural network for mobile devices,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
2018, pp. 6848–6856.
[18] B. Zoph, V . Vasudevan, J. Shlens, and Q. V . Le, “Learning transferable
architectures for scalable image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp.
8697–8710.

