==== Page 1 ====
SPECIAL ISSUE ARTICLE
Predictive analytics and governance: a new
sociotechnical imaginary for uncertain futures
Christophe Lazaro1and Marco Rizzi2*
1UCLouvain, Belgium and2UWA Law School, Australia
*Corresponding author. E-mail: marco.rizzi@uwa.edu.au (pfortes@stanfordalumni.org andrestrepo-amariles@hec.fr )
Abstract
In an era of global sanitary, economic and ecological crisis, beliefs in the predictive power of artificialintelligence (AI) progressively penetrate the legal and political spheres, in search of new ways to anticipateand govern the future. In this context, it is critical to understand the idiosyncratic nature of the interplaybetween governance and algorithmic logics of prediction. This contribution discusses how the associationbetween governance and AI makes the future knowable in the present and shapes a programmatic way offormalising, justifying and deploying action in the here and now. We focus on three principles of insti-tutional mobilisation in the face of uncertainty and indeterminacy: precaution, pre-emption and prepared-ness, each of which is affected by the use of AI relying on so-called ‘real-time predictions ’. Drawing from
risk theory and Science and Technology Studies, we argue that the current convergence between AI andgovernance is shaping a new sociotechnical imaginary, promoting a distinctive conception of life and ofthe future in the age of the Anthropocene.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; governance; predictive analytics; STS; AI and law; uncertainty
1 Introduction
Contemporary algorithmic devices are establishing themselves as essential methods for the optimisa-
tion of decision-making processes and anticipating risks. Whether based on conventional statistical
modelling systems or artificial intelligence (AI) and machine-learning algorithms, these systems fosterthe belief in the possibility of anticipating the future and reducing the complexity of life. They seem-ingly do so by providing reliable projections of future unfoldings. Arguably, their functional capacities
reveal a striking feature of our age: an obsession with prediction and anticipation of the future.
Innovations in the field of AI are spreading from the body to the world, permeating many aspects
of contemporary human life (Adams et al. ,2009 ). These include health, communication, education,
economic activities and beyond, and arguably allow both the private and public sectors to optimise
decision-making. In this paper, we are not so much concerned with dissecting a particular sector,
but rather preoccupied with teasing out some overarching themes inherent in the use of these tech-nologies in decision-making.
Technologies such as predictive modelling, machine learning and data mining facilitate the analysis
of past and present data to make predictions about the future. In this paper, we use the term ‘predictive
analytics ’to refer to these technologies (Finlay, 2014 ). Modern discourse on predictive analytics,
whether in the fields of journalism, politics, hard sciences or humanities, often resorts to a semanticsofmagic ordivination , identifying algorithms as the oracles of our contemporary societies: ‘The mod-
ern oracles of our networked digital age are Big Data and data analytics …. They provide a targeted
look into the crystal ball ’(Romeike and Eicher, 2016 , p. 168; Baker and Gourley, 2015 ; Timms, 2017 ).
© The Author(s), 2022. Published by Cambridge University Press. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution, and reproduc-
tion in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.International Journal of Law in Context (2023), 19,7 0–90
doi:10.1017/S1744552322000477
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 2 ====
We increasingly expect AI to solve the world ’s biggest challenges: treating chronic diseases, predict-
ing pandemic and epidemic outbreaks, reducing fatality rates in traffic accidents, fighting climatechange and fostering sustainable development (European Commission, 2020b ). Beliefs in predictive
analytics thus progressively penetrate the legal and political spheres. In this contribution, our main
objective is to reflect on contemporary beliefs in the divinatory power of digital technologies(Lazaro, 2018 ) in the broad domain of governance.
Taking these ‘apparently irrational beliefs ’seriously (Sperber, 1982 ) requires understanding how
the association between governance and AI makes the future knowable in the present ( epistemic prac-
tices) (Cetina, 1999 ), shaping a programmatic way of formalising, justifying and deploying action in
the here and now ( normative logics ). The contemporary debate surrounding AI is dominated by
the analysis of risks and human rights impacts of algorithmic systems (such as the violation of privacy,
problems of discrimination or lack of transparency) (Council of Europe, 2020 ; European Commission,
2019 ). The literature on the risks inherent to biases and the implications of AI for individual consent is
growing alongside awareness of the complexity of the challenges posed by the technology for protec-tion of individual rights (Andreotta et al. ,2021 ). In this paper, we take a complementary approach. We
are conducting a review of a large body of literature spanning a number fields and drawing together
what we understand to be constitutive threads of a complex tapestry depicting the impact of predictiveanalytics on governance.
We acknowledge that tackling ‘governance ’as a theme means casting the net very wide. However,
an overarching theme of governance, in whatever form or setting, is its preoccupation with providing
direction and exercising control over entities. As such, we suggest that governance is particularlyinvested in shaping the future. It is important here to distinguish between prediction and anticipation,the former being but one modality of the latter. For example, law, a key instrument of governance, can
be described as a discrete mode of anticipation (Ost, 1999 ).
1Law does not predict but, through a var-
iety of rules, is a vector of anticipation and serves as a guide. It operates as a cognitive and pragmaticresource as well as a constraint. This supports the co-ordination of human actors between themselvesand with the world. It is thus essential to grasp the idiosyncratic nature of the progressive convergence
between governance (particularly legal) and algorithmic anticipatory logics in order to move beyond a
risk-based approach and appreciate in full the impact of the use of predictive analytics on the govern-ance of ‘what is not and may never happen ’(Massumi, 2007 ).
A growing body of literature has emerged in recent years to examine the nuts and bolts of ‘algo-
rithmic governance ’(Cantero Gamito and Ebers, 2021 ; Danaher et al. ,2017 ; Gritsenko and Wood,
2022 ; Kalpokas, 2019 )o r ‘algorithmic regulation ’(Yeung, 2018 ). These are identified as analytical con-
structs developed in scholarship to unpack ‘the role of algorithms as a mode of social coordination and
control ’in concrete contexts of application (Ulbricht and Yeung, 2021 , p. 18). In an ideal dialogue
with this literature, we come at the topic from a different angle. Drawing from Science and
Technology Studies (STS) (Cole and Bertenthal, 2017 ), we argue that the current convergence between
algorithmic technology and governance is shaping a new sociotechnical imaginary , promoting a dis-
tinctive conception of the future in the age of the Anthropocene. Sheila Jasanoff defines sociotechnical
imaginaries as follows: ‘collectively held, institutionally stabilized, and publicly performed visions of
desirable futures, animated by shared understandings of forms of social life and social order attainablethrough, and supportive of, advances in science and technology ’(Jasanoff and Kim, 2015 , p. 25).
1An argument can be made that such overlap exists between governance and law that the distinction, conceptually, is
minimal. This is particularly true where one accepts the conclusions of Bruno Latour who refers to law as an ambivalent
phenomenon, both institutional and pragmatic: law as an institution (legislation, regulation, governance) and law as a
practice (‘law in action ’, adjudication) (Gutwirth, 2013 ; Latour, 2009 ). However, we will not be making these arguments
here and will maintain the analytical distinction whereby law is an instrument of governance. A parallel suggests that ‘law
in action ’, beyond its technical adjudication, embraces the broader spectrum of its ‘life’beyond the black letter of legal
rules (Friedman et al. ,1995 ). Again, we cannot engage with the complexity of this strand of socio-legal scholarship here,
but we acknowledge its potential relevance to our arguments.International Journal of Law in Context 71
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 3 ====
This new imaginary appears to be rooted at the heart of an enigmatic synchrony: predictive analy-
tics are fast emerging at a time when the future appears more unpredictable and ungovernable thanever. The cosmology of the modern world is filled with radical threats. To mention but one very recent
example, the latest report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change paints a sobering picture
of the planet ’s future in the face of rising temperatures (IPCC, 2021 ). As a result, a variety of post-
apocalyptic narratives has been flourishing for some time, from collapsology to radical trans-humanism and the most basic survivalism (Chateauraynaud and Debaz, 2019 ). In this context, new
attempts to grasp the future through predictive analytics involve a special kind of ‘ontopolitics ’
(Chandler, 2018 ) characterised by normative stances about which forms of life are to be valorised
and preserved (or not) in order to cope with uncertain futures. Or, in Jasanoff ’s terminology, govern-
ance through algorithms arguably constitutes a peculiar form of co-production, which she defines as
‘shorthand for the proposition that the ways in which we know and represent the world (both nature
and society) are inseparable from the ways in which we choose to live in it ’(Jasanoff, 2004 , p. 3).
Building on an extensive interdisciplinary body of literature, we thus provide a first outline of the
emerging sociotechnical imaginary as well as the modalities of its development. We supplement our
findings drawing examples from official documents emanating from European institutions devoted to
AI and predictive analytics. We do not claim this to be a comprehensive discursive analysis. Rather, thesamples are provided instrumentally as qualitative augmentations of descriptive and theoreticalpropositions (Baxter and Jack, 2008 ; Stake, 1995 ). Indeed, official discourses of the state provide a
particularly fertile ground to grasp ‘the coalescence of the collective imagination with scientific and
technological production ’(Hajer, 2010 , p. 27) and in this context ‘law emerges as an especially fruitful
site in which to examine imaginaries in practice ’(Jasanoff and Kim, 2015 , p. 25). We focus particularly
on statements in which ‘the future ’as an abstract category is disclosed and related to (Rieder, 2018 ).
Among the widespread use of broad concepts such as ‘prediction ’,‘prevision ’and ‘anticipation ’,w e
pay particular attention to the pervasive notion of ‘real-time ’, and ‘real-time prediction ’. This peculiar
and counter-intuitive idea is symptomatic of the tensions that characterise a profound dynamic ofreconfiguration of the temporalities of our world, stemming from real-time calculations, and affecting
the links between past, present and future (Amoore and Piotukh, 2015 ). This reconfiguration carries
significant normative consequences, particularly as regards the valorisation or exclusion of certainforms of life.
The paper is structured in three parts. First, we analyse the contemporary theme of ‘real-time pre-
diction ’and contextualise the growing popularity of this oxymoron in the context of what we define as
‘life as pure contingency ’. Second, we discuss the epistemological and normative dimensions of ‘gov-
erning the future ’through predictive analytics. Finally, we sketch the contours of the new
sociotech-
nical imaginary that emerges from the convergence between governance and AI. As this paper
represents the first step of a broader project on ‘AI, Law and the Future ’, we conclude by setting
the scene for future research.
2 Real-time predictions of contingent life
2.1 From complexity to pure contingency
Whether forged in hard or social sciences, contemporary theories (in Western societies) tackling fun-
damental questions about life increasingly converge towards conceiving of it as pure contingency as
opposed to a system marked by linear and deterministic temporality (Anderson, 2010a ). This entails
three crucial aspects.
First, life is conceived of in terms of irreducible complexity (Holland, 2014 ; Morin, 2008 ). This
complexity is among other things the result of a globalised world woven by a multiplicity of hetero-
geneous flows and connections, embodied in the figure of the ‘network ’. The governance of complex
life revolves around the problem of the relationship between ‘good ’and ‘bad’flows or connections
(such as transnational terrorists, personal data, epidemics, etc.). The complexity of life can also be72 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 4 ====
explained by the infinite nature of its intrinsic risks. For instance, risks tend to exceed the limits of the
insurable in two directions: the infinitely small (e.g. biological, natural, health risks related to food con-sumption) and the infinitely large (e.g. major technological risks or technological disasters) (Ewald,
1993 ).
Second, life is conceptualised according to the principle of included middle . This aspect creates a
major problem: the entanglement or ‘heterogenesis of the bad within the good ’(Anderson, 2010a ,
p. 781), which deviates from the law of non-contradiction. The causes of a disaster are presumed
to incubate within life itself, requiring intervention before (or as) the catastrophic process incubates
and certainly before it exceeds the threshold of catastrophe. Brian Massumi gives an insightful accountof how life and its underlying threats are conceived of today: ‘[t]his is the figure of today ’s threat: the
suddenly irrupting, locally self-organising, systemically self-amplifying threat of large-scale disruption.
This form of threat is not only indiscriminate, coming anywhere, as out of nowhere, at any time, it is
also indiscriminable ’(Massumi, 2009 , p. 154).
Finally, if life is contingent, the future remains open as disasters are themselves emerging phenom-
ena (Christen and Franklin, 2002 ). The effects or impacts of disasters change and evolve as they cir-
culate. This idea implies that one can take advantage of a crisis to invest and earn money. For example,
Michael Lewis has produced a masterful account of the large profits made by certain market players inthe lead-up to the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 –2008 in his compelling book, The Big Short (Lewis,
2011 ). The uncertainty characterising life is therefore both a promise and a threat to be simultaneously
neutralised and nurtured (Amin, 2013 ). Anticipatory actions based on predictive analytics emerge in a
situation in which the very contingency of life generates the occurrence of a threat/opportunity, dan-ger/profit.
These aspects of ‘life as pure contingency ’are particularly noticeable, for example, in the unfolding
of the COVID-19 crisis. The phenomenon is complex not only because of its global scale, but also
because of the participation of an intricate network of human and non-human actors, including publichealth responses, asymptomatic virus holders, vaccine discovery and access, and viral mutations. Thecauses of disaster incubate indiscriminately within life in ways that render certain social and/or cul-
tural lifestyles problematic. Yet, despite the dramatic consequences of the COVID-19 crisis, the future
remains open. The effects of the pandemic hint at new opportunities in environmental issues as lock-downs appear to have positively affected the environment. Carbon emissions have reduced due todrops in traffic, power usage and industrial production (Le Quéré et al. ,2020 ). Similarly, the challenges
posed by the so-called Delta variant of the original SARS-CoV-2 virus are raising awareness about the
importance of adequate ventilation systems in closed indoor shared spaces (WHO, 2021 ).
In a world permeated by contingency, real-time prediction becomes the tool that allows a fresh
injection of control and autonomy (Misuraca et al. ,2012 ). Indeed, despite today ’s perception of life
as contingent and indeterminate, humans must still engage with it. The yearning for a recovery of con-
trol is apparent in the discourse of institutions and experts:
‘Today a growing number of societal challenges (such as climate change, natural disasters, urban
planning and pandemics) are not only extremely complex, but also interrelated. Data represents akey raw material to deal with such challenges. The huge amount of data produced every day canreveal real-time information that is critical to understanding patterns of human behaviour and
activities. ’(European Commission, 2020a , p. 15)
In a report for the Council of Europe, Karen Yeung points out that there is an intimate link between
living in a complex world and the potential value of AI in helping us to govern it. However, she stresses
the future challenges that lie ahead for computer science research in this respect:
‘The challenge of devising solutions that will enable us reliably to predict, model and take action
to prevent unwanted and potentially catastrophic outcomes arising from the interaction betweenInternational Journal of Law in Context 73
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 5 ====
dynamic and complex socio-technical systems generates a new and increasingly urgent frontier
for computational research. ’(Yeung, 2019 , p. 67)
‘Potentially catastrophic outcomes ’,‘complex socio-technical systems ’,‘to predict ’and ‘model ’emerge
as key discursive elements of the contemporary bond between the ontology of life as pure contingencyand the emerging epistemology of digital devices based on AI.
2.2 From conditional future to real time
When reading official documents of European institutions as well as the literature on predictive ana-lytics, one notion keeps surfacing, and its meaning remains uneasy to grasp: ‘real-time ’or‘real-time
prediction ’, often presented as one of the key characteristics of AI (Yeung, 2019 , p. 22).
For example, the Communication of 24 April 2018 of the European Commission, entitled Towards
a Common European Data Space , mentions this notion several times (explicitly or implicitly):
‘In manufacturing, real-time sensor data supports predictive maintenance. Data-driven innov-
ation …can help with crisis management and in developing environmental and financial pol-
icies. Sharing research data on the outbreak of epidemics can advance relevant research muchfaster and contribute to a more timely response. High-resolution satellite data …contributes
to the real-time monitoring of natural water resources to prevent drought or pollution. ’
(European Commission, 2018a ,p .2 )
To predict in real time is a convoluted notion, comprising predicting as time passes, predicting
through instantaneous translations of reality, predicting as an immediate adjustment to reality. To pre-
dict: what meaning is left for the prefix and the term as a whole? Does it still refer to anticipation ormerely to a constant adjustment to events? And what is the exact reality of this time called ‘real’–does
it encompass the quantification of its unfolding? This kind of reality would only account for what is
happening now and what we grasp from this particular irruption of time. The future would thus be
reduced to the actualisation of its imminence and to the digital capture of analmost-already-happening-here-and-now. In other words, ‘what is real is what unfolds in real time ’
(Hui Kyong Chun, 2011 , p. 96).
Predicting in real time sounds contradictory. Even computer scientists acknowledge the ambiguity
of the term and the fact that ‘a predictive model cannot be built in “real time ”in its true sense ’
(Sangireddy, 2015 ) because it is not possible to predict the here-and-now of what is still becoming.
The expression highlights a confusion between thought and action –a collision between the future
and the present. The reality of this time appears to be intrinsic to its conjuration of the future or its
‘de-futurization ’(Esposito, 2011b , p. 180). The future is only the one that has triumphed over count-
less possible others by becoming actualised, making it entirely subsumed to the present that is emer-ging while simultaneously forming the object of predictions. This ambition to ‘predict the present ’has
led researchers to forge the neologism ‘nowcasting ’to supplement the more conventional ‘forecasting ’
(Choi and Varian, 2012 ; Sanila et al. ,2017 ;W u et al. ,2020 ).
The promise of real-time prediction has been described as the new avatar of ‘presentism ’(Hartog,
2003 ) or the domination of a perpetual present. Presentism entails a way of articulating the universal
categories of past, present and future entirely subject to the reign of immediacy. It presupposes that our
temporal horizon has been invaded by an ‘increasingly inflated, hypertrophied present ’, imposing
demands of productivity, flexibility and mobility upon us all (Baschet, 2018 ). This analysis assimilates
real-time predictions to a form of alienating injunction, thrusting upon human beings the strict nor-
mativity of a life lived for the sake of permanent and vigilant adaptation (Stiegler, 2019 ). We believe
this interpretation to be a simplistic shortcut that neglects to question the conceptual tensions that lieat the heart of ‘real-time prediction ’. These tensions, we argue, crystallise a series of reconfigurations
that signal a transition towards a more complex and novel sociotechnical imaginary .74 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 6 ====
The salient features of this new imaginary are embedded in the epistemological and normative
dimensions discussed in the next sections. In summary, these include a series of reconfigurations ofthe relationships between (1) temporality and materiality ; (2) knowledge and action ; (3) subject and
object ; (4) the virtual and the possible ; and (5) the past, present and future. Before engaging with
these reconfigurations, we must discuss the emerging phenomenon of governing the future through
predictive analytics. This exercise sheds light on two forms of heterogeneity –epistemological andnor-
mative –that are intrinsic to the use of predictive analytics in governance and revelatory of tensions
that often remain concealed by virtue of the apparent immediacy of the medium.
3 Governance of the future and predictive analytics
The multiplication and increasing prevalence of predictive analysis systems, as well as the legitimacy
they are gradually acquiring, put Ulrich Beck ’s theory into question. Beck described our contemporary
world as a risk society in which catastrophic, incalculable and uninsurable risks proliferate, to the point
that incalculability moulds the transformation of society (Beck, 1992 ). His analysis shows how the
development of technology generates risks, the effects of which are unlimited in time and space,
and can affect future generations around the globe. The consequence of incalculability is that modernrisks cannot be contained, anticipated or even diverted (Sørensen, 2018 ).
However, predictive analytics and the ‘politics of temporality ’they foster (Adams et al. ,2009 ,
p. 247) postulate the calculability of all phenomena. These systems aim to establish a predictive
score (in the form of a probability or a profile) for any entity (customer, employee, patient, product,machine, etc.) in order to determine, inform or influence organisational processes. The indeterminacyand complexity of life have not defeated the urge to quantify and calculate risks and, more broadly, the
probability of events occurring. On the contrary, recent years have arguably brought a shift from a risk
society to a score society (Citron and Pasquale, 2014 ).
3.1 Epistemological heterogeneity: constructions of knowledge
The development of analytical tools such as deep-learning algorithms has made it possible to develop
‘scores ’emerging from immense datasets to identify forms of regularities, patterns or modes of behav-
iour. These tools create new modes of knowledge acquisition that enable predictions. Far from being
neutral and declarative, these predictions shape the future in very visible ways. Reverting again to the
notion of ‘real-time prediction ’, we identify further aspects particularly problematic for governance
purposes. Indeed, the notion is misleading because it suggests that ‘real time ’refers to what is
im-mediate and un- mediated . However, this belief ‘ignores the formal structure and materiality of
the technologies that make real time itself …possible ’(Thomas, 2014 , p. 290).
What we call ‘real time ’is the result of a constant technical mediation involving a structural time
lag, which is unavoidable for two reasons. First, time is required for the construction of new datasets,the potential modifications of the analytical model ’s parameters or the updating of technical infra-
structure (Thomas, 2014 ). Second, time is needed to make newly collected data intelligible and appro-
priately usable in accordance with the objectives pursued (Kaufmann et al. ,2019 ). This time lag makes
the capture of the future incomplete, imperfect and in need of constant readjustment as the datachange and the analytical tools evolve. This defeats the magical idea that the processing of information
can be concomitant with the event or phenomenon that the information purports to describe.
The mediating role of technical devices also implies that the type of knowledge obtained from pre-
dictive analytics varies according to their specificity, with consequences for the ways in which theymake the future present. The systems used in predictive policing for example rely on patterns for
the identification of future crimes (Benbouzid, 2018 ). These patterns stem from the association of spe-
cific algorithms with equally specific datasets (e.g. a cartography of areas more prone to arrests forviolent crimes). Relevance of these patterns varies according to the different algorithmic models
used, the data on which they rely and the analytical approaches applied to data collection andInternational Journal of Law in Context 75
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 7 ====
identification. Relevance also depends on human decisions evaluating their possible meaning in the
specific context of police activities.
The ability of AI systems to unveil new information hidden within datasets provides them with an
aura of ‘epistemological authority ’, the apparent unquestionability of which masks the collaborative
efforts, methodological options and value judgments involved in identifying patterns (Amoore,2019 ). For example, recent research reveals the full extent of the constructive process leading to the
emergence of patterns structuring police activity –a process that ‘makes patterns political ’
(Kaufmann et al. ,2019 , p. 684). The complex assemblage of actors, algorithms, theories and decisions
that contribute to the emergence of patterns (Ananny, 2015 ) signals their intrinsically normative
dimensions (Winner, 2020 ): they formalise conceptions of crime that are themselves based on specific
ideas about how to govern it.
This type of analysis not only debunks the alleged neutrality of AI systems; it also breaks with rep-
resentational schemes that narrow the complexity and richness of experience in favour of abstractformalisms or questionable reifications. In contrast, what emerges is the importance of teasing outthe plurality of forms of knowledge that can be inferred from AI systems (Kaufmann et al. ,2019 ,
p. 680) –what we call epistemological heterogeneity. Predictive practices therefore do more than just
gather the knowledge that is necessary to know the future: they enable performative operations thatestablish the presence of the future in different ways (Aykut et al. ,2019 ).
This epistemological heterogeneity questions the type of rationality that predictive analytics are
based upon. Early modern rationality rests on the notion that the human observer occupies an exter-
nal, neutral and objective position with respect to the world they are studying (Esposito, 2011a ; Latour,
2002 ). The distinction between a knowable subject and a knowable object is ill-equipped to discern the
self-referential circularities of predictive or oracular logics
2–that is, the consequences that the actions
of the observer and the act of observing itself have on events (Barad, 2007 ). For instance, a recent ana-
lysis of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis has highlighted how the ‘models being used to forecast future
developments in the markets have not taken into account the extent to which current predictionswould affect the future ’(Esposito, 2011a , p. 16).
Additionally, in the context of predictive analytics, even linear relationships of cause and effect are
transformed through retroactive loops (Hofstadter, 2008 ) by virtue of which desired effects end up
becoming originating causes that are difficult to control (Esposito, 2011a , p. 15). Paradoxically, the
development of devices capable of performing complex tasks through reflexive processes, similar to
those of humans, makes predicting the effects of predictive systems increasingly hard (European
Commission, 2018a ). This (rather ironic) tension is apparent in a recent report of the Council of
Europe on advanced digital technologies. The report highlights the extreme difficulty of making accur-ate predictions about the long-term effects of the digital revolution (European Commission, 2018b ), as
well as the great complexity of these technologies:
‘[m]achine learning and deep learning systems become progressively complex, not only due to
the availability of data, but also due to increased programming complexity. As a result, these sys-
tems are subject to three types of vulnerability: first, increased programming complexity increases
the propensity of these systems to generate stochastic components (i.e. make mistakes); secondly,this complexity opens the door to a wide range of adversarial attacks; and thirdly, the unpredict-ability of their outputs can generate unintended yet highly consequential adverse third party
effects ( ‘externalities ’).’(European Commission, 2018a , p. 21)
Contemporary digital technologies are therefore just as likely to provoke new crises as they are to help
us solve existing and emerging ones (Hui Kyong Chun, 2011 , p. 92). In this context, we must question
2In these, the observer is located within the world they observe and are subject to its inescapable principles. This is won-
derfully illustrated by the myth of Oedipus and its self-fulfilling prophecy: the observer who wants to escape the prediction
announced by the oracle contributes to its realisation (Rosset, 2012 ).76 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 8 ====
the assumption, inherent in current European (but arguably global) policy discourse, that complexity
necessarily requires new ways of governing based on predictive analytics ’performances.
3.2 Normative heterogeneity: logics of action
Once a score is calculated or a pattern identified, a spectral reality takes shape. Made present in the
here and now through the analysis of past data, the uncertain future becomes almost palpable and vis-ible. Anticipation of the future is a form of ‘generative truth ’that requires a transition from knowledge
to action and eventually imposes itself as a ‘moral imperative, a will to anticipate ’or an ‘injunction ’of
sorts (Adams et al. ,2009 , p. 254; Andersson, 2018 , p. 30).
The authority of predictive practices –whether in the form of machine-learning algorithms or
ancestral divinatory rites –is thus not only epistemic (Vernant et al. ,1974 , p. 10). It is also normative
as it both requires and justifies the deployment of certain logics of action in the here and now.
Alongside the strictly predictive function, providing legitimate grounds for decision-making is integralto the role of predictive practices. In this respect, digital signals have replaced divine signs. Governanceis done by numbers (Supiot, 2015 ), but numbers have the same function as the omens of the past: to
immunise decision-making against failure. Of course, the quantification of risk does not always pre-
vent bad outcomes and cannot provide a guarantee or insurance against an uncertain future. Butregardless of success or failure (Chandler, 2016 ), it serves as a justification for action. Although it can-
not make the future really foreseeable or the world really controllable, it can provide the means to act
as if it did.
It has been observed that ‘the unknowability of complex life itself comes to constitute the rationality
of its governance ’(Chandler, 2014 , p. 58), which also ends up taking very complex detours. AI can
serve different logics of anticipatory action, prompting diverse initiatives for the prevention, compen-
sation, preparation or adaptation to the emergence of a specific future. An examination of the plurality
of logics of action leads to the identification of more or less coherent ways of justifying and carryingout political or legal interventions in the present. Crucially, these are not necessarily aimed at neutra-lising the future before it occurs. Taking into account this normative heterogeneity enriches an analysis
too often limited to an indictment of the inhibiting pre-emptive powers of ‘algorithmic governmen-
tality ’(Rouvroy and Stiegler, 2015 ).
The institutional governance of complex life is performed through a number of normative princi-
ples that pursue different logics of action and require different interventions in the here and now.
These are revelatory of different ways of anticipating uncertain futures. From an analytical standpoint,
AI systems can support at least three distinct logics of action: (1) precaution; (2) pre-emption; and(3) preparedness (Anderson, 2010a ).
The logic of precaution involves situations in which the risk or threat has been identified and
demands action before the damage becomes irreversible. The precautionary logic is probably the
best known because it has been established as a legal principle over the course of the past decadesat both the national and international levels. In February 2000, the European Commission outlinedthe essential characteristics of the principle (now enshrined in Art. 191 TFEU):
‘Whether or not to invoke the precautionary principle is a decision exercised where scientific
information is insufficient, inconclusive, or uncertain and where there are indications that thepossible effects on the environment, or human, animal or plant health may be potentially dan-
gerous and inconsistent with the chosen level of protection. ’(European Commission, 2000 ,p .7 )
At the heart of the precautionary principle is the idea that, in the face of uncertainty, the occurrence of
a potentially catastrophic event and its impact on different forms of life must be prevented. The impos-
sibility of determining the exact probability or severity of a potentially catastrophic event should not
prompt decision-makers to refrain from taking preventative action. Recourse to the precautionaryprinciple therefore presupposes a particular ‘epistemic situation ’, which is one of uncertainty
(Guillaume, 2012 , p. 494): the impact of a situation on the environment or human health may beInternational Journal of Law in Context 77
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 9 ====
probable, but the probabilities are unknown –or, more broadly, the potentially hazardous effects of a
phenomenon, product or process have been identified but the scientific assessment does not allow foran exact determination of the risk of harm (Bourguignon, 2015 ).
Much of the debate on AI and the precautionary principle to date has focused on a precautionary
approach toAI and how this could potentially stifle technological progress. The fear is that an excess of
precaution by public authorities will hinder innovation, thus creating unnecessary obstacles to the ful-filment of AI ’s potential (Castro and McLaughlin, 2019 ). However, an analysis of relevant policy docu-
ments suggests this fear is unwarranted. For example, the recent EU ‘White Paper on Artificial
Intelligence ’(European Commission, 2020c ) does not mention the precautionary principle at all,
and no concession is made for the possibility of a precautionary approach toAI. Conversely, the
potential of AI-powered predictive analytics is heavily relied upon for varied purposes including
the prevention of diseases, climate change mitigation, etc. Scepticism towards precaution as a logic
is of course not new (Clarke, 2005 ; Sunstein, 2002 ). What is interesting here is the apparent paradox
inherent to AI, which refracts precautionary attempts while at the same time it is increasingly embed-ded in large-scale preventative actions. Indeed, in contrast with rule-makers ’hesitancy in applying pre-
caution to AI as an object of regulation , the use of predictive analysis systems for precautionary
purposes is establishing itself in a number of areas.
Perhaps the most obvious example is the environmental sphere, where predictive analytics improve
understanding of a series of phenomena as complex as climate change or the evolution of biodiversity
(Hallgren et al. ,2016 ; Hampton et al. ,2013 ). Experts in these fields emphasise the need for massive
data collection, from disparate sources, over a long period of time and on a large spatial scale, in orderto better grasp the characteristics of these phenomena and take action.
3
The logic of pre-emption takes preventative action one step further. It prompts action prior to any
formation and identification of a real threat, which is considered in the abstract as likely to have con-
siderable impact. Recourse to this logic implies a different ‘epistemic situation ’: no longer one of
uncertainty, but one of ignorance. Pre-emption is aimed at cases in which both the impacts of a poten-tial situation on society and their probabilities are unknown. In this sense, while the precautionary
logic can be said to react to ‘known unknowns ’, the pre-emptive logic entails the neutralisation of
risks before knowledge of their potential even consolidates: ‘unknown unknowns ’(Massumi, 2007 ;
Rasmussen, 2004 ).
It may appear paradoxical or oxymoronic that predictive analytics would be used to inspire pre-
emptive action since, by definition, their predictions are based on known and existing data, in contrast
with the ignorance that inspires the pre-emptive logic. Yet, reliance on predictive analytics for pre-emptive purposes has become increasingly common in the fight against crime and terrorism, in par-ticular through ‘predictive justice ’(McCulloch and Wilson, 2015 ). Based on profiling and risk analysis,
this process of neutralisation aims at anticipating individuals ’capabilities, intentions or desires in
order to intervene by structuring the possible scope of their action. In other words, ‘pre-emptive pre-
dictions are intentionally used to diminish a person ’s range of future options ’(Kerr and Earle, 2013 ,
p. 67, emphasis in original). For this reason, this form of algorithmic governance predominantly
focuses on the predispositions of individuals, as evidenced by the establishment of profiles or scores,
evaluating the potential for dangerousness, failure or fallibility.
This new mode of governance has been described as emblematic of our contemporary ‘societies of
clairvoyance ’(Neyrat, 2010 ). Increasing recourse to this logic of action signals how our societies nur-
ture a very limited and problematic relationship with the future: they foster an actuarial and pre-
emptive temporality that crushes the present into predetermined courses of action (Mantello, 2016 ;
3There is a deeply shared conviction that climate modelling powered by big data, while not a ‘silver bullet ’, will allow gov-
ernments to soften the blow of climate change and prevent some of its consequences. For example, the potential of predictive
analytics has been described as capable of a ‘sustainability revolution ’(Herweijer and Ramchandani, 2018 ) as well as improv-
ing local biodiversity and conservation efforts (Norouzzadeh et al. ,2018 ).78 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 10 ====
Neyrat, 2009 ).4In Europe, the use of pre-emptive logic in the context of predictive justice has been
problematised with a particular focus on the threat to individual rights (such as privacy, or theGDPR protection against fully automated decision-making) (Jansen, 2018 ; Lynskey, 2019 ; Williams
and Kind, 2019 ). Less attention has been dedicated to the broader collective implications of accepting
‘clairvoyance ’as a method of governance. When the logic shifts away from prevention in its traditional
sense to embrace a pre-emptive turn, ensuing measures equally change in nature. The focus movesfrom causes to intervene ‘on the information and physical environment of individuals ’to prevent cer-
tain things or actions from being actualised or even possible (Rouvroy and Stiegler, 2015 , p. 125).
The key tenet of this mode of governance is the connection between traditional approaches to risk
assessment, based on a risk-utility calculus, and the notion of ‘clairvoyance ’, provided by predictive
analytics, which refutes the ontological uncertainty of future events in favour of a more reassuring
form of artificially designed determinism.
Finally, the logic of preparedness is engaged at a different point in the timeline, when a particular
event is either unfolding or producing its impact on life. Much like precaution, the logic of prepared-ness is designed to be applied to ‘epistemic situations ’in which threats are neither calculable nor con-
trollable. Unlike precaution however, preparedness does not prescribe the avoidance of a threatening
event. Rather, it ‘assumes that the occurrence of the event may not be avoidable and so generates
knowledge about its potential consequences ’(Lakoff, 2017 , p. 19).
The logic of preparedness and that of precaution represent the two ends of the same paradox. The
worst case scenario is perceived as something to be avoided at all costs while, at the same time, it is
understood as fundamentally unavoidable. In this sense, the two logics are ‘increasingly joined ’to
inspire ‘operational criteria of response ’(Aradau and Van Munster, 2008 , p. 30).
Preparedness engages simultaneously speculative and reactive dimensions. The aim is to be
prepared for the worst as if its devastating consequences were already present. To make a disaster
fictitiously occur in the here and now requires an artificial projection into a state of emergency to for-mulate potential responses to the crisis (imaginatively) at hand. In this sense, preparatory logics tendto rely upon resilience (Zebrowski, 2013 ), as well as crisis management planning and the protection of
vital infrastructures for society (Collier and Lakoff, 2015 ). Specifically, they require taking into account
the various phases of initial rescue operations (e.g. medical triage, evacuations, provision of food andwater supplies), as well as initial actions to be taken in the immediate aftermath of the event generatingthe crisis to minimise its consequences.
The use of predictive analytics in the context of preparedness and crisis management is increasingly
common, whether for the purpose of monitoring epidemics (Jayalakshmi and Anuradha, 2017 ; Raza,
2020 ; Zeng et al. ,2021 ) or mitigating the impacts of a humanitarian crisis (Raymond and Al Achkar,
2016 ) or natural catastrophe (Yu et al. ,2018 ). In these contexts, AI systems are supposed to provide
and help maintain high levels of ‘situational awareness ’, which in turn are necessary to ensure
adequate response to the emergency (Mehrotra et al. ,2013 ).
Preparing for the worst entails the capacity to respond adequately once the worst materialises.
Thus, preparedness also engages the response phase in the aftermath of a crisis, which necessitates
the deployment of appropriate reactions constantly alive to mutating circumstances. In this very spe-
cific context, the expression ‘
real-time prediction ’carries understandable value and meaning, as algo-
rithmic devices are able to inform reactions ‘live’while a disastrous event is unfolding:
‘Big Data analysis in real time can identify which areas need the most urgent attention from the
crisis administrators. With the use of the GIS and GPS systems, Big Data analysis can assist the
right guidance to the public to avoid or move away from the hazardous situation. Furthermore,
analysis from prior crisis could help identify the most effective strategy for responding to futuredisasters. ’(Dontas and Dontas, 2015 , p. 480)
4In criminal law, the pre-emptive logic triggers a threefold phenomenon: (1) the shift from the category of act to that of
intention; (2) the emergence of linguistic avatars of terrorism (such as ‘dangerousness ’) as predisposition to crime; and (3) the
adoption of laws acting on these predispositions.International Journal of Law in Context 79
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 11 ====
Given the characteristics of predictive analytics, it is unsurprising that their deployment in the context
of preparedness has followed increasing levels of securitisation of potential threats, and health threatsin particular. A progressive expansion of the scope of biosecurity governance and regulations, both
globally and at the European level, has been recently highlighted (Dijkstra and De Ruijter, 2017 ;
Roberts, 2019 ). The availability of modern algorithmic devices is exacerbating the levels of permanent
surveillance and data collection practices that the logic of preparedness is inherently capable of gen-erating, as it is dependent on them. With the rise of predictive analytics, the logic of preparedness,
originally conceived to ready societies for the unknown, paradoxically entrenches pre-existing experi-
ences as the sole source of preparatory inspiration, thereby limiting the range of action.
While we cannot exclude the possibility that there may be more, precaution ,pre-emption and
preparedness constitute three major logics of action that p redictive analytics can serve. It is possible
and necessary to sepa rate these logics from an analytical standpoint, yet it is equally crucial to
appreciate that they can be juxtaposed or used in conjunction in the course of attempts to appre-hend complex phenomena. These principles can operate in pairs. For example, precautionary andpreparatory logic can operate in tandem in the face of emerging health threats.
5Similarly, it is con-
ceivable that matters of public order may prompt aut horities to combine pre-emptive with prepara-
tory actions. It is also possible to observe a simultaneous deployment of all three logics of action bypublic authorities as attested by the European policies for the collection and use of Passenger NameRecords (PNR) data in the context of anti-terrorism and trans-border criminal laws (European
Commission, 2011 ).
In an early working paper on the topic, the European Commission explicitly refers to three poten-
tial uses of PNR data: ‘reactive ’,‘in real time ’and ‘proactive ’. The paper insists on the necessity for
combining different logics of action in the use of the data:
‘The combined pro-active and real-time use of PNR data thus enable law enforcement authorities
to address the threat of serious crime and terrorism from a different perspective than through the
processing of other categories of personal data: as explained further below, the processing of per-sonal data available to law enforcement authorities through existing and planned EU-level mea-sures such as the Directive on Advance Passenger Information, the Schengen Information System
(SIS) and the second-generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) do not enable law
enforcement authorities to identify “unknown ”suspects in the way that the analysis of PNR
data does. ’(European Commission, 2011 , p. 12)
PNR data can be used reactively in the context of criminal investigations for the purpose of disen-
tangling networks after a crime has been committed –thus falling within the logic of preparedness.
It is equally crucial to use PNR data in real time upon arrival or departure of identified passengers
to observe or arrest individuals before a crime is committed, because it is about to be or is in the
course of being committed –therefore encompassing both the precautionary and preparatory
logics. Finally, the Commission ’s working paper underlines the specific utility of using PNR data
by reference to predetermined evaluative criteria in order to identify individuals without criminal
records. PNR data can then be used pro-actively to further develop analytical benchmarks and
evaluative criteria for assessing passengers prior to their arrival or departure –thus following a pre-
emptive logic.
The complex discussion of epistemic andnormative heterogeneity developed in this section prompts
us to interrogate, in the final part of the paper, the significance of this modern conjunction between
predictive analytics and governance practices from a broader societal perspective.
5E.g. the successful (to date) public health countermeasures enacted by the governments of Australia and New Zealand to
face the COVID-19 pandemic, while initially inspired by a logic of preparedness, have become increasingly informed by a
logic of precaution –if not pre-emption with blanket border closures.80 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 12 ====
4 A new sociotechnical imaginary?
4.1 Governing through real-time predictions
The association between predictive analytics and governance strives to make the future knowable in
the present ( epistemic practices ) and shapes a programmatic way of formalising, justifying and deploy-
ing action in the here and now ( normative logics ). We argue that this convergence is shaping a new
sociotechnical imaginary –to paraphrase Jasanoff: a collectively held, institutionally stabilised and pub-
licly performed vision of a desirable future, animated by shared understandings of social life and socialorder attainable through advances in science and technology. We now interrogate its scope and limits.
This emergent vision is not quite institutionally stabilised and yet it is increasingly performed in the
public sphere. It enshrines a capricious and indomitable future that is always indeterminate, unpre-
dictable and complex, requiring permanent taming and, in some cases, total neutralisation. Wehave seen that ‘real-time ’predictions are the providential tools for the task: anticipatory techniques
allowing humans to regain a measure of control and autonomy in a contingent world. The conver-
gence between algorithmic and politico-legal logics is in this sense both the result and the vector of
the new imaginary (Jasanoff, 2015 , p. 26).
As discussed, predicting in real time is counter-intuitive. Conceptually, this expression uncovers
many contradictions and tensions inherent in current predictive practices. These tensions perform
a profound reconfiguring role that sketches the contours of the new sociotechnical imaginary .W e
identify five critical ones:
1 The idea of real-time prediction reconfigures the relations between temporality and materiality ,
the (im)mediate and the mediated. The sparkling velocity of big data and the immediacy of real
time render technology invisible and distract from the materiality of predictive analytics.
Through a process of ‘blackboxing ’(Kallinikos, 2002 )o r ‘camouflage ’(Dubey and de
Jouvancourt, 2018 ), the apparently immediate result obliterates the mediating role of technology
(Verbeek, 2016 ) and all the material work and significant time involved in algorithmic model-
ling, data cleansing, system testing, etc.
2 The idea of real-time prediction blurs the relations between knowledge and action because it
implies that following the digital traces of a phenomenon in real time is tantamount to actingon the phenomenon itself. The time of observation and the time of action merge into an
epistemic trap, prompting people to believe that knowledge about a phenomenon or behaviour
provides normative guidance on how to act in its face. Big data generates a different type of‘knowledge ’than ordinary science. Based on correlations, it is ‘more akin to the translation or
interpretation of signs rather than …understanding chains of causation ’(Chandler, 2015 ,
p. 836). Can the performativity of a score or profile justify action without adequate understand-
ing of the multiplicity of causes behind a phenomenon?
3 The idea of real-time prediction questions the distinction between subject and object , and more
specifically between a predicting subject and a knowable object. These predictions do not operate
in accordance with modernist rationality because they follow an oracular logic of self-referential
and self-fulfilling circularities, where the observer is located inside the world under observationand subject to its principles. This requires taking into consideration the consequences that theactions of the observer and the acts of observing and predicting themselves have on events.
The self-fulfilling nature of predictions is of course not new and has been discussed in socio-
logical literature for decades (Merton, 1948 ). It is the fact that predictions seemingly occur in
‘real time ’that exacerbates these tendencies, which are indeed inherent to the very idea of
predicting.
4 The idea of real-time prediction blurs the distinction between the virtual and the possible . As real
time points to ‘real world ’events, real-time predictions only relate to what is possibly happening
as it has already happened. By identifying correlations from past regularities, this kind of pre-
diction reduces the real to the possible and overlooks the virtual dimension of life and itsInternational Journal of Law in Context 81
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 13 ====
multiple potentialities. Giles Deleuze has discussed that the virtual is not opposed or alternative
to the real. Virtual is what exists potentially and can materialise through actualisation. Thus, thevirtual differs from the possible in that it is not predetermined and is therefore unpredictable and
responds to an open multiplicity of variables from which one or more forms of actualisations
may emerge (Deleuze, 2013 ).
5 The idea of real-time prediction reconfigures the links between the past, the present and the
future . Because these predictions rely exclusively on past regularities, the future made present
in the here and now is impoverished and reduced to a mere repetition of the possible, of
what has already happened at least once. In this sense, predictive analytics end up ‘reducing
the future to the past, or, more precisely, to a past anticipation of the future ’(Hui Kyong
Chun, 2011 , p. 92). Additionally, predictions are no longer made with a view to anticipating
today what could happen in the future: they are made to anticipate right now what immediately
comes next. The temporal unit radically changes with real-time predictions –it shrinks and
therefore modifies the notions of short-, medium- and long-term.
These reconfiguring tensions are moulding the transition towards the new imaginary, which appears
eminently characterised by the ‘necessity of continuous adaptation to the world in its emergence ’
(Chandler, 2016 , p. 410). However, this way of envisioning the future has important limitations, par-
ticularly given its role in inspiring normative logics of action.
4.2 Pluralising the future
The first limitation of the emerging imaginary relates to the issue of epistemological heterogeneity and
requires questioning the place occupied by predictive analytics among other anticipatory techniques. Ifgovernance practices yearn to address a purely contingent life, to what extent can or should they relyon data-driven science and quantified future visions? The question involves the hierarchical place of
‘algorithmic governance ’vis-à-vis radically different modes of anticipatory knowledge such as fore-
sight (Cazes, 1986 ), imagination (Engélibert, 2019 ) or performance (Anderson, 2010b ). As the epis-
temological authority of quantified knowledge gains momentum in the era of big data, the risk is amove towards a future monopolised by data-driven science with reduced normative options. This is
problematic because reliance on a multiplicity of anticipatory techniques (Aykut et al. ,2019 ) is essen-
tial for alternative ‘visions of desirable futures ’to be contested, negotiated or reconciled by different
actors. Maintaining plurality is critical to preserve an ‘ecology of futures ’(Michael, 2017 ) within
which policy-makers, lawyers, experts, stakeholders and citizens can navigate and make decisions to
face the adversities of a contingent life.
The analysis of the normative logics of action above is revealing of the need for this plurality. Let us
take preparedness as an example. The very idea of this logic of action is to accept the inevitability of the
unknown, and prepare for its aftermath. But this necessarily requires a measure of imagination as a
mode of anticipation. Where the operation of the logic is subsumed within the crushing limitations
of correlative patterns identified in existing datasets –even where these are updated in real time –
the normative force of the logic changes in nature. When deploying preparatory action becomes inex-tricably tied to a predictive score, the logic arguably ceases to be one of preparedness and becomes one
ofadjustment. A risk inherent to allowing a data-driven monopoly of anticipation is therefore an invo-
lution of normative logics of action projected towards unknown futures into a data-directed adjust-ment to emerging presents –the continuous adaptation Chandler refers to. This prompts us to
raise a strong caveat against the hegemony of quantification in governance, and argue instead for
decision-making processes that rely on a diversity of ‘arts and technologies of imagining the actionable
future ’(de Goede and Randalls, 2009 , p. 860). The inability of predictive scores to imagine beyond set
patterns and therefore capture the unexpected is well exemplified by the failure of the ‘hundreds of AI
tools ’developed to ‘catch ’COVID-19 (Heaven, 2021 ).82 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 14 ====
In this regard, a report drafted by a group of foresight experts and addressed to the European
Commission in 2015 rightly insists on the need for a ‘co-production of knowledge ’in a context of rad-
ical uncertainty:
‘In an era of big data, some are optimistic that real-time data mining combined with continued
increases in computational power and speed will enable more reliable predictive modelling.However, being able to run the modelling process faster and deliver more detail does not guar-
antee better outcomes. Achieving this requires the worlds of theory and practice to be effectively
bridged in a co-production of knowledge. In the foresight philosophy of non-deterministic, stillemerging and open multiple futures, this bridging needs to be done in a way that effectively grap-ples with problematic situations or enables the management of unprecedented large-scale transi-
tions in the context of unpredictability and uncertainties. ’(Wendeling, 2015 , p. 31)
Crucially, a combination of diverse anticipatory techniques would have the ability to balance out one
of the intrinsic weaknesses of predictive analytics –their conservative or reactionary nature. Emerging
as it is from correlative patterns in past data, the future deduced from predictive analytics is one that
makes it impossible to apprehend the new, the abnormal or the spontaneous: a future that ignores thevirtual and reduces itself to the possible (Deleuze, 2013 ). This inevitable characteristic leads us to
reflect upon the second major limitation of the new sociotechnical imaginary : the uncertain fate of
forms or modes of life that do not conform to dominant the sociopolitical model. Indeed, visions
of a desirable future are ‘animated by shared understandings of forms of social life and social
order ’(Jasanoff and Kim, 2015 , p. 4). This raises three questions: (1) Which conceptions of (social)
life and (social) order are involved in the new imaginary? (ii) Are they truly shared and by whom?
(iii) Which normativity is associated with these conceptions or, in other words, how do they valorise
(or not) certain forms of life –particularly ‘non-conforming ’ones?
Answering these questions requires a firm grasp of the constructivist nature of predictive practices.
Indeed, these practices can only claim to possess knowledge about the future because they inherently
imply specific ways of defining what counts as the real world, along with its various constituents
(Holbraad, 2013 ). In this sense, predictive practices can be described as ‘demiurgic ’(De Boeck and
Devisch, 1994 ) as they shape the world by bringing about the presence of the future in the here
and now. This demiurgic power makes people and things exist in a certain way: it is a process of ‘insti-
tution ’(Castoriadis, 1975 )o r ‘instauration ’of persons and things –a process that allows existence to
gain reality (Lapoujade, 2017 , p. 73; Souriau, 1939 ).
In the face of their intrinsic link to the possible , which drastically limits their ability to address nov-
elty or abnormality, the process of instauration performed by predictive analytics opens itself to ques-
tions, particularly with regard to the way algorithmic governance contributes to forging and valorising
certain forms of life (human or non-human) to the detriment of others. Indeed, consubstantial to anyrecognition or instauration of some form of life is a reflex of immunisation towards others, deemed
expendable because of their difference or abnormality. This type of reflex generates a form of ‘immu-
nopolitics ’(Esposito, 2008 ) that translates into indifference, discrimination or even alienation:
‘we can get a sense of how anticipatory action (re)distributes the relationship that lives within and
outside liberal democracies have to disaster. To protect, save and care for certain forms of life is to
potentially abandon, dispossess and destroy others.
’(Anderson, 2010a , p. 791)
Large-scale manifestations of this process of immunisation are surfacing in a multitude of domains.
Two recent books, both evocatively titled The Uncounted (Cobham, 2020 ; Davis, 2020 ), develop the
theme of underrepresentation of marginalised groups in datasets spanning economic welfare, demo-
graphics and public health (with a particular focus on the fight against HIV/AIDS). A further exampleis the progressive emergence of a ‘digital welfare state ’in which social protection and assistance are
data-driven and digital technologies are used for diverse purposes, including ‘to automate, predict,International Journal of Law in Context 83
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 15 ====
identify, surveil, detect, target and punish ’(Alston, 2019b , p. 4; Madden et al. ,2017 ). The recent Dutch
case involving the system SyRI (System Risk Indication) is very instructive in this regard as it is one ofthe first examples of successful litigation against the governmental use of a digital tool in the context of
welfare provision ( de Rechtspraak ,2020 ; Gantchev, 2019 ).
Although the exact technology used in SyRI has not been publicly released, this automated system
allows the Dutch central and local governments to identify risks of social security fraud. Processingdata from a range of datasets relating to education, credit-worthiness, health insurance, welfare ben-
efits, etc., SyRI provides an opaque risk-assessment modelling to identify whether individuals are
worthy of investigation for potential fraud and unlawful claims under (and/or non-compliancewith) legislation.
Since its adoption in 2014, SyRI has been under scrutiny by several non-governmental organisa-
tions and other interest groups, which filed a lawsuit in 2018. This was due to serious concerns
about the specific targeting of people from low socio-economic backgrounds and other vulnerablegroups such as immigrants and ethnic or religious minorities. It is now apparent that SyRI was dis-proportionately focusing on ‘difficult neighbourhoods ’, further undermining their reputation and
that of their inhabitants (Leijten, 2020 ; Vervloesem, 2020 ). The use of SyRI raises critical issues
both in terms of procedural fairness and human rights –be it the right to privacy or the right to social
security. Philip Alston, the UN the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, submit-ted a brief as Amicus Curiae in the case, in which he makes several remarks about the potential det-
rimental impact of the use of systems like SyRI:
‘The use of digital tools to pursue welfare fraud is …not a neutral development, but part of a
partisan political trend. In this environment, welfare recipients, especially those who receive non-
contributory assistance designed to assist the poorest in society, are regularly depicted as second-class citizens intent on defrauding the state and the community. In such an atmosphere …digital
tools are being mobilized to target disproportionately those groups that are already more vulner-
able and less able to protect their social rights. ’(Alston, 2019a ,p .7 )
In February 2020, the District Court of The Hague held that the SyRI legislation violated Article 8 of
the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), which protects the right to private and family
life. The court ’s reasoning focused chiefly on the issue of privacy and on the proportionality of SyRI ’s
interference with private life. Surprisingly, the issue of discrimination and the stigmatisation of thepoor and recipients of social benefits, put forward by the plaintiffs and discussed by Alston, received
little attention. Yet, this dimension is crucial as SyRI had been demonstrably used to disproportion-
ately target groups of already vulnerable individuals, with serious impact on their rights and no dueprocess. The case is all the more interesting as it reveals how predictive analytics can cause socialunfairness beyond the sensitive categories explicitly identified and protected by the law (Timan and
Grommé, 2020 ). This is troublesome, particularly in the current ‘move to predicting risk instead of
the ex post enforcement of rules violations ’(Alston, 2019b , p. 19) –a move that animates the increas-
ing reliance on predictive analytics in the context of governance practices inspired by the normativelogic of actions analysed above.
These reflexes of immunisation, which exclude certain groups or forms of life deemed intrinsically
suspect or pernicious, are symptomatic of ‘the inequality of the value of lives ’(Fassin, 2018 , p. 32) in
the digital age. Thus, as governance and algorithmic logics keep converging, a fundamental questionremains open: how to avoid entrenching indifference for forms of life neglected by dominant socio-
political models –in other words, how to develop ‘novel and less exclusive cosmologies ’
(Chateauraynaud and Debaz, 2019 , p. 132). Any positive answer will require safeguarding a plurality
of anticipatory techniques as a necessary premise for alternative ‘visions of desirable futures ’to
emerge.84 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 16 ====
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have problematised contemporary beliefs in the miracles of big data and the divin-
atory power of AI with reference to the implications of such beliefs for the anticipatory aspirations of
governance practices. By way of conclusion, we suggests the contours of what we understand to be the
necessary objectives of future research.
The link between access to knowledge and the ability to govern the future is inevitably determined by
our relationship to the real and our recognition of its qualities, which may vary between times and epochs,
and from culture to culture, as ‘anticipation is a regime of being in time ’(Adams et al. ,2009, p. 247).
The ways in which we describe reality or ‘the state of the world ’are critical for two reasons. The first
is to elucidate our comprehension of how societies operate and organise themselves to anticipate thefuture; the second is to reveal the cosmologies, the worldviews that lie at the heart of these descriptions
(Reith, 2004 ). Analysing modes of anticipation allows us to understand the means by which a certain
imaginary frames and represents alternative futures, links the past to the future, enables or hindersaction and naturalises specific ways of contemplating possible worlds.
6
This process is not merely of epistemological consequence for the ways in which reality is
represented through emerging means of knowledge. In a world in which life is envisaged and under-
stood in terms of pure contingency, the challenge of governing extreme complexity gains a specificontological dimension. The issue ceases to be that of ‘knowing more ’about a certain reality and
turns into delimiting ‘what is to be known ’(Chandler, 2014 , p. 50).
Awareness of the ontological dimensions of anticipatory logics deployed in governance and predictive
analytics is critical to grasp the profound meaning of any truth-claim posited by the association betweenthe two. By claiming to possess knowledge about the future, these logics necessarily imply specific modesof defining what matters, what does not and what can be legitimately regarded as constituting part of the
world. In this sense, prediction is indeed a ‘project of world making ’(Andersson, 2018,p .2 3 ) .
The logics of anticipation enshrined in the association between predictive analytics and governance
thus aspire to make the future present in the here and now and, in so doing, impose themselves asworld-shaping instruments, fostering specific ways of instauring people and things. ‘Instauration ’how-
ever comes at the price of ‘immunisation ’, which can occur as distantiation, detachment or complete
indifference towards forms of life that are not afforded any credit or value. Therefore, future researchon the assemblage between governance and AI must consider the fate of those forms of life that do notadapt, do not align or even actively resist dominant sociopolitical models. The risk is otherwise for the
assemblage to crystallise into an exclusive mode of protection of life aligned to and acknowledged by
these models (Schinkel, 2011 ).
As masterfully put by Jenny Andersson, the fundamental problem that we have today vis-à-vis the
future is not the passage from progress to crisis, as some believe. It is rather the challenge of managing
a potentially infinite plurality of futures and of moulding a society that is truly plural, where access to
the widest spectrum of modes of engagement in and with the world is genuinely open.
Acknowledgements. The authors wish to thank Amy Thomasson for her assistance in finalising this article.
Conflicts of Interest. None
References
Adams V, Murphy M and Clarke AE (2009) Anticipation: technoscience, life, affect, temporality. Subjectivity 28, 246 –265.
Alston P (2019a) Brief by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights as Amicus Curiae
in the Case NJCM c.s./Der Staat Der Nederlanden (SyRI) before the District Court of The Hague (Case Number: C/09/
6The link between past and future can take different forms depending on the normative logic under consideration. The
precautionary principle involves a future that manifests itself in the form of an absence (it is not yet here and we do not
know what its impact will be); with the principle of pre-emption, the future is apprehended in the form of imminence
(it is about to happen and we must act immediately before it does); finally, with the principle of preparedness, the future
is characterised by its presence (the worst is happening and we must respond appropriately).International Journal of Law in Context 85
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 17 ====
550982/HA ZA 18/388) . New York: United Nations. Available at: https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Poverty/
Amicusfinalversionsigned.pdf (accessed 29 December 2020).
Alston P (2019b) Extreme Poverty and Human Rights –A/74/493 . United Nations. Available at: https://undocs.org/A/74/493
(accessed 29 December 2020).
Amin A (2013) Surviving the turbulent future. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 31, 140 –156.
Amoore L (2019) Doubt and the algorithm: on the partial accounts of machine learning. Theory, Culture and Society 36,
147–169.
Amoore L and Piotukh V (2015) Introduction. In Amoore L and Piotukh V (eds), Algorithmic Life: Calculative Devices in the
Age of Big Data . New York: Routledge, pp. 15 –32.
Ananny M (2015) Toward an ethics of algorithms: convening, observation, probability, and timeliness. Science Technology
and Human Values 41,9 3–117.
Anderson B (2010a) Preemption, precaution, preparedness: anticipatory action and future geographies. Progress in Human
Geography 34, 777 –798.
Anderson B (2010b) Security and the future: anticipating the event of terror. Geoforum 41, 227 –235.
Andersson J (2018) The Future of the World: Futurology, Futurists, and the Struggle for the Post Cold War Imagination .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Andreotta AJ, Kirkham N and Rizzi M (2021) AI, big data, and the future of consent. AI & SOCIETY 30August, 1 –14.
Aradau C and Van Munster R (2008) Taming the future: the dispositif of risk in the War on Terror. In Amoore L and de
Goede M (eds), Risk and the War on Terror . New York: Routledge, pp. 23 –40.
Aykut SC, Demortain D and Benbouzid B (2019) The politics of anticipatory expertise: plurality and contestation of futures
knowledge in governance: introduction to the Special Issue. Science and Technology Studies 32,2–12.
Baker P and Gourley B (2015) Data Divination: Big Data Strategies . Boston, MA: Cengage Learning PTR.
Barad K (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning . London:
Duke University Press.
Baschet J (2018) Défaire La Tyrannie Du Présent: Temporalité Émergentes et Futurs Inédits [Undo the Tyranny of the Present:
Emerging Temporalities and New Futures] . Paris: La Découverte.
Baxter P and Jack S (2008) Qualitative case study methodology: study design and implementation for novice researchers. The
Qualitative Report Volume 13, 544 –559.
Beck U (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, 1st edn. London: SAGE Publications.
Benbouzid B (2018) Quand prédire, c ’est gérer [When to predict is to manage]. Réseaux 5, 221 –256.
Bourguignon D (2015) Le principe de précaution: définitions, applications et gouvernance: analyse approfondie [The pre-
cautionary principle: definitions, applications and governance: an in-depth analysis]. Strasbourg: European Parliament,
Directorate-General for Parliamentary Research Services Office. Available at: https://doi.org/10.2861/96978 (accessed
13 August 2022).
Cantero Gamito M and Ebers M (2021) Algorithmic governance and governance of algorithms: an introduction. In Ebers M
and Cantero Gamito M (eds), Algorithmic Governance and Governance of Algorithms . Cham: Springer, pp. 1 –22.
Castoriadis C (1975) L’institution Imaginaire de La Société [The Imaginary Institution of Society] . Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Castro D and McLaughlin M (2019) Ten Ways the Precautionary Principle Undermines Progress in Artificial Intelligence .
Available at: https://itif.org/publications/2019/02/04/ten-ways-precautiona ry-principle-undermines-progress-artificial-intelligence
(accessed 3 December 2020).
Cazes B (1986) Histoire Des Futurs Les Figures de l ’avenir, de Saint Augustin Au XXIe Siècle [History of the Future: The
Figures of the Future of Saint Augustine in the 21st Century] . Paris: Seghers.
Cetina KK (1999) Epistemic Cultures Harvard: How the Sciences Make Knowledge . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Chandler D (2014) Beyond neoliberalism: resilience, the new art of governing complexity. Resilience 2,4 7–63.
Chandler D (2015) A world without causation: big data and the coming of age of posthumanism. Millennium: Journal of
International Studies 43, 833 –851.
Chandler D (2016) How the world learned to stop worrying and love failure: big data, resilience and emergent causality.
Millennium: Journal of International Studies 44, 391 –410.
Chandler D (2018) Ontopolitics in the Anthropocene: An Introduction to Mapping, Sensing and Hacking . New York/London:
Routledge.
Chateauraynaud F and Debaz J (2019) Agir avant et après la fin du monde, dans l ’infinité des milieux en interaction [Acting
before and after the end of the world within infinite milieus of interaction]. Multitudes 76, 126 –132.
Choi H and Varian H (2012) Predicting the present with google trends. Economic Record 88,2–9.
Christen M and Franklin LR (2002) The Concept of Emergence in Complexity Science: Finding Coherence between Theory and
Practice . New York/Zurich. Available at: https://www.encyclog.com/_upl/files/2002_emergence.pdf (accessed 3 December
2020).
Citron DK and Pasquale F (2014) The scored society: due process for automated predictions. Washington Law Review 89,
1–33.86 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 18 ====
Clarke S (2005) Future technologies, dystopic futures and the precautionary principle. Ethics and Information Technology 7,
212–126.
Cobham A (2020) The Uncounted . Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cole SA and Bertenthal A (2017) Science, technology, society, and law. Annual Review of Law and Social Science 13, 351 –371.
Collier SJ and Lakoff A (2015) Vital systems security: reflexive biopolitics and the government of emergency. Theory, Culture
& Society 32,1 9–51.
Council of Europe (2020) Recommendation CM/Rec(2020)1 of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on the Human
Rights Impacts of Algorithmic Systems . Council of Europe. Available at: https://search.coe.int/cm/pages/result_details.aspx?
ObjectId=09000016809e1154 (accessed 2 December 2020).
Danaher J et al.(2017) Algorithmic governance: developing a research agenda through the power of collective intelligence.
Big Data & Society 4,1–21.
Davis S (2020) The Uncounted: Politics of Data in Global Health . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
De Boeck F and Devisch RD (1994) Ndembu, luunda and yaka divination compared: from representation and social
engineering to embodiment and worldmaking. Journal of Religion in Africa 24,9 8–133.
de Goede M and Randalls S (2009) Precaution, preemption: arts and technologies of the actionable future. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 27, 859 –878.
de Rechtspraak (2020) SyRI Legislation in Violation of the European Convention on Human Rights . The Hague. Available at:
https://www.rechtspraak.nl/Organisatie-en-contact/Organ isatie/Rechtbanken/Rechtbank-Den-Haag/Nieuws/Paginas/
SyRI-wetgeving-in-strijd-met-het-Europees-Verdrag-voor-de-Rechten-voor-de-Mens.aspx (accessed 3 December 2020).
Deleuze G (2013) Différence et répétition [Difference and Repetition ]. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Dijkstra H and De Ruijter A (2017) The health-security nexus and the European Union: toward a research agenda.
European Journal of Risk Regulation 8, 613 –625.
Dontas E and Dontas N (2015) Big data analytics in prevention, preparedness, response and recovery in crisis and disaster
management. Recent Advances in Computer Science 32, 476 –482.
Dubey G and de Jouvancourt P (2018) Mauvais Temps. Anthropocène et Numérisation Du Monde [Bad Times:
Anthropocene and the Digitalization of the World] . Paris: DEHORS.
Engélibert J-P (2019) Fabuler La Fin Du Monde: La Puissance Critique Des Fictions d ’apocalypse [Make Up the End of the
World: The Critical Power of Apocalypse Fiction] . Paris: La Découverte.
Esposito E (2011a) A Time of Divination and a Time of Risk: Social Precondition for Prophecy and Prediction in Fate, Freedom
and Prognostication. Strategies for Coping with the Future in East Asia and Europe , Modena, International Consortium for
Research in the Humanities, 30 November 2011.
Esposito E (2011b) The Future of Futures . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Esposito R (2008) Bíos: Biopolitics and Philosophy . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
European Commission (2000) Communication from the Commission precautionary principle. COM(2000) 1 Final . Brussels:
Commission of the European Communities. Available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=COM:2000:0001:FIN:EN:PDF (accessed 3 December 2020).
European Commission (2011) Commission Staff Working Paper –Impact Assessment: Accompanying document to the Proposal
for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the Use of Passenger Name Record Data for the Prevention, Detection,
Investigation and Prosecution of Terrorist Offences and Secious Crime . Brussels: European Commission. Available at: https:/ /
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52010SC0132&from=EN (accessed 3 December 2020).
European Commission (2018a) Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: ‘Towards a Common European Data Space ’. Brussels:
European Commission. Available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52018DC0232&
from=EN (accessed 1 September 2022).
European Commission (2018b) Staff Working Document on Liability for Emerging Digital Technologies Accompanying the
Document Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee . Brussels: European Commission. Available at: https://ec.
europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/european-commission-staff-working-document-liability-emerging-digital-tech-
nologies (accessed 3 December 2020).
European Commission (2019) Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI | Shaping Europe ’s Digital Future . Brussels: European
Commission. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai (accessed
2 December 2020).
European Commission (2020a) Towards a European Strategy on Business-to-Government Data Sharing for the Public
Interest: Final Report Prepared by the High-Level Expert Group on Business-to-Government Data Sharing . Brussels:
European Commission. Available at: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/d96edc29-70fd-11eb-9ac9-
01aa75ed71a1 (accessed 3 December 2020).
European Commission (2020b) What Can Big Data Do for You? | Shaping Europe ’s Digital Future . Brussels: European
Commission. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/what-can-big-data-do-you (accessed 2 December
2020).International Journal of Law in Context 87
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 19 ====
European Commission (2020c) White Paper on Artificial Intelligence –A European Approach to Excellence and Trust .
Brussels: European Commission. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/political-guide-
lines-next-commission_en.pdf . (accessed 3 December 2020).
Ewald F (1993) Two infinities of risk. In Massumi B (ed), The Politics of Everyday Fear . Minneapolis: University of
Minneapolis Press, pp. 221 –228.
Fassin D (2018) Life: A Critical User ’s Manual . Cambridge: Polity Press.
Finlay S (2014) Predictive Analytics, Data Mining and Big Data: Predictive Analytics, Data Mining and Big Data . Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Friedman L, Macaulay S and Stookey J (1995) Law & Society: Readings on the Social Study of Law . New York: W.W. Norton
&C o .
Gantchev V (2019) Data protection in the age of welfare conditionality: respect for basic rights or a race to the bottom?
European Journal of Social Security 21,3–22.
Gritsenko D and Wood M (2022) Algorithmic governance: a modes of governance approach. Regulation & Governance 16,
45–62.
Guillaume B (2012) L ’esprit de la précaution [The spirit of precaution]. Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale 76, 491 –509.
Gutwirth S (2013) Le contexte du droit ce sont ses sources formelles et les faits et moyens qui exigent son intervention [The
context of the law is its formal sources and the facts and means which require its intervention]. Revue interdisciplinaire
d’études juridiques 70, 108 –116.
Hajer MA (2010) Authoritative Governance: Policy Making in the Age of Mediatization . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hallgren W et al .(2016) The biodiversity and climate change virtual laboratory: where ecology meets big data.
Environmental Modelling and Software 76, 182 –186.
Hampton SE et al.(2013) Big data and the future of ecology. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 11, 156 –162.
Hartog F (2003) Régimes d ’historicité. Présentisme et Expériences Du Temps, François Hartog, Sciences Humaines [Regimes of
Historicity: Presentism and Experiences of Time] . Paris: Seuil.
Heaven WD (2021) Hundreds of AI Tools Have Been Built to Catch Covid: None of them Helped . MIT Technology Review.
Available at: https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/07/30/1030329/machine-learning-ai-failed-covid-hospital-diagno-
sis-pandemic/ (accessed 31 December 2020).
Herweijer C and Ramchandani P (2018) Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth Series Harnessing Artificial Intelligence
for the Earth . Fourth Industrial Revolution for the Earth Series. Available at: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/
Harnessing_Artificial_Intelligence_for_the_Earth_report_2018.pdf (accessed 31 December 2020).
Hofstadter D (2008) Gödel, Escher, Bach –Les Brins d ’une Guirlande Éternelle [Gödel, Escher, Bach: The Strands of an Eternal
Garland] . Paris: Dunod.
Holbraad M (2013) Turning a corner: Preamble for ‘The relative native ’by Eduardo Viveiros de Castro. HAU: Journal of
Ethnographic Theory 3, 467 –470.
Holland JH (2014) Complexity: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hui Kyong Chun W (2011) Crisis, crisis, crisis, or sovereignty and networks. Theory, Culture & Society 28,9 1–112.
IPCC (2021) Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . New York/Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jansen F (2018) Data Driven Policing in the Context of Europe . Working paper. Cardiff University, Wales. Available at:
https://www.digitalmarketplace.service.gov.uk/digital-outcomes-and-specialists/opportunities/1227 (accessed 3 December
2020).
Jasanoff S (2004) States of Knowledge: The Co-production of Science and the Social Order . London/New York: Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group.
Jasanoff S (2015) Future imperfect: science, technology, and the imaginations of modernity. In Jasanoff S and Kim S-H (eds),
Dreamscapes of Modernity: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power . Chicago/London: University of
Chicago Press.
Jasanoff S and Kim S-H (eds) (2015) Dreamscapes of Modernity. Dreamscapes of Modernity . Chicago/London: University of
Chicago Press.
Jayalakshmi G and Anuradha T (2017) Big Data Technologies for Predicting Epidemics and Enhancing the Quality of Human
Life, 2017 International Conference on Big Data Analytics and Computational Intelligence, 23 –25 March. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICBDACI.2017.8070831 (accessed 30 December 2020).
Kallinikos J (2002) Reopening the black box of technology artifacts. ICIS 2002 Proceedings published online December 2002,
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2002/26 .
Kalpokas I (2019) Algorithmic Governance: Politics and Law in the Post-human Era . Cham: Springer International
Publishing.
Kaufmann M, Egbert S and Leese M (2019) Predictive policing and the politics of patterns. British Journal of Criminology
59, 674 –692.
Kerr I and Earle J (2013) Prediction, preemption, presumption: how big data threatens big picture privacy. Stanford Law
Review Online 66,6 5–72.88 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 20 ====
Lakoff A (2017) Unprepared –Global Health in a Time of Emergency . Oakland: University of California Press.
Lapoujade D (2017) Les Existences Moindres [Lesser Existences] . Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit.
Latour B (2002) We Have Never Been Modern . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour B (2009) The Making of Law: An Ethnography of the Conseil d ’Etat. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Lazaro C (2018) Le pouvoir « divinatoire » des algorithmes [The ‘divinatory ’power of algorithms]. Anthropologie et Sociétés
published online 5 October, https://doi.org/10.7202/1052640ar .
Le Quéré C et al.(2020) Temporary reduction in daily global CO2 emissions during the COVID-19 forced confinement.
Nature Climate Change 10, 647 –653.
Leijten I (2020) The Dutch SyRI Case: Some Thoughts on Indivisible Interferences and the Status of Social Rights . IACL-AIDC
Blog. Available at: https://blog-iacl-aidc.org/social-rights/2020/5/19/the-dutch-syri-case-some-thoughts-on-indivisible-
interferences-and-the-status-of-social-rights (accessed 29 December 2020).
Lewis M (2011) The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine . New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Lynskey O (2019) Criminal justice profiling and EU data protection law: precarious protection from predictive policing.
International Journal of Law in Context 15, 162 –176.
Madden M et al.(2017) Privacy, poverty, and big data: a matrix of vulnerabilities for poor privacy, poverty, and big data: a
matrix of vulnerabilities for poor americans. Washington University Law Review 95,5 3–125.
Mantello P (2016) The machine that ate bad people: the ontopolitics of the precrime assemblage. Big Data and Society 3,
published online 12 December, https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951716682538 .
Massumi B (2007) Potential politics and the primacy of preemption. Theory & Event 10, 3-3.
Massumi B (2009) National enterprise emergency: steps toward an ecology of powers. Theory, Culture & Society 26, 153 –185.
McCulloch J and Wilson D (2015) Pre-Crime: Pre-Emption, Precaution and the Future . London: Routledge.
Mehrotra S et al.(2013) Technological challenges in emergency response. IEEE Intelligent Systems published online July,
https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2013.118 .
Merton RK (1948) The self-fulfilling prophecy. Antioch Review 8, 193 –210.
Michael M (2017) Enacting big futures, little futures: toward an ecology of futures. Sociological Review 65, 509 –524.
Misuraca G, Broster D and Centeno C (2012) Digital Europe 2030: designing scenarios for ICT in future governance and
policy making. Government Information Quarterly 29, S121 –S131.
Morin E (2008) On Complexity . New York: Hampton Press.
Neyrat F (2009) Rupture de défense [Defence break]. Lignes published online, https://doi.org/10.3917/lignes.029.0046 .
Neyrat F (2010) Avant-propos sur les sociétés de clairvoyance [Foreword on clairvoyance societies]. Multitudes 40, 104 –111.
Norouzzadeh MS et al.(2018) Automatically identifying, counting, and describing wild animals in camera-trap images with
deep learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 115, E5716 –E5725.
Ost F (1999) Le Temps Du Droit [The time of law]. Paris: Odile Jacob.
Rasmussen MV (2004) ‘It sounds like a riddle ’: security studies, the War on Terror and risk. Millennium: Journal of
International Studies 33, 381 –395.
Raymond N and Al Achkar Z (2016) Data Preparedness: Connecting Data, Decision-making and Humanitarian Response .
Cambridge: Harvard Humanitarian Initiative. Available at: https://hhi.harvard.edu/files/humanitarianinitiative/files/data_-
preparedness_update.pdf?m=1607547533 (accessed 3 December 2020).
Raza K (2020) Artificial intelligence against COVID-19: a meta-analysis of current research. In Hassanien A, Dey N and
Elghamrawy S (eds), Big Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence Against COVID-19: Innovation Vision and Approach .
Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 165 –176.
Reith G (2004) Uncertain times: the notion of ‘risk’and the development of modernity. Time & Society 13, 383 –402.
Rieder G (2018) Tracing Big Data Imaginaries through Public Policy: The Case of the European Commission . New York:
Routledge.
Roberts SL (2019) Big data, algorithmic governmentality and the regulation of pandemic risk. European Journal of Risk
Regulation 1–22.
Romeike F and Eicher A (2016) Predictive Analytics –RiskNET –The Risk Management Network . FIRM Yearbook. Available
at:https://www.risknet.de/en/topics/news-details/predictive-analytics-1/ (accessed 2 December 2020).
Rosset C (2012) The Real and Its Double . Chicago: Seagull Books.
Rouvroy A and Stiegler B (2015) Le régime de vérité numérique [The digital truth regime]. Socio 4, 113 –140.
Sangireddy R (2015) Unraveling Real-time Predictive Analytics . IOT Central. Available at: https://www.iotcentral.io/blog/
unraveling-real-time-predictive-analytics (accessed 2 December 2020).
Sanila S, Subramanian DV and Sathyalakshmi S (2017) Real-time mining techniques: a big data perspective for a smart
future. Indian Journal of Science and Technology 10,1–7.
Schinkel W (2011) Prepression: the actuarial archive and new technologies of security. Theoretical Criminology 15, 365 –380.
Sørensen MP (2018) Ulrich Beck: exploring and contesting risk. Journal of Risk Research 21,6–16.
Souriau E (1939) L’instauration Philosophique [The Philosphical Establishment] . Paris: Alcan.
Sperber D (1982) Apparently irrational beliefs. In Lukes S and Hollis M (eds), Rationality and Relativism . Oxford: Blackwell,
pp. 149 –180.International Journal of Law in Context 89
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

==== Page 21 ====
Stake R (1995) The Art of Case Study Research . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Stiegler B (2019) Il Faut s ’adapter –Sur Un Nouvel Impératif Politique [‘You Have to Adapt ’–On a New Political Imperative ].
Paris: Gallimard.
Sunstein C (2002) Risk and Reason –Safety Law and Environment . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Supiot A (2015) La Gouvernance Par Les Nombres [Governance by Numbers ]. Paris: Frayard.
Thomas L (2014) Pandemics of the future: disease surveillance in real time. Surveillance and Society 12, 287 –300.
Timan T and Grommé F (2020) A framework for social fairness: insights from two algorithmic decision-making controver-
sies in the Netherlands. SSRN Electronic Journal . Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstrac-
t_id=3756755 (accessed 29 December 2020).
Timms A (2017) Data divination [technically speaking by Paull McFedries]. IEEE Spectrum published online 31 January,
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSPEC.2017.7833501 .
Ulbricht L and Yeung K (2021) Algorithmic regulation: a maturing concept for investigating regulation of and through algo-
rithms. Regulation & Governance 16, published online 27 August, https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12437 .
Verbeek P-P (2016) Toward a theory of technological mediation: a program for postphenomenological research. In Berg O,
Friis JK and Crease RP (eds), Technoscience and Postphenomenology: The Manhattan Papers . Maryland/London:
Lexington Books, pp. 1 –189.
Vernant JP et al.(1974) Divination et Rationalité [Divination and Rationality] . Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Vervloesem K (2020) How Dutch activists got an invasive fraud detection algorithm banned. Algorithm Watch . Available at:
https://algorithmwatch.org/en/story/syri-netherlands-algorithm/ (accessed 29 December 2020).
Wendeling C (2015) Concurrent Design Foresight: Report to the European Commission of the Expert Group on Foresight
Modelling . Publications Office of the European Union. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/research/swafs/pdf/pub_gover-
nance/concurrent_design_foresight_report.pdf (accessed 3 December 2020).
Williams P and Kind E (2019) Data-driven Policing: The Hardwiring of Discriminatory Policing Practices Across Europe .
Brussels: European Network Against Racism.
Winner L (2020) Do artefacts have politics? In Winner L (ed.), The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of
High Technology , 2nd edn. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
World Health Organization (WHO) (2021) Roadmap to Improve and Ensure Good Indoor Ventilation in the Context of
COVID-19 . Geneva: WHO Headquarters.
Wu JT, Leung K and Leung GM (2020) Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the
2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. The Lancet 395, 689 –697.
Yeung K (2018) Algorithmic regulation: a critical interrogation. Regulation and Governance 12, 505 –523.
Yeung K (2019) A study of the implications of advanced digital technologies (including AI systems) for the concept of
responsibility within a human rights framework. SSRN Electronic Journal . Available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3286027
(accessed 29 December 2020).
Yu M, Yang C and Li Y (2018) Big data in natural disaster management: a review. Geosciences 8, 165.
Zebrowski C (2013) The nature of resilience. Resilience 1, 159 –173.
Zeng D, Cao Z and Neill DB (2021) Artificial intelligence –enabled public health surveillance –from local detection to global
epidemic monitoring and control. In Xing L, Giger M and Min J (eds), Artificial Intelligence in Medicine: Technical Basis
and Clinical Applications . Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 437 –453.
Cite this article: Lazaro C, Rizzi M (2023). Predictive analytics and governance: a new sociotechnical imaginary for uncertain
futures. International Journal of Law in Context 19,7 0–90. https://doi.org/10.1017/S174455232200047790 Christophe Lazaro and Marco Rizzi
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1744552322000477  Published online by Cambridge University Press

