==== Page 1 ====
PyGAD: An Intuitive Genetic Algorithm Python
Library
Ahmed Fawzy Gad
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, ON, Canada
agad069@uottawa.ca
©2021 Ahmed Fawzy Gad. Published at arXiv on June, 10 2021. Donation is open at PayPal (paypal.me/ahmedfgad or e-mail ahmed.f.gad@gmail.com),
OpenCollective (opencollective.com/pygad), and Interac e-Transfer (ahmed.f.gad@gmail.com).Abstract —This paper introduces PyGAD, an open-source easy-
to-use Python library for building the genetic algorithm. PyGAD
supports a wide range of parameters to give the user control over
everything in its life cycle. This includes, but is not limited to,
population, gene value range, gene data type, parent selection,
crossover, and mutation. PyGAD is designed as a general-
purpose optimization library that allows the user to customize
the ﬁtness function. Its usage consists of 3 main steps: build
the ﬁtness function, create an instance of the pygad.GA class,
and calling the pygad.GA.run() method. The library supports
training deep learning models created either with PyGAD itself
or with frameworks like Keras and PyTorch. Given its stable
state, PyGAD is also in active development to respond to the
user’s requested features and enhancement received on GitHub
github.com/ahmedfgad/GeneticAlgorithmPython. PyGAD comes
with documentation pygad.readthedocs.io for further details and
examples.
Keywords— genetic algorithm, evolutionary algorithm, optimiza-
tion, deep learning, Python, NumPy, Keras, PyTorch
I. I NTRODUCTION
Nature has inspired computer scientists to create algorithms for
solving computational problems. These naturally-inspired algorithms
are called evolutionary algorithms (EAs) [1] where the initial solution
(or individual) to a given problem is evolved across multiple iterations
aiming to increase its quality. The EAs can be categorized by different
factors like the number of solutions used. Some EAs evolve a single
initial solution (e.g. hill-climbing) and others evolve a population of
solutions (e.g. particle swarm or genetic algorithm).
The genetic algorithm (GA) a biologically-inspired EA that solves
optimization problems inspired by Darwin’s theory “survival of the
ﬁttest” [1], [2]. Originally, the GA was not designed for being a
computational algorithm rather understanding how natural selection
happens. Later, it becomes one of the most popular computational
EAs.
The core concepts of the GA are derived from the natural solution.
There are several organisms called population. The members of
the population may have the ability to mate and reproduce new
organisms. Because the good organisms can produce better offspring,
then the good members of the population are selected for mating and
others die. When 2 good organisms mate, their offspring will likely
be better specially when some new, hopefully, better, changes are
introduced. These concepts form the core of the GA in computer
science.
The GA steps are explained in Figure 1 [2]. The ﬁrst step creates
an initial population of solutions for the problems. These solutions
are not the best for the problem and thus evolved. The evolution starts
by selecting the ﬁttest solutions as parents based on a maximization
ﬁtness function. Each pair of parents mate to produce one or more
Fig. 1. Flowchart of the genetic algorithm.
children. Each child shares genes from its 2 parents using the
crossover operation.
To go beyond the parents’ capabilities, the mutation is introduced
to make some changes to the children. Due to the randomness in these
changes, some children may be ﬁtter or worse than their parents. By
mating the best parents and producing more children, a better solution
is likely found after each generation. Either the offspring only or
combined with the parents form the next generation’s population.
The process is repeated for a limited number of generations or until
a satisfactory solution is found where no further optimization is
necessary.
There are many parameters to tune in to make the GA ﬁts the
problem. For experimentation, it is essential to use an easy tool for
building the genetic algorithm.
This paper introduces PyGAD, an open-source intuitive Python
library for optimization using the genetic algorithm. PyGAD was
released in April 2020 and has over 185K installations at the time ofarXiv:2106.06158v1  [cs.NE]  11 Jun 2021

==== Page 2 ====
writing this paper. The library supports single-objective optimization
with a wide range of parameters to customize the GA for different
types of problems in an easy-to-use way with less effort. PyGAD
has a lifecycle to trace how everything is working from population
creation until ﬁnding the best solution. The lifecycle can also be
customized to help researchers alter its sequence, enable or disable
some operations, make modiﬁcations, or introduce new operators.
PyGAD works with both decimal and binary representations. The
genes can be of int,float , or any supported NumPy numeric
data types ( int/uint /float ). Given the advantages of the GA over
the gradient-based optimizers, PyGAD supports training Keras and
PyTorch models.
The paper is organized so that section II covers the related
work, section III extensively introduces PyGAD and brieﬂy com-
pares PyGAD with DEAP and LEAP, and ﬁnally, section IV draws
conclusions. Appendix A lists some resources to know more about
PyGAD and Appendix B lists the GitHub links of some projects built
with PyGAD.
II. R ELATED WORK
There are already existing Python libraries for building the genetic
algorithm. Some examples include:
A DEAP (Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) II-A
B Pyevolve II-B
C EasyGA II-C
D LEAP (Library for Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) II-D
This section gives an overview of these libraries by explaining
their objectives and limitations.
A. DEAP
DEAP (Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) [3] is
considered one of the most common Python libraries for optimization
using the genetic algorithm based on the number of installations,
GitHub issues, and stars (4.2K). One of the reasons is being one
of the ﬁrst libraries about EAs which was published in 2012. DEAP
supports other algorithms than GA like non-dominated sorting genetic
algorithm II (NSGA-II), particle swarm optimization (PSO), and
evolution strategy (ES). Its latest release at Python Package Index
(PyPI) is 1.3.1 released on Jan 2020.
DEAP uses 2 main structures which are creator andtoolbox .
Thecreator module is used for creating data types like ﬁtness,
individual, and population. These data types are empty and ﬁlled
using the toolbox module. Given the special structure of DEAP,
the user would take some time until understanding getting familiar.
It needs more than a beginner’s level in Python.
One problem about DEAP is being not user-friendly as the user
has to do some efforts for each optimization problem. For example,
the user has to write extra code for creating the population and ﬁlling
it with appropriate values. The motivation for that is to enable the
user to create custom data types that are not supported. But this
boilerplate code unnecessarily increases the length of the Python
script and makes it uncomfortable for users to write and understand
more syntax about DEAP. Sometimes, the scripts are hard to read.
Moreover, the users have to create a main function in which
everything is grouped in an evolutionary loop. The loop in this user-
deﬁned function should is where the user needs to follow the GA
pipeline by 1) calculating the ﬁtness function, 2) selecting the parents,
3) applying crossover and mutation, 4) and repeating that for several
generations. This is not the best interface for users who try to focus
on the experiments and save time on the other stuff. Writing the
evolutionary loop makes the library non-friendly.
Even if the library supports some ready-to-use algorithms that
save time building the main function, each algorithm does a speciﬁc
task and is limited in its features. With the few parameters each
algorithm accepts, there is little customization possible. Examples of
these algorithms are eaSimple ,eaMuPlusLambda , and varOr .The library leaves much stuff to be built by the end-user which
makes the user feel lost between the modules, classes, and functions
needed to customize the library to solve a problem. For example,
building a population of mixed data types requires the user to:
1) Register a data type for each gene.
2) Register an individual that combines those gene data types.
3) Register a population that uses that individual.
4) Build the population
There is no way to restrict the gene values to a set of sparse
discrete values. This is necessary for some problems where the gene
value may not fall within a regular range. To select which genes to
mutate, DEAP only supports the mutation probability. There is no
way to specify the exact number of genes to be mutated.
DEAP only supports the traditional mutation operators where all
solutions, regardless of their ﬁtness value, are given equal mutation
probability. This would distort the high-quality solutions.
Another major drawback of DEAP is the lack of means of
visualizing the results after the evolution completes [4]. The users
have to manually create their plots to summarize the results.
B. Pyevolve
Pyevolve is another pure Python library for building the genetic
algorithm [5]. Even that it is published in 2009, it is less popular than
DEAP and this is based on the total number of installations (50K for
all the time), GitHub stars (301), and citations. It also has a limited
community compared to DEAP.
Its scripts start by creating the ﬁtness function, preparing the
chromosome, setting some parameters like which operators to use,
create an instance of the GSimpleGA class and then call the
evolve() method to start the evolution.
Like DEAP, this library has boilerplate code for conﬁgurations that
makes its scripts unnecessarily longer even for simple problems. The
supported mutation operators apply mutation equally to all solutions
independent of their ﬁtness value.
Even that Pyevolve is easier than DEAP, but it is limited in its
features. It supports some predeﬁned data types for the genes like in-
teger and real. To create new data types, then more details about some
classes in the library are needed like GenomeBase.GenomeBase
which may be problematic for some users.
A comparison between DEAP and Pyevolve shows that the number
of code lines needed to solve the OneMax problem is 59 for DEAP
and 378 for Pyevolve [3]. Given the simplicity of the problem,
Pyevolve needed too many lines.
This library is no longer maintained as the latest version was
released at the end of 2014 and the most recent commit on its GitHub
project was at the end of 2015.
C. EasyGA
The EasyGA library allows only deﬁning a continuous range for
the gene values. If the range has some exclusions or if the gene values
do not follow a range at all, then there is no way to deﬁne the gene
values. Moreover, the user has to build the solutions manually without
given a simple interface. Commonly, users would like to focus more
on the algorithm itself and save time building additional modules
specially if they are not involved in Python.
This library has a limited number of operators for crossover,
mutation, and parent selection. Given the
The EasyGA library supports a random mutation operation that
applies mutation over any solution in the population, including
parents, and is not restricted to the new offspring. It randomly selects
the solutions to mutate. This is against the nature of the GA as only
random changes could be introduced to the offspring, not the parents.
The users have to know about decorators, at some stage, to
build their operators. While writing the paper, the GitHub project
of EasyGA has only 22 stars.

==== Page 3 ====
D. LEAP
LEAP (Library for Evolutionary Algorithms in Python) is another
recent Python library published in 2020 for EAs that supports the
genetic algorithm [6]. This library has 3 core classes which are
Individual ,Decoder , and Problem . The decoder is respon-
sible for converting the genes from one form to another to calculate
the ﬁtness value for each individual given the current problem.
According to the examples posted by the developers, the decoder
is usually set to IdentityDecoder() which means the gene is
translated to itself. This is a design issue in the library. Maybe this
feature is helpful in some speciﬁc problems but the library uses it
as something essential for all types of problems. It is better to work
directly on the genes without having to decode them to another form
or leave that decoding part to the ﬁtness function.
Even it is published in July 2020, the library has many missing
features as mentioned in its documentation. One of these missing
features is the mixed data representation in the individual. There is no
lifecycle in LEAP to help trace what is happening in each generation.
Even if one of the objectives of LEAP is to make it simpler than
the other libraries, the user still has to write the evolution loop. This
results in more lines to solve a problem. Moreover, the user has to
take care of calling a function that increases the generations counter
by calling the util.inc_generation() function. Avoiding to
call it causes an inﬁnite evolution loop. This would be a problem for
users with less experience.
Creating and managing the evolution loop is against another
objective of LEAP to make it suitable for all types of software users
(users who solve problems with existing tools).
This library is not popular as it has a total of 3.4K installations
since publication in addition to just 39 starts in the GitHub project.
III. P ROPOSED PYGAD L IBRARY
PyGAD is an open-source Python library for optimization us-
ing the genetic algorithm. It is published in April 2020 at PyPI
(pypi.org/project/pygad). Its GitHub project has over 525 stars
(github.com/ahmedfgad/GeneticAlgorithmPython). With over 185K
installations over 1 year, PyGAD is the most rising library compared
to the other libraries.
The name PyGAD has 3 parts:
1)Pywhich means it is a Python library. This is a common naming
convention for Python libraries.
2)GAstands for genetic algorithm .
3)Dfordecimal because the library was originally supporting only
decimal genetic algorithm. Now, it supports both decimal and
binary genetic algorithm.
This section gives an overview of PyGAD III-A, discusses the
steps of its usage III-B, its lifecycle III-C, and main features in
PyGAD III-D.
A. PyGAD Overview
PyGAD is an intuitive library for optimization using the genetic
algorithm. It is designed with 2 main objectives:
1) Making everything as simple as possible for the users with the
least knowledge.
2) Giving the user control over everything possible.
The simplicity comes from using descriptive names for the classes,
methods, attributes, and parameters. This is in addition to making
things straightforward to build the genetic algorithm and specify a
wide range of easy-to-understand conﬁguration parameters. There
are fewer classes, methods, or functions to call to solve a problem
compared to the other libraries.
The users do not have to build the evolution loop in any situation
as PyGAD supports an elastic lifecycle that can be altered. This
includes, but is not limited to, enabling or disabling the mutation
or crossover operators and overriding them to build new operators
for research purposes.The 7 modules included in PyGAD are:
1)pygad.pygad : It is the main module which builds everything
in the genetic algorithm. This module is implicitly imported
when the library itself is imported.
2)pygad.nn : Builds fully-connected neural networks (FCNNs)
from scratch using only NumPy.
3)pygad.gann : Uses the pygad module to train networks build
using the nnmodule.
4)pygad.cnn : Similar to the nnmodule but builds convolu-
tional neural networks (CNNs).
5)pygad.gacnn : Similar to the gann module but trains CNNs.
6)pygad.kerasga : Trains Keras models using the pygad
module.
7)pygad.torchga : Trains PyTorch models using the pygad
module.
Given that the pygad.pygad is the most critical module in the
library, it is given the most attention.
PyGAD has detailed documentation that covers all of its features
with examples. Moreover, the source code of various projects built
using PyGAD is explained in tutorials. A list of some of these
tutorials is available in Appendix A.
PyGAD gained popularity in the last months and some of its
English articles and tutorials are translated to different languages
like Korean, Turkish, Hungarian, Chinese, and Russian. A list of
such translated articles and tutorials is found in the PyGAD in Other
Languages section of the documentation.
The documentation of PyGAD has a section called Release History
to summarize the changes and additions in each release.
Appendix A has extra reading resources about PyGAD. Appendix
B lists some projects built with PyGAD.
B. PyGAD Usage
There are 3 core steps to use PyGAD:
1) Build the ﬁtness function.
2) Instantiate the pygad.GA class with the appropriate conﬁgu-
ration parameters.
3) Call the run() method to start the evolution.
For the following equation with 3 inputs, we can use PyGAD to
ﬁnd the values of w1,w2, and w3that satisfy equation:
Y=w1X1+w3X3+w3X3
Where Y = 44; X 1= 4; X 2= 2; and X 3= 3:5
A basic PyGAD example that solves this problem is given in
Listing 1. Line 1 imports the library. This import statement implicitly
imports the pygad module. The NumPy library is also imported in
Line 2 because it is used in the ﬁtness function.
Line 4 creates a Python list to hold the 3 inputs and line 5 holds
the output.
The ﬁtness function in PyGAD is a regular Python function that
accepts 2 parameters:
1) The solution evolved by the genetic algorithm as a 1D vector.
The function should return a single numeric value representing
the ﬁtness of this solution.
2) The index of the solution within the population.
The length of the solution in this example is 3, one value for each
weight in the equation. The ﬁtness function must be a maximization
function (the higher the ﬁtness value the better the solution).
The ﬁtness function is deﬁned from line 7 to line 10 in Listing 1.
The function calculates the sum of products between each value in
the solution and its corresponding input. The absolute difference is
calculated between the sum and the output.
Returning the absolute difference makes it a minimization function.
This is why the result is returned as 1:0=abs . A tiny value of
0:000001 is added to the denominator to avoid diving by zero.

==== Page 4 ====
A new instance of the pygad.GA class is created in line 12.
All conﬁguration parameters are grouped in the pygad.GA class’s
constructor. With the available IDE’s, the user can easily check the
names of all available parameters. This way the user does not have
to memorize the names of functions or classes compared to the other
libraries.
There are 5 required parameters that must be speciﬁed for each
problem:
1)num_generations : The number of generations/iterations.
2)sol_per_pop : The number of solutions/chromosomes/indi-
viduals in the population (i.e. population size).
3)num_parents_mating : The number of solutions to be se-
lected from the population as parents for mating and producing
the offspring.
4)num_genes : The number of genes in each solution.
5)fitness_func : The ﬁtness function.
These are the minimum parameters to use PyGAD. Note that the
names of the parameters are self-describing. The documentation has
information about the classes, parameters, attributes, methods, and
functions in all PyGAD modules.
1i m p o r t pygad
2i m p o r t numpy
3
4e q u a t i o n i n p u t s = [ 4 , −2 , 3 . 5 ]
5Y = 44
6
7d e f f i t n e s s f u n c ( s o l u t i o n , s o l u t i o n i d x ) :
8 o u t = numpy . sum ( s o l u t i o n *e q u a t i o n i n p u t s )
9 f i t n e s s = 1 . 0 / ( numpy . abs ( o u t − Y) +0.000001)
10 r e t u r n f i t n e s s
11
12g a i n s t a n c e = pygad .GA( n u m g e n e r a t i o n s =100 ,
13 s o l p e r p o p =10 ,
14 num parents mating =5 ,
15 num genes =3 ,
16 f i t n e s s f u n c = f i t n e s s f u n c )
17
18g a i n s t a n c e . run ( )
Listing 1. PyGAD example.
In Listing 1, a population of size 10 is evolved through 100
generations. Out of the population, 5 solutions are selected for mating.
Each solution has 3 genes where the ﬁtness value is calculated using
the Python function named fitness_func .
The instances of the pygad.GA class has a method called
run() which runs the genetic algorithm to start evolving the initial
population according to the selected parameters. This is the minimal
code for optimizing this problem using PyGAD.
Once the run() method completes, additional methods can be
called to ﬁnd information about the solution found by PyGAD. Two
of these methods are:
1)best_solution() : Returns the following information about
the best solution found by PyGAD:
a) The parameters of the best solution (e.g. the 3 weights for
the problem solved in Listing 1.
b) The ﬁtness value of the best solution.
c) The index of this solution in its population.
2)plot_result() : Creates a plot showing how the ﬁtness
value evolves by each generation. This method returns the ﬁgure
in case the user would like to save it.
These 2 methods are called in Listing 2. Figure 2 shows that the
best solution is found after 31 generations only with a ﬁtness value
of 182.698. The best solution’s parameters can be plugged into the
equation to return the predicted value.
Fig. 2. Evolution of the ﬁtness value for 100 generations.
1s o l u t i o n , s o l u t i o n f i t n e s s , s o l u t i o n i d x =
g a i n s t a n c e . b e s t s o l u t i o n ( )
2f i g = g a i n s t a n c e . p l o t r e s u l t ( )
Listing 2. Evolution results.
For the OneMax optimization problem, it is solved with PyGAD
in just 15 lines of code compared to 45 for DEAP and 34 for LEAP.
For 3 different runs with 100 generations each, the average time
for PyGAD is 0.14 seconds compared to 0.65 for DEAP and 0.052
for LEAP. The trouble with LEAP is that the optimal solution was
not found even after 1,000 generations. The maximum number of
ones did not even reach 90=100 after tens of trials with the code
published by the developer at GitHub.
C. PyGAD Lifecycle
PyGAD has a lifecycle that helps to user to keep track and control
all different stages of the evolution process. Figure 3 shows the
PyGAD lifecycle. Note that the side blocks refer to operations done
between one state and another.
The passed parameters to the pygad.GA class’s constructor are
validated. Then, instance attributes are initialized according to the
passed parameters. Some of these attributes include population
which is a NumPy array holding all solutions in the population.
Once an instance of the pygad.GA class is created successfully,
then it is time to start the lifecycle of PyGAD by calling the run()
method. For the 7 states in PyGAD lifecycle, the following 7 callback
functions exist:
1)on_start() : Called once after the run() method is called.
2)on_fitness() : Called after calculating the population ﬁtness
in each generation.
3)on_parents() : Called in each generation after the parents
are selected.
4)on_crossover() : For each generation, it is called after
applying the crossover operation.
5)on_mutation() : For each generation, it is called after ap-
plying the mutation operation.
6)on_generation() : Called at the end of each generation.
7)on_stop() : Called once after the run() method stops.
The user can assign a Python function, with the appropriate
parameters, to any of these callback functions. By doing this, the
user can track and control everything from the start to the end of the
evolution. This includes, but is not limited to, getting information
about the population, ﬁtness, selected parents, crossover or mutation
results, and the best solution yet found. The user can also do some

==== Page 5 ====
Fig. 3. PyGAD lifecycle.
pre-processing or post-processing tasks in the on_start() and
on_stop() functions, respectively.
For research purposes and supporting an operator that is not
supported by PyGAD, the user can deﬁne custom crossover and
mutation operators in the callback functions.
Theon_generation() callback function can be used to add
some conditions and alter the execution. For example, returning the
string ”stop” immediately stops the run() method earlier before
completing all generations.
D. PyGAD Features
The previous sections should have covered some features of
PyGAD. This section highlights the main features supported byPyGAD that make it distinctive compared to the other libraries. For
more details, check its documentation pygad.readthedocs.io.
1) PyGAD is very intuitive to use. Its steps are self-explanatory
and easy to follow in a user-friendly way. With just 3 simple
steps, PyGAD can optimize different types of problems.
2) All parameters are grouped in the constructor of the pygad.GA
class. This helps the user to be focused and not distracted.
3) A user-deﬁned gene value space, either for all genes at once
or for each gene, can be created using the gene_space
parameter. This is helpful even if the gene’s values do not follow
a certain pattern. If a gene has values enclosed within a given
range, then the gene value can be randomly generated from a
user-deﬁned range.
4) It is possible to control the gene data type, for all genes or
each gene, using the gene_type parameter. The supported
data types are Python’s int andfloat in addition to all
int/uint /float types in the NumPy library.
5) Using the initial_population parameter, a user-deﬁned
initial population can be used as the start point. This helps to
continue where the evolution stopped. PyGAD builds an initial
population randomly if this parameter is not set.
6) PyGAD has a lifecycle to keep track of everything. A call to a
callback function can be triggered for each step in the lifecycle.
7) The user can stop the evolution at any time. For example, return-
ing the string “stop” from the on_generation() callback
function stops PyGAD at the current generation.
8) It is easy to access the best solutions across all generations
in addition to their ﬁtness using the best_solutions and
best_solutions_fitness attributes, respectively.
9) The crossover and mutation operations can be disabled by
setting crossover_type ormutation_type toNone and
then plug a user-deﬁned operation in the lifecycle.
10) There are different ways to specify the number of genes to
mutate. According to the user’s preference, this can be speci-
ﬁed as probability ( mutation_probability ), percentage
(mutation_percent_genes ), or an explicit number of
genes ( mutation_num_genes ).
11) PyGAD supports adaptive mutation so that the user controls
how mutation is applied based on the solution’s ﬁtness. For
the high-quality solutions, low mutation probability/percent-
age/number is expected compared to low-quality solutions. This
helps to maintain the quality of the good solutions in addition
to increasing the quality of the bad solutions.
12) The mutation_by_replacement bool parameter selects
whether the mutation adds to or replaces the gene value.
13) A bool parameter called allow_duplicate_genes helps
to accept or reject duplicate values in the same chromosome.
For this to work, there must be enough value space to guarantee
unique genes’ values.
14) Ability to control the number of parents to keep in the next
generation using the keep_parents parameter. This helps to
save 0 or more parents to keep the ﬁtness curve increasing.
15) The instance attributes in the pygad.GA class starting with
last_generation_ help to keep track of the outcomes of
each generation.
16) PyGAD supports training Keras and PyTorch models using the
pygad.kerasga andtorchga modules, respectively.
17) PyGAD also has its own modules to build and train neu-
ral networks ( pygad.nn ,pygad.gann ,pygad.cnn , and
pygad.gacnn ).
18) The interface to use any PyGAD feature is very simple and
does not require much knowledge about Python compared to
the other libraries. The minimum level is to know how to create
variables, how to deﬁne a Python function that accepts param-
eters and returns something, little about classes like creating
instances in addition to accessing class/instance attributes.

==== Page 6 ====
19) PyGAD has built-in support to visualize the results. For exam-
ple, the best_solution() method shows how the ﬁtness
changes by generation.
20) There are many resources to help you get started with PyGAD.
This includes documentation, blog posts, examples, projects,
and a community over GitHub, reddit, StackOverﬂow, Face-
book, and Twitter.
IV. C ONCLUSION
This paper proposed a new Python library called PyGAD for
single-objective optimization using the genetic algorithm. PyGAD
is an intuitive library that makes it easy to optimize problems in just
3 steps: ﬁtness function creation, instantiating the pygad.GA class,
and calling run() method. There is a wide range of parameters and
attributes to have a high degree of customizing the genetic algorithm.
This includes deﬁning a space of values for each gene, customizing
each gene’s data type, training Keras and PyTorch models, rejecting
duplicates, and more. PyGAD has a lifecycle to keep track of the
evolution process from the beginning to the end. PyGAD supports
a simpler interface for users with less experience with Python to
solve problems with few lines of code and even faster than the other
libraries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank everyone who used or showed interest in
PyGAD. Some of those people who reported issues or suggested
useful features are Tamer Farrag (Assistant Professor, Misr Higher
Institute for Engineering and Technology, Egypt), Hamada Kassem
(RA/TA, Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University, Egypt),
Curt McDowell , Andrei Rozanski (PhD Bioinformatics Specialist,
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Germany), Marios
Giouvanakis (PhD candidate in Electrical & Computer Engineer,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece), L ´aszl´o Fazekas (CTO
Senior Software Developer at Pressenger Ltd, Hungary), and special
thanks to Rainer Engel (Imaging Artist and Pipeline Developer,
Germany) for his generous suggestions and time offered in inspecting
PyGAD.
REFERENCES
[1] Simon, Dan. Evolutionary optimization algorithms . John Wiley & Sons,
2013.
[2] Gad, Ahmed Fawzy. Practical computer vision applications using deep
learning with CNNs. Apress, 2018.
[3] Fortin, F ´elix-Antoine, et al. ”DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made easy.”
The Journal of Machine Learning Research 13.1 (2012): 2171-2175.
[4] Kim, Jinhan, and Shin Yoo. ”Software review: Deap (distributed evolu-
tionary algorithm in python) library.” Genetic Programming and Evolv-
able Machines 20.1 (2019): 139-142.
[5] Perone, Christian S. ”Pyevolve: a Python open-source framework for
genetic algorithms.” Acm Sigevolution 4.1 (2009): 12-20.
[6] Coletti, Mark A., Eric O. Scott, and Jeffrey K. Bassett. ”Library for
evolutionary algorithms in Python (LEAP).” Proceedings of the 2020
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion. 2020.
APPENDIX A
PYGAD S UPPLEMENTAL RESOURCES
This appendix lists some tutorials and articles to get started with
PyGAD.
5 Genetic Algorithm Applications Using PyGAD, June 2020,
Ahmed Gad
Building a Game-Playing Agent for CoinTex Using PyGAD,
July 2020, Ahmed Gad
Working with Different Genetic Algorithm Representations in
PyGAD, September 2020, Ahmed Gad
Train Neural Networks Using a Genetic Algorithm in Python
with PyGAD, September 2020, Fatima Ezzahra JarmouniHow To Train Keras Models Using the Genetic Algorithm with
PyGAD, December 2020, Ahmed Gad
Genetic Algorithm V Gradient Boosting, January 2021, Mark
Littlewood
Clustering Using the Genetic Algorithm with PyGAD, March
2021, Ahmed Gad
Train PyTorch Models Using Genetic Algorithm with PyGAD,
March 2021, Ahmed Gad
How Genetic Algorithms Can Compete with Gradient Descent
and Backprop, March 2021, L ´aszl´o Fazekas
Adaptive Mutation in Genetic Algorithm with PyGAD Exam-
ples, April 2021, Ahmed Gad
PyGAD v GBM, June 2021, Mark Littlewood
APPENDIX B
PROJECTS WITH PYGAD
This is a list of some projects built using PyGAD with their source
code:
github.com/ahmedfgad/CoinTex/tree/master/PlayerGA: Play a
game called CoinTex.
github.com/ahmedfgad/FlappyBirdPyGAD: Play the ﬂappy bird
game.
github.com/ahmedfgad/8QueensGenetic: Solve the 8-queen puz-
zle.
github.com/ahmedfgad/GARI: Reproduce gray and RGB im-
ages.

