==== Page 1 ====
sensors
Article
Quantization and Deployment of Deep Neural Networks
on Microcontrollers
Pierre-Emmanuel Novac1,*
, Ghouthi Boukli Hacene2,3
, Alain Pegatoquet1, Benoît Miramond1and
Vincent Gripon2
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Novac, P .-E.; Boukli
Hacene, G.; Pegatoquet, A.;
Miramond B.; Gripon V . Quantization
and Deployment of Deep Neural
Networks on Microcontrollers.
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984. https://doi.
org/10.3390/s21092984
Academic Editor: Alexander Wong
Received: 29 March 2021
Accepted: 20 April 2021
Published: 23 April 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).1CNRS, LEAT, Université Côte d’Azur, 06903 Sophia Antipolis, France;
alain.pegatoquet@univ-cotedazur.fr (A.P .); Benoit.Miramond@univ-cotedazur.fr (B.M.)
2IMT Atlantique, 29200 Brest, France; Ghouthi.BoukliHacene@imt-atlantique.fr (G.B.H.);
vincent.gripon@imt-atlantique.fr (V .G.)
3MILA, Montreal, QC H2S 3H1, Canada
*Correspondence: Pierre-Emmanuel.Novac@univ-cotedazur.fr
Abstract: Embedding Artiﬁcial Intelligence onto low-power devices is a challenging task that has
been partly overcome with recent advances in machine learning and hardware design. Presently,
deep neural networks can be deployed on embedded targets to perform different tasks such as
speech recognition, object detection or Human Activity Recognition. However, there is still room for
optimization of deep neural networks onto embedded devices. These optimizations mainly address
power consumption, memory and real-time constraints, but also an easier deployment at the edge.
Moreover, there is still a need for a better understanding of what can be achieved for different use
cases. This work focuses on quantization and deployment of deep neural networks onto low-power
32-bit microcontrollers. The quantization methods, relevant in the context of an embedded execution
onto a microcontroller, are ﬁrst outlined. Then, a new framework for end-to-end deep neural networks
training, quantization and deployment is presented. This framework, called MicroAI, is designed as
an alternative to existing inference engines (TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI).
Our framework can indeed be easily adjusted and/or extended for speciﬁc use cases. Execution using
single precision 32-bit ﬂoating-point as well as ﬁxed-point on 8- and 16 bits integers are supported.
The proposed quantization method is evaluated with three different datasets (UCI-HAR, Spoken
MNIST and GTSRB). Finally, a comparison study between MicroAI and both existing embedded
inference engines is provided in terms of memory and power efﬁciency. On-device evaluation is
done using ARM Cortex-M4F-based microcontrollers (Ambiq Apollo3 and STM32L452RE).
Keywords: embedded systems; artiﬁcial intelligence; machine learning; quantization; power con-
sumption; microcontrollers
1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) are presently a widespread tool to solve a wide range
of problems including classiﬁcation. DNN can indeed classify all sorts of data such as audio,
images or accelerometer samples for tasks such as speech recognition, object recognition or
Human Activity Recognition (HAR).
A well-known downside of DNN is its high energy consumption requirement. Indeed,
the training phase is usually based on a large amount of data processed by costly algorithms.
Although the inference phase requires less processing power, it is still a costly process.
GPUs and ASICs are then often used in the Cloud to perform computations of such tasks [ 1].
However, Cloud computing requires transmitting the collected data to a network
server to process it and fetch the result, thus requiring a permanent connectivity, causing
privacy concerns as well as non-deterministic latency. As an alternative, computations
can be done at the edge on the device itself. By doing so, data do not need to be sent
by the device to the cloud anymore. However, running DNN on resource-constrained
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21092984 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

==== Page 2 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 2 of 32
devices such as a microcontroller used in Internet of Things (IoT) devices or wearables is a
challenging task [2–4].
These devices have indeed only a very small amount of memory, often less than
1 MiB. They also run DNN algorithms several orders of magnitude slower than GPUs
or even CPUs (see Appendix A). The reason is that microcontrollers generally rely on a
general-purpose processing core that does not implement parallelism techniques such as
thread-level parallelism or advanced vectorization. Moreover, microcontrollers typically
run at a much lower frequency than GPU (8 MHz to 80 MHz compared to 1 GHz to
2 GHz). Microcontrollers can also be coupled with tiny battery cells. In some cases, for
example when data are collected in remote areas, they cannot even be recharged in the
ﬁeld. Therefore, performing inference at the edge faces major issues in terms of real-
time constraint, power consumption and memory footprint. To meet these embedded
constraints, the deployment of a DNN must respect an upper bound for one inference
response time as well as an upper bound for the number of parameters of the network.
As a result, a DNN must be limited in width and depth to be deployed on a micro-
controller. As it has been observed many times so far, deeper and/or wider networks are
often able to solve more complex tasks with better accuracy [ 5]. As such, there is always
a trade-off between memory footprint, response time, power consumption and accuracy
of the model. In a previous work [ 6], we already presented a trade-off between memory
footprint, power consumption and accuracy when performing HAR onto smart glasses.
This work has shown that HAR is feasible in real time on a low-power Cortex-M4F-based
microcontroller. However, we also concluded that there was room for memory footprint
and power consumption improvement.
A technique that can provide a signiﬁcant decrease of the memory footprint is based
on network quantization. Quantization consists of reducing the number of bits used to
encode each weight of the model, so that the total memory footprint is reduced by the same
factor. Quantization also enables the use of ﬁxed-point rather than ﬂoating-point encoding.
In other words, operations can be performed using integer rather than ﬂoating-point data
types. This is something interesting as integer operations require much less computations
on most processor cores, including microcontrollers. Without a Floating-Point Unit (FPU),
ﬂoating-point instructions must be emulated in software, thus creating a large overhead as
it has been illustrated in [ 7]. In this study, a comparison between software, hardware and
hybrid custom FPU implementation is provided.
In this paper, we present a framework, called MicroAI, to perform end-to-end training,
quantization and deployment of deep neural networks on microcontrollers. The training
phase relies on well-known TensorFlow and PyTorch deep learning frameworks. Our ob-
jective is to provide a framework easy to adapt and extend, while maintaining a good
compromise between accuracy, energy efﬁciency and memory footprint.
As a second contribution we provide some comparative results using two different
microcontrollers (STM32L452RE and Ambiq Apollo3) and three different inference engines
(TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers, STM32Cube.AI and our own MicroAI). Results are
compared in terms of memory footprint, inference time and power efﬁciency. Finally,
we propose to apply 8-bit and 16-bit quantization methods on three datasets dealing with
different modalities: acceleration and angular velocity from body-worn sensors for UCI-
HAR, speech for Spoken MNIST and images for GTSRB. These datasets are light enough to
be handled by a deep neural network running on a microcontroller, but still relevant for
applications relying on embedded artiﬁcial intelligence.
Section 2 presents the challenges of running deep neural networks on microcontrollers
and recent advances in this ﬁeld. Section 3 describes the two common ways of repre-
senting real numbers on modern computers: ﬂoating-point and ﬁxed-point. Section 4
presents the methodology implemented in our MicroAI framework for deep neural net-
works quantization. Section 5 details our MicroAI framework and compares it to existing
solutions. In Section 6, some comparative results between our framework MicroAI and
two popular embedded neural network frameworks (TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers

==== Page 3 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 3 of 32
and STM32Cube.AI) are given for two microcontroller platforms (Nucleo-L452RE-P and
SparkFun Edge) in terms of inference time and power efﬁciency. Impact of our 8- and 16-bit
quantization methods for three different datasets (UCI-HAR, Spoken MNIST and GTSRB)
is also presented. In Section 7 a discussion on obtained results is given. Finally, Section 8
concludes this work and discusses future perspectives.
2. State of the Art on Embedded Execution of Quantized Neural Networks
A ﬁrst family of optimization methods for embedded deep neural networks, based on
network quantization, proposes to reduce the precision (i.e., the number of bits used to
represent a value). Numerous works propose to use low-bit quantization (i.e., 2 or 3 bits to
quantize both weights and activations) such as PArameterized Clipping acTivation (PACT)
combined to Statistics-Aware Weight Binning (SAWB) [ 8], Learned Step Size Quantization
(LSQ) [ 9], Bit-Pruning [ 10] or Differentiable Quantization of Deep Neural Networks [ 11]
(DQDNN). In the extreme case, this amounts to binarizing the network parameters [ 12,13].
Nevertheless, it is usually possible to ﬁnd a good compromise between the precision and
the performance of a given architecture.
Another family of methods focuses on low-cost architectures. This is notably the case
of the well-known MobileNet [ 14] and Squeeze-Net [ 15] networks. Finding a good architec-
ture for a given problem is difﬁcult, and remains an open issue even if hardware constraints
are not taken into account. Indeed, the combinatorial explosion of hyperparameters makes
the exploration of an architecture very expensive. These networks are often tailored to
solve computer vision problems such as ImageNet [ 16] classiﬁcation, and are therefore
not well suited for general use cases or simpler problems. In practice, many applications
use a generic network such as ResNet [ 17]. This is also the solution retained in this work.
The reason is that we want to easily make use of the same deep neural network on different
kind of data (time series, audio spectrum and image) and simplify the implementation.
In a third family of possibilities, some authors explored the possibility of reducing
the number of parameters in neural networks by identifying parts of the network that
are not very useful for decision making. These parts can then be removed from the
architecture. These pruning techniques make it possible to considerably reduce the number
of parameters. Hence, in [ 18], the authors manage to remove up to 90% of the number
of parameters. However, the unstructured nature of the removed parameters makes it
difﬁcult to operate the network. Recently, several works have been proposed to prune in
a structured way where a whole kernel, a ﬁlter of even a layer is pruned according to a
speciﬁc criterion [19–22].
Finally, a last family of methods consists of identifying similar parts at various points
in the architectures to factorize them. For example, in [ 23] the authors demonstrate that it
is possible to reduce the number of parameters by replacing them with memory pointers.
Some works propose to improve accuracy by adding some learning steps and algorithms
to get a more representative factorization [24,25].
All these compression techniques make it possible to considerably reduce the size of
architectures, but usually at the cost of a reduction in performance. In practice, it is also
common to reduce by two or even two thirds the memory used to store the parameters
while maintaining a similar level of performance.
In this work we will focus on quantization-based compression. To reduce the number
of bits used to represent a value, quantization maps values from one set to another smaller
set. The smaller set can have a constant step between its elements, in which case the
quantization scheme is said to be uniform. In the case of convolutional neural networks,
the authors in [ 26] show that the weights of convolutional layers typically follow a Gaussian
distribution when weight decay is applied. More generally, it has been shown that weights
can closely ﬁt Gaussian Mixture Models [ 27]. Therefore, choosing a non-uniform quantiza-
tion scheme to better represent the values of the non-unform distribution of weights would
allow for a lower quantization error.

==== Page 4 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 4 of 32
A non-uniform quantization scheme was implemented in [ 28] on an FPGA device.
In this work, instead of coding the value in a ﬁxed-point format, only the nearest power of
two is coded. Using this approach, it is possible to obtain a better resolution compared to a
ﬁxed-point representation for numbers near 0. This approach also allows large values to be
represented, but at the cost of a lower resolution. The quantization step is determined by
minimizing the quantization error at the output of the layer, thus balancing the precision
and the dynamic range. As the implementation relies on bit shifts rather than on integer
multiplications, this solution has some beneﬁts in terms of resource usage and latency for
an FPGA target. Additionally, results show that there is a slight accuracy degradation
when using the proposed non-uniform quantization versus a uniform quantization.
Using lower precision computation for deep neural networks has already been ex-
plored in [ 29] where the authors compare the test error rates on various image datasets for
single precision ﬂoating-point, half-precision ﬂoating-point, 20-bit ﬁxed-point and their
own dynamic ﬁxed-point approach with 10 bits for activations and 12 bits for weights.
In their work, it is worth noting that the training is also performed using a lower precision
arithmetic. Training with ﬁxed-point arithmetic was already presented in [ 30] with 16-bit
weights and 8-bit inputs, causing an accuracy loss of a few percent in their evaluation of
text-to-speech, parity bit computation, protein structure prediction and sonar signals classi-
ﬁcation problems. In [ 31], the authors show that on an Intel ®E5640 microprocessor with
an x86 architecture, using 8-bit integer instructions instead of ﬂoating-point instructions
provides an execution speedup of more than 2, without a loss of accuracy on a speech recog-
nition problem. In this case, the training is performed using single precision ﬂoating-point
arithmetic, and the evaluation is done after the quantization of the network parameters.
These prior works were however mostly out of the scope of embedded computing on
microcontrollers. Running deep neural networks on microcontrollers started to be popular
in the last few years thanks to the rise of the Internet of Things and the improved efﬁciency
of deep neural networks.
In [32], the authors insist on the fact that the ISA (Instruction Set Architecture) of
available microcontrollers can be a great limitation to running quantized neural networks.
Indeed, most microcontroller architectures do not exhibit any kind of SIMD instructions.
On the other hand, most of these microcontrollers rely on 32-bit registers. Thus, even if
the neural network parameters and the input data use a lower precision representation,
they must be computed one by one using the register width of 32 bits. Some more advanced
microcontroller architectures offer instructions able to handle 4 ×8-bit or 2 × 16-bit data
packed in 32-bit registers. However, such advances do not allow working with intermediate
precision or sub-byte precision, and not all arithmetic and logic instructions are covered.
Intermediate or sub-byte precision requires manually packing and unpacking data, thus in-
ducing a noticeable computation overhead, even though it helps further reducing the
memory footprint.
Moreover, microcontrollers used in IoT mostly rely on ARM Cortex-M cores with
the associated ISA. However, ARM cores are not open, meaning that modifying and
extending the ISA is not possible. To overcome these limitations, the authors in [ 32]
proposed an extension to the RISC-V ISA, which is open, with instructions to handle
sub-byte quantization. Unfortunately, as microcontrollers implementing RISC-V are still
scarce on the market, and not readily available with the proposed extension, this approach
cannot be reasonably used to deploy IoT devices since it requires manufacturing a custom
microcontroller. Manufacturing a custom microcontroller is not feasible when the goal
is to release an IoT product on the market due to large costs, time and the required level
of expertise. As a result, only off-the-shelf microcontrollers are considered in this work.
Only 8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit precision will therefore be studied.
Deep neural networks have already been deployed on 8-bit microcontrollers. One of
the ﬁrst method was proposed in [ 33]. Although interesting, this method requires a lot
of work to implement pseudo-ﬂoating-point coding, a custom multiplication algorithm
over 16 bits, as well as a hyperbolic tangent approximation for the activation function,

==== Page 5 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 5 of 32
all in assembly language. Over the last few years, implementations have relied on 32-bit
microcontrollers with either a hardware FPU or ﬁxed-point computations. Additionally,
the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) [ 34] became widely used as an activation function and
has the beneﬁt of being easily computed as a max between 0 and the layer’s output,
thus being much less complex than a hyperbolic tangent. In the meantime, neural network
architectures and training methods continued to evolve to provide more and more efﬁcient
models. As a result, applications such as spoken keyword spotting [ 35] and Human
Activity Recognition [ 6] can now be performed in real time on IoT devices relying on
low-power microcontrollers.
3. Real Numbers Representation
3.1. Floating-Point
In modern computation systems, real numbers typically use a ﬂoating-point represen-
tation. A ﬂoating-point representation relies on the encoding of three different information:
the sign, the signiﬁcand and the exponent. Coding the signiﬁcand and the exponent sepa-
rately allows representing values with a very large dynamic range, while at the same time
providing increasing precision as the numbers approach 0.
Most ﬂoating-point implementations follow the IEEE754 [ 36] standard which deﬁnes
how the sign, signiﬁcand and exponent are coded in a binary format. Floating-point
numbers can be coded in half, single or double precision requiring 16-, 32- or 64-bit,
respectively. Obviously, the more bits allocated to code a value, the more precise it is.
A higher number of bits allocated to the exponent also allows for a larger dynamic range.
In deep neural networks, single precision is more than enough for training and inference.
Double precision requires more computing resources, so it is generally not used. Recently,
it has been shown that half-precision can further accelerate the training and inference
without a signiﬁcant drop in the accuracy of the deep neural networks [37].
However, the choice is much more restricted for low-power microcontrollers. When present,
the hardware ﬂoating-point unit often only supports single precision computation. The dou-
ble precision must be computed in software and is therefore signiﬁcantly slower than single
precision. The half-precision is converted to single precision before the computation.
In 2019, ARM released the ARMv8.1-M ISA which includes instructions for half-precision
support. Even though the Cortex-M55 core is planned to implement these instructions,
there is so far no microcontroller with this core available on the market. As a result,
when ﬂoating-point is used on a microcontroller, only single precision is considered.
The binary representation of single precision ﬂoating-point numbers is called binary32
and is represented with 1 bit for the sign, 8 bits for the exponent and 23 bits for the
signiﬁcand (see Table 1). It allows a dynamic range of roughly [ 1038, 1038], far beyond the
values typically seen in a deep neural network, while increasing the resolution for numbers
close to 0. The number closest to 0 are about 1.410 45.
Table 1. Single precision ﬂoating-point binary32 representation.
31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
sign exponent signiﬁcand
3.2. Fixed-Point
Fixed-point is another way to represent real numbers. In this representation, the inte-
ger part and the fractional part have a ﬁxed length. As a result, the dynamic range and
the resolution are directly limited by the length of the integer part and the length of the
fractional part, respectively. The resolution is constant across the whole dynamic range.
In binary, the Qnotation is often used to specify the number of bits associated with each
part. Qm.nis a number where mbits are allocated to the integer part and nbits to the
fractional part [ 38]. It is important to note that we consider signed numbers in two’s com-
plement representation, the sign bit being included in the integer part. The number of bits

==== Page 6 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 6 of 32
for the integer part can be increased to obtain a larger dynamic range, but it will conversely
reduce the number of bits allocated to the fractional part, thus reducing its precision.
Given a Qm.nsigned number, its dynamic range is [ 2m 1, 2m 1 2 n]and its reso-
lution is 2 n.
As an example, in Table 2, a signed Q16.16 number stored into a 32-bit register has
16 bits for the integer part including 1 bit for the sign and 16 bits for the fractional part.
This translates to a dynamic range of [ 32, 768, 32, 767.9999847 ], much smaller than the
equivalent ﬂoating-point representation, and a constant resolution of 1.525910 5across
the whole range, less precise than the ﬂoating-point representation near 0.
Table 2. Fixed-point Q16.16 on 32-bit representation.
31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
integer part fractional part
4. Training and Quantization of Deep Neural Networks
In this work, the training is always performed using single precision ﬂoating-point
computation, i.e., in the binary32 format. As training is done ofﬂine on a workstation,
there is no need to perform it in ﬁxed-point. Despite it being feasible, it would come with
additional challenges regarding gradient computation.
4.1. Floating-Point to Fixed-Point Quantization of a Deep Neural Network
Since the training relies on ﬂoating-point computation, a conversion from a ﬂoating-
point to a ﬁxed-point representation must be performed before the deep neural network
is deployed on the target. As the set of possible values is different between ﬂoating-
point and ﬁxed-point representations, this involves quantizing the weights of the deep
neural network.
Floating-point to ﬁxed-point conversion requires determining a scale factor, so that
the ﬂoating-point number can be represented as an integer multiplied by a scale factor.
The scale factor is a positive or negative power of two so that it can be computed using
only left or right shifts. In the case of the Cortex-M4 architecture, both multiplication and
shift instructions take one cycle. However, a division requires 2 to 12 cycles. Therefore,
divisions should be avoided as much as possible.
The scale factor must be chosen to represent the whole range of values while avoiding
any risk of data overﬂow, but at the cost of a lower precision for smaller numbers.
4.1.1. Uniform and Non-Uniform
Similarly to the works presented in Section 2, in our experiments, we also observed
that convolutional layer weights are close to Gaussian distributions, with a mean close
to 0 when inputs are normalized. Such a distribution of weights for a convolutional
layer kernel is shown in Figure 1. As a result, convolutional layer weights can be better
represented using a non-uniform distribution of numbers. This is what ﬂoating-point
numbers originally do to get a better precision around 0.
However, as the goal is to perform fast computations, a uniform quantization is pre-
ferred. Non-uniform quantization would indeed require performing additional transforma-
tions before using the microcontroller’s instructions. This overhead can be non-negligible
and lead to quantization performance lower than ﬂoating-point computations. To obtain a
non-constant quantization step, a nonlinear function must be computed, either online or
ofﬂine, to generate a lookup table where operands for each operation are stored. On the
other hand, uniform quantization is based on a constant quantization step. Additionally,
coding only the nearest power of two does not bring an improvement on Cortex-M4-based
microcontrollers. Multiplications and shifts are implemented in hardware and take only
1 cycle. In consequence, the beneﬁts of this kind of approach are limited. For these reasons,
we will rely on uniform quantization in this work.

==== Page 7 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 7 of 32
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00012345Density
conv1d/kernel:0
Mean=−0.0013869114918634295
Std=0.1366153210401535
Max=0.487394779920578
Min=−0.6174291372299194
Figure 1. Example of the distribution of weights for a convolutional layer kernel.
4.1.2. Scaling and Offset
An alternative consists of ﬁnding a scale factor that is not necessarily a power of two,
but scale values in [ 1;+1]. Using this technique, all the bits (except the sign bit) are used
to represent the fractional parts of numbers. As an example, there is the Q1.15 format for
16-bit numbers.
The scale factor also uses a ﬁxed-point representation but with its own power of two
scale factor. This allows for a slightly lower quantization error since the quantization step
is not necessarily a power of two. However, scaling a number adds computations: instead
of performing only a shift, a multiplication with the scale factor followed by a shift with
the scale factor’s power of two scale factor must be performed.
Additionally, the range could be asymmetric by introducing an offset value. It would
also allow for a slightly lower quantization error when the distribution is not centered
around 0. However, this requires one more addition when scaling a number. It is worth
noting that using unsigned numbers for ReLU activation could help recovering one more bit
for the fractional part if fully merged with the previous layer. Nevertheless, it also comes
with an additional implementation complexity to perform operations between signed
and unsigned numbers. All these alternatives imply a higher complexity and additional
computations, with only a slight improvement of the quantization error. For these reasons,
we decided to use a scale factor that is a power of two and a symmetric range.
4.1.3. Per-Network, Per-Layer and Per-Filter Scale Factor
To reach the best quantization, the scale factor should be in theory chosen for each
weight value. However, storing a scale factor for each value is obviously not a reasonable
approach since it leads to an important memory overhead, defeating the beneﬁt of quan-
tization to reduce memory usage. On the other hand, using a scale factor for the whole
network is too coarse to achieve a good overall quantization error. Instead, the scale factor
can be made different for each layer. Another solution consists of using a scale factor for
each ﬁlter of each layer. Although more complex to implement and introducing some
overhead (scale factors of the layer must be stored in memory), this approach can slightly
decrease the quantization error. So far, our implementation only allows a per-network and
a per-layer scale factor. The parameters and the activations can have a different scale factor.
4.1.4. Conversion Method
To convert from ﬂoating-point to ﬁxed-point, the method starts with ﬁnding the
required number of bits mto represent the unsigned integer part:
m=1+
log2(max
1iNjxij)
(1)
where xiis an element of the ﬂoating-point vector xof length N.
A positive value of mmeans that mbits are required to represent the absolute value of
the integer part, while a negative value of mmeans that the fractional part has mleading
unused bits. This allows obtaining a greater precision for vectors with numbers smaller

==== Page 8 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 8 of 32
than 2 1, since the leading unused bits can be removed and replaced instead by more
trailing bits for precision.
From this we can compute the number of remaining bits nfor the fractional part:
n=w m 1 (2)
where wis the data type width (e.g., 16 bits).
In this equation, 1 is subtracted to take the additional bit required to represent signed
numbers into account.
A positive value of nmeans that nbits are available to represent the fractional part.
A negative value of nmeans that the fractional part cannot be represented, and the
integer part cannot be represented to its full precision.
An element x f ixed iof the ﬁxed-point vector x f ixed is computed from the element xi
of the ﬂoating-point vector xas:
x f ixed i=trunc (xi2n) (3)
where trunc (y)truncates a real number yto its integer part.
And the scale factor sis deﬁned as:
s=2 n(4)
Two methods can be used to get the weights of a deep neural network in a quantized
format. These methods are detailed in the following.
4.2. Post-Training Quantization
In post-training quantization, the neural network is entirely trained using ﬂoating-
point computation (a binary32 format is assumed here). Once the training is over, the neural
network is frozen, and the parameters are then quantized. The quantized neural network
is then used to perform the inference, without any adjustments of the parameters.
The quantization phase introduces a quantization error on each parameter as well as
on the input, thus leading to a quantization error on the activations. The accumulation of
quantization errors at the output of the neural network can cause the classiﬁer to incorrectly
predict the class of the input data, creating an accuracy drop compared to the non-quantized
version. As the bit width of the values decreases, the quantization error increases, and the
resulting accuracy typically decreases as well. In some situations, a slight increase in the
quantization error can help the network generalize better over new data, inducing a slight
increase in the accuracy over test data.
4.3. Quantization-Aware Training
The objective of the Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) is to compensate the quanti-
zation error by training the deep neural network using the quantized version during the
forward pass. This should help mitigating the accuracy drop to some extent. The back-
propagation still relies on non-quantized values. To stabilize the learning phase with a
quantized version, and then obtain better results on average, the DNN can be pre-trained
using a ﬂoating-point representation in order to initialize the parameters to a sensible value.
In this work we decided to perform all the computations using a ﬂoating-point
representation. As shown in Figure 2, the inputs, weights and biases of each layer are
quantized (but kept in ﬂoating-point representation) before actually performing the layer’s
computation. The layer’s output is quantized after the computation, before reaching
the next layer. The quantization operation is done following the method presented in
Section 4.1 . During the training phase, the range of the values is reassessed each time to
adjust the scale factor before performing the layer’s computation. When doing inference
only, the scale factor is frozen.

==== Page 9 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 9 of 32
QuantizeInputs
(Previous layer outputs)Weights Bias
Layer operation (Convolution, FC…)
Outputs
(Next layer inputs)Quantize
Update scale factorUpdate scale factor Update scale factorLayer parameters
Quantized forward pass Non-quantized backward passif training:
if training:
Skipped during inferenceQuantize
Figure 2. Quantization-Aware Training.
In case of a convolutional neural network, the convolutional and fully connected
layers require a quantization-aware training for the weights. Please note that batch normal-
ization layers also require quantization-aware training. However, as we do not use batch
normalization in our experiments, it has not been implemented. Concerning max-pooling
layers, nothing must be trained with quantization as they do not have weights. Moreover,
as max-pooling only consists of an element-wise max, there is no need to quantize: inputs
are already quantized from the previous layer and the dynamic range cannot be expanded.
Actually, max-pooling can only shrink data without the possibility to recover an already
lost precision. Therefore, no quantization is done on the max-pooling layers. It is similar
for the ReLU activation which is considered to be a separate layer. On the other hand,
the element-wise addition layer requires quantization. It does not have trainable weights;
however, the dynamic range of the output can increase after adding two large numbers.
Therefore, the same quantization process is applied to compute the output scale factor.
5. Deployment of Quantized Neural Network
After the network has been trained and optionally quantized, it is deployed onto a
microcontroller to perform the inference on the target platform. Deployment involves the
following phases:
• exporting the weights of the deep neural network and encoding them into a format
suitable for on-target inference,
• generating the inference program according to the topology of the deep neural network,
• compiling the inference program,
• and then uploading the inference program with the weights onto the microcon-
troller’s ROM.
5.1. Existing Embedded AI Frameworks
Several embedded AI frameworks are already available. Among them, the most popu-
lar ones are TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers [ 39] and STM32Cube.AI [ 40]. Other frame-
works stemming from research projects also exist and are discussed in the following.
5.1.1. TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers (or TFLite Micro) is a project derived from
TensorFlow Lite. Originally focused on deep neural network deployment on smartphones,

==== Page 10 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 10 of 32
it has been made available for microcontrollers. TFLite Micro supports a wide range
of operations [ 41], enabling the deployment of a variety of deep neural networks such
as multi-layer perceptrons and convolutional neural networks including residual neural
networks. Deep neural networks are developed and trained using TensorFlow/Keras,
and can then be deployed semi-automatically onto a microcontroller.
TFLite Micro is intended to be generic enough to be deployed on any kind of 32-bit
microcontroller. The inference library is therefore portable, but it also means there is
no integration with speciﬁc microcontroller families and vendor tools. The trained deep
neural network (topology and weights) can indeed be automatically converted to a format
understandable by the inference library, but there are no tools to generate and deploy
the application code. Moreover, application test must be written by hand. Nevertheless,
a template source code for a few development boards (e.g., the SparkFun Edge) as well
as a few demo applications (e.g., keyword spotting) are available. Finally, TFLite Micro
does not come with tools to measure metrics such as the inference time or the RAM and
ROM usage.
TFLite Micro supports computation on both ﬂoating-point in binary32 format and
ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers. The quantization technique uses a non-power of two scale
factor, a symmetric range for weights and an asymmetric range for the activations. Biases
are quantized on 32-bit integers. Convolution operations can make use of per-ﬁlter scale
factor and offset, while other operations use per-tensor (i.e., per-layer) scale factor and
offset [42,43]. There is no support for ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers.
Inference on 8-bit integers can be accelerated using low-level optimizations pro-
vided by the CMSIS-NN [ 3] library from ARM. This library uses SIMD-like instructions
(from the ARMv7E-M instruction set architecture of Cortex-M4 cores) to perform two multi-
ply–accumulate (MACC) on 16-bit operands with a single 32-bit accumulator in one cycle.
While being entirely free/open-source, the complexity of the software architecture
makes it quite difﬁcult to manipulate and extend. This is a substantial drawback in a
research environment, and it also comes with additional overhead. The deep neural
network topology is deployed as a sort of microcode that is interpreted at runtime instead
of being statically compiled. This process makes it more difﬁcult for the compiler to
perform optimizations and causes a larger memory usage.
5.1.2. STM32Cube.AI
STM32Cube.AI is a software suite from STMicroelectronics enabling the deployment
of deep neural networks onto their STM32 family of microcontrollers. STM32Cube.AI
supports deployment of trained deep neural network models from several frameworks
including Keras and TensorFlow Lite. A wide range of operations are supported [ 44],
allowing the deployment of several deep neural network architectures such as multi-layer
perceptron and convolutional neural networks including residual neural networks.
STM32Cube.AI is a software suite fully integrated with other STMicroelectronics devel-
opment and deployment tools such as STM32CubeMX, STM32CubeIDE and
STM32CubeProgrammer. This provides a very straightforward and easy to use ﬂow.
Moreover, a test application is included to evaluate the model on target with a real test
dataset, providing metrics on inference time, ROM and RAM usage, without having to
write a single line of code.
Like TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI supports computations on ﬂoating-point in binary32
format and ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers. In fact, the quantization on 8-bit integers comes
from TFLite. There is no support for ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers.
STM32Cube.AI also has an optimized inference engine that seems to be partially based
on CMSIS-NN. However, as the source code of the inference engine is not freely available,
it is not clear what is optimized and how.
The inference library is entirely proprietary/closed-source, therefore it is not possible
to manipulate and extend this library. This represents a major drawback in a research
environment. It is also not possible to use STM32Cube.AI on microcontrollers which are not

==== Page 11 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 11 of 32
part of the STMicroelectronics portfolio. The inference process and optimizations are not
detailed, but unlike TFLite Micro, the network topology is compiled into a set of function
calls to the closed-source library rather than being interpreted at runtime.
5.1.3. Other Frameworks
Some other frameworks have been developed as part of research projects. These frame-
works mainly focus on “classical” machine learning (SVM, Decision Tree . . . ) such as
emlearn [ 45] and Micro-LM [ 46], or multi-layer perceptron such as Gravity [ 47] and FANN-
on-MCU [ 48]. These frameworks do not support convolutional neural networks with
residual connections. At the time of this work, microTVM seems less mature and popular
than TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI. It is, therefore, not studied
in this work.
5.2. MicroAI: Our Framework Proposition
As mentioned above, existing tools for quantized neural networks have some draw-
backs that motivated the development of our own framework. This framework addresses
the following issues:
• open-source frameworks do not support convolutional neural networks with non-
sequential topologies,
• frameworks that support convolutional neural networks are proprietary or too com-
plex to be modiﬁed and extended easily,
• frameworks do not provide 16-bit quantization,
• some frameworks are dedicated to a limited family of hardware targets.
In this work, we aim at providing a framework, easy to extend and modify, that
allows for a complete pipeline from the neural network training to the deployment and
evaluation on the microcontroller. Additionally, this framework must provide a lightweight
runtime on the microcontroller to reduce the overhead. Finally, our objective is to achieve
performance close to existing solutions.
Our framework, called MicroAI, is built in two parts:
1. The neural network training code that relies on Keras or PyTorch.
2. The conversion tool (called KerasCNN2C) that takes a trained Keras model and
produces a portable C code for the inference
Both parts are written in Python since it is the most popular programming language
to build deep neural networks and it easily interfaces with existing frameworks, libraries
and tools.
5.3. MicroAI: General Flow
As seen in Figure 3, MicroAI provides an interface to automatically train, deploy and
evaluate an artiﬁcial neural network model. A conﬁguration ﬁle written in TOML [ 49] is
used to describe the whole ﬂow of an experiment:
• The number of iterations for the experiment (for statistical purposes)
• The dataset to use for training and evaluation
• The preprocessing steps to apply to the dataset
• The framework used for training
• The various model conﬁgurations to train, deploy and evaluate
• The conﬁguration of the optimizer
• The post-processing steps to apply to the trained model
• The target conﬁguration for deployment and evaluation
The three main steps, training, deployment and evaluation, are described in the
following. The commands used to trigger them are available in Appendix C.

==== Page 12 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 12 of 32
Data acquisition and windowing
float32 Training
int16 Post-training quantization
int8 Quantization-aware training with PyTorch
PyTorch to Keras model conversion
C inference code generation from Keras model
Deployment on microcontroller
Evaluation on microcontroller
Figure 3. MicroAI general ﬂow for neural network quantization and evaluation on embedded target.
5.4. MicroAI: Training
For the training phase, MicroAI is simply a wrapper around Keras or PyTorch.
A dataset requires an importation module to be loaded into an appropriate data model.
The training process expects a RawDataModel instance, which gathers the train and test
sets. This instance contains numpy arrays for the data and the labels. A higher-level data
model HARDataModel is also available for Human Activity Recognition to process subjects
and activities more easily. This model is then converted to a RawDataModel using the
DatamodelConverter in the preprocessing phase. The preprocessing phase also includes
features such as normalization. Dataset importation module for UCI-HAR, SMNIST and
GTSRB (described in Section 6) are included and can be easily extended to new datasets.
To make use of a deep neural network architecture in the model conﬁguration, it must
be ﬁrst described according to the training framework API in use. The description of
the model is a template where parameters can be set by the user in the conﬁguration ﬁle.
MicroAI provides the following neural network architectures for both Keras and PyTorch:
• MLP: a simple multi-layer perceptron with conﬁgurable number of layers and neurons
per layer.
• CNN: a 1D or 2D convolutional neural network with conﬁgurable number of layers,
ﬁlters per layer, kernels and pools size, and number of neurons per fully connected
layer for the classiﬁer
• ResNet: a 1D or 2D residual neural network (v1) with convolutional layers. The num-
ber of blocks and ﬁlters per layer, stride, kernel size, and optional BatchNorm can be
conﬁgured.
All architectures use ReLU activation units.
In the conﬁguration ﬁle, several model settings can be described, each inside their
own [[model]] block. Each model will be trained sequentially. A common conﬁguration
for all the models can be speciﬁed in a [model_template] block. Model conﬁguration
also includes optimizer conﬁguration and other parameters such as the batch size and the
number of epochs.

==== Page 13 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 13 of 32
Once the model is trained, some post-processing can be applied. It is for instance
possible to remove the SoftMax layer for Keras models with the RemoveKerasSoftmax
module. This layer is indeed useless when only inference is performed.
Even though it also performs model training, Quantization-aware training described in
Section 4.3 is also included for PyTorch as a post-processing step in the
QuantizationAwareTraining module. The actual training step before post-processing
is seen as a general training, before optionally performing post-training quantization
or quantization-aware training. The quantization-aware training can be seen as a ﬁne-
tuning on top of the more general training (which can also be skipped if necessary).
The quantization-aware training does not actually convert the weights from a ﬂoating-
point data type to an integer data type with ﬁxed-point representation. This conversion is
rather performed by the KerasCNN2C conversion tool or another deployment tool.
Support for additional learning frameworks can be added by creating a new class imple-
menting the LearningFramework interface and by supplying compatible model templates.
5.5. MicroAI: Deployment
MicroAI can deploy a trained model to perform inference on a target using either
STM32Cube.AI, TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers or our own tool, KerasCNN2C.
STM32Cube.AI can be used for STM32 platforms, support for the Nucleo-L452RE-P
with an STM32L452RE microcontroller is included. Support for other platforms using
a STM32 microcontroller can be added by providing a sample STM32CubeIDE project
including the X-CUBE-AI package. STM32Cube.AI does not support microcontrollers
outside the STM32 family.
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers is a portable library that can be included in any
project. Therefore, it could be used for any 32-bit microcontroller. However only integration
with the SparkFun Edge platform with an Ambiq Apollo3 microcontroller is included in
our framework so far.
Similarly, KerasCNN2C produces a portable library that can be included in any project.
So far, only integration with the Nucleo-L452RE-P and the SparkFun Edge boards has
been performed. Support for other platforms can be added by providing project ﬁles
calling the inference code and a module interfacing with the build and deployment tools
for that platform.
Please note that none of these tools can take a PyTorch trained model as an input to
deploy onto a microcontroller. The PyTorch trained model must therefore be converted to a
Keras model prior to the deployment. Our framework provides a module to perform semi-
automatic conversion from a PyTorch model to a Keras model. A Keras model that matches
the structure of the PyTorch model must be programmed and the matching between the
PyTorch model and Keras model layer names also must be speciﬁed. The semi-automatic
conversion module can then automatically copy the weights from the PyTorch model to
the Keras model and export it for use by one of the deployment tool.
5.6. KerasCNN2C: Conversion Tool from Trained Keras Model to Portable C Code
KerasCNN2C is a tool that we developed to automatically generate, from a trained
Keras model exported as an HDF5 ﬁle, a C library for the inference. It can also be used
independently of the MicroAI framework.
In this work, only 1D models are evaluated on target. Work is underway for full
support of 2D models deployment. Training and quantization are already supported,
therefore 2D models are evaluated ofﬂine. Here are the supported layers so far:
• Add
• AveragePooling1D
• BatchNormalization
• Conv1D
• Dense
• Flatten

==== Page 14 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 14 of 32
• MaxPooling1D
• ReLU
• SoftMax
• ZeroPadding1D
Layers can have multiple inputs such as the Add layer, thus allowing residual neural
networks (ResNet) to be built. The sequential convolutional neural network or multi-layer
perceptron models are also supported.
The generated library exposes a function in the model.h header to run the inference
process with the following signature:
1void cnn (
const number_t input [MODEL_INPUT_CHANNELS] [MODEL_INPUT_SAMPLES] ,
3output_layer_type output ) ;
where number_t is the data type used during inference deﬁned in the number.h header,
MODEL_INPUT_CHANNELS and MODEL_INPUT_SAMPLES are the dimensions of the input de-
ﬁned in the generated model.h header. The input and output arrays must be allocated by
the caller.
The model inference function does not proceed to the conversion of the input from
ﬁxed-point to ﬂoating-point representation when using a ﬁxed-point inference code.
The caller must perform the conversion before feeding the buffer to the model inference
function (see Section 5.8).
To this aim, a ﬂoating-point number x_float can be converted to a ﬁxed-point number
x_fixed with the following call:
1x_fixed = clamp_to_number_t ( ( long_number_t ) ( x _ f l o a t *(1 < <INPUT_SCALE_FACTOR) ) ) ;
where long_number_t is a type twice the size of number_t and clamp_to_number_t satu-
rates and converts to number_t . Both are deﬁned in the number.h header.
INPUT_SCALE_FACTOR is the scale factor for the ﬁrst layer, deﬁned in the model.h header.
The output array corresponds to the output of the model’s last layer, which is typically
a fully connected layer when solving a classiﬁcation problem. If the purpose is to predict a
single class, the caller must ﬁnd the index of the max element in the output array.
5.7. KerasCNN2C: Conversion Process
This tool ﬁrst parses the model using the Keras API from TensorFlow 2.4 and generates
an internal representation of the topology (i.e., a graph), with each node corresponding to
a layer.
Then, a series of transformations is performed to produce a graph better suited for
deployment on a microcontroller:
• Combine ZeroPadding1D layers (if they exist) with the next Conv1D layer
• Combine ReLU activation layers with the previous Conv1D, MaxPooling1D, Dense or
Add layer
• Convert BatchNorm [ 50] weights from the mean m, the variance V, the scale g, the off-
setbandeto a multiplicand wand an addend busing the following formula:
w=g
s(5)
s=p
V+e (6)
b=b gm
s(7)
so that the output of the BatchNorm layer can be computed as y=wx+b. It could
be folded in the previous convolutional layer, but this is not implemented yet.
Then, for each node in the graph, the weights of the layer go through the quantization
and conversion module if the conversion to ﬁxed-point representation is enabled. The C

==== Page 15 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 15 of 32
inference function is generated from a Jinja2 [ 51] template ﬁle using the layer’s conﬁgura-
tion. Similarly, the layer’s weights are converted into a C array from a Jinja2 template ﬁle.
Code generation is used to avoid runtime overhead of an interpreter such as the one used
in TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers. Additionally, it allows the compiler to perform
better optimizations. Indeed, the layer’s conﬁguration is generated as constants or literals
in the code, allowing the compiler to perform appropriate optimizations such as loop
unrolling, using immediates when relevant and doing better register allocation. By default,
GCC’s -Ofast optimization level is enabled. Moreover, the code is written in a simple and
straightforward way. So far, no special effort has been made to further optimize the source
code for faster execution.
The allocator module aims at saving the RAM usage. To do so, it allocates the layer’s
output buffers in the smallest number of pools without conﬂicts. For each layer of the
model, its output buffer is allocated to the ﬁrst pool that satisﬁes two conditions: it must
neither overwrite its input, nor the output of a layer that has not already been consumed.
If there is no such available pool, a new one is created. It is worth noting that the allocator
module does not yet try to optimize the allocation to minimize the size of each pool (this is
a harder problem to solve). In consequence, the total RAM usage is not optimized.
Finally, the main function cnn(...) is generated. This function only contains the
allocation of the buffers done by the allocator module and a sequence of calls to each of the
layers’ inference function. The correct input and output buffers are passed to each layer
according to the graph of the model.
5.8. KerasCNN2C: Quantization and Fixed-Point Computation
The post-training quantization is performed by the quantization module itself. The scale
factor for each layer is found according to the method in Section 4.1.4, but it can also
be speciﬁed manually for the whole network. The ﬁxed-point coding used for all the
weights is computed according to this method as well, and the data type is converted
from float to an integer data type, such as int8_t for 8-bit quantization or int16_t for
16 bits quantization.
When doing quantization-aware training, the scale factors are found during the
training phase (also according to the method in Section 4.1.4 as previously explained).
Therefore, the quantization module reuses them. However, the weights are still in ﬂoating-
point representation since the training phase only relies on ﬂoating-point computation.
In consequence, the quantization module must perform a data type conversion similar to
the one performed for post-training quantization.
Once the model is deployed and running on the target, the ﬁxed-point computation
can be done using a regular integer arithmetic and logic unit. The data type for the
input and output of a layer is the same as the one used to store the weights. To avoid
overﬂows, computation is done using a data type twice the width of the operands’ data type.
For example, if the data type of the weights and inputs is int16_t , then the intermediate
results in a layer are computed and stored with an int32_t data type. The result is then
scaled back to the correct output scale factor before saturating and converting it back to the
original operands’ data type.
Before performing an addition or a subtraction, operands must be represented with
the same number of integer and fractional bits. It is not required for the multiplication,
but the result’s number of bits allocated for the fractional part is the sum of the number of
bits for the fractional part of both operands. Therefore, after a multiplication, the result
must be scaled to the required format by shifting the result to the right by the appropriate
number of bits.
In Appendix E, the number of operations required for the main layers of a residual
neural network in our implementation are provided, along with the number of cycles
taken for these operations. Enabling compiler optimizations generates some ARMv7E-M
instructions, namely SMLABB that performs a multiply–accumulate operation in one cycle
(instead of two cycles). However, the compiler does not make use of the SSAT operation

==== Page 16 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 16 of 32
that could allow saturating in one cycle. Instead, it uses the same instructions as a regular
max operation, i.e., a compare instruction and a conditional move instruction requiring a
total of two cycles.
6. Results
All the results presented in this section rely on the same model architecture, a ResNetv1-
6 network with the layers shown in Figure 4. The number of ﬁlters per layer fis the same
for all layers, but is modiﬁed to adjust the number of parameters of the model. The convo-
lutional and pooling layers are one-dimensional except when handling the GTSRB dataset
for which they are two-dimensional.
Input
dims=(x,y,c)
Convolution
size=(3, 3)
stride=(1, 1)
padding=(1, 1)
filters=f
ReLU
Convolution
size=(3, 3)
stride=(1, 1)
padding=(1, 1)
filters=f
MaxPooling
size=(2, 2)
stride=(2, 2)
ReLU
Convolution
size=(3, 3)
stride=(1, 1)
padding=(1, 1)
filters=f
Convolution
size=(1, 1)
stride=(1, 1)
padding=(0, 0)
filters=f
MaxPooling
size=(2, 2)
stride=(2, 2)
+
ReLU
Convolution
size=(3, 3)
stride=(1, 1)
padding=(1, 1)
filters=f
ReLU
Convolution
size=(3, 3)
stride=(1, 1)
padding=(1, 1)
filters=f
+
ReLU
MaxPooling
size=(x/2, y/2)
stride=(x/2, y/2)
Flatten
FullyConnected
out=n_classes
Figure 4. ResNet model architecture.

==== Page 17 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 17 of 32
For each experiment, the residual neural network is initially trained using 32-bit
ﬂoating-point numbers (i.e., without quantization), and then evaluated over the testing set.
This baseline version is depicted as ﬂoat32 in the ﬁgures shown in the following.
The ﬂoat32 neural network is quantized for ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers inference
and is then evaluated without additional training. This version is depicted as int16 in the
ﬁgures shown hereafter. Quantization is performed using the Q7.9 format for the whole
network, meaning the number of bits nfor the fractional part is ﬁxed to 9.
The ﬂoat32 neural network is also trained and evaluated for ﬁxed-point on 8-bit
integers inference using quantization-aware training. This version is indicated as int8
in the ﬁgures. In this case, the ﬁxed-point precision can vary from layer to layer and is
determined using the method introduced in Section 4.1.4.
The SGD optimizer is used for all experiments. The stability of the SGD optimizer has
motivated this choice, especially for the quantization-aware training. Training parameters
are described below for each dataset. Additionally, training and testing sets are normalized
using the z-score of the training set. It is worth noting that Mixup [ 52] is also used
during training.
Accuracy is not evaluated directly on the target due to the amount of time it would
require. Only inference time for the UCI-HAR dataset is measured on the target.
The ﬁgures show an average over 15 runs for each point.
6.1. Evaluation of the MicroAI Quantization Method
6.1.1. Human Activity Recognition dataset (UCI-HAR)
The University of California Irvine’s hosted Human Activity Recognition dataset
(UCI-HAR) [ 53] is a dataset of activities of daily living recorded using the accelerometer
and gyroscope sensors of a smartphone. In this experiment, we use the raw data coming
from the sensors and divided in ﬁxed time windows rather than the pre-computed features.
The reason is that we want to perform real-time embedded recognition. To do so, it is
required to avoid the overhead of computing the features for each inference before entering
the deep neural network. Instead, the features are extracted by the convolutional neural
network itself.
The dataset is divided into a training set of 7352 vectors and a testing set of 2947 vectors .
Each vector is a one-dimensional time series of 2.56 s composed of 128 samples sampled at
50 Hz, with 50% overlap between vectors. Each sample has 9 channels: 3 axes of total accel-
eration, 3 axes of angular velocity and 3 axes of body acceleration. Six different classes are
available in the dataset: walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing
and lying.
The initial training without quantization is performed using a batch size of 64over
300epochs. Initial learning rate is set to 0.05, momentum is set to 0.9and weight decay
is set to 510 4. The learning rate is multiplied by 0.13 at epochs 100,200and 250.
The quantization-aware training for ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers uses the same parameters.
As can be seen in Figure 5, for the UCI-HAR dataset, the same accuracy is obtained
using a 16-bit quantization ( UCI-HAR int16 ) or 32-bit ﬂoating-point (i.e., the baseline
UCI-HAR ﬂoat32 ), whatever the number of ﬁlters per convolution.
On the other hand, we can observe that the 8-bit quantization causes an accuracy drop
that increases up to 0.81% when the number of ﬁlters per convolution grows, even though
quantization-aware training is used to mitigate this issue.
In Figure 6, we can observe that the accuracy obtained using 8-bit and 16-bit quantiza-
tion is similar only for deep neural networks exhibiting a reduced number of parameters,
in other words a low memory footprint.As an example, for 16 ﬁlters per convolution,
an 8-bit quantization leads to an accuracy of 92.41% while requiring 3958 memory bytes
to store the parameters. When a 16-bit quantization is used, an accuracy of 92.46% can be
achieved, but at the cost of an increase of the required memory for storing the parameters
(7916 bytes).

==== Page 18 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 18 of 32
As can be seen, when more than 24 ﬁlters per convolution are used, the 16-bit quan-
tization clearly exhibits the best accuracy vs. memory ratio. For more than 48 ﬁlters per
convolution, the 8-bit quantization even provides a worse ratio than the baseline.
20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Filters0.9150.9200.9250.9300.9350.9400.9450.950Accuracy
UCI-HAR float32
UCI-HAR int8
UCI-HAR int16
Figure 5. Human Activity Recognition dataset (UCI-HAR): accuracy vs. ﬁlters.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Parameters memory (kiB)0.9150.9200.9250.9300.9350.9400.9450.950Accuracy
1624324048 6480
1624324048 6480
16243240 48 6480
UCI-HAR float32
UCI-HAR int8
UCI-HAR int16
Figure 6. Human Activity Recognition dataset (UCI-HAR): accuracy vs. parameters memory.
6.1.2. Spoken Digits Dataset (SMNIST)
Spoken MNIST is the spoken digits part of the written and spoken digits database for
multi-modal learning [ 54]. This dataset is made of spoken digits extracted from the Google
Speech Commands [ 55] dataset. The audio signal is preprocessed to obtain 12 MFCC plus
an energy coefﬁcient using a window of 50 ms with 50% overlap over the audio ﬁles of
approximately 1 s each, generating one-dimensional series of 39 samples with 13 channels .
The dataset is divided into a training and a testing set of 34,801 and 4107 vectors , respec-
tively. Some samples are duplicated to obtain 60,000 training vectors and 10,000 testing
vectors. There are 10 different classes for each digit between 0 and 9.
The initial training, without quantization, uses a batch size of 256over 120epochs.
Initial learning rate is set to 0.05, momentum is set to 0.9and weight decay is set to 510 4.
Learning rate is multiplied by 0.1 at epochs 40, 80 and 100.

==== Page 19 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 19 of 32
The quantization-aware training for ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers uses a batch size of
1024 over 140epochs. Initial learning rate, momentum and weight decay are the same as
for the initial training. Learning rate is multiplied by 0.1 at epochs 40, 80, 100 and 120.
As can be observed in Figure 7 and regardless of the number of ﬁlters, the 16-bit
quantization ( SMNIST int16 ) provides overall a similar accuracy compared to the ﬂoating-
point baseline ( SMNIST ﬂoat32 ). On the other hand, the accuracy drops by up to 1.07%
when the 8-bit quantization is used. However, the accuracy drop slightly decreases when
48 ﬁlters per convolution are used, and then stays around 0.5% and 0.6% for a higher
number of ﬁlters.
In Figure 8, we can see that the 16-bit quantization is still the best solution in terms
of memory footprint. Despite the fact that the 8-bit quantization stays closer to 16-bit
quantization on SMNIST than on UCI-HAR, the 8-bit quantization does not provide any
beneﬁt over 16-bit quantization in terms of accuracy vs. memory ratio even for small
neural networks.
20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Filters0.9300.9350.9400.9450.9500.9550.9600.9650.970Accuracy
SMNIST float32
SMNIST int8
SMNIST int16
Figure 7. Spoken digits dataset (SMNIST): accuracy vs. ﬁlters.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Parameters memory (kiB)0.9300.9350.9400.9450.9500.9550.9600.9650.970Accuracy
16243240486480
16243240486480
16243240486480
SMNIST float32
SMNIST int8
SMNIST int16
Figure 8. Spoken digits dataset (SMNIST): accuracy vs. parameters memory.

==== Page 20 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 20 of 32
6.1.3. The German Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB)
The German Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB [ 56]) is a dataset containing
various road signs color pictures. Image sizes vary between 1515to250250pix-
els. In this experiment, the two-dimensional images are scaled to 3232pixels using
bilinear interpolation and anti-aliasing, while keeping the 3 color channels (red, green,
blue). The dataset is divided into a training and a testing set of 39,209 and 12,630 vectors,
respectively. There are 43 different classes, one for each type of road sign in the dataset.
The initial training without quantization uses a batch size of 128over 120epochs.
Initial learning rate is set to 0.01, momentum is set to 0.9and weight decay is set to 510 4.
Learning rate is multiplied by 0.1 at epochs 40, 80 and 100.
The quantization-aware training for ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers uses a batch size of
512over 120epochs. Initial learning rate, momentum and weight decay are the same as for
the initial training. Learning rate is multiplied by 0.1 at epochs 20, 60, 80 and 100.
The accuracy results obtained for 8- and 16-bit quantization and the 32-bit ﬂoating-
point versions are shown in Figure 9 for different number of ﬁlters. As can be seen,
the16-bit quantization ( GTSRB int16 ) provides an accuracy similar to the one obtained
with the baseline ( GTSRB ﬂoat32 ). In the meantime, an accuracy drop of up to 1.1% can be
observed when the 8-bit quantization is used with this GTSRB dataset. However, and as it
has been observed with the SMNIST dataset, the accuracy gets closer to the baseline when
the network has more ﬁlters (0.33% for 64 ﬁlters).
20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Filters0.920.930.940.950.960.970.98Accuracy
GTSRB float32
GTSRB int8
GTSRB int16
Figure 9. German Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark: accuracy vs. ﬁlters.
Moreover, even though the 8-bit quantization does not outperform the results obtained
with the 16-bit quantization, the Figure 10 shows that the 8-bit quantization can represent
an interesting solution when a two-dimensional network is used on an image dataset.

==== Page 21 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 21 of 32
0 200 400 600 800
Parameters memory (kiB)0.920.930.940.950.960.970.98Accuracy
16243240 486480
16243240486480
16243240 486480
GTSRB float32
GTSRB int8
GTSRB int16
Figure 10. German Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark: accuracy vs. parameters memory.
6.2. Evaluation of Frameworks and Embedded Platforms
In our experiments, two different targets have been used to deploy a deep neural
network on a microcontroller: the SparkFun Edge and the Nucleo-L452RE-P . Both platforms
are set to run at 48 MHz on a 3.3 V supply and their main speciﬁcations are summarized in
Table 3.
Table 3. Embedded platforms.
Board Nucleo-L452RE-P SparkFun Edge
MCU STM32L452RE Ambiq Apollo3
Core Cortex-M4F Cortex-M4F
Max Clock 80 MHz 48 MHz (96 MHz “Burst Mode”)
RAM 128 kiB 384 kiB
Flash 512 kiB 1024 kiB
CoreMark/MHz 3.42 2.479
Run current @3.3 V , 48 MHz 4.80 mA 0.82 mA *
* After removing peripherals (Mic1&2, accelerometer . . . ).
VDD_MCU is set to 1.8 V for the Nucleo-L452RE-P platform and current measurement
is taken from the IDDjumper. It does not have any on-board peripherals. On the SparkFun
Edge board, the measure of the current is done using the power input pin of the board
(after the programmer). The built-in peripherals were unsoldered from the board to
eliminate their power consumption. The current consumption was measured using a
Brymen BM857s auto-ranging digital multimeter conﬁgured in max mode. The energy
results are based on this maximum observed current consumption and the supply voltage
of 3.3 V .
As can be seen in Table 3, and even though both platforms are built around a Cortex-
M4F core running at the same frequency, thanks to its subthreshold operation the SparkFun
Edge board consumes much less power than the Nucleo-L452RE-P , while having also more
Flash and RAM memory. However, results obtained with the CoreMark benchmark show
that the Ambiq Apollo3 microcontroller is slower than the STM32L452RE. It is worth noting
that the CoreMark results have been measured on the Ambiq Apollo3 microcontroller,
while it has been extracted from the datasheet for the STM32L452RE microcontroller.

==== Page 22 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 22 of 32
The deep neural network used in our experiments is the residual neural network
described in Section 6. This network has been trained on the UCI-HAR dataset presented
in Section 6.1.1. Inference time is measured from 50 test vectors from the testing set of UCI-
HAR on the microcontrollers. TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers version 2.4.1 has been
used to deploy the deep neural network on the SparkFun Edge board, while STM32Cube.AI
version 5.2.0 has been used to deploy it on the Nucleo-L452RE-P board, both for the 32-bit
ﬂoating-point and ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers inference. Our framework is used to deploy
the deep neural network on both platforms for 32-bit ﬂoating-point, ﬁxed-point on 16-bit
integers and ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integer inference. It is worth noting that optimizations
for the Cortex-M4F provided by CMSIS-NN are enabled for both TensorFlow Lite for
Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI tools. Our framework does not make use of these
optimizations yet. The main characteristics of the frameworks are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4. Embedded AI frameworks.
Framework STM32Cube.AI TFLite Micro MicroAI
Source Keras, TFLite, . . . Keras, TFLite Keras, PyTorch *
Validation Integrated tools None Integrated tools
Metrics RAM/ROM footprint, None ROM footprint
inference time, MACC inference time
Portability STM32 only Any 32-bit MCU Any 32-bit MCU
Built-in platform STM32 boards 32F746GDiscovery, SparkFun Edge,
support (Nucleo, . . . ) SparkFun Edge, . . . Nucleo-L452-RE-P
Sources Private Public Public
Data type float ,int8_t float ,int8_t float ,int8_t ,int16_t
Quantized data Weights, activations Weights, activations Weights, activations
Quantizer Uniform (from TFlite) Uniform Uniform
Quantized coding Offset and scale Offset and scale Fixed-point Qm.n
* PyTorch models must be semi-automatically converted to Keras model prior to deployment.
To compare software and hardware platforms, only the results with 80 ﬁlters per
convolution are analyzed below. Nevertheless, results with less than 80 ﬁlters are still
available in the tables of Appendix D to highlight how fast and efﬁcient a small deep
neural network can be when deployed on a constrained embedded target. They also
highlight a higher overhead for very small neural networks especially for TensorFlow Lite
for Microcontrollers compared to our framework.
In Figure 11, we can observe that TFLite Micro has a higher overhead than
STM32Cube.AI, while MicroAI exhibits a slightly lower overhead than STM32Cube.AI.
As outlined in Table A3 of Appendix D, when the number of ﬁlters per convolution
increases, most of the ROM is used by the model’s weights.
The inference time obtained for both platforms and the different deployment tools is
illustrated in Figure 12. As can be seen, the STM32Cube.AI with the 8-bit inference provides
the best solution as it requires only 352ms for one inference. In the same conﬁguration,
TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers requires 592ms for one inference. Finally, 1034 ms
and 1003 ms are required for one inference using our framework on the Nucleo-L452RE-P
board and the SparkFun Edge board, respectively.
When using ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers for the inference, our framework provides
approximately the same performance than with 8 bits. The reason is that the inference
code is the same: similar instructions are generated, and computations are still performed
using 32-bit registers. On the Nucleo-L452RE-P , we can observe that the inference time
for one input is 1223 ms, while it is only 1042 ms on the SparkFun Edge board. We guess

==== Page 23 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 23 of 32
this improvement should be due to a different implementation around the core in terms of
memory access, especially the cache for the Flash memory.
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge float32MicroAI SparkFunEdge float32MicroAI NucleoL452REP float32
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP float32MicroAI SparkFunEdge int16MicroAI NucleoL452REP int16TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge int8MicroAI SparkFunEdge int8MicroAI NucleoL452REP int8
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP int80100200300400ROM footprint (kiB)float32
int16
int8
Figure 11. ROM footprint for TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI and MicroAI with 80 filters per convolution.
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge float32MicroAI SparkFunEdge float32MicroAI NucleoL452REP float32
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP float32MicroAI SparkFunEdge int16MicroAI NucleoL452REP int16TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge int8MicroAI SparkFunEdge int8MicroAI NucleoL452REP int8
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP int8025050075010001250150017502000Response time (ms)float32
int16
int8
Figure 12. Inference time for 1 input for TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI and MicroAI with 80 ﬁlters
per convolution.

==== Page 24 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 24 of 32
The Figure 12 also shows that whatever the tool and target, the 32-bit ﬂoating-point
inference is slower than 16- or 8-bit quantization. We can also observe that our framework
requires 1561 ms and 1512 ms for one inference on the SparkFun Edge and the Nucleo-
L452RE-P boards, respectively. In the meantime, the STM32Cube.AI requires 1387 ms for
one inference on the Nucleo-L452RE-P board. Our framework exhibits therefore perfor-
mance comparable to the STM32Cube.AI. Finally, we can see that TensorFlow Lite for
microcontrollers on the SparkFun Edge board provides lower performance as it requires
2087 ms to perform one inference
To conclude, and as outlined in Figure 13, we can say the SparkFun Edge board
provides the best power efﬁciency in all situations. The reason is that the SparkFun Edge
board power consumption is approximately 6 times lower compared to the Nucleo-L452RE-
P .Using the SparkFun Edge board and TensorFlow Lite for Microcontroller with ﬁxed-point
on 8-bit integers, one inference requires 0.45 µWh of energy consumption. On the other
hand, our framework requires 0.75 µWh and 0.78 µWh on the SparkFunEdge board for
ﬁxed-point on 8-bit and 16-bit integers inference, respectively. When 32-bit ﬂoating-point
is used for inference on the SparkFun Edge board, our framework provides a better energy
efﬁciency than TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers as it requires 1.17 µWh instead of
1.57 µWh.
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge float32MicroAI SparkFunEdge float32MicroAI NucleoL452REP float32
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP float32MicroAI SparkFunEdge int16MicroAI NucleoL452REP int16TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge int8MicroAI SparkFunEdge int8MicroAI NucleoL452REP int8
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP int801234567Energy (µWh)float32
int16
int8
Figure 13. Energy consumption for 1 input for TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI and MicroAI with
80 ﬁlters per convolution.
Concerning the energy consumed on the Nucleo-L452RE-P board, our framework re-
quires 4.58 µWh, 5.42 µWh and 6.70 µWh for one inference using fixed-point on 8-bit integers,
16-bit integers and 32-bit floating-point, respectively. In the meantime, only 6.15 µWh of
energy are required for one inference when the STM32Cube.AI framework is used with
32-bit floating-point. Finally, we can see that the required energy for one inference when
using STM32Cube.AI with fixed-point on 8-bit integers is 1.56 µWh on the Nucleo-L452RE-P .

==== Page 25 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 25 of 32
This amount of energy is similar to the one obtained with TensorFlow Lite for Microcon-
trollers on the SparkFun Edge board when performing floating-point inference.
7. Discussion
First, a high variance can be observed when we compare the accuracy results obtained
on the three datasets versus the model size. This variability makes it difﬁcult to draw any
deﬁnitive conclusions. However, there is a trend in our results that allows getting some
insights of the performance for each experiment.
As has been shown, execution using ﬁxed-point on 8-bit and 16-bit integers provide
a signiﬁcant decrease of the inference time, thus reducing as well the average power
consumption. As power consumption is a key parameter in embedded systems, having a
lower inference time is interesting as it is possible either to reduce the microcontroller’s
operating frequency or to put the microcontroller in sleep mode for a longer period between
two inferences. Additionally, execution using 8-bit and 16-bit integers also provide a
signiﬁcant reduction in memory footprint. The required memory for the model parameters
is divided by 4 and 2 for for 8-bit and 16-bit quantization, respectively. It is worth noticing
that the RAM usage, which is not illustrated here, is also reduced.
Our results also show that performing inference using quantization for ﬁxed-point
on 16-bit integers does not lead to an accuracy drop whatever the considered test case.
Moreover, inference using 16-bit does not require quantization-aware training to achieve
such results. As both the power consumption and the memory footprint can be decreased,
ﬁxed-point quantization on 16-bit integers can therefore always be preferred to a 32-bit
ﬂoating-point inference.
On the other hand, 8-bit quantization does not provide a substantial improvement over
16-bit quantization. Moreover, 8-bit quantization requires performing a quantization-aware
training to even achieve the obtained results. It is worth noting that quantization-aware
training for 8-bit quantization introduces more variance in the results over the baseline,
and is also more sensitive to a change in the training parameters. As it is quite difﬁcult to
achieve a stable training, it is preferable to use an optimizer such as SGD with conservative
parameters, instead of optimizers such as Adam or RAdam, to reduce the variance of the
results, even though it means achieving a lower maximum accuracy.
During our experiments, it has also been observed that the 8-bit Post-Training Quanti-
zation of TensorFlow Lite achieves better results compared to the 8-bit Quantization-Aware
Training provided by our framework. This is likely due to the combination of per-ﬁlter
quantization, asymmetric range, non-power of two scale factor as well as optimizations
of TensorFlow Lite to avoid unnecessary truncation, therefore loss of precision. We also
observed that using 9-bit instead of 8-bit during the Post-Training Quantization allows us
to outperform the TensorFlow Lite quantization performance. Some results showing this
improvement are available in Appendix B for the UCI-HAR dataset. From these results, we
can conclude that the slight additional precision brought by the combination of per-ﬁlter
quantization, asymmetric range and non-power of two scale factor does in fact matter.
Implementing these methods in our framework seems therefore required to reduce the
accuracy loss of our 8-bit quantization.
Another beneﬁt of 8-bit quantization is that SIMD instructions can be used (with some
classes of microcontrollers) to improve the inference time and then further reduce the
power consumption. Such instructions allow performing in a single cycle either 2 mul-
tiply–accumulate with common accumulator of 16-bit operand ( SMLAD ), or 2 additions
of16-bit operand ( QADD16 ), or shift and saturation in ( SSAT ). In the case of inference
using 16-bit integers, it is not always possible to make use of such instructions since in-
termediate results must be stored in 32-bit and some of these instructions require 16-bit
operands. The SMLAD ,QADD16 and SSAT instructions are not yet used in our framework,
but it is a work on progress. Nonetheless, a 16-bit quantization scheme can be used with
our framework, which is not the case with either TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers or
STM32Cube.AI. The 16-bit quantization from our framework provides a good compromise

==== Page 26 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 26 of 32
between accuracy, inference time and memory footprint without requiring additional work
on quantization-aware training as presented in the previous results.
The results obtained on inference time clearly show that both the software and the
hardware platforms have a substantial impact on energy efﬁciency. STM32Cube.AI offers
the most optimized inference engine in terms of execution time, both in ﬂoating-point
and ﬁxed-point on integers. Our results show that TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
is slower than STM32Cube.AI in both conditions. For the ﬂoating-point inference, our
framework is in between these two software platforms as it is only slightly slower than
STM32Cube.AI. However, as optimizations using SIMD instructions have not been imple-
mented yet in our framework, inference using 8-bit integers still provides lower perfor-
mance than TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers and STM32Cube.AI.
Regardless of the software performance, running STM32Cube.AI on a Nucleo-L452RE-
P board is only competitive with inference using 8-bit integers when compared to Tensor-
Flow Lite for Microcontrollers in 32-bit floating-point inference on the SparkFun Edge board.
The reason is that the Ambiq Apollo3 microcontroller on the SparkFun Edge board is much
more energy efficient. In all remaining cases, running TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers
or our framework on the SparkFun Edge board provides much better energy efficiency
figures than running STM32Cube.AI or our framework on the Nucleo-L452RE-P board.
8. Conclusions
In this work, we presented a framework to perform quantization and then deployment
of deep neural networks on microcontrollers. This framework represents an alternative to
the STM32Cube.AI proprietary solution or TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers, an open-
source but complex environment. Inference time and energy efﬁciency measured on two
different embedded platforms demonstrated that our framework is a viable alternative to
the aforementioned solutions to perform inference of deep neural networks. Our frame-
work also introduces a ﬁxed-point on 16-bit integers post-training quantization which is
not available with the two other frameworks. We have shown that this 16-bit ﬁxed-point
quantization provides an improvement over a 32-bit ﬂoating-point inference, while being
competitive with ﬁxed-point on 8-bit integers quantization-aware training. It provides
a reduced inference time compared to ﬂoating-point inference. Moreover, the memory
footprint is dived by two while keeping the same accuracy. The 8-bit quantization provides
further improvements in inference time and memory footprint but at the cost of a slight
accuracy decrease and a more complex implementation.
Work is still in progress to implement some optimizations techniques for ﬁxed-point
on 8-bit integers inference. Three optimizations are especially targeted: per-ﬁlter quanti-
zation, asymmetric range and non-power of two scale factor. On top of that, using SIMD
instructions in the inference engine should help further decreasing inference time. These
optimizations would therefore make our framework more competitive in terms of inference
time and accuracy. Another possible improvement for ﬁxed-point on integers inference
consists of using 8-bit quantization for weights and 16-bit quantization for activations. Ten-
sorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers is currently in the process of implementing this technique.
Mixed precision can indeed provide a way to reduce the memory footprint of layers that
do not need a high precision representation (using 8-bit for weights and activations), while
keeping a higher precision (16-bit representation) for layers that need it. The CMix-NN [ 57]
library already provides an implementation of convolution functions for various data
types of conﬁguration (in 2, 4 and 8 bits). To further improve power consumption and
memory footprint, binary neural networks can also be considered. However, to run them
efﬁciently on microcontrollers, binary neural networks need to be implemented using
bit-wise operations on 32-bit registers. This way, as many as 32 computations could be
performed in parallel.
Apart from quantization, other techniques can be used to improve the execution of
deep neural network on embedded targets. One of these techniques is the big/LITTLE
DNN approach [ 58] where the inference is done ﬁrst on a very small deep neural network.

==== Page 27 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 27 of 32
Then, if the conﬁdence is too low, inference is done using a larger deep neural network
to reduce the confusion of the classiﬁcation task. This technique allows a fast inference
response time for most inputs, thus lowering the power consumption. In fact, it has
been shown that only a small set of inputs are difﬁcult to classify and so require running
the bigger deep neural network. However, this approach does not lower the memory
footprint. Other techniques such as pruning can also be used to obtain a smaller deep
neural network while keeping the same accuracy. When structured pruning [ 59] is used for
instance, the entire ﬁlters are completely removed from the convolutional neural network
model. This would reduce both the memory footprint and the power consumption. Finally,
other optimizations techniques also consider new neural network architectures. One can
cite for example the recently published MCUNet [ 2] framework with its TinyNAS tool that
intends to identify a neural network model that performs well on the target.
Future works will also be dedicated to the deployment of neural network architectures
on FPGA using High-Level Synthesis tool such as Vivado. In fact, a feasibility study has
already been performed and has shown that our framework can be used for a deployment
on FPGA as well. Moreover, work is in progress to natively support automatic PyTorch
deployment. To do so, the features provided by the torch.fx module of the newly released
PyTorch 1.8.0 is used.
Finally, we are currently working on a real application of our framework that consists
in integrating artiﬁcial intelligence into smart glasses [ 60] to perform human activity
recognition in the context of elder care among other tasks. Preliminar results have been
published in [6].
Author Contributions: Investigation, P .-E.N.; methodology, P .-E.N. and G.B.H.; software, P .-E.N. and
G.B.H.; supervision, A.P ., B.M. and V .G.; writing—original draft preparation, P .-E.N.; writing—review
and editing, G.B.H., A.P ., B.M., V .G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
Funding: This research is funded by “Université Côte d’Azur”, “CNRS”, “Région Sud Provence-
Alpes-Côte d’Azur, France” and “Ellcie Healthy”.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
in the decision to publish the results.
Appendix A. Comparison of Inference Time between a Microcontroller, a CPU and
a GPU
Table A1. Microcontroller (STM32L452RE), CPU (Intel Core i7-8850H) and GPU (NVidia Quadro
P2000M) platforms. Power consumption ﬁgures for GPU and CPU are the TDP values from the
manufacturer and do not reﬂect the exact power consumption of the device.
Platform Model Framework Power Consumption
MCU STM32L452RE STM32Cube.AI 0.016 W
CPU Intel Core i7-8850H TensorFlow 45 W
GPU NVidia Quadro P2000M TensorFlow 50 W

==== Page 28 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 28 of 32
Table A2. Comparison of 32-bit ﬂoating-point inference time for a single input on a microcontroller,
a CPU and a GPU. Neural network architecture is described in Section 6 with several ﬁlters per
convolution layer varying from 16 to 80 and dataset is described in Section 6.1.1. For CPU and GPU,
inference batch size is set to 512 and the dataset is repeated 104 times to try to compensate for the
large startup overhead compared to the total inference time. Measurements are averaged over at
least 5 runs.
Inference Time (ms)Platform16 Filters 24 Filters 32 Filters 40 Filters 48 Filters 64 Filters 80 Filters
MCU 85 174 271 404 544 921 1387
CPU 0.0396 0.0552 0.0720 0.0937 0.1134 0.1538 0.2046
GPU 0.0227 0.0197 0.0223 0.0284 0.0317 0.0395 0.0515
Appendix B. Comparison between TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers and
MicroAI Quantizations
32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48
Filters0.9350.9400.9450.9500.955Accuracy
UCI-HAR int8 MicroAI QAT
UCI-HAR float32
UCI-HAR int9 MicroAI PTQ
UCI-HAR int8 TFLite PTQ
Figure A1. Accuracy vs. ﬁlters for baseline ( ﬂoat32 ), 8-bit Post-Training Quantization from Tensor-
Flow Lite ( int8 TFLite PTQ ), 8-bit Quantization-Aware Training from our framework ( int8 MicroAI
QAT ), and 9-bit Post-Training Quantization from our framework ( int9 MicroAI PTQ ). Neural network
architecture is described in Section 6 with several ﬁlters per convolution layer varying from 32 to 48
and dataset is described in Section 6.1.1.
Appendix C. MicroAI Commands to Run for Automatic Training and Deployment of
Deep Neural Networks
Data can be preprocessed (e.g., to apply normalization) from the source dataset and
serialized to an intermediate dataset ﬁle with the following command:
1microai <config . toml> preprocess_data
The training phase is started by running the following command:
1microai <config . toml> t r a i n

==== Page 29 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 29 of 32
Before being deployed and evaluated, the appropriate code must be generated and
built for the targeted platform by running the following command:
1microai <config . toml> prepare_deploy
Once the binaries are generated, they can be deployed, and the model can be evaluated
on the target by running the following command:
1microai <config . toml> deploy_and_evaluate
Appendix D. Detailed Results of Frameworks and Embedded Platforms Evaluation
Table A3. ROM footprint vs. ﬁlters for TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI and MicroAI.
ROM Footprint (kiB)
Framework Target Data Type 16 Filters 24 Filters 32 Filters 40 Filters 48 Filters 64 Filters 80 Filters
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge ﬂoat32 116.520 133.988 157.957 188.426 225.395 318.926 438.363
MicroAI SparkFunEdge ﬂoat32 54.316 67.066 91.035 121.512 158.473 251.863 371.332
MicroAI NucleoL452REP ﬂoat32 55.770 68.145 92.129 122.582 159.559 253.004 372.434
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP ﬂoat32 61.965 79.449 103.410 133.898 170.859 264.289 383.742
MicroAI SparkFunEdge int16 46.952 50.629 62.629 77.832 96.355 142.973 202.699
MicroAI NucleoL452REP int16 48.129 51.629 63.613 78.855 97.340 144.051 203.770
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge int8 111.051 117.066 124.691 133.957 144.832 171.473 204.613
MicroAI SparkFunEdge int8 43.256 42.249 48.229 55.854 65.089 88.343 118.202
MicroAI NucleoL452REP int8 45.038 43.474 49.464 57.078 66.322 89.683 119.541
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP int8 72.742 77.746 84.336 92.582 102.430 126.996 158.098
Table A4. Inference time for one input vs. ﬁlters for TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI and MicroAI.
Response Time (ms)
Framework Target Data Type 16 Filters 24 Filters 32 Filters 40 Filters 48 Filters 64 Filters 80 Filters
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge ﬂoat32 179.633 294.157 438.541 624.172 860.835 1406.945 2087.241
MicroAI SparkFunEdge ﬂoat32 53.247 153.732 259.212 394.494 569.852 1017.118 1561.264
MicroAI NucleoL452REP ﬂoat32 55.762 152.426 259.160 395.721 559.249 976.732 1512.143
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP ﬂoat32 85.359 174.082 271.362 403.898 544.406 921.646 1387.083
MicroAI SparkFunEdge int16 40.867 113.035 191.439 287.655 389.450 667.547 1041.617
MicroAI NucleoL452REP int16 44.915 120.308 205.499 318.310 459.880 796.310 1223.513
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge int8 92.529 130.760 172.673 225.092 280.942 418.198 591.785
MicroAI SparkFunEdge int8 39.417 101.704 172.551 259.830 375.840 658.441 1003.365
MicroAI NucleoL452REP int8 43.003 107.705 180.830 272.986 383.761 659.996 1034.033
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP int8 32.297 53.871 80.388 111.635 146.022 242.002 352.079

==== Page 30 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 30 of 32
Table A5. Energy consumption for 1 input vs. ﬁlters for TFLite Micro, STM32Cube.AI and MicroAI.
Energy (µWh)
Framework Target Data Type 16 Filters 24 Filters 32 Filters 40 Filters 48 Filters 64 Filters 80 Filters
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge ﬂoat32 0.135 0.221 0.330 0.469 0.647 1.058 1.569
MicroAI SparkFunEdge ﬂoat32 0.040 0.116 0.195 0.297 0.428 0.765 1.174
MicroAI NucleoL452REP ﬂoat32 0.247 0.675 1.148 1.753 2.478 4.327 6.700
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP ﬂoat32 0.378 0.771 1.202 1.789 2.412 4.083 6.146
MicroAI SparkFunEdge int16 0.031 0.085 0.144 0.216 0.293 0.502 0.783
MicroAI NucleoL452REP int16 0.199 0.533 0.910 1.410 2.038 3.528 5.421
TFLiteMicro SparkFunEdge int8 0.070 0.098 0.130 0.169 0.211 0.314 0.445
MicroAI SparkFunEdge int8 0.030 0.076 0.130 0.195 0.283 0.495 0.754
MicroAI NucleoL452REP int8 0.191 0.477 0.801 1.209 1.700 2.924 4.581
STM32Cube.AI NucleoL452REP int8 0.143 0.239 0.356 0.495 0.647 1.072 1.560
Appendix E. Number of Integer ALU Operations for a Fixed-Point Residual
Neural Network
Table A6. Number of arithmetic and logic operations with ﬁxed-point on integers inference for the
main layers of a residual neural network with fthe number of ﬁlters (output channels), sthe number
of input samples, cthe number of input channels, kthe kernel size, nthe number of neurons and i
the number of input layers to the residual Add layer. Conv1D is assumed to be without padding and
with a stride of 1.
MACC (1 Cycle) Add (1 Cycle) Shift (1 Cycle) Max/Saturate (2 Cycles)
Conv1D fsck N/A 2 fs fs
ReLU N/A N/A N/A cs
Maxpool N/A N/A N/A csk
Add N/A sc(i 1)sci cs
FullyConnected ns N/A 2 n n
References
1. Wang, Y.; Wei, G.; Brooks, D. Benchmarking TPU, GPU, and CPU Platforms for Deep Learning. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1907.10701.
2. Lin, J.; Chen, W.M.; Lin, Y.; Cohn, J.; Gan, C.; Han, S. MCUNet: Tiny Deep Learning on IoT Devices. In Proceedings of the 34th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Online, 6–12 December 2020.
3. Lai, L.; Suda, N. Enabling Deep Learning at the IoT Edge. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer-Aided
Design (ICCAD’18), San Diego, CA, USA, 5–8 November 2018; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2018.
[CrossRef]
4. Kromes, R.; Russo, A.; Miramond, B.; Verdier, F. Energy consumption minimization on LoRaWAN sensor network by using an
Artiﬁcial Neural Network based application. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS), Sophia
Antipolis, France, 11–13 March 2019; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
5. Tan, M.; Le, Q. EfﬁcientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 36th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR 2019), Long Beach, CA, USA, 9–15 June 2019; Chaudhuri, K., Salakhutdinov, R.,
Eds.; Volume 97, pp. 6105–6114.
6. Novac, P .E.; Russo, A.; Miramond, B.; Pegatoquet, A.; Verdier, F.; Castagnetti, A. Toward unsupervised Human Activity
Recognition on Microcontroller Units. In Proceedings of the 2020 23rd Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD),
Kranj, Slovenia, 26–28 August 2020; pp. 542–550. [CrossRef]
7. Pimentel, J.J.; Bohnenstiehl, B.; Baas, B.M. Hybrid Hardware/Software Floating-Point Implementations for Optimized Area and
Throughput Tradeoffs. IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. 2017 ,25, 100–113. [CrossRef]
8. Choi, J.; Chuang, P .I.J.; Wang, Z.; Venkataramani, S.; Srinivasan, V .; Gopalakrishnan, K. Bridging the accuracy gap for 2-bit
quantized neural networks (qnn). arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1807.06964.

==== Page 31 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 31 of 32
9. Esser, S.K.; McKinstry, J.L.; Bablani, D.; Appuswamy, R.; Modha, D.S. Learned step size quantization. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1902.08153.
10. Nikoli´ c, M.; Hacene, G.B.; Bannon, C.; Lascorz, A.D.; Courbariaux, M.; Bengio, Y.; Gripon, V .; Moshovos, A. Bitpruning: Learning
bitlengths for aggressive and accurate quantization. arXiv 2020 arXiv:2002.03090.
11. Uhlich, S.; Mauch, L.; Yoshiyama, K.; Cardinaux, F.; Garcia, J.A.; Tiedemann, S.; Kemp, T.; Nakamura, A. Differentiable
quantization of deep neural networks. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1905.11452.
12. Hubara, I.; Courbariaux, M.; Soudry, D.; El-Yaniv, R.; Bengio, Y. Binarized Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems ; Lee, D., Sugiyama, M., Luxburg, U., Guyon, I., Garnett, R., Eds.; Curran Associates, Inc.: Barcelona, Spain,
2016; Volume 29.
13. Rastegari, M.; Ordonez, V .; Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. Xnor-net: Imagenet classiﬁcation using binary convolutional neural networks.
In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 8–16 October 2016; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 525–542.
14. Howard, A.G.; Zhu, M.; Chen, B.; Kalenichenko, D.; Wang, W.; Weyand, T.; Andreetto, M.; Adam, H. MobileNets: Efﬁcient
Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile Vision Applications. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1704.04861.
15. Iandola, F.N.; Han, S.; Moskewicz, M.W.; Ashraf, K.; Dally, W.J.; Keutzer, K. SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer
parameters and <0.5 MB model size. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1602.07360.
16. Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.-J.; Li, K.; Fei-Fei, L. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings
of the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Miami, FL, USA, 20–25 June 2009; pp. 248–255.
[CrossRef]
17. He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 770–778. [CrossRef]
18. Han, S.; Pool, J.; Tran, J.; Dally, W. Learning both weights and connections for efﬁcient neural network. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems—Volume 1, Montreal, QC, Canada, 7–10 December 2015;
MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015; pp. 1135–1143.
19. Yamamoto, K.; Maeno, K. PCAS: Pruning Channels with Attention Statistics. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1806.05382.
20. Hacene, G.B.; Lassance, C.; Gripon, V .; Courbariaux, M.; Bengio, Y. Attention based pruning for shift networks. arXiv 2019 ,
arXiv:1905.12300.
21. Ramakrishnan, R.K.; Sari, E.; Nia, V .P . Differentiable Mask for Pruning Convolutional and Recurrent Networks. In Proceedings
of the 2020 17th Conference on Computer and Robot Vision (CRV), Ottawa, ON, Canada, 13–15 May 2020; pp. 222–229.
22. He, Y.; Ding, Y.; Liu, P .; Zhu, L.; Zhang, H.; Yang, Y. Learning Filter Pruning Criteria for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Acceleration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Seattle, WA, USA, 14–19
June 2020; pp. 2009–2018.
23. Han, S.; Mao, H.; Dally, W.J. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and
huffman coding. arXiv 2015 , arXiv:1510.00149.
24. Fard, M.M.; Thonet, T.; Gaussier, E. Deep k-means: Jointly clustering with k-means and learning representations. Pattern Recognit.
Lett. 2020 ,138, 185–192. [CrossRef]
25. Cardinaux, F.; Uhlich, S.; Yoshiyama, K.; García, J.A.; Mauch, L.; Tiedemann, S.; Kemp, T.; Nakamura, A. Iteratively training
look-up tables for network quantization. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. 2020 ,14, 860–870. [CrossRef]
26. He, Z.; Fan, D. Simultaneously Optimizing Weight and Quantizer of Ternary Neural Network Using Truncated Gaussian
Approximation. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Long Beach, CA, USA, 16–20 June 2019; pp. 11430–11438. [CrossRef]
27. Lee, E.; Hwang, Y. Layer-Wise Network Compression Using Gaussian Mixture Model. Electronics 2021 ,10, 72. [CrossRef]
28. Vogel, S.; Raghunath, R.B.; Guntoro, A.; Van Laerhoven, K.; Ascheid, G. Bit-Shift-Based Accelerator for CNNs with Selectable
Accuracy and Throughput. In Proceedings of the 2019 22nd Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), Kallithea,
Greece, 28–30 August 2019; pp. 663–667. [CrossRef]
29. Courbariaux, M.; Bengio, Y.; David, J.P . Training deep neural networks with low precision multiplications. arXiv 2015 .
arXiv:1412.7024.
30. Holt, J.L.; Baker, T.E. Back propagation simulations using limited precision calculations. In Proceedings of the IJCNN-91-Seattle
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, Seattle, WA, USA, 8–12 July 1991; Volume ii, pp. 121–126. [CrossRef]
31. Vanhoucke, V .; Senior, A.; Mao, M.Z. Improving the speed of neural networks on CPUs. In Proceedings of the Deep Learning
and Unsupervised Feature Learning Workshop (NIPS 2011), Granada, Spain, 12–17 December 2011.
32. Garofalo, A.; Tagliavini, G.; Conti, F.; Rossi, D.; Benini, L. XpulpNN: Accelerating Quantized Neural Networks on RISC-V
Processors Through ISA Extensions. In Proceedings of the 2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition,
DATE 2020, Grenoble, France, 9–13 March 2020; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2020; pp. 186–191. [CrossRef]
33. Cotton, N.J.; Wilamowski, B.M.; Dundar, G. A Neural Network Implementation on an Inexpensive Eight Bit Microcontroller. In
Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Intelligent Engineering Systems, Miami, FL, USA, 25–29 February 2008;
pp. 109–114. [CrossRef]
34. Nair, V .; Hinton, G.E. Rectiﬁed Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltzmann Machines. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’10), Haifa, Israel, 21–24 June 2010; Omnipress: Madison,
WI, USA, 2010; pp. 807–814.

==== Page 32 ====
Sensors 2021 ,21, 2984 32 of 32
35. Zhang, Y.; Suda, N.; Lai, L.; Chandra, V . Hello Edge: Keyword Spotting on Microcontrollers. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1711.07128.
36. IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic. IEEE Std 754-2019 (Revision of IEEE 754-2008) ; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2019;
pp. 1–84. [CrossRef]
37. Micikevicius, P .; Narang, S.; Alben, J.; Diamos, G.; Elsen, E.; Garcia, D.; Ginsburg, B.; Houston, M.; Kuchaiev, O.; Venkatesh, G.;
et al. Mixed Precision Training. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, 30 April–3 May 2018.
38. ARM. ARM Developer Suite AXD and armsd Debuggers Guide, 4.7.9 Q-Format ; ARM DUI 0066D Version 1.2; Arm Ltd.: Cambridge,
UK, 2001.
39. David, R.; Duke, J.; Jain, A.; Reddi, V .; Jeffries, N.; Li, J.; Kreeger, N.; Nappier, I.; Natraj, M.; Regev, S.; et al. TensorFlow Lite
Micro: Embedded Machine Learning on TinyML Systems. arXiv 2020 , arXiv:2010.08678.
40. STMicroelectronics. STM32Cube.AI. Available online: https://www.st.com/content/st_com/en/stm32-ann.html (accessed on
19 March 2021).
41. Google. TensorFlow Lite for Microcontrollers Supported Operations. Available online: https://github.com/tensorﬂow/
tensorﬂow/blob/master/tensorﬂow/lite/micro/kernels/micro_ops.h (accessed on 22 March 2021).
42. Google. TensorFlow Lite 8-Bit Quantization Speciﬁcation. Available online: https://www.tensorﬂow.org/lite/performance/
quantization_spec (accessed on 19 March 2021).
43. Jacob, B.; Kligys, S.; Chen, B.; Zhu, M.; Tang, M.; Howard, A.; Adam, H.; Kalenichenko, D. Quantization and Training of Neural
Networks for Efﬁcient Integer-Arithmetic-Only Inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18–22 June 2018; pp. 2704–2713. [CrossRef]
44. STMicroelectronics. Supported Deep Learning Toolboxes and Layers, Documentation Embedded in X-CUBE-AI Expansion
Package 5.2.0, 2020. Available online: https://www.st.com/en/embedded-software/x-cube-ai.html (accessed on 19 March
2021).
45. Nordby, J. Emlearn: Machine Learning Inference Engine for Microcontrollers and Embedded Devices. 2019. Available online:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2589394 (accessed on 18 February 2021).
46. Sakr, F.; Bellotti, F.; Berta, R.; De Gloria, A. Machine Learning on Mainstream Microcontrollers. Sensors 2020 ,20, 2638. [CrossRef]
47. Givargis, T. Gravity: An Artiﬁcial Neural Network Compiler for Embedded Applications. In Proceedings of the 26th Asia
and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (ASPDAC’21), Tokyo, Japan, 18–21 January 2021; Association for Computing
Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2021; pp. 715–721. [CrossRef]
48. Wang, X.; Magno, M.; Cavigelli, L.; Benini, L. FANN-on-MCU: An Open-Source Toolkit for Energy-Efﬁcient Neural Network
Inference at the Edge of the Internet of Things. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020 ,7, 4403–4417. [CrossRef]
49. Tom’s Obvious Minimal Language. Available online: https://toml.io/ (accessed on 19 March 2021).
50. Ioffe, S.; Szegedy, C. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. In
Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Lille, France, 6–11 July 2015; Bach, F., Blei, D., Eds.;
PMLR: Lille, France, 2015; Volume 37, pp. 448–456.
51. Jinja2. Available online: https://palletsprojects.com/p/jinja/ (accessed on 19 March 2021).
52. Zhang, H.; Cissé, M.; Dauphin, Y.N.; Lopez-Paz, D. mixup: Beyond Empirical Risk Minimization. In Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Learning Representations, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 30 April–3 May 2018.
53. Davide, A.; Alessandro, G.; Luca, O.; Xavier, P .; Jorge, L.R.O. A Public Domain Dataset for Human Activity Recognition using
Smartphones. In Proceedings of the ESANN, Bruges, Belgium, 24–26 April 2013.
54. Khacef, L.; Rodriguez, L.; Miramond, B. Written and Spoken Digits Database for Multimodal Learning. 2019. Available online:
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3515935 (accessed on 18 February 2021).
55. Warden, P . Speech Commands: A Dataset for Limited-Vocabulary Speech Recognition. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1804.03209.
56. Stallkamp, J.; Schlipsing, M.; Salmen, J.; Igel, C. The German Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark: A multi-class classiﬁcation
competition. In Proceedings of the 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, San Jose, CA, USA, 31 July–5 August
2011; pp. 1453–1460. [CrossRef]
57. Capotondi, A.; Rusci, M.; Fariselli, M.; Benini, L. CMix-NN: Mixed Low-Precision CNN Library for Memory-Constrained Edge
Devices. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Express Briefs 2020 ,67, 871–875. [CrossRef]
58. Park, E.; Kim, D.; Kim, S.; Kim, Y.; Kim, G.; Yoon, S.; Yoo, S. Big/little deep neural network for ultra low power inference.
In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Hardware/Software Codesign and System Synthesis (CODES + ISSS),
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4–9 October 2015; pp. 124–132. [CrossRef]
59. Anwar, S.; Hwang, K.; Sung, W. Structured Pruning of Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. J. Emerg. Technol. Comput. Syst.
2017 ,13, 1–18. [CrossRef]
60. Arcaya-Jordan, A.; Pegatoquet, A.; Castagnetti, A. Smart Connected Glasses for Drowsiness Detection: A System-Level Modeling
Approach. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS), Sophia Antipolis, France, 11–13 March 2019;
pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]

