==== Page 1 ====
Quantum machine learning in feature Hilbert spaces
Maria Schuldand Nathan Killoran
Xanadu, 372 Richmond St W, Toronto, M5V 2L7, Canada
(Dated: March 21, 2018)
The basic idea of quantum computing is surprisingly similar to that of kernel methods in machine
learning, namely to eciently perform computations in an intractably large Hilbert space. In this
paper we explore some theoretical foundations of this link and show how it opens up a new avenue
for the design of quantum machine learning algorithms. We interpret the process of encoding inputs
in a quantum state as a nonlinear feature map that maps data to quantum Hilbert space. A
quantum computer can now analyse the input data in this feature space. Based on this link, we
discuss two approaches for building a quantum model for classication. In the rst approach, the
quantum device estimates inner products of quantum states to compute a classically intractable
kernel. This kernel can be fed into any classical kernel method such as a support vector machine. In
the second approach, we can use a variational quantum circuit as a linear model that classies data
explicitly in Hilbert space. We illustrate these ideas with a feature map based on squeezing in a
continuous-variable system, and visualise the working principle with 2-dimensional mini-benchmark
datasets.
I. INTRODUCTION
The goal of many quantum algorithms is to perform
ecient computations in a Hilbert space that grows
rapidly with the size of a quantum system. `Ecient'
means that the number of operations applied to the
system grows at most polynomially with the system size.
An illustration is the famous quantum Fourier transform
applied to an n-qubit system, which uses O(poly(n))
operations to perform a discrete Fourier transform on
2namplitudes. In continuous-variable systems this is
pushed to the extreme, as a single operation { for exam-
ple, squeezing { applied to a mode formally manipulates
a quantum state in an innite-dimensional Hilbert space.
In this sense, quantum computing can be understood
as a technique to perform \implicit" computations in
an intractably large Hilbert space through the ecient
manipulation of a quantum system.
In machine learning, so-called kernel methods are a
well-established eld with a surprisingly similar logic.
In a nutshell, the idea of kernel methods is to formally
embed data into a higher- (and sometimes innite-)
dimensional feature space in which it becomes easier to
analyse (see Figure 1). A popular example is a support
vector machine that draws a decision boundary between
two classes of datapoints by mapping the data into a
feature space where it becomes linearly separable. The
trick is that the algorithm never explicitly performs
computations with vectors in feature space, but uses a
so-called kernel function that is dened on the domain
of the original input data. Just like quantum computing,
kernel methods therefore perform implicit computations
in a possibly intractably large Hilbert space through the
ecient manipulation of data inputs.
maria@xanadu.aiBesides this apparent link, kernel methods have
been hardly studied in the quantum machine learning
literature, a eld that (in the denition we employ here)
investigates the use of quantum computing as a resource
for machine learning. Across the approaches in this
young eld, which vary from sampling [1{5] to quantum
optimisation [6, 7], linear algebra solvers [8{10] and
using quantum circuits as trainable models for inference
[11, 12], a lot of attention has been paid to recent trends
in machine learning such as deep learning and neural
networks. Kernel methods, which were most successful
in the 1990s, are only mentioned in a few references
[9, 13]. Besides a single study on the connection between
coherent states and Gaussian kernels [14], their potential
for quantum computing remains widely unexplored.
The aim of this paper is to investigate the relationship
between feature maps, kernel methods and quantum
computing. We interpret the process of encoding inputs
into a quantum state as a feature map which maps
data into a potentially vastly higher-dimensional feature
space, the Hilbert space of the quantum system. Data
can now be analysed in this `feature Hilbert space',
where simple classiers such as linear models may
gain enormous power. Furthermore, it is well known
that the inner product of two data inputs that have
been mapped into feature space gives rise to a kernel
function that measures the distance between the data
points. Kernel methods use these kernel functions to
create models that have been very successful in pattern
recognition. By switching between kernels one eec-
tively switches between dierent models, which is known
as the kernel trick . In the quantum case, the kernel
trick corresponds to changing the data encoding strategy.
These two perspectives, namely of kernels on the one
hand and feature spaces one the other hand, naturally
lead to two ways of building quantum classiers for
supervised learning. The implicit approach takes aarXiv:1803.07128v1  [quant-ph]  19 Mar 2018

==== Page 2 ====
2
original space feature space
FIG. 1. While in the original space of training inputs, data
from the two classes `blue squares' and `red circles' are not
separable by a simple linear model (left), we can map them
to a higher dimensional feature space where a linear model is
indeed sucient to dene a separating hyperplane that acts
as a decision boundary (right).
classical model that depends on a kernel function, but
uses the quantum device to evaluate the kernel, which
is computed as the inner products of quantum states
in `feature Hilbert space'. The explicit approach uses
the quantum device to directly learn a linear decision
boundary in feature space by optimising a variational
quantum circuit.
A central result of this paper is that the idea of em-
bedding data into a quantum Hilbert space opens up
a promising avenue to quantum machine learning, in
which we can generically use quantum devices for pat-
tern recognition. The implicit and explicit approaches
are not only hardware-independent, but also suitable for
intermediate-term quantum technologies, which allows us
to test them with the generation of quantum comput-
ers that is currently being developed. Nonlinear feature
maps also circumvent the need to implement nonlinear
transformations on amplitude-encoded data, and thereby
solve an outstanding problem in quantum machine learn-
ing which we will come back to in the conclusion.
II. FEATURE MAPS, KERNELS AND
QUANTUM COMPUTING
In machine learning we are typically given a dataset
of inputsD=fx1;:::;xMgfrom a certain input set X,
and have to recognise patterns to evaluate or produce
previously unseen data. Kernel methods use a distance
measure(x;x0) between any two inputs x;x02X in or-
der to construct models that capture the properties of a
data distribution. This distance measure is connected to
inner products in a certain space, the feature space . Be-
sides many practical applications, the most famous being
the support vector machine, these methods have a rich
theoretical foundation [15] from which we want to high-
light some relevant points.A. Feature maps and kernels
Let us start with the denition of a feature map.
Denition 1. LetFbe a Hilbert space, called the feature
space ,Xan input set and xa sample from the input
set. A feature map is a map:X!F from inputs to
vectors in the Hilbert space. The vectors (x)2F are
called feature vectors .
Feature maps play an important role in machine learning,
since they map any type of input data into a space with a
well-dened metric. This space is usually of much higher
dimension. If the feature map is a nonlinear function it
changes the relative position between data points (as in
the example of Figure 1), and a dataset can become a
lot easier to classify in feature space. Feature maps are
intimitely connected to kernels [16].
Denition 2. LetXbe a nonempty set, called the input
set. A function :XX ! Cis called a kernel if
the Gram matrix Kwith entries Km;m0=(xm;xm0)
is positive semidenite, in other words, if for any nite
subsetfx1;:::;xMgX withM2andc1;:::;cM2C,
MX
m;m0=1cmc
m0(xm;xm0)0:
By denition of the inner product, every feature map
gives rise to a kernel.
Theorem 1. Let:X!F be a feature map. The inner
product of two inputs mapped to feature space denes a
kernel via
(x;x0) :=h(x);(x0)iF; (1)
whereh;iFis the inner product dened on F.
Proof. We must show that the Gram matrix of this kernel
is positive denite. For arbitrary cm;cm02Cand any
fx1;:::;xMgX withM2, we nd that
MX
m;m0=1cmc
m0(xm;xm0) =hX
mcm(xm);X
m0cm0(xm0)i
=jjX
mcm(xm)jj20
The connection between feature maps and kernels
means that every feature map corresponds to a distance
measure in input space by means of the inner product
of feature vectors. It also means that we can compute
inner products of vectors mapped to much higher dimen-
sional spaces by computing a kernel function, which may
be computationally a lot easier.

==== Page 3 ====
3
feature map kernel RKHSThm 1 Def 3
Thm 2
FIG. 2. Relationships between the concepts of a feature map,
kernel and reproducing kernel Hilbert space.
B. Reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces
Kernel theory goes further and denes a unique Hilbert
space associated with each kernel, the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space or RKHS [17, 18]. Although rather ab-
stract, this concept is useful in order to understand the
signicance of kernels for machine learning, as well as
their connection to linear models in feature space.
Denition 3. LetXbe a non-empty input set and Ra
Hilbert space of functions f:X!Cthat map inputs to
the real numbers. Let h;ibe an inner product dened
onR(which gives rise to a norm via jjfjj=p
hf;fi).
Ris a reproducing kernel Hilbert space if every point
evaluation is a continuous functional F:f!f(x)for
allx2X. This is equivalent to the condition that there
exists a function :XX! Cfor which
hf;(x;)i=f(x) (2)
with(x;)2R and for all f2H,x2X.
The function is the unique reproducing kernel ofR,
and Eq. (2) is the reproducing property . Note that a
dierent, but isometrically isomorphic Hilbert space can
be derived for a so-called Mercer kernel [19].
Since a feature map gives rise to a kernel and a kernel
gives rise to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, we can
construct a unique reproducing kernel Hilbert space for
any given feature map (see Figure 2).
Theorem 2. Let:X !F be a feature map over an
input setX, giving rise to a complex kernel (x;x0) =
h(x);(x0)iF. The corresponding reproducing kernel
Hilbert space has the form
R=ff:X!Cj
f(x) =hw;(x)iF;8x2X;w2Fg (3)
The functionshw;iin the RKHS associated with
feature map can be interpreted as linear models, for
whichw2F denes a hyperplane in feature space.
In machine learning these rather formal concepts gain
relevance because of the (no less formal) representer the-
orem [20]:
Theorem 3. LetXbe an input set, :XX ! Ra
kernel,Da data set consisting of data pairs (xm;ym)2XRandf:X ! Ra class of model functions that
live in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space Rof. Fur-
thermore, assume we have a cost function Cthat quan-
ties the quality of a model by comparing predicted out-
putsf(xm)with targets ym, and which has a regularisa-
tion term of the form g(jjfjj)whereg: [0;1)!Ris
a strictly monotonically increasing function. Then any
functionf2Rthat minimises the cost function Ccan
be written as
f(x) =MX
m=1m(x;xm); (4)
for some parameters m2R.
The representer theorem implies that for a common
family of machine learning optimisation problems over
functions in an RKHS R, the solution can be represented
as an expansion of kernel functions as in Eq. (4). Conse-
quently, instead of explicitly optimising over an innite-
dimensional RKHS we can directly start with the implicit
ansatz of Eq. (4) and solve the convex optimisation prob-
lem of nding the parameters m. The combination of
Theorem 2 and Theorem 3 shows another facet of the
link of kernels and feature maps. A model that denes
a hyperplane in feature space can often be written as a
model that depends on kernel evaluations. In Section III
we will translate these two viewpoints into two ways of
designing quantum machine learning algorithms.
C. Input encoding as a feature map
The immediate approach to combine quantum me-
chanics and the theory of kernels is to associate the
Hilbert space of a quantum system with a reproducing
kernel Hilbert space and nd the reproducing kernel of
the system. We show in Appendix A that for Hilbert
spaces with discrete bases, as well as for the special
`continuous-basis' case of the Hilbert space of coherent
states, the reproducing kernel is given by inner products
of basis vectors. This insight can lead to interesting
results. For example, Chatterjee et al. [14] show that
the inner product of an optical coherent state can
be turned into a Gaussian kernel (also called radial
basis function kernel ) which is widely used in machine
learning. However, to widen the framework we choose
another route here. Instead of asking what kernel is
associated with a quantum Hilbert space, we associate
a quantum Hilbert space with a feature space and
derive a kernel that is given by the inner product of
quantum states. As seen in the previous section, this
will automatically give rise to an RKHS, and the entire
apparatus of kernel theory can be applied.
Assume we want to encode some input xfrom an input
setXinto a quantum state that is described by a vector
j(x)iand which lives in Hilbert space F. This procedure
of `input encoding' fullls the denition of a feature map

==== Page 4 ====
4
:X!F , which we call a quantum feature map here.
According to Theorem 1 we can derive a kernel from
this feature map via Eq. (1). By virtue of Theorem
2, the kernel is the reproducing kernel of an RKHS R
as dened in Eq. (3). The functions in Rare the inner
products of the `feature-mapped' input data and a vector
jwi2F , which denes a linear model
f(x;w) =hwj(x)i (5)
Note that we use Dirac brackets hji instead of the inner
producth;ito signify that we are calculating inner prod-
ucts in a quantum Hilbert space. Finally, the representer
theorem 3 guarantees that the minimiser min wC(w;D)
of the empirical risk
C(w;D) =MX
m=1jf(xm;w) ymj2+jjfjjR
can be expressed by Equation (4). The simple idea of in-
terpretingx!j(x)ias a feature map therefore allows
us to make use of the rich theory of kernel methods and
gives rise to machine learning models whose trained can-
didates can be expressed by inner products of quantum
states. Note that if the state j(x)ihas complex ampli-
tudes, we can always construct a real kernel by taking
the absolute square of the inner product.
III. QUANTUM MACHINE LEARNING IN
FEATURE HILBERT SPACE
Now let us enter the realm of quantum computing and
quantum machine learning. We show how to use the ideas
of Section II C to design two types of quantum machine
learning algorithms and illustrate both approaches with
an example from continuous-variable systems.
A. Feature-encoding circuits
From the perspective of quantum computing, a
quantum feature map x! j(x)icorresponds to
a state preparation circuit U(x) that acts on a
ground or vacuum state j0:::0iof a Hilbert space Fas
U(x)j0:::0i=j(x)i. We will call U(x) the feature-
embedding circuit . The models from Eq. (5) in the
reproducing Hilbert space from Denition 2 are inner
products between j(x)iand a general quantum state
jwi 2 F . We therefore consider a second circuit W
withWj0:::0i=jwi, which we call the model circuit .
The model circuit species the hyperplane of a linear
model in feature Hilbert space. If the feature state
j(x)iis orthogonal to jwi, thenxlies on the deci-
sion boundary, whereas states with a positive [negative]
inner product lie on the left [right] side of the hyperplane.
To show some examples of feature-embedding circuits
and their associated kernels, let us have a look atpopular input encoding techniques in quantum machine
learning.
a. Basis encoding. Many quantum machine learning
algorithms assume that the inputs xto the computation
are encoded as binary strings represented by a compu-
tational basis state of the qubits [12, 21]. For exam-
ple,x= 01001 is represented by the 5-qubit basis state
j01001i. The computational basis state corresponds to a
standard basis vector jii(withibeing the integer rep-
resentation of the bitstring) in a 2n-dimensional Hilbert
spaceF, and the eect of the feature-embedding circuit
is given by
U:x2f0;1gn!jii:
This feature map maps each data input to a state from an
orthonormal basis and is equivalent to the generic nite-
dimensional case discussed in Appendix A. As shown
there, the generic kernel is the Kronecker delta
(x;x0) =hijji=ij;
which is a binary similarity measure that is only nonzero
for two identical inputs.
b. Amplitude encoding. Another approach to infor-
mation encoding is to associate normalised input vectors
x= (x0;:::;xN 1)T2RNof dimension N= 2nwith the
amplitudes of a nqubit statej xi[8, 13],
U:x2RN!j xi=N 1X
i=0xijii:
As above,jiidenotes the i'th computational basis state.
This choice corresponds to the linear kernel,
(x;x0) =h xj x0i=xTx0:
c. Copies of quantum states. With a slight variation
of amplitude encoding we can implement polynomial ker-
nels [9]. Taking dcopies of an amplitude encoded quan-
tum state,
U:x2RN!j xi

j xi;
corresponds to the kernel
(x;x0) =h xj x0ih xj x0i= (xTx0)d:
d. Product encoding. One can also use a (tensor)
product encoding, in which each feature of the input
x= (x1;::;xN)T2RNis encoded in the amplitudes
of one separate qubit. An example is to encode xias
j(xi)i= cos(xi)j0i+ sin(xi)j1ifori= 1;:::;N [22, 23].
This corresponds to a feature-embedding circuit with the
eect
U:x2RN!
cosx1
sinx1



cosxN
sinxN
2R2N;
and implies a cosine kernel,
(x;x0) =NY
i=1cos(xi x0
i):

==== Page 5 ====
5
implicit approachquantum 
device kernel(   ,     ) 
explicit approachquantum 
devicemodelprediction
prediction
new input training inputs
FIG. 3. Illustration of the two approaches to use quantum fea-
ture maps for supervised learning. The implicit approach uses
the quantum device to evaluate the kernel function as part of
a hybrid or quantum-assisted model which can be trained by
classical methods. In the explicit approach, the model is solely
computed by the quantum device, which consists of a varia-
tional circuit trained by hybrid quantum-classical methods.
B. Building a quantum classier
Having formulated the ideas from Section II C in the
language of quantum computing, we can identify two
dierent strategies of designing a quantum machine
learning algorithm (see Figure 3). On the one hand, we
can use the quantum computer to estimate the inner
products(x;x0) =h(x)j(x0)ifrom a kernel-dependent
model as in Eq. (4), which we call the implicit approach ,
since we use the quantum system to estimate distance
measures on input space. This strategy requires a quan-
tum computer that can do two things: to implement
U(x) for anyx2 X and to estimate inner products
between quantum states (for example using a SWAP
test routine). The computation of the model from those
kernel estimates, as well as the training algorithm is left
to a classical device. This is an excellent strategy in the
context of intermediate-term quantum technologies [24],
where we are interested in using a quantum computer
only for small routines of limited gate count, and
compute as much as possible on the classical hardware.
Note that in the long term, quantum computers could
also be used to learn the parameters mby computing
the inverse of the kernel Gram matrix, which has been
investigated in Refs. [9, 25].
On the other hand, and as motivated in the in-
troduction, one can bypass the representer theorem
and explicitly perform the classication in the `feature
Hilbert space' of the quantum system. We call this
theexplicit approach . For example, this can mean to
nd ajwithat denes a model 5. To do so, we can
make the model circuit trainable, W=W(), so that
quantum-classical hybrid training [23, 26] of can learn
the optimal model jw()i=W()j0i. The ansatz for
1.0
0.0
c = 2.0 c = 1.5 c = 1.0FIG. 4. Shape of the squeezing kernel function sq(x;x0) from
Equation (7) for dierent squeezing strength hyperparameters
c. The input xis xed at (0 ;0) andx0is varied. The plots
show the interval [  1;1] on both horizontal axes.
the model circuit's architecture denes the space of
possible models and can act as regularisation (see also
[22]). Below we will follow a slightly more general
strategy and compute a state W()Uj0:::0i, from which
measurements determine the output of the model.
Depending on the measurement, this is not necessarily a
linear model in feature Hilbert space. We could even go
further and include postselection in the model circuit,
which might give the classier in feature Hilbert space
even more power.
Using quantum computers for learning tasks with
these two approaches is desirable in various settings.
For example, the implicit approach may be interesting
in cases where the quantum device evaluates kernels
or models faster in terms of absolute runtime speed.
Another interesting example is a setting in which the
kernel one wants to use is classically intractable because
the runtime grows exponentially or even faster with
the input dimension. The explicit approach may be
useful when we want to leave the limits of the RKHS
framework and construct classiers directly on Hilbert
space.
In the remainder of this work we want to explore these
two approaches with several examples. We use squeez-
ing in continuous-variable quantum systems as a fea-
ture map, for which the Hilbert space Fis an innite-
dimensional Fock space. This constructs a squeezing-
based quantum machine learning classier which can for
example be implemented by optical quantum computers.
C. Squeezing as a feature map
Asqueezed vacuum state is dened as
jzi=1p
cosh(r)1X
n=0p
(2n)!
2nn!( ei'tanh(r))nj2ni;
wherefjnigdenotes the Fock basis and z=rei'is the
complex squeezing factor with absolute value rand phase
'. It will be useful to introduce the notation jzi=
j(r;')i. We can interpret x!j(x)i=j(c;x)ias a fea-
ture map from a one-dimensional real input space x2R

==== Page 6 ====
6
train 0 test 0c = 1.5
train 1 test 1
c = 1.5 c = 1.5
c = 1.0 c = 1.5 c = 2.0
FIG. 5. Decision boundary of a support vector machine with
the custom kernel from Eq. (7). The shaded areas show the
decision regions for Class 0 (blue) and Class 1 (red), and each
plot shows the rate of correct classications on the training
set/test set. The rst row plots three standard 2-dimensional
datasets: `circles', `moons' and `blobs', each with 150 test and
50 training samples. The second row illustrates that increas-
ing the squeezing hyperparameter cchanges the classication
performance. Here we use a dataset of 500 training and 100
test samples. Training was performed with python's scikit-
learn SVC classier using a custom kernel which implements
the overlap of Eq. (8).
to the Hilbert space of Fock states, in short, the Fock
space . Here,cis a constant hyperparameter that deter-
mines the strength of the squeezing, and xis associated
with the phase. Moreover, when given multi-dimensional
inputs in a dataset of vectors x= (x1;:::;xN)T2RN, we
can dene the joint state of Nsqueezed vacuum modes,
:x!j(c;x)i; (6)
with
j(c;x)i=j(c;x1)i
:::
j(c;xN)i2F;
as a feature map, where Fis now a multimode Fock
space. We call this feature map the squeezing feature
map with phase encoding .
The kernel
(x;x0;c) =NY
i=1h(c;xi)j(c;x0
i)i (7)
with
h(c;xi)j(c;x0
i)i=r
sechcsechc
1 ei(x0
i xi)tanhctanhc;(8)
derived from this feature map [27] is easy to compute on
a classical computer. It is plotted in Figure 4, where we
see that the hyperparameter cdetermines the variance
of the kernel function. Note that we can also encode
train 0 test 0epoch 1 epoch 500 epoch 5000
train 1 test 1FIG. 6. Decision boundary of a perceptron classier in Fock
space after mapping the 2-dimensional data points via the
squeezing feature map with phase encoding from Eq. (6)
(withc= 1:5). The perceptron only acts on the real sub-
space and without regularisation. The `blobs' dataset has
now only 70 training and 20 test samples. The perceptron
achieves a training accuracy of 1 after less than 5000 epochs,
which means that the data is linearly separable in Fock space.
Interestingly, in this example the test performance remains
exactly the same. The simulations were performed with the
Strawberry Fields simulator as well as a scikit-learn out-of-
the-box perceptron classier.
features in the absolute value of the squeezing and de-
ne a squeezing feature map with absolute value encoding ,
x!j(x)i=j(x;c)i. However, in this version we cannot
vary the variance of the kernel function, which is why we
use the phase encoding in the following investiagtions.
D. An implicit quantum-assisted classier
In the implicit approach, we evaluate the kernel in Eq.
(7) with a quantum computer and feed it into a classical
kernel method. Instead of using a real quantum device,
we exploit the fact that, in the case of squeezing, the
kernel can be eciently computed classically, and use it
as a custom kernel in a support vector machine. Figure
5 shows that such a model easily learns the decision
boundary of 2-dimensional mini-benchmark datasets.
Since the idea of a support vector machine is to nd
the maximum-margin hyperplane in feature space, we
want to know whether we can always nd a hyperplane
for which the training accuracy is 1. In other words,
we ask if the data becomes linearly separable in Fock
space by the squeezing feature map. An easy way to
do this is to apply a perceptron classier to the data in
feature space. The perceptron is guaranteed to nd such
a separating hyperplane if it exists. Figure 6 shows the
performance of a perceptron classier in the Fock space
for the `blobs' data. The data was mapped to this space
by the squeezing feature map with phase encoding. As
one can see, after 5000 epochs (runs through the dataset)
the decision boundary perfectly ts the training data,
achieving an accuracy of 1. The number of iterations to
train the perceptron is known to increase with O(1=2)
whereis the margin between the two classes [28], and
indeed we nd in other simulations that the `moons' and

==== Page 7 ====
7
`circles' data only take a few epochs until reaching full
accuracy. Although the perfect t to the training data is
of course not useful for machine learning (as can be seen
by the non-increasing accuracy on the test set) these
results are a clue to the fact that the squeezing feature
map makes data linearly separable in feature space, a
fact that we prove in Appendix B.
While the results of the simulations are promising,
a goal is to nd more sophisticated kernels. Although
quantum computers could oer constant speed advan-
tages, they become indispensable if the feature map cir-
cuit is classically intractable. However, squeezed states
are an example of so-called Gaussian states, and it is
well known that Gaussian states (although living in an
innite-dimensional Hilbert space) can be eciently sim-
ulated by a classical computer [29], which we used in the
simulations. In order to do something more interesting,
one needs non-Gaussian elements to the circuit. For ex-
ample, one can extend a standard linear optical network
of beamsplitters by a cubic phase gate [30, 31] or use pho-
ton number measurements [32]. To this end, let V(x)
be a non-Gaussian feature map circuit, i.e. a quantum
algorithm that takes a vacuum state and prepares an x-
dependent non-Gaussian state. The kernel
(x;x0) =h0:::0jVy
(x)V(x0)j0:::0i
can in general not be simulated by a classical computer
any more. It is therefore an interesting open question
what type of feature map circuits Vare classically in-
tractable, but at the same time lead to powerful kernels
for classical models such as support vector machines.
E. An explicit quantum classier
In the explicit approach dened above, we use a
parametrised continuous-variable circuit W() to build
a \Fock-space" classier. For our squeezing example this
can be done as follows. We start with two vacuum modes
j0i
j0i. To classify a data input x, rst map the input
to a quantum state jc;xi=jc;x1i
jc;x2iby performing
a squeezing operation on each of the modes. Second, ap-
ply the model circuit W() tojc;xi. Third, interpret the
probability p(n1;n2) of measuring a certain Fock state
jn1;n2ias the output of the machine learning model.
Since this probability depends on the displacement and
squeezing intensity, it is better to dene two probabili-
ties, sayp(n1= 2;n2= 0) andp(n1= 0;n2= 2), as
a one-hot encoded output vector ( o0;o1). This output
vector can be normalised [33] to a new vector
1
o0+o1
o0
o1
=
p(y= 0)
p(y= 1)
;
wherep(y= 0),p(y= 1) can now be interpreted as the
probability for the model to predict class y= 0 and
y= 1, respectively. The nal label is the class with thea.)
feature map
circuitmodel
circuitW()
x1
x2
...o0
o1p(y= 0)
p(y= 1)
X
FY
b.)
j(c;x1)i
W()p(n1)
j(c;x2)i p(n2)
c.)
BS(1;2)D(3)P(5)V(7)
D(4)P(6)V(8)
FIG. 7. a.) Representation of the Fock-space-classier in
the graphical language of quantum neural networks. A vector
(x1;x2)Tfrom the input space Xgets mapped into the feature
spaceFwhich is the innite-dimensional 2-mode Fock space
of the quantum system. The model circuit, including photon
detection measurement, implements a linear model in feature
space and reduces the \innite hidden layer" to two outputs.
b.) The model circuit of the explicit classier described in the
text uses only 2 modes to instantiate this innite-dimensional
hidden layer. The variational circuit W() consists of repe-
titions of a gate block. We use the gate block shown in c.)
with the beamsplitter (BS), displacement (D), quadratic (P)
and cubic phase gates (C) described in the text.
higher probability. We can interpret this circuit in the
graphical representation of neural networks as shown at
the top in Figure 7.
Let us assume we could represent any possible quan-
tum circuit in the feature Hilbert space with the circuit
W(). Since the data in Fis linearly separable, there is
aWfor which we obtain 100% accuracy on the training
set, as we saw in Figure 6. However, the goal of machine
learning is not to perfectly t data, but to generalise from
it. It is therefore not desirable to nd the optimal deci-
sion boundary for the training data in F, but to nd a
good candidate from a class of decision boundaries that
captures the structure in the data well. Such a restricted
class of decision boundaries can be dened by using an
ansatz for the model circuit W() which cannot represent
anycircuit, yet still exible enough to reach interesting
candidates. Figure 7 c.) shows such a model circuit for
the 2 input modes in our continuous-variable example.
The architecture consists of repetitions of a general gate

==== Page 8 ====
8
train 0 test 01detail
iterationsloss
train 1 test 1.99.98
FIG. 8. Fock space classier presented in Figure 7 and the
text for the `moons' dataset. The shaded areas show the prob-
abilityp(y= 1) of predicting class 1. The datasets consist of
150 training and 50 test samples, and has been trained for
5000 steps with stochastic gradient descent of batch-size 5,
an adaptive learning rate and a square-loss cost function with
a gentlel2regularisation applied to all weights. The loss drops
predominantly in the rst 200 steps (left).
block. We denote by ^ a1;2;^ay
1;2the creation and annihi-
lation operators of mode 1 and 2, and with ^ x1;2;^p1;2the
corresponding quadrature operators (see [34]). After an
entangling beam splitter gate,
BS(u;v) = eu(eiv^ay
1^a2 e iv^a1^ay
2);
withu;v2R, the circuit consists of single-mode gates
that are rst, second and third order in the quadratures.
The rst-order gate is implemented by a displacement
gate
D(z) = ep
2i(Im(z)^x Re(z)^p);
with the complex displacement factor z. We use a
quadratic phase gate for the second order,
P(u) = eiu
2^x2;
and a cubic phase gate for the third order operator,
V(u) = eiu
3^x3:
We can in principle construct any continuous-variable
quantum circuit from this gate set. This basic circuit
block can easily be generalised to circuits of more modes
by replacing the single beam splitter by a full optical
network of beam splitters [35].
To show that the Fock space classier works, we plot
the decision boundary for the `moons' data in Figure 8,
using 4 repetitions of the gate block from Figure 7 c.)
and 32 parameters in total. The training loss shows that
after about 200 iterations of a stochastic gradient descent
algorithm, the loss converges to almost zero.IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we introduced a number of new ideas
for the area of quantum machine learning based on the
theory of feature spaces and kernels. Interpreting the
encoding of inputs into quantum states as a feature map,
we associate a quantum Hilbert space with a feature
space. Inner products of quantum states in this feature
space can be used to evaluate a kernel function. We
can alternatively train a variational quantum circuit as
an explicit classier in feature space to learn a decision
boundary. We introduced a squeezing feature map as
an example and motivated with small-scale simulations
that these two approach can lead to interesting results.
From this work there are many further avenues of
research. For example, we raised the question whether
there are interesting kernel functions that can be
computed by estimating the inner products of quan-
tum states, for which state preparation is classically
intractable. Another open question are the details
in the design and training of variational circuits, and
how learning algorithms can be tailormade for the use
in hybrid training schemes. This is a topic that has
just begun to be investigated by the quantum machine
learning community [1, 12].
Last but not least, we want to come back to a point
we raised in the introduction. In quantum machine learn-
ing, a lot of models use amplitude encoding, which means
that a data vector is represented by the amplitudes of
a quantum state. Especially when trying to reproduce
neural network-like dynamics one would like to perform
nonlinear transformations on the data. But while linear
transformations are natural for quantum theory, nonlin-
earities are dicult to design in this context. Interest-
ing workarounds based on postselection or repeat-until-
success circuits were proposed in [23, 36], but at the con-
siderable costs of making the circuit non-deterministic,
and with a probability of failure that grows with the
size of the architecture. The feature map approach `out-
sources' the nonlinearity into the procedure of encoding
inputs into a quantum state and therefore oers an ele-
gant solution to the problem of nonlinearities in ampli-
tude encoding.
[1] G. Verdon, M. Broughton, and J. Biamonte, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1712.05304 (2017).[2] M. H. Amin, Physical Review A 92, 1 (2015).
[3] M. Benedetti, J. Realpe-G omez, R. Biswas, and

==== Page 9 ====
9
A. Perdomo-Ortiz, arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02542
(2016).
[4] T. J. Y. Guang Hao Low and I. L. Chuang, Physical
Review A 89, 062315 (2014).
[5] P. Wittek and C. Gogolin, Scientic Reports 7(2017).
[6] V. Denchev, N. Ding, H. Neven, and S. Vishwanathan,
inProceedings of the 29th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML-12) (2012) pp. 863{870.
[7] B. OGorman, R. Babbush, A. Perdomo-Ortiz,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, and V. Smelyanskiy, The Euro-
pean Physical Journal Special Topics 224, 163 (2015).
[8] N. Wiebe, D. Braun, and S. Lloyd, Physical Review
Letters 109, 050505 (2012).
[9] P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, and S. Lloyd, Physcial Re-
view Letters 113, 130503 (2014).
[10] M. Schuld, I. Sinayskiy, and F. Petruccione, Physical
Review A 94, 022342 (2016).
[11] K. H. Wan, O. Dahlsten, H. Kristj ansson, R. Gardner,
and M. Kim, npj Quantum Information 3, 36 (2017).
[12] E. Farhi and H. Neven, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06002
(2018).
[13] M. Schuld, M. Fingerhuth, and F. Petruccione, Euro-
physics Letters 119, 60002 (2017).
[14] R. Chatterjee and T. Yu, Quantum Information and
Communication 17, 1292 (2017).
[15] B. Sch olkopf and A. J. Smola, Learning with kernels:
Support vector machines, regularization, optimization,
and beyond (MIT Press, 2002).
[16] C. Berg, J. P. R. Christensen, and P. Ressel, Harmonic
analysis on semigroups (Springer-Verlag, 1984).
[17] T. Hofmann, B. Sch olkopf, and A. J. Smola, The Annals
of Statistics , 1171 (2008).
[18] N. Aronszajn, Transactions of the American Mathemat-
ical Society 68, 337 (1950).
[19] B. J Mercer, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 209, 415
(1909).
[20] B. Sch olkopf, R. Herbrich, and A. Smola, in Computa-
tional learning theory (Springer, 2001) pp. 416{426.
[21] S. Wang, Journal of Mathematics Research 7, 175 (2015).
[22] E. Stoudenmire and D. J. Schwab, in Advances In Neural
Information Processing Systems (2016) pp. 4799{4807.
[23] G. G. Guerreschi and M. Smelyanskiy, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1701.01450 (2017).
[24] J. Preskill, arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00862 (2018).
[25] M. Schuld, I. Sinayskiy, and F. Petruccione, Physical
Review A 94, 022342 (2016).
[26] J. R. McClean, J. Romero, R. Babbush, and A. Aspuru-
Guzik, New Journal of Physics 18, 023023 (2016).
[27] S. M. Barnett and P. M. Radmore, Methods in theoretical
quantum optics , Vol. 15 (Oxford University Press, 2002).
[28] A. B. Noviko, On convergence proofs for perceptrons ,
Tech. Rep. (Stanford Research Institute, 1963).
[29] S. D. Bartlett, B. C. Sanders, S. L. Braunstein, and
K. Nemoto, in Quantum Information with Continuous
Variables (Springer, 2002) pp. 47{55.
[30] D. Gottesman, A. Kitaev, and J. Preskill, Physical Re-
view A 64, 012310 (2001).
[31] S. Lloyd and S. L. Braunstein, in Quantum Information
with Continuous Variables (Springer, 1999) pp. 9{17.
[32] S. D. Bartlett and B. C. Sanders, Physical Review A 65,
042304 (2002).
[33] In contrast to a standard technique in machine learning,
it is not advisable to use a softmax layer for this purpose,
sinceo0;o1can be very small, which leads to almost uni-form probabilities.
[34] C. Weedbrook, S. Pirandola, R. Garc a-Patr on, N. J.
Cerf, T. C. Ralph, J. H. Shapiro, and S. Lloyd, Reviews
of Modern Physics 84, 621 (2012).
[35] F. Flamini, N. Spagnolo, N. Viggianiello, A. Crespi,
R. Osellame, and F. Sciarrino, Scientic Reports 7,
15133 (2017).
[36] N. Wiebe and C. Granade, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.03145 (2015).
[37] A. Berlinet and C. Thomas-Agnan, Reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces in probability and statistics (Springer Sci-
ence & Business Media, 2011).
[38] T. Griths and A. Yuille, The probabilistic mind:
Prospects for Bayesian cognitive science , 33 (2008).
[39] R. D. la Madrid, European Journal of Physics 26, 287
(2005).
[40] J. R. Klauder and B.-S. Skagerstam, Coherent states: ap-
plications in physics and mathematical physics (World
scientic, 1985).
[41] L. Hogben, Handbook of linear algebra (CRC Press,
2006).
Appendix A: Reproducing kernels of quantum
systems
In this section of the appendix we will try to nd
an answer to the question of which reproducing kernels
the Hilbert space of generic quantum systems gives
rise to. Quantum theory prescribes that the state of a
quantum system is modelled by a vector in a Hilbert
spaceHs. In a typical setting, the Hilbert space is
constructed from a complete basis of eigenvectors fjsig
of a complete set of commuting Hermitian operators
which corresponds to physical observables. Due to the
hermiticity of the observables, the basis is orthogonal,
and it can be continuous (i.e., if the observable is the
position operator describing the location of a particle),
countably innite (i.e., observing the number of photons
in an electric eld), or nite (i.e., observing the spin of
an electron). Vectors in the Hilbert space are abstractly
referred to asj i 2 H in Dirac notation. However,
every such Hilbert space has a functional represen-
tation . In the case of a discrete basis of dimension
N2N[1, the functional representation Hf
sofHs
is given by the (Hilbert) space l2of square summable
sequencesf (si) =hsij igN
i=1with the inner product
h ;'i=P
si (si)'(si). In the continuous case this is
the spaceL2of square summable (equivalence classes
of) functions  (s) =hsj iwith the inner product
h ;'i=R
ds (s)'(s). The preceding formulation of
quantum theory therefore associates every quantum
system with a Hilbert space of functions mapping from
a setS=fsgto the complex numbers. The question is
if these Hilbert spaces give rise to a reproducing kernel
that makes them a RKHS with respect to the input set S.
With the resolution of identity 1=R
dsjsihsjfor the
continuous and 1=P
ijsiihsijfor the discrete case, we
can immediately \create" the reproducing property from

==== Page 10 ====
10
Eq. (2). Consider rst the discrete case:
 (si) =hsij i=X
sjhsijsjihsjj i=hhsjij ()i:
We can identify hsijsjiwith the reproducing kernel.
Since the basis is orthonormal, we have (si;sj) =i;j.
The continuous case is more subtle. Inserting the iden-
tity, we get
 (s) =Z
ds0hsjs0ihs0j i=hhsji; ()i;
which is the reproducing kernel property with the repro-
ducing kernel (s;s0) =hsjs0i. However, the \function"
s0(s) =(s s0) is not square integrable, which means it
is itself not part of Hf
s, and the properties of Denition
3 are not fullled. This is no surprise, as the space of
square integrable functions L2is a frequent example of a
Hilbert space that is not a RKHS [37]. The inconsistency
between Dirac's formalism and functional analysis is
also a well-known issue in quantum theory, but usually
glossed over in physical contexts [38]. If mathematical
rigour is needed, physicists usually refer to the theory of
rigged Hilbert spaces [39].
There are quantum systems with an innite basis
which naturally give rise to a reproducing kernel that is
not the delta function. These systems are described by
so-called generalised coherent states [40]. In the context
of quantum machine learning, this has been discussed in
Ref. [14]. Generalised coherent states are vectors jliin
a Hilbert spaceHcof nite or countably innite dimen-
sion, and where the index lis from some topological space
L(allowing us to dene a norm jjjlijj=p
hljli). They
have two fundamental properties. First, jliis a strongly
continuous function of l,
lim
l!l0jjjl0i jlijj= 0;jli6= 0:
Note that this excludes for example the discrete Fock
basisfjnig, but also any orthonormal set of states fjzig
with a continuous label z2C, since1
2jjjz0i jzijj= 1 for
z06=z. Second, there exists a measure onLso that
we have a resolution of identity 1=R
Ljlihljd(l). This
leads to a functional representation of the Hilbert space
where a vectorj i2Hcis expressed viaj i=P
l (l)jli
with (l) =hlj i. Inserting the resolution of identity to
the right hand side of this expression yields
 (l) =Z
Lhljl0ihl0j id(l0);
which is exactly the reproducing property in Denition
3 with the reproducing kernel (l;l0) =hljl0i. Since
there is a nite overlap between any two states from
the basis, the kernel is not the Dirac delta func-
tion, and we do not run into the same problem as
for continuous orthogonal bases. Hence, the Hilbertspace of coherent states is an RKHS for the input set flg.
The most well-known type of coherent state are optical
coherent states
ji=e jj2
21X
n=0n
p
n!jni;
which are the eigenstates of the non-Hermitian bosonic
creation operator ^ a, with the associated kernel
(;) =hji= e 
jj2
2+jj2
2 
; (A1)
whose square is a radial basis function orGaussian kernel
as remarked in [14].
Appendix B: Linear separability in Fock space
If we map the inputs of a dataset Dto a new dataset
D0=fj(c;x1)i;:::;j(c;xM)ig;
using the squeezing feature map with phase encoding
from Eq. (6), the feature mapped data vectors in D0are
always linearly separable, which means any assignment
of two classes of labels to the data can be separated by
a hyperplane in F(see Figure 1). To show this, rst
consider the following:
Proposition 1. A set ofMvectors in RNare linearly
separable if M 1of them are linear independent.
The proof can be found in Appendix C. Proposition
1 tells us that if our data is linearly independent,
it is linearly separable. This result is in fact known
from statistical learning theory: The VC dimension
{ a measure of exibility or expressive power { of
linear models in Kdimensions is K+ 1, which means
that a linear model can separate or \shatter" K+ 1
data points if we can choose the strategy of how to ar-
range them, but not the strategy of how they are labelled.
If we can show that the squeezing feature map maps
vectors to linearly independent states in Fock space, we
know that any dataset becomes linearly separable in Fock
space. To simplify, lets rst see look at the squeezing map
of a single mode.
Proposition 2. Given a set of squeezing phases
f'1;:::;'Mgwith'm6='m0form= 1;:::;M;m6=m0
and a hyperparameter c2R, the squeezed vacuum Fock
statesj(c;'1)i;:::;j(c;'M)iare linearly independent.
The proof is found in Appendix D. A very similar
proof conrms that the proposition also holds true for
the sueezing map with absolute value encoding described
in Section III C. Symbolic computation of the rank of the
design matrix in feature space in Mathematica conrms
this result for randomly selected squeezing factors up

==== Page 11 ====
11
toM= 10 and a cuto dimension that truncates Fock
space to 40 dimensions.
For the multimode feature map dealing with input data
of dimension higher than one,
j(c;'m)i=j(c;'m
1)i
:::
j(c;'m))i;
and
j(c;'m0)i=j(c;'m0
1)i
:::
j(c;'m0))i:
We have
h(c;'m)j(c;'m0)i=NY
i=1h(c;'m
i)j(c;'m0
i)i;
which is 1 if 'm
i='m0
ifor alli= 1;:::;N and a value
other than zero else. The linear independence therefore
carries over to multi-dimensional feature maps.
Appendix C: Proof of Proposition 1
Let
D=f(x1;y1);;(xM;yM)g
be a dataset of Mvectors with xm2RNfor allm=
1;;M, andy2f  1;1g. The vectors are guaranteed
to be linearly separable if for any assignment of classes
f 1;1gto labelsy1;:::;yMthere is a hyperplane dened
by parameters w1;:::;wN;bso that
sgn(NX
i=1wixm
i+b) =ym8m= 1;:::;M: (C1)
The sign function is a bit tricky, but if we can instead
show that the stronger condition
NX
i=1wixm
i+b=ym8m= 1;:::;M (C2)
holds for some parameters, Eq. C1 must automatically
be satised.
Equation C2 denes a system of Mlinear equations
withN+ 1 unknowns (namely the variables). From the
theorey of linear algebra we know [41] that there is at
least one solution if and only if the rank of the `coecient
matrix'
[Xj1] =0
B@x1
1x1
N1
............
xM
1xM
N11
CA
is equal to the rank of its augmented matrix
[Xj1jy] =0
B@x1
1x1
N1y1
...............
xM
1xM
N1yM1
CA:Remember that the rank of a matrix is the number of
linearly independent row (and column) vectors.
If the data vectors are all linearly independent we have
thatNM(ifN < M there would be some vectors
that depend on others, because we have more vectors
than dimensions), and the rank of Xis min(M;N ) =M.
Augmenting Xby stacking any number of column
vectors simply increases N, which means that it does
not change the rank of the matrix. It follows that for
Mlinearly independent data points embedded in a N
dimensional space the system has a solution. The data
is therefore linearly separable.
With this argument we can add more vectors that are
linearly dependent until M=N. After this, we can in
fact add one (but only one) more data point that linearly
depends on the others, and still guarantee linear separa-
bility. That is because adding one data point makes the
row number equal to the column number in [ Xj1], and
adding more columns does not change the rank. In con-
trast, adding twodata points means that we have more
columns than rows in [ Xj1], and adding the column for
[Xj1jy] can indeed change the rank.
Appendix D: Proof of Proposition 2
Let's consider a matrix Mwhere the squeezed states
in Fock basis form the rows:
Mjn:=1p
cosh(rj) 
 eijtanh(rj)np
(2n)!
2nn!
We introduce two auxiliary diagonal matrices:
D1:= diagfq
cosh(rj)g
D2:= diag(
n!p
(2n)!)
Multiplying, we nd that the matrix V:=D1MD 2has
matrix elements
Vjn=
 1
2eijtanh(rj)n
:
Importantly, Vhas the structure of a Vandermonde ma-
trix. In particular, it has determinant
det(V) =1
2Y
1i<jn 
 eiitanh(ri) + eijtanh(rj)
:
The only way that det( V) = 0 is if
ei(i j)tanh(ri) = tanh(rj)
for somei=j. The squeezing feature map with phase
encoding prescribes that ri=rj=c(and we assume that

==== Page 12 ====
12
c>0). Thus, the only solution to the above equation is
when'i='j, which can only be true if the two feature
vectors describe the same datapoint, which we excluded
in Proposition 2. Thus, det( V)>0, which means that
det(M)>0, and hence Mis full rank. This means that
the columns of M, which are our feature vectors, arelinearly independent. Note that the same proof also pre-
scribes that squeezing feature maps with absolute value
encoding makes distinct data points linearly independent
in Fock space.

