==== Page 1 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Karl Cobbe1Oleg Klimov1Chris Hesse1Taehoon Kim1John Schulman1
Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the problem of over-
ﬁtting in deep reinforcement learning. Among
the most common benchmarks in RL, it is cus-
tomary to use the same environments for both
training and testing. This practice offers rela-
tively little insight into an agent’s ability to gen-
eralize. We address this issue by using proce-
durally generated environments to construct dis-
tinct training and test sets. Most notably, we in-
troduce a new environment called CoinRun, de-
signed as a benchmark for generalization in RL.
Using CoinRun, we ﬁnd that agents overﬁt to sur-
prisingly large training sets. We then show that
deeper convolutional architectures improve gen-
eralization, as do methods traditionally found in
supervised learning, including L2 regularization,
dropout, data augmentation and batch normaliza-
tion.
1. Introduction
Generalizing between tasks remains difﬁcult for state of the
art deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Although
trained agents can solve complex tasks, they struggle to
transfer their experience to new environments. Agents that
have mastered ten levels in a video game often fail catas-
trophically when ﬁrst encountering the eleventh. Humans
can seamlessly generalize across such similar tasks, but this
ability is largely absent in RL agents. In short, agents be-
come overly specialized to the environments encountered
during training.
That RL agents are prone to overﬁtting is widely appreci-
ated, yet the most common RL benchmarks still encourage
training and evaluating on the same set of environments.
We believe there is a need for more metrics that evalu-
ate generalization by explicitly separating training and test
environments. In the same spirit as the Sonic Benchmark
1OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Karl
Cobbe <karl@openai.com >.
Proceedings of the 36thInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright
2019 by the author(s).(Nichol et al. ,2018 ), we seek to better quantify an agent’s
ability to generalize.
To begin, we train agents on CoinRun, a procedurally gen-
erated environment of our own design, and we report the
surprising extent to which overﬁtting occurs. Using this
environment, we investigate how several key algorithmic
and architectural decisions impact the generalization per-
formance of trained agents.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1.We show that the number of training environments re-
quired for good generalization is much larger than the
number used by prior work on transfer in RL.
2.We propose a generalization metric using the CoinRun
environment, and we show how this metric provides a
useful signal upon which to iterate.
3.We evaluate the impact of different convolutional ar-
chitectures and forms of regularization, ﬁnding that
these choices can signiﬁcantly improve generalization
performance.
2. Related Work
Our work is most directly inspired by the Sonic Benchmark
(Nichol et al. ,2018 ), which proposes to measure general-
ization performance by training and testing RL agents on
distinct sets of levels in the Sonic the HedgehogTMvideo
game franchise. Agents may train arbitrarily long on the
training set, but are permitted only 1 million timesteps at
test time to perform ﬁne-tuning. This benchmark was de-
signed to address the problems inherent to “training on the
test set.”
(Farebrother et al. ,2018 ) also address this problem, ac-
curately recognizing that conﬂating train and test environ-
ments has contributed to the lack of regularization in deep
RL. They propose using different game modes of Atari
2600 games to measure generalization. They turn to su-
pervised learning for inspiration, ﬁnding that both L2 reg-
ularization and dropout can help agents learn more gener-
alizable features.
(Packer et al. ,2018 ) propose a different benchmark to mea-
sure generalization using six classic environments, each of

==== Page 2 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Figure 1. Two levels in CoinRun. The level on the left is much easier than the level on the right.
which has been modiﬁed to expose several internal param-
eters. By training and testing on environments with differ-
ent parameter ranges, their benchmark quantiﬁes agents’
ability to interpolate and extrapolate. ( Zhang et al. ,2018a )
measure overﬁtting in continuous domains, ﬁnding that
generalization improves as the number of training seeds in-
creases. They also use randomized rewards to determine
the extent of undesirable memorization.
Other works create distinct train and test environments us-
ing procedural generation. ( Justesen et al. ,2018 ) use the
General Video Game AI (GVG-AI) framework to gener-
ate levels from several unique games. By varying difﬁ-
culty settings between train and test levels, they ﬁnd that
RL agents regularly overﬁt to a particular training distri-
bution. They further show that the ability to generalize to
human-designed levels strongly depends on the level gen-
erators used during training.
(Zhang et al. ,2018b ) conduct experiments on procedurally
generated gridworld mazes, reporting many insightful con-
clusions on the nature of overﬁtting in RL agents. They ﬁnd
that agents have a high capacity to memorize speciﬁc levels
in a given training set, and that techniques intended to miti-
gate overﬁtting in RL, including sticky actions ( Machado
et al. ,2018 ) and random starts ( Hausknecht and Stone ,
2015 ), often fail to do so.
In Section 5.4, we similarly investigate how injecting
stochasticity impacts generalization. Our work mirrors
(Zhang et al. ,2018b ) in quantifying the relationship be-
tween overﬁtting and the number of training environments,
though we additionally show how several methods, includ-
ing some more prevalent in supervised learning, can reduce
overﬁtting in our benchmark.
These works, as well as our own, highlight the growing
need for experimental protocols that directly address gen-
eralization in RL.3. Quantifying Generalization
3.1. The CoinRun Environment
We propose the CoinRun environment to evaluate the gen-
eralization performance of trained agents. The goal of each
CoinRun level is simple: collect the single coin that lies
at the end of the level. The agent controls a character that
spawns on the far left, and the coin spawns on the far right.
Several obstacles, both stationary and non-stationary, lie
between the agent and the coin. A collision with an ob-
stacle results in the agent’s immediate death. The only re-
ward in the environment is obtained by collecting the coin,
and this reward is a ﬁxed positive constant. The level ter-
minates when the agent dies, the coin is collected, or after
1000 time steps.
We designed the game CoinRun to be tractable for existing
algorithms. That is, given a sufﬁcient number of training
levels and sufﬁcient training time, our algorithms learn a
near optimal policy for allCoinRun levels. Each level is
generated deterministically from a given seed, providing
agents access to an arbitrarily large and easily quantiﬁable
supply of training data. CoinRun mimics the style of plat-
former games like Sonic, but it is much simpler. For the
purpose of evaluating generalization, this simplicity can be
highly advantageous.
Levels vary widely in difﬁculty, so the distribution of levels
naturally forms a curriculum for the agent. Two different
levels are shown in Figure 1. See Appendix Afor more de-
tails about the environment and Appendix Bfor additional
screenshots. Videos of a trained agent playing can be found
here, and environment code can be found here.
3.2. CoinRun Generalization Curves
Using the CoinRun environment, we can measure how suc-
cessfully agents generalize from a given set of training lev-

==== Page 3 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
(a) Final train and test performance of Nature-CNN agents after
256M timesteps, as a function of the number of training levels.
(b) Final train and test performance of IMPALA-CNN agents af-
ter 256M timesteps, as a function of number of training levels.
Figure 2. Dotted lines denote ﬁnal mean test performance of the agents trained with an unbounded set of levels. The solid line and
shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation respectively across 5 seeds. Training sets are generated separately for each
seed.
els to an unseen set of test levels. Train and test levels are
drawn from the same distribution, so the gap between train
and test performance determines the extent of overﬁtting.
As the number of available training levels grows, we ex-
pect the performance on the test set to improve, even when
agents are trained for a ﬁxed number of timesteps. At test
time, we measure the zero-shot performance of each agent
on the test set, applying no ﬁne-tuning to the agent’s pa-
rameters.
We train 9 agents to play CoinRun, each on a training set
with a different number of levels. During training, each
new episode uniformly samples a level from the appropri-
ate set. The ﬁrst 8 agents are trained on sets ranging from
of 100 to 16,000 levels. We train the ﬁnal agent on an un-
bounded set of levels, where each level is seeded randomly.
With 232level seeds, collisions are unlikely. Although this
agent encounters approximately 2M unique levels during
training, it still does not encounter any test levels until test
time. We repeat this whole experiment 5 times, regenerat-
ing the training sets each time.
We ﬁrst train agents with policies using the same 3-layer
convolutional architecture proposed by ( Mnih et al. ,2015 ),
which we henceforth call Nature-CNN. Agents are trained
with Proximal Policy Optimization ( Schulman et al. ,2017 ;
Dhariwal et al. ,2017 ) for a total of 256M timesteps across 8
workers. We train agents for the same number of timestepsindependent of the number of levels in the training set. We
average gradients across all 8 workers on each mini-batch.
We use  =.999, as an optimal agent takes between 50 and
500 timesteps to solve a level, depending on level difﬁculty.
See Appendix Dfor a full list of hyperparameters.
Results are shown in Figure 2a. We collect each data point
by averaging the ﬁnal agent’s performance across 10,000
episodes, where each episode samples a level from the ap-
propriate set. We can see that substantial overﬁtting occurs
when there are less than 4,000 training levels. Even with
16,000 training levels, overﬁtting is still noticeable. Agents
perform best when trained on an unbounded set of levels,
when a new level is encountered in every episode. See Ap-
pendix Efor performance details.
Now that we have generalization curves for the baseline
architecture, we can evaluate the impact of various algo-
rithmic and architectural decisions.
4. Evaluating Architectures
We choose to compare the convolutional architecture used
in IMPALA ( Espeholt et al. ,2018 ) against our Nature-CNN
baseline. With the IMPALA-CNN, we perform the same
experiments described in Section 3.2, with results shown
in Figure 2b. We can see that across all training sets,
the IMPALA-CNN agents perform better at test time than

==== Page 4 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
(a) Performance of Nature-CNN and IMPALA-CNN agents dur-
ing training, on an unbounded set of training levels.
(b) Performance of Nature-CNN and IMPALA-CNN agents dur-
ing training, on a set of 500 training levels.
Figure 3. The lines and shaded regions represent the mean and standard deviation respectively across 3 runs.
Nature-CNN agents.
To evaluate generalization performance, one could train
agents on the unbounded level set and directly compare
learning curves. In this setting, it is impossible for an agent
to overﬁt to any subset of levels. Since every level is new,
the agent is evaluated on its ability to continually general-
ize. For this reason, performance with an unbounded train-
ing set can serve as a reasonable proxy for the more explicit
train-to-test generalization performance. Figure 3ashows
a comparison between training curves for IMPALA-CNN
and Nature-CNN, with an unbounded set of training levels.
As we can see, the IMPALA-CNN architecture is substan-
tially more sample efﬁcient.
However, it is important to note that learning faster with
an unbounded training set will not always correlate posi-
tively with better generalization performance. In particu-
lar, well chosen hyperparameters might lead to improved
training speed, but they are less likely to lead to improved
generalization. We believe that directly evaluating gener-
alization, by training on a ﬁxed set of levels, produces the
most useful metric. Figure 3bshows the performance of
different architectures when training on a ﬁxed set of 500
levels. The same training set is used across seeds.
In both settings, it is clear that the IMPALA-CNN archi-
tecture is better at generalizing across levels of CoinRun.
Given the success of the IMPALA-CNN, we experimented
with several larger architectures, ﬁnding a deeper and wider
variant of the IMPALA architecture (IMPALA-Large) that
performs even better. This architecture uses 5 residual
blocks instead of 3, with twice as many channels at eachlayer. Results with this architecture are shown in Figure 3.
It is likely that further architectural tuning could yield even
greater generalization performance. As is common in su-
pervised learning, we expect much larger networks to have
a higher capacity for generalization. In our experiments,
however, we noticed diminishing returns increasing the
network size beyond IMPALA-Large, particularly as wall
clock training time can dramatically increase. In any case,
we leave further architectural investigation to future work.
5. Evaluating Regularization
Regularization has long played an signiﬁcant role in su-
pervised learning, where generalization is a more immedi-
ate concern. Datasets always include separate training and
test sets, and there are several well established regulariza-
tion techniques for reducing the generalization gap. These
regularization techniques are less often employed in deep
RL, presumably because they offer no perceivable beneﬁts
in the absence of a generalization gap – that is, when the
training and test sets are one and the same.
Now that we are directly measuring generalization in RL,
we have reason to believe that regularization will once
again prove effective. Taking inspiration from supervised
learning, we choose to investigate the impact of L2 regular-
ization, dropout, data augmentation, and batch normaliza-
tion in the CoinRun environment.
Throughout this section we train agents on a ﬁxed set of
500 CoinRun levels, following the same experimental pro-
cedure shown in Figure 3b. We have already seen that sub-

==== Page 5 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
(a) Final train and test performance after
256M timesteps as a function of the L2
weight penalty. Mean and standard devia-
tion is shown across 5 runs.
(b) Final train and test performance af-
ter 512M timesteps as a function of the
dropout probability. Mean and standard
deviation is shown across 5 runs.
(c) The effect of using data augmentation,
batch normalization and L2 regularization
when training on 500 levels. Mean and
standard deviation is shown across 3 runs.
Figure 4. The impact of different forms of regularization.
stantial overﬁtting occurs, so we expect this setting to pro-
vide a useful signal for evaluating generalization. In all
subsequent experiments, ﬁgures show the mean and stan-
dard deviation across 3-5 runs. In these experiments, we
use the original IMPALA-CNN architecture with 3 resid-
ual blocks, but we notice qualitatively similar results with
other architectures.
5.1. Dropout and L2 Regularization
We ﬁrst train agents with either dropout probability p2
[0,0.25]or with L2 penalty w2[0,2.5⇥10 4]. We train
agents with L2 regularization for 256M timesteps, and we
train agents with dropout for 512M timesteps. We do this
since agents trained with dropout take longer to converge.
We report both the ﬁnal train and test performance. The
results of these experiments are shown in Figure 4. Both
L2 regularization and dropout noticeably reduce the gener-
alization gap, though dropout has a smaller impact. Empir-
ically, the most effective dropout probability is p=0.1and
the most effective L2 weight is w= 10 4.
5.2. Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is often effective at reducing overﬁt-
ting on supervised learning benchmarks. There have been a
wide variety of augmentation transformations proposed for
images, including translations, rotations, and adjustments
to brightness, contrast, or sharpness. ( Cubuk et al. ,2018 )
search over a diverse space of augmentations and train a
policy to output effective data augmentations for a target
dataset, ﬁnding that different datasets often beneﬁt from
different sets of augmentations.
We take a simple approach in our experiments, using aslightly modiﬁed form of Cutout ( Devries and Taylor ,
2017 ). For each observation, multiple rectangular regions
of varying sizes are masked, and these masked regions are
assigned a random color. See Appendix Cfor screenshots.
This method closely resembles domain randomization ( To-
bin et al. ,2017 ), used in robotics to transfer from simula-
tions to the real world. Figure 4cshows the boost this data
augmentation scheme provides in CoinRun. We expect that
other methods of data augmentation would prove similarly
effective and that the effectiveness of any given augmenta-
tion will vary across environments.
5.3. Batch Normalization
Batch normalization ( Ioffe and Szegedy ,2015 ) is known to
have a substantial regularizing effect in supervised learning
(Luo et al. ,2018 ). We investigate the impact of batch nor-
malization on generalization, by augmenting the IMPALA-
CNN architecture with batch normalization after every con-
volutional layer. Training workers normalize with the
statistics of the current batch, and test workers normalize
with a moving average of these statistics. We show the
comparison to baseline generalization in Figure 4c. As
we can see, batch normalization offers a signiﬁcant per-
formance boost.
5.4. Stochasticity
We now evaluate the impact of stochasticity on generaliza-
tion in CoinRun. We consider two methods, one varying
the environment’s stochasticity and one varying the pol-
icy’s stochasticity. First, we inject environmental stochas-
ticity by following ✏-greedy action selection: with proba-
bility ✏at each timestep, we override the agent’s preferred
action with a random action. In previous work, ✏-greedy ac-

==== Page 6 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
(a) Comparison of ✏-greedy and high en-
tropy bonus agents to baseline during
training.
(b) Final train and test performance
for agents trained with different entropy
bonuses.
(c) Final train and test performance for ✏-
greedy agents trained with different values
of✏.
Figure 5. The impact of introducing stochasticity into the environment, via epsilon-greedy action selection and an entropy bonus. Train-
ing occurs over 512M timesteps. Mean and standard deviation is shown across 3 runs.
tion selection has been used both as a means to encourage
exploration and as a theoretical safeguard against overﬁt-
ting ( Bellemare et al. ,2012 ;Mnih et al. ,2013 ). Second, we
control policy stochasticity by changing the entropy bonus
in PPO. Note that our baseline agent already uses an en-
tropy bonus of kH=.01.
We increase training time to 512M timesteps as training
now proceeds more slowly. Results are shown in Figure 5.
It is clear that an increase in either the environment’s or the
policy’s stochasticity can improve generalization. Further-
more, each method in isolation offers a similar generaliza-
tion boost. It is notable that training with increased stochas-
ticity improves generalization to a greater extent than any
of the previously mentioned regularization methods. In
general, we expect the impact of these stochastic methods
to vary substantially between environments; we would ex-
pect less of a boost in environments whose dynamics are
already highly stochastic.
5.5. Combining Regularization Methods
We brieﬂy investigate the effects of combining several of
the aforementioned techniques. Results are shown in Fig-
ure4c. We ﬁnd that combining data augmentation, batch
normalization, and L2 regularization yields slightly better
test time performance than using any one of them individ-
ually. However, the small magnitude of the effect suggests
that these regularization methods are perhaps addressing
similar underlying causes of poor generalization. Further-
more, for unknown reasons, we had little success com-
bining ✏-greedy action selection and high entropy bonuses
with other forms of regularization.6. Additional Environments
The preceding sections have revealed the high degree over-
ﬁtting present in one particular environment. We corrob-
orate these results by quantifying overﬁtting on two addi-
tional environments: a CoinRun variant called CoinRun-
Platforms and a simple maze navigation environment called
RandomMazes.
We apply the same experimental procedure described in
Section 3.2to both CoinRun-Platforms and RandomMazes,
to determine the extent of overﬁtting. We use the orig-
inal IMPALA-CNN architecture followed by an LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber ,1997 ), as memory is neces-
sary for the agent to explore optimally. These experiments
further reveal how susceptible our algorithms are to over-
ﬁtting.
Figure 6. Levels from CoinRun-Platforms (left) and Random-
Mazes (right). In RandomMazes, the agent’s observation space
is shaded in green.
6.1. CoinRun-Platforms
In CoinRun-Platforms, there are several coins that the agent
attempts to collect within the 1000 step time-limit. Coins

==== Page 7 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
Figure 7. Final train and test performance in CoinRun-Platforms
after 2B timesteps, as a function of the number of training levels.
Figure 8. Final train and test performance in RandomMazes after
256M timesteps, as a function of the number of training levels.
are randomly scattered across platforms in the level. Lev-
els are a larger than in CoinRun, so the agent must actively
explore, sometimes retracing its steps. Collecting any coin
gives a reward of 1, and collecting all coins in a level gives
an additional reward of 9. Each level contains several mov-
ing monsters that the agent must avoid. The episode ends
only when all coins are collected, when time runs out, or
when the agent dies. See Appendix Bfor environment
screenshots.
As CoinRun-Platforms is a much harder game, we train
each agent for a total of 2B timesteps. Figure 7shows
that overﬁtting occurs up to around 4000 training levels.
Beyond the extent of overﬁtting, it is also surprising that
agents’ training performance increases as a function of the
number of training levels, past a certain threshold. This
is notably different from supervised learning, where train-
ing performance generally decreases as the training set be-
comes larger. We attribute this trend to the implicit cur-
riculum in the distribution of generated levels. With ad-
ditional training data, agents are more likely to learn skills
that generalize even across training levels, thereby boosting
the overall training performance.
6.2. RandomMazes
In RandomMazes, each level consists of a randomly gener-
ated square maze with dimension uniformly sampled from
3 to 25. Mazes are generated using Kruskal’s algorithm
(Kruskal ,1956 ). The environment is partially observed,
with the agent observing the 9⇥9patch of cells directly
surrounding its current location. At every cell is either a
wall, an empty space, the goal, or the agent. The episode
ends when the agent reaches the goal or when time expires
after 500 timesteps. The agent’s only actions are to move
to an empty adjacent square. If the agent reaches the goal,a constant reward is received. Figure 8reveals particularly
strong overﬁtting, with a sizeable generalization gap even
when training on 20,000 levels.
6.3. Discussion
In both CoinRun-Platforms and RandomMazes, agents
must learn to leverage recurrence and memory to optimally
navigate the environment. The need to memorize and re-
call past experience presents challenges to generalization
unlike those seen in CoinRun. It is unclear how well suited
LSTMs are to this task. We empirically observe that given
sufﬁcient data and training time, agents using LSTMs even-
tually converge to a near optimal policy. However, the rel-
atively poor generalization performance raises the question
of whether different recurrent architectures might be better
suited for generalization in these environments. This inves-
tigation is left for future work.
7. Conclusion
Our results provide insight into the challenges underlying
generalization in RL. We have observed the surprising ex-
tent to which agents can overﬁt to a ﬁxed training set. Us-
ing the procedurally generated CoinRun environment, we
can precisely quantify such overﬁtting. With this metric,
we can better evaluate key architectural and algorithmic de-
cisions. We believe that the lessons learned from this envi-
ronment will apply in more complex settings, and we hope
to use this benchmark, and others like it, to iterate towards
more generalizable agents.

==== Page 8 ====
Quantifying Generalization in Reinforcement Learning
References
M. G. Bellemare, Y. Naddaf, J. Veness, and M. Bowling.
The arcade learning environment: An evaluation plat-
form for general agents. CoRR , abs/1207.4708, 2012.
E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Man ´e, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V.
Le. Autoaugment: Learning augmentation policies from
data. CoRR , abs/1805.09501, 2018. URL http://
arxiv.org/abs/1805.09501 .
T. Devries and G. W. Taylor. Improved regularization
of convolutional neural networks with cutout. CoRR ,
abs/1708.04552, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1708.04552 .
P. Dhariwal, C. Hesse, O. Klimov, A. Nichol, M. Plap-
pert, A. Radford, J. Schulman, S. Sidor, Y. Wu, and
P. Zhokhov. Openai baselines. https://github.
com/openai/baselines , 2017.
L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V. Mnih,
T. Ward, Y. Doron, V. Firoiu, T. Harley, I. Dunning,
S. Legg, and K. Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA: scalable dis-
tributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures. CoRR , abs/1802.01561, 2018.
J. Farebrother, M. C. Machado, and M. Bowling.
Generalization and regularization in DQN. CoRR ,
abs/1810.00123, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1810.00123 .
M. J. Hausknecht and P. Stone. The impact of deter-
minism on learning atari 2600 games. In Learning
for General Competency in Video Games, Papers from
the 2015 AAAI Workshop, Austin, Texas, USA, January
26, 2015. , 2015. URL http://aaai.org/ocs/
index.php/WS/AAAIW15/paper/view/9564 .
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term mem-
ory.Neural Computation , 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerat-
ing deep network training by reducing internal covariate
shift. CoRR , abs/1502.03167, 2015.
N. Justesen, R. R. Torrado, P. Bontrager, A. Khalifa, J. To-
gelius, and S. Risi. Illuminating generalization in deep
reinforcement learning through procedural level genera-
tion. CoRR , abs/1806.10729, 2018.
J. B. Kruskal. On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph
and the traveling salesman problem. In Proceedings
of the American Mathematical Society, 7 , pages 48–50,
1956.
P. Luo, X. Wang, W. Shao, and Z. Peng. Towards under-
standing regularization in batch normalization. CoRR ,
abs/1809.00846, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1809.00846 .M. C. Machado, M. G. Bellemare, E. Talvitie, J. Ve-
ness, M. J. Hausknecht, and M. Bowling. Revisiting
the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols
and open problems for general agents. J. Artif. Intell.
Res., 61:523–562, 2018. doi: 10.1613/jair.5699. URL
https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.5699 .
V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves,
I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. A. Riedmiller. Play-
ing atari with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR ,
abs/1312.5602, 2013.
V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness,
M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. A. Riedmiller, A. Fid-
jeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik,
I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran, D. Wierstra,
S. Legg, and D. Hassabis. Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540):529–
533, 2015.
A. Nichol, V. Pfau, C. Hesse, O. Klimov, and J. Schulman.
Gotta learn fast: A new benchmark for generalization
in RL. CoRR , abs/1804.03720, 2018. URL http://
arxiv.org/abs/1804.03720 .
C. Packer, K. Gao, J. Kos, P. Kr ¨ahenb ¨uhl, V. Koltun, and
D. Song. Assessing generalization in deep reinforcement
learning. CoRR , abs/1810.12282, 2018.
J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and
O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms.
CoRR , abs/1707.06347, 2017.
J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba,
and P. Abbeel. Domain randomization for transferring
deep neural networks from simulation to the real world.
CoRR , abs/1703.06907, 2017. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/1703.06907 .
A. Zhang, N. Ballas, and J. Pineau. A dissection of over-
ﬁtting and generalization in continuous reinforcement
learning. CoRR , abs/1806.07937, 2018a.
C. Zhang, O. Vinyals, R. Munos, and S. Bengio. A study
on overﬁtting in deep reinforcement learning. CoRR ,
abs/1804.06893, 2018b. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1804.06893 .

