==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Zeguendry, A.; Jarir, Z.;
Quafafou, M. Quantum Machine
Learning: A Review and Case
Studies. Entropy 2023 ,25, 287.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e25020287
Academic Editor: Andreas Wichert
Received: 30 December 2022
Revised: 31 January 2023
Accepted: 1 February 2023
Published: 3 February 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
entropy
Review
Quantum Machine Learning: A Review and Case Studies
Amine Zeguendry1,*
, Zahi Jarir1,*
and Mohamed Quafafou2
1Laboratoire d’Ingénierie des Systèmes d’Information, Faculty of Sciences, Cadi Ayyad University,
Marrakech 40000, Morocco
2Laboratoire des Sciences de l’Information et des Systèmes, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7296, Aix-Marseille
University, 13007 Marseille, France
*Correspondence: amine.zeguendry@ced.uca.ma (A.Z.); jarir@uca.ma (Z.J.)
Abstract: Despite its undeniable success, classical machine learning remains a resource-intensive
process. Practical computational efforts for training state-of-the-art models can now only be handled
by high speed computer hardware. As this trend is expected to continue, it should come as no surprise
that an increasing number of machine learning researchers are investigating the possible advantages
of quantum computing. The scientiﬁc literature on Quantum Machine Learning is now enormous,
and a review of its current state that can be comprehended without a physics background is necessary.
The objective of this study is to present a review of Quantum Machine Learning from the perspective
of conventional techniques. Departing from giving a research path from fundamental quantum theory
through Quantum Machine Learning algorithms from a computer scientist’s perspective, we discuss
a set of basic algorithms for Quantum Machine Learning, which are the fundamental components
for Quantum Machine Learning algorithms. We implement the Quanvolutional Neural Networks
(QNNs) on a quantum computer to recognize handwritten digits, and compare its performance
to that of its classical counterpart, the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Additionally, we
implement the QSVM on the breast cancer dataset and compare it to the classical SVM. Finally, we
implement the Variational Quantum Classiﬁer (VQC) and many classical classiﬁers on the Iris dataset
to compare their accuracies.
Keywords: quantum computing; quantum algorithms; Quantum Machine Learning (QML); quantum
classiﬁcation; Variational Quantum Circuit (VQC); QSVM; Quanvolutional Neural Network (QNN);
Variational Quantum Classiﬁer (VQC); quantum encoding
1. Introduction
Machine Learning is a subset of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) that aims to create mod-
els that learn from previous experience without being explicitly formulated, and it has
been used extensively in several scientiﬁc and technical ﬁelds, including natural language
processing, medical diagnostics, computer vision, and data mining, and so on. Many
machine learning problems require the use of linear algebra to execute matrix operations
since data are described as matrices. On the other hand, performing these operations on
traditional computers requires a signiﬁcant amount of time and computational resources.
Quantum Computing is an ambitious new ﬁeld that combines computer science, math-
ematics, and physics. This ﬁeld investigates ways to use some of the special properties
of quantum physics to build quantum computers that take advantage of quantum bits
(qubits) that can contain 0 and 1 combinations in superposition at the same time. As a
result, quantum computers can handle and process large matrices, as well as accelerate
various linear algebra operations, signiﬁcantly improving traditional machine learning
applications. Theoretically, it should solve problems that belong to classes of complexity
that traditional computers, even large giant supercomputers, will never be able to solve.
Grover’s algorithm, for instance, has demonstrated a quadratic speedup for exploring
unstructured databases [ 1], while Shor’s technique [ 2] illustrates that quantum computing
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25020287 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/entropy

==== Page 2 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 2 of 41
may provide an exponential speedup in solving the traditionally difﬁcult problem of big
integer factorization. These algorithms are anticipated to include some key characteris-
tics of quantum computation, including quantum superposition, quantum measurement,
and quantum entanglement.
While machine learning is being limited by a lack of computing power, researchers are
exploring the prospects of combining quantum computing and machine learning to handle
classical data using machine learning algorithms. This combination of machine learning
theory with the characteristics of quantum computing is a new research sub-discipline
called Quantum Machine Learning (QML). Therefore, QML aims to build quantum appli-
cations for diverse machine learning algorithms, using the processing power of quantum
computers and the scalability and learning capacity of machine learning algorithms.
Quantum variants of several popular algorithms for machine learning are already
developed. Quantum Neural Network (QNN) described by Narayanan and Menneer [ 3],
in which they presented the theoretical design of a QNN architecture and how the system’s
components might perform relative to their traditional counterparts. Quantum Support
Vector Machines (QSVM) was proposed by Rebentrost et al. [ 4] for solving least-squares
SVM using the HHL algorithm [ 5] for matrix inversion in order to generate the hyperplane.
In 2014, Wiebe et al. [ 6] provided a quantum version of k-nearest neighbors for comput-
ing the nearest neighbors relying on the Euclidean distance between the data locations,
in addition to amplitude estimation which eliminates the requirement for measurement.
In 2018, Dang et al. [ 7] also introduced an image classiﬁcation model based on quantum
k-nearest neighbors and parallel computing. Their model improved categorization preci-
sion and productivity. Schuld et al. [ 8] proposed quantum linear regression as a version of
classical linear regression, and it operates in an exponential runtime with Ndimensions of
features, using quantum data, which is presented as quantum information. The quantum
decision tree classiﬁer developed by Lu et al. [ 9] employs quantum ﬁdelity measurement
and quantum entropy impurity.
Lloyd et al. [ 10] described several quantum machine learning techniques for cluster
detection and cluster assignment. A quantization version of Lloyd’s method [ 11] is provided
as a part of their k-means clustering algorithm. Furthermore, Kerenidis et al. [ 12] have
suggested Q-means, a quantized form of the k-means method with similar results and
convergence to the traditional k-means algorithm. Aïmeur et al. [ 13] introduced quantum
K-medians clustering, which uses Grover’s search algorithm for locating the cluster’s
median. In 2014, Lloyd et al. [ 14] developed Quantum Principal Component Analysis
(QPCA), which identiﬁes the eigenvectors relating to the unknown state’s huge eigenvalues
exponentially faster than any other solution.
Inside Machine Learning, there is a more advanced ﬁeld known as Reinforcement
Learning. It is built on continuous learning through exploration of the environment. There
exist few quantum variants of conventional Reinforcement Learning algorithms including
Quantum Reinforcement Learning introduced by Dong et al. [ 15], which makes use of
the quantum parallelism and superposition principle. They discovered that probability
amplitude and quantum parallelism may aid in learning speed. For solving Dynamic
Programming problems, which are deterministic forms of Markov decision problems
that are studied in reinforcement learning, in [ 16], they have suggested various quantum
algorithms as solutions. McKiernan et al. [ 17] developed a general algorithm to improve
hybrid quantum-classical computing using reinforcement learning.
Deep Learning is a new machine learning sub-discipline. Deep Learning techniques,
which demand a signiﬁcant amount of storage and time consumption, are now being im-
plemented on quantum computers. These algorithms are shown by Quantum Generative
Adversarial Networks (Quantum GAN) [ 18–20] with its implementation in [ 21], which uses
a superconducting quantum processor to learn and generate real-world handwritten digit
pictures, Quantum Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks (Quantum WGAN) [ 22],
which improves the scalability and stability of quantum generative adversarial model
training on quantum machines, Quantum Boltzmann Machines [ 23,24], Quantum Autoen-

==== Page 3 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 3 of 41
coders [ 25,26], and Quantum Convolutional Neural Networks [ 27–29], and the latter is
implemented in the benchmark section.
Optimization is also important in conventional machine learning, since most of the
time learning training machine learning models are based on optimizing cost functions.
Numerical optimization techniques are a major ﬁeld of study that tries to enhance optimiza-
tion algorithm computations. Quantum-enhanced Optimization (QEO) [ 30], a sub-ﬁeld
of quantum computing, intends to augment these techniques even further, similar to con-
ventional optimization. Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm and Quantum
Gradient Descent [ 31,32] are two well-known examples of this type, which are used within
Quantum Neural Networks such as Quantum Boltzman Machines [24].
In this paper, we aim to introduce quantum computing to the ﬁeld of machine learn-
ing from a basics perspective all the way to its applications. The remainder of this work
is structured as follows. In Section 2, we explore the background of quantum comput-
ing, the architecture of quantum computers, and an introduction to quantum algorithms.
In Section 3, we start introducing several fundamental algorithms for quantum machine
learning that are the fundamental components of QML algorithms and can primarily offer
a performance boost over conventional machine learning algorithms, and we discuss a
few popular quantum machine learning algorithms. In Section 4, we implement three
machine learning algorithms in order to compare the performance of each algorithm with
its classical counterparts. In the ﬁnal sections, ahead of the conclusions and perspectives,
we discuss some quantum computer challenges.
2. Background
Quantum computing uses quantum physics principles including superposition ,
entanglement , and quantum measurement , to process data. Superposition is the quantum
mechanical feature that permits objects to exist in several states simultaneously. Entangle-
ment may join two or even more quantum particles in full synchronization, despite being
on different sides of the universe. Quantum measurement is a process that transforms
quantum information into classical information. This section provides an introduction to
the basics of quantum computing, from Dirac notations through quantum algorithms.
2.1. Dirac (Bra-Ket) Notation
States and operators in quantum mechanics are represented as vectors and matrices,
respectively. Instead of utilizing standard linear algebra symbols, Dirac notation is used to
represent the vectors.
Letaand bbe inC2:
• Ket:
jai=a1
a2
. (1)
• Bra:
hbj=jbi=b1
b2
= 
b
1b
2
. (2)
Note that the complex conjugate of any complex number can be generated by inverting
the sign of its imaginary component—for example, the complex conjugate of b=
a+idisb=a id.
• Bra-Ket: Inner product
hbjai=a1b
1+a2b
2=hajbi. (3)
• Ket-Bra: Outer product
jaihbj=a1b
1a1b
2
a2b
1a2b
2
. (4)

==== Page 4 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 4 of 41
2.2. Qubit
The bit is the standard measure of information in classical computing. It could exist in
one of two states: 0 or 1. Quantum computers, similarly, use a “qubit” that is also called
“quantum bit” [ 33], which represents the likelihood of an electron’s “spin up” or “spin
down” when passing through some kind of a magnetic ﬁeld. In traditional computing,
the spin may be thought of as the value of a bit. A qubit may be considered as the complex
two-dimensional Hilbert space C2. An instantaneous qubit state can be expressed as a
vector in this multidimensional Hilbert space.
An inner product between two vectors that represent qubit states in Hilbert space
allows us to identify their relative positions. hajbirepresents the inner product of the
vectorsjaiandjbi; it equals 0 ifjaiandjbiare orthogonal and 1 if jai=jbi.
The statesj0iandj1ican be represented with vectors, as shown below. These two are
known as the computational basis of a two-level system. These vectors in the state space
are then susceptible to matrix-based operators:
j0i=1
0
;j1i=0
1
. (5)
A qubit could be in one of three states: j0i,j1i, or a superposition of both,
c1j0i+c2j1i, (6)
where the coefﬁcients c1,c22C, called amplitudes . According to the Born rule,
the total of the squares of the amplitudes of all possible states in a superposition equals 1:
jc1j2+jc2j2=1. (7)
When we perform a measurement , we obtain a single bit of information: 0 or 1.
The most basic measurement is in the computational basis (Z-Basis : fj0i,j1ig). For ex-
ample, the result of measuring the state c1j0i+c2j1iin the computational basis is 0 with
probabilityjc1j2and 1 with probability jc2j2.
There are numerous different bases; however, below are some of the most common ones:
• X-Basis:
j+i:=1p
2(j0i+j1i),j i:=1p
2(j0i j 1i)
• Y-Basis:
j+ii:=1p
2(j0i+ij1i),j ii:=1p
2(j0i ij1i)
The probability that a state jyicollapses during a measurement in the basis fjbi,jbig,
for the statejbiis provided by P(b) =jhbjyij2;S
iP(b) = 1, as claimed by the Born rule.
For example, we measure the state jyi=1p
3
j0i+p
2j1i
in thefj0i,j1igbasis,
P(0) =h01p
3
j0i+p
2j1i
i2
=1p
3h0j0i+p
2p
3h0j1i2
=1
3and P(1) =1 1
3=2
3,
whereh0j0i=1(normalized) and h0j1i=0(orthogonal); thus, the qubit is in the state j1i.
2.3. Quantum Circuit
Quantum circuits are represented using circuit diagrams. These diagrams are built
and read from left to right. Barenco et al. [ 34] deﬁned several of the basic operators that we
now use in quantum circuits today. Two binary operators were added to this set by Toffoli
and Fredkin [ 35,36]. We start building a quantum circuit with a line representing a circuit
wire. As seen in Figure 1a, on the left side of the wire, a ket indicates its original condition
of state preparation.

==== Page 5 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 5 of 41
The qubit stays in the state in which it was originally created if there is no operator on
the line. This indicates that the qubit state is maintained by the quantum computer.
The number of qubits produced in that condition is denoted by a slash nsign all over
the wire as shown in Figure 1b.
A quantum circuit is a computer process that combines traditional real-time computa-
tion with coherent quantum gates on quantum data such as qubits.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Representations of wires of quantum circuit. ( a) Single quantum circuit wire; ( b) Quantum
circuit wire with n qubits.
2.4. Quantum Gates
Quantum gates or operators fundamentally involve the modiﬁcation of one or more
qubits. Single-qubit gates are represented as a box with the letter of the operator straddling
the line. An operator box connecting two quantum wires is the basis of a binary gate.
2.4.1. Single Qubit Gates
Pauli matrices are the ﬁrst of three operators we examine, which are used to represent
certain typical quantum gates.
• Pauli-X Gate: Is the quantum equivalent of the NOT gate used in traditional computers,
generally termed as the bit ﬂip operator or x sx:
X:=0 1
1 0
.
When we apply Xtoj0i, we obtain
0 1
1 01
0
=0
1
=j1i.
As we can see, this gate ﬂips the amplitudes of the j0iandj1istates. In a quantum
circuit, the symbol in Figure 2a represents the Pauli-X gate.
• Pauli-Y Gate: Is commonly abbreviated as sy, which transforms the state vector
throughout the whole y-axis:
Y:=0 i
i0
.
Consequently, when it is applied to the j1istate, we obtain
0 i
i00
1
= i
0
= ij0i.
In Figure 2b, the circuit design for the Y operator is displayed.
• Pauli-Z Gate: The Z operator, also known as the phase ﬂip operator, used to perform a
180rotation of the state vector around the z-axis.
Z:=1 0
0 1
.
By applying the Pauli-Z gate to the computational basis state, we obtain the result
shown below:
Zjui= ( 1)ujui.
For the particular case u=0, we present it in matrix form:

==== Page 6 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 6 of 41
1 0
0 11
0
=1
0
= ( 1)0j0i=j0i.
We have in the case where u=1,
1 0
0 10
1
=0
 1
= ( 1)1j1i= j1i.
The Pauli-Z gate’s circuit diagram is shown in Figure 2c.
• Phase shift gates: Consists of a set of single-qubit gates which convert the basis states
j0i7!j 0iandj1i7! eijj1i.
The matrix below represents the phase shift gate:
P(j) =0 1
1eij
,
where jdenotes the phase shift over a period of 2p. Typical instances include the
Pauli-Z gate where j=p,Tgate where j=p
4, and Sgate where j=p
2.
• Hadamard Gate: This quantum operator is essential for quantum computing because
it allows the qubit to transform from one computational basis state to a superposition.
H:=1p
21 1
1 1
.
When Hadamard gate is applied to the state j0i, we obtain
1p
21 1
1 11
0
=1p
21
1
=j0i+j1ip
2,
and to statej1i, we obtain
1p
21 1
1 10
1
=1p
21
 1
=j0i j 1ip
2.
As can be seen, the Hadamard gate projects a computational basis state into the
superposition of two states.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 2. Circuit representations of the four most used gates in quantum circuits. ( a) The Pauli-Y gate;
(b) The Pauli-Y gate; ( c) The Pauli-Z gate; ( d) The CNOT gate.
2.4.2. Multi Qubit States and Gates
A single bit offers two possible states; in addition, a qubit state contains two complex
amplitudes, as we saw before. Similarly, two bits might be in one of four states: 00, 10,
01, or 11. Four complex amplitudes are needed to present the state of two qubits. These
amplitudes are stored in a 4D-vector:

==== Page 7 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 7 of 41
jui=u00j00i+u01j01i+u10j10i+u11j11i=2
664u00
u01
u10
u1103
775.
The tensor product 
can be used to characterize the combined state of two sepa-
rated qubits:
jui=u0
u1
;jvi=v0
v1
,
jvui=jvi
j ui=v0
v1u0
u1
=2
664v0u0
v0u1
v1u0
v1u13
775.
States of this form ( jvi
j ui) called uncorrelated, but there are also bipartite states
which cannot be expressed as jvi
j ui; these states are correlated and sometimes entangled .
The CNOT or CX gate is one of several quantum gates which perform on multi qubits,
if the ﬁrst qubit is in state j1i, the second qubit will execute the NOT operation, otherwise
leaving it unaltered. Using the CNOT gate, we entangle two qubits in a quantum circuit.
This gate is described by the following matrix:
CNOT =0
BB@1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 1 01
CCA.
As an instance, the CNOT gate may be applied to the state j10ias follows:
0
BB@1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 1 01
CCA0
BB@0
0
1
01
CCA=0
BB@0
0
0
11
CCA=j11i.
The Table 1 reveals that the output state of the targeted qubit matches that of a
conventional XOR gate. The targeted qubit is j0iwhen both inputs are the same, but j1i
when the inputs are different. We represent the CNOT gate with the circuit’s diagram in
Figure 2d.
Table 1. CNOT gate truth table.
Before Applying CNOT After Applying CNOT
Controlled Targeted Controlled Targeted
j0i j 0i j 0i j 0i
j0i j 1i j 0i j 1i
j1i j 0i j 1i j 1i
j1i j 1i j 1i j 0i
2.5. Representation of Qubit States
The state of a qubit may be represented with different ways. Dirac notation allows us
to express this state in a readable form. A qubit in state j0i, for instance, will transfer to
statej1iafter the application of the X operator.
Xj0i!j 1i

==== Page 8 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 8 of 41
In Figure 3, a state of a single qubit is represented by the Bloch sphere. Quantum states
are represented by vectors that extend from the origin to a certain point on the surface of
the Bloch sphere. The top and bottom antipodes of the sphere are j0iandj1i, respectively.
Figure 3. Bloch sphere representation of the state of qubit. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 37].
2014, Anton Frisk Kockum.
On the Bloch sphere, we may write any pure state (i.e., a qubit state speciﬁed by a
vector of norm 1. Mixed state , in contrast, is a state that combines numerous pure quantum
states or qubits) as seen below:
jyi=cos(q/2)j0i+eifsin(q/2)j1i, (8)
with q2[0,p], determines the probability to measure the state j0iasP(0) = cos2(q/2)
and the statej1iasP(1) = sin2(q/2), and f2[0, 2p]describes the relative phase. On
the surface of a Bloch sphere, all of these pure states may be represented with a radius of
j!rj=1. The Bloch vector generates such a state’s coordinates:
!r=0
@sin(q)cos(f)
sin(q)sin(f)
cos(q)1
A, (9)
as result,
•j0i:q=0,farbitrary!!r= (0, 0, 1 );
•j1i:q=p,farbitrary!!r= (0, 0, 1);
•j+i:q=p/2,f=0!!r= (1, 0, 0 );
•j i:q=p/2,f=p!!r= ( 1, 0, 0 );
•j+ii:q=p/2,f=p/2!!r= (0, 1, 0 );
•j ii:q=p/2,f=3p/2!!r= (0, 1, 0).
Bloch sphere is only capable of representing the state of a particular qubit. Therefore,
theQ sphere is used for multi-qubits (and single qubits as well).
• For a single qubit as shown in Figure 4a:
– The south pole represents the state j1i;
– The north pole represents the state j0i;

==== Page 9 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 9 of 41
– The size of the blobs is related to the likelihood that the relevant state will be
measured;
– The color indicates the relative phase compared to the state j0i.
• For nqubits:
In Figure 4b, we plot all states as equally distributed points on sphere with 0
non the
north pole, 1
non the south pole, and all other state are aligned on parallels, such as
the number of “1”s on each latitude is constant and increasing from north to south.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 4. Representations of single qubit and multi-qubit in Q-sphere. ( a) Representation of a
superposition state; ( b) Representation of three-qubit states.
2.6. Entanglement
Quantum entanglement is a phenomena wherein quantum particles interact and are
represented by reference to one another despite their great distance apart. At the point
of measurement, if one of the entangled particles in a pair is determined to be in the
’down’ spin state, this state is instantly transmitted to the other particle, which now adopts
the opposite spin, state of ’up’. Even if entangled particles were positioned on opposite
corners of the universe, they would remain “connected”. This example is signiﬁcant
because it demonstrates how wave–particle duality qualities may be used to allow qubits to
interact with quantum algorithms via inter f erence in some cases. We consider, for example,
the state1p
2(j00i+j11i)(which is a Bell state ), and this state has a chance of 50 percent
of being measured in state j00iand another half chance of being measured in the state
j11i. The measurement of one causes the superposition to collapse and seems to have an
instantaneous impact on the other.
The Bell states, also called EPR pairs, are quantum states with two qubits that represent
the simplest (and most extreme) forms of quantum entanglement; they are a form of
normalized and entangled basis vectors. This normalization indicates that the particle’s
overall probability of being in one of the states stated is 1: hyjyi=1 [38].
Four fully entangled states known as Bell states exist, and they constitute an orthonor-
mal basis (i.e, a basis in which all of the vectors have the same unit norm and are orthogonal
to one another):
1.jy00i=1p
2(j00i+j11i).
2.jy01i=1p
2(j01i+j10i).
3.jy10i=1p
2(j00i j 11i).
4.jy11i=1p
2(j01i j 10i).
Although there are a variety of ways to create entangled Bell states using quantum
circuits, the most basic uses a computational basis as input and includes a Hadamard gate
and a CNOT gate (see Figure 5a).

==== Page 10 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 10 of 41
The circuit calculation results are displayed in Table 2.
Table 2. The results of the Bell states circuit computation.
Input H CNOT
j00ij00i+j10ip
2jy00i=j00i+j11ip
2
j01ij01i+j11ip
2jy01i=j01i+j10ip
2
j10ij00i j10ip
2jy10i=j00i j11ip
2
j11ij01i j11ip
2jy11i=j01i j10ip
2
In the opposite sense: Bell’s measure is a standard measure with standard outputs
iand jcorresponds to a measure of the state jyiji. Figure 5b represents the circuit of
Bell measurement.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 5. Quantum circuits of Bell state and Bell measurement. ( a) Bell state; ( b) Bell measurement.
2.7. Quantum Computer
Quantum computers are processing machines that take advantage of quantum physics
properties. This may be extremely beneﬁcial for some tasks, where they can greatly
outperform the most powerful supercomputers. A quantum computer can be considered
as a co-processor of a traditional computer, as a GPU can be for video games or for
training neural networks in deep learning. As shown in Figure 6, a traditional computer
closely control computer operations by triggering at precise rates the qubit operations
performed by the quantum gates. This trigger takes into consideration the execution time
of the quantum gates as well as the known coherence time of the qubits, i.e., the duration
for which the qubits remain in a superposition state. In addition to its classical control
computer, the quantum computer includes several components, which we analyze one by
one, with the details below:
• Quantum registers are just a collections of qubits. In November 2022, the benchmarked
record was 433 qubits, announced by IBM. Quantum registers store the information
manipulated in the computer and exploit the principle of superposition allowing a large
number of values to coexist in these registers and to operate on them simultaneously;
• Quantum gates are physical systems acting on the qubits of the quantum registers,
to initialize them and to perform computational operations on them. These gates are
applied in an iterative way according to the algorithms to be executed;
• At the conclusion of the sequential execution of quantum gates, the measurement
interface permits the retrieval of the calculations’ results. Typically, this cycle of setup,
computation, and measurement is repeated several times to assess the outcome. We
then obtain an average value between 0 and 1 for each qubit of the quantum computer
registers. The values received by the physical reading devices are therefore translated
into digital values and sent to the traditional computer, which controls the whole
system and permits the interpretation of the data. In common cases, such as at D-

==== Page 11 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 11 of 41
Wave or IBM, which are the giants of quantum computers building, the calculation is
repeated at least 1024 times in the quantum computer;
• Quantum chipset includes quantum registers, quantum gates and measurement de-
vices when it comes to superconducting qubits. Current chipsets are not very large.
They are the size of a full-frame photo sensor or double size for the largest of them.
The size of the latest powerful quantum chip called the 433-qubit Osprey, around the
size of a quarter;
• Refrigerated enclosure generally holds the inside of the computer at temperatures near
absolute zero. It contains part of the control electronics and the quantum chipset to
avoid generating disturbances that prevent the qubits from working, especially at the
level of their entanglement and coherence, and to reduce the noise of their operation;
• Electronic writing and reading in the refrigerated enclosure, control the physical
devices needed to initialize, update, and read the state of qubits.
Figure 6. The quantum computer’s architecture.
Quantum computers today are built based on atoms (e.g., cold atoms, trapped ions
and nuclear magnetic resonance), electrons (e.g., superconducting, silicon and topological),
or photon (e.g., linear optics). D-Wave, IBM and Google have all shown signiﬁcant quantum
computer development progress. The D-Wave model is built using the quantum adiabatic
technique, which handles issues involving optimization or probabilistic sampling, whereas
the IBM model is mostly dealing with non-adiabatic models. Most of those companies
provide a quantum computer simulator that runs on a classical computer to test code
before executing it on a quantum device. It is possible to use this simulator in either a local
environment or the cloud. It cannot handle true quantum states because it is operating on a
classical computer, but it is useful for testing code syntax and ﬂow.
2.8. Quantum Algorithms
The creation of quantum algorithms necessitates a higher level of expertise than
traditional algorithms and programs. Quantum computers will need the development
of a new generation of mathematicians and developers capable of reasoning with the

==== Page 12 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 12 of 41
mathematical formalization of quantum programming. Furthermore, these algorithms
must be more efﬁcient than those designed for traditional computers or supercomputers.
Given that quantum computing employs a distinct method of computation, it is only
reasonable to ask what kinds of problems may now be solved in this new environment,
even if they were not expected to be solved in a traditional computer. To do this, we must
review the theory of complexity.
The complexity theory focuses on the scalability and computational cost of algorithms
in general and for speciﬁc problems. Scalability refers to the time and/or space necessary
to increase the volume or complexity of a computation’s goal. Using the Big-O notation,
an algorithm that is O(n3)is considered to be “harder” than one that is O(n2), since the
former will often affect more operations than the latter, regardless of the time at which
these operations are executed. A speciﬁc complexity class is composed of problems that
share similar characteristics of difﬁculty. The most signiﬁcant categories of complexity are
discussed below:
• Polynomial time (P): Are issues solvable in a polynomial amount of time. In other
terms, a traditional computer is capable of resolving the issue in a reasonable time;
• Non-deterministic Polynomial time (NP): Is a collection of decision issues that a
nondeterministic Turing machine might solve in polynomial time. P is an NP subset;
• NP-Complete: X is considered to be NP-Complete only if the requirements here are
met: (i)X is in NP , and (ii)in polynomial time, all NP problems are reducible to X.
We assert that X is NP-hard if only (ii)is true and not necessarily (i);
• Polynomial Space (PSPACE): This category is concerned with memory resources
instead of time. PSPACE is a category of decision issues that can be solved by an
algorithm whose total space utilization is always polynomially restricted by the
instance size;
• Bounded-error Probabilistic Polynomial time (BPP): Is a collection of decision issues
which may be handled in polynomial time using a probabilistic Turing computer with
such a maximum error probability equal to 1/3;
• Bounded-error Quantum Polynomial time (BQP): A decision issue is BQP , if it has
a polynomial time solution and has a high accuracy probability. BQP is the basic
complexity category of problems which quantum computers may effectively solve. It
corresponds to the classical BPP class on the quantum level;
• Exact Quantum Polynomial time (EQP or QP): Is a type of decision issue that a
quantum computer can handle in polynomial time with probability 1. This is the
quantum counterpart of the P complexity class.
The potential uses of quantum computing vary from decrypting cryptography systems
to the creation of novel medications. These applications use quantum algorithms, which
are programs that exploit quantum gates on a quantum computer in order to obtain a
speedup or even other advantages over traditional algorithms. An important consideration
in the creation of quantum algorithms is to ensure that they are more efﬁcient than their
counterparts optimized for traditional computers. Theories exist to verify this by evaluating
the exponential, polynomial, logarithmic, or linear scaling of the computation time as a
measure of the task’s complexity, or a combination of all four. Currently, there are four pri-
mary classes of quantum algorithms: search algorithms based on those of Deutsch Jozsa [ 39]
and Grover [ 1];algorithms based on Quantum Fourier Trans f orms (QFT) such as Shor’s
algorithm [ 2], which is used to factor integers; quantum annealing algorithms , algorithms
that search for an equilibrium point of a complex system as in neural network training, op-
timal path search in networks or process optimization; and quantum simulation algorithms ,
which are used to simulate the interactions between atoms in various molecular structures.
Quantum chemistry, which simulates the impact of chemical stimulation on a huge amount
of atomic particles, is one particularly exciting topic in quantum simulation.
One of the ﬁrst quantum algorithms invented is that of David Deutsch, called Deutsch
Jozsa algorithm [ 39], co-invented with Richard Jozsa. This algorithm allows for identifying
the function of a “black box” called an “oracle” (a black box that is frequently used in

==== Page 13 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 13 of 41
quantum algorithms to estimate functions using qubits), which we know in advance that it
will return for all its inputs, either always the same value, 0 or 1, or the values 0 and 1 in
equal parts. The algorithm thus makes it possible to know if the function has a balanced
output. It is implemented on a set of qubits n, all of the input qubits are set to zero,
except one which is initialized to 1, then they are each put in superposition between 0
and 1 using Hadamard gates. The qubits thus have simultaneously all the possible values
with 2n+1combinations of values. It is easy to understand why this quantum algorithm is
much more efﬁcient than its conventional counterpart. In conventional computation, more
than half of the possible input values would have to be sequentially scanned, whereas,
in the quantum version, they are all scanned at the same time. This is an example of a
strong algorithm that has no known practical use. Moreover, there are classical probabilistic
algorithms algorithms that erase a good part of the quantum power gain of the Deutsch–
Jozsa algorithm.
Grover’s algorithm is the other popular algorithm [ 1], created in 1996. It allows for a
fast quantum search in a database. A bit like the Deutsch–Jorza algorithm, it scans a list
of elements to ﬁnd those that verify a speciﬁc condition. It also uses the superposition
of qubit states to speed up the processing compared to a traditional sequential search.
The improvement in performance is signiﬁcant compared to an unsorted database. Grover’s
algorithm also uses an “oracle” or “black box” function that will indicate whether a set of
input qubits veriﬁes a search condition or not, such as verifying that a given phone number
has been found in a list of phone numbers. In such a case, the function compares the phone
number searched and the one submitted to it, to answer one if they are identical and zero
otherwise. The black box is a quantum box and will evaluate this function for 2Nregisters
of qubits at the same time. It will therefore output a one once and zeros elsewhere. The
computing time is determined by the square root of the list size, while a classical approach
has a computation time proportional to the size of the list. Therefore, going from a time
Ntop
Nis an interesting gain. This algorithm can then be used to be integrated in other
algorithms such as those which allow for discovering the optimal path in a graph or the
minimal or maximal number of a series of Nnumbers.
The quantum Fourier transform (QFT) was invented by Don Coppersmith in 1994 [ 40].
It is used in various other algorithms and in particular in Shor’s algorithm, which is a
factoring algorithm for integers. The QFT could compute the prime factorization of an N-bit
integer in log2(N)time, whereas the most well-known basic Fourier transform requires
Nlog(N)time. IBM performed one of the initial implementations of Shor’s technique in
2001 using an experimental quantum computer with seven qubits to factor the integer 15.
In 2012, Nanyang et al. [ 41] claimed factorization of 143 using an NMR adiabatic quantum
computer at ambient temperature (300 K). Using a D-Wave 2X quantum computer, the 18-
bit number 200 099 successfully factored in April 2016 utilizing quantum annealing [ 42].
Late in 2019, an industry collaboration determined that 1,099,551,473,989 equals 1,048,589
times 1,048,601 [ 43]. Note that Shor’s algorithm also allows for breaking cryptography
using elliptic curves [ 44], which compete with RSA cryptography. Incidentally, a part of the
cryptography used in the Bitcoin protocol would also pass through the Shor algorithm [ 45].
In addition to the purely quantum algorithms (based only on quantum gates), we must
indeed add: hybrid algorithms, combining traditional algorithms and quantum algorithms
or algorithms based on quantum-classical gates. This is notably the situation involving
the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) [ 46], which allows the solution of chemical
simulation problems as well as neural network training; and quantum inspired algorithms,
which are algorithms for classical computers inspired by quantum algorithms for solving
complex problems.
3. Quantum Machine Learning
There are four strategies of how to combine machine learning and quantum computing,
based on if one considers the data was created by a classical (C) or quantum (Q) system,

==== Page 14 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 14 of 41
and whether the computer that processes data are classical (C) or quantum (Q),(as shown
in Figure 7).
Figure 7. Four different ways to combine quantum computing with machine learning. Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [47]. 2017, Maria Schuld.
The scenario CC refers to data that is treated traditionally. This is the traditional
technique of machine learning; however, in this case, it refers to machine learning using
quantum information research-derived approaches. Tensor networks that are designed
addressing to quantum many-body processes, have been employed in training neural net-
works [ 48]. In addition, there are various ’quantum-inspired’ machine learning algorithms
with varied degrees of quantum theoretical background.
The scenario QC examines how machine learning might aid quantum computing.
For instance, if we wish to obtain a complete explanation of the state of a computing device
by taking a few measurements, we may analyze the measurement data using machine
learning [ 49]. There are several applications for machine learning to distinguish either
quantum states generated by a quantum source or manipulations carried out by a quantum
experiment [50,51].
The scenario CQ uses quantum computing to examine conventional datasets. Observa-
tions from classical computers, which include images and text, are supplied to a quantum
device for evaluation. The primary objective of the CQ methodology is the development
of quantum algorithms to be used in data mining, for which the community has offered a
variety of solutions. They might be adaptations of traditional machine learning models to
function with quantum algorithms, or they can be entirely novel creations inspired by the
characteristics of quantum computing.
The last scenario QQ examines the processing of “quantum data” by a quantum device.
There are two possible interpretations of this. The information may be obtained through
a quantum experiment involving a quantum system and the subsequent input of those
experimental measurements into a different quantum computer. In a second interpretation,
a quantum computer simulates the behavior of the quantum system and then uses the state
of this system as such an input of a QML algorithm performed on the same computer.
Nowadays, Quantum Machine Learning (QML) algorithms are separated into three
distinct strategies. Quantum machine learning algorithms, which are quantum versions
of classical machine learning, in addition to algorithms that are implemented on a real
quantum computer, including QSVM [ 4], Quantum Neural Network [ 52] and Quantum
Linear Regression [ 8]. The second strategy is quantum-inspired machine learning, which

==== Page 15 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 15 of 41
leverages the concepts of quantum computing to enhance traditional machine learning algo-
rithms. A few examples of such algorithms include quantum-inspired binary classiﬁer [ 53],
Helstrom Quantum Centroid which is a quantum-inspired binary supervised learning
classiﬁcation [ 54], Quantum-inspired Support Vector Machines [ 55], Quantum Nearest
Mean Classiﬁer [ 56], inspired Quantum K Nearest-Neighbor [ 57], quantum algorithms
for ridge regression [ 58] and Quantum inspired Neural network [ 59]. The third strategy,
hybrid classical-quantum machine learning algorithms, merges classical and quantum
algorithms to improve performance and reduce the cost of learning—for example, using
quantum circuit to propose a novel variational quantum classiﬁer [ 60], variational quantum
SVM and SVM quantum kernel-based algorithm [ 61], quantum KNN algorithm [ 62], and a
hybrid quantum computer-based quantum version of nonlinear regression [63].
In our study, we concentrate on the CQ scenario. There are two distinct approaches
to the development of quantum machine learning models. The ﬁrst approach involves
running traditional machine learning algorithms on quantum computers or simulators in
an effort to achieve algorithmic speedups. This approach needs to translate conventional
data into quantum data, a process known as quantum encoding . Another approach is to
create QML algorithms based on quantum subroutines, including Grover’s algorithm, HHL
algorithm, quantum phase estimation, and Variational Quantum Circuit (VQC), which we
cover later in detail.
Figure 8 illustrates the processing strategies used in conventional machine learning
and QML. In traditional machine learning, data are a direct input to the algorithm, which
then analyses the data and generates an output. QML, on the other hand, demands the
initial encoding of the data into quantum data. QML receives quantum data as input,
processes it, and generates quantum data as output. The quantum data are then converted
to conventional data.
Figure 8. Processing techniques of conventional machine learning and quantum machine learning.
CD represents classical data and QD represents quantum data.

==== Page 16 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 16 of 41
Quantum Machine Learning requires a more intricate encoding of classical to quantum
data than classical machine learning.
3.1. Quantum Encoding
The majority of machine learning models depends on sets of data with fxigi2[N]
samples, where xi2Rdfor every i. Additionally, one requires classical outcomes including
labels or classesfyigi2[N], where yi2Rd0
for every i. It appears that the ability to deal
with conventional data will be required for the vast majority of practical applications of
quantum machine learning [64].
In a Hilbert space, there are several strategies for encoding data from conventional data
to quantum data. In other words, data encoding requires putting conventional data into a
quantum computer as quantum states. We describe three methods. We recommend [ 65] for
information on different strategies.
3.1.1. Basis Encoding
Basis encoding links a computational basis state for an n-qubit system. Therefore,
traditional data should be the binary strings, and encoded quantum state is the bit-wise
conversion of a binary string towards the equivalent states of the quantum subsystems.
In example, x=1001 is encoded by the 4-qubit quantum state j1001i. Furthermore, one bit
of classical data are encoded by one quantum subsystem. In some ways, it is the most basic
type of computing since every bit is effectively replaced with a qubit, and computations are
carried out simultaneously on all bits in a superposition. Consequently, the bit encoding
for a vector is the following: m+ [log(d)]qubits could a vector x= (x1,. . .,xd)2Rdas a
quantum superposition of bit strings, where each instance must be a binary string with N
bits for the basis encoding. xi= (b1, . . . , bj, . . . , bN)forj=1, . . . , Nwith bj2f0, 1g:
jxi=1p
dd
å
i=1jxii, (10)
where mdenotes the amount of qubits used for the precision, while drepresents the number
of samples. To encode a vector x= (2, 3)in basis encoding. First, we must transform it to a
binary format, with 2 bits, x1=10,x2=11. The corresponding basis encoding makes use
of two qubits to represent the data as below:
jxi=1p
2j10i+1p
2j11i.
3.1.2. Amplitude Encoding
To employ qubits to represent classical vectors or matrices, the most efﬁcient encoding
is by far the amplitude encoding approach. It is the theoretical link between quantum
computing and linear algebra that uses quantum features to the maximum. The amplitudes
of an n-qubit quantum state jyxiasjyxi=åd
i=1xijii,with d=2nrepresent a normalized
classical d-dimensional set of data x, where xiis the i-th item, andjiiis the i-th computa-
tional base state. However, in this case, ximight be any numeric value, such as a ﬂoating
or integer point. For instance, suppose we want to use amplitude encoding to encode the
four-dimensional array x= (1.0, 3.0, 2.5, 0.0 ). The ﬁrst step is to normalize this array,
which is achieved by setting xnorm=1p16,25(1.0, 3.0, 2.5, 0.0 ). Two qubits are used to
encode xnorm in the corresponding amplitude encoding as follows:
jyxnormi=1p16, 25[j00i+3j01i 2.5j10i].

==== Page 17 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 17 of 41
This result state will at the same moment encode the matrix below:
X=1p16, 251.0 3.0
 2.5 0.0
,
where the ﬁrst qubit represents the index for such a row, while the second qubit represents
the index for such a column.
3.1.3. Qsample Encoding
Qsample encoding is a hybrid scenario of amplitude and basis encoding, and it com-
bines a real amplitude vector with conventional binary probability distributions. Suppose
an amplitude vector v= (v1,. . .,v2n)Tthat describes an n-qubit quantum state. Sampling
a series of bits of size nwith a set of discrete probabilities p1=jv1j2,. . . , p2n=jv2nj2is
comparable to measuring the nqubits. This means that the amplitude vector may be used
to characterize the distribution of an a classical discrete random variable [ 66]. Taking into
account a discrete classical probability distribution over binary representation p1,. . .,p2n,
the quantum state is:
jyi=2n
å
i=1ppijii. (11)
3.2. Essential Quantum Routines for QML
In this subsection, we discuss a few of the most basic quantum algorithms which aid
in the development of quantum machine learning algorithms.
3.2.1. HHL Algorithm
Using a quantum implementation, the Harrow–Hassidim–Lloyd algorithm [ 5] consists
of solving a linear equation set. Solving a system of linear equations is comparable to the
matrix inversion issue. The objective of the matrix inversion problem, with a matrix Mand
a vector v, is to determine the vector x:
Mx=v. (12)
Numerous algorithms for machine learning determine their parameter qthrough
solving the Mq=vmatrix inversion issue, which makes this algorithm essential for
quantum machine learning. In general, the matrix Mrepresents the input characteristics
of the training data points expressed in the matrix X. The data point matrix Xand the
targeted vector Yare both used to create the training data point vector v. In linear regression,
in which the predicted output is y=qTx, determining qis as simple as solving the matrix
inversion issue presented below:
(XTX)q=XTY, (13)
thus, M=XTXand v=XTYin linear regression.
For the HHL algorithm, we must identify one or more operators capable of transform-
ing the statejviinto the solution vector q. Clearly, M=XTXwould have to be included
into one of the operators. If Mis unitary, we cannot use it as the quantum operator. How-
ever, if Mis Hermitian, we might assign it to a Hamiltonian denoted by Hof a quantum
system. As a reminder, a linear operator or matrix His Hermitian only if its complex
conjugate transpose H†is identical to H. Although if Mis not Hermitian, a Hermitian
operator ˜Mmay be deﬁned as shown below:
˜M=0M†
M 0
. (14)

==== Page 18 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 18 of 41
While ˜Mis now Hermitian, it has the following eigenvalue decomposition:
˜M=å
ilijuiihuij, (15)
in which the eigenvectors juiiprovide an orthonormal basis. The vector jvimay be
expressed as follows in the orthonormal basis juii:
jvi=å
ibijuii. (16)
The following is the answer to the inverse problem:
jxi=˜M 1jvi. (17)
Despite the fact that ˜Mis a Hermitian matrix of spectral decomposition ˜M=åilijuiihuij,
its inverse is given as follows:
˜M 1=å
i1
lijuiihuij. (18)
The answerjxiis obtained by putting the value of ˜M 1of Equation (18) as well as jvi
of Equation (16) into Equation (17), which can be seen below:
jxi=å
i1
lijuiihuijå
jbjjuji=å
jbj
ljjuji. (19)
Equation (19) demonstrates that, if we could move from eigenstates juiito1
lijuii, then
would indeed be nearer to the answer. Quantum phase estimation (which we discuss later)
is one approach for achieving this objective, which used the unitary operator U=e i˜Mt
upon that statejvirepresented as the superposition state of such basis states juii, as this
will transform the eigenstates juiiintolijuii. Then, the eigenvalues may be inverted from
lijuiito1
lijuiiby a controlled rotation. Let us remember that the state jvimust have
a unit norm before a quantum phase estimate could be performed on it. In compared
to its classical version, the algorithm asserts exponential gains in speedup for certain
issue formulations. The result of the procedure requires O((logN)2)quantum states,
butO(NlogN )conventional computing processes.
3.2.2. Grover’s Algorithm
The speed at which database components may be accessed is one of the possible
beneﬁts of quantum computing above traditional computing. Such an algorithm is Grover’s
algorithm, which may yield a quadratic speedup while searching a database. The algorithm
of Grover [ 1] employs the amplitude ampliﬁcation approach [ 67] that is used in database
search as well as in several other applications.
Assuming we have such a database containing N=2nentries, and we wish to ﬁnd the
one indexed by w, which we refer to as the winner. The computational basis states jxithat
correspond to ninput quantum bits may be used to deﬁne the Nitems. The oracle operates
on every one of the computational basis states jxi2f 0, 1gnwith the output f(x) =1, while
for the other elements, it returns 0. In the paradigm of quantum computing, the oracle Uw
may be seen as the unitary operator which further operates upon that computational basis
statejxi, seen below:
Uwjxi= ( 1)f(x)jxi. (20)
The Oracle has the following impact on the winning element indicated element jwi
speciﬁed by the computational basis state:
Uwjwi= ( 1)f(w)jwi= 11jwi= jwi. (21)

==== Page 19 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 19 of 41
Now that we are already familiar with the oracle, let us examine the stages of Grover’s
method. Letjwirepresent the superposition of every state:
jsi=1p
NN 1
å
x=0jxi, (22)
and the operator,
Us=2jsihsj I, (23)
is called the Grover diffusion operator. We can consider the winner jwiand an extra state
js0iwhich is in the span of jwiandjsi, which is orthogonal to jwi, and which is obtained
fromjsiby eliminatingjwiand rescaling.
1. Let us just put the system in the state jsi,
jsi=1p
NN 1
å
x=0jxi. (24)
This superposition jsi, which is easily produced from jsi=H
nj0in, is the beginning
for the amplitude ampliﬁcation technique, as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Geometric visualization and the condition of the amplitude of the state jsi.
The left chart corresponds to the two-dimensional plane spanned by orthogonal
vectorsjwiandjs0iwhich allows for describing the beginning state as jsi=sinqjwi+
cosqjs0i, where q=arcsinhsjwi=arcsin1p
N. The right picture is a bar chart of the
amplitudes of the state jsi.
2. Execute r(N)times the following “Grover iteration”:
(a) Apply the Uwoperator tojsi.
Geometrically, this relates to a reﬂection of the state jsiaboutjs0i. This trans-
formation indicates that the amplitude in front of the jwistate turns negative,
which in turn implies that the average amplitude (shown by a dashed line in
Figure 10) has been reduced.
(b) We now implement the operator Usto the statejsi.
This transformation completes the transformation by matching the state to
UsUwjsi, which relates a rotation around an angle qas shown in Figure 11.
The state will rotate by rqafter rimplementation of step 2, where r=p
4p
2n
O(p
N)[38].
3. The ﬁnal measurement will give the state jwiwith probability P(w)1 sin2(q
2) =
1 1
2n.

==== Page 20 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 20 of 41
Figure 10. Geometric visualization and the condition of the amplitude after the implementation of
theUwoperator.
Figure 11. Geometric visualization and the condition of the amplitude after the implementation of
theUsoperator.
3.2.3. Quantum Phase Estimation
Quantum phase estimation is a quantum algorithm that employs the Quantum Fourier
Transform (QFT) to convert information encoded within the phase jwith an amplitude
a=jajeijof a state. The QFT accelerates exponentially the process of translating a quantum
state encoded vector into Fourier space. It is often utilized in QML algorithms to retrieve
the information contained in the eigenvalues of operators which includes details of data
points. Phase estimation consists essentially to identify the eigenvalues of such a matrix
U, which is represented as the operator Uin the quantum circuit U, hence this operator
must be unitary. We designate their eigenvectors by jujias well as eigenvalues eiqj, thus
Ujuji=eiqjjuji. Assuming as inputs an eigenvector and an additional register jujij0i,
the method should return jujijqji. Because the eigenvectors form a basis, it is possible to
express every state jyiasjyi=åj2[n]ajjuji. Phase estimation is therefore particularly
convincing due to its potential for use in superposition. The circuit diagram is shown
below. Given an eigenvector as well as an extra register jujij0ias input, the algorithm will
returnjujijqji. Since eigenvectors constitute a basis, each state jyicould be represented as

==== Page 21 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 21 of 41
jyi=åj2[n]ajjuji. Thus, the most intriguing aspect of phase estimation is its application in
superposition. The circuit diagram of the quantum phase estimation is shown in Figure 12.
Figure 12. Quantum phase estimation circuit. QFT 1is just the inverse QFT.
One has the option of measuring the ﬁnal output to obtain a classical description of
the eigenvalues or retaining it as a quantum state for future computing. Recall that this
circuit requires the sequential controlled application of the unitary U. For such Ucircuits,
this can be an expensive operation.
3.2.4. Variational Quantum Circuit
Variational quantum circuits (VQC) [ 68] is the method that has attracted the most
interest from researchers. It was suggested using the variational quantum eigensolver
(VQE) method for quantum chemistry [46] and the quantum approximation optimization
algorithm (QAOA) [ 31] for optimization based on classical machine learning. The latter
used for a lot of related applications in machine learning [ 27,69,70]. Variational quantum
circuit have universal qualities [ 71,72] and have already shown positive outcomes in real-
world tests [ 73], but their natures are vastly different. They generally based on the approach
shown in Figure 13. The ansatz is a tiny circuit comprised of numerous gates having
adjustable characteristics, including the angle of a gate that controls rotation. The resultant
quantum state is then measured, which should provide the correct answers for the intended
problem (classiﬁcation, regression). Initial ﬁndings are poor since settings are almost
random. The name of this measure referred to as the Loss or the Objective Function. In the
end, an optimization is performed on a traditional computer in order to provide a hopefully
improved set of parameters for the experiment to test. In addition, this process is repeated
until the circuit produces acceptable results.
When performing a VQC, it is necessary to make an estimate of the gradients of such a
cost function relative to every parameter. In conventional neural networks, this is typically
achieved through backpropagation across analytic procedures. While using VQC, processes
become excessively complicated, and we are unable to reach intermediate quantum states
unless we ﬁrst measure them. In the present day, the progressed approach is referred to as
the parameter shift rule [ 73], and needs to apply the circuit twice for each parameter and
measuring its outcome twice. In contrast, traditional deep learning just requires a single
forward and backward pass through the network to collect all of the thousand of gradients.
The parameter shift rule could be parallelizable over several simulators or quantum devices.
However, this might be impractical for a high number of parameters.

==== Page 22 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 22 of 41
Figure 13. Representation of a variational quantum circuit optimization scheme.
Table 3 presents a comprehensive overview of the current QML algorithms and indi-
cates the quantum routines they are based on or have used.
Table 3. An overview of current quantum machine learning algorithm.
Quantum Routines QML Applications
HHL algorithmQSVM [4,74]
Q linear regression [8]
Q least squares [75]
QPCA [14]
Grover’s algorithmQ k-Means [10]
Q K-Median [13]
QKNN [6]
Q Perceptron Models [76]
Q Neural Networks [3]
Quantum phase estimation Q k-Means [10]
Variational quantum circuitQ decision tree [9]
Circuit-centric quantum
classiﬁers [77]
Deep reinforcement
learning [78]
3.3. QML Algorithms
3.3.1. Quantum Support Vector Machines
Support Vector Machines, generally known as SVMs, are a type of supervised algo-
rithm for machine learning that may be used to handle problems involving linear dis-
crimination. The approach involves establishing a hyperplane that differentiates between
two different classes of feature vectors. This hyperplane serves as a decision threshold for
the further categorization of data and is based on the concept of ﬁnding the hyperplane.
The SVM is described as aiming to maximize the distance between the hyperplane and
the support vectors of the data points that are located nearest to it. Depending on the
kernel employed by the SVM method, the objective function is sometimes convex or not.
Non-convex functions are often closer to the local maximum; hence, the conventional SVM
compromises optimization efﬁciency and accuracy rate. QSVM uses Grover’s algorithm as
a quantum subroutine for reduction. This makes it possible for non-convex cost functions

==== Page 23 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 23 of 41
to converge to their global optimal value [ 79]. We describe the Quantum SVM algorithm as
the following. For clarity, consider linear SVMs with hyperplanes given below:
qTx c=1. (25)
Recall that cis a constant value while xand qare vectors. If qis constrained to a
minimum, then the margin may be relied upon to accurately categorize the data. All of
that is characterized by the following optimization issue:
min
q,c1
2jjqjj2, (26)
subject to one constraint:
yi(qTx(i) c)1. (27)
In the training data i=f1,. . .,Mgand y(i)=f 1, 1g, using Lagrange multipliers
a(i), the constraint may be included into an objective function, as a consequence, and
the problem might be described as follows:
min
q,cmax
a(i)0 
1
2jjqjj2 M
å
i=1h
a(i)(qTx(i) c) 1i!
. (28)
It is important to note that the only non-zero value of a(i)is equivalent to the sum of
the support vectors x(i). The derivatives listed below are all set to zero order to maximize
the objective function F with regard to a(i):
¶F
¶q(i)=q(i) a(i)y(i)x(i)=0;¶F
¶c=M
å
i=1a(i)y(i)=0. (29)
As a result, we can describe weights as:
q=M
å
i=1a(i)y(i)x(i), (30)
as well as the simultaneous issue as:
min
a(i)(
1
2å
i,ja(i)a(j)y(i)y(j)(x(i))Tx(j) M
å
i=1a(i))
, (31)
assuming that:
a(i)0, (32)
for every iin the training set i=1, . . . , Mas well as:
M
å
i=1a(i)y(i)=0. (33)
It is possible to introduce nonlinearity into the optimization problem by expanding it
to all kernel functions K(x(i),x(j)). This kernel approach is used instead of the dot product
in the preceding dual problem:
min
a(i)(
1
2å
i,ja(i)a(j)y(i)y(j)K(x(i),x(j)) M
å
i=1a(i))
. (34)

==== Page 24 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 24 of 41
For instance, we may deﬁne the Gaussian kernel function by:
K(x(i),x(j)) =exp( gjjx(i) x(j)jj2). (35)
This necessitates more Euclidean distance computations. A detailed explanation of
each stage of the algorithm is given below:
1. kernel function and parameters initialization: Each parameter utilized by a kernel
function must have its value initialized. Choose a relevant kernel function for the
problem at hand and then generate the corresponding kernel matrix;
2. Parameters and classical information represented by quantum states: In this stage,
the objective function is segmented, and its components are recorded in qubits. Binary
strings may be used to represent the conventional data:
x!b= (b1,b2, . . . , bm)T, (36)
with bi=f0, 1gfori=1,. . .,m. Then, the binary strings may be simply converted
into kqubit quantum states:
jb1,b2, . . . , bmi, (37)
which form a Hilbert space of 2kdimensions covered by basis fj00 . . . 0i,j10 . . . 0i,. . .,
j11 . . . 1ig;
3. The quantum minimization subroutine examines objective function space: The Grover
technique determines the optimal value of a(i)that resolves for qand cby searching
the space of all possible objective functions. By ﬁrst generating a superposition of
all potential inputs to a quantum oracle Oexpressing the objective function, this
procedure achieves a global minimum for the SVM optimization problem. This
subroutine’s measurement yields the answer with a high degree of probability.
The Grover approach decreases the temporal complexity of the given SVM opti-
mization problem from O(N)toO(p
N), in which Nis the training vector’s dimension,
and provides a global minimum. The computation of a kernel matrix is one of the most time-
consuming aspects of any SVM algorithm, with a computational complexity of O(M2N).
The approach has the same limitations as that of the quantum subroutine GroverOptim,
namely that the algorithm could not produce acceptable results due to quantum noise. It is
assumed that the objective function of SVM is provided as an input to the algorithm by a
quantum oracle. Another quantum technique for SVM, introduced in [ 4], demonstrates an
unconstrained exponential speed-up, as we shall discuss below.
3.3.2. Quantum Least Square SVM
The quantum variant of the Least Square SVM is a quantum machine learning break-
through, in which Rebentrost et al. [ 4] obtained a signiﬁcant exponentially speedup gain in
the formulation of support vector machine. This algorithm transforms the optimization
issue into such a linear equation system that includes the kernel matrix in handling the
optimization model. By handling the least squares method and accelerating the kernel
matrix computations, we obtain a signiﬁcantly more efﬁcient method for solving the linear
equations system. We use quantum advantages in the following areas to improve the
efﬁciency of the SVM:
• Quantum random access memory (QRAM) data translation: Preparing the collected
data as input into the quantum device for computation is among the difﬁcult tasks
in QML. QRAM aids in transforming a collection of classical data into its quantum
counterpart. QRAM requires O(log2d)steps to retrieve data from storage in order to
reconstruct a state, with drepresenting the feature vector’s dimension;
• Computation of the kernel matrix: The kernel matrix is mostly determined by the
examination of the dot product. Therefore, if we obtain speedup beneﬁts of the
dot product performance in the quantum approach, this will result in an overall

==== Page 25 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 25 of 41
speedup increase in the computation of the kernel matrix. With the use of quantum
characteristics, the authors of [ 5] provide a quicker method for calculating dot products.
A quantum paradigm is also used for the computation of the normalized kernel matrix
inversion K 1. As previously said, QRAM requires only O(log2d)steps to request
for recreating a state, hence a simple dot product using QRAM requires O(e 1log2d)
steps, where erepresents a desired level of accuracy;
• Least square formulation: The quantum implementation of the exponentially faster
eigenvector performance makes the speedup increase conceivable during the training
phase in matrix inversion method and non-sparse density matrices [5].
The formulation for the least square SVM is as follows:
bA(jb,  !ai) =j  !yi;bA=0 1T
1K+g 1I
, (38)
usingbA=A
TrANormalized TrA, and TrA represents a trace of A. The aim will be solving
the optimization issue bA(jb,  !ai) =j  !yi, where band  !aare parameters, and Kdenotes
the kernel matrix.
3.3.3. Quantum Linear Regression
The aim of any regression issue is to make an accurate prediction of the contin-
uous value of a target variable yi2R, based on a collection of input characteristics
x(1),x(2). . .x(N), which may be expressed as an N-dimensional input data vector x2RN.
It is assumed in linear regression that the output is a linear composition of the input
characteristics and an unavoidable error factor ei, as shown below:
yi=q1x(1)+q2x(2)+. . .+qNx(N)+b+ei=N
å
i=1qix(i) +b+ei. (39)
The parameters of the model we would like to learn are the qivalues relating to each
feature and the intercept b. If the parameters qi, where i2f1, 2,. . .Ngare represented with
such a vector q2R, the linear connection from Equation (39) may therefore be simpliﬁed
as follows:
yi/xi=qTxi+b+ei. (40)
The phrase yi/xii represents the value of yias a function of xi. Therefore, eiwould
be the fundamental component which has zero association with the input characteristics,
and, as a result, cannot be learned. Nevertheless, given xi, we can precisely deﬁne the
phrase qTxi+b. Assuming that the error eihas a normal distribution having zero mean
and limited standard deviation si, the following expression may be written:
eiN(0,s2), (41)
andqTxi+bwas indeed constant based on the value within the feature vector xi; hence,
we may afﬁrm:
qTxi+b+eiN(qTxi+b,s2), (42)
!yi/xiN(qTxi+b,s2).
Given the input feature, the target label yifollows a normally distributed with mean
qTxi+band standard deviation s. As can be seen below, in linear regression, the condi-
tional mean of the distribution is used to make predictions:
byi=E[yi/xi]=qTxi+b. (43)
Minimizing the square of the error term eiat every data point enables the identiﬁcation
of the model parameters qand b. The bias factor bmay be used as a parameter through the

==== Page 26 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 26 of 41
parameter vector qassociated with the constant feature of 1 for convenience of notation.
This results in the prediction byi=qTxiwhere qand xirepresent N+1-dimensional vectors.
Through this reduction in complexity, the equation system describing the Mdata points
may be expressed in matrix notation below:
2
6666664xT
1
xT
2
. . .
xT
i
. . .
xT
M3
7777775q=2
6666664by1
by1
. . .
byi
. . .
byM3
7777775. (44)
Equation (44) may be rewritten as follows using a matrix representation of the input
feature vectors X2RM(N+1)and a vector representation of the prediction bYi2RM:
Xq=bY. (45)
Therefore, if we let the vector Y2RMrepresent the actual targets yiin all Msets of
data, we can calculate the error vector e2Ras below:
e=Y bY=Y Xq. (46)
The loss function may be expressed also as the average of the squared errors in the predic-
tions over all points in the data:
L(q) =1
MM
å
i=1e2
i=1
MeTe=1
M(Y Xq)T(Y Xq). (47)
The parameter may be determined by minimizing the loss L(q)for a range of values
ofq. The minima may be found by setting the gradient of the loss L(q)relative to qto zero
vector, as illustrated below:
rq= 2
MXT(Y Xq) =0; (48)
then,
(XTX)q=XTY.
The matrix (XTX)may be thought of as the Hamiltonian of a quantum system due to its
Hermitian character. Using the HHL technique, we may solve the matrix inversion issue
posed by Equation (48) in order to obtain the model parameter q.
3.3.4. Quantum K-Means Clustering
Grover’s search algorithm and the Euclidean distance computation approach may be
used to provide the quantum equivalent of conventional k-means clustering. The processes
are identical to those of the traditional k-means algorithm, only with the exception that
quantum routines rather than conventional ones are used to execute each step. The steps
are detailed below.
1. Initialization: Set the kcluster u1,u2,. . .,uk2Rnby using heuristic comparable to
that of the traditional k-means algorithm. For instance, kdata points may be randomly
selected as the ﬁrst clusters;
2. Until Convergence:
(a) In every piece of data, xi2Rndeﬁned with its magnitude jj  !xijj2saved
conventionally as well as the unit norm jxiisaved like a quantum state, the dis-
tance is computed by using quantum Euclidean distance computation proce-
dure with every one of the kcluster centroids:

==== Page 27 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 27 of 41
d(i,j) =jj(xi uj)jj2=4Z(P(j0i) 0.5), (49)
with j2f1, 2, . . . kg;
(b) Apply the search technique developed by Grover to allocate every xiin the data
set to a single kclusters. As seen below, the oracle implemented in Grover’s
search method must be capable of taking the distance d(i,j)and then allocate
the proper cluster ciaccording to the formula below:
ci=argmin jjj(xi uj)jj2ci2f1, 2, . . . kg; (50)
(c) The mean of each cluster is determined after assigning each piece of data xito
its cluster ci2f1, 2, . . . kg:
uj=1
Njå
ci=jxi, (51)
where Njrepresents the total number of data that might be assigned to cluster j.
The method converges when the clusters of data points no longer change with each
iteration. Conventional k-means clustering does have an iteration complexity equal to
O(MNk )). For each data point, the computational complexity of the distance to a cluster
isO(N), wherein Nrepresents the number of features. The complexity is O(Nk)for each
data point, as there are kclusters. Moreover, the total complexity for every iteration is
O(MNk ), as the complexity for each of the Mpoints of data are O(Nk). The advantage of
the quantum k-means implementation is that the complexity of computing the quantum
Euclidean distance between every data point in a cluster is just Mlog (N)kfor a high value
of a feature size N. Notably, for conventional and quantum k-means, the complications of
allocating every data point towards the right cluster using distance minimization are not
taken into account. In this aspect, if built appropriately, Grover’s technique, which is used
to allocate data points to its respective clusters, may give an additional speedup.
3.3.5. Quantum Principal Component Analysis
The classical Principal component analysis (PCA) is a crucial dimensionality reduction
approach. We might claim that PCA works by transposing the covariance matrix of the
data, C=åj  !u  !uT
j, onto its diagonal. The covariance matrix summarizes how the various
data elements are related to one another. To write the covariance matrix in terms of
its eigenvectors and eigenvalues, we write C=åjek  !vk  !v†
k, wherein ekrepresents the
eigenvalues corresponding to the eigenvectors vk. Principal components refer to the few
eigenvalues that are relatively big compared to the rest. Therefore, each of the primary
components is regarded as a new feature vector.
The traditional PCA technique has a runtime complexity of O(d2), wherein dcor-
responds to the size of the Hilbert space. For quantum PCA [ 14], a quantum state is
transferred into a randomly selected data vector using QRAM. r=1
Nåjjujihujjis the den-
sity matrix of the resultant state, with Nbeing the cardinality of the input vector collection.
Applying density matrix exponentiation in conjunction with the continuous sampling of
the data and quantum phase estimation approach, we may deconstruct the input vectors
into their principal components. The quantum PCA method has a runtime complexity of
O((logd)2).
4. ML vs. QML Benchmarks
In this section, we perform the Variational Quantum Classiﬁer and compare it with
several classical classiﬁers; next, we implement QSVM and compare it with the classical
SVM, and then the implementation of the Quantum Convolutional Neural Network is
discussed in the last sub-section.

==== Page 28 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 28 of 41
4.1. Variational Quantum Classiﬁer
The Variational Quantum Classiﬁer (VQC) is based on the use of a function f(x,q) =y
which can be implemented in a quantum computer using a circuit denoted as Sxin order
to encode the input data xtoward a quantum state and especially as amplitudes of the
state, then a quantum circuit denoted as Uq, ﬁnally a one simple qubit measurement. This
latter measurement yields the likelihood of the VQC predicting ’0’ or ’1’, which may be
used to determine the prediction of a binary classiﬁcation. The circuit parameters ( q) of this
classiﬁcation are also trainable, and a variational technique may be employed to train these
parameters [77]. The four steps of VQC are shown in Figure 14 and explained below.
Figure 14. The classiﬁcation with the quantum classiﬁer consists of four phases, each represented
by a distinct color, and can be examined from three different perspectives: a formal mathematical
diagram, a quantum circuit diagram, and a graphical neural network diagram [77].
• State preparation: To be able to encode classical data into quantum states, we use
particular operations to help us work with data in a quantum circuit. As mentioned
earlier, quantum encoding is one these methods that consists of representing classical
data in the form of a quantum state in Hilbert space employing a quantum feature
map. Recall that a feature map is a mathematical mapping that allows us to integrate
our data into higher dimensional spaces, such as quantum states in our case. It is
similar to a variational circuit in which the parameters are determined by the input
data. It is essential to emphasize that a variational circuit depends on parameters that
can be optimized using classical methods;
• The model circuit: The next step is the model circuit, or the classiﬁer in precise terms.
j0is generated using a parameterized unitary operator Uqapplied to the feature vector
noted as j(x)which became a vector of a quantum state in an n-qubit system (in the
Hilbert space ). The model uses a circuit that is composed of gates which change the
state of the input and are built on unitary processes, and they depend on external
factors that can be adjusted. Uqtranslates j(x)into another vector j0with a prepared
statejj(x)iin the model circuit. Uqis comprised of a series of unitary gates;
• Measurement: We take measurements in order to obtain information from a quantum
system. Although a quantum system has an inﬁnite number of potential states, we can

==== Page 29 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 29 of 41
only recover a limited amount of information from a quantum measurement. Notice
that the number of qubits is equal to the amount of results;
• Post-process: Finally, the results were post-processed including a learnable bias pa-
rameter and a step function to translate the result to the outcome 0 or 1.
4.1.1. Implementation
The architecture that we have implemented is inspired from [77], as we have already
mentioned. The goal is to encode the real vectors as amplitude vectors (amplitude encoding)
and training the model to detect the ﬁrst two classes of the Iris dataset.
• Dataset: Our classiﬁcation data sets made up of three sorts of irises (Setosa, Versicolour,
and Virginica), and containing four features that are Sepal Length, Sepal Width, Petal
Length and Petal Width. In our implementation, we used the two ﬁrst classes:
• Implemented models:
– VQC: The Variational Quantum Classiﬁers commonly deﬁne a “layer”, whose
fundamental circuit design is replicated to create the variational circuit. Our
circuit layer is composed of a random rotation upon each qubit, and also a CNOT
gate that entangles each qubit with its neighbor. The classical data were encoded
to amplitude vectors via amplitude encoding;
– SVC: A support vector classiﬁer (SVC) implemented by the sklearn Python library;
– Decision Tree: Is a non-parametric learning algorithm which anticipates the target
variable through learning decision rules;
– Naive Bayes: Naive Bayes classiﬁers utilize Bayes theory with the assumption of
conditional independence in between each pair of features;
• Experimental Environment: We use the Jupyter Notebook and PennyLane [ 80] (A
cross-platform Python framework for discrete programming of quantum computing)
for developing all the codes and executing them on IBM Quantum simulators [ 81].
We implemented three classical Scikitlearn [ 82] algorithms to accomplish the same
classiﬁcation task on a conventional computer in order to compare their performance
with that of the VQC. We also used the end value of the cost function and the test
accuracy as metrics for evaluating the implemented algorithms.
4.1.2. Results
As it can be plainly observed from the Table 4, our VQC works slightly better than
the best result obtained with the SVC in both terms of accuracy and cost function value.
The probability of a model guessing the correct class in the classical example is less than 0.96,
but the probability of the quantum classiﬁer is 1 with the value of the cost function equal to
0.23, which shows that the quantum classiﬁer made small errors in the data compared to
SVC and Decision Tree.
Table 4. Result of the classiﬁcation algorithms for the Iris dataset.
Metric VQC SVC Decision Tree Naive Bayes
Accuracy 1 0.96 0.96 0.96
Cost 0.2351166 0.0873071 0.0906691 1.381551
One may assume that the effort required to employ quantum algorithms is exaggerated.
However, we have to look at the whole process, in which we reduced the dimension of the
data set in order to handle it by only two qubits in order to use a smaller circuit depth to
prepare quantum states. Despite this, the results are promising.
4.2. SVM vs. QSVM
Quantum Support Vector Machine (QSVM) is a quantum variant of the standard SVM
algorithm that uses quantum principles to perform computations. QSVM employs the
advantages of quantum hardware and quantum software to enhance the performance of

==== Page 30 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 30 of 41
classic SVM algorithms that perform on classical computers with GPUs or CPUs. The initial
procedure QSVM is to encode the conventional data which contains speciﬁc categories
(class, features, dimension, etc.) giving the information about the data we wish to classify.
Current quantum hardware functions are yet to achieve full capability as there is a limited
number of qubits accessible. Therefore, we need to decrease the features of the data to
render it compatible with the available qubits. The principal component analysis (PCA) is
typically employed in machine learning for this kind of procedure. Next, the classical data
are required to be mapped towards quantum input in order to be treated by the quantum
computer. These mapped data are called a feature map which operates as a quantum feature
for classical data. Finally, the proper machine learning algorithm needs to implemented to
attain the best classiﬁcation result. This implementation covers many processes including
dividing the data into training and testing sets, determining the amount of qubits to be
employed, deﬁning the classes of data. Additionally, we need to deﬁne the algorithm as
well as parameters for how many iterations this should be carried out with the depth of
the circuit.
4.2.1. Implementation
The objective of this implementation is to compare the performances of the classical
SVM and the QSVM which is implemented on a dataset that represents the real world
using a quantum computer.
• Breast cancer dataset: The Wisconsin Diagnostic Breast Cancer dataset (WDBC) of
UCI machine learning repository is a classiﬁcation dataset that includes breast cancer
case metrics. There are two categories: benign and malignant. This dataset contains
information on 31 characteristics that deﬁne a tumor, among which are: average
radius, mean perimeter, mean texture, etc., and a total of 569 records and 31 features;
• Principal Component Analysis: The existing quantum computers are yet to attain full
potential as their functions are constrained by the limited number of accessible qubits,
noise, and decoherence. Thereby, a dataset with exceptionally big dimensionality is
difﬁcult to be implemented. In addition, this is where Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) comes to help. As mentioned above, PCA is the technique that reduces the
huge dimension into smaller-scaled dimensions keeping the correlation given in the
dataset. The principal components are orthogonal since they are the eigenvectors of
the covariance matrix. Generally, we can assume that the data summarized can be
processed by a quantum computer. Using PCA offers us the ﬂexibility to leave out
some of the components without losing much information and therefore minimizing
the complexity of the problem as illustrated in Figure 15, where we reduced our
dataset in order to handle it with a quantum computer;
• Quantum Feature Map: As we discussed earlier, the Kernel techniques are the set of
algorithms for pattern analysis or recognition of the data points. Kernel techniques
map data to higher dimensional spaces in order to ease data structure and separability.
The data may be translated not only to higher-level space but to an endless dimension.
Kernel “trick” is the technique of replacing the inner products of two vectors in
our algorithm with the kernel function. In other hand, we have Quantum Kernel
techniques which is a method for identifying a hyperplane that is performing a
nonlinear transformation to the data, This is termed as a “feature map”. We may either
apply available Qiskit (an open-source quantum computing framework created by
IBM.) feature maps including ZZ feature map, Z feature map, or a Pauli feature map
that has Pauli (X, Y, Z) gates, or create a custom feature map based on the dataset
compatibility. The quantum feature map can be built by using Hadamard gates with
entangling unitary gates between them. In our case, we used the ZZ feature map.
The needed number of qubits is proportional to the data dimensionality. By altering
the angle of unitary gates to a certain value, data are encoded. QSVM uses a Quan-
tum processor to estimate the kernel in the feature space. During the training step,
the kernel is estimated or computed, and support vectors are obtained. However, in

==== Page 31 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 31 of 41
applying the Quantum Kernel method directly, we should encode our training data
and test data into proper quantum states. Using Amplitude Encoding, we may encode
the training samples in a superposition inside one register, while test examples can be
encoded in a second register.
Figure 15. The set of data (20 total) after performing PCA.
4.2.2. Results
We have implemented SVM on the breast cancer dataset from the Scikit learn library
in a classical computer using SVM as well as using QSVM on a quantum simulator in the
IBM cloud using its quantum machine learning library Qiskit [ 81], in order to compare
their performances.
As we can observe from Figure 16, the QSVM has predicted accurately the classes of
our test data, and we obtained an accuracy around 90 %. Notice that, on the diagonal of the
kernel matrix, we have only black squares, which means that each point is at a distance of
zero from itself. In addition, what we are seeing in the kernel matrix in Figures 16 and 17,
is the calculated distance of the kernel in the space with higher dimensions. Thus, we may
say that, with QSVM, our dataset can simply classify, due to the quantum feature map
method which encodes data in a space with a higher dimension.
Figure 16. Kernel matrix of QSVM, with an accuracy of around 90%.

==== Page 32 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 32 of 41
Figure 17. Kernel matrix of SVM, with an accuracy of around 85%.
4.3. CNN vs. QCNN
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are a prominent model in computer vision
that has gained a ton of potential for different machine learning tasks notably in the area of
image recognition. The capacity of such networks to retrieve features from input in a typical
hierarchical structure provides the majority of their advantages. Several transformation
layers, mainly the convolutional layer that provides its name to the model, are employed to
retrieve these features. To perform the CNN model on a quantum computer, we implement
another kind of transformation layer named quanvolutional layer or quantum convolution
utilized in Quanvolutional Neural Networks model (QNNs), which is introduced by
Henderson et. al. [ 29]. Quanvolutional layers perform on data input by encoding it through
a series of arbitrary quantum circuits, in a manner that is equivalent to the task of the
aleatory convolutional ﬁlter layers. In this subsection, we brieﬂy review the architectural
design of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and then the architectural design of
Quanvolutional Neural Networks (QNNs) that are also known as Quantum Convolutional
Neural Networks (QCNNs). Then, we evaluated the performance advantage of quantum
transformations by making a comparison between the CNN and QNN models based on
the MNIST dataset.
• Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are a specialized sort of neural networks,
built primarily for time series or image processing. They become presently the most
frequently used models for image recognition applications. Their abilities have indeed
been applied in several sectors such as gravitational wave detection or autonomous
vision. Despite these advances, CNNs struggle from a computational limitation which
renders deep CNNs extremely pricey in reality. As Figure 18 illustrates, a convolutional
neural network generally consists of three components even though the architectural
implementation varies considerably:
1. Input: The most popular input is an image, although signiﬁcant work has also
been carried out on so-called 3D convolutional neural networks which can han-
dle either volumetric data (three spatial dimensions) or videos (two spatial
dimensions + one temporal dimension). For the majority of the implementations,
the input needs to be adjusted to correspond to the speciﬁcs of the CNN used.
These include cropping, lowering the size of the image, identifying a particular
region of interest, and also normalizing pixel values to speciﬁed regions. Im-
ages, and even more widely layers of a network, may be represented as tensors.
The tensor is a generalization of a matrix into extra dimensionality. For example,

==== Page 33 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 33 of 41
an image of a height Hand a width Wmay indeed be visualized as just a matrix
inRHW, wherein every pixel represents a greyscale ranging between 0 and 255.
Furthermore, all three channels in color RGB (Red Green Blue) should be taken
into account, simply layering 3 times the matrix for every color. A whole image
is thus viewed as a three-dimensional vector in RHWDwherein Drepresents
the number of channels;
Figure 18. Representation of a CNN’s architecture. Source: Mathworks.
2. Feature Learning: The feature learning is built of three principal procedures,
executed and repeated in any sequence: Convolution Layers, usually followed
with an Activation Function and Pooling Layers at the end of this feature learning
process. We indicate by lthe present layer.
– Convolution Layer: Each lth layer is combined by a collection ﬁlter named
kernels. The result of this procedure would be the (l+1)th layer. The convo-
lution using a simple kernel may be considered to be like a feature detector,
which will screen through all sections of the input. If a feature described by
a kernel, for example, a vertical border, is present through some area of the
input, it will be highly valuable at the corresponding point of the outcome.
The outcome is known as the feature map of the whole convolution;
– Function: Just like in normal neural networks, we add certain nonlinearities
also named activation functions. These functions are necessary for a neural
network in order to be capable of learning any function. As in implementa-
tion of a CNN, every convolution is frequently followed by a Relu (Rectiﬁed
Linear Unit function). This is a basic function that sets all negative numbers
of the output to zero, then leaves the positive values as they are;
– Pooling Layer: The downsampling method that reduces the dimensions
of the layer, particularly optimizing the calculation. Furthermore, it pro-
vides the CNN the capability to learn a form invariant to lower translations.
Almost all of the cases, either we use a Maximum Pooling or perhaps an
Average Pooling. Maximum Pooling consists of swapping a subsection of
PPcomponents just by another with the biggest value. Average Pool-
ing achieves this by averaging all numbers. Note that the number of a
pixel relates to how often a certain feature is represented in the preceding
convolution layer;
3. Classiﬁcation/Fully Connected Layer: Following a speciﬁc set of convolution
layers, the inputs had been properly handled such that we may deploy a fully
connected network. The weights link every input to every output, wherein inputs
are all components of the preceding layer. The ﬁnal layer must include a single
node for each possible label. The node value may be read as the probability that
the input image belongs to the speciﬁed class.

==== Page 34 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 34 of 41
• Quanvolutional Neural Networks
The Quanvolutional Neural Networks (QNNs) are essentially a variant of classical
convolutional neural networks with an extra transformation layer known as the
quanvolutional layer, or quantum convolution that is composed of quanvolutional
ﬁlters [ 29]. When applied, the latter ﬁlters to a data input tensor; then, this will indi-
vidually generate a feature map by changing spatially local subsections of this input.
However, unlike the basic handling data element by element in matrix multiplication
performed by a traditional convolutional ﬁlter, a quanvolutional ﬁlter transforms input
data using a quantum circuit that may be structured or arbitrary. In our implemen-
tation, we employ random quantum circuits as proposed in [ 29] for quanvolutional
ﬁlters rather than circuits with a speciﬁc form, for simplicity and to create a baseline.
This technique for converting classical data using quanvolutional ﬁlters can be formal-
ized as follows and illustrated in Figure 19:
1. Let us simply begin with a basic quanvolutional ﬁlter. The latter ﬁlter employs
the arbitrary quantum circuit qthat accepts as inputs subsections of images
of dataset a u. Each input is denoted by the letter ux, with each uxbeing a
two-dimensional matrix of length n-by-n, where nis greater than 1;
Figure 19. (A) represents a quanvolutional layer inside a network architecture. The quanvolutional
layer has a series of quanvolutional ﬁlters (three in this case) that transform the entered data to
various outcome feature maps. ( B) represents the transformation of conventional data input and
output of an arbitrary quantum circuit within the quanvolutional ﬁlter [29].
2. Despite the fact that there are a variety of methods for “encoding” uxas an
initial state of q, we chose one encoding method efor every quanvolutional ﬁlter,
and we deﬁne the resulting state of this encoding with ix=e(ux);
3. Thereafter, the application of the quantum circuit qto the beginning state ix,
and the outcome of the quantum computing was indeed the quantum state ox,
as deﬁned by the relation ox=q(ix)that also equals q(e(ux));
4. In order to decode the quantum state ox, we use dwhich is our decoding method
that converts the quantum output into classical output using a set of measure-
ments, which guarantees that the output of the quanvolutional ﬁlter is equivalent
to the output of a simple classical convolution. The decoded state is described by
fx=d(ox)with d(q(e(ux)))in which fxrepresents a scale value;

==== Page 35 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 35 of 41
5. Lastly, we denote the full transformation achieved by the ’quanvolutional ﬁl-
ter transformation’ [ 29] by Qof a data point ux, which is also described as
fx=Q(ux,e,q,d). Figure 19B represents one basic quanvolutional ﬁlter, show-
ing the encoding, the applying circuit and the decoding process.
4.3.1. Implementation
The aim of this implementation is to demonstrate the practicality of quanvolutional
layers included in a classical CNN model, the feasibility to employ this quanvolutional
technique using actual world data sets, and the possibility of using features created by the
quanvolutional transformation.
• Dataset: We used a subset of the MNIST (Modiﬁed or Mixed National Institute of
Standards and Technology) dataset, which includes 70,000 handwritten 28 by 28 pixels
in grayscale;
• Implemented models:
– The CNN model: We used a simple model: Fully-connected layer containing
ten output nodes and then a ﬁnal activation function softmax in a pure classical
convolutional neural network;
– The QNN model: A CNN with one quanvolutional layer seems to be the simplest
basic quanvolutional neural network. The single quantum layer will be the ﬁrst,
and then the rest of the model is identical to the traditional CNN model;
• Experimental Environment: The Pennylane library [80] was used to create the imple-
mentation, which was then run on the IBM quantum computer simulator QASM;
• Quanvolutional layer generation process described as follows:
– A quantum circuit is created by including some small section of the input image,
in our case a square of 22. A rotation encoding layer denoted by Ry(with
angles scaled by a factor p);
– The system performs a quantum computation associated with a unit U. A varia-
tional quantum circuit or, quite generally, a randomized circuit could generate
this unit;
– The quantum system is measured using a computational basis measurement,
which gives a set of four classical expectation values. The outcomes of the
measurements can eventually be post-processed in a classical way;
– Each value is translated into a distinct channels of one output pixel, as in a
classical convolution layer;
– In repeating the technique on different parts, the whole input image can be
scanned, thus obtaining an output object structured as a multi-channel;
– Other quantum or classical layers can be added after the quanvolutional layer.
4.3.2. Results
Before analyzing the performance of the QNN model and traditional CNN results, we
should ﬁrst conﬁrm that the model works as planned; the addition of the quanvolutional
layer to the model has resulted in a highest accuracy, and the more the training iterations
there are, the more the accurate the model becomes. The value of the loss function in the
QNN models is quite low, which shows that our model has fewer errors during testing.
As shown in Table 5 below, the QNN has a slightly higher accuracy than the CNN which
indicates that our QNN model has well predicted our test data which are not used in the
training of the model. We can conclude that the generated quantum features were effective
in constructing features for the MNIST data set for classiﬁcation purposes.
In Figure 20, we clearly observe the reduction of the sampling of the resolution and
certain local deformations generated by our quanvolutional layer. In addition, the general
shape of the input image is preserved, as expected for a convolution layer.

==== Page 36 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 36 of 41
Table 5. Results of the benchmarking experiments.
Algorithm Loss Function Test Accuracy
CNN 1.0757 0.6667
QNN 0.9882 0.7000
Figure 20. Under each input, the four outcome channels produced by our quantum convolution were
shown in grayscale images.
Figure 21 displays the outcomes of this implementation. Our QNN model typically
provides superior learning performance compared to the CNN model. The presented
results prove that the quantum convolution layer might boost learning performance.

==== Page 37 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 37 of 41
Figure 21. Comparative performance of the QCNN model and the CNN model.
5. General Discussion
As shown in the results above, the three quantum algorithms outperformed their
classical counterparts in terms of accuracy and cost function value. However, it is indeed
challenging to afﬁrm that a QML algorithm will ever be better compared to a classical
machine learning algorithm through practice since a quantum computer is evolved in noisy
intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) and small-scale quantum devices, which inhibits us to
use a limited amount of qubits and few features, and huge data processing on quantum
devices is impracticable due to the loss of a large amount of important information. QML
has a number of challenges that are required to be solved on both the hardware and software
levels. Quantum computers with a high-qubit-count and interface devices, such as quantum
random access memory (qRAM), which enables classical information to be recorded in
quantum states structure, represents the biggest and most signiﬁcant challenges. Small scale
quantum computers with 50–150 qubits are commonly accessible through quantum cloud
computing, and their hardware is distinct; we can observe ion-trapped devices (IonQ) and
both superconducting devices (IBM or Rigetti). Additionally, there are devices consisting
of topological qubits, NV center (diamond), photons, quantum dots and neutral atoms.
When it comes to physically implementing the quantum devices, each company decides
one or more technologies. Each has beneﬁts and drawbacks, and there is no agreement or
dominance of one in the literature. However, due to the size of these devices, the complexity
of their implementation, and their ongoing development, their everyday access is not yet
feasible. An upgrade in quantum hardware will enable an improvement in the performance
of applied algorithms. Because the the potential number of output labels is proportional to

==== Page 38 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 38 of 41
the amount of qubits in the device, most of the used algorithms, such as image classiﬁcation
using QCNN, are constrained by the number of qubits. We may also ﬁnd a vast selection of
quantum simulators on many platforms, which enable the testing of quantum computers
as if they were real and even imitate their noise.
6. Conclusions and Perspectives
This article reviews a selection of the most recent research on QML algorithms for
a variety of issues which are more accurate and effective than classical algorithms in
classical computing, especially focusing on the quantum variant of certain supervised
machine learning algorithms that rely on the VQC. In addition, we discuss numerous
ways for mapping data into quantum computers. We covered approaches of quantum
machine learning such as quantum sub-processes. In addition, then, we compared the
performance of various QML algorithms such as QSVM, VQC, and QNN with that of its
classical counterparts.
The QSVM algorithm exceeded the classical SVM in performance and speed up,
but when it performed on a small subset of the dataset. Most quantum machine learning
techniques are at some point restricted by the absence of an appropriate quantum RAM
(QRAM) which facilitates the mapping of classical input to a quantum computer. The num-
ber of practical machine learning algorithms in the area of QML is expected to rise as
QRAM implementations reach a stable state.
The VQC obtains a greater advantage over certain classical classiﬁers when imple-
mented on a quantum computer with a smaller circuit depth, employing only two qubits to
encode a subset of the dataset. Furthermore, we aim for a similar result on a large dataset
with the existence of large number of qubits.
The result produced by the QNN demonstrated that the model can be a solution in
several classiﬁcation tasks, and it is a more efﬁcient and effective learning model when
employed with a classical CNN model. Moreover, the QNN model may also predict
highly efﬁcient results in much more sophisticated and large-scale training using quantum
computers of the NISQ (Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum) era.
In conclusion, comprehensive benchmarks on large datasets are needed to systemati-
cally examine the inﬂuence of growing input data. In addition, in the near-term, the quan-
tum encoding (feature maps) approach is a strong and theoretically interesting approach to
think about in order to successfully implement quantum machine learning algorithms.
As a future work, we are currently developing new quantum machine learning al-
gorithms that are able to handle a large actual world datasets which can be handled on
currently quantum computers. Our next objective is to examine the implementation of
classical machine learning models on quantum computers.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The notebooks used during this study can be provided after contacting
the authors.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Grover, L.K. Quantum Mechanics Helps in Searching for a Needle in a Haystack. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997 ,79, 325–328. [CrossRef]
2. Shor, P .W. Algorithms for Quantum Computation: Discrete Logarithms and Factoring. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Symposium on Foundation of Computer Science, Washington, DC, USA, 20–22 November 1994; pp. 124–134.
3. Menneer, T.; Narayanan, A. Quantum-inspired neural networks. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems 95,
Denver, CO, USA, 27–30 November 1995.
4. Rebentrost, P .; Mohseni, M.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Support Vector Machine for Big Data Classiﬁcation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 ,
113, 130503. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Harrow, A.W.; Hassidim, A.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm for Linear Systems of Equations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009 ,103, 150502.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 39 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 39 of 41
6. Wiebe, N.; Kapoor, A.; Svore, K. Quantum algorithms for nearest-neighbor methods for supervised and unsupervised learning.
arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1401.2142.
7. Dang, Y.; Jiang, N.; Hu, H.; Ji, Z.; Zhang, W. Image classiﬁcation based on quantum K-Nearest-Neighbor algorithm. Quantum Inf.
Process. 2018 ,17, 1–18. [CrossRef]
8. Schuld, M.; Sinayskiy, I.; Petruccione, F. Prediction by linear regression on a quantum computer. Phys. Rev. A 2016 ,94, 022342.
[CrossRef]
9. Lu, S.; Braunstein, S.L. Quantum decision tree classiﬁer. Quantum Inf. Process. 2014 ,13, 757–770. [CrossRef]
10. Lloyd, S.; Mohseni, M.; Rebentrost, P . Quantum algorithms for supervised and unsupervised machine learning. arXiv 2013 ,
arXiv:1307.0411.
11. Lloyd, S. Least squares quantization in PCM. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 1982 ,28, 129–137. [CrossRef]
12. Kerenidis, I.; Landman, J.; Luongo, A.; Prakash, A. q-means: A quantum algorithm for unsupervised machine learning. arXiv
2018 , arXiv:1812.03584.
13. Aïmeur, E.; Brassard, G.; Gambs, S. Quantum speed-up for unsupervised learning. Mach. Learn. 2013 ,90, 261–287. [CrossRef]
14. Lloyd, S.; Mohseni, M.; Rebentrost, P . Quantum principal component analysis. Nat. Phys. 2014 ,10, 631–633. 10.1038/nphys3029.
[CrossRef]
15. Dong, D.; Chen, C.; Li, H.; Tarn, T.-J. Quantum Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part B (Cybern.) 2008 ,
38, 1207–1220. [CrossRef]
16. Ronagh, P . Quantum algorithms for solving dynamic programming problems. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1906.02229.
17. McKiernan, K.A.; Davis, E.; Alam, M.S.; Rigetti, C. Automated quantum programming via reinforcement learning for combinato-
rial optimization. arXiv 2019 arXiv:1908.08054.
18. Lloyd, S.; Weedbrook, C. Quantum Generative Adversarial Learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018 ,121, 040502. [CrossRef]
19. Dallaire-Demers, P .-L.; Killoran, N. Quantum generative adversarial networks. Phys. Rev. A 2018 ,98, 012324. [CrossRef]
20. Situ, H.; He, Z.; Wang, Y.; Li, L.; Zheng, S. Quantum generative adversarial network for generating discrete distribution. Inf. Sci.
2020 ,538, 193–208. [CrossRef]
21. Huang, H.-L.; Du, Y.; Gong, M.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, Y.; Wang, C.; Li, S.; Liang, F.; Lin, J.; Xu, Y.; et al. Experimental Quantum Generative
Adversarial Networks for Image Generation. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2021 ,16, 024051. [CrossRef]
22. Chakrabarti, S.; Yiming, H.; Li, T.; Feizi, S.; Wu, X. Quantum Wasserstein generative adversarial networks. arXiv 2019 ,
arXiv:1911.00111.
23. Kieferová, M.; Wiebe, N. Tomography and generative training with quantum Boltzmann machines. Phys. Rev. A 2017 ,96, 062327.
[CrossRef]
24. Amin, M.H.; Andriyash, E.; Rolfe, J.; Kulchytskyy, B.; Melko, R. Quantum Boltzmann Machine. Phys. Rev. X 2018 ,8, 021050.
[CrossRef]
25. Romero, J.; Olson, J.P .; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Quantum autoencoders for efﬁcient compression of quantum data. Quantum Sci. Technol.
2017 ,2, 045001. [CrossRef]
26. Khoshaman, A.; Vinci, W.; Denis, B.; Andriyash, E.; Sadeghi, H.; Amin, M.H. Quantum variational autoencoder. Quantum Sci.
Technol. 2018 ,4, 014001. [CrossRef]
27. Cong, I.; Choi, S.; Lukin, M.D. Quantum convolutional neural networks. Nat. Phys. 2019 ,15, 1273–1278. s41567-019-0648-8.
[CrossRef]
28. Kerenidis, I.; Landman, J.; Prakash, A. Quantum algorithms for deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv 2019 , arXiv:1911.01117.
29. Henderson, M.; Shakya, S.; Pradhan, S.; Cook, T. Quanvolutional neural networks: Powering image recognition with quantum
circuits. Quantum Mach. Intell. 2020 ,2, 2. [CrossRef]
30. Jiang, Z.; Rieffel, E.G.; Wang, Z. Near-optimal quantum circuit for Grover’s unstructured search using a transverse ﬁeld. Phys.
Rev. A 2017 ,95, 062317. [CrossRef]
31. Farhi, E.; Goldstone, J.; Gutmann, S. A quantum approximate optimization algorithm. arXiv 2014 , arXiv:1411.4028.
32. Kerenidis, I.; Prakash, A. Quantum gradient descent for linear systems and least squares. Phys. Rev. A 2020 ,101, 022316.
[CrossRef]
33. Schumacher, B. Quantum coding. Phys. Rev. A 1995 ,51, 2738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Barenco, A.; Bennett, C.H.; Cleve, R.; DiVincenzo, D.P .; Margolus, N.; Shor, P .; Sleator, T.; Smolin, J.A.; Weinfurter, H. Elementary
gates for quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 1995 ,52, 3457–3467. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Toffoli, T. Reversible computing. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 1980; pp. 632–644.
36. Fredkin, E.; Toffoli, T. Conservative logic. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 1982 ,21, 219–253. [CrossRef]
37. Kockum, A.K. Quantum Optics with Artiﬁcial Atoms ; Chalmers University of Technology: Gothenburg, Sweden, 2014.
38. Nielsen, M.A.; Chuang, I.; Grover, L.K. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information. Am. J. Phys. 2002 ,70, 558–559.
[CrossRef]
39. Deutsch, D.; Jozsa, R. Rapid solution of problems by quantum computation. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. Math. Phys. Sci. 1992 ,
439, 553–558. [CrossRef]
40. Coppersmith, D. An approximate Fourier transform useful in quantum factoring. arXiv 2002 , arXiv:quant-ph/0201067.

==== Page 40 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 40 of 41
41. Xu, N.; Zhu, J.; Lu, D.; Zhou, X.; Peng, X.; Du, J. Quantum Factorization of 143 on a Dipolar-Coupling Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012 ,108, 130501. [CrossRef]
42. Dridi, R.; Alghassi, H. Prime factorization using quantum annealing and computational algebraic geometry. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,
7, 1–10.
43. Crane, L. Quantum computer sets new record for ﬁnding prime number factors. New Scientist , 13 December 2019.
44. David, H. “RSA in a “Pre-Post-Quantum” Computing World”. Available online: https://www.f5.com/labs/articles/threat-
intelligence/rsa-in-a-pre-post-quantum-computing-world (accessed on 20 April 2022).
45. Aggarwal, D.; Brennen, G.K.; Lee, T.; Santha, M.; Tomamichel, M.Quantum attacks on Bitcoin, and how to protect against them.
arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1710.10377.
46. Peruzzo, A.; McClean, J.; Shadbolt, P .; Yung, M.-H.; Zhou, X.-Q.; Love, P .J.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; O’Brien, J.L. A variational
eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor. Nat. Commun. 2014 ,5, 4213. [CrossRef]
47. Wikipedia. Quantum Machine Learning. Last Modiﬁed 6 June 2021. 2021. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=Quantum_machine_learning&oldid=1055622615 (accessed on 20 April 2022).
48. Stoudenmire, E.; Schwab, D.J. Supervised learning with quantum-inspired tensor networks. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1605.05775.
49. Aaronson, S. The learnability of quantum states. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2007 ,463, 3089–3114. [CrossRef]
50. Sasaki, M.; Carlini, A. Quantum learning and universal quantum matching machine. Phys. Rev. A 2002 ,66, 022303. [CrossRef]
51. Bisio, A.; Chiribella, G.; D’Ariano, G.M.; Facchini, S.; Perinotti, P . Optimal quantum learning of a unitary transformation. Phys.
Rev. A 2010 ,81, 032324. [CrossRef]
52. da Silva, A.J.; Ludermir, T.B.; de Oliveira, W.R. Quantum perceptron over a ﬁeld and neural network architecture selection in a
quantum computer. Neural Netw. 2016 ,76, 55–64. [CrossRef]
53. Tiwari, P .; Melucci, M. Towards a Quantum-Inspired Binary Classiﬁer. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 42354–42372. [CrossRef]
54. Sergioli, G.; Giuntini, R.; Freytes, H. A new quantum approach to binary classiﬁcation. PLoS ONE 2019 ,14, e0216224. [CrossRef]
55. Ding, C.; Bao, T.Y.; Huang, H.L. Quantum-inspired support vector machine. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2021 ,
33, 7210–7222. [CrossRef]
56. Sergioli, G.; Russo, G.; Santucci, E.; Stefano, A.; Torrisi, S.E.; Palmucci, S.; Vancheri, C.; Giuntini, R. Quantum-inspired minimum
distance classiﬁcation in a biomedical context. Int. J. Quantum Inf. 2018 ,16, 18400117. [CrossRef]
57. Chen, H.; Gao, Y.; Zhang, J. Quantum k-nearest neighbor algorithm. Dongnan Daxue Xuebao 2015 ,45, 647–651.
58. Yu, C.H.; Gao, F.; Wen, Q.Y. An improved quantum algorithm for ridge regression. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2019 ,33, 858–866.
[CrossRef]
59. Sagheer, A.; Zidan, M.; Abdelsamea, M.M. A Novel Autonomous Perceptron Model for Pattern Classiﬁcation Applications.
Entropy 2019 ,21, 763. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Adhikary, S.; Dangwal, S.; Bhowmik, D. Supervised learning with a quantum classiﬁer using multi-level systems. Quantum Inf.
Process. 2020 ,19, 89. [CrossRef]
61. Havlíˇ cek, V .; Córcoles, A.D.; Temme, K.; Harrow, A.W.; Kandala, A.; Chow, J.M.; Gambetta, J.M. Supervised learning with
quantum-enhanced feature spaces. Nature 2019 ,567, 209–212. [CrossRef]
62. Ruan, Y.; Xue, X.; Liu, H.; Tan, J.; Li, X. Quantum Algorithm for K-Nearest Neighbors Classiﬁcation Based on the Metric of
Hamming Distance. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 2017 ,56, 3496–3507. [CrossRef]
63. Zhang, D.B.; Zhu, S.L.; Wang, Z.D. Nonlinear regression based on a hybrid quantum computer. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1808.09607.
64. Cortese, J.A.; Braje, T.M. Loading classical data into a quantum computer. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1803.01958.
65. Schuld, M.; Killoran, N. Quantum Machine Learning in Feature Hilbert Spaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019 ,122, 040504. [CrossRef]
66. Schuld, M.; Petruccione, F. Supervised Learning with Quantum Computers ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2018; Volume 17.
67. Wikipedia. Amplitude Ampliﬁcation. Last Modiﬁed 5 April 2021. 2021. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=Amplitude_ampliﬁcation&oldid=1021327631 (accessed on 24 June 2022).
68. Cerezo, M.; Arrasmith, A.; Babbush, R.; Benjamin, S.C.; Endo, S.; Fujii, K.; McClean, J.R.; Mitarai, K.; Yuan, X.; Cincio, L.; et al.
Variational quantum algorithms. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2021 ,3, 625–644. [CrossRef]
69. Biamonte, J.; Wittek, P .; Pancotti, N.; Rebentrost, P .; Wiebe, N.; Lloyd, S. Quantum machine learning. Nature 2017 ,549, 195–202.
[CrossRef]
70. Coyle, B.; Mills, D.; Danos, V .; Kasheﬁ, E. The Born supremacy: Quantum advantage and training of an Ising Born machine. NPJ
Quantum Inf. 2020 ,6, 60. [CrossRef]
71. Biamonte, J. Universal variational quantum computation. Phys. Rev. A 2021 ,103, L030401. l030401. [CrossRef]
72. Abbas, A.; Sutter, D.; Zoufal, C.; Lucchi, A.; Figalli, A.; Woerner, S. The power of quantum neural networks. Nat. Comput. Sci.
2021 ,1, 403–409. [CrossRef]
73. Mitarai, K.; Negoro, M.; Kitagawa, M.; Fujii, K. Quantum circuit learning. Phys. Rev. A 2018 ,98, 032309. [CrossRef]
74. Bishwas, A.K.; Mani, A.; Palade, V . An all-pair quantum SVM approach for big data multiclass classiﬁcation. Quantum Inf. Process.
2018 ,17, 282. [CrossRef]
75. Wiebe, N.; Braun, D.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Algorithm for Data Fitting. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012 ,109, 050505. [CrossRef]
76. Kapoor, A.; Wiebe, N.; Svore, K. Quantum perceptron models. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1602.04799.
77. Schuld, M.; Bocharov, A.; Svore, K.M.; Wiebe, N. Circuit-centric quantum classiﬁers. Phys. Rev. A 2020 ,101, 032308. [CrossRef]

==== Page 41 ====
Entropy 2023 ,25, 287 41 of 41
78. Chen, S.Y.-C.; Yang, C.-H.H.; Qi, J.; Chen, P .-Y.; Ma, X.; Goan, H.-S. Variational Quantum Circuits for Deep Reinforcement
Learning. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 141007–141024. [CrossRef]
79. Anguita, D.; Ridella, S.; Rivieccio, F.; Zunino, R. Quantum optimization for training support vector machines. Neural Netw. 2003 ,
16, 763–770. [CrossRef]
80. Bergholm, V .; Izaac, J.; Schuld, M.; Gogolin, C.; Alam, M.S.; Ahmed, S.; Arrazola, J.M.; Blank, C.; Delgado, A.; Jahangiri, S.; et al.
Pennylane: Automatic differentiation of hybrid quantum-classical computations. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1811.04968.
81. Aleksandrowicz, G.; Alexander, T.; Barkoutsos, P .; Bello, L.; Ben-Haim, Y.; Bucher, D.; Cabrera-Hernández, F.J.; Carballo-
Franquis, J.; Chen, A.; Chen, C.F.; et al. Qiskit: An Open-Source Framework for Quantum Computing. 2019. Available online:
https://zenodo.org/record/2562111 (accessed on 26 June 2022).
82. Buitinck, L.; Louppe, G.; Blondel, M.; Pedregosa, F.; Mueller, A.; Grisel, O.; Niculae, V .; Prettenhofer, P .; Gramfort, A.;
Grobler, J.; et al. API design for machine learning software: Experiences from the scikit-learn project. arXiv 2013 , arXiv:1309.0238.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

