==== Page 1 ====
sensors
Review
Real-Time EMG Based Pattern Recognition Control
for Hand Prostheses: A Review on Existing Methods,
Challenges and Future Implementation
Nawadita Parajuli1,*, Neethu Sreenivasan2, Paolo Bifulco3, Mario Cesarelli3, Sergio Savino3
,
Vincenzo Niola3, Daniele Esposito3
, Tara J. Hamilton4
, Ganesh R. Naik1
,
Upul Gunawardana2
and Gaetano D. Gargiulo2,3
1The MARCS Institute, Western Sydney University, Werrington 2747, NSW, Australia;
Ganesh.Naik@westernsydney.edu.au
2School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, Western Sydney University, Penrith 2751, NSW,
Australia; N.sreenivasan@westernsydney.edu.au (N.S.); U.Gunawardana@westernsydney.edu.au (U.G.);
G.Gargiulo@westernsydney.edu.au (G.D.G.)
3Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, “Federico II” The University of Naples,
Via Claudio 10, 80140 Naples, Italy; pabifulc@unina.it (P .B.); cesarell@unina.it (M.C.);
sergio.savino@unina.it (S.S.); vincenzo.niola@unina.it (V .N.); daniele.esposito@unina.it (D.E.)
4School of Engineering, Macquarie University, Macquarie Park (NSW), Waterloo road, Sydney 2113,
Australia; tara.hamilton@mq.edu.au
*Correspondence: N.Parajuli2@westernsydney.edu.au.; Tel.: +61-(2)-4736-0920
Received: 18 September 2019; Accepted: 19 October 2019; Published: 22 October 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Upper limb amputation is a condition that signiﬁcantly restricts the amputees from
performing their daily activities. The myoelectric prosthesis, using signals from residual stump
muscles, is aimed at restoring the function of such lost limbs seamlessly. Unfortunately, the acquisition
and use of such myosignals are cumbersome and complicated. Furthermore, once acquired, it usually
requires heavy computational power to turn it into a user control signal. Its transition to a practical
prosthesis solution is still being challenged by various factors particularly those related to the fact that
each amputee has di erent mobility, muscle contraction forces, limb positional variations and electrode
placements. Thus, a solution that can adapt or otherwise tailor itself to each individual is required for
maximum utility across amputees. Modiﬁed machine learning schemes for pattern recognition have
the potential to signiﬁcantly reduce the factors (movement of users and contraction of the muscle)
aecting the traditional electromyography (EMG)-pattern recognition methods. Although recent
developments of intelligent pattern recognition techniques could discriminate multiple degrees of
freedom with high-level accuracy, their e ciency level was less accessible and revealed in real-world
(amputee) applications. This review paper examined the suitability of upper limb prosthesis (ULP)
inventions in the healthcare sector from their technical control perspective. More focus was given to
the review of real-world applications and the use of pattern recognition control on amputees. We ﬁrst
reviewed the overall structure of pattern recognition schemes for myo-control prosthetic systems and
then discussed their real-time use on amputee upper limbs. Finally, we concluded the paper with a
discussion of the existing challenges and future research recommendations.
Keywords: Myo-prosthesis; EMG; Pattern recognition; myosignals
1. Introduction
The human upper limb is a signiﬁcant part of the body, the partial or complete loss of which can
have a signiﬁcant e ect on a person’s ability on the day to day activities. The human upper limb has
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596; doi:10.3390 /s19204596 www.mdpi.com /journal /sensors

==== Page 2 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 2 of 30
three sections the hand, forearm and arm. For the movement of each section, coordinating the relation
of the nervous system, musculoskeletal systems and its surroundings are necessary. To perform various
daily activities, coordination of di erent joints (shoulder, elbow, wrist and ﬁnger joint) is essential,
including a broad range of motions with several degrees of freedom. These coordinated movements
are always redundant and can be beneﬁcial to perform complex tasks. When it comes to an artiﬁcial
hand, all such control features of the normal hand should extensively match, so that the user can
perform their daily needs in a modiﬁed and e ective way. The coordinated control of the biological
hand is quite complex, making it highly di cult to replicate it exactly in any prosthetic hand.
A typical prosthetic hand involves three main connected parts: an input signal acquisition unit,
processing and control unit and an end e ector. Nowadays, almost all high performing artiﬁcial
hands (or prosthesis) use surface electromyography signals (sEMG or myosignals) for controlling
their end e ectors. Surface electromyography records the muscle movements electrically from the
surface of muscle cells when they are electrically or neurologically activated [ 1]. The amplitude of
sEMG signals ranges from 0 to 10 mV (peak to peak) /0 to 1.5 mV (RMS) with dominant energy in the
20–450 Hz band [ 2]. Moreover, the acquisition of the sEMG signal requires proper skin preparation,
and EMG electrodes should be placed after conﬁrming the target muscles (from which the EMG
signal comparable to predeﬁned limb movement can be produced). With the technological and
miniaturization of sensors, dry electrodes that work as transducers for muscular inputs have replaced
traditional gel EMG electrodes and have improved performance [ 3]. On a usability level, sometimes,
muscle fatigue can happen due to the positioning of these dry electrodes on a single target muscle [ 4].
Recently, a modular scheme was developed as a solution, which uses the combination of several
electrodes and channels for accurate quantiﬁcation [ 5,6]. An extension to this is that these electrodes
are replaced with transducers, such as force and resistive sensors, which use only a single channel
acquisition method with fewer disturbances [7,8].
In general, myoelectric hands have evolved a lot to overcome the traditional disadvantages of
acquiring myosignals to satisfy the needs of all levels of amputees. However, the basic control of the
majority of those myo-activated limbs has followed the same operating principles (muscle contractions)
for more than half of a century [ 9,10]. These devices use two types of technical control: pattern
recognition (PR)-based control and non-pattern recognition-based control [ 11]. The conventional
non-pattern recognition method is commonly used and limited to the proportional control (on /o
control). EMG-PR techniques have been developed to increase the dexterity of myoelectric prosthetic
devices, and to overcome the limitations of conventional proportional control. EMG-PR operates by
extracting multiple features from EMG signals rather than entirely relying on EMG amplitude [ 12] (as
EMG amplitude is slow, cumbersome and di cult for users to control their residual muscles movement).
A well-developed artiﬁcial upper limb design comprises of trajectories of a limb and their associated
movement patterns. To delineate this, a control algorithm requires parameters such as kinematics
and models of joints [ 13], motion and activities range [ 11]. Through EMG-based pattern recognition,
researchers are working on the hypothesis that EMG patterns contain much information on intended
movements. Once the EMG patterns are identiﬁed for intended movements using pattern classiﬁcation,
the prosthesis controller will receive the command to implement the movement. Thus, EMG-PR
approach may allow users to control their myoelectric prosthesis more e ortlessly with a broad range
of control.
The use of artiﬁcial hands instead of biological hands with the same degree of dexterity [ 14]
and complexity is a challenging task. However, pattern recognition (PR) technology has played an
important role in controlling myoelectric prosthetic devices for over 20 years [ 15–17]. Pattern recognition
technology provides more natural control, which is easier to learn by user and machine. It also provides
independent control of multiple DOFs using simultaneous, sequential or semi-sequential control, as well
as bringing the prosthesis closer to natural arm functions [ 18]. By applying proper PR-based methods
and signal processing techniques in combination with machine learning algorithms, an amputee’s limb
movement can be accurately decoded and used to control a prosthetic device [ 11,19]. EMG-based PR

==== Page 3 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 3 of 30
methods involve various approaches such as pre-processing, segmentation of data, feature extraction,
feature classiﬁcation and post-processing [20].
All these approaches related to myoelectric pattern recognition in one way or another can be helpful,
but these methods still need further real-time evaluations for their validity [ 6]. Much research has been
done on the myoelectric prosthesis; nevertheless, some of the areas in the ﬁeld need to be improved:
(i) control of multiple degrees of freedoms (DOFs) naturally and intuitively, (ii) two-way communication
with the brain (peripheral nervous system (PNS)) and iii) fast learning. Moreover, several advanced
pattern recognition techniques have been proposed without any real-world user applications [ 21,22].
A large portion of pattern recognition techniques described in the literature is still being applied in
clinical settings. Moreover, the performance of these algorithms is a ected greatly by several factors,
including the positioning of electrodes, the fatigue of the muscle, arm position, surface EMG cross-talk
and muscle contraction. This paper is mainly focused on a review of the major pattern recognition
control approaches for myo-activated prostheses and their real-time amputee applications, and then
suggests some critical directions to follow to improve their performance level while maintaining
quantiﬁable viability.
The research methodology is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 describes the pattern recognition
techniques and systems used today, their merits and demerits if these are hands-on and what extents
need to be innovative for these technologies to be accomplished. Section 4 describes the methods
and analysis of the real-time application of myo-prosthesis. The results are discussed in Section 5.
The issues and advances made concerning this research area are discussed in Section 6. Section 7
concludes and provides an overall analysis of the article.
2. Research Methodology
This paper is a review article that summarises the current state of real-time EMG-PR control of
hand prosthesis. Many classiﬁcation approaches have been proposed to obtain better performance of
the real-time application of myoelectric prosthesis. Despite the fact that the classiﬁcation accuracy
is high (nearly >95%) on o ine measurements, the implementation of classiﬁcation techniques on
prosthetics does not give the same accuracy. The main reason behind preparing this review paper
is to show existing development achieved over the years on real-time usability of hand prosthesis.
More focus is given on PR classiﬁcation techniques, feature extraction technique, embedded processor,
virtual reality and other factors (sampling frequency, window length). Many review paper has been
published on EMG-PR, but in our understanding, this is one of a few review papers on real-time
EMG-PR control of hand prosthesis.
Firstly, the key ideas related to the EMG characteristics are discussed in brief on the introduction.
The process of pattern recognition techniques is presented in Figure 1 and then discussed. Following this,
we will explore the key techniques and research ideas related to the real-time myoelectric pattern
recognition and control. These key ideas were established through a literature survey that attempted
to capture the major achievement in the ﬁeld of classiﬁcation to obtain real-time control of prosthesis,
real-time with embedded PR based prosthetics and real-time using virtual reality. In the ﬁnal sections
of the paper, we speculate on future research directions in this ﬁeld based on our critical analysis of the
current state of the art.
3. Pattern Recognition-Based Myoelectric Control
Myoelectric control systems can be classiﬁed as a pattern recognition control system and
a non-pattern recognition control system. The non-pattern recognition control includes onset
analysis, proportional level control and threshold level control. All of them are easy to implement
in a real system but are limited in their degrees of freedom. From the early 1960s onwards,
pattern recognition-classiﬁcation techniques attracted the attention of the research community working
on controlling artiﬁcial limbs. This approach consists of segmentation of data, feature extraction,
and classiﬁcation of a set of features or patterns for the various mode of myo-activations [ 23,24]. Figure 1

==== Page 4 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 4 of 30
shows some of the existing pattern recognition techniques used for myoelectric controls. Feature
extraction and windowing are two di erent parts of the [ 25] segmentation of data. Several studies
use a pre-processing stage before the feature extraction to avoid the preliminary level of inherent
disturbances and electromagnetic interferences. The output of pattern recognition is categorised into
dierent classes or labels based on the input feature extracted. The classes deﬁne the control of the
actuator with a speciﬁc command. In the next (sub) sections, we explain the detailed steps involved in
real-time pattern classiﬁcation of EMG based prosthetic hands. For simplicity, we summarised all the
results (processing steps) as (a) real-time collected data from amputee (Table 1), (b) real-time using
embedded packages (Table 2) and (c) real-time with virtual reality (Table 3), respectively.
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 27 
 use a pre-processing stage before the feature extrac tion to avoid the preliminary level of inherent 
disturbances and electromagnetic interferences. The output of pattern recognition is categorised into 
different classes or labels based on the input feature extracted. The classes define the control of the 
actuator with a specific command. In the next (sub ) sections, we explain the detailed steps involved 
in real-time pattern classification of EMG based prosthetic hands. For simplicity, we summarised all the results (processing steps) as (a) real-time coll ected data from amputee (Table 1), (b) real-time 
using embedded packages (Table 2) and (c) real-time with virtual reality (Table 3), respectively. 
 
Figure 1. General pattern recognition schemes [11,26,27]. EMG: electromyography. 
3.1. Pre Processing of EMG Recorded Signal 
Figure 1. General pattern recognition schemes [11,26,27]. EMG: electromyography.

==== Page 5 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 5 of 30
3.1. Pre Processing of EMG Recorded Signal
Recorded EMG signal is characterised by many interferences, such as signal acquisition noise,
electromagnetic disturbances, signal instability and motion artefact due to electrodes and cables.
Pre-processing is the very ﬁrst step of pattern recognition techniques regarding proper signal analysis
and minimizing the inherent interferences [ 28]. It should be noted that Independent component analysis
(ICA) and Common spatial pattern (CSP) are used as a Pre-processing (ﬁltering) and dimensionality
reduction (after feature extraction).
3.2. Segmentation of Data
The results obtained from the Pre-processed EMG signal (random nature) is not regarded as a
useful input in the pattern recognition technique. Thus, to extract the descriptive features, the window
(segmentation) of the Pre-processed data is required. There are mainly two di erent types of windowing
techniques proposed: overlapping window and non-overlapping (adjacent) window. In overlapped
windowing technique, the former window overlaps over the current window with increment timeless
than the window length itself [ 11]. The window length should be selected properly in real-time,
which could deliver an acceptable delay. Larger window length would provide high classiﬁcation
accuracy but delay in the classiﬁer’s decision. The di erent optimal length used in various works of
literature has been reported in Tables 1–3.
Segmentation of EMG data (using windowing) helps in estimating the intended motion for the
myoelectric classiﬁer. It helps in the decision making of intended motion while new data are being
acquired. Englehart and Hudgins [ 29] used an adjacent, disjoint analysis window length equivalent to
0.25Sample frequency (SF) (256 ms for SF of 1000 Hz) for continuous myoelectric classiﬁcation [ 30].
They also demonstrated that the data segment length of 0.125 SF (128 ms for SF of 1000 Hz) or
even less as 0.03125 SF (32 ms) could be considered, without much reduction in accuracy for the
continuous segmentation of steady-state signal. As with the advanced real-time computation facility
and high-speed processors, data processing could take less than 5 ms, thereby classifying data segment
length could vary from 32 to 25 ms. In this approach, with the time increment less than segment length,
the new segment could slide over the current segment. The segment length must be higher than the
processing period because the mainframe feature set had been calculated and must take a choice earlier
to the next segment. Thus, normally, the denser yet semi-class decisions are made through small
segment increments that help to improve response time and accuracy [31].
3.3. Feature Extraction
Generally, EMG features are extracted in the form of time-domain (TD), frequency domain (FD)
and time-frequency domain (TFD). In the TD, the features are extracted from the variations of signal
amplitude with time [ 32] as per the muscular conditions. Unlike time features, the frequency domain
uses the power spectrum density of the myosignals for extraction [ 33]. On the other hand, the combined
features of time and frequency domain are used for time-frequency extraction (examples such as
short Fourier transform and wavelets). The studies based on feature extractions proposed across
TD, FD and TFD shows the best results using the TD EMG feature. Hudgins [ 34] proposed the four
dierent time-domain features (MAV , WL, ZC, SSC) [ 35] for feature extraction from EMG, and it is
the most adopted one to date in the ﬁeld of myoelectric pattern recognition [ 11]. Willison amplitude
(WAMP) [ 36], Autoregressive (AR) model parameters [ 37] and time domain-auto regression (TD-AR)
are also used to extract feature information. In comparison to other feature extraction methods,
such as Fourier transform and Wavelet Transforms (WT), TD-AR features have achieved higher
classiﬁcation performance for the detection of hand movements with EMG signals [ 37]. Lui and
Huang [ 38] implemented a fourth-order AR model for the EMG feature extraction and showed better
classiﬁcation performance. This approach only includes the trained data (EMG pattern classes) and
rejects all untrained data of the classiﬁer. Some of the recently developed features are Wavelet packet

==== Page 6 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 6 of 30
transform (WPT) based features [ 11], short-time Fourier transform (STFT) [ 39] and EMG synergies
by matrix factorization analysis [ 40]. STFT comparing to TD and fractal domain features state EMG
signals better relationships with di erent muscles.
Recently, time-dependent power spectral descriptors (TD-PSD) [ 11] were proposed, which consists
of feature sets (wavelength ration, sparseness, irregularity factor and spectral moments (ﬁrst, second
and fourth)). TD-PSD with force level training shows more robustness of pattern recognition against
force variation than most of the other feature extraction methods [ 41], such as reduced spectral
moments by Vuskovic and Du (VD-MOM), AR +RMS, TD, wavelet and discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) [ 42]. Khushaba [ 43] proposed a temporal-spatial descriptor (TSDs). EMG features set collected
from several intact-limbed and amputees are accepted on multiple sparse and high-density (HD) for
executing multiple degrees of freedom (hand and ﬁnger movements). Time-derivative moments (TDM)
based feature extraction [ 44] is a novel feature set extraction proposed to enhance the performance of
EMG-PR in upper limb motion classiﬁcation. Furthermore, most of the previous studies had focused
on time-domain features to reduce computational di culty. In addition, it does not require additional
levels of data transformation [45].
Usually, after feature extraction, dimensionality reduction (DR) is applied. DR is the process of
removing the number of arbitrary variables under consideration by locating a group of key variables.
When the information is liberally dispersed (scattered) due to the EMG classiﬁcation, there may be a
problem caused by the large variance of the EMG signal. Thus, dimensionality reduction methods can
unite this information more e ectively and solve the problem of feature dimension. Dimensionality
reduction thus helps in saving the computational cost and reduces the level of system complexity [ 46].
Uncorrelated linear discriminant analysis (ULDA), principle component analysis (PCA), and orthogonal
fuzzy neighbourhood discriminative approach (OFNDA) are common dimensionality reduction (DR)
techniques used to reduce the feature space.
3.4. Myoelectric Classiﬁcation
The next stage, followed by feature extraction, is feature classiﬁcation. The information gathered
during feature extraction is fed into the classiﬁcation stage. A classiﬁer should be able to classify the
pattern e ciently in less time to meet the real-time constraints of the prosthesis. Notably, only a few
numbers of studies have compared the potentiality of classiﬁers to meet real-time control.
The myosignals pattern classiﬁcation for explicit movements is more focused on the extraction
of activities from arm muscles. For amputees, due to their amputations, only a few muscles will be
present in the residual limb to extract the feature of signals. For instance, in the case of transhumeral
amputation, the availability of forearm muscles is completely unavailable. Most of the pattern
recognition studies are, therefore, concentrated on trans-radial control. However, several studies tried
to classify ﬁnger movements using multiple features and classiﬁers, such as multi-layer perceptron
and neural network. Usually, in EMG-PR, the classiﬁer performs well on trained (actions) classiﬁcation
patterns. To improve the robustness of PR systems, the untrained classiﬁcation pattern is also equally
important. Furthermore, from the past few years, the detection of untrained actions (novelty detection)
has also been studied. In order to solve the problem of novelty detection [ 47], dierent methods were
proposed and studied, such as the ensemble of one-class support vector data description (SVDD) [ 38],
and modiﬁed boosted random forests [47].
Although various classiﬁcation methods are available, classiﬁcation algorithms include two main
trends: Statistical (LDA and SVM) and Neural (MLP and ANN) [ 48]. The conventional PR method
also depended on KNN and LDA algorithms to categorise arm motions into di erent pattern classes.
LDA scheme is one of the most adopted classiﬁers in the implementation of myoelectric control. LDA
classiﬁer has shown high classiﬁcation accuracy, and it is very simple to implement [ 49]. In KNN
feasibility and precision check of classifying features have done for diverse time windows such as EMG
histogram and noise levels [ 50,51]. In 2001, instead of concentrating fully on the classiﬁer like KNN
or LDA, some authors demonstrated that the pattern classiﬁcation and its accuracy are more deeply

==== Page 7 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 7 of 30
depend on the selection of features [ 39,52]. As the input data are suddenly changing myosignals,
they have the downside of immediately switching the control from rest to contraction. This prohibits
changeover of the feature set from one to another in less time and an e cient manner.
Moreover, it delays the coordination between multiple tasks utilizing large degrees of freedom
in real-time. As a solution, the wavelet packet-based feature set can classify myoelectric activity in
real-time where the data streams are continuously exhibiting superior performance. A research work
then started on the KNN classiﬁer with a genetic algorithm, upon the trans-radial muscles having the
potential to control a multi-ﬁngered prosthetic hand.
Another classiﬁcation technique mostly used for the EMG signal classiﬁcation is an artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN). An ANN is easily trainable and has the capability of modelling both linear
and non-linear data [ 49]. The SVM classiﬁer, due to its kernel-based characteristics, has gained wide
application in the ﬁeld of myoelectric control. SVM is most popular for performing classiﬁcation as
well as regression using machine learning tasks. SVM is an advanced statistical learning approach
providing an accurate and optimal solution in a short time. The di erent classiﬁers used in various
works of literature have been reported in Tables 1–3.
Although a lot of developments and progress were made in the ﬁeld of EMG-PR, the development
of a DOF prosthesis that could aid in simultaneous prosthetic control is still a challenge. Based on
the literature studies, it indicates that classiﬁcation accuracy can be increased with appropriate use of
EMG channel and feature set.
3.5. Post-Processing for Upper Limb EMG
To overcome the limitations of conventional EMG control [ 11] post-processing has been proposed.
Furthermore, the post-processing stage is next to the classiﬁcation level for the removal of errors and
misclassiﬁcations. The control performance of a multifunctional prosthesis in a practical and laboratory
setting will always show various disparities. To minimise this classiﬁcation error due to unintended
actions during the real-time applications, Simon et al. [ 53] introduced the practice of decision-based
velocity ramp functions as a post-processing method. This function attenuates the speed of action
soon after the classiﬁer decision is altered. Moreover, post-processing approaches give a smooth state
transition from the current motion class to the changeover state. The greatest advantage of this is that it
could be combined with the multi-level real-time continuous control. Some of the other post-processing
techniques are Moving Velocity [ 30], and the majority vote [ 39,54,55]. The majority vote [ 56] has also
shown improvement in real-time EMG-PR control of hand prosthesis.
All advances in pattern recognition schemes with multiple input channels have improved the
overall classiﬁcation accuracy for multifunctional control. Pattern recognition methods inherently
use sequential control, which requires su cient windows (intervals) to extract useful classiﬁcation
features without delay of response time. When the processing window decreases, the performance
window decreases signiﬁcantly. Generally, with a normal pattern recognition algorithm, simultaneous
and proportional control is di cult to achieve. For instance, to grab an object—closing of ﬁngers
together with pronation—an additional combination of classiﬁcation features is required. This may
increase the number of patterns needed to be trained, which in turn creates an undesirable increase in
response time.
Moreover, pattern recognition does not provide proportional control, which is critical for
optimizing the response time. As a classiﬁer is a binary decision control, it cannot inﬂuence the speed
or strength of prosthesis that requires an additional proportional component to the control of signal.
This will make the system more complex and decrease overall power [57].
To overcome the need for a complex device and to provide proportional and simultaneous control,
regression is one of the commonly used methods [ 47]. The regression approach can evaluate number
of control signals continuously from the EMG signal directly. For example, if one control signal assists
wrist rotation then the other control signal evaluates hand opening. Moreover, this approach provides
more user-friendly and spontaneous control of the prosthesis. Some of the regression approach used

==== Page 8 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 8 of 30
for the control (movement) of prosthesis are linear and non-linear regression [ 16], ANN [ 58] and
non-negative matrix factorization [ 40]. The regression method has thus far presented promising results,
permitting direct and spontaneous control to the user and further developments are likely to reinforce
the robustness of regression approach.
4. Real-Time Application of Myoelectric Prosthesis
The high functionality (multiple DOF) and high accuracy are achieved on testing o ine and
real-time collected data from amputees. However, when tested by amputees or patients for real-time
usability, it does not give the same level of accuracy. Moving from the virtual environment to the
real world requires the implementation of prosthetic devices. One of the major challenges that
inﬂuenced the usability of the prosthesis is the lack of robust and a portable embedded system to
implement the EMG- PR algorithms, other challenges include the design of dexterous prosthetic
hands, multichannel electrodes placement, compensation between power consumption, small size,
etc. [ 59]. Various hardware has been implemented to develop prosthetic hands for persons with
disabilities. Hardware chips are designed for ﬁltering EMG signals and other applications such as
grasp detection and human-computer interventions to obtain an accurate signal for prosthetic arm
control. Furthermore, virtual environments allow the user to practice di erent controlling gestures
that the designated prosthetic device supposed to control in real-world [ 60]. Some of the experimental
outcomes on the real-time collected data from amputee, real-time with embedded packages and
real-time using virtual reality environment are discussing in the following Sections 4.1–4.3, respectively.
4.1. Real-Time Collected Data from Amputee
Several research studies on able-bodied and hand amputees have been done to evaluate the consequences
of arm position variation on EMG-PR classification performance. Offline classification accuracy /errors have
shown that arm variation affects the classification performance. To reduce such effect of arm variation,
various classification techniques [ 61] have been proposed. Similarly, classiﬁcation accuracy identiﬁes
the desired movements from several classes of motion. Some of the previous research studies had
shown that o ine classiﬁcation has not a good correlation with real-time performance of EMG-PR [ 61]
control of the prosthesis. However, some of the recent classiﬁcation accuracies on the real-time
performance of amputee data are explained in this section. Nearly all EMG-PR control for real-time
collected data from hand amputee followed the same stages to operate. The features are extracted
from pre-processed EMG data. From the extracted data, the feature is usually selected for training
and control set. Then, the classiﬁcation technique is applied for training classiﬁers and control set
classiﬁers. The general algorithm of this whole system is shown in Figure 2.
In 2003, Karlik et al. [ 62] conducted a study on the classiﬁcation of myoelectric signals for
precise overall control of multifunction prosthesis using Fuzzy clustering neural network architecture.
The author also compared the accuracy of multi-layer perceptron (MLP) having a back-propagation
algorithm and the new fuzzy clustering neural networks (FCCN). The fuzzy clustering involved the
division of input data into several fuzzy parts that intersect each other and thus deﬁned by membership
grade [0,1]. An algorithm was proposed to implement these fuzzy clustering that minimised the cost
function. A comparative assessment shows that using FCNN provides more reliable results than MLP .
The FCNN achieved 98% accuracy with half training time than that of MLP . Later, in 2005, a promising
method by Chan and Englehart [ 63] added into the row of the continuous controllers. The new method
followed a hidden Markov model (HMM) as the data segment classiﬁer. The HMM classiﬁer was a
suitable probabilistic approach for pattern recognition at that time due to the resilience to sequential
myosignal variations. For a four-channel six function design, HMM has more performance accuracy
(94.63%) than MLP with a good level of robustness and quick response.

==== Page 9 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 9 of 30
Sensors 2019 , 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 27 
  
Figure 2. General pattern followed by the EMG-PR for real-time collected data from amputee. 
In 2003, Karlik et al. [62] conducted a study on the classification of myoelectric signals for precise 
overall control of multifunction prosthesis using Fuzzy clustering neural network architecture. The author also compared the accuracy of multi-la yer perceptron (MLP) having a back-propagation 
algorithm and the new fuzzy clustering neural networks (FCCN). The fuzzy clustering involved the 
division of input data into several fuzzy parts that intersect each other and thus defined by 
membership grade [0,1]. An algorithm was propos ed to implement these fuzzy clustering that 
minimised the cost function. A comparative as sessment shows that using FCNN provides more 
reliable results than MLP. The FCNN achieved 98% accuracy with half training time than that of MLP. Later, in 2005, a promising method by Chan  and Englehart [63] added into the row of the 
continuous controllers. The new method follow ed a hidden Markov model (HMM) as the data 
segment classifier. The HMM classifi er was a suitable probabilistic approach for pattern recognition 
at that time due to the resilience to sequential myosignal variations. For a four-channel six function 
design, HMM has more performance accuracy (94.63%) than MLP with a good level of robustness and quick response.  
Al-Timemy et al. [37] proposed a process for the classification of finger motions for dexterous 
control of the myoelectric prosthesis. The myosig nal was recorded from six traumatic below-elbow 
amputees. TD-AR features were used to extrac t useful information from the segmented EMG 
window. To find the best match of features reduction (to reduce computational power) and 
classifiers, two different feat ures reduction tools (PCA and orthogonal fuzzy neighbourhood 
discriminative approach (OFNDA)) and classifiers (LDA and SVM) were combined to make four different forms. The results show the high accuracy with OFNDA and LDA.  
Furthermore, the studies show that feature reduction plays an important role than a classifier to 
achieve high accuracy with multi EMG channels. In 2013, Pan et al. proposed a solution for partial hand amputees with a functional wrist to predict the finger joint angle using EMG [64]. The 
Figure 2. General pattern followed by the EMG-PR for real-time collected data from amputee.
Al-Timemy et al. [ 37] proposed a process for the classiﬁcation of ﬁnger motions for dexterous
control of the myoelectric prosthesis. The myosignal was recorded from six traumatic below-elbow
amputees. TD-AR features were used to extract useful information from the segmented EMG
window. To ﬁnd the best match of features reduction (to reduce computational power) and classiﬁers,
two di erent features reduction tools (PCA and orthogonal fuzzy neighbourhood discriminative
approach (OFNDA)) and classiﬁers (LDA and SVM) were combined to make four di erent forms.
The results show the high accuracy with OFNDA and LDA.
Furthermore, the studies show that feature reduction plays an important role than a classiﬁer to
achieve high accuracy with multi EMG channels. In 2013, Pan et al. proposed a solution for partial hand
amputees with a functional wrist to predict the ﬁnger joint angle using EMG [ 64]. The experiment was
performed on two amputees. EMG signal was recorded from eight targeted muscles and was sampled
at 2000 Hz frequency. TD feature sets were fed to the LDA classiﬁer to identify seven di erent static
wrist positions. A switching rule, including LDA classiﬁer and 14 state-space models, was proposed
for continuous decoding of ﬁnger joint angles. The average classiﬁcation error rate (CER) was 6.18%,
which demonstrates that forearm movements and the continuous movement of the ﬁnger can be easily
classiﬁed. Similarly, in 2016, Ganesh et al. proposed the combination of ICA and Icasso to minimise
the number of EMG sensors and increased robustness of myoelectric control [12].
Early in 1993, [ 34] an experiment was performed on one amputee using the Hudgins feature set.
These features classiﬁed using ANN classiﬁer with one EMG channel proved that the EMG signal
shows deterministic structure during the beginning of muscle contraction. Riillo et al. [ 65] proposed an
optimization methodology of sEMG based hand gesture classiﬁcation using pre-processing techniques
such as PCA (unsupervised) and CSP (supervised). One trans-radial amputee (right-hand below-elbow
amputee) participated in the experiment. TD features were extracted from segmented data (using

==== Page 10 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 10 of 30
overlapped windows). Similarly, three classiﬁers (LDA, SVM and ANN) [ 65] were tested by assessing
the average accuracies of each time window. The study shows that the best results obtained for the
real-time system were using the ANN classiﬁer.
Another research work extended the classiﬁcation control using a support vector machine (SVM),
obtained high accuracy (92–98%) with less training time [ 66]. Stango et al. [ 67] used the SVM
classiﬁcation technique, followed by variogram features. The variogram is a measurable degree of
spatial correlation. The experiment was performed on one trans-radial traumatic amputees. The main
purpose of this experiment was to analyse the spatial features of HD EMG-PR for myoelectric control.
Variogram features maintain a good classiﬁcation accuracy without retraining even if the EMG channel
is eliminated during the experiment phase. Hence, the study shows spatial proposed improved the
robustness of EMG-PR. In [ 68], the e ectiveness of using twin SVM (TSVM) in multi-class prosthetic
control with unbalanced datasets was demonstrated with the RMS value (feature).
The summary of the comparison of some of the EMG-PR classiﬁers using real-time amputee data
is shown in Table 1. All the achieved accuracy was demonstrated only in ideal research settings.
Among the many classiﬁers (Figure 1) in myoelectric control, LDA seems to be widely used
classiﬁers. On the other hand, SVM and KNN, due to their kernel trick characteristics and
non-parametric nature [ 51], respectively, have equally been used widely. Though the better performance
was achieved with many classiﬁers, high-density surface EMG is impractical to use as a source for
real-time control.

==== Page 11 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 11 of 30
Table 1. Summary of various individual classiﬁers and combined classiﬁers tested on amputee data1.
Pre-Processing Segmentation /Window LengthFeature
Extraction /DRClassiﬁcation Post-ProcessingClasses /EMG
ChannelAccuracy
N/A 256 ms overlapping 32 msTD, 6AR, RMS /PCA,
ULDAKNN, LDA [69] Majority vote 7 /57 >97%
N/A200 ms length with
50 ms increment6AR, RMS, IAV , ZC,
WL, SSC /OFNDALDA [37] N /A 12 /11 90%
N/A200 ms with 5 ms
increment windowMAV , ZC, WL,
SSC/N/ALDA [64] N /A 7 /7 95.64%
ICA250 ms overlapping window
with 64 ms increment4AR, RMS, MAV , ZC,
VAR, WL /ULDALDA [12] N /A 12 /11 >90%
CSP300 ms with 75 ms of delay
between the overlapped windowM, RMS, WA,
SSC/PCAANN [65] N /A 5 /692.04%(PCA)
93.4%(CSP)
N/AWindow set to 4500 and window
shift 50Variogram /N/A SVM [67] N /A 7 /48 81.6%
N/A 256 ms with window shift 32 ms WL /N/A NN [70] N /A 4 /6An average RMS
error =0.16 for 4 patterns
N/A 200 ms sliding window RMS, log(rms) /N/AFuzzy c- means
clustering [71]N/A 4 /3 87.5 13%
N/A200 ms with an increment
of 75 msRMS, WL, ZC,
SSC/N/ALDA [72] N /A 6 /8 >91%
1Table omit the results from able-bodied subjects.

==== Page 12 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 12 of 30
4.2. Real-Time EMG-PR with Embedded System
An embedded system was customised to perform a speciﬁc task and function often with real-time
control. This system was mainly based on microcontrollers or microprocessors. Real-time embedded
for the EMG-PR for hand prosthesis can be enhanced to reduce cost, size and increase the reliability
and performance of the prosthetic device. Almost all of the real-time EMG-PR control using embedded
systems followed the same stages to operate, as shown in Figure 3. Firstly, the sEMG signal is recorded
from the subject muscle using electrodes. Then sEMG signal acquisition takes place. This signal goes
through pre-processing techniques. The features are extracted and selected from the pre-processed
signal. Once the selected features are classiﬁed, the command was sent to the embedded controller to
control the end e ector.
 
  Figure 3. Real-time EMG-PR with embedded system. 
 
 
Figure 3. Real-time EMG-PR with embedded system.
Wirta et al. [ 73] ﬁrst reported the used of embedded myoelectric pattern recognition system in 1963.
The robotic arm was developed, and Discriminant analysis was chosen as a classiﬁcation technique.
After a few years during 1996, a real-time EMG-PR was proposed with a digital signal processing
(DSP) (TMS320C31) based system having a modiﬁed maximum likelihood distance (MMLD) classiﬁer.
Four able-bodied and two quadriplegic subjects volunteered and were designated with ﬁve motions of
neck and shoulders. The total response time for EMG discrimination was 0.17 s, and it achieved a
95% mean discrimination rate [ 74]. An analogue integrated circuit for the wireless transmission of
physiological signals designed by Yeng et al. [ 75] focused more on the transmission system, not on
the implementation of the prosthesis. In 1999, an Evolvable Hardware (EHW) chip for myoelectric
artiﬁcial hands was developed to serve as a standard tool for hardware validation [76].

==== Page 13 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 13 of 30
To access the computer for limbs disabled through their remaining muscles, a real-time assistive
device was designed in 2007 with PR of EMG signals [ 77]. The signals were measured from the
muscles of the lower arm of the subject during di erent wrist motions. The obtained signals were
ﬁltered, and a supervised multi-layer neural network trained by a backpropagation algorithm was
used for the classiﬁcation of the user’s movement and clicking of a cursor. The drawback of that article
was that the researcher focussed more on the qualitative evaluation of performance than presenting
the control implementation. Similarly, Anbin et al. [ 78] proposed the novel combination of signals
(EMG and inertial measurement unit (IMU)) to be used for mouse controller (cursor movements).
LDA classiﬁes the EMG data into several groups of 128 ms time window and 32 ms increment window,
which correspond to the pre-deﬁned computer mouse operations. The results showed an accuracy
of 88%.
In 2007, Bitar et al. [ 48] explained in detail the design of portable Musical Instrument
Digital Interface (MIDI) using a continuous wavelet transform (CWT) decomposition and SVM.
A low-complexity portable dsPIC33FJ256GP710 embedded system was designed that collects and
classiﬁes EMG signals. This embedded system is quite inexpensive and consumes less power.
The output from four-channel was sampled at 1 kHz frequency using the dsPIC’s on-chip A /D
converters. The channel window (ﬁxed-length windows of 0.6 s with 0.3 s overlap) was normalised
by its respective power. The CWT coe cients were computed for each and every channel separately,
and the desired features were extracted. Finally, six class classiﬁcations were performed using the SVM
classiﬁer, and the decision of the classiﬁer transmits the result as labels in real-time using Bluetooth to a
remote interface. Moreover, to control a MIDI-enabled device (mechanical prosthetic hand), these labels
were then converted to MIDI commands. The experiment showed an achieved 91% accuracy.
Ke et al [ 59] presented the latest progress on EMG-PR control of a prosthetic hand. EMG signal
was acquired using an armband with eight-channel electrodes. A powerful embedded system was
introduced to deal with the decoding algorithm of EMG signals. These real-time surface myoelectric
signals decoding and EMG training (onboard) were incorporated in the embedded system to control a
prosthetic hand of six DOFs. The result showed that the possibility of speeding up the movement of a
PR prosthetic arm, making it more suited for daily application, is promising.
In 2013, Xiaorong et al. [ 79] proposed a ﬁrst real-time EMG-PR self-recovery classiﬁcation using a
cumulative sum algorithm (CUSUM) detector. Forty-eight motion artefacts were introduced on 12
real-time testing trials. CUSUM detector successfully detected the 43 artifacts, which lead to 93.5% of the
elimination of misclassiﬁcation caused by motion artefact. Similarly, in 2015, Ann et al. [ 80] compared
the non-adaptive (conventional) and adaptive control (real-time) prediction learning. The experiment
was performed on one trans-humeral prosthesis and three able-bodied subjects. EMG signal acquired
using eight channels sampled at 1 kHz to classify the eight classes of motion. Subjects were asked to
wear a Bento arm (anthropometric robotic arm), which consists of MTT (AX-18 smart robotic arm)
incorporating ﬁve DOF. The result shows the adaptive control decreases the total switching time and
improve myoelectric robotic arm during uninterrupted use by subjects (amputee and normally limbed).
A few articles showed the real-time control of commercially available prostheses for ﬁnding the
user experience with pattern recognition control. Understanding the patient’s experience can help
clinicians and patients who choose prosthetic options. The commercially available EMG-PR control
was interfaced with multiple degrees of freedom DEKA arm [ 81]. This study provided an extensive
description of the user experience of operating a DEKA arm using EMG-PR control. The majority of
the participants preferred the future prospective of EMG-PR as a control measure.
Mastinu et al. [ 82] presented the real-time implementations of PR techniques on dysmelia subjects
(congenital disorder). The subject was asked to use iLimb-ultra (Touch Bionics, UK) for ﬁve consecutive
days during the experiment. This system is known as the artiﬁcial limb controller which includes a
pattern recognition system. The classiﬁcation accuracy and motion test of the system were compared
with di erent classes on motion (open hand, closed hand, side grip, ﬁne grip and pointer) individually.

==== Page 14 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 14 of 30
The real-time pattern recognition accuracy for motion test (subjects were asked to perform as directed
on-screen) was higher than the classiﬁcation or execution accuracy.
Hargrove et al. [ 83] demonstrated the outcomes obtained from the commercially available
prosthetic used by subjects undergone targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR). Subjects wore a
commercially available prosthesis to perform di erent household tasks. A comparison of direct
method and pattern recognition methods in TMR subjects were performed, and statistical signiﬁcance
of both methods was evaluated. Users performed well with pattern recognition incorporated devices.
Additionally, among the eight subjects participated, seven preferred pattern recognition control.
Some of the papers related to the real-time with embedded packages are summarised and shown in
Table 2.
Among many classiﬁers (NN and SVM), LDA is one of the most used classiﬁers for real-time
embedded systems. LDA’s main advantages are its simplicity of implementation in an embedded
processor. Although many studies have been done and the embedded system has been implemented
to develop the prosthetic of a lost limb using EMG-PR control, a major issue of achieving natural and
reliable control of limb remains unsolved.

==== Page 15 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 15 of 30
Table 2. Summary of the real-time controller in an embedded package.
Pre-ProcessingSegmentation /Window
LengthFeature Extraction CLASSIFICATION Post-ProcessingClasses /EMG
ChannelSampling
FrequencyProcessor
N/A N /A N /A MLNN [77] N /A 6 /4 1 kHz PCI-6034e
N/A 600 samples (0.586 s) CWT SVM [48] N /A 5 /4 1024 Hz dsPIC33FJ256GP710
N/AOverlapped analysis window
160 ms with 20 ms incrementMAV , SSC, ZC, WL LDA [79] N /A 3 /4 1000 Hz M3-Microcontroller
N/A300 ms with 200 ms overlap
(100 ms increment)MAV , SSC, ZC, WL LDA [59] N /A 6 /8200 K samples
per secSTM32F4072GT6
N/A 100 ms with 50 ms increment MAV , SSC, ZC, WL LDA [82] N /A 5 /7 1000 Hz M4 microcontroller
N/A 250 msIntegrate- EMG,
RSS, INVARKFD (DR), RBFNN
(classiﬁ-er) [84]Majority vote 9 /8 200 Hz /channel Arm Cortex—A53
N/A 200 ms with 175 overlapMRV ,
WVL, ZC, SC, 6ARLDA [85] N /A 7 /12 1000 Hz Logic PD SOMDM 3730
N/A150 ms analysis window with
50 ms overlapMAV , ZC, SSC, WL LDA [86] N /A 11 /12 1 kHz USB-1616FS

==== Page 16 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 16 of 30
4.3. Real-Time Using Virtual Reality
To be able to control virtual prosthesis and to become familiar with a real-time prosthesis, voluntary
muscle contraction control is very important; this can be done by using a visual feedback system.
The improvement of learning depends on the user and visual feedback system, thus, the feedback
system must allow the user to learn new tasks using their muscles [ 87]. Most of the virtual prosthesis
followed the same stages to operate. Firstly, the EMG signal acquisition takes place using electrodes on
the residual muscle of amputees. Then, the signal is ampliﬁed and ﬁltered to acquire the myoelectric
signal to be used. The interface between the virtual system and acquisition of myoelectric signal is
created, which consists of isolation, pre-processing of the signal in the hardware, personal computer (PC)
communication, communication between PC and MATLAB, processing in software and communication
between MATLAB and virtual world [ 87] (part of MATLAB). The general idea followed by most of the
virtual prosthesis is shown in Figure 4.
 
Figure 4. General representation of virtual prosthesis process. 
 
Figure 4. General representation of virtual prosthesis process.
The continuing the examination of real-time control of prostheses using the myoelectric signal
resulted in a robust scheme pattern recognition [ 29]. Twelve subject data from four channels were
used for real-time control. Unlike the traditional methods involving transient control, which requires
initiation from rest, a continuous stream of class decisions was delivered to the prosthetic device.
Pattern recognition was performed on sliding time windows with 256 ms in duration and with the
LDA classiﬁer. The continuous decision (intended motion) permitted intricate classiﬁcations involving
multiple joints without disruption. The continuous classiﬁer performs very well with a signiﬁcant
gain in accuracy and response time over a wide range of analysis window lengths if accompanied by
majority vote post-processing. Moreover, the control scheme required minimal storage capacity.
Ann et al. [ 88] presented that the target achievement control (TAC) test in the virtual environment
provides a good platform for PR control practice and testing. In a TAC test, virtual prosthesis moved
from an inactive position to the target position. In 2015, Martina and Haripriya [ 89] constructed a
prototype using sEMG signal to record the data from the brachioradialis muscle of forearm to control
the movement of powerpoint slides transmitted in real-time. Furthermore, Agamemnon et al. [ 90]
performed an experiment on 20 able-bodied and two amputees to ﬁnd the outcome of two sensors

==== Page 17 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 17 of 30
(sEMG and inertial measurement (IM)). Twelve electrodes were used to acquire sEMG signal in a
sampling frequency of 2 kHz. Feature sets such as MAV , WL, 4AR and logVar were extracted using a
sliding window of 256 ms with 50 ms increments. Two sets of the experiment (o ine and real-time)
were performed. Real-time prosthetic hand control was based on o ine observation. Touch Bionics
’robotic hand’ have been used for real-time performance. It shows that the combination of both IM
and sEMG improved the classiﬁcation performance of a prosthetic hand. Additionally, the use of
IM and sEMG reduce number of sensor require to achieve high level of accuracy. Yanjuan et al [ 61]
investigated that both o ine motion classiﬁcation accuracy and real-time motion completion rate are
important to assess the performance of EMG-PR control.
Identifying multiple DOF (hand movements) using a few EMG sensors is one of the necessities for
developing high levels of usability prosthetic hands. Trongmun et al. [ 91] present a signal processing
technique that classiﬁes 17 spontaneous classes of motion from EMG signals using spectral features
and an ANN. Online classiﬁcation experiments were performed on twelve subjects (seven male
and ﬁve female) to assess the reliability of the proposed method. An overall correct classiﬁcation
rate of 83% was achieved, showing the ability to classify 17 movements from six EMG sensors.
Moreover, the classiﬁcation of nine movements could achieve accuracy of up to 92%. EMG pattern
classiﬁcation has been widely studied to decode user-determined for intuitive prosthesis control.
The signiﬁcant breakthrough was occurred with the introduction of surgical procedure to improve
the control of hand prosthesis known as targeted muscle reinnervation (TMR) [ 92]. The real-time
and o ine performance of EMG-PR with TMR patients was presented using a generic electrode
grid. Four amputee subjects (two trans-humeral, two shoulder articulation) that underwent TMR
surgery participated in this study. In a real-time virtual analysis as well as o ine classiﬁcation,
a generic grid-like electrode performed better than the control site (speciﬁc site for electrode placement).
Although TMR has the potential to provide advanced control of wrist and grasp patterns for myoelectric
control, the concept has not yet been a success in implementing it to multiple DOFs for the prosthesis.
For assessing the real-time PR control of TMR based multifunction prostheses, Todd et al. [ 86]
showed the performance outcome based on motion (selection time, completion time and completion
rate). The experiment was performed on both virtual and real prosthesis. The performance was ﬁrst
ascertained by training and testing with a virtual multifunction prosthesis. Later on, the experiment
was carried on three TMR patients with upper-limb prostheses. The mean classiﬁcation accuracy of
88% with standard deviation (SD) of 7% for patients who had undergone TMR surgery and 97% with
standard deviation (SD 2%) for control participants was achieved. Furthermore, the summary of some
studies based on real-time using the virtual reality environment is presented in Table 3.

==== Page 18 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 18 of 30
Table 3. Summary of real-time analysis with a virtual prosthesis.
Pre-Processing Segmentation /Window Length Feature Extraction Classiﬁcation Post-ProcessingClasses /EMG
ChannelSampling Frequency
N/A 256 ms ZC, MAV , SSC, WL LDA [29] Majority vote 4 /4 1000 Hz
N/A150 ms analysis window with 50
ms window incrementMAV , SSC, ZC, WL LDA [88] N /A 7 /6 1 kHz
N/A 500 sample /s N /A NN [93] N /A 8 /17 N /A
N/A32 sample hamming window
with 75% overlapPSDs ANN [91] N /A 17 /6 200 Hz
N/ASequential analysis window 150
ms with a time increment of 100
ms (50 ms overlapping)MAV , ZC, WL, SSCSPC
CC
MPC [61]Majority vote 7 /16 1000 Hz
N/A100 ms overlapping
sliding windowMAVError-correcting output codes
classiﬁer [94]N/A 13 /15 2048 Hz
N/A150 ms sliding window with 100
ms incrementMAV , ZC, WL, SSC LDA [56] Majority vote 7 /6 1000 Hz
N/A 128 ms increment to 1024 ms 6AR and RMSLinear regression cascade
model [95]N/A 3 /6 1000 Hz
N/A 250 ms with 50 ms increment 6AR, MAV , ZC, SSC, WL LDA [92] N /A (9-13-17-29) /(14-15) 1 kHz
N/A 200 ms sliding window TD5 -MAV , SSC, WL, ZC EASRC [28] N /A 6 /8 1000 Hz

==== Page 19 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 19 of 30
5. Discussion
The ﬁrst pattern recognition control scheme was developed in the late 1960s. By the 1980s,
the approach was more reﬁned by extracting features using autoregression from a smaller number
of input channels. This allowed greater accuracy (nearly 86%), but was unable to achieve that in
real-time. At the beginning of the 1990s, pattern recognition and its accuracy were improved further
with artiﬁcial neural networks. Then, the methodology was shifted to the analysis of real-time scenarios
with a continuous shrinkage to permit precision of roughly above 92%. The inclusion of real-life
constraints and reduction of dynamic error were large discussions after the late 1990s. Since then,
most of the studies attempt to achieve a perfect natural level control in myo prosthesis by the selection
of appropriate classiﬁers and post-processing techniques. It is obvious that the popularity of pattern
recognition methods keeps on increasing, and the research studies are evolving into a more natural
control of artiﬁcial arms. A sudden increase in pattern recognition control can be visible from the
year 2000 onwards. Though there are some ﬂuctuations in the level, with the change in computing
capability of processors, the interest in research on pattern recognition has risen and shown major turn
since 2010.
There are still many challenges to implementing real-time prosthesis, mainly in a wearable
embedded system. First, a solution scheme involves a re-training PR classiﬁer. Presently, this process
includes the restructuring of the training feature matrix, the estimation of variables in the pattern
classiﬁers, and then forming new organization of the testing feature vectors. It is unknown if the
embedded system can control all this approach fast enough for each decision. Second, many components
are incorporated into the EMG-PR algorithm; the interaction between the components and the precise
time control is critical.
At last, it requires a compact combination of all components of the embedded PC. The system
requires to provide the interfaces needed for the collection of data, su cient computing power for
decision making in real-time, e ective memory management and low energy utilization [ 79]. All of the
above-mentioned challenges are less explored.
Most of the above said articles tried to analyse and use repeated data by setting ideal clinical
conditions for classiﬁcation error and accuracy. Moreover, the real-time articles mostly tested their
results with able-bodied subjects. In real amputee life, some unwanted, unrealistic repeatable
contractions can be observed from myo-signals during classiﬁer learning. Those considerations were
the least discussed and identiﬁed. When a user is asked to perform several activities under real-life
conditions, such as varying size loads, orientation and weather, the classiﬁcation error in the real-life
scenario is high from their equivalent able-bodied subject. It is also clear that pattern recognition
systems have yet to obtain an extensive application for numerous reasons such as (1) the absence of
good user interface, (2) uncertainty in classiﬁcation accurateness and control and (3) variations in
patterns over the period. The previous studies have shown practical achievements for the control of
ULPs. Together with this achievement, the advancement of inaccurate classiﬁcation and speed from a
reliable command method is enough to process with less time, less error and minimum mental e ort.
While many classiﬁcation schemes have been analysed, generally, the feature identiﬁcation methods
are stuck to time-domain features and are paired with LDA classiﬁer.
Moreover, none of the pattern recognition systems have been found to be 100% precise. The wrong
classiﬁcations need to be alleviated to make a myoelectric pattern recognition control as a valid choice
for an amputee. Otherwise, users become frustrated, as they are unsuccessful at completing a task due
to unintended prosthesis movement. Ultimately, this can lead to the rejection of the device itself.

==== Page 20 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 20 of 30
6. Challenges and Future Prospects
With technological advancement, purely aesthetic orthopaedic prostheses have gained more and
more functionality over the years. Although the prosthesis nowadays provides a lot of movements
(DOF) for amputees, there are still some challenges that need to be ﬁxed for the real-time EMG-PR
control for hand prosthesis.
The real-time usability of available multiple DOF prosthesis is impacted by various factors such
as intuitiveness of device, comfort, appearance, function, durability and cost. Furthermore, there are
some other compounding factors, which are explained in Table 4.

==== Page 21 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 21 of 30
Table 4. Some of the challenges of real-time EMG-PR control of hand prosthesis.
Challenges Description
Comfort The socket that is the part of the upper limb prosthesis may interfere with the elbow (a function of the residual joint). If the socket does not ﬁt correctly,
the patient may su er from pain, sores and blisters. Such prostheses will be experienced as heavy and cumbersome [ 96]. Even some prostheses with
appropriately designed sockets, face problems of heat, sweating and chaﬁng.
Appearance Most of the developed upper-limb prostheses do not look natural in appearance. Additionally, the user can ﬁnd the prosthesis uncomfortable to wear.
The user is still unable to control the multiple degrees of freedom simultaneously and consistently.
Function Nowadays, upper limb prostheses perform almost all everyday activities. However, it remains challenging to obtain opening and closing positions of
the hand from the residual limb. This is because residual muscles often used for hand prosthesis are biceps and triceps, which do not convey the
information for closing and opening the hand [97].
Durability Many of the upper limb prostheses are heavy and have short battery life.
Cost Upper limb prosthesis costs around $50,000, which is quite di cult to a ord by amputees from all over the world.
Technology Developed prosthetic devices still lack intuitiveness and reliability between user motion volition and real motion of prosthesis. Similarly, much
training is needed to operate those prosthetic hands.
Processing delay The embedded processor used exhibits some delay (around 3 s), which halt the acquisition of EMG for that delay period.
EMG interferences The transient changes in EMG often result from external interferences, changes in electrode impedance, muscle fatigue and electrode shift, among
others. During practical use, this transient change arising from variations (long- and short-term) in the acquisition environment caused degradation of
the clinical vitality of the device and limited its users’ adoption [11].
Electrode displacement (shift) Electrode displacement occurs each time when users use a prosthesis, electrodes slightly reconcile in a di erent position relative to underlying
musculature. When the user performs some task, due to the loading and positioning of limb, a movement of electrode occurs. Such an electrode shift
can lead to a change in EMG characteristic (recording) of the limb, and thus, make it more di cult to decode the movements [98].
Amputee movement EMG signal from the limb position is mostly recorded when the user is in a static position (sitting), but in a real-time scenario, prosthesis users have to
use the device in di erent positions (walking, climbing stairs). However, the variation in limb position e ect the classiﬁcation performance of
EMG-PR [99].
Muscle contraction forces While performing everyday activities, the same limb assists di erent muscle contraction forces across di erent conditions. Thus, the variation in
muscle contraction force occurs due to the same targeted limb results in myoelectric signal pattern classiﬁcation inconsistency. Hence, it a ects the
EMG-PR control of prosthesis [24].
Limb position variation Variation in limb position occurs while performing a di erent action in everyday life. For upper-limb amputation, the e ects are seen on residual
muscle (located in a prosthetic socket) from which the EMG signal is collected. Additionally, various limb positions lead to the variation in
gravitational force, which leads to the displacement of target muscles. These factors cause variation in EMG signal pattern a ecting the EMG-PR
control of prosthesis performance.

==== Page 22 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 22 of 30
Future Prospects-Implementation of Real-Time EMG-PR Control
 Electroencephalogram (EEG), and ECog (Electrocortocogram) measures brain signals, and they
could be used to supersede EMG for prostheses control. ECog electrodes are invasive as
they are placed directly inside the head, whereas EEG electrodes are non-invasive, as they are
positioned on the scalp area [ 100], where information regarding the targeted body movements
are measurable [ 101]. EEG and ECog have currently found an application as a brain-machine
interface [ 102], and in theory, can control the movement of the prosthesis similar to the EMG. In
other words, while EMG measures the electric current from muscles and provides the control
signal according to the action intended by subject [ 103], brain-machine interface decodes the
electrical signal generated from the brain and converts them to the control signal for the control
of prostheses [ 104] without using a muscle as an intermediate [ 100]. Unfortunately, due to
the invasiveness (ECog) and the problem associated with electrodes montage stability (EEG),
generalised poor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the poor spatial resolution of the signals, not to
mention the discomfort related to the need of having multiple devices over the subject’s body
(i.e., head and limbs), we believe that, at present, these devices may be better suited for patients
with spinal cord injury where voluntary EMG signals may be not available. It is necessary to
mention that another issue often related to the use of brain signals to drive external devices is the
need of extensive training [105,106] and poor performances of the brain to computer interface.
 The prosthetic control unit should be increased, and appropriate pattern-recognition should be
used for proper handling of the prosthetic device.
 The prosthetic device should be developed using low-cost materials, a ordable to all amputees.
 Intuitiveness can be developed by extracting the signals using ultrasound imaging [ 107],
force myography (FMG), TMR and Implantable myoelectric sensor [108].
 One possible way to minimise or eliminate this drawback of EMG interferences is to develop an
electromagnetic shielding technique [11] and implement the best ﬁltering strategy.
 Rather than depending on existing proposed training, an intelligent adaptive prosthetic system
should be developed and implemented. An intelligent EMG-PR system requires to represent a data
stream accurately in real-time. It shows a possible way to restrict the deﬁciency in the prosthesis
market. With such developments, users’ expectations can be met, and thus, device adoption for
everyday use can be increased.
 Feature extraction is a core of conventional EMG-based pattern recognition control. To achieve
the real-time usability of prosthetic, issues related to the feature extraction should be addressed.
Deep learning (machine learning method based on ANN) may be one possible way to solve
the problem of feature extraction [ 11]. Thus, more research on deep learning in pattern
recognition-based prosthesis control should be conducted.
7. Conclusions
This review paper presents a brief introduction to EMG-PR techniques and explores the work
done on real-time (amputee data, embedded and virtual environment) myo-activated prosthesis based
on pattern recognition control over the years. Through the literature survey, some of the key techniques
required for the improvement of existing real-time application of EMG-PR for hand prosthesis are
presented. Although the perspective of intelligent pattern recognition control methods for the multiple
degrees of freedom for hand prosthesis has been well investigated, their real-time usability is still being
challenged by a number of compounding factors. Natural neuromuscular control of prosthesis should
be proportional and investigate multiple degrees of freedom. However, while reviewing the existing
literature, we have observed that the majority of real-time prosthesis uses EMG, i.e., multiple channels
targeting multiple residual muscles to generate multiple synchronous control signals. The challenges
are even greater than a single degree of freedom due to the proximity of the muscles /electrodes,
etc. This should be well investigated in the future for real-time scenarios. Furthermore, to achieve

==== Page 23 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 23 of 30
real-time usability, appropriate design of the prosthetic device, virtual training, feature extraction and
classiﬁcation techniques should be properly investigated and implemented.
Author Contributions: Formal analysis, P .B., M.C., S.S., V .N. and D.E.; writing—original draft preparation, N.P .
and N.S.; writing—review and editing, G.R.N. and T.J.H.; supervision, G.D.G. and U.G.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
ALFN Abe lan fuzzy network
ANFIS Adaptive neuro-fuzzy interface system
ANN Artiﬁcial neural network
AR Auto regressive
CER Classiﬁcation error rate
CSF Common spatial pattern
CUSUM Cummulative sum
CWT Continuous wavelet transform
DFT Discrete fourier transform
DOF Degree of freedom
DSP Digital signal processing
DR Dimensionality reduction
EASRC Extreme learning machine with adaptive sparse
representation classiﬁcation
ECog Electrocorticogram
EEG Electroencephalogram
EHW Evolvable hardware
EMG Electromyogram
FCM Fuzzy C means
FCNN Fuzzy clustering neural network
FD Frequency domain
FDF Frequency domain feature
FP Feature projection
HD High density
HMM Hidden Markov model
IAV Integral absolute value
ICA Independent component analysis
IM Inertial measurement
IMU Inertial measurement unit
KFD Kernel ﬁsher discriminant
KNN K-nearest neighbour
LDA Linear discriminate analysis
LTFR Linear time frequency representations
MA Moving average
MAV Mean absolute value
MDA Multiple discriminant analysis
MIDI Musical instrument digital interface
MLP Multi-layer perceptron
MMLD Maximum likelihood distance
MRV Mean relative value
MV Majority Voting

==== Page 24 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 24 of 30
NBC Naive Bayes classiﬁer
NN Neural network
OFNDA Orthogonal fuzzy neighbourhood
discriminative approach
PCA Principal component analysis
PNS Peripheral nervous system
PR Pattern recognition
PSD Power spectral density
QTFR Quadratic time frequency representations
RBF Radial Basis function
RF Random forest
RMS Root mean square
SD Standard deviation
sEMG Surface EMG
SF Sample frequency
SNR Signal to noise ratio
SOM Self organizing maps
SPSE Steady posture and steady EMG
SRC Sparse representation classiﬁcation
SSC Slope sign change
STFT Short time Fourier transform
SVDD Support vector data description
SVM Support vector machine
TAC Target achievement control
TD Time domain
TDF Time domain features
TD-PSD TD-Power spectral descriptors
TFDF Time frequency domain features
TKE Teager-Kaiser energy operator
TMR Targeted muscle re-innervation
TSD Temporal- spatial descriptor
TSVM Twin SVM
ULAs Upper limb amputees
ULDA Uncorrelated linear discriminant analysis
ULP Upper limb prosthesis
VD-MOM Vuskovic and Du-MOM
WAMP Willison amplitude
WL Waveform length
WPT Wavelet packet transforms
WT Wavelet transform
ZC Zero crossing
References
1. Naik, G.R.; Nguyen, H.T. Nonnegative matrix factorization for the identiﬁcation of EMG ﬁnger movements:
Evaluation using matrix analysis. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2015 ,19, 478–485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Shaw, L.; Bagha, S. Online Emg Signal Analysis for Diagnosis of Neuromuscular Diseases By Using Pca and
Pnn. Int. J. Eng. Sci. 2012 ,4, 4453–4459.
3. Gargiulo, G.D.; Bifulco, P .; Cesarelli, M.; Fratini, A.; Romano, M. Problems in Assessment of Novel Biopotential
Front-End with Dry Electrode: A Brief Review. Machines 2014 ,2, 87–98. [CrossRef]
4. Pasquina, P .F.; Miller, M.; Carvalho, A.J.; Corcoran, M.; Vandersea, J.; Johnson, E.; Chen, Y.T. Special
Considerations for Multiple Limb Amputation. Curr. Phys. Med. Rehabil. Rep. 2014 ,2, 273–289. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

==== Page 25 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 25 of 30
5. Marco, G.; Alberto, B.; Taian, V . Surface EMG and muscle fatigue: Multi-channel approaches to the study of
myoelectric manifestations of muscle fatigue Surface EMG and muscle fatigue: Multi-channel approaches
to the study of myoelectric manifestations of muscle fatigue. Physiol. Meas. 2017 ,38, R27–R60. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
6. Tavakoli, M.; Benussi, C.; Lourenco, J.L. Single channel surface EMG control of advanced prosthetic hands:
A simple, low cost and e cient approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 2017 ,79, 322–332. [CrossRef]
7. Popa, G.T.; Name, A. A stretchable, conductive rubber sensor to detect muscle contraction for prosthetic hand
control. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on E-Health and Bioengineering—EHB
2017, Sinaia, Romania, 22–24 June 2017.
8. Starr, M. Myo armbands used to control prosthetic arm. CNET Tech Culture , 18 January 2016.
9. Witteveen, H.J.B.; Droog, E.A.; Rietman, J.S.; Veltink, P .H. Vibro- and electrotactile user feedback on hand
opening for myoelectric forearm prostheses. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2012 ,59, 2219–2226. [CrossRef]
10. Van der Linde, H.; Hofstad, C.J.; Geurts, A.C.; Postema, K.; Geertzen, J.H.; Van Limbeek, J. A systematic
literature review of the e ect of di erent prosthetic components on human functioning with a lower-limb
prosthesis. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2004 ,41, 555–570. [CrossRef]
11. Samuel, O.W.; Asogbon, M.G.; Geng, Y.; Al-Timemy, A.H.; Pirbhulal, S.; Ji, N.; Chen, S.; Fang, P .; Li, G.
Intelligent EMG Pattern Recognition Control Method for Upper-Limb Multifunctional Prostheses: Advances,
Current Challenges, and Future Prospects. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 10150–10165. [CrossRef]
12. Naik, G.R.; Al-Timemy, A.H.; Nguyen, H.T. Transradial Amputee Gesture Classiﬁcation Using an Optimal
Number of sEMG Sensors: An Approach Using ICA Clustering. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2016 ,
24, 837–846. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Bi, L.; Feleke, A.; Guan, C. A review on EMG-based motor intention prediction of continuous human upper
limb motion for human-robot collaboration. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2019 ,51, 113–127. [CrossRef]
14. Yang, D.; Yang, W.; Huang, Q.; Liu, H. Classiﬁcation of Multiple Finger Motions during Dynamic Upper
Limb Movements. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2017 ,21, 134–141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Radmand, A.; Scheme, E.; Englehart, K. High-density force myography: A possible alternative for upper-limb
prosthetic control. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2016 ,53, 443–456. [CrossRef]
16. Hahne, J.M.; Biessmann, F.; Jiang, N.; Rehbaum, H.; Farina, D.; Meinecke, F.C.; Muller, K.R.; Parra, L.C.
Linear and Nonlinear Regression Techniques for Simultaneous and Proportional Myoelectric Control. IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2014 ,22, 269–279. [CrossRef]
17. Strait, E. Prosthetics in Developing Countries ; American Academy of Orthotists & Prosthetists: Bethesda, MD,
USA, 2006.
18. Cordella, F.; Ciancio, A.L.; Sacchetti, R.; Davalli, A.; Cutti, A.G.; Guglielmelli, E.; Zollo, L. Literature Review
on Needs of Upper Limb Prosthesis Users. Front. Neurosci. 2016 ,10, 209. [CrossRef]
19. Bergman, K.; Örnholmer, L.; Zackrisson, K.; Thyberg, M. Functional beneﬁt of an adaptive myoelectric
prosthetic hand compared to a conventional myoelectric hand. Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 1992 ,16, 32–37.
20. Vidovic, M.M.C.; Hwang, H.J.; Amsuss, S.; Hahne, J.M.; Farina, D.; Muller, K.R. Improving the robustness of
myoelectric pattern recognition for upper limb prostheses by covariate shift adaptation. IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2016 ,24, 961–970. [CrossRef]
21. Raez, M.B.I.; Hussain, M.S.; Mohd-Yasin, F. Techniques of EMG signal analysis: Detection, processing,
classiﬁcation and applications. Biol. Proced. Online 2006 ,8, 11–35. [CrossRef]
22. Jung, P .G.; Lim, G.; Kim, S.; Kong, K. A Wearable Gesture Recognition Device for Detecting Muscular
Activities Based on Air-Pressure Sensors. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2015 ,11, 485–494. [CrossRef]
23. Jiang, N.; Dosen, S.; Farina, D. Myoelectric Control of Artiﬁcial Limbs—Is There a Need to Change Focus?
IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2012 ,29, 12–15. [CrossRef]
24. Scheme, E.; Englehart, K. Electromyogram pattern recognition for control of powered upper-limb prostheses:
State of the art and challenges for clinical use. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2011 ,48, 643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. He, J.; Zhang, D.; Sheng, X.; Zhu, X. A comparison of open-loop and closed-loop adaptive calibration
for pattern recognition based myoelectric control. In Proceedings of the 2015 37th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, Italy, 25–29 August 2015;
Volume 2015, pp. 1144–1147.

==== Page 26 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 26 of 30
26. Spiewak, C. A Comprehensive Study on EMG Feature Extraction and Classiﬁers. Open Access J. Biomed. Eng.
Biosci. 2018 ,1, 17–26. [CrossRef]
27. Gopura, R.A.R.C.; Bandara, D.S.V .; Gunsekara, J.M.P .; Jayawardane, T.S.S. Recent Trends in EMG-Based
Control Methods for Assistive Robots. In Electrodiagnosis in New frontiers of Clinical Research ; Turker, H., Ed.;
IntechOpen: London, UK, 2013; pp. 237–268.
28. Betthauser, J.L.; Hunt, C.L.; Osborn, L.E.; Masters, M.R.; L évay, G.; Kaliki, R.R.; Thakor, N.V . Limb Position
Tolerant Pattern Recognition for Myoelectric Prosthesis Control with Adaptive Sparse Representations from
Extreme Learning. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2017 ,65, 770–778. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Englehart, K.; Hugdins, B. A robust, real-time control scheme for multifunction myoelectric control.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2003 ,50, 848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Huang, Y.; Englehart, K.B.; Hudgins, B.; Chan, A.D.C. A Gaussian Mixture Model Based Classiﬁcation
Scheme for Myoelectric Control of Powered Upper Limb Prostheses. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2005 ,2016 ,
1801–1811. [CrossRef]
31. Smith, L.H.; Hargrove, L.J.; Lock, B.A.; Kuiken, T.A. Determining the optimal window length for pattern
recognition-based myoelectric control: Balancing the competing e ects of classiﬁcation error and controller
delay. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2011 ,19, 186–192. [CrossRef]
32. Liu, J. Adaptive myoelectric pattern recognition toward improved multifunctional prosthesis control.
Med. Eng. Phys. 2015 ,37, 424–430. [CrossRef]
33. Scheme, E.; Lock, B.; Hargrove, L.; Hill, W.; Kuruganti, U.; Englehart, K. Motion Normalized Proportional
Control for Improved Pattern Recognition-Based Myoelectric Control. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.
2014 ,22, 149–157. [CrossRef]
34. Hudgins, B.; Parker, P .; Scott, R.N. A New Strategy for Multifunction Myoelectric Control. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 1993 ,40, 82–94. [CrossRef]
35. Hassan, H.F.; Abou-Loukh, S.J.; Ibraheem, I.K. Teleoperated robotic arm movement using electromyography
signal with wearable Myo armband. J. King Saud Univ. Eng. Sci. 2019 . In press. [CrossRef]
36. Park, S.; Lee, S. EMG pattern recognition based on artiﬁcial intelligence techniques. IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng.
1998 ,6, 400–405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Al-Timemy, A.H.; Bugmann, G.; Escudero, J.; Outram, N. Classiﬁcation of Finger Movements for the
Dexterous Hand Prosthesis Control With Surface Electromyography. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2013 ,17,
608–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Liu, Y.-H.; Huang, H.-P . Towards a high-stability EMG recognition system for prosthesis control: A one-class
classiﬁcation based non-target EMG pattern ﬁltering scheme. In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, San Antonio, TX, USA, 11–14 October 2009; pp. 4752–4757.
39. Englehart, K.; Hudgins, B.; Parker, P .A. A wavelet-based continuous classiﬁcation scheme for multifunction
myoelectric control. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2001 ,48, 302–311. [CrossRef]
40. Jiang, N.; Rehbaum, H.; Vujaklija, I.; Graimann, B.; Farina, D. Intuitive, Online, Simultaneous, and
Proportional Myoelectric Control Over Two Degrees-of-Freedom in Upper Limb Amputees. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2014 ,22, 501–510. [CrossRef]
41. Khushaba, R.N.; Takruri, M.; Miro, J.V .; Kodagoda, S. Towards limb position invariant myoelectric pattern
recognition using time-dependent spectral features. Neural Netw. 2014 ,55, 42–58. [CrossRef]
42. Al-Timemy, A.H.; Khushaba, R.N.; Bugmann, G.; Escudero, J. Improving the Performance Against Force
Variation of EMG Controlled Multifunctional Upper-Limb Prostheses for Transradial Amputees. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2016 ,24, 650–661. [CrossRef]
43. Khushaba, R.N.; Al-Timemy, A.H.; Al-Ani, A.; Al-Jumaily, A. A Framework of Temporal-Spatial
Descriptors-Based Feature Extraction for Improved Myoelectric Pattern Recognition. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng. 2017 ,25, 1821–1831. [CrossRef]
44. Pancholi, S.; Joshi, A.M. Time Derivative Moments Based Feature Extraction Approach for Recognition of
Upper Limb Motions Using EMG. IEEE Sens. Lett. 2019 ,3, 1–4. [CrossRef]
45. Nazmi, N.; Rahman, M.A.; Yamamoto, S.-I.; Ahmad, S.; Zamzuri, H.; Mazlan, S. A Review of Classiﬁcation
Techniques of EMG Signals during Isotonic and Isometric Contractions. Sensors 2016 ,16, 1304. [CrossRef]

==== Page 27 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 27 of 30
46. Hargrove, L.; Member, S.; Li, G.; Englehart, K.; Hargrove, L. Principal Components Analysis Preprocessing to
improve Classiﬁcation Accuracies in Pattern Recognition Based Myoelectric Control Corresponding author.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2009 ,56, 1–28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Simão, M.; Mendes, N.; Gibaru, O. A Review on Electromyography Decoding and Pattern Recognition for
Human-Machine Interaction. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 39564–39582. [CrossRef]
48. Bitar, F.; Madi, N.; Ramly, E.; Saghir, M.; Karameh, F. A portable MIDI controller using EMG-based individual
ﬁnger motion classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference
BiOCAS2007, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 27–30 November 2007; pp. 138–141.
49. Ahmad, S.A.; Ishak, A.J.; Ali, S.H.; Chappell, P .H. Review of Electromyography Control Systems Based on
Pattern Recognition for Prosthesis Control Application. Aust. J. Basic Appl. Sci. 2011 ,5, 1512–1518.
50. Dening, D.C.; Gray, F.G.; Haralick, R.M. Prosthesis Control Using a Nearest Neighbor Electromyographic
Pattern Classiﬁer. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 1983 ,BME-30 , 356–360. [CrossRef]
51. Zardoshti-Kermani, M.; Wheeler, B.C.; Badie, K.; Hashemi, R.M. EMG feature evaluation for movement
control of upper extremity protheses. IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 1995 ,3, 324–333. [CrossRef]
52. Carey, S.L.; Lura, D.J.; Highsmith, M.J. Stephanie. Di erences in myoelectric and body-powered upper-limb
prostheses: Systematic literature review. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2015 ,52, 247–262. [CrossRef]
53. Simon, A.M.; Hargrove, L.J.; Member, I. A Decision-Based V elocity Ramp for Minimizing the Effect of
Misclassifications During Real-Time Pattern Recognition Control. IEEE T rans. Biomed. Eng. 2011 ,58, 3350–3353.
[CrossRef]
54. Scheme, E.J.; Englehart, K.B.; Hudgins, B.S. Selective classiﬁcation for improved robustness of myoelectric
control under nonideal conditions. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2011 ,58, 1698–1705. [CrossRef]
55. Amsüss, S.; Goebel, P .M.; Jiang, N.; Graimann, B.; Paredes, L.; Farina, D. Self-Correcting Pattern Recognition
System of Surface EMG Signals for Upper Limb Prosthesis Control. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2014 ,61,
1167–1176. [CrossRef]
56. Zhang, X.; Li, X.; Samuel, O.W.; Huang, Z.; Fang, P .; Li, G. Improving the robustness of electromyogram-pattern
recognition for prosthetic control by a postprocessing strategy. Front. Neurorobot. 2017 ,11, 1–15. [CrossRef]
57. Roche, A.D.; Rehbaum, H.; Farina, D.; Aszmann, O.C. Prosthetic Myoelectric Control Strategies: A Clinical
Perspective. Curr. Surg. Rep. 2014 ,2. [CrossRef]
58. Nielsen, J.L.G.; Holmgaard, S.; Jiang, N.; Englehart, K.; Farina, D.; Parker, P . Enhanced EMG signal
processing for simultaneous and proportional myoelectric control. In Proceedings of the 2009 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Minneapolis, MN, USA,
3–6 September 2009; pp. 4335–4338.
59. Xu, K.; Guo, W.; Hua, L.; Sheng, X.; Zhu, X. A prosthetic arm based on EMG pattern recognition.
In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, ROBIO, Qingdao,
China, 3–7 December 2016; Volume 2016, pp. 1179–1184.
60. Resnik, L.; Etter, K.; Klinger, S.L.; Kambe, C. Using virtual reality environment to facilitate training with
advanced upper-limb prosthesis. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2011 ,48, 707–718. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Geng, Y.; Samuel, O.W.; Wei, Y.; Li, G. Improving the Robustness of Real-Time Myoelectric Pattern Recognition
against Arm Position Changes in Transradial Amputees. Biomed Res. Int. 2017 ,2017 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Karlik, B.; Prosthesis, M.U.; Karlik, B.; Tokhi, M.O.; Member, S.; Alci, M. A Fuzzy Clustering Neural Network
Architecture for Multifunction Upper-Limb Prosthesis. IEEE T rans. Biomed. Eng. 2003 ,50, 1255–1261. [CrossRef]
63. Chan, A.D.C.; Englehart, K.B. Continuous Myoelectric Control for Powered Prostheses Using Hidden Markov
Models Adrian. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2005 ,52, 121–124. [CrossRef]
64. Pan, L.; Zhang, D.; Liu, J.; Sheng, X.; Zhu, X. Continuous estimation of ﬁnger joint angles under di erent
static wrist motions from surface EMG signals. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2014 ,14, 265–271. [CrossRef]
65. Riilloa, F.; Quitadamoa, L.R.; Cavrini, F.; Gruppioni, E.; Pinto, C.A.; Past ò, N.C.; Sbernini, L.; Alberoa, L.;
Saggio, G. Optimization of EMG-based hand gesture recognition: Supervised vs. unsupervised data
preprocessing on healthy subjects and transradial amputees. Biomed. Signal Process. Control 2014 ,14, 117–125.
[CrossRef]
66. Shenoy, P .; Miller, K.J.; Crawford, B.; Rao, R.P .N. Online electromyographic control of a robotic prosthesis.
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2008 ,55, 1128–1135. [CrossRef]

==== Page 28 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 28 of 30
67. Stango, A.; Member, S.; Negro, F.; Farina, D.; Member, S. Spatial Correlation of High Density EMG Signals
Provides Features Robust to Electrode Number and Shift in Pattern Recognition for Myocontrol. IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2015 ,23, 189–198. [CrossRef]
68. Soman, S.; Jayadeva; Arjunan, S.; Kumar, D.K. Improved sEMG signal classiﬁcation using the Twin SVM.
In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), Budapest,
Hungary, 9–12 October 2016; pp. 004507–004512.
69. Liu, J.; Zhou, P . A novel myoelectric pattern recognition strategy for hand function restoration after incomplete
cervical spinal cord injury. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2013 ,21, 96–103. [CrossRef]
70. Kawasaki, H.; Kayukawa, M.; Sakaeda, H.; Mouri, T. Learning system for myoelectric prosthetic hand control
by forearm amputees. In Proceedings of the 23rd IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication, Edinburgh, UK, 25–29 August 2014; pp. 899–904.
71. Momen, K.; Krishnan, S.; Chau, T. Real-time classiﬁcation of forearm electromyographic signals corresponding
to user-selected intentional movements for multifunction prosthesis control. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil.
Eng. 2007 ,15, 535–542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Pancholi, S.; Joshi, A.M. Electromyography-Based Hand Gesture Recognition System for Upper Limb
Amputees. IEEE Sens. Lett. 2019 ,3, 1–4. [CrossRef]
73. Wirta, R.W.; Taylor, D.R.; Finley, F.R. Pattern-recognition arm prosthesis: A historical perspective-a ﬁnal
report. Bull. Prosthet. Res. 1978 ,10, 8–35.
74. Chang, G.C.; Kang, W.J.; Luh, J.J.; Cheng, C.K.; Lai, J.S.; Chen, J.J.; Kuo, T.S. Real-time implementation of
electromyogram pattern recognition as a control command of man-machine interface. Med. Eng. Phys. 1996 ,
18, 529–537. [CrossRef]
75. Yen, C.J.; Chung, W.Y.; Lin, K.P .; Tsai, C.L.; Lee, S.H.; Chen, T.S. Analog integrated circuit design for
the wireless bio-signal transmission system. In Proceedings of the AP-ASIC 1999—1st IEEE Asia Paciﬁc
Conference ASICs, Seoul, Korea, 23–25 August 1999; pp. 345–346.
76. Kajitani, I.; Murakawa, M.; Nishikawa, D.; Yokoi, H.; Kajihara, N.; Iwata, M.; Keymeulen, D.; Sakanashi, H.;
Higuchi, T. An evolvable hardware chip for prosthetic hand controller. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Microelectronics for Neural, Fuzzy and Bio-Inspired Systems, MicroNeuro, Granada, Spain,
9 April 1999; pp. 179–186.
77. Choi, C.; Kim, J. A Real-time EMG-based Assistive Computer Interface for the Upper Limb Disabled.
In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, Noordwijk,
The Netherlands, 13–15 June 2007; pp. 459–462.
78. Xiong, A.; Chen, Y.; Zhao, X.; Han, J.; Liu, G. A novel HCI based on EMG and IMU. In Proceedings of the 2011
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics ROBIO, Phuket, Thailand, 7–11 December 2011;
pp. 2653–2657.
79. Zhang, X.; Huang, H.; Yang, Q. Real-time implementation of a self-recovery EMG pattern recognition
interface for artiﬁcial arms. In Proceedings of the 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Osaka, Japan, 3–7 July 2013; pp. 5926–5929.
80. Edwards, A.L.; Dawson, M.R.; Hebert, J.S.; Sherstan, C.; Sutton, R.S.; Chan, K.M.; Pilarski, P .M. Application
of real-time machine learning to myoelectric prosthesis control: A case series in adaptive switching.
Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 2016 ,40, 573–581. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81. Resnik, L.J.; Acluche, F.; Klinger, S.L. User experience of controlling the DEKA Arm with EMG pattern
recognition. PLoS ONE 2018 ,13. [CrossRef]
82. Mastinu, E.; Member, S.; Ahlberg, J. An Alternative Myoelectric Pattern Recognition Approach for the
Control of Hand Prostheses: A Case Study of Use in Daily Life by a Dysmelia Subject. IEEE J. Transl. Eng.
Health Med. 2018 ,6, 1–12. [CrossRef]
83. Hargrove, L.J.; Miller, L.A.; Turner, K.; Kuiken, T.A. Myoelectric Pattern Recognition Outperforms Direct
Control for Transhumeral Amputees with Targeted Muscle Reinnervation: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 1–9. [CrossRef]
84. Raurale, S.; McAllister, J.; del Rincon, J.M. EMG Wrsit-Hand Motion Recognition System for Real-Time
Embedded Platform ; The Institute of Electronics, Communications and Information Technology (ECIT),
Queen’s University of Belfast: Belfast, Northern Ireland, 2019; pp. 1523–1527.

==== Page 29 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 29 of 30
85. Woodward, R.B.; Hargrove, L.J. Adapting myoelectric control in real-time using a virtual environment.
J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2019 ,16, 1–12. [CrossRef]
86. Kuiken, T.A.; Lock, B.A.; Lipschutz, R.D.; Miller, L.A.; Stubbleﬁeld, K.A.; Englehart, K.B. Targeted Muscle
Reinnervation for Real-time Myoelectric Control of Multifunction Artiﬁcial Arms. JAMA J. Am. Med. Assoc.
2009 ,301, 619–628. [CrossRef]
87. Barraza-Madrigal, J.A.; Ramirez-Garcia, A.; Munoz-Guerrero, R. A virtual upper limb prosthesis as a training
system. In Proceedings of the 2010 7th International Conference on Electrical Engineering Computing
Science and Automatic Control, Tuxtla Gutierrez, Mexico, 8–10 September 2010; pp. 210–215.
88. Simon, A.M.; Hargrove, L.J.; Lock, B.A.; Kuiken, T.A. Target achievement control test: Evaluating real-time
myoelectric pattern-recognition control of multifunctional upper-limb prostheses. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 2011 ,
48, 619–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Edith, R.M.; Haripriya, A.B. Gesture recognition using real time EMG. In Proceedings of the 2015 International
Conference on Innovations in Information, Embedded and Communication Systems (ICIIECS), Coimbatore,
India, 19–20 March 2015; pp. 1–3.
90. Krasoulis, A.; Kyranou, I.; Erden, M.S.; Nazarpour, K.; Vijayakumar, S. Improved prosthetic hand control
with concurrent use of myoelectric and inertial measurements. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 2017 ,14, 71. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
91. Jiralerspong, T.; Nakanishi, E.; Liu, C.; Ishikawa, J. Experimental study of real-time classiﬁcation of 17
voluntary movements for multi-degree myoelectric prosthetic hand. Appl. Sci. 2017 ,7, 1163. [CrossRef]
92. Tkach, D.C.; Young, A.J.; Smith, L.H.; Rouse, E.J.; Hargrove, L.J. Real-time and o ine performance of pattern
recognition myoelectric control using a generic electrode grid with targeted muscle reinnervation patients.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2014 ,22, 727–734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Converse, H.; Ferraro, T.; Jean, D.; Jones, L.; Mendhiratta, V .; Naviasky, E.; Par, M.; Rimlinger, T.; Southall, S.;
Sprenkle, J.; et al. An EMG biofeedback device for video game use in forearm physiotherapy. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Sensors 2013, Baltimore, MD, USA, 3–6 November 2013.
94. Kanitz, G.; Cipriani, C.; Edin, B.B. Classiﬁcation of transient myoelectric signals for the control of multi-grasp
hand prostheses. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2018 ,26, 1756–1764. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Liu, J.; Ren, Y.; Xu, D.; Kang, S.H.; Zhang, L.-Q. EMG-Based Real-Time Linear-Nonlinear Cascade Regression
Decoding of Shoulder, Elbow and Wrist Movements in Able-Bodied Persons and Stroke Survivors. IEEE Trans.
Biomed. Eng. 2019 . [CrossRef]
96. Gonz ález-Fern ández, M. Development of Upper Limb Prostheses: Current Progress and Areas for Growth.
Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 2014 ,95, 1013–1014. [CrossRef]
97. Pasquina, P .F.; Perry, B.N.; Miller, M.E.; Ling, G.S.F.; Tsao, J.W. Recent advances in bioelectric prostheses.
Neurol. Clin. Pract. 2015 ,5, 164–170. [CrossRef]
98. Hargrove, L.; Englehart, K.; Hudgins, B. The e ect of electrode displacements on pattern recognition based
myoelectric control. In Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, New York, NY, USA, 30 August–3 September 2006; pp. 2203–2206.
99. Samuel, O.W.; Li, X.; Geng, Y.; Asogbon, M.G.; Fang, P .; Huang, Z.; Li, G. Resolving the adverse impact of
mobility on myoelectric pattern recognition in upper-limb multifunctional prostheses. Comput. Biol. Med.
2017 ,90, 76–87. [CrossRef]
100. Ribeiro, J.; Mota, F.; Cavalcante, T.; Nogueira, I.; Gondim, V .; Alexandria, V .A.A. Analysis of man-machine
interfaces in upper-limb prosthesis: A review. Robotics 2019 ,8, 16. [CrossRef]
101. Bandara, D.S.V .; Arata, J.; Kiguchi, K. Towards Control of a Transhumeral Prosthesis with EEG Signals.
Bioengineering 2018 ,5, 26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Guger, C.; Schlogl, A.; Neuper, C.; Walterspacher, D.; Strein, T.; Pfurtscheller, G. Rapid prototyping of an
EEG-based brain-computer interface (BCI). IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2001 ,9, 49–58. [CrossRef]
103. Fifer, M.S.; Acharya, S.; Benz, H.L.; Mollazadeh, M.; Crone, N.E.; Thakor, N.V . Toward electrocorticographic
control of a dexterous upper limb prosthesis: Building brain-machine interfaces. IEEE Pulse 2012 ,3, 38–42.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Liao, K.; Xiao, R.; Gonzalez, J.; Ding, L. Decoding individual ﬁnger movements from one hand using human
EEG signals. PLoS ONE 2014 ,9, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 30 ====
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4596 30 of 30
105. Gargiulo, G.D.; Mohamed, A.; McEwan, A.L.; Bifulco, P .; Cesarelli, M.; Jin, C.T.; Ru o, M.; Tapson, J.;
van Schaik, A. Investigating the role of combined acoustic-visual feedback in one-dimensional synchronous
brain computer interfaces, a preliminary study. Med. Devices Evid. Res. 2012 ,5, 81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Guger, C.; Edlinger, G.; Harkam, W.; Niedermayer, I.; Pfurtscheller, G. How many people are able to operate
an eeg-based brain-computer interface (bci)? IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2003 ,11, 145–147.
[CrossRef]
107. Gonz ález, D.S.; Castellini, C. A realistic implementation of ultrasound imaging as a human-machine interface
for upper-limb amputees. Front. Neurorobot. 2013 ,7, 17. [CrossRef]
108. Troyk, P .R.; DeMichele, G.A.; Kerns, D.A.; Weir, R.F. IMES: An implantable myoelectric sensor. Annu. Int.
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Proc. 2007 ,2007 , 1730–1733.
©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

