==== Page 1 ====
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing via Large Pre-Trained
Language Models: A Survey
Bonan Min*1, Hayley Ross*2, Elior Sulem*3, Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh*4,
Thien Huu Nguyen4, Oscar Sainz5, Eneko Agirre5, Ilana Heinz1, and Dan Roth3
1Raytheon BBN Technologies
fbonan.min, ilana.Heintz g@raytheon.com
2Harvard University
hayleyross@g.harvard.edu
3University of Pennsylvania
feliors, danroth g@seas.upenn.edu
4University of Oregon
fapouran, thien g@cs.uoregon.edu
5University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
foscar.sainz, e.agirre g@ehu.eus
* indicate equal contribution
Abstract
Large, pre-trained transformer-based language
models such as BERT have drastically
changed the Natural Language Processing
(NLP) ﬁeld. We present a survey of re-
cent work that uses these large language mod-
els to solve NLP tasks via pre-training then
ﬁne-tuning, prompting, or text generation ap-
proaches. We also present approaches that use
pre-trained language models to generate data
for training augmentation or other purposes.
We conclude with discussions on limitations
and suggested directions for future research.
1 Introduction
In recent years, large pre-trained transformer-based
language models (PLMs), such as the BERT (De-
vlin et al., 2019) and GPT (Radford et al., 2018)
families of models, have taken Natural Language
Processing (NLP) by storm, achieving state-of-the-
art performance on many tasks.
These large PLMs have fueled a paradigm shift
in NLP. Take a classiﬁcation task p(yjx)(classi-
fying textual input xinto a label y) as an exam-
ple: traditional statistical NLP approaches often
design hand-crafted features to represent x, and
then apply a machine learning model (e.g. SVM
(Cortes and Vapnik, 1995), logistic regression) to
learn the classiﬁcation function. Deep learning
models learn the latent feature representation viaa deep neural network (LeCun et al., 2015) in ad-
dition to the classiﬁcation function. Note that the
latent representation needs to be learned afresh for
each new NLP task, and that, in many cases, the
size of the training data limits the quality of the
latent feature representation. Given that the nu-
ances of language are common to all NLP tasks,
one could posit that we could learn a generic la-
tent feature representations from some generic task
once, and then share it across all NLP tasks. Lan-
guage modeling, where the model needs to learn
how to predict the next word given previous words,
is such a generic task with abundant naturally oc-
curring text to pre-train such a model (hence the
name pre-trained language models). In fact, the lat-
est, ongoing paradigm shift begins when PLMs are
introduced: for numerous NLP tasks, researchers
now leverage existing PLMs via ﬁne-tuning for the
task of interest, prompting the PLMs to perform the
desired task, or reformulating the task as a text gen-
eration problem with application of PLMs to solve
it accordingly. Advances in these three PLM-based
paradigms have continuously established new state-
of-the-art performances.
This paper surveys recent works that leverage
PLMs for NLP. We organize these works into the
following three paradigms:
•Pre-train then ﬁne-tune ( §2): perform general-
purpose pre-training with a large unlabeled
1arXiv:2111.01243v1  [cs.CL]  1 Nov 2021

==== Page 2 ====
corpus, and then perform a small amount of
task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning for the task of inter-
est.
•Prompt-based learning ( §3): prompt a PLM
such that solving an NLP task is reduced to
a task similar to the PLM’s pre-training task
(e.g. predicting a missing word), or a simpler
proxy task (e.g. textual entailment). Prompt-
ing can usually more effectively leverage the
knowledge encoded in the PLMs, leading to
few-shot approaches.
•NLP as text generation ( §4): Reformulate
NLP tasks as text generation, to fully leverage
knowledge encoded in a generative language
model such as GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020).
Generative PLMs can be also used for text gen-
eration tasks. We refer readers to the excellent
surveys on text generation such as Li et al. (2021b)
and Yu et al. (2021b). This paper, unless otherwise
speciﬁed, focuses on tasks that are not generative
in nature (e.g. classiﬁcation, sequence labeling and
structure prediction) that still cover a broad range
of NLP tasks including syntactic or semantic pars-
ing of text, Information Extraction (IE), Question
Answering (QA), Textual Entailment (TE), senti-
ment analysis, and so on.
In addition to the three paradigms, there is an-
other, complementary method: to indirectly use any
of the PLM paradigms above to improve results of
target NLP tasks:
•Data generation ( §5): run PLMs to automat-
ically generate data for NLP tasks. The gen-
erated data can be silver labeled data, where
typically the generative PLM is ﬁne-tuned for
the task, or some auxiliary data, such as coun-
terexamples, clariﬁcations, contexts, or other.
In the ﬁrst case, the silver labeled data can be
added to existing labeled data. In the second
case, the auxiliary data supports the target task
in some way.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
provides background on the PLMs and describes
the ﬁrst paradigm, pre-train then ﬁne-tune . Sec-
tion 3 discusses the second paradigm, prompt-
based learning . Section 4 summarizes works in
the third paradigm, NLP as text generation . In Sec-
tion 5, we describe approaches that generate datavia PLMs for a broad range of NLP tasks. We dis-
cuss limitations and provide directions for future
research in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.
2 Paradigm 1: Pre-Train then Fine-Tune
While work in traditional statistical NLP focused
on training task-speciﬁc models on labeled datasets,
this paradigm shifts to training one large model
on a shared, “fundamental” pre-training task and
then adapting (“ﬁne-tuning”) it to a variety of tasks
in a second step. The pre-training task is almost
invariably a type of language modeling task1that
can leverage a massive quantity of unlabelled data
to learn representations that beneﬁt a range of NLP
tasks (Rogers et al., 2020).
In this section, we ﬁrst provide a primer on
pre-trained large language models (PLMs), then
describe approaches that use frozen or ﬁne-tuned
PLMs for NLP tasks.
2.1 The Beginnings of the Paradigm Shift
While pre-training in machine learning and, in par-
ticular, computer vision has been studied since at
least 2010 (Erhan et al., 2010; Yosinski et al., 2014;
Huh et al., 2016), the technique did not gain trac-
tion in NLP until later in the decade, with the publi-
cation of Vaswani et al. (2017). The delay in uptake
is partly due to the later arrival of deep neural mod-
els to NLP compared to computer vision, partly due
to the difﬁculty of choosing a self-supervised task2
suitable for pre-training, and above all, due to the
need for drastically larger model sizes and corpora
in order to be effective for NLP tasks. We explore
these aspects further in the discussion below.
The idea of pre-training on a language model-
ing task is quite old. Collobert and Weston (2008)
ﬁrst suggested pre-training a model on a number
of tasks to learn features instead of hand-crafting
them (the predominant approach at the time). Their
version of language model pre-training, however,
differed signiﬁcantly from the methods we see to-
day. They used language modeling as only one of
many tasks in a multitask learning setting, along
with other supervised tasks such as part-of-speech
(POS) tagging, named entity recognition (NER)
1The exact formulation varies from the classic unidirec-
tional language modeling (next word prediction) to cloze-style
ﬁll-in-the-blank, uncorrupting spans, and other variants (see
Section 2.3).
2In self-supervised learning, the ground truth (e.g. the
missing word) comes from the unlabeled text itself. This al-
lows the pre-training to scale up with the near-inﬁnite amount
of text available on the web.
2

==== Page 3 ====
Figure 1: Three types of pre-trained language models. Model architecture illustrations are from Lewis et al.
(2020). For the encoder-decoder model, the corruption strategy of document rotation is shown. Alternatives
include sentence permutation, text inﬁlling, token deletion/masking, etc.
and semantic role labeling (SRL). Collobert and
Weston proposed sharing the weights of their deep-
est convolutional layer – the word embeddings
learned by the model – between the multiple train-
ing tasks and ﬁne-tuning the weights of the two
remaining two feed-forward layers for each indi-
vidual task.
Pre-training and ﬁne-tuning did not gain popular-
ity in NLP until the advent of ELMo (Peters et al.,
2018) and ULMFiT (Howard and Ruder, 2018).
Both models are based on Long Short-Term Mem-
ory architecture (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber, 1997), but differ in signiﬁcant ways. ULM-
FiT pre-trains a three-layer LSTM on a standard
language modeling objective, predicting the next
token in a sequence. ELMo uses layers of bidirec-
tional LSTMs that combine two language model
tasks in forward and backward directions to capture
context from both sides. Both proposed ﬁne-tuning
the language model layer by layer for downstream
application. Both studies also suggested adding
additional classiﬁer layers on top of the language
model, which were ﬁne-tuned alongside the lan-
guage model layers. These changes, combined
with the substantially larger model size and pre-
training corpus size compared to previous models,
allowed the pre-training then ﬁne-tuning paradigm
to succeed. Both ELMo and ULMFiT showed com-
petitive or improved performance compared to the
then-state-of-the-art for a number of tasks, demon-
strating the value of language model pre-training
on a large scale.
The pace of this paradigm shift picked up dra-
matically in late 2018 when Vaswani et al. (2017)introduced the Transformer architecture that can be
used for language model pre-training. The Trans-
former’s multi-head self-attention mechanism al-
lows every word to attend to all previous words or
every word except the target, allowing the model to
efﬁciently capture long-range dependencies with-
out the expensive recurrent computation in LSTMs.
Multiple layers of multi-head self-attention allow
for increasingly more expressive representations,
useful for a range of NLP problems. As a result,
nearly all popular language models, including GPT,
BERT, BART (Lewis et al., 2020) and T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020), are now based on the Transformer
architecture. They also differ in a number of im-
portant ways, which we discuss in the following
sections. For more details about the Transformer ar-
chitecture, we refer the reader to the original paper
or to the excellent tutorials available3;4.
2.2 Modern Pre-Trained Language Models
There are three classes of pre-trained language
models: autoregressive language models (e.g.
GPT), masked language models (e.g. BERT), and
encoder-decoder models (e.g. BART, T5). Fig-
ure 1 shows the difference in model architecture
and training objectives with an example training
input for each.
2.2.1 Autoregressive Language Models
An autoregressive language model is trained
to predict the next word xigiven all previ-
3http://nlp.seas.harvard.edu/2018/04/
03/attention.html
4http://jalammar.github.io/
illustrated-transformer/
3

==== Page 4 ====
Model Pre-Training Sources Size of Pre-Training Corpus # Model parameters
(1)English Monolingual Models
BERT(B ASE)(Devlin et al., 2019) Wiki, books 3.3B tokens (13GB data) 110M
BERT(L ARGE )(D EVLIN ET AL ., 2019) Wiki, books 3.3B tokens (13GB data) 340M
ROBERT A(Liu et al., 2019) Wiki, books, web crawl 161GB data 340M
XLN ET(Yang et al., 2019) Wiki, books, web crawl 142GB data 340M
GPT(Radford et al., 2018) Web crawl 800M tokens 117M
GPT-2(Radford et al., 2019) Web crawl 8M documents (40GB data) 1.5B
GPT-3(Brown et al., 2020) Wiki, books, web crawl 500B tokens 175B
BART (Lewis et al., 2020) Wiki, books 3.3B tokens 370M
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) Web crawl 200B tokens (750GB data) 11B
(2)Multilingual Models
MBERT(Devlin et al., 2019) Wiki 21.9B tokens 172M
XLM-R( BASE ) (Conneau et al., 2020) Web crawl 295B tokens 270M
XLM-R( LARGE ) (Conneau et al., 2020) Web crawl 295B tokens 550M
MT5 ( LARGE ) (Raffel et al., 2020) Web crawl 6.3T tokens 1.2B
MT5 (XXL) (Raffel et al., 2020) Web crawl 6.3T tokens 13B
Table 1: Training sources, dataset size, and model parameters for popular PLMs. Data sources differ, and are
described in the citations listed in each row.
ous words x1,x2, ..., andxi 1. The train-
ing objective is to maximize the log-likelihoodP
ilog(P(xijx1;x2;:::;x i 1);T), in which T
are the model parameters. In a Transformer de-
coder, these are in multiple layers of multi-head
self-attention modules. Typical models include
GPT (Radford et al., 2018), GPT-2 (Radford et al.,
2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020)5.
GPT only utilizes the autoregressive decoder
portion of the Transformer architecture, stacking
multiple transformer decoder layers with masked
self-attention. This allows the model to attend to
all previous tokens in the sequence when predict-
ing the next token. Each newer version of GPT
is trained with increasingly large amounts of text
(Table 1).
The GPT paper (Radford et al., 2018) proposed
ﬁne-tuning GPT for speciﬁc tasks, providing exam-
ples for natural language inference, QA (including
commonsense reasoning), semantic similarity and
paraphrase detection, sentiment analysis, and lin-
guistic acceptability (CoLA, Warstadt et al., 2019),
as well as the GLUE benchmark. In particular,
GPT achieves a dramatic improvement on CoLA
(scoring 45.4 compared to the previous state of
the art of 35.0), showcasing the model’s ability to
gain a much more sophisticated grasp of language
than previous models. Subsequent versions of GPT
(GPT-2 and GPT-3, Radford et al., 2019; Brown
5Open-source re-implementations of GPT are also avail-
able, such as GPT-Neo (Black et al., 2021) and GPT-J (Wang,
2021), trained on an 800GB open-source dataset (Gao et al.,
2020a), with model sizes similar to GPT-2 (2.7B and 6B pa-
rameters respectively).et al., 2020), however, do not opt for the ﬁne-tuning
approach and instead leverage GPT’s generative de-
sign to tackle tasks in a prompt-based manner or
via outright language generation, as described in
Sections 3 and 4.
2.2.2 Masked Language Models
Whereas autoregressive models are unidirectional,
masked language models (MLMs), predict a
“masked” word conditioned on all other words
in the sequence. When training an MLM,
words are chosen at random to be masked, us-
ing a special token [MASK] , or replaced by
a random token. This forces the model to
collect bidirectional information in making pre-
dictions. The training objective is to recover
the original tokens at the masked positions:P
imilog(P(xijx1;:::;x i 1;xi+1;:::;x n);T), in
whichmi2f0;1gindicates whether xiis masked
or not, andTare the parameters in a Transformer
encoder. Note that in BERT and similar models,
it is a common practice to mask multiple words
from a sequence to allow parallel training. Popular
examples of MLMs include BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019), RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), and XLM-R
(Conneau et al., 2020).
Speciﬁcally, MLMs such as BERT use the en-
coder portion of the Transformer architecture. Like
autoregressive models, MLMs stack multiple trans-
former encoder layers to learn increasingly com-
plex and meaningful representations, but it uses
masked self-attention to attend to all other tokens
in the sequence in both directions when learning
a representation for a particular token. The non-
4

==== Page 5 ====
autoregressive nature allows the computation to be
parallelized, so it is often more efﬁcient at infer-
ence time. Dynamic unfolding of all positions in
relation to the masked word provides efﬁciency at
training time.
There is a large family of models derived
from BERT, including RoBERTa (Liu et al.,
2019), which improves BERT’s pre-training, AL-
BERT (Lan et al., 2020), which is smaller and
faster to train, and XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) and
Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019), which incor-
porate an autoregressive pre-training approach to
better handle long-distance dependencies. There
are also a range of derived models trained on spe-
ciﬁc domains (Table 6 in Appendix A). See Qiu
et al. (2020) for a full taxonomy of BERT-derived
models.
2.2.3 Encoder-Decoder Language Models
The encoder-decoder model is a more ﬂexible “text
in, text out” model that learns to generate a se-
quence of token y1;:::;y ngiven an input sequence
x1;:::;x m. Given a pair of sequences, the train-
ing objective is to maximize the log-likelihood of
log(P(y1;:::;y njx1;:::;x m);T), in whichTare
the parameters in a full encoder-decoder Trans-
former model (Vaswani et al., 2017).
To generate adequate data for self-supervised
pre-training, researchers experiment with different
forms of sequence corruption. The input is a token
sequence modiﬁed in some particular way, and
the output is the reconstructed, original sequence.
Forms of sequence corruption include document
rotation, shown in Figure 1, sentence permutation,
text inﬁlling, token deletion/masking, and others.
Representative models include BART (Lewis et al.,
2020) and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020).
Given the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) na-
ture, it is straightforward to ﬁne-tune the encoder-
decoder language model to perform seq2seq tasks
such as Machine Translation, style transfer, and
text summarization. The seq2seq formulation is
also versatile: many tasks can be reformulated as
“text in, text out”. We describe those approaches in
details in Section 4.
2.3 Pre-Training Corpora
The pre-training corpus is a primary distinguishing
factor between language models. Both the size and
the quality (source data characteristics) are impor-
tant considerations. Table 1 presents the sources
and the corpus size used for several popular lan-guage models. There is a clear trend of increasing
the size of the pre-training corpus as well as in-
creasing the diversity of the data. For example,
ULMFiT (Howard and Ruder, 2018) is trained on
a small, highly pre-processed corpus of 29,000
Wikipedia articles (103 million words), and is rep-
resentative of models of that year. A few years later,
models such as XLM-R (Conneau et al., 2020) and
GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) leveraged billions of
words of crawled web data (diverse in nature). Raf-
fel et al. (2020) observe that the primary gains in
performance are typically driven by model size and
dataset size (“the bigger, the better”), if the qual-
ity of the dataset is held constant. They ﬁnd that
quality can play a larger role if there is a genre
match to the task, but a larger dataset provides
more advantages, eventually overcoming any gain
from quality. For a detailed discussion of model
performance scaling by model size, dataset size,
and other factors, see Kaplan et al. (2020). De-
spite the advantages of the larger dataset, Raffel
et al. (2020) also demonstrate the importance of
cleaning large crawled datasets. They show that
a model trained on such an unﬁltered dataset per-
forms substantially worse than if ﬁltering heuristics
are applied. Similarly, GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019)
and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) use heuristics to
improve the quality of the training data. However,
Hendrycks et al. (2020) noted that larger models do
not necessarily perform better out of domain. Lin
et al. (2021) also observe that larger language mod-
els (trained on these very diverse sources) are more
likely to incorrectly answer questions that some hu-
mans would answer incorrectly due to false beliefs
or misconceptions, thus mimicking the inaccura-
cies in their training data.
The domain of intended downstream applica-
tions is an important consideration for pre-training
source data selection. Table 6 (Appendix A) pro-
vides a list of domain-speciﬁc pre-trained language
models that achieved signiﬁcantly better perfor-
mance in the intended domain than general-purpose
language models. These models are either trained
from scratch or trained with domain-speciﬁc text
using a general-purpose model as the initialization.
2.4 Fine-Tuning: Applying PLMs to NLP
Tasks
Having described the various approaches to creat-
ing complex, meaningful representations through
pre-training, we turn to the ﬁne-tuning step that
5

==== Page 6 ====
Figure 2: Typical “pre-train then ﬁne-tune” strategies. We illustrate strategies that ﬁne-tune the full PLM (left),
ﬁne-tune the full PLM in a custom model (center), and ﬁne-tune just a small adapter sub-layer per each Transformer
layer (right). We show the Transformer blocks that will be ﬁne-tuned for the speciﬁc tasks in blue, and the frozen
blocks (keep the pre-trained weights unchanged) in grey. For brevity, we represent the entire Transformer block
(stacked innlayers) by its multi-head self-attention and (if applicable) adapter layers. We refer interested readers
to Vaswani et al., 2017 and Pfeiffer et al., 2020a for more architecture details. “Heads” refers to task-speciﬁc
prediction functions (Wolf et al., 2020).
allows PLMs to perform accurately on disparate
NLP tasks. Figure 2 illustrates typical pre-training
then ﬁne-tuning strategies. We describe each of
them below. A more comprehensive list of prior
work using different pre-training then ﬁne-tuning
strategies are in Table 8 (Appendix B).
2.4.1 Contextual Embeddings
The simplest approach to using large pre-trained
language models is to “freeze” the model and use
its output as sophisticated, context-sensitive word
embeddings for a subsequent architecture, which
is trained from scratch for the speciﬁc task. In
other words, while this still involves a forward pass
through the pre-trained language model over the
input text, the language model’s weights are not
ﬁne-tuned, rendering this approach closer to a fea-
ture extraction family of approaches in classic sta-
tistical NLP. There are three types of scenarios for
using frozen PLMs.
In contexts with insufﬁcient labeled data or com-
pute power, “frozen” contextual embeddings are
employed. For non-benchmark tasks, the only la-
beled training datasets are too small to ﬁne-tune
even the top layers of BERT-base, let alone larger
models. The computational cost of ﬁne-tuning the
entire PLM may be prohibitive for some applica-
tions or developers, leading to use of the more
efﬁcient frozen PLM solution. Other data-efﬁcient
and time-efﬁcient approaches to ﬁne-tuning are dis-
cussed in Section 2.4.4.
Highly complex or difﬁcult NLP tasks oftenmake use of the frozen PLM technique to help
reduce training complexity. Examples are con-
stituency parsing (Zhang et al., 2020c), semantic
graph parsing using UCCA6(Jiang et al., 2019)
and AMR7(Zhang et al., 2019b; Naseem et al.,
2019; Zhou et al., 2020b), Aspect-Based Sentiment
Analysis (Li et al., 2019b) and Machine Transla-
tion (Zhu et al., 2020). For instance, Zhang et al.
(2020c) uses frozen BERT embeddings to seed an
innovative approach to Conditional Random Field
(CRF) modeling (Lafferty et al., 2001) that replaces
the inside-outside algorithm with backpropagation,
using a two-step process to ﬁrst bracket then label
the parses, and a batched version of the CKY al-
gorithm. For complex tasks like these, there may
only be enough data or compute power available
to train the secondary model (Zhang et al. (2019b)
cited limitations in compute power). While the use
of frozen PLM parameters is currently in vogue for
these tasks, perhaps due to researcher preference
for simplicity as well as computational require-
ments, we may see a shift to full-model ﬁne-tuning
for tasks with sufﬁcient training data.
Unsupervised tasks such as word sense disam-
biguation (Hadiwinoto et al., 2019) and word sense
induction (Amrami and Goldberg, 2019) are not
associated with a supervised dataset for ﬁne-tuning.
Instead, frozen BERT embeddings are fed through
a variety of strategies such as nearest-neighbour
6Universal Conceptual Cognitive Annotation (Abend and
Rappoport, 2013)
7Abstract Meaning Representation (Banarescu et al., 2013)
6

==== Page 7 ====
matching, afﬁne transformations, gated linear units
(GLU, Dauphin et al., 2017) or clustering algo-
rithms to perform these tasks.
2.4.2 Fine-tuning the PLM
This approach ﬁne-tunes some or all the layers of
the PLM and then adds one or two simple out-
put layers (known as prediction heads, Wolf et al.,
2020). Typically, these are feed-forward layers for
classiﬁcation. The output layers and the PLM are
trained together in an end-to-end setup, but the bulk
of the computation is applied to ﬁne-tuning the lan-
guage model to produce the desired representation
of the input. The task of the output layers is merely
to condense the information provided by the em-
beddings of each token into the number of desired
classes. The word embeddings may come from the
top layer, or from a concatenation or a weighted
average of the top n(oftenn= 4) layers (Peters
et al., 2018). Figure 2 (left) shows an illustration
of this approach.
This approach is most suitable for sequence clas-
siﬁcation tasks (e.g. sentiment analysis, NLI, se-
mantic similarity), sequence tagging tasks such as
NER, and span extraction tasks (e.g. QA) in which
the newly trained layers learn the start and end span
of an answer.
For sequence classiﬁcation tasks, Devlin et al.
(2019) suggests ﬁne-tuning BERT’s representation
of the special [CLS] token, and following with a
single feed-forward layer that classiﬁes it as one
of the task labels. For token-level or span-level
classiﬁcation tasks, the representations of each to-
ken, or alternatively just the representation of the
ﬁrst sub-token of each token or span (as in De-
vlin et al., 2019), may be passed to the classiﬁer.
This ﬁne-tuning approach is use to apply BERT
to all 11 tasks in GLUE, as well as QA (SQuAD),
NER (CoNLL 2003), and common-sense inference
(SWAG). For many additional examples of this
highly popular approach, see Table 8 (Appendix
B).
In this setting, care is needed to choose an appro-
priate learning rate that works for both the weights
of the feed-forward layer(s) and for the PLM. Since
the PLM is already largely trained, a low learning
rate should be used (between 1e-3 (Raffel et al.,
2020) and 1e-5 (Liu et al., 2019)), with a lower
learning rate for smaller datasets. However, the
randomly initialized feed-forward layer weights
still require signiﬁcant training. As such, it is a
common practice to freeze the language model lay-ers temporarily while initially training the feed-
forward layers, then unfreeze the language model
gradually for additional ﬁne-tuning (Howard and
Ruder, 2018; Yang et al., 2019). The degree to
which this should be done depends on the size of
feed-forward layers, and whether a token such as
BERT’s [CLS] is being used. If the majority of
the labour is being done by [CLS] , as in all the
examples in Devlin et al. (2019), there are fewer
beneﬁts to training the feed-forward layer alone.
Again, this is a function of the availability of super-
vised training data.
The next choice is how many layers of the PLM
to ﬁne-tune. While the examples in the BERT pa-
per ﬁne-tune the entire model, this is not feasible
for NLP tasks with small datasets or in situations
where compute power is a limitation. Often, tun-
ing just the top few layers of the language model
is sufﬁcient; for example, Ross et al. (2020) only
ﬁne-tune the top layer of BERT on their small su-
pervised dataset of 2000 sentences. A range of pa-
pers in the growing ﬁeld of “BERTology” (Tenney
et al., 2019, Clark et al., 2019b, Rogers et al., 2020)
show that the lower layers of BERT contain word-
speciﬁc and syntactic information such as part of
speech, while the upper layers contain more seman-
tic and increasingly complex information such as
semantic roles and coreference information.
2.4.3 Fine-tuning the PLM in Customized
Models
Some tasks require signiﬁcant additional architec-
ture on top of a language model, as illustrated in
Figure 2 (center). With sufﬁcient training data and
computational power, researchers may choose to
train both a substantial task-speciﬁc architecture
and also ﬁne-tune the language model. This is
the preferred choice for structure prediction tasks,
in particular parsing tasks and occasionally se-
quence tagging tasks. Examples of sequence tag-
ging models using this approach include BERT-
CRF for NER (Souza et al., 2020b; Taher et al.,
2019), though notably Devlin et al. (2019) show
that the Conditional Random Field (CRF) layer is
not necessarily needed for NER with BERT. Ex-
amples of parsing models using this approach in-
clude UDapter for dependency parsing ( ¨Ust¨un et al.,
2020).
Any sequence-to-sequence task that uses a pre-
trained language model as its encoder may em-
ploy this approach. An interesting example is Zhu
et al. (2020)’s formulation of machine translation.
7

==== Page 8 ====
However, Zhu et al. did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
improvement over using BERT-based frozen word
embeddings.
A related and highly successful approach is to
ﬁne-tune the entire language model with a small
number of feed-forward layers, then layer on an
algorithmic approach that provides a substantial
amount of task-speciﬁc heavy lifting. For example,
it might transform the task from a classiﬁcation
problem (as understood by the language model)
into the desired target formulation, often a struc-
tured form such as a tree or a set of clusters. For
coreference resolution, Joshi et al. (2019, 2020)
adds a substantial algorithm, in their case e2e-coref
(Lee et al., 2018) which transforms ratings of pairs
of spans into valid mention clusters. Speciﬁcally,
for each candidate mention span, the algorithm
computes a distribution over possible antecedent
spans from the mention score (whether it is likely
to be a mention) and the compatibility score of
the two spans, which itself involves a feed-forward
network to compute. Two more structural pars-
ing examples in this vein are temporal dependency
parsing (Ross et al., 2020) and modal dependency
parsing (Yao et al., 2021). These studies approach
tree building algorithmically by ﬁrst performing a
classiﬁcation problem to identify suitable depen-
dency pairs, then ranking them to construct a valid
tree.
2.4.4 Efﬁcient Fine-tuning Approaches
A wide range of approaches, in addition to limiting
ﬁne-tuning to the top layers, seek to ﬁne-tune only
a small number of model weights. These can be
classiﬁed into two types: (a) ﬁne-tuning a separate,
small network that is tightly coupled with the PLM
(but does not change it), and (b) selecting only a
small number of the PLM’s weights to ﬁne-tune or
keep.
The most prominent approach of the ﬁrst type
are adapter modules (Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna
and Firat, 2019; Pfeiffer et al., 2020b,a), as illus-
trated in Figure 2 (right). Adapters add a small
set of newly initialized weights at every layer of
the transformer. Houlsby et al. (2019) show that a
two-layer feed-forward network with a bottleneck
works well. The placement and conﬁguration of
the adapters within the Transformer blocks varies
in the literature (Houlsby et al., 2019; Bapna and
Firat, 2019; Stickland and Murray, 2019; Pfeiffer
et al., 2020b). During ﬁne-tuning, all weights in
the PLM remain frozen except for the few weightsin the adapters. One set of adapters is ﬁne-tuned
per task of interest. This approach is more efﬁcient
in training (typically <5%of all PLM weights),
and allows efﬁcient weight-sharing, both in terms
of using the same frozen PLM for each task, and in
allowing the weights of adapter modules to be dis-
tributed and also re-used. Notably, the weights of
adapters independently trained for different tasks
can be successfully combined to solve a new task
(Pfeiffer et al., 2020b). Finally, catastrophic for-
getting of old capabilities when ﬁne-tuning on a
new task or language is prevented. AdapterHub
(Pfeiffer et al., 2020a) and Trankit (Nguyen et al.,
2021) are examples of frameworks promoting an
adapter ecosystem; an example of using adapters
for Universal Dependency Parsing is ¨Ust¨un et al.
(2020).
A similar method is side-tuning (Zhang et al.,
2020b), which adapts a pre-trained network by
training a lightweight “side” network that is fused
with the (unchanged) pre-trained network using
a simple additive process. Also closely related
is diff-pruning (Guo et al., 2021), which adds a
sparse, task-speciﬁc difference vector to the orig-
inal (frozen) parameters. These difference vec-
tors are regularized to be sparse, which further de-
creases the number of weights that need to be stored
(around 0.5% of the original model’s parameters).
Moving to the second type of approach, Bit-
Fit (Zaken et al., 2021) proposes to limit ﬁne-tuning
to the bias terms (or a subset of the bias terms,
around 0.1% of the total parameters) of pre-trained
BERT models, plus a task-speciﬁc classiﬁcation
layer. This is shown to be competitive with, and
for some tasks better than, ﬁne-tuning all of BERT.
BitFit builds on the intuition that ﬁne-tuning ex-
poses existing capabilities, rather than teaching the
model new ones.
Similarly, Radiya-Dixit and Wang (2020) show
that it sufﬁces to ﬁne-tune only the “most sensitive”
layers, i.e. those which are most distant in param-
eter space from the rest of the model. In parallel,
they sparsify the model substantially by setting 1-
4% of pre-trained parameters to zero. This retains
performance, as also demonstrated by work like
DistilBERT (Sanh et al., 2020) and other pruning
studies (Prasanna et al., 2020 inter alia) which show
that many parameters in a large PLM are redundant.
In fact, Zhao et al. (2020a) propose masking, i.e.
setting weights to zero, as a sole alternative to ﬁne-
tuning the model weights. This approach freezes
8

==== Page 9 ====
all the weights of the PLM, selects the weights
that are relevant for a given task, and masks (dis-
cards) the rest. They train one mask per down-
stream task, with every layer masked except the
embedding layer. While in principle this trains as
many parameters as the original model, the mask
is both binary and sparse and thus much simpler to
learn and store. The initial sparsity of the mask is
an important hyperparameter in this approach, as
is deciding which layers to mask, since the differ-
ent layers encode various degrees of syntactic and
semantic knowledge (Tenney et al., 2019). Zhao
et al. show that masking “top-down” (mostly the
top layers, which are more task-speciﬁc and encode
more semantic and long-distance information) is
more effective than masking “bottom-up” (which
would mask mostly the layers dealing with ele-
mentary word meaning and syntax). In particular,
performance on CoLA increases as more layers are
masked top-down. The authors further show that
masking yields entirely comparable performance
to ﬁne-tuning on a range of tasks from POS tagging
to reading comprehension.
3 Paradigm 2: Prompt-based Learning
We use prompting to refer to the practice of adding
natural language text, often short phrases, to the
input or output to encourage pre-trained models to
perform speciﬁc tasks (Yuan et al., 2021). There are
several advantages to using prompts. Prompting,
especially in-context learning (e.g. Brown et al.,
2020), may not require updates to the PLM’s pa-
rameters, reducing computational requirements as
compared to ﬁne-tuning approaches, or in addition
to those described in 2.4.4. Prompts also encour-
age a better alignment of the new task formulation
with the pre-training objective, leading to better
use of knowledge captured in pre-training. The
closer match also enables a few-shot approach (Liu
et al., 2021b), especially for tasks with small train-
ing datasets; a good prompt can be worth hundreds
of labeled data points (Le Scao and Rush, 2021).
Finally, prompts allow probing of the PLMs, of-
ten in an unsupervised way, in order to assess the
knowledge acquired by the PLM for speciﬁc tasks
of interest (e.g. Petroni et al., 2019).
We discuss 3 types of prompt-based learning ap-
proaches below: Learning from instructions and
demonstrations, template-based learning, and learn-
ing from proxy tasks. Figure 3 shows illustrations
for each of the three approaches.Input Output
(1) Text pair generation (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021)
Task: Write two sentences
that mean the same thing.
Sentence 1: “A man is play-
ing a ﬂute.” Sentence 2:“He’s playing a ﬂute.”
(2) Mathematical reasoning (Reynolds and McDonell, 2021)
f(x) =xx. What is
f(f(3))? Let’s solve this
problem by splitting it into
steps.f(f(3)) =f(33) = 333 =
27. We can see that f(3) = 3
3 = 9 , sof(f(3)) = 27 .
Table 2: Example prompt designs for learning from in-
structions.
3.1 Learning from Instructions and
Demonstrations
First attempts made use of instructions such as
“translate X to Y:” (Raffel et al., 2020) to simultane-
ously teach the model varied tasks in a text-to-text
manner. However, this approach required a large
amount of labeled data.
With the emergence of large generative PLMs
(Radford et al., 2019), the ﬁrst signs that language
models are multi-task learners emerged. For in-
stance, GPT-2 understands that if the instruction
“TL;DR” (“too long; didn’t read”) is given, then
it should generate a summary of the context fol-
lowing the instruction. More recently, and with
even larger generative PLMs (GPT-3), Brown et al.
(2020) showed that those models are indeed very
good at few-shot learning. Brown et al. showed
that GPT-3 can perform few-shot tasks via priming
(in-context learning): given instructions and a few
input/output pairs, GPT-3 is able to produce the de-
sired outputs for new inputs. No gradient updates
are performed (see Figure 3, left box). Caveats
include the requirement of a very large LM to work
well, and an inability to scale to more than a few ex-
amples, because the context window of most LMs
is limited to a few hundred tokens. We refer readers
to the GPT-3 paper (Brown et al., 2020) for many
additional examples of learning from instructions
and/or demonstrations.
Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021) and Reynolds and
McDonell (2021) introduce new tasks based on de-
scriptions. For example, the text pair generation
task Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021) consists in gener-
ating a continuation sentence (Sentence 2) given
an input sentence (Sentence 1) and a description of
the relations between the sentences (Table 2(1)).8
8A variation of this task consists in generating both Sen-
tence 1 and Sentence 2 given the description (Schick and
Sch¨utze, 2021).
9

==== Page 10 ====
Figure 3: The three main prompt-based approaches. On the instruction based learning (left box) the instructions are
marked in purple, the in-context examples in blue and the prompt in cyan. On the prompt based learning (middle
box), the text to classify is marked on light cyan and the prompt on dark cyan; the label verbalizations are shown
in small boxes. On the proxy task based learning (right box), prompts are marked with dark cyan, the context is on
light cyan and the answers generated by the model are in blue.
To address this task, Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021)
use a generative PLM (GPT2-XL) that generates
Sentence 2, replacing the token. Impressively,
even mathematical reasoning can be handled (Ta-
ble 2(2)): Reynolds and McDonell (2021) show
that by inserting a natural language prompt (“Let’s
solve . . . steps.”) after the math problem statement,
GPT-3 can generate a procedure that solves the
math problem.
Recently, Wei et al. (2021) showed that teaching
a very large PLM to follow instructions with su-
pervised data improves the zero and few-shot abili-
ties of these PLMs. They carried out a large scale
multi-task experiment over more than 60 datasets
grouped into 12 task different tasks, and showed
that a PLM trained via natural language instruc-
tions on other tasks outperforms a standard lan-
guage model on the test task. Mishra et al. (2021)
ﬁne-tuned BART (Lewis et al., 2020) to perform a
similar task using instructions and few-shot exam-
ples for a variety of crowd-sourced NLP tasks. The
crowdsourcing process of each task consists of sev-
eral steps that are natural and intuitive for human
annotators. The instructions to the PLM match the
step-by-step crowdsourcing instructions, decom-
posed into self-contained, separate tasks, leading to
improved performance on unseen tasks, in contrast
to an earlier work (Efrat and Levy, 2020) that re-
ported negative performance when using the crowd-
sourcing instructions as-is.
Scaling limitations may affect the broad appli-
cability of this approach: Wei et al. (2021) show
that instruction tuning achieves signiﬁcant improve-
ments on held-out tasks in the zero-shot setting
when using very large PLMs (e.g. with 68B or137B parameters), but hurts performance when ap-
plied to PLMs with 10B parameters or less. In a
similar setting, Sanh et al. (2021) showed that it is
possible for a model with 11B parameters to bene-
ﬁt from instruction tuning, and identiﬁed three key
differences compared to Wei et al. (2021). (1) They
use a encoder-decoder model trained ﬁrst with the
MLM objective, then as a standard LM, and ﬁnally
ﬁne-tuned on a multitask objective, rather than a
decoder-only autoregressive LM. (2) They argue
that their prompts are qualitatively more diverse in
terms of length and creativity. (3) They hold out
multiple tasks at once, rather than only one at a
time.
We note that the descriptions in instruction learn-
ing can be very detailed. For example, the crowd-
sourcing instructions in Mishra et al. (2021) contain
the task deﬁnition, things to avoid, emphasis and
caution (i.e. required properties for the output), and
positive and negative examples.
3.2 Template-based Learning
A more widely used approach, template-based
learning, reformulates NLP tasks into tasks that
are closer to language models’ pre-training tasks
via template-based prompts. This better lever-
ages the knowledge captured in the pre-training
tasks, leading to a signiﬁcant reduction in the
number of task-speciﬁc training examples required
to achieve a similar performance to previous ap-
proaches(Le Scao and Rush, 2021), or even elim-
inating the need for training data. To achieve this
goal, template-based learning reformulates various
NLP tasks into language modeling tasks via care-
fully designed templates with open slots. In this
10

==== Page 11 ====
Input Output
(1) Topic/sentiment classiﬁcation (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a)
Best pizza ever!. It was .great!Positive
(2) Textual entailment (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a)
Mia likes pie? , Mia hates
pie.No!Contradiction
(3) Event argument extraction (Chen et al., 2020c)
Americans sought to bring
calm to Mosul, where U.S.
troops killed 17 people
in clashes earlier in the
week. someone killed
someone with something in
some place at some time .U.S. troops killed 17 people
with something inMosul at
earlier in the week .
(4) Probing for relations/facts (Petroni et al., 2019)
Dante was born in . Florence
(5) Probing for commonsense (Trinh and Le, 2019)
The trophy doesn’t ﬁt in the
suitcase because itis too bigit!trophy :0.9
it!suitcase :0.2
(6) Probing for reasoning (Talmor et al., 2020)
The size of an airplane is
than the size of a house . A.
larger B. smallerlarger
Table 3: Example prompt designs for template-based
methods. great!Positive means that the answer great
will be converted to label Positive . For Chen et al.
(2020c), each of the underlined words (e.g. someone )
will be replaced with the underlined phrase on the out-
put side by a PLM. “ it!trophy : 0.9” means by replac-
ing the underlined pronoun itwith trophy , the modiﬁed
sentence has a likelihood score of 0.9 according to the
PLM.
way, solving the tasks is reduced to ﬁlling the slots
with words or phrases using PLMs, and then pro-
jecting these outputs into the task-speciﬁc labels.
Template-based learning differs from instruction
learning (Section 3.1) in that templates are less
detailed and do not explicitly describe the task.
3.2.1 Template Design
Using a cloze-style prompt design, inputs to a PLM
are converted into a format such that solving the
NLP task only requires the PLM to predict missing
word(s). Table 3 (1) shows the most straightfor-
ward example of this approach, as applied in the
sentiment detection domain.
For classiﬁcation tasks, each predicted word or
phrase is converted into a class label of interest.
For example, we can design a cloze-style prompt
for a textual entailment task in which the goal is to
predict the entail/contradict relation between a pair
of input sentences hX1;X2i. Pattern-Exploiting
Training (PET) (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a) (Ta-
ble 3 (2)) converts a pair of inputs hX1;X2iinto
“X1?;X2” and asks a masked language model to
predict the missing word. The prediction (here yesorno) is directly mapped to one of the textual entail-
ment class labels. This template design allows PET
to reformulate the text entailment problem into the
same masked language modeling problem that was
used to pre-train the PLM. Therefore, it is popular
among classiﬁcation tasks that may be reformu-
lated as predicting a masked word or short phrase
(e.g. topic classiﬁcation, textual entailment, and
knowledge probing). Chen et al. (2020c) reformu-
lates the event argument extraction challenge as a
cloze-style problem (Table 3 (3)), predicting ﬁllers
for the underlined positions, and then apply greedy
decoding to ﬁll in the position incrementally.
Petroni et al. (2019) similarly use the cloze-style
task for relation/fact probing (Table 3 (4))
Amultiple-choice style prompt proves useful
for probing for commonsense knowledge. This
kind of template provides a selection of hypotheses
for the PLM, which selects its preferred answer.
For example, in Table 3 (5), Trinh and Le (2019)’s
model selects trophy instead of suitcase to replace it
in the original sentence. Table 3 (6) shows work by
Talmor et al. (2020), expressing similar reasoning
through a hypothesis-driven approach.
Preﬁx prompts (Li and Liang, 2021; Ham-
bardzumyan et al., 2021; Lester et al., 2021) are
another common type of template. Preﬁxes are
task-speciﬁc vectors prepended to the input. They
do not correspond to actual words but consist of
free parameters. Preﬁx prompts are usually the
best choice for tasks that require generating text
or predicting a next word or phrase, because the
preﬁx-based prompt design is consistent with the
left-to-right nature of the autoregresive model (Liu
et al., 2021b).
Prompts can be further augmented via adding
demonstrations ( demonstration learning ) (Gao
et al., 2021a). In that case, a few labeled exam-
ples are appended to the template to make it more
informative, allowing the PLMs to better predicting
the answer.
3.2.2 Template Construction
Templates can be either manually crafted or au-
tomatically generated. We here survey the differ-
ent methods for generating them as well as ways
to combine and manipulate the template-based
prompts (multi-prompt learning).
Manually-crafted Templates. Most early work
in prompt-based learning uses some form of manu-
ally crafted templates. For example, manual cloze
11

==== Page 12 ====
templates are used in Petroni et al. (2019) to probe
the knowledge of the model, as well as in Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2020), Schick et al. (2020) and Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2021a) for text classiﬁcation in a few-
shot setting. Manually designed preﬁx prompts are
leveraged in Brown et al. (2020) for QA, transla-
tion, and probing tasks for commonsense reason-
ing. The quality of the prompts impacts perfor-
mance. Indeed, Zhao et al. (2021) showed that
different prompts can cause accuracy to vary from
near chance to near state-of-the-art.
Automatically-generated Discrete Templates.
Discrete templates, which usually correspond to
natural language phrases, are described in a discrete
space. To search for such templates given a set of
inputs and outputs, Jiang et al. (2021) proposed a
mining-based approach called MINE that aims to
ﬁnd either the middle words or dependency paths
between the inputs and outputs. A second approach
(Jiang et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021) consists of
paraphrasing an existing template prompt using
back and forth machine translation, and then se-
lecting the best prompt among the new paraphrases
with guidance from a thesaurus. Prompt paraphras-
ing is also used by Haviv et al. (2021) who used a
neural prompt rewriter that optimizes the accuracy
of systems using the prompt. In that case, a differ-
ent paraphrase is generated for each input. A third
approach uses gradient-based search to ﬁnd short
sequences that can serve as prompt (Wallace et al.,
2019; Shin et al., 2020). Gao et al. (2021a) and
Ben-David et al. (2021) further generate prompts
using standard generation models such as T5 (Raf-
fel et al., 2020). In the latter, the authors proposed
a domain adaptation algorithm that trains T5 to
generate unique domain relevant features that can
be concatenated with the input to form a template
for downstream tasks.
Automatically-generated Continuous Tem-
plates. Continuous prompts, which perform
prompting directly in the embedding space
of the model, allow us to abstract away from
natural language prompts (i.e. the prompts do
not correspond to actual words) and from the
parameters of the LM (Liu et al., 2021b). These
continuous prompts often require tuning on
task-speciﬁc data. Li and Liang (2021) propose
preﬁx tuning, which prepends a sequence of
continuous, task-speciﬁc vectors to the input while
keeping the LM parameters frozen. This allowsthem to ﬁne-tune just 0.1% of the total model
parameters. A similar method is used by Lester
et al. (2021), who differ from Li and Liang (2021)
by adding special tokens to form a template and
tuning the embeddings of these tokens directly,
without introducing additional tunable parameters
within each network layer. Continuous preﬁx
tuning is also used by Tsimpoukelli et al. (2021)
in the context of multimodal learning (language
and vision) but in that case the preﬁx is sample
dependent. Tuning can be initialized with discrete
prompts as in Zhong et al. (2021b), Qin and
Eisner (2021) and Hambardzumyan et al. (2021).
It can also be done by inserting some tunable
embeddings into a hard prompt template as in
Liu et al. (2021c) and Han et al. (2021b), who
propose prompt tuning with rules (PTR). This
uses manually crafted sub-templates to compose a
complete template using logic rules (see Section
3.2.5 for its application to relation extraction).
It is worth noting that Logan IV et al. (2021)
showed that ﬁne-tuning PLMs in the few-shot set-
ting can avoid prompt engineering, and that one can
use prompts that contain neither task-speciﬁc tem-
plates nor training examples, and even null prompts
that are simple concatenations of the inputs and the
[MASK] token and still achieve competitive accu-
racy on NLU tasks.
Multi-Prompt Learning A number of ap-
proaches use prompt ensembling, augmentation,
and decomposition/composition for a more ﬂexible
task design. We describe them below.
First, multiple prompts can be used for an in-
put (dubbed prompt ensembling ) at inference time.
The prompts can be combined using a uniform
average (Jiang et al., 2021; Schick and Sch ¨utze,
2021a; Yuan et al., 2021) or a weighted average
(Jiang et al., 2021; Qin and Eisner, 2021; Schick
and Sch ¨utze, 2021a,b). Another way to combine
the prompts is majority voting to combine the re-
sults of the different prompts as in Lester et al.
(2021) and Hambardzumyan et al. (2021). Knowl-
edge distillation (Allen-Zhu and Li, 2021), where
the idea is that the knowledge present in an ensem-
ble of models can be distilled into a single model,
has been borrowed to the context of prompt com-
bination by Schick and Sch ¨utze (2021a,b); Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2020) and Gao et al. (2021a) where
for each template-answer pair a separate model
is trained, before ensembling them to annotate an
unlabeled dataset. Then, the authors train a new
12

==== Page 13 ====
model to distill the knowledge from the annotated
dataset. In the case of generation tasks, Schick and
Sch¨utze (2020) trained a separate model for each
prompt. Then the model outputs were scored by
averaging their generation probability across all
models.
Second, prompts can be decomposed or com-
posed to more effectively solve an NLP task. De-
composition involves ﬁnding sub-problems for
which prompts can be generated separately. For
example, Cui et al. (2021) proposed an approach
for named entity recognition, where the different
prompts for each candidate span were created and
predicted separately.
Third, augmentation methods such as demon-
stration learning (Gao et al., 2021a) create more
descriptive prompts, as in a multiple-choice prob-
lem. Lu et al. (2021a) showed that both the choice
of examples in the prompts and the order of the
prompts can considerably affect the results. To se-
lect the examples from which the PLM must choose
the correct response ( example sampling ), Gao et al.
(2021a) and Liu et al. (2021a) used sentence em-
beddings to ﬁnd examples semantically close to
the input. Mishra et al. (2021) used both positive
and negative examples, teaching the PLM types of
items to avoid in performing new tasks with only
instructions. As for the order of the selected exam-
ples ( sample ordering ), Kumar and Talukdar (2021)
searched for the best permutation of prompts and
also learned a segmentation token to separate be-
tween the prompts. They showed the usefulness
of this method for few-shot learning on the task of
sentiment classiﬁcation.
3.2.3 Answer Generation
There are two main types of answers to prompts:
those that map to a classiﬁcation label (e.g. Yin
et al., 2019; Cui et al., 2021), and those intended
as the ﬁnal answer (e.g. Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019). For classiﬁ-
cation tasks, typically addressed with cloze-style
prompts, the developers identify a subset of words
and phrases from which the PLM may choose, and
that choice is easily mapped to the class of inter-
est. For instance, in a sentiment detection task, the
PLM may answer a prompt with “good,” “great,” or
“excellent,” all of which are mapped to a “positive”
sentiment label. The second type of answer, free
text, prevails for text generation tasks. Examples
of both types are shown in Table 3.
In either case, the deﬁnition of the answer spacemay be optimized to produce ideal prompt re-
sponses. Jiang et al. (2021) used paraphrasing
to extend the search space with back translation
(translating to another language, then back to the
original). Another approach, explored by Schick
and Sch ¨utze (2021a), Schick et al. (2020), Shin
et al. (2020) and Gao et al. (2021a), is prune-then-
search , a two-step method where the answer space
is pruned, for example by only selecting a subset
of words according to their zero-shot accuracy on
the training data (Gao et al., 2021a) and then an an-
swer is searched in the pruned space. An approach
called label decomposition optimizes the search
space by modeling the label names for comparison
to the answer tokens; for instance, in Chen et al.
(2021d) the decomposed relation labels (their indi-
vidual tokens) represent the answer space. Lastly,
Hambardzumyan et al. (2021) add a virtual token
for each class label and optimize its embedding
together with the token embeddings of the prompts,
using gradient descent. This gradient descent op-
timization approach allows direct optimization of
the answers instead of using a discrete search.
3.2.4 Task-speciﬁc Tuning
While prompts can be directly used in a zero-shot,
unsupervised setting, prompts have also been used
in fully supervised or few-shot settings where ei-
ther all or part of the speciﬁc-task training data is
available. Two main approaches currently prevail
for tuning a PLM with prompts.
The ﬁrst approach uses a ﬁxed template-style
prompt to perform tuning of the PLM. Here, a
ﬁxed template is usually applied to every training
and test example as in the PET-TC (Schick and
Sch¨utze, 2021a), PET-Gen (Schick and Sch ¨utze,
2020) and LM-BFF (Gao et al., 2021a) models.
Le Scao and Rush (2021) quantiﬁed the beneﬁt of
using prompts in classiﬁcation tasks by ﬁne-tuning
in equal conditions across many tasks and data
sizes. They showed that prompting consistently
improves the results across tasks over just ﬁne-
tuning, that it is most robust to the choice of pattern,
and that it can be learned without an informative
verbalizer (a function that maps each label to a
single vocabulary token). Logan IV et al. (2021)
showed that only tuning 0.1% of the parameters in
the prompt-based few-shot setting can achieve com-
parable or better accuracy than standard ﬁne-tuning.
For this purpose, they explored different ways to
perform memory-efﬁcient ﬁne-tuning, including (i)
Adapters (Houlsby et al., 2019), which are neural
13

==== Page 14 ====
network layers inserted between the feed-forward
portion of the Transformer architecture (see Sec-
tion 2.4.4); (ii) BitFit (Zaken et al., 2021), where
only the bias terms inside the Transformer are up-
dated; (iii) PLM head tuning, where the embed-
dings in the MLM output layer that are associated
with the tokens of the verbalizer are updated; and
(iv) Calibration (Zhao et al., 2021), where an afﬁne
transformation on top of the logits associated with
the verbalizer tokens is learned. They found that
the best results are achieved using BitFit.
The second approach is joint tuning of the
prompt and the PLM. Here, prompt-relevant pa-
rameters are ﬁne-tuned together with the all or
some of the parameters of the PLM, as in PADA
(Ben-David et al., 2021), where the prompts are
properties of source domains, generated based on
their relatedness to the input example (from a new
domain), and P-Tuning (Liu et al., 2021c), which
makes use of trainable continuous prompt embed-
dings when applying GPT models on NLU tasks.
Finetuning both the model and the prompt-relevant
parameters makes this approach very expressive.
On the other hand, it requires the storage of all the
parameters, with makes it less applicable to small
datasets (Liu et al., 2021b).
It is worth noting that task-speciﬁc training can
also be used earlier during the construction and val-
idation of the prompts. Indeed, as pointed out by
Perez et al. (2021), previous PLM-based few-shot
learning approaches used many held-out examples
to tune various aspects of learning, such as hyperpa-
rameters, training objectives, and natural language
templates (“prompts”). Perez et al. (2021) propose
instead to evaluate the few-shot ability of PLMs in
atrue few-shot learning setting, where such held-
out examples are unavailable.
3.2.5 Applications of Template-based
Methods
Template-based prompting methods are currently
applied to a growing list of NLP tasks. We provide
a survey of how recent studies have addressed a
varied set of NLP applications.
Text Classiﬁcation. In Puri and Catanzaro
(2019), natural language descriptions of classiﬁ-
cation tasks were given as input. Then, the model
was trained to generate the correct answer in natural
language via a language modeling objective, aim-
ing to generalize to new classiﬁcation tasks without
task-speciﬁc tuning.Information Extraction (IE). Cui et al. (2021)
considered the NER task as a language model
ranking problem in a sequence-to-sequence frame-
work where the source sequence corresponds to
the original sentence and the target sequence corre-
sponds to the template prompt, ﬁlled by candidate
spans. For the relation extraction task, Han et al.
(2021b) proposed a model called Prompt Tuning
with Rules (PTR), which applies logic rules to con-
struct prompts with several sub-prompts. Chen
et al. (2021d), instead of using rules, constructed
the prompts by leveraging learnable virtual tem-
plate words and virtual answer words. Their repre-
sentation is synergistically optimized with knowl-
edge constraints. For the event extraction task in a
cross-lingual setting, Fincke et al. (2021) proposed
using the event type and an integer representing the
argument type as preﬁxes.
Knowledge Probing. Factual probing has been
explored in particular by Petroni et al. (2019) and
Jiang et al. (2020) to quantify the amount of factual
knowledge already present in the PLMs, providing
the LAMA and X-FACTR datasets, respectively.
Other works that investigated model knowledge
with discrete template search include Petroni et al.
(2020), Jiang et al. (2021), Haviv et al. (2021),
Shin et al. (2020) and Perez et al. (2021). Continu-
ous template learning was used in Qin and Eisner
(2021), Liu et al. (2021c) and Zhong et al. (2021b).
Prompt ensemble learning was applied to knowl-
edge probing by Jiang et al. (2021) and Qin and
Eisner (2021).
In addition to factual knowledge, additional
types of knowledge that have been probed using
the cloze test include commonsense (Trinh and
Le, 2019), relational knowledge (Petroni et al.,
2019), reasoning (Talmor et al., 2020) and under-
standing rare words (Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2019).
For commonsense reasoning, Winograd Schemas
(Levesque et al., 2012) require the model to iden-
tify the antecedent of an ambiguous pronoun within
context, or involve completing a sentence given
multiple choices. For commonsense knowledge
mining, Feldman et al. (2019) construct a candi-
date piece of knowledge as a sentence, then use a
language model to approximate the likelihood of
the text as a proxy for its truthfulness.
Prompts can also be used to explore the linguistic
knowledge of PLMs, focusing on different phenom-
ena such as analogies (Brown et al., 2020), nega-
tion (Ettinger, 2020) or semantic similarity (Sun
14

==== Page 15 ====
et al., 2021). Linguistic evaluation of language
models (Linzen et al.; Gulordava et al., 2018; Gold-
berg, 2019; Tran et al., 2018; Bacon and Regier,
2019; McCoy et al., 2020; Linzen, 2020) usually
considers minimal pairs of grammatical and non-
grammatical sentences addressing a speciﬁc phe-
nomenon that differs in a single place in the sen-
tence. To succeed, a model must score the grammat-
ical sentence higher than its ungrammatical coun-
terpart. A main resource in this context is BLiMP
(Benchmark of Linguistic Minimal Pairs, Warstadt
et al., 2020a) which provides minimal pairs for var-
ious grammatical phenomena. Recently, the use of
this benchmark was adapted for language acquisi-
tion research (Huebner et al., 2021): the authors
probe a RoBERTa-based model pre-trained on tran-
scriptions of child-directed speech (MacWhinney,
2000) to complete the benchmark task. The pref-
erence score can be calculated either holistically ,
summing the cross-entropy errors at each position
in the sentence (Zaczynska et al., 2020; Huebner
et al., 2021), or in an MLM-based way, where each
candidate sentence is masked by a language model
multiple times with the mask changing position.
The score is computed by summing the log-losses
at the different masked positions (Salazar et al.,
2020).
Other tasks. The PET procedure (Schick and
Sch¨utze, 2021a) was also applied to the Textual
Entailment task. QA is addressed in Khashabi et al.
(2020) with appropriate prompts from the context
and questions, formulating several QA tasks into
a uniﬁed text generation problem with encoder-
decoder pre-trained models such as T5.
Prompts have also been used for the evalua-
tion of text generation. Yuan et al. (2021) used
prompts in the BARTSCORE-PROMPT variant of
the BARTSCORE measure they propose that treats
the evaluation of various text generation tasks as a
generation problem. In BARTSCORE-PROMPT,
prompts are either appended to the source text or
prepended to the target text and are shown to be
useful. For example, adding the phrase “such as” to
the translated text when using pre-trained models
signiﬁcantly improves the correlation with human
evaluation on German-English machine translation
evaluation.
Schick et al. (2021) showed that PLMs are able
to recognize the toxicity of the text they produce
(self-diagnosis). Then they proposed an algorithm
that permits the language model to produce lessproblematic text (self-debiasing), using a textual
description of the undesired behavior.
Shin et al. (2021) explore the use of PLMs as
few-shot semantic parsers. The authors use GPT-3
to convert text into a canonical text (in a controlled
sub-language) satisfying a grammar, that is then
automatically mapped to the target structured mean-
ing representation.
3.3 Learning from Proxy Tasks
Templates and prompts play a role again in an indi-
rect approach to NLP tasks called “proxy tasks”.
Examples for the use of this approach are emo-
tion classiﬁcation or event and argument extraction,
both shown in Figure 3 (right box) with prompt-
based proxy tasks. See Table 4 for additional ex-
amples of proxy tasks and prompt design.
The key distinction between learning from proxy
tasks and previous methods is the use of supervised
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) tasks as
a proxy instead of self-supervised language mod-
eling for the target task. Indeed, taking advantage
of large NLU datasets for extra supervision results
in better zero and few-shot performance in the tar-
get task with relatively small PLMs (Wang et al.,
2021b), commonly RoBERTa largeat 345M param-
eters. Knowledge-rich classiﬁcation tasks in par-
ticular beneﬁt from PLM proxy tasks, because the
latter can reformulate the class label as a prompt,
taking advantage of the meaning of class labels
instead of treating them as indices. In this section,
we describe the main proxy-task-based learning
approaches using QA (Section 3.3.1) and Textual
Entailment (Section 3.3.2).
3.3.1 Question Answering as Proxy Task
In a strong move away from traditional informa-
tion extraction, recent studies replace modeling of
explicit entity, relation, and event classes with nat-
ural language questions that get at the exact item
of interest. Questions can be used to probe for the
required information in the text.
The choice of using QA as a proxy task is mo-
tivated by the relative ease of answering simple
questions, as compared to performing expert anno-
tation for complex linguistic phenomena.
In information extraction tasks, question
prompts typically address identiﬁcation and clas-
siﬁcation jointly, by constructing the question to
identify a particular type. For example, the ques-
tion “Who bought something?” will produce an
answer speciﬁc to the Buyer argument role in an
15

==== Page 16 ====
Application Work Task design Prompt design
Relation Extrac-
tionLi et al. (2019a) Use question-answering to iden-
tify the most appropriate entity
span, given an incomplete text
and an indication of the class
typeInput: The armory is north of the music center. Prompt: Find a
facility near E1?E1, physical, facility
Sainz et al.
(2021)Use textual entailment to deter-
mine the likelihood of a can-
didate relation (such as Place-
OfDeath(X,Y) given an input
sentence.Input: Gary’s car crash occurred in Houston; Prompt: Gary died
in Houston
Event Extrac-
tionDu and Cardie
(2020)Use a series of ordered ques-
tions, each leveraging the out-
put of the previous answer, to
ﬁnd event triggers and appropri-
ate arguments(1) Input: Donna purchased a new laptop; Prompt: What is the
trigger? purchased (2) Prompt: What was purchased? laptop
Topic and Senti-
ment Classiﬁca-
tionYin et al. (2019) Use textual entailment to deter-
mine whether a topic name Tis
suitable for a text.Input: Dinosaurs and humans never coexisted. Prompt: This
text is about T.
Puri and Catan-
zaro (2019)Use question answering to
probe for a topic or sentiment
name from among a closed set
of responses.Input: Dinosaurs and humans never coexisted. Prompt: How is
the text best described? T1,T2, orT3
Coreference
ResolutionWu et al.
(2020b)Use question-answering to ﬁnd
a coreferent mention of a
marked mention from within
the same text.Input: I arrived at the party with my tux on, and introduced
myself as George. I told them that <mention>I</mention>
was hired to do some Christmas music; Prompt: Who does it I
refer to?
Table 4: Examples of task design and example prompts for four different applications of prompt-based proxy tasks.
event of type Exchange-Ownership (see Figure 3,
right box).
Li et al. (2020c) formulates Named Entity
Recognition (NER) as a QA problem. For ex-
ample, the prompt “which person is mentioned
in the text?” will identify a mention classiﬁed as a
PERSON. The proposed BERT-based system per-
forms detection of multiple spans through the use
of separate binary classiﬁers identifying start and
end tokens. The authors incorporate synonyms and
examples into the queries.
Wu et al. (2020b) formulated coreference reso-
lution as a span prediction task via QA, where a
query is generated for each candidate mention us-
ing its surrounding context, and a span prediction
module uses the query to extract the coreference
spans in the document.
Levy et al. (2017) ﬁrst formulated relation ex-
traction as a QA task. This approach has been
pursued in the context of PLMs by Li et al. (2019a)
and Zhao et al. (2020b). Han et al. (2021b) ad-
dresses relation extraction with sub-prompts for en-
tity recognition andrelation classiﬁcation , com-
posing them into a complete prompt using logic
rules. Both types of questions are used to probe a
QA system in a supervised setting to perform the
two sub-tasks. Task decomposition is also used in
the work of Zhou et al. (2021) for event extractionwhere natural questions for argument identiﬁca-
tion (“What plays the role?”) and argument clas-
siﬁcation (“What is the role?”) mutually improve
each other.
Chen et al. (2020c) reformulated event extrac-
tion as a cloze task with QA model based on BERT
and the SQuAD 2.0 dataset (Rajpurkar et al., 2018).
Question answering is used directly, preserving
the QA format, in Du and Cardie (2020), Feng
et al. (2020a), Li et al. (2020a), Zhou et al. (2021)
and Liu et al. (2020a) for argument extraction, in-
cluding the argument identiﬁcation and classiﬁca-
tion sub-tasks. In these cases the event extraction
training data is converted to the QA format, where
the questions are derived from the ontology. Liu
et al. (2020a) also experimented in a zero-shot set-
ting where no task-speciﬁc data is used for train-
ing, only using prompts for probing. The zero-
shot setting for the full event extraction pipeline
has been explored in Lyu et al. (2021) where QA-
based prompts are used for argument extraction and
prompts based on Textual Entailment (Dagan et al.,
2013) are used for trigger classiﬁcation (see Sec-
tion 3.3.1 below). Several ablation experiments an-
alyzed the different components of the system such
as the choice of PLM, the choice of QA dataset and
the way to generate the questions (ﬁxed vs. contex-
tualized). It was shown in particular that RoBERTA
16

==== Page 17 ====
trained on QAMR (Michael et al., 2018) achieved
the best results for argument extraction.
Identiﬁcation-only sub-tasks such as trigger
identiﬁcation (Du and Cardie, 2020), are ad-
dressed by more general questions, e.g. “What
is the trigger?”. In contrast, Zhou et al. (2021) uses
separate questions to address the identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of arguments.
Du et al. (2021a) addressed slot-ﬁlling , which
aims to extract task-speciﬁc slot ﬁllers (for exam-
ple, a ﬂight date) from user utterances by formulat-
ing it as a QA task. In particular, they addressed
the zero-shot slot-ﬁlling problem, where the model
needs to predict spans and their values, given utter-
ances from new, unsupervised domains. Extracting
slot-ﬁller spans from utterances with a QA model
improved the performance, compared to a direct
encoding of the slot descriptions.
Lastly, Gao et al. (2019) formulated the dialogue
state tracking task that aims to the estimate of the
current belief state of a dialog given all the pre-
ceding conversation, as a QA problem. The pro-
posed system uses a simple attention-based neural
network to point to the slot values within the con-
versation. This direction was pursued by Gao et al.
(2020b) who also included a multiple-choice set-
ting, where several candidate values for each slot in
the question are given. The latter setting was also
investigated by Zhou and Small (2020) who fur-
ther improved the results. Namazifar et al. (2020)
used this approach to address language understand-
ing problems in the dialogue context, experiment-
ing on ATIS (Airline Travel Information Systems,
Hemphill et al., 1990) and on the Restaurants-8k
dataset (Coope et al., 2020).
QA Task Design. Questions are typically gener-
ated via hand-crafted templates derived from the
task-speciﬁc ontologies. Some of the works intro-
duce contextualization, integrating relevant words
from the text into the question. For example, in
argument extraction, the question can include the
trigger extracted from the text (e.g Liu et al., 2020a;
Lyu et al., 2021) or another argument that was pre-
viously identiﬁed (Li et al., 2020a) (see the Event
Extraction row in Table 4). Neural based question
generation models can also improve the quality of
the question, as in Liu et al. (2020a), where mono-
lingual unsupervised machine translation (Lample
et al., 2018) is used to generate the part of the ques-
tion that does not depend on the template, trans-
lating a descriptive statement into a question-styleexpression.
Other aspects of QA-style proxy tasks are the
ability to use multiple questions, and to formulate
questions in any style. In addition to sequential
questions for determining event arguments, multi-
ple formulations of the same question may be used
in a weighted voting scheme to generate an ensem-
ble answer Zhao et al. (2020b). The input to the QA
system need not necessarily include natural ques-
tions. It may instead consist of pseudo-questions
such as keywords, synonyms, position index of la-
bels, or a single word/type from the ontology or
annotation guidelines (e.g. Li et al., 2020c; Du and
Cardie, 2020).
PLMs ﬁne-tuned on the SQuAD 2.0 dataset (Ra-
jpurkar et al., 2018) or on QAMR are particularly
useful to initialize QA-style prompt-based learn-
ing methods.9With the advent of web-scale QA
datasets (Huber et al., 2021), QA-infused PLMs
may provide signiﬁcantly richer representation, en-
abling a wider range of applications.
3.3.2 Textual Entailment as Proxy Task
Textual Entailment is a popular proxy for classi-
ﬁcation tasks (Yin et al., 2019), as these models
have shown a striking ability to perform few-shot
learning. Wang et al. (2021b) hypothesizes that
this phenomenon might be because the entailment
task is a true language understanding task; a model
that performs entailment well is likely to succeed
on similarly-framed tasks. An example of textual
entailment as a proxy for emotion classiﬁcation is
shown in Figure 3, while an example of its use for
topic detection is shown in Table 4.
For entailment prompting, developers deﬁne a
template that describes the task, and create a natural
language version (“verbalization”) of each poten-
tial label. Multiple hypotheses for entailment are
produced by inserting the potential labels into the
template. The inference is performed by selecting
the most probable candidate hypothesis given the
input. Some recent works also make use of multi-
ple verbalizations for each label to boost the system
performance (Sainz and Rigau, 2021; Sainz et al.,
2021).
Sainz et al. (2021) also proposed an approach
to guiding the “art” that is prompt crafting more
towards a “science”: the authors ﬁne-tune a model
on Textual Entailment data and use the model’s
probability of a prompt given the template, applied
9Fine-tuning on a PLM on QAMR corresponds to the p-
QuASE representation presented in He et al. (2020).
17

==== Page 18 ====
on the guideline example(s), to measure the quality
of manually designed prompts.
Obamuyide and Vlachos (2018) reformulated
relation extraction as a textual entailment task.
This approach has been pursued in the context of
PLMs by Sainz et al. (2021).
Roughly equivalent to textual entailment is
Yes/No Question Answering (Clark et al., 2019a)
where a model is asked about the veracity of some
fact given a passage. It has also been used as a
proxy task for text classiﬁcation by Zhong et al.
(2021a).
PLMs needs to be ﬁne-tuned to solve the textual
entailment task. They are commonly ﬁne-tuned on
MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), but other datasets
such as SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015), FEVER
(Thorne et al., 2018), ANLI (Nie et al., 2020) or
XNLI (Conneau et al., 2018) are also used. In ad-
dition, data from different tasks can be used when
framed properly (Zhong et al., 2021a).
4 Paradigm 3: NLP as Text Generation
The success of generative Transformer-based
PLMs10such as GPT, BART, and T5 has recently
sparked interest in leveraging generative PLMs to
solve various non-generative NLP tasks. These
tasks include, but are not limited to, traditional dis-
criminative tasks such as classiﬁcation and struc-
ture prediction. For example, Figure 4 illustrates
this “text-to-text” approach as described in Raf-
fel et al. (2020). Instead of using traditional dis-
criminative models for NLP tasks, these tasks are
reformulated as text generation problems so that
they can be directly solved with generative PLMs.
The generated output sequences usually include the
desired labels or other auxiliary information for the
given task, enabling accurate reconstruction of the
expected class labels (i.e. to avoid ambiguities in
mapping) and facilitating the generation/decoding
process (i.e. to provide sufﬁcient context for pre-
dictions).
It is worth noting that some NLP tasks are al-
ready text generation tasks. Therefore, a straight-
forward strategy for those tasks is to ﬁne-tune a
generative PLM using task-speciﬁc training data to
perform the speciﬁc tasks of interest. Examples in-
clude Machine Translation (Cooper Stickland et al.,
2021), text summarization (Lewis et al., 2020), text
style transfer (Lai et al., 2021), etc. We refer read-
10In this section and next, we use the term PLM to refer to
a generative PLM.ers to Section 2 for more detailed discussion of
this “pre-train then ﬁne-tune” approach. In this
section, we focus on tasks that are not traditionally
text generation tasks.
Reformulating NLP Tasks as Text Generation
Problems Pre-trained from large corpora, PLMs
demonstrate an extraordinary ability to generate
text. PLMs also capture rich knowledge that could
be used for many NLP tasks and show strong per-
formance on learning new patterns via ﬁne-tuning.
These factors lead to the hypothesis that many NLP
tasks can be reformulated as text generation prob-
lems. In particular, given an NLP task with an input
textx, this approach ﬁrst attempts to design an out-
put sequence ythat includes information about the
desired labels for x(e.g. markers). Then, a PLM
directly generates y, conditioning on the input x,
modelingP(yjx). In this formulation, the desired
labels/outputs for the task on xneed to be retrieved
unambiguously from y, requiringyto be generated
in a valid format by the design of the reformulated
task. In addition to the label information, evidence
useful for providing context can also be incorpo-
rated into the formulation of yto aid the generation
process. To train the PLMs, the original training
data of the NLP task is ﬁrst converted into pairs
(x;y)following the designed format. The PLMs
are usually ﬁne-tuned with such pairs using the
standard maximum likelihood loss.
There are a few advantages of this approach.
First, in this formulation, a uniﬁed text-to-
text/seq2seq framework can be used to solve differ-
ent NLP tasks via encoder-decoder architectures,
thus facilitating multi-task learning and transfer
learning across tasks of different natures (Raffel
et al., 2020). Second, the direct generation of la-
bels in output sequences allows the PLMs to exploit
the semantics of the labels to improve the perfor-
mance and data efﬁciency, a beneﬁt that cannot be
achieved in discriminative models (Paolini et al.,
2021). Finally, when adapting to structure predic-
tion problems, PLM-based models can naturally
capture the inter-dependencies between prediction
steps/tasks in the modeling process to further im-
prove the performance (Athiwaratkun et al., 2020).
As such, the formation of the output sequence
yfor an input xis critical for the performance
of the PLM-based methods. Existing works tend
to customize such output sequences for speciﬁc
NLP tasks to better capture the nature of the tasks.
Therefore, in the rest of this section, we group
18

==== Page 19 ====
Figure 4: An illustration of T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) text-to-text text generation approach for Machine Translation,
linguistic acceptability, text semantic similarity and summarizing tasks. Figure source: Raffel et al. (2020).
prior works according to their strategies in design-
ing the output sequences to solve NLP tasks with
generative models, and discuss their representative
techniques in each subsection. Table 5 provides a
brief summary.
4.1 Generating Label-Augmented Texts
In this strategy, the output sequence ycopies
the input text xand augments it with additional
markers that can be decoded into desired label an-
notations for xfor a given NLP task. The repetition
of the words from the input text aims to provide
explicit context to reduce ambiguity for the genera-
tion process (Paolini et al., 2021). This strategy is
often applied to structure prediction tasks that aim
to jointly extract the text spans of interest and their
relations or dependencies in an input text.
Athiwaratkun et al. (2020) explores the idea of
label-augmented text generation for sequence la-
beling problems, e.g. slot ﬁlling (identifying spans
that deﬁne the left or right “slot” of a relationship)
and Named Entity Recognition (NER). Given an
input sentence, the output sequence is formed by
marking the token sequences for the slots or entity
types of interest, for instance with square brack-
ets or another identiﬁer. The corresponding labels
are then introduced immediately after the token
sequences, within the brackets, separated by the
token by a bar “j”. The encoder-decoder PLM T5
is used to generate label-augmented texts. Paolini
et al. (2021) extends this idea to other structure
prediction tasks, including joint entity and relation
extraction, relation classiﬁcation, semantic role la-
beling (SRL), event extraction, coreference reso-
lution, and dialogue state tracking. To encode a
relation between two text spans the input text, thesecond text span might be annotated with both the
relation label and an indicator of the ﬁrst text span.
For example, for the joint entity and relation
extraction task, the input sentence xcan be trans-
formed into the label-augmented output sequence
y, where (1) the square brackets indicate token
spans for entity mentions; (2) person andbook
are the corresponding entity type labels; and
(3)author=Tolkien indicates the author re-
lation between Tolkien andThe Lord of
the Rings :
x=Tolkien’s epic novel The
Lord of the Rings was
published in 1954-1955.
y=[Tolkien|person]’s epic
novel [The Lord of the
Rings|book|author=Tolkien]
was published in 1954-1955.
In order to transform the generated label-
augmented texts into desired annotations, Paolini
et al. (2021) uses dynamic programming to match
the generated output sequence and the input text,
searching for the closest entity mention that exactly
matches the predicted tail entity and discarding in-
valid entity/relation types. Similarly, Zhang et al.
(2021a) utilize label-augmented text generation for
different variations of aspect-based sentiment anal-
ysis (ABSA), including aspect opinion pair extrac-
tion, uniﬁed ABSA, aspect sentiment triplet extrac-
tion, and target aspect sentiment detection. Zhang
et al. (2021a), also propose a normalization pre-
diction mechanism: if a generated token does not
belong to the original sentence or set of expected
labels, the closest word from the input sentence
using the Levenshtein distance is used instead.
Due to the uniﬁed text-to-text formulation, label-
19

==== Page 20 ====
Output
TypeWork TaskExample
Input Output
Label-
augmented
TextPaolini et al. (2021)Joint Entity and Relation ExtractionTolkien’s epic novel The Lord of the [ Tolkienjperson ]‘s epic novel [ The Lord of the Rings
Rings was published in 1954-1955. jbookjauthor = Tolkien ] was published in 1954-1955
Relation ClassiﬁcationBorn in Bologna, Orlandi was a student of the famous Italian relationship between [ Carmen Melis ] and
[ soprano ] and voice teacher [ Carmen Melis ] in Milan. [ soprano ] = voice type
The relationship between [ Carmen Melis ] and [ soprano ] is
Semantic Role LabelingThe luxury auto maker last year [ sold ] [ The luxury auto maker jsubject ] [ last year jtemporal ]
1,214 cars in the U.S. sold [ 1,214 carsjobject ] [ in the U.S. jlocation ]
Event Extraction Two soldiers were attacked and injured yesterday Two soldiers were [ attacked jattack ] and [ injured jinjury ] yester-
day
Coreference ResolutionBarack Obama nominated Hillary Rodham Clinton [ Barack Obama ] nominated [ Hillary Rodham Clinton ] as [ his j
as his secretary of state on Monday. Barack Obama ] [ secretary of state jHillary Rodham Clinton ] on
Monday
Dialogue State Tracking[ user ] : I am looking for a cheap place [ belief ] hotel price range cheap, hotel
to stay [ agent ] : How long? [ user ] : Two type hotel, duration two [ belief ]
Athiwaratkun et al.
(2020)Slot Filling Add Kent James to the Disney soundtrack (( AddToPlaylist )) Add [ Kent James jartist ] to the [ Disney j
playlist ]
Named Entity Recognition He is John Wethy from NBC News He is [ John Wethy jperson ] from [ NBC News jorg ]
Zhang et al. (2021a)Aspect Opinion Pair Extraction Salads were fantastic, our server was also very helpful.[Saladsjfantastic] were fantastic,
our [serverjhelpful] was also very helpful.
Aspect Sentiment Triplet Extraction The Unibody construction is solid, sleek and beautiful.The [Unibody construction jpositivejsolid, sleek,
beautiful] is solid, sleek and beautiful.
Target Aspect Sentiment Detection The pizza was cold. The [pizzajfood qualityjnegative] was cold.
Generating
Word
IndicesYan et al. (2021b) Named Entity Recognition have muscle pain and fatigue 2 3 7 2 5 6
Yan et al. (2021a)Aspect Term ExtractionThe wine list is interesting and
has good values , but the service
is dreadful1, 2, 12, 12
Opinion Term Extraction 4, 4, 7, 8, 14, 14
Aspect-level Sentiment Classiﬁcation 1, 2 , Positive
Aspect-oriented Opinion Extraction 1, 2, 4, 4, 7, 8
Rongali et al. (2020) Slot Filling play the song don’t stop believin by journeyPlaySongIntent SongName( @pt r3 @pt r4 @pt r5)
SongName ArtistName( @pt r7 )ArtistName
Generating
AnswersWang et al. (2021a) Closed-book QA What is Southern California often abbreviated as? Southern California, often abbreviated SoCal, is :::ANSWER SoCal
Hsu et al. (2021) Answer Selection How a water pump works? A water pump is a device that moves ﬂuids by mechanical action.
Filling
TemplatesDu et al. (2021b) Event Extraction[CLS] Attack, Bombing, Arson, :::[SEP T] (Document[CLS] Attack -T1 REEs- [SEP T] Bombing -T2 REEs- [SEP T]tokens): Several attacks were carried out in La Paz :::[SEP]
Li et al. (2021c) Event Argument ExtractionElliott testiﬁed that on April 15, McVeigh came into the body
-tgr- reserved -tgr- the truck, to be picked up at 4pm two days
later shop andElliott bought, sold or traded truck to McVeigh in exchange for
$280.32 for the beneﬁt of -arg- at body shop place
Structure-
linearized
TextsRen et al. (2021) Joint Entity and Relation Extraction He was captured in Baghdad late Monday night “He” Type PER [SEP] “Baghdad” Type GPE PHYS “He”
Lu et al. (2021b) Event Extraction The man returned to Los Angeles from Mexico((Transport returned (Artifact The man) (Destination Los Angeles)
(Origin Mexico))
Ranking
Input-
output
PairsNogueira dos
Santos et al. (2020)Answer Selection<bos>Ice formations in the Titlis glacier cave0.5<boq>How are glacier cave formed <eoq>
Nogueira et al. (2020) Document RetrievalHow are glacier cave formed [Q] A glacierTruecave is a cave formed within the ice of a glacier [D]
De Cao et al. (2021) Entity Retrieval Superman saved [START] Metropolis [END] Metropolis (comics) jMetropolis (1927 ﬁlm)
Cui et al. (2021) Named Entity Recognition ACL will be held in Bangkok Bangkok is a location
Table 5: A summary of methods reformulating NLP task as a generation task solved by PLMs.
augmented text generation allows multi-task learn-
ing where a single generative model can be trained
to simultaneously perform multiple tasks of differ-
ent natures. Paolini et al. (2021) and Athiwaratkun
et al. (2020) show that learning from multiple
tasks with a single model can improve the perfor-
mance on the individual tasks. Furthermore, label-
augmented text generation also shows impressive
performance in few-shot learning settings (Paolini
et al., 2021), improving the data efﬁciency.
4.2 Generating Word Indices
For many text understanding problems (e.g. span
tagging problems such as NER), the generative
PLM must not generate words that are not in the
input text, other than markers or labels as shown in
the example in Section 4.1. Restricting the PLMs to
consider only words in the input text as candidates
at decoding (text generation) time enforces this
constraint.
An alternative approach is to directly generate
indices of the words of interest in the input text.
Given the input x, the output sequence yprovides
a sequence of index numbers referring to the po-
sitions of words in x. Label indices encode classlabels within y. A few examples are included in
Table 5 in the “Generating Word Indices” rows.
Yan et al. (2021b) explores an index generation
idea for NER that can naturally handle different
settings, e.g. ﬂat, nested, and discontinuous NER.
Given the input sequence x= [x1;x2;:::;x n],
the output sequence yis formed via the indices:
y= [s11;e11;:::;s 1k1;e1k1;t1;:::;s i1;ei1;:::;
siki;eiki;ti]wheresandeindicates the start
and end indexes of a span. The spans for the
i-th name in xare represented by the tuple
[si1;ei1;:::;s iki;eiki;ti] wheretiis the index of
the entity type and kiis the number of text spans for
thei-th name (a name can have multiple spans due
to the consideration of discontinuous names). As
such,sijandeijshould be between 1 and nwhile
the entity types can be indexed from n+ 1(i.e.,
ti>n). To compute the hidden vectors at decod-
ing time, the representations for the span indices
can be obtained from the representations of the cor-
responding words in the input sentence x(i.e., via
pointer networks (Vinyals et al., 2015)). BART is
used as the base model for the index generation for
NER.
Similarly, Yan et al. (2021a) generates indices
20

==== Page 21 ====
of the spans of interest for variations of the aspect-
based sentiment analysis (ABSA) task, including
aspect term extraction, opinion term extraction,
aspect-level sentiment classiﬁcation and aspect-
oriented opinion extraction. Finally, casting a prob-
lem into an index generation task is also proposed
for semantic parsing (i.e. ﬁlling slots) (Rongali
et al., 2020). The output sequence in this work
starts with the intent, followed by slot names and
the index sequences of the words in the input for
the slots. At decoding time, each step produces
a distribution over the word indexes in the input
sentence (as a pointer network) and the vocabulary
for slots and intents in the datasets.
4.3 Generating Answers
This strategy is designed mainly for the QA task.
The basic idea is to ﬁne-tune PLMs to generate an-
swers for the QA problems of interest. Wang et al.
(2021a) use BART for closed-book QA that aims to
directly provide answers for input questions. They
show that BART struggles on a version of SQuAD
for closed-book QA where the test and training
data do not have much question and answer over-
lap. It also shows that BART cannot remember
knowledge from the ﬁne-tuning data if there are
many training passages for ﬁne-tuning. Sugges-
tions to address those issues include decoupling the
knowledge memorization and QA ﬁne-tuning, and
forcing the model to recall relevant knowledge in
the answer generation step.
Hsu et al. (2021) applies answer generation to
the problem of answer selection, in which the sys-
tem must choose the correct answer from a pro-
vided candidate set (it is also provided the question).
Instead of training an answer selector (Han et al.,
2021a), Hsu et al. (2021) uses answer generation
through ﬁne-tuning PLMs such as T5 and BART,
which consume the input question and the top an-
swer candidates, then generate an answer for the
question. To prepare training data for ﬁne-tuning,
the output answers might come from human anno-
tators or be directly inherited from the provided
correct answer (i.e. the correct answer will be re-
moved from the input for the generative models
and maybe replaced by another answer candidate).
4.4 Filling templates
For many extraction tasks, the output are spans or-
ganized into one or several templates. For example,
event extraction tasks require a system to extracttemplates in the form of who did what to whom
where and when .
A template deﬁnes the appropriate relationship
and order for the spans and labels for generation,
forming the output sequence y. Du et al. (2021b)
explores the template ﬁlling idea for an IE task:
given a document, a model must identify event
templates/types (via trigger words) and entity men-
tion ﬁllers for the argument roles. A sequence-
to-sequence model for template ﬁlling takes the
possible event types concatenated with words in
the input document xas the input, and outputs a
sequence of tuples. Each tuple corresponds to a
detected event template, starting with an event type
and followed by the text span ﬁllers for the roles in
the input document (following an order). The roles
with no ﬁllers are associated with null. (Zhang
et al., 2021a) also examines a similar approach of
tuple generation for ABSA.
The template ﬁlling methods can also introduce
additional information into the templates to aid the
label generation process, such as natural descrip-
tions or deﬁnitions of the labels. In particular, Li
et al. (2021c) pursue a general template ﬁlling ap-
proach for document-level event argument extrac-
tion: given an event trigger in an input document,
ﬁnd entity mentions to ﬁll in the roles for the event.
A conditional generative model (e.g. BART) is
employed for argument extraction where the input
(the condition) to the model is created by combin-
ing an unﬁlled template and the document context.
The template is essentially a sentence describing
the event type augmented with placeholders for
argument role ﬁllers. The output sequence yis a
ﬁlled template where placeholders are replaced by
concrete arguments (entity mentions). To avoid
entity type mismatch for arguments, the templates
in the inputs are also appended with sentences to
indicate entity types for arguments (e.g. arg 1is a
person) that can be used to re-rank the output se-
quences to follow the type constraints. Below is an
example input xin which a template over a list of
event arguments arg 1;:::;arg 6and the document
text DOC TEXT are concatenated, and output y,
in which the underlined text spans are ﬁllers from
DOC TEXT) from Li et al. (2021c):
x=hsi harg 1ibought, sold,
or tradedharg 3itoharg 2iin
exchange for harg 4ifor the
benefit ofharg 5iatharg 6i
21

==== Page 22 ====
place.hsi h=siDOCTEXTh=si
y= Elliott bought, sold or
traded truck to McVeigh in
exchange for 280:32for the
benefit ofhargiat body shop
place.
4.5 Generating Structure-Linearized Texts
Structure prediction problems in NLP typically re-
quire multiple prediction outputs for an input text
xthat are interconnected to form a single struc-
ture that represents the input. To cast structure
prediction tasks as text generation problems, one
approach involves linearizing the output structure
to serve as the output sequence y. For example, tak-
ingxas input, TEXT2EVENT (Lu et al., 2021b)
directly generates the event structures y:
x=The man returned to Los
Angeles from Mexico following
his capture Tuesday by bounty
hunters.
y =((Transport returned
(Artifact The man)
(Destination Los Angeles)
(Origin Mexico)) (Arrest-Jail
capture (Person The man)
(Time Tuesday) (Agent bounty
hunters))
Graph traversal algorithms are often used to ac-
complish the linearization in this approach. Ren
et al. (2021) study structure-linearization for joint
entity and relation extraction (Li et al., 2014; Miwa
and Bansal, 2016). The main idea is to construct
an information graph for each input sentence to
capture entity mentions, their entity types, and
relations. Depth or breath ﬁrst traversal can be
used for graph linearization for y. To solve the
sequence-to-sequence problem for pairs of hx;yi,
Ren et al. (2021) linearize the information graph
to an alternating sequence of nodes and edge types
(given depth/breath ﬁrst traversal), and directly gen-
erate such sequences via a hybrid span decoder that
decodes both the spans and the types recurrently.
For event extraction with joint extraction of event
triggers and arguments (Li et al., 2014; Nguyen
et al., 2016), a structure-linearization and text gen-
eration approach comes from Lu et al. (2021b).
The authors ﬁrst build a labeled tree to capture
the event types and argument roles in the sentence
(i.e. event schema), with trigger and argument textspans as leaves. The labeled tree is transformed
into the output sequence yby depth-ﬁrst traver-
sal where T5 is used to perform the conditional
generation of yfromx. To improve the model, a
trie-based constrained decoding procedure (Chen
et al., 2020a; De Cao et al., 2021) is introduced to
ensure the generation of valid event structures. A
trie (preﬁx-tree) determines possible candidates for
the next generation step given the previously gen-
erated tokens to guarantee valid output sequences.
Lu et al. (2021b) also report the effectiveness of
the generation-based model for extending models
to extract new event types.
4.6 Ranking Input-Output Pairs
Some NLP tasks require choosing the best response
from among many: answer selection in multiple
choice-sytle QA, information retrieval, and certain
kinds of entity retrieval all provide a set of can-
didate answers to a posed query from which the
system selects the best one. Typically, a system will
rank the candidates in relation to the input query,
a task at which PLMs can excel. The idea has its
roots in the classical literature on probabilistic mod-
els for information retrieval that rank documents
using language models (Ponte and Croft, 1998; Laf-
ferty and Zhai, 2001). Given an input query, a can-
didate document is scored in two steps: (i) training
a language model on the candidate document, and
(ii) computing the likelihood of generating the in-
put query from that language model, which serves
as the candidate’s ranking score.
We now see the use of PLMs to per-
form generation-based ranking for selection.
Nogueira dos Santos et al. (2020) apply the idea for
answer selection by ﬁne-tuning generative models
(GPT-2 or BART) over hanswer, questionipairs,
thus learning to generate questions given correct
answer passages. The simplest approach is to
ﬁne-tune the models over only the positive pairs.
Nogueira dos Santos et al. (2020) also explore ﬁne-
tuning with negative pairs using an unlikelihood
objective or ranking-based objective (e.g. the hinge
loss). At inference time, the ranking score for an
input passage is obtained via the likelihood of the
ﬁne-tuned PLM over the input question condition-
ing on that passage.
Nogueira et al. (2020) approach the document
relevance ranking problem in a similar way. The pa-
per concatenates the input query and each candidate
document and feeds them as an input/condition for
22

==== Page 23 ====
a ﬁne-tuned T5 model. To ﬁne-tune T5, the model
is asked to generate “True” or “False” as the output
sequence, indicating the document’s relevance to
the query. The probability of generating “True” is
used as the ranking score for the candidate.
De Cao et al. (2021) address the entity retrieval
problem: given a set of Wikipedia articles repre-
senting entities, return the entity that is most rel-
evant to a textual input source x. Each entity is
represented by its textual representation (e.g. the
title of its Wikipedia article), which will be used
as the output sequence yfor the generative models.
BART is ﬁne-tuned to rank the entities using the
generation likelihood P(yjx). Cui et al. (2021) ex-
plore generation-based ranking for NER, especially
in few-shot and cross-domain few-shot settings.
Given an input sentence and a text span, a template
is formed by concatenating the words in the span
and an expression of type “is a entity type entity”.
The original sentence and the template serve as an
input-output pair in sequence-to-sequence models.
BART is then employed to score this pair (using the
probability of the template output produced by the
decoder of BART). For each span, the entity type
corresponding to the template with highest score
is selected. Original NER training data is used to
create gold standard templates to ﬁne-tune BART.
In addition to question answering, other genera-
tive tasks have been shown to beneﬁt from PLMs.
For instance, semantic parsing, generating a struc-
ture representing the semantics of the sentence, is
explored in a recent work by Shin et al. (2021).
Authors show that by reformulating the output of
PLMs the generated natural language can be used
to recover the semantic structure of the input text.
They use GPT-3 in the experiments.
5 Data Generation via PLM
In addition to using PLMs to perform NLP tasks
directly, PLMs can be used to generate data that
can be used to enhance the performance of NLP
systems in two ways. Note that these data gener-
ation approaches are complementary to the three
paradigms of PLM-for-NLP discussed in previous
sections.
First, data generated by PLMs can be combined
with original training data to improve NLP mod-
els where training data is too sparse. Typically,
this is applied to create new labeled data to in-
crease diversity, enrich the models, and otherwise
alleviate common limitations of hand-labeled data.The studies presented below discuss, for various
downstream NLP tasks: approaches for ﬁne-tuning
PLMs to ensure they capture the key characteristics
of the task when performing data generation; ap-
propriate reformulation of the original training data
for PLM ﬁne-tuning and generation; and ﬁltering
the new data for noise introduced by the generation
process.
Second, we discuss the use of auxiliary data
generated by PLMs to shed light on interesting
aspects of NLP models. This approach plays a role
in machine learning explainability by providing
generations such as counterexamples, clarifying
questions, context for answers, inference rules, and
other insight-rich sequences.
5.1 Augmenting NLP Models with
Automatically Generated Data
Traditional approaches to data augmentation, in-
cluding generation via semi-supervised learning on
large unlabeled data sets and synthesis with back-
translation or synonymous word replacement (Feng
et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021a) were shown to be ef-
fective for increasing NLP models’ accuracy and/or
coverage. Newer studies show that PLMs can be
also used as an effective method for data augmen-
tation (Zhang et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2020; Peng
et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020; Anaby-Tavor et al.,
2020), requiring no signiﬁcant change to the model
architecture. The ﬂuency of PLM text generations
stand in contrast to the outcomes of traditional ap-
proaches that may produce less natural samples. As
discussed in previous sections, the massive amount
of linguistic knowledge accumulated by the PLM
allows for adaptation to many domains and tasks,
including those with very limited labeled data. The
vast knowledge may also produce a greater vari-
ety of new examples, further improving the NLP
models trained on them.
We organize the discussion of data augmentation
methods according to the NLP tasks they support.
5.1.1 Information Extraction (IE)
Prior works explored synthetic data generation with
PLMs (Madaan et al., 2020; Bosselut et al., 2019)
for a variety of IE tasks.
Veyseh et al. (2021a) and Veyseh et al. (2021b)
use GPT-2 to produce synthetic labeled data for
event detection. Sentences in existing training
datasets are augmented with markers to indicate
positions of event trigger words. The resulting la-
beled sentences are used to ﬁne-tune GPT-2 us-
23

==== Page 24 ====
ing the standard autoregressive next word pre-
diction (NWP) objective. Veyseh et al. (2021a)
shows that the ﬁne-tuned GPT-2 model can gener-
ate label-augmented data for different domains (e.g.
newswire, cybersecurity); however, the generated
data might include some noise, for instance, incor-
rect grammar, meaningless sentences, or incorrect
annotations. To minimize the impact of the noisy
generated examples and maximize the beneﬁts of
the generated data, Veyseh et al. (2021a) and Vey-
seh et al. (2021b) present a student-teacher network
framework: the teacher network is trained on the
original labeled data to obtain anchor knowledge,
while the student is trained over the combination
of original and synthetic data, with constraints in-
troduced to enforce consistency with the teacher’s
learned anchor knowledge. The framework leads
to signiﬁcant performance improvement over dif-
ferent datasets for event detection.
Guo and Roth (2021) employ GPT-2 to generate
synthetic labeled data for cross-lingual NER fol-
lowing the annotation projection approach: training
data in a source language is translated and projected
into a target language to train models. To project an-
notation, a training sentence in the source language
is ﬁrst translated into the target language using
word-to-word translation (via a dictionary). GPT-2
is then ﬁne-tuned to generate complete sentences
from the important words in target languages. A
hard-constrained generation mechanism is also en-
coded into the decoding process of GPT-2 to ensure
the appearance of the named entities in the origi-
nal source sentence in the automatically generated
sentences.
Synthetic data generation with GPT-2 is also ex-
plored for relation extraction in Papanikolaou and
Pierleoni (2020). This paper ﬁne-tunes GPT-2 over
labeled examples of the same relation type, where
each sentence in the training data is marked with
the two entity mentions in the corresponding rela-
tion. The ﬁne-tuned model for each relation type
is then leveraged to produce new training instances
for that relation.
5.1.2 Question Answering (QA)
Given an input paragraph Cand a sampled ex-
tractive short answer AinC, Alberti et al. (2019)
attempts to generate a question Qusing a sequence-
to-sequence Transformer (with BERT as its en-
coder). The triple, consisting of the input para-
graph, the generated question, and the sampled
answer (C;Q;A ), can be used as a new traininginstance for QA models. To mitigate the noise in
the generated data, Alberti et al. (2019) present a
round trip consistency approach where a second
generative model is trained to take the input pas-
sageCand generated question Qfrom the prior
step to produce an answer A0. The tuple (C;Q;A )
is only retained as new training data if A0==A.
Following a similar principle, Shakeri et al.
(2020) explore synthetic data generation for cross-
domain QA where models trained on a source do-
main (typically SQuAD) are evaluated on datasets
from a different target domain. The paper aims to
generate QA pairs in the target domain and com-
bine them with the source-domain training data to
train improved QA models. The data generation
model is also trained on the source domain dataset
SQuAD using BART and GPT-2. Starting with a
passage as the context, the generative models di-
rectly generate QA pairs. Generated QA pairs are
ﬁltered by the likelihood scores of the generative
models to reduce noise.
The data generation idea is extended to multi-
hop QA that requires combining disjoint pieces of
evidence to answer a question. In particular, Pan
et al. (2021b) aim to generate human-like multi-hop
question–answer pairs to train QA models. The
model consists of three components: operators,
reasoning graphs, and question ﬁltration. Opera-
tors are atomic operations that are implemented by
rules or off-the-shelf pretrained models to retrieve,
generate, or fuse relevant information from input
contexts. Approaches to fusing relevant informa-
tion from across contexts include: ﬁne-tuning a
T5 model on SQuAD to generate single-hop ques-
tions; generating descriptions of table entities with
GPT-TabGen (Chen et al., 2020b); and combining
single-hop questions with sentences about the same
entities to produce multi-hop questions via ﬁlling
in masked tokens of designed templates. Reason-
ing graphs then deﬁne different types of reasoning
chains for multi-hop QA using the operators as
building blocks. Training QA pairs are generated
by executing the reasoning graphs, which generate
output texts. Finally, question ﬁltration removes
irrelevant and unnatural QA pairs to produce the
ﬁnal generated training set for multi-hop QA. The
ﬁltration is done by choosing the samples ranked
as most ﬂuent by GPT-2, and paraphrasing each
generated question using BART.
5.1.3 Sentiment Analysis (SA)
Yu et al. (2021a) applies data augmentation for
24

==== Page 25 ====
aspect-based SA in the unsupervised domain adap-
tation setting, aiming to transform labeled datasets
in a source domain to a new target domain. The
main approach involves two steps. In the ﬁrst step
of domain generalization, domain-speciﬁc words
and phrases in the labeled source data and un-
labeled target data are identiﬁed and masked in
the inputs. Opinion words for the source domain
and target-speciﬁc terms and opinion words are
retrieved via sentiment lexicon and bootstrapping
methods using relations in dependency trees. The
target-speciﬁc terms in the unlabeled data will be
masked to ﬁne-tune BERT. In the second step of
domain speciﬁcation , the source-speciﬁc terms in
the source data are masked (thus producing domain-
independent texts) and sent into the ﬁne-tuned
BERT to produce labeled sentences in the target do-
main. Here, some constraints based on dictionaries
are necessary to ensure that the inﬁlled words are
terms or opinion words with the same sentiment
polarity. The generated data can be used indepen-
dently or combined with original source training
data to train a SA model for the target domain.
Li et al. (2020b) use PLMs to generate synthetic
data for aspect term extraction (cast as a sequence
labeling problem). To ﬁne-tune PLMs with the
sequence-to-sequence framework for this purpose,
the input includes a masked sentence from a train-
ing dataset and the corresponding label sequence
while the output are the masked tokens in the input.
The ﬁne-tuned PLMs are then exploited to generate
new possibilities for the masked tokens that can be
injected into the masked input, using the original
label sequence to obtain synthetic labeled data to
train models.
5.1.4 Fact Veriﬁcation
Fact veriﬁcation aims to predict whether a given
claim is supported, denied, or unresolved based on
the given evidence. Automatically generated texts
can be used to generate claim-evidence pairs for
each label category. To this end, Pan et al. (2021a)
employ a two-step approach to generate synthetic
data for fact veriﬁcation. In the ﬁrst step of ques-
tion generation, given the evidence and an answer,
a BART model, ﬁne-tuned on the SQuAD dataset
using the similar input-output format, generates a
question for that answer. Next, a question-to-claim
model is employed to take the question and answer
as inputs and generate a claim (also using a BART
model ﬁne-tuned on SQuAD). To produce hclaim,
evidenceipairs with the “support” relation, an en-tity is selected in the original evidence in the ﬁrst
step of the process. To produce a “refute” claim,
the work replaces the original answer with another
entity in the generation process. Finally, to create a
“not-enough-evidence” claim, the paper expands the
original evidence to include other paragraphs in the
same document and produce claims for some en-
tity in the extended paragraph. Experiments show
competitive results when the augmented data is
combined with few or even no human-labeled ex-
amples for model training.
5.1.5 Document Classiﬁcation
A typical approach to generating synthetic data
for text classiﬁcation is to build a conditional gen-
erative model for each class by ﬁne-tuning with
labeled data from that class. While these models
can be ﬁne-tuned with the next word prediction ob-
jective with generative PLMs such as GPT-2, Liu
et al. (2020b) use reinforcement learning to train
generative models to augment text classiﬁcation
labeled data. The rewards for training are based on
the similarity between the generated tokens and a
salient lexicon of the target class computed via top
frequency-based salient words, and the divergence
between the conditional and unconditional models.
Liu et al. (2020b) demonstrate the effectiveness of
using the automatically generated data in multiple
text classiﬁcation problems and datasets, including
sentiment analysis and offense detection.
5.2 Generating Auxiliary Data to Improve
Different Aspects of NLP Models
The following sections, again arranged by task, dis-
cuss ways of using PLM-generated text to aid in
auxiliary tasks, helping developers or users under-
stand model strengths and weaknesses or decision-
making characteristics.
5.2.1 Explaining Models’ Decisions
Despite the impressive performance of deep learn-
ing models for various NLP tasks, a remaining
challenge to widespread adoption is the lack of
explanations for the models’ decisions. This hin-
ders the development and debugging process, as
well as user trust. This is especially true for appli-
cation domains such as healthcare, security, and
online education. As such, a considerable number
of approaches have been proposed for explaining
deep learning models’ behavior, including model-
intrinsic (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg and Lee,
2017; Chen et al., 2018) and model-agnostic ap-
25

==== Page 26 ====
proaches (Park et al., 2018; Kim et al., 2018; Ling
et al., 2017). While model-intrinsic explanations
expose internal model state (e.g. feature impor-
tance or attention scores), in model-agnostic (post-
hoc) methods, explanations are generated via the
model predictions without inspecting the internal
state. Generative models are often applied for post-
hoc explanations, aiming to obtain either counterex-
amples (Kim et al., 2016; Wachter et al., 2018; Wu
et al., 2021a) or natural language texts (Camburu
et al., 2018; Kumar and Talukdar, 2020; Chen et al.,
2021c) for explaining purposes.
Generating counterexamples can shed light
on the decision boundaries of the models (i.e.
explaining when a model changes its decision),
thus improving intepretability. To this end, the
generated counterexamples should be close to the
decision boundaries so that small modiﬁcations
result in changing the model predictions. Tradi-
tionally, heuristic rules applied to the original
inputs create likely counterexamples (Wachter
et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2018; Iyyer et al., 2018;
Li et al., 2021a). PLMs have been leveraged
to generate more diverse examples for better
evaluation (Madaan et al., 2021b; Wu et al.,
2021a; Ross et al., 2021). In particular, Wu et al.
(2021a) proposes a method based on GPT-2 to
generate counterfactuals that are close to the
original sentences and entail speciﬁc relationships
with the original, facilitating label induction (e.g.
negation, insertion, shufﬂe). Concretely, an input
sentence is concatenated with a relation label
(e.g. negation) and a template consisting of the
special tokens [BLANK] to form the prompt for
GPT-2 model. For instance, for the sentence “ It is
great for kids ” and the relation label “ negate ”,
the following prompt is constructed: “ It is
great for kids. [negation] It is
[BLANK] great for [BLANK]. [SEP] ”.
Next, the GPT-2 model generates answers
for the [BLANK] in the template (e.g. “ not
[ANSWER] children ”, separated by the
special token [ANSWER] ). To ﬁne-tune the GPT-2
model, non-parallel datasets (e.g. CommonGen,
Natural Questions and SQuAD) are automatically
processed to ﬁnd the relations between pairs of
sentences and to construct the templates for each
relation based on the obtained pairs. It is worth
noting that the sentences generated by GPT-2
might have the same label as the original input
sentence. In addition, Wu et al. (2021a) show thatthe generated counterexamples can be helpful to
improve the performance of the downstream mod-
els, e.g. for natural language inference, duplicate
question detection, and sentiment analysis.
Other research is informing the task of natural
language explanation generation , where the goal is
to expose the rationale behind the model decisions
in automatically generated natural language text.
Any approach must critically require that the gen-
erated response is faithful to the model behavior.
To this end, Kumar and Talukdar (2020) propose to
ﬁrst generate the explanations, and then employ the
explanations to obtain the ﬁnal model predictions.
They use natural language inference as the task re-
quiring explanations. Label-speciﬁc GPT-2 models
are ﬁne-tuned over concatenations of correspond-
ing premises, hypotheses, and human-provided ex-
planations, so that at inference, the model generates
an explanation based on premise and hypothesis.
Next, the explanations together with the premise
and the hypothesis are consumed by an explanation
processor model (e.g. RoBERTa) to select the most
likely label. This process obtains a more faithful
explanation for the label choice, compared to tradi-
tional prediction-ﬁrst approaches (Camburu et al.,
2018). However, this approach does not provide
explanations that reference non-selected labels. To
address the question of why other labels are not cho-
sen, Chen et al. (2021c) exploit counterexamples,
deriving them from original samples with heuristic
rules. The original samples and counterexamples
are provided to GPT-2 to generate an explanation
for the question “ Why A not B ”.
5.2.2 Knowledge Extraction
Generative PLMs are pre-trained on massive text
corpora containing a large amount of information
about entities and commonsense knowledge. As
such, PLMs might directly be used to elicit knowl-
edge required for downstream applications such
as information extraction, sentiment analysis and
question answering. To this end, it is important
to properly prompt these models so their outputs
contain the required information. Section 3.2 de-
scribes the prompt design for knowledge extrac-
tion/probing tasks, and in particular, the “Knowl-
edge Probing” subsection describes applications in
details. Here we focus on the text generation aspect
of knowledge extraction approaches.
Prior works can be categorized into two sub-
categories. The ﬁrst category involves prompting
PLMs with partial knowledge via a prompt and
26

==== Page 27 ====
asking the models to complete the prompt. Specif-
ically, pre-deﬁned templates can be designed and
ﬁlled with partial knowledge (e.g. the two entities
involved in a relation) and the generative PLMs can
predict the missing words in the templates (e.g. the
relation type between the two entities.) The tem-
plates can be ﬁxed (Goswami et al., 2020) or they
can be dynamically constructed by a pre-trained
model (Shin et al., 2020) (further details are in Sec-
tion 3.2). The second category instead proposes
to prompt the PLMs with full knowledge and ask
the models to generate a natural language text to
describe that knowledge. This task is known as
Data-to-Text (Kukich, 1983), and the goal is to
obtain a textual description of existing knowledge
bases. The generated textual descriptions can be
used by downstream applications such as knowl-
edge probing (Petroni et al., 2019) or QA (Agarwal
et al., 2021), among others. Agarwal et al. (2021)
introduce a model based on T5 to convert Wiki-
data knowledge graphs (with triples of relations be-
tween two entities) into textual data. The proposed
approach consists of three stages. First, create a
large but noisy training dataset using distant super-
vision for relation extraction by aligning knowl-
edge base (KB) triples to Wikipedia texts. Next,
ﬁne-tune T5 in stages, starting with the distantly
supervised dataset for better coverage, then moving
on to a small clean dataset for less hallucination.
The model learns to generate descriptive sentences
from KB triples. Last, build a ﬁlter for the gener-
ated texts based on semantic quality with respect
to the KB triples by scoring the concatenation of
input and output with BERT.
5.2.3 Question Generation
While PLMs can be directly used for generating
answers for questions, they might be also help-
ful to support existing QA systems. Speciﬁcally,
PLMs can be employed to provide clariﬁcation for
downstream QA systems. The clariﬁcation can be
realized in terms of question clariﬁcation when the
question is ambiguous or it can be fulﬁlled by pro-
viding more context. For instance, in Gao et al.
(2021b) and Min et al. (2020), multi-step question
generation approaches are proposed for ambiguous
QA in which the BART model is prompted with an
ambiguous question and the top similar passages
retrieved in a document to generate candidate an-
swers. If multiple answers are generated, another
BART model is employed to generate a disambigua-
tion question for each answer. The newly generatedquestions are later used to extract other candidate
answers. Finally, the generated answer-question
pairs are ranked to select the top one for the am-
biguous QA problem. Min et al. (2020) show that
the process of generating auxiliary disambiguation
questions could further help the models to encode
the interactions between the original input question
and the candidate answers.
In another line of work, Mao et al. (2021) seek
to generate clariﬁcation texts for input questions
to improve the retrieval quality in open-domain
QA (answering factoid questions without a pre-
speciﬁed domain). The most common approach
for this problem involves a retriever-reader archi-
tecture (Chen et al., 2017), which ﬁrst retrieves a
small subset of documents in the pool using the
input question as the query and then analyzes the
retrieved documents to extract (or generate) an an-
swer. To generate augmented texts for the input
question in the ﬁrst retrieval component, Mao et al.
(2021) ﬁne-tune BART to consume the input ques-
tion and attempt to produce the answer and the sen-
tence or title of the paragraph containing the answer.
This method demonstrates superior performance
for both retrieval and end-to-end QA performance.
In addition to clariﬁcation information, PLMs
can also be used to paraphrase questions to support
QA models. Mass et al. (2020) explore the problem
of FAQ retrieval, retrieving the top QA pair given
a user query. Based on the returned QA pairs (q;a)
from a retrieval system, this work proposes an un-
supervised method to re-rank the pairs to improve
the performance. One of the ranking scores is a
matching score between the question pin the pair
(q;a)with respect to the user question. A triple
network is trained over the tuples (p;q;q0), where
qis a paraphrase of the question pwhileq0is ran-
domly selected questions from other QA pairs. To
this end, Mass et al. (2020) ﬁne-tune GPT-2 over
the concatenations of the corresponding answers
and questions in the FAQ. The ﬁne-tuned GPT-2
is then prompted with the answer ato produce a
paraphraseq0forqin the ranking network.
5.2.4 Inference Rule Generation
For some applications, it is important to understand
the process by which the ﬁnal predictions of the
models are obtained. These intermediate inference
rules provide are another form of model explana-
tion and provide insights for improving model per-
formance.
27

==== Page 28 ====
Paul and Frank (2021) exploit GPT-2 to perform
narrative story completion: given a few sentences
of a story, the goal is to complete the story us-
ing sentences that logically follow the narrative
in the given incomplete story. In an incremental
generation method, each step seeks to generate a
contextualized inference rule conditioned on the
current incomplete story. To accomplish this, GPT-
2 is ﬁne-tuned on human annotation of story line
inferences. Next, given the current story and gener-
ated inference rule, a new sentence for the story is
generated (using another ﬁne-tuned GPT-2 model).
By interspersing the inference rules, the storyline
generations should create a coherent story that fol-
lows logical connections and causal relationships
between events.
Madaan et al. (2021a) employ T5 to generate in-
ference graphs for defeasible inference (Rudinger
et al., 2020). In this mode of reasoning, given a
premise, a hypothesis may be weakened or over-
turned in light of new evidence. As training in-
ference graphs for this problem requires a large
amount of human-annotated inference graphs, they
propose to exploit reasoning graphs in related tasks
to ﬁne-tune T5. In particular, this work leverages
the inﬂuence graphs in the WIQA dataset that in-
cludes a set of procedural passages, each accompa-
nied by a human-curated inﬂuence graph. The in-
ﬂuence graphs are linearized to ﬁt into the seq2seq
framework for ﬁne-tuning T5 and producing infer-
ence graphs for defeasible inference afterward. It
has been shown that the generated inference graphs
can improve human accuracy on defeasible infer-
ence (which is originally challenging for humans).
6 Discussion
Mix of paradigms or PLMs. The three
paradigms presented in this paper are by no means
mutually exclusive. Instead, it is not rare to see
approaches that use two or three paradigms to-
gether: ﬁne-tuning techniques are often used as part
of prompt-based methods; NLP-as-text-generation
approaches often use carefully crafted templates
(prompts); and prompt-based learning often lever-
ages the text generation capabilities of PLMs to
generate words, phrases, or sentences.
A representative example is Khashabi et al.
(2020), which combined three paradigms: appro-
priate prompts from the context and questions help
to formulate several QA tasks into a uniﬁed text
generation problem with seq2seq-based pre-trainedmodels such as T5, with model ﬁne-tuning to im-
prove performance in several QA tasks.
As independently trained models, PLMs are also
by no means mutually exclusive. For example,
ACE (Wang et al., 2021c) shows that combining
multiple PLMs (e.g ELMo, BERT, mBERT, XLM-
R) yields further improvements over using a single
PLM for a range of NLP tasks. Investigation of
the complementarity of different PLMs is a future
research direction.
From another perspective, the design of the train-
ing for MLMs has been driven by the results on the
ﬁne-tuning paradigm, but it is not clear whether an
exploration of different training objectives could
lead to PLMs that are more effective when used
with prompting or generation to solve NLP tasks.
How much unlabeled data is needed? While
PLMs are usually trained on billions of words,
some works have investigated what can be learned
with less pre-training data. Zhang et al. (2021b),
experimenting on RoBERTa models trained on 1M,
10M, 100M and 1B words (Warstadt et al., 2020b,
MiniBERTas), showed that 10M to 100M words
are sufﬁcient to acquire many syntactic and se-
mantic features. Huebner et al. (2021) presented
BabyBERTa, a RoBERTa-based model trained on
language acquisition data that acquires grammat-
ical knowledge comparable to that of pre-trained
RoBERTa-base – and does so with approximately
15x fewer parameters and 6,000x fewer words. On
the other hand, Zhang et al. (2021b), using the pre-
train then ﬁne-tune paradigm for NLU tasks, found
that millions of words are not sufﬁcient for key
NLU skills, which instead may require billions of
words and continue improvements with additional
pre-training data.
How much labeled data is still needed? While
Le Scao and Rush (2021) present experiments to
quantify the impact of prompts, there has been little
work in designing rigorous experiments to study
how many labeled examples are required by PLMs
to achieve various levels of performance for a range
of NLP tasks, and using each of the three paradigms
outlined in this survey. Such studies will provide a
better understanding of the pros and cons of each
formulation, including cost-beneﬁt analyses weigh-
ing the impact of more labeled data, helping devel-
opers design NLP systems that achieve the desired
goal while minimizing human labeling effort.
28

==== Page 29 ====
Can we reduce the amount and cost of compu-
tation? The development of deep learning in gen-
eral and the use of PLMs in particular have dramat-
ically increased the amount of computation used
in NLP, leading to a high environmental footprint.
Schwartz et al. (2020) argue for Green AI, suggest-
ing that we should consider efﬁciency, measured
by the number of ﬂoating-point operations used to
generate a result, as a main evaluation criterion, to-
gether with accuracy. Green AI also aims to reduce
the ﬁnancial cost of the computation. In line with
this approach, Izsak et al. (2021) propose software
optimization and design choices for pre-training
BERT in 24 hours using a single low-end deep
learning server.
Do PLMs excel at semantic understanding or
memorization? Another interesting avenue to
explore is separating extraction or text under-
standing from memorization. To what extent can
PLMs memorize facts and extract an answer from
a passage provided (understanding a text), for
knowledge-intensive tasks such as Questions An-
swering (QA) and Information Retrieval (IR)? This
is motivated by the observation by Wang et al.
(2021a) that PLMs are terrible at remembering
training facts with high precision and that it is also
challenging for them to answer closed-book ques-
tions even if relevant knowledge is retained.
Is explicit linguistic information needed? A re-
lated debate is whether a symbolic annotation cov-
ering syntax or semantics should be integrated to
improve the performance of a PLM-based system,
or whether this information is already present in the
model. Below we list some successes in leverag-
ing syntax or semantics, though there is no def-
inite answer yet. In terms of syntax, Xu et al.
(2021) utilize automatically produced syntax in
both the pre-training and ﬁne-tuning stages, and
show improved performance on several benchmark
datasets. Nguyen et al. (2020b) and Sachan et al.
(2021) inject syntax only in the ﬁne-tuning stage.
Regarding semantics, Zhang et al. (2020d) incor-
porate Semantic Role Labeling predictions into
the pre-training procedure of BERT, improving the
performance on textual entailment and QA tasks.
Wu et al. (2021b) integrate semantic information
into the task-speciﬁc ﬁne-tuning stage, focusing on
the DELPHIN dependencies formalism or “DM”
(Ivanova et al., 2012). Experimenting on RoBERTa,
they obtained improvements on the GLUE bench-mark. Syntax and semantics can also be jointly in-
tegrated, as in Zhou et al. (2020a), where multi-task
learning was used to combine BERT pre-training
with both semantic and syntactic parsing tasks, im-
proving the performance on the GLUE benchmark.
Can we integrate implicit semantic information
using QA? Instead of enriching PLMs with sym-
bolic annotations, a possible alternative for a su-
pervision signal is QA data, as it is easier to an-
swer questions relative to a sentence than to an-
notate linguistic phenomena in it (Roth, 2017; He
et al., 2020). In the s-QuASE PLM presented in He
et al. (2020), further pre-training of BERT on QA
datasets is done while restricting the interaction be-
tween the question and context inputs. s-QuASE is
particularly useful in single-sentence tasks such as
Semantic Role Labeling and NER. A similar direc-
tion was pursued by Jia et al. (2021) who leveraged
question generation and knowledge distillation to
build a QA-based pre-training objective.
Do PLMs need meaningful prompts? The suc-
cess of prompts in zero- and few-shot learning has
been attributed to the prompts serving as instruc-
tions that allow the PLM to learn with fewer exam-
ples, much the way humans would (Mishra et al.,
2021; Schick and Sch ¨utze, 2021a; Brown et al.,
2020). In fact, the excellent results may instead be
attributable to the mere exploitation of patterns in
the training data of PLMs, and not to PLMs’ per-
ceived ability to interpret and follow meaningful
instructions. Webson and Pavlick (2021) show,
for instance, that irrelevant templates match the
performance of meaningful ones in few-shot en-
tailment experiments, adding that some of the tem-
plates discovered by automatic generation of dis-
crete prompts are also unnatural (Shin et al., 2020).
In this sense, the results of continuous prompts also
show that PLMs do not need meaningful instruc-
tions for improving few-shot performance.
Theoretical and empirical analysis The theo-
retical understanding of the paradigms presented
in this survey is preliminary. Apart from the issues
mentioned above, there is a lack of understanding
of what actually makes these paradigms so suc-
cessful, and whether their success can be general-
ized across models and languages. For instance,
prompts may be PLM-dependent, or they may be
transferable across models as indicated in (Perez
et al., 2021). There is very little work on study-
ing the generalization of prompting and generation
29

==== Page 30 ====
across languages, in the way that transfer learning
has been applied to learning in one language and
testing in another (Conneau et al., 2020).
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we present a survey of the three trend-
ing paradigms that use pre-trained language models
for NLP. We describe each of them in depth, and
summarize prior works whose applications have
shown promise. In addition, we describe the use
of pre-trained language models to automatically
generate data that is used to improve performance
in NLP tasks. We hope this survey will provide
readers with key fundamental concepts and a com-
prehensive view of the paradigm shift.
Acknowledgments
This research is based upon work supported in part
by the Ofﬁce of the Director of National Intelli-
gence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA), via Contract No. 2019-
19051600006 under the IARPA BETTER program
and by Contracts FA8750- 19-2-0201 and FA8750-
19-2-1004 with the US Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA). Approved for
Public Release, Distribution Unlimited. The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed
or implied, of ODNI, IARPA, the Department of
Defense or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Gov-
ernment is authorized to reproduce and distribute
reprints for governmental purposes not withstand-
ing any copyright annotation therein.
We would like to thank Paul Cummer for his
insightful comments on this work.
References
Omri Abend and Ari Rappoport. 2013. Universal Con-
ceptual Cognitive Annotation (UCCA). In Proceed-
ings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers) , pages 228–238, Soﬁa, Bulgaria. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Oshin Agarwal, Heming Ge, Siamak Shakeri, and
Rami Al-Rfou. 2021. Knowledge graph based syn-
thetic corpus generation for knowledge-enhanced
language model pre-training. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT .Rodrigo Agerri, I ˜naki San Vicente, Jon Ander Campos,
Ander Barrena, Xabier Saralegi, Aitor Soroa, and
Eneko Agirre. 2020. Give your text representation
models some love: the case for Basque. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference , pages 4781–4788, Marseille, France.
European Language Resources Association.
Chris Alberti, Daniel Andor, Emily Pitler, Jacob De-
vlin, and Michael Collins. 2019. Synthetic QA cor-
pora generation with roundtrip consistency. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics .
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. 2021. Towards
understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
self-distillation in deep learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.09816 .
Emily Alsentzer, John Murphy, William Boag, Wei-
Hung Weng, Di Jindi, Tristan Naumann, and
Matthew McDermott. 2019. Publicly available clini-
cal BERT embeddings. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Clinical Natural Language Processing Workshop ,
pages 72–78, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Asaf Amrami and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Towards bet-
ter substitution-based word sense induction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.12598 .
Ateret Anaby-Tavor, Boaz Carmeli, Esther Goldbraich,
Amir Kantor, George Kour, Segev Shlomov, Naama
Tepper, and Naama Zwerdling. 2020. Do not have
enough data? deep learning to the rescue! In The
Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (AAAI) .
Ben Athiwaratkun, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Jason
Krone, and Bing Xiang. 2020. Augmented natural
language for generative sequence labeling. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Geoff Bacon and Terry Regier. 2019. Does bert
agree? evaluating knowledge of structure depen-
dence through agreement relations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09892 .
Livio Baldini Soares, Nicholas FitzGerald, Jeffrey
Ling, and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Matching the
blanks: Distributional similarity for relation learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2895–2905, Florence, Italy. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Laura Banarescu, Claire Bonial, Shu Cai, Madalina
Georgescu, Kira Grifﬁtt, Ulf Hermjakob, Kevin
Knight, Philipp Koehn, Martha Palmer, and Nathan
Schneider. 2013. Abstract Meaning Representation
for sembanking. In Proceedings of the 7th Linguis-
tic Annotation Workshop and Interoperability with
Discourse , pages 178–186, Soﬁa, Bulgaria. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
30

==== Page 31 ====
Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. 2019. Simple, Scal-
able Adaptation for Neural Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 1538–
1548, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciB-
ERT: A Pretrained Language Model for Scientiﬁc
Text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
3615–3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Eyal Ben-David, Nadav Oved, and Roi Reichart. 2021.
Pada: A prompt-based autoregressive approach for
adaptation to unseen domains. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.12206 .
Sid Black, Gao Leo, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and
Stella Biderman. 2021. GPT-Neo: Large Scale
Autoregressive Language Modeling with Mesh-
Tensorﬂow.
Antoine Bosselut, Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Chai-
tanya Malaviya, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Yejin Choi.
2019. Comet: Commonsense transformers for auto-
matic knowledge graph construction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05317 .
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Samuel Broscheit. 2019. Investigating entity knowl-
edge in BERT with simple neural end-to-end en-
tity linking. In Proceedings of the 23rd Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL) , pages 677–685, Hong Kong, China. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-
V oss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon
Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish,
Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei.
2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Deng Cai and Wai Lam. 2020. AMR parsing via graph-
sequence iterative inference. In Proceedings of the58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 1290–1301, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rockt ¨aschel, Thomas
Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. 2018. e-snli: Nat-
ural language inference with natural language expla-
nations. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems .
Jos´e Ca ˜nete, Gabriel Chaperon, Rodrigo Fuentes, Jou-
Hui Ho, Hojin Kang, and Jorge P ´erez. 2020. Span-
ish pre-trained BERT model and evaluation data. In
PML4DC Workshop at ICLR .
Ilias Chalkidis, Manos Fergadiotis, Prodromos Malaka-
siotis, Nikolaos Aletras, and Ion Androutsopoulos.
2020. LEGAL-BERT: The muppets straight out of
law school. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 2898–
2904, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Branden Chan, Stefan Schweter, and Timo M ¨oller.
2020. German’s next language model. In Proceed-
ings of the 28th International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 6788–6796, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). International Committee on Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Wanxiang Che, Longxu Dou, Yang Xu, Yuxuan Wang,
Yijia Liu, and Ting Liu. 2019. HIT-SCIR at MRP
2019: A uniﬁed pipeline for meaning representa-
tion parsing via efﬁcient training and effective en-
coding. In Proceedings of the Shared Task on Cross-
Framework Meaning Representation Parsing at the
2019 Conference on Natural Language Learning ,
pages 76–85, Hong Kong. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Danqi Chen, Adam Fisch, Jason Weston, and Antoine
Bordes. 2017. Reading Wikipedia to answer open-
domain questions. In Proceedings of the 55th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
Jiaao Chen, Derek Tam, Colin Raffel, Mohit Bansal,
and Diyi Yang. 2021a. An empirical survey of data
augmentation for limited data learning in nlp. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.07499 .
Jianbo Chen, Le Song, Martin J. Wainwright, and
Michael I. Jordan. 2018. Learning to explain: An
information-theoretic perspective on model interpre-
tation. In Proceedings of the 35th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming
Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Ka-
plan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen
Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sas-
try, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray,
Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz
Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
31

==== Page 32 ====
Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cum-
mings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Eliza-
beth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-V oss, William Hebgen
Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie
Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain,
William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N.
Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles
Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welin-
der, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish,
Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021b. Eval-
uating Large Language Models Trained on Code.
arXiv:2107.03374 [cs] . ArXiv: 2107.03374.
Pinzhen Chen, Nikolay Bogoychev, Kenneth Heaﬁeld,
and Faheem Kirefu. 2020a. Parallel sentence min-
ing by constrained decoding. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) .
Qian Chen, Zhu Zhuo, and Wen Wang. 2019. Bert
for joint intent classiﬁcation and slot ﬁlling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1902.10909 .
Qianglong Chen, Feng Ji, Xiangji Zeng, Feng-Lin Li,
Ji Zhang, Haiqing Chen, and Yin Zhang. 2021c.
KACE: Generating knowledge aware contrastive ex-
planations for natural language inference. In Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (ACL) .
Wenhu Chen, Jianshu Chen, Yu Su, Zhiyu Chen, and
William Yang Wang. 2020b. Logical natural lan-
guage generation from open-domain tables. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
Xiang Chen, Ningyu Zhang, Xin Xie, Shumin
Deng, Yunzhi Yao, Chuanqi Tan, Fei Huang,
Luo Si, and Huajun Chen. 2021d. Knowprompt:
Knowledge-aware prompt-tuning with synergistic
optimization for relation extraction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.07650 .
Yunmo Chen, Tongfei Chen, Seth Ebner, Aaron Steven
White, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2020c. Reading
the manual: Event extraction as deﬁnition compre-
hension. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on
Structured Prediction for NLP , pages 74–83, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Avihay Chriqui and Inbal Yahav. 2021. Hebert &
hebemo: a hebrew bert model and a tool for polar-
ity analysis and emotion recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.01909 .
Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang,
Tom Kwiatkowski, Michael Collins, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2019a. BoolQ: Exploring the surprising
difﬁculty of natural yes/no questions. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1(Long and Short Papers) , pages 2924–2936, Min-
neapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2019b. What does BERT
look at? an analysis of BERT’s attention. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 276–286, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. 2008. A uniﬁed
architecture for natural language processing: deep
neural networks with multitask learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 25th international conference on Ma-
chine learning , ICML ’08, pages 160–167, New
York, NY , USA. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco
Guzm ´an, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised
cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.02116 .
Alexis Conneau, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume Lample, Ad-
ina Williams, Samuel Bowman, Holger Schwenk,
and Veselin Stoyanov. 2018. XNLI: Evaluating
cross-lingual sentence representations. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 2475–2485,
Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Samuel Coope, Tyler Farghly, Daniela Gerz, Ivan Vuli ´c,
and Matthew Henderson. 2020. Span-ConveRT:
Few-shot span extraction for dialog with pretrained
conversational representations. In Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 107–121, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Asa Cooper Stickland, Xian Li, and Marjan
Ghazvininejad. 2021. Recipes for adapting
pre-trained monolingual and multilingual models
to machine translation. In Proceedings of the
16th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Main
Volume , pages 3440–3453, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-
vector networks. Machine learning , 20(3):273–297.
Leyang Cui, Yu Wu, Jian Liu, Sen Yang, and Yue
Zhang. 2021. Template-based named entity recog-
nition using BART. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-IJCNLP) .
Yiming Cui, Wanxiang Che, Ting Liu, Bing Qin, Shi-
jin Wang, and Guoping Hu. 2020. Revisiting pre-
trained models for Chinese natural language process-
ing. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 657–668,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
32

==== Page 33 ====
Ido Dagan, Dan Roth, Mark Sammons, and Fabio Mas-
simo Zanzotto. 2013. Recognizing textual entail-
ment: Models and applications. Synthesis Lectures
on Human Language Technologies , 6(4):1–220.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2019.
Transformer-XL: Attentive Language Models be-
yond a Fixed-Length Context. In Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 2978–2988, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yann N Dauphin, Angela Fan, Michael Auli, and David
Grangier. 2017. Language modeling with gated con-
volutional networks. In International conference on
machine learning , pages 933–941. PMLR.
Nicola De Cao, Gautier Izacard, Sebastian Riedel, and
Fabio Petroni. 2021. Autoregressive entity retrieval.
InProceedings of the 9th International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR) .
Pieter Delobelle, Thomas Winters, and Bettina Berendt.
2020. RobBERT: a Dutch RoBERTa-based Lan-
guage Model. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages
3255–3265, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Xinya Du and Claire Cardie. 2020. Event extrac-
tion by answering (almost) natural questions. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 671–683, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Xinya Du, Luheng He, Qi Li, Dian Yu, Panupong Pa-
supat, and Yuan Zhang. 2021a. QA-driven zero-
shot slot ﬁlling with weak supervision pretraining.
InProceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages
654–664, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Xinya Du, Alexander Rush, and Claire Cardie. 2021b.
Template ﬁlling with generative transformers. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT) .Avia Efrat and Omer Levy. 2020. The turking test: Can
language models understand instructions? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.11982 .
Dumitru Erhan, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville,
Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, Pascal Vincent, and Samy
Bengio. 2010. Why Does Unsupervised Pre-training
Help Deep Learning? Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 11(19):625–660.
Allyson Ettinger. 2020. What BERT is not: Lessons
from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for
language models. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 8:34–48.
Mehrdad Farahani, Mohammad Gharachorloo,
Marzieh Farahani, and Mohammad Manthouri.
2021. Parsbert: Transformer-based model for
persian language understanding. Neural Processing
Letters .
Joshua Feldman, Joe Davison, and Alexander M. Rush.
2019. Commonsense knowledge mining from pre-
trained models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00505 .
Rui Feng, Jie Yuan, and Chao Zhang. 2020a. Prob-
ing and ﬁne-tuning reading comprehension mod-
els for few-shot event extraction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11325 .
Steven Y . Feng, Varun Gangal, Jason Wei, Sarath Chan-
dar, Soroush V osoughi, Teruko Mitamura, and Ed-
uard Hovy. 2021. A survey of data augmentation
approaches for NLP. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-IJCNLP) .
Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan,
Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing
Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2020b.
CodeBERT: A pre-trained model for programming
and natural languages. In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 ,
pages 1536–1547, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Steven Fincke, Shantanu Agarwal, Scott Miller, and
Elizabeth Boschee. 2021. Language model prim-
ing for cross-lingual event extraction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.12383 .
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Gold-
ing, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason Phang, Ho-
race He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. 2020a.
The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for lan-
guage modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027 .
Shuyang Gao, Sanchit Agarwal, Di Jin, Tagyoung
Chung, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2020b. From ma-
chine reading comprehension to dialogue state track-
ing: Bridging the gap. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Workshop on Natural Language Processing for Con-
versational AI , pages 79–89, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
33

==== Page 34 ====
Shuyang Gao, Abhishek Sethi, Sanchit Agarwal, Tagy-
oung Chung, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. 2019. Dialog
state tracking: A neural reading comprehension ap-
proach. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual SIGdial
Meeting on Discourse and Dialogue , pages 264–273,
Stockholm, Sweden. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. 2021a.
Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 3816–3830, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yifan Gao, Henghui Zhu, Patrick Ng, Cicero
Nogueira dos Santos, Zhiguo Wang, Feng Nan, De-
jiao Zhang, Ramesh Nallapati, Andrew O Arnold,
and Bing Xiang. 2021b. Answering ambiguous
questions through generative evidence fusion and
round-trip prediction. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
Yoav Goldberg. 2019. Assessing bert’s syntactic abili-
ties. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05287 .
Ankur Goswami, Akshata Bhat, Hadar Ohana, and
Theodoros Rekatsinas. 2020. Unsupervised relation
extraction from language models using constrained
cloze completion. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EMNLP) .
Kristina Gulordava, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave,
Tal Linzen, and Marco Baroni. 2018. Colorless
green recurrent networks dream hierarchically. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages 1195–1205, New
Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Demi Guo, Alexander M. Rush, and Yoon Kim.
2021. Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer Learning with
Diff Pruning. arXiv:2012.07463 [cs] . ArXiv:
2012.07463.
Ruohao Guo and Dan Roth. 2021. Constrained labeled
data generation for low-resource named entity recog-
nition. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 .
Christian Hadiwinoto, Hwee Tou Ng, and Wee Chung
Gan. 2019. Improved word sense disambiguation us-
ing pre-trained contextualized word representations.
InProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the
9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5297–
5306, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.Karen Hambardzumyan, Hrant Khachatrian, and
Jonathan May. 2021. WARP: Word-level Adversar-
ial ReProgramming. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 4921–4933, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Rujun Han, Luca Soldaini, and Alessandro Moschitti.
2021a. Modeling context in answer sentence selec-
tion systems on a latency budget. In Proceedings of
the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL) .
Xu Han, Weilin Zhao, Ning Ding, Zhiyuan Liu,
and Maosong Sun. 2021b. Ptr: Prompt tuning
with rules for text classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.11259 .
Adi Haviv, Jonathan Berant, and Amir Globerson.
2021. BERTese: Learning to speak to BERT. In
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Main Volume , pages 3618–3623, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hangfeng He, Qiang Ning, and Dan Roth. 2020.
QuASE: Question-answer driven sentence encoding.
InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
8743–8758, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Luheng He, Kenton Lee, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2018. Jointly predicting predicates and argu-
ments in neural semantic role labeling. In Proceed-
ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers) , pages 364–369, Melbourne, Australia. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Charles T. Hemphill, John J. Godfrey, and George R.
Doddington. 1990. The ATIS spoken language sys-
tems pilot corpus. In Speech and Natural Language:
Proceedings of a Workshop Held at Hidden Valley,
Pennsylvania, June 24-27,1990 .
Dan Hendrycks, Xiaoyuan Liu, Eric Wallace, Adam
Dziedzic, Rishabh Krishnan, and Dawn Song. 2020.
Pretrained transformers improve out-of-distribution
robustness. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2744–2751, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Sepp Hochreiter and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. 1997.
Long short-term memory. Neural computation ,
9(8):1735–1780.
Ehsan Hosseini-Asl, Bryan McCann, Chien-Sheng Wu,
Semih Yavuz, and Richard Socher. 2020. A simple
language model for task-oriented dialogue. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.00796 .
34

==== Page 35 ====
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski,
Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, Andrea
Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly.
2019. Parameter-Efﬁcient Transfer Learning for
NLP. In International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 2790–2799. PMLR.
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers) , pages 328–339, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chao-Chun Hsu, Eric Lind, Luca Soldaini, and
Alessandro Moschitti. 2021. Answer generation for
retrieval-based question answering systems. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics (ACL-IJCNLP) .
Kexin Huang, Jaan Altosaar, and Rajesh Ran-
ganath. 2020. ClinicalBERT: Modeling Clini-
cal Notes and Predicting Hospital Readmission.
arXiv:1904.05342 [cs] . ArXiv: 1904.05342.
Patrick Huber, Armen Aghajanyan, Barlas O ˘guz,
Dmytro Okhonko, Wen tau Yih, Sonal Gupta, and
Xilun Chen. 2021. Ccqa: A new web-scale ques-
tion answering dataset for model pre-training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2110.07731 .
Philip Huebner, Elior Sulem, Cynthia Fisher, and Dan
Roth. 2021. Babyberta: Learning more grammar
with small-scale child-directed language. In Proc.
of the Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL) .
Minyoung Huh, Pulkit Agrawal, and Alexei A. Efros.
2016. What makes ImageNet good for transfer learn-
ing? arXiv:1608.08614 [cs] . ArXiv: 1608.08614.
Jena D. Hwang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
Jeff Da, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Antoine Bosselut, and
Yejin Choi. 2020. Comet-atomic 2020: On symbolic
and neural commonsense knowledge graphs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.05953 .
Tohoku University Inui Laboratory. 2021. Pretrained
Japanese BERT models. GitHub.
Angelina Ivanova, Stephan Oepen, Lilja Øvrelid, and
Dan Flickinger. 2012. Who did what to whom? a
contrastive study of syntacto-semantic dependencies.
InProceedings of the Sixth Linguistic Annotation
Workshop , pages 2–11, Jeju, Republic of Korea. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Mohit Iyyer, John Wieting, Kevin Gimpel, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Adversarial example generation
with syntactically controlled paraphrase networks.
InProceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(NAACL-HLT) .Peter Izsak, Moshe Berchansky, and Omer Levy. 2021.
How to train bert with an academic budget. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.07705 .
Robin Jia, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2021.
Question answering infused pre-training of general-
purpose contextualized representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.08190 .
Wei Jiang, Zhenghua Li, Yu Zhang, and Min Zhang.
2019. HLT@SUDA at SemEval-2019 task 1:
UCCA graph parsing as constituent tree parsing.
InProceedings of the 13th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation , pages 11–15, Minneapo-
lis, Minnesota, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zhengbao Jiang, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Jun Araki,
Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. 2020. X-FACTR:
Multilingual factual knowledge retrieval from pre-
trained language models. In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5943–5959,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhengbao Jiang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham
Neubig. 2021. How can we know when language
models know? on the calibration of language mod-
els for question answering. Transactions of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics , 8:423–438.
Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S.
Weld, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2020.
SpanBERT: Improving pre-training by representing
and predicting spans. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics , 8:64–77.
Mandar Joshi, Omer Levy, Daniel S. Weld, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. Bert for coreference res-
olution: Baselines and analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.09091 .
Mihir Kale and Abhinav Rastogi. 2020. Text-to-text
pre-training for data-to-text tasks. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Generation , pages 97–102, Dublin, Ireland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan,
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Scaling Laws for Neural Language
Models. arXiv:2001.08361 [cs, stat] . ArXiv:
2001.08361.
Daniel Khashabi, Sewon Min, Tushar Khot, Ashish
Sabharwal, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Han-
naneh Hajishirzi. 2020. UNIFIEDQA: Crossing for-
mat boundaries with a single QA system. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 1896–1907, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Been Kim, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Rajiv Khanna.
2016. Examples are not enough, learn to criticize!
35

==== Page 36 ====
criticism for interpretability. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS) .
Jinkyu Kim, Anna Rohrbach, Trevor Darrell, John F.
Canny, and Zeynep Akata. 2018. Textual expla-
nations for self-driving vehicles. In In Proceed-
ings of the European conference on computer vision
(ECCV) .
Karen Kukich. 1983. Design of a knowledge-based re-
port generator. In 21st Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL) .
Sawan Kumar and Partha Talukdar. 2021. Reorder-
ing examples helps during priming-based few-shot
learning. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages
4507–4518, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sawan Kumar and Partha P. Talukdar. 2020. NILE :
Natural language inference with faithful natural lan-
guage explanations. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, (ACL) .
Varun Kumar, Ashutosh Choudhary, and Eunah Cho.
2020. Data augmentation using pre-trained trans-
former models. In arXiv .
Yuri Kuratov and Mikhail Arkhipov. 2019. Adaptation
of deep bidirectional multilingual transformers for
russian language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07213 .
John Lafferty and Chengxiang Zhai. 2001. Document
language models, query models, and risk minimiza-
tion for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
24th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval .
John D. Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random ﬁelds:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling se-
quence data. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning , ICML
’01, page 282–289, San Francisco, CA, USA. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Huiyuan Lai, Antonio Toral, and Malvina Nissim.
2021. Thank you bart! rewarding pre-trained mod-
els improves formality style transfer. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.06947 .
Guillaume Lample and Alexis Conneau. 2019. Cross-
lingual language model pretraining. arXiv preprint
arXiv: .
Guillaume Lample, Myle Ott, Alexis Conneau, Lu-
dovic Denoyer, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2018.
Phrase-based & neural unsupervised machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 5039–5049, Brussels, Belgium. Association
for Computational Linguistics.Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
cut. 2020. ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-
supervised Learning of Language Representations.
arXiv:1909.11942 [cs] .
Hang Le, Lo ¨ıc Vial, Jibril Frej, Vincent Segonne, Max-
imin Coavoux, Benjamin Lecouteux, Alexandre Al-
lauzen, Benoit Crabb ´e, Laurent Besacier, and Didier
Schwab. 2020. FlauBERT: Unsupervised language
model pre-training for French. In Proceedings of
the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Con-
ference , pages 2479–2490, Marseille, France. Euro-
pean Language Resources Association.
Teven Le Scao and Alexander Rush. 2021. How many
data points is a prompt worth? In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies , pages 2627–2636, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton.
2015. Deep learning. nature , 521(7553):436–444.
Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim,
Donghyeon Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So,
and Jaewoo Kang. 2019. BioBERT: a pre-
trained biomedical language representation model
for biomedical text mining. Bioinformatics ,
36(4):1234–1240.
Kenton Lee, Luheng He, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018.
Higher-order coreference resolution with coarse-to-
ﬁne inference. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages
687–692, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. 2021.
The power of scale for parameter-efﬁcient prompt
tuning. In EMNLP .
Hector Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgen-
stern. 2012. The winograd schema challenge. In
Thirteenth International Conference on the Princi-
ples of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning.
Omer Levy, Minjoon Seo, Eunsol Choi, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2017. Zero-shot relation extraction via
reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 21st
Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL 2017) , pages 333–342, Vancou-
ver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
36

==== Page 37 ====
Linguistics , pages 7871–7880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Dianqi Li, Yizhe Zhang, Hao Peng, Liqun Chen, Chris
Brockett, Ming-Ting Sun, and Bill Dolan. 2021a.
Contextualized perturbation for textual adversarial
attack. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (NAACL-HLT) .
Fayuan Li, Weihua Peng, Yuguang Chen, Quan Wang,
Lu Pan, Yajuan Lyu, and Yong Zhu. 2020a. Event
extraction as multi-turn question answering. In Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 829–838, Online. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Wayne Xin Zhao, and Ji-
Rong Wen. 2021b. Pretrained language models
for text generation: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.10311 .
Kun Li, Chengbo Chen, Xiaojun Quan, Qing Ling,
and Yan Song. 2020b. Conditional augmentation
for aspect term extraction via masked sequence-to-
sequence generation. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL) .
Qi Li, Heng Ji, Yu Hong, and Sujian Li. 2014. Con-
structing information networks using one single
model. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) . Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Sha Li, Heng Ji, and Jiawei Han. 2021c. Document-
level event argument extraction by conditional gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 894–908, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. 2021. Preﬁx-
tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for genera-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00190 .
Xiaoya Li, Jingrong Feng, Yuxian Meng, Qinghong
Han, Fei Wu, and Jiwei Li. 2020c. A uniﬁed MRC
framework for named entity recognition. In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5849–
5859, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Xiaoya Li, Fan Yin, Zijun Sun, Xiayu Li, Arianna
Yuan, Duo Chai, Mingxin Zhou, and Jiwei Li. 2019a.
Entity-relation extraction as multi-turn question an-
swering. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 1340–1350, Florence, Italy. Association
for Computational Linguistics.Xin Li, Lidong Bing, Wenxuan Zhang, and Wai Lam.
2019b. Exploiting BERT for End-to-End Aspect-
based Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings of the 5th
Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text (W-NUT
2019) , pages 34–41, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. 2021.
TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Hu-
man Falsehoods. arXiv:2109.07958 [cs] . ArXiv:
2109.07958.
Jeffrey Ling, Nicholas FitzGerald, Zifei Shan,
Livio Baldini Soares, Thibault F ´evry, David Weiss,
and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2020. Learning cross-
context entity representations from text. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.03765 .
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blun-
som. 2017. Program induction by rationale genera-
tion: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word
problems. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) .
Tal Linzen. 2020. How can we accelerate progress to-
wards human-like linguistic generalization? In Pro-
ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 5210–
5217, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg.
Assessing the ability of lstms to learn syntax-
sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics , 4:521–535.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan,
Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. 2021a. What
makes good in-context examples for gpt- 3?arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.06804 .
Jian Liu, Yubo Chen, Kang Liu, Wei Bi, and Xiaojiang
Liu. 2020a. Event extraction as machine reading
comprehension. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1641–1651, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang,
Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig. 2021b. Pre-
train, Prompt, and Predict: A Systematic Survey of
Prompting Methods in Natural Language Processing.
arXiv:2107.13586 [cs] . ArXiv: 2107.13586.
Ruibo Liu, Guangxuan Xu, Chenyan Jia, Weicheng
Ma, Lili Wang, and Soroush V osoughi. 2020b. Data
boost: Text data augmentation through reinforce-
ment learning guided conditional generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Xiao Liu, Yanan Zheng, Zhengxiao Du, Ming Ding,
Yujie Qian, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. 2021c. Gpt
understands, too. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.10385 .
37

==== Page 38 ====
Yang Liu and Mirella Lapata. 2019. Text summa-
rization with pretrained encoders. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.08345 .
Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey
Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020c. Multilingual denoising
pre-training for neural machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.08210 .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretrain-
ing Approach. arXiv:1907.11692 [cs] .
Robert L. Logan IV, Ivana Bala ˇzevi´c, Eric Wallace,
Fabio Petroni, Sameer Singh, and Sebastian Riedel.
2021. Cutting down on prompts and parameters:
Simple few-shot learning with language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13353 .
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian
Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. 2021a. Fantastically
ordered prompts and where to ﬁnd them: Over-
coming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.08786 .
Yaojie Lu, Hongyu Lin, Jin Xu, Xianpei Han, Jialong
Tang, Annan Li, Le Sun, Meng Liao, and Shaoyi
Chen. 2021b. Text2Event: Controllable sequence-
to-structure generation for end-to-end event extrac-
tion. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (ACL) .
Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017. A uniﬁed
approach to interpreting model predictions. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NIPS) .
Qing Lyu, Hongming Zhang, Elior Sulem, and Dan
Roth. 2021. Zero-shot event extraction via trans-
fer learning: Challenges and insights. In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 322–332,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shuming Ma, Jian Yang, Haoyang Huang, Zewen Chi,
Li Dong, Dongdong Zhang, Hany Hassan Awadalla,
Alexandre Muzio, Akiko Eriguchi, Saksham Sing-
hal, Xia Song, Arul Menezes, and Furu Wei. 2020.
Xlm-t: Scaling up multilingual machine translation
with pretrained cross-lingual transformer encoders.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15547 .
Brian MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project:
Tools for analyzing talk. transcription format and
programs , volume 1. Psychology Press.
Aman Madaan, Dheeraj Rajagopal, Niket Tandon, Yim-
ing Yang, and Eduard Hovy. 2021a. Could you giveme a hint? generating inference graphs for defea-
sible reasoning. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 .
Aman Madaan, Dheeraj Rajagopal, Yiming Yang, Ab-
hilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, and Shrimai
Prabhumoye. 2020. EIGEN: event inﬂuence genera-
tion using pre-trained language models. In arXiv .
Nishtha Madaan, Inkit Padhi, Naveen Panwar, and Dip-
tikalyan Saha. 2021b. Generate your counterfactu-
als: Towards controlled counterfactual generation
for text. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, (AAAI) .
Eric Malmi, Sebastian Krause, Sascha Rothe, Daniil
Mirylenka, and Aliaksei Severyn. 2019. Encode,
tag, realize: High-precision text editing. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 5054–5065, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Yuning Mao, Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Yelong
Shen, Jianfeng Gao, Jiawei Han, and Weizhu Chen.
2021. Generation-augmented retrieval for open-
domain question answering. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (ACL) .
Louis Martin, Angela Fan, ´Eric de la Clergerie, An-
toine Bordes, and Beno ˆıt Sagot. 2021. Muss: Multi-
lingual unsupervised sentence simpliﬁcation by min-
ing paraphrases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00352 .
Louis Martin, Benjamin Muller, Pedro Javier Or-
tiz Su ´arez, Yoann Dupont, Laurent Romary, ´Eric
de la Clergerie, Djam ´e Seddah, and Beno ˆıt Sagot.
2020. CamemBERT: a tasty French language model.
InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
7203–7219, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yosi Mass, Boaz Carmeli, Haggai Roitman, and David
Konopnicki. 2020. Unsupervised FAQ retrieval with
question generation and BERT. In Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL) .
R. Thomas McCoy, Robert Frank, and Tal Linzen.
2020. Does syntax need to grow on trees? sources of
hierarchical inductive bias in sequence-to-sequence
networks. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , 8:125–140.
Julian Michael, Gabriel Stanovsky, Luheng He, Ido Da-
gan, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Crowdsourcing
question-answer meaning representations. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
ume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 560–568, New Orleans,
38

==== Page 39 ====
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. AmbigQA: Answering am-
biguous open-domain questions. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP) .
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Cross-task generaliza-
tion via natural language crowdsourcing instructions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773 .
Makoto Miwa and Mohit Bansal. 2016. End-to-end re-
lation extraction using LSTMs on sequences and tree
structures. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(ACL) . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Khalil Mrini, Franck Dernoncourt, Quan Hung Tran,
Trung Bui, Walter Chang, and Ndapa Nakashole.
2020. Rethinking self-attention: Towards inter-
pretability in neural parsing. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2020 , pages 731–742, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Mahdi Namazifar, Alexandros Papangelis, Gokhan
Tur, and Dilek Hakkani-T ¨ur. 2020. Language
model is all you need: Natural language under-
standing as question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.03023 .
Tahira Naseem, Abhishek Shah, Hui Wan, Radu Flo-
rian, Salim Roukos, and Miguel Ballesteros. 2019.
Rewarding Smatch: Transition-based AMR parsing
with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 4586–4592, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dat Quoc Nguyen, Thanh Vu, and Anh Tuan Nguyen.
2020a. BERTweet: A pre-trained language model
for English tweets. In Proceedings of the 2020 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 9–14,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Minh Van Nguyen, Viet Dac Lai, Amir Pouran
Ben Veyseh, and Thien Huu Nguyen. 2021. Trankit:
A light-weight transformer-based toolkit for multi-
lingual natural language processing. In Proceedings
of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Sys-
tem Demonstrations , pages 80–90, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Thien Huu Nguyen, Kyunghyun Cho, and Ralph Gr-
ishman. 2016. Joint event extraction via recurrent
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2016 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies .Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Shaﬁq Joty, Steven C. H. Hoi,
and Richard Socher. 2020b. Tree-structured atten-
tion with hierarchical accumulation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.08046 .
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit
Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Ad-
versarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 4885–4901, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Rodrigo Nogueira, Zhiying Jiang, Ronak Pradeep, and
Jimmy Lin. 2020. Document ranking with a pre-
trained sequence-to-sequence model. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EMNLP) .
Abiola Obamuyide and Andreas Vlachos. 2018. Zero-
shot relation classiﬁcation as textual entailment. In
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Fact Extrac-
tion and VERiﬁcation (FEVER) , pages 72–78, Brus-
sels, Belgium. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Kostiantyn Omelianchuk, Vipul Raheja, and Oleksandr
Skurzhanskyi. 2021. Text Simpliﬁcation by Tag-
ging. In Proceedings of the 16th Workshop on Inno-
vative Use of NLP for Building Educational Appli-
cations , pages 11–25, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Wenhan Xiong, Min-
Yen Kan, and William Yang Wang. 2021a. Zero-
shot fact veriﬁcation by claim generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (ACL) .
Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Wenhan Xiong, Min-
Yen Kan1, and William Yang Wang. 2021b. Unsu-
pervised multi-hop question answering by question
generation:. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (ACL-HLT) .
Giovanni Paolini, Ben Athiwaratkun, Jason Krone,
Jie Ma, Alessandro Achille, Rishita Anubhai, Ci-
cero dos Santos Nogueira, Bing Xiang, and Stefano
Soatto. 2021. Structured prediction as translation
between augmented natural languages. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) .
Yannis Papanikolaou and Andrea Pierleoni. 2020.
Dare: Data augmented relation extraction with gpt-2.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.13845 .
Loreto Parisi, Simone Francia, and Paolo Magnani.
2020. UmBERTo: an Italian language model trained
with whole word masking. GitHub.
39

==== Page 40 ====
Dong Huk Park, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Zeynep Akata,
Anna Rohrbach, Bernt Schiele, Trevor Darrell, and
Marcus Rohrbach. 2018. Multimodal explanations:
Justifying decisions and pointing to the evidence. In
Proceedings of 2018 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
Debjit Paul and Anette Frank. 2021. Coins: Dynam-
ically generating contextualized inference rules for
narrative story completion. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL) .
Baolin Peng, Chenguang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Jian-
feng Gao. 2020. Data augmentation for spoken lan-
guage understanding via pretrained models.
Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2021.
True few-shot learning with language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2105.11447 .
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep Contextualized Word Rep-
resentations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) , pages
2227–2237, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Fabio Petroni, Patrick Lewis, Aleksandra Piktus, Tim
Rockt ¨aschel, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H. Miller, and
Sebastian Riedel. 2020. How context affects lan-
guage models’ factual predictions. In AKBC .
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rockt ¨aschel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
Alexander Miller. 2019. Language models as knowl-
edge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .
Jonas Pfeiffer, Andreas R ¨uckl´e, Clifton Poth, Aish-
warya Kamath, Ivan Vuli ´c, Sebastian Ruder,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Iryna Gurevych. 2020a.
AdapterHub: A framework for adapting transform-
ers. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 46–54, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vuli ´c, Iryna Gurevych, and Se-
bastian Ruder. 2020b. MAD-X: An Adapter-Based
Framework for Multi-Task Cross-Lingual Transfer.
InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 7654–7673, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Marco Polignano, Pierpaolo Basile, Marco Degemmis,
Giovanni Semeraro, and Valerio Basile. 2019. Al-
berto: Italian bert language understanding model for
nlp challenging tasks based on tweets. In CLiC-it .Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1998. A language
modeling approach to information retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st Annual International ACM SI-
GIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval .
Jakob Prange, Nathan Schneider, and Vivek Sriku-
mar. 2021. Supertagging the long tail with tree-
structured decoding of complex categories. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 9(0):243–260.
Sai Prasanna, Anna Rogers, and Anna Rumshisky.
2020. When BERT Plays the Lottery, All Tickets
Are Winning. In Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) , pages 3208–3229, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Raul Puri and Bryan Catanzaro. 2019. Zero-shot
text classiﬁcation with generative language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.10165 .
Guanghui Qin and Jason Eisner. 2021. Learning how
to ask: Querying LMs with mixtures of soft prompts.
InProceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,
pages 5203–5212, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
XiPeng Qiu, TianXiang Sun, YiGe Xu, YunFan Shao,
Ning Dai, and XuanJing Huang. 2020. Pre-
trained models for natural language processing: A
survey. Science China Technological Sciences ,
63(10):1872–1897.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving Language Under-
standing by Generative Pre-Training. OpenAI blog ,
page 12.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Lan-
guage models are unsupervised multitask learners.
OpenAI blog , 1(8):9.
Evani Radiya-Dixit and Xin Wang. 2020. How ﬁne can
ﬁne-tuning be? learning efﬁcient language models.
InProceedings of the Twenty Third International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics ,
volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search , pages 2435–2443. PMLR.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the Lim-
its of Transfer Learning with a Uniﬁed Text-to-Text
Transformer. In Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search .
Pranav Rajpurkar, Robin Jia, and Percy Liang. 2018.
Know what you don’t know: Unanswerable ques-
tions for squad. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03822 .
40

==== Page 41 ====
Giulio Ravasio and Leonardo Di Perna. 2020.
GilBERTo: An Italian pretrained language
model based on roberta. https://github.com/idb-
ita/GilBERTo . GitHub.
Liliang Ren, Chenkai Sun, Heng Ji, and Julia Hock-
enmaier. 2021. HySPA: Hybrid span generation
for scalable text-to-graph extraction. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
IJCNLP) .
Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt pro-
gramming for large language models: Beyond the
few-shot paradigm. In Extended Abstracts of the
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, CHI EA ’21 , New York, NY , USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Marco T ´ulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2016. ”why should I trust you?”: Explain-
ing the predictions of any classiﬁer. In Proceedings
of the Demonstrations Session of 2016 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (NAACL-HLT) .
Marco T ´ulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos
Guestrin. 2018. Semantically equivalent adversarial
rules for debugging NLP models. In Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, (ACL) .
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky.
2020. A primer in BERTology: What we know
about how BERT works. Transactions of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics , 8:842–866.
Subendhu Rongali, Luca Soldaini, Emilio Monti, and
Wael Hamza. 2020. Don’t parse, generate! a se-
quence to sequence architecture for task-oriented se-
mantic parsing. In Proceedings of the International
World Wide Web Conference (WWW) .
Alexis Ross, Ana Marasovic, and Matthew E. Peters.
2021. Explaining NLP models via minimal con-
trastive editing (mice). In Findings of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: (ACL/IJCNLP) .
Hayley Ross, Jonathon Cai, and Bonan Min. 2020. Ex-
ploring Contextualized Neural Language Models for
Temporal Dependency Parsing. In Proceedings of
the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 8548–
8553, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Dan Roth. 2017. Incidental supervision: Moving be-
yond supervised learning. In Proc. of the Conferen-
nce on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) .
Rachel Rudinger, Vered Shwartz, Jena D. Hwang,
Chandra Bhagavatula, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan
Le Bras, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020.
Thinking like a skeptic: Defeasible inference in nat-
ural language. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (EMNLP) .Devendra Sachan, Yuhao Zhang, Peng Qi, and
William L. Hamilton. 2021. Do syntax trees help
pre-trained transformers extract information? In
Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Main Volume , pages 2647–2661, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ali Safaya, Moutasem Abdullatif, and Deniz Yuret.
2020. KUISAIL at SemEval-2020 task 12: BERT-
CNN for offensive speech identiﬁcation in social me-
dia. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on
Semantic Evaluation , pages 2054–2059, Barcelona
(online). International Committee for Computational
Linguistics.
Oscar Sainz, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, Gorka Labaka, An-
der Barrena, and Eneko Agirre. 2021. Label verbal-
ization and entailment for effective zero- and few-
shot relation extraction. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) , Punta Cana, Domini-
can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Oscar Sainz and German Rigau. 2021.
Ask2Transformers: Zero-shot domain labelling
with pretrained language models. In Proceedings
of the 11th Global Wordnet Conference , pages
44–52, University of South Africa (UNISA). Global
Wordnet Association.
Julian Salazar, Davis Liang, Toan Q. Nguyen, and Ka-
trin Kirchhoff. 2020. Masked language model scor-
ing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 2699–2712, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2020. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.01108 .
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H.
Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
Chafﬁn, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja,
Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla,
Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak,
Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian
Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Baw-
den, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen,
Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry,
Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Stella Biderman,
Leo Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexan-
der M. Rush. 2021. Multitask prompted training en-
ables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.0820 .
Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Xiaofei Ma, Ramesh Nal-
lapati, Zhiheng Huang, and Bing Xiang. 2020. Be-
yond [CLS] through ranking by generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .
41

==== Page 42 ====
Maarten Sap, Ronan LeBras, Emily Allaway, Chan-
dra Bhagavatula, Nicholas Lourie, Hannah Rashkin,
Brendan Roof, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2019.
Atomic: An atlas of machine commonsense for if-
then reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00146 .
Timo Schick, Helmut Schmid, and Hinrich Sch ¨utze.
2020. Automatically identifying words that can
serve as labels for few-shot text classiﬁcation. In
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics , pages 5569–5578,
Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee
on Computational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2020. BERTRAM:
Improved word embeddings have big impact on con-
textualized model performance. In Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , pages 3996–4007, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2021a. Exploiting
cloze-questions for few-shot text classiﬁcation and
natural language inference. In Proceedings of the
16th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Main Vol-
ume, pages 255–269, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2021b. It’s not just
size that matters: Small language models are also
few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies , pages 2339–2352, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2019. Rare words:
A major problem for contextualized embeddings and
how to ﬁx it by attentive mimicking. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.06707 .
Timo Schick and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2020. Few-shot text
generation with pattern-exploiting training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.11926 .
Timo Schick and Hinrich Sch ¨utze. 2021. Generating
datasets with pretrained language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.07540 .
Timo Schick, Sahana Udupa, and Hinrich Sch ¨utze.
2021. Self-diagnosis and self-debiasing: A pro-
posal for reducing corpus-based bias in nlp. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.00453 . To appear in TACL.
Tal Schuster, Ori Ram, Regina Barzilay, and Amir
Globerson. 2019. Cross-lingual alignment of con-
textual word embeddings, with applications to zero-
shot dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and
Short Papers) , pages 1599–1613, Minneapolis, Min-
nesota. Association for Computational Linguistics.Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and Oren
Etzioni. 2020. Green AI. Communications of the
ACM , 63(12):54–63.
Stefan Schweter. 2020. Berturk - bert models for turk-
ish.
Amit Seker, Elron Bandel, Dan Bareket, Idan
Brusilovsky, Refael Shaked Greenfeld, and Reut
Tsarfaty. 2021. Alephbert:a hebrew large pre-
trained language model to start-off your hebrew nlp
application with. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.04052 .
Siamak Shakeri, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Henghui
Zhu, Patrick Ng, Feng Nan, Zhiguo Wang, Ramesh
Nallapati, and Bing Xiang. 2020. End-to-end syn-
thetic data generation for domain adaptation of ques-
tion answering systems. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) .
Peng Shi and Jimmy Lin. 2019. Simple bert models for
relation extraction and semantic role labeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.05255 .
Richard Shin, Christopher Lin, Sam Thomson, Charles
Chen, Subhro Roy, Emmanouil Antonios Platanios,
Adam Pauls, Dan Klein, Jason Eisner, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2021. Constrained language models
yield few-shot semantic parsers.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L. Logan IV ,
Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. 2020. AutoPrompt:
Eliciting Knowledge from Language Models with
Automatically Generated Prompts. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
4222–4235, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
F´abio Souza, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Roberto Lotufo.
2020a. BERTimbau: pretrained BERT models for
Brazilian Portuguese. In 9th Brazilian Conference
on Intelligent Systems, BRACIS .
F´abio Souza, Rodrigo Nogueira, and Roberto Lotufo.
2020b. Portuguese named entity recognition using
bert-crf. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10649 .
Asa Cooper Stickland and Iain Murray. 2019. BERT
and PALs: Projected Attention Layers for Efﬁcient
Adaptation in Multi-Task Learning. In Proceedings
of the 36th International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 5986–5995. PMLR. ISSN: 2640-
3498.
Chi Sun, Xipeng Qiu, Yige Xu, and Xuanjing Huang.
2020. How to ﬁne-tune bert for text classiﬁcation?
arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05583 .
Yu Sun, Shuohuan Wang, Shikun Feng, Siyu Ding,
Chao Pang, Junyuan Shang, Jiaxiang Liu, Xuyi
Chen, Yanbin Zhao, Yuxiang Lu, Weixin Liu, Zhi-
hua Wu, Weibao Gong, Jianzhong Liang, Zhizhou
Shang, Peng Sun, Wei Liu, Xuan Ouyang, Dian-
hai Yu, Hao Tian, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang.
42

==== Page 43 ====
2021. Ernie 3.0: Large-scale knowledge enhanced
pre-training for language understanding and genera-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02137 .
Ehsan Taher, Seyed Abbas Hoseini, and Mehrnoush
Shamsfard. 2019. Beheshti-NER: Persian named
entity recognition using BERT. In Proceedings of
The First International Workshop on NLP Solutions
for Under Resourced Languages (NSURL 2019) co-
located with ICNLSP 2019 - Short Papers , pages 37–
42, Trento, Italy. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Alon Talmor, Yanai Elazar, Yoav Goldberg, and
Jonathan Berant. 2020. olmpics – on what lan-
guage model pre-training captures. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.13283 .
Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019.
BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4593–
4601, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction
and VERiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers) , pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ke Tran, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof Monz. 2018.
The importance of being recurrent for modeling hi-
erarchical structure. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 4731–4736, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Trieu H. Trinh and Quoc V . Le. 2019. A simple
method for commonsense reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.02847 .
Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jacob Menick, Serkan Cabi,
S. M. Ali Eslami, Oriol Vinyals, and Felix Hill. 2021.
Multimodal few-shot learning with frozen language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13884 .
Ahmet ¨Ust¨un, Arianna Bisazza, Gosse Bouma, and
Gertjan van Noord. 2020. UDapter: Language adap-
tation for truly Universal Dependency parsing. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 2302–2315, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All
you Need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Viet Lai, Franck Dernon-
court, and Thien Huu Nguyen. 2021a. Unleash GPT-
2 power for event detection. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6271–6282.
Amir Pouran Ben Veyseh, Minh Van Nguye, Bonan
Min, and Thien Huu Nguyen. 2021b. Augment-
ing open-domain event detection with synthetic data
from gpt-2. In Proceedings of the European Confer-
ence on Machine Learning and Principles and Prac-
tice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases .
Oriol Vinyals, Meire Fortunato, and Navdeep Jaitly.
2015. Pointer networks. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 28:2692–2700.
Antti Virtanen, Jenna Kanerva, Rami Ilo, Jouni Luoma,
Juhani Luotolahti, Tapio Salakoski, Filip Ginter, and
Sampo Pyysalo. 2019. Multilingual is not enough:
Bert for ﬁnnish. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.07076 .
Wietse de Vries, Andreas van Cranenburgh, Arianna
Bisazza, Tommaso Caselli, Gertjan van Noord, and
Malvina Nissim. 2019. Bertje: A dutch bert model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09582 .
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell.
2018. Counterfactual explanations without opening
the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr.
Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Nikhil Kandpal, Matt Gardner,
and Sameer Singh. 2019. Universal adversarial trig-
gers for attacking and analyzing NLP. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2153–2162, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ben Wang. 2021. Mesh-Transformer-
JAX: Model-Parallel Implementation of
Transformer Language Model with JAX.
https://github.com/kingoﬂolz/mesh-transformer-
jax.
Cunxiang Wang, Pai Liu, and Yue Zhang. 2021a. Can
generative pre-trained language models serve as
knowledge bases for closed-book QA? In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3241–3251,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sinong Wang, Han Fang, Madian Khabsa, Hanzi Mao,
and Hao Ma. 2021b. Entailment as few-shot learner.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14690 .
Xinyu Wang, Yong Jiang, Nguyen Bach, Tao Wang,
Zhongqiang Huang, Fei Huang, and Kewei Tu.
2021c. Automated concatenation of embed-
dings for structured prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.05006 .
43

==== Page 44 ====
Xinyu Wang and Kewei Tu. 2020. Second-order neural
dependency parsing with message passing and end-
to-end training. In Proceedings of the 1st Confer-
ence of the Asia-Paciﬁc Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 10th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 93–99, Suzhou, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-
hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R.
Bowman. 2020a. BLiMP: A benchmark of linguis-
tic minimal pairs for English. In Proceedings of the
Society for Computation in Linguistics 2020 , pages
409–410, New York, New York. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Alex Warstadt, Amanpreet Singh, and Samuel R. Bow-
man. 2019. CoLA: The Corpus of Linguistic Ac-
ceptability (with added annotations). http://nyu-
mll.github.io/cola .
Alex Warstadt, Yian Zhang, Xiaocheng Li, Haokun
Liu, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020b. Learning
which features matter: RoBERTa acquires a prefer-
ence for linguistic generalizations (eventually). In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 217–235, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Albert Webson and Ellie Pavlick. 2021. Do prompt-
based models really understand the meaning of their
prompts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01247 .
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y . Zhao, Kelvin
Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
drew M. Dai, and Quoc V . Le. 2021. Fine-
tuned Language Models Are Zero-Shot Learners.
arXiv:2109.01652 [cs] . ArXiv: 2109.01652.
Rongxiang Weng, Heng Yu, Shujian Huang, Shanbo
Cheng, and Weihua Luo. 2020. Acquiring knowl-
edge from pre-trained model to neural machine
translation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 9266–
9273.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Ledell Wu, Fabio Petroni, Martin Josifoski, Sebastian
Riedel, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020a. Scalable zero-
shot entity linking with dense entity retrieval. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.03814 .
Shanchan Wu and Yifan He. 2019. Enriching
pre-trained language model with entity informa-
tion for relation classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.0828 .
Tongshuang Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Jeffrey Heer,
and Daniel S. Weld. 2021a. Polyjuice: Generating
counterfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and im-
proving models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00288 .
Wei Wu, Fei Wang, Arianna Yuan, Fei Wu, and Ji-
wei Li. 2020b. CorefQA: Coreference resolution as
query-based span prediction. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 6953–6963, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Zhaofeng Wu, Hao Peng, and Noah A. Smith. 2021b.
Infusing ﬁnetuning with semantic dependencies.
Transactions of the Association of Computational
Linguistics , 9:226–242.
Dongqin Xu, Junhui Li, Muhua Zhu, Min Zhang, and
Guodong Zhou. 2020. Improving AMR parsing
with sequence-to-sequence pre-training. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
2501–2511, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zenan Xu, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Qinliang Su, Linjun
Shou, Ming Gong, Wanjun Zhong, Xiaojun Quan,
Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. 2021. Syntax-enhanced
pre-trained model. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 5412–5422, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Hang Yan, Junqi Dai, Tuo Ji, Xipeng Qiu, and Zheng
Zhang. 2021a. A uniﬁed generative framework for
aspect-based sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of
the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers) .
Hang Yan, Tao Gui, Junqi Dai, Qipeng Guo, Zheng
Zhang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2021b. A uniﬁed genera-
tive framework for various NER subtasks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (ACL) .
44

==== Page 45 ====
Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. 2020. Strongly incremen-
tal constituency parsing with graph neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14568 .
Yiben Yang, Chaitanya Malaviya, Jared Fernandez,
Swabha Swayamdipta, Ronan Le Bras, Ji-Ping
Wang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Yejin Choi, and Doug
Downey. 2020. G-daug: Generative data augmen-
tation for commonsense reasoning. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EMNLP) .
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Car-
bonell, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Quoc V Le. 2019.
XLNet: Generalized Autoregressive Pretraining for
Language Understanding. In Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran
Associates, Inc.
Jiarui Yao, Haoling Qiu, Jin Zhao, Bonan Min, and Ni-
anwen Xue. 2021. Factuality assessment as modal
dependency parsing. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 1540–1550, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Wenpeng Yin, Jamaal Hay, and Dan Roth. 2019.
Benchmarking zero-shot text classiﬁcation:
Datasets, evaluation and entailment approach.
InProceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing and
the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
3914–3923, Hong Kong, China. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod
Lipson. 2014. How transferable are features in deep
neural networks? In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems , volume 27. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Jianfei Yu, Chenggong Gong, and Rui Xia. 2021a.
Cross-domain review generation for aspect-based
sentiment analysis. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-IJCNLP) .
Wenhao Yu, Chenguang Zhu, Zaitang Li, Zhiting Hu,
Qingyun Wang, Heng Ji, and Meng Jiang. 2021b.
A survey of knowledge-enhanced text generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04389 .
Xiaodong Yu, Wenpeng Yin, and Dan Roth. 2020.
Paired representation learning for event and entity
coreference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12808 .
Weizhe Yuan, Graham Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. 2021.
Bartscore: Evaluating generated text as text genera-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11520 .
Karolina Zaczynska, Nils Feldhus, Robert Schwarzen-
berg, Aleksandra Gabryszak, and Sebastian M ¨oller.
2020. Evaluating German transformer languagemodels with syntactic agreement tests. In Proceed-
ings of the 5th Swiss Text Analytics Conference and
the 16th Conference on Natural Language Process-
ing, SwissText/KONVENS 2020, Zurich, Switzerland,
June 23-25, 2020 , volume abs/2007.03765, Zurich,
Switzerland. CEUR Workshop Proceedings.
Elad Ben Zaken, Shauli Ravfogel, and Yoav Gold-
berg. 2021. Bitﬁt: Simple parameter-efﬁcient
ﬁne-tuning for transformer-based masked language-
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10199 .
Danqing Zhang, Tao Li, Haiyang Zhang, and Bing
Yin. 2020a. On data augmentation for ex-
treme multi-label classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.10778 .
Haoyu Zhang, Jingjing Cai, Jianjun Xu, and Ji Wang.
2019a. Pretraining-based natural language gener-
ation for text summarization. In Proceedings of
the 23rd Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning (CoNLL) , pages 789–797, Hong
Kong, China. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Jeffrey O Zhang, Alexander Sax, Amir Zamir,
Leonidas Guibas, and Jitendra Malik. 2020b.
Side-tuning: A baseline for network adapta-
tion via additive side networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.13503 .
Sheng Zhang, Xutai Ma, Kevin Duh, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2019b. AMR parsing as sequence-to-
graph transduction. In Proceedings of the 57th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 80–94, Florence, Italy. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Wenxuan Zhang, Xin Li, Yang Deng, Lidong Bing, and
Wai Lam. 2021a. Towards generative aspect-based
sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-
ence on Natural Language Processing (ACL) .
Yian Zhang, Alex Warstadt, Xiaocheng Li, and
Samuel R. Bowman. 2021b. When do you need
billions of words of pretraining data? In Proceed-
ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1112–1125,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yu Zhang, Houquan Zhou, and Zhenghua Li. 2020c.
Fast and accurate neural crf constituency parsing.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Zhuosheng Zhang, Yuwei Wu, Hai Zhao, Zuchao Li,
Shuailiang Zhang, Xi Zhou, and Xiang Zhou. 2020d.
Semantics-aware BERT for language understanding.
InThe Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI) .
45

==== Page 46 ====
Mengjie Zhao, Tao Lin, Fei Mi, Martin Jaggi, and Hin-
rich Sch ¨utze. 2020a. Masking as an efﬁcient alter-
native to ﬁnetuning for pretrained language models.
InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pages 2226–2241, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Tianyang Zhao, Zhao Yan, Yunbo Cao, and Zhoujun
Li. 2020b. Asking effective and diverse questions:
A machine reading comprehension based framework
for joint entity-relation extraction. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-20 , pages 3948–3954.
International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Organization. Main track.
Tony Z. Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein,
and Sameer Singh. 2021. Calibrate before use: Im-
proving few-shot performance of language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09690 .
Ruiqi Zhong, Kristy Lee, Zheng Zhang, and Dan Klein.
2021a. Adapting language models for zero-shot
learning by meta-tuning on dataset and prompt col-
lections. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (EMNLP) .
Zexuan Zhong, Dan Friedman, and Danqi Chen. 2021b.
Factual probing is [MASK]: Learning vs. learning
to recall. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies , pages 5017–5033, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Junru Zhou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Hai Zhao, and Shuail-
iang Zhang. 2020a. LIMIT-BERT : Linguistics in-
formed multi-task BERT. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 ,
pages 4450–4461, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Junru Zhou and Hai Zhao. 2019. Head-Driven Phrase
Structure Grammar parsing on Penn Treebank. In
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
2396–2408, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Li Zhou and Kevin Small. 2020. Multi-domain dia-
logue state tracking as dynamic knowledge graph
enhanced question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.06192 .
Qiji Zhou, Yue Zhang, Donghong Ji, and Hao Tang.
2020b. AMR parsing with latent structural infor-
mation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 4306–4319, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Yang Zhou, Yubo Chen, Jun Zhao, Yin Wu, Jiexin Xu,
and Jinlong Li. 2021. What the role is vs. what plays
the role: Semi-supervised event argument extrac-
tion via dual question answering. In Proceedings ofthe AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol-
ume 35, pages 14638–14646.
Jinhua Zhu, Yingce Xia, Lijun Wu, Di He, Tao Qin,
Wengang Zhou, Houqiang Li, and Tie-Yan Liu.
2020. Incorporating bert into neural machine trans-
lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06823 .
46

==== Page 47 ====
A PLMs for specialized domains or
languages
Table 6 shows PLMs for special domains. Table 7
presents PLMs pre-trained on different languages.
B Pre-train then ﬁne-tune approaches
Table 8 shows a summary of prior work organized
by the strategies in the ﬁrst paradigm, “pretrain
then ﬁne-tune”. It is worth noting that “Contextual
embeddings” does not involve ﬁne-tuning, but we
included here because it is architecturally similar
to other strategies, except that the PLM’s weights
are frozen, that is they are not ﬁne-tuned for the
speciﬁc tasks.
47

==== Page 48 ====
Model Domain Training Sources
SCIBERT (Beltagy et al., 2019) Science Scientiﬁc articles in computer science and biomedicine
BIOBERT (Lee et al., 2019) Biomedical Biomedical publications (abstracts and full-text articles)
CLINICAL BERT (Huang et al., 2020),
Alsentzer et al. (2019)Clinical Clinical notes
LEGAL BERT (Chalkidis et al., 2020) Legal Legal documents (e.g. contracts)
CODEBERT (Feng et al., 2020b),
CODEX (Chen et al., 2021b)Source code GitHub repositories
BERTweet (Nguyen et al., 2020a), Al-
BERTo (for Italian; Polignano et al., 2019)Twitter Tweets
BabyBERTa (Huebner et al., 2021) Child-directed speech Child-directed speech transcriptions
Table 6: PLMs pre-trained on speciﬁc domains.
Language Model
Arabic Arabic-BERT (Safaya et al., 2020)
Basque BERTeus (Agerri et al., 2020)
Chinese MacBERT (Cui et al., 2020)
Dutch BERTje (de Vries et al., 2019), RobBERT (Delobelle et al., 2020)
Farsi ParsBERT (Farahani et al., 2021)
Finnish FinBERT (Virtanen et al., 2019)
French CamemBERT (Martin et al., 2020), FlauBERT (Le et al., 2020)
German GBERT and GELECTRA (Chan et al., 2020)
Hebrew HeBERT (Chriqui and Yahav, 2021), AlphaBERT (Seker et al., 2021)
Italian GilBERTo (Ravasio and Perna, 2020), UmBERTo (Parisi et al., 2020)
Japanese Japanese BERT (Inui Laboratory, 2021)
Portuguese BERTimbau (Souza et al., 2020a)
Russian RuBERT (Kuratov and Arkhipov, 2019)
Spanish BETO (Ca ˜nete et al., 2020)
Turkish BERTurk (Schweter, 2020)
Table 7: PLMs pre-trained on different languages.
48

==== Page 49 ====
Task Work PLM
(1)Contextual Embeddings
Word Sense disambiguation/induction Hadiwinoto et al. (2019), Amrami and Goldberg (2019) BERT
Coreference resolution (Lee et al., 2018) ElMO
Constituency parsing (Zhang et al., 2020c) BERT
Yang and Deng (2020) XLNet, BERT
Zhou and Zhao (2019) ELMo, BERT
Constituency parsing, Dependency parsing (Mrini et al., 2020) XLNet, BERT
Dependency parsing Wang and Tu (2020) BERT
Schuster et al. (2019) ElMo
Semantic role labeling (He et al., 2018) ElMO
AMR parsing Cai and Lam (2020), Xu et al. (2020) BERT
UCCA parsing (Jiang et al., 2019) BERT, mBERT
Commonsense reasoning ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019) ELMo
Machine Translation Zhu et al. (2020) BERT
Text summarization (Zhang et al., 2019a) BERT
(2)Fine-tuning the PLM
Text classiﬁcation (Yang et al., 2019) XLNet
(Sun et al., 2020) BERT
(Peters et al., 2018) ElMO
Semantic textual similarity (Yang et al., 2019) XLNet
NER ELMo (Peters et al., 2018) ELMo
NER, QA, Textual Entailement (TE) Devlin et al. (2019) BERT
TE (Liu et al., 2019) RoBERTa
Entity Linking Broscheit (2019), Ling et al. (2020), (Wu et al., 2020a) BERT
Relation extraction (Baldini Soares et al., 2019; Wu and He, 2019; Shi and Lin, 2019) BERT
Intent Detection and Slot Filling (Chen et al., 2019) BERT
XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) XLNet
Text generation (Kale and Rastogi, 2020) T5
Coreference resolution (Joshi et al., 2019) BERT
(Yu et al., 2020) RoBERTa
Text simpliﬁcation (Martin et al., 2021) BART/mBART
(Raffel et al., 2020) T5
Dialogue (Hosseini-Asl et al., 2020) GPT-2
Semantic role labeling (Shi and Lin, 2019) BERT
Text summarization (Liu and Lapata, 2019) BERT
(Lewis et al., 2020) BART
Commonsense reasoning COMET (Bosselut et al., 2019) GPT
ATOMIC2020 (Hwang et al., 2020) GPT2
Machine Translation (Liu et al., 2020c) mBART
(Lample and Conneau, 2019) XLM
(3)Fine-tuning Customized Models
NER, POS tagging, dependency parsing, aspect extraction ACE (Wang et al., 2021c) ELMo, (m)BERT, XLM-R
Semantic parsing (Che et al., 2019) BERT
Temporal relation extraction (Ross et al., 2020) BERT
Text simpliﬁcation (Omelianchuk et al., 2021) RoBERTa
Text simpliﬁcation, summarization (Malmi et al., 2019) BERT
Coreference resolution CorefQA (Wu et al., 2020b) SpanBERT
Machine Translation (Weng et al., 2020) BERT, GPT
(Ma et al., 2020) XLM-R
CCG parsing Tree-structured supertagger (Prange et al., 2021) RoBERTa-base
(4)Efﬁcient Fine-tuning Approaches
BitFit (Zaken et al., 2021)
Adapter-Transformer (Pfeiffer et al., 2020a)
POS tagging, dependency parsing Trankit (Nguyen et al., 2021) XLM-R
Table 8: A summary of prior work organized by the strategies in the ﬁrst paradigm “pretrain then ﬁne-tune”.
49

