==== Page 1 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep
Learning: A Survey
Pranav Singh Chiba, Pravendra Singha,∗
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand, India
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords :
Autonomous Driving
End-to-End Driving
Deep Learning
Deep Neural NetworkABSTRACT
End-to-Enddrivingisapromisingparadigmasitcircumventsthedrawbacksassociatedwithmodular
systems, such as their overwhelming complexity and propensity for error propagation. Autonomous
drivingtranscendsconventionaltrafficpatternsbyproactivelyrecognizingcriticaleventsinadvance,
ensuringpassengerssafetyandprovidingthemwithcomfortabletransportation,particularlyinhighly
stochastic and variable traffic settings. This paper presents a comprehensive review of the End-to-
End autonomous driving stack. It provides a taxonomy of automated driving tasks wherein neural
networks have been employed in an End-to-End manner, encompassing the entire driving process
from perception to control. Recent developments in End-to-End autonomous driving are analyzed,
and research is categorized based on underlying principles, methodologies, and core functionality.
These categories encompass sensorial input, main and auxiliary output, learning approaches ranging
fromimitationtoreinforcementlearning,andmodelevaluationtechniques.Thesurveyincorporatesa
detailed discussion of the explainability and safety aspects. Furthermore, it assesses the state-of-the-
art, identifies challenges, and explores future possibilities. We maintain the latest advancements and
their corresponding open-source implementations at this link.
1. Introduction
Autonomous driving refers to the capability of a vehi-
cle to drive partly or entirely without human intervention.
The modular architecture [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] is a widely used
approachinautonomousdrivingsystems,whichdividesthe
driving pipeline into discrete sub-tasks. This architecture
relies on individual sensors and algorithms to process data
andgeneratecontroloutputs.Itencompassesinterconnected
modules,includingperception,planning,andcontrol.How-
ever, the modular architecture has certain drawbacks that
impede further advancements in autonomous driving (AD).
One significant limitation is its susceptibility to error prop-
agation. For instance, errors in the perception module of a
self-drivingvehicle,suchasmisclassification,canpropagate
to subsequent planning and control modules, potentially
leading to unsafe behaviors. Additionally, the complexity
ofmanaginginterconnectedmodulesandthecomputational
inefficiencyofprocessingdataateachstageposeadditional
challengesassociatedwiththemodularapproach.Toaddress
these shortcomings, an alternative approach called End-to-
End driving [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] has emerged. This approach
aimstoovercomethelimitationsofthemodulararchitecture.
The End-to-End approach streamlines the system, im-
proving efficiency and robustness by directly mapping sen-
sory input to control outputs. The benefits of End-to-End
autonomous driving have garnered significant attention in
the research community as shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, End-
to-End driving addresses the issue of error propagation,
as it involves a single learning task pipeline [12, 13] that
∗Corresponding author: Pravendra Singh
pravendra.singh@cs.iitr.ac.in (P. Singh)
ORCID(s):0000-0003-4930-3937 (P.S. Chib); 0000-0003-1001-2219 (P.
Singh)
Figure 1: The number of articles in the Web of Science
database containing the keywords ‘End-to-End’ and ‘Au-
tonomous Driving’ from 2014 to 2022 illustrates the increasing
trend in the research community.
learns task-specific features, thereby reducing the likeli-
hood of error propagation. Secondly, End-to-End driving
offers computational advantages. Modular pipelines often
entail redundant computations, as each module is trained
for task-specific outputs [4, 5]. This results in unnecessary
and prolonged computation. In contrast, End-to-End driv-
ing focuses on the specific task of generating the control
signal,reducingtheneedforunnecessarycomputationsand
streamlining the overall process. End-to-End models were
previously regarded as “black boxes", lacking transparency.
However,recentmethodologieshaveimprovedinterpretabil-
ity in End-to-End models by generating auxiliary outputs
[7, 13], attention maps [14, 15, 16, 9, 17, 18], and in-
terpretable maps [18, 19, 8, 20, 12, 21]. This enhanced
interpretability provides insights into the root causes of
P.S. Chib et al. Page 1 of 28arXiv:2307.04370v2  [cs.RO]  19 Sep 2023

==== Page 2 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 2: The charts illustrate statistics of the papers included in this survey according to learning approaches (section 6),
environment being utilized for training (sections 10, 11), input modality (section 4), and output modality (section 5).
errors and model decision-making. Furthermore, End-to-
End driving demonstrates resilience to adversarial attacks.
Adversarial attacks [22] involve manipulating sensor inputs
to deceive or confuse autonomous driving systems. In End-
to-End models, it is challenging to identify and manipulate
the specific driving behavior triggers as it is unknown what
causes specific driving patterns. Lastly, End-to-End driv-
ing offers ease of training. Modular pipelines require sep-
arate training and optimization of each task-driven module,
necessitating domain-specific knowledge and expertise. In
contrast,End-to-Endmodelscanlearnrelevantfeaturesand
patterns[23,24]directlyfromrawsensordata,reducingthe
need for extensive engineering and expertise.
Related Surveys :Anumberofrelatedsurveysareavail-
able, though their emphasis differs from ours. The author
Yurtsever et al. [25] covers the autonomous driving domain
withaprimaryemphasisonthemodularmethodology.Sev-
eralpastsurveyscenteraroundspecificlearningtechniques,
such as imitation learning [26] and reinforcement learning
[27]. A few end-to-end surveys, including the work by
Tampuuet al.[28], provideanarchitectural overviewofthe
complete end-to-end driving pipeline. Recently, Chen et al.
[29] discuss the methodology and challenges in end-to-end
autonomous driving in their survey. Our focus, however, is
on the latest advancements, including modalities, learning
principles, safety, explainability, and evaluation (see Ta-
ble 3).
Motivation and Contributions : The End-to-End ar-
chitectures have significantly enhanced autonomous driv-
ing systems. As elaborated earlier, these architectures have
overcomethelimitationsofmodularapproaches.Motivated
by these developments, we present a survey on recent ad-
vancements in End-to-End autonomous driving. The key
contributions of this paper are threefold. First, this survey
exclusively explores End-to-End autonomous driving using
deep learning. We provide a comprehensive analysis of
theunderlyingprinciples,methodologies,andfunctionality,delving into the latest state-of-the-art advancements in this
domain.Second,wepresentadetailedinvestigationinterms
ofmodality,learning,safety,explainability,andresults,and
provideaquantitativesummaryinTable3.Third,wepresent
an evaluation framework based on both open and closed-
loopassessmentsandcompileasummarizedlistofavailable
datasets and simulators.
Paper Organization : The survey is organized as per
the underlying principles and methodologies (see Fig. 2).
We present the background of modular systems in Sec-
tion 2. Section 3 provides an overview of the End-to-End
autonomous driving pipeline architecture. This is followed
by sections 4 and 5, which discuss the input and output
modalitiesoftheEnd-to-Endsystem.Section6comprehen-
sively covers End-to-End learning methods, from imitation
learning to reinforcement learning. The domain adaptation
is explained in section 7. Next, we explore the safety aspect
of End-to-End approaches in section 8. The importance of
explainability and interpretability is discussed in section 9.
The evaluation of the End-to-End system consists of open
and closed-loop evaluations, which are discussed in section
10. The relevant datasets and the simulator are presented in
section 11. Finally, sections 12 and 13 provide the future
research direction and conclusion, respectively.
2. Modular system architecture
Themodularpipeline[30,31,32,2,3,33,34]beginsby
inputting the raw sensory data into the perception module
for obstacle detection and localization via the localization
module,followedbyplanningandpredictionfortheoptimal
and safe trajectory of the vehicle. Finally, the motor con-
troller outputs the control signals. The standard modules of
the modular driving pipeline are listed below:
P.S. Chib et al. Page 2 of 28

==== Page 3 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 3: The perception module receives and processes various raw sensor inputs, which are then utilized by the localization and
mapping module.
2.1. Components of modular pipeline
Preception: The perception module seeks to achieve a
better understanding [32] of the scene. It is built on top
of algorithms such as object detection and lane detection.
The perception module is responsible for sensor fusion,
information extraction, and acts as a mediator between the
low-level sensor input and the high-level decision module.
Itfusesheterogeneoussensorstocaptureandgeneralizethe
environment. The primary tasks of the perception module
include: (i) Object detection (ii) Object tracking (iii) Road
and lane detection
Localization and mapping: Localization is the next im-
portantmodule,whichisresponsiblefordeterminingthepo-
sition of the ego vehicle and the corresponding road agents
[35]. It is crucial for accurately positioning the vehicle and
enablingsafemaneuversindiversetrafficscenarios.Theend
productofthelocalizationmoduleisanaccuratemap.Some
of the localization techniques include High Definition map
(HD map) and Simultaneous Localization And Mapping
(SLAM), which serve as the online map and localize the
trafficagentsatdifferenttimestamps.Thelocalizationmap-
ping can further be utilized for driving policy and control
commands.Planning and driving policy: The planning and driving
policy module [36] is responsible for computing a motion-
level command that determines the control signal based on
the localization map provided by the previous module. It
predicts the optimal future trajectory [37] based on past
traffic patterns. The categorization of trajectory prediction
techniques (Table 1) is as follows:
•Physics-based methods: These methods are suitable
forvehiclemotionthatcanbeaccuratelycharacterized
bykinematicsordynamicsmodels.Theycansimulate
variousscenariosquicklywithminimalcomputational
cost.
•Classic machine learning-based methods: Compared
tophysics-basedapproaches,thisclassofmethodscan
considermorevariables,providereasonableaccuracy,
and have a longer forecasting span, but at a higher
computing cost. Most of these techniques use histori-
cal motion data to estimate future trajectories.
•Deep learning-based methods: Deep learning algo-
rithms are capable of reliable prediction over a wider
range of prediction horizons. In contrast, standard
trajectory prediction methods are only suited for ba-
sic scenes and short-term prediction. Deep learning-
based systems can make precise predictions across a
P.S. Chib et al. Page 3 of 28

==== Page 4 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Table 1
Performance of different driving policy approaches: PB (Physics-Based), CML (Classical Machine Learning), DL (Deep Learning),
RL (Reinforcement Learning).
Techniques Accuracy Computation cost Prediction distance
PB Medium Low Short
CML Low Medium Medium
DL Highly accurate High Wide
RL Highly accurate High Wide
Table 2
Summary of deep learning-based approaches for motion prediction utilizing different backbone networks.
Methods Detail ClassificationAgent and context
encoderContext encoder Decoder
CoverNet [38]Formulation of
classification problem
over the set of diverse trajectoriesCNN CNN CNNTrajectory set
generator
HOME [39]It outputs the
2D top view representation
of agent possible futureCNN CNN,GRU CNN CNN
TPCN [40]Splitting of trajectory prediction
into both temporal and
spatial dimensionCNN PointNET ++ PointNET++Displacement
prediction
MHA-JAM
[41]Attention head is used
to generate distinct
future trajectories
while addressing multimodalityAttention LSTM CNN LSTM
MMTransformer
[42]Network architecture
based on stacked
transformer to model the
feature multimodalityAttention Transformer VectorNet MLP
DenseTNT [43]It is a anchor-free model which
directly outputs from
the dense goal candidatesGNN VectorNet VectorNetGoal Bases
multi-trajectory
prediction
TS-GAN [44]Collaborative learning
and GAN for modeling
motion behaviorGenerative
modelLSTM - LSTM
PRIME [44]Utilizes the model generator and
learning based evaluatorGenerative
modelCNN,LSTM LSTMModel-based
generator
MotionDiff
[45]Diffusion probability based
kinematics model to diffuse
original states to
noise distributionCNNSpatial
transformer,
GRUSpatial
transformer,
GRUMLP
ScePT [10]A policy planning
based trajectory prediction for
accurate motion planning.GNN LSTM CNN GRU, PonitNET
widertimehorizon.AsshowninTable2,deeplearn-
ing utilizes RNN, CNN, GNN, and other networks
forfeatureextraction,calculatinginteractionstrength,
and incorporating map information.
•Reinforcement learning-based methods: These meth-
ods aim to mimic how people make decisions and
learn the reward function by studying expert demon-
strations to produce the best driving strategy. How-
ever, most of these techniques are computationally
costly.Control: Themotionplannergeneratesthetrajectory,which
is then updated by the obstacle subsystem and sent to the
controllersubsystem.Thecomputedcommandissenttothe
actuators of the driving components, including the throttle,
brakes, and steering, to follow the desired trajectory, which
is optimized and safer in real-world scenarios. The Propor-
tional Integral Derivative (PID) [5] and Model Predictive
Control (MPC) [4] are some of the controllers used to
generate the aforementioned control signals.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 4 of 28

==== Page 5 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
2.2. Input and output modality of modular
pipeline
The output modality of each module is designed to be
compatible with the input modality of subsequent modules
inthepipelinetoensurethatinformationiscorrectlypropa-
gated through the modular system.
Sensory data: At this level (Fig. 3), the raw data from
the embedded multi-sensor array is retrieved, filtered, and
processedforsemanticmapping.LiDAR,RADAR,Camera,
GPS, and Odometer are some of the sensor inputs to the
perception stack. LiDAR and RADAR are used for depth
analysis, while cameras are employed for detection. The
INU, GPS, and Odometer sensors capture and map the
vehicle’sposition,state,andthecorrespondingenvironment,
which can be further utilized by decision-level stages.
Input to the mapping and localization: Localization
aims to estimate the vehicle’s position at each time stamp.
Utilizing information from the perception module, the ve-
hicle’s position and the environment are mapped based on
parameters such as position, orientation, pose, speed, and
acceleration. Localization techniques [3] allow for the inte-
gration of multiple objectsand the identification of their re-
lationships, resulting in a more comprehensive, augmented,
and enriched representation.
AsshowninFig.4,wedefine 𝑋𝑡asthevehicle’sposition
estimate at time 𝑡, and𝑀as the environment map. These
variables can be estimated using control inputs 𝐶𝑡, which
aretypicallyderivedfromwheelencodersorsensorscapable
ofestimatingthevehicle’sdisplacement.Themeasurements
derivedfromsensorreadingsaredenotedby 𝑆𝑡andareused
to aid in the estimation of the vehicle’s pose.
Figure 4: Visualization of temporal correlations from localiza-
tion that can be used to identify specific behaviors and predict
future positions.
Input to the path planning and decision module: Path
planning is broadly categorized into local and global path
planners. The purpose of the local planner is to execute thegoalssetbytheglobalpathplanner.Itisresponsibleforfind-
ingtrajectoriesthatavoidobstaclesandsatisfyoptimization
requirements within the vehicle’s operational space.
Theproblemoflocaltrajectorypredictioncanbeformu-
lated as estimating the future states ( 𝑡𝑓) of various traffic
actors (𝑅𝑡) in a given scenario based on their current and
past states (𝑡ℎ). The state of traffic actors includes vehicles
or pedestrians with historical trajectories at different time
stamps.
𝐼𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡 = {𝑅1,𝑅2,𝑅3,𝑅3......,𝑅𝑡ℎ} (1)
where𝑅𝑡contains the coordinates of different traffic
actors at each time stamp 𝑡(up toℎpast time stamps).
𝑅𝑡= {𝑥𝑡
0,𝑦𝑡
0,𝑥𝑡
1,𝑦𝑡
1...𝑥𝑡
𝑛,𝑦𝑡
𝑛} (2)
where𝑛represents all traffic vehicles detected by the ego
vehicle; (𝑥𝑡
𝑖,𝑦𝑡
𝑖) are the coordinates of the vehicle at the 𝑡
timestamp.𝑋istheinputtothepathplanningmodule,and
thevehicletrajectory 𝑌ispredictedfromthemodelatfuture
time stamp𝑡𝑓.
𝑌={𝑅𝑡ℎ+1,𝑅𝑡ℎ+2,𝑅𝑡ℎ+3⋅ ⋅ ⋅𝑅𝑡ℎ+𝑡𝑓}(3)
Input to the control module: Therearetwoprimaryforms
of trajectory command that the controller receives: (i) as a
series of commands ( 𝑇𝑐) and (ii) as a series of states ( 𝑇𝑠).
Controller subsystems that receive a 𝑇𝑠trajectory may be
categorized as path tracking techniques, while those that
receive a𝑇𝑐trajectory can be classified as direct hardware
actuation control methods.
•Direct hardware actuation control methods: The Pro-
portionalIntegralDerivative(PID)[5]controlsystem
is a commonly used hardware actuation technique for
self-driving automobiles. It involves determining a
desired hardware input and an error measure gauging
how much the output deviates from the desired out-
come.
•Path tracking methods: Model Predictive Control
(MPC) [4] is a path-tracking approach that involves
choosing control command inputs that will result
in desirable hardware outputs, then simulating and
optimizing those outputs using the motion model of
the car over a future prediction horizon.
3. End-to-End system architecture
In general, modular systems are referred to as the medi-
ated paradigm and are constructed as a pipeline of discrete
components (Fig. 5) that connect sensory inputs and motor
outputs.Thecoreprocessesofamodularsystemincludeper-
ception,localization,mapping,planning,andvehiclecontrol
[1]. The modular pipeline starts by inputting raw sensory
datatotheperceptionmoduleforobstacledetection[46]and
localizationviathelocalizationmodule[3].Thisisfollowed
P.S. Chib et al. Page 5 of 28

==== Page 6 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 5: Comparison between End-to-End and modular pipelines. End-to-End is a single pipeline that generates the control signal
directly from perception input, whereas a modular pipeline consists of various sub-modules, each with task-specific functionalities.
byplanningandprediction[44]todeterminetheoptimaland
safe trajectory for the vehicle. Finally, the motor controller
generates commands for safe maneuvering.
Ontheotherhand,directperceptionorEnd-to-Enddriv-
ing directly generates ego-motion from the sensory input.
It optimizes the driving pipeline (Fig. 5) by bypassing the
sub-tasks related to perception and planning, allowing for
continuouslearningtosenseandact,similartohumans.The
first attempt at End-to-End driving was made by Pomerleau
Alvinn [47], which trained a 3-layer sensorimotor fully
connectednetworktooutputthecar’sdirection.End-to-End
drivinggeneratesego-motionbasedonsensoryinput,which
can be of various modalities. However, the prominent ones
are the camera [48, 49, 50], Light Detection and Ranging
(LiDAR) [6, 10, 7], navigation commands [51, 49, 23],
and vehicle dynamics, such as speed [52, 53, 50]. This
sensory information is utilized as the input to the backbone
model, which is responsible for generating control signals.
Ego-motion can involve different types of motions, such as
acceleration, turning, steering, and pedaling. Additionally,
many models also output additional information, such as a
costmapforsafemaneuvers,interpretableoutputs,andother
auxiliary outputs.There are two main approaches for End-to-End driving:
either the driving model is explored and improved via Re-
inforcement Learning (RL) [54, 53, 55, 56, 21, 57], or it is
trainedinasupervisedmannerusingImitationLearning(IL)
[18,6,19,15,17,58,7]toresemblehumandrivingbehavior.
The supervised learning paradigm aims to learn the driving
style from expert demonstrations, which serve as training
examplesforthemodel.However,expandinganautonomous
driving system based on IL [23] is challenging since it is
impossibletocovereveryinstanceduringthelearningphase.
On the other hand, RL works by maximizing cumulative
rewards [59, 55] over time through interaction with the
environment, and the network makes driving decisions to
obtain rewards or penalties based on its actions. While RL
model training occurs online and allows exploration of the
environment during training, it is less effective in utilizing
data compared to imitation learning. Table 3 summarizes
recent methods in End-to-End driving.
4. Input modalities in End-to-End system
The following section explores the input modalities es-
sential for end-to-end autonomous driving. These encom-
passcamerasforvisualinsights,LiDARforprecise3Dpoint
P.S. Chib et al. Page 6 of 28

==== Page 7 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
clouds, multi-modal inputs, and navigational inputs. Fig. 6
illustrates some of the input and output modalities.
4.1. Camera
Camera-based methods [14, 9, 6, 23, 49, 60, 50, 53, 12,
13] have shown promising results in End-to-End driving.
For instance, Toromanoff et al. [53] demonstrated their
capabilitiesbywinningtheCARLA2019autonomousdriv-
ing challenge using vision-based approaches in an urban
context. The use of monocular [13, 11, 61, 53] and stereo
vision [58, 17, 15] camera views is a natural input modality
for image-to-control End-to-End driving. Xiao et al. [62]
employedinputsconsistingofamonocularRGBimagefrom
a forward-facing camera and the vehicle speed. Chen et al.
LAV [10] utilize only the camera image input as shown
in Fig. 6(d). Wu et al. [15], Xiao et al. [17], Zhang et
al. [58] utilize camera-only modality to generate high-level
instructions for lane following, turning, stopping and going
straight using imitation learning.
4.2. LiDAR
Another significant input source in self-driving is the
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor. LiDAR [63,
64, 65, 20] is resistant to lighting conditions and offers
accurate distance estimates. Compared to other perception
sensors, LiDAR data is the richest and provides the most
comprehensive spatial information. It utilizes laser light
to detect distances and generates PointClouds, which are
3D representations of space where each point includes the
(𝑥,𝑦,𝑧 )coordinatesofthesurfacethatreflectedthesensor’s
laserbeam.Whenlocalizingavehicle,generatingodometry
measurements is critical. Many techniques utilize LiDAR
for feature mapping in Birds Eye View (BEV) [9, 19, 16],
High Definition (HD) map [20, 66], and Simultaneous Lo-
calization and Mapping (SLAM) [67]. Shenoi et al. [68]
haveshownthataddingdepthandsemanticsviaLiDARhas
the potential to enhance driving performance. Liang et al.
[69, 70] utilized point flow to learn the driving policy in an
End-to-End manner.
4.3. Multi-modal
Multimodality [8, 18, 10, 16, 71] outperforms single
modalityincrucialperceptiontasksandisparticularlywell-
suited for autonomous driving applications, as it combines
multi-sensor data. There are three broad categorizations for
utilizing information depending on when to combine multi-
sensorinformation.Inearlyfusion,sensordataiscombined
before feeding them into the learnable End-to-End system.
Chenetal.[10]asshowninFig.6(d)useanetworkthatac-
cepts(RGB+Depth)channelinputs,Xiaoetal.[62]model
alsoinputthesamemodality.Thenetworkmodifiesjustthe
first convolutional layer to account for the additional input
channel, while the remaining network remains unchanged.
Renz et al. [18] fuse object-level input representation using
a transformer encoder. The author combinedly represents a
set of objects as vehicles and segments of the routes.
In mid-fusion, information fusion is done either after
some preprocessing stages or after some feature extraction.Zhou et al. [72] perform information fusion at the mid-
levelbyleveragingthecomplementaryinformationprovided
by both the bird’s-eye view (BEV) and perspective views
of the LiDAR point cloud. Transfuser [7] as shown in
Fig. 6(a) addresses the integration of image and LiDAR
modalitiesusingself-attentionlayers.Theyutilizedmultiple
transformer modules at multiple resolutions to fuse inter-
mediate features. Obtained feature vector forms a concise
representationwhichanMLPthenprocessesbeforepassing
to an auto-regressive waypoint prediction network. In late
fusion, inputs are processed separately, and their output is
fused and further processed by another layer. Some authors
[73, 69, 70, 62] use a late fusion architecture for LiDAR
andvisualmodalities,inwhicheachinputstreamisencoded
separately and concatenated.
4.4. Navigational inputs
End-to-Endnavigationinputcanoriginatefromtheroute
planner [8, 14, 74] and navigation commands [48, 75, 76,
77]. Routes are defined by a sequence of discrete endpoint
locations in Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates
provided by a global planner [14]. The TCP model [13] as
illustratedinFig.6(c)isprovidedwithcorrelatednavigation
directiveslikelanekeeping,left/rightturns,andthedestina-
tion.Thisinformationisusedtoproducethecontrolactions.
Shao et al. [8] propose a technique that guides driving
usingthesesparsedestinationlocationsinsteadofexplicitly
defining discrete navigation directives. PlanT [18] utilizes
point-to-point navigation based on the input of the goal
location.FlowDriveNet[78]considersboththeglobalplan-
ner’s discrete navigation command and the coordinates of
thenavigationtarget.Hubschneideretal.[75]includeaturn
indicator command in the driving model, while Codevilla
et al. [76] utilize a CNN block for specific navigation tasks
and a second block for subset navigation. In addition to the
aforementionedinputs,End-to-Endmodelsalsoincorporate
vehicledynamics,suchasego-vehiclespeed[52,49,53,12].
5. Output modalities in End-to-End system
Usually,anEnd-to-Endautonomousdrivingsystemout-
puts control commands, waypoints, or trajectories. In addi-
tion,itmayalsoproduceadditionalrepresentations,suchas
a cost map and auxiliary outputs.
5.1. Waypoints
Predicting future waypoints is a higher-level output
modality.Severalauthors[10,6,7,79]useanauto-regressive
waypoint network to predict differential waypoints. Trajec-
tories [8, 74, 80, 13, 19] can also represent sequences of
waypoints in the coordinate frame. The network’s output
waypoints are converted into low-level steering and ac-
celeration using Model Predictive Control (MPC) [4] and
ProportionalIntegralDerivative(PID)[5].Thelongitudinal
controller considers the magnitude of a weighted average
of vectors between successive time-step waypoints, while
the lateral controller considers their direction. The ideal
waypoint[53]reliesondesiredspeed,position,androtation.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 7 of 28

==== Page 8 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
(a) Fusion Transformer
b) NEAT
(c) TCP
(d) LAV
(e) UniAD
 (f) ST-P3
Figure 6: The input-output representation of various End-to-End models: (a) Considered RGB image and LiDAR BEV
representations as inputs to the multi-modal fusion transformer [7] and predicts the differential ego-vehicle waypoints. (b) NEAT
[12] inputs the image patch and velocity features to obtain a waypoint for each time-step used by PID controllers for driving. (c)
TCP [13] takes input image i, navigation information g, current speed v, to generate the control actions guided by the trajectory
branch and control branch. (d) LAV [10] uses an image-only input and predicts multi-modal future trajectories used for braking
and handling traffic signs and obstacles. (e) UniAD [9] generates attention mask visualization which shows how much attention
is paid to the goal lane as well as the critical agents that are yielding to the ego-vehicle.(f) ST-P3 [20] outputs the sub cost map
from the prediction module (darker color indicates a smaller cost value). By incorporating the occupancy probability field and
leveraging pre-existing knowledge, the cost function effectively balances safety considerations for the final trajectory.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 8 of 28

==== Page 9 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Figure 7: Vehicle maneuvers, represented by a triplet of steering angle, throttle, and brake, depend on a high-level route navigation
command (e.g., turn-left, turn-right, go-straight, continue), as well as perception data (e.g., RGB image) and vehicle state
measurements (e.g., speed). These inputs guide the specific actions taken by the vehicle, enabling it to navigate the environment
effectively through conditional imitation learning [62].
The lateral distance and angle must be minimized to
maximize the reward (or minimize the deviation). The ben-
efit of utilizing waypoints as an output is that they are not
affected by vehicle geometry. Additionally, waypoints are
easier to analyze by the controller for control commands
such as steering. Waypoints in continuous form can be
transformed into a specific trajectory. Zhang et al. [54] and
Zhouetal.[74]utilizeamotionplannertogenerateaseries
of waypoints that describe the future trajectory. LAV [10]
predicts multi-modal future trajectories (Fig. 6(d)) for all
detectedvehicles,includingtheego-vehicle.Theyusefuture
waypoints to represent the motion plan.
5.2. Cost function
Manytrajectoriesandwaypointsarepossibleforthesafe
maneuveringofthevehicle.Thecost[20,81,56,21,80,82]
is used to select the optimal one among the possibilities.
It assigns a weight (positive or negative score) to each
trajectorybasedonparametersdefinedbytheenduser,such
as safety, distance traveled, comfort, and others. Rhinehart
et al. [83] and Chen et al. [10] refine control using the
predictiveconsistencymap,whichupdatesknowledgeattest
time. They also evaluate the trajectory using an ensemble
expert likelihood model. Prakash et al. [14] utilize object-
level representations to analyze collision-free routes. Zeng
et al. [84] employ a neural motion planner that uses a cost
volume to predict future trajectories. Hu et al. [20] employ
a cost function illustrated in Fig. 6(f) that takes advantage
of the learned occupancy probability field, represented by
segmentationmaps,andpriorknowledgesuchastrafficrules
to select the trajectory with the minimum cost. Regarding
safety cost functions, Zhao et al. [50], Chen et al. [85], and
Shao et al. [8] employ safety maps. They analyze actionswithin the safe set to create causal insights regarding haz-
ardous driving situations.
5.3. Direct control and acceleration
Most of the End-to-End models [83, 74, 53, 48, 23,
75, 76, 77, 48] provide the steering angle and speed as
outputs at a specific timestamp. The output control needs to
be calibrated based on the vehicle’s dynamics, determining
the appropriate steering angle for turning and the necessary
braking for stopping at a measurable distance.
5.4. Auxiliary output
The auxiliary output can provide additional information
for the model’s operation and the determination of driving
actions. Several types of auxiliary outputs include the seg-
mentation map [9, 7] (Fig. 6(e)), BEV map [12, 9, 19, 16],
future occupancy [18, 9, 84, 82] of the vehicle (Fig. 6(e)),
and interpretable feature map [18, 8, 7, 20, 12, 81] (Fig.
6(b)(f)). These outputs provide additional functionality to
the End-to-End pipeline and help the model learn better
representations. The auxiliary output also facilitates the
explanation of the model’s behavior [7, 82], as one can
comprehendtheinformationandinferthereasonsbehindthe
model’s decisions.
6. Learning approaches for End-to-End
system
The following sections discuss various learning ap-
proaches in End-to-End Driving, including imitation learn-
ing and reinforcement learning.
6.1. Imitation learning
Imitation learning (IL) [10, 18, 13, 14, 86] is based
on the principle of learning from expert demonstrations.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 9 of 28

==== Page 10 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Thesedemonstrationstrainthesystemtomimictheexpert’s
behavior in various driving scenarios. Large-scale expert
drivingdatasetsarereadilyavailable,whichcanbeleveraged
by imitation learning [62] to train models that perform at
human-like standards.
The main objective is to train a policy 𝜋𝜃(𝑠)that maps
eachgivenstatetoacorrespondingaction(Fig.7)asclosely
as possible to the given expert policy 𝜋∗, given an expert
dataset with state action pair (𝑠,𝑎):
arg min
𝜃𝐸𝑠∼𝑃(𝑠∣𝜃)𝐿(𝜋∗(𝑠),𝜋𝜃(𝑠)) (4)
where𝑃(𝑠∣𝜃)represents the state distribution of the
trained policy 𝜋𝜃.
BehaviouralCloning(BC),DirectPolicyLearning(DPL),
andInverseReinforcementLearning(IRL)areextensionsof
imitation learning in the domain of autonomous driving.
6.1.1. Behavioural cloning
Behavioural cloning [87, 7, 13, 12, 49, 23, 88] is the
supervised imitation learning task where the goal is to treat
each state-action combination in expert distribution as an
IndependentandIdenticallyDistributed(I.I.D)exampleand
minimise imitation loss for the trained policy:
arg min
𝜃𝐸(𝑠,𝑎∗)∼𝑃∗𝐿(𝑎∗,𝜋𝜃(𝑠)) (5)
where𝑝∗(𝑠∣𝜋∗)is an expert policy state distribution,
and (state s, action 𝑎∗) is provided by expert policy 𝑝∗.
Figure 8: Behaviorcloning[49]isaperception-to-actiondriving
model that learns behavior reflex for various driving scenarios.
The agent acquires the ability to integrate expert policies in a
context-dependent and task-optimized manner, allowing it to
drive confidently.
Prakashetal.[14],Chittaetal.[7],NEAT[12],Ohnetal.
[49]utilizeapolicythatmapsinputframestolow-levelcon-
trolsignalsintermsofwaypoints.Thesewaypointsarethen
fedintoaPIDtoobtainthesteering,throttle,andbrakecom-
mands based on the predicted waypoints. Behavior cloning
[49]assumesthattheexpert’sactionscanbefullyexplained
byobservation,asittrainsamodeltodirectlymapfrominputto output based on the training dataset (Fig. 8). However,
this leads to the distribution shift problem, where the actual
observations diverge from the training observations. Many
latentvariablesimpactandgoverndrivingagent’sactionsin
real-world scenarios. Therefore, it is essential to learn these
variables effectively.
6.1.2. Direct policy learning
Within the context of BC, which maps sensor inputs to
control commands and is limited by the training dataset,
DLPaimstolearnanoptimalpolicy[48]directlythatmaps
inputstodrivingactions.TheDLPalgorithmobtainsexpert
evaluations[56]duringruntimetogathermoretrainingdata,
particularlyforscenarioswheretheinitialpolicyfallsshort.
It combines an expert dataset with Imitation Learning for
initial training and iteratively augments the dataset with
additional trajectories collected by the trained policy. The
agent can explore its surroundings and discover novel and
efficient driving policies.
The online imitation learning algorithm DAGGER [89]
provides robustness against cascading errors and accumu-
lates additional training instances. Chen et al. [10] intro-
duced automated dagger-like monitoring, where the privi-
leged agent’s supervision is collected through online learn-
ing and transformed into an agent that provides on-policy
supervision. However, the main drawback of direct policy
learning is the continuous need for expert access during the
training process, which is both costly and inefficient.
6.1.3. Inverse reinforcement learning
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [90, 48] aims to
deduce the underlying specific behaviours through the re-
wardfunction.Expertdemonstrations 𝐷={𝜁1,𝜁2,𝜁3,......,𝜁𝑛}
are fed into IRL. Each 𝜁𝑖={(𝑠1,𝑎2),(𝑠2,𝑎2),.....(𝑠𝑛,𝑎𝑛)}
consists of a state-action pair. The principal goal is to
get the underlying reward which can be used to repli-
cate the expert behaviour. Feature-based IRL [91] teaches
the different driving styles in the highway scenario. The
human-providedexamplesareusedtolearndifferentreward
functions and capabilities of interaction with road users.
MaximumEntropy(MaxEnt)inversereinforcementlearning
[92] is an extension of the feature-based IRL based on
the principle of maximum entropy. This paradigm robustly
addresses reward ambiguity and handles sub-optimization.
The major drawback is that IRL algorithms are expensive
to run. They are also computationally demanding, unstable
duringtraining,andmaytakelongertoconvergeonsmaller
datasets.
6.2. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [93, 57, 56, 53] is a
promising approach to address the distribution shift prob-
lem.Itaimstomaximizecumulativerewards[94]overtime
byinteractingwiththeenvironment,andthenetworkmakes
drivingdecisionstoobtainrewardsorpenaltiesbasedonits
actions. IL cannot handle novel situations significantly dif-
ferentfromthetrainingdataset,RLisrobusttothisissueasit
explores scenario under given environment. Reinforcement
P.S. Chib et al. Page 10 of 28

==== Page 11 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
(a) Roach Expert Supervision
 (b) Human Copilot Learning
Figure 9: RL-based learning method for training the agent to drive optimally: (a) Illustrating the reinforcement learning expert
[54] that maps the BEV to the low-level driving actions; the expert can also provide supervision to the imitation learning agent.
(b) Human-in-the-loop learning [55] allows the agent to explore the environment, and in danger scenarios, the human expert
takes over the control and provides the safe demonstration.
learning encompasses various models, including value-
basedmodelssuchasDeepQ-Networks(DQN)[95],actor-
criticbasedmodelslikeDeepDeterministicPolicyGradient
(DDPG) and Asynchronous Advantage Actor Critic (A3C)
[95], maximum entropy models [92] such as Soft Actor
Critic (SAC) [96], and policy-based optimization methods
such as Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) and
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [97].
Liang et al. [98] demonstrated the first effective RL ap-
proachforvision-baseddrivingpipelinesthatoutperformed
the modular pipeline at the time. Their method is based
on the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG), an
extended version of the actor-critic algorithm. Chen et al.
[99] uses tabular-RL to first learn an expert policy and
then uses policy distillation to learn a student policy in an
imitation learning approach.
Recently,Human-In-The-Loop(HITL)approaches[100,
55, 56, 54, 14] have gained attention in the literature. These
approachesarebasedonthepremisethatexpertdemonstra-
tions provide valuable guidance for achieving high-reward
policies. Several studies have focused on incorporating hu-
man expertise into the training process of traditional RL or
ILparadigms.OnesuchexampleisEGPO[56],whichaims
to develop an expert-guided policy optimization technique
where an expert policy supervises the learning agent.
HACO [55] allows the agent to explore hazardous en-
vironments while ensuring training safety. In this approach,
a human expert can intervene and guide the agent to avoid
potentially harmful situations or irrelevant actions (see Fig.
9(b)). Another reinforcement learning expert, Roach [54],
translates bird’s-eye view images into continuous low-level
actions (see Fig. 9(a)). Experts can provide high-level su-
pervisionforimitationlearningorreinforcementlearningin
general.Policiescanbeinitiallytaughtusingimitationlearn-
ing and then refined using reinforcement learning, which
helps reduce the extensive training period required for RL.
Jia et al. [19] utilize features extracted from Roach to learn
the ground-truth action/trajectory, providing supervision in
their study. Therefore, reinforcement learning provides a
solution to address the challenges of imitation learning by
enabling agents to actively explore and learn from theirenvironment. There are also associated challenges, such
as sample inefficiency, exploration difficulties leading to
suboptimal behaviors, and difficulties generalizing learned
policies to new scenarios.
7. Learning domain adaptation from
simulator to real
Large-scale virtual scenarios can be constructed in vir-
tual engines, enabling the collection of a significant quan-
tity of data more readily. However, there still exist signifi-
cantdomaindisparitiesbetweenvirtualandreal-worlddata,
which posechallenges increating andimplementing virtual
datasets. By leveraging the principle of domain adaptation,
we can extract critical features directly from the simulator
and transfer the knowledge learned from the source domain
to the target domain, consisting of accurate real-world data.
The H-Divergence framework [101] resolves the do-
main gap at both the visual and instance levels by ad-
versarially learning a domain classifier and a detector si-
multaneously. Zhang et al. [102] propose a simulator-real
interaction strategy that leverages disparities between the
source domain and the target domain. The authors create
two components to align differences at the global and local
levels and ensure overall consistency between them. The
realistic-lookingsyntheticimagesmaysubsequentlybeused
to train an End-to-End model. A number of techniques rely
on an open pipeline that introduces obstacles in the current
environment. PlaceNet [103] places objects into the image
space for detection and segmentation operations. GeoSim
[104]isageometry-awareapproachthatdynamicallyinserts
objects using LiDAR and HD maps. DummyNet [105] is
a pedestrian augmentation framework based on a GAN
architecture that takes the background image as input and
inserts pedestrians with consistent alignment. Some works
takeadvantageofvirtualLiDARdata[106,107,108].Sallab
etal.[106]performlearningonvirtualLiDARpointclouds
fromCARLA[109]andutilizeCycleGANtotransferstyles
fromthevirtualdomaintotherealKITTI[110]dataset.Fang
et al. [107] propose a LiDAR simulator that
P.S. Chib et al. Page 11 of 28

==== Page 12 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A SurveyTable 3: RECENT METHODS IN END-TO-END AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
Paper, Year Environment Input modality Output modality Learning Evaluation Explaibility Safety Results Data
PAD [9],
2023NuScenes6 Multi-camera
imagesSegmentation map,
agent future trajectories,
future
occupancyMulti-task
learning.min ADE,
min FDE, IoU, L2
errorExp. Via attention mask
in planner moduleLowest collision rate,
lowest L2 error, Safety
boost via goal planner.L2: 1.65
CR: 0.71Perception training: 6 epochs
Joint training: 20 epochs
ReasonNet [16],
2023CARLAVehicle measurements
navigation,
LiDAR, RGBSteering, speed, BEV,
brakeMulti-task learningDOS and
LeaderBoardAttention map -DS: 79.95
RC: 89.89
IS: 0.89Train: 2M frames (eight Towns)
Test: Town05
Policy Pre-Training [111],
2023NuScenes,
CARLACamera and intrinsics Steering, throttle Imitation learningLongest6,
collision rateAttention
activation mapHandles cases where the
agent needs to stopDS: 47.4 ±5.6
RC: 65.05 ±5.1
IS: 0.79 ±0.08
L2: 3.01,
CR: 0.94Train: 40K
(Town01, 03, 04, 06)
Test: 50 routes
Think Twice [19],
2023CARLA RGB camera, LiDARBEV feature map,
agent future trajectories,
control actionsOpen-loop imitation
learningLongest6Explainable via
expert BEV feature mapSafety-critical regions,
anticipate
future motion
to avoid collisionsDS: 70.9 ±3.4
RC: 95.5 ±2.6
IS: 0.75 ±0.05Training: 189K data on four Towns,
Roach based teaching
Scaling Vision-based [17],
2023CARLA Three cameras (views)Ego-vehicle’s
steering angle and
accelerationSelf-supervised
imitation learningNoCrash,
LeaderboardAttention mapPedestrians caused strong
braking (0.794),
despite
green lightDS: 98 ±1.7
RC: 68 ±2.7Train: 15 hours (540K frames)
Test: 25 hours ( 900k frames)
Coaching a Teachable [58],
2023CARLANavigation,
3 RGB camerasWaypoints,
control commandsKnowledge
distillation,
imitation learningLongest6,
ADE, FDE-Attend to safety-critical
entitiesDS: 73.30 ±1.07
RC: 87.44 ±0.28
ADE: 0.41
FDE: 0.36Train: Town01 - Town06
Hidden Biases of [71],
2023CARLASpeed,
camera and
LiDARSteer, throttle, and brake,
waypoints, pathImitation learning Longest6 -Larger safety distance,
safety areaDS: 72 ±3
RC: 95 ±2Train: variable size 185k and 555k
KING [6],
2022CARLAFront-facing
camera and
LiDARThrottle and steering Behaviour cloningClosed-loop (CR),
(RC), (IS), (DS)-Safety-critical
driving
scenarios and
stress-testing.DS: 90.20 ±0.00
RC: 94.42 ±0.36
IS: 0.96 ±0.36Train: 4 GPU
hours 80 routes
on Town 3,4,5,6.
LAV [10],
2022CARLAFront-facing camera,
LiDARSingle steering and
acceleration commandKnowledge
distillation,
imitation learningLongest6 (DS),
(RC),(IS),
(CR), (PC),
(LC), (RV)Spatial feature 2D mapScenario such
as pedestrians crossing,
lane change
are modeledDS: 61.85
RC: 94.46
IS: 0.64Train: Four Towns, 186K frames
Test: Town02 and Town05
TransFuse [7],
2022CARLARGB,
LiDARWaypoints, steer, throttle,
and brakeBehaviour cloningLongest 6 (DS),
(RC), (IPK), (IS)Explainable via auxiliary
output like depth,
semantic, HD map,
planner A*Global safety heuristicDS: 61.18
RC: 86.69
IS: 0.71Train: 2500 routes on eight
Towns, 228k frames
Test: 36 route
Learning to Drive [11],
2022NuScenes,
youtubeFront-facing cameraSteering, throttle,
brake,
and velocityConditional
behavior cloningCARLA benchmark,
F1 metric- -F1 : 75.0
7 perc. increase in RCTrain: 120 hour YouTube,
Test: Town01 and
Town02 with
40K transition
HACO [55],
2022CARLACurrent state,
navigation
informationAcceleration, brake
and steeringReinforcement
learningSafety violation
data usage,
success rate-Safety violation
cost the episodeSV: 11.84
SR: 0.35Train: 50 min
HACO training.
35k transition
PlanT [18],
2022CARLACamera ,
LiDAR,
route, objectWaypoints, predicting
the future attributes of
other vehiclesImitation
learningLongest6 CARLA
(DS),(RC),
(IS), (IPK),
(IT)Post hoc explanations,
attention weights for
identify relevant objects.Identification of collision
free routes,
RFDS algorithm
for collision avoidanceDS: 81.36 ±6.54
RC: 93.55 ±2.62
IS: 0.87 ±0.05Train: 3.2 hours on PlanT,
95 hours of
driving.
Trajectory-guided [13],
2022CARLAMonocular
cameraSteering,
throttle and brakeBehaviour
cloningCARLA (DS),
(RC), (IS)Auxiliary tasks
include value
and speed headReduce collision via long
prediction,
less infraction,
control model preform goodDS: 75.14
RC: 85.63
IS: 0.87Train: Town01, 03, 04, 06
Test: Town02, 05
Safety- Enhanced
Autonomous
Driving [8],
2022CARLA3 RGB,
1 LiDAR10 Waypoints,
steering,
accelerationInterFuserCARLA leaderboard,
CARLA 42 Routes
benchmark,
(RC),(IS),(DS)Intermediate interpretable
features output from
transformer decoder
(safety map, object density)Safe set contain only
safe actions, safety sensitive
output via InterFuserDS: 76.18
RC: 88.23
IS: 0.84Train: 3M frames or
410 hours (eight Towns)
ST-P3 [20],
2022NuScenes,
CARLA6 Camera(NuScenes),
4 cameras (CARLA),
navigation commandSteering,
throttle and brakeST-P3Open loop: IOU, PQ,
RQ, SQ,
L2 error
Closed: (DS), (RC)Interpretable map
lanes and
area which is drivableSafety Cost function
for the jerk action
penalizeDS: 55.14
RC: 86.74
L2: 2.90, CR: 1.27Train: 26124 samples
Validation: 5719 samples
Safe Driving via
Expert Guided
Policy optimization [56],
2022MetaDrive Camera Control signalExpert-in-the-loop
reinforcement
learningMetaDriv benchmark -Guardian to ensure
training safetyER: 388.37 ±10.01
EC: 0.56 ±0.35
SR: 0.85 ±0.05Train: 100 scenes
Test: 50 scenes
COOPERNAUT [88] ,
2022CARLAFront-facing camera,
LiDARControl signalBehaviour
cloningAUTOCASTSIM -Reduces safety
hazards
for line-of
sight sensing.SR: 90.5 ±1.2
CR: 4.5 ±3.1Train: 12 traces + 84 traces
Test : 27 accident
prone traces
Human-AI Shared
Control via Policy [21],
2022MetaDriveCurrent state,
goal stateControl signalReinforcement
learningMetaDrive and
Pybullet-A1Interpretable control
interfaceHuman-AI,
safety guarantee
95 percentage
success rateEC: 0.05 ±0.08
SR: 0.95 ±0.02Train: 50 training scenario
Test: 20 test scene
P.S. Chib et al. Page 12 of 28

==== Page 13 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A SurveyTable 3 CONTINUED: RECENT METHODS IN END-TO-END AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
Paper, Year Environment Input modality Output modality Learning Evaluation Explaibility Safety Results Data
MMFN: Multi-Modal
Fusion-Net for [66],
2022CARLAHD map and
radar on top of the
LiDAR and
cameraSteering,
throttle and brakeImitation
learningCARLA
LeaderBoard-Expert has more
awareness of safe
drivingDS: 22.8
RC: 47.22Train: 207K frames
Test: 20 routes
CADRE: A Cascade
Deep Reinforcement [57],
2022CARLAFront-view camera,
position,
orientation
and speedControl signalImitation
learningCARLA
NoCrash- -VA: 81/81
PA: 76/78Train:25 training routes
Test: Town02
Model-Based Imitation
Learning for [112],
2022CARLA RGB image, routeVehicle control,
BEV SegmentationModel-based
imitation learningCARLA
LeaderBoardBEV semantic
segmentation for
interpretability-DS: 61.1 ±3.2
RC: 97.4 ±0.8
IS: 63.0 ±3.0Test: Town05, routes
Train: Four different training
towns total
of 2.9M frames.
LookOut: Diverse
Multi-Future
Prediction and Planning [80],
2021ATG4D,
LidarsimLiDAR,
navigation.Trajectory,
vehicle controlCost learningOpen loop: mAP,
mSADE,
mSADE, PlanASD
Cloose loop: Lidarsim-Cost function include
driving including
safety, comfort,
traffic-rules.CR: 7.93
Progress:62.65
Jerk: 4.69Train: one million frames
Test: Lidarsim
MP3: A Unified Model
to Map, Perceive,
Predict and Plan [82],
2021URBANEXPERTRaw sensor data
and a high-level
commandControl command,
dynamic occupancy
fieldMP3Closed-loop: Lidarsim
Open loop: L2Interpretable cost
functions, dynamic
occupancy field,
Interpretable Scene repr.Penalize trajectories
where the SDV overlaps
occupied regions, penalize
jerk, lateral accelerationL2: 12.95
Collision: 1037.08
Jerk: 1.64
Success Pre: 74.39Train: 5000 scenarios
Test: 1000
Object-Aware
Regularization
for Addressing Causal [113],
2021CARLA RGB image Control signalBehaviour
cloningAtari environment,
CARLA .- Policy safe adaptation.Straight: 87 ±4.4
turn: 70.0 ±7.2
Nav: 35.7 ±10.2Train: 150 demonstrations
Test : 25 routes
GRI: General Reinforced
Imitation and its
application to vision-based [100],
2021CARLA 3 RGB camera view Control signalOff-policy
reinforcement
learningCARLA Leaderboard,
NoCrash,
Mujoco benchmark- -DS: 36.79
RC: 61.85
IS: 0.60Train: 60M steps
Test: with 12M and 16M steps
Multi-Modal
Fusion [14],
2021CARLAFront-facing
camera and
LiDAR4 Waypoints,
steer, throttle,
and brakeImitation
learningCARLA
LeaderBoardAttention map
visualizationsHandle adversarial
scenarios in urban
driving,
e.g., hard turnings.DS: 33.15 ±4.04
RC: 56.36 ±7.14Train: 7 towns
Test: Twon05
Learning by
Watching [51],
2021CARLASpeed,
high-level
navigationWaypoints,
steer, throttle,
and brakeImitation
learningCARLA
NoCrash
benchmarksBEV visibility mapAvoid an unsafe
maneuver.NC-R: 92
NC-D: 24
OB: 92Train: Town 1
Test: Town 2
NEAT [12],
2021CARLARGB cameras,
and intrinsics,
locations,speedWaypoints,
BEV as a
auxiliary outputBehaviour
cloningCARLA
Leaderboard.
(RC), (IS), (DS)NEAT intermediate
representations provides
interpretable attention mapAt that time highest safety
among other
methods on the CARLA.DS: 24.08 ±3.30
RC: 59.94 ±0.50
IS: 0.49 ±0.02Train: 8 towns
Test: (Town01-
Town 06)
100 secret routes
End-to-End Urban
Driving [54],
2021CARLAWide-angle camera
image with a
100 degree
horizontal FOVSteering,
throttle and brakeReinforcement
learning expert,
imitation learningCARLA
NoCrash and
LeaderBoard- -DS: 55.27 ±1.43
RC: 88.16 ±1.52
IS: 0.62 ±0.02Off-policy
dataset 80 episodes,
Train: 50 routes
Test: 26 routes
Learning to drive
from [52],
2021CARLARGB images
and
speed readingsSteering,
throttle and
brakeReinforcement
learning, policy
distillationCARLA
LeaderBoard-Action-values
based on the
current ego-vehicle
stateDS: 17.36 ±2.95
RC: 43.46 ±2.99
IS: 0.54 ±0.06Train: 69 hours
about 1m frames
Test: 270K frames
Safe Local Motion
Planning with
Self-Supervised [63],
2021NuScenes,
CARLALiDARControl signal,
BEVBehaviour
cloningCARLA NoCrashObject-centric
representationSafe planner, maintaining
a wide safety margin, avoid
safety critical situations(Success rate)
NC-E:66 ±3
NC-R: 73 ±1
NC-D: 44 ±5Train: Town 1
Test: Town 2
Train: 850 scenes(NuScenes)
Test: 150 scenes
Carl-Lead: Lidar-based
End-to-End
Autonomous [64],
2021CARLA LiDARSteering,
throttle, brake,
HD mapReinforcement
learningCARLA NoCrashSaliency maps for
visualizing
model predictionsCollision reward
punishment for unsafe
driving(Success rate)
NC-R: 93.50
NC-D: 93.00Train: 677.7K interaction steps
Test: 14,400 episodes
A Versatile and
Efficient
Reinforcement Learning [93],
2021CARLA,
BDD100kRGB image Control signalReinforcement
learning,
imitation learningNoGap on CARLAInterpretable
segmentation
mapMove the vehicle
to safe stateMPI (m): Turn:7.2,
Straight : 4.1
SR: Turn: 53.2
Straight: 16.7
Close loop : MPI:
RL: 332.6, IL:180.9Train: 28h of driving
and 2.5M RL steps
Multi-task Learning
with Attention
for End-to-end [61],
2021CARLAMonocular RGB,
velocitySteering,
throttle and
brakeConditional
imitation learning,
multitask learningCARLA NoCrash ,
CoRL2017
benchmark- -Straight :99 ±1
One Turn: 99 ±1
NC-E: 81 ±11
NC-R :67 ±9
NC-D:23 ±5Train: Town01
(466,000 frames)
Test: Town02
End-to-End Model-
Free Reinforcement [53],
2020CARLAFront-facing
camera ,
speed5 steer actions,
3 values for
throttle,
one for brakeReinforcement
learningCARLA
NoCrash,
LeaderBoardCoin implicit
affordances-NC-R: 96
NC-D:70
NC-E: 100Train: 20M
iterations Town05
Test: Town02
Learning by
cheating [48],
2020CARLAFront-facing
camera , speed,
navigation
commandSteering,
throttle and
brakeOn-policy
imitation
learningCARLA
NoCrash
and
LeaderBoardMap representationConduct a
separate
infraction analysisNC-E: 100
NC-R: 94 ±4
NC-D: 85 ±1DAgger training.
Train: 157K frames,
4 hours driving Town1,
Test: Town2
P.S. Chib et al. Page 13 of 28

==== Page 14 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A SurveyTable 3 CONTINUED: RECENT METHODS IN END-TO-END AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
Paper, Year Environment Input modality Output modality Learning Evaluation Explaibility Safety Results Data
Learning Situational
Driving [49],
2020CARLAFront-facing camera ,
speed, navigation
commandLongitudinal
and lateral
control valuesBehaviour
cloningCARLA
NoCrash,
LeaderBoardSituation-specific
predictions can be
inspected
at test timeLearned agent to adhere
to traffic rules and
safetyNC-R: 64
NC-D: 32Train: Town1
Test: Town2
SAM [50],
2020CARLAImage,
self-speed,
turning commandBrake,
gas, and
steering angleConditional
imitation
learningTraffic-school
benchmark,
CARLA NoCrash-Stop intentions help
avoid
hazardous traffic
situationsNC-E: 83 ±1
NC-R: 68 ±7
NC-D: 29 ±2Train : 10 hours
(360K frames) Town01.
Multi-task Learning with
Future States
for Vision [86],
2020CARLAThree RGB
camerasControl signalMulti-task learning,
conditional
imitation learningNoCrash,
AnyWeather-Localization tasks is
useful for safe
driving.NC-E: 92,
NC-R 66,
NC-D: 32,
SR: 93.2Train: 100 hours
DSDNet [65],
2020NuScenes,
ATG4D,
CARLALiDAR,
HD mapSteering, speedImitation
learningCR, L2,
CARLALearn interpretable
intermediate
resultsSafer planning by
cost functionL2: 1.22,
Lane vio: 1.55
IOU: 55.4
Min MSD: 0.213Train: 60K, 1000, 5000 samples
Test: 17K, 500 samples
Perceive, Predict, and
Plan: Safe Motion [90],
2020Real scenarioRaw sensor data,
HD map,
high level routeControl actionImitation learning,
inverse RLL2, CR,
jerk and
lateral accelerationInterpretable
Semantic
Representations
(occupancy map)Planner learn
safety cost,
safety bufferCR: 1.78
L2:3.34
Jerk: 1.27
Lat. acc: 2.89Train: 6100 scenarios
Test: 1500 scenarios.
Urban driving
with condition
imitation learning [24],
2020Real scenarioCamera ,
navigation
commandSteering, speedImitation
learningSuccessful turns,
CR,TVUsing pre trained
perceptionSafety-driver in loop MAE: 0.0715Train: 30h
Test: 26 routes
Exploring the
Limitations of Behavior [23],
2019CARLAImage,
self-speed,
turning commandWaypoints,
steer, throttle,
and brakeBehaviour
cloningCARLA
NoCrash,
LeaderBoard-Potentially inconsistent
put the
vehicle back
to a safe stateNC-E: 90 ±2
NC-R: 56 ±2
NC-D: 24 ±8Train: 100 hours dataset
Test: 80 hours dataset
Learning
to drive from
from simulation without [114],
2019Simulation
+ Real
scenarioSingle frontal
cameraSteeringImitation
learningAverage distance
per interventionBi-directional
image translator-Sim MAE: 0.017
Real MAE: 0.081Train and Test:
60K frames
Learning accurate,
comfortable
and human-like driving[115],
2019Real scenarioSingle frontal
cameraSteering, speedImitation
learningL1, comfort measure,
driving accuracy,
human-likeness
scoreHERE map -AS: 7.96
HL: 29.3Train: 60h,
Test: 10h
Learning to
drive in a day [59],
2019Real +
Unreal Engine 4Single frontal
cameraSteering,
throttle and
brakeReinforcement
learningDistance travel
reward- Safer reward functionMeter/Disengagement
(250m): 0Train: 10 episode
Test : 250 meters
Multimodal
end-to-end
autonomous driving [62],
2019CARLAFront-facing
camera and
LiDARSteering,
throttle and
brakeConditional
imitation
learningCARLA - - SR: 94Train: 25h
Test : Town 1 and 2
End-to-end
interpretable neural
motion planner[81],
2019Real scenarioFront-facing
camera ,
speed.Cost volume,
future trajectories,
Object locationImitation
learningCollision rate,
traffic violation rateInterpretable
intermediate representationsCost volume can
generate safer planningL2(3sec): 2.353
Colli rate: 0.78Train : 50000 scenarios
Val: 500 scenarios
Test: 1000 scenarios
Route Completion (RC), Infraction Score/penalty (IS), Driving score (DS), Collisions pedestrians (CP)/(PC), Collisions vehicles (CV), Collisions layout (CL)/(LC), Red light infractions (RLI), Red light violation (RV), Stop sign infractions (SSI), Off-road infractions (OI), Route deviations (RD), Agent blocked (AB).
Average Displacement Error (ADE), Final Displacement Error (FDE), Intersection over Union (IOU), Panoptic Quality (PQ), Recognition Quality (RQ), Segmentation Quality (SQ), Instance Contrastive Pair (ICP), Action Contrastive Pair (ACP), Driving in Occlusion Simulation (DOS), Episodic Cost (EC), Success Rate (SR).
Collision Rate (CR), Safety Violation (SV), Episodic Return (ER), Episodic Cost (EC), Vehicle Avoidance (VA), Pedestrian Avoidance (PA), Meters Per Intervention(MPI), Reinforcement Learning (RL), Imitation Learning (IL), NoCrash Regular Traffic (NC-R), NoCrash Dense Traffic (NC-D), NoCrash Empty (NC-E) .
P.S. Chib et al. Page 14 of 28

==== Page 15 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
(a) InterFuser
(b) KING Lane Merger Scenario
 (c) KING Collision Avoidance
Figure 10: Demonstration of safe driving methods: (a) InterFuser [8] processes multisensorial information to detect adversarial
events,whicharethenusedbythecontrollertoconstraindrivingactionswithinsafesets.(b)KING[6]improvescollisionavoidance
using scenario generation. The image shows the ego vehicle (shown in red) maintaining a safe distance during a lane merge in
the presence of an adversarial agent (shown in blue). (c) In the same context, the image illustrates the vehicle slowing down to
avoid collision.
augments real point clouds with artificial obstacles by
blending them appropriately into the surroundings. Regard-
ingplanninganddecisiondisparity,Panetal.[116]propose
learningdrivingpoliciesinasimulatedsettingwithrealistic
frames before applying them in the real world. Osinski et
al. [117] propose a driving policy using a simulator, where
a segmentation network is developed using annotated real-
world data, while the driving controller is learned using
synthetic images and their semantics. Mitchell et al. [118]
and Stocco et al. [119] enable robust online policy learning
adaptation through a mixed-reality arrangement, which in-
cludesanactualvehicleandothervirtualcarsandobstacles,
allowing the real car to learn from simulated collisions and
test scenarios.
8. Safety
Ensuring safety in End-to-End autonomous driving sys-
tems is a complex challenge. While these systems offer
high-performance potential, several considerations and ap-
proachesareessentialformaintainingsafetythroughoutthe
pipeline. First, training the system with diverse and high-
qualitydatathatcoversawiderangeofscenarios,including
rare and critical situations. Hanselmann et al. [6], Chen et
al.[10],Chittaetal.[7],Xiaoetal.[14],andOhn-Baretal.
[49]demonstratethattrainingoncriticalscenarioshelpsthe
system learn robust and safe behaviors and prepares it forenvironmental conditions and potential hazards. These sce-
narios include unprotected turnings at intersections, pedes-
trians emerging from occluded regions, aggressive lane-
changing,andothersafetyheuristics,asshowninFig.10(b)
and Fig. 10(c). Hanselmann et al. [6] focus on improving
robustness by inducing adversarial scenarios (collision sce-
narios)andcollectinganobservation-waypointdatasetusing
experts, which is then used to fine-tune the policy.
Integrating safety constraints and rules into the End-to-
End system is another vital aspect. The system can prior-
itize safe behavior by incorporating safety considerations
during learning or post-processing system outputs. Safety
constraints include a safety cost function [80, 82, 65, 90],
avoidingunsafemaneuvers[11,19],andcollisionavoidance
strategies[58,13,50].Zengetal.[84]definethecostvolume
responsible for safe planning; Kendall et al. [59] propose a
practical safety reward function for safety-sensitive outputs.
Lietal.[55]andHuetal.[20]demonstratesafetybyutilizing
the Safety Cost function that penalizes jerk, significant ac-
celeration,andsafetyviolations.Toavoidunsafemaneuvers,
Zhangetal.[51]eliminateunsafewaypoints,andShaoetal.
[8] introduce InterFuser (Fig. 10(a)), which constrains only
the actions within the safety set and steers only the safest
action.Theaboveconstraintsensurethatthesystemoperates
within predefined safety boundaries.
Implementing additional safety modules and testing
mechanisms (Tables 4, 5) enhances the system’s safety.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 15 of 28

==== Page 16 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Table 4
END-TO-END DRIVING TESTING TO ENSURE SAFETY
Methods Summary Literature
Generating neuron coverage to
identify false actions[120]
Designing an diverse and critical
unsafe test cases[6]Search-based
testing Objective function to search safety
sensitive output[84]
Place the original object with an
adversarial one[103]
Optimization-
based attackVirtual obstacles to generate
adversarial attack in natural environment[22]
Generate the adversarial realistic-looking
representations based on images[121]
Generate pedestrian augmentation from
inserting pedestrians in image[122]GAN-based
attack Designing an objective function to search
for the diverse unsafe test cases[8]
Table 5
END-TO-END TESTING ORACLE MEASURES CORRECT CONTROL DECISION AT DIFFERENT SCENARIOS
Test Oracle Detail Literature
Metamorphic
testingThe control signal should not get alter
in different condition[6]
Differential
testingThe End-to-End system must give the same
safe control for same scenario[50]
Model-based
oraclePredicting the critical scenario that
cause system failure[23]
Real-time monitoring of the system’s behavior allows for
detecting abnormalities or deviations from safe operation.
Hu et al. [9], Renz et al. [18], Wu et al. [13], and Hawke
et al. [24] implement a planner that identifies collision-
free routes, reduces possible infractions, and compensates
for potential failures or inaccuracies. Renz et al. [18] use arule-based expert algorithm for their planner, while Wu et
al. [13] propose a trajectory + control model that predicts
a safe trajectory over the long horizon. Hu et al. [9] also
employ a goal planner to ensure safety. Codevilla et al. [23]
demonstrate the system’s ability to respond appropriately
and return the vehicle to a safe state when encountering
Table 6
POPULAR SAFETY METRICS USED FOR SAFETY EVALUATION OF DRIVING SYSTEM
Classification Critical Metrics Literature Description
Time to Collision (TTC) [123]It defines the minimum time interval that the two agents
will collide
Worst Time to Collision (WTTC) [124]The WTTC metric is an extension of the traditional TTC that
takes numerous traces of actors into consideration
Time to Maneuver (TTM) [123]The TTM yields the latest time in the range [0, TTC] at which an
expert actor may conduct a movement that avoids a collision
Time to React (TTR) [120]TTR metric provides an approximation of the latest time before a
reaction is necessaryTemporal
metrics
Time Headway (THW) [123]The THW measure determines the amount of time it will take an
actor to get to the location of other vehicle
Deceleration Safety Time (DST) [125]It calculates the deceleration required to maintain the
safe distance
Stopping Distance (SD) [126]Minimum stopping distance at the time of
deceleration
Crash Potential Index (CPI) [127]It measures the probability that the vehicle cannot avoid the
collision by decelerationNon-Temporal
metrics
Conflict Index (CI) [127]It estimates the collision probability and the severity
factors
P.S. Chib et al. Page 16 of 28

==== Page 17 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
potentialinconsistencies.Similarly,Zhaoetal.[50]incorpo-
ratestopintentionstohelpavoidhazardoustrafficsituations
and respond appropriately. These mechanisms ensure that
thesystemcandetectandrespondtoabnormalorunexpected
situations, thereby reducing the risk of accidents or unsafe
behavior.
Adversarial attack [22] methods, as shown in the Table
4, are utilized in driving testing to evaluate the correctness
of the output control signal. These testing methodologies
aim to identify vulnerabilities and assess the robustness
againstadversaries.TheEnd-to-Endtestingoracle(Table5)
determines the correct control decision within a given sce-
nario. Metamorphic testing tackles the oracle problem by
verifying the consistency of the steering angle [6] across
various weather and lighting conditions. It provides a reli-
ablewaytoensurethatthesteeringangleremainsstableand
unaffectedbythesefactors.Differentialtesting[50]exposes
inconsistenciesamongdifferentDNNmodelsbycomparing
their inference results for the same scenario. If the models
producedifferentoutcomes,itindicatesunexpectedbehavior
and potential issues in the system. The model-based oracle
employs a trained probabilistic model to assess and predict
potential risks [23] in real scenarios. By monitoring the
environment, it can identify situations that the system may
not adequately handle.
Safetymetricsprovidequantitativemeasurestoevaluate
the performance of autonomous driving systems and assess
how well the system functions in terms of safety. Time to
Collision (TTC), Conflict Index (CI), Crash Potential Index
(CPI), Time to React (TTR), and others are some of the
metrics that can provide additional objective comparisons
between the safety performance of various approaches and
identify areas that require improvement. A description of
these metrics is provided in Table 6.
9. Explainability
Explainability [128] refers to the ability to understand
the logic of an agent and is focused on how a user inter-
prets the relationships between the input and output of a
model. It encompasses two main concepts: interpretability,
which relates to the understandability of explanations, and
completeness, which pertains to exhaustively defining the
behavior of the model through explanations. Choi et al.
[129] distinguish three types of confidence in autonomous
vehicles:transparency,whichreferstotheperson’sabilityto
foreseeandcomprehendvehicleoperation;technicalcompe-
tence, which relates to understanding vehicle performance;
and situation management, which involves the notion that
the user can regain vehicle control at any time. According
toHaspieletal.[130],explanationsplayacrucialrolewhen
humansareinvolved,astheabilitytoexplainanautonomous
vehicle’sactionssignificantlyimpactsconsumertrust,which
isessentialforthewidespreadacceptanceofthistechnology.
Inthecontextofexplainabilityforend-to-endautonomous
driving systems, we can categorize explanation approaches
intotwo maintypes(Fig.11): localexplanationsandglobal
Figure 11: Categorization of Explainability Approaches.
explanations.Alocalexplanationaimstodescribetheratio-
nalebehindthepredictionsofthemodel.Ontheotherhand,
globalexplanationsaimtocomprehensivelycomprehendthe
model’s behavior by describing the underlying knowledge.
As of now, there is no available research on global explana-
tionsinthecontextofend-to-endautonomousdriving[131].
Therefore, future research should focus on addressing this
gap.
9.1. Local explanations
Alocalexplanationdescribeswhythemodel 𝑓produces
its prediction 𝑦=𝑓(𝑥)given an input 𝑥. There are two
approaches: in 9.1.1, we determine which visual region has
the most impact, and in 9.1.2, we identify the factors that
caused the model to predict 𝑓(𝑥).
9.1.1. Post-hoc saliency methods
Apost-hocsaliencytechniqueattemptstoexplainwhich
portions of the input space have the most effect on the
model’s output. These approaches provide a saliency map
thatillustratesthelocationswherethemodelmadethemost
significant decisions.
Post-hoc saliency methods primarily focus on the per-
ception component of the driving architecture. Bojarski et
al. [132] introduced the first post-hoc saliency approach
for visualizing the impact of inputs in autonomous driving.
Renz et al. [18] proposed the PlanT method (Fig. 12(a)),
whichutilizesanattentionmechanismforpost-hocsaliency
visualization to provide object-level representations using
theattentionweightsofthetransformertoidentifythemost
relevant objects. Mori et al. [133] proposed an attention
mechanism that utilizes the model’s predictions of steering
angle and throttle. These local predictions are employed as
visualattentionmapsandcombinedwithlearnedparameters
usingalinearcombinationtomakethefinaldecision.While
attention-based methods are often believed to improve the
transparency of neural networks, it should be noted that
learnedattentionweightsmayexhibitweakcorrelationswith
several features. The attention weights can provide accurate
predictions when measuring different input features during
driving. Overall, evaluating the post-hoc effectiveness of
attention mechanisms is challenging and often relies on
subjective human evaluation.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 17 of 28

==== Page 18 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
(a) PlanT agent’s attention
LeftViewFrontViewRightViewObjectDensityMapt0t1t2ReasonsforthefailureInaccurately predict of thevehicle’ s headingInaccurately predict of thebicycle’ s speedFailtodetectthefallenpedestrianahead (b) InterFuser failure explanation
Figure 12: Explainability Methods: (a) PlanT [18] visualization showing the attention given to the agent in various scenarios.
(b) Using InterFuser [8], failure cases can be visualized by integrating three RGB views and a predicted object density map. The
orange boxes indicate objects that pose a collision risk to the ego-vehicle. The object density map offers predictions for the current
traffic scene ( 𝑡0) and future traffic scenes at 1-second ( 𝑡1) and 2-second ( 𝑡2) intervals.
9.1.2. Counterfactual explanation
Saliency approaches focus on answering the ‘where’
question,identifyinginfluentialinputlocationsforthemodel’s
decision.Incontrast,counterfactualexplanationsaddressthe
‘what’ question by seeking small changes in the input that
alterthemodel’sprediction.Counterfactualanalysisaimsto
identifyfeatures 𝑋withintheinput 𝑥thatledtotheoutcome
𝑦=𝑓(𝑥)by creating a new input instance 𝑥′where𝑋is
modified, resulting in a different outcome 𝑦′. The modified
input instance 𝑥′serves as the counterfactual example, and
𝑦′representsthecontrastingclass,suchas‘Whatchangesin
thetrafficscenariowouldcausethevehicletostopmoving?’
It could be a red light.
Since the input space consists of semantic dimensions
and is modifiable, assessing the causality of input compo-
nents is straightforward. Li et al. [125] proposed a causal
inferencetechniqueforidentifyingriskyobjects.Steex[134]
developedacounterfactualmethodthatmodifiesthestyleof
the region to explain the visual model. The semantic input
provides a high-level object representation, making it more
interpretable compared to pixel-level representations.
Bansal et al. [135] explore the underlying causes of
particular outcomes by examining the ChauffeurNet model
using manually crafted inputs that involve omitting particu-
lar objects.
In End-to-End driving, the steering, throttle, and brake
drivingoutputscanbecomplementedwithauxiliaryoutputs
suchastheoccupancyandinterpretablesemanticstodemon-
strate a specific degree of counterfactual understandability.
Chitta et al. [7] introduce an auxiliary output (semantics
map)thatemploystheA*plannertoaddressacounterfactual
inquiry of “What is the possibility of a collision without
braking".Shaoetal.[8]designedasystem,asshowninFig.
12(b),whichinferscounterfactualreasoningforthepotential
failureswiththeassistanceofanintermediateobjectdensity
map.Sadatetal.[90]generateaprobabilisticsemanticoccu-
pancymapoverspaceandtime,capturingthepositionsofdi-
verseroadagents.Occupancymapsprovideacounterfactual
explanation as they act as an intermediary representation tothemotionplanningsystem,higheroccupancyprobabilities
willdiscouragesthemaneuverswhileloweroccupancywill
encourage them.
9.2. Global explanations
Global explanations aim to provide an overall under-
standing of a model’s behavior by describing the knowl-
edge it possesses. They are classified into model translation
(9.2.1)andrepresentationexplanationtechniques(9.2.2)for
analyzing global explanations.
9.2.1. Model translation
The objective of model translation is to transfer the
informationfromtheoriginalmodeltoadifferentmodelthat
isinherentlyinterpretable.Thisinvolvestraininganexplain-
able model to mimic the input-output relationship. Recent
studies have explored translating deep learning models into
decision trees [136], rule-based models [137], or causal
models[138].However,onelimitationofthisapproachisthe
potential discrepancies between the interpretable translated
model and the original self-driving model.
9.2.2. Explaining representations
Explaining representations aims to explain the informa-
tion captured by the model’s structures at various scales.
Zhang et al. [139] and Bau et al. [140] make efforts to gain
insights into what the neurons capture. The activation of a
neuron can be understood by examining input patterns that
maximizeitsactivity.Forexample,onecansampletheinput
using gradient ascent [141] or generative networks [142].
Tian et al. [120] employ the concept of neuron coverage to
identifyfalseactionsthatcouldpotentiallyleadtofatalities.
They partition the input space based on neuron coverage,
assuming that inputs with the same neuron coverage will
result in the same model decision. Their objective is to
increase neuron coverage through transformations such as
linear changes in image intensity and affine transformations
like rotation and convolution.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 18 of 28

==== Page 19 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Table 7
CARLA AUTONOMOUS DRIVING LEADERBOARD 1.0 SUBMISSION UNTIL AUGUST 2023
Rank Submission DSRCIPCPCVCLRLISSIOIRD AB Type
%%[0,1] infractions/km E/M
1 ReasonNet [16] 79.9589.890.890.020.130.010.080.000.040.00 0.33 E
1 InterFuser [8] 76.1888.230.840.040.370.140.220.000.130.00 0.43 E
2 TCP [13] 75.1485.630.870.000.320.000.090.000.040.00 0.54 E
3 TF++ [71] 66.3278.570.840.000.500.000.010.000.120.00 0.71 E
3 LAV [10] 61.8594.460.640.040.700.020.170.000.250.09 0.10 E
4 TransFuser [7] 61.1886.690.710.040.810.010.050.000.230.00 0.43 E
5Latent TransFuser [7] 45.2066.310.720.021.110.020.050.000.160.00 1.82 E
6 GRIAD [100] 36.7961.850.600.002.770.410.480.001.391.11 0.84 E
7 TransFuser+ [7] 34.5869.840.560.040.700.030.750.000.180.00 2.41 E
8World on Rails [99] 31.3757.650.560.611.351.020.790.000.961.69 0.47 E
9 MaRLn [53] 24.9846.970.520.002.332.470.550.001.821.44 0.94 E
10 NEAT [12] 21.8341.710.650.040.740.620.700.002.680.00 5.22 E
11 AIM-MT [12] 19.3867.020.390.181.530.121.550.000.350.00 2.11 E
12 TransFuser [14] 16.9351.820.420.911.090.191.260.000.570.00 1.96 E
13CNN-Planner [143] 15.4050.050.410.084.670.420.350.002.780.12 4.63 M
14 Learning by [48] 8.9417.540.730.000.401.160.710.001.520.03 4.69 E
15 MaRLn [53] 5.5624.720.360.773.2513.23 0.850.0010.732.97 11.41 E
16 CILRS [12] 5.3714.400.552.691.482.351.620.004.554.14 4.28 E
17 CaRINA [144] 4.5623.800.410.017.5651.5220.640.0014.320.0010055.99 M
Route Completion (RC), Infraction Score/penalty (IS), Driving score (DS), Collisions pedestrians (CP)/(PC), Collisions
vehicles (CV), Collisions layout (CL)/(LC), Red light infractions (RLI), Red light violation (RV), Stop sign infractions (SSI),
Off-road infractions (OI), Route deviations (RD), Agent blocked (AB), End-to-End Architecture (E), Modular Architecture
(M).
10. Evaluation
The evaluation of the End-to-End system consists of
open-loop evaluation and closed-loop evaluation. The open
loopisassessedusingreal-worldbenchmarkdatasetssuchas
KITTI [110] and nuScenes [145]. It compares the system’s
drivingbehaviorwithexpertactionsandmeasuresthedevia-
tion.MeasuressuchasMinADE,MinFDE[9],L2error[20],
and collision rate [84] are some of the evaluation metrics
presented in Table 3. In contrast the closed-loop evaluation
directlyassessesthesystemincontrolledreal-worldorsimu-
latedsettingsbyallowingittodriveindependentlyandlearn
safe driving maneuvers.
In the open-loop evaluation of End-to-End driving sys-
tems,thesystem’sinputs,suchascameraimagesorLiDAR
data, are provided to the system. The resulting outputs,
suchassteeringcommandsandvehiclespeed,areevaluated
againstpredefineddrivingbehaviors.Theevaluationmetrics
commonly used in the open-loop evaluation include mea-
sures of the system’s ability to follow the desired trajectory
ordrivingbehaviors,suchasthemeansquarederror[50],L2
[9, 82] between the predicted and actual trajectories or the
percentage of time the system remains within a certain dis-
tanceofthedesiredtrajectory[13].Otherevaluationmetrics
may also be employed to assess the system’s performance
in specific driving scenarios [14, 6], such as the system’s
capability to navigate intersections, handle obstacles, or
perform lane changes. The open loop provides faster initial
assessment based on functionalities and is also helpful fortesting specific components or behaviors in isolation. How-
ever,theyinheritdrawbacksfromthebenchmarkdatasetsas
they cannot generalize to wider geographical distribution.
Most of the recent End-to-End systems are evaluated in
closed-loopsettingssuchasLEADERBOARDandNOCRASH
[109]. Table 7 compares all the state-of-the-art methods
on the CARLA public leaderboard. The CARLA leader-
boardanalyzesautonomousdrivingsystemsinunanticipated
environments. Vehicles are tasked with completing a set
of specified routes, incorporating risky scenarios such as
unexpectedly crossing pedestrians or sudden lane changes.
The leaderboard measures how far the vehicle has suc-
cessfully traveled on the given Town route within a time
constraint and how many times it has incurred infractions.
Several metrics provide a comprehensive understanding of
the driving system, which are mentioned below:
•Route Completion (RC): [7, 10, 18, 13, 8] measures
the percentage of the distance that an agent can com-
plete.
•Infraction Score/penalty (IS): [14, 51, 12] is a geo-
metricseriesthattracksinfractionsandaggregatesthe
infraction penalties. It measures how often an agent
drives without causing infractions.
•Driving score (DS): [54, 52, 49] is a primary metric
calculated as the multiplication of the route comple-
tion and the infraction penalty. It measures the route
completion rate weighted by infractions per route.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 19 of 28

==== Page 20 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Therearespecificmetricsthatevaluateinfractions;each
metrichaspenaltycoefficientsappliedeverytimeaninfrac-
tiontakesplace.Collisionswithpedestrians,collisionswith
other vehicles, collisions with static elements, collisions
layout, red light infractions, stop sign infractions, and off-
roadinfractionsaresomeofthemetricsused[143].Closed-
loopevaluationprovidesdynamictestingadaptabilitywhere
one can provide customized configuration and sensor set-
tings.Thefeedbackloopinitallowsforiterativerefinement,
enabling the system to learn and improve from mistakes
andexperiences.However,severalchallengesareassociated
withclosed-loop.Theseincludethecomplexityoftheinitial
setup and the domain gap, which might require additional
fine-tuning.
11. Datasets and simulator
11.1. Datasets
In End-to-End models, the quality and richness of data
are critical aspects of model training. Instead of using dif-
ferent hyperparameters, the training data is the most crucial
factor influencing the model’s performance. The amount of
information fed into the model determines the kind of out-
comes it produces. We summarized the self-driving dataset
basedontheirsensormodalities,includingcamera,LiDAR,
GNSS, and dynamics. The content of the datasets includes
urbandriving,traffic,anddifferentroadconditions.Weather
conditions also influence the model’s performance. Some
datasets, such as ApolloScape [146], capture all weather
conditions from sunny to snowy. The details are provided
in Table 8.
11.2. Simulators and toolsets
Standard testing of End-to-End driving and learning
pipelines requires advanced software simulators to process
information and make conclusions for their various func-
tionalities. Experimenting with such driving systems is ex-
pensive, and conducting tests on public roads is heavily
restricted. Simulation environments assist in training spe-
cificalgorithms/modulesbeforeroadtesting.Simulatorslike
Carla [109] offer flexibility to simulate the environment
basedonexperimentalrequirements,includingweathercon-
ditions, traffic flow, road agents, etc. Simulators play a
crucial role in generating safety-critical scenarios and con-
tribute to model generalization for detecting and preventing
such scenarios.
Widely used platforms for training End-to-End driv-
ing pipelines are compared in Table 9. MATLAB/Simulink
[147] is used for various settings; it contains efficient plot
functions and has the ability to co-simulate with other soft-
ware,suchasCarSim[148],whichsimplifiesthecreationof
different settings. PreScan [149] can mimic real-world en-
vironments,includingweatherconditions,whichMATLAB
and CarSim lack. It also supports the MATLAB Simulink
interface,makingmodelingmoreeffective.Gazebo[150]is
well-knownforitshighversatilityandeasyconnectionwith
ROS. In contrast to the CARLA and LGSVL [151] simula-
tors,creatingasimulatedenvironmentwithGazeborequiresmechanical effort. CARLA and LGSVL offer high-quality
simulationframeworksthatrequireaGPUprocessingunitto
operateatadecentspeedandframerate.CARLAisbuilton
theUnrealEngine,whileLGSVLisbasedontheUnitygame
engine.TheAPIallowsuserstoaccessvariouscapabilitiesin
CARLAandLGSVL,fromdevelopingcustomizablesensors
to map generation. LGSVL generally links to the driving
stack through various bridges, and CARLA allows built-in
bridge connections via ROS and Autoware.
12. Future research directions
This section will highlight the possible research direc-
tionsthatcandrivefutureadvancementsinthedomainfrom
the perspective of learning principles, safety, explainability,
and others.
12.1. Learning robustness
Current research in End-to-End autonomous driving
mainly focuses on reinforcement learning (Section 6.2)
and imitation learning (Section 6.1) methods. RL trains
agentsbyinteractingwithsimulatedenvironments,whileIL
learns from expert agents without extensive environmental
interaction.However,challengeslikedistributionshiftinIL
and computational instability in RL highlight the need for
further improvements.
12.2. Enhanced safety
Ensuringthebehavioralsafetyofvehiclesandaccurately
predicting uncertain behaviors are key aspects in safety re-
searchasdiscussedinSection8.Aneffectivesystemshould
becapableofhandlingvariousdrivingsituations,contribut-
ing to comfortable and reliable transportation. To facilitate
the widespread adoption of End-to-End approaches, it is
essentialtorefinesafetyconstraintsandenhancetheireffec-
tiveness.
12.3. Advancing model explainability
The lack of interpretability poses a new challenge for
the advancement of End-to-End driving. However, ongoing
efforts(Section9)arebeingmadetoaddressthisissuebyde-
signing and generating interpretable features. These efforts
have shown promising improvements in both performance
and explainability. However, further exploration is required
in global explanation strategies, including designing novel
approaches to explain model actions leading to failures
and suggesting potential solutions. Future research can also
explore ways to improve feedback mechanisms, allowing
users to understand the decision-making process and infuse
confidence in the reliability of End-to-End driving systems.
12.4. Collaboration perception systems
Vehicles can communicate directly utilizing collabora-
tive perception to observe surroundings beyond their line
of sight and field of view. This approach addresses issues
relatedtoocclusionandlimitedreceptivefields.Cooperative
orcollaborativeperceptionenablesvehiclesinthesamearea
to communicate and jointly assess the scene.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 20 of 28

==== Page 21 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A SurveyTable 8
CUMULATIVE LIST OF DATASETS WITH THEIR DYNAMICS FOR END-TO-END TRAINING
Datasets Year Sensors Modalities Content Weather Size Location LicenseCameras
LiDAR
GNSS
Steering
Speed,
Acceleration
Navigational
command
Route planner
Obstacles
Traffic
Raods
Sunny
Rain
Snow or Fog
Udacity [152] 2016 ✓✓✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ 5h Mountain View MIT
Drive360 [153] 2019 ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ 55h Switzerland Academic
Comma.ai 2016 [154] 2016 ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓ 7h 15min San Francisco CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
Comma.ai 2019 [155] 2019 ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓ 30h San Jose California MIT
BDD 100 [156] 2018 ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ 1100h US Berkley
Oxford RobotCar [2] 2019 ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓ 214h Oxford CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
HDD [157] 2018 ✓✓✓✓✓ ✓ ✓✓✓ 104h San Francisco Academic
Brain4Cars [158] 2016 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓✓ 1180 miles US Academic
Li-Vi [159, 160] 2018 ✓✓✓✓✓ 10h China Academic
DDD17 [161] 2017 ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓ 12h Switzerland, Germany CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
A2D2 [162] 2020 ✓✓✓✓✓ ✓✓ ✓ 390k frames South of Germany CC BY-ND 4.0
nuScenes [145] 2019 ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓✓ 5.5h Boston, Singapore Non-commercial
Waymo [163] 2019 ✓✓✓✓✓ ✓ ✓ 5.5h California Non-commercial
H3D [46] 2019 ✓✓✓✓✓ ✓ N/A Japan Academic
HAD [164] 2019 ✓ ✓✓✓ ✓ ✓ 30h San Francisco Academic
BIT [165] 2015 ✓ ✓ ✓ 9850 frames Beijing Academics
UA-DETRAC [166] 2015 ✓ ✓ ✓ 140k frames Beijing, Tianjing CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
DFG [167] 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓✓ 7k+8k Slovenia CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Bosch [168] 2017 ✓ ✓ ✓ 8334 frames Germany Research Only
Tencent 100k [169] 2016 ✓ ✓ ✓ 30k China CC-BY-NC
LISA [170] 2012 ✓ ✓ ✓ 20k California Research Only
STSD [171] 2011 ✓ ✓ ✓ 2503 frames Sweden CC BY-SA 4.0
GTSRB [172] 2013 ✓ ✓ ✓✓ 50k Germany CC0 1.0
KUL [173] 2013 ✓ ✓ ✓ 16k Flanders CC0 1.0
Caltech [174] 2009 ✓ ✓ ✓ 10 hours California CC4.0
CamVid [175] 2009 ✓ ✓✓✓✓ 22 min, 14 s Cambridge Academic
Ford[176] 2018 ✓✓ ✓ ✓ 66 km Michigan CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0
KITTI [110] 2013 ✓✓✓ ✓✓✓✓ 43 k Karlsruhe Apache License 2.0
CityScapes [177] 2016 ✓ ✓ ✓✓ ✓ 20+5 K frams Germany, France, Scotland Apache License 2.0
Mapillary [178] 2017 ✓ ✓ ✓✓✓25000 frames Germany Research Only
ApolloScape [146] 2018 ✓✓ ✓✓ ✓✓✓147 k frames China Non-commercial
VERI-Wild [179] 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓✓ 125, 280 hours China Research Only
D2 -City [180] 2019 ✓ ✓ ✓✓✓ 10000 video China Research Only
DriveSeg [181] 2020 ✓ ✓✓✓✓ 500 minutes Massachusetts CC BY-NC 4.0
P.S. Chib et al. Page 21 of 28

==== Page 22 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Table 9
PROMINENT SIMULATORS USED FOR CREATING VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS FOR END-TO-END SYSTEMS
SimulatorsMATLAB
[147]CarSim
[148]PreScan
[149]CARLA
[109]LGSVL
[151]
Sensors
support✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Weather
condition✓ ✓ ✓
Camera
calibration✓ ✓ ✓
Path
planning✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Vehicle
dynamics✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Virtual
environment✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Infrastructure
fabrication✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Scenarios
simulator✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Ground
truth✓ ✓ ✓
Simulator
connectivity✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
System
scalability✓ ✓
Open
source✓ ✓
System
stable✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
System
portable✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
API
flexibility✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Cooperativeperceptionmethods[182,183,184]include
V2V (vehicle-to-vehicle), V2I (vehicle-to-infrastructure),
andV2X(vehicle-to-everything)modes.Futureworksshould
focus on enhancing the transmission efficiency within col-
laboration systems while safeguarding data privacy.
12.5. Large language and vision models
Large vision models have emerged as a prominent trend
in AI. By harnessing the advancements in these models,
various domains can benefit from their integration. Visual
prompts have become essential aids for understanding visu-
alsacrossdiversedomainsandenhancingmodelcapacityfor
interpretingvisualdata.Presently,SAM-Track[185]forob-
jecttrackingandVIMA[186]forrobotactionmanipulation
showcasepotential,implyingthattheselargemodelscanop-
timize visual recognition systems. Moreover, we can effec-
tivelyutilizelargelanguageandvisionmodelsthroughtrans-
fer learning, domain adaptation, and fine-tuning. We can
transfer insights from a larger model to a smaller one, em-
phasizing the importance of compact transfer of knowledge
and applying it to novel tasks while upholding performance
and adaptability, especially in contexts like autonomous
driving. Future efforts must focus on designing large visionmodelstailoredexplicitlytoautonomousdrivingandprompt
fine-tuning to guide tasks related to perception and control.
13. Conclusion
Overthepastfewyears,therehasbeensignificantinter-
est in End-to-End autonomous driving due to the simplicity
ofitsdesigncomparedtoconventionalmodularautonomous
driving.Wedevelopataxonomybasedonmodalities,learn-
ing, and training methodology and investigate the potential
ofleveragingdomainadaptationapproachestooptimizethe
trainingprocess.Furthermore,thepaperexploresevaluation
framework that encompasses both open and closed-loop as-
sessments,enablingacomprehensiveanalysisofsystemper-
formance. To facilitate further research and development in
thedomain,wecompileasummarizedlistofadvancements,
publicly available datasets and simulators. The paper also
explores potential solutions proposed by different articles
regarding safety and explainability. Despite the impressive
performance of End-to-End approaches, there is a need
for continued exploration and improvement in safety and
interpretability to achieve broader technology acceptance.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 22 of 28

==== Page 23 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
References
[1] C. Chen, A. Seff, A. Kornhauser, J. Xiao, Deepdriving: Learning
affordancefordirectperceptioninautonomousdriving,in:Proceed-
ingsoftheIEEEinternationalconferenceoncomputervision,2015,
pp. 2722–2730.
[2] W. Maddern, G. Pascoe, C. Linegar, P. Newman, 1 year, 1000 km:
The oxford robotcar dataset, The International Journal of Robotics
Research 36 (1) (2017) 3–15.
[3] N. Akai, L. Y. Morales, T. Yamaguchi, E. Takeuchi, Y. Yoshihara,
H. Okuda, T. Suzuki, Y. Ninomiya, Autonomous driving based on
accurate localization using multilayer lidar and dead reckoning, in:
2017IEEE20thInternationalConferenceonIntelligentTransporta-
tion Systems (ITSC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[4] J. Kong, M. Pfeiffer, G. Schildbach, F. Borrelli, Kinematic and
dynamic vehicle models for autonomous driving control design, in:
2015 IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium (IV), IEEE, 2015, pp.
1094–1099.
[5] P. Zhao, J. Chen, Y. Song, X. Tao, T. Xu, T. Mei, Design of a
control system for an autonomous vehicle based on adaptive-pid,
InternationalJournalofAdvancedRoboticSystems9(2)(2012)44.
[6] N. Hanselmann, K. Renz, K. Chitta, A. Bhattacharyya, A. Geiger,
King: Generating safety-critical driving scenarios for robust imita-
tion via kinematics gradients, in: Computer Vision–ECCV 2022:
17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022,
Proceedings, Part XXXVIII, Springer, 2022, pp. 335–352.
[7] K. Chitta, A. Prakash, B. Jaeger, Z. Yu, K. Renz, A. Geiger,
Transfuser: Imitation with transformer-based sensor fusion for au-
tonomous driving, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-
chine Intelligence (2022).
[8] H. Shao, L. Wang, R. Chen, H. Li, Y. Liu, Safety-enhanced au-
tonomous driving using interpretable sensor fusion transformer, in:
Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR, 2023, pp. 726–737.
[9] Y. Hu, J. Yang, L. Chen, K. Li, C. Sima, X. Zhu, S. Chai,
S. Du, T. Lin, W. Wang, L. Lu, X. Jia, Q. Liu, J. Dai, Y. Qiao,
H.Li,Planning-orientedautonomousdriving,in:Proceedingsofthe
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2023.
[10] D.Chen,P.Krähenbühl,Learningfromallvehicles,in:Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2022, pp. 17222–17231.
[11] Q.Zhang,Z.Peng,B.Zhou,Learningtodrivebywatchingyoutube
videos: Action-conditioned contrastive policy pretraining, in: Com-
puter Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv,
Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXVI, Springer,
2022, pp. 111–128.
[12] K. Chitta, A. Prakash, A. Geiger, Neat: Neural attention fields for
end-to-end autonomous driving, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 15793–
15803.
[13] P. Wu, X. Jia, L. Chen, J. Yan, H. Li, Y. Qiao, Trajectory-guided
control predictionfor end-to-end autonomous driving:A simple yet
strong baseline, in: NeurIPS, 2022.
[14] A.Prakash,K.Chitta,A.Geiger,Multi-modalfusiontransformerfor
end-to-end autonomous driving, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2021,pp.
7077–7087.
[15] P. Wu, L. Chen, H. Li, X. Jia, J. Yan, Y. Qiao, Policy pre-training
for end-to-end autonomous driving via self-supervised geometric
modeling, arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01006 (2023).
[16] H. Shao, L. Wang, R. Chen, S. L. Waslander, H. Li, Y. Liu, Rea-
sonnet: End-to-end driving with temporal and global reasoning, in:
Proceedingsof theIEEE/CVFConference onComputerVision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 13723–13733.
[17] Y.Xiao, F.Codevilla, D.P. Bustamante,A. M.Lopez,Scaling self-
supervised end-to-end driving with multi-view attention learning,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03198 (2023).[18] K.Renz,K.Chitta,O.-B.Mercea,A.S.Koepke,Z.Akata,A.Geiger,
Plant: Explainable planning transformers via object-level represen-
tations, in: CoRL 2022 Workshop on Learning, Perception, and
Abstraction for Long-Horizon Planning.
[19] X. Jia, P. Wu, L. Chen, J. Xie, C. He, J. Yan, H. Li, Think twice be-
foredriving:Towardsscalabledecodersforend-to-endautonomous
driving,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 21983–21994.
[20] S. Hu, L. Chen, P. Wu, H. Li, J. Yan, D. Tao, St-p3: End-to-end
vision-basedautonomousdrivingviaspatial-temporalfeaturelearn-
ing, in: Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference,
TelAviv,Israel,October23–27,2022,Proceedings,PartXXXVIII,
Springer, 2022, pp. 533–549.
[21] Q. Li, Z. Peng, H. Wu, L. Feng, B. Zhou, Human-ai shared control
via policy dissection, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 35 (2022) 8853–8867.
[22] H.Wu,S.Yunas,S.Rowlands,W.Ruan,J.Wahlstrom,"adversarial
driving: Attacking end-to-end autonomous driving", in ieee intelli-
gent vehicles symposium (iv) (2023).
[23] F.Codevilla,E.Santana,A.M.López,A.Gaidon,Exploringthelim-
itationsofbehaviorcloningforautonomousdriving,in:Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
2019, pp. 9329–9338.
[24] J. Hawke, R. Shen, C. Gurau, S. Sharma, D. Reda, N. Nikolov,
P.Mazur,S.Micklethwaite,N.Griffiths,A.Shah,etal.,Urbandriv-
ingwithconditionalimitationlearning,in:2020IEEEInternational
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2020, pp.
251–257.
[25] E. Yurtsever, J. Lambert, A. Carballo, K. Takeda, A survey of
autonomousdriving:Commonpracticesandemergingtechnologies,
IEEE access 8 (2020) 58443–58469.
[26] L. Le Mero, D. Yi, M. Dianati, A. Mouzakitis, A survey on imita-
tion learning techniques for end-to-end autonomous vehicles, IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23 (9) (2022)
14128–14147.
[27] Z. Zhu, H. Zhao, A survey of deep rl and il for autonomous driving
policy learning, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems 23 (9) (2021) 14043–14065.
[28] A. Tampuu, T. Matiisen, M. Semikin, D. Fishman, N. Muhammad,
Asurveyofend-to-enddriving:Architecturesandtrainingmethods,
IEEETransactionsonNeuralNetworksandLearningSystems33(4)
(2020) 1364–1384.
[29] L. Chen, P. Wu, K. Chitta, B. Jaeger, A. Geiger, H. Li, End-to-end
autonomous driving: Challenges and frontiers, arXiv 2306.16927
(2023).
[30] J.Levinson,J.Askeland,J.Becker,J.Dolson,D.Held,S.Kammel,
J. Z. Kolter, D. Langer, O. Pink, V. Pratt, et al., Towards fully
autonomous driving: Systems and algorithms, in: 2011 IEEE intel-
ligent vehicles symposium (IV), IEEE, 2011, pp. 163–168.
[31] C. Urmson, J. Anhalt, D. Bagnell, C. Baker, R. Bittner, M. Clark,
J.Dolan,D.Duggins,T.Galatali,C.Geyer,etal.,Autonomousdriv-
inginurbanenvironments:Bossandtheurbanchallenge,Journalof
field Robotics 25 (8) (2008) 425–466.
[32] J.Wei,J.M.Snider,J.Kim,J.M.Dolan,R.Rajkumar,B.Litkouhi,
Towards a viable autonomous driving research platform, in: 2013
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), IEEE, 2013, pp. 763–
770.
[33] H. Somerville, P. Lienert, A. Sage, Uber’s use of fewer safety sen-
sors prompts questions after arizona crash, Business news, Reuters
(2018).
[34] J. Ziegler, P. Bender, M. Schreiber, H. Lategahn, T. Strauss,
C. Stiller, T. Dang, U. Franke, N. Appenrodt, C. G. Keller, et al.,
Making bertha drive—an autonomous journey on a historic route,
IEEEIntelligenttransportationsystemsmagazine6(2)(2014)8–20.
[35] S. Kuutti, S. Fallah, K. Katsaros, M. Dianati, F. Mccullough,
A. Mouzakitis, A survey of the state-of-the-art localization tech-
niques and their potentials for autonomous vehicle applications,
IEEE Internet of Things Journal 5 (2) (2018) 829–846.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 23 of 28

==== Page 24 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
[36] L.Bergamini,Y.Ye,O.Scheel,L.Chen,C.Hu,L.DelPero,B.Os-
iński, H. Grimmett, P. Ondruska, Simnet: Learning reactive self-
drivingsimulationsfromreal-worldobservations,in:2021IEEEIn-
ternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),IEEE,
2021, pp. 5119–5125.
[37] C.-F.Lin,A.G.Ulsoy,D.J.LeBlanc,Vehicledynamicsandexternal
disturbance estimation for vehicle path prediction, IEEE Transac-
tions on Control Systems Technology 8 (3) (2000) 508–518.
[38] T. Phan-Minh, E. C. Grigore, F. A. Boulton, O. Beijbom, E. M.
Wolff, Covernet: Multimodal behavior prediction using trajectory
sets, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 14074–14083.
[39] T. Gilles, S. Sabatini, D. Tsishkou, B. Stanciulescu, F. Moutarde,
Home:Heatmapoutputforfuturemotionestimation,in:2021IEEE
InternationalIntelligentTransportationSystemsConference(ITSC),
IEEE, 2021, pp. 500–507.
[40] M. Ye, T. Cao, Q. Chen, Tpcn: Temporal point cloud networks for
motion forecasting, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021, pp.
11318–11327.
[41] M. Ye, T. Cao, Q. Chen, Tpcn: Temporal point cloud networks for
motionforecasting,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2021,pp.11318–11327.
[42] Y.Liu,J.Zhang,L.Fang,Q.Jiang,B.Zhou,Multimodalmotionpre-
dictionwithstackedtransformers,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVF
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2021,pp.
7577–7586.
[43] J. Gu, C. Sun, H. Zhao, Densetnt: End-to-end trajectory prediction
fromdensegoalsets,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternational
Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 15303–15312.
[44] H.Song,D.Luan,W.Ding,M.Y.Wang,Q.Chen,Learningtopre-
dict vehicle trajectories with model-based planning, in: Conference
on Robot Learning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 1035–1045.
[45] D. Wei, H. Sun, B. Li, J. Lu, W. Li, X. Sun, S. Hu, Human joint
kinematics diffusion-refinement for stochastic motion prediction,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05976 (2022).
[46] A. Patil, S. Malla, H. Gang, Y.-T. Chen, The h3d dataset for full-
surround 3d multi-object detection and tracking in crowded urban
scenes,in:2019InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutoma-
tion (ICRA), IEEE, 2019, pp. 9552–9557.
[47] D. A. Pomerleau, Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neu-
ral network, Advances in neural information processing systems 1
(1988).
[48] D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, P. Krähenbühl, Learning by cheating,
in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR, 2020, pp. 66–75.
[49] E. Ohn-Bar, A. Prakash, A. Behl, K. Chitta, A. Geiger, Learning
situationaldriving,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2020,pp.11296–11305.
[50] A. Zhao, T. He, Y. Liang, H. Huang, G. Van den Broeck, S. Soatto,
Sam: Squeeze-and-mimic networks for conditional visual driving
policy learning, in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR, 2021,
pp. 156–175.
[51] J.Zhang, E.Ohn-Bar,Learningby watching,in:Proceedings ofthe
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2021, pp. 12711–12721.
[52] D. Chen, V. Koltun, P. Krähenbühl, Learning to drive from a world
onrails,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternationalConference
on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 15590–15599.
[53] M. Toromanoff, E. Wirbel, F. Moutarde, End-to-end model-free
reinforcementlearningforurbandrivingusingimplicitaffordances,
in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionand
pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 7153–7162.
[54] Z.Zhang,A.Liniger,D.Dai,F.Yu,L.VanGool,End-to-endurban
drivingbyimitatingareinforcementlearningcoach,in:Proceedings
oftheIEEE/CVFinternationalconferenceoncomputervision,2021,
pp. 15222–15232.
[55] Q. Li, Z. Peng, B. Zhou, Efficient learning of safe driving policy
via human-ai copilot optimization, in: International Conference onLearning Representations.
[56] Z.Peng,Q.Li,C.Liu,B.Zhou,Safedrivingviaexpertguidedpolicy
optimization, in: Conference on Robot Learning, PMLR, 2022, pp.
1554–1563.
[57] Y. Zhao, K. Wu, Z. Xu, Z. Che, Q. Lu, J. Tang, C. H. Liu, Cadre:
A cascade deep reinforcement learning framework for vision-based
autonomousurbandriving,in:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConference
on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 36, 2022, pp. 3481–3489.
[58] J. Zhang, Z. Huang, E. Ohn-Bar, Coaching a teachable student, in:
Proceedingsof theIEEE/CVFConference onComputerVision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 7805–7815.
[59] A. Kendall, J. Hawke, D. Janz, P. Mazur, D. Reda, J.-M. Allen,
V.-D. Lam, A. Bewley, A. Shah, Learning to drive in a day, in:
2019InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
2019, pp. 8248–8254. doi:10.1109/ICRA.2019.8793742 .
[60] A. Prakash, A. Behl, E. Ohn-Bar, K. Chitta, A. Geiger, Explor-
ing data aggregation in policy learning for vision-based urban au-
tonomousdriving,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceon
ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2020,pp.11763–11773.
[61] K. Ishihara, A. Kanervisto, J. Miura, V. Hautamaki, Multi-task
learning with attention for end-to-end autonomous driving, in: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 2902–2911.
[62] Y. Xiao, F. Codevilla, A. Gurram, O. Urfalioglu, A. M. López,
Multimodal end-to-end autonomous driving, IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems 23 (1) (2020) 537–547.
[63] P.Hu,A.Huang,J.Dolan,D.Held,D.Ramanan,Safelocalmotion
planningwithself-supervisedfreespaceforecasting,in:Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2021, pp. 12732–12741.
[64] P.Cai,S.Wang,H.Wang,M.Liu,Carl-lead:Lidar-basedend-to-end
autonomous driving with contrastive deep reinforcement learning,
ArXiv abs/2109.08473 (2021).
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:237563170
[65] W. Zeng, S. Wang, R. Liao, Y. Chen, B. Yang, R. Urtasun, Dsdnet:
Deep structured self-driving network, in: European Conference on
Computer Vision, 2020.
URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:221112477
[66] Q. Zhang, M. Tang, R. Geng, F. Chen, R. Xin, L. Wang, Mmfn:
Multi-modal-fusion-net for end-to-end driving, in: 2022 IEEE/RSJ
InternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),
IEEE, 2022, pp. 8638–8643.
[67] T. Bailey, H. Durrant-Whyte, Simultaneous localization and map-
ping (slam): Part ii, IEEE robotics & automation magazine 13 (3)
(2006) 108–117.
[68] A. Shenoi, M. Patel, J. Gwak, P. Goebel, A. Sadeghian,
H. Rezatofighi, R. Martin-Martin, S. Savarese, Jrmot: A real-time
3d multi-object tracker and a new large-scale dataset, in: 2020
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), IEEE, 2020, pp. 10335–10342.
[69] M. Liang, B. Yang, Y. Chen, R. Hu, R. Urtasun, Multi-task
multi-sensor fusion for 3d object detection, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2019, pp. 7345–7353.
[70] M. Liang, B. Yang, S. Wang, R. Urtasun, Deep continuous fusion
formulti-sensor3dobjectdetection,in:ProceedingsoftheEuropean
conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 641–656.
[71] B.Jaeger,K.Chitta,A.Geiger,Hiddenbiasesofend-to-enddriving
models (2023).
[72] Y.Zhou,P.Sun,Y.Zhang,D.Anguelov,J.Gao,T.Ouyang,J.Guo,
J.Ngiam,V.Vasudevan,End-to-endmulti-viewfusionfor3dobject
detection in lidar point clouds, in: Conference on Robot Learning,
PMLR, 2020, pp. 923–932.
[73] I. Sobh, L. Amin, S. Abdelkarim, K. Elmadawy, M. Saeed, O. Ab-
deltawab, M. Gamal, A. El Sallab, End-to-end multi-modal sensors
fusion system for urban automated driving (2018).
[74] B.Zhou,P.Krähenbühl,V.Koltun,Doescomputervisionmatterfor
action?, Science Robotics 4 (30) (2019) eaaw6661.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 24 of 28

==== Page 25 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
[75] C. Hubschneider, A. Bauer, M. Weber, J. M. Zöllner, Adding nav-
igation to the equation: Turning decisions for end-to-end vehicle
control, in: 2017 IEEE 20th International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[76] F. Codevilla, M. Müller, A. López, V. Koltun, A. Dosovitskiy, End-
to-end driving via conditional imitation learning, in: 2018 IEEE
internationalconferenceonroboticsandautomation(ICRA),IEEE,
2018, pp. 4693–4700.
[77] X. Liang, T. Wang, L. Yang, E. Xing, Cirl: Controllable imitative
reinforcementlearningforvision-basedself-driving,in:Proceedings
of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp.
584–599.
[78] S. Wang, J. Qin, M. Li, Y. Wang, Flowdrivenet: An end-to-end
network for learning driving policies from image optical flow and
lidarpointflow,in:2021IEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics
and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1861–1867.
[79] R. Fong, M. Patrick, A. Vedaldi, Understanding deep networks via
extremal perturbations and smooth masks, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2019, pp.
2950–2958.
[80] A. Cui, S. Casas, A. Sadat, R. Liao, R. Urtasun, Lookout: Diverse
multi-future prediction and planning for self-driving, in: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, 2021, pp. 16107–16116.
[81] W. Zeng, W. Luo, S. Suo, A. Sadat, B. Yang, S. Casas, R. Urtasun,
End-to-end interpretable neural motion planner, in: Proceedings of
theIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecog-
nition, 2019, pp. 8660–8669.
[82] S. Casas, A. Sadat, R. Urtasun, Mp3: A unified model to map,
perceive,predictandplan,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConfer-
enceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2021,pp.14403–
14412.
[83] N. Rhinehart, R. McAllister, S. Levine, Deep imitative models for
flexible inference, planning, and control, in: International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations.
[84] W. Zeng, W. Luo, S. Suo, A. Sadat, B. Yang, S. Casas, R. Urtasun,
End-to-end interpretable neural motion planner, in: Proceedings of
theIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecog-
nition, 2019, pp. 8660–8669.
[85] X. Chen, H. Ma, J. Wan, B. Li, T. Xia, Multi-view 3d object detec-
tion network for autonomous driving, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp.
1907–1915.
[86] I. Kim, H. Lee, J. Lee, E. Lee, D. Kim, Multi-task learning with
future states for vision-based autonomous driving, in: Proceedings
of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.
[87] M. Bain, C. Sammut, A framework for behavioural cloning., in:
Machine Intelligence 15, 1995, pp. 103–129.
[88] J. Cui, H. Qiu, D. Chen, P. Stone, Y. Zhu, Coopernaut: End-to-
end driving with cooperative perception for networked vehicles, in:
Proceedingsof theIEEE/CVFConference onComputerVision and
Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 17252–17262.
[89] S. Ross, G. Gordon, D. Bagnell, A reduction of imitation learning
and structured prediction to no-regret online learning, in: Proceed-
ings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelli-
gence and statistics, JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings,
2011, pp. 627–635.
[90] A. Sadat, S. Casas, M. Ren, X. Wu, P. Dhawan, R. Urtasun, Per-
ceive,predict,andplan:Safemotionplanningthroughinterpretable
semantic representations, in: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
EuropeanConference,Glasgow,UK,August23–28,2020,Proceed-
ings, Part XXIII 16, Springer, 2020, pp. 414–430.
[91] D. Sadigh, S. Sastry, S. A. Seshia, A. D. Dragan, Planning for au-
tonomouscarsthatleverageeffectsonhumanactions.,in:Robotics:
Science and systems, Vol. 2, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 2016, pp. 1–9.
[92] B.D.Ziebart,A.L.Maas,J.A.Bagnell,A.K.Dey,etal.,Maximum
entropy inverse reinforcement learning., in: Aaai, Vol. 8, Chicago,
IL, USA, 2008, pp. 1433–1438.[93] G. Wang, H. Niu, D. Zhu, J. Hu, X. Zhan, G. Zhou, A versatile and
efficientreinforcementlearningframeworkforautonomousdriving,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11573 (2021).
[94] R.S.Sutton,A.G.Barto,Reinforcementlearning:Anintroduction,
MIT press, 2018.
[95] L. Chen, X. Hu, B. Tang, Y. Cheng, Conditional dqn-based motion
planning with fuzzy logic for autonomous driving, IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23 (4) (2020) 2966–
2977.
[96] J. Chen, S. E. Li, M. Tomizuka, Interpretable end-to-end urban
autonomous driving with latent deep reinforcement learning, IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23 (6) (2021)
5068–5078.
[97] X. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, X. Xu, Receding-horizon reinforcement
learningapproachforkinodynamicmotionplanningofautonomous
vehicles, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles 7 (3) (2022)
556–568.
[98] X. Liang, T. Wang, L. Yang, E. Xing, Cirl: Controllable imitative
reinforcementlearningforvision-basedself-driving,in:Proceedings
of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp.
584–599.
[99] D. Chen, V. Koltun, P. Krähenbühl, Learning to drive from a world
onrails,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFInternationalConference
on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 15590–15599.
[100] R. Chekroun, M. Toromanoff, S. Hornauer, F. Moutarde, Gri: Gen-
eral reinforced imitation and its application to vision-based au-
tonomous driving, in: NeurIPS 2021, Machine Learning for Au-
tonomous Driving Workshop, 2021.
[101] Y. Chen, W. Li, C. Sakaridis, D. Dai, L. V. Gool, Domain adaptive
fasterr-cnnforobjectdetectioninthewild(2018). arXiv:1803.03243 .
[102] H. Zhang, G. Luo, Y. Tian, K. Wang, H. He, F.-Y. Wang, A virtual-
real interaction approach to object instance segmentation in traffic
scenes, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems
22 (2) (2021) 863–875. doi:10.1109/TITS.2019.2961145 .
[103] L. Zhang, T. Wen, J. Min, J. Wang, D. Han, J. Shi, Learning object
placement by inpainting for compositional data augmentation, in:
A. Vedaldi, H. Bischof, T. Brox, J.-M. Frahm (Eds.), Computer
Vision - ECCV 2020 - 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK,
August 23-28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XIII, Vol. 12358 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer, 2020, pp. 566–581. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-58601-0_34 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58601-0_34
[104] Y. Chen, F. Rong, S. Duggal, S. Wang, X. Yan, S. Manivasagam,
S. Xue, E. Yumer, R. Urtasun, Geosim: Realistic video simulation
viageometry-awarecompositionforself-driving,in:Proceedingsof
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, 2021, pp. 7230–7240.
[105] A. Vobeck `y, D. Hurych, M. Uřičář, P. Pérez, J. Sivic, Artificial
dummies for urban dataset augmentation, in: Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 35, 2021, pp.
2692–2700.
[106] A. E. Sallab, I. Sobh, M. Zahran, M. Shawky, Unsupervised neural
sensor models for synthetic lidar data augmentation (2019). arXiv:
1911.10575 .
[107] J. Fang, D. Zhou, F. Yan, T. Zhao, F. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Wang,
R. Yang, Augmented lidar simulator for autonomous driving, IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters 5 (2) (2020) 1931–1938. doi:
10.1109/LRA.2020.2969927 .
[108] S. Manivasagam, S. Wang, K. Wong, W. Zeng, M. Sazanovich,
S. Tan, B. Yang, W.-C. Ma, R. Urtasun, Lidarsim: Realistic lidar
simulation by leveraging the real world (2020). arXiv:2006.09348 .
[109] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, V. Koltun, Carla:
An open urban driving simulator, in: Conference on robot learning,
PMLR, 2017, pp. 1–16.
[110] A.Geiger,P.Lenz,C.Stiller,R.Urtasun,Visionmeetsrobotics:The
kittidataset,TheInternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch32(11)
(2013) 1231–1237.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 25 of 28

==== Page 26 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
[111] P. Wu, L. Chen, H. Li, X. Jia, J. Yan, Y. Qiao, Policy pre-training
forautonomousdrivingviaself-supervisedgeometricmodeling,in:
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[112] A. Hu, G. Corrado, N. Griffiths, Z. Murez, C. Gurau, H. Yeo,
A. Kendall, R. Cipolla, J. Shotton, Model-based imitation learning
for urban driving, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 35 (2022) 20703–20716.
[113] J. Park, Y. Seo, C. Liu, L. Zhao, T. Qin, J. Shin, T.-Y. Liu, Object-
aware regularization for addressing causal confusion in imitation
learning, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34
(2021) 3029–3042.
[114] A. Bewley, J. Rigley, Y. Liu, J. Hawke, R. Shen, V.-D. Lam,
A. Kendall, Learning to drive from simulation without real world
labels,in:2019Internationalconferenceonroboticsandautomation
(ICRA), IEEE, 2019, pp. 4818–4824.
[115] S.Hecker,D.Dai,L.VanGool,Learningaccurate,comfortableand
human-like driving, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10995 (2019).
[116] X. Pan, Y. You, Z. Wang, C. Lu, Virtual to real reinforcement
learning for autonomous driving (2017). arXiv:1704.03952 .
[117] B.Osiński,A.Jakubowski,P.Miłoś,P.Zięcina,C.Galias,S.Homo-
ceanu,H.Michalewski,Simulation-basedreinforcementlearningfor
real-world autonomous driving (2020). arXiv:1911.12905 .
[118] R. Mitchell, J. Fletcher, J. Panerati, A. Prorok, Multi-vehicle mixed
realityreinforcementlearningforautonomousmulti-lanedriving,in:
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and MultiAgent Systems, 2020, pp. 1928–1930.
[119] A. Stocco, B. Pulfer, P. Tonella, Mind the gap! a study on the trans-
ferability of virtual versus physical-world testing of autonomous
drivingsystems,IEEETransactionsonSoftwareEngineering49(4)
(2023) 1928–1940. doi:10.1109/tse.2022.3202311 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1109.2Ftse.2022.3202311
[120] Y.Tian,K.Pei,S.Jana,B.Ray,Deeptest:Automatedtestingofdeep-
neural-network-drivenautonomouscars,in:Proceedingsofthe40th
international conference on software engineering, 2018, pp. 303–
314.
[121] I.Goodfellow,J.Pouget-Abadie,M.Mirza,B.Xu,D.Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, Y. Bengio, Generative adversarial networks,
Communications of the ACM 63 (11) (2020) 139–144.
[122] X. Ouyang, Y. Cheng, Y. Jiang, C.-L. Li, P. Zhou, Pedestrian-
synthesis-gan: Generating pedestrian data in real scene and beyond
(2018). arXiv:1804.02047 .
[123] B.Weng,S.J.Rao,E.Deosthale,S.Schnelle,F.Barickman,Model
predictive instantaneous safety metric for evaluation of automated
driving systems, in: 2020 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium
(IV), IEEE, 2020, pp. 1899–1906.
[124] W.Wachenfeld,P.Junietz,R.Wenzel,H.Winner,Theworst-time-to-
collisionmetricforsituationidentification,in:2016IEEEintelligent
vehicles symposium (IV), IEEE, 2016, pp. 729–734.
[125] C. Li, S. H. Chan, Y.-T. Chen, Who make drivers stop? towards
driver-centric risk assessment: Risk object identification via causal
inference, in: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2020, pp. 10711–10718.
[126] G.Li,Y.Li,S.Jha,T.Tsai,M.Sullivan,S.K.S.Hari,Z.Kalbarczyk,
R. Iyer, Av-fuzzer: Finding safety violations in autonomous driving
systems, in: 2020 IEEE 31st international symposium on software
reliability engineering (ISSRE), IEEE, 2020, pp. 25–36.
[127] W.K.Alhajyaseen,Theintegrationofconflictprobabilityandsever-
ity for the safety assessment of intersections, Arabian Journal for
Science and Engineering 40 (2015) 421–430.
[128] A. Rosenfeld, A. Richardson, Explainability in human–agent sys-
tems,AutonomousAgentsandMulti-AgentSystems33(2019)673–
705.
[129] J.K.Choi,Y.G.Ji,Investigatingtheimportanceoftrustonadopting
an autonomous vehicle, International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction 31 (10) (2015) 692–702.
[130] J. Haspiel, N. Du, J. Meyerson, L. P. Robert Jr, D. Tilbury, X. J.
Yang,A.K.Pradhan,Explanationsandexpectations:Trustbuilding
in automated vehicles, in: Companion of the 2018 ACM/IEEEinternationalconferenceonhuman-robotinteraction,2018,pp.119–
120.
[131] Y. Tian, K. Pei, S. Jana, B. Ray, Deeptest: Automated testing of
deep-neural-network-driven autonomous cars. 2017, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.08559 (2017).
[132] M. Bojarski, A. Choromanska, K. Choromanski, B. Firner, L. J.
Ackel, U. Muller, P. Yeres, K. Zieba, Visualbackprop: Efficient
visualizationofcnnsforautonomousdriving,in:2018IEEEInterna-
tionalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),IEEE,2018,
pp. 4701–4708.
[133] K. Mori, H. Fukui, T. Murase, T. Hirakawa, T. Yamashita, H. Fu-
jiyoshi, Visual explanation by attention branch network for end-to-
end learning-based self-driving, in: 2019 IEEE intelligent vehicles
symposium (IV), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1577–1582.
[134] P. Jacob, É. Zablocki, H. Ben-Younes, M. Chen, P. Pérez, M. Cord,
Steex:steeringcounterfactualexplanationswithsemantics,in:Com-
puter Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv,
Israel,October23–27,2022,Proceedings,PartXII,Springer,2022,
pp. 387–403.
[135] M.Bansal,A.Krizhevsky,A.Ogale,Chauffeurnet:Learningtodrive
by imitating the best and synthesizing the worst, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1812.03079 (2018).
[136] N.Frosst,G.Hinton,Distillinganeuralnetworkintoasoftdecision
tree, arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09784 (2017).
[137] J. R. Zilke, E. Loza Mencía, F. Janssen, Deepred–rule extraction
fromdeepneuralnetworks,in:DiscoveryScience:19thInternational
Conference,DS2016,Bari,Italy,October19–21,2016,Proceedings
19, Springer, 2016, pp. 457–473.
[138] M. Harradon, J. Druce, B. Ruttenberg, Causal learning and expla-
nation of deep neural networks via autoencoded activations, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.00541 (2018).
[139] Q.-s. Zhang, S.-C. Zhu, Visual interpretability for deep learning: a
survey,FrontiersofInformationTechnology&ElectronicEngineer-
ing 19 (1) (2018) 27–39.
[140] D.Bau,B.Zhou,A.Khosla,A.Oliva,A.Torralba,Networkdissec-
tion: Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations, in:
ProceedingsoftheIEEEconferenceoncomputervisionandpattern
recognition, 2017, pp. 6541–6549.
[141] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, A. Zisserman, Deep inside convolu-
tionalnetworks:visualisingimageclassificationmodelsandsaliency
maps, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), ICLR, 2014.
[142] A. Nguyen, A. Dosovitskiy, J. Yosinski, T. Brox, J. Clune, Syn-
thesizing the preferred inputs for neurons in neural networks via
deepgeneratornetworks,Advancesinneuralinformationprocessing
systems 29 (2016).
[143] L. Rosero, J. Silva, D. Wolf, F. Osório, Cnn-planner: A neural path
planner based on sensor fusion in the bird’s eye view representa-
tion space for mapless autonomous driving, in: 2022 Latin Ameri-
can Robotics Symposium (LARS), 2022 Brazilian Symposium on
Robotics (SBR), and 2022 Workshop on Robotics in Education
(WRE), 2022, pp. 181–186. doi:10.1109/LARS/SBR/WRE56824.2022.
9995888.
[144] L. A. Rosero, I. P. Gomes, J. A. R. da Silva, T. C. dos Santos,
A. T. M. Nakamura, J. Amaro, D. F. Wolf, F. S. Osório, A software
architecture for autonomous vehicles: Team lrm-b entry in the first
carla autonomous driving challenge (2020). arXiv:2010.12598 .
[145] H.Caesar,V.Bankiti,A.H.Lang,S.Vora,V.E.Liong,Q.Xu,A.Kr-
ishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, O. Beijbom, nuscenes: A multimodal
dataset for autonomous driving, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp.
11621–11631.
[146] X. Huang, P. Wang, X. Cheng, D. Zhou, Q. Geng, R. Yang, The
apolloscapeopendatasetforautonomousdrivinganditsapplication,
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
42 (10) (2019) 2702–2719.
[147] Automated Driving Toolbox.
URL https://in.mathworks.com/products/automated-driving.html
P.S. Chib et al. Page 26 of 28

==== Page 27 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
[148] Mechanical Simulation.
URL https://www.carsim.com/
[149] PreScan.
URL https://in.mathworks.com/products/connections/product_
detail/prescan.html
[150] Gazebo.
URL https://classic.gazebosim.org/
[151] SVL Simulator by LG - Autonomous and Robotics real-time sensor
Simulation,LiDAR,CamerasimulationforROS1,ROS2,Autoware,
Baidu Apollo. Perception, Planning, Localization, SIL and HIL
Simulation, Open Source and Free.
URL https://www.svlsimulator.com/
[152] Udacity: Public driving dataset, https://github.com/udacity/
self-driving-car/tree/master/datasets (2017).
[153] S.Hecker,D.Dai,L.VanGool,End-to-endlearningofdrivingmod-
elswithsurround-viewcamerasandrouteplanners,in:Proceedings
oftheEuropeanConferenceonComputerVision(ECCV),2018,pp.
435–453.
[154] E. Santana, G. Hotz, Learning a driving simulator, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.01230 (2016).
[155] H. Schafer, E. Santana, A. Haden, R. Biasini, A commute in data:
The comma2k19 dataset, arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05752 (2018).
[156] F. Yu, H. Chen, X. Wang, W. Xian, Y. Chen, F. Liu, V. Madhavan,
T. Darrell, Bdd100k: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous
multitasklearning,in:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFconferenceon
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 2636–2645.
[157] V. Ramanishka, Y.-T. Chen, T. Misu, K. Saenko, Toward driving
scene understanding: A dataset for learning driver behavior and
causal reasoning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 7699–7707.
[158] A. Jain, H. S. Koppula, B. Raghavan, S. Soh, A. Saxena, Car
that knows before you do: Anticipating maneuvers via learning
temporal driving models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 3182–3190.
[159] Y. Chen, J. Wang, J. Li, C. Lu, Z. Luo, H. Xue, C. Wang, Lidar-
video driving dataset: Learning driving policies effectively, in: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 5870–5878.
[160] Large-scale driving behavior dataset, http://www.dbehavior.net/
index.html .
[161] Y. Hu, J. Binas, D. Neil, S.-C. Liu, T. Delbruck, Ddd20 end-to-end
event camera driving dataset: Fusing frames and events with deep
learningforimprovedsteeringprediction,in:2020IEEE23rdInter-
national Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[162] J. Geyer, Y. Kassahun, M. Mahmudi, X. Ricou, R. Durgesh,
A. S. Chung, L. Hauswald, V. H. Pham, M. Mhlegg, S. Dorn,
et al., A2d2: Aev autonomous driving dataset, https://www.
audi-electronics-venture.com/aev/web/en/driving-dataset.html
(2019).
[163] P. Sun, H. Kretzschmar, X. Dotiwalla, A. Chouard, V. Patnaik,
P. Tsui, J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, B. Caine, et al., Scalability in
perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset, arXiv
(2019) arXiv–1912.
[164] J.Kim,T.Misu,Y.-T.Chen,A.Tawari,J.Canny,Groundinghuman-
to-vehicle advice for self-driving vehicles, in: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2019, pp. 10591–10599.
[165] J. Sang, Z. Wu, P. Guo, H. Hu, H. Xiang, Q. Zhang, B. Cai, An
improved yolov2 for vehicle detection, Sensors 18 (2018) 4272.
doi:10.3390/s18124272 .
[166] L. Wen, D. Du, Z. Cai, Z. Lei, M.-C. Chang, H. Qi, J. Lim, M.-
H. Yang, S. Lyu, Ua-detrac: A new benchmark and protocol for
multi-object detection and tracking, Computer Vision and Image
Understanding 193 (2020) 102907.
[167] D. Tabernik, D. Skočaj, Deep Learning for Large-Scale Traffic-
Sign Detection and Recognition, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (2019). doi:10.1109/TITS.2019.2913588 .[168] K. Behrendt, L. Novak, A deep learning approach to traffic lights:
Detection,tracking,andclassification,in:RoboticsandAutomation
(ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE.
[169] Z. Zhu, D. Liang, S. Zhang, X. Huang, B. Li, S. Hu, Traffic-sign
detectionandclassificationinthewild,in:TheIEEEConferenceon
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[170] M. B. Jensen, M. P. Philipsen, A. Møgelmose, T. B. Moeslund,
M. M. Trivedi, Vision for looking at traffic lights: Issues, survey,
and perspectives, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems 17 (7) (2016) 1800–1815. doi:10.1109/TITS.2015.2509509 .
[171] F. Larsson, M. Felsberg, Using fourier descriptors and spatial mod-
els for traffic sign recognition, 2011, pp. 238–249. doi:10.1007/
978-3-642-21227-7_23 .
[172] J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, C. Igel, The german traffic
sign recognition benchmark: a multi-class classification competi-
tion,in:The2011internationaljointconferenceonneuralnetworks,
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1453–1460.
[173] M. Mathias, R. Timofte, R. Benenson, L. Van Gool, Traffic sign
recognition—how far are we from the solution?, in: The 2013
international joint conference on Neural networks (IJCNN), IEEE,
2013, pp. 1–8.
[174] P. Dollár, C. Wojek, B. Schiele, P. Perona, Pedestrian detection:
A benchmark, in: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, IEEE, 2009, pp. 304–311.
[175] G. J. Brostow, J. Fauqueur, R. Cipolla, Semantic object classes in
video:Ahigh-definitiongroundtruthdatabase,PatternRecognition
Letters 30 (2) (2009) 88–97.
[176] S. Agarwal, A. Vora, G. Pandey, W. Williams, H. Kourous,
J.McBride,Fordmulti-AVseasonaldataset,TheInternationalJour-
nal of Robotics Research 39 (12) (2020) 1367–1376. doi:10.1177/
0278364920961451 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0278364920961451
[177] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Be-
nenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, B. Schiele, The cityscapes dataset for
semantic urban scene understanding, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp.
3213–3223.
[178] G. Neuhold, T. Ollmann, S. Rota Bulo, P. Kontschieder, The map-
illary vistas dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes,
in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision, 2017, pp. 4990–4999.
[179] Y.Lou,Y.Bai,J.Liu,S.Wang,L.Duan,Veri-wild:Alargedataset
and a new method for vehicle re-identification in the wild, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 3235–3243.
[180] Z.Che,G.Li,T.Li,B.Jiang,X.Shi,X.Zhang,Y.Lu,G.Wu,Y.Liu,
J.Ye,D2-city:Alarge-scaledashcamvideodatasetofdiversetraffic
scenarios (2019). arXiv:1904.01975 .
[181] L. Ding, J. Terwilliger, R. Sherony, B. Reimer, L. Fridman, Mit
driveseg (manual) dataset (2020). doi:10.21227/mmke-dv03 .
URL https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/mmke-dv03
[182] Y.L.YueHu,R.Xu,W.Xie,Y.W.SihengChen,Collaborationhelps
cameraovertakelidarin3ddetection,in:TheIEEE/CVFConference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
[183] H. Xiang, R. Xu, J. Ma, Hm-vit: Hetero-modal vehicle-to-vehicle
cooperative perception with vision transformer, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.10628 (2023).
[184] B. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, T. Zhou, Core: Coop-
erative reconstruction for multi-agent perception, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.11514 (2023).
[185] Y.Cheng,L.Li,Y.Xu,X.Li,Z.Yang,W.Wang,Y.Yang,Segment
and track anything, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06558 (2023).
[186] Y.Jiang,A.Gupta,Z.Zhang,G.Wang,Y.Dou,Y.Chen,L.Fei-Fei,
A.Anandkumar,Y.Zhu,L.Fan,Vima:Generalrobotmanipulation
withmultimodalprompts,arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.03094(2022).
P.S. Chib et al. Page 27 of 28

==== Page 28 ====
Recent Advancements in End-to-End Autonomous Driving using Deep Learning: A Survey
Pranav Singh Chib is a Ph.D. candidate in the
Computer Science and Engineering department
at the Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee.
He holds a Post-Graduate Computer Science and
Technology Specialization from Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi. Pranav’s research inter-
ests lie in machine learning, computer vision, and
autonomous driving. His ongoing doctoral stud-
ies focus on contributing to advancements in au-
tonomous driving and deep learning.
Pravendra Singh received his Ph.D. degree from
IIT Kanpur. He is currently an Assistant Profes-
sor in the CSE department at IIT Roorkee, India.
His research interests include deep learning, ma-
chine learning, computer vision, and artificial in-
telligence. He has published papers at internation-
ally reputable conferences and journals, includ-
ing IEEE TPAMI, IJCV, CVPR, ECCV, NeurIPS,
AAAI, IJCAI, IJCV, Pattern Recognition, Neural
Networks,Knowledge-BasedSystems,Neurocom-
puting, and others.
P.S. Chib et al. Page 28 of 28

