==== Page 1 ====
Recent Advances in Convolutional Neural Network Acceleration
Qianru Zhanga, Meng Zhanga,, Tinghuan Chenb, Zhifei Suna, Yuzhe Mab, Bei Yub
aNational ASIC System Engineering Technology Research Center, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
bDepartment of Computer Science &Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Abstract
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown great performance in various ﬁelds such as image
classiﬁcation, pattern recognition, and multi-media compression. Two of the feature properties, local connectivity and
weight sharing, can reduce the number of parameters and increase processing speed during training and inference.
However, as the dimension of data becomes higher and the CNN architecture becomes more complicated, the end-
to-end approach or the combined manner of CNN is computationally intensive, which becomes limitation to CNN’s
further implementation. Therefore, it is necessary and urgent to implement CNN in a faster way. In this paper, we ﬁrst
summarize the acceleration methods that contribute to but not limited to CNN by reviewing a broad variety of research
papers. We propose a taxonomy in terms of three levels, i.e. structure level, algorithm level, and implementation level,
for acceleration methods. We also analyze the acceleration methods in terms of CNN architecture compression,
algorithm optimization, and hardware-based improvement. At last, we give a discussion on di erent perspectives
of these acceleration and optimization methods within each level. The discussion shows that the methods in each
level still have large exploration space. By incorporating such a wide range of disciplines, we expect to provide a
comprehensive reference for researchers who are interested in CNN acceleration.
Keywords: Convolutional neural network, Model compression, Algorithm optimization, Hardware acceleration
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures
have been around for over two decades. Compared with
other neural network models such as multiple layer per-
ceptron (MLP), CNN is designed to take multiple arrays
as input and then process the input using convolution
operator within a local ﬁeld by mimicking eyes perceiv-
ing images. Therefore, it shows excellent performance
in solving computer vision problems such as image clas-
siﬁcation, recognition and understanding [1, 2, 3]. It is
also e ective for a wide range of ﬁelds such as speech
recognition that requires correlated speech spectral rep-
resentations [4], VLSI physical design [5], multi-media
compression [6] comparing with the traditional DCT
transformation and compressive sensing methods [7, 8],
and cancer detection from a series of condition changing
images [9]. Moreover, many top players have been in a
fever to play Go match with alphaGo recently, which
has CNN implemented.
Corresponding author
Email address: zmeng@seu.edu.cn (Meng Zhang)However, in order to receive good performance of
prediction and accomplish more di cult goals, CNN
architecture becomes deeper and more complicated. At
the same time, more pixels are packed into one image
thanks to high resolution acquisition devices. As a re-
sult, CNN training and inference are very computation-
ally expensive and become limited for implementation
due to its slow speed. Although acceleration and op-
timization for CNN have been explored since it was
brought up, recently this seems to be keener as it has
such good industrial impact.
Some companies have unveiled accelerators for deep
learning inference that can be extensively used for
CNN. Google’s second generation Tensor Processing
Unit (TPU) is designed for TensorFlow framework
that has the increased performance of 92TFLOPS in
peak and on-chip memory of 28MiB. It not only
supports integers but also ﬂoating point calculations,
which makes it more powerful in deep learning training
[10]. NVIDIA launches an open source project called
NVIDIA Deep Learning Accelerator (NVDLA) along
with an open license that is ready for people who are
interested in data intensive automotive products. It in-
Preprint submitted to Neurocomputing July 24, 2018arXiv:1807.08596v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jul 2018

==== Page 2 ====
OUTPUT F6 C5 S4 C3 S2 C1Figure 1: Illustration of LeNet-5.
cludes Verilog and C-model for the chip, Linux drivers,
test suites, and kernel and user based software with de-
velopment tools [11]. Intel’s Nervana Neural Network
Processor (NNP) has been announced recently for deal-
ing with neural network matrix multiplications and con-
volutions. The memory architecture is designed for ef-
ﬁcient operations and data movements without cache
hierarchy, which improves the training performance of
deep learning [12].
In this paper, we review many recent works and sum-
marize acceleration methods not only in structure level
and algorithm level, but also in implementation level.
This paper di ers from other deep neural network re-
view papers in three aspects. 1) Topic: Some review pa-
pers summarize the relevant work regarding deep neu-
ral networks in di erent applications such as computer
vision, natural language processing and acoustic sig-
nal processing, among which CNN is only a compo-
nent [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. They make systematic
introduction for various kinds of neural networks that
are ﬁt for speciﬁc applications and provide a guide for
people who want to implement deep neural networks in
their ﬁelds. However, few of them mention acceleration
methods, while our paper focuses on CNN and its accel-
eration methods. 2) Time: Recent deep learning review
papers are mostly historical [19, 20, 21]. They usually
trace back the origins through over ﬁfteen years to form
a big picture of the neural network development, which
is very inspiring to think over the origins. Our paper
focuses on researches recently when hardware becomes
limited and e ciency becomes the priority. 3) Taxon-omy: There are no reviews that incorporate hardware
into algorithms since they are di erent disciplines. In
this paper, we talk about the acceleration methods in
three levels, because they are interwoven and highly de-
pendent.
This survey paper is organized as following. In Sec-
tion 2, an overview of modern CNN structure is given
with di erent typical layers that the improvement is
focused on. In Section 3 we present our taxonomy
for recent CNN acceleration methods followed by the
overview in three categories, including CNN compres-
sion in Section 4, algorithm optimization in Section 5,
and hardware-oriented acceleration in Section 6. After
that, in Section 7 a discussion is given on these meth-
ods from di erent perspectives. Finally, Section 8 con-
cludes this paper with some future challenges.
2. Convolutional Neural Network
The modern convolutional neural networks proposed
by LeCun [22] is a 7-layer (excluding the input layer)
LeNet-5 structure. It has the following structure C1,
S2, C3, S4, C5, F6, OUTPUT as shown in Figure 1,
where C indicates convolutional layer, S indicates sub-
sampling layer, and F indicates fully-connected layer.
There are many modiﬁcations regarding the structure of
CNNs in order to handle more complicated datasets and
problems, such as AlexNet (8 layers) [23], GoogLeNet
(22 layers) [27], VGG-16 (16 layers) [25], and ResNet
(152 layers) [26]. Table 1 summarizes the state-of-the-
art CNNs. In this table, Feature column summarizes the
2

==== Page 3 ====
Model Layer Size Conﬁguration Feature Parameter Size Application
LeNet
[22]7 layers 3C-2S-1F-RBF out-
put layer60,000 Document recog-
nition
AlexNet
[23]8 layers 5C-3S-3F Local response
normalization60,000,000 Image classiﬁca-
tion
NIN [24] - 3mlpconv-global av-
erage pooling (S can
be added in between
the mlpconv)mlpconv layer:
1C-3MLP; global
average pooling- Image classiﬁca-
tion
VGG [25] 11-19
layersVGG-16: 13C-5S-
3FIncreased depth
with stacked 33
kernels133,000,000 to
144,000,000Image classiﬁca-
tion and localiza-
tion
ResNet
[26]Can be very
deep (152
layers)ResNet-152: 151C-
2S-1FResidual module ResNet-20:
270,000;
ResNet-1202:
19,400,000Image classiﬁca-
tion, object detec-
tion
GoogLeNet
[27]22 layers 3C-9Inception-5S-
1FInception module 6,797,700 Image classiﬁca-
tion, object detec-
tion
Xception
[28]37 layers 36C-5S-1F Depth-wise sepa-
rable convolutions22,855,952 Image classiﬁca-
tion
Table 1: CNN model summary.
C: convolutional layer, S: subsampling layer, F: fully-connected layer
most important parts in each model [29, 30, 31]. Appli-
cation column provides the ﬁelds that the methods were
proposed for the ﬁrst time. Fully-connected layer is fol-
lowed by the Softmax layer except for LeNet and NIN.
As we can see from the table, the number of parameters
in modern CNNs is large, which usually takes a long
time for training and for inference. Plus, higher dimen-
sional input, large number of parameters, and complex
CNN conﬁguration challenge hardware in terms of pro-
cessing element e ciency, memory bandwidth, o -chip
memory, communication and so on.
Among these di erent structures, they share four
key features including weight sharing, local connec-
tion, pooling, and the use of many layers [20]. There
are some commonly used layers such as convolutional
layers, subsampling layers (pooling layers), and fully-
connected layers. Usually, there is a convolutional layer
after the input. The convolutional layer is often fol-
lowed by a subsampling layer. This combination repeats
several times to increase the depth of CNN. The fully-
connected layers are designed as the last few layers in
order to map from extracted features to labels. These
four layers are introduced as follows.
a) Input Layer: In CNNs, input layers usually take
multiple arrays and are often size-ﬁxed. Comparing toordinary fully-connected neural networks, the CNN in-
put do not need size-normalization and centralization,
because CNN enjoys the characteristic of translation in-
variance [32].
b) Convolutional Layer: As a key feature layer
that makes CNNs di erent from other ordinary neu-
ral networks, neuron units of convolutional layers are
ﬁrst computed by convolution operation over small local
patches of input, and then followed by activation func-
tions (tanh, sigmoid, ReLU, etc.), and form a 2D feature
map (3D feature map channel). In general, we have that
Zj=X
iXiKi j+Bj; (1)
Aj=f(Zj); (2)
where Zjrepresents the output from the convolution
operation, Xidenotes the input to the convolutional
layer, Ki jis the convolution kernel, and Bjis the ad-
ditive bias. In the following equation, Ajis the output
feature map of the convolutional layer and f() is an ac-
tivation function.
Activation functions are mathematical operations
over the input, which introduces non-linearity into neu-
ral networks and help catch non-linear features of the
3

==== Page 4 ====
10
 5
 0 5 10x1.0
0.5
0.5
1.0
f(x)(a) Sigmoid
10
 5
 0 5 10x1.0
0.5
0.5
1.0
f(x) (b) Tanh
10
 5
 0 5 10x
5
510f(x) (c) ReLU
10
 5
 0 5 10x
5
510f(x)
(d) LeakyReLU /PReLU /RReLU
10
 5
 0 5 10x
5
510f(x) (e) ELU
Figure 2: Activation function plot.
Function Saturation Deﬁnition Parameter  Plot
Sigmoid Saturated f(x)=1=(1+e x) - (a)
Tanh Saturated f(x)=2=(1+e 2x) 1 - (b)
ReLU Non-saturated f(x)=8>><>>:x x0
0x<0- (c)
LeakyReLU Non-saturated f(x)=8>><>>:x x0
x x<02(0;1) (d)
PReLU Non-saturated f(x)=8>><>>:x x0
x x<0is a learned parameter (d)
RReLU Non-saturated f(x)=8>><>>:x x0
x x<0uniform(a, b) (d)
ELU Non-saturated f(x)=8>><>>:x x0
(ex 1)x<0is a predeﬁned parameter (e)
Table 2: Activation function summary.
input data. There are various types of activation func-
tions as summarized in Table 2 and Figure 2.
Sigmoid and Tanh are called saturated functions. As
we can see from their deﬁnitions or plots, when the in-
put is very small or very large, the output saturates at
0 or 1 for Sigmoid and -1 or 1 for Tanh. There are
two problems with saturation. The gradients at satu-
rated regions are almost zero, which dramatically de-
creases neurons backpropagation and makes it di cult
to converge in the training phase. Furthermore, moreattention needs to be paid in weight initialization when
using saturated activation functions for the neural net-
works may not learn in the ﬁrst place. To alleviate satu-
ration problem, many non-saturated activations are pro-
posed such as Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) [33], Leaky
ReLU [34], Parametric ReLU (PReLU) [35], Random-
ized Leaky ReLU (RReLU) [36], and Exponential Lin-
ear Unit (ELU) [37].
Convolution plays a very important role in CNN. On
one hand, by weight sharing, neurons in the same fea-
4

==== Page 5 ====
ture map share the same parameters, which reduces dra-
matically the total number of parameters. In di erent
spatial location, input may have some same features
such as edges, points, angles, etc. Weight sharing makes
the CNN less sensitive to location and shifting. On the
other hand, since each convolution operation is targeted
for a small patch of input, the extracted features remain
intrinsic topology of the input that helps recognize pat-
terns.
c) Subsampling Layer (pooling layer): Convolu-
tional layers are usually followed by subsampling layers
to reduce the feature map resolution. The amount of pa-
rameters and computation are also reduced accordingly.
More formally,
Zj=down( Xj); (3)
where down() represents a subsampling method.
Maximum operation and average operation are two
typical subsampling methods and have been imple-
mented in CNNs. In spite of max pooling and average
pooling, some methods that work better in mitigating
overﬁtting problems in CNN are proposed such as Lp
pooling [38], stochastic pooling [39], and mixed pool-
ing [40]. He et al . propose a pooling method called
spatial pyramids pooling (SPP) that can output a ﬁxed-
length feature map and therefore can deal with various
input image sizes [41]. Spectral pooling is a pooling
method to reduce dimensionality in frequency, which
preserves more information than spacial domain, and
can be implemented in Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
based CNNs [42]. While multi-scale orderless pooling
proposed by Gong et al. outperforms other methods in
highly variable scene matching [43].
Dierent from convolution kernels, subsampling ker-
nels are often hand-picked and remain unchanged dur-
ing training and inference. There are two main reasons
for subsampling. One is that by maximizing or aver-
aging over the previous feature map, the size of feature
map reduces. The other one is that by subsampling, the
output feature map is more robust to distortions and er-
rors of individual neuron units [44].
d) Fully-connected Layer: After several layers,
high-level features are extracted and require mapping to
labels. In fully-connected layer, neuron units are trans-
formed from 2D into 1D. Each unit in the current layer
is connected to all the units in the previous layer such
like regular neural networks. It not only extracts fea-
tures in a more complex way in order to dig deep for
more information, but patterns in di erent locations are
connected as well.
e) Output Layer: As a feed-forward neural network,
the output layer neuron units are ﬁxed. They are usuallylinked with previous neurons in a fully-connected way
and they are the ﬁnal threshold for predicting.
In general, CNNs have gained a lot of interest in re-
searching the meaning behind the combination of those
dierent layers. The advantages brought by the struc-
ture of CNNs include reduced number of parameters
and translation invariance.
3. Acceleration Method Taxonomy
Our taxonomy is shown in Figure 3. The philos-
ophy behind the taxonomy is the order from design-
ing, to training a CNN and ﬁnally to implementing it
on hardware. For the CNN structure, there is redun-
dancy in both weights and the number of bits for rep-
resentation. For the redundancy in weights, layer de-
composition, network pruning, block-circulant projec-
tion and knowledge distillation methods can be applied.
For the redundancy in representation, using ﬁxed-point
representation is the mainstream. Once the structure is
decided, CNN adopts training algorithms that are gen-
erally used in other neural networks for training pro-
cess. The most popular training method is gradient de-
cent based back-propagation algorithm. By propagat-
ing errors back from output to input and by adjusting
weights wired in the network, errors can be reduced to
an acceptable degree. The criterion for algorithm op-
timization is convergence speed with proper stability.
Considering that convolutional layers are computation-
ally intensive, we are also interested in the convolution
operation complexity. Therefore, we also summarize
some e cient convolution methods that are adopted in
the CNN. As for the implementation level, the main-
stream GPU, FPGA, ASIC are discussed. Recently,
people see a promising future for fast implementation
of CNN as neuromorphic engineering develops. Some
new devices are also presented in this paper. The accel-
eration approaches of each level is orthogonal and can
be combined with those in other levels. By researching
such a wide range of methods, we expect to provide a
general idea on CNN acceleration, especially for deep
CNN, from the perspectives of structure, algorithm, and
hardware.
4. Structure Level
Many training and inference process can be accel-
erated by reducing redundancy in network structures.
There is redundancy both in weights and in the way how
weights are represented. Two perspectives of accelera-
tion methods will be summarized as follows in terms
5

==== Page 6 ====
IMPLEMENTATION LEVELExplore 
Hardware 
CharacteristicsExtend Memory
Explore Parallelism
Reduce Data MovementGPU
FPGA
ASIC
New DeviceSTRUCTURE LEVELReduce
RedundancyRedundancy
In Weights
Redundancy
In Representation Fixed-point Representation
ALGORITHM LEVEL Improve Training 
 and Inference SpeedGradient Decent 
Algorithm
Efficient 
Convolution
FFTim2col-based  Algorithms
Winograd AlgorithmLayer decomposition
Pruning
Block-circulant Projection
Knowledge Distillation
Distributed Gradient Decent
Adaptive Learning Rates
Momentum FactorsHybrid Variants
Partial GradientsFixed-point RepresentationFixed-point RepresentationFigure 3: Taxonomy of CNN acceleration methods.
of redundancy in weights and redundancy in represen-
tations.
4.1. Redundancy In Weights
There is signiﬁcant redundancy in the parameteri-
zation of some neural networks. As Denil et al . and
Sainath et al. observe that some weights learned in net-
works are correlated with each other, they demonstrate
that some of the weights can either be predicted or be
unnecessary to learn [45, 46].
4.1.1. Layer Decomposition
Low-rank approximation can be adopted to reduce
redundancy in weights [47]. For one layer, the input-
output relationship can be described by
y=g(xW); (4)
where Wis the weight matrix with size mn.Wcan be
replaced by the product of two full rank matrices UV
with size mrandrnrespectively. The number of
parameters in Wcan be reduced to 1 =dif the following
inequality holds, d(mr+rn)<mn. An e cient low-rank
approximation of kernels can be applied in ﬁrst few con-
volutional layers of CNN to exploit the linear structure
of the over-parameterization within a ﬁlter. For exam-
ple, Denton et al. reduce the computation work for re-
dundancy within kernels. It achieves 2 2:5speedupwith less than 1% drop in classiﬁcation performance
for a single convolutional layer. It uses singular value
decomposition method to exploit the approximation of
kernels with assumptions that the singular values of the
kernels decay rapidly so that the size of the kernels can
be reduced signiﬁcantly [48].
Instead of treating kernel ﬁlters as di erent matri-
ces, kernels in one layer can be treated as a 3D ten-
sor with two spatial dimensions and the third dimen-
sion representing channels. Lebedev et al . use CP-
decomposition for convolutional layers, which achieves
8:5CPU speedup at the cost of 1% error increase [49].
Taiet al. utilize tensor decomposition to remove the re-
dundancy in the convolution kernels, which achieves
twice more e ciency of inference for VGG-16 [50].
Wang et al. propose to use group sparse tensor decom-
position for each convolutional layer, which achieves
6:6speed-up on PC and 5 :91speed-up on mobile de-
vice with less than 1% error rate increase [51]. Tucker
decomposition is also used recently to decompose pre-
trained weights with ﬁne-tuning afterwards [52, 53].
Weight matrix decomposition method can not only be
applied to convolutional layers, but also fully-connected
layers. Applying the low-rank approximation to the
fully-connected layer weight can achieve a 30 50%
reduction of number of parameters with little loss in
accuracy, which is roughly an equivalent reduction in
6

==== Page 7 ====
training time [46]. In spite of using two full rank matri-
ces
W=UV; (5)
some works have proposed di erent decomposition
forms
W=D1HPD2HD3; (6)
with diagonal matrices D1;2;3and Hadamard matrix H
[54], and
W=ACDC 1; (7)
with diagonal matrices A,Dand DCT matrix C[55].
This method can be used during training the CNN,
which is very meaningful. The CNN e ciency can be
further improved if the training complexity can be re-
duced as well. Ioannou et al. propose to learn some ba-
sis small ﬁlters that can describe the more complex ﬁl-
ters from the scratch. By carefully choosing the initial-
ization status, the new method can be used during train-
ing [56]. Wen et al. force more weight information into
the ﬁlters to get more e cient CNNs. With its help, the
training process converges faster during the ﬁne-tuning
phase. In the experiments, it obtains 2 faster on GPU
without accuracy loss [57].
The decomposition technique is layer oriented and
can be interleaved with other modules such as ReLU
modules in CNN. It can also be applied to the structure
of neural networks. Rigamonti et al . apply this tech-
nique to the general frameworks and reduce the com-
putational complexity by using linear combinations of
fewer separable ﬁlters [58]. This method can be ex-
tended for multiple layers (e.g. >10) by utilizing low-
rank approximation for both weights and input [59]. It
can achieve 4speedup with 0 :3% error increase for
deep network models VGG-16 by focusing on reducing
accumulated error across layers using generalized sin-
gular value decomposition.
The methods above can be generalized as layer de-
composition for ﬁlter weight matrix dimension reduc-
tion, while pruning is another method for dimension re-
duction.
4.1.2. Network Pruning
Network pruning originates as a method to reduce the
size and over-ﬁtting of a neural network. As neural net-
work implementation on hardware becomes more pop-
ular, it is necessary to reduce the limitation such as its
intensive computation and large memory bandwidth re-
quirement. Nowadays, pruning is usually adopted as a
method to reduce the network size and to increase the
network inference speed so that it can be applied in spe-
ciﬁc hardware such as embedded systems.There are many pruning methods in terms of weights,
connections, ﬁlters, channels, feature maps, and so
on. Unlike layer decomposition in which computa-
tional complexity is reduced through reducing the total
size of layers, selected neurons are removed in prun-
ing. For pruning weights, the unimportant connections
of weights with magnitudes smaller than a given thresh-
old are dropped. Experiments are taken on NVIDIA Ti-
tanX and GTX980 GPUs, which achieves 9 and 13
parameter reduction for AlexNet and VGG-16 models
respectively with no loss of accuracy [60]. Zhou et
al. incorporate sparse constraints to decimate the num-
ber of neurons during training, which reduces the 70%
number of neurons without accuracy sacriﬁce [61]. Be-
sides the method to eliminate least inﬂuential neurons,
another method is to merge selected and the rest of neu-
rons to maintain diversity in the information. Mariet et
al. succeed in merging the qualiﬁed neurons with un-
qualiﬁed ones and reduce the network complexity [62].
By trading o the training error with the remaining hid-
den neurons, they achieve 25% reduction of the original
number of parameters with 0 :04 accuracy reduction in
MNIST dataset. Channel pruning method is to elimi-
nate lowly active channels, which means ﬁlters are ap-
plied in fewer number of channels in each layer. Polyak
et al. propose a channel-pruning based method Inbound
Prune to compress a redundant network. Their exper-
iment is taken on the platform of Samsung Galaxy S6
and it achieves 1 :59speedup [63]. Recently, pruning is
combined with other acceleration techniques to achieve
speedup. For example, Han et al. combine pruning with
trained quantization and Hu man coding to deep com-
press the neural networks in three steps. It achieves
3layer-wise speedup on fully-connected layer over
benchmark on CPU [60].
Some of these pruning methods result in structured
sparsity, while others cause unstructured sparsity such
as weight-based pruning. Many techniques are pro-
posed to deal with problems of unstructured sparsity be-
ing unfriendly to hardware. Wen et al. propose a method
called Structured Sparsity Learning (SSL) for regulariz-
ing compressed structures of deep CNNs and speeding
up convolutional computation by group Lasso regular-
ization and locality optimization respectively. It im-
proves convolutional layer computation speed by 5.1 
and 3.1over CPU and GPU [64]. He el al. propose a
channel pruning method by iteratively reducing redun-
dant channels through solving LASSO and reconstruct-
ing the outputs with linear least squares. It achieves
5speed increase in VGG-16 and 2 speedup in
ResNet /Xception [65]. Liu et al. also impose channel-
based pruning. They use L1 regularization and achieve
7

==== Page 8 ====
20reduction in model size and 5 reduction in com-
puting operations for VGG model [66]. Li et al. prune
whole ﬁlters as well as their related feature maps and re-
duce inference cost of VGG-16 by 34% and ResNet-110
by 38% [67]. Their method uses sum of ﬁlter’s absolute
values as a measurement of ﬁlter importance, which is
ﬁlter-based and avoids sparse connectivity. Based on
Taylor expansion of cost function between pruning and
non-pruning situations, Molchanov et al. reduce feature
maps from convolutional layers and implement the it-
erative pruning method in transfer learning setting [68].
ASIC based methods dealing with irregular sparsity are
proposed as well and will be discussed in Section 6.3.
4.1.3. Block-circulant Projection
A square matrix could be represented by a one-block-
circulant matrix, while a non-squared matrix could be
represented by block-circulant matrix. Block-circulant
matrix is one of the structured matrices that is usually
used in paradigms such as dimension reduction [69],
since it can represent an unstructured matrix with a vec-
tor. A one-block-circulant matrix is deﬁned as
R=circ(r) :=26666666666666664r0rd 1 r2r1
r1 r0rd 1 r2
::: r1 r0::::::
rd 1rd 2 r1r037777777777777775;(8)
which can be represented by a vector r=
(r0;r1;:::; rd 1). Block-circulant based CNN has
been explored nowadays as it has small storage
requirements.
Cheng et al . apply the circulant matrix in the fully
connected layer and achieve signiﬁcant gain in e -
ciency with little decrease in accuracy [70]. Yang et
al. focus on reducing the computational time spent in
fully-connected layer by imposing the circulant struc-
ture on the weight matrix for dimension reduction with
little loss in performance [71]. Ding et al. propose to use
block-circulant structure in both fully-connected lay-
ers and convolutional layers in non-square-matrix sit-
uations to further reduce the storage waste. They also
mathematically prove that fewer weights in circulant
form do not harm the ability of a deep CNN without
weight redundancy reduction [72].
4.1.4. Knowledge Distillation
Knowledge distillation is a concept that information
obtained from a large complex ensemble neural net-
works can be utilized to form a compact neural network
Training
DatalabelEnsemble
Network
Synthetic
DataEnsemble
NetworkOut-
put
Compact
NetworkSynthetic
DataOut-
putDistillation
TransferFigure 4: Illustration of knowledge distillation.
[73]. The way that knowledge is transferred can be de-
picted in the following Figure 4. Information ﬂow from
one complex network to a simpler one by training the
latter one with data labeled by the former network. By
using synthetic data generated from a complex network
to train a compact model, it is less likely to cause overﬁt-
ting and can approximate the functions very well. More
importantly, it provides a new perspective for model
compression and complicated neural network acceler-
ation.
Synthetic data is very important in succeeding model
compression. If it matches well with the true distri-
bution from the functions of a complex model, it usu-
ally takes less data for training to mimic it with high-
ﬁdelity. Furthermore, the compact model has good gen-
eralization characteristics in some missions as it reduces
overﬁtting. Bucilu et al. lay a foundation for mimick-
ing a large machine learning model by experimenting
three ways to generate pseudo data, which are random,
naive bayes estimation, and MUNGE respectively [74].
Some researches propose teacher-student format, which
also adopts knowledge distillation concepts with di er-
ent methods for synthesizing data. For example, Hinton
et al. compress a deep teacher network into a student
network using data combined from teacher network out-
come and the true labeled data [75]. The student net-
work can achieve very high accuracy on MNIST dataset
with less run time of inference. Romero et al. mimic
a wider and shallower teacher neural network with a
thinner and deeper network called a student network by
learning an intermediate representation that is predicted
by the teacher network [76]. The depth of the student
network ensures its performance, while its thin charac-
8

==== Page 9 ====
teristic reduces the computation complexity.
4.2. Redundancy in Representations
Many weights in neural networks have very small
values. For example, the ﬁrst non-zero digit of many
weights occurs in the eighth decimal place, which re-
quires more precise way to record them. Most arith-
metic operations in neural networks use 32-ﬂoating
point representation in order to achieve a good accuracy.
As a trade-o , that increases the computation workload
and memory size for the neural networks. However,
arithmetic operations in ﬁxed-point instead of ﬂoating-
point can achieve enough good performance for neu-
ral networks [77]. A 16-bit ﬁxed-point representation
method is proposed by using stochastic rounding for
training CIFAR-10 dataset [78]. A further compression
of 10-bit dynamic ﬁxed-point is also explored [79]. Han
et al. quantize pruned CNNs to 8-bit and achieve further
storage reduction with no loss of accuracy [60].
For now, representation in one bit is the simplest
form. In terms of binarization, there can be three forms,
binary input, binary weights of the network, and bi-
nary operations. Courbariaux et al . propose a Bina-
ryConnect method to use 1-bit ﬁxed-point weights to
train a neural network [80]. Rastegari et al. come up
with a XNOR-Nets with binary weights and binary in-
put fed to convolutional layers [81]. It results in 58 
speedup of convolutional operations. Kim et al . pro-
pose a Bitwise Neural Network, which takes everything
as binary such as weights, bias terms, input, output,
and basic logic operations instead of ﬂoating or ﬁxed-
point arithmetic operations [82]. Zhou et al . propose
to train CNN using binary and stochastically quantized
low bit-width gradients and achieve comparable perfor-
mance as 32-bit counterparts [83]. Hubara et al. pro-
pose training methods for quantized neural networks
that use low precision including 1-bit weights and ac-
tivations, and replace most arithmetic operations with
bit-wise operations [84]. Kim et al . compress binary
weight CNNs by decomposing kernels into sub-kernels
with common parts. They reduce the operation of each
image by 47 :7% [85]. Ternary CNNs are proposed re-
cently as a more expressive method comparing to binary
CNNs, which seeks to achieve a balance between binary
networks and full precision networks in terms of com-
pression rate and accuracy [86, 87, 88].
Stochastic computing (SC) is a type of technique that
simpliﬁes numerical computations into bit-wise opera-
tions by representing continuous values with random bit
streams. It provides many beneﬁts for neural networks
such as low computation footprint, error tolerance, sim-
ple implementation in circuits and better trade-o be-tween time and accuracy [89]. Many works contribute
to exploring potential space in optimization and in deep
belief networks [90, 91, 92]. Recently it starts to gain at-
tentions in CNN ﬁeld and regarded as a promising tech-
nique for deep CNN implementation on ASIC (Section
6.3) and on embedded portable devices as it can signiﬁ-
cantly reduce resource consumption with high accuracy.
SC is ﬁrst adopted in deep CNN by Ren et al. with
proposed method called SC-DCNN. They design both
function blocks and feature extraction blocks that help
SC eciently implemented in deep CNN. It success-
fully achieves the lowest resource consumption of
LeNet5 with optimized conﬁgurations among many
state-of-the-art software and hardware platforms [93].
Liet al. further improve SC based DCNN by introduc-
ing normalization in the hardware implementation and
dropout in DCNN software training. They design the
stochastic normalization circuit by decoupling complex
normalization into three units, namely, square and sum-
mation, activation and division. Their proposed method
improves the SC-based DCNN with 3 :26% top-1 accu-
racy and 3:05% top-5 accuracy [94].
Although errors may accumulate due to representa-
tion approximation, its hardware implementation can
achieve a much faster speed and lead to less energy con-
sumption.
5. Algorithm Level
In the training process, gradient-based method is
widely used in multi-layer feedforward neural networks
(FNN), while some other models use analytically de-
termined methods to minimize the cost function [95].
In the forward pass, the output of CNN is calculated,
while in the backward pass, weights and bias are ad-
justed. By reducing the number of iterations to con-
verge, training time can be decreased. Therefore, opti-
mizing gradient decent algorithm is very important for
improving the performance in training. For CNN, con-
volution computation reduces the amount of weights
dramatically because it focuses on a local perception
ﬁeld. But repeated mathematic addition and multipli-
cation increase the computation intensity. Therefore, in
the forward process, convolution operation workloads
are computationally intensive and become constrained
for implementation. In the following, we discuss the al-
gorithm optimization of the two directions of data ﬂow,
which are gradient-based backward training methods
and convolution-based forward inference methods. We
summarize distributed gradient descent methods, hybrid
variants of the gradient decent and the improvement in
9

==== Page 10 ====
terms of self-adaptive learning rates, momentum fac-
tors, and partial gradients. We also give an overview on
im2col-based algorithms, Winograd based algorithms,
and FFT, all of which address the convolution cost prob-
lem in CNN.
5.1. Gradient Decent Optimization
Gradient decent is one of the most popular algorithms
for optimization. It has been largely used in ﬁnding
global minima for error functions during training neu-
ral networks, because it is simple and empirical to im-
plement. The core of mathematical model of gradient
decent algorithm is the update rule = rJ(),
where the parameters are updated in the opposite direc-
tion of the gradient of the error function rJ().
Distributed gradient decent methods have been pro-
posed to alleviate hardware workload. Take Google
training CNN [75] as an example. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 5, there are two types of parallelism for the distribu-
tion. (a) Replica of CNNs are trained through a server
using averaging gradients and di erent batches of data.
Parameters are updated based on all the average gradi-
ents, which indicates that new parameters reﬂect the fea-
tures from the whole data. (b) For each replica of CNN,
it distributes the computation into di erent cores with
dierent subset of neurons. Its implementation will be
introduced in Section 6.1.
Back-propagation algorithm is a form of gradient de-
cent algorithm that is implemented in the neural net-
works. Some hybrid variants of back-propagation have
been proposed in order to take advantage of the bene-
ﬁts from other algorithms. For example, combining it
with cuckoo search algorithm can increase the search-
ing speed for optimal solutions [96]. The combina-
tion with ant colony algorithm can decrease the com-
putational cost with increased stability of convergence
[97]. Pan et al . introduce three stages in the back-
propagation with genetic algorithms and steepest decent
methods combined together to achieve a fast and stable
goal [98]. Ding et al. use genetic algorithms to optimize
the weights of a back-propagation neural network by en-
coding and thresholding the connection weights [99].
For deep CNN, as errors accumulate layer by layer,
the gradient either decays rapidly to zero or increases
out of bound. Researchers focus on making changes
in error functions, learning rates and incorporating mo-
mentum [100] to reduce the derivative vanishing ef-
fects and to improve the speed of convergence in the
1990’s, while in the recent 7 years, incorporating var-
ious factors with momentum factors, introducing self-
adaptive learning rates, and using partial gradients are
mainstreams to improve the gradient algorithms.For example, adapting learning rate to parameters
with exponentially decaying average of squared gradi-
ents leads to a varying learning rate, which depends on
each current and past parameter instead of being a con-
stant [101, 102, 103]. Hamid et al. incorporate the mo-
mentum factor and give control over it, which acceler-
ates the convergence speed especially for oscillating sit-
uations in ravine [104]. Nesterov et al. have proposed
to use partial gradient to update each parameter rather
than using the whole gradient [105, 106]. They ran-
domly collect feature dimensions by sampling a block
of coordinates and taking partial derivatives over this
block, which can dramatically reduce the gradient com-
putation complexity. As a result, it is much faster than
the regular stochastic gradient decent method especially
for high-dimensional dataset.
For deep neural networks, gradient descent with
back-propagation is not guaranteed to ﬁnd the global
minimum of the error function, and is subject to weight
vanishing or exploding. The former issue is due to
the non-convexity of error functions in neural net-
works. Some works focus on non-gradient-based meth-
ods, such as ant bee colony algorithms and genetic algo-
rithms. They are usually for simple dataset like Boolean
dataset and simple neural network structures with one
to two hidden layers. In practical, local minimum prob-
lem can be leveraged by a deep architecture [20]. The
second issue that weight vanishes or explodes when the
amount of layers accumulates is still an open problem
and has much potential to explore.
5.2. Feed-forward E cient Convolution
Three methods are summarized for the feed-forward
ecient convolution including im2col-based algorithm,
Winograd based method, and FFT based method, with
the most commonly used one being introduced ﬁrstly.
For the direct convolution in the CNN, convolution ker-
nels slide over the two dimensions of the input and
the output is obtained by dot product between the ker-
nels and the input. While for the im2col-based algo-
rithms, the input matrix is linearized into multiple low-
ered vectors, which can be later e ciently computed
[107, 108, 109]. Cho et al. further reduce the lineariza-
tion memory-overhead and improve the computational
eciency by modifying both the lowered vectors and
the vectorized kernels [110]. Winograd based meth-
ods are to incorporate Winograds minimal ﬁltering al-
gorithms to compute minimal convolution over small
ﬁlters. Coppersmith Winograd algorithm is known as
a fast matrix multiplication algorithm. Winograd based
convolution reduces the multiplications by increasing
the number of additions and it reduces the memory
10

==== Page 11 ====
SERVER
Replica of CNNTraining Data
Mini-batch 1Average 
Gradient 1
Updated 
Parameters 
Based on All 
Gradients
Core n
Subset n
of NeuronsCore 1
Subset 1
of NeuronsReplica of CNNTraining Data
Mini-batch 2Average 
Gradient 2
Updated 
Parameters 
Based on All 
Gradients
Core n
Subset n
of NeuronsCore 1
Subset 1
of NeuronsReplica of CNNTraining Data
Mini-batch mAverage 
Gradient m
Updated 
Parameters 
Based on All 
Gradients
Core n
Subset n
of NeuronsCore 1
Subset 1
of NeuronsFigure 5: Illustration of CNN distributed system.
consumption on GPU [111, 112]. Winograd’s minimal
ﬁltering algorithms can help reduce convolution com-
putation at the expense of memory bandwidth. Xiao
et al. utilize Winograd’s minimal ﬁltering theory com-
bined with heterogeneous algorithms for a fusion archi-
tecture to mitigate memory bandwidth problem [113].
Based on the experiment that FFT can be applied in
MLP to accelerate the ﬁrst layer inference [114], Math-
ieuet al. ﬁrst apply FFT on weights of CNN and achieve
good performance and speedup for large perceptive ar-
eas [115]. For using FFT in CNN, it is necessary to
transform back and forth between time domain and fre-
quency domain, which consumes a lot of resources and
takes time. Therefore, it needs delicate balance between
the beneﬁts of computation in frequency domain and
the drawbacks of transforming back and forth. Large
perception areas have better performance, which results
in limitation in the neural network with small convolu-
tion ﬁlters. In order to solve this problem, one of the
solutions is to train weights directly in frequency do-
main [116]. Ko et al . train the CNNs entirely in the
frequency domain with approximate frequency-domain
nonlinear operations, sinc interpolation and Hermitian
symmetry. By eliminating Fourier transforms at each
layer, they achieve signiﬁcantly training time reduction
for CIFAR-10 recognition [117].
6. Implementation Level
Neural networks regain their vigor due to high per-
formance hardware recently. CPU used to be the main
stream for implementing machine learning algorithms
about twenty years ago, because matrix multiplica-
tion and factorization techniques were not popular backthen. Nowadays, GPU, FPGA, and ASIC are utilized
for accelerating training and predicting process. Be-
sides, much new device technology is proposed to meet
requirement for very large models and large training
datasets. In the following, hardware based accelera-
tors are summarized in terms of GPU, FPGA, ASIC and
frontier new device that is promising for accelerating
deep convolutional neural networks.
6.1. GPU
In terms of GPU, clusters of GPUs can accelerate
very large neural networks with over one billion pa-
rameters in a parallel way. The mainstream of GPU
cluster neural networks usually work with distributed
SGD algorithms as illustrated in Section 5.1. Many
researches further exploit the parallelism and make ef-
forts on communication among di erent clusters. For
example, Baidu Heterogeneous Computing Group uses
two types of parallelism called model-data parallelism
and data parallelism to extend CNN architectures to 36
servers, each with 4 NVIDIA Tesla K40m GPUs and
12GB memory. The strategies include butterﬂy syn-
chronization and lazy update, which makes good use of
overlapping in computation and communication [118].
Coates et al. propose a clustering of GPU servers us-
ing Commodity O -The-Shelf High Performance Com-
puting (COTS HPC) technology and high-speed com-
munication infrastructure for parallelism in distributed
gradient decent algorithm, which reduces 98% number
of machines used for training [119]. In terms of non-
distributed SGD algorithms, Imani et al. propose a near-
est content addressable memory block called NNCAM,
which stores highly frequent patterns for reusing. It ac-
celerates CNNs over general purpose GPU with 40%
speedup [120].
11

==== Page 12 ====
6.2. FPGA
There are many parallelism levels in hardware accel-
eration, such as coarse-grain, medium-grain, ﬁne-grain,
and massive [121]. FPGA outperforms in terms of its
ﬁne grain and coarse grain reconﬁguration ability and
its hierarchical storage structure and scheduling mech-
anism can be optimized ﬂexibly. Flexible hierarchical
memory systems can support complex data access mode
of CNN. It is often used to improve the e ciency of on-
chip memory and to reduce the energy consumption.
Peemen et al. experiment on Virtex 6 FPGA board
and show that the accelerator design can achieve 11 
speedup with very complicated address mapping of data
access [122]. Zhang et al. take data reuse, parallel pro-
cessing, and o -chip memory bandwidth into consid-
eration in FPGA accelerator. The accelerator achieves
17:42faster speed than CPU in AlexNet CNN archi-
tecture [123]. Martnez et al . take advantage of the
FPGA reconﬁguration characteristics by unfolding the
loop execution on di erent cascading stages. As the
number of multipliers for convolution increases, the
proposed method can achieve 12 GOPS at most [124].
A hardware acceleration method for CNN is proposed
by combining ﬁne grain in operator level parallelism
and coarse grain parallelism. Compared with 4xIntel
Xeon 2.3 GHz, 1.35 GHz C870, and a 200 MHz FPGA,
the proposed design achieves a 4 to 8speed boost
[125]. Wang et al. propose an on-chip memory design
called Memsqueezer that can be implemented on FPGA.
They shrink the memory size by compressing data,
weights, and intermediate data from the perspectives of
hardware, which achieves 80% energy reduction com-
pared with conventional bu er designs [126]. Zhang
et al . design an FPGA accelerator engine called Caf-
feine that decreases underutilized memory bandwidth.
It reorganizes the memory access according to their
proposed matrix-multiplication representation applied
to both convolutional layers and fully-connected layers.
Caeines implementation on Xilinx KU060 and Virtex
7690t FPGA achieves very high peak performance of
365 GOPS and 636 GOPS respectively [127]. Rahman
et al. present a 3D array architecture, which can beneﬁt
all layers in CNNs. With optimization of on-chip bu er
sizes for FPGAs, it can outperform the state-of-the-art
solutions by 22% in terms of MAC [128]. Alwani et
al. explore the design space of dataﬂow across multi-
ple convolutional layers, where a fused layer accelerator
is designed that reduces feature map data transfer from
and to o -chip memory [129].6.3. ASIC
For ASIC design, despite of using methods in struc-
ture level such as block-circulant projection in Section
4.1.3 and SC in Section 4.2, to improve the design in im-
plementation level, memory can be expanded and local-
ity can be increased to reduce data transporting within
systems for deep neural network accelerating. Tensor
Processing Unit (TPU) is designed for low precision
computation with high e ciency. It uses a large on-chip
memory of 28MiB to execute the neural network appli-
cations, which can achieve at most 30 faster speed than
an Nvidia K80 GPU [10]. TETRIS is an architecture
using 3D memory proposed by Gao et al. It saves more
area for processing elements and leaves more space for
accelerator design [130].
Luo et al . create an architecture of 64-chip system
that minimizes data moving between synapses and neu-
rons by storing them closely. It reduces the burden on
external memory bandwidth and achieves a speedup of
450over a GPU with 150 energy reduction [131].
Wang et al. propose to group adjacent process engines
(PEs) into dual-channel PEs called Chain-NN to miti-
gate huge amount of data movements. They simulate it
under TSMC 28nm process and achieve a peak through-
put of 806:4 GOPS in AlexNet [132]. Single instruction
multiple data (SIMD) processors are used on a 32-bit
CPU to design a system targeted for ASIC synthesis to
perform real-time detection, recognition and segmen-
tation of mega-pixel images. They optimize the oper-
ation in CNN with available parallelism in hardware.
The ASIC implementations outperform the CPU con-
ventional methods in terms of frames /s [133].
Recently, some ASIC designs target at sparse net-
works with irregularity. For example, Zhang et al. pro-
pose an accelerator called Cambricon-X that can reach
544 GOP /s in 6:38mm2[134]. It consists an Indexing
Module, which can e ciently schedule processing el-
ements that store irregular and compressed synapses.
Kwon et al. design a reconﬁgurable accelerator called
MAERI to adapt various layer dataﬂow patterns. They
can e ciently utilize compute resources and provides
6:9speedup at 50% sparsity [135]. Network prun-
ing could induce sparsity and irregularity as discussed
in Section 4.1.2. With such designs, better performance
is expected to achieve when combined.
6.4. New Devices
As new device technology and circuits arise, deep
convolutional neural networks can be potentially accel-
erated by orders of magnitude. In terms of new de-
vice, very large scale integration systems are explored
to mimic complex biological neuron architectures.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Some of them are in their theoretical demonstration
state for training deep neural networks. For example,
Gokmen and Vlasov from IBM research center propose
a resistive processing unit (RPU) device, which can both
store and compute parameters in this unit. It has ex-
tremely high processing speed with 30000 higher than
state-of-the-art microprocessors (84000 GigaOps /s/W)
[136]. As neuromorphic engineering develops, more
new devices emerge to handle high frequency and high
volume information transformation through synapses.
Some are in theoretical state that have not been imple-
mented on neural networks for classiﬁcation and recog-
nition, such as nano-scale phase change device [137]
and ferroelectric memristors [138].
Resistive memories are treated as one of the promis-
ing solutions for deep neural network accelerations due
to its nonvolatility, high storage density, and low power
consumption [139]. Its architecture mimics neural net-
works, where weight storage and computation can be
done simultaneously [140, 141]. As CMOS memo-
ries become larger, its scale becomes limited. There-
fore, besides the main stream CMOS based memory,
nonvolatile memory becomes more popular in stor-
ing weights, such as resistive random access memory
(RRAM) [142, 143, 144, 145] and spin-transfer torque
random access memory (STT-RAM) [146].
Memristor crossbar array structures can deal with
computational expensive matrix multiplication and have
been explored in CNN hardware implementations. For
example, Hu et al. develop a Dot-Product Engine (DPE)
utilizing memristor crossbar, which achieves 1000 to
10;000speed-e ciency product compared with a dig-
ital ASIC [147]. Xia et al . address energy consump-
tion problem between crossbars and ADC /DAC and can
save more than 95% energy with similar accuracy of
CNN [148]. Ankit et al. propose a hierarchical recon-
ﬁgurable architecture with memristive crossbar arrays
called RESPARC, which is 15 more energy e cient
and has 60more throughput for deep CNNs [149].
In general, for any CNN hardware implementation,
there are a lot of potential solutions to be explored in
design space. It is not trivial to design a general hard-
ware architecture that can be applied to every CNN, es-
pecially when limitations on computation resource and
memory bandwidth are considered.
7. Discussion
Researches have di erent ﬂavors over dataset, model,
and implementation platforms. Many datasets and mod-
els are treated as benchmarks based on previous re-
searches. But di erent benchmarks and their combi-nations make it di cult to compare the method in one
level with one in other levels. In the following discus-
sion, we constrain our comparison and analysis within
each level.
7.1. Structure Level
We have summarized methods of layer decomposi-
tion and pruning in Table 3. Some of the layer de-
composition and pruning methods focus on inference,
because pre-trained CNNs are required before apply-
ing the corresponding methods. It is a limitation com-
paring to other acceleration methods. For example,
some large scale networks still need training for weeks
or months before layer decomposition method imple-
mentation [47, 48]. Pruning by sparsiﬁed weights and
their connections require pre-training on the original
full model and ﬁne-tuning [150, 151].
Many layer decomposition and pruning methods are
layer-wised and optimized for speciﬁc layer when they
are ﬁrst time proposed. For example, Sainath et
al. demonstrate signiﬁcant reduction in parameters in
the output softmax layer [46]. Mariet et al. successfully
prune 25% of the parameters with good performance in
the fully connected layer [62]. Denton et al. success-
fully reduce a large magnitude number of parameters in
the convolutional layer [48]. As these methods focus
on di erent types of layers, there is exploration space
about how to combine them for further acceleration.
After reducing redundancy in representation, the size
of neural networks can reduce dramatically. However,
speciﬁc hardware is required to achieve a speedup in
training and testing, since currently most GPUs are im-
proved to suit for ﬂoating-point performance. For ex-
ample, using BinaryConnect method [152] to train a
Torch7 frame ConvNet on GPU takes more time. The
time complexity can be reduced theoretically by 60% if
using dedicated hardware.
We have summarized methods of reducing redun-
dancy in representation in Table 4 and Table 5. The
Note column in these two tables provide important in-
formation that needs to be distinguished among di er-
ent methods. Low-bit representation methods are tar-
geted for both large and small models. Various bit-width
representation results in di erent performance depen-
dent on di erent models and datasets. Many experi-
ments are conducted based on small datasets with low
resolution (e.g. 32 32) such as CIFAR10, and usually
achieve less than 5% error rate increase. For image clas-
siﬁcation at large scale (e.g. ImageNet), low-bit repre-
sentation method is di cult to achieve the same perfor-
mance as that for small dataset.
13

==== Page 14 ====
Method Target Layer Pre-training Performance
Layer decom-
position[47] Convolutional layers required 2 :5speedup with no loss
in accuracy
[48] Convolutional layers required 2 speedup with <1% ac-
curacy drop
[52] Whole network required 1 :09 reduction in
weights & 4 :93speedup
in VGG-16
[56] Convolutional layers not required 76% reduction in weights
in VGG-11
Pruning [150] Whole network required prune 90% parameters of
the convolutional kernels
[151] Whole network required prune 13 parameters in
VGG-16
[64] Whole network not required 5 :1(CPU) & 3 :1
(GPU) speedup in convo-
lutional layers
[67] Whole network required 34% inference FLOP re-
duction in VGG-16
Table 3: Layer decomposition and pruning methods analysis
Bit-width Method Model Error rate
increaseNote
Binary BinaryConnect
[80]Self-designed
(e.g. 6C-3S-
2F-L2SVM)2% error rate
dropBinary weights during train-
ing and testing
Binarynet [152] Self-designed 10 :15% ab-
solute error
rateBinary weights & activations
during forward pass
Ternary TWN [86] VGG-7 <1% Ternary weights in forward &
backward pass
Ternary Connect
[87]6C-1F-
1softmax3% error rate
dropTernary weights during train-
ing
TNN [88] VGG-variant 12 :11% ab-
solute error
rateTeacher-student approach
based ternary input & activa-
tions during training
Others 12 /14/16-bit [78] 3C-3S-
1softmax<5% Fixed-point number represen-
tation with stochastic round-
ing
10-bit [79] Maxout
networks<5% Dynamic 10-bit ﬁxed point
precision during training
Table 4: Representation Reduction Methods (CIFAR10)
C: convolutional layer, S: subsampling layer, F: fully-connected layer
7.2. Algorithm Level
7.2.1. Information for Updating
According to the cost function of gradient descent al-
gorithm, there are two categories, which are ﬁrst-orderderivatives gradient descent and second-order deriva-
tives gradient decent. Compared with ﬁrst-order deriva-
tives based gradient decent algorithm, the second-order
one is faster to converge. But it is more complex to
14

==== Page 15 ====
Bit-
widthMethod Model Error rate
increaseNote
Binary QNN [84] GoogLeNet,
AlexNet>10% Binary weights & activations
during training and testing
XNOR-net
[81]AlexNet,
ResNet,
GoogLeNet-
variation>10% Binary weights & input to con-
volutional layers
BWN [81] AlexNet,
ResNet,
GoogLeNet-
variation<10% Binary weights in forward &
backward pass
DoReFa-Net
[83]AlexNet around
10%Binary weights & 2-bit activa-
tions & 6-bit gradients
Ternary TWN [86] ResNet <5% Ternary weights in forward &
backward pass
Table 5: Representation Reduction Methods (ImageNet).
utilize the second order information, which makes it
prohibitive in practice for deep large neural networks.
Therefore, more emphasis has been put on how to ap-
proximate the Hessian matrices, which consists of the
second-order derivatives for simplicity [153].
7.2.2. Data for Training
According to the update amount of data, there are
three variants of the algorithms, which are batch, mini-
batch, and online. The batch method uses whole dataset
to update the gradient in one iteration. The mini-batch
uses randomly picked small amount of data to update
the gradient while the online method uses new incom-
ing subset of data once to update the gradient and stops
at any time.
For batch gradient decent, it is guaranteed to con-
verge to the global minimum for convex surfaces. But it
can be very slow and requires very large memory stor-
age. The mini-batch can avoid redundant gradient com-
putation using shu ed examples. As a result, it usu-
ally shoots the minimum faster than the batch gradient.
With delicate picked learning rate, its ﬂuctuation per-
formance decreases. The online method can be used for
designing a light-weight algorithm in terms of memory
and speed for handling a stream of data. Since the data
is updated frequently, it can be used to predict the most
recent state of the trend. But as data is discarded after
gradient update, online method is considered to be more
dicult and unreliable [154].7.2.3. Asynchronous Updating
Asynchronous training algorithms help improve the
eciency on large-scale clusters of machines for dis-
tributed training and inference. Proposed asynchronous
stochastic gradient decent algorithms such as Downpour
SGD and AASGD help improve neural network perfor-
mance in classiﬁcation problems with a large amount of
high dimensional data. But more attention is needed on
communication among di erent workers in the clusters,
since suboptimal communication can result in parame-
ters diverging [155, 156].
7.2.4. From Frequency Perspective
Table 6 summarizes methods of FFT based CNNs.
The concept of implementing CNN in frequency is to
replace convolution operation in time domain with mul-
tiplication in frequency domain. It takes time to trans-
form back and forth. As a result, it performs well on
large feature maps. Development is made to suit for
small feature maps such as training network directly in
frequency domain. Compared with other algorithms,
FFT method requires additional memory for padding
the ﬁlters to the same size of the input and storing fre-
quency domain intermediate results. This leads to a
trade-o for hardware implementation. On one hand, it
can take use of power in GPU parallelism to speedup
convolution computation dramatically. On the other
hand, more delicate GPU memory allocation is required
due to limit memory.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Method Platform Feature Additional
MemoryComplexity of
Fourier Trans-
form & InverseComplexity of Add &
Mul in Frequency Do-
main & Extra Complexity
Mathieu
[115]GeForce
GTX
Titan
GPUPerform con-
volutions as
products in
frequency
domainYes (2 Cn2logn)(S
f+f0f+Sf0)4Sf0fn2
Rippel
[157]Xeon Phi
coproces-
sorPooling in fre-
quency domainYes
Ko
[117]ASIC Train the net-
work entirely
in frequency
domainNo 2 Cn2logn(Sf) (3=2(n2 )+)Sf0
f+3=2n2k2f0f
S: mini-batch size, f: input feature map depth, f’: output feature map depth, n: feature map dimension
k: kernel dimension, C: hidden constant in the Onotation,: 1 for odd and 4 for even n
Table 6: FFT based method analysis.
Method Platform Memory Frequency Performance
Minwa [118] GPUs 6 :9 TB host mem-
ory & 1:7 TB device
memory- 0 :6 PFlops single
precision at peak
Rooﬂine-model-based
accelerator [123]VC707
FPGA- 100MHz 61 :62 GFLOPS
Caeine [127] Xilinx
KU060
FPGA- 200MHz 365 GOPS
ICAN accelerator [128] Virtex-7
FPGAMemory bandwidth
6:2 GB /s160MHz 147 :82 GOPS
Dadiannao [131] ASIC 36MB node eDRAM 606 MHz 2 :09 TeraOps /s of a
node at peak
Chain-NN [132] ASIC 352KB on-chip
memory700MHz 806 :4 GOPS at
peak
Cambricon-X [134] ASIC 56KB on-chip
SRAM1 GHz 544 GOPS
Table 7: Performance comparison among GPU, FPGA, and ASIC.
7.3. Implementation Level
As CNN becomes more and more complex, general
purpose processors cannot exploit the inherent paral-
lelism for matrix or tensor operations and therefore be-
comes bottleneck when performing large deep convolu-
tional neural networks. Various designs for accelerat-
ing network training and inference have been proposed
based on GPU, ASIC, and FPGA. Table 7 gives a perfor-
mance comparison of di erent methods implementing
on GPU, FPGA, and ASIC. Figure 6 shows the compar-ison among CPU, GPU, FPGA, and ASIC in terms of
power and throughput [158, 159, 160, 161, 162].
GPU supports several teraFLOPS throughput and
large memory access, but consumes a lot of energy. In
terms of economy, GPU costs to set up for large deep
convolutional neural networks.
Comparing to GPU, ASIC is specialized hardware
and can be delicately designed to maximize its beneﬁts
such as power-e ciency and large throughput in CNN
implementation. However, once CNN algorithms are
16

==== Page 17 ====
GOPS102101103W10−11102103CPU
ASICFPGAGPUFigure 6: Power and throughput among CPU, GPU, FPGA, and ASIC.
implemented on ASIC, it is di cult to change the hard-
ware design. On the other hand FPGA is easy to be pro-
grammed and reconﬁgured. It is more convenient for
prototyping.
Compared with GPU, FPGA throughput is tens of gi-
gaFLOPS and it has limited memory access. In addi-
tion, it does not support ﬂoating-point natively. But it
is more power-e cient. Due to its limited memory ac-
cess, many proposed methods are focused on acceler-
ating inference time of neural network since inference
process requires less memory access comparing to train-
ing process. Others are emphasized on external mem-
ory optimization for large neural network acceleration.
Dierent models need di erent hardware optimization
and even for the same model, di erent designs result in
quite various acceleration performance [60]. In terms
of economy, FPGA is reconﬁgurable and is easier to
evolve hardware, frameworks and software. Especially
for various models of neural networks, its ﬂexibility
shortens design cycle and costs less.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we have summarized recent advances
in CNN acceleration methods from all structure level,
algorithm level, and implementation level. In structure
level, CNN is compressed without losing signiﬁcant ac-
curacy since there is redundancy in most of the CNN
architectures. For training algorithms, besides conver-
gence speed, convolution calculation is also an impor-
tant factor for CNN. FFT method introduces a frequency
perspective for training neural networks. In implemen-
tation level, characteristics for di erent hardware such
as FPGA and GPU are explored combined with CNN
features. CNN performs better in computer vision ﬁeld
as its structure goes deeper and the amount of data be-
comes larger, which makes it time consuming and com-
putationally expensive. It is imperative and necessary
to accelerate CNN for its further implementation in life.
For now, there is no generalized evaluation system totest the acceleration performance for comparison among
dierent methods in di erent levels. Researches use
case by case dataset benchmark and di erent criterion
in each level. Therefore, it is challenging in accelera-
tion performance evaluation as well.
Acknowledgement
This research work was partly supported by the
Natural Science Foundation of China and Jiangsu
(Project No. 6171101145, 61671148, BK20161147),
the Research and Innovation Program for Grad-
uate Students in Universities of Jiangsu Province
(Grant No. SJLX16 0081, SJCX17 0048), and the Re-
search Grants Council of Hong Kong SAR (Project
No. CUHK24209017).
References
[1] S. Yu, S. Jia, C. Xu, Convolutional neural networks for hy-
perspectral image classiﬁcation, Neurocomputing 219 (2017)
88–98.
[2] C. Farabet, C. Couprie, L. Najman, Y . LeCun, Learning hier-
archical features for scene labeling, IEEE Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35 (8) (2013) 1915–
1929.
[3] K. Wang, C. Gou, N. Zheng, J. M. Rehg, F. Y . Wang, Paral-
lel vision for perception and understanding of complex scenes:
methods, framework, and perspectives, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Review (2016) 1–31.
[4] P. Qin, W. Xu, J. Guo, An empirical convolutional neural net-
work approach for semantic relation classiﬁcation, Neurocom-
puting 190 (2016) 1–9.
[5] B. Yu, D. Z. Pan, T. Matsunawa, X. Zeng, Machine learning
and pattern matching in physical design, in: IEEE /ACM Asia
and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (ASPDAC),
2015, pp. 286–293.
[6] L. Theis, W. Shi, A. Cunningham, F. Husz ´ar, Lossy image
compression with compressive autoencoders, in: International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
[7] M. Zhang, T. Chen, X. Shi, P. Cao, Image arbitrary-ratio down-
and up-sampling scheme exploiting dct low frequency compo-
nents and sparsity in high frequency components, IEICE Trans-
actions on Information and Systems 99 (2) (2016) 475–487.
[8] T. Chen, M. Zhang, J. Wu, C. Yuen, Y . Tong, Image encryp-
tion and compression based on kronecker compressed sensing
and elementary cellular automata scrambling, Optics & Laser
Technology 84 (2016) 118–133.
[9] J. A. A. Jothi, V . M. A. Rajam, A survey on automated cancer
diagnosis from histopathology images, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Review 48 (1) (2017) 31–81.
[10] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal,
R. Bajwa, S. Bates, S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, et al.,
In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit,
in: IEEE /ACM International Symposium on Computer Archi-
tecture (ISCA), 2017, pp. 1–12.
[11] NVDLA, http://nvdla.org .
[12] https://www.intelnervana.com .
17

==== Page 18 ====
[13] Y . Guo, Y . Liu, A. Oerlemans, S. Lao, S. Wu, M. S. Lew, Deep
learning for visual understanding: A review, Neurocomputing
187 (2016) 27–48.
[14] M. Ghayoumi, A quick review of deep learning in facial ex-
pression, Journal of Communication and Computer 14 (2017)
34–38.
[15] A. Carrio, C. Sampedro, A. Rodriguez-Ramos, P. Campoy,
A review of deep learning methods and applications for un-
manned aerial vehicles, Journal of Sensors 2017.
[16] J. Zhang, C. Zong, Deep neural networks in machine trans-
lation: An overview, IEEE Intelligent Systems 30 (5) (2015)
16–25.
[17] S. P. Singh, A. Kumar, H. Darbari, L. Singh, A. Rastogi,
S. Jain, Machine translation using deep learning: An overview,
in: International Conference on Computer, Communications
and Electronics (Comptelix), 2017, pp. 162–167.
[18] Z. H. Ling, S. Y . Kang, H. Zen, A. Senior, M. Schuster, X.-J.
Qian, H. M. Meng, L. Deng, Deep learning for acoustic mod-
eling in parametric speech generation: A systematic review of
existing techniques and future trends, IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine 32 (3) (2015) 35–52.
[19] J. Schmidhuber, Deep learning in neural networks: An
overview, Neural Networks 61 (2015) 85–117.
[20] Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, G. Hinton, Deep learning, Nature
521 (7553) (2015) 436–444.
[21] X. Du, Y . Cai, S. Wang, L. Zhang, Overview of deep learning,
in: Youth Academic Annual Conference of Chinese Associa-
tion of Automation (YAC), IEEE, 2016, pp. 159–164.
[22] Y . Lecun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, P. Ha ner, Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition, Proceedings of the
IEEE 86 (11) (1998) 2278–2324.
[23] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, Imagenet classiﬁca-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks, in: Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2012, pp.
1097–1105.
[24] M. Lin, Q. Chen, S. Yan, Network in network, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.4400.
[25] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition, in: International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[26] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for
image recognition, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[27] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov,
D. Erhan, V . Vanhoucke, A. Rabinovich, Going deeper with
convolutions, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015, pp. 1–9.
[28] F. Chollet, Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable
convolutions, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
[29] N. Aloysius, M. Geetha, A review on deep convolutional neural
networks, in: Communication and Signal Processing (ICCSP),
2017 International Conference on, IEEE, 2017, pp. 0588–
0592.
[30] A. A. M. Al-Sa ar, H. Tao, M. A. Talab, Review of deep
convolution neural network in image classiﬁcation, in: Radar,
Antenna, Microwave, Electronics, and Telecommunications
(ICRAMET), 2017 International Conference on, IEEE, 2017,
pp. 26–31.
[31] W. Rawat, Z. Wang, Deep convolutional neural networks for
image classiﬁcation: A comprehensive review, Neural compu-
tation 29 (9) (2017) 2352–2449.
[32] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning,
Springer, New York, 2006.
[33] V . Nair, G. E. Hinton, Rectiﬁed linear units improve restrictedboltzmann machines, in: International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2010, pp. 807–814.
[34] A. L. Maas, A. Y . Hannun, A. Y . Ng, Rectiﬁer nonlineari-
ties improve neural network acoustic models, in: International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2013.
[35] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Delving deep into rectiﬁers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classiﬁca-
tion, in: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2015, pp. 1026–1034.
[36] B. Xu, N. Wang, T. Chen, M. Li, Empirical evaluation of rec-
tiﬁed activations in convolutional network, in: International
Conference on Machine Learning Workshop, 2015.
[37] D.-A. Clevert, T. Unterthiner, S. Hochreiter, Fast and accurate
deep network learning by exponential linear units (elus), in:
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2016.
[38] P. Sermanet, S. Chintala, Y . LeCun, Convolutional neural net-
works applied to house numbers digit classiﬁcation, in: IEEE
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2012,
pp. 3288–3291.
[39] M. D. Zeiler, R. Fergus, Stochastic pooling for regularization
of deep convolutional neural networks, in: International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2013.
[40] D. Yu, H. Wang, P. Chen, Z. Wei, Mixed pooling for convolu-
tional neural networks, in: International Conference on Rough
Sets and Knowledge Technology, Springer, 2014, pp. 364–375.
[41] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Spatial pyramid pooling
in deep convolutional networks for visual recognition, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
37 (9) (2015) 1904–1916.
[42] O. Rippel, J. Snoek, R. P. Adams, Spectral representations for
convolutional neural networks, in: Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015, pp. 2449–2457.
[43] Y . Gong, L. Wang, R. Guo, S. Lazebnik, Multi-scale orderless
pooling of deep convolutional activation features, in: European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Springer, 2014, pp.
392–407.
[44] W. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Liu, N. Zeng, Y . Liu, F. E. Alsaadi, A sur-
vey of deep neural network architectures and their applications,
Neurocomputing 234 (2017) 11–26.
[45] M. Denil, B. Shakibi, L. Dinh, N. de Freitas, et al., Predicting
parameters in deep learning, in: Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2013, pp. 2148–2156.
[46] T. N. Sainath, B. Kingsbury, V . Sindhwani, E. Arisoy, B. Ram-
abhadran, Low-rank matrix factorization for deep neural net-
work training with high-dimensional output targets, in: IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP), 2013, pp. 6655–6659.
[47] M. Jaderberg, A. Vedaldi, A. Zisserman, Speeding up convo-
lutional neural networks with low rank expansions, in: British
Machine Vision Conference (BMVC), 2014.
[48] E. L. Denton, W. Zaremba, J. Bruna, Y . LeCun, R. Fergus, Ex-
ploiting linear structure within convolutional networks for ef-
ﬁcient evaluation, in: Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NIPS), 2014, pp. 1269–1277.
[49] V . Lebedev, Y . Ganin, M. Rakhuba, I. Oseledets, V . Lempitsky,
Speeding-up convolutional neural networks using ﬁne-tuned
cp-decomposition, in: International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2014.
[50] C. Tai, T. Xiao, Y . Zhang, X. Wang, et al., Convolutional
neural networks with low-rank regularization, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06067.
[51] P. Wang, J. Cheng, Accelerating convolutional neural networks
for mobile applications, in: ACM International Multimedia
Conference (MM), 2016, pp. 541–545.
18

==== Page 19 ====
[52] Y .-D. Kim, E. Park, S. Yoo, T. Choi, L. Yang, D. Shin, Com-
pression of deep convolutional neural networks for fast and
low power mobile applications, in: International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2016.
[53] H. Ding, K. Chen, Y . Yuan, M. Cai, L. Sun, S. Liang, Q. Huo,
A compact CNN-DBLSTM based character model for o ine
handwriting recognition with tucker decomposition, in: IAPR
International Conference on Document Analysis and Recogni-
tion (ICDAR), V ol. 1, IEEE, 2017, pp. 507–512.
[54] Q. Le, T. Sarl ´os, A. Smola, Fastfood-approximating kernel ex-
pansions in loglinear time, in: International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), V ol. 85, 2013.
[55] M. Moczulski, M. Denil, J. Appleyard, N. de Freitas, ACDC:
A structured e cient linear layer, in: International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
[56] Y . Ioannou, D. Robertson, J. Shotton, R. Cipolla, A. Criminisi,
Training CNNs with low-rank ﬁlters for e cient image classi-
ﬁcation, in: International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR), 2016.
[57] W. Wen, C. Xu, C. Wu, Y . Wang, Y . Chen, H. Li, Coordinating
ﬁlters for faster deep neural networks, in: IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017.
[58] R. Rigamonti, A. Sironi, V . Lepetit, P. Fua, Learning separable
ﬁlters, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence.
[59] X. Zhang, J. Zou, K. He, J. Sun, Accelerating very deep convo-
lutional networks for classiﬁcation and detection, IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 38 (10)
(2016) 1943–1955.
[60] S. Han, H. Mao, W. J. Dally, Deep compression: Compress-
ing deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization
and hu man coding, in: International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2016.
[61] H. Zhou, J. M. Alvarez, F. Porikli, Less is more: Towards
compact CNNs, in: European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), Springer, 2016, pp. 662–677.
[62] Z. Mariet, S. Sra, Diversity networks, in: International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
[63] A. Polyak, L. Wolf, Channel-level acceleration of deep face
representations, IEEE Access 3 (2015) 2163–2175.
[64] W. Wen, C. Wu, Y . Wang, Y . Chen, H. Li, Learning structured
sparsity in deep neural networks, in: Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016, pp. 2074–2082.
[65] Y . He, X. Zhang, J. Sun, Channel pruning for accelerating very
deep neural networks, in: IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), V ol. 2, 2017, p. 6.
[66] Z. Liu, J. Li, Z. Shen, G. Huang, S. Yan, C. Zhang, Learning
ecient convolutional networks through network slimming, in:
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
2017, pp. 2755–2763.
[67] H. Li, A. Kadav, I. Durdanovic, H. Samet, H. P. Graf, Pruning
ﬁlters for e cient convnets, in: International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
[68] A. Vedaldi, K. Lenc, Matconvnet: Convolutional neural net-
works for MATLAB, in: ACM International Multimedia Con-
ference (MM), 2015, pp. 689–692.
[69] S. Oymak, C. Thrampoulidis, B. Hassibi, Near-optimal sample
complexity bounds for circulant binary embedding, in: IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP), 2017, pp. 6359–6363.
[70] Y . Cheng, F. X. Yu, R. S. Feris, S. Kumar, A. Choudhary, S. F.
Chang, An exploration of parameter redundancy in deep net-
works with circulant projections, in: IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015, pp. 2857–2865.
[71] Z. Yang, M. Moczulski, M. Denil, N. de Freitas, A. Smola,L. Song, Z. Wang, Deep fried ConvNets, in: IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015, pp.
1476–1483.
[72] C. Ding, S. Liao, Y . Wang, Z. Li, N. Liu, Y . Zhuo, C. Wang,
X. Qian, Y . Bai, G. Yuan, et al., CirCNN: accelerating
and compressing deep neural networks using block-circulant
weight matrices, in: IEEE /ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2017, pp. 395–408.
[73] R. Caruana, A. Niculescu Mizil, G. Crew, A. Ksikes, Ensemble
selection from libraries of models, in: International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), 2004, p. 18.
[74] C. Bucilu, R. Caruana, A. Niculescu Mizil, Model compres-
sion, in: ACM International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (KDD), 2006, pp. 535–541.
[75] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, J. Dean, Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network, arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531.
[76] A. Romero, N. Ballas, S. E. Kahou, A. Chassang, C. Gatta,
Y . Bengio, Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets, in: International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[77] D. Hammerstrom, A VLSI architecture for high-performance,
low-cost, on-chip learning, in: International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 1990, pp. 537–544.
[78] S. Gupta, A. Agrawal, K. Gopalakrishnan, P. Narayanan, Deep
learning with limited numerical precision., in: International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015, pp. 1737–
1746.
[79] M. Courbariaux, Y . Bengio, J. P. David, Training deep neu-
ral networks with low precision multiplications, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.7024.
[80] M. Courbariaux, Y . Bengio, J. P. David, Binaryconnect: Train-
ing deep neural networks with binary weights during propaga-
tions, in: Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS), 2015, pp. 3123–3131.
[81] M. Rastegari, V . Ordonez, J. Redmon, A. Farhadi, XNOR-Net:
Imagenet classiﬁcation using binary convolutional neural net-
works, in: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
Springer, 2016, pp. 525–542.
[82] M. Kim, P. Smaragdis, Bitwise neural networks, in: Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
[83] S. Zhou, Y . Wu, Z. Ni, X. Zhou, H. Wen, Y . Zou, DoReFa-Net:
Training low bitwidth convolutional neural networks with low
bitwidth gradients, arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06160.
[84] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, Y . Ben-
gio, Quantized neural networks: Training neural networks
with low precision weights and activations, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.07061.
[85] H. Kim, J. Sim, Y . Choi, L.-S. Kim, A kernel decomposition
architecture for binary-weight convolutional neural networks,
in: ACM /IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2017,
p. 60.
[86] F. Li, B. Zhang, B. Liu, Ternary weight networks, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.04711.
[87] Z. Lin, M. Courbariaux, R. Memisevic, Y . Bengio, Neural net-
works with few multiplications, in: International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
[88] H. Alemdar, V . Leroy, A. Prost-Boucle, F. P ´etrot, Ternary neu-
ral networks for resource-e cient AI applications, in: Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2017,
pp. 2547–2554.
[89] B. D. Brown, H. C. Card, Stochastic neural computation.
i. computational elements, IEEE Transactions on Computers
50 (9) (2001) 891–905.
[90] Z. Li, A. Ren, J. Li, Q. Qiu, B. Yuan, J. Draper, Y . Wang,
Structural design optimization for deep convolutional neural
networks using stochastic computing, in: IEEE /ACM Proceed-
19

==== Page 20 ====
ings Design, Automation and Test in Eurpoe (DATE), 2017, pp.
250–253.
[91] K. Kim, J. Kim, J. Yu, J. Seo, J. Lee, K. Choi, Dynamic
energy-accuracy trade-o using stochastic computing in deep
neural networks, in: ACM /IEEE Design Automation Confer-
ence (DAC), 2016, pp. 124:1–124:6.
[92] Y . Ji, F. Ran, C. Ma, D. J. Lilja, A hardware implementation of
a radial basis function neural network using stochastic logic,
in: IEEE /ACM Proceedings Design, Automation and Test in
Eurpoe (DATE), 2015, pp. 880–883.
[93] A. Ren, Z. Li, C. Ding, Q. Qiu, Y . Wang, J. Li, X. Qian,
B. Yuan, SC-DCNN: highly-scalable deep convolutional neu-
ral network using stochastic computing, in: ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-
guages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2017, pp. 405–418.
[94] J. Li, Z. Yuan, Z. Li, A. Ren, C. Ding, J. Draper, S. Nazar-
ian, Q. Qiu, B. Yuan, Y . Wang, Normalization and dropout
for stochastic computing-based deep convolutional neural net-
works, Integration, the VLSI Journal.
[95] G. Li, P. Niu, X. Duan, X. Zhang, Fast learning network: a
novel artiﬁcial neural network with a fast learning speed, Neu-
ral Computing and Applications 24 (7-8) (2014) 1683–1695.
[96] N. M. Nawi, A. Khan, M. Z. Rehman, A new back-propagation
neural network optimized with cuckoo search algorithm, in:
International Conference on Computational Science and Its
Applications, Springer, 2013, pp. 413–426.
[97] Y . P. Liu, M. G. Wu, J. X. Qian, Evolving neural networks
using the hybrid of ant colony optimization and bp algorithms,
in: International Symposium on Neural Networks, Springer,
2006, pp. 714–722.
[98] S. T. Pan, M. L. Lan, An e cient hybrid learning algorithm for
neural network–based speech recognition systems on FPGA
chip, Neural Computing and Applications 24 (7-8) (2014)
1879–1885.
[99] S. Ding, C. Su, J. Yu, An optimizing bp neural network al-
gorithm based on genetic algorithm, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Re-
view 36 (2) (2011) 153–162.
[100] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, R. J. Williams, Learning inter-
nal representations by error propagation, Tech. rep., California
Univ San Diego La Jolla Inst for Cognitive Science (1985).
[101] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, Y . Singer, Adaptive subgradient methods
for online learning and stochastic optimization, Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research 12 (Jul) (2011) 2121–2159.
[102] M. D. Zeiler, ADADELTA: an adaptive learning rate method,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.5701.
[103] D. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion, Journal of Machine Learning Research (2015) 1–13.
[104] N. A. Hamid, N. M. Nawi, R. Ghazali, M. N. M. Salleh, Ac-
celerating learning performance of back propagation algorithm
by using adaptive gain together with adaptive momentum and
adaptive learning rate on classiﬁcation problems, in: Interna-
tional Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Multimedia
Applications, Springer, 2011, pp. 559–570.
[105] Y . Nesterov, E ciency of coordinate descent methods on huge-
scale optimization problems, SIAM Journal on Optimization
22 (2) (2012) 341–362.
[106] P. Richt ´arik, M. Tak ´aˇc, Iteration complexity of randomized
block-coordinate descent methods for minimizing a composite
function, Mathematical Programming 144 (1-2) (2014) 1–38.
[107] cuBLAS, http://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cublas .
[108] MLK, https://software.intel.com/en-us/
intel-mkl .
[109] OpenBLAS, http://www.openblas.net .
[110] M. Cho, D. Brand, Mec: Memory-e cient convolution for
deep neural network, in: International Conference on MachineLearning (ICML), 2017, pp. 815–824.
[111] A. Lavin, S. Gray, Fast algorithms for convolutional neural net-
works, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 4013–4021.
[112] H. Park, D. Kim, J. Ahn, S. Yoo, Zero and data reuse-aware
fast convolution for deep neural networks on GPU, in: Inter-
national Conference on Hardware /Software Codesign and Sys-
tem Synthesis, 2016, pp. 1–10.
[113] Q. Xiao, Y . Liang, L. Lu, S. Yan, Y .-W. Tai, Exploring hetero-
geneous algorithms for accelerating deep convolutional neural
networks on fpgas, in: ACM /IEEE Design Automation Con-
ference (DAC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[114] S. Ben Yacoub, B. Fasel, J. Luettin, Fast face detection us-
ing MLP and FFT, in: International Conference on Audio and
Video-based Biometric Person Authentication, 1999, pp. 31–
36.
[115] M. Mathieu, M. Hena , Y . LeCun, Fast training of convolu-
tional networks through ts, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5851.
[116] T. Brosch, R. Tam, E cient training of convolutional deep be-
lief networks in the frequency domain for application to high-
resolution 2D and 3D images, Neurocomputing.
[117] J. H. Ko, B. Mudassar, T. Na, S. Mukhopadhyay, Design
of an energy-e cient accelerator for training of convolu-
tional neural networks using frequency-domain computation,
in: ACM /IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2017,
pp. 1–6.
[118] R. Wu, S. Yan, Y . Shan, Q. Dang, G. Sun, Deep image: Scaling
up image recognition, arXiv preprint arXiv:1501.02876 7 (8).
[119] A. Coates, B. Huval, T. Wang, D. Wu, B. Catanzaro, N. An-
drew, Deep learning with cots hpc systems, in: International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2013, pp. 1337–
1345.
[120] M. Imani, D. Peroni, Y . Kim, A. Rahimi, T. Rosing, E cient
neural network acceleration on GPGPU using content address-
able memory, in: IEEE /ACM Proceedings Design, Automation
and Test in Eurpoe (DATE), 2017, pp. 1026–1031.
[121] N. Izeboudjen, C. Larbes, A. Farah, A new classiﬁcation ap-
proach for neural networks hardware: from standards chips
to embedded systems on chip, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review
41 (4) (2014) 491–534.
[122] M. Peemen, A. A. Setio, B. Mesman, H. Corporaal, Memory-
centric accelerator design for convolutional neural networks,
in: IEEE International Conference on Computer Design
(ICCD), 2013, pp. 13–19.
[123] C. Zhang, P. Li, G. Sun, Y . Guan, B. Xiao, J. Cong, Optimizing
FPGA-based accelerator design for deep convolutional neural
networks, in: ACM Symposium on FPGAs, 2015, pp. 161–
170.
[124] J. J. Mart ´ınez, J. Garrig ´os, J. Toledo, J. M. Ferr ´andez, An ef-
ﬁcient and expandable hardware implementation of multilayer
cellular neural networks, Neurocomputing 114 (2013) 54–62.
[125] S. Chakradhar, M. Sankaradas, V . Jakkula, S. Cadambi, A dy-
namically conﬁgurable coprocessor for convolutional neural
networks, in: IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS), 2010.
[126] Y . Wang, H. Li, X. Li, Re-architecting the on-chip memory
sub-system of machine-learning accelerator for embedded de-
vices, in: IEEE /ACM International Conference on Computer-
Aided Design (ICCAD), 2016, p. 13.
[127] C. Zhang, Z. Fang, P. Zhou, P. Pan, J. Cong, Ca eine: Towards
uniformed representation and acceleration for deep convolu-
tional neural networks, in: IEEE /ACM International Confer-
ence on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), 2016, pp. 1–8.
[128] A. Rahman, J. Lee, K. Choi, E cient FPGA acceleration of
convolutional neural networks using logical-3D compute array,
20

==== Page 21 ====
in: IEEE /ACM Proceedings Design, Automation and Test in
Eurpoe (DATE), 2016, pp. 1393–1398.
[129] M. Alwani, H. Chen, M. Ferdman, P. Milder, Fused-layer CNN
accelerators, in: IEEE /ACM International Symposium on Mi-
croarchitecture (MICRO), 2016, pp. 1–12.
[130] M. Gao, J. Pu, X. Yang, M. Horowitz, C. Kozyrakis, Tetris:
Scalable and e cient neural network acceleration with 3d
memory, in: ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(ASPLOS), 2017, pp. 751–764.
[131] T. Luo, S. Liu, L. Li, Y . Wang, S. Zhang, T. Chen, Z. Xu,
O. Temam, Y . Chen, Dadiannao: A neural network supercom-
puter, IEEE Transactions on Computers 66 (1) (2017) 73–88.
[132] S. Wang, D. Zhou, X. Han, T. Yoshimura, Chain-NN: An
energy-e cient 1D chain architecture for accelerating deep
convolutional neural networks, in: IEEE /ACM Proceedings
Design, Automation and Test in Eurpoe (DATE), 2017, pp.
1032–1037.
[133] C. Farabet, B. Martini, P. Akselrod, S. Talay, Y . LeCun, E. Cu-
lurciello, Hardware accelerated convolutional neural networks
for synthetic vision systems, in: IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2010, pp. 257–260.
[134] S. Zhang, Z. Du, L. Zhang, H. Lan, S. Liu, L. Li, Q. Guo,
T. Chen, Y . Chen, Cambricon-X: An accelerator for sparse neu-
ral networks, in: IEEE /ACM International Symposium on Mi-
croarchitecture (MICRO), 2016, pp. 1–12.
[135] H. Kwon, A. Samajdar, T. Krishna, MAERI: Enabling ﬂexible
dataﬂow mapping over DNN accelerators via reconﬁgurable
interconnects, in: ACM International Conference on Architec-
tural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Sys-
tems (ASPLOS), 2018, pp. 461–475.
[136] T. Gokmen, Y . Vlasov, Acceleration of deep neural network
training with resistive cross-point devices: Design considera-
tions, Frontiers in Neuroscience 10.
[137] B. L. Jackson, B. Rajendran, G. S. Corrado, M. Breitwisch,
G. W. Burr, R. Cheek, K. Gopalakrishnan, S. Raoux, C. T.
Rettner, A. Padilla, et al., Nanoscale electronic synapses using
phase change devices, ACM Journal on Emerging Technolo-
gies in Computing Systems (JETC) 9 (2) (2013) 12.
[138] S. Sa ¨ıghi, C. G. Mayr, T. Serrano Gotarredona, H. Schmidt,
G. Lecerf, J. Tomas, J. Grollier, S. Boyn, A. F. Vincent,
D. Querlioz, et al., Plasticity in memristive devices for spik-
ing neural networks, Frontiers in Neuroscience 9 (2015) 51.
[139] J. Seo, B. Lin, M. Kim, P. Y . Chen, D. Kadetotad, Z. Xu,
A. Mohanty, S. Vrudhula, S. Yu, J. Ye, et al., On-chip sparse
learning acceleration with CMOS and resistive synaptic de-
vices, IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology (TNANO) 14 (6)
(2015) 969–979.
[140] X. Zeng, S. Wen, Z. Zeng, T. Huang, Design of memristor-
based image convolution calculation in convolutional neural
network, Neural Computing and Applications (2016) 1–6.
[141] Y . Shim, A. Sengupta, K. Roy, Low-power approximate con-
volution computing unit with domain-wall motion based spin-
memristor for image processing applications, in: ACM /IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2016, pp. 1–6.
[142] L. Ni, H. Huang, H. Yu, On-line machine learning accelerator
on digital RRAM-crossbar, in: IEEE International Symposium
on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2016, pp. 113–116.
[143] Z. Xu, A. Mohanty, P. Y . Chen, D. Kadetotad, B. Lin, J. Ye,
S. Vrudhula, S. Yu, J. Seo, Y . Cao, Parallel programming of re-
sistive cross-point array for synaptic plasticity, Procedia Com-
puter Science 41 (2014) 126–133.
[144] M. Prezioso, F. Merrikh Bayat, B. Hoskins, G. Adam, K. K.
Likharev, D. B. Strukov, Training and operation of an inte-
grated neuromorphic network based on metal-oxide memris-tors, Nature 521 (7550) (2015) 61–64.
[145] M. Cheng, L. Xia, Z. Zhu, Y . Cai, Y . Xie, Y . Wang, H. Yang,
TIME: A training-in-memory architecture for memristor-based
deep neural networks, in: ACM /IEEE Design Automation
Conference (DAC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[146] L. Song, Y . Wang, Y . Han, H. Li, Y . Cheng, X. Li, Stt-ram
buer design for precision-tunable general-purpose neural net-
work accelerator, IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Inte-
gration Systems (TVLSI) 25 (4) (2017) 1285–1296.
[147] M. Hu, J. P. Strachan, Z. Li, E. M. Grafals, N. Davila,
C. Graves, S. Lam, N. Ge, J. J. Yang, R. S. Williams,
Dot-product engine for neuromorphic computing: program-
ming 1T1M crossbar to accelerate matrix-vector multiplica-
tion, in: ACM /IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC),
2016, p. 19.
[148] L. Xia, T. Tang, W. Huangfu, M. Cheng, X. Yin, B. Li,
Y . Wang, H. Yang, Switched by input: Power e cient
structure for RRAM-based convolutional neural network, in:
ACM /IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2016, pp.
1–6.
[149] A. Ankit, A. Sengupta, P. Panda, K. Roy, Resparc: A reconﬁg-
urable and energy-e cient architecture with memristive cross-
bars for deep spiking neural networks, in: ACM /IEEE Design
Automation Conference (DAC), 2017, pp. 27:1–27:6.
[150] B. Liu, M. Wang, H. Foroosh, M. Tappen, M. Pensky, Sparse
convolutional neural networks, in: IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015, pp. 806–
814.
[151] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, W. Dally, Learning both weights
and connections for e cient neural network, in: Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015, pp.
1135–1143.
[152] M. Courbariaux, I. Hubara, D. Soudry, R. El Yaniv, Y . Ben-
gio, Binarized neural networks: Training deep neural networks
with weights and activations constrained to +1 or-1, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1602.02830.
[153] S. S. Liew, M. Khalil Hani, R. Bakhteri, An optimized second
order stochastic learning algorithm for neural network training,
Neurocomputing 186 (2016) 74–89.
[154] H. Cho, M. K. An, Co-clustering algorithm: Batch, mini-batch,
and online, International Journal of Information and Electron-
ics Engineering 4 (5) (2014) 340.
[155] J. Dean, G. Corrado, R. Monga, K. Chen, M. Devin, M. Mao,
A. Senior, P. Tucker, K. Yang, Q. V . Le, et al., Large scale dis-
tributed deep networks, in: Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS), 2012, pp. 1223–1231.
[156] Q. Meng, W. Chen, J. Yu, T. Wang, Z. M. Ma, T.-Y . Liu,
Asynchronous accelerated stochastic gradient descent, in: In-
ternational Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
2016.
[157] O. Rippel, J. Snoek, R. P. Adams, Spectral representations for
convolutional neural networks, in: Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015, pp. 2449–2457.
[158] Z. Du, S. Liu, R. Fasthuber, T. Chen, P. Ienne, L. Li, T. Luo,
Q. Guo, X. Feng, Y . Chen, et al., An accelerator for high
ecient vision processing, IEEE Transactions on Computer-
Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems (TCAD)
36 (2) (2017) 227–240.
[159] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao, J. Pu, A. Pedram, M. A. Horowitz,
W. J. Dally, Eie: e cient inference engine on compressed deep
neural network, in: IEEE /ACM International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2016, pp. 243–254.
[160] J. Qiu, J. Wang, S. Yao, K. Guo, B. Li, E. Zhou, J. Yu, T. Tang,
N. Xu, S. Song, et al., Going deeper with embedded FPGA
platform for convolutional neural network, in: ACM Sympo-
21

==== Page 22 ====
sium on FPGAs, 2016, pp. 26–35.
[161] B. Moons, M. Verhelst, An energy-e cient precision-scalable
ConvNet processor in 40-nm CMOS, IEEE Journal Solid-State
Circuits 52 (4) (2017) 903–914.
[162] Y . H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, V . Sze, Eyeriss: An energy-
ecient reconﬁgurable accelerator for deep convolutional neu-
ral networks, IEEE Journal Solid-State Circuits 52 (1) (2017)
127–138.
22

