==== Page 1 ====
Recent Advances in Deep Learning for Object Detection
Xiongwei Wua,, Doyen Sahooa, Steven C.H. Hoia,b
aSchool of Information System, Singapore Management University
bSalesforce Research Asia
Abstract
Object detection is a fundamental visual recognition problem in computer vision and has been widely studied in the past decades.
Visual object detection aims to ﬁnd objects of certain target classes with precise localization in a given image and assign each
object instance a corresponding class label. Due to the tremendous successes of deep learning based image classiﬁcation, object
detection techniques using deep learning have been actively studied in recent years. In this paper, we give a comprehensive survey
of recent advances in visual object detection with deep learning. By reviewing a large body of recent related work in literature,
we systematically analyze the existing object detection frameworks and organize the survey into three major parts: (i) detection
components, (ii) learning strategies, and (iii) applications & benchmarks. In the survey, we cover a variety of factors affecting
the detection performance in detail, such as detector architectures, feature learning, proposal generation, sampling strategies, etc.
Finally, we discuss several future directions to facilitate and spur future research for visual object detection with deep learning.
Keywords: Object Detection, Deep Learning, Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
1. Introduction
In the ﬁeld of computer vision, there are several fundamen-
tal visual recognition problems: image classiﬁcation [1], object
detection and instance segmentation [2, 3], and semantic seg-
mentation [4] (see Fig. 1). In particular, image classiﬁcation
(Fig 1.1(a)), aims to recognize semantic categories of objects in
a given image. Object detection not only recognizes object cat-
egories, but also predicts the location of each object by a bound-
ing box (Fig. 1(b)). Semantic segmentation (Fig. 1(c)) aims to
predict pixel-wise classiﬁers to assign a speciﬁc category label
to each pixel, thus providing an even richer understanding of an
image. However, in contrast to object detection, semantic seg-
mentation does not distinguish between multiple objects of the
same category. A relatively new setting at the intersection of
object detection and semantic segmentation, named “instance
Corresponding author
Email addresses: xwwu.2015@phdis.smu.edu.sg (Xiongwei Wu),
doyens.smu.edu.sg (Doyen Sahoo), chhoi@smu.edu.sg (Steven
C.H. Hoi)
(a) Image Classiﬁcation
 (b) Object Detection
(c) Semantic Segmentation
 (d) Instance Segmentation
Figure 1: Comparison of different visual recognition tasks in computer vision.
(a) “Image Classiﬁcation” only needs to assign categorical class labels to the
image; (b) “Object detection” not only predict categorical labels but also lo-
calize each object instance via bounding boxes; (c) “Semantic segmentation”
aims to predict categorical labels for each pixel, without differentiating object
instances; (d) “Instance segmentation”, a special setting of object detection,
differentiates different object instances by pixel-level segmentation masks.
segmentation” (Fig. 1(d)), is proposed to identify different ob-
jects and assign each of them a separate categorical pixel-level
Preprint submitted to Elsevier August 13, 2019arXiv:1908.03673v1  [cs.CV]  10 Aug 2019

==== Page 2 ====
mask. In fact, instance segmentation can be viewed as a spe-
cial setting of object detection, where instead of localizing an
object by a bounding box, pixel-level localization is desired. In
this survey, we direct our attention to review the major efforts
in deep learning based object detection. A good detection al-
gorithm should have a strong understanding of semantic cues
as well as the spatial information about the image. In fact,
object detection is the basic step towards many computer vi-
sion applications, such as face recognition [5, 6, 7], pedestrian
detection [8, 9, 10], video analysis [11, 12], and logo detec-
tion [13, 14, 15].
In the early stages, before the deep learning era, the pipeline
of object detection was divided into three steps: i) proposal
generation; ii) feature vector extraction; and iii) region clas-
siﬁcation. During proposal generation, the objective was to
search locations in the image which may contain objects. These
locations are also called regions of interest (roi). An intu-
itive idea is to scan the whole image with sliding windows
[16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. In order to capture information about
multi-scale and different aspect ratios of objects, input images
were resized into different scales and multi-scale windows were
used to slide through these images. During the second step, on
each location of the image, a ﬁxed-length feature vector was
obtained from the sliding window, to capture discriminative se-
mantic information of the region covered. This feature vector
was commonly encoded by low-level visual descriptors such
as SIFT(Scale Invariant Feature Transform) [21], Haar [22],
HOG(Histogram of Gradients) [19] or SURF(Speeded Up Ro-
bust Features) [23], which showed a certain robustness to scale,
illumination and rotation variance. Finally, in the third step,
the region classiﬁers were learned to assign categorical la-
bels to the covered regions. Commonly, support vector ma-
chines(SVM) [24] were used here due to their good perfor-
mance on small scale training data. In addition, some classi-
ﬁcation techniques such as bagging [25], cascade learning [20]
and adaboost [26] were used in region classiﬁcation step, lead-
ing to further improvements in detection accuracy.
Most of the successful traditional methods for object de-tection focused on carefully designing feature descriptors to
obtain embedding for a region of interest. With the help of
good feature representations as well as robust region classi-
ﬁers, impressive results [27, 28] were achieved on Pascal VOC
dataset [29] (a publicly available dataset used for benchmark-
ing object detection). Notably, deformable part based machines
(DPMs) [30], a breakthrough detection algorithm, were 3-time
winners on VOC challenges in 2007, 2008 and 2009. DPMs
learn and integrate multiple part models with a deformable
loss and mine hard negative examples with a latent SVM for
discriminative training. However, during 2008 to 2012, the
progress on Pascal VOC based on these traditional methods had
become incremental, with minor gains from building compli-
cated ensemble systems. This showed the limitations of these
traditional detectors. Most prominently, these limitations in-
cluded: (i) during proposal generation, a huge number of pro-
posals were generated, and many of them were redundant; this
resulted in a large number of false positives during classiﬁca-
tion. Moreover, window scales were designed manually and
heuristically, and could not match the objects well; (ii) fea-
ture descriptors were hand-crafted based on low level visual
cues [31, 32, 23], which made it difﬁcult to capture repre-
sentative semantic information in complex contexts. (iii) each
step of the detection pipeline was designed and optimized sep-
arately, and thus could not obtain a global optimal solution for
the whole system.
After the success of applying deep convolutional neural net-
works(DCNN) for image classiﬁcation [33, 1], object detection
also achieved remarkable progress based on deep learning tech-
niques [34, 2]. The new deep learning based algorithms out-
performed the traditional detection algorithms by huge mar-
gins. Deep convolutional neural network is a biologically-
inspired structure for computing hierarchical features. An
early attempt to build such a hierarchical and spatial-invariant
model for image classiﬁcation was “neocognitron” [35] pro-
posed by Fukushima. However, this early attempt lacked ef-
fective optimization techniques for supervised learning. Based
on this model, Lecun et al. [36] optimized a convolutional neu-
2

==== Page 3 ====
AlexNet
(Krizhevsky et al. )OverFeat
(Sermanet et al. )
GoogleNet
(Szegedy et al. )VGGNet
(Simonyan and 
Zisserman )R-CNN
(Girshick et al. )
Fast R -CNN
(Girshick et al. )
ResNet
(He et al. )Faster R -CNN
(Ren et al. )
FPN
(Linet al. )YOLO
(Redmon et al. )
SSD
(Liuet al. )
ResNet v2
(He et al. )R-FCN
(Daiet al. )
ResNeXt
(Lin et al. )
DenseNet
(Huang et al. )DPN
(Chen et al. )YOLO9000
(Redmon and 
Farhadi )
Hourglass
(Newell et al. )
MobileNet
(Howard et al. )DCN
(Dai et al. )
RetinaNet
(Lin et al. )Mask R -CNN
(He et al. )
RefineDet
(Zhang et al. )Cascade RCNN
(Cai et al. )
NASNet
(Zoph et al. )CornerNet
(Law and Deng )FSAF
(Zhu et al. )
SENet
(Huet al. )ExtremeNet
(Zhou et al. )NAS-FPN
(Ghiasi et al. )Detnas
(Chen et al. )
FCOS
(Tian et al. )CenterNet
(Duan et al. )
Efficien tNet
(Tan and Le )Figure 2: Major milestone in object detection research based on deep convolution neural networks since 2012. The trend in the last year has been designing object
detectors based on anchor-free(in red) and AutoML(in green) techniques, which are potentially two important research directions in the future.
ral network by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) via back-
propagation and showed competitive performance on digit
recognition. After that, however, deep convolutional neural net-
works were not heavily explored, with support vector machines
becoming more prominent. This was because deep learning had
some limitations: (i) lack of large scale annotated training data,
which caused overﬁtting; (ii) limited computation resources;
and (iii) weak theoretical support compared to SVMs. In 2009,
Jia et al. [37] collected a large scale annotated image dataset
ImageNet which contained 1.2M high resolution images, mak-
ing it possible to train deep models with large scale training
data. With the development of computing resources on parallel
computing systems(such as GPU clusters), in 2012 Krizhevsky
et al. [33] trained a large deep convolutional model with Im-
ageNet dataset and showed signiﬁcant improvement on Large
Scale Visual Recognition Challenge(ILSVRC) compared to all
other approaches. After the success of applying DCNN for
classiﬁcation, deep learning techniques were quickly adapted
to other vision tasks and showed promising results compared to
the traditional methods.
In contrast to hand-crafted descriptors used in traditional de-
tectors, deep convolutional neural networks generate hierarchi-
cal feature representations from raw pixels to high level seman-
tic information, which is learned automatically from the train-ing data and shows more discriminative expression capability
in complex contexts. Furthermore, beneﬁting from the pow-
erful learning capacity, a deep convolutional neural network
can obtain a better feature representation with a larger dataset,
while the learning capacity of traditional visual descriptors are
ﬁxed, and can not improve when more data becomes available.
These properties made it possible to design object detection al-
gorithms based on deep convolutional neural networks which
could be optimized in an end-to-end manner, with more power-
ful feature representation capability.
Currently, deep learning based object detection frameworks
can be primarily divided into two families: (i) two-stage detec-
tors, such as Region-based CNN (R-CNN) [2] and its variants
[38, 34, 39] and (ii) one-stage detectors, such as YOLO [40] and
its variants [41, 42]. Two-stage detectors ﬁrst use a proposal
generator to generate a sparse set of proposals and extract fea-
tures from each proposal, followed by region classiﬁers which
predict the category of the proposed region. One-stage detec-
tors directly make categorical prediction of objects on each lo-
cation of the feature maps without the cascaded region classiﬁ-
cation step. Two-stage detectors commonly achieve better de-
tection performance and report state-of-the-art results on public
benchmarks, while one-stage detectors are signiﬁcantly more
time-efﬁcient and have greater applicability to real-time object
3

==== Page 4 ====
Object Detection
Detection Components
 Learning Strategy
Applications & 
Benchmarks
Detection Settings Backbone Architecture
Proposal Generation Feature RepresentationTraining Stage
Testing StageApplications
Public BenchmarksBounding Box
Pixel MaskVGG16,ResNet,DenseNet
MobileNet , ResNeXt
DetNet , Hourglass Net
Multi -scale Feature Learning
Region Feature Encoding
Contextual Reasoning
Deformable Feature LearningTraditional Computer Vision Methods
Anchor -based Methods
Keypoint -based Methods
Other MethodsData Augmentation
Imbalance Sampling
Localization Refinement
Cascade LearningFace Detection
Pedestrian Detection
Others
MSCOCO, Pascal VOC, 
Open Images
FDDB, WIDER FACE
KITTI, ETH, CityPersonsTwo-Stage Detectors
One-Stage Detectors
Duplicate Removal
Model Acceleration
OthersOthersDetection ParadigmsFigure 3: Taxonomy of key methodologies in this survey. We categorize various contributions for deep learning based object detection into three major categories:
Detection Components, Learning Strategies, Applications and Benchmarks. We review each of these categories in detail.
detection. Figure 2 also illustrates the major developments and
milestones of deep learning based object detection techniques
after 2012. We will cover basic ideas of these key techniques
and analyze them in a systematic manner in the survey.
The goal of this survey is to present a comprehensive un-
derstanding of deep learning based object detection algorithms.
Fig. 3 shows a taxonomy of key methodologies to be cov-
ered in this survey. We review various contributions in deep
learning based object detection and categorize them into three
groups: detection components, learning strategies, and appli-
cations & benchmarks. For detection components, we ﬁrst in-
troduce two detection settings: bounding box level(bbox-level)
and pixel mask level(mask-level) localization. Bbox-level algo-
rithms require to localize objects by rectangle bounding boxes,
while more precise pixel-wise masks are required to segment
objects in mask-level algorithms. Next, we summarize the rep-
resentative frameworks of two detection families: two-stage de-
tection and one-stage detection. Then we give a detailed survey
of each detection component, including backbone architecture,
proposal generation and feature learning. For learning strate-gies, we ﬁrst highlight the importance of learning strategy of
detection due to the difﬁculty of training detectors, and then in-
troduce the optimization techniques for both training and test-
ing stages in detail. Finally, we review some real-world object
detection based applications including face detection, pedes-
trian detection, logo detection and video analysis. We also dis-
cuss publicly available and commonly used benchmarks and
evaluation metrics for these detection tasks. Finally we show
the state-of-the-art results of generic detection on public bench-
marks over the recent years.
We hope our survey can provide a timely review for re-
searchers and practitioners to further catalyze research on de-
tection systems. The rest of the paper are organized as follows:
in Section 2, we give a standard problem setting of object detec-
tion. The details of detector components are listed in Section 3.
Then the learning strategies are presented in Section 4. Detec-
tion algorithms for real-world applications and benchmarks are
provided in Section 5 and Section 6. State-of-the-art results of
generic detection are listed in Section 7. Finally, we conclude
and discuss future directions in Section 8.
4

==== Page 5 ====
2. Problem Settings
In this section, we present the formal problem setting for ob-
ject detection based on deep learning. Object detection involves
both recognition (e.g., “object classiﬁcation”) and localization
(e.g., “location regression”) tasks. An object detector needs to
distinguish objects of certain target classes from backgrounds
in the image with precise localization and correct categorical la-
bel prediction to each object instance. Bounding boxes or pixel
masks are predicted to localize these target object instances.
More formally, assume we are given a collection of Nanno-
tated imagesn
x1;x2;:::;xNo
, and forithimagexi, there are
Miobjects belonging to Ccategories with annotations:
yi=n
(ci
1;bi
1);(ci
2;bi
2);:::;(ci
Mi;bi
Mi)o
(1)
whereci
j(ci
j2C) andbi
j(bounding box or pixel mask of the
object) denote categorical and spatial labels of j-th object in xi
respectively. The detector is fparameterized by . Forxi, the
predictionyi
predshares the same format as yi:
yi
pred=n
(ci
pred1;bi
pred1);(ci
pred2;bi
pred2);:::)o
(2)
Finally a loss function `is set to optimize detector as:
`(x;) =1
NNX
i=1`(yi
pred;xi;yi;) +
2kk2
2(3)
where the second term is a regularizer, with trade-off parameter
. Different loss functions such as softmax loss [38] and focal
loss [43] impact the ﬁnal detection performance, and we will
discuss these functions in Section 4.
At the time of evaluation, a metric called intersection-over-
union (IoU) between objects and predictions is used to evaluate
the quality of localization(we omit index ihere):
IoU(bpred;bgt) =Area(bpredTbgt)
Area(bpredSbgt)(4)
Here,bgtrefers to the ground truth bbox or mask. An IoU
threshold 
is set to determine whether a prediction tightly cov-ers the object or not(i.e. IoU 
; commonly researchers set

 = 0:5). For object detection, a prediction with correct cate-
gorical label as well as successful localization prediction (meet-
ing the IoU criteria) is considered as positive, otherwise it’s a
negative prediction:
Prediction =8
<
:Positivecpred=cgtand IoU (bpred;bgt)>
Negative otherwise
(5)
For generic object detection problem evaluation, mean average
precision(mAP) over Cclasses is used for evaluation, and in
real world scenarios such as pedestrian detection, different eval-
uation metrics are used which will be discussed in Section 5. In
addition to detection accuracy, inference speed is also an im-
portant metric to evaluate object detection algorithms. Specif-
ically, if we wish to detect objects in a video stream (real-time
detection), it is imperative to have a detector that can process
this information quickly. Thus, the detector efﬁciency is also
evaluated on Frame per second (FPS), i.e., how many images it
can process per second. Commonly a detector that can achieve
an inference speed of 20 FPS, is considered to be a real-time
detector.
3. Detection Components
In this section, we introduce different components of ob-
ject detection. The ﬁrst is about the choice of object detection
paradigm. We ﬁrst introduce the concepts of two detection set-
tings: bbox-level and mask-level algorithms. Then, We intro-
duce two major object detection paradigms: two-stage detectors
and one-stage detectors. Under these paradigms, detectors can
use a variety of deep learning backbone architectures, proposal
generators, and feature representation modules.
3.1. Detection Settings
There are two settings in object detection: i) vanilla object
detection (bbox-level localization) and ii) instance segmenta-
tion (pixel-level or mask-level localization). Vanilla object de-
tection has been more extensively studied and is considered as
5

==== Page 6 ====
the traditional detection setting, where the goal is to localize ob-
jects by rectangle bounding boxes. In vanilla object detection
algorithms, only bbox annotations are required, and in evalua-
tion, the IoU between predicted bounding box with the ground
truth is calculated to measure the performance. Instance seg-
mentation is a relatively new setting and is based on traditional
detection setting. Instance segmentation requires to segment
each object by a pixel-wise mask instead of a rough rectangle
bounding box. Due to more precise pixel-level prediction, in-
stance segmentation is more sensitive to spatial misalignment,
and thus has higher requirement to process the spatial informa-
tion. The evaluation metric of instance segmentation is almost
identical to the bbox-level detection, except that the IoU com-
putation is performed on mask predictions. Though the two
detection settings are slightly different, the main components
introduced later can mostly be shared by the two settings.
3.2. Detection Paradigms
Current state-of-the-art object detectors with deep learning
can be mainly divided into two major categories: two-stage de-
tectors and one-stage detectors. For a two-stage detector, in the
ﬁrst stage, a sparse set of proposals is generated; and in the
second stage, the feature vectors of generated proposals are en-
coded by deep convolutional neural networks followed by mak-
ing the object class predictions. An one-stage detector does
not have a separate stage for proposal generation (or learning a
proposal generation). They typically consider all positions on
the image as potential objects, and try to classify each region
of interest as either background or a target object. Two-stage
detectors often reported state-of-the-art results on many public
benchmark datasets. However, they generally fall short in terms
of lower inference speeds. One-stage detectors are much faster
and more desired for real-time object detection applications, but
have a relatively poor performance compared to the two-stage
detectors.
3.2.1. Two-stage Detectors
Two-stage detectors split the detection task into two stages:
(i) proposal generation; and (ii) making predictions for theseproposals. During the proposal generation phase, the detector
will try to identify regions in the image which may potentially
be objects. The idea is to propose regions with a high recall,
such that all objects in the image belong to at least one of these
proposed region. In the second stage, a deep-learning based
model is used to classify these proposals with the right categor-
ical labels. The region may either be a background, or an object
from one of the predeﬁned class labels . Additionally, the model
may reﬁne the original localization suggested by the proposal
generator. Next, we review some of the most inﬂuential efforts
among two-stage detectors.
R-CNN [2] is a pioneering two-stage object detector pro-
posed by Girshick et al. in 2014. Compared to the previous
state-of-the-art methods based on a traditional detection frame-
work SegDPM [44] with 40.4% mAP on Pascal VOC2010, R-
CNN signiﬁcantly improved the detection performance and ob-
tained 53.7% mAP. The pipeline of R-CNN can be divided into
three components: i) proposal generation, ii) feature extraction
and iii) region classiﬁcation. For each image, R-CNN generates
a sparse set of proposals (around 2,000 proposals) via Selective
Search [45], which is designed to reject regions that can eas-
ily be identiﬁed as background regions. Then, each proposal is
cropped and resized into a ﬁxed-size region and is encoded into
a (e.g. 4,096 dimensional) feature vector by a deep convolu-
tional neural network, followed by a one-vs-all SVM classiﬁer.
Finally the bounding box regressors are learned using the ex-
tracted features as input in order to make the original proposals
tightly bound the objects. Compared to traditional hand-crafted
feature descriptors, deep neural networks generate hierarchical
features and capture different scale information in different lay-
ers, and ﬁnally produce robust and discriminative features for
classiﬁcation. utilize the power of transfer learning, R-CNN
adopts weights of convolutional networks pre-trained on Ima-
geNet. The last fully connected layer (FC layer) is re-initialized
for the detection task. The whole detector is then ﬁnetuned on
the pre-trained model. This transfer of knowledge from the Im-
agenet dataset offers signiﬁcant performance gains. In addition,
R-CNN rejects huge number of easy negatives before training,
6

==== Page 7 ====
which helps improve learning speed and reduce false positives.
However, R-CNN faces some critical shortcomings: i) the
features of each proposal were extracted by deep convolutional
networks separately (i.e., computation was not shared), which
led to heavily duplicated computations. Thus, R-CNN was ex-
tremely time-consuming for training and testing; ii) the three
steps of R-CNN (proposal generation, feature extraction and
region classiﬁcation) were independent components and the
whole detection framework could not be optimized in an end-
to-end manner, making it difﬁcult to obtain global optimal so-
lution; and iii) Selective Search relied on low-level visual cues
and thus struggled to generate high quality proposals in com-
plex contexts. Moreover, it is unable to enjoy the beneﬁts of
GPU acceleration.
Inspired by the idea of spatial pyramid matching (SPM) [46],
He et al. proposed SPP-net [47] to accelerate R-CNN as well
as learn more discriminative features. Instead of cropping pro-
posal regions and feeding into CNN model separately, SPP-net
computes the feature map from the whole image using a deep
convolutional network and extracts ﬁxed-length feature vectors
on the feature map by a Spatial Pyramid Pooling (SPP) layer.
SPP partitions the feature map into an NNgrid, for multiple
values ofN(thus allowing obtaining information at different
scales), and performs pooling on each cell of the grid, to give a
feature vector. The feature vectors obtained from each NN
grid are concatenated to give the representation for the region.
The extracted features are fed into region SVM classiﬁers and
bounding box regressors. In contrast to RCNN, SPP-layer can
also work on images/regions at various scales and aspect ratios
without resizing them. Thus, it does not suffer from informa-
tion loss and unwanted geometric distortion.
SPP-net achieved better results and had a signiﬁcantly faster
inference speed compared to R-CNN. However, the training of
SPP-net was still multi-stage and thus it could not be optimized
end-to-end (and required extra cache memory to store extracted
features). In addition, SPP layer did not back-propagate gra-
dients to convolutional kernels and thus all the parameters be-
fore the SPP layer were frozen. This signiﬁcantly limited thelearning capability of deep backbone architectures. Girshick et
al. proposed Fast R-CNN [38], a multi-task learning detector
which addressed these two limitations of SPP-net. Fast R-CNN
(like SPP-Net) also computed a feature map for the whole im-
age and extracted ﬁxed-length region features on the feature
map. Different from SPP-net, Fast R-CNN used ROI Pooling
layer to extract region features. ROI pooling layer is a special
case of SPP which only takes a single scale (i.e., only one value
ofNfor theNNgrid) to partition the proposal into ﬁxed
number of divisions, and also backpropagated error signals to
the convolution kernels. After feature extraction, feature vec-
tors were fed into a sequence of fully connected layers before
two sibling output layers: classiﬁcation layer(cls) and regres-
sion layer(reg). Classiﬁcation layer was responsible for gen-
erating softmax probabilities over C+1 classes(C classes plus
one background class), while regression layer encoded 4 real-
valued parameters to reﬁne bounding boxes. In Fast RCNN,
the feature extraction, region classiﬁcation and bounding box
regression steps can all be optimized end-to-end, without extra
cache space to store features (unlike SPP Net). Fast R-CNN
achieved a much better detection accuracy than R-CNN and
SPP-net, and had a better training and inference speed.
Despite the progress in learning detectors, the proposal gen-
eration step still relied on traditional methods such as Selec-
tive Search [45] or Edge Boxes [48], which were based on low-
level visual cues and could not be learned in a data-driven man-
ner. To address this issue, Faster R-CNN [34] was developed
which relied on a novel proposal generator: Region Proposal
Network(RPN). This proposal generator could be learned via
supervised learning methods. RPN is a fully convolutional net-
work which takes an image of arbitrary size and generates a set
of object proposals on each position of the feature map. The
network slid over the feature map using an nnsliding win-
dow, and generated a feature vector for each position. The fea-
ture vector was then fed into two sibling output branches, ob-
ject classiﬁcation layer (which classiﬁed whether the proposal
was an object or not) and bounding box regression layer. These
results were then fed into the ﬁnal layer for the actual object
7

==== Page 8 ====
classiﬁcation and bounding box localization. RPN could be in-
serted into Fast R-CNN and thus the whole framework could be
optimized in an end-to-end manner on training data. This way
RPN enabled proposal generation in a data driven manner, and
was also able to enjoy the discriminative power of deep back-
bone networks. Faster R-CNN was able to make predictions
at 5FPS on GPU and achieved state-of-the-art results on many
public benchmark datasets, such as Pascal VOC 2007, 2012 and
MSCOCO. Currently, there are huge number of detector vari-
ants based on Faster R-CNN for different usage [49, 39, 50, 51].
Faster R-CNN computed feature map of the input image and
extracted region features on the feature map, which shared fea-
ture extraction computation across different regions. However,
the computation was not shared in the region classiﬁcation step,
where each feature vector still needed to go through a sequence
of FC layers separately. Such extra computation could be ex-
tremely large as each image may have hundreds of proposals.
Simply removing the fully connected layers would result in
the drastic decline of detection performance, as the deep net-
work would have reduced the spatial information of propos-
als. Dai et al. [52] proposed Region-based Fully Convolutional
Networks ( R-FCN ) which shared the computation cost in the
region classiﬁcation step. R-FCN generated a Position Sen-
sitive Score Map which encoded relative position information
of different classes, and used a Position Sensitive ROI Pooling
layer (PSROI Pooling) to extract spatial-aware region features
by encoding each relative position of the target regions. The ex-
tracted feature vectors maintained spatial information and thus
the detector achieved competitive results compared to Faster R-
CNN without region-wise fully connected layer operations.
Another issue with Faster R-CNN was that it used a sin-
gle deep layer feature map to make the ﬁnal prediction. This
made it difﬁcult to detect objects at different scales. In partic-
ular, it was difﬁcult to detect small objects. In DCNN feature
representations, deep layer features are semantically-strong but
spatially-weak, while shallow layer features are semantically-
weak but spatially-strong. Lin et al. [39] exploited this property
and proposed Feature Pyramid Networks( FPN ) which com-bined deep layer features with shallow layer features to enable
object detection in feature maps at different scales. The main
idea was to strengthen the spatially strong shallow layer fea-
tures with rich semantic information from the deeper layers.
FPN achieved signiﬁcant progress in detecting multi-scale ob-
jects and has been widely used in many other domains such as
video detection [53, 54] and human pose recognition [55, 56].
Most instance segmentation algorithms are extended from
vanilla object detection algorithms. Early methods [57, 58, 59]
commonly generated segment proposals, followed by Fast
RCNN for segments classiﬁcation. Later, Dai et al. [59] pro-
posed a multi-stage algorithm named “MNC” which divided the
whole detection framework into multiple stages and predicted
segmentation masks from the learned bounding box propos-
als, which were later categorized by region classiﬁers. These
early works performed bbox and mask prediction in multiple
stages. To make the whole process more ﬂexible, He et al. [3]
proposed Mask R-CNN , which predicted bounding boxes and
segmentation masks in parallel based on the proposals and re-
ported state-of-the-art results. Based on Mask R-CNN, Huang
et al. [60] proposed a mask-quality aware framework, named
Mask Scoring R-CNN, which learned the quality of the pre-
dicted masks and calibrated the misalignment between mask
quality and mask conﬁdence score.
Figure 4 gives an overview of the detection frameworks for
several representative two-stage detectors.
3.2.2. One-stage Detectors
Different from two-stage detection algorithms which divide
the detection pipeline into two parts: proposal generation and
region classiﬁcation; one-stage detectors do not have a sepa-
rate stage for proposal generation (or learning a proposal gen-
eration). They typically consider all positions on the image as
potential objects, and try to classify each region of interest as
either background or a target object.
One of the early successful one-stage detectors based on deep
learning was developed by Sermanet et al. [61] named Over-
Feat. OverFeat performed object detection by casting DCNN
8

==== Page 9 ====
SPP-netSS 
Proposal
Input 
ImageRCNNFor each region Store all region 
feats in Cache
Fast RCNNC+1 Softmax
Regressors
C SVMs
Regressors
~2k
proposalsCrop 
Region Resize
224x224CNN
Feature 
VectorStage 1 Stage 2
SS 
Proposal
Input 
Image
~2k
proposals
CNN
Crop 
Region
For each regionSPP 
LayerStore all region 
feats in Cache
C SVMs
Regressors
…
Concate
SS 
Proposal
Input 
Image
~2k
proposals
Crop 
RegionROI 
Layer
For each regionFC
 FCFaster RCNNC+1 Softmax
RegressorsCNN
Input 
Image
Feature map
ROI 
Layer
On each spatial 
locationFC
 FC
RPNCNN
2 Softmax
RegressorsFor each region
R-FCNC+1 Softmax
RegressorsCNN
Input 
Image
1x1 
Conv
RPNPosition -sensitive 
feature map
PsROI
Pooling
Stage 1Stage 2
Stage 1 Stage 2Stage 1 Stage 2
Stage 1 Stage 2
Feature map
For each region
CNNFigure 4: Overview of different two-stage detection frameworks for generic object detection. Red dotted rectangles denote the outputs that deﬁne the loss functions.
classiﬁer into a fully convolutional object detector. Object de-
tection can be viewed as a ”multi-region classiﬁcation” prob-
lem, and thus OverFeat extended the original classiﬁer into de-
tector by viewing the last FC layers as 1x1 convolutional layers
to allow arbitrary input. The classiﬁcation network output a grid
of predictions on each region of the input to indicate the pres-
ence of an object. After identifying the objects, bounding box
regressors were learned to reﬁne the predicted regions based on
the same DCNN features of classiﬁer. In order to detect multi-
scale objects, the input image was resized into multiple scales
which were fed into the network. Finally, the predictions across
all the scales were merged together. OverFeat showed signiﬁ-
cant speed strength compared with RCNN by sharing the com-
putation of overlapping regions using convolutional layers, and
only a single pass forward through the network was required.
However, the training of classiﬁers and regressors were sepa-
rated without being jointly optimized.
Later, Redmon et al. [40] developed a real-time detector
called YOLO (You Only Look Once). YOLO considered ob-
ject detection as a regression problem and spatially divided the
whole image into ﬁxed number of grid cells (e.g. using a 77
grid). Each cell was considered as a proposal to detect the pres-ence of one or more objects. In the original implementation,
each cell was considered to contain the center of (upto) two ob-
jects. For each cell, a prediction was made which comprised
the following information: whether that location had an object,
the bounding box coordinates and size(width and height), and
the class of the object. The whole framework was a single net-
work and it omitted proposal generation step which could be
optimized in an end-to-end manner. Based on a carefully de-
signed lightweight architecture, YOLO could make prediction
at 45 FPS, and reach 155 FPS with a more simpliﬁed backbone.
However, YOLO faced some challenges: i) it could detect upto
only two objects at a given location, which made it difﬁcult to
detect small objects and crowded objects [40]. ii) only the last
feature map was used for prediction, which was not suitable for
predicting objects at multiple scales and aspect ratios.
In 2016, Liu et al. proposed another one-stage detector
Single-Shot Mulibox Detector ( SSD) [42] which addressed the
limitations of YOLO. SSD also divided images into grid cells,
but in each grid cell, a set of anchors with multiple scales and
aspect-ratios were generated to discretize the output space of
bounding boxes (unlike predicting from ﬁxed grid cells adopted
in YOLO). Each anchor was reﬁned by 4-value offsets learned
9

==== Page 10 ====
by the regressors and was assigned (C+1) categorical probabil-
ities by the classiﬁers. In addition, SSD predicted objects on
multiple feature maps, and each of these feature maps was re-
sponsible for detecting a certain scale of objects according to
its receptive ﬁelds. In order to detect large objects and increase
receptive ﬁelds, several extra convolutional feature maps were
added to the original backbone architecture. The whole net-
work was optimized with a weighted sum of localization loss
and classiﬁcation loss over all prediction maps via an end-to-
end training scheme. The ﬁnal prediction was made by merg-
ing all detection results from different feature maps. In order to
avoid huge number of negative proposals dominating training
gradients, hard negative mining was used to train the detector.
Intensive data augmentation was also applied to improve de-
tection accuracy. SSD achieved comparable detection accuracy
with Faster R-CNN but enjoyed the ability to do real-time in-
ference.
Without proposal generation to ﬁlter easy negative samples,
the class imbalance between foreground and background is a
severe problem in one-stage detector. Lin et al. [43] proposed
a one-stage detector RetinaNet which addressed class imbal-
ance problem in a more ﬂexible manner. RetinaNet used focal
loss which suppressed the gradients of easy negative samples
instead of simply discarding them. Further, they used feature
pyramid networks to detect multi-scale objects at different lev-
els of feature maps. Their proposed focal loss outperformed
naive hard negative mining strategy by large margins.
Redmon et al. proposed an improved YOLO version,
YOLOv2 [41] which signiﬁcantly improved detection perfor-
mance but still maintained real-time inference speed. YOLOv2
adopted a more powerful deep convolutional backbone archi-
tecture which was pre-trained on higher resolution images from
ImageNet(from 224224to448448), and thus the weights
learned were more sensitive to capturing ﬁne-grained informa-
tion. In addition, inspired by the anchor strategy used in SSD,
YOLOv2 deﬁned better anchor priors by k-means clustering
from the training data (instead of setting manually). This helped
in reducing optimizing difﬁculties in localization. Finally inte-grating with Batch Normalization layers [62] and multi-scale
training techniques, YOLOv2 achieved state-of-the-art detec-
tion results at that time.
The previous approaches required designing anchor boxes
manually to train a detector. Later a series of anchor-free object
detectors were developed, where the goal was to predict key-
points of the bounding box, instead of trying to ﬁt an object to
an anchor. Law and Deng proposed a novel anchor-free frame-
work CornerNet [63] which detected objects as a pair of cor-
ners. On each position of the feature map, class heatmaps, pair
embeddings and corner offsets were predicted. Class heatmaps
calculated the probabilities of being corners, and corner offsets
were used to regress the corner location. And the pair embed-
dings served to group a pair of corners which belong to the
same objects. Without relying on manually designed anchors
to match objects, CornerNet obtained signiﬁcant improvement
on MSCOCO datasets. Later there were several other variants
of keypoint detection based one-stage detectors [64, 65].
Figures 5 gives an overview of different detection frame-
works for several representative one-stage detectors.
3.3. Backbone Architecture
R-CNN [2] showed adopting convolutional weights from
models pre-trained on large scale image classiﬁcation problem
could provide richer semantic information to train detectors and
enhanced the detection performance. During the later years,
this approach had become the default strategy for most object
detectors. In this section, we will ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce the basic
concept of deep convolutional neural networks and then review
some architectures which are widely used for detection.
3.3.1. Basic Architecture of a CNN
Deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) is a typical deep
neural network and has proven extremely effective in visual
understanding [36, 33]. Deep convolutional neural networks
are commonly composed of a sequence of convolutional layers,
pooling layers, nonlinear activation layers and fully connected
layers (FC layers). Convolutional layer takes an image input
and convolves over it by nnkernels to generate a feature map.
10

==== Page 11 ====
SSD
 YOLOInput 
ImageFeature 
vectorDivide into nxnGridsFor 
each gridCLS Softmax
Extra Added Feature Maps
CornerNet
CLS Heatmaps
Corner offsetsTop-left corner
Pair EmbeddingsCorner 
Pooling
RetinaNet
CNN Resize
Regression
CNN Conv Conv Conv Conv
…Conv
Input 
ImagePrediction 
Module
For each  spatial locationCLS Softmax
Regression
3x3 
Conv
Extra Added Feature 
Maps
CNN Conv Conv Conv Conv
…Conv
Input 
ImageFeature 
PyramidFeature 
PyramidFeature 
PyramidFeature 
PyramidFeature 
Pyramid…
…Conv
For each  spatial locationFocal Loss
Regression
Conv
Input 
ImageCNN
Conv
Conv
Bottom -right cornerPrediction 
Module
Feature 
map
For each  spatial location
Prediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModulePrediction 
Module3x3 
Conv
Prediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModulePrediction 
ModuleFigure 5: Overview of different one-stage detection frameworks for generic object detection. Red rectangles denotes the outputs that deﬁne the objective functions.
The generated feature map can be regarded as a multi-channel
image and each channel represents different information about
the image. Each pixel in the feature map (named neuron) is
connected to a small portion of adjacent neurons from the pre-
vious map, which is called the receptive ﬁeld. After generating
feature maps, a non-linear activation layer is applied. Pooling
layers are used to summarize the signals within the receptive
ﬁelds, to enlarge receptive ﬁelds as well as reduce computation
cost, .
With the combination of a sequence of convolutional layers,
pooling layers and non-linear activation layers, the deep convo-
lutional neural network is built. The whole network can be op-
timized via a deﬁned loss function by gradient-based optimiza-
tion method (stochastic gradient descent [66], Adam [67], etc.).
A typical convolutional neural network is AlexNet [33], which
contains ﬁve convolutional layers, three max-pooling layers and
three fully connected layers. Each convolutional layer is fol-
lowed by a ReLU [68] non-linear activation layer.
3.3.2. CNN Backbone for Object Detection
In this section, we will review some architectures which are
widely used in object detection tasks with state-of-the-art re-
sults, such as VGG16 [34, 38], ResNet [1, 52], ResNeXt [43]
and Hourglass [63].
VGG16 [69] was developed based on AlexNet. VGG16is composed of ﬁve groups of convolutional layers and three
FC layers. There are two convolutional layers in the ﬁrst two
groups and three convolutional layers in the next three groups.
Between each group, a Max Pooling layer is applied to decrease
spatial dimension. VGG16 showed that increasing depth of
networks by stacking convolutional layers could increase the
model’s expression capability, and led to a better performance.
However, increasing model depth to 20 layers by simply stack-
ing convolutional layers led to optimization challenges with
SGD. The performance declined signiﬁcantly and was inferior
to shallower models, even during the training stages. Based
on this observation, He et al. [1] proposed ResNet which re-
duced optimization difﬁculties by introducing shortcut connec-
tions. Here, a layer could skip the nonlinear transformation and
directly pass the values to the next layer as is (thus giving us an
implicit identity layer). This is given as:
xl+1=xl+fl+1(xl;) (6)
wherexlis the input feature in l-th layer and fl+1denotes op-
erations on input xlsuch as convolution, normalization or non-
linear activation. fl+1(xl;)is the residual function to xl, so
the feature map of any deep layer can be viewed as the sum of
the activation of shallow layer and the residual function. Short-
cut connection creates a highway which directly propagates the
11

==== Page 12 ====
gradients from deep layers to shallow units and thus, signiﬁ-
cantly reduces training difﬁculty. With residual blocks effec-
tively training networks, the model depth could be increased
(e.g. from 16 to 152), allowing us to train very high capacity
models. Later, He et al. [70] proposed a pre-activation variant of
ResNet, named ResNet-v2. Their experiments showed appro-
priate ordering of the Batch Normalization [62] could further
perform better than original ResNet. This simple but effective
modiﬁcation of ResNet made it possible to successfully train
a network with more than 1000 layers, and still enjoyed im-
proved performance due to the increase in depth. Huang et al.
argued that although ResNet reduced the training difﬁculty via
shortcut connection, it did not fully utilize features from previ-
ous layers. The original features in shallow layers were missing
in element-wise operation and thus could not be directly used
later. They proposed DenseNet [71], which retained the shallow
layer features, and improved information ﬂow, by concatenat-
ing the input with the residual output instead of element-wise
addition:
xl+1=xlfl+1(xl;) (7)
wheredenotes concatenation. Chen [72] et al. argued that
in DenseNet, the majority of new exploited features from shal-
low layers were duplicated and incurred high computation cost.
Integrating the advantages of both ResNet and DenseNet, they
propose a Dual Path Network(DPN) which divides xlchannels
into two parts: xd
landxr
l.xd
lwas used for dense connec-
tion computation and xr
lwas used for element-wise summation,
with unshared residual learning branch fd
l+1andfr
l+1. The ﬁnal
result was the concatenated output of the two branches:
xl+1= (xr
l+fr
l+1(xr
l;r))(xd
lfd
l+1(xd
l;d)) (8)
Based on ResNet, Xie et al. [73] proposed ResNeXt which
considerably reduced computation and memory cost while
maintaining comparable classiﬁcation accuracy. ResNeXt
adopted group convolution layers [33] which sparsely connects
feature map channels to reduce computation cost. By increas-ing group number to keep computation cost consistent to the
original ResNet, ResNeXt captures richer semantic feature rep-
resentation from the training data and thus improves backbone
accuracy. Later, Howard et al. [74] set the coordinates equal
to number of channels of each feature map and developed Mo-
bileNet. MobileNet signiﬁcantly reduced computation cost as
well as number of parameters without signiﬁcant loss in clas-
siﬁcation accuracy. This model was speciﬁcally designed for
usage on a mobile platform.
In addition to increasing model depth, some efforts explored
beneﬁts from increasing model width to improve the learning
capacity. Szegedy et al. proposed GoogleNet with an inception
module [75] which applied different scale convolution kernels
(11;33and55) on the same feature map in a given
layer. This way it captured multi-scale features and summa-
rized these features together as an output feature map. Bet-
ter versions of this model were developed later with different
design of choice of convolution kernels [76], and introducing
residual blocks [77].
The network structures introduced above were all designed
for image classiﬁcation. Typically these models trained on Im-
ageNet are adopted as initialization of the model used for object
detection. However, directly applying this pre-trained model
from classiﬁcation to detection is sub-optimal due to a poten-
tial conﬂict between classiﬁcation and detection tasks. Specif-
ically, i) classiﬁcation requires large receptive ﬁelds and wants
to maintain spatial invariance. Thus multiple downsampling op-
eration (such as pooling layer) are applied to decrease feature
map resolution. The feature maps generated are low-resolution
and spatially invariant and have large receptive ﬁelds. However,
in detection, high-resolution spatial information is required to
correctly localize objects; and ii) classiﬁcation makes predic-
tions on a single feature map, while detection requires feature
maps with multiple representations to detect objects at multi-
ple scales. To bridge the difﬁculties between the two tasks,
Li et al. introduced DetNet [78] which was designed speciﬁ-
cally for detection. DetNet kept high resolution feature maps
for prediction with dilated convolutions to increase receptive
12

==== Page 13 ====
ﬁelds. In addition, DetNet detected objects on multi-scale fea-
ture maps, which provided richer information. DetNet was pre-
trained on large scale classiﬁcation dataset while the network
structure was designed for detection.
Hourglass Network [79] is another architecture, which was
not designed speciﬁcally for image classiﬁcation. Hourglass
Network ﬁrst appeared in human pose recognition task [79],
and was a fully convolutional structure with a sequence of hour-
glass modules. Hourglass module ﬁrst downsampled the input
image via a sequence of convolutional layer or pooling layer,
and upsampled the feature map via deconvolutional operation.
To avoid information loss in downsampling stage, skip con-
nection were used between downsampling and upsampling fea-
tures. Hourglass module could capture both local and global
information and thus was very suitable for object detection.
Currently Hourglass Network is widely used in state-of-the-art
detection frameworks [63, 64, 65].
3.4. Proposal Generation
Proposal generation plays a very important role in the object
detection framework. A proposal generator generates a set of
rectangle bounding boxes, which are potentially objects. These
proposals are then used for classiﬁcation and localization re-
ﬁnement. We categorize proposal generation methods into four
categories: traditional computer vision methods, anchor-based
supervised learning methods, keypoint based methods and other
methods. Notably, both one-stage detectors and two-stage de-
tectors generate proposals, the main difference is two-stage de-
tectors generates a sparse set of proposals with only foreground
or background information, while one-stage detectors consider
each region in the image as a potential proposal, and accord-
ingly estimates the class and bounding box coordinates of po-
tential objects at each location.
3.4.1. Traditional Computer Vision Methods
These methods generate proposals in images using tradi-
tional computer vision methods based on low-level cues, such
as edges, corners, color, etc. These techniques can be catego-
rized into three principles: i) computing the ’objectness score’of a candidate box; ii) merging super-pixels from original im-
ages; iii) generating multiple foreground and background seg-
ments;
Objectness Score based methods predict an objectness score
of each candidate box measuring how likely it may contain an
object. Arbelaez et al. [80] assigned objectness score to propos-
als by classiﬁcation based on visual cues such as color contrast,
edge density and saliency. Rahtu et al.[81] revisited the idea of
Arbelaez et al. [80] and introduced a more efﬁcient cascaded
learning method to rank the objectness score of candidate pro-
posals.
Superpixels Merging is based on merging superpixels gen-
erated from segmentation results. Selective Search [45] was a
proposal generation algorithm based on merging super-pixels.
It computed the multiple hierarchical segments generated by
segmentation method [82], which were merged according to
their visual factors(color, areas, etc.), and ﬁnally bounding
boxes were placed on the merged segments. Manen et al. [83]
proposed a similar idea to merge superpixels. The difference
was that the weight of the merging function was learned and the
merging process was randomized. Selective Search is widely
used in many detection frameworks due to its efﬁciency and
high recall compared to other traditional methods.
Seed Segmentation starts with multiple seed regions, and for
each seed, foreground and background segments are generated.
To avoid building up hierarchical segmentation, CPMC [84]
generated a set of overlapping segments initialized with di-
verse seeds. Each proposal segment was the solution of a bi-
nary(foreground or background) segmentation problem. Enreds
and Hoiem [85] combined the idea of Selective Search [45] and
CPMC [84]. It started with super-pixels and merged them with
new designed features. These merged segments were used as
seeds to generate larger segments, which was similar to CPMC.
However, producing high quality segmentation masks is very
time-consuming and it’s not applicable to large scale datasets.
The primary advantage of these traditional computer vision
methods is that they are very simple and can generate propos-
als with high recall (e.g. on medium scale datasets such as
13

==== Page 14 ====
Pascal VOC). However, these methods are mainly based on
low level visual cues such as color or edges. They cannot be
jointly optimized with the whole detection pipeline. Thus they
are unable to exploit the power of large scale datasets to im-
prove representation learning. On challenging datasets such as
MSCOCO [86], traditional computer vision methods struggled
to generate high quality proposals due to these limitations.
3.4.2. Anchor-based Methods
One large family of supervised proposal generators is anchor-
based methods. They generate proposals based on pre-deﬁned
anchors. Ren et al. proposed Region Proposal Network
(RPN) [34] to generate proposals in a supervised way based
on deep convolutional feature maps. The network slid over the
entire feature map using 33convolution ﬁlters. For each
position,kanchors (or initial estimates of bounding boxes) of
varying size and aspect ratios were considered. These sizes and
ratios allowed for matching objects at different scales in the
entire image. Based on the ground truth bonding boxes, the ob-
ject locations were matched with the most appropriate anchors
to obtain the supervision signal for the anchor estimation. A
256 dimensional feature vector was extracted from each an-
chor and was fed into two sibling branches - classiﬁcation layer
and regression layer. Classiﬁcation branch was responsible
for modeling objectness score while regression branch encoded
four real-values to reﬁne location of the bounding box from the
original anchor estimation. Based on the ground truth, each an-
chor was predicted to either be an object, or just background by
the classiﬁcation branch (See Fig. 6). Later, SSD [42] adopted
a similar idea of anchors in RPN by using multi-scale anchors
to match objects. The main difference was that SSD assigned
categorical probabilities to each anchor proposal, while RPN
ﬁrst evaluated whether the anchor proposal was foreground or
background and performed the categorical classiﬁcation in the
next stage.
Despite promising performance, the anchor priors are manu-
ally designed with multiple scales and aspect ratios in a heuris-
tic manner. These design choices may not be optimal, anddifferent datasets would require different anchor design strate-
gies. Many efforts have been made to improve the design
choice of anchors. Zhang et al. proposed Single Shot Scale-
invariant Face Detector (S3FD) [87] based on SSD with care-
fully designed anchors to match the objects. According to the
effective receptive ﬁeld [88] of different feature maps, differ-
ent anchor priors were designed. Zhu et al. [89] introduced
an anchor design method for matching small objects by en-
larging input image size and reducing anchor strides. Xie et
al. proposed Dimension-Decomposition Region Proposal Net-
work (DeRPN) [90] which decomposed the dimension of an-
chor boxes based on RPN. DeRPN used an anchor string mech-
anism to independently match objects width and height. This
helped match objects with large scale variance and reduced the
searching space.
Ghodrati et al. developed DeepProposals [91] which pre-
dicted proposals on the low-resolution deeper layer feature
map. These were then projected back onto the high-resolution
shallow layer feature maps, where they are further reﬁned. Red-
mon et al. [41] designed anchor priors by learning priors from
the training data using k-means clustering. Later, Zhang et
al. introduced Single-Shot Reﬁnement Neural Network (Re-
ﬁneDet) [92] which reﬁned the manually deﬁned anchors in
two steps. In the ﬁrst step, ReﬁneDet learned a set of local-
ization offsets based on the original hand-designed anchors and
these anchors were reﬁned by the learned offsets. In the sec-
ond stage, a new set of localization offsets were learned based
on the reﬁned anchors from the ﬁrst step for further reﬁne-
ment. This cascaded optimization framework signiﬁcantly im-
proved the anchor quality and ﬁnal prediction accuracy in a
data-driven manner. Cai et al. proposed Cascade R-CNN [49]
which adopted a similar idea as ReﬁneDet by reﬁning proposals
in a cascaded way. Yang et al. [93] modeled anchors as func-
tions implemented by neural networks which was computed
from customized anchors. Their method MetaAnchor showed
comprehensive improvement compared to other manually de-
ﬁned methods but the customized anchors were still designed
manually.
14

==== Page 15 ====
Feature Map For Prediction3x3conv, ReLUFeature Vectorreg layer clslayer2*K scores 4*K offsets
….
K anchors…...
Figure 6: Diagram of RPN [34]. Each position of the feature map connects
with a sliding windows, followed with two sibling branches.
3.4.3. Keypoints-based Methods
Another proposal generation approach is based on keypoint
detection, which can be divided into two families: corner-based
methods and center-based methods. Corner-based methods
predict bounding boxes by merging pairs of corners learned
from the feature map. Denet [94] reformulated the object detec-
tion problem in a probabilistic way. For each point on the fea-
ture map, Denet modeled the distribution of being one of the 4
corner types of objects (top-left, top-right, bottom-left, bottom-
right), and applied a naive bayesian classiﬁers over each cor-
ner of the objects to estimate the conﬁdence score of a bound-
ing box. This corner-based algorithm eliminated the design of
anchors and became a more effective method to produce high
quality proposals. Later based on Denet, Law and Deng pro-
posed CornerNet [63] which directly modeled categorical infor-
mation on corners. CornerNet modeled information of top-left
and bottom-right corners with novel feature embedding meth-
ods and corner pooling layer to correctly match keypoints be-
longing to the same objects, obtaining state-of-the-art results on
public benchmarks. For center-based methods , the probability
of being the center of the objects is predicted on each position
of the feature map, and the height and width are directly re-
gressed without any anchor priors. Zhu et al. [95] presented a
feature-selection-anchor-free (FSAF) framework which could
be plugged into one-stage detectors with FPN structure. In
FSAF, an online feature selection block is applied to train multi-level center-based branches attached in each level of the feature
pyramid. During training, FSAF dynamically assigned each ob-
ject to the most suitable feature level to train the center-based
branch. Similar to FSAF, Zhou et al. proposed a new center-
based framework [64] based on a single Hourglass network [63]
without FPN structure. Furthermore, they applied center-based
method into higher-level problems such as 3D-detection and
human pose recognition, and all achieved state-of-the-art re-
sults. Duan et al. [65] proposed CenterNet, which combined the
idea of center-based methods and corner-based methods. Cen-
terNet ﬁrst predicted bounding boxes by pairs of corners, and
then predicted center probabilities of the initial prediction to
reject easy negatives. CenterNet obtained signiﬁcant improve-
ments compared with baselines. These anchor-free methods
form a promising research direction in the future.
3.4.4. Other Methods
There are some other proposal generation algorithms which
are not based on keypoints or anchors but also offer competi-
tive performances. Lu et al. proposed AZnet [96] which auto-
matically focused on regions of high interest. AZnet adopted a
search strategy that adaptively directed computation resources
to sub-regions which were likely contain objects. For each re-
gion, AZnet predicted two values: zoom indicator and adja-
cency scores. Zoom indicator determined whether to further
divide this region which may contain smaller objects and ad-
jacency scores denoted its objectness. The starting point was
the entire image and each divided sub-region is recursively pro-
cessed in this way until the zoom indicator is too small. AZnet
was better at matching sparse and small objects compared to
RPN’s anchor-object matching approach.
3.5. Feature Representation Learning
Feature Representation Learning is a critical component in
the whole detection framework. Target objects lie in complex
environments and have large variance in scale and aspect ratios.
There is a need to train a robust and discriminative feature em-
bedding of objects to obtain a good detection performance. In
15

==== Page 16 ====
this section, we introduce feature representation learning strate-
gies for object detection. Speciﬁcally, we identify three cate-
gories: multi-scale feature learning, contextual reasoning, and
deformable feature learning.
3.5.1. Multi-scale Feature Learning
Typical object detection algorithms based on deep convo-
lutional networks such as Fast R-CNN [38] and Faster R-
CNN [34] use only a single layer’s feature map to detect ob-
jects. However, detecting objects across large range of scales
and aspect ratios is quite challenging on a single feature map.
Deep convolutional networks learn hierarchical features in dif-
ferent layers which capture different scale information. Specif-
ically, shallow layer features with spatial-rich information have
higher resolution and smaller receptive ﬁelds and thus are more
suitable for detecting small objects, while semantic-rich fea-
tures in deep layers are more robust to illumination, translation
and have larger receptive ﬁelds (but coarse resolutions), and
are more suitable for detecting large objects. When detecting
small objects, high resolution representations are required and
the representation of these objects may not even be available in
the deep layer features, making small object detection difﬁcult.
Some techniques such as dilated/atrous convolutions [97, 52]
were proposed to avoid downsampling, and used the high reso-
lution information even in the deeper layers. At the same time,
detecting large objects in shallow layers are also non-optimal
without large enough receptive ﬁelds. Thus, handling feature
scale issues has become a fundamental research problem within
object detection. There are four main paradigms addressing
multi-scale feature learning problem: Image Pyramid, Predic-
tion Pyramid, Integrated Features and Feature Pyramid. These
are brieﬂy illustrated in the Fig. 7.
Image Pyramid : An intuitive idea is to resize input images
into a number of different scales (Image Pyramid) and to train
multiple detectors, each of which is responsible for a certain
range of scales [98, 99, 100, 101]. During testing, images are
resized to different scales followed by multiple detectors and
the detection results are merged. This can be computationally
predict
predict
predict
predict
predict Fuse
predict
predict
predict
predict
predict
 predict
 predictFigure 7: Four paradigms for multi-scale feature learning. Top Left: Image
Pyramid , which learns multiple detectors from different scale images; Top
Right: Prediction Pyramid , which predicts on multiple feature maps; Bottom
Left: Integrated Features , which predicts on single feature map generated
from multiple features; Bottom Right: Feature Pyramid which combines the
structure of Prediction Pyramid andIntegrated Features .
2x Up
FuseTop-Down Features
Bottom -Up Features
Figure 8: General framework for feature combination. Top-down features are 2
times up-sampled and fuse with bottom-up features. The fuse methods can be
element-wise sum, multiplication, concatenation and so on. Convolution and
normalization layers can be inserted in to this general framework to enhance
semantic information and reduce memory cost.
expensive. Liu et al. [101] ﬁrst learned a light-weight scale-
aware network to resize images such that all objects were in
a similar scale. This was followed by learning a single scale
detector. Singh et. al. [98] conducted comprehensive exper-
iments on small object detection. They argued that learning a
single scale-robust detector to handle all scale objects was much
more difﬁcult than learning scale-dependent detectors with im-
age pyramids. In their work, they proposed a novel framework
Scale Normalization for Image Pyramids (SNIP) [98] which
trained multiple scale-dependent detectors and each of them
was responsible for a certain scale objects.
Integrated Features : Another approach is to construct a
single feature map by combining features in multiple layers
and making ﬁnal predictions based on the new constructed
map [102, 51, 50, 103, 104, 105]. By fusing spatially rich shal-
low layer features and semantic-rich deep layer features, the
16

==== Page 17 ====
new constructed features contain rich information and thus can
detect objects at different scales. These combinations are com-
monly achieved by using skip connections [1]. Feature nor-
malization is required as feature norms of different layers have
a high variance. Bell et al. proposed Inside-Outside Network
(ION) [51] which cropped region features from different lay-
ers via ROI Pooling [38], and combined these multi-scale re-
gion features for the ﬁnal prediction. Kong et. al. proposed
HyperNet [50] which adopted a similar idea as IoN. They care-
fully designed high resolution hyper feature maps by integrat-
ing intermediate and shallow layer features to generate pro-
posals and detect objects. Deconvolutional layers were used
to up-sample deep layer feature maps and batch normaliza-
tion layers were used to normalize input blobs in their work.
The constructed hyper feature maps could also implicitly en-
code contextual information from different layers. Inspired
by ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation algorithms which integrate high-
order representation instead of exploiting simple ﬁrst-order rep-
resentations of object proposals, Wang et al. proposed a novel
framework Multi-scale Location-aware Kernel Representation
(MLKP) [103] which captured high-order statistics of proposal
features and generated more discriminative feature representa-
tions efﬁciently. The combined feature representation was more
descriptive and provides both semantic and spatial information
for both classiﬁcation and localization.
Prediction Pyramid : Liu et al.’s SSD [42] combined coarse
and ﬁne features from multiple layers together. In SSD, pre-
dictions were made from multiple layers, where each layer
was responsible for a certain scale of objects. Later, many ef-
forts [106, 107, 108] followed this principle to detect multi-
scale objects. Yang et al. [100] also exploited appropriate fea-
ture maps to generate certain scale of object proposals and these
feature maps were fed into multiple scale-dependent classiﬁers
to predict objects. In their work, cascaded rejection classiﬁers
were learned to reject easy background proposals in early stages
to accelerate detection speed. Multi-scale Deep Convolutional
Neural Network (MSCNN) [106] applied deconvolutional lay-
ers on multiple feature maps to improve their resolutions, andlater these reﬁned feature maps were used to make predic-
tions. Liu et al. proposed a Receptive Field Block Net (RF-
BNet) [108] to enhance the robustness and receptive ﬁelds via
a receptive ﬁeld block (RFB block). RFB block adopted simi-
lar ideas as the inception module [75] which captured features
from multiple scale and receptive ﬁelds via multiple branches
with different convolution kernels and ﬁnally merged them to-
gether.
Feature Pyramid : To combine the advantage of Integrated
Features and Prediction Pyramid, Lin et al. proposed Fea-
ture Pyramid Network(FPN) [39] which integrated different
scale features with lateral connections in a top-down fashion
to build a set of scale invariant feature maps, and multiple
scale-dependent classiﬁers were learned on these feature pyra-
mids. Speciﬁcally, the deep semantic-rich features were used to
strengthen the shallow spatially-rich features. These top-down
and lateral features were combined by element-wise summation
or concatenation, with small convolutions reducing the dimen-
sions. FPN showed signiﬁcant improvement in object detec-
tion, as well as other applications, and achieved state-of-the art
results in learning multi-scale features. Many variants of FPN
were later developed [109, 110, 109, 111, 112, 92, 113, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, 119], with modiﬁcations to the feature pyra-
mid block (see Fig. 8). Kong et al. [120] and Zhang et. al. [92]
built scale invariant feature maps with lateral connections. Dif-
ferent from FPN which generated region proposals followed by
categorical classiﬁers, their methods omitted proposal gener-
ation and thus were more efﬁcient than original FPN. Ren et
al. [109] and Jeong et al. [110] developed a novel structure
which gradually and selectively encoded contextual informa-
tion between different layer features. Inspired by super resolu-
tion tasks [121, 122], Zhou et al. [111] developed high resolu-
tion feature maps using a novel transform block which explic-
itly explored the inter-scale consistency nature across multiple
detection scales.
17

==== Page 18 ====
3.5.2. Region Feature Encoding
For two-stage detectors, region feature encoding is a critical
step to extract features from proposals into ﬁxed length feature
vectors. In R-CNN, Girshick et al. [2] cropped region proposals
from the whole image and resized the cropped regions into ﬁxed
sized patches( 224224) via bilinear interpolation, followed
by a deep convolution feature extractor. Their method encoded
high resolution region features but the computation was expen-
sive.
Later Girshick et al. [38] and Ren [34] proposed ROI Pooling
layer to encode region features. ROI Pooling divided each re-
gion intonncells (e.g. 77by default) and only the neuron
with the maximum signal would go ahead in the feedforward
stage. This is similar to max-pooling, but across (potentially)
different sized regions. ROI Pooling extracted features from
the down-sampled feature map and as a result struggled to han-
dle small objects. Dai [59] proposed ROI Warping layer which
encoded region features via bilinear interpolation. Due to the
downsampling operation in DCNN, there can be a misalign-
ment of the object position in the original image and the down-
sampled feature maps, which RoI Pooling and RoI Warping lay-
ers are not able to handle. Instead of quantizing grids border as
ROI Warping and ROI Pooling do, He et al. [3] proposed ROI
Align layer which addressed the quantization issue by bilinear
interpolation at fractionally sampled positions within each grid.
Based on ROI Align, Jiang et al. [123] presented Precise ROI
Pooing (PrROI Pooling), which avoided any quantization of co-
ordinates and had a continuous gradient on bounding box coor-
dinates.
In order to enhance spatial information of the downsampled
region features, Dai et al. [52] proposed Position Sensitive ROI
Pooing (PSROI Pooling) which kept relative spatial information
of downsampled features. Each channel of generated region
feature map only corresponded to a subset channels of input re-
gion according to its relative spatial position. Based on PSROI
Pooling, Zhai et al. [124] presented feature selective networks
to learn robust region features by exploiting disparities among
sub-region and aspect ratios. The proposed network encodedsub-region and aspect ratio information which were selectively
pooled to reﬁne initial region features by a light-weight head.
Later, more algorithms were proposed to well encode region
features from different viewpoints. Zhu et al. proposed Cou-
pleNet [125] which extracted region features by combining out-
puts generated from both ROI Pooling layer and PSROI Pool-
ing layer. ROI Pooling layer extracted global region informa-
tion but struggled for objects with high occlusion while PSROI
Pooling layer focused more on local information. CoupleNet
enhanced features generated from ROI Pooling and PSROI
Pooling by element-wise summation and generated more pow-
erful features. Later Dai et al. proposed Deformable ROI Pool-
ing [97] which generalized aligned RoI pooling by learning an
offset for each grid and adding it to the grid center. The sub-grid
start with a regular ROI Pooling layer to extract initial region
features and the extracted features were used to regress offset
by an auxiliary network. Deformable ROI Pooling can auto-
matically model the image content without being constrained
by ﬁxed receptive ﬁelds.
3.5.3. Contextual Reasoning
Contextual information plays an important role in object de-
tection. Objects often tend to appear in speciﬁc environments
and sometimes also coexist with other objects. For each ex-
ample, birds commonly ﬂy in the sky. Effectively using con-
textual information can help improve detection performance,
especially for detecting objects with insufﬁcient cues(small ob-
ject, occlusion etc.) Learning the relationship between objects
with their surrounding context can improve detector’s ability to
understand the scenario. For traditional object detection algo-
rithms, there have been several efforts exploring context [126],
but for object detection based on deep learning, context has not
been extensively explored. This is because convolutional net-
works implicitly already capture contextual information from
hierarchical feature representations. However, some recent ef-
forts [1, 127, 128, 129, 3, 59, 3, 130, 131, 106] still try to
exploit contextual information. Some works [132] have even
shown that in some cases context information may even harm
the detection performance. In this section we review contextual
18

==== Page 19 ====
reasoning for object detection from two aspects: global context
andregion context .
Global context reasoning refers to learning from the context
in the whole image. Unlike traditional detectors which attempt
to classify speciﬁc regions in the image as objects, the idea here
is to use the contextual information (i.e., information from the
rest of the image) to classify a particular region of interest. For
example, detecting a baseball ball from an image can be chal-
lenging for a traditional detector (as it may be confused with
balls from other sports); but if the contextual information from
the rest of the image is used (e.g. baseball ﬁeld, players, bat), it
becomes easier to identify the baseball ball object.
Some representative efforts include ION [51], DeepId [127]
and improved version of Faster R-CNN [1]. In ION, Bell et
al. used recurrent neural network to encode contextual infor-
mation across the whole image from four directions. Ouyang
et al. [127] learned a categorical score for each image which
is used as contextual features concatenated with the object de-
tection results. He et al. [1] extracted feature embedding of
the entire image and concatenate it with region features to im-
prove detection results. In addition, some methods [129, 3, 59,
133, 134, 135, 136] exploit global contextual information via
semantic segmentation. Due to precise pixel-level annotation,
segmentation feature maps capture strong spatial information.
He et al. [3] and Dai et al. [59] learn uniﬁed instance seg-
mentation framework and optimize the detector with pixel-level
supervision. They jointly optimized detection and segmenta-
tion objectives as a multi-task optimization. Though segmenta-
tion can signiﬁcantly improve detection performance, obtaining
the pixel-level annotation is very expensive. Zhao et al. [133]
optimized detectors with pseudo segmentation annotation and
showed promising results. Zhang et al.’s work Detection with
Enriched Semantics (DES) [134], introduced contextual infor-
mation by learning a segmentation mask without segemtation
annotations. It also jointly optimized object detection and seg-
mentation objectives and enriched original feature map with a
more discriminative feature map.
Region Context Reasoning encodes contextual informationsurrounding regions and learns interactions between the objects
with their surrounding area. Directly modeling different lo-
cations and categories objects relations with the contextual is
very challenging. Chen et al. proposed Spatial Memory Net-
work (SMN) [130] which introduced a spatial memory based
module. The spatial memory module captured instance-level
contexts by assembling object instances back into a pseudo
”image” representations which were later used for object re-
lations reasoning. Liu et al. proposed Structure Inference Net
(SIN) [137] which formulated object detection as a graph in-
ference problem by considering scene contextual information
and object relationships. In SIN, each object was treated as a
graph node and the relationship between different objects were
regarded as graph edges. Hu et al. [138] proposed a lightweight
framework relation network which formulated the interaction
between different objects between their appearance and image
locations. The new proposed framework did not need addi-
tional annotation and showed improvements in object detection
performance. Based on Hu et al., Gu et al. [139] proposed a
fully learnable object detector which proposed a general view-
point that uniﬁed existing region feature extraction methods.
Their proposed method removed heuristic choices in ROI pool-
ing methods and automatically select the most signiﬁcant parts,
including contexts beyond proposals. Another method to en-
code contextual information is to implicitly encode region fea-
tures by adding image features surrounding region proposals
and a large number of approaches have been proposed based
on this idea [131, 106, 140, 141, 142, 143]. In addition to en-
code features from region proposals, Gidaris et al. [131] ex-
tracted features from a number of different sub-regions of the
original object proposals(border regions, central regions, con-
textual regions etc.) and concatenated these features with the
original region features. Similar to their method, [106] ex-
tracted local contexts by enlarging the proposal window size
and concatenating these features with the original ones. Zeng et
al. [142] proposed Gated Bi-Directional CNN (GBDNet) which
extracted features from multi-scale subregions. Notably, GBD-
Net learned a gated function to control the transmission of dif-
19

==== Page 20 ====
ferent region information because not all contextual informa-
tion is helpful for detection.
3.5.4. Deformable Feature Learning
A good detector should be robust to nonrigid deformation of
objects. Before the deep learning era, Deformable Part based
Models(DPMs) [28] had been successfully used for object de-
tection. DPMs represented objects by multiple component parts
using a deformable coding method, making the detector robust
to nonrigid object transformation. In order to enable detec-
tors based on deep learning to model deformations of object
parts, many researchers have developed detection frameworks
to explicitly model object parts [97, 127, 144, 145]. DeepID-
Net [127] developed a deformable-aware pooling layer to en-
code the deformation information across different object cate-
gories. Dai et al. [97] and Zhu et al. [144] designed deformable
convolutional layers which automatically learned the auxiliary
position offsets to augment information sampled in regular sam-
pling locations of the feature map.
4. Learning Strategy
In contrast to image classiﬁcation, object detection requires
optimizing both localization and classiﬁcation tasks, which
makes it more difﬁcult to train robust detectors. In addition,
there are several issues that need to be addressed, such as im-
balance sampling, localization, acceleration etc. Thus there is a
need to develop innovative learning strategies to train effective
and efﬁcient detectors. In this section, we review some of the
learning strategies for object detection.
4.1. Training Stage
In this section, we review the learning strategies for training
object detectors. Speciﬁcally we discuss, data augmentation,
imbalance sampling, cascade learning, localization reﬁnement
and some other learning strategies.
4.1.1. Data Augmentation.
Data augmentation is important for nearly all deep learning
methods as they are often data-hungry and more training dataleads to better results. In object detection, in order to increase
training data as well as generate training patches with multiple
visual properties, Horizontal ﬂips of training images is used in
training Faster R-CNN detector [38]. A more intensive data
augmentation strategy is used in one-stage detectors including
rotation, random crops, expanding and color jittering [42, 106,
146]. This data augmentation strategy has shown signiﬁcant
improvement in detection accuracy.
4.1.2. Imbalance Sampling
In object detection, imbalance of negative and positive sam-
ples is a critical issue. That is, most of the regions of interest
estimated as proposals are in fact just background images. Very
few of them are positive instances (or objects). This results
in problem of imbalance while training detectors. Speciﬁcally,
two issues arise, which need to be addressed: class imbalance
and difﬁculty imbalance. The class imbalance issue is that most
candidate proposals belong to the background and only a few
of proposals contain objects. This results in the background
proposals dominating the gradients during training. The difﬁ-
culty imbalance is closely related to the ﬁrst issue, where due
to the class imbalance, it becomes much easier to classify most
of the background proposals easily, while the objects become
harder to classify. A variety of strategies have been developed
to tackle the class imbalance issue. Two-stage detectors such
as R-CNN and Fast R-CNN will ﬁrst reject majority of nega-
tive samples and keep 2,000 proposals for further classiﬁcation.
In Fast R-CNN [38], negative samples were randomly sampled
from these 2k proposals and the ratio of positive and negative
was ﬁxed as 1:3 in each mini-batch, to further reduce the ad-
verse effects of class imbalance. Random sample can address
class imbalance issue but are not able to fully utilize informa-
tion from negative proposals. Some negative proposals may
contain rich context information about the images, and some
hard proposals can help to improve detection accuracy. To ad-
dress this, Liu et al. [42] proposed hard negative sampling strat-
egy which ﬁxed the foreground and background ratio but sam-
pled most difﬁcult negative proposals for updating the model.
20

==== Page 21 ====
Speciﬁcally, negative proposals with higher classiﬁcation loss
were selected for training.
To address difﬁculty imbalance, most sampling strategies
are based on carefully designed loss functions. For obejct
detection, a multi-class classiﬁer is learned over C+1 cate-
gories(C target categories plus one background category). As-
sume the region is labeled with ground truth class u, andpis the
output discrete probability distribution over C+1 classes( p=
fp0;:::;pCg). The loss function is given by:
Lcls(p;u) = logpu (9)
Lin et al. proposed a novel focal loss[43] which suppressed sig-
nals from easy samples. Instead of discarding all easy samples,
they assigned an importance weight to each sample w.r.t its loss
value as:
LFL= (1 pu)log(pu) (10)
whereandwere parameters to control the importance
weight. The gradient signals of easy samples got suppressed
which led the training process to focus more on hard propos-
als. Li et al. [147] adopt a similar idea from focal loss and
propose a novel gradient harmonizing mechanism (GHM). The
new proposed GHM not only suppressed easy proposals but
also avoided negative impact of outliers. Shrivastava et al. [148]
proposed an online hard example mining strategy which was
based on a similar principle as Liu et al.’s SSD [42] to auto-
matically select hard examples for training. Different from Liu
et al., online hard negative mining only considered difﬁculty
information but ignored categorical information, which meant
the ratio of foreground and background was not ﬁxed in each
mini-batch. They argued that difﬁcult samples played a more
important role than class imbalance in object detection task.
4.1.3. Localization Reﬁnement
An object detector must provide a tight localization predic-
tion (bbox or mask) for each object. To do this, many efforts
reﬁne the preliminary proposal prediction to improve the local-ization. Precise localization is challenging because predictions
are commonly focused on the most discriminative part of the
objects, and not necessarily the region containing the object. In
some scenarios, the detection algorithms are required to make
high quality predictions (high IoU threshold) See Fig. 9 for an
illustration of how a detector may fail in a high IoU threshold
regime. A general approach for localization reﬁnement is to
generate high quality proposals (See Sec 3.4). In this section,
we will review some other methods for localization reﬁnement.
In R-CNN framework, the L-2 auxiliary bounding box regres-
sors were learned to reﬁne localizations, and in Fast R-CNN,
the smooth L1 regressors were learned via an end-to-end train-
ing scheme as:
Lreg(tc;v) =X
i2fx;y;w;hgSmoothL1 (tc
i vi) (11)
SmoothL1 (x) =8
<
:0:5x2ifjxj<1
jxj 0:5otherwise(12)
where the predicted offset is given by tc= (tc
x;tc
y;tc
w;tc
h)for
each target class, and vdenotes ground truth of object bounding
boxes(v= (vx;vy;vw;vh)).x;y;w;h denote bounding box
center, width and height respectively.
Beyond the default localization reﬁnement, some methods
learn auxiliary models to further reﬁne localizations. Gidaris
et al. [131] introduced an iterative bounding box regression
method, where an R-CNN was applied to reﬁne learned predic-
tions. Here the predictions were reﬁned multiple times. Gidaris
et al. [149] proposed LocNet which modeled the distribution of
each bounding box and reﬁned the learned predictions. Both
these approaches required a separate component in the detec-
tion pipeline, and prevent joint optimization.
Some other efforts [150, 151] focus on designing a uni-
ﬁed framework with modiﬁed objective functions. In Multi-
Path Network, Zagoruyko et al. [150] developed an ensemble
of classiﬁers which were optimized with an integral loss target-
ing various quality metrics. Each classiﬁer was optimized for
21

==== Page 22 ====
IoU=0.52Figure 9: Example of failure case of detection in high IoU threshold. Purple box
is ground truth and yellow box is prediction. In low IoU requirement scenario,
this prediction is correct while in high IoU threshold, it’s a false positive due to
insufﬁcient overlap with objects.
a speciﬁc IoU threshold and the ﬁnal prediction results were
merged from these classiﬁers. Tychsen et al. proposed Fitness-
NMS [152] which learned novel ﬁtness score function of IoU
between proposals and objects. They argued that existing detec-
tors aimed to ﬁnd qualiﬁed predictions instead of best predic-
tions and thus highly quality and low quality proposals received
equal importance. Fitness-IoU assigned higher importance to
highly overlapped proposals. They also derived a bounding box
regression loss based on a set of IoU upper bounds to maximum
the IoU of predictions with objects. Inspired by CornerNet [63]
and DeNet [94], Lu et al. [151] proposed a Grid R-CNN which
replaced linear bounding box regressor with the principle of lo-
cating corner keypoints corner-based mechanism.
4.1.4. Cascade Learning
Cascade learning is a coarse-to-ﬁne learning strategy which
collects information from the output of the given classiﬁers to
build stronger classiﬁers in a cascaded manner. Cascade learn-
ing strategy was ﬁrst used by Viola and Jones [17] to train the
robust face detectors. In their models, a lightweight detector
ﬁrst rejects the majority easy negatives and feeds hard propos-
als to train detectors in next stage. For deep learning based
detection algorithms, Yang et al. [153] proposed CRAFT (Cas-
cade Region-proposal-network And FasT-rcnn) which learned
RPN and region classiﬁers with a cascaded learning strategy.
CRAFTS ﬁrst learned a standard RPN followed by a two-class
Fast RCNN which rejected the majority easy negatives. Theremaining samples were used to build the cascade region clas-
siﬁers which consisted of two Fast RCNNs. Yang et al. [100]
introduced layer-wise cascade classiﬁers for different scale ob-
jects in different layers. Multiple classiﬁers were placed on dif-
ferent feature maps and classiﬁers on shallower layers would
reject easy negatives. The remaining samples would be fed into
deeper layers for classiﬁcation. ReﬁneDet [92] and Cascade
R-CNN [49] utilized cascade learning methods in reﬁning ob-
ject locations. They built multi-stage bounding box regressors
and bounding box predictions were reﬁned in each stage trained
with different quality metrics. Cheng et al. [132] observed the
failure cases of Faster RCNN, and noticed that even though the
localization of objects was good, there were several classiﬁca-
tion errors. They attributed this to sub-optimal feature repre-
sentation due to sharing of features and joint multi-task opti-
mization, for classiﬁcation and regression; and they also argued
that the large receptive ﬁeld of Faster RCNN induce too much
noise in the detection process. They found that vanilla RCNN
was robust to these issues. Thus, they built a cascade detection
system based on Faster RCNN and RCNN to complement each
other. Speciﬁcally, A set of initial predictions were obtained
from a well trained Faster RCNN, and these predictions were
used to train RCNN to reﬁne the results.
4.1.5. Others
There are some other learning strategies which offer interest-
ing directions, but have not yet been extensively explored. We
split these approaches into four categories: adversarial learning,
training from scratch and knowledge distillation.
Adversarial Learning. Adversarial learning has shown sig-
niﬁcant advances in generative models. The most famous
work applying adversarial learning is generative adversarial
network(GAN) [154] where a generator is competing with a
discriminator. The generator tries to model data distribution by
generating fake images using a noise vector input and use these
fake images to confuse the discriminator, while the discrimi-
nator competes with the generator to identify the real images
from fake images. GAN and its variants [155, 156, 157] have
22

==== Page 23 ====
shown effectiveness in many domains and have also found ap-
plications in object detection. Li et al. [158] proposed a new
framework Perceptual GAN for small object detection. The
learnable generator learned high-resolution feature representa-
tions of small objects via an adversarial scheme. Speciﬁcally,
its generator learned to transfer low-resolution small region fea-
tures into high-resolution features and competed with the dis-
criminator which identiﬁed real high-resolution features. Fi-
nally the generator learned to generate high quality features
for small objects. Wang et al. [159] proposed A-Fast-R-CNN
which was trained by generated adversarial examples. They ar-
gued the difﬁcult samples were on long tail so they introduced
two novel blocks which automatically generated features with
occlusion and deformation. Speciﬁcally, a learned mask was
generated on region features followed by region classiﬁers. In
this case, the detectors could receive more adversarial examples
and thus become more robust.
Training from Scratch. Modern object detectors heavily
rely on pre-trained classiﬁcation models on ImageNet, how-
ever, the bias of loss functions and data distribution between
classiﬁcation and detection can have an adversarial impact on
the performance. Finetuning on detection task can relieve this
issue, but cannot fully get rid of the bias. Besides, transferring
a classiﬁcation model for detection in a new domain can lead
to more challenges (from RGB to MRI data etc.). Due to these
reasons, there is a need to train detectors from scratch, instead
of relying on pretrained models. The main difﬁculty of train-
ing detectors from scratch is the training data of object detec-
tion is often insufﬁcient and may lead to overﬁtting. Different
from image classiﬁcation, object detection requires bounding
box level annotations and thus, annotating a large scale detec-
tion dataset requires much more effort and time(ImageNet has
1000 categories for image classiﬁcation while only 200 of them
have detection annotations).
There are some works [107, 160, 161] exploring training ob-
ject detectors from scratch. Shen et al. [107] ﬁrst proposed
a novel framework DSOD (Deeply Supervised Object Detec-
tors) to train detectors from scratch. They argued deep super-vision with a densely connected network structure could sig-
niﬁcantly reduce optimization difﬁculties. Based on DSOD,
Shen et al. [162] proposed a gated recurrent feature pyramid
which dynamically adjusted supervision intensities of interme-
diate layers for objects with different scales. They deﬁned a
recurrent feature pyramid structure to squeeze both spatial and
semantic information into a single prediction layer, which fur-
ther reduced parameter numbers leading to faster convergence.
In addition, the gate-control structure on feature pyramids adap-
tively adjusted the supervision at different scales based on the
size of objects. Their method was more powerful than original
DSOD. However, later He et al. [160] validated the difﬁculty
of training detectors from scratch on MSCOCO and found that
the vanilla detectors could obtain a competitive performance
with at least 10K annotated images. Their ﬁndings proved no
speciﬁc structure was required for training from scratch which
contradicted the previous work.
Knowledge Distillation. Knowledge distillation is a training
strategy which distills the knowledge in an ensemble of models
into a single model via teacher-student training scheme. This
learning strategy was ﬁrst used in image classiﬁcation [163].
In object detection, some works [164, 132] also investigate
this training scheme to improve detection performance. Li et
al. [164] proposed a light weight detector whose optimization
was carefully guided by a heavy but powerful detector. This
light detector could achieve comparable detection accuracy by
distilling knowledge from the heavy one, meanwhile having
faster inference speed. Cheng et al. [132] proposed a Faster R-
CNN based detector which was optimized via teacher-student
training scheme. An R-CNN model is used as teacher net-
work to guide the training process. Their framework showed
improvement in detection accuracy compared with traditional
single model optimization strategy.
4.2. Testing Stage
Object detection algorithms make a dense set of predictions
and thus these predictions cannot be directly used for evalua-
tion due to heavy duplication. In addition, some other learning
23

==== Page 24 ====
strategies are required to further improve the detection accu-
racy. These strategies improve the quality of prediction or ac-
celerate the inference speed. In this section, we introduce these
strategies in testing stage including duplicate removal, model
acceleration and other effective techniques.
4.2.1. Duplicate Removal
Non maximum suppression(NMS) is an integral part of ob-
ject detection to remove duplicate false positive predictions
(See Figure 10). Object detection algorithms make a dense set
of predictions with several duplicate predictions. For one-stage
detection algorithms which generate a dense set of candidate
proposals such as SSD [42] or DSSD (Deconvolutional Single
Shot Detector) [112], the proposals surrounding the same object
may have similar conﬁdence scores, leading to false positives.
For two-stage detection algorithms which generates a sparse set
of proposals, the bounding box regressors will pull these pro-
posals close to the same object and thus lead to the same prob-
lem. The duplicate predictions are regarded as false positives
and will receive penalties in evaluation, so NMS is needed to
remove these duplicate predictions. Speciﬁcally, for each cat-
egory, the prediction boxes are sorted according to the conﬁ-
dence score and the box with highest score is selected. This box
is denoted as M. Then IoU of other boxes with Mis calculated,
and if the IoU value is larger than a predeﬁned threshold 
test,
these boxes will are removed. This process is repeated for all
remaining predictions. More formally, the conﬁdence score of
boxBwhich overlaps with Mlarger than 
testwill be set to
zero:
ScoreB=8
<
:ScoreBIoU(B;M )<
test
0 IoU(B;M )
test(13)
However, if an object just lies within 
testofM, NMS will
result in a missing prediction, and this scenario is very common
in clustered object detection. Navaneeth et al. [165] introduced
a new algorithm Soft-NMS to address this issue. Instead of
directly eliminating the prediction B, Soft-NMS decayed the
conﬁdence score of Bas a continuous function F(Fcan be
NMS
Confidence. Score: 0.5 Confidence. Score: 0.9
Confidence. Score: 0.6 Confidence. Score: 0.7Figure 10: Duplicate predictions are eliminated by NMS operation. The most-
conﬁdent box is kept, and all other boxes surrounding it will be removed.
linear function or guassian function) of its overlaps with M.
This is given by:
ScoreB=8
<
:ScoreB IoU(B;M )<
test
F(IoU(B;M ))IoU(B;M )
test(14)
Soft-NMS avoided eliminating prediction of clustered ob-
jects and showed improvement in many common benchmarks.
Hosong et al.[166] introduced a network architecture designed
to perform NMS based on conﬁdence scores and bounding
boxes, which was optimized separately from detector training
in a supervised way. They argued the reason for duplicate pre-
dictions was that the detector deliberately encouraged multiple
high score detections per object instead of rewarding one high
score. Based on this, they designed the network following two
motivations: (i) a loss penalizing double detections to push de-
tectors to predict exactly one precise detection per object; (ii)
joint processing of detections nearby to give the detector infor-
mation whether an object is detected more than once. The new
proposed model did not discard detections but instead reformu-
lated NMS as a re-scoring task that sought to decrease the score
of detections that cover objects that already have been detected.
4.2.2. Model Acceleration
Application of object detection for real world application re-
quires the algorithms to function in an efﬁcient manner. Thus,
evaluating detectors on efﬁciency metrics is important. Al-
though current state-of-the-art algorithms [167, 1] can achieve
very strong results on public datasets, their inference speeds
make it difﬁcult to apply them into real applications. In this sec-
24

==== Page 25 ====
tion we review several works on accelerating detectors. Two-
stage detectors are usually slower than one-stage detectors be-
cause they have two stages - one proposal generation and one
region classiﬁcation, which makes them computationally more
time consuming than one-stage detectors which directly use one
network for both proposal generation and region classiﬁcation.
R-FCN [52] built spatially-sensitive feature maps and extracted
features with position sensitive ROI Pooling to share compu-
tation costs. However, the number of channels of spatially-
sensitive feature maps signiﬁcantly increased with the number
of categories. Li et al. [168] proposed a new framework Light
Head R-CNN which signiﬁcantly reduced the number of chan-
nels in the ﬁnal feature map (from 1024 to 16) instead of shar-
ing all computation. Thus, though computation was not shared
across regions, but the cost could be neglected.
From the aspect of backbone architecture, a major compu-
tation cost in object detection is feature extraction [34]. A
simple idea to accelerate detection speed is to replace the de-
tection backbone with a more efﬁcient backbone, e.g., Mo-
bileNet [74, 169] was an efﬁcient CNN model with depth-wise
convolution layers which was also adopted into many works
such as [170] and [171]. PV ANet [104] was proposed as a
new network structure with CReLu [172] layer to reduce non-
linear computation and accelerated inference speed. Another
approach is to optimize models off-line, such as model com-
pression and quantization [173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179]
on the learned models. Finally, NVIDIA Corporation1released
an acceleration toolkit TensorRT2which optimized the compu-
tation of learned models for deployment and thus signiﬁcantly
sped up the inference.
4.2.3. Others
Other learning strategies in testing stage mainly comprise the
transformation of input image to improve the detection accu-
racy. Image pyramids [1, 92] are a widely used technique to
improve detection results, which build a hierarchical image set
1https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/
2https://developer.nvidia.com/tensorrtat different scales and make predictions on all of these images.
The ﬁnal detection results are merged from the predictions of
each image. Zhang et al. [87, 92] used a more extensive im-
age pyramid structure to handle different scale objects. They
resized the testing image to different scales and each scale was
responsible for a certain scale range of objects. Horizontal Flip-
ping [3, 92] was also used in the testing stage and also showed
improvement. These learning strategies largely improved the
the capability of detector to handle different scale objects and
thus were widely used in public detection competitions. How-
ever, they also increase computation cost and thus were not suit-
able for real world applications.
5. Applications
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task and
there are many real world applications based on this task. Dif-
ferent from generic object detection, these real world applica-
tions commonly have their own speciﬁc properties and thus
carefully-designed detection algorithms are required. In this
section, we will introduce several real world applications such
as face detection and pedestrian detection.
5.1. Face Detection
Face detection is a classical computer vision problem to de-
tect human faces in the images, which is often the ﬁrst step
towards many real-world applications with human beings, such
as face veriﬁcation, face alignment and face recognition. There
are some critical differences between face detection and generic
detection: i) the range of scale for objects in face detection is
much larger than objects in generic detection. Moreover occlu-
sion and blurred cases are more common in face detection; ii)
Face objects contain strong structural information, and there is
only one target category in face detection. Considering these
properties of face detection, directly applying generic detection
algorithms is not an optimal solution as there could be some
priors that can exploited to improve face detection.
In early stages of research before the deep learning era,
face detection [20, 180, 181, 182] was mainly based on slid-
25

==== Page 26 ====
ing windows, and dense image grids were encoded by hand-
crafted features followed by training classiﬁers to ﬁnd and lo-
cate objects. Notably, Viola and Jones [20] proposed a pi-
oneering cascaded classiﬁers using AdaBoost with Haar fea-
tures for face detection and obtained excellent performance
with high real time prediction speed. After the progresses of
deep learning in image classiﬁcation, face detectors based on
deep learning signiﬁcantly outperformed traditional face detec-
tors [183, 184, 185, 186, 187].
Current face detection algorithms based on deep learning are
mainly extended from generic detection frameworks such as
Fast R-CNN and SSD. These algorithms focus more on learning
robust feature representations. In order to handle extreme scale
variance, multi-scale feature learning methods discussed before
have been widely used in face detection. Sun et al. [183] pro-
posed a Fast R-CNN based framework which integrated multi-
scale features for prediction and converted the resulting detec-
tion bounding boxes into ellipses as the regions of human faces
are more elliptical than rectangular. Zhang et al. [87] proposed
one-stage S3FD which found faces on different feature maps to
detect faces at a large range of scales. They made predictions
on larger feature maps to capture small-scale face information.
Notably, a set of anchors were carefully designed according to
empirical receptive ﬁelds and thus provided a better match to
the faces. Based on S3FD, Zhang et al. [188] proposed a novel
network structure to capture multi-scale features in different
stages. The new proposed feature agglomerate structure inte-
grated features at different scales in a hierarchical way. More-
over, a hierarchical loss was proposed to reduce the training dif-
ﬁculties. Single Stage Headless Face Detector (SSH) [189] was
another one-stage face detector which combined different scale
features for prediction. Hu et al. [99] gave a detailed analysis of
small face detection and proposed a light weight face detector
consisting of multiple RPNs, each of which was responsible for
a certain range of scales. Their method could effectively handle
face scale variance but it was slow for real world usage. Unlike
this method, Hao et al. [190] proposed a Scale Aware Face net-
work which addresses scale issues without incurring signiﬁcantcomputation costs. They learned a scale aware network which
modeled the scale distribution of faces in a given image and
guided zoom-in or zoom-out operations to make sure that the
faces were in desirable scale. The resized image was fed into
a single scale light weight face detector. Wang et al. [191] fol-
lowed RetinaNet [43] and utilized more dense anchors to han-
dle faces in a large range of scales. Moreover, they proposed
an attention function to account for context information, and to
highlight the discriminative features. Zhang et al. [192] pro-
posed a deep cascaded multi-task face detector with cascaded
structure (MTCNN). MTCNN had three stages of carefully de-
signed CNN models to predict faces in a coarse-to-ﬁne style.
Further, they also proposed a new online hard negative mining
strategy to improve the result. Samangouei et al. [193] pro-
posed a Face MegNet which allowed information ﬂow of small
faces without any skip connections by placing a set of decon-
volution layers before RPN and ROI Pooling to build up ﬁner
face representations.
In addition to multi-scale feature learning, some frameworks
were focused on contextual information. Face objects have
strong physical relationships with the surrounding contexts
(commonly appearing with human bodies) and thus encoding
contextual information became an effective way to improve de-
tection accuracy. Zhang et al. [194] proposed FDNet based on
ResNet with larger deformable convolutional kernels to cap-
ture image context. Zhu et al. [195] proposed a Contextual
Multi-Scale Region-based Convolution Neural Network (CMS-
RCNN) in which multi-scale information was grouped both in
region proposal and ROI detection to deal with faces at vari-
ous range of scale. In addition, contextual information around
faces is also considered in training detectors. Notably, Tang et
al. [185] proposed a state-of-the-art context assisted single shot
face detector, named PyramidBox to handle the hard face detec-
tion problem. Observing the importance of the context, they im-
proved the utilization of contextual information in the follow-
ing three aspects: i) ﬁrst, a novel context anchor was designed
to supervise high-level contextual feature learning by a semi-
supervised method, dubbed as PyramidAnchors; ii) the Low-
26

==== Page 27 ====
level Feature Pyramid Network was developed to combine ade-
quate high-level context semantic features and low-level facial
features together, which also allowed the PyramidBox to pre-
dict faces at all scales in a single shot; and iii) they introduced a
context sensitive structure to increase the capacity of prediction
network to improve the ﬁnal accuracy of output. In addition,
they used the method of data-anchor-sampling to augment the
training samples across different scales, which increased the di-
versity of training data for smaller faces. Yu et al.[196] intro-
duced a context pyramid maxout mechanism to explore image
contexts and devised an efﬁcient anchor based cascade frame-
work for face detection which optimized anchor-based detector
in cascaded manner. Zhang et al. [197] proposed a two-stream
contextual CNN to adaptively capture body part information.
In addition, they proposed to ﬁlter easy non-face regions in the
shallow layers and leave difﬁcult samples to deeper layers.
Beyond efforts on designing scale-robust or context-assistant
detectors, Wang et al. [191] developed a framework from the
perspective of loss function design. Based on vanilla Faster
R-CNN framework, they replaced original softmax loss with
a center loss which encouraged detectors to reduce the large
intra-class variance in face detection. They explored multiple
technologies in improving Faster R-CNN such as ﬁxed-ratio
online hard negative mining, multi-scale training and multi-
scale testing, which made vanilla Faster R-CNN adaptable to
face detection. Later, Wang et al. [198] proposed Face R-FCN
which was based on vanilla R-FCN. Face R-FCN distinguished
the contribution of different facial parts and introduced a novel
position-sensitive average pooling to re-weight the response on
ﬁnal score maps. This method achieved state-of-the-art results
on many public benchmarks such as FDDB [199] and WIDER
FACE[200].
5.2. Pedestrian Detection
Pedestrian detection is an essential and signiﬁcant task in any
intelligent video surveillance system. Different from generic
object detection, there are some properties of pedestrian de-
tection different from generic object detection: i) Pedestrianobjects are well structured objects with nearly ﬁxed aspect ra-
tios (about 1.5), but they also lie at a large range of scales; ii)
Pedestrian detection is a real world application, and hence the
challenges such as crowding, occlusion and blurring are com-
monly exhibited. For example, in the CityPersons dataset, there
are a total of 3157 pedestrian annotations in the validation sub-
set, among which 48.8% overlap with another annotated pedes-
trian with Intersection over Union (IoU) above 0.1. Moreover,
26.4% of all pedestrians have considerable overlap with another
annotated pedestrian with IoU above 0.3. The highly frequent
crowd occlusion harms the performance of pedestrian detec-
tors; iii) There are more hard negative samples (such as trafﬁc
light, Mailbox etc.) in pedestrian detection due to complicated
contexts.
Before the deep learning era, pedestrian detection algorithms
[19, 201, 202, 203, 204] were mainly extended from Viola
Jones frameworks [20] by exploiting Integral Channel Features
with a sliding window strategy to locate objects, followed by re-
gion classiﬁers such as SVMs. The early works were mainly fo-
cused on designing robust feature descriptors for classiﬁcation.
For example, Dalal and Triggs [19] proposed the histograms of
oriented gradient (HOG) descriptors, while Paisitkriangkrai et
al. [204] designed a feature descriptor based on low-level visual
cues and spatial pooling features. These methods show promis-
ing results on pedestrian detection benchmarks but were mainly
based on hand-crafted features.
Deep learning based methods for pedestrian detection [8, 9,
10, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211] showed excellent per-
formance and achieved state-of-the-art results on public bench-
marks. Angelova et al [10] proposed a real-time pedestrian de-
tection framework using a cascade of deep convolutional net-
works. In their work, a large number of easy negatives were
rejected by a tiny model and the remaining hard proposals were
then classiﬁed by a large deep networks. Zhang et al. [212]
proposed decision tree based framework. In their method, mul-
tiscale feature maps were used to extract pedestrian features,
which were later fed into boosted decision trees for classiﬁ-
cation. Compared with FC layers, boosted decision trees ap-
27

==== Page 28 ====
plied bootstrapping strategy for mining hard negative samples
and achieved better performance. Also to reduce the impact
of large variance in scales, Li et al. [8] proposed Scale-aware
Fast R-CNN (SAF RCNN) which inserted multiple built-in net-
works into the whole detection framework. The proposed SAF
RCNN detected different scale pedestrian instances using dif-
ferent sub-net. Further, Yang et al. [100] inserted Scale Depen-
dent Pooling (SDP) and Cascaded Rejection Classiﬁers (CRC)
into Fast RCNN to handle pedestrian scale issue. According
to the height of the instances, SDP extracted region features
from suitable scale feature maps, while CRC rejected easy neg-
ative samples in shallower layers. Wang et al. [213] proposed
a novel Repulsion Loss to detect pedestrians in a crowd. They
argued that detecting a pedestrian in a crowd made it very sen-
sitive to the NMS threshold, which led to more false positives
and missing objects. The new proposed repulsion loss pushed
the proposals into their target objects but also pulled them away
from other objects and their target proposals. Based on their
idea, Zhang et al. [214] proposed an Occlusion-aware R-CNN
(OR-CNN) which was optimized by Aggression Loss. The new
loss function encouraged the proposals to be close to the objects
and other proposals with the same targeted proposals. Mao et
al. [215] claimed that properly aggregating extra features into
pedestrian detector can boost detection accuracy. In their pa-
per, they explored different kinds of extra features useful in im-
proving accuracy and proposed a new method to use these fea-
tures. The new proposed component HyperLearner aggregated
extra features into vanilla DCNN detector via jointly optimiza-
tion fashion and no extra input was required in inference stage.
For pedestrian detection, one of the most signiﬁcant chal-
lenges is to handle occlusion [216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221,
222, 223, 224, 225, 214, 226]. A straightforward method is
to use part-based models which learn a series of part detectors
and integrate the results of part detectors to locate and clas-
sify objects. Tian et al. [216] proposed DeepParts which con-
sisted of multiple parts detectors. During training, the impor-
tant body parts were automatically selected from a part pool
covered all scale parts of the body, and for each selected part,a detector was learned to handle occlusions. To avoid integrate
inaccurate scores of part models, Ouyang and Wang [223] pro-
posed a framework which modeled visible parts as hidden vari-
ables in training the models. In their paper, the visible rela-
tionship of overlapping parts were learned by a discriminative
deep models, instead of being manually deﬁned or even being
assumed independent. Later, Ouyang et al. [225] addressed
this issue from another aspect. They proposed a mixture net-
work to capture unique visual information which was formed by
crowded pedestrians. To enhance the ﬁnal predictions of single-
pedestrian detectors, a probabilistic framework was learned to
model the relationship between the conﬁgurations estimated by
single- and multi-pedestrian detectors. Zhang et al. [214] pro-
posed an occlusion-aware ROI Pooling layer which integrated
the prior structure information of pedestrian with visibility pre-
diction into the ﬁnal feature representations. The original re-
gion was divided into ﬁve parts and for each part a sub-network
enhanced the original region feature via a learned visibility
score for better representations. Zhou et al. [222] proposed
Bi-box which simultaneously estimated pedestrian detection as
well as visible parts by regressing two bounding boxes, one for
the full body and the other for visible part. In addition, a new
positive-instance sampling criterion was proposed to bias pos-
itive training examples with large visible area, which showed
effectiveness in training occlusion-aware detectors.
5.3. Others
There are some other real applications with object detection
techniques, such as logo detection and video object detection.
Logo detection is an important research topic in e-commerce
systems. Compared to generic detection, logo instance is much
smaller with strong non-rigid transformation. Further, there are
few logo detection baselines available. To address this issue, Su
et al. [15] adopted the learning principle of webly data learning
which automatically mined information from noisy web images
and learns models with limited annotated data. Su et al. [14]
described an image synthesising method to successfully learn a
detector with limited logo instances. Hoi et al. [13] collected a
28

==== Page 29 ====
large scale logo dataset from an e-commerce website and con-
ducted a comprehensive analysis on the problem logo detection.
Existing detection algorithms are mainly designed for still
images and are suboptimal for directly applying in videos for
object detection. To detect objects in videos, there are two
major differences from generic detection: temporal and con-
textual information. The location and appearance of objects in
video should be temporally consistent between adjacent frames.
Moreover, a video consists of hundreds of frames and thus con-
tains far richer contextual information compared to a single
still image. Han et al. [54] proposed a Seq-NMS which as-
sociates detection results of still images into sequences. Boxes
of the same sequence are re-scored to the average score across
frames, and other boxes along the sequence are suppressed by
NMS. Kang et al. proposed Tubelets with Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (T-CNN) [53] which was extended from Faster
RCNN and incorporated the temporal and contextual informa-
tion from tubelets(box sequence over time). T-CNN propagated
the detection results to the adjacent frames by optical ﬂow, and
generated tubelets by applying tracking algorithms from high-
conﬁdence bounding boxes. The boxes along the tubelets were
re-scored based on tubelets classiﬁcation.
There are also many other real-world applications based on
object detection such as vehicle detection [227, 228, 229],
trafﬁc-sign detection [230, 231] and skeleton detection [232,
233].
6. Detection Benchmarks
In this section we will show some common benchmarks of
generic object detection, face detection and pedestrian detec-
tion. We will ﬁrst present some widely used datasets for each
task and then introduce the evaluation metrics.
6.1. Generic Detection Benchmarks
Pascal VOC2007 [29] is a mid scale dataset for object detection
with 20 categories. There are three image splits in VOC2007:
training, validation and test with 2501, 2510 and 5011 images
respectively.Pascal VOC2012 [29] is a mid scale dataset for object detec-
tion which shares the same 20 categories with Pascal VOC2007.
There are three image splits in VOC2012: training, validation
and test with 5717, 5823 and 10991 images respectively. The
annotation information of VOC2012 test set is not available.
MSCOCO [86] is a large scale dataset for with 80 categories.
There are three image splits in MSCOCO: training, validation
and test with 118287, 5000 and 40670 images respectively. The
annotation information of MSCOCO test set is not available.
Open Images [234] contains 1.9M images with 15M objects
of 600 categories. The 500 most frequent categories are used
to evaluate detection benchmarks, and more than 70% of these
categories have over 1000 training samples.
LVIS [235] is a new collected benchmark with 164000 images
and 1000+ categories. It’s a new dataset without any existing
results so we leave the details of LVIS in future work section
(Section 8).
ImageNet [37] is also a important dataset with 200 categories.
However, the scale of ImageNet is huge and the object scale
range is similar to VOC datasets, so it is not a commonly used
benchmarks for detection algorithms.
Evaluation Metrics: The detail of evaluation metrics are
shown in Tab. 1, both detection accuracy and inference speed
are used to evaluate detection algorithms. For detection accu-
racy, mean Average Precision(mAP) is used as evaluation met-
ric for all these challenges. For VOC2012, VOC2007 and Im-
ageNet, IoU threshold of mAP is set to 0.5, and for MSCOCO,
more comprehensive evaluation metrics are applied. There
are six evaluation scores which demonstrates different capabil-
ity of detection algorithms, including performance on different
IoU thresholds and on different scale objects. Some examples
of listed datasets(Pascal VOC, MSCOCO, Open Images and
LVIS) are shown in Fig. 11.
6.2. Face Detection Benchmarks
In this section, we introduce several widely used face detec-
tion datasets (WIDER FACE, AFW, FDDB and Pascal Face)
and the commonly used evaluation metrics.
29

==== Page 30 ====
Pascal VOC MSCOCO Open Images LVIS
HorsePerson
TV
ChairChair
Figure 11: Some examples of Pascal VOC, MSCOCO, Open Images and LVIS.
Alias Meaning Deﬁnition and Description
FPS Frame per second The number of images processed per second.

 IoU threshold The IoU threshold to evaluate localization.
D All PredictionsToppredictions returned by the detectors
with highest conﬁdence score.
TP True Positive Correct predictions from sampled predictions
FP False Positive False predictions from sampled predictions.
P Precision The fraction of TP out of D.
R Recall The fraction of TP out of all positive samples.
AP Average Precision Computed over the different levels of recall by varying the .
mAP mean AP Average score of AP across all classes.
TPR True Positive Rate The fraction of positive rate over false positives.
FPPI FP Per Image The fraction of false positive for each image.
MRlog-average
missing rate Average miss rate over different FPPI rates evenly spaced in log-space
Generic Object Detection
mAPmean
Average
PrecisionVOC2007 mAP at 0.50 IoU threshold over all 20 classes.
VOC2012 mAP at 0.50 IoU threshold over all 20 classes.
OpenImages mAP at 0.50 IoU threshold over 500 most frequent classes.
MSCOCOAPcoco: mAP averaged over ten 
:f0:5 : 0:05 : 0:95g;
AP50: mAP at 0.50 IoU threshold;
AP75: mAP at 0.75 IoU threshold;
APS: AP cocofor small objects of area smaller than 322;
APM: AP cocofor objects of area between 322and962;
APL: AP cocofor large objects of area bigger than 962;
Face Detection
mAPmean
Average
PrecisionPascal Face mAP at 0.50 IoU threshold.
AFW mAP at 0.50 IoU threshold.
WIDER FACEmAP easy: mAP for easy level faces;
mAP mid: mAP for mid level faces;
mAP hard: mAP for hard level faces;
TPRTrue
Positive
RateFDDBTPR diswith 1k FP at 0.50 IoU threshold, with bbox level.
TPR contwith 1k FP at 0.50 IoU threshold, with eclipse level.
Pedestrian Detection
mAPmean
Average
PrecisionKITTImAP easy: mAP for easy level pedestrians;
mAP mid: mAP for mid level pedestrians;
mAP hard: mAP for hard level pedestrians;
MRlog-average
miss rateCityPersons MR: ranging from 1e 2to 100 FPPI
Caltech MR: ranging from 1e 2to 100 FPPI
ETH MR: ranging from 1e 2to 100 FPPI
INRIA MR: ranging from 1e 2to 100 FPPI
Table 1: Summary of common evaluation metrics for various detection tasks
including generic object detection, face detection and pedestrian detection.
WIDER FACE [200]. WIDER FACE has totally 32203 images
with about 400k faces for a large range of scales. It has three
subsets: 40% for training, 10% for validation, and 50% for test.
The annotations of training and validation sets are online avail-
able. According to the difﬁculty of detection tasks, it has three
splits: Easy, Medium and Hard.
FDDB [199]. The Face Detection Data set and Benchmark(FDDB) is a well-known benchmark with 5171 faces in 2845
images. Commonly face detectors will ﬁrst be trained on a large
scale dataset(WIDERFACE etc. ) and tested on FDDB.
PASCAL FACE [29]. This dataset was collected from PAS-
CAL person layout test set, with 1335 labeled faces in 851 im-
ages. Similar to FDDB, it’s commonly used as test set only.
Evaluation Metrics. As Tab. 1 shown, the evaluation metric
for WIDER FACE and PASCAL FACE is mean average preci-
sion (mAP) with IoU threshold as 0.5, and for WIDER FACE
the results of each difﬁculty level will be reported. For FDDB,
true positive rate (TPR) at 1k false positives are used for evalua-
tion. There are two annotation types to evaluate FDDB dataset:
bounding box level and eclipse level.
6.3. Pedestrian Detection Benchmarks
In this section we will ﬁrst introduce ﬁve widely used
datasets(Caltech, ETH, INRIA, CityPersons and KITTI) for
pedestrian object detection and then introduce their evaluation
metrics.
CityPersons [242] is a new pedestrian detection dataset on
top of the semantic segmentation dataset CityScapes [243], of
which 5000 images are captured in several cities in Germany.
A total of 35000 persons with an additional 13000 ignored re-
gions, both bounding box annotation of all persons and annota-
tion of visible parts are provided.
Caltech [244] is one of the most popular and challenging
datasets for pedestrian detection, which comes from approxi-
mately 10 hours 30Hz VGA video recorded by a car traversing
the streets in the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area. The
30

==== Page 31 ====
Method Backbone Proposed Year Input size(Test)mAP (%)
VOC2007 VOC2012
Two-stage Detectors:
R-CNN [2] VGG-16 2014 Arbitrary 66.062.4y
SPP-net [2] VGG-16 20146001000 63.1-
Fast R-CNN [38] VGG-16 20156001000 70.0 68.4
Faster R-CNN [34] VGG-16 20156001000 73.2 70.4
MR-CNN [131] VGG-16 2015 Multi-Scale 78.2 73.9
Faster R-CNN [1] ResNet-101 20166001000 76.4 73.8
R-FCN [52] ResNet-101 20166001000 80.5 77.6
OHEM [148] VGG-16 20166001000 74.6 71.9
HyperNet [50] VGG-16 20166001000 76.3 71.4
ION [51] VGG-16 20166001000 79.2 76.4
CRAFT [153] VGG-16 20166001000 75.7 71.3y
LocNet [149] VGG-16 20166001000 78.4 74.8y
R-FCN w DCN [97] ResNet-101 20176001000 82.6 -
CoupleNet [125] ResNet-101 20176001000 82.7 80.4
DeNet512(wide) [94] ResNet-101 2017512512 77.1 73.9
FPN-Reconﬁg [115] ResNet-101 20186001000 82.4 81.1
DeepRegionLet [140] ResNet-101 20186001000 83.3 81.3
DCN+R-CNN [132] ResNet-101+ResNet-152 2018 Arbitrary 84.0 81.2
One-stage Detectors:
YOLOv1 [40] VGG16 2016 448448 66.4 57.9
SSD512 [42] VGG-16 2016 512512 79.8 78.5
YOLOv2 [41] Darknet 2017 544544 78.6 73.5
DSSD513 [112] ResNet-101 2017 513513 81.5 80.0
DSOD300 [107] DS/64-192-48-1 2017 300300 77.7 76.3
RON384 [120] VGG-16 2017 384384 75.4 73.0
STDN513 [111] DenseNet-169 2018 513513 80.9 -
ReﬁneDet512 [92] VGG-16 2018 512512 81.8 80.1
RFBNet512 [108] VGG16 2018 512512 82.2 -
CenterNet [64] ResNet101 2019 512512 78.7 -
CenterNet [64] DLA [64] 2019 512512 80.7 -
This entry reports the the model is trained with VOC2007 trainval sets only.
yThis entry reports the the model are trained with VOC2012 trainval sets only .
Table 2: Detection results on PASCAL VOC dataset. For VOC2007, the models are trained on VOC2007 and VOC2012 trainval sets and
tested on VOC2007 test set. For VOC2012, the models are trained on VOC2007 and VOC2012 trainval sets plus VOC2007 test set
and tested on VOC2012 test set by default. Since Pascal VOC datasets are well tuned and thus the number of detection frameworks for VOC
reduces in recent years.
31

==== Page 32 ====
Method Backbone Year AP AP 50 AP75 APS APM APL
Two-Stage Detectors:
Fast R-CNN [38] VGG-16 2015 19.7 35.9 - - - -
Faster R-CNN [34] VGG-16 2015 21.9 42.7 - - - -
OHEM [148] VGG-16 2016 22.6 42.5 22.2 5.0 23.7 37.9
ION [51] VGG-16 2016 23.6 43.2 23.6 6.4 24.1 38.3
OHEM++ [148] VGG-16 2016 25.5 45.9 26.1 7.4 27.7 40.3
R-FCN [52] ResNet-101 2016 29.9 51.9 - 10.8 32.8 45.0
Faster R-CNN+++ [1] ResNet-101 2016 34.9 55.7 37.4 15.6 38.7 50.9
Faster R-CNN w FPN [39] ResNet-101 2016 36.2 59.1 39.0 18.2 39.0 48.2
DeNet-101(wide) [94] ResNet-101 2017 33.8 53.4 36.1 12.3 36.1 50.8
CoupleNet [125] ResNet-101 2017 34.4 54.8 37.2 13.4 38.1 50.8
Faster R-CNN by G-RMI [167] Inception-ResNet-v2 2017 34.7 55.5 36.7 13.5 38.1 52.0
Deformable R-FCN [52] Aligned-Inception-ResNet 2017 37.5 58.0 40.8 19.4 40.1 52.5
Mask-RCNN [3] ResNeXt-101 2017 39.8 62.3 43.4 22.1 43.2 51.2
umd det [236] ResNet-101 2017 40.8 62.4 44.9 23.0 43.4 53.2
Fitness-NMS [152] ResNet-101 2017 41.8 60.9 44.9 21.5 45.0 57.5
DCN w Relation Net [138] ResNet-101 2018 39.0 58.6 42.9 - - -
DeepRegionlets [140] ResNet-101 2018 39.3 59.8 - 21.7 43.7 50.9
C-Mask RCNN [141] ResNet-101 2018 42.0 62.9 46.4 23.4 44.7 53.8
Group Norm [237] ResNet-101 2018 42.3 62.8 46.2 - - -
DCN+R-CNN [132] ResNet-101+ResNet-152 2018 42.6 65.3 46.5 26.4 46.1 56.4
Cascade R-CNN [49] ResNet-101 2018 42.8 62.1 46.3 23.7 45.5 55.2
SNIP++ [98] DPN-98 2018 45.7 67.3 51.1 29.3 48.8 57.1
SNIPER++ [146] ResNet-101 2018 46.1 67.0 51.6 29.6 48.9 58.1
PANet++ [238] ResNeXt-101 2018 47.4 67.2 51.8 30.1 51.7 60.0
Grid R-CNN [151] ResNeXt-101 2019 43.2 63.0 46.6 25.1 46.5 55.2
DCN-v2 [144] ResNet-101 2019 44.8 66.3 48.8 24.4 48.1 59.6
DCN-v2++ [144] ResNet-101 2019 46.0 67.9 50.8 27.8 49.1 59.5
TridentNet [239] ResNet-101 2019 42.7 63.6 46.5 23.9 46.6 56.6
TridentNet [239] ResNet-101-Deformable 2019 48.4 69.7 53.5 31.8 51.3 60.3
Single-Stage Detectors:
SSD512 [42] VGG-16 2016 28.8 48.5 30.3 10.9 31.8 43.5
RON384++ [120] VGG-16 2017 27.4 49.5 27.1 - - -
YOLOv2 [41] DarkNet-19 2017 21.6 44.0 19.2 5.0 22.4 35.5
SSD513 [112] ResNet-101 2017 31.2 50.4 33.3 10.2 34.5 49.8
DSSD513 [112] ResNet-101 2017 33.2 53.3 35.2 13.0 35.4 51.1
RetinaNet800++ [43] ResNet-101 2017 39.1 59.1 42.3 21.8 42.7 50.2
STDN513 [111] DenseNet-169 2018 31.8 51.0 33.6 14.4 36.1 43.4
FPN-Reconﬁg [115] ResNet-101 2018 34.6 54.3 37.3 - - -
ReﬁneDet512 [92] ResNet-101 2018 36.4 57.5 39.5 16.6 39.9 51.4
ReﬁneDet512++ [92] ResNet-101 2018 41.8 62.9 45.7 25.6 45.1 54.1
GHM SSD [147] ResNeXt-101 2018 41.6 62.8 44.2 22.3 45.1 55.3
CornerNet511 [63] Hourglass-104 2018 40.5 56.5 43.1 19.4 42.7 53.9
CornerNet511++ [63] Hourglass-104 2018 42.1 57.8 45.3 20.8 44.8 56.7
M2Det800 [116] VGG-16 2019 41.0 59.7 45.0 22.1 46.5 53.8
M2Det800++ [116] VGG-16 2019 44.2 64.6 49.3 29.2 47.9 55.1
ExtremeNet [240] Hourglass-104 2019 40.2 55.5 43.2 20.4 43.2 53.1
CenterNet-HG [64] Hourglass-104 2019 42.1 61.1 45.9 24.1 45.5 52.8
FCOS [241] ResNeXt-101 2019 42.1 62.1 45.2 25.6 44.9 52.0
FSAF [95] ResNeXt-101 2019 42.9 63.8 46.3 26.6 46.2 52.7
CenterNet511 [65] Hourglass-104 2019 44.9 62.4 48.1 25.6 47.4 57.4
CenterNet511++ [65] Hourglass-104 2019 47.0 64.5 50.7 28.9 49.9 58.9
Table 3: Detection performance on the MS COCO test-dev data set. ”++” denotes applying inference strategy such as multi scale test, horizontal ﬂip, etc.
32

==== Page 33 ====
training and testing sets contains 42782 and 4024 frames, re-
spectively.
ETH [245] contains 1804 frames in three video clips and com-
monly it’s used as test set to evaluate performance of the models
trained on the large scale datasets(CityPersons dataset etc.).
INRIA [19] contains images of high resolution pedestrians col-
lected mostly from holiday photos, which consists of 2120
images, including 1832 images for training and 288 images.
Speciﬁcally, there are 614 positive images and 1218 negative
images in the training set.
KITTI [246] contains 7481 labeled images of resolution
1250x375 and another 7518 images for testing. The person
class in KITTI is divided into two subclasses: pedestrian and
cyclist, both evaluated by mAP method. KITTI contains three
evaluation metrics: easy, moderate and hard, with difference in
the min. bounding box height, max. occlusion level, etc.
Evaluation Metrics. For CityPersons, INRIA and ETH, the
log-average miss rate over 9 points ranging from 1e 2to 100
FPPI(False Positive Per Image) is used to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the detectors(lower is better). For KITTI, standard
mean average precision is used as evaluation metric with 0.5
IoU threshold.
7. State-of-the-art for Generic Object Detection
Pascal VOC2007, VOC2007 and MSCOCO are three most
commonly used datasets for evaluating detection algorithms.
Pascal VOC2012 and VOC2007 are mid scale datasets with 2
or 3 objects per image and the range of object size in VOC
dataset is not large. For MSCOCO, there are nearly 10 objects
per image and the majority objects are small objects with large
scale ranges, which leads to a very challenge task for detection
algorithms. In Table 3 and Table 2 we give the benchmarks of
VOC2007, VOC2012 and MSCOCO over the recent few years.
8. Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
Object detection has been actively investigated and new
state-of-the-art results have been reported almost every fewmonths. However, there are still many open challenges. Be-
low we discuss sveral open challenges and future directions.
i) Scalable Proposal Generation Strategy. As claimed in
Sec. 3.4, currently most detectors are anchor-based methods,
and there are some critical shortcomings which limit the detec-
tion accuracy. Current anchor priors are mainly manually de-
signed which is difﬁcult to match multi-scale objects and the
matching strategy based on IoU is also heuristic. Although
some methods have been proposed to transform anchor-based
methods into anchor-free methods (e.g. methods based on key-
points), there are still some limitations(high computation cost
etc.) with large space to improve. From Figure 2, developing
anchor-free methods becomes a very hot topic in object detec-
tion [63, 95, 240, 241, 65], and thus designing an efﬁcient and
effective proposal generation strategy is potentially a very im-
portant research direction in the future.
ii) Effective Encoding of Contextual Information. Contexts
can contribute or impede visual object detection results, as ob-
jects in the visual world have strong relationships, and contexts
are critical to better understand the visual worlds. However, lit-
tle effort has been focused on how to correctly use contextual
information. How to incorporate contexts for object detection
effectively can be a promising future direction.
iii) Detection based on Auto Machine Learning(AutoML).
To design an optimal backbone architecture for a certain task
can signiﬁcantly improve the results but also requires huge
engineering effort. Thus to learn backbone architecture di-
rectly on the datasets is a very interesting and important re-
search direction. From Figure 2, inspired by the pioneering
AutoML work on image classiﬁcation [247, 248], more rele-
vant work has been proposed to address detection problems via
AutoML [249, 250], such as learning FPN structure [250] and
learning data augmentation policies [251], which show signif-
icant improvement over the baselines. However, the required
computation resource for AutoML is unaffordable to most re-
searchers(more than 100 GPU cards to train a single model).
Thus, developing a low-computation framework shall have a
large impact for object detection. Further, new structure poli-
33

==== Page 34 ====
cies (such as proposal generation and region encoding) of de-
tection task can be explored in the future.
iv) Emerging Benchmarks for Object Detection. Currently
MSCOCO is the most commonly used detection benchmark
testbed. However, MSCOCO has only 80 categories, which is
still too small to understand more complicated scenes in real
world. Recently, a new benchmark dataset LVIS [235] has
been proposed in order to collect richer categorical informa-
tion. LVIS contains 164000 images with 1000+ categories, and
there are total of 2.2 million high-quality instance segmenta-
tion masks. Further, LVIS simulates the real-world low-shot
scenario where a large number of categories are present but
per-category data is sometimes scarce. LVIS will open a new
benchmark for more challenging detection, segmentation and
low-shot learning tasks in near future.
v) Low-shot Object Detection. Training detectors with lim-
ited labeled data is dubbed as Low-shot detection. Deep learn-
ing based detectors often have huge amount of parameters and
thus are data-hungry, which require large amount of labeled
data to achieve satisfactory performance. However, labeling
objects in images with bounding box level annotation is very
time-consuming. Low-shot learning has been actively studied
for classiﬁcation tasks, but only a few studies are focused on
detection tasks. For example, Multi-modal Self-Paced Learn-
ing for Detection (MSPLD) [252] addresses the low-shot de-
tection problem in a semi-supervised learning setting where a
large-scale unlabeled dataset is available. RepMet [253] adopts
a Deep Metric Learning (DML) structure, which jointly learns
feature embedding space and data distribution of training set
categories. However, RepMet was only tested on datasets
with similar concepts (animals). Low-Shot Transfer Detector
(LSTD) [254] addresses low-shot detection based on transfer
learning which transfers the knowledge form large annotated
external datasets to the target set by knowledge regularization.
LSTD still suffers from overﬁtting. There is still a large room
to improve the low-shot detection tasks.
vi) Backbone Architecture for Detection Task. It has be-
come a paradigm to adopt weights of classiﬁcation models pre-trained on large scale dataset into detection problem. However,
there still exist conﬂicts between classiﬁcation and detection
tasks [78], and thus it’s not an optimal solution to do so. From
Table 3, most state-of-the-art detection algorithms are based on
classiﬁcation backbones, and only a few of them try different
selections (such as CornerNet based on Hourglass Net). Thus
how to develop a detection-aware backbone architecture is also
an important research direction in the future.
vii) Other Research Issues. In addition, there are some other
open research issues, such as large batch learning [255] and
incremental learning [256]. Batch size is a key factor in DCNN
training but has not been well studied in detection task. And
for incremental learning, detection algorithms still suffer from
catastrophic forgetting if adapted to a new task without initial
training data. These open and fundamental research issues also
deserve more attention for future work.
In this survey, we give a comprehensive survey of recent ad-
vances in deep learning techniques for object detection tasks.
The main contents of this survey are divided into three ma-
jor categories: object detector components, machine learning
strategies, real-world applications and benchmark evaluations.
We have reviewed a large body of representative articles in re-
cent literature, and presented the contributions on this important
topic in a structured and systematic manner. We hope this sur-
vey can give readers a comprehensive understanding of object
detection with deep learning and potentially spur more research
work on object detection techniques and their applications.
References
References
[1] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recog-
nition, in: CVPR, 2016.
[2] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, J. Malik, Rich feature hierarchies for
accurate object detection and semantic segmentation, in: CVPR, 2014.
[3] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Doll ´ar, R. Girshick, Mask r-cnn, in: ICCV , 2017.
[4] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, A. L. Yuille, Se-
mantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets and fully con-
nected crfs, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7062, 2014.
34

==== Page 35 ====
[5] Y . Sun, D. Liang, X. Wang, X. Tang, Deepid3: Face recognition with
very deep neural networks, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.00873, 2015.
[6] Y . Sun, Y . Chen, X. Wang, X. Tang, Deep learning face representation
by joint identiﬁcation-veriﬁcation, in: NeurIPS, 2014.
[7] W. Liu, Y . Wen, Z. Yu, M. Li, B. Raj, L. Song, Sphereface: Deep hyper-
sphere embedding for face recognition, in: CVPR, 2017.
[8] J. Li, X. Liang, S. Shen, T. Xu, J. Feng, S. Yan, Scale-aware fast r-cnn
for pedestrian detection, in: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2018.
[9] J. Hosang, M. Omran, R. Benenson, B. Schiele, Taking a deeper look at
pedestrians, in: CVPR, 2015.
[10] A. Angelova, A. Krizhevsky, V . Vanhoucke, A. S. Ogale, D. Ferguson,
Real-time pedestrian detection with deep network cascades., in: BMVC,
2015.
[11] A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, T. Leung, R. Sukthankar, L. Fei-Fei,
Large-scale video classiﬁcation with convolutional neural networks, in:
CVPR, 2014.
[12] H. Mobahi, R. Collobert, J. Weston, Deep learning from temporal coher-
ence in video, in: Annual International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, 2009.
[13] S. C. Hoi, X. Wu, H. Liu, Y . Wu, H. Wang, H. Xue, Q. Wu, Logo-net:
Large-scale deep logo detection and brand recognition with deep region-
based convolutional networks, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02462,
2015.
[14] H. Su, X. Zhu, S. Gong, Deep learning logo detection with data ex-
pansion by synthesising context, in: 2017 IEEE Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2017.
[15] H. Su, S. Gong, X. Zhu, Scalable deep learning logo detection, in: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.11417, 2018.
[16] A. Vedaldi, V . Gulshan, M. Varma, A. Zisserman, Multiple kernels for
object detection, in: ICCV , 2009.
[17] P. Viola, M. Jones, Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of
simple features, in: CVPR, 2001.
[18] H. Harzallah, F. Jurie, C. Schmid, Combining efﬁcient object localiza-
tion and image classiﬁcation, in: ICCV , 2009.
[19] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, Histograms of oriented gradients for human detec-
tion, in: CVPR, 2005.
[20] P. Viola, M. J. Jones, Robust real-time face detection, in: IJCV , 2004.
[21] D. G. Lowe, Object recognition from local scale-invariant features, in:
ICCV , 1999.
[22] R. Lienhart, J. Maydt, An extended set of haar-like features for rapid ob-
ject detection, in: International Conference on Image Processing, 2002.
[23] H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars, L. Van Gool, Surf: Speeded up robust features,
in: ECCV , 2006.
[24] M. A. Hearst, S. T. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, B. Scholkopf, Support
vector machines, in: IEEE Intelligent Systems and their applications,
1998.
[25] D. Opitz, R. Maclin, Popular ensemble methods: An empirical study, in:
Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research, 1999.[26] Y . Freund, R. E. Schapire, et al., Experiments with a new boosting algo-
rithm, in: ICML, 1996.
[27] Y . Yu, J. Zhang, Y . Huang, S. Zheng, W. Ren, C. Wang, K. Huang,
T. Tan, Object detection by context and boosted hog-lbp, in: PASCAL
VOC Challenge, 2010.
[28] P. Felzenszwalb, R. Girshick, D. McAllester, D. Ramanan, Discrimina-
tively trained mixtures of deformable part models, in: PASCAL VOC
Challenge, 2008.
[29] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, A. Zisserman,
The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge, in: IJCV , 2010.
[30] P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, D. McAllester, D. Ramanan, Object
detection with discriminatively trained part-based models, in: TPAMI,
2010.
[31] D. G. Lowe, Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,
in: IJCV , 2004.
[32] T. Ojala, M. Pietikainen, T. Maenpaa, Multiresolution gray-scale and
rotation invariant texture classiﬁcation with local binary patterns, in:
TPAMI, 2002.
[33] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton, Imagenet classiﬁcation with
deep convolutional neural networks, in: NeurIPS, 2012.
[34] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, J. Sun, Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time ob-
ject detection with region proposal networks, in: NeurIPS, 2015.
[35] K. Fukushima, S. Miyake, Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural net-
work model for a mechanism of visual pattern recognition, in: Compe-
tition and cooperation in neural nets, 1982.
[36] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, P. Haffner, Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998.
[37] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: A
large-scale hierarchical image database, in: CVPR, 2009.
[38] R. Girshick, Fast r-cnn, in: ICCV , 2015.
[39] T.-Y . Lin, P. Doll ´ar, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, S. Belongie, Fea-
ture pyramid networks for object detection, in: CVPR, 2017.
[40] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, A. Farhadi, You only look once:
Uniﬁed, real-time object detection, in: CVPR, 2016.
[41] J. Redmon, A. Farhadi, Yolo9000: better, faster, stronger, in: CVPR,
2017.
[42] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C.-Y . Fu, A. C.
Berg, SSD: Single shot multibox detector, in: ECCV , 2016.
[43] T.-Y . Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, P. Doll ´ar, Focal loss for dense
object detection, in: ICCV , 2017.
[44] S. Fidler, R. Mottaghi, A. Yuille, R. Urtasun, Bottom-up segmentation
for top-down detection, in: CVPR, 2013.
[45] J. R. Uijlings, K. E. Van De Sande, T. Gevers, A. W. Smeulders, Selec-
tive search for object recognition, in: IJCV , 2013.
[46] J. Kleban, X. Xie, W.-Y . Ma, Spatial pyramid mining for logo detection
in natural scenes, in: Multimedia and Expo, 2008 IEEE International
Conference on, 2008.
[47] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Spatial pyramid pooling in deep con-
35

==== Page 36 ====
volutional networks for visual recognition, in: ECCV , 2014.
[48] C. L. Zitnick, P. Doll ´ar, Edge boxes: Locating object proposals from
edges, in: ECCV , 2014.
[49] Z. Cai, N. Vasconcelos, Cascade r-cnn: Delving into high quality object
detection, in: CVPR, 2018.
[50] T. Kong, A. Yao, Y . Chen, F. Sun, Hypernet: Towards accurate region
proposal generation and joint object detection, in: CVPR, 2016.
[51] S. Bell, C. Lawrence Zitnick, K. Bala, R. Girshick, Inside-outside net:
Detecting objects in context with skip pooling and recurrent neural net-
works, in: CVPR, 2016.
[52] J. Dai, Y . Li, K. He, J. Sun, R-fcn: Object detection via region-based
fully convolutional networks, in: NeurIPS, 2016.
[53] K. Kang, W. Ouyang, H. Li, X. Wang, Object detection from video
tubelets with convolutional neural networks, in: CVPR, 2016.
[54] W. Han, P. Khorrami, T. L. Paine, P. Ramachandran, M. Babaeizadeh,
H. Shi, J. Li, S. Yan, T. S. Huang, Seq-nms for video object detection,
in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.08465, 2016.
[55] M. Rayat Imtiaz Hossain, J. Little, Exploiting temporal information for
3d human pose estimation, in: ECCV , 2018.
[56] G. Pavlakos, X. Zhou, K. G. Derpanis, K. Daniilidis, Coarse-to-ﬁne vol-
umetric prediction for single-image 3d human pose, in: CVPR, 2017.
[57] P. O. Pinheiro, T.-Y . Lin, R. Collobert, P. Doll ´ar, Learning to reﬁne ob-
ject segments, in: ECCV , 2016.
[58] P. O. Pinheiro, R. Collobert, P. Doll ´ar, Learning to segment object can-
didates, in: NeurIPS, 2015.
[59] J. Dai, K. He, J. Sun, Instance-aware semantic segmentation via multi-
task network cascades, in: CVPR, 2016.
[60] Z. Huang, L. Huang, Y . Gong, C. Huang, X. Wang, Mask scoring r-cnn,
in: CVPR, 2019.
[61] P. Sermanet, D. Eigen, X. Zhang, M. Mathieu, R. Fergus, Y . LeCun,
Overfeat: Integrated recognition, localization and detection using con-
volutional networks, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6229, 2013.
[62] S. Ioffe, C. Szegedy, Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network
training by reducing internal covariate shift, in: ICML, 2015.
[63] H. Law, J. Deng, Cornernet: Detecting objects as paired keypoints, in:
ECCV , 2018.
[64] X. Zhou, D. Wang, P. Kr ¨ahenb ¨uhl, Objects as points, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.07850, 2019.
[65] K. Duan, S. Bai, L. Xie, H. Qi, Q. Huang, Q. Tian, Centernet: Keypoint
triplets for object detection, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08189, 2019.
[66] H. Robbins, S. Monro, A stochastic approximation method, in: The an-
nals of mathematical statistics, 1951.
[67] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, in:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[68] V . Nair, G. E. Hinton, Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted boltzmann
machines, in: ICML, 2010.
[69] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556,2014.
[70] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Identity mappings in deep residual
networks, in: ECCV , Springer, 2016.
[71] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, K. Q. Weinberger, Densely con-
nected convolutional networks., in: CVPR, 2017.
[72] Y . Chen, J. Li, H. Xiao, X. Jin, S. Yan, J. Feng, Dual path networks, in:
NeurIPS, 2017, pp. 4467–4475.
[73] S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Doll ´ar, Z. Tu, K. He, Aggregated residual trans-
formations for deep neural networks, in: CVPR, 2017.
[74] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang,
T. Weyand, M. Andreetto, H. Adam, Mobilenets: Efﬁcient convolu-
tional neural networks for mobile vision applications, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
[75] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Er-
han, V . Vanhoucke, A. Rabinovich, Going deeper with convolutions, in:
CVPR, 2015.
[76] C. Szegedy, V . Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, Z. Wojna, Rethinking the
inception architecture for computer vision, in: CVPR, 2016.
[77] C. Szegedy, S. Ioffe, V . Vanhoucke, A. A. Alemi, Inception-v4,
inception-resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning., in:
AAAI, 2017.
[78] Z. Li, C. Peng, G. Yu, X. Zhang, Y . Deng, J. Sun, Detnet: A backbone
network for object detection, in: ECCV , 2018.
[79] A. Newell, K. Yang, J. Deng, Stacked hourglass networks for human
pose estimation, in: ECCV , 2016.
[80] B. Alexe, T. Deselaers, V . Ferrari, Measuring the objectness of image
windows, in: TPAMI, 2012.
[81] E. Rahtu, J. Kannala, M. Blaschko, Learning a category independent
object detection cascade, in: ICCV , 2011.
[82] P. F. Felzenszwalb, D. P. Huttenlocher, Efﬁcient graph-based image seg-
mentation, in: IJCV , 2004.
[83] S. Manen, M. Guillaumin, L. Van Gool, Prime object proposals with
randomized prim’s algorithm, in: CVPR, 2013.
[84] J. Carreira, C. Sminchisescu, Cpmc: Automatic object segmentation us-
ing constrained parametric min-cuts, in: TPAMI, 2011.
[85] I. Endres, D. Hoiem, Category-independent object proposals with di-
verse ranking, in: TPAMI, 2014.
[86] T.-Y . Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan,
P. Doll ´ar, C. L. Zitnick, Microsoft coco: Common objects in context,
in: ECCV , 2014.
[87] S. Zhang, X. Zhu, Z. Lei, H. Shi, X. Wang, S. Z. Li, S3fd: Single shot
scale-invariant face detector, in: ICCV , 2017.
[88] W. Luo, Y . Li, R. Urtasun, R. Zemel, Understanding the effective recep-
tive ﬁeld in deep convolutional neural networks, in: NeurIPS, 2016.
[89] C. Zhu, R. Tao, K. Luu, M. Savvides, Seeing small faces from robust
anchors perspective, in: CVPR, 2018.
[90] L. J. Z. X. Lele Xie, Yuliang Liu, Derpn: Taking a further step toward
more general object detection, in: AAAI, 2019.
36

==== Page 37 ====
[91] A. Ghodrati, A. Diba, M. Pedersoli, T. Tuytelaars, L. Van Gool, Deep-
proposal: Hunting objects by cascading deep convolutional layers, in:
ICCV , 2015.
[92] S. Zhang, L. Wen, X. Bian, Z. Lei, S. Z. Li, Single-shot reﬁnement
neural network for object detection, in: CVPR, 2018.
[93] T. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Li, W. Zhang, J. Sun, Metaanchor: Learning to
detect objects with customized anchors, in: NeurIPS, 2018.
[94] L. Tychsen-Smith, L. Petersson, Denet: Scalable real-time object detec-
tion with directed sparse sampling, in: ICCV , 2017.
[95] C. Zhu, Y . He, M. Savvides, Feature selective anchor-free module for
single-shot object detection, in: CVPR, 2019.
[96] Y . Lu, T. Javidi, S. Lazebnik, Adaptive object detection using adjacency
and zoom prediction, in: CVPR, 2016.
[97] J. Dai, H. Qi, Y . Xiong, Y . Li, G. Zhang, H. Hu, Y . Wei, Deformable
convolutional networks, in: ICCV , 2017.
[98] B. Singh, L. S. Davis, An analysis of scale invariance in object
detection–snip, in: CVPR, 2018.
[99] P. Hu, D. Ramanan, Finding tiny faces, in: CVPR, 2017.
[100] F. Yang, W. Choi, Y . Lin, Exploit all the layers: Fast and accurate cnn ob-
ject detector with scale dependent pooling and cascaded rejection clas-
siﬁers, in: CVPR, 2016.
[101] Y . Liu, H. Li, J. Yan, F. Wei, X. Wang, X. Tang, Recurrent scale approx-
imation for object detection in cnn, in: ICCV , 2017.
[102] A. Shrivastava, R. Sukthankar, J. Malik, A. Gupta, Beyond skip con-
nections: Top-down modulation for object detection, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1612.06851, 2016.
[103] H. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Gao, P. Li, W. Zuo, Multi-scale location-aware
kernel representation for object detection, in: CVPR, 2018.
[104] K.-H. Kim, S. Hong, B. Roh, Y . Cheon, M. Park, Pvanet: deep but
lightweight neural networks for real-time object detection, in: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1608.08021, 2016.
[105] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation, in: International Conference on Medi-
cal image computing and computer-assisted intervention, 2015.
[106] Z. Cai, Q. Fan, R. S. Feris, N. Vasconcelos, A uniﬁed multi-scale deep
convolutional neural network for fast object detection, in: ECCV , 2016.
[107] Z. Shen, Z. Liu, J. Li, Y .-G. Jiang, Y . Chen, X. Xue, Dsod: Learning
deeply supervised object detectors from scratch, in: ICCV , 2017.
[108] S. Liu, D. Huang, Y . Wang, Receptive ﬁeld block net for accurate and
fast object detection, in: ECCV , 2018.
[109] J. Ren, X. Chen, J. Liu, W. Sun, J. Pang, Q. Yan, Y .-W. Tai, L. Xu,
Accurate single stage detector using recurrent rolling convolution, in:
CVPR, 2017.
[110] J. Jeong, H. Park, N. Kwak, Enhancement of ssd by concatenating fea-
ture maps for object detection, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09587,
2017.
[111] P. Zhou, B. Ni, C. Geng, J. Hu, Y . Xu, Scale-transferrable object detec-
tion, in: CVPR, 2018.[112] C.-Y . Fu, W. Liu, A. Ranga, A. Tyagi, A. C. Berg, Dssd: Deconvolu-
tional single shot detector, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06659, 2017.
[113] S. Woo, S. Hwang, I. S. Kweon, Stairnet: Top-down semantic aggrega-
tion for accurate one shot detection, in: 2018 IEEE Winter Conference
on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2018.
[114] H. Li, Y . Liu, W. Ouyang, X. Wang, Zoom out-and-in network
with recursive training for object proposal, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05711, 2017.
[115] T. Kong, F. Sun, W. Huang, H. Liu, Deep feature pyramid reconﬁgura-
tion for object detection, in: ECCV , 2018.
[116] Q. Zhao, T. Sheng, Y . Wang, Z. Tang, Y . Chen, L. Cai, H. Ling, M2det:
A single-shot object detector based on multi-level feature pyramid net-
work, in: AAAI, 2019.
[117] Z. Li, F. Zhou, Fssd: Feature fusion single shot multibox detector, in:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00960, 2017.
[118] K. Lee, J. Choi, J. Jeong, N. Kwak, Residual features and uni-
ﬁed prediction network for single stage detection, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.05031, 2017.
[119] L. Cui, Mdssd: Multi-scale deconvolutional single shot detector for
small objects, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.07009, 2018.
[120] T. Kong, F. Sun, A. Yao, H. Liu, M. Lu, Y . Chen, Ron: Reverse con-
nection with objectness prior networks for object detection, in: CVPR,
2017.
[121] B. Lim, S. Son, H. Kim, S. Nah, K. Mu Lee, Enhanced deep residual
networks for single image super-resolution, in: CVPR workshops, 2017.
[122] W. Shi, J. Caballero, F. Husz ´ar, J. Totz, A. P. Aitken, R. Bishop,
D. Rueckert, Z. Wang, Real-time single image and video super-
resolution using an efﬁcient sub-pixel convolutional neural network, in:
CVPR, 2016.
[123] B. Jiang, R. Luo, J. Mao, T. Xiao, Y . Jiang, Acquisition of localization
conﬁdence for accurate object detection, in: ECCV , 2018.
[124] Y . Zhai, J. Fu, Y . Lu, H. Li, Feature selective networks for object detec-
tion, in: CVPR, 2018.
[125] Y . Zhu, C. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Zhao, Y . Wu, H. Lu, Couplenet: Coupling
global structure with local parts for object detection, in: ICCV , 2017.
[126] C. Galleguillos, S. Belongie, Context based object categorization: A
critical survey, in: Computer vision and image understanding, 2010.
[127] W. Ouyang, X. Wang, X. Zeng, S. Qiu, P. Luo, Y . Tian, H. Li, S. Yang,
Z. Wang, C.-C. Loy, et al., Deepid-net: Deformable deep convolutional
neural networks for object detection, in: CVPR, 2015.
[128] W. Chu, D. Cai, Deep feature based contextual model for object detec-
tion, in: Neurocomputing, 2018.
[129] Y . Zhu, R. Urtasun, R. Salakhutdinov, S. Fidler, segdeepm: Exploiting
segmentation and context in deep neural networks for object detection,
in: CVPR, 2015.
[130] X. Chen, A. Gupta, Spatial memory for context reasoning in object de-
tection, in: ICCV , 2017.
[131] S. Gidaris, N. Komodakis, Object detection via a multi-region and se-
37

==== Page 38 ====
mantic segmentation-aware cnn model, in: ICCV , 2015.
[132] B. Cheng, Y . Wei, H. Shi, R. Feris, J. Xiong, T. Huang, Revisiting rcnn:
On awakening the classiﬁcation power of faster rcnn, in: ECCV , 2018.
[133] X. Zhao, S. Liang, Y . Wei, Pseudo mask augmented object detection, in:
CVPR, 2018.
[134] Z. Zhang, S. Qiao, C. Xie, W. Shen, B. Wang, A. L. Yuille, Single-shot
object detection with enriched semantics, Tech. rep. (2018).
[135] A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, Contextual priming and feedback for faster
r-cnn, in: ECCV , 2016.
[136] B. Li, T. Wu, L. Zhang, R. Chu, Auto-context r-cnn, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.02842, 2018.
[137] Y . Liu, R. Wang, S. Shan, X. Chen, Structure inference net: Object
detection using scene-level context and instance-level relationships, in:
CVPR, 2018.
[138] H. Hu, J. Gu, Z. Zhang, J. Dai, Y . Wei, Relation networks for object
detection, in: CVPR, 2018.
[139] J. Gu, H. Hu, L. Wang, Y . Wei, J. Dai, Learning region features for object
detection, in: ECCV , 2018.
[140] H. Xu, X. Lv, X. Wang, Z. Ren, R. Chellappa, Deep regionlets for object
detection, in: ECCV , 2018.
[141] Z. Chen, S. Huang, D. Tao, Context reﬁnement for object detection, in:
ECCV , 2018.
[142] X. Zeng, W. Ouyang, B. Yang, J. Yan, X. Wang, Gated bi-directional
cnn for object detection, in: ECCV , 2016.
[143] J. Li, Y . Wei, X. Liang, J. Dong, T. Xu, J. Feng, S. Yan, Attentive con-
texts for object detection, in: IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2017.
[144] S. L. Xizhou Zhu, Han Hu, J. Dai, Deformable convnets v2: More de-
formable, better results, in: CVPR, 2019.
[145] R. Girshick, F. Iandola, T. Darrell, J. Malik, Deformable part models are
convolutional neural networks, in: CVPR, 2015.
[146] B. Singh, M. Najibi, L. S. Davis, Sniper: Efﬁcient multi-scale training,
in: NeurIPS, 2018.
[147] Y . L. Buyu Li, X. Wang, Gradient harmonized single-stage detector, in:
AAAI, 2019.
[148] A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, R. Girshick, Training region-based object de-
tectors with online hard example mining, in: CVPR, 2016.
[149] S. Gidaris, N. Komodakis, Locnet: Improving localization accuracy for
object detection, in: CVPR, 2016.
[150] S. Zagoruyko, A. Lerer, T.-Y . Lin, P. O. Pinheiro, S. Gross, S. Chintala,
P. Doll ´ar, A multipath network for object detection, in: BMVC, 2016.
[151] X. Lu, B. Li, Y . Yue, Q. Li, J. Yan, Grid r-cnn, in: CVPR, 2019.
[152] L. Tychsen-Smith, L. Petersson, Improving object localization with ﬁt-
ness nms and bounded iou loss, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00164,
2017.
[153] B. Yang, J. Yan, Z. Lei, S. Z. Li, Craft objects from images, in: CVPR,
2016.
[154] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, Y . Bengio, Generative adversarial nets, in:NeurIPS, 2014.
[155] J.-Y . Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, Unpaired image-to-image trans-
lation using cycle-consistent adversarial networkss, in: ICCV , 2017.
[156] A. Radford, L. Metz, S. Chintala, Unsupervised representation learn-
ing with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks, in: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
[157] A. Brock, J. Donahue, K. Simonyan, Large scale gan training for high
ﬁdelity natural image synthesis, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096,
2018.
[158] J. Li, X. Liang, Y . Wei, T. Xu, J. Feng, S. Yan, Perceptual generative
adversarial networks for small object detection, in: CVPR, 2017.
[159] X. Wang, A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, A-fast-rcnn: Hard positive genera-
tion via adversary for object detection, in: CVPR, 2017.
[160] R. G. Kaiming He, P. Dollro, Rethinking imagenet pre-training, in:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.08883, 2018.
[161] R. Zhu, S. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Wen, H. Shi, L. Bo, T. Mei, Scratchdet:
Exploring to train single-shot object detectors from scratch, in: CVPR,
2019.
[162] Z. Shen, H. Shi, R. Feris, L. Cao, S. Yan, D. Liu, X. Wang, X. Xue,
T. S. Huang, Learning object detectors from scratch with gated recurrent
feature pyramids, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00886, 2017.
[163] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, J. Dean, Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
[164] Q. Li, S. Jin, J. Yan, Mimicking very efﬁcient network for object detec-
tion, in: CVPR, 2017.
[165] N. Bodla, B. Singh, R. Chellappa, L. S. Davis, Soft-nms – improving
object detection with one line of code, in: ICCV , 2017.
[166] J. Hosang, R. Benenson, B. Schiele, Learning non-maximum suppres-
sion, in: CVPR, 2017.
[167] J. Huang, V . Rathod, C. Sun, M. Zhu, A. Korattikara, A. Fathi, I. Fischer,
Z. Wojna, Y . Song, S. Guadarrama, et al., Speed/accuracy trade-offs for
modern convolutional object detectors, in: CVPR, 2017.
[168] Z. Li, C. Peng, G. Yu, X. Zhang, Y . Deng, J. Sun, Light-head r-
cnn: In defense of two-stage object detector, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.07264, 2017.
[169] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, L.-C. Chen, Inverted
residuals and linear bottlenecks: Mobile networks for classiﬁcation, de-
tection and segmentation, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04381, 2018.
[170] A. Wong, M. J. Shaﬁee, F. Li, B. Chwyl, Tiny ssd: A tiny single-shot
detection deep convolutional neural network for real-time embedded ob-
ject detection, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06488, 2018.
[171] Y . Li, J. Li, W. Lin, J. Li, Tiny-dsod: Lightweight object detection for
resource-restricted usages, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.11013, 2018.
[172] K. S. D. A. Shang, Wenling, H. Lee., Understanding and improving
convolutional neural networks via concatenated rectiﬁed linear units, in:
ICML, 2016.
[173] Y . D. Kim, E. Park, S. Yoo, T. Choi, L. Yang, D. Shin, Compression
of deep convolutional neural networks for fast and low power mobile
38

==== Page 39 ====
applications, in: Computer Science, 2015.
[174] Y . He, X. Zhang, J. Sun, Channel pruning for accelerating very deep
neural networks, in: ICCV , 2017.
[175] Y . Gong, L. Liu, M. Yang, L. Bourdev, Compressing deep convolutional
networks using vector quantization, in: Computer Science, 2014.
[176] Y . Lin, S. Han, H. Mao, Y . Wang, W. J. Dally, Deep gradient compres-
sion: Reducing the communication bandwidth for distributed training,
in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01887, 2017.
[177] J. Wu, L. Cong, Y . Wang, Q. Hu, J. Cheng, Quantized convolutional
neural networks for mobile devices, in: CVPR, 2016.
[178] S. Han, H. Mao, W. J. Dally, Deep compression: Compressing deep
neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding,
in: Fiber, 2015.
[179] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, W. Dally, Learning both weights and connec-
tions for efﬁcient neural network, in: NeurIPS, 2015.
[180] E. Osuna, R. Freund, F. Girosit, Training support vector machines: an
application to face detection, in: CVPR, 1997.
[181] M. R ¨atsch, S. Romdhani, T. Vetter, Efﬁcient face detection by a cas-
caded support vector machine using haar-like features, in: Joint Pattern
Recognition Symposium, 2004.
[182] S. Romdhani, P. Torr, B. Scholkopf, A. Blake, Computationally efﬁcient
face detection, in: ICCV , 2001.
[183] X. Sun, P. Wu, S. C. Hoi, Face detection using deep learning: An im-
proved faster rcnn approach, in: Neurocomputing, 2018.
[184] Y . Liu, M. D. Levine, Multi-path region-based convolutional neural net-
work for accurate detection of unconstrained” hard faces”, in: Computer
and Robot Vision (CRV), 2017 14th Conference on, 2017.
[185] X. Tang, D. K. Du, Z. He, J. Liu, Pyramidbox: A context-assisted single
shot face detector, in: ECCV , 2018.
[186] C. Chi, S. Zhang, J. Xing, Z. Lei, S. Z. Li, X. Zou, Selective reﬁne-
ment network for high performance face detection, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02693, 2018.
[187] J. Li, Y . Wang, C. Wang, Y . Tai, J. Qian, J. Yang, C. Wang, J. Li,
F. Huang, Dsfd: Dual shot face detector, in: CVPR, 2019.
[188] J. Zhang, X. Wu, J. Zhu, S. C. Hoi, Feature agglomeration networks for
single stage face detection, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00721, 2017.
[189] M. Najibi, P. Samangouei, R. Chellappa, L. Davis, Ssh: Single stage
headless face detector, in: ICCV , 2017.
[190] Z. Hao, Y . Liu, H. Qin, J. Yan, X. Li, X. Hu, Scale-aware face detection,
in: CVPR, 2017.
[191] H. Wang, Z. Li, X. Ji, Y . Wang, Face r-cnn, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.01061, 2017.
[192] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, Y . Qiao, Jjoint face detection and alignment
using multi-task cascaded convolutional networks, in: IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Letters, 2016.
[193] P. Samangouei, M. Najibi, L. Davis, R. Chellappa, Face-magnet:
Magnifying feature maps to detect small faces, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05258, 2018.[194] C. Zhang, X. Xu, D. Tu, Face detection using improved faster rcnn, in:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.02142, 2018.
[195] C. Zhu, Y . Zheng, K. Luu, M. Savvides, Cms-rcnn: Contextual multi-
scale region-based cnn for unconstrained face detection, in: Deep Learn-
ing for Biometrics, 2017.
[196] B. Yu, D. Tao, Anchor cascade for efﬁcient face detection, in: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.03363, 2018.
[197] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Li, Y . Qiao, W. Liu, Detecting faces
using inside cascaded contextual cnn, in: ICCV , 2017.
[198] Y . Wang, X. Ji, Z. Zhou, H. Wang, Z. Li, Detecting faces us-
ing region-based fully convolutional networks, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.05256, 2017.
[199] V . Jain, E. Learned-Miller, Fddb: A benchmark for face detection in un-
constrained settings, Tech. Rep. UM-CS-2010-009, University of Mas-
sachusetts, Amherst (2010).
[200] S. Yang, P. Luo, C.-C. Loy, X. Tang, Wwider face: A face detection
benchmark, in: CVPR, 2016.
[201] J. Han, W. Nam, P. Dollar, Local decorrelation for improved detection,
in: NeurIPS, 2014.
[202] P. Doll ´ar, Z. Tu, P. Perona, S. Belongie, Integral channel features, in:
BMVC, 2009.
[203] P. Doll ´ar, R. Appel, S. Belongie, P. Perona, Fast feature pyramids for
object detection, in: TPAMI, 2014.
[204] C. P. Papageorgiou, M. Oren, T. Poggio, A general framework for object
detection, in: ICCV , 1998.
[205] G. Brazil, X. Yin, X. Liu, Illuminating pedestrians via simultaneous de-
tection & segmentation, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08564, 2017.
[206] X. Du, M. El-Khamy, J. Lee, L. Davis, Fused dnn: A deep neural net-
work fusion approach to fast and robust pedestrian detection, in: IEEE
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2017.
[207] S. Wang, J. Cheng, H. Liu, M. Tang, Pcn: Part and context information
for pedestrian detection with cnns, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04483,
2018.
[208] D. Xu, W. Ouyang, E. Ricci, X. Wang, N. Sebe, Learning cross-modal
deep representations for robust pedestrian detection, in: CVPR, 2017.
[209] R. Benenson, M. Omran, J. Hosang, B. Schiele, Ten years of pedestrian
detection, what have we learned?, in: ECCV , 2014.
[210] Z. Cai, M. Saberian, N. Vasconcelos, Learning complexity-aware cas-
cades for deep pedestrian detection, in: ICCV , 2015.
[211] P. Sermanet, K. Kavukcuoglu, S. Chintala, Y . LeCun, Pedestrian detec-
tion with unsupervised multi-stage feature learning, in: CVPR, 2013.
[212] L. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Liang, K. He, Is faster r-cnn doing well for pedes-
trian detection?, in: ECCV , 2016.
[213] X. Wang, T. Xiao, Y . Jiang, S. Shao, J. Sun, C. Shen, Repulsion loss:
Detecting pedestrians in a crowd, in: CVPR, 2018.
[214] S. Zhang, L. Wen, X. Bian, Z. Lei, S. Z. Li, Occlusion-aware r-cnn:
Detecting pedestrians in a crowd, in: ECCV , 2018.
[215] J. Mao, T. Xiao, Y . Jiang, Z. Cao, What can help pedestrian detection?,
39

==== Page 40 ====
in: CVPR, 2017.
[216] Y . Tian, P. Luo, X. Wang, X. Tang, Deep learning strong parts for pedes-
trian detection, in: CVPR, 2015.
[217] W. Ouyang, X. Wang, Joint deep learning for pedestrian detection, in:
ICCV , 2013.
[218] M. Mathias, R. Benenson, R. Timofte, L. Van Gool, Handling occlusions
with franken-classiﬁers, in: ICCV , 2013.
[219] W. Ouyang, X. Zeng, X. Wang, Modeling mutual visibility relationship
in pedestrian detection, in: CVPR, 2013.
[220] G. Duan, H. Ai, S. Lao, A structural ﬁlter approach to human detection,
in: ECCV , 2010.
[221] M. Enzweiler, A. Eigenstetter, B. Schiele, D. M. Gavrila, Multi-cue
pedestrian classiﬁcation with partial occlusion handling, in: CVPR,
2010.
[222] C. Zhou, J. Yuan, Bi-box regression for pedestrian detection and occlu-
sion estimation, in: ECCV , 2018.
[223] W. Ouyang, X. Wang, A discriminative deep model for pedestrian de-
tection with occlusion handling, in: CVPR, 2012.
[224] S. Tang, M. Andriluka, B. Schiele, Detection and tracking of occluded
people, in: IJCV , 2014.
[225] W. Ouyang, X. Wang, Single-pedestrian detection aided by multi-
pedestrian detection, in: CVPR, 2013.
[226] V . D. Shet, J. Neumann, V . Ramesh, L. S. Davis, Bilattice-based logical
reasoning for human detection, in: CVPR, 2007.
[227] Y . Zhou, L. Liu, L. Shao, M. Mellor, Dave: A uniﬁed framework for fast
vehicle detection and annotation, in: ECCV , 2016.
[228] T. Gebru, J. Krause, Y . Wang, D. Chen, J. Deng, L. Fei-Fei, Fine-grained
car detection for visual census estimation, in: AAAI, 2017.
[229] S. Majid Azimi, Shufﬂedet: Real-time vehicle detection network in on-
board embedded uav imagery, in: ECCV , 2018.
[230] Z. Zhu, D. Liang, S. Zhang, X. Huang, B. Li, S. Hu, Trafﬁc-sign detec-
tion and classiﬁcation in the wild, in: CVPR, 2016.
[231] A. Pon, O. Adrienko, A. Harakeh, S. L. Waslander, A hierarchical deep
architecture and mini-batch selection method for joint trafﬁc sign and
light detection, in: Conference on Computer and Robot Vision (CRV),
2018.
[232] W. Ke, J. Chen, J. Jiao, G. Zhao, Q. Ye, Srn: side-output residual net-
work for object symmetry detection in the wild, in: CVPR, 2017.
[233] W. Shen, K. Zhao, Y . Jiang, Y . Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Bai, Object skeleton
extraction in natural images by fusing scale-associated deep side out-
puts, in: CVPR, 2016.
[234] A. Kuznetsova, H. Rom, N. Alldrin, J. Uijlings, I. Krasin, J. Pont-Tuset,
S. Kamali, S. Popov, M. Malloci, T. Duerig, et al., The open images
dataset v4: Uniﬁed image classiﬁcation, object detection, and visual re-
lationship detection at scale, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00982, 2018.
[235] A. Gupta, P. Dollar, R. Girshick, Lvis: A dataset for large vocabulary
instance segmentation, in: CVPR, 2019.
[236] N. Bodla, B. Singh, R. Chellappa, L. S. Davis, Soft-nms–improving ob-ject detection with one line of code, in: ICCV , 2017.
[237] Y . Wu, K. He, Group normalization, in: ECCV , 2018.
[238] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, J. Jia, Path aggregation network for instance
segmentation, in: CVPR, 2018.
[239] Y . Li, Y . Chen, N. Wang, Z. Zhang, Scale-aware trident networks for
object detection, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.01892, 2019.
[240] X. Zhou, J. Zhuo, P. Krahenbuhl, Bottom-up object detection by group-
ing extreme and center points, in: CVPR, 2019.
[241] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, T. He, Fcos: Fully convolutional one-stage
object detection, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.01355, 2019.
[242] S. Zhang, R. Benenson, B. Schiele, Citypersons: A diverse dataset for
pedestrian detection, in: CVPR, 2017.
[243] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Benen-
son, U. Franke, S. Roth, B. Schiele, The cityscapes dataset for semantic
urban scene understanding, in: CVPR, 2016.
[244] P. Dollar, C. Wojek, B. Schiele, P. Perona, Pedestrian detection: An
evaluation of the state of the art, in: TPAMI, 2012.
[245] A. Ess, B. Leibe, L. Van Gool, Depth and appearance for mobile scene
analysis, in: ICCV , 2007.
[246] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, R. Urtasun, Vision meets robotics: The
kitti dataset, 2013.
[247] B. Zoph, V . Vasudevan, J. Shlens, Q. V . Le, Learning transferable archi-
tectures for scalable image recognition, in: CVPR, 2018.
[248] M. Tan, Q. V . Le, Efﬁcientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolu-
tional neural networks, in: arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11946, 2019.
[249] Y . Chen, T. Yang, X. Zhang, G. Meng, C. Pan, J. Sun, Detnas:
Neural architecture search on object detection, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.10979, 2019.
[250] G. Ghiasi, T.-Y . Lin, Q. V . Le, Nas-fpn: Learning scalable feature pyra-
mid architecture for object detection, in: CVPR, 2019.
[251] B. Zoph, E. D. Cubuk, G. Ghiasi, T.-Y . Lin, J. Shlens, Q. V . Le, Learn-
ing data augmentation strategies for object detection, in: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.11172, 2019.
[252] X. Dong, L. Zheng, F. Ma, Y . Yang, D. Meng, Few-example object de-
tection with model communication, in: TPAMI, 2018.
[253] E. Schwartz, L. Karlinsky, J. Shtok, S. Harary, M. Marder, S. Pankanti,
R. Feris, A. Kumar, R. Giries, A. M. Bronstein, Repmet: Representative-
based metric learning for classiﬁcation and one-shot object detection, in:
CVPR, 2019.
[254] H. Chen, Y . Wang, G. Wang, Y . Qiao, Lstd: A low-shot transfer detector
for object detection, in: AAAI, 2018.
[255] C. Peng, T. Xiao, Z. Li, Y . Jiang, X. Zhang, K. Jia, G. Yu, J. Sun, Megdet:
A large mini-batch object detector, in: CVPR, 2018.
[256] K. Shmelkov, C. Schmid, K. Alahari, Incremental learning of object de-
tectors without catastrophic forgetting, in: ICCV , 2017.
40

