==== Page 1 ====
REVIEW ARTICLE OPEN
Recent advances and applications of deep learning methods in
materials science
Kamal Choudhary1,2,3✉, Brian DeCost4, Chi Chen5, Anubhav Jain6, Francesca Tavazza1, Ryan Cohn7, Cheol Woo Park8,
Alok Choudhary9, Ankit Agrawal9, Simon J. L. Billinge10, Elizabeth Holm7, Shyue Ping Ong5and Chris Wolverton8
Deep learning (DL) is one of the fastest-growing topics in materials data science, with rapidly emerging applications spanning
atomistic, image-based, spectral, and textual data modalities. DL allows analysis of unstructured data and automated identi ﬁcation
of features. The recent development of large materials databases has fueled the application of DL methods in atomistic prediction
in particular. In contrast, advances in image and spectral data have largely leveraged synthetic data enabled by high-quality
forward models as well as by generative unsupervised DL methods. In this article, we present a high-level overview of deep learningmethods followed by a detailed discussion of recent developments of deep learning in atomistic simulation, materials imaging,
spectral analysis, and natural language processing. For each modality we discuss applications involving both theoretical and
experimental data, typical modeling approaches with their strengths and limitations, and relevant publicly available software anddatasets. We conclude the review with a discussion of recent cross-cutting work related to uncertainty quanti ﬁcation in this ﬁeld
and a brief perspective on limitations, challenges, and potential growth areas for DL methods in materials science.
npj Computational Materials            (2022) 8:59 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-022-00734-6
INTRODUCTION
“Processing-structure-property-performance ”is the key mantra in
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE)
1. The length and time
scales of material structures and phenomena vary signi ﬁcantly
among these four elements, adding further complexity2. For
instance, structural information can range from detailed knowl-edge of atomic coordinates of elements to the microscale spatialdistribution of phases (microstructure), to fragment connectivity
(mesoscale), to images and spectra. Establishing linkages between
the above components is a challenging task.
Both experimental and computational techniques are useful to
identify such relationships. Due to rapid growth in automation in
experimental equipment and immense expansion of computa-
tional resources, the size of public materials datasets has seenexponential growth. Several large experimental and computa-tional datasets
3–10have been developed through the Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI)11and the increasing adoption of Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable (FAIR)12principles. Such an
outburst of data requires automated analysis which can be
facilitated by machine learning (ML) techniques13–20.
Deep learning (DL)21,22is a specialized branch of machine
learning (ML). Originally inspired by biological models of
computation and cognition in the human brain23,24, one of DL ’s
major strengths is its potential to extract higher-level features
from the raw input data.
DL applications are rapidly replacing conventional systems in
many aspects of our daily lives, for example, in image and speech
recognition, web search, fraud detection, email/spam ﬁltering,
ﬁnancial risk modeling, and so on. DL techniques have beenproven to provide exciting new capabilities in numerous ﬁelds
(such as playing Go25, self-driving cars26, navigation, chip design,
particle physics, protein science, drug discovery, astrophysics,
object recognition27, etc).
Recently DL methods have been outperforming other machine
learning techniques in numerous scienti ﬁcﬁelds, such as
chemistry, physics, biology, and materials science20,28–32.D L
applications in MSE are still relatively new, and the ﬁeld has not
fully explored its potential, implications, and limitations. DL
provides new approaches for investigating material phenomenaand has pushed materials scientists to expand their traditional
toolset.
DL methods have been shown to act as a complementary
approach to physics-based methods for materials design. While
large datasets are often viewed as a prerequisite for successful DL
applications, techniques such as transfer learning, multi- ﬁdelity
modelling, and active learning can often make DL feasible for
small datasets as well
33–36.
Traditionally, materials have been designed experimentally
using trial and error methods with a strong dose of chemical
intuition. In addition to being a very costly and time-consuming
approach, the number of material combinations is so huge that it
is intractable to study experimentally, leading to the need for
empirical formulation and computational methods. While compu-
tational approaches (such as density functional theory, molecular
dynamics, Monte Carlo, phase- ﬁeld, ﬁnite elements) are much
faster and cheaper than experiments, they are still limited by
length and time scale constraints, which in turn limits their
respective domains of applicability. DL methods can offer
substantial speedups compared to conventional scienti ﬁc
1Materials Science and Engineering Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA.2Theiss Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
3DeepMaterials LLC, Silver Spring, MD 20906, USA.4Material Measurement Science Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA.
5Department of NanoEngineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.6Energy Technologies Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA,
USA.7Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.8Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.9Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.10Department of
Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics and the Data Science Institute, Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Columbia Univers ity, New York, NY 10027,
USA.✉email: kamal.choudhary@nist.govwww.nature.com/npjcompumats
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
1234567890():,;

==== Page 2 ====
computing, and, for some applications, are reaching an accuracy
level comparable to physics-based or computational models.
Moreover, entering a new domain of materials science and
performing cutting-edge research requires years of education,training, and the development of specialized skills and intuition.Fortunately, we now live in an era of increasingly open data andcomputational resources. Mature, well-documented DL librariesmake DL research much more easily accessible to newcomersthan almost any other research ﬁeld. Testing and benchmarking
methodologies such as under ﬁtting/over ﬁtting/cross-valida-
tion
15,16,37are common knowledge, and standards for measuring
model performance are well established in the community.
Despite their many advantages, DL methods have disadvan-
tages too, the most signi ﬁcant one being their black-box nature38
which may hinder physical insights into the phenomena under
examination. Evaluating and increasing the interpretability andexplainability of DL models remains an active ﬁeld of research.
Generally a DL model has a few thousand to millions ofparameters, making model interpretation and direct generationof scienti ﬁc insight dif ﬁcult.
Although there are several good recent reviews of ML
applications in MSE
15–17,19,39–49, DL for materials has been
advancing rapidly, warranting a dedicated review to cover theexplosion of research in this ﬁeld. This article discusses some of
the basic principles in DL methods and highlights major trendsamong the recent advances in DL applications for materialsscience. As the tools and datasets for DL applications in materialskeep evolving, we provide a github repository ( https://github.
com/deepmaterials/dlmatreview ) that can be updated as new
resources are made publicly available.
GENERAL MACHINE LEARNING CONCEPTS
It is beyond the scope of this article to give a detailed hands-on
introduction to Deep Learning. There are many materials forthis purpose, for examp le, the free online book “Neural
N e t w o r k sa n dD e e pL e a r n i n g ”by Michael Nielsen ( http://
neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com ), Deep Learning by Good-
fellow et al.
21, and multiple online courses at Coursera, Udemy,
and so on. Rather, this article aims to motivate materialsscientist researchers in the types of problems that are amenableto DL, and to introduce some of the basic concepts, jargon, and
materials-speci ﬁc databases and software (at the time of
writing) as a helpful on-ramp to help get started. With this inmind, we begin with a very basic introduction to Deep learning.Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
13is the development of machines and
algorithms that mimic human intelligence, for example, byoptimizing actions to achieve certain goals. Machine learning(ML) is a subset of AI, and provides the ability to learn withoutexplicitly being programmed for a given dataset such as playingchess, social network recommendation etc. DL, in turn, is thesubset of ML that takes inspiration from biological brains and usesmultilayer neural networks to solve ML tasks. A schematic of AI-ML-DL context and some of the key application areas of DL in thematerials science and engineering ﬁeld are shown in Fig. 1.
Some of the commonly used ML technologies are linear
regression, decision trees, and random forest in which generalizedmodels are trained to learn coef ﬁcients/weights/parameters for a
given dataset (usually structured i.e., on a grid or a spreadsheet).
Applying traditional ML techniques to unstructured data (such
as pixels or features from an image, sounds, text, and graphs) ischallenging because users have to ﬁrst extract generalized
meaningful representations or features themselves (such ascalculating pair-distribution for an atomic structure) and thentrain the ML models. Hence, the process becomes time-consum-ing, brittle, and not easily scalable. Here, deep learning (DL)techniques become more important.
DL methods are based on arti ﬁcial neural networks and
allied techniques. According to the “universal approximation
theorem ”
50,51, neural networks can approximate any function
to arbitrary accuracy. However, it is important to note thatthe theorem doesn ’t guarantee that the functions can be
learnt easily
52.
NEURAL NETWORKS
Perceptron
A perceptron or a single arti ﬁcial neuron53is the building block of
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) and performs forward propaga-
tion of information. For a set of inputs [ x1,x2,..., xm] to the
perceptron, we assign ﬂoating number weights (and biases to shift
wights) [ w1,w2,..., wm] and then we multiply them correspond-
ingly together to get a sum of all of them. Some of the commonsoftware packages allowing NN trainings are: PyTorch
54, Tensor-
ﬂow55, and MXNet56. Please note that certain commercial
equipment, instruments, or materials are identi ﬁed in this paper
in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Suchidenti ﬁcation is not intended to imply recommendation or
endorsement by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the
Fig. 1 Schematic showing an overview of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and deep learning (DL) methods and its
applications in materials science and engineering. Deep learning is considered a part of machine learning, which is contained in an umbrella
term arti ﬁcial intelligence.
K. Choudhary et al.
2
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences1234567890():,;

==== Page 3 ====
materials or equipment identi ﬁed are necessarily the best
available for the purpose.
Activation function
Activation functions (such as sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent (tanh),
rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU), leaky ReLU, Swish) are the critical
nonlinear components that enable neural networks to compose
many small building blocks to learn complex nonlinear functions.For example, the sigmoid activation maps real numbers to the
range (0, 1); this activation function is often used in the last layer
of binary classi ﬁers to model probabilities. The choice of activation
function can affect training ef ﬁciency as well as ﬁnal accuracy
57.
Loss function, gradient descent, and normalization
The weight matrices of a neural network are initialized randomly
or obtained from a pre-trained model. These weight matrices are
multiplied with the input matrix (or output from a previous layer)
and subjected to a nonlinear activation function to yield updatedrepresentations, which are often referred to as activations orfeature maps. The loss function (also known as an objective
function or empirical risk) is calculated by comparing the output of
the neural network and the known target value data. Typically,network weights are iteratively updated via stochastic gradientdescent algorithms to minimize the loss function until the desired
accuracy is achieved. Most modern deep learning frameworks
facilitate this by using reverse-mode automatic differentiation
58to
obtain the partial derivatives of the loss function with respect to
each network parameter through recursive application of the
chain rule. Colloquially, this is also known as back-propagation.
Common gradient descent algorithms include: Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), Adam, Adagrad etc. The learning rate is
an important parameter in gradient descent. Except for SGD, all
other methods use adaptive learning parameter tuning. Depend-ing on the objective such as classi ﬁcation or regression, different
loss functions such as Binary Cross Entropy (BCE), Negative Log
likelihood (NLLL) or Mean Squared Error (MSE) are used.
The inputs of a neural network are generally scaled i.e.,
normalized to have zero mean and unit standard deviation.Scaling is also applied to the input of hidden layers (using batch or
layer normalization) to improve the stability of ANNs.
Epoch and mini-batches
A single pass of the entire training data is called an epoch, and
multiple epochs are performed until the weights converge. In DL,datasets are usually large and computing gradients for the entire
dataset and network becomes challenging. Hence, the forward
passes are done with small subsets of the training data calledmini-batches.
Under ﬁtting, over ﬁtting, regularization, and early stopping
During an ML training, the dataset is split into training,
validation, and test sets. The test set is never used during the
training process. A model is said to be under ﬁtting if the model
performs poorly on the trainin g set and lacks the capacity to
fully learn the training data. A model is said to over ﬁti ft h e
model performs too well on the training data but does not
perform well on the validation data. Over ﬁtting is controlled
with regularization techniqu es such as L2 regularization,
dropout, and early stopping
37.
Regularization discourages the model from simply memorizing
the training data, resulting in a model that is more generalizable.
Over ﬁtting models are often characterized by neurons that have
weights with large magnitudes. L2 regularization reduces the
possibility of over ﬁtting by adding an additional term to the loss
function that penalizes the large weight values, keeping the valuesof the weights and biases small during training. Another popularregularization is dropout
59in which we randomly set the
activations for an NN layer to zero during training. Similar to
bagging60, the use of dropout brings about the same effect of
training a collection of randomly chosen models which prevents
the co-adaptations among the neurons, consequently reducing
the likelihood of the model from over ﬁtting. In early stopping,
further epochs for training are stopped before the model over ﬁts
i.e., accuracy on the validation set ﬂattens or decreases.
CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS
Convolutional neural networks (CNN)61can be viewed as a
regularized version of multilayer perceptrons with a stronginductive bias for learning translation-invariant image representa-
tions. There are four main components in CNNs: (a) learnable
convolution ﬁlterbanks, (b) nonlinear activations, (c) spatial
coarsening (via pooling or strided convolution), (d) a prediction
module, often consisting of fully connected layers that operate ona global instance representation.
In CNNs we use convolution functions with multiple kernels or
ﬁlters with trainable and shared weights or parameters, instead of
general matrix multiplication. These ﬁlters/kernels are matrices
with a relatively small number of rows and columns that convolve
over the input to automatically extract high-level local features in
the form of feature maps. The ﬁlters slide/convolve (element-wise
multiply) across the input with a ﬁxed number of strides to
produce the feature map and the information thus learnt is passed
to the hidden/fully connected layers. Depending on the input
data, these ﬁlters can be one, two, or three-dimensional.
Similar to the fully connected NNs, nonlinearities such as ReLU
are then applied that allows us to deal with nonlinear and
complicated data. The pooling operation preserves spatialinvariance, downsamples and reduces the dimension of each
feature map obtained after convolution. These downsampling/
pooling operations can be of different types such as maximum-
pooling, minimum-pooling, average pooling, and sum pooling.
After one or more convolutional and pooling layers, the outputsare usually reduced to a one-dimensional global representation.
CNNs are especially popular for image data.
GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS
Graphs and their variantsClassical CNNs as described above are based on a regular grid
Euclidean data (such as 2D grid in images). However, real-life datastructures, such as social networks, segments of images, word
vectors, recommender systems, and atomic/molecular structures,
are usually non-Euclidean. In such cases, graph-based non-Euclidean data structures become especially important.
Mathematically, a graph Gis de ﬁned as a set of nodes/vertices
V, a set of edges/links, Eand node features, X:G=(V,E,X)
62–64and
can be used to represent non-Euclidean data. An edge is formedbetween a pair of two nodes and contains the relation information
between the nodes. Each node and edge can have attributes/
features associated with it. An adjacency matrix Ais a square
matrix indicating connections between the nodes or not in the
form of 1 (connected) and 0 (unconnected). A graph can be of
various types such as: undirected/directed, weighted/unweighted,
homogeneous/heterogeneous, static/dynamic.
An undirected graph captures symmetric relations between
nodes, while a directed one captures asymmetric relations such
that Aij≠Aji. In a weighted graph, each edge is associated with a
scalar weight rather than just 1s and 0s. In a homogeneous graph,
all the nodes represent instances of the same type, and all theedges capture relations of the same type while in a hetero-
geneous graph, the nodes and edges can be of different types.
Heterogeneous graphs provide an easy interface for managingK. Choudhary et al.
3
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 4 ====
nodes and edges of different types as well as their associated
features. When input features or graph topology vary with time,
they are called dynamic graphs otherwise they are considered
static. If a node is connected to another node more than once it istermed a multi-graph.
Types of GNNs
At present, GNNs are probably the most popular AI method for
predicting various materials properties based on structuralinformation
33,65–69. Graph neural networks (GNNs) are DL methods
that operate on graph domain and can capture the dependence
of graphs via message passing between the nodes and edges ofgraphs. There are two key steps in GNN training: (a) we ﬁrst
aggregate information from neighbors and (b) update the nodes
and/or edges. Importantly, aggregation is permutation invariant.Similar to the fully connected NNs, the input node features, X
(with embedding matrix) are multiplied with the adjacency matrix
and the weight matrices and then multiplied with the nonlinearactivation function to provide outputs for the next layer. This
method is called the propagation rule.
Based on the propagation rule and aggregation methodology,
there could be different variants of GNNs such as Graphconvolutional network (GCN)
70, Graph attention network (GAT)71,
Relational-GCN72, graph recurrent network (GRN)73, Graph isomer-
ism network (GIN)74, and Line graph neural network (LGNN)75.
Graph convolutional neural networks are the most popular GNNs.
SEQUENCE-TO-SEQUENCE MODELS
Traditionally, learning from sequential inputs such as text involves
generating a ﬁxed-length input from the data. For example, the
“bag-of-words ”approach simply counts the number of instances
of each word in a document and produces a ﬁxed-length vector
that is the size of the overall vocabulary.
In contrast, sequence-to-sequence models can take into
account sequential/contextual information about each word
and produce outputs of arbitrary length. For example, in named
entity recognition (NER), an input sequence of words (e.g., a
chemical abstract) is mapped to an output sequence of “entities ”
or categories where every word in the sequence is assigned a
category.
An early form of sequence-to-sequence model is the recurrent
neural network, or RNN. Unlike the fully connected NN architec-
ture, where there is no connection between hidden nodes in thesame layer, but only between nodes in adjacent layers, RNN has
feedback connections. Each hidden layer can be unfolded and
processed similarly to traditional NNs sharing the same weight
matrices. There are multiple types of RNNs, of which the most
common ones are: gated recurrent unit recurrent neural network(GRURNN), long short-term memory (LSTM) network, and clock-
work RNN (CW-RNN)
76.
However, all such RNNs suffer from some drawbacks, includ-
ing: (i) dif ﬁculty of parallelization and therefore dif ﬁculty in
training on large datasets and (ii) dif ﬁculty in preserving long-
range contextual information due to the “vanishing gradient ”
problem. Nevertheless, as we will later describe, LSTMs have
been successfully applied to various NER problems in thematerials domain.
More recently, sequence-to-sequence models based on a
“transformer ”architecture, such as Google ’s Bidirectional Enco-
der Representations from Transformers (BERT) model
77,h a v e
helped address some of the issues of traditional RNNs. Rather
than passing a state vector that is iterated word-by-word, such
models use an attention mechanism to allow access to allprevious words simultaneously without explicit time steps. This
mechanism facilitates parallelization and also better preserves
long-term context.GENERATIVE MODELS
While the above DL frameworks are based on supervised machine
learning (i.e., we know the target or ground truth data such as inclassi ﬁcation and regression) and discriminative (i.e., learn
differentiating features between various datasets), many AI tasks
are based on unsupervised (such as clustering) and are generative(i.e., aim to learn underlying distributions)
78.
Generative models are used to (a) generate data samples similar
to the training set with variations i.e., augmentation and for
synthetic data, (b) learn good generalized latent features, (c) guide
mixed reality applications such as virtual try-on. There are varioustypes of generative models, of which the most common are: (a)variational encoders (VAE), which explicitly de ﬁne and learn
likelihood of data, (b) Generative adversarial networks (GAN),
which learn to directly generate samples from model ’s distribu-
tion, without de ﬁning any density function.
A VAE model has two components: namely encoder and
decoder. A VAE ’s encoder takes input from a target distribution
and compresses it into a low-dimensional latent space. Then the
decoder takes that latent space representation and reproducesthe original image. Once the network is trained, we can generatelatent space representations of various images, and interpolate
between these before forwarding them through the decoder
which produces new images. A VAE is similar to a principalcomponent analysis (PCA) but instead of linear data assumption in
PCA, VAEs work in nonlinear domain. A GAN model also has two
components: namely generator, and discriminator. GAN ’s gen-
erator generates fake/synthetic data that could fool the discrimi-nator. Its discriminator tries to distinguish fake data from real ones.
This process is also termed as “min-max two-player game. ”We
note that VAE models learn the hidden state distributions duringthe training process, while GAN ’s hidden state distributions are
prede ﬁned. Rather GAN generators serve to generate images that
could fool the discriminator. These techniques are widely used forimages and spectra and have also been recently applied to atomicstructures.
DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING
Reinforcement learning (RL) deals with tasks in which a
computational agent learns to make decisions by trial and error.
Deep RL uses DL into the RL framework, allowing agents to makedecisions from unstructured input data
79. In traditional RL,
Markov decision process (MDP) is used in which an agent at
every timestep takes action to receive a scalar reward andtransitions to the next state according to system dynamics tolearn policy in order to maximize returns. However, in deep RL,
the states are high-dimensional (such as continuous images or
spectra) which act as an input to DL methods. DRL architecturescan be either model-based or model-free.
SCIENTIFIC MACHINE LEARNING
The nascent ﬁeld of scienti ﬁc machine learning (SciML)
80is
creating new opportunities across all paradigms of machine
learning, and deep learning in particular. SciML is focused on
creating ML systems that incorporate scienti ﬁc knowledge and
physical principles, either directly in the speci ﬁc form of the model
or indirectly through the optimization algorithms used for
training. This offers potential improvements in sample andtraining complexity, robustness (particularly under extrapolation),and model interpretability. One prominent theme can be found in
ref.
57. Such implementations usually involve applying multiple
physics-based constraints while training a DL model81–83. One of
the key challenges of universal function approximation is that a
NN can quickly learn spurious features that have nothing to do
with the features that a researcher could be actually interested in,
K. Choudhary et al.
4
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 5 ====
within the data. In this sense, physics-based regularization can
assist. Physics-based deep learning can also aid in inverse design
problems, a challenging but important task84,85. On the ﬂip side,
deep Learning using Graph Neural Nets and symbolic regression(stochastically building symbolic expressions) has even been used
to“discover ”symbolic equations from data that capture known
(and unknown) physics behind the data
86, i.e., to deep learn a
physics model rather than to use a physics model to constrain DL.
OVERVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
Some aspects of successful DL application that require materials-
science-speci ﬁc considerations are:
(1) acquiring large, balanced, and diverse datasets (often on the
order of 10,000 data points or more),
(2) determing an appropriate DL approach and suitable vector
or graph representation of the input samples, and
(3) selecting appropriate performance metrics relevant to
scienti ﬁc goals.
In the following sections we discuss some of the key areas of
materials science in which DL has been applied with available linksto repositories and datasets that help in the reproducibility and
extensibility of the work. In this review we categorize materials
science applications at a high level by the type of input dataconsidered: 11 atomistic, 12 stoichiometric, 13 spectral, 14 image,
and 15 text. We summarize prevailing machine learning tasks and
their impact on materials research and development within eachbroad materials data modality.
APPLICATIONS IN ATOMISTIC REPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we provide a few examples of solving materials
science problems with DL methods trained on atomistic data. The
atomic structure of material usually consists of atomic coordinatesand atomic composition information of material. An arbitrary
number of atoms and types of elements in a system poses a
challenge to apply traditional ML algorithms for atomisticpredictions. DL-based methods are an obvious strategy to tackle
this problem. There have been several previous attempts to
represent crystals and molecules using ﬁxed-size descriptors such
as Coulomb matrix
87–89, classical force ﬁeld inspired descriptors
(CFID)90–92, pair-distribution function (PRDF), Voronoi tessella-
tion93–95. Recently graph neural network methods have been
shown to surpass previous hand-crafted feature set28.
DL for atomistic materials applications include: (a) force- ﬁeld
development, (b) direct property predictions, (c) materials screen-
ing. In addition to the above points, we also elucidate upon someof the recent generative adversarial network and complimentary
methods to atomistic aproaches.
Databases and software libraries
In Table 1we provide some of the commonly used datasets used
for atomistic DL models for molecules, solids, and proteins. Wenote that the computational methods used for different datasets
are different and many of them are continuously evolving.
Generally it takes years to generate such databases usingconventional methods such as density functional theory; incontrast, DL methods can be used to make predictions with
much reduced computational cost and reasonable accuracy.
Table 1we provide DL software packages used for atomistic
materials design. The type of models includes general property
(GP) predictors and interatomic force ﬁelds (FF). The models have
been demonstrated in molecules (Mol), solid-state materials (Sol),or proteins (Prot). For some force ﬁelds, high-performance large-
scale implementations (LSI) that leverage paralleling computing
exist. Some of these methods mainly used interatomic distancesto build graphs while others use distances as well as bond-angle
information. Recently, including bond angle within GNN has beenshown to drastically improve the performance with comparablecomputational timings.
Force- ﬁeld development
Theﬁrst application includes the development of DL-based force
ﬁelds (FF)
96,97/interatomic potentials. Some of the major advan-
tages of such applications are that they are very fast (on the orderof hundreds to thousands times
64) for making predictions and
solving the tenuous development of FFs, but the disadvantage is
they still require a large dataset using computationally expensive
methods to train.
Models such as Behler-Parrinello neural network (BPNN) and its
variants98,99are used for developing interatomic potentials that
can be used beyond just 0 K temperature and time-dependentbehavior using molecular dynamics simulations such as fornanoparticles
100. Such FF models have been developed for
molecular systems, such as water, methane, and other organicmolecules
99,101as well as solids such as silicon98, sodium102,
graphite103, and titania ( TiO 2)104.
While the above works are mainly based on NNs, there has also
been the development of graph neural network force- ﬁeld
(GNNFF) framework105,106that bypasses both computational
bottlenecks. GNNFF can predict atomic forces directly usingautomatically extracted structural features that are not onlytranslationally invariant, but rotationally-covariant to the coordi-nate space of the atomic positions, i.e., the features and hence thepredicted force vectors rotate the same way as the rotation ofcoordinates. In addition to the development of pure NN-basedFFs, there have also been recent developments of combiningtraditional FFs such as bond-order potentials with NNs and ReaxFFwith message passing neural network (MPNN) that can help
mitigate the NNs issue for extrapolation
82,107.
Direct property prediction from atomistic con ﬁgurations
DL methods can be used to establish a structure-property
relationship between atomic structure and their properties with
high accuracy28,108. Models such as SchNet, crystal graph
convolutional neural network (CGCNN), improved crystal graphconvolutional neural network (iCGCNN), directional messagepassing neural network (DimeNet), atomistic line graph neuralnetwork (ALIGNN) and materials graph neural network (MEGNet)shown in Table 1have been used to predict up to 50 properties of
crystalline and molecular materials. These property datasets areusually obtained from ab-initio calculations. A schematic of suchmodels shown in Fig. 2. While SchNet, CGCNN, MEGNet are
primarily based on atomic distances, iCGCNN, DimeNet, andALIGNN models capture many-body interactions using GCNN.
Some of these properties include formation energies, electronic
bandgaps, solar-cell ef ﬁciency, topological spin-orbit spillage,
dielectric constants, piezoelectric constants, 2D exfoliation ener-gies, electric ﬁeld gradients, elastic modulus, Seebeck coef ﬁcients,
power factors, carrier effective masses, highest occupied mole-cular orbital, lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, energy gap,zero-point vibrational energy, dipole moment, isotropic polariz-ability, electronic spatial extent, internal energy.
For instance, the current state-of-the-art mean absolute error for
formation energy for solids at 0 K is 0.022 eV/atom as obtained by
the ALIGNN model
65. DL is also heavily being used for predicting
catalytic behavior of materials such as the Open Catalyst Project109
which is driven by the DL methods materials design. There is anongoing effort to continuously improve the models. Usuallyenergy-based models such as formation and total energies aremore accurate than electronic property-based models such asbandgaps and power factors.K. Choudhary et al.
5
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 6 ====
Table 1. Databases and software for DL atomistic design ( ‘k’,‘mil ’=thousand, million).
Databases
DB name Datasize Link Ref.
JARVIS-DFT 56k https://jarvis.nist.gov/jarvisdft/3
JARVIS-FF 2.5k https://jarvis.nist.gov/jarvisff/3
MP 144k https://materialsproject.org/5
OQMD 816k http://oqmd.org/4
AFLOW 3.5mil http://www.a ﬂowlib.org/6
QM9 134k http://quantum-machine.org/datasets/7
ANI 20mil https://github.com/isayev/ANI1_dataset96
MD17 1mil http://quantum-machine.org/datasets308
Tox21 760k https://tox21.gov/resources/309
CCCBDB 2069 https://cccbdb.nist.gov/310
HOPV15 350 https://doi.org/10.6084/m9. ﬁgshare.1610063311
C2DB 4000 https://cmr.fysik.dtu.dk/c2db/c2db.html312
FreeSolv 504 https://github.com/MobleyLab/FreeSolv313
NOMAD 11mil https://nomad-lab.eu/prod/rae/gui/search8
OPTIMADE 18mil http://www.optimade.org/providers-dashboard/314
Open catalyst
project 1.2mil https://opencatalystproject.org315
MatBench 200k https://matbench.materialsproject.org/316
MCloud 22mil https://www.materialscloud.org/home#statistics317
CoreMOF 163k https://mof.tech.northwestern.edu/318
QMOF 22k https://github.com/arosen93/QMOF124
PDB 183k https://www.rcsb.org/319
PDBBind 23k http://www.pdbbind.org.cn/9
MOAD 39k http://www.bindingmoad.org/320
Software packages
Model name Applications Link
Ref.
ALIGNN Mol, Sol https://github.com/usnistgov/alignn65
SchNetPack Mol, Sol https://github.com/atomistic-machine-learning69
CGCNN Sol https://github.com/txie-93/cgcnn67
MEGNet Mol, Sol https://github.com/materialsvirtuallab/megnet33
DimeNet Mol https://github.com/klicperajo/dimenet68
MPNN Mol https://github.com/priba/nmp_qc108
MatDeepLearn Sol https://github.com/vxfung/MatDeepLearn321
GATGCNN Sol https://github.com/superlouis/GATGNN322
ANI Mol https://github.com/isayev/ASE_ANI96
Amp Sol https://bitbucket.org/andrewpeterson/amp323
TensorMol Mol https://github.com/jparkhill/TensorMol324
TorchMD Mol https://github.com/torchmd/torchmd325
PROPhet Sol https://github.com/biklooost/PROPhet326
DeepMD Mol https://github.com/deepmodeling/deepmd-kit101,327
ænet Sol https://github.com/atomisticnet/aenet328
E3NN Mol https://github.com/e3nn/e3nn329
Neural
ﬁngerprint Mol https://github.com/HIPS/neural- ﬁngerprint330
DeepChemSt. Mol https://github.com/MingCPU/DeepChemStable331
MoleculeNet Mol, Sol https://github.com/deepchem/deepchem332
dgl-lifesci Prot https://github.com/awslabs/dgl-lifesci66
gnina Prot https://github.com/gnina/gnina110
K. Choudhary et al.
6
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 7 ====
In addition to molecules and solids, property predictions
models have also been used for bio-materials such as proteins,which can be viewed as large molecules. There have been severalefforts for predicting protein-based properties, such as binding
afﬁnity
66and docking predictions110.
There have also been several applications for identifying
reasonable chemical space using DL methods such as autoenco-ders
111and reinforcement learning112 –114for inverse materials
design. Inverse materials design with techniques such as GAN
deals with ﬁnding chemical compounds with suitable properties
and act as complementary to forward prediction models. Whilesuch concepts have been widely applied to molecular systems,
115,
recently these methods have been applied to solids as well116 –120.
Fast materials screening
DFT-based high-throughput methods are usually limited to a few
thousands of compounds and take a long time for calculations,
DL-based methods can aid this process and allow much fasterpredictions. DL-based property prediction models mentionedabove can be used for pre-screening chemical compounds.
Hence, DL-based tools can be viewed as a pre-screening tool for
traditional methods such as DFT. For example, Xie et al. usedCGCNN model to screen stable perovskite materials
67as well
hierarchical visualization of materials space121. Park et al.122used
iCGCNN to screen ThCr 2Si2-type materials. Lugier et al. used DL
methods to predict thermoelectric properties123. Rosen et al.124
used graph neural network models to predict the bandgaps ofmetal-organic frameworks. DL for molecular materials has been
used to predict technologically important properties such as
aqueous solubility
125and toxicity126.It should be noted that the full atomistic representations and
the associated DL models are only possible if the crystal structure
and atom positions are available. In practice, the precise atompositions are only available from DFT structural relaxations orexperiments, and are one of the goals for materials discovery
instead of the starting point. Hence, alternative methods have
been proposed to bypass the necessity for atom positions inbuilding DL models. For example, Jain and Bligaard
127proposed
the atomic position-independent descriptors and used a CNN
model to learn the energies of crystals. Such descriptors include
information based only on the symmetry (e.g., space group andWyckoff position). In principle, the method can be applieduniversally in all crystals. Nevertheless, the model errors tend to
be much higher than graph-based models. Similar coarse-grained
representation using Wyckoff representation was also used byGoodall et al.
128. Alternatively, Zuo et al.129started from the
hypothetical structures without precise atom positions, and used a
Bayesian optimization method coupled with a MEGNet energy
model as an energy evaluator to perform direct structuralrelaxation. Applying the Bayesian optimization with symmetryrelaxation (BOWSR) algorithm successfully discovered ReWB(Pca2
1) and MoWC 2(P6 3/mmc) hard materials, which were then
experimentally synthesized.
APPLICATIONS IN CHEMICAL FORMULA AND SEGMENT
REPRESENTATIONS
One of the earliest applications for DL included SMILES for
molecules, elemental fractions and chemical descriptors for solids,
and sequence of protein names as descriptors. Such descriptorslack explicit inclusion of atomic structure information but are still
(a) CGCNN (b) ALIGNN
(c) MEGNet (d) iCGCNN
Fig. 2 Schematic representations of an atomic structure as a graph. a CGCNN model in which crystals are converted to graphs with nodes
representing atoms in the unit cell and edges representing atom connections. Nodes and edges are characterized by vectors corresponding
to the atoms and bonds in the crystal, respectively [Reprinted with permission from ref.67Copyright 2019 American Physical Society],
bALIGNN65model in which the convolution layer alternates between message passing on the bond graph and its bond-angle line graph.
cMEGNet in which the initial graph is represented by the set of atomic attributes, bond attributes and global state attributes [Reprinted with
permission from ref.33Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society] model, diCGCNN model in which multiple edges connect a node to
neighboring nodes to show the number of Voronoi neighbors [Reprinted with permission from ref.122Copyright 2019 American Physical
Society].K. Choudhary et al.
7
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 8 ====
useful for various pre-screening applications for both theoretical
and experimental data.
SMILES and fragment representation
The simpli ﬁed molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES) is a
method to represent elemental and bonding for molecular
structures using short American Standard Code for Information
Interchange (ASCII) strings. SMILES can express structural differ-ences including the chirality of compounds, making it more useful
than a simply chemical formula. A SMILES string is a simple grid-
like (1-D grid) structure that can represent molecular sequencessuch as DNA, macromolecules/polymers, protein sequencesalso
130,131. In addition to the chemical constituents as in the
chemical formula, bondings (such as double and triple bondings)
are represented by special symbols (such as ’=’and ’#’). The
presence of a branch point indicated using a left-hand bracket “(”
while the right-hand bracket “)”indicates that all the atoms in that
branch have been taken into account. SMILES strings are
represented as a distributed representation termed a SMILESfeature matrix (as a sparse matrix), and then we can apply DL to
the matrix similar to image data. The length of the SMILES matrix
is generally kept ﬁxed (such as 400) during training and in
addition to the SMILES multiple elemental attributes and bondingattributes (such as chirality, aromaticity) can be used. Key DL tasks
for molecules include (a) novel molecule design, (b) molecule
screening.
Novel molecules with target properties can designed using VAE,
GAN and RNN based methods
132 –134. These DL-generated
molecules might not be physically valid, but the goal is to train
the model to learn the patterns in SMILES strings such that theoutput resembles valid molecules. Then chemical intuitions can befurther used to screen the molecules. DL for SMILES can also be
used for molecularscreening such as to predict molecular toxicity.
Some of the common SMILES datasets are: ZINC
135, Tox21136, and
PubChem137.
Due to the limitations to enforce the generation of valid
molecular structures from SMILES, fragment-based models aredeveloped such as DeepFrag and DeepFrag-K
138,139. In fragment-
based models, a ligand/receptor complex is removed and then a
DL model is trained to predict the most suitable fragment
substituent. A set of useful tools for SMILES and fragmentrepresentations are provided in Table 2.
Chemical formula representation
There are several ways of using the chemical formula-based
representations for building ML/DL models, beginning with a
simple vector of raw elemental fractions
140,141or of weight
percentages of alloying compositions142 –145, as well as more
sophisticated hand-crafted descriptors or physical attributes toadd known chemistry knowledge (e.g., electronegativity, valency,
etc. of constituent elements) to the feature representations
146 –151.
Statistical and mathematical operations such as average, max, min,median, mode, and exponentiation can be carried out on
elemental properties of the constituent elements to get a set of
descriptors for a given compound. The number of suchcomposition-based features can range from a few dozens to afew hundreds. One of the commonly used representations that
have been shown to work for a variety of different use-cases is the
materials agnostic platform for informatics and exploration(MagPie)
150. All these composition-based representations can be
used with both traditional ML methods such as Random Forest as
well as DL.
It is relevant to note that ElemNet141, which is a 17-layer neural
network composed of fully connected layers and uses only raw
elemental fractions as input, was found to signi ﬁcantly outperform
traditional ML methods such as Random Forest, even when theywere allowed to use more sophisticated physical attributes basedon MagPie as input. Although no periodic table information was
provided to the model, it was found to self-learn some interesting
chemistry, like groups (element similarity) and charge balance
(element interaction). It was also able to predict phase diagrams
on unseen materials systems, underscoring the power of DL for
representation learning directly from raw inputs without explicit
feature extraction. Further increasing the depth of the network
was found to adversely affect the model accuracy due to the
vanishing gradient problem. To address this issue, Jha et al.
152
developed IRNet, which uses individual residual learning to allow asmoother ﬂow of gradients and enable deeper learning for cases
where big data is available. IRNet models were tested on a variety
of big and small materials datasets, such as OQMD, AFLOW,
Materials Project, JARVIS, using different vector-based materials
representations (element fractions, MagPie, structural) and were
found to not only successfully alleviate the vanishing gradient
problem and enable deeper learning, but also lead to signi ﬁcantly
better model accuracy as compared to plain deep neural networks
and traditional ML techniques for a given input materials
representation in the presence of big data
153. Further, graph-
based methods such as Roost154have also been developed which
can outperform many similar techniques.
Such methods have been used for diverse DFT datasets
mentioned above in Table 1as well as experimental datasets
such as SuperCon155,156for quick pre-screening applications. In
terms of applications, they have been applied for predicting
properties such as formation energy141, bandgap, and magnetiza-
tion152, superconducting temperatures156, bulk, and shear mod-
ulus153. They have also been used for transfer learning across
datasets for enhanced predictive accuracy on small data34, even
for different source and target properties157, which is especially
useful to build predictive models for target properties for which
big source datasets may not be readily available.Table 2. Software to apply DL to chemical formula, SMILES, and
fragment representations.
Chemical formula
Model name Link Ref.
MatMiner https://github.com/hackingmaterials/
matminer151
MagPie https://bitbucket.org/wolverton/magpie150
DScribe https://github.com/SINGROUP/dscribe158
ElemNet https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/ElemNet141
IRNet https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/IRNet152,153
Roost https://github.com/CompRhys/roost154
CrabNet https://github.com/anthony-wang/CrabNet333
CFID-Chem https://github.com/usnistgov/jarvis/90
Atom2vec https://github.com/idocx/Atom2Vec334
CrossPropertyTL https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/
CrossPropertyTL157
SMILES and fragments
DeepSMILES https://github.com/baoilleach/deepsmiles335
ChemicalVAE https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/
chemical_vae336
CVAE https://github.com/jaechanglim/CVAE133
DeepChem https://github.com/deepchem/deepchem332
DeepFRAG https://git.durrantlab.pitt.edu/jdurrant/
deepfrag/337
DeepFRAG-k https://github.com/yaohangli/DeepFragK/338
CheMixNet https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/CheMixNet339
SINet https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/SINet340
K. Choudhary et al.
8
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 9 ====
There have been libraries of such descriptors developed such as
MatMiner151and DScribe158. Some examples of such models are
given in Table 2. Such representations are especially useful for
experimental datasets such as those for superconducting materi-
als where the atomic structure is not tabulated. However, theserepresentations cannot distinguish different polymorphs of asystem with different point groups and space groups. It has been
recently shown that although composition-based representations
can help build ML/DL models to predict some properties likeformation energy with remarkable accuracy, it does not necessa-rily translate to accurate predictions of other properties such as
stability, when compared to DFT ’s own accuracy
159.
SPECTRAL MODELS
When electromagnetic radiation hits materials, the interaction
between the radiation and matter measured as a function of thewavelength or frequency of the radiation produces a spectro-scopic signal. By studying spectroscopy, researchers can gain
insights into the materials ’composition, structural, and dynamic
properties. Spectroscopic techni ques are foundati onal in materi-
als characterization. For instance, X-ray diffraction (XRD) hasbeen used to characterize the crystal structure of materials for
more than a century. Spectroscopic analysis can involve ﬁttingquantitative physical models (for example, Rietveld re ﬁnement)
or more empirical approaches such as ﬁtting linear combina-
tions of reference spectra, such as with x-ray absorption near-
edge spectroscopy (XANES). Both approaches require a high
degree of researcher expert ise through careful design of
experiments; speci ﬁcation, revision, and iterative ﬁtting of
physical models; or the availability of template spectra of known
materials. In recent years, with the advances in high-throughput
experiments and computational data, spectroscopic data hasmultiplied, giving opportunities for researchers to learn from the
data and potentially displace the conventional methods in
analyzing such data. This section covers emerging DL applica-
tions in various modes of spectro scopic data analysis, aiming to
offer practice examples and insights. Some of the applicationsare shown in Fig. 3.
Databases and software libraries
Currently, large-scale and element-diverse spectral data mainly
exist in computational databases. For example, in ref.
160, the
authors calculated the infrared spectra, piezoelectric tensor, Born
effective charge tensor, and dielectric response as a part of the
JARVIS-DFT DFPT database. The Materials Project has establishedthe largest computational X-ray absorption database (XASDb),
Fig. 3 Example applications of deep learning for spectral data. a Predicting structure information from the X-ray diffraction374, Reprinted
according to the terms of the CC-BY license374. Copyright 2020. bPredicting catalysis properties from computational electronic density of
states data. Reprinted according to the terms of the CC-BY license202. Copyright 2021.K. Choudhary et al.
9
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 10 ====
covering the K-edge X-ray near-edge ﬁne structure (XANES)161,162
and the L-edge XANES163of a large number of material structures.
The database currently hosts more than 400,000 K-edge XANES
site-wise spectra and 90,000 L-edge XANES site-wise spectra of
many compounds in the Materials Project. There are considerablyfewer experimental XAS spectra, being on the order of hundreds,as seen in the EELSDb and the XASLib. Collecting largeexperimental spectra databases that cover a wide range of
elements is a challenging task. Collective efforts focused on
curating data extracted from different sources, as found in theRRUFF Raman, XRD and chemistry database
164, the open Raman
database165, and the SOP spectra library166. However, data
consistency is not guaranteed. It is also now possible for
contributors to share experimental data in a Materials Project
curated database, MPContribs167. This database is supported by
the US Department of Energy (DOE) providing some expectationof persistence. Entries can be kept private or published and arelinked to the main materials project computational databases.
There is an ongoing effort to capture data from DOE-funded
synchrotron light sources ( https://lightsources.materialsproject.
org/) into MPContribs in the future.
Recent advances in sources, detectors, and experimental
instrumentation have made high-throughput measurements ofexperimental spectra possible, giving rise to new possibilities forspectral data generation and modeling. Such examples include
the HTEM database
10that contains 50,000 optical absorption
spectra and the UV-Vis database of 180,000 samples from the JointCenter for Arti ﬁcial Photosynthesis. Some of the common spectra
databases for spectra data are shown in Table 3. There are
beginning to appear cloud-based software as a service platforms
for high-throughput data analysis, for example, pair-distribution
function (PDF) in the cloud ( https://pd ﬁtc.org )
168which are backed
by structured databases, where data can be kept private or madepublic. This transition to the cloud from data analysis softwareinstalled and run locally on a user ’s computer will facilitate the
sharing and reuse of data by the community.
Applications
Due to the widespread deployment of XRD across many
materials technologies, XRD spectra became one of the ﬁrst
test grounds for DL models. Phase identi ﬁcation from XRD can
be mapped into a classi ﬁcation task (assuming all phases are
known) or an unsupervised clustering task. Unlike the traditional
analysis of XRD data, where the spectra are treated as
convolved, discrete peak positions and intensities, DL methodstreat the data as a continuous pattern similar to an image.Unfortunately, a signi ﬁcant number of experimental XRD
datasets in one place are not readily available at the moment.
Nevertheless, extensive, high-qu ality crystal structure data
makes creating simul ated XRD trivial.
Park et al.
169calculated 150,000 XRD patterns from the
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) structural database170
and then used CNN models to predict structural information fromthe simulated XRD patterns. The accuracies of the CNN modelsreached 81.14%, 83.83%, and 94.99% for space-group, extinction-
group, and crystal-system classi ﬁcations, respectively.
Liu et al.
95obtained similar accuracies by using a CNN for
classifying atomic pair-distribution function (PDF) data into space
groups. The PDF is obtained by Fourier transforming XRD into real
space and is particularly useful for studying the local andnanoscale structure of materials. In the case of the PDF, modelswere trained, validated, and tested on simulated data from theICSD. However, the trained model showed excellent performance
when given experimental data, something that can be a challenge
in XRD data because of the different resolutions and line-shapes ofthe diffraction data depending on speci ﬁcs of the sample andexperimental conditions. The PDF seems to be more robust
against these aspects.
Similarly, Zaloga et al.
171also used the ICSD database for XRD
pattern generation and CNN models to classify crystals. The
models achieved 90.02% and 79.82% accuracy for crystal systemsand space groups, respectively.
It should be noted that the ICSD database contains many
duplicates, and such duplicates should be ﬁltered out to avoid
information leakage. There is also a large difference in the number
of structures represented in each space group (the label) in the
database resulting in data normalization challenges.
Lee et al.
172developed a CNN model for phase identi ﬁcation
from samples consisting of a mixture of several phases in a limited
chemical space relevant for battery materials. The training data aremixed patterns consisting of 1,785,405 synthetic XRD patterns from
the Sr-Li-Al-O phase space. The resulting CNN can not only identify
the phases but also predict the compound fraction in the mixture.Table 3. Databases and software packages for applying DL methods
for spectra data.
Databases
DB name Datasize Link Ref.
MP XAS-DB 490k https://materialsproject.org/162,163
JV Dielectric
function16k http://jarvis.nist.gov/jarvisdft341
JV Infrared 5k http://jarvis.nist.gov/jarvisdft160
RRUFF 3527 https://rruff.info164
ICDD XRD 108k https://www.icdd.com/pdf-
product-summary/342
ICSD XRD 150k https://icsd.nist.gov/343
COD XRD 480k http://www.crystallography.
net/cod/344
MP XRD 140k https://materialsproject.org/5
JV XRD 60k https://jarvis.nist.gov/jarvisdft/3
MPContribs – https://mpcontribs.org/167
Raman OpenDB 1k https://solsa.crystallography.
net/rod/index.php165
Chem. Web 1k https://webbook.nist.gov/
chemistry/345
PDFitc XPD – https://pd ﬁtc.org168
SDBS 35k http://sdbs.riodb.aist.go.jp/
sdbs/cgi-bin/cre_index.cgi346
NMRShiftDB 44k https://nmrshiftdb.nmr.uni-
koeln.de/347
SpectraBase – https://spectrabase.com/347
SOP 325 https://soprano.kikirpa.be/
index.php?lib =sop166
HTEM 140k https://htem.nrel.gov/10
Software packages
Software name Type Link Ref.
DOSNet Sol https://github.com/vxfung/DOSnet348
Mat2Spec Sol https://github.com/gomes-lab/H-CLMP349
PCA-CGCNN Sol https://github.com/kihoon-bang/PCA-
CGCNN350
autoXRD Sol https://github.com/PV-Lab/autoXRD177
PDFitc XPD Sol https://pd ﬁtc.org168
DRNets Sol https://github.com/gomes-lab/DRNets-
Nature-Machine-Intelligence351
HCLMP Sol https://github.com/gomes-lab/H-CLMP349
K. Choudhary et al.
10
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 11 ====
A similar CNN was utilized by Wang et al.173for fast identi ﬁcation
of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), where experimental spectral
noise was extracted and then synthesized into the theoretical XRD
for training data augmentation.
An alternative idea was proposed by Dong et al.174. Instead of
recognizing only phases from the CNN, a proposed “parameter
quanti ﬁcation network ”(PQ-Net) was able to extract physico-
chemical information. The PQ-Net yields accurate predictions forscale factors, crystallite size, and lattice parameters for simulatedand experimental XRD spectra. The work by Aguiar et al.
175took a
step further and proposed a modular neural network architecture
that enables the combination of diffraction patterns and chemistrydata and provided a ranked list of predictions. The ranked listpredictions provide user ﬂexibility and overcome some aspects of
overcon ﬁdence in model predictions. In practical applications, AI-
driven XRD identi ﬁcation can be bene ﬁcial for high-throughput
materials discovery, as shown by Maffettone et al.
176. In their work,
an ensemble of 50 CNN models was trained on synthetic data
reproducing experimental variations (missing peaks, broadening,peaking shifting, noises). The model ensemble is capable ofpredicting the probability of each category label. A similar data
augmentation idea was adopted by Oviedo et al.
177, where
experimental XRD data for 115 thin- ﬁlm metal-halides were
measured, and CNN models trained on the augmented XRD dataachieved accuracies of 93% and 89% for classifying dimensionality
and space group, respectively.
Although not a DL method, an unsupervised machine learning
approach, non-negative matrix factorization (NMF), is showing
great promise for yielding chemically relevant XRD spectra from
time- or spatially-dependent sets of diffraction patterns. NMF isclosely related to principle component analysis in that it takes aset of patterns as a matrix and then compresses the data by
reducing the dimensionality by ﬁnding the most important
components. In NMF a constraint is applied that all thecomponents and their weights must be strictly positive. Thisoften corresponds to a real physical situation (for example, spectra
tend to be positive, as are the weights of chemical constituents).
As a result, it appears that the mathematical decomposition oftenresults in interpretable, physically meaningful, components andweights, as shown by Liu et al. for PDF data
178. An extension of
this showed that in a spatially resolved study, NMF could be used
to extract chemically resolved differential PDFs (similar to theinformation in EXAFS) from non-chemically resolved PDF mea-
surements
179. NMF is very quick and easy to apply and can be
applied to just about any set of spectra. It is likely to becomewidely used and is being implemented in the PDFitc.org websiteto make it more accessible to potential users.
Other than XRD, the XAS, Raman, and infrared spectra, also
contain rich structure-dependent spectroscopic information aboutthe material. Unlike XRD, where relatively simple theories andequations exist to relate structures to the spectral patterns, the
relationships between general spectra and structures are some-
what elusive. This dif ﬁculty has created a higher demand for
machine learning models to learn structural information from
other spectra.
For instance, the case of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS),
including the X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES)and extended X-ray absorption ﬁne structure (EXAFS), is usually
used to analyze the structural information on an atomic level.
However, the high signal-to-noise XANES region has no equationfor data ﬁtting. DL modeling of XAS data is fascinating and offers
unprecedented insights. Timoshenko et al. used neural networks
to predict the coordination numbers of Pt
180and Cu181in
nanoclusters from the XANES. Aside from the high accuracies, theneural network also offers high prediction speed and new
opportunities for quantitative XANES analysis. Timoshenko
et al.
182further carried out a novel analysis of EXAFS using DL.
Although EXAFS analysis has an explicit equation to ﬁt, the studyis limited to the ﬁrst few coordination shells and on relatively
ordered materials. Timoshenko et al.182ﬁrst transformed the
EXAFS data into 2D maps with a wavelet transform and thensupplied the 2D data to a neural network model. The model can
instantly predict relatively long-range radial distribution functions,
offering in situ local structure analysis of materials. The advent of
high-throughput XAS databases has recently unveiled more
possibilities for machine learning models to be deployed using
XAS data. For example, Zheng et al.
161used an ensemble learning
method to match and fast search new spectra in the XASDb. Later,
the same authors showed that random forest models outperform
DL models such as MLPs or CNNs in directly predicting atomic
environment labels from the XANES spectra183. Similar approaches
were also adopted by Torrisi et al.184In practical applications,
Andrejevic et al.185used the XASDb data together with the
topological materials database. They constructed CNN models to
classify the topology of materials from the XANES and symmetry
group inputs. The model correctly predicted 81% topological and
80% trivial cases and achieved 90% accuracy in material classes
containing certain elements.
Raman, infrared, and other vibrational spectroscopies provide
structural ﬁngerprints and are usually used to discriminate and
estimate the concentration of components in a mixture. For
example, Madden et al.186have used neural network models to
predict the concentration of illicit materials in a mixture using the
Raman spectra. Interestingly, several groups have independently
found that DL models outperform chemometrics analysis in
vibrational spectroscopies187,188. For learning vibrational spectra,
the number of training spectra is usually less than or on the order
of the number of features (intensity points), and the models can
easily over ﬁt. Hence, dimensional reduction strategies are
commonly used to compress the information dimension using,for example, principal component analysis (PCA)
189,190.D L
approaches do not have such concerns and offer elegant and
uniﬁed solutions. For example, Liu et al.191applied CNN models to
the Raman spectra in the RRUFF spectral database and show that
CNN models outperform classical machine learning models such
as SVM in classi ﬁcation tasks. More DL applications in vibrational
spectral analysis can be found in a recent review by Yang et al.192.
Although most current DL work focuses on the inverse problem,
i.e., predicting structural information from the spectra, some
innovative approaches also solve the forward problems bypredicting the spectra from the structure. In this case, the
spectroscopy data can be viewed simply as a high-dimensional
material property of the structure. This is most common in
molecular science, where predicting the infrared spectra
193,
molecular excitation spectra194, is of particular interest. In the
early 2000s, Selzer et al.193and Kostka et al.195attempted
predicting the infrared spectra directly from the molecular
structural descriptors using neural networks. Non-DL models can
also perform such tasks to a reasonable accuracy196. For DL
models, Chen et al.197used a Euclidean neural network (E(3)NN) to
predict the phonon density of state (DOS) spectra198from atom
positions and element types. The E(3)NN model captures
symmetries of the crystal structures, with no need to perform
data augmentation to achieve target invariances. Hence the E(3)
NN model is extremely data-ef ﬁcient and can give reliable DOS
spectra prediction and heat capacity using relatively sparse data of
1200 calculation results on 65 elements. A similar idea was also
used to predict the XAS spectra. Carbone et al.199used a message
passing neural network (MPNN) to predict the O and N K-edge
XANES spectra from the molecular structures in the QM9
database7. The training XANES data were generated using the
FEFF package200. The trained MPNN model reproduced all
prominent peaks in the predicted XANES, and 90% of the
predicted peaks are within 1 eV of the FEFF calculations. Similarly,
Rankine et al.201started from the two-body radial distributionK. Choudhary et al.
11
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 12 ====
function (RDC) and used a deep neural network model to predict
the Fe K-edge XANES spectra for arbitrary local environments.
In addition to learn the structure-spectra or spectra-structure
relationships, a few works have also explored the possibility ofrelating spectra to other material properties in a non-trivial way.The DOSnet proposed by Fung et al.
202(Fig. 3b) uses the
electronic DOS spectra calculated from DFT as inputs to a CNNmodel to predict the adsorption energies of H, C, N, O, S and theirhydrogenated counterparts, CH, CH
2,C H 3, NH, OH, and SH, on
bimetallic alloy surfaces. This approach extends the previousd-band theory
203, where only the d-band center, a scalar, was
used to correlate with the adsorption energy on transition metals.Similarly, Kaundinya et al.
204used Atomistic Line Graph Neural
Network (ALIGNN) to predict DOS for 56,000 materials in theJARVIS-DFT database using a direct discretized spectrum (D-
ALIGNN), and a compressed low-dimensional representation using
an autoencoder (AE-ALIGNN). Stein et al.
205tried to learn the
mapping between the image and the UV-vis spectrum of thematerial using the conditional variational encoder (cVAE) withneural network models as the backbone. Such models cangenerate the UV-vis spectrum directly from a simple materialimage, offering much faster material characterizations. Predictinggas adsorption isotherms for direct air capture (DAC) are also animportant application of spectra-based DL models. There havebeen several important works
206,207for CO 2capture with high-
performance metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) which are impor-tant for mitigating climate change issues.
IMAGE-BASED MODELS
Computer vision is often credited as precipitating the current
wave of mainstream DL applications a decade ago
208. Naturally,
materials researchers have developed a broad portfolio ofapplications of computer vision for accelerating and improvingimage-based material characterization techniques. High-levelmicroscopy vision tasks can be organized as follows: imageclassi ﬁcation (and material property regression), auto-tuning
experimental imaging hyperparameters, pixelwise learning (e.g.,semantic segmentation), super-resolution imaging, object/entityrecognition, localization, and tracking, microstructure representa-tion learning.
Often these tasks generalize across many different imaging
modalities, spanning optical mi croscopy (OM), scanning elec-
tron microscopy (SEM) techniques, scanning probe microscopy(SPM, as in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) or atomicforce microscopy (AFM), and transmission electron microscopy(TEM) variants, including scanning transmission electron micro-scopy (STEM).
The images obtained with these techniques range from
capturing local atomic to mesoscale structures (microstructure),the distribution and type of defects, and their dynamics which arecritically linked to the functionality and performance of thematerials. Over the past few decades, atomic-scale imaging hasbecome widespread and near-routine due to aberration-correctedSTEM
209. The collection of large image datasets is increasingly
presenting an analysis bottleneck in the materials characterizationpipeline, and the immediate need for automated image analysisbecomes important. Non-DL image analysis methods have driventremendous progress in quantitative microscopy, but often imageprocessing pipelines are brittle and require too much manualidenti ﬁcation of image features to be broadly applicable. Thus, DL
is currently the most promising solution for high-performance,high-throughput automated analysis of image datasets. For agood overview of applications in microstructure characterizationspeci ﬁcally, see
210.Databases and software libraries
Image datasets for materials can come from either experiments
or simulations. Software librari es mentioned above can be used
to generate images such as STM/STEM. Images can also be
obtained from the literature. A few common examples for image
datasets are shown below in Table 4. Recently, there has been a
rapid development in the ﬁeld of image learning tasks for
materials leading to several useful packages. We list some of
them in Table 4.
Applications in image classi ﬁcation and regression
DL for images can be used to automatically extract information
from images or transform images into a more useful state. The
bene ﬁts of automated image analysis include higher throughput,
better consistency of measurements compared to manualanalysis, and even the ability to measure signals in images thathumans cannot detect. The bene ﬁts of altering images include
image super-resolution, denoising, inferring 3D structure from 2D
images, and more. Examples of the applications of each task aresummarized below.
Image classi ﬁcation and regression
Classi ﬁcation and regression are the processes of predicting one
or more values associated with an image. In the context of DL the
only difference between the two methods is that the outputs ofclassi ﬁcation are discrete while the outputs of regression models
are continuous. The same network architecture may be used for
both classi ﬁcation and regression by choosing the appropriate
activation function (i.e., linear for regression or Softmax forclassi ﬁcation) for the output of the network. Due to its simplicity
image classi ﬁcation is one of the most established DL techniques
available in the materials science literature. Nonetheless, thistechnique remains an area of active research.
Modarres et al. applied DL with transfer learning to auto-
matically classify SEM images of different material systems
211.
They demonstrated how a single approach can be used to identify
a wide variety of features and material systems such as particles,
ﬁbers, Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) devices, and more.
The model achieved 90% accuracy on a test set. Misclassi ﬁcations
resulted from images containing objects from multiple classes,
which is an inherent limitation of single-class classi ﬁcation. More
advanced techniques such as those described in subsequentsections can be applied to avoid these limitations. Additionally,
they developed a system to deploy the trained model at scale to
process thousands of images in parallel. This approach is essentialfor large-scale, high-throughput experiments or industrial applica-
tions of classi ﬁcation. ImageNet-based deep transfer learning has
also been successfully applied for crack detection in macroscalematerials images
212,213, as well as for property prediction on small,
noisy, and heterogeneous industrial datasets214,215.
DL has also been applied to characterize the symmetries of
simulated measurements of samples. In ref.216, Ziletti et al.
obtained a large database of perfect crystal structures, introduced
defects into the perfect lattices, and simulated diffraction patternsfor each structure. DL models were trained to identify the space
group of each diffraction patterns. The model achieved high
classi ﬁcation performance, even on crystals with signi ﬁcant
numbers of defects, surpassing the performance of conventionalalgorithms for detecting symmetries from diffraction patterns.
DL has also been applied to classify symmetries in simulated
STM measurements of 2D material systems
217. DFT was used to
generate simulated STM images for a variety of material systems.
A convolutional neural network was trained to identify which oftheﬁve 2D Bravais lattices each material belonged to using the
simulated STM image as input. The model achieved an average
F1 score of around 0.9 for each lattice type.
K. Choudhary et al.
12
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 13 ====
DL has also been used to improve the analysis of electron
backscatter diffraction (EBSD) data, with Liu et al.218presenting
one of the ﬁrst DL-based solution for EBSD indexing capable of
taking an EBSD image as input and predicting the three Euler
angles representing the orientation that would have led to thegiven EBSD pattern. However, they considered the three Eulerangles to be independent of each other, creating separate CNNsfor each angle, although the three angles should be considered
together. Jha et al.
219built upon that work to train a single DL
model to predict the three Euler angles in simulated EBSDpatterns of polycrystalline Ni while directly minimizing themisorientation angle between the true and predicted orientations.When tested on experimental EBSD patterns, the model achieved
16% lower disorientation error than dictionary-based indexing.
Similarly, Kaufman et al. trained a CNN to predict the correspond-ing space group for a given diffraction pattern
220. This enables
EBSD to be used for phase identi ﬁcation in samples where the
existing phases are unknown, providing a faster or more cost-
effective method of characterizing than X-ray or neutron
diffraction. The results from these studies demonstrate thepromise of applying DL to improve the performance and utilityof EBSD experiments.
Recently, DL has also been to learn crystal plasticity using
images of strain pro ﬁles as input
221,222. The work in ref.221used
domain knowledge integration in the form of two-point auto-correlation to enhance the predictive accuracy, while
222applied
residual learning to learn crystal plasticity at nanoscale. It used
strain pro ﬁles of materials of varying sample widths ranging from
2μm down to 62.5 nm obtained from discrete dislocation
dynamics to build a deep residual network capable of identifyingprior deformation history of the sample as low, medium, or high.
Compared to the correlation function-based method (68.24%
accuracy), the DL model was found to be signi ﬁcantly more
accurate (92.48%) and also capable of predicting stress-straincurves of test samples. This work additionally used saliency mapsto try to interpret the developed DL model.
Pixelwise learning
DL can also be applied to generate one or more predictions for
every pixel in an image. This can provide more detailed
information about the size, position, orientation, and morphologyof features of interest in images. Thus, pixelwise learning has beena signi ﬁcant area of focus with many recent studies appearing in
materials science literature.
Azimi et al. applied an ensemble of fully convolutional neural
networks to segment martensite, tempered martensite, bainite,
and pearlite in SEM images of carbon steels. Their model achieved
94% accuracy, demonstrating a signi ﬁcant improvement over
previous efforts to automate the segmentation of different phasesin SEM images. Decost, Francis, and Holm applied PixelNet tosegment microstructural constituents in the UltraHigh Carbon
Steel Database
223,224. In contrast to fully convolutional neural
networks, which encode and decode visual signals using a seriesof convolution layers, PixelNet constructs “hypercolumns ”,o r
concatenations of feature representations corresponding to eachpixel at different layers in a neural network. The hypercolumns aretreated as individual feature vectors, which can then be classi ﬁed
using any typical classi ﬁcation approach, like a multilayer
perceptron. This approach achieved phase segmentation precisionand recall scores of 86.5% and 86.5%, respectively. Additionally,this approach was used to segment spheroidite particles in thematrix, achieving precision and recall scores of 91.1% and 91.1%,
respectively.
Pixelwise DL has also been appl ied to automatically segment
dislocations in Ni superalloys
210. Dislocations are visually similar
toγ/C0γ0and dislocation in Ni superalloys. With limited training
data, a single segmentation model could not distinguishTable 4. Databases and software packages for applying DL methods
for image applications.
Databases
DB Name Link Ref.
JARVIS-STM https://jarvis.nist.gov/jarvisstm217
atomagined https://github.com/MaterialEyes/
atomagined352
deep damage https://git.rwth-aachen.de/Sandra.Korte.
Kerzel/DeepDamage230
NanoSEM https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2018.172353
UHCSDB http://hdl.handle.net/11256/940223
UHCS micro. DB http://hdl.handle.net/11256/964224
SmBFO https://drive.google.com/354
Diffranet https://github.com/arturluis/diffranet355
Peregrine v2021-03 https://doi.org/10.13139/ORNLNCCS/
1779073356
Warwick electronmicroscopy datahttps://github.com/Jeffrey-Ede/datasets/
wiki357
Powder bedanamolyhttps://www.osti.gov/biblio/1779073
356
Software packages
Package Name Link Ref.
PyCroscopy https://github.com/pycroscopy/pycroscopy358
Prismatic https://github.com/prism-em/prismatic352
AtomVision https://github.com/usnistgov/atomvision217
py4DSTEM https://github.com/py4dstem/py4DSTEM359
abTEM https://github.com/jacobjma/abTEM360
QSTEM https://github.com/QSTEM/QSTEM361
MuSTEM https://github.com/HamishGBrown/
MuSTEM362
MuSTEM https://github.com/HamishGBrown/
MuSTEM362
AICrystallographer https://github.com/pycroscopy/
AICrystallographer363
AtomAI https://github.com/pycroscopy/atomai363
EM-net https://github.com/cellsmb/EM-net364
NionSwift https://github.com/nion-software/nionswift365
EENCM https://github.com/ceright1/Prediction-
material-property366
DefectSegNet https://github.com/rajatsainju/
DefectSegNet229
AMPIS https://github.com/rccohn/AMPIS235
partial-STEM https://github.com/Jeffrey-Ede/partial-
STEM/tree/1.0.0237
ZeroCostDL4Mic https://github.com/HenriquesLab/
ZeroCostDL4Mic367
EBSD indexing https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/EBSD-
indexing219
PADNet-XRD https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/PADNet-XRD368
DKACNN https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/DKACNN221
PlasticityDL https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/PlasticityDL222
HomogenizationDL https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/
HomogenizationDL241
LocalizationDL https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/
LocalizationDL243
MDGAN https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/MDGAN248
MDN-GAN https://github.com/NU-CUCIS/MDN-GAN249K. Choudhary et al.
13
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 14 ====
between these features. To overcome this, a second model was
trained to generate a coarse mask corresponding to thedeformed region in the material. Overlaying this mask withpredictions from the ﬁrst model selects the dislocations,
enabling them to be distinguished from γ/C0γ
0interfaces.
Stan, Thompson, and Voorhees applied Pixelwise DL to
characterize dendritic growth from serial sectioning and synchro-tron computed tomography data
225. Both of these techniques
generate large amounts of data, making manual analysisimpractical. Conventional image processing approaches, utilizingthresholding, edge detectors, or other hand-crafted ﬁlters, cannot
effectively deal with noise, contrast gradients, and other artifactsthat are present in the data. Despite having a small training set oflabeled images, SegNet automatically segmented these imageswith much higher performance.
Object/entity recognition, localization, and tracking
Object detection or localization is needed when individual
instances of recognized objects in a given image need to bedistinguished from each other. In cases where instances do notoverlap each other by a signi ﬁcant amount, individual instances
can be resolved through post-processing of semantic segmenta-tion outputs. This technique has been applied extensively todetect individual atoms and defects in microstructural images.
Madsen et al. applied pixelwise DL to detect atoms in simulated
atomic-resolution TEM images of graphene
226. A neural network
was trained to detect the presence of each atom as well as predict
its column height. Pixelwise results are used as seeds forwatershed segmentation to achieve instance-level detection.Analysis of the arrangement of the atoms led to the autonomouscharacterization of defects in the lattice structure of the material.Interestingly, despite being trained only on simulations, the modelsuccessfully detected atomic positions in experimental images.
Maksov et al. demonstrated atomistic defect recognition and
tracking across sequences of atomic-resolution STEM images ofWS
2227. The lattice structure and defects existing in the ﬁrst framewere characterized through a physics-based approach utilizing
Fourier transforms. The positions of atoms and defects in the ﬁrst
frame were used to train a segmentation model. Despite onlyusing the ﬁrst frame for training, the model successfully identi ﬁed
and tracked defects in the subsequent frames for each sequence,even when the lattice underwent signi ﬁcant deformation.
Similarly, Yang et al.
228used U-net architecture (as shown in
Fig.4) to detect vacancies and dopants in WSe 2in STEM images
with model accuracy of up to 98%. They classi ﬁed the possible
atomic sites based on experimental observations into ﬁve
different types: tungsten, vanadium substituting for tungsten,selenium with no vacancy, mono-vacancy of selenium, and di-vacancy of selenium.
Roberts et al. developed DefectSegNet to automatically identify
defects in transmission and STEM images of steel includingdislocations, precipitates, and voids
229. They provide detailed
information on the model ’s design, training, and evaluation. They
also compare measurements generated from the model to
manual measurements performed by several different human
experts, demonstrating that the measurements generated by DLare quantitatively more accurate and consistent.
Kusche et al. applied DL to localize defects in panoramic SEM
images of dual-phase steel
230. Manual thresholding was applied to
identify dark defects against the brighter matrix. Regions contain-
ing defects were classi ﬁed via two neural networks. The ﬁrst neural
network distinguished between inclusions and ductile damage inthe material. The second classi ﬁed the type of ductile damage (i.e.,
notching, martensite cracking, etc.) Each defect was alsosegmented via a watershed algorithm to obtain detailed
information on its size, position, and morphology.
Applying DL to localize defects and atomic structures is a
popular area in materials science research. Thus, several otherrecent studies on these applications can be found in theliterature
231 –234.
In the above examples pixelwise DL, or classi ﬁcation models are
combined with image analysis to distinguish individual instancesof detected objects. However, when several adjacent objects of
Fig. 4 Deep-learning-based algorithm for atomic site classi ﬁcation. a Deep neural networks U-Net model constructed for quanti ﬁcation
analysis of annular dark- ﬁeld in the scanning transmission electron microscope (ADF-STEM) image of V-WSe 2.bExamples of training dataset
for deep learning of atom segmentation model for ﬁve different species. cPixel-level accuracy of the atom segmentation model as a function
of training epoch. dMeasurement accuracy of the segmentation model compared with human-based measurements. Scale bars are 1 nm
[Reprinted according to the terms of the CC-BY license ref.228].
K. Choudhary et al.
14
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 15 ====
the same class touch or overlap each other in the image, this
approach will falsely detect them to be a single, larger object. In
this case, DL models designed for the detection or instance
segmentation can be used to resolve overlapping instances. Inone such study, Cohn and Holm applied DL for instance-levelsegmentation of individual particles and satellites in dense
powder images
235. Segmenting each particle allows for computer
vision to generate detailed size and morphology informationwhich can be used to supplement experimental powdercharacterization for additive manufacturing. Additionally, over-
laying the powder and satellite masks yielded the ﬁrst method for
quantifying the satellite content of powder samples, which cannotbe measured experimentally.
Super-resolution imaging and auto-tuning experimental
parameters
The studies listed so far focus on automating the analysis of
existing data after it has been collected experimentally. However,
DL can also be applied during experiments to improve the quality
of the data itself. This can reduce the time for data collection orimprove the amount of information captured in each image.Super-resolution and other DL techniques can also be applied
in situ to autonomously adjust experimental parameters.
Recording high-resolution electron microscope images often
require large dwell times, limiting the throughput of microscopy
experiments. Additionally, during imaging, interactions betweenthe electron beam and a microscopy sample can result inundesirable effects, including charging of non-conductive samples
and damage to sensitive samples. Thus, there is interest in using
DL to arti ﬁcially increase the resolution of images without
introducing these artifacts. One method of interest is applying
generative adversarial networks (GANs) for this application.
De Haan et al. recorded SEM images of the same regions of
interest in carbon samples containing gold nanoparticles at two
resolutions
236. Low-resolution images recorded were used as
inputs to a GAN. The corresponding images with twice theresolution were used as the ground truth. After training the GAN
reduced the number of undetected gaps between nanoparticles
from 13.9 to 3.7%, indicating that super-resolution was successful.Thus, applying DL led to a four-fold reduction of the interactiontime between the electron beam and the sample.
Ede and Beanland collected a dataset of STEM images of
different samples
237. Images were subsampled with spiral and
‘jittered ’grid masks to obtain partial images with resolutions
reduced by a factor up to 100. A GAN was trained to reconstructfull images from their corresponding partial images. The results
indicated that despite a signi ﬁcant reduction in the sampling area,
this approach successfully reconstructed high-resolution imageswith relatively small errors.
DL has also been applied to automated tip conditioning for SPM
experiments. Rashidi and Wolkow trained a model to detectartifacts in SPM measurements resulting from degradation in tip
quality
238. Using an ensemble of convolutional neural networks
resulted in 99% accuracy. After detecting that a tip has degraded,the SPM was con ﬁgured to automatically recondition the tip
in situ until the network indicated that the atomic sharpness of
the tip has been restored. Monitoring and reconditioning the tip is
the most time and labor-intensive part of conducting SPMexperiments. Thus, automating this process through DL can
increase the throughput and decrease the cost of collecting data
through SPM.
In addition to materials characterization, DL can be applied to
autonomously adjust parameters during manufacturing. Scimeet al. mounted a camera to multiple 3D printers
239. Images of the
build plate were recorded throughout the printing process. A
dynamic segmentation convolutional neural network was trained
to recognize defects such as recoater streaking, incompletespreading, spatter, porosity, and others. The trained model
achieved high performance and was transferable to multipleprinters from three different methods of additive manufacturing.
This work is the ﬁrst step to enabling smart additive manufactur-
ing machines that can correct defects and adjust parametersduring printing.
There is also growing interest in establishing instruments and
laboratories for autonomous experimentation. Eppel et al. trainedmultiple models to detect chemicals, materials, and transparentvessels in a chemistry lab setting
240. This study provides a rigorous
analysis of several different approaches for scene understanding.
Models were trained to characterize laboratory scenes withdifferent methods including semantic segmentation and instancesegmentation, both with and without overlapping instances. Themodels successfully detected individual vessels and materials in avariety of settings. Finer-grained understanding of the contents of
vessels, such as segmentation of individual phases in multi-phase
systems, was limited, outlining the path for future work in thisarea. The results represent an important step towards realizingautomated experimentation for laboratory-scale experiments.
Microstructure representation learning
Materials microstructure is often represented in the form of multi-
phase high-dimensional 2D/3D images and thus can readily
leverage image-based DL methods to learn robust, low-dimensional microstructure representations, which can subse-quently be used for building predictive and generative models tolearn forward and inverse structure-property linkages, which aretypically studied across different length scales (multi-scale
modeling). In this context, homogenization and localization refer
to the transfer of information from lower length scales to higherlength scales and vice-versa. DL using customized CNNs has beenused both for homogenization, i.e., predicting the macroscaleproperty of material given its microstructure information
221,241,242,
as well as for localization, i.e., predicting the strain distribution
across a given microstructure for a loading condition243.
Transfer learning has also been widely used for analyzing
materials microstructure images; methods for improving the useof transfer learning to materials science applications remain anarea of active research. Goetz et al. investigated the use ofunsupervised domain adaptation as an alternative to simply ﬁne-
tuning a pre-trained model
244. In this technique a model is ﬁrst
trained on a labeled dataset in the source domain. Next, adiscriminator model is used to train the model to generatedomain-agnostic features. Compared to simple ﬁne-tuning,
unsupervised domain adaptation improved the performance of
classi ﬁcation and segmentation neural networks on materials
science datasets. However, it was determined that the highestperformance was achieved when the source domain was morevisually similar to the target (for example, using a different set ofmicrostructural images instead of ImageNet.) This highlights the
utility of establishing large, publicly available datasets of
annotated images in materials science.
Kitaraha and Holm used the output of an intermediate layer of a
pre-trained convolutional neural network as a feature representa-
tion for images of steel surface defects and Inconnel fracturesurfaces
245. Images were classi ﬁed by defect type or fracture
surface orientation using unsupervised DL. Even though nolabeled data was used to train the neural network or the
unsupervised classi ﬁer, the model found natural decision bound-
aries that achieved a classi ﬁcation performance of 98% and 88%
for the defect classes and fracture surface orientations, respec-tively. Visualization of the representations through principalcomponent analysis (PCA) and t-distributed stochastic neighbor-
hood embedding (t-SNE) provided qualitative insights into the
representations. Although the detailed physical interpretation ofthe representations is still a distant goal, this study provides toolsK. Choudhary et al.
15
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 16 ====
for investigating patterns in visual signals contained in image-
based datasets in materials science.
Larmuseau et al. investigated the use of triplet networks to
obtain consistent representations for visually similar images ofmaterials
246. Triplet networks are trained with three images at a
time. The ﬁrst image, the reference, is classi ﬁed by the network.
The second image, called the positive, is another image with the
same class label. The last image, called the negative, is an image
from a separate class. During training the loss function includeserrors in predicting the class of the reference image, the difference
in representations of the reference and positive images, and the
similarity in representations of the reference and negative images.
This process allows the network to learn consistent representa-
tions for images in the same class while distinguishing imagesfrom different classes. The triple network outperformed an
ordinary convolutional neural network trained for image classi ﬁca-
tion on the same dataset.
In addition to investigating representations used to analyze
existing images, DL can generate synthetic images of materials
systems. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are currently the
predominant method for synthetic microstructure generation.
GANs consist of a generator, which creates a synthetic micro-structure image, and a discriminator, which attempts to predict if a
given input image is real or synthetic. With careful application,
GANs can be a powerful tool for microstructure representationlearning and design.
Yang and Li et al.
247,248developed a GAN-based model for
learning a low-dimensional embedding of microstructures, which
could then be easily sampled and used with the generator of the
GAN model to generate realistic, statistically similar microstructureimages, thus enabling microstructural materials design. The model
was able to capture complex, nonlinear microstructure character-
istics and learn the mapping between the latent design variablesand microstructures. In order to close the loop, the method was
combined with a Bayesian optimization approach to design
microstructures with optimal optical absorption performance. The
discovered microstructures were found to have up to 17% better
property than randomly sampled microstructures. The uniquearchitecture of their GAN model also facilitated generator
scalability to generate arbitrary-sized microstructure images and
discriminator transferability to build structure-property prediction
models. Yang et al.
249recently combined GANs with MDNs
(mixture density networks) to enable inverse modeling inmicrostructural materials design, i.e., generate the microstructure
for a given desired property.
Hsu et al. constructed a GAN to generate 3D synthetic solid
oxide fuel cell microstructures
250. These microstructures were
compared to other synthetic microstructures generated by
DREAM.3D as well as experimentally observed microstructures
measured via sectioning and imaging with PFIB-SEM. Synthetic
microstructures generated from the GAN were observed toqualitatively show better agreement to the experimental micro-
structures than the DREAM.3D microstructures, as evidenced by
the more realistic phase connectivity and lower amount of
agglomeration of solid phases. Additionally, a statistical analysis
of various features such as volume fraction, particle size, andseveral other quantities demonstrated that the GAN microstruc-
tures were quantitatively more similar to the real microstructures
than the DREAM.3D microstructures.
In a similar study, Chun et al. generated synthetic microstruc-
tures of high energy materials using a GAN
251. Once again, a
synthetic microstructure generated via GAN showed better
qualitative visual similarity to an experimentally observed micro-
structure compared to a synthetic microstructure generated via atransfer learning approach, with sharper phase boundaries and
fewer computational artifacts. Additionally, a statistical analysis of
the void size, aspect ratio, and orientation distributions indicatedthat the GAN produced microstructures that were quantitatively
more similar to real materials.
Applications of DL to microstructure representation learning
can help researchers improve the performance of predictivemodels used for the applications listed above. Additionally, usinggenerative models can generate more realistic simulated micro-
structures. This can help researchers develop more accurate
models for predicting material properties and performancewithout needing to synthesize and process these materials,signi ﬁcantly increasing the throughput of materials selection
and screening experiments.
Mesoscale modeling applications
In addition to image-based characterization, deep learning
methods are increasingly used in mesoscale modeling. Daiet al.
252trained a GNN successfully trained to predict magnetos-
triction in a wide range of synthetic polycrystalline systems with
around 10% prediction error. The microstructure is represented by
a graph where each node corresponds to a single grain, and theedges between nodes indicate an interface between neighboring
grains. Five node features (3 Euler angles, volume, and the number
of neighbors) were associated with each grain. The GNNoutperformed other machine learning approaches for propertyprediction of polycrystalline materials by accounting for interac-
tions between neighboring grains.
Similarly, Cohn and Holm present preliminary work applying
GNNs to predict the occurrence of abnormal grain growth (AGG)in Monte Carlo simulations of microstructure evolution
253. AGG
appears to be stochastic, making it notoriously dif ﬁcult to predict,
control, and even observe experimentally in some materials. AGGhas been reproduced in Monte Carlo simulations of materialsystems, but a model that can predict which initial microstructures
will undergo AGG has not been established before. A dataset of
Monte Carlo simulations was created using SPPARKS
254,255.A
microstructure GNN was trained to predict AGG in individual
simulations, with 75% classi ﬁcation accuracy. In comparison, an
image-based only achieved 60% accuracy. The GNN also providedphysical insight to understanding AGG and indicated that only 2neighborhood shells are needed to achieve the maximum
performance achieved in the study. These early results motivate
additional work on applying GNNs to predict the occurrence inboth simulated and real materials during processing.
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Most of the existing knowledge in the materials domain is
currently unavailable as structured information and only exists as
unstructured text, tables, or images in various publications. Thereexists a great opportunity to use natural language processing(NLP) techniques to convert text to structured data or to directly
learn and make inferences from the text information. However,
as a relatively new ﬁeld within materials science, many
challenges remain unsolved in this domain, such as resolvingdependencies between words and phrases across multiple
sentences and paragraphs.
Datasets for NLP
Datasets relevant to natural language processing include peer-
reviewed journal articles, articles published on preprint serverssuch as arXiv or ChemRxiv, patents, and online material such asWikipedia. Unfortunately, accessing or parsing most such datasets
remains dif ﬁcult. Peer-reviewed journal articles are typically
subject to copyright restrictions and thus dif ﬁcult to obtain,
especially in the large numbers required for machine learning.
Many publishers now offer text and data mining (TDM) agree-
ments that can be signed online, allowing at least a limited,restricted amount of work to be performed. However, gaining
K. Choudhary et al.
16
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 17 ====
access to the full text of many publications still typically requires
strict and dedicated agreements with each publisher. The major
advantage of working with publishers is that they have often
already converted the articles from a document format such asPDF into an easy-to-parse format such as HyperText MarkupLanguage (HTML). In contrast, articles on preprint servers and
patents are typically available with fewer restrictions, but are
commonly available only as PDF ﬁles. It remains dif ﬁcult to
properly parse text from PDF ﬁles in a reliable manner, even when
the text is embedded in the PDF. Therefore, new tools that can
easily and automatically convert such content into well-structuredHTML format with few residual errors would likely have a major
impact on the ﬁeld. Finally, online sources of information such as
Wikipedia can serve as another type of data source. However, suchonline sources are often more dif ﬁcult to verify in terms of
accuracy and also do not contain as much domain-speci ﬁc
information as the research literature.
Software libraries for NLP
Applying NLP to a raw dataset involves multiple steps. These steps
include retrieving the data, various forms of “pre-processing ”
(sentence and word tokenization, word stemming and lemmatiza-
tion, featurization such as word vectors or part of speech tagging),
and ﬁnally machine learning for information extraction (e.g.,
named entity recognition, entity-relationship modeling, question
and answer, or others). Multiple software libraries exist to aid in
materials NLP, as described in Table 5. We note that although
many of these steps can in theory be performed by general-
purpose NLP libraries such as NLTK
256, SpaCy257, or AllenNLP258,
the specialized nature of chemistry and materials science text(including the presence of complex chemical formulas) often leadsto errors. For example, researchers have developed specialized
codes to perform preprocessing that better detect chemical
formulas (and not split them into separate tokens or applystemming/lemmatization to them) and scienti ﬁc phrases and
notation such as oxidation states or symbols for physical units.
Similarly, chemistry-speci ﬁc codes for extracting entities are
better at extracting the names of chemical elements (e.g.,
recognizing that “He”likely represents helium and not a male
pronoun) and abbreviations for chemical formulas. Finally, wordembeddings that convert words such as “manganese ”into
numerical vectors for further data mining are more informative
when trained speci ﬁcally on materials science text versus moregeneric texts, even when the latter datasets are larger
259. Thus,
domain-speci ﬁc tools for NLP are required in nearly all aspects of
the pipeline. The main exception is that the architecture of the
speci ﬁc neural network models used for information extraction
(e.g., LSTM, BERT, or architectures used to generate wordembeddings such as word2vec or GloVe) are typically notmodi ﬁed speci ﬁcally for the materials domain. Thus, much of
the materials and chemistry-centric work currently regards data
retrieval and appropriate preprocessing. A longer discussion of
this topic, with speci ﬁc examples, can be found in refs.
260,261.
Applications
NLP methods for materials have been applied for information
extraction and search (particularly as applied to synthesisprediction) as well as materials discovery. As the domain is rapidlygrowing, we suggest dedicated reviews on this topic by Olivetti
et al.
261and Kononova et al.260for more information.
One of the major uses of NLP methods is to extract datasets
from the text in published studies. Conventionally, such datasets
required manual entry of datasets by researchers combing theliterature, a laborious and time-consuming process. Recently,software tools such as ChemDataExtractor
262and other meth-
ods263based on more conventional machine learning and rule-
based approaches have enabled automated or semi-automated
extraction of datasets such as Curie and Néel magnetic phasetransition temperatures
264, battery properties265, UV-vis spectra266,
and surface and pore characteristics of metal-organic frame-works
267. In the past few years, DL approaches such as LSTMs and
transformer-based models have been employed to extract various
categories of information268, and in particular materials synthesis
information269 –271from text sources. Such data have been used to
predict synthesis maps for titania nanotubes272, various binary and
ternary oxides273, and perovskites274.
Databases based on natural language processing have also
been used to train machine learning models to identify materialswith useful functional properties, such as the recent discovery of
the large magnetocaloric properties of HoBe
2275. Similarly,
Cooper et al.276demonstrated a “design to device approach ”
for designing dye-sensitized solar cells that are co-sensitizedwith two dyes
276. This study used automated text mining to
compile a list of candidate dyes for the application along with
measured properties such as maximum absorption wavelengths
and extinction coef ﬁcients. The resulting list of 9431 dyes
extracted from the literature was downselected to 309 candi-dates using various criteria such as molecular structure andability to absorb in the solar spectrum. These candidates were
evaluated for suitable combinations for co-sensitization, yielding
33 dyes that were further downselected using density functionaltheory calculations and experimental constraints. The resulting 5dyes were evaluated experimentally, both individually and incombinations, resulting in a combination of dyes that not only
outperformed any of the individual dyes but demonstrated
performance comparable to exi sting standard material. This
study demonstrates the possibility of using literature-basedextraction to identify materials candidates for new applications
from the vast body of published work, which may have nevertested those materials for the desired application.
It is even possible that natural language processing can directly
make materials predictions without intermediary models. In a
study reported by Tshitoyan et al.
259(as shown in Fig. 5), word
embeddings (i.e., numerical vectors representing distinct words)trained on materials science literature could directly predictmaterials applications through a simple dot product between thetrained embedding for a composition word (such as PbTe) and an
application words (such as thermoelectrics). The researchers
demonstrated that such an approach, if applied in the past usinghistorical data, may have subsequently predicted many recentlyTable 5. Software packages for applying DL to natural language
processing.
Software name Link Ref.
Borges https://github.com/CederGroupHub/Borges270
ChemDataExtractor http://chemdataextractor.org262
ChemicalTagger https://github.com/BlueObelisk/
chemicaltagger369
ChemListem https://bitbucket.org/rscapplications/
chemlistem/370
ChemSpot https://github.com/rockt/ChemSpot371
LBNLP https://github.com/lbnlp/lbnlp268
mat2vec https://github.com/materialsintelligence/
mat2vec259
MaterialsParser https://github.com/CederGroupHub/
MaterialParser271
OSCAR4 https://github.com/BlueObelisk/oscar4372
Synthesis Project https://www.synthesisproject.org272
tmChem https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/research/
bionlp/Tools/tmchem/373K. Choudhary et al.
17
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 18 ====
reported thermoelectric materials; they also presented a list of
potentially interesting thermoelectric compositions using theknown literature at the time. Since then, several of thesepredictions have been tested either computationally
277 –282or
experimentally283as potential thermoelectrics. Such approaches
have recently been applied to search for understudied areas ofmetallocene catalysis
284, although challenges still remain in such
direct approaches to materials prediction.
UNCERTAINTY QUANTIFICATION
Uncertainty quanti ﬁcation (UQ) is an essential step in evaluating
the robustness of DL. Speci ﬁcally, DL models have been criticized
for lack of robustness, interpretability, and reliability and the
addition of carefully quanti ﬁed uncertainties would go a long way
towards addressing such shortcomings. While most of the focus inthe DL ﬁeld currently goes into developing new algorithms or
training networks to high accuracy, there is increasing attention toUQ, as exempli ﬁed by the detailed review of Abdar et al.
285.
However, determining the uncertainty associated with DL predic-tions is still challenging and far from a completely solved problem.
The main drawback to estimating UQ when performing DL is
the fact that most of the currently available UQ implementationsdo not work for arbitrary, off-the-shelf models, without retrainingor redesigning. Bayesian NNs are the exception; however, theyrequire signi ﬁcant modi ﬁcations to the training procedure, are
computationally expensive compared to non-Bayesian NNs, andbecome increasingly inef ﬁcient the larger the datasize gets. A
considerable fraction of the current research in DL UQ focusesexactly on such an issue: how to evaluate uncertainty without
requiring computationally expensive retraining or DL code
modi ﬁcations. An example of such an effort is the work of Mi
et al.
286, where three scalable methods are explored, to evaluate
the variance of output from trained NN, without requiring anyamount of retraining. Another example is Teye, Azizpour, andSmith ’s exploration of the use of batch normalization as a way to
approximate inference in Bayesian models
287.Before reviewing the most common methods used to evaluate
uncertainty in DL, let us brie ﬂy point out key reasons to add UQ
to DL modeling. Reaching high accuracy when training DL
models implicitly assume the availability of a suf ﬁciently large
and diverse training dataset. Unfortunately, this rarely occurs inmaterial discovery applications
288. ML/DL models are prone to
perform poorly on extrapolation289. It is also extremely dif ﬁcult
for ML/DL models to recognize ambiguous samples290.I n
general, determining the amount of data necessary to train aDL to achieve the required accuracy is a challenging problem.Careful evaluation of the uncertainty associated with DL
predictions would not only increase reliability in predicted
results but would also provide guidance on estimating theneeded training dataset size as well as suggesting what new datashould be added to reach the target accuracy (uncertainty-guided decision). Zhang, Kailkhura, and Han ’sw o r ke m p h a s i z e s
how including a UQ-motivated reject option into the DL modelsubstantially improves the performance of the remainingmaterial data
288. Such a reject option is associated with the
detection of out-of-distribution samples, which is only possible
through UQ analysis of the predicted results.
Two different uncertainty types are associated with each ML
prediction: epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty. Epis-temic uncertainty is related to insuf ﬁcient training data in part of
the input domain. As mentioned above, while DL is very effectiveat interpolation tasks, they can have more dif ﬁculty in extrapola-
tion. Therefore, it is vital to quantify the lack of accuracy due to
localized, insuf ﬁcient training data. The aleatory uncertainty,
instead, is related to parameters not included in the model. Itrelates to the possibility of training on data that our DL perceivesas very similar but that are associated with different outputsbecause of missing features in the model. Ideally, we would likeUQ methodologies to distinguish and quantify both types ofuncertainties separately.
The most common approaches to evaluate uncertainty using DL
are Dropout methods, Deep Ensemble methods, Quantile regres-sion, and Gaussian Processes. Dropout methods are commonlyused to avoid over ﬁtting. In this type of approach, network nodes
Fig. 5 A schematic showing the application of skip-gram variation of Word2vec for predicting context words. a Network for training word
embeddings for natural language processing application. A one-hot encoded vector at left represents each distinct word in the corpus; therole of a hidden layer is to predict the probability of neighboring words in the corpus. This network structure trains a relatively small hiddenlayer of 100 –200 neurons to contain information on the context of words in the entire corpus, with the result that similar words end up with
similar hidden layer weights (word embeddings). Such word embeddings can transform wordsin text form into numerical vectors that may beuseful for a variety of applications. bprojection of word embeddings for various materials science words, as trained on a corpus scienti ﬁc
abstracts, into two dimensions using principle components analysis. Without any explicit training, the word embeddings naturally preserve
relationships between chemical formulas, their common oxides, and their ground state structures. [Reprinted according to the terms of theCC-BY license ref.
259].
K. Choudhary et al.
18
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 19 ====
are disabled randomly during training, resulting in the evaluation
of a different subset of the network at each training step. When a
similar randomization procedure is also applied to the prediction
procedure, the methodology becomes Monte-Carlo dropout291.
Repeating such randomization multiple times produces a dis-tribution over the outputs, from which mean and variance are
determined for each prediction. Another example of using a
dropout approach to approximate Bayesian inference in deepGaussian processes is the work of Gal and Ghahramani
292.
Deep ensemble methodologies293 –296combine deep learning
modelling with ensemble learning. Ensemble methods utilize
multiple models and different random initializations to improvepredictability. Because of the multiple predictions, statisticaldistributions of the outputs are generated. Combining such
results into a Gaussian distribution, con ﬁdence intervals are
obtained through variance evaluation. Such a multi-modelstrategy allows the evaluation of aleatory uncertainty when
sufﬁcient training data are provided. For areas without suf ﬁcient
data, the predicted mean and variance will not be accurate, butthe expectation is that a very large variance should be estimated,clearly indicating non-trustable predictions. Monte-Carlo Dropout
and Deep Ensembles approaches can be combined to further
improve con ﬁdence in the predicted outputs.
Quantile regression can be utilized with DL
297.I nt h i s
approach, the loss function is used in a way that allows to
predict for the chosen quantile a (between 0 and 1). A choice of
a=0.5 corresponds to evaluating the Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
and predicting the median of the distribution. Predicting for two
more quantile values (amin and amax) determines con ﬁdence
intervals of width amax −amin. For instance, predicting for amin =
0.1 and amax =0.8 produces con ﬁdence intervals covering 70% of
the population. The largest drawback of using quantile to estimate
prediction intervals is the need to run the model three times, one
for each quantile needed. However, a recent implementation inTensorFlow allows to simultaneously obtain multiple quantiles inone run.
Lastly, Gaussian Processes (GP) can be used within a DL
approach as well and have the side bene ﬁt of providing UQ
information at no extra cost. Gaussian processes are a family ofinﬁnite-dimensional multivariate Gaussian distributions comple-
tely speci ﬁed by a mean function and a ﬂexible kernel function
(prior distribution). By optimizing such functions to ﬁt the training
data, the posterior distribution is determined, which is later used
to predict outputs for inputs not included in the training set.
Because the prior is a Gaussian process, the posterior distributionis Gaussian as well
298, thus providing mean and variance
information for each predicted data. However, in practice standard
kernels under-perform299. In 2016, Wilson et al.300suggested
processing inputs through a neural network prior to a Gaussianprocess model. This procedure could extract high-level patternsand features, but required careful design and optimization. In
general, Deep Gaussian processes improve the performance of
Gaussian processes by mapping the inputs through multipleGaussian process ‘layers ’. Several groups have followed this
avenue and further perfected such an approach (ref.
299and
references within). A common drawback of Bayesian methods is aprohibitive computational cost if dealing with large datasets
292.
LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES
Although DL methods have various fascinating opportunities for
materials design, they have several limitations and there is much
room to improve. Reliability and quality assessment of datasets
used in DL tasks are challenging because there is either a lack ofground truth data, or there are not enough metrics for global
comparison, or datasets using similar or identical set-ups may not
be reproducible
301. This poses an important challenge in relying
upon DL-based prediction.Material representations based on chemical formula alone by
deﬁnition do not consider structure, which on the one hand
makes them more amenable to work for new compounds for
which structure information may not be available, but on theother hand, makes it impossible for them to capture phenomenasuch as phase transitions. Properties of materials depend
sensitively on structure to the extent that their properties can
be quite opposite depending on the atomic arrangement, like adiamond (hard, wide-band-gap insulator) and graphite (soft, semi-metal). It is thus not a surprise that chemical formula-based
methods may not be adequate in some cases
159.
Atomistic graph-based predictions, although considered a full
atomistic description, are tested on bulk materials only and not for
defective systems or for multi-dimensional phases of spaceexploration such as using genetic algorithms. In general, thisunderscores that the input features must be predictive for the
output labels and not be missing some key information. Although
atomistic graph neural network models such as atomistic linegraph neural network (ALIGNN) have achieved remarkableaccuracy compared to previous atomistic based models, the
model errors still need to be further brought down to reach
something resembling deep learning ‘chemical-accuracies. ’
In terms of images and spectra, the experimental data are too
noisy most of the time and require much manipulation beforeapplying DL. In contrast, theory-based simulated data represent analternate path forward but may not capture realistic scenarios
such as the presence of structured noise
217.
Uncertainty quanti ﬁcation for deep learning for materials
science is important, yet only a few works have been published
in this ﬁeld. To alleviate the black-box38nature of the DL
methods, a package such as GNNExplainer302has been tried in
the context of the material. Such attempts at greater interpret-
ability will be important moving forward to gain the trust of thematerials community.
While training-validation-test split strategies were primarily
designed in DL for image classi ﬁcation tasks with a certain
number of classes, the same for re gression models in materials
science may not be the best approach. This is because it is
possible that during the training the model is seeing amaterial very similar to the test set material and in reality it isdifﬁcult to generalize the model. Best practices need to be
developed for data split, normalization, and augmentation to
avoid such issues
289.
Finally, we note an important technological challenge is to
make a closed-loop autonomous materials design and synthesisprocess
303,304that can include both machine learning and
experimental components in a self-driving laboratory305. For an
overview of early proof of principle attempts see306. For example,
in an autonomous synthesis experiment the oxidation state ofcopper (and therefore the oxide phase) was varied in a sample ofcopper oxide by automatically ﬂowing more oxidizing or more
reducing gas over the sample and monitoring the charge state of
the copper using XANES. An algorithmic decision policy was thenused to automatically change the gas composition for asubsequent experiment based on the prior experiments, with no
human in the loop, in such a way as to autonomously move
towards a target copper oxidation state
307. This simple proof of
principle experiment provides just a glimpse of what is possiblemoving forward.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data from new ﬁgures are available on reasonable request from the
corresponding author. Data from other publishers are not available from the
corresponding author of this work but may be available by reaching thecorresponding author of the cited work.K. Choudhary et al.
19
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 20 ====
CODE AVAILABILITY
Software packages mentioned in the article (whichever made available by the
authors) can be found at https://github.com/deepmaterials/dlmatreview . Software for
other packages can be obtained by reaching the corresponding author of the
cited work.
Received: 25 October 2021; Accepted: 24 February 2022;
REFERENCES
1. Callister, W. D. et al. Materials Science and Engineering: An Introduction (Wiley,
2021).
2. Saito, T. Computational Materials Design, Vol. 34 (Springer Science & Business
Media, 2013).
3. Choudhary, K. et al. The joint automated repository for various integrated
simulations (jarvis) for data-driven materials design. npj Comput. Mater. 6,1–13
(2020).
4. Kirklin, S. et al. The open quantum materials database (oqmd): assessing the
accuracy of dft formation energies. npj Comput. Mater. 1,1–15 (2015).
5. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome approach
to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 1, 011002 (2013).
6. Curtarolo, S. et al. A ﬂow: An automatic framework for high-throughput materials
discovery. Comput. Mater. Sci. 58, 218 –226 (2012).
7. Ramakrishnan, R., Dral, P. O., Rupp, M. & Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quantum chemistry
structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Sci. Data 1,1–7 (2014).
8. Draxl, C. & Schef ﬂer, M. Nomad: The fair concept for big data-driven materials
science. MRS Bull. 43, 676 –682 (2018).
9. Wang, R., Fang, X., Lu, Y., Yang, C.-Y. & Wang, S. The pdbbind database: meth-
odologies and updates. J. Med. Chem. 48, 4111 –4119 (2005).
10. Zakutayev, A. et al. An open experimental database for exploring inorganic
materials. Sci. Data 5,1–12 (2018).
11. de Pablo, J. J. et al. New frontiers for the materials genome initiative. npj
Comput. Mater. 5,1–23 (2019).
12. Wilkinson, M. D. et al. The fair guiding principles for sci. data management and
stewardship. Sci. Data 3,1–9 (2016).
13. Friedman, J. et al. The Elements of Statistical Learning, Vol. 1 (Springer series in
statistics New York, 2001).
14. Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. Perspective: Materials informatics and big data:
Realization of the “fourth paradigm ”of science in materials science. APL Mater.
4, 053208 (2016).
15. Vasudevan, R. K. et al. Materials science in the arti ﬁcial intelligence age: high-
throughput library generation, machine learning, and a pathway from correla-tions to the underpinning physics. MRS Commun. 9, 821
–838 (2019).
16. Schmidt, J., Marques, M. R., Botti, S. & Marques, M. A. Recent advances and
applications of machine learning in solid-state materials science. npj Comput.
Mater. 5,1–36 (2019).
17. Butler, K. T., Davies, D. W., Cartwright, H., Isayev, O. & Walsh, A. Machine learning
for molecular and materials science. Nature 559, 547 –555 (2018).
18. Xu, Y. et al. Deep dive into machine learning models for protein engineering. J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 60, 2773 –2790 (2020).
19. Schleder, G. R., Padilha, A. C., Acosta, C. M., Costa, M. & Fazzio, A. From dft to
machine learning: recent approaches to materials science –a review. J. Phys.
Mater. 2, 032001 (2019).
20. Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. Deep materials informatics: applications of deep
learning in materials science. MRS Commun. 9, 779 –792 (2019).
21. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y. & Courville, A. Deep Learning (MIT Press, 2016).
22. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436 –444 (2015).
23. McCulloch, W. S. & Pitts, W. A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous
activity. Bull. Math. Biophys. 5, 115 –133 (1943).
24. Rosenblatt, F. The perceptron: A probabilistic model for information storage and
organization in the brain. Psychol. Rev. 65, 386 –408 (1958).
25. Gibney, E. Google ai algorithm masters ancient game of go. Nat. News 529, 445
(2016).
26. Ramos, S., Gehrig, S., Pinggera, P., Franke, U. & Rother, C. Detecting unexpected
obstacles for self-driving cars: Fusing deep learning and geometric modeling. in
2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) , 1025 –1032 (IEEE, 2017).
27. Buduma, N. & Locascio, N. Fundamentals of deep learning: Designing next-
generation machine intelligence algorithms (O’Reilly Media, Inc., O ’Reilly, 2017).
28. Kearnes, S., McCloskey, K., Berndl, M., Pande, V. & Riley, P. Molecular graph
convolutions: moving beyond ﬁngerprints. J. Computer Aided Mol. Des. 30,
595–608 (2016).29. Albrecht, T., Slabaugh, G., Alonso, E. & Al-Arif, S. M. R. Deep learning for single-
molecule science. Nanotechnology 28, 423001 (2017).
30. Ge, M., Su, F., Zhao, Z. & Su, D. Deep learning analysis on microscopic imaging in
materials science. Mater. Today Nano 11, 100087 (2020).
31. Agrawal, A., Gopalakrishnan, K. & Choudhary, A. In Handbook on Big Data and
Machine Learning in the Physical Sciences: Volume 1. Big Data Methods inExperimental Materials Discovery World Scienti ﬁc Series on Emerging Technol-
ogies, 205 –230 ( “World Scienti ﬁc, 2020).
32. Erdmann, M., Glombitza, J., Kasieczka, G. & Klemradt, U. Deep Learning for Physics
Research (World Scienti ﬁc, 2021).
33. Chen, C., Ye, W., Zuo, Y., Zheng, C. & Ong, S. P. Graph networks as a universal
machine learning framework for molecules and crystals. Chem. Mater. 31,
3564 –3572 (2019).
34. Jha, D. et al. Enhancing materials property prediction by leveraging computa-
tional and experimental data using deep transfer learning. Nat. Commun .10,
1–12 (2019).
35. Cubuk, E. D., Sendek, A. D. & Reed, E. J. Screening billions of candidates for solid
lithium-ion conductors: a transfer learning approach for small data. J. Chem.
Phys. 150, 214701 (2019).
36. Chen, C., Zuo, Y., Ye, W., Li, X. & Ong, S. P. Learning properties of ordered and
disordered materials from multi- ﬁdelity data. Nat. Comput. Sci. 1,4 6–53 (2021).
37. Artrith, N. et al. Best practices in machine learning for chemistry. Nat. Chem. 13,
505–508 (2021).
38. Holm, E. A. In defense of the black box. Science 364,2 6–27 (2019).
39. Mueller, T., Kusne, A. G. & Ramprasad, R. Machine learning in materials science:
Recent progress and emerging applications. Rev. Comput. Chem. 29, 186 –273
(2016).
40. Wei, J. et al. Machine learning in materials science. InfoMat 1, 338 –358 (2019).
41. Liu, Y. et al. Machine learning in materials genome initiative: a review. J. Mater.
Sci. Technol. 57, 113 –122 (2020).
42. Wang, A. Y.-T. et al. Machine learning for materials scientists: an introductory
guide toward best practices. Chem. Mater. 32, 4954 –4965 (2020).
43. Morgan, D. & Jacobs, R. Opportunities and challenges for machine learning in
materials science. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 50,7 1–103 (2020).
44. Himanen, L., Geurts, A., Foster, A. S. & Rinke, P. Data-driven materials science:
status, challenges, and perspectives.
Adv. Sci. 6, 1900808 (2019).
45. Rajan, K. Informatics for materials science and engineering: data-driven discovery
for accelerated experimentation and application (Butterworth-Heinemann, 2013).
46. Montáns, F. J., Chinesta, F., Gómez-Bombarelli, R. & Kutz, J. N. Data-driven
modeling and learning in science and engineering. Comptes Rendus Mécanique
347, 845 –855 (2019).
47. Aykol, M. et al. The materials research platform: de ﬁning the requirements from
user stories. Matter 1, 1433 –1438 (2019).
48. Stanev, V., Choudhary, K., Kusne, A. G., Paglione, J. & Takeuchi, I. Arti ﬁcial
intelligence for search and discovery of quantum materials. Commun. Mater. 2,
1–11 (2021).
49. Chen, C. et al. A critical review of machine learning of energy materials. Adv.
Energy Mater. 10, 1903242 (2020).
50. Cybenko, G. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Math.
Control Signals Syst. 2, 303 –314 (1989).
51. Kidger, P. & Lyons, T. Universal approximation with deep narrow networks .i n
Conference on learning theory , 2306 –2327 (PMLR, 2020).
52. Lin, H. W., Tegmark, M. & Rolnick, D. Why does deep and cheap learning work so
well? J. Stat. Phys. 168, 1223 –1247 (2017).
53. Minsky, M. & Papert, S. A. Perceptrons: An introduction to computational geometry
(MIT press, 2017).
54. Paszke, A. et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32, 8026 –8037 (2019).
55. Abadi et al., TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning.
arXiv:1605.08695, Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.08695 (2006).
56. Chen, T. et al. Mxnet: A ﬂexible and ef ﬁcient machine learning library for het-
erogeneous distributed systems. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.01274 (2015).
57. Nwankpa, C., Ijomah, W., Gachagan, A. & Marshall, S. Activation functions:
comparison of trends in practice and research for deep learning. arXiv .https://
arxiv.org/abs/1811.03378 (2018).
58. Baydin, A. G., Pearlmutter, B. A., Radul, A. A. & Siskind, J. M. Automatic differ-
entiation in machine learning: a survey. J. Machine Learn. Res. 18,1–43 (2018).
59. Hinton, G. E., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Salakhutdinov, R. R.
Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors.
arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.0580 (2012).
60. Breiman, L. Bagging predictors. Machine Learn. 24, 123 –140 (1996).
61. LeCun, Y. et al. The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks vol. 3361 (MIT
press Cambridge, MA, USA 1995).
62. Wilson, R. J. Introduction to Graph Theory (Pearson Education India, 1979).
K. Choudhary et al.
20
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 21 ====
63. West, D. B. et al. Introduction to Graph Theory Vol. 2 (Prentice hall Upper Saddle
River, 2001).
64. Wang, M. et al. Deep graph library: A graph-centric, highly-performant package
for graph neural networks. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.01315 (2019).
65. Choudhary, K. & DeCost, B. Atomistic line graph neural network for improved
materials property predictions. npj Comput. Mater. 7,1–8 (2021).
66. Li, M. et al. Dgl-lifesci: An open-source toolkit for deep learning on graphs in life
science. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.14232 (2021).
67. Xie, T. & Grossman, J. C. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an
accurate and interpretable prediction of material properties. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
145301 (2018).
68. Klicpera, J., Groß, J. & Günnemann, S. Directional message passing for molecular
graphs. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.03123 (2020).
69. Schutt, K. et al. Schnetpack: A deep learning toolbox for atomistic systems. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 15, 448 –455 (2018).
70. Kipf, T. N. & Welling, M. Semi-supervised classi ﬁcation with graph convolutional
networks. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907 (2016).
71. Veli čkovi ć, P. et al. Graph attention networks. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/
1710.10903 (2017).
72. Schlichtkrull, M. et al. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional net-
works. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06103 (2017).
73. Song, L., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z. & Gildea, D. A graph-to-sequence model for AMR-to-
text generation .I nProceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 1616 –1626 (Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2018).
74. Xu, K., Hu, W., Leskovec, J. & Jegelka, S. How powerful are graph neural net-
works? arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00826 (2018).
75. Chen, Z., Li, X. & Bruna, J. Supervised community detection with line graph
neural networks. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.08415 (2017).
76. Jing, Y., Bian, Y., Hu, Z., Wang, L. & Xie, X.-Q. S. Deep learning for drug design: an
artiﬁcial intelligence paradigm for drug discovery in the big data era. AAPS J. 20,
1–10 (2018).
77. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1810.04805 (2018).
78. De Cao, N. & Kipf, T. Molgan: An implicit generative model for small molecular
graphs. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.11973 (2018).
79. Pereira, T., Abbasi, M., Ribeiro, B. & Arrais, J. P. Diversity oriented deep reinfor-
cement learning for targeted molecule generation. J. Cheminformatics 13,1–17
(2021).
80. Baker, N. et al. Workshop report on basic research needs for scienti ﬁc machine
learning: core technologies for arti ﬁcial intelligence. Tech. Rep .https://doi.org/
10.2172/1478744 . (2019).
81. Chan, H. et al. Rapid 3d nanoscale coherent imaging via physics-aware deep
learning. Appl. Phys. Rev. 8, 021407 (2021).
82. Pun, G. P., Batra, R., Ramprasad, R. & Mishin, Y. Physically informed arti ﬁcial
neural networks for atomistic modeling of materials. Nat. Commun. 10,1–10
(2019).
83. Onken, D. et al. A neural network approach for high-dimensional optimal
control. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03270 (2021).
84. Zunger, A. Inverse design in search of materials with target functionalities. Nat.
Rev. Chem. 2,1–16 (2018).
85. Chen, L., Zhang, W., Nie, Z., Li, S. & Pan, F. Generative models for inverse design
of inorganic solid materials. J. Mater. Inform. 1, 4 (2021).
86. Cranmer, M. et al. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with
inductive biases. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11287 (2020).
87. Rupp, M., Tkatchenko, A., Müller, K.-R. & Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Fast and accurate
modeling of molecular atomization energies with machine learning. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 108, 058301 (2012).
88. Bartók, A. P., Kondor, R. & Csányi, G. On representing chemical environments.
Phys. Rev. B 87, 184115 (2013).
89. Faber, F. A. et al. Prediction errors of molecular machine learning models lower
than hybrid dft error. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 13, 5255 –5264 (2017).
90. Choudhary, K., DeCost, B. & Tavazza, F. Machine learning with force- ﬁeld-
inspired descriptors for materials: Fast screening and mapping energy land-scape. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 083801 (2018).
91. Choudhary, K., Garrity, K. F., Ghimire, N. J., Anand, N. & Tavazza, F. High-
throughput search for magnetic topological materials using spin-orbit spillage,
machine learning, and experiments. Phys. Rev. B 103, 155131 (2021).
92. Choudhary, K., Garrity, K. F. & Tavazza, F. Data-driven discovery of 3d and 2d
thermoelectric materials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 32, 475501 (2020).
93. Ward, L. et al. Including crystal structure attributes in machine learning models
of formation energies via voronoi tessellations. Phys. Rev. B 96, 024104 (2017).
94. Isayev, O. et al. Universal fragment descriptors for predicting properties of
inorganic crystals. Nat. Commun. 8,1–12 (2017).95. Liu, C.-H., Tao, Y., Hsu, D., Du, Q. & Billinge, S. J. Using a machine learning
approach to determine the space group of a structure from the atomic pairdistribution function. Acta Crystallogr. Sec. A 75, 633 –643 (2019).
96. Smith, J. S., Isayev, O. & Roitberg, A. E. Ani-1: an extensible neural network
potential with dft accuracy at force ﬁeld computational cost. Chem. Sci. 8,
3192 –3203 (2017).
97. Behler, J. Atom-centered symmetry functions for constructing high-dimensional
neural network potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 134, 074106 (2011).
98. Behler, J. & Parrinello, M. Generalized neural-network representation of high-
dimensional potential-energy surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401 (2007).
99. Ko, T. W., Finkler, J. A., Goedecker, S. & Behler, J. A fourth-generation high-
dimensional neural network potential with accurate electrostatics includingnon-local charge transfer. Nat. Commun. 12, 398 (2021).
100. Weinreich, J., Romer, A., Paleico, M. L. & Behler, J. Properties of alpha-brass
nanoparticles. 1. neural network potential energy surface. J. Phys. Chem C 124,
12682 –12695 (2020).
101. Wang, H., Zhang, L., Han, J. & E, W. Deepmd-kit: A deep learning package for
many-body potential energy representation and molecular dynamics. Computer
Phys. Commun. 228, 178 –184 (2018).
102. Eshet, H., Khaliullin, R. Z., Kühne, T. D., Behler, J. & Parrinello, M. Ab initio quality
neural-network potential for sodium. Phys. Rev. B 81, 184107 (2010).
103. Khaliullin, R. Z., Eshet, H., Kühne, T. D., Behler, J. & Parrinello, M. Graphite-
diamond phase coexistence study employing a neural-network mapping of the
ab initio potential energy surface. Phys. Rev. B 81, 100103 (2010).
104. Artrith, N. & Urban, A. An implementation of arti ﬁcial neural-network potentials
for atomistic materials simulations: Performance for tio2. Comput. Mater. Sci.
114, 135 –150 (2016).
105. Park, C. W. et al. Accurate and scalable graph neural network force ﬁeld and
molecular dynamics with direct force architecture. npj Comput. Mater. 7,1–9
(2021).
106. Chmiela, S., Sauceda, H. E., Müller, K.-R. & Tkatchenko, A. Towards exact mole-
cular dynamics simulations with machine-learned force ﬁelds. Nat. Commun. 9,
1–10 (2018).
107. Xue, L.-Y. et al. Reaxff-mpnn machine learning potential: a combination of
reactive force
ﬁeld and message passing neural networks. Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 23, 19457 –19464 (2021).
108. Gilmer, J., Schoenholz, S. S., Riley, P. F., Vinyals, O. & Dahl, G. E. Neural message
passing for quantum chemistry. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01212 (2017).
109. Zitnick, C. L. et al. An introduction to electrocatalyst design using machine learning
for renewable energy storage. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.09435 (2020).
110. McNutt, A. T. et al. Gnina 1 molecular docking with deep learning. J. Che-
minformatics 13,1–20 (2021).
111. Jin, W., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
molecular graph generation. in International conference on machine learning ,
2323 –2332 (PMLR, 2018).
112. Olivecrona, M., Blaschke, T., Engkvist, O. & Chen, H. Molecular de-novo design
through deep reinforcement learning. J. Cheminformatics 9,1–14 (2017).
113. You, J., Liu, B., Ying, R., Pande, V. & Leskovec, J. Graph convolutional policy
network for goal-directed molecular graph generation. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1806.02473 (2018).
114. Putin, E. et al. Reinforced adversarial neural computer for de novo molecular
design. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 58, 1194 –1204 (2018).
115. Sanchez-Lengeling, B., Outeiral, C., Guimaraes, G. L. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Opti-
mizing distributions over molecular space. an objective-reinforced generativeadversarial network for inverse-design chemistry (organic). ChemRxiv https://doi.
org/10.26434/chemrxiv.5309668.v3 (2017).
116. Nouira, A., Sokolovska, N. & Crivello, J.-C. Crystalgan: learning to discover crys-
tallographic structures with generative adversarial networks. arXiv. https://arxiv.
org/abs/1810.11203 (2018).
117. Long, T. et al. Constrained crystals deep convolutional generative adversarial net-
work for the inverse design of crystal structures. npj Comput. Mater. 7, 66 (2021).
118. Noh, J. et al. Inverse design of solid-state materials via a continuous repre-
sentation. Matter 1, 1370 –1384 (2019).
119. Kim, S., Noh, J., Gu, G. H., Aspuru-Guzik, A. & Jung, Y. Generative adversarial
networks for crystal structure prediction. ACS Central Sci. 6, 1412 –1420 (2020).
120. Long, T. et al. Inverse design of crystal structures for multicomponent systems.
arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08040 (2021).
121. Xie, T. & Grossman, J. C. Hierarchical visualization of materials space with graph
convolutional neural networks. J. Chem. Phys. 149, 174111 (2018).
122. Park, C. W. & Wolverton, C. Developing an improved crystal graph convolutional
neural network framework for accelerated materials discovery. Phys. Rev. Mater.
4, 063801 (2020).
123. Laugier, L. et al. Predicting thermoelectric properties from crystal graphs and
material descriptors- ﬁ
rst application for functional materials. arXiv. https://arxiv.
org/abs/1811.06219 (2018).K. Choudhary et al.
21
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 22 ====
124. Rosen, A. S. et al. Machine learning the quantum-chemical properties of
metal –organic frameworks for accelerated materials discovery. Matter 4,
1578 –1597 (2021).
125. Lusci, A., Pollastri, G. & Baldi, P. Deep architectures and deep learning in che-
moinformatics: the prediction of aqueous solubility for drug-like molecules. J.
Chem. Inf. Model. 53, 1563 –1575 (2013).
126. Xu, Y. et al. Deep learning for drug-induced liver injury. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 55,
2085 –2093 (2015).
127. Jain, A. & Bligaard, T. Atomic-position independent descriptor for machine
learning of material properties. Phys. Rev. B 98, 214112 (2018).
128. Goodall, R. E., Parackal, A. S., Faber, F. A., Armiento, R. & Lee, A. A. Rapid dis-
covery of novel materials by coordinate-free coarse graining. arXiv .https://arxiv.
org/abs/2106.11132 (2021).
129. Zuo, Y. et al. Accelerating Materials Discovery with Bayesian Optimization and
Graph Deep Learning. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.10242 (2021).
130. Lin, T.-S. et al. Bigsmiles: a structurally-based line notation for describing mac-
romolecules. ACS Central Sci. 5, 1523 –1531 (2019).
131. Tyagi, A. et al. Cancerppd: a database of anticancer peptides and proteins.
Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D837 –D843 (2015).
132. Krenn, M., Häse, F., Nigam, A., Friederich, P. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Self-referencing
embedded strings (sel ﬁes): a 100% robust molecular string representation.
Machine Learn. Sci. Technol. 1, 045024 (2020).
133. Lim, J., Ryu, S., Kim, J. W. & Kim, W. Y. Molecular generative model based on
conditional variational autoencoder for de novo molecular design. J. Che-
minformatics 10,1–9 (2018).
134. Krasnov, L., Khokhlov, I., Fedorov, M. V. & Sosnin, S. Transformer-based arti ﬁcial
neural networks for the conversion between chemical notations. Sci. Rep. 11,
1–10 (2021).
135. Irwin, J. J., Sterling, T., Mysinger, M. M., Bolstad, E. S. & Coleman, R. G. Zinc: a free
tool to discover chemistry for biology. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 52, 1757 –1768 (2012).
136. Dix, D. J. et al. The toxcast program for prioritizing toxicity testing of environ-
mental chemicals. Toxicol. Sci. 95,5–12 (2007).
137. Kim, S. et al. Pubchem 2019 update: improved access to chemical data. Nucleic
Acids Res. 47, D1102 –D1109 (2019).
138. Hirohara, M., Saito, Y., Koda, Y., Sato, K. & Sakakibara, Y. Convolutional neural
network based on smiles representation of compounds for detecting chemical
motif. BMC Bioinformatics 19,8 3–94 (2018).
139. Gómez-Bombarelli, R. et al. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven
continuous representation of molecules. ACS Central Sci. 4, 268 –276 (2018).
140. Liu, R. et al. Deep learning for chemical compound stability prediction .I n Pro-
ceedings of ACM SIGKDD workshop on large-scale deep learning for data mining(DL-KDD) ,1–7.https://rosanneliu.com/publication/kdd/ (ACM SIGKDD, 2016).
141. Jha, D. et al. Elemnet: Deep learning the chem. mater. from only elemental
composition. Sci. Rep. 8,1–13 (2018).
142. Agrawal, A. et al. Exploration of data science techniques to predict fatigue
strength of steel from composition and processing parameters. Integr. Mater.
Manuf. Innov. 3,9 0–108 (2014).
143. Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. A fatigue strength predictor for steels using ensemble
data mining: steel fatigue strength predictor .I n Proceedings of the 25th ACM
International on Conference on information and knowledge management ,
2497 –2500. https://doi.org/10.1145/2983323.2983343 (2016).
144. Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. An online tool for predicting fatigue strength of
steel alloys based on ensemble data mining. Int. J. Fatigue 113, 389 –400 (2018).
145. Agrawal, A., Saboo, A., Xiong, W., Olson, G. & Choudhary, A. Martensite start
temperature predictor for steels using ensemble data mining .i n2019 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA) , 521 –530
(IEEE, 2019).
146. Meredig, B. et al. Combinatorial screening for new materials in unconstrained
composition space with machine learning. Phys. Rev. B 89, 094104 (2014).
147. Agrawal, A., Meredig, B., Wolverton, C. & Choudhary, A. A formation energy
predictor for crystalline materials using ensemble data mining .i n2016 IEEE 16th
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) , 1276 –1279 (IEEE,
2016).
148. Furmanchuk, A., Agrawal, A. & Choudhary, A. Predictive analytics for crystalline
materials: bulk modulus. RSC Adv. 6, 95246 –95251 (2016).
149. Furmanchuk, A. et al. Prediction of seebeck coef ﬁcient for compounds without
restriction to ﬁxed stoichiometry: A machine learning approach. J. Comput.
Chem. 39
, 191 –202 (2018).
150. Ward, L., Agrawal, A., Choudhary, A. & Wolverton, C. A general-purpose machine
learning framework for predicting properties of inorganic materials. npj Comput.
Mater. 2,1–7 (2016).
151. Ward, L. et al. Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data mining.
Comput. Mater. Sci. 152,6 0–69 (2018).
152. Jha, D. et al. Irnet: A general purpose deep residual regression framework for
materials discovery .I n Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD InternationalConference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , 2385 –2393. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1907.03222 (2019).
153. Jha, D. et al. Enabling deeper learning on big data for materials informatics
applications. Sci. Rep. 11,1–12 (2021).
154. Goodall, R. E. & Lee, A. A. Predicting materials properties without crystal structure:
Deep representation learning from stoichiometry. Nat. Commun. 11,1–9 (2020).
155. NIMS. Superconducting material database (supercon) .https://supercon.nims.go.
jp/(2021).
156. Stanev, V. et al. Machine learning modeling of superconducting critical tem-
perature. npj Comput. Mater. 4,1–14 (2018).
157. Gupta, V. et al. Cross-property deep transfer learning framework for enhanced
predictive analytics on small materials data. Nat. Commun .12,1–10 (2021).
158. Himanen, L. et al. Dscribe: Library of descriptors for machine learning in
materials science. Computer Phys. Commun. 247, 106949 (2020).
159. Bartel, C. J. et al. A critical examination of compound stability predictions from
machine-learned formation energies. npj Comput. Mater. 6,1–11 (2020).
160. Choudhary, K. et al. High-throughput density functional perturbation theory and
machine learning predictions of infrared, piezoelectric, and dielectric responses.npj Comput. Mater. 6,1–13 (2020).
161. Zheng, C. et al. Automated generation and ensemble-learned matching of X-ray
absorption spectra. npj Comput. Mater. 4,1–9 (2018).
162. Mathew, K. et al. High-throughput computational x-ray absorption spectro-
scopy. Sci. Data 5,1–8 (2018).
163. Chen, Y. et al. Database of ab initio l-edge x-ray absorption near edge structure.
Sci. Data 8,1–
8 (2021).
164. Lafuente, B., Downs, R. T., Yang, H. & Stone, N. In Highlights in mineralogical
crystallography 1–30 (De Gruyter (O), 2015).
165. El Mendili, Y. et al. Raman open database: ﬁrst interconnected raman –x-ray
diffraction open-access resource for material identi ﬁcation. J. Appl. Crystallogr.
52, 618 –625 (2019).
166. Fremout, W. & Saverwyns, S. Identi ﬁcation of synthetic organic pigments: the
role of a comprehensive digital raman spectral library. J. Raman Spectrosc. 43,
1536 –1544 (2012).
167. Huck, P. & Persson, K. A. Mpcontribs: user contributed data to the materials project
database .https://docs.mpcontribs.org/ (2019).
168. Yang, L. et al. A cloud platform for atomic pair distribution function analysis:
Pdﬁtc.Acta Crystallogr. A 77,2–6 (2021).
169. Park, W. B. et al. Classi ﬁcation of crystal structure using a convolutional neural
network. IUCrJ 4, 486 –494 (2017).
170. Hellenbrandt, M. The Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) —present and
future. Crystallogr. Rev. 10,1 7–22 (2004).
171. Zaloga, A. N., Stanovov, V. V., Bezrukova, O. E., Dubinin, P. S. & Yakimov, I. S.
Crystal symmetry classi ﬁcation from powder X-ray diffraction patterns using a
convolutional neural network. Mater. Today Commun. 25, 101662 (2020).
172. Lee, J.-W., Park, W. B., Lee, J. H., Singh, S. P. & Sohn, K.-S. A deep-learning
technique for phase identi ﬁcation in multiphase inorganic compounds using
synthetic XRD powder patterns. Nat. Commun. 11, 86 (2020).
173. Wang, H. et al. Rapid identi ﬁcation of X-ray diffraction patterns based on very
limited data by interpretable convolutional neural networks. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
60, 2004 –2011 (2020).
174. Dong, H. et al. A deep convolutional neural network for real-time full pro ﬁle
analysis of big powder diffraction data. npj Comput. Mater. 7,1–9 (2021).
175. Aguiar, J. A., Gong, M. L. & Tasdizen, T. Crystallographic prediction from dif-
fraction and chemistry data for higher throughput classi ﬁcation using machine
learning. Comput. Mater. Sci. 173, 109409 (2020).
176. Maffettone, P. M. et al. Crystallography companion agent for high-throughput
materials discovery. Nat. Comput. Sci. 1, 290 –297 (2021).
177. Oviedo, F. et al. Fast and interpretable classi ﬁcation of small X-ray diffraction
datasets using data augmentation and deep neural networks. npj Comput.
Mater. 5,1–9 (2019).
178. Liu, C.-H. et al. Validation of non-negative matrix factorization for rapid
assessment of large sets of atomic pair-distribution function (pdf) data. J. Appl.
Crystallogr. 54, 768 –775 (2021).
179. Rakita, Y. et al. Studying heterogeneities in local nanostructure with scanning
nanostructure electron microscopy (snem). arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/
2110.03589 (2021).
180. Timoshenko, J., Lu, D., Lin, Y. & Frenkel, A. I. Supervised machine-learning-based
determination of three-dimensional structure of metallic nanoparticles. J. Phys.
Chem Lett. 8, 5091 –5098 (2017).
181. Timoshenko, J. et al. Subnanometer substructures in nanoassemblies formed
from clusters under a reactive atmosphere revealed using machine learning. J.
Phys. Chem C 122, 21686 –21693 (2018).
182. Timoshenko, J. et al. Neural network approach for characterizing structural
transformations by X-ray absorption ﬁne structure spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett.
120, 225502 (2018).
K. Choudhary et al.
22
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 23 ====
183. Zheng, C., Chen, C., Chen, Y. & Ong, S. P. Random forest models for accurate
identi ﬁcation of coordination environments from X-ray absorption near-edge
structure. Patterns 1, 100013 (2020).
184. Torrisi, S. B. et al. Random forest machine learning models for interpretable
X-ray absorption near-edge structure spectrum-property relationships. npj
Comput. Mater. 6,1–11 (2020).
185. Andrejevic, N., Andrejevic, J., Rycroft, C. H. & Li, M. Machine learning spectral
indicators of topology. arXiv preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.00994 (2020).
186. Madden, M. G. & Ryder, A. G. Machine learning methods for quantitative analysis
of raman spectroscopy data .i n Opto-Ireland 2002: Optics and Photonics Tech-
nologies and Applications , Vol. 4876, 1130 –1139 (International Society for Optics
and Photonics, 2003).
187. Conroy, J., Ryder, A. G., Leger, M. N., Hennessey, K. & Madden, M. G. Qualitative
and quantitative analysis of chlorinated solvents using Raman spectroscopy andmachine learning . in Opto-Ireland 2005: Optical Sensing and Spectroscopy, Vol.
5826, 131 –142 (International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2005).
188. Acquarelli, J. et al. Convolutional neural networks for vibrational spectroscopic
data analysis. Anal. Chim. Acta 954,2 2–31 (2017).
189. O ’Connell, M.-L., Howley, T., Ryder, A. G., Leger, M. N. & Madden, M. G. Classi ﬁ-
cation of a target analyte in solid mixtures using principal component analysis,support vector machines, and Raman spectroscopy .i nOpto-Ireland 2005: Optical
Sensing and Spectroscopy , Vol. 5826, 340 –350 (International Society for Optics
and Photonics, 2005).
190. Zhao, J., Chen, Q., Huang, X. & Fang, C. H. Qualitative identi ﬁcation of tea
categories by near infrared spectroscopy and support vector machine. J. Pharm.
Biomed. Anal. 41, 1198 –1204 (2006).
191. Liu, J. et al. Deep convolutional neural networks for Raman spectrum recogni-
tion: a uni ﬁed solution. Analyst 142, 4067 –4074 (2017).
192. Yang, J. et al. Deep learning for vibrational spectral analysis: Recent progress
and a practical guide. Anal. Chim. Acta 1081 ,6–17 (2019).
193. Selzer, P., Gasteiger, J., Thomas, H. & Salzer, R. Rapid access to infrared reference
spectra of arbitrary organic compounds: scope and limitations of an approachto the simulation of infrared spectra by neural networks. Chem. Euro. J. 6,
920–927 (2000).
194. Ghosh, K. et al. Deep learning spectroscopy: neural networks for molecular
excitation spectra. Adv. Sci. 6, 1801367 (2019).
195. Kostka, T., Selzer, P. & Gasteiger, J. A combined application of reaction predic-
tion and infrared spectra simulation for the identi
ﬁcation of degradation pro-
ducts of s-triazine herbicides. Chemistry 7, 2254 –2260 (2001).
196. Mahmoud, C. B., Anelli, A., Csányi, G. & Ceriotti, M. Learning the electronic
density of states in condensed matter. Phys. Rev. B 102, 235130 (2020).
197. Chen, Z. et al. Direct prediction of phonon density of states with Euclidean
neural networks. Adv. Sci. 8, 2004214 (2021).
198. Kong, S. et al. Density of states prediction for materials discovery via contrastive
learning from probabilistic embeddings. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.11444
(2021).
199. Carbone, M. R., Topsakal, M., Lu, D. & Yoo, S. Machine-learning X-ray absorption
spectra to quantitative accuracy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 156401 (2020).
200. Rehr, J. J., Kas, J. J., Vila, F. D., Prange, M. P. & Jorissen, K. Parameter-free cal-
culations of X-ray spectra with FEFF9. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 5503 –5513
(2010).
201. Rankine, C. D., Madkhali, M. M. M. & Penfold, T. J. A deep neural network for the
rapid prediction of X-ray absorption spectra. J. Phys. Chem A 124, 4263 –4270
(2020).
202. Fung, V., Hu, G., Ganesh, P. & Sumpter, B. G. Machine learned features from
density of states for accurate adsorption energy prediction. Nat. Commun. 12,
88 (2021).
203. Hammer, B. & Nørskov, J. Theoretical surface science and catalysis-calculations
and concepts. Adv. Catal. Impact Surface Sci. Catal. 45,7 1–129 (2000).
204. Kaundinya, P. R., Choudhary, K. & Kalidindi, S. R. Prediction of the electron
density of states for crystalline compounds with atomistic line graph neuralnetworks (alignn). arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08348 (2022).
205. Stein, H. S., Soedarmadji, E., Newhouse, P. F., Guevarra, D. & Gregoire, J. M.
Synthesis, optical imaging, and absorption spectroscopy data for 179072 metaloxides. Sci. Data 6, 9 (2019).
206. Choudhary, A. et al. Graph neural network predictions of metal organic framework
co2 adsorption properties. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10231 (2021).
207. Anderson, R., Biong, A. & Gómez-Gualdrón, D. A. Adsorption isotherm predic-
tions for multiple molecules in mofs using the same deep learning model. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 16, 1271 –1283 (2020).
208. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G. E. Imagenet classi ﬁcation with deep
convolutional neural networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25, 1097 –1105
(2012).
209. Varela, M. et al. Materials characterization in the aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electron microscope. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 35, 539 –569 (2005).210. Holm, E. A. et al. Overview: Computer vision and machine learning for micro-
structural characterization and analysis.
Metal. Mater Trans. A 51, 5985 –5999
(2020).
211. Modarres, M. H. et al. Neural network for nanoscience scanning electron
microscope image recognition. Sci. Rep. 7,1–12 (2017).
212. Gopalakrishnan, K., Khaitan, S. K., Choudhary, A. & Agrawal, A. Deep convolu-
tional neural networks with transfer learning for computer vision-based data-driven pavement distress detection. Construct. Build. Mater. 157, 322 –330
(2017).
213. Gopalakrishnan, K., Gholami, H., Vidyadharan, A., Choudhary, A. & Agrawal, A.
Crack damage detection in unmanned aerial vehicle images of civil infra-
structure using pre-trained deep learning model. Int. J. Traf ﬁc Transp. Eng .8,
1–14 (2018).
214. Yang, Z. et al. Data-driven insights from predictive analytics on heterogeneous
experimental data of industrial magnetic materials .I n IEEE International Con-
ference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) , 806 –813. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICDMW.2019.00119 (IEEE Computer Society, 2019).
215. Yang, Z. et al. Heterogeneous feature fusion based machine learning on shallow-
wide and heterogeneous-sparse industrial datasets .I n 25th International Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition Workshops, ICPR 2020 , 566 –577. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-68799-1_41 (Springer Science and Business Media
Deutschland GmbH, 2021).
216. Ziletti, A., Kumar, D., Schef ﬂer, M. & Ghiringhelli, L. M. Insightful classi ﬁcation of
crystal structures using deep learning. Nat. Commun. 9, 2775 (2018).
217. Choudhary, K. et al. Computational scanning tunneling microscope image
database. Sci. Data 8,1–9 (2021).
218. Liu, R., Agrawal, A., Liao, W.-k., Choudhary, A. & De Graef, M. Materials discovery:
Understanding polycrystals from large-scale electron patterns .i n2016 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Big Data (Big Data) , 2261 –2269 (IEEE, 2016).
219. Jha, D. et al. Extracting grain orientations from EBSD patterns of polycrystalline
materials using convolutional neural networks. Microsc. Microanal. 24, 497 –502
(2018).
220. Kaufmann, K., Zhu, C., Rosengarten, A. S. & Vecchio, K. S. Deep neural network
enabled space group identi ﬁcation in EBSD. Microsc. Microanal. 26,4 4 7 –457 (2020).
221. Yang, Z. et al.
Deep learning based domain knowledge integration for small
datasets: Illustrative applications in materials informatics .i n 2019 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) ,1–8 (IEEE, 2019).
222. Yang, Z. et al. Learning to predict crystal plasticity at the nanoscale: Deep
residual networks and size effects in uniaxial compression discrete dislocationsimulations. Sci. Rep. 10,1–14 (2020).
223. Decost, B. L. et al. Uhcsdb: Ultrahigh carbon steel micrograph database. Integr.
Mater. Manuf. Innov. 6, 197 –205 (2017).
224. Decost, B. L., Lei, B., Francis, T. & Holm, E. A. High throughput quantitative
metallography for complex microstructures using deep learning: a case study inultrahigh carbon steel. Microsc. Microanal. 25,2 1–29 (2019).
225. Stan, T., Thompson, Z. T. & Voorhees, P. W. Optimizing convolutional neural
networks to perform semantic segmentation on large materials imaging data-sets: X-ray tomography and serial sectioning. Materials Characterization 160,
110119 (2020).
226. Madsen, J. et al. A deep learning approach to identify local structures in atomic-
resolution transmission electron microscopy images. Adv. Theory Simulations 1,
1800037 (2018).
227. Maksov, A. et al. Deep learning analysis of defect and phase evolution during
electron beam-induced transformations in ws 2. npj Comput. Mater. 5,1–8( 2 0 1 9 ) .
228. Yang, S.-H. et al. Deep learning-assisted quanti ﬁcation of atomic dopants and
defects in 2d materials. Adv. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202101099 (2021).
229. Roberts, G. et al. Deep learning for semantic segmentation of defects in
advanced stem images of steels. Sci. Rep. 9,1–12 (2019).
230. Kusche, C. et al. Large-area, high-resolution characterisation and classi ﬁcation of
damage mechanisms in dual-phase steel using deep learning. PLoS ONE 14,
e0216493 (2019).
231. Vlcek, L. et al. Learning from imperfections: predicting structure and thermo-
dynamics from atomic imaging of ﬂuctuations. ACS Nano 13, 718 –727 (2019).
232. Ziatdinov, M., Maksov, A. & Kalinin, S. V. Learning surface molecular structures
via machine vision. npj Comput. Mater. 3,1–9 (2017).
233. Ovchinnikov, O. S. et al. Detection of defects in atomic-resolution images of
materials using cycle analysis. Adv. Struct. Chem. Imaging 6, 3 (2020).
234. Li, W., Field, K. G. & Morgan, D. Automated defect analysis in electron micro-
scopic images. npj Comput. Mater. 4,1–9 (2018).
235. Cohn, R. et al. Instance segmentation for direct measurements of satellites in
metal powders and automated microstructural characterization from imagedata. JOM
73, 2159 –2172 (2021).
236. de Haan, K., Ballard, Z. S., Rivenson, Y., Wu, Y. & Ozcan, A. Resolution
enhancement in scanning electron microscopy using deep learning. Sci. Rep. 9,
1–7 (2019).K. Choudhary et al.
23
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 24 ====
237. Ede, J. M. & Beanland, R. Partial scanning transmission electron microscopy with
deep learning. Sci. Rep. 10,1–10 (2020).
238. Rashidi, M. & Wolkow, R. A. Autonomous scanning probe microscopy in situ tip
conditioning through machine learning. ACS Nano 12, 5185 –5189 (2018).
239. Scime, L., Siddel, D., Baird, S. & Paquit, V. Layer-wise anomaly detection and
classi ﬁcation for powder bed additive manufacturing processes: A machine-
agnostic algorithm for real-time pixel-wise semantic segmentation. Addit.
Manufact. 36, 101453 (2020).
240. Eppel, S., Xu, H., Bismuth, M. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Computer vision for recognition
of materials and vessels in chemistry lab settings and the Vector-LabPics Data
Set. ACS Central Sci. 6, 1743 –1752 (2020).
241. Yang, Z. et al. Deep learning approaches for mining structure-property linkages
in high contrast composites from simulation datasets. Comput. Mater. Sci. 151,
278–287 (2018).
242. Cecen, A., Dai, H., Yabansu, Y. C., Kalidindi, S. R. & Song, L. Material structure-
property linkages using three-dimensional convolutional neural networks. Acta
Mater. 146,7 6–84 (2018).
243. Yang, Z. et al. Establishing structure-property localization linkages for elastic
deformation of three-dimensional high contrast composites using deep learn-ing approaches. Acta Mater. 166, 335 –345 (2019).
244. Goetz, A. et al. Addressing materials ’microstructure diversity using transfer
learning. arXiv . arXiv-2107. https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.13841 (2021).
245. Kitahara, A. R. & Holm, E. A. Microstructure cluster analysis with transfer learning
and unsupervised learning. Integr. Mater. Manuf. Innov. 7, 148 –156 (2018).
246. Larmuseau, M. et al. Compact representations of microstructure images using
triplet networks. npj Comput. Mater. 2020 6:1 6,1–11 (2020).
247. Li, X. et al. A deep adversarial learning methodology for designing microstructural
material systems .i nInternational Design Engineering Technical Conferences and
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , Vol. 51760, V02BT03A008
(American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2018).
248. Yang, Z. et al. Microstructural materials design via deep adversarial learning
methodology. J. Mech. Des. 140, 111416 (2018).
249. Yang, Z. et al. A general framework combining generative adversarial networks
and mixture density networks for inverse modeling in microstructural materialsdesign. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.10553 (2021).
250. Hsu, T. et al. Microstructure generation via generative adversarial network for
heterogeneous, topologically complex 3d materials. JOM 73,9 0–
102 (2020).
251. Chun, S. et al. Deep learning for synthetic microstructure generation in a
materials-by-design framework for heterogeneous energetic materials. Sci. Rep.
10,1–15 (2020).
252. Dai, M., Demirel, M. F., Liang, Y. & Hu, J.-M. Graph neural networks for an
accurate and interpretable prediction of the properties of polycrystalline
materials. npj Comput. Mater. 7,1–9 (2021).
253. Cohn, R. & Holm, E. Neural message passing for predicting abnormal grain
growth in Monte Carlo simulations of microstructural evolution. arXiv. https://
arxiv.org/abs/2110.09326v1 (2021).
254. Plimpton, S. et al. SPPARKS Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulator .https://spparks.github.
io/index.html . (2021).
255. Plimpton, S. et al. Crossing the mesoscale no-man ’s land via parallel kinetic
Monte Carlo. Tech. Rep .https://doi.org/10.2172/966942 (2009).
256. Xue, N. Steven bird, evan klein and edward loper. natural language processing
with python. oreilly media, inc.2009. isbn: 978-0-596-51649-9. Nat. Lang. Eng. 17,
419–424 (2010).
257. Honnibal, M. & Montani, I. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom
embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3358113 (2017).
258. Gardner, M. et al. Allennlp: A deep semantic natural language processing
platform. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.07640 (2018).
259. Tshitoyan, V. et al. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowledge
from materials science literature. Nature 571,9 5–98 (2019).
260. Kononova, O. et al. Opportunities and challenges of text mining in aterials
research. iScience 24, 102155 (2021).
261. Olivetti, E. A. et al. Data-driven materials research enabled by natural language
processing and information extraction. Appl. Phys. Rev. 7, 041317 (2020).
262. Swain, M. C. & Cole, J. M. Chemdataextractor: a toolkit for automated extraction
of chemical information from the scienti ﬁc literature. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 56,
1894 –1904 (2016).
263. Park, S. et al. Text mining metal –organic framework papers. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
58, 244 –251 (2018).
264. Court, C. J. & Cole, J. M. Auto-generated materials database of curie and néel
temperatures via semi-supervised relationship extraction. Sci. Data 5,1–12
(2018).
265. Huang, S. & Cole, J. M. A database of battery materials auto-generated using
chemdataextractor. Sci. Data 7,1–13 (2020).266. Beard, E. J., Sivaraman, G., Vázquez-Mayagoitia, Á., Vishwanath, V. & Cole, J. M.
Comparative dataset of experimental and computational attributes of uv/visabsorption spectra. Sci. Data 6,1–11 (2019).
267. Tayfuroglu, O., Kocak, A. & Zorlu, Y. In silico investigation into h2 uptake in mofs:
combined text/data mining and structural calculations. Langmuir 36, 119 –129
(2019).
268. Weston, L. et al. Named entity recognition and normalization applied to large-
scale information extraction from the materials science literature. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 59, 3692 –3702 (2019).
269. Vaucher, A. C. et al. Automated extraction of chemical synthesis actions from
experimental procedures. Nat. Commun. 11,1–11 (2020).
270. He, T. et al. Similarity of precursors in solid-state synthesis as text-mined from
scienti ﬁc literature. Chem. Mater. 32, 7861 –7873 (2020).
271. Kononova, O. et al. Text-mined dataset of inorganic materials synthesis recipes.
Sci. Data 6,1–11 (2019).
272. Kim, E. et al. Materials synthesis insights from scienti ﬁc literature via text
extraction and machine learning. Chem. Mater. 29, 9436 –9444 (2017).
273. Kim, E., Huang, K., Jegelka, S. & Olivetti, E. Virtual screening of inorganic
materials synthesis parameters with deep learning. npj Comput. Mater. 3,1–9
(2017).
274. Kim, E. et al. Inorganic materials synthesis planning with literature-trained neural
networks. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 60, 1194 –1201 (2020).
275. de Castro, P. B. et al. Machine-learning-guided discovery of the gigantic mag-
netocaloric effect in hob 2 near the hydrogen liquefaction temperature. NPG
Asia Mater. 12,1–7 (2020).
276. Cooper, C. B. et al. Design-to-device approach affords panchromatic co-
sensitized solar cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 9, 1802820 (2019).
277. Yang, X., Dai, Z., Zhao, Y., Liu, J. & Meng, S. Low lattice thermal conductivity and
excellent thermoelectric behavior in li3sb and li3bi. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 30,
425401 (2018).
278. Wang, Y., Gao, Z. & Zhou, J. Ultralow lattice thermal conductivity and electronic
properties of monolayer 1t phase semimetal site2 and snte2. Phys. E 108,5 3–59
(2019).
279. Jong, U.-G., Yu, C.-J., Kye, Y.-H., Hong, S.-N. & Kim, H.-G. Manifestation of the
thermoelectric properties in ge-based halide perovskites.
Phys. Rev. Mater. 4,
075403 (2020).
280. Yamamoto, K., Narita, G., Yamasaki, J. & Iikubo, S. First-principles study of
thermoelectric properties of mixed iodide perovskite cs (b, b ’) i3 (b, b ’=ge, sn,
and pb). J. Phys. Chem. Solids 140, 109372 (2020).
281. Viennois, R. et al. Anisotropic low-energy vibrational modes as an effect of cage
geometry in the binary barium silicon clathrate b a 24 s i 100. Phys. Rev. B 101,
224302 (2020).
282. Haque, E. Effect of electron-phonon scattering, pressure and alloying on the
thermoelectric performance of tmcu _3 ch _4(tm =v, nb, ta; ch =s, se, te). arXiv .
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.08461 (2020).
283. Yahyaoglu, M. et al. Phase-transition-enhanced thermoelectric transport in
rickardite mineral cu3 –x te2. Chem. Mater. 33, 1832 –1841 (2021).
284. Ho, D., Shkolnik, A. S., Ferraro, N. J., Rizkin, B. A. & Hartman, R. L. Using word
embeddings in abstracts to accelerate metallocene catalysis polymerization
research. Computers Chem. Eng. 141, 107026 (2020).
285. Abdar, M. et al. A review of uncertainty quanti ﬁcation in deep learning: tech-
niques, applications and challenges. Inf. Fusion .76, 243 –297 (2021).
286. Mi, Lu, et al. Training-free uncertainty estimation for dense regression: Sensiti-
vityas a surrogate. arXiv . preprint at arXiv:1910.04858. https://arxiv.org/abs/
1910.04858 (2019).
287. Teye, M., Azizpour, H. & Smith, K. Bayesian uncertainty estimation for batch
normalized deep networks .i n International Conference on Machine Learning ,
4907 –4916 (PMLR, 2018).
288. Zhang, J., Kailkhura, B. & Han, T. Y.-J. Leveraging uncertainty from deep learning for
trustworthy material discovery work ﬂows. ACS Omega 6,1 2 7 1 1 –12721 (2021).
289. Meredig, B. et al. Can machine learning identify the next high-temperature
superconductor? examining extrapolation performance for materials discovery.
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 3, 819 –825 (2018).
290. Zhang, J., Kailkhura, B. & Han, T. Y.-J. Mix-n-match: Ensemble and compositional
methods for uncertainty calibration in deep learning .i nInternational Conference
on Machine Learning , 11117 –11128 (PMLR, 2020).
291. Seoh, R. Qualitative analysis of monte carlo dropout. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2007.01720 (2020).
292. Gal, Y. & Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing
model uncertainty in deep learning .i n international conference on machine
learning , 1050 –1059 (PMLR, 2016).
293. Jain, S., Liu, G., Mueller, J. & Gifford, D. Maximizing overall diversity for improved
uncertainty estimates in deep ensembles .I nProceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,34, 4264 –4271. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v34i04.5849 (2020).
K. Choudhary et al.
24
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

==== Page 25 ====
294. Ganaie, M. et al. Ensemble deep learning: a review. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/
2104.02395 (AAAI Technical Track: Machine Learning, 2021).
295. Fort, S., Hu, H. & Lakshminarayanan, B. Deep ensembles: a loss landscape per-
spective. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02757 (2019).
296. Lakshminarayanan, B., Pritzel, A. & Blundell, C. Simple and scalable predictive
uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/
1612.01474 (2016).
297. Moon, S. J., Jeon, J.-J., Lee, J. S. H. & Kim, Y. Learning multiple quantiles with
neural networks. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 30,1–11.https://doi.org/10.1080/
10618600.2021.1909601 (2021).
298. Rasmussen, C. E. Summer School on Machine Learning ,6 3–71 (Springer, 2003).
299. Hegde, P., Heinonen, M., Lähdesmäki, H. & Kaski, S. Deep learning with differ-
ential gaussian process ﬂows. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04066 (2018).
300. Wilson, A. G., Hu, Z., Salakhutdinov, R. & Xing, E. P. Deep kernel learning. in
Artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics , 370 –378 (PMLR, 2016).
301. Hegde, V. I. et al. Reproducibility in high-throughput density functional theory: a
comparison of a ﬂow, materials project, and oqmd. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/
2007.01988 (2020).
302. Ying, R., Bourgeois, D., You, J., Zitnik, M. & Leskovec, J. Gnnexplainer: Generating
explanations for graph neural networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32, 9240 (2019).
303. Roch, L. M. et al. Chemos: orchestrating autonomous experimentation. Sci.
Robot. 3, eaat5559 (2018).
304. Szymanski, N. et al. Toward autonomous design and synthesis of novel inor-
ganic materials. Mater. Horiz. 8, 2169 –2198. https://doi.org/10.1039/
D1MH00495F (2021).
305. MacLeod, B. P. et al. Self-driving laboratory for accelerated discovery of thin- ﬁlm
materials. Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz8867 (2020).
306. Stach, E. A. et al. Autonomous experimentation systems for materials devel-
opment: a community perspective. Matter https://www.cell.com/matter/fulltext/
S2590-2385(21)00306-4 (2021).
307. Rakita, Y. et al. Active reaction control of cu redox state based on real-time
feedback from in situ synchrotron measurements. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142,
18758 –18762 (2020).
308. Chmiela, S. et al. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular
force ﬁelds. Sci. Adv. 3, e1603015 (2017).
309. Thomas, R. S. et al. The us federal tox21 program: a strategic and operational
plan for continued leadership. Altex 35, 163 (2018).
310. Russell Johnson, N. Nist computational chemistry comparison and benchmark
database .I nThe 4th Joint Meeting of the US Sections of the Combustion Institute .
https://ci.confex.com/ci/2005/techprogram/P1309.HTM (2005).
311. Lopez, S. A. et al. The harvard organic photovoltaic dataset. Sci. Data 3,1–7( 2 0 1 6 ) .
312. Johnson, R. D. et al. Nist computational chemistry comparison and benchmark
database .http://srdata.nist.gov/cccbdb (2006).
313. Mobley, D. L. & Guthrie, J. P. Freesolv: a database of experimental and calculated
hydration free energies, with input ﬁles.J. Computer Aided Mol. Des. 28, 711 –720
(2014).
314. Andersen, C. W. et al. Optimade: an api for exchanging materials data. arXiv.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.02068 (2021).
315. Chanussot, L. et al. Open catalyst 2020 (oc20) dataset and community chal-
lenges. ACS Catal. 11, 6059 –6072 (2021).
316. Dunn, A., Wang, Q., Ganose, A., Dopp, D. & Jain, A. Benchmarking materials
property prediction methods: the matbench test set and automatminer refer-ence algorithm. npj Comput. Mater. 6,1–10 (2020).
317. Talirz, L. et al. Materials cloud, a platform for open computational science. Sci.
Data 7,1–12 (2020).
318. Chung, Y. G. et al. Advances, updates, and analytics for the computation-ready,
experimental metal –organic framework database: Core mof 2019. J. Chem. Eng.
Data 64, 5985 –5998 (2019).
319. Sussman, J. L. et al. Protein data bank (pdb): database of three-dimensional
structural information of biological macromolecules. Acta Crystallogr. Sec. D Biol.
Crystallogr. 54, 1078 –1084 (1998).
320. Benson, M. L. et al. Binding moad, a high-quality protein –ligand database.
Nucleic Acids Res. 36, D674 –D678 (2007).
321. Fung, V., Zhang, J., Juarez, E. & Sumpter, B. G. Benchmarking graph neural
networks for materials chemistry. npj Comput. Mater. 7,1–8 (2021).
322. Louis, S.-Y. et al. Graph convolutional neural networks with global attention for
improved materials property prediction. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 22,
18141 –18148 (2020).
323. Khorshidi, A. & Peterson, A. A. Amp: A modular approach to machine learning in
atomistic simulations. Computer Phys. Commun. 207, 310 –324 (2016).
324. Yao, K., Herr, J. E., Toth, D. W., Mckintyre, R. & Parkhill, J. The tensormol-0.1 model
chemistry: a neural network augmented with long-range physics. Chem. Sci. 9,
2261 –2269 (2018).
325. Doerr, S. et al. Torchmd: A deep learning framework for molecular simulations. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 17, 2355 –2363 (2021).326. Kolb, B., Lentz, L. C. & Kolpak, A. M. Discovering charge density functionals and
structure-property relationships with prophet: A general framework for couplingmachine learning and ﬁrst-principles methods. Sci. Rep. 7,1–9 (2017).
327. Zhang, L., Han, J., Wang, H., Car, R. & Weinan, E. Deep potential molecular
dynamics: a scalable model with the accuracy of quantum mechanics. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 120, 143001 (2018).
328. Artrith, N. & Urban, A. An implementation of arti ﬁcial neural-network potentials
for atomistic materials simulations: Performance for tio2. Comput. Mater. Sci.
114, 135 –150 (2016).
329. Geiger, M. et al. e3nn/e3nn: 2021-06-21 .https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5006322
(2021).
330. Duvenaud, D. K. et al. Convolutional networks on graphs for learning molecular
ﬁngerprints (eds. Cortes, C., Lawrence, N. D., Lee, D. D., Sugiyama, M. & Garnett,
R.) in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 28 2224 –2232 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2015).
331. Li, X. et al. Deepchemstable: Chemical stability prediction with an attention-
based graph convolution network. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 59, 1044 –1049 (2019).
332. Wu, Z. et al. MoleculeNet: A benchmark for molecular machine learning. Chem.
Sci.9, 513 –530 (2018).
333. Wang, A. Y.-T., Kauwe, S. K., Murdock, R. J. & Sparks, T. D. Compositionally
restricted attention-based network for materials property predictions. npj
Comput. Mater. 7, 77 (2021).
334. Zhou, Q. et al. Learning atoms for materials discovery. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
115, E6411 –E6417 (2018).
335. O ’Boyle, N. & Dalke, A. Deepsmiles: An adaptation of smiles for use in machine-
learning of chemical structures. ChemRxiv https://doi.org/10.26434/
chemrxiv.7097960.v1 (2018).
336. Gómez-Bombarelli, R. et al. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven
continuous representation of molecules. ACS Central Sci.
4, 268 –276 (2018).
337. Green, H., Koes, D. R. & Durrant, J. D. Deepfrag: a deep convolutional neural
network for fragment-based lead optimization. Chem. Sci. 12, 8036 –8047.
https://doi.org/10.1039/D1SC00163A (2021).
338. Elhefnawy, W., Li, M., Wang, J. & Li, Y. Deepfrag-k: a fragment-based deep learning
approach for protein fold recognition. BMC Bioinformatics 21, 203 (2020).
339. Paul, A. et al. Chemixnet: Mixed dnn architectures for predicting chemical
properties using multiple molecular representations. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/
1811.08283 (2018).
340. Paul, A. et al. Transfer learning using ensemble neural networks for organic solar
cell screening .i n2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) ,
1–8 (IEEE, 2019).
341. Choudhary, K. et al. Computational screening of high-performance optoelectronic
materials using optb88vdw and tb-mbj formalisms. Sci. Data 5,1–12 (2018).
342. Wong-Ng, W., McMurdie, H., Hubbard, C. & Mighell, A. D. Jcpds-icdd research
associateship (cooperative program with nbs/nist). J. Res. Natl Inst. Standards
Technol. 106, 1013 (2001).
343. Belsky, A., Hellenbrandt, M., Karen, V. L. & Luksch, P. New developments in the
inorganic crystal structure database (icsd): accessibility in support of materialsresearch and design. Acta Crystallogr. Sec. B Struct. Sci. 58, 364 –369 (2002).
344. Gra žulis, S. et al. Crystallography Open Database —an open-access collection of
crystal structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 42, 726 –729 (2009).
345. Linstrom, P. J. & Mallard, W. G. The nist chemistry webbook: a chemical data
resource on the internet. J. Chem. Eng. Data 46, 1059 –1063 (2001).
346. Saito, T. et al. Spectral database for organic compounds (sdbs). (National Insti-
tute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2006).
347. Steinbeck, C., Krause, S. & Kuhn, S. Nmrshiftdb constructing a free chemical
information system with open-source components. J. Chem. inf. Computer Sci.
43, 1733 –1739 (2003).
348. Fung, V., Hu, G., Ganesh, P. & Sumpter, B. G. Machine learned features from
density of states for accurate adsorption energy prediction. Nat. Commun. 12,
1–11 (2021).
349. Kong, S., Guevarra, D., Gomes, C. P. & Gregoire, J. M. Materials representation
and transfer learning for multi-property prediction. arXiv .https://arxiv.org/abs/
2106.02225 (2021).
350. Bang, K., Yeo, B. C., Kim, D., Han, S. S. & Lee, H. M. Accelerated mapping of
electronic density of states patterns of metallic nanoparticles via machine-learning. Sci. Rep .11
,1–11 (2021).
351. Chen, D. et al. Automating crystal-structure phase mapping by combining deep
learning with constraint reasoning. Nat. Machine Intell. 3, 812 –822 (2021).
352. Ophus, C. A fast image simulation algorithm for scanning transmission electron
microscopy. Adv. Struct. Chem. imaging 3,1–11 (2017).
353. Aversa, R., Modarres, M. H., Cozzini, S., Ciancio, R. & Chiusole, A. The ﬁrst
annotated set of scanning electron microscopy images for nanoscience. Sci.
Data 5,1–10 (2018).
354. Ziatdinov, M. et al. Causal analysis of competing atomistic mechanisms in fer-
roelectric materials from high-resolution scanning transmission electron
microscopy data. npj Comput. Mater. 6,1–9 (2020).K. Choudhary et al.
25
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 

==== Page 26 ====
355. Souza, A. L. F. et al. Deepfreak: Learning crystallography diffraction patterns with
automated machine learning. arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.11834 (2019).
356. Scime, L. et al. Layer-wise imaging dataset from powder bed additive manu-
facturing processes for machine learning applications (peregrine v2021-03).
Tech. Rep .https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1779073 (2021).
357. Ede, J. M. & Beanland, R. Partial scanning transmission electron microscopy with
deep learning. Sci. Rep. 10,1–10 (2020).
358. Somnath, S., Smith, C. R., Laanait, N., Vasudevan, R. K. & Jesse, S. Usid and
pycroscopy –open source frameworks for storing and analyzing imaging and
spectroscopy data. Microsc. Microanal. 25, 220 –221 (2019).
359. Savitzky, B. H. et al. py4dstem: A software package for multimodal analysis of
four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy datasets. arXiv.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09523 (2020).
360. Madsen, J. & Susi, T. The abtem code: transmission electron microscopy from
ﬁrst principles. Open Res. Euro. 1, 24 (2021).
361. Koch, C. T. Determination of core structure periodicity and point defect density
along dislocations . (Arizona State University, 2002).
362. Allen, L. J. et al. Modelling the inelastic scattering of fast electrons. Ultramicro-
scopy 151,1 1–22 (2015).
363. Maxim, Z., Jesse, S., Sumpter, B. G., Kalinin, S. V. & Dyck, O. Tracking atomic
structure evolution during directed electron beam induced si-atom motion ingraphene via deep machine learning. Nanotechnology 32, 035703 (2020).
364. Khadangi, A., Boudier, T. & Rajagopal, V. Em-net: Deep learning for electron
microscopy image segmentation .i n2020 25th International Conference on Pattern
Recognition (ICPR) ,3 1–38 (IEEE, 2021).
365. Meyer, C. et al. Nion swift: Open source image processing software for instru-
ment control, data acquisition, organization, visualization, and analysis usingpython. Microsc. Microanal. 25, 122 –123 (2019).
366. Kim, J., Tiong, L. C. O., Kim, D. & Han, S. S. Deep learning-based prediction of
material properties using chemical compositions and diffraction patterns as
experimentally accessible inputs. J. Phys. Chem Lett. 12, 8376 –8383 (2021).
367. Von Chamier, L. et al. Zerocostdl4mic: an open platform to simplify access and
use of deep-learning in microscopy. BioRxiv. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/
10.1101/2020.03.20.000133v4 (2020).
368. Jha, D. et al. Peak area detection network for directly learning phase regions from
raw x-ray diffraction patterns .i n 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks (IJCNN) ,1–8 (IEEE, 2019).
369. Hawizy, L., Jessop, D. M., Adams, N. & Murray-Rust, P. Chemicaltagger: A tool for
semantic text-mining in chemistry. J. Cheminformatics 3,1–13 (2011).
370. Corbett, P. & Boyle, J. Chemlistem: chemical named entity recognition using
recurrent neural networks. J. Cheminformatics 10,1–9 (2018).
371. Rocktäschel, T., Weidlich, M. & Leser, U. Chemspot: a hybrid system for chemical
named entity recognition. Bioinformatics 28, 1633 –1640 (2012).
372. Jessop, D. M., Adams, S. E., Wi llighagen, E. L., Hawizy, L. & Murray-Rust, P. Oscar4: a
ﬂexible architecture for chemical text-mining. J. Cheminformatics 3,1–12 (2011).
373. Leaman, R., Wei, C.-H. & Lu, Z. tmchem: a high performance approach for
chemical named entity recognition and normalization. J. Cheminformatics 7,
1–10 (2015).
374. Suzuki, Y. et al. Symmetry prediction and knowledge discovery from X-ray dif-
fraction patterns using an interpretable machine learning approach. Sci. Rep. 10,
21790 (2020).ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Contributions from K.C. were supported by the ﬁnancial assistance award
70NANB19H117 from the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of
Standards and Technology. E.A.H. and R.C. (CMU) were supported by the National
Science Foundation under grant CMMI-1826218 and the Air Force D3OM2S Center ofExcellence under agreement FA8650-19-2-5209. A.J., C.C., and S.P.O. were supportedby the Materials Project, funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Of ﬁce of Science,
Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under
contract no. DE-AC02-05-CH11231: Materials Project program KC23MP. S.J.L.B. was
supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation through grant DMREF-1922234.
A.A. and A.C. were supported by NIST award 70NANB19H005 and NSF award CMMI-2053929.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The authors contributed equally to the search as well as analysis of the literature andwriting of the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Kamal
Choudhary.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the U.S.; foreign
copyright protection may apply 2022
K. Choudhary et al.
26
npj Computational Materials (2022)    59 Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

