==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1905.13566v2  [cs.RO]  19 Jun 2019InProceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on A rtiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI 2019),
Macao, China, August 2019
Recent Advances in Imitation Learning from Observation
Faraz Torabi1,Garrett Warnell2and Peter Stone1
1The University of Texas at Austin
2Army Research Laboratory
{faraztrb, pstone }@cs.utexas.edu, garrett.a.warnell.civ@mail.mil
Abstract
Imitation learning is the process by which one
agent tries to learn how to perform a certain task us-
ing information generated by another, often more-
expert agent performing that same task. Con-
ventionally, the imitator has access to both state
andaction information generated by an expert per-
forming the task (e.g., the expert may provide a
kinesthetic demonstration of object placement us-
ing a robotic arm). However, requiring the ac-
tion information prevents imitation learning from
a large number of existing valuable learning re-
sources such as online videos of humans perform-
ing tasks. To overcome this issue, the speciﬁc
problem of imitation from observation (IfO) has re-
cently garnered a great deal of attention, in which
the imitator only has access to the state information
(e.g., video frames) generated by the expert. In this
paper, we provide a literature review of methods
developed for IfO, and then point out some open
research problems and potential future work.
1 Introduction
Imitation learning [Schaal, 1997; Argall et al. , 2009;
Osaet al. , 2018 ]is a problem in machine learning that
autonomous agents face when attempting to learn tasks from
another, more-expert agent. The expert provides demonstra -
tions of task execution, from which the imitator attempts
to mimic the expert’s behavior. Conventionally, methods
developed in this framework require the demonstration
information to include not only the expert’s states (e.g.,
robot joint angles), but also its actions (e.g., robot torque
commands). For instance, a human expert might provide
a demonstration of an object-manipulation task to a robot
by manually moving the robot’s arms in the correct way,
during which the robot can record both its joint angles and
also the joint torques induced by the human demonstrator.
Unfortunately, requiring demonstration action informati on
prevents imitating agents from using a large number of
existing valuable demonstration resources such as online
videos of humans performing a wide variety of tasks. These
resources provide state information (i.e., video frames)only—the actions executed by the demonstrator are not
available.
In order to take advantage of these valuable resources, the
more-speciﬁc problem of imitation learning from observa-
tion(IfO) must be considered. The IfOproblem arises when
an autonomous agent attempts to learn how to perform tasks
by observing state-only demonstrations generated by an ex-
pert. Compared to the typical imitation learning paradigm
described above, IfOis a more natural way to consider learn-
ing from an expert, and exhibits more similarity with the way
many biological agents appear to approach imitation. For ex -
ample, humans often learn how to do new tasks by observing
other humans performing those tasks without ever having ex-
plicit knowledge of the exact low-level actions (e.g., musc le
commands) that the demonstrator used.
Considering the problem of imitation learning using
state-only demonstrations is not new [Ijspeert et al. , 2002;
Bentivegna et al. , 2002 ]. However, with recent advances in
deep learning and visual recognition, researchers now have
much better tools than before with which to approach the
problem, especially with respect to using raw visual obser-
vations. These advances have resulted in a litany of new im-
itation from observation techniques in the literature, whi ch
can be categorized in several fundamentally-different way s.
In this paper, we offer an organization of recent IfOresearch
and then consider open research problems and potential fu-
ture work.
2 Background
In this section, we ﬁrst describe Markov decision processes
(MDP s), which constitute the foundation of all the algorithms
presented in this paper. We then provide background on con-
ventional imitation learning, including the problem setti ng
and a number of algorithms developed for that problem.
2.1 Markov Decision Processes
We consider artiﬁcial learning agents operating in the fram e-
work of Markov decision processes ( MDP s). An MDP can
be described as a 6-tuple M={S,A,P,r,γ}, whereS
andAare state and action spaces, P(st+1|st,at)is a func-
tion which represents the probability of an agent transitio n-
ing from state stat timettost+1at timet+ 1 by taking
actionat,r:S × A → R is a function that represents the
reward feedback that the agent receives after taking a speci ﬁc

==== Page 2 ====
action at a given state, and γis a discount factor. We de-
note byo∈ O visual observations, i.e., an image at time tis
denoted by ot. Typically, these visual observations can only
provide partial state information. s, on the other hand, consti-
tutes the full proprioceptive state of the agent, and theref ore
is considered to provide complete state information. In the
context of the notation established above, the goal of rein-
forcement learning ( RL)[Sutton and Barto, 1998 ]is to learn
policiesπ:S × A → [0,1]—used to select actions at each
state—that exhibit some notion of optimality with respect t o
the reward function.
2.2 Imitation Learning
In imitation learning ( IL), agents do not receive task reward
feedback r. Instead, they have access to expert demonstra-
tions of the task and, from these demonstrations, attempt to
learn policies πthat produce behaviors similar to that present
in the demonstration. Conventionally, these demonstratio ns
are composed of the state and action sequences experienced
by the demonstrator, i.e., expert demonstration trajector ies
are of the form τe={(st,at)}. Broadly speaking, research in
imitation learning area can be split into two main categorie s:
(1)behavioral cloning ( BC), and (2)inverse reinforcement
learning ( IRL).
Behavioral Cloning
Behavioral cloning [Bain and Sommut, 1999;
Ross et al. , 2011; Daftry et al. , 2016 ]is a class of imi-
tation learning algorithms where, given τe, supervised
learning is used to learn an imitating policy. BChas been
used in a variety of the applications. For instance, it has
recently been used in the context of autonomous driving
[Bojarski et al. , 2016 ]and in the context of autonomous con-
trol of aerial vehicles [Giusti et al. , 2016 ].BCis powerful in
the sense that it requires only demonstration data to direct ly
learn an imitation policy and does not require any further
interaction between the agent and the environment. However ,
BCapproaches can be rather brittle due to the well-known
covariate shift problem [Ross and Bagnell, 2010 ].
Inverse Reinforcement Learning
The other major category of ILapproaches is composed
of techniques based on inverse reinforcement learning
[Russell, 1998; Ng et al. , 2000 ]. Instead of directly learn-
ing a mapping from states to actions using the demon-
stration data, IRL-based techniques iteratively alternate be-
tween using the demonstration to infer a hidden reward
function and using RLwith the inferred reward function
to learn an imitating policy. IRL-based techniques have
been used for a variety of tasks such as maneuvering a
helicopter [Abbeel and Ng, 2004 ]and object manipulation
[Finn et al. , 2016 ]. Using RLto optimize the policy given the
inferred reward function requires the agent to interact wit h its
environment, which can be costly from a time and safety per-
spective. Moreover, the IRLstep typically requires the agent
to solve an MDP in the inner loop of iterative reward opti-
mization [Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Ziebart et al. , 2008 ], which
can be extremely costly from a computational perspective.
However, recently, a number of methods have been devel-
oped which do not make this requirement [Finn et al. , 2016;Ho and Ermon, 2016; Fu et al. , 2018 ]. One of these ap-
proaches is called generative adversarial imitation from o b-
servation ( GAIL )[Ho and Ermon, 2016 ], which uses an ar-
chitecture similar to generative adversarial networks ( GAN s)
[Goodfellow et al. , 2014 ], and the associated algorithm can
be thought of as trying to induce an imitator state-action oc -
cupancy measure that is similar to that of the demonstrator.
3 Imitation Learning from Observation
We now turn to the problem that is the focus of this sur-
vey, i.e., that of imitation learning from observation ( IfO),
in which the agent has access to state-only demonstrations
(visual observations) of an expert performing a task, i.e.,
τe={ot}. As in IL, the goal of the IfOproblem is to learn an
imitation policy πthat results in the imitator exhibiting sim-
ilar behavior to the expert. Broadly speaking, there are two
major components of the IfOproblem: (1)perception, and (2)
control.
3.1 Perception
Because IfO depends on observations of a more expert
agent, processing these observations perceptually is ex-
tremely important. In the existing IfOliterature, multi-
ple approaches have been used for this part of the prob-
lem. One approach to the perception problem is to
record the expert’s movements using sensors placed di-
rectly on the expert agent [Ijspeert et al. , 2001 ]. Us-
ing this style of perception, previous work has studied
techniques that can allow humanoid or anthropomorphic
robots to mimic human motions, e.g., arm-reaching move-
ments [Ijspeert et al. , 2002; Bentivegna et al. , 2002 ], biped
locomotion [Nakanishi et al. , 2004 ], and human gestures
[Calinon and Billard, 2007 ]. A more recent approach is
that of motion capture [Field et al. , 2009 ], which typi-
cally uses visual markers on the demonstrator to in-
fer movement. IfOtechniques built upon this approach
have been used for a variety of tasks, including loco-
motion, acrobatics, and martial arts [Peng et al. , 2018a;
Merel et al. , 2017; Setapen et al. , 2010 ]. The methods dis-
cussed above often require costly instrumentation and pre-
processing [Holden et al. , 2016 ]. Moreover, one of the goals
ofIfOis to enable task imitation from available, passive re-
sources such as YouTube videos, for which these methods are
not helpful.
Recently, however, convolutional neural networks and ad-
vances in visual recognition have provided promising tools to
work towards visual imitation where the expert demonstra-
tion consists of raw video information (e.g., pixel color va l-
ues). Even with such tools, the imitating agent is still face d
with a number of challenges: (1)embodiment mismatch, and
(2)viewpoint difference.
Embodiment Mismatch
One challenge that might arise is if the demonstrating agent
has a different embodiment from that of the imitator. For
example, the video could be of a human performing a task,
but the goal may be to train a robot to do the same. Since
humans and robots do not look exactly alike (and may look
quite different), the challenge is in how to interpret the vi sual

==== Page 3 ====
information such that IfOcan be successful. One IfOmethod
developed to address this problem learns a correspondence
between the embodiments using autoencoders in a supervised
fashion [Gupta et al. , 2018 ]. The autoencoder is trained in
such a way that the encoded representations are invariant wi th
respect to the embodiment features. Another method learns
the correspondence in an unsupervised fashion with a small
amount of human supervision [Sermanet et al. , 2018 ].
Viewpoint Difference
Another perceptual challenge that might arise in IfOapplica-
tions comes when demonstrations are not recorded in a con-
trolled environment. For instance, video background may
be cluttered, or there may be mismatch in the point of view
present in the demonstration video and that with which the
agent sees itself. One IfOapproach that attempts to ad-
dress this issue learns a context translation model to trans -
late an observation by predicting it in the target context
[Liuet al. , 2018 ]. The translation is learned using data that
consists of images of the target context and the source con-
text, and the task is to translate the frame from the source co n-
text to the that of the target. Another approach uses a classi -
ﬁer to distinguish between the data that comes from differen t
viewpoints and attempts to maximize the domain confusion in
an adversarial setting during the training [Stadie et al. , 2017 ].
Consequently, the extracted features can be invariant with re-
spect to the viewpoint.
3.2 Control
Another main component of IfOis control, i.e., the approach
used to learn the imitation policy, typically under the assu mp-
tion that the agent has access to clean state demonstration d ata
{st}. Since the action labels are not available, this is a very
challenging problem, and many approaches have been dis-
cussed in the literature. We organize IfOcontrol algorithms
in the literature into two general groups: (1)model-based al-
gorithms, and (2)model-free algorithms. In the following,
we discuss the features of each group and present relevant
example algorithms from the literature.
Model-based
Model-based approaches to IfOare characterized by the fact
that they learn some type of dynamics model during the imi-
tation process. The learned models themselves can be either
(1)inverse dynamics models, or (2)forward dynamics model.
Inverse Dynamics Models An inverse dynamics model is
a mapping from state-transitions {(st,st+1)}to actions {at}
[Hanna and Stone, 2017 ]. One algorithm that learns and uses
this kind of model for IfOis that of Nair et al. [2017 ]. Given
a single video demonstration, the goal of the proposed algo-
rithm is to allow the imitator to reproduce the observed be-
havior directly. To do so, the algorithm ﬁrst allows the agen t
to interact with the environment using an exploratory polic y
to collect data {(st,at,st+1)}. Then, the collected data is
used to learn a pixel-level inverse dynamics model which is a
mapping from observation transition, {(ot,ot+1)}, to actions,
{at}. Finally, the algorithm computes the actions for the im-
itator to take by applying the inverse dynamics model to the
video demonstration. Another algorithm of this type, rein-
forced inverse dynamics modeling [Pavse et al. , 2019 ], afterlearning the inverse dynamics model, uses a sparse reward
function to further optimize the model. Then it executes the
actions in the environment. It is shown that in most of the ex-
periments the resulting behavior outperforms the expert. C rit-
ically, these methods make the assumption that each observa -
tion transition is reachable through the application of a si ngle
action. Pathak et al. [2018 ]attempt to remove this assump-
tion by allowing the agent to execute multiple actions until it
gets close enough to the next demonstrated frame. Then this
process is repeated for the next frame, and so on. All of the
algorithms mentioned above attempt to exactly reproduce sin-
gledemonstrations. The authors [Torabi et al. , 2018 ], on the
other hand, have proposed an algorithm, behavioral cloning
from observation ( BCO ), that is instead concerned with learn-
ing generalized imitation policies using multiple demonst ra-
tions. The approach also learns an inverse dynamics model
using an exploratory policy, and then uses that model to infe r
the actions from the demonstrations. Then, however, since
the states and actions of the demonstrator are available, a r eg-
ular imitation learning algorithm (behavioral cloning) is used
to learn the task. In another work, Guo et al. [2019 ]pro-
posed a hybrid algorithm that assumes that the agent also has
access to both visual demonstrations and reward informatio n
as in the RLproblem. A method similar to BCO is formu-
lated for imitating the demonstrations, and a gradient-bas ed
RLapproach is used to take advantage of the additional re-
ward signal. The ﬁnal imitation policy is learned by min-
imizing a linear combination of the behavioral cloning loss
and the RLloss.
Forward Dynamics Models A forward dynamics model
is a mapping from state-action pairs, {(st,at)}, to the next
states,{st+1}. One IfOapproach that learns and uses this
type of dynamics model is called imitating latent policies
from observation ( ILPO )[Edwards et al. , 2019 ].ILPO cre-
ates an initial hypothesis for the imitation policy by learn ing
a latent policy π(z|st)that estimates the probability of la-
tent (unreal) action zgiven the current state st. Since actual
actions are not needed, this process can be done ofﬂine with-
out any interaction with the environment. In order to learn
the latent policy, they use a latent forward dynamics model
which predicts st+1and a prior over zgivenst. Then they
use a limited number of environment interactions to learn an
action-remapping network that associates the latent actio ns
with their corresponding correct actions. Since most of the
process happens ofﬂine, the algorithm is efﬁcient with rega rds
to the number of interactions needed.
Model-free
The other broad category of IfOcontrol approaches is that
of model-free algorithms. Model-free techniques attempt t o
learn the imitation policy without any sort of model-learni ng
step. Within this category, there are two fundamentally-
different types of algorithms: (1) adversarial methods, an d
(2) reward-engineering methods.
Adversarial Methods Adversarial approaches to IfOare
inspired by the generative adversarial imitation learning
(GAIL ) algorithm described in Section 2.2. Motivated by
this work, Merel et al. [2017 ]proposed an IfOalgorithm

==== Page 4 ====
IfOControl Algorithms
Model-based Model-free
Inverse Model Forward Model Adversarial Methods Reward-Engineering
Figure 1: A diagrammatic representation of categorization of the IfOcontrol algorithm. The algorithms can be categorized into t wo
groups: (1) model-based algorithms in which the algorithms may use either a forward dynamics model [Edwards et al. , 2019 ]or an in-
verse dynamics model [Torabi et al. , 2018; Nair et al. , 2017 ]. (2) Model-free algorithms, which itself can be categorize d to adversar-
ial methods [Torabi et al. , 2019c; Merel et al. , 2017; Stadie et al. , 2017 ]and reward engineering [Sermanet et al. , 2018; Gupta et al. , 2018;
Liuet al. , 2018 ].
that assumes access to proprioceptive state-only demonstr a-
tions{st}and uses a GAN -like architecture in which the
imitation policy is interpreted as the generator. The imita -
tion policy is executed in the environment to collect data,
{(si
t,ai
t)}, and single states are fed into the discriminator,
which is trained to differentiate between the data that come s
from the imitator and data that comes from the demonstrator.
The output value of the discriminator is then used as a re-
ward to update the imitation policy using RL. Another algo-
rithm, called OptionGAN [Henderson et al. , 2018 ], uses the
same algorithm combined with option learning to enable the
agent to decompose policies for cases in which the demon-
strations contain trajectories result from a diverse set of un-
derlying reward functions rather than a single one. In both
of the algorithms discussed above, the underlying goal is to
achieve imitation policies that generate a state distribut ion
similar to the expert. However, two agents having similar
state distributions does not necessarily mean that they wil l
exhibit similar behaviors. For instance, in a ring-like en-
vironment, two agents that move with the same speed but
different directions (i.e., one clockwise and one counter-
clockwise) would result in each exhibiting the same state
distribution even though their behaviors are opposite one a n-
other. To resolve this issue, the authors [Torabi et al. , 2019c;
Torabi et al. , 2019b ]proposed an algorithm similar to those
above, but with the difference that the discriminator consi d-
ers state transitions ,{(st,st+1)}, as the input instead of sin-
gle states. This paper also tested the proposed algorithm on
the cases that the imitator has only access to visual demon-
strations{ot}, and showed that using multiple video frames
instead of single frames resulted in good imitation policie s
for the demonstrated tasks. In this paper, the authors consi der
policies to be a mapping from observations {ot}to actions
{at}. In follow up work [Torabi et al. , 2019d ], motivated by
the fact that agents often have access to their own internal
states (i.e., proprioception ), proposed a modiﬁed version of
this algorithm for the case of visual imitation that leverag es
this information in the policy learning process by consider -
ing a multi-layer perceptron (instead of convolutional neu -
ral networks) as the policy which maps internal states sto
actionsa. Then it uses the observation oas the input of
the discriminator. By changing the architecture of the pol-
icy and leveraging the proprioceptive features, the author s
showed that the performance improves signiﬁcantly and the
algorithm is much more sample efﬁcient. In another follow
up work [Torabi et al. , 2019a ], the authors modiﬁed the algo-rithm to make it more sample efﬁcient in order to be able to
execute it directly on physical robots. To do so, the algorit hm
was adapted in a way that linear quadratic regulators ( LQR )
[Tassa et al. , 2012 ]could be used for the policy training step.
The algorithm is tested on a robotic arm which has resulted
in reasonable performnce. Zolna et al. [2018 ]has built on
this work, and proposed an approach to adapt the algorithm
to cases in which the imitator and the expert have different
action spaces. Instead of using consecutive states as the in -
put of the discriminator, they use pairs of states with rando m
time gaps, and show that this change helps improve imitation
performance. Another adversarial IfOapproach developed
by Stadie et al. [2017 ]considers cases in which the imita-
tor and demonstrator have different viewpoints. To overcom e
this challenge, a new classiﬁer is introduced that uses the o ut-
put of early layers in the discriminator as input, and attemp ts
to distinguish between the data coming from different view-
points. Then they train early layers of the discriminator an d
the classiﬁer in such a way as to maximize the viewpoint con-
fusion. The intuition is to ensure that the early layers of th e
discriminator are invariant to viewpoint. Finally, Sun et al.
[2019 ]have also developed an adversarial IfOapproach in
which, from a given start state, a policy for each time-step o f
the horizon is learned by solving a minimax game. The min-
imax game learns a policy that matches the state distributio n
of the next state given the policies of the previous time step s.
Reward Engineering Another class of model-free ap-
proaches developed for IfOcontrol are those that utilize re-
ward engineering. Here, reward engineering means that,
based on the expert demonstrations, a manually-designed
reward function is used to ﬁnd imitation policies via RL.
Importantly, the designed reward functions are not neces-
sarily the ones that the demonstrator used to produce the
demonstrations—rather, they are simply estimates inferre d
from the demonstration data. One such method, developed
by Kimura et al. [2018 ], ﬁrst trains a predictor that pre-
dicts the demonstrator’s next state given the current state .
The manually-designed reward function is then deﬁned as
the Euclidean distance of the actual next state and the one
that the approximator returns. An imitation policy is learn ed
viaRLusing the designed reward function. Another reward-
engineering approach is that of time-contrastive networks
(TCN )[Sermanet et al. , 2018 ].TCN considers settings in
which demonstrations are generated by human experts per-
forming tasks and the agent is a robot with arms. A triplet

==== Page 5 ====
loss is used to train a neural network that is used to gen-
erate a task-speciﬁc state encoding at each time step. This
loss function brings states that occur in a small time-windo w
closer together in the embedding space and pushes others far -
ther apart. The engineered reward function is then deﬁned as
the Euclidean distance between the embedded demonstration
and the embedded agent’s state at each time step, and an im-
itation policy is learned using RLtechniques. Dwibedi et al.
[2018 ]claims that, since TCN uses single frames to learn the
embedding function, it is difﬁcult for TCN to encode mo-
tion cues or the velocities of objects. Therefore, they ex-
tend TCN to the multi-frame setting by learning an embed-
ding function that uses multiple frames as the input, and the y
show that it results in better imitation. Another approach o f
this type is developed by Goo and Niekum [2019 ]in which
the algorithm uses a formulation similar to shufﬂe-and-lea rn
[Misra et al. , 2016 ]to train a classiﬁer that learns the order
of frames in the demonstration. The manually-speciﬁed re-
ward function is then deﬁned as the progress toward the task
goal based on the learned classiﬁer. Aytar et al. [2018 ]also
take a similar approach, learning an embedding function for
the video frames based on the demonstration. They use the
closeness between the imitator’s embedded states and some
checkpoint embedded features as the reward function. In an-
other work, Gupta et al. [2018 ]consider settings in which
the demonstrator and the imitator have different state spac es.
First, they train an autoencoder that maps states into an inv ari-
ant feature space where corresponding states have the same
features. Then, they deﬁne the reward as the Euclidean dis-
tance of the expert and imitator state features in the invari ant
space at each time step. Finally, they learn the imitation po l-
icy using this reward function with an RLalgorithm. Liu et al.
[2018 ]also uses the same reward function to solve the task
however in a setting where the expert demonstrations and the
imitator’s viewpoints are different.
4 Conclusion and Future Directions
In this paper, we reviewed recent advances in imitation lear n-
ing from observation ( IfO) and, for the ﬁrst time, provided
an organization of the research that is being conducted in th is
ﬁeld. In this section, we provide some directions for future
work.
4.1 Perception
Adversarial training techniques have led to several recent
and exciting advances in the computer vision commu-
nity. One such advance is in the area of pose estimation
[Caoet al. , 2017; Wang et al. , 2019 ], which enables detec-
tion of the position and orientation of the objects in a clut-
tered video through keypoint detection—such keypoint info r-
mation may also prove useful in IfO. While there has been
a small amount of effort to incorporate these advances in
IfO[Peng et al. , 2018b ], there is still much to investigate.
Another recent advancement in computer vision is in the
area of visual domain adaptation [Wang and Deng, 2018 ],
which is concerned with transferring learned knowledge to
different visual contexts. For instance, the recent succes s of
CycleGAN [Zhuet al. , 2017 ]suggests that modiﬁed adver-sarial techniques may be applicable to IfOproblems that re-
quire solutions to embodiment mismatch, though it remains
to be seen if such approaches will truly lead to advances in
IfO.
4.2 Application on Physical Robots
Very few of the IfO algorithms discussed have actu-
ally been successfully tested on physical robots, such as
[Sermanet et al. , 2018; Liu et al. , 2018 ]. That is, most dis-
cuss results only in simulated domains. For instance, while
adversarial methods currently provide state-of-the-art p er-
formance for a number of baseline experimental IfOprob-
lems, these methods exhibit high sample complexity and have
therefore only been applied to relatively simple simulatio n
tasks. Thus, an open problem in IfOis that of ﬁnding ways to
adapt these techniques such that they can be used in scenario s
for which high sample complexity is prohibitive, i.e., task s in
robotics.
4.3 Integration
The papers reviewed in this survey are exclusively con-
cerned with the IfOproblem, i.e., ﬁnding imitation poli-
cies from state-only demonstrations. However, to achieve
the overall goal of developing fully-intelligent agents, a lgo-
rithms that have been developed for other learning paradigm s
(e.g., RL) should be integrated with these techniques. While
there is some previous work that considers a combination
of imitation learning and RL[Zhuet al. , 2018 ]orIfOand
RL[Guo et al. , 2019 ], there is still much to investigate.
Acknowledgments
This work has taken place in the Learning Agents Research
Group (LARG) at the Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin. LARG research is supported
in part by grants from the National Science Foundation (IIS-
1637736, IIS-1651089, IIS-1724157), the Ofﬁce of Naval
Research (N00014-18-2243), Future of Life Institute (RFP2 -
000), Army Research Lab, DARPA, Intel, Raytheon, and
Lockheed Martin. Peter Stone serves on the Board of Direc-
tors of Cogitai, Inc. The terms of this arrangement have been
reviewed and approved by the University of Texas at Austin
in accordance with its policy on objectivity in research.
References
[Abbeel and Ng, 2004 ]Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng.
Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learn-
ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
page 1. ACM, 2004.
[Argall et al. , 2009 ]Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova,
Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot
learning from demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous
Systems , 57(5):469–483, 2009.
[Aytar et al. , 2018 ]Yusuf Aytar, Tobias Pfaff, David Bud-
den, Thomas Paine, Ziyu Wang, and Nando de Freitas.
Playing hard exploration games by watching youtube. In
NeurIPS , pages 2935–2945, 2018.

==== Page 6 ====
[Bain and Sommut, 1999 ]Michael Bain and Claude Som-
mut. A framework for behavioural claning. Machine In-
telligence 15 , 15:103, 1999.
[Bentivegna et al. , 2002 ]Darrin C Bentivegna, Ales Ude,
Christopher G Atkeson, and Gordon Cheng. Humanoid
robot learning and game playing using pc-based vision. In
IROS , volume 3, pages 2449–2454. IEEE, 2002.
[Bojarski et al. , 2016 ]Mariusz Bojarski, Davide Del Testa,
Daniel Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat Flepp, Pra-
soon Goyal, Lawrence D Jackel, Mathew Monfort, Urs
Muller, Jiakai Zhang, et al. End to end learning for self-
driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316 , 2016.
[Calinon and Billard, 2007 ]Sylvain Calinon and Aude Bil-
lard. Incremental learning of gestures by imitation in a
humanoid robot. In HRI. ACM, 2007.
[Caoet al. , 2017 ]Zhe Cao, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and
Yaser Sheikh. Realtime multi-person 2d pose estimation
using part afﬁnity ﬁelds. In CVPR , pages 7291–7299,
2017.
[Daftry et al. , 2016 ]Shreyansh Daftry, J Andrew Bagnell,
and Martial Hebert. Learning transferable policies for
monocular reactive mav control. In International Sym-
posium on Experimental Robotics , pages 3–11. Springer,
2016.
[Dwibedi et al. , 2018 ]Debidatta Dwibedi, Jonathan Tomp-
son, Corey Lynch, and Pierre Sermanet. Learning action-
able representations from visual observations. In IROS ,
pages 1577–1584. IEEE, 2018.
[Edwards et al. , 2019 ]Ashley D Edwards, Himanshu Sahni,
Yannick Schroeker, and Charles L Isbell. Imitating latent
policies from observation. International Conference on
Machine Learning , 2019.
[Field et al. , 2009 ]Matthew Field, David Stirling, Fazel
Naghdy, and Zengxi Pan. Motion capture in robotics re-
view. In 2009 IEEE-ICCA , pages 1697–1702. IEEE, 2009.
[Finn et al. , 2016 ]Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter
Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal con-
trol via policy optimization. In International Conference
on Machine Learning , 2016.
[Fuet al. , 2018 ]Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine.
Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse rein-
forcement learning. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations , 2018.
[Giusti et al. , 2016 ]Alessandro Giusti, J´ erˆ ome Guzzi, Dan C
Cires ¸an, Fang-Lin He, Juan P Rodr´ ıguez, Flavio Fontana,
Matthias Faessler, Christian Forster, J¨ urgen Schmidhube r,
Gianni Di Caro, et al. A machine learning approach to
visual perception of forest trails for mobile robots. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters , 1(2):661–667, 2016.
[Goo and Niekum, 2019 ]Wonjoon Goo and Scott Niekum.
One-shot learning of multi-step tasks from observation via
activity localization in auxiliary video. International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation , 2019.
[Goodfellow et al. , 2014 ]Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-
Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Gen-
erative adversarial nets. In NIPS , pages 2672–2680, 2014.
[Guo et al. , 2019 ]Xiaoxiao Guo, Shiyu Chang, Mo Yu, Ger-
ald Tesauro, and Murray Campbell. Hybrid reinforcement
learning with expert state sequences. In Association for
the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2019.
[Gupta et al. , 2018 ]Abhishek Gupta, Coline Devin, YuXuan
Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Learning invariant
feature spaces to transfer skills with reinforcement learn -
ing. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions , 2018.
[Hanna and Stone, 2017 ]Josiah P Hanna and Peter Stone.
Grounded action transformation for robot learning in sim-
ulation. In Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2017.
[Henderson et al. , 2018 ]Peter Henderson, Wei-Di Chang,
Pierre-Luc Bacon, David Meger, Joelle Pineau, and Doina
Precup. Optiongan: Learning joint reward-policy options
using generative adversarial inverse reinforcement learn -
ing. In Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence , 2018.
[Ho and Ermon, 2016 ]Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon.
Generative adversarial imitation learning. In NIPS , pages
4565–4573, 2016.
[Holden et al. , 2016 ]Daniel Holden, Jun Saito, and Taku
Komura. A deep learning framework for character mo-
tion synthesis and editing. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) , 35(4):138, 2016.
[Ijspeert et al. , 2001 ]Auke Jan Ijspeert, Jun Nakanishi, and
Stefan Schaal. Trajectory formation for imitation with
nonlinear dynamical systems. In IROS , volume 2, pages
752–757. IEEE, 2001.
[Ijspeert et al. , 2002 ]Auke Jan Ijspeert, Jun Nakanishi, and
Stefan Schaal. Movement imitation with nonlinear dynam-
ical systems in humanoid robots. In International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation , volume 2, pages 1398–
1403. IEEE, 2002.
[Kimura et al. , 2018 ]Daiki Kimura, Subhajit Chaudhury,
Ryuki Tachibana, and Sakyasingha Dasgupta. Inter-
nal model from observations for reward shaping. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.01267 , 2018.
[Liuet al. , 2018 ]YuXuan Liu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter
Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Imitation from observation:
Learning to imitate behaviors from raw video via context
translation. In International Conference on Robotics and
Automation . IEEE, 2018.
[Merel et al. , 2017 ]Josh Merel, Yuval Tassa, Sriram Srini-
vasan, Jay Lemmon, Ziyu Wang, Greg Wayne, and Nicolas
Heess. Learning human behaviors from motion capture by
adversarial imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02201 ,
2017.
[Misra et al. , 2016 ]Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
Martial Hebert. Shufﬂe and learn: unsupervised learning
using temporal order veriﬁcation. In ECCV , pages 527–
544. Springer, 2016.

==== Page 7 ====
[Nair et al. , 2017 ]Ashvin Nair, Dian Chen, Pulkit Agrawal,
Phillip Isola, Pieter Abbeel, Jitendra Malik, and Sergey
Levine. Combining self-supervised learning and imitation
for vision-based rope manipulation. In International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation , pages 2146–2153.
IEEE, 2017.
[Nakanishi et al. , 2004 ]Jun Nakanishi, Jun Morimoto, Gen
Endo, Gordon Cheng, Stefan Schaal, and Mitsuo Kawato.
Learning from demonstration and adaptation of biped lo-
comotion. Robotics and autonomous systems , 47(2-3):79–
91, 2004.
[Nget al. , 2000 ]Andrew Y Ng, Stuart J Russell, et al. Algo-
rithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 663–670, 2000.
[Osaet al. , 2018 ]Takayuki Osa, Joni Pajarinen, Gerhard
Neumann, J Andrew Bagnell, Pieter Abbeel, Jan Peters,
et al. An algorithmic perspective on imitation learn-
ing.Foundations and Trends R/circlecopyrtin Robotics , 7(1-2):1–179,
2018.
[Pathak et al. , 2018 ]Deepak Pathak, Parsa Mahmoudieh,
Michael Luo, Pulkit Agrawal, Dian Chen, Fred Shentu,
Evan Shelhamer, Jitendra Malik, Alexei A. Efros, and
Trevor Darrell. Zero-shot visual imitation. In International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[Pavse et al. , 2019 ]Brahma Pavse, Faraz Torabi, Josiah
Hanna, Garrett Warnell, and Peter Stone. Ridm: Rein-
forced inverse dynamics modeling for learning from a sin-
gle observed demonstration. In ICML Workshop on Imita-
tion, Intent, and Interaction (I3), arXiv:1906.07372 , 2019.
[Peng et al. , 2018a ]Xue Bin Peng, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey
Levine, and Michiel van de Panne. Deepmimic: Example-
guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based char-
acter skills. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) ,
37(4):143, 2018.
[Peng et al. , 2018b ]Xue Bin Peng, Angjoo Kanazawa, Jiten-
dra Malik, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Sfv: Rein-
forcement learning of physical skills from videos. In SIG-
GRAPH Asia 2018 . ACM, 2018.
[Ross and Bagnell, 2010 ]St´ ephane Ross and Drew Bagnell.
Efﬁcient reductions for imitation learning. In AIStats ,
pages 661–668, 2010.
[Ross et al. , 2011 ]St´ ephane Ross, Geoffrey J Gordon, and
Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and struc-
tured prediction to no-regret online learning. In AIStats ,
pages 627–635, 2011.
[Russell, 1998 ]Stuart Russell. Learning agents for uncertain
environments. In COLT . ACM, 1998.
[Schaal, 1997 ]Stefan Schaal. Learning from demonstration.
InNIPS , pages 1040–1046, 1997.
[Sermanet et al. , 2018 ]Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yev-
gen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal,
and Sergey Levine. Time-contrastive networks: Self-
supervised learning from video. International Conference
on Robotics and Automation , 2018.[Setapen et al. , 2010 ]Adam Setapen, Michael Quinlan, and
Peter Stone. Marionet: Motion acquisition for robots
through iterative online evaluative training. In AAMAS ,
pages 1435–1436, 2010.
[Stadie et al. , 2017 ]Bradly C Stadie, Pieter Abbeel, and Ilya
Sutskever. Third-person imitation learning. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2017.
[Sunet al. , 2019 ]Wei Sun, Hanzhang Hul, Byron Boots, and
J Andrew Bagnell. Provably efﬁcient imitation learning
from observation alone. ICML , 2019.
[Sutton and Barto, 1998 ]Richard S Sutton and Andrew G
Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction , vol-
ume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
[Tassa et al. , 2012 ]Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Emanuel
Todorov. Synthesis and stabilization of complex behaviors
through online trajectory optimization. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems, pages 4906–4913. IEEE, 2012.
[Torabi et al. , 2018 ]Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Pe-
ter Stone. Behavioral cloning from observation. In Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
4950–4957. AAAI Press, 2018.
[Torabi et al. , 2019a ]Faraz Torabi, Sean Geiger, Garrett
Warnell, and Peter Stone. Sample-efﬁcient adversarial im-
itation learning from observation. In ICML Workshop on
Imitation, Intent, and Interaction (I3), arXiv:1906.0737 4,
2019.
[Torabi et al. , 2019b ]Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Pe-
ter Stone. Adversarial imitation learning from state-only
demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Sys-
tems, pages 2229–2231, 2019.
[Torabi et al. , 2019c ]Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Pe-
ter Stone. Generative adversarial imitation from observa-
tion. In ICML Workshop on Imitation, Intent, and Interac-
tion (I3) . arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.04905, 2019.
[Torabi et al. , 2019d ]Faraz Torabi, Garrett Warnell, and Pe-
ter Stone. Imitation learning from video by leveraging pro-
prioception. In International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2019.
[Wang and Deng, 2018 ]Mei Wang and Weihong Deng.
Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomput-
ing, 312:135–153, 2018.
[Wang et al. , 2019 ]Keze Wang, Liang Lin, Chenhan Jiang,
Chen Qian, and Pengxu Wei. 3d human pose machines
with self-supervised learning. IEEE-TPAMI , 2019.
[Zhuet al. , 2017 ]Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola,
and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image transla-
tion using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In ICCV ,
pages 2223–2232, 2017.
[Zhuet al. , 2018 ]Yuke Zhu, Ziyu Wang, Josh Merel, Andrei
Rusu, Tom Erez, Serkan Cabi, Saran Tunyasuvunakool,
J´ anos Kram´ ar, Raia Hadsell, Nando de Freitas, et al. Re-
inforcement and imitation learning for diverse visuomotor
skills. RSS, 2018.

==== Page 8 ====
[Ziebart et al. , 2008 ]Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas,
J Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K Dey. Maximum entropy
inverse reinforcement learning. In AAAI , 2008.
[Zolna et al. , 2018 ]Konrad Zolna, Negar Rostamzadeh,
Yoshua Bengio, Sungjin Ahn, and Pedro O Pinheiro. Re-
inforced imitation learning from observations. NeurIPS
2018 Workshop , 2018.

