==== Page 1 ====
Relation-Aware Graph Attention Network for Visual Question Answering
Linjie Li, Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, Jingjing Liu
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{lindsey.li, zhe.gan, yu.cheng, jingjl }@microsoft.com
Abstract
In order to answer semantically-complicated questions
about an image, a Visual Question Answering (VQA) model
needs to fully understand the visual scene in the image,
especially the interactive dynamics between different ob-
jects. We propose a Relation-aware Graph Attention Net-
work (ReGAT), which encodes each image into a graph
and models multi-type inter-object relations via a graph
attention mechanism, to learn question-adaptive relation
representations. Two types of visual object relations are
explored: ( i) Explicit Relations that represent geometric
positions and semantic interactions between objects; and
(ii) Implicit Relations that capture the hidden dynamics be-
tween image regions. Experiments demonstrate that ReGAT
outperforms prior state-of-the-art approaches on both VQA
2.0 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. We further show that Re-
GAT is compatible to existing VQA architectures, and can
be used as a generic relation encoder to boost the model
performance for VQA.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have driven tremen-
dous progress in both Computer Vision and Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP). Interdisciplinary area between
language and vision, such as image captioning, text-to-
image synthesis and visual question answering (VQA), has
attracted rapidly growing attention from both vision and
NLP communities. Take VQA as an example - the goal
(and the main challenge) is to train a model that can achieve
comprehensive and semantically-aligned understanding of
multimodal input. Speciﬁcally, given an image and a nat-
ural language question grounded on the image, the task is
to associate visual features in the image with the semantic
meaning in the question, in order to correctly answer the
question.
Most state-of-the-art approaches to VQA [ 56,11,38,33,
49] focus on learning a multimodal joint representation of
images and questions. Speciﬁcally, a Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) or Region-based CNN (R-CNN) is com-
Figure 1. An overview of the ReGAT model. Both explicit rela-
tions (semantic and spatial) and implicit relations are considered.
The proposed relation encoder captures question-adaptive object
interactions via Graph Attention.
monly used as a visual feature extractor for image encod-
ing, and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) is used for
question encoding. After obtaining a sparse set of image
regions from the visual feature extractor, multimodal fusion
is applied to learn a joint representation that represents the
alignment between each individual region and the question.
This joint representation is then fed into an answer predictor
to produce an answer.
This framework has proven to be useful for the VQA
task, but there still exists a signiﬁcant semantic gap between
image and natural language. For example, given an image
of a group of zebras (see Figure 1), the model may recog-
nize the black and white pixels, but not which white and
black pixels are from which zebra. Thus, it is difﬁcult to
answer questions such as “ Is the zebra at the far right a
baby zebra? ” or “ Are all the zebras eating grass? ”. A VQA
system needs to recognize not only the objects (“ zebras “)
and the surrounding environment (“ grass ”), but also the se-
mantics about actions (“ eating ”) and locations (“ at the far
right ”) in both images and questions.
In order to capture this type of action and location in-
formation, we need to go beyond mere object detection in
image understanding, and learn a more holistic view of the
visual scene in the image, by interpreting the dynamics and
interactions between different objects in an image. One
possible solution is to detect the relative geometrical posi-
tions of neighboring objects (e.g., <motorcycle-next
1
10313


==== Page 2 ====
to-car>), to align with spacial descriptions in the ques-
tion. Another direction is to learn semantic dependencies
between objects (e.g., <girl-eating-cake >) to cap-
ture the interactive dynamics in the visual scene.
Motivated by this, we propose a Relation-aware Graph
Attention Network (ReGAT) for VQA, introducing a novel
relation encoder that captures these inter-object relations
beyond static object/region detection. These visual rela-
tion features can reveal more ﬁne-grained visual concepts
in the image, which in turn provides a holistic scene in-
terpretation that can be used for answering semantically-
complicated questions. In order to cover the high variance
in image scenes and question types, both explicit (e.g., spa-
tial/positional, semantic/actionable) relations and implicit
relations are learned by the relation encoder, where images
are represented as graphs and interactions between objects
are captured via a graph attention mechanism.
Furthermore, the graph attention is learned based on the
context of the question, permitting the injection of seman-
tic information from the question into the relation encoding
stage. In this way, the features learned by the relation en-
coder not only capture object-interactive visual contents in
the image, but also absorb the semantic clues in the ques-
tion, to dynamically focus on particular relation types and
instances for each question on the ﬂy.
Figure 1shows an overview of the proposed model.
First, a Faster R-CNN is used to generate a set of object re-
gion proposals, and a question encoder is used for question
embedding. The convolutional and bounding-box features
of each region are then injected into the relation encoder
to learn the relation-aware, question-adaptive, region-level
representations from the image. These relation-aware vi-
sual features and the question embeddings are then fed into
a multimodal fusion module to produce a joint representa-
tion, which is used in the answer prediction module to gen-
erate an answer.
In principle, our work is different from (and compatible
to) existing VQA systems. It is pivoted on a new dimension:
using question-adaptive inter-object relations to enrich im-
age representations in order to enhance VQA performance.
The contributions of our work are three-fold:
•We propose a novel graph-based relation encoder to
learn both explicit and implicit relations between vi-
sual objects via graph attention networks.
•The learned relations are question-adaptive, meaning
that they can dynamically capture visual object rela-
tions that are most relevant to each question.
•We show that our ReGAT model is a generic approach
that can be used to improve state-of-the-art VQA mod-
els on the VQA 2.0 dataset. Our model also achieved
state-of-the-art performance on the more challanging
VQA-CP v2 dataset.2. Related Work
2.1. Visual Question Answering
The current dominant framework for VQA systems con-
sists of an image encoder, a question encoder, multimodal
fusion, and an answer predictor. In lieu of directly us-
ing visual features from CNN-based feature extractors,
[56,11,41,33,49,38,63,36] explored various image at-
tention mechanisms to locate regions that are relevant to the
question. To learn a better representation of the question,
[33,38,11] proposed to perform question-guided image at-
tention and image-guided question attention collaboratively,
to merge knowledge from both visual and textual modalities
in the encoding stage. [ 15,25,60,4,24] explored higher-
order fusion methods to better combine textual information
with visual information (e.g., using bilinear pooling instead
of simpler ﬁrst-order methods such as summation, concate-
nation and multiplication).
To make the model more interpretable, some literature
[30,59,29,54,55,53] also exploited high-level semantic
information in the image, such as attributes, captions and
visual relation facts. Most of these methods applied VQA-
independent models to extract semantic knowledge from
the image, while [ 34] built a Relation-VQA dataset and di-
rectly mined VQA-speciﬁc relation facts to feed additional
semantic information to the model. A few recent studies
[48,35,29] investigated how to incorporate memory to aid
the reasoning step, especially for difﬁcult questions.
However, the semantic knowledge brought in by either
memory or high-level semantic information is usually con-
verted into textual representation, instead of directly used
as visual representation, which contains richer and more in-
dicative information about the image. Our work is com-
plementary to these prior studies in that we encode object
relations directly into image representation, and the relation
encoding step is generic and can be naturally ﬁt into any
state-of-the-art VQA model.
2.2. Visual Relationship
Visual relationship has been explored before deep learn-
ing became popular. Early work [ 10,14,7,37] pre-
sented methods to re-score the detected objects by consid-
ering object relations (e.g., co-occurrence [ 10], position and
size [ 5]) as post-processing steps for object detection. Some
previous work [ 16,17] also probed the idea that spatial re-
lationships (e.g., “above”, “around”, “below” and “inside”)
between objects can help improve image segmentation.
Visual relationship has proven to be crucial to many
computer vision tasks. For example, it aided the cogni-
tive task of mapping images to captions [ 13,12,58] and
improved image search [ 47,23] and object localization
[45,21]. Recent work on visual relationship [ 45,43,9] fo-
cused more on non-spatial relation, or known as “semantic
10314


==== Page 3 ====
Figure 2. Model architecture of the proposed ReGAT for visual question answering. Faster R-CNN is employed to detect a set of object
regions. These region-level features are then fed into different relation encoders to learn relation-aware question-adaptive visual features,
which will be fused with question representation to predict an answer. Multimodal fusion and answer predictor are omitted for simplicity.
relation” (i.e., actions of, or interactions between objects).
A few neural network architectures have been designed for
the visual relationship prediction task [ 32,8,61].
2.3. Relational Reasoning
We name the visual relationship aforementioned as ex-
plicit relation, which has been shown to be effective for im-
age captioning [ 58]. Speciﬁcally, [ 58] exploited pre-deﬁned
semantic relations learned from the Visual Genome dataset
[28] and spatial relations between objects. A graph was then
constructed based on these relations, and a Graph Convolu-
tional Network (GCN) [ 26] was used to learn representa-
tions for each object.
Another line of research focuses on implicit relations,
where no explicit semantic or spatial relations are used to
construct the graph. Instead, all the relations are implic-
itlycaptured by an attention module or via higher-order
methods over the fully-connected graph of an input im-
age [ 46,21,6,57], to model the interactions between de-
tected objects. For example, [ 46] reasons over all the possi-
ble pairs of objects in an image via the use of simple MLPs.
In [6], a bilinear fusion method, called MuRel cell, was in-
troduced to perform pairwise relationship modeling.
Some other work [ 50,39,52] have been proposed for
learning question-conditioned graph representations for im-
ages. Speciﬁcally, [ 39] introduced a graph learner module
that is conditioned on question representations to compute
the image representations using pairwise attention and spa-
tial graph convolutions. [ 50] exploited structured question
representations such as parse trees, and used GRU to model
contextualized interactions between both objects and words.
A more recent work [ 52] introduced a sparser graph deﬁned
by inter/intra-class edges, in which relationships are implic-
itly learned via a language-guided graph attention mecha-
nism. However, all these work still focused on implicit re-
lations, which are less interpretable than explicit relations.Our contributions Our work is inspired by [ 21,58].
However, different from them, ReGAT considers both ex-
plicit and implicit relations to enrich image representations.
For explicit relations, our model uses Graph Attention Net-
work (GAT) rather than a simple GCN as used in [ 58]. As
opposed to GCNs, the use of GAT allows for assigning dif-
ferent importances to nodes of the same neighborhood. For
implicit relations, our model learns a graph that is adap-
tive to each question by ﬁltering out question-irrelevant re-
lations, instead of treating all the relations equally as in [ 21].
In experiments, we conduct detailed ablation studies to
demonstrate the effectiveness of each individual design.
3. Relation-aware Graph Attention Network
Here is the problem deﬁnition of the VQA task: given
a question qgrounded in an image I, the goal is to predict
an answer ˆa∈ A that best matches the ground-truth answer
a⋆. As common practice in the VQA literature, this can be
deﬁned as a classiﬁcation problem:
ˆa= argmax
a∈Apθ(a|I,q), (1)
wherepθis the trained model.
Figure 2gives a detailed illustration of our proposed
model, consisting of an Image Encoder, a Question En-
coder, and a Relation Encoder. For the Image Encoder,
Faster R-CNN [ 2] is used to identify a set of objects V=
{vi}K
i=1, where each object viis associated with a visual
feature vector vi∈Rdvand a bounding-box feature vec-
torbi∈Rdb(K= 36 ,dv= 2048 , anddb= 4 in our
experiments). Each bi= [x,y,w,h]corresponds to a 4-
dimensional spatial coordinate, where (x,y)denotes the co-
ordinate of the top-left point of the bounding box, and h/w
corresponds to the height/width of the box. For the Ques-
tion Encoder, we use a bidirectional RNN with Gated Re-
current Unit (GRU) and perform self attention on the se-
quence of RNN hidden states to generate question embed-
10315


==== Page 4 ====
dingq∈Rdq(dq= 1024 in our experiments). The fol-
lowing sub-sections will explain the details of the Relation
Encoder.
3.1. Graph Construction
Fully-connected Relation Graph By treating each ob-
jectviin the image as one vertex, we can construct a fully-
connected undirected graph Gimp= (V,E), whereEis the
set ofK×(K−1)edges. Each edge represents an im-
plicit relation between two objects, which can be reﬂected
by the learned weight assigned to each edge through graph
attention. All the weights are learned implicitly without any
prior knowledge. We name the relation encoder built on this
graphGimptheimplicit relation encoder.
Pruned Graph with Prior Knowledge On the other
hand, if explicit relations between vertices are available, one
can readily transform the fully-connected graph Gimpinto
an explicit relation graph, by pruning the edges where the
corresponding explicit relation does not exist. For each pair
of objects i,j, if<i-p-j>is a valid relation, an edge is cre-
ated from itoj, with an edge label p. In addition, we assign
each object node iwith a self-loop edge and label this edge
asidentical . In this way, the graph becomes sparse, and
each edge encodes prior knowledge about one inter-object
relation in the image. We name the relation encoder built
upon this graph the explicit relation encoder.
The explicit nature of these features requires pre-trained
classiﬁers to extract the relations in the form of discrete
class labels, which represent the dynamics and interactions
between objects explicit to the human eye. Different types
of explicit relations can be learned based on this pruned
graph. In this paper, we explore two instances: spatial and
semantic graphs, to capture positional and actionable rela-
tions between objects, which is imperative for visual ques-
tion answering.
Spatial Graph Letspai,j=<object i-predicate
-object j>denote the spatial relation that represents the
relative geometric position of object iagainstobject i.
In order to construct a spatial graph Gspa, given two ob-
ject region proposals object iandobject j, we classify
spai,jinto11different categories [ 58] (e.g.,object iis
insideobject j(class 1),object jis insideobject i
(class 2), as illustrated in Figure 3(a)), including a
no-relation class retained for objects that are too far
away from each other. Note that edges formed by spatial
relations are symmetrical: if <object i-pi,j-object j
>is a valid spatial relation, there must be a valid spatial
relationspaj,i=<object j-pj,i-object i>. However,
the two predicates pi,jandpj,iare different.
Semantic Graph In order to construct semantic graph
Gsem, semantic relations between objects need to be
extracted (e.g., <subject-predicate-object >).
(a)Spatial Relation
 (b)Semantic Relation
Figure 3. Illustration of spatial and semantic relations. The green
arrows denote the direction of relations (subject →object). Labels
in green boxes are class labels of relations. Red and Blue boxes
contain class labels of objects.
This can be formulated as a classiﬁcation task [ 58] by
training a semantic relation classiﬁer on a visual relation-
ship dataset (e.g., Visual Genome [ 27]). Given two ob-
ject regions iandj, the goal is to determine which pred-
icateprepresents a semantic relation <i-p-j>between
these two regions. Here, the relations between the sub-
jectjand the object iare not interchangeable, meaning
that the edges formed by semantic relations are not sym-
metric. For a valid <i-pi,j-j>, there may not exist a
relation<j-pj.i-i>within our deﬁnition. For example,
<man-holding-bat >is a valid relation, while there is
no semantic relation from bat toman.
The classiﬁcation model takes in three inputs: feature
vector of the subject region vi, feature vector of the ob-
ject region vj, and region-level feature vector vi,jof the
union bounding box containing both iandj. These three
types of feature are obtained from pre-trained object detec-
tion model, and then transformed via an embedding layer.
The embedded features are then concatenated and fed into
a classiﬁcation layer to produce softmax probability over
14 semantic relations, with an additional no-relation
class. The trained classiﬁer is then used to predict relations
between any pair of object regions in a given image. Exam-
ples of semantic relations are shown in Figure 3(b).
3.2. Relation Encoder
Question-adaptive Graph Attention The proposed rela-
tion encoder is designed to encode relational dynamics be-
tween objects in an image. For the VQA task, there might
be different types of relations that are useful for different
question types. Thus, in designing the relation encoder, we
use a question-adaptive attention mechanism to inject se-
mantic information from the question into relation graphs,
to dynamically assign higher weights to those relations that
are mostly relevant to each question. This is achieved by
ﬁrst concatenating the question embedding qwith each of
theKvisual features vi, denoted as
v′
i= [vi||q]fori= 1,...,K. (2)
Self-attention is then performed on the vertices, which gen-
erates hidden relation features {v⋆
i}K
i=1that characterize the
10316


==== Page 5 ====
relations between a target object and its neighboring ob-
jects. Based on this, each relation graph goes through the
following attention mechanism:
v⋆
i=σ/parenleftBig/summationdisplay
j∈Niαij·Wv′
j/parenrightBig
. (3)
For different types of relation graph, the deﬁnition of the at-
tention coefﬁcients αijvaries, so does the projection matrix
W∈Rdh×(dq+dv)and the neighborhood Niof object i.
σ(·)is a nonlinear function such as ReLU. To stabilize the
learning process of self-attention, we also extend the above
graph attention mechanism by employing multi-head atten-
tion, where Mindependent attention mechanisms are exe-
cuted, and their output features are concatenated, resulting
in the following output feature representation:
v⋆
i=/bardblM
m=1σ/parenleftBig/summationdisplay
j∈Niαm
ij·Wmv′
j/parenrightBig
. (4)
In the end, v⋆
iis added to the original visual feature vito
serve as the ﬁnal relation-aware feature.
Implicit Relation Since the graph for learning implicit
relation is fully-connected, Nicontains all the objects in
the image, including object iitself. Inspired by [ 21], we
design the attention weight αijto not only depend on
visual-feature weight αv
ij, but also bounding-box weight
αb
ij. Speciﬁcally,
αij=αb
ij·exp(αv
ij)
/summationtextK
j=1αb
ij·exp(αv
ij), (5)
whereαv
ijrepresents the similarity between the visual fea-
tures, computed by scaled dot-product [ 51]:
αv
ij= (Uv′
i)⊤·Vv′
j, (6)
whereU,V∈Rdh×(dq+dv)are projection matrices. αb
ij
measures the relative geometric position between any pair
of regions:
αb
ij= max{0,w·fb(bi,bj)}, (7)
wherefb(·,·)ﬁrst computes a 4-dimensional relative geom-
etry feature (log(|xi−xj|
wi),log(|yi−yj|
hi),log(wj
wi),log(hj
hi)),
then embeds it into a dh-dimensional feature by computing
cosine and sine functions of different wavelengths. w∈
Rdhtransforms the dh-dimensional feature into a scalar
weight, which is further trimmed at 0. Unlike how we as-
sumeno-relation for objects that are too far away from
each other in the explicit relation setting, the restrictions for
implicit relations are learned through wand the zero trim-
ming operation.Explicit Relation We consider semantic relation encoder
ﬁrst. Since edges in the semantic graph Esemnow contain
label information and are directional, we design the atten-
tion mechanism in ( 3) to be sensitive to both directionality
(vi-to-vj,vj-to-viandvi-to-vi) and labels. Speciﬁcally,
v⋆
i=σ/parenleftBig/summationdisplay
j∈Niαij·(Wdir(i,j)v′
j+blab(i,j)/parenrightBig
, (8)
αij=exp((Uv′
i)⊤·Vdir(i,j)v′
j+clab(i,j))/summationtext
j∈Niexp((Uv′
i)⊤·Vdir(i,j)v′
j+clab(i,j)),
whereW{·},V{·}are matrices, and b{·},c{·}are bias
terms.dir(i,j)selects the transformation matrix wrt the di-
rectionality of each edge, and lab(i,j)represents the label
of each edge. Consequently, after encoding all the regions
{v′
i}K
i=1via the above graph attention mechanism, the re-
ﬁned region-level features {v⋆
i}K
i=1are endowed with the
prior semantic relations between objects.
As opposed to graph convolutional networks, this graph
attention mechanism effectively assigns different weights of
importance to nodes of the same neighborhood. Combining
with the question-adaptive mechanism, the learned attention
weights can reﬂect which relations are relevant to a speciﬁc
question. The relation encoder can work in the same manner
on the spatial graph Espa, with a different set of parameters
to be learned, thus details are omitted for simplicity.
3.3. Multimodal Fusion and Answer Prediction
After obtaining relation-aware visual features, we want
to fuse question information qwith each visual represen-
tationv⋆
ithrough a multi-model fusion strategy. Since our
relation encoder preserves the dimensionality of visual fea-
tures, it can be incorporated with any existing multi-modal
fusion method to learn a joint representation J:
J=f(v⋆,q;Θ), (9)
wherefis a multi-modal fusion method and Θare trainable
parameters of the fusion module.
For the Answer Predictor, we adopt a two-layer multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) as the classiﬁer, with the joint rep-
resentation Jas the input. Binary cross entropy is used as
the loss function, similar to [ 2].
In the training stage, different relations encoders are
trained independently. In the inference stage, we combine
the three graph attention networks with a weighted sum of
the predicted answer distributions. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁnal an-
swer distribution is calculated by:
Pr(a=ai) =αPrsem(a=ai)+βPrspa(a=ai)
+(1−α−β)Primp(a=ai), (10)
whereαandβare trade-off hyper-parameters ( 0≤α+
β≤1,0≤α,β≤1).Prsem(a=ai),Prspa(a=ai)
10317


==== Page 6 ====
andPrimp(a=ai)denote the predicted probability for
answerai, from the model trained with semantic, spatial
and implicit relations, respectively.
4. Experiments
We evaluate our proposed model on VQA 2.0 and VQA-
CP v2 datasets [ 3,19,1]. In addition, Visual Genome [ 27]
is used to pre-train the semantic relation classiﬁer. It is also
used to augment the VQA dataset when testing on the test-
dev and test-std splits. We use accuracy as the evaluation
metric:
Acc(ans) = min(1 ,#humans provided ans
3). (11)
4.1. Datasets
VQA 2.0 dataset is composed of real images from
MSCOCO [ 31] with the same train/validation/test splits.
For each image, an average of 3 questions are gener-
ated. These questions are divided into 3 categories: Y/N,
Number andOther . 10 answers are collected for each
image-question pair from human annotators, and the most
frequent answer is selected as the correct answer. Both
open-ended and multiple-choice question types are included
in this dataset. In this work, we focus on the open-ended
task, and take the answers that appeared more than 9 times
in the training set as candidate answers, which produces
3,129answer candidates. The model is trained on the train-
ing set, but when testing on the test set, both training and
validation set are used for training, and the max-probable
answer is selected as the predicted answer.
VQA-CP v2 dataset is a derivation of the VQA 2.0
dataset, which was introduced to evaluate and reduce the
question-oriented bias in VQA models. In particular, the
distribution of answers with respect to question types dif-
fers between training and test splits.
Visual Genome contains 108K images with densely an-
notated objects, attributes and relationships, which we used
to pre-train the semantic relation classiﬁer in our model. We
ﬁltered out those images that also appeared in the VQA val-
idation set, and split the relation data into 88K for train-
ing, 8K for validation, and 8K for testing. Furthermore,
we selected the top-14 most frequent predicates in the train-
ing data, after normalizing the predicates with relationship-
alias provided in Visual Genome. The ﬁnal semantic re-
lation classiﬁer is trained over 14 relation classes plus a
no-relation class.
4.2. Implementation Details
Each question is tokenized and each word is embedded
using 600-dimensional word embeddings (including 300-
dimensional GloVe word embeddings [ 42]). The sequence
of embedded words is then fed into GRU for each time stepup to the 14th token (similar to [ 24]). Questions shorter than
14 words are padded at the end with zero vectors. The di-
mension of the hidden layer in GRU is set as 1024. We em-
ploy multi-head attention with 16 heads for all three graph
attention networks. The dimension of relation features is set
to 1024. For implicit relation, we set the embedded relative
geometry feature dimension dhto be 64.
For the semantic relation classiﬁer, we extract pre-
trained object detection features with known bounding
boxes from Faster R-CNN [ 44] model in conjunction with
ResNet-101 [ 20]. More speciﬁcally, the features are the
output of the Pool5 layer after RoI pooling from Res4b22
feature map [ 58]. The Faster R-CNN model is trained over
1,600 selected object classes and 400 attribute classes, sim-
ilar to the bottom-up attention [ 2].
Our model is implemented based on PyTorch [ 40]. In
experiments, we use Adamax optimizer for training, with
the mini-batch size as 256. For choice of learning rate, we
employ the warm-up strategy [ 18]. Speciﬁcally, we begin
with a learning rate of 0.0005, linearly increasing it at each
epoch till it reaches 0.002 at epoch 4. After 15 epochs, the
learning rate is decreased by 1/2 for every 2 epochs up to
20 epochs. Every linear mapping is regularized by weight
normalization and dropout ( p= 0.2except for the classiﬁer
with0.5).
4.3. Experimental Results
This sub-section provides experimental results on the
VQA 2.0 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. By way of design, the
relation encoder can be composed into different VQA archi-
tectures as a plug-and-play component. In our experiments,
we consider three popular VQA models with different mul-
timodal fusion methods: Bottom-up Top-down [ 2] (BUTD),
Multimodal Tucker Fusion [ 4] (MUTAN), and Bilinear At-
tention Network [ 24] (BAN). Table 1reports results on the
VQA 2.0 validation set in the following setting:
•Imp /Sem /Spa: only one single type of relation
(implicit, semantic or spatial) is used to incorporate
bottom-up attention features.
•Imp+Sem /Imp+Spa /Sem+Spa : two different types
of relations are used via weighted sum.
•All: all three types of relations are utilized, through
weighted sum (e.g.: α= 0.4,β= 0.3). See Eqn. ( 10)
for details.
Compared to the baseline models, we can observe con-
sistent performance gain for all three architectures after
adding the proposed relation encoder. These results demon-
strate that our ReGAT model is a generic approach that can
be used to improve state-of-the-art VQA models. Further-
more, the results indicate that each single relation helps im-
prove the performance, and pairwise combination of rela-
tions can achieve consistent performance gain. When all
three types are combined, our model can achieve the best
10318


==== Page 7 ====
Fusion Model
Method Baseline BiLSTM Imp Sem Spa Imp+Sem Imp+Spa Sem+Spa All
BUTD [ 2] 63.15 (63.38†) 61.95 64.10 64.11 64.02 64.93 64.92 64.84 65.30
MUTAN [ 4] 58.16 (61.36†) 61.22 62.45 62.60 62.01 63.99 63.70 63.89 64.37
BAN [ 24] 65.36±0.14(65.51†) 64.55 65.93±0.06 65.97±0.05 66.02±0.12 66.81 66.76 66.85 67.18
Table 1. Performance on VQA 2.0 validation set with different fusion methods. Consistent improvements are observed across 3 popular fu-
sion methods, which demonstrates that our model is compatible to generic VQA frameworks. ( †) Results based on our re-implementations.
Model SOTA [ 6] Baseline Sem Spa Imp All
Acc. 39.54 39.24 39.54 40.30 39.58 40.42
Table 2. Model accuracy on the VQA-CP v2 benchmark (open-
ended setting on the test split).
ModelTest-devTest-stdOverall Y/N Num Other
BUTD [ 49] 65.32 81.82 44.21 56.05 65.67
MFH [ 60] 68.76 84.27 50.66 60.50 -
Counter [ 62] 68.09 83.14 51.62 58.97 68.41
Pythia [ 22] 70.01 - - - 70.24
BAN [ 24] 70.04 85.42 54.04 60.52 70.35
v-AGCN [ 57] 65.94 82.39 56.46 45.93 66.17
Graph learner [ 39] - - - - 66.18
MuRel [ 6] 68.03 84.77 49.84 57.85 68.41
ReGAT (ours) 70.27 86.08 54.42 60.33 70.58
Table 3. Model accuracy on the VQA 2.0 benchmark (open-ended
setting on the test-dev and test-std split).
performance. Our best results are achieved by combining
the best single relation models through weighted sum. To
verify the performance gain is signiﬁcant, we performed t-
test on the results of our BAN baseline and our proposed
model with each single relation. We report the standard de-
viation in Table 1, and the p-value is 0.001459 . The im-
provement from our method is signiﬁcant at p <0.05. We
also compare with an additional baseline model that uses
BiLSTM as the contextualized relation encoder, the results
show that using BiLSTM hurts the performance.
To demonstrate the generalizability of our ReGAT
model, we also conduct experiments on the VQA-CP v2
dataset, where the distributions of the training and test splits
are very different from each other. Table 2shows results on
VQA-CP v2 test split. Here we use BAN with four glimpses
as the baseline model. Consistent with what we have ob-
served on VQA 2.0, our ReGAT model surpasses the base-
line by a large margin. With only single relation, our model
has already achieved state-of-the-art performance on VQA-
CP v2 (40.30 vs. 39.54). When adding all the relations, the
performance gain was further lifted to +0.88.
Table 3shows single-model results on VQA 2.0 test-dev
and test-std splits. The top ﬁve rows show results from
models without relational reasoning, and the bottom four
rows are results from models with relational reasoning. Our
model surpasses all previous work with or without relational
reasoning. Our ﬁnal model uses bilinear attention with four
glimpses as the multimodal fusion method. Compared toAtt. Q-adaptive Semantic Spatial Implicit All
No No 63.20 63.04 n/a n/a
Yes No 63.90 63.85 63.36 64.98
No Yes 63.31 63.13 n/a n/a
Yes Yes 64.11 64.02 64.10 65.30
Table 4. Performance on VQA 2.0 validation set for ablation study
(Q-adaptive: question-adaptive; Att: Attention).
BAN [ 24], which uses eight bilinear attention maps, our
model outperforms BAN with fewer glimpses. Pythia [ 22]
achieved 70.01 by adding additional grid-level features and
using 100 object proposals from a ﬁne-tuned Faster R-CNN
on the VQA dataset for all images. Our model, without any
feature augmentation used in their work, surpasses Pythia’s
performance by a large margin.
4.4. Ablation Study
In Table 4, we compare three ablated instances of Re-
GAT with its complete form. Speciﬁcally, we validate the
importance of concatenating question features to each ob-
ject representation and attention mechanism. All the results
reported in Table 4are based on BUTD model architecture.
To remove attention mechanism from our relation encoder,
we simply replace graph attention network with graph con-
volution network, which can also learn node representation
from graphs but with simple linear transformation.
Firstly, we validate the effectiveness of using attention
mechanism to learn relation-aware visual features. Adding
attention mechanism leads to a higher accuracy for all three
types of relation. Comparison between line 1 and line 2
shows a gain of +0.70for semantic relation and +0.81for
spatial relation. Secondly, we validate the effectiveness of
question-adaptive relation features. Between line 1 and line
3, we see a gain of approximately +0.1for both seman-
tic and spatial relations. Finally, attention mechanism and
question-adaptive features are added to give the complete
ReGAT model. This instance gives the highest accuracy
(line 4). Surprisingly, by comparing line 1 and line 4, we
can observe that combining graph attention with question-
adaptive gives better gain than simply adding the individual
gains from the two methods. It is worth mentioning that
for implicit relation, adding question-adaptive improves the
model performance by +0.74, which is higher than the gain
from question-adaptive for the two explicit relations. When
all the relations are considered, we observe consistent per-
formance gain by adding the question-adaptive mechanism.
10319


==== Page 8 ====
Figure 4. Visualization of attention maps learned from ablated in-
stances: The three bounding boxes shown in each image are the
top-3 attended regions. The numbers are attention weights.
To better understand how these two components help an-
swer questions, we further visualize and compare the atten-
tion maps learned by the ablated instances in Section 4.5.
4.5. Visualization
To better illustrate the effectiveness of adding graph at-
tention and question-adaptive mechanism, we compare the
attention maps learned by the complete ReGAT model in
a single-relation setting with those learned by two ablated
models. As shown in Figure 4, the second, third and last
rows correspond to line 1, 3 and 4 in Table 4, respectively.
Comparing row 2 with row 3 leads to the observation that
graph attention helps to capture the interactions between
objects, which contributes to a better alignment between
image regions and questions. Row 3 and row 4 show that
adding the question-adaptive attention mechanism produces
sharper attention maps and focuses on more relevant re-
gions. These visualization results are consistent with the
quantitative results reported in Table 4.
Figure 5provides visualization examples on how differ-
ent types of relations help improve the performance. In
each example, we show the top-3 attended regions and the
learned relations between these regions. As shown in these
examples, each relation type contributes to a better align-
ment between image regions and questions. For example,
in Figure 5(a), semantic relations “ Holding ” and “ Riding ”
resonate with the same words that appeared in the corre-
sponding questions. Figure 5(b) shows how spatial relations
Figure 5. Visualization of different types of visual object relation
in VQA task. The 3 bounding boxes shown in each image are the
top-3 attended regions. Green arrows indicate relations from sub-
ject to object. Labels and numbers in green boxes are class labels
for explicit relation and attention weights for implicit relation.
capture the relative geometric positions between regions.
To visualize implicit relations, Figure 5(c) shows the at-
tention weights to the top-1 region from every other region.
Surprisingly, the learned implicit relations are able to cap-
ture both spatial and semantic interactions. For example,
the top image in Figure 5(c) illustrates spatial interaction
“on” between the table and the vase, and the bottom image
illustrates the semantic interaction “ walking ” between the
trafﬁc light and the person.
5. Conclusion
We have presented Relation-aware Graph Attention Net-
work (ReGAT), a novel framework for visual question an-
swering, to model multi-type object relations with question-
adaptive attention mechanism. ReGAT exploits two types
of visual object relations: Explicit Relations and Implicit
Relations, to learn a relation-aware region representation
through graph attention. Our method achieves state-of-the-
art results on both VQA 2.0 and VQA-CP v2 datasets. The
proposed ReGAT model is compatible with generic VQA
models. Comprehensive experiments on two VQA datasets
show that our model can be infused into state-of-the-art
VQA architectures in a plug-and-play fashion. For future
work, we will investigate how to fuse the three relations
more effectively and how to utilize each relation to solve
speciﬁc question types.
10320


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Aishwarya Agrawal, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Anirud-
dha Kembhavi. Don’t just assume; look and answer: Over-
coming priors for visual question answering. In CVPR , 2018.
6
[2] Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien
Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould, and Lei Zhang.
Bottom-up and top-down attention for image captioning and
visual question answering. In CVPR , 2018. 3,5,6,7
[3] Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret
Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Devi
Parikh. VQA: Visual Question Answering. In ICCV , 2015.
6
[4] Hedi Ben-Younes, R ´emi Cadene, Matthieu Cord, and Nico-
las Thome. Mutan: Multimodal tucker fusion for visual
question answering. In ICCV , 2017. 2,6,7
[5] Irving Biederman, Robert J Mezzanotte, and Jan C Rabi-
nowitz. Scene perception: Detecting and judging objects un-
dergoing relational violations. Cognitive psychology , 1982.
2
[6] Remi Cadene, Hedi Ben-younes, Matthieu Cord, and Nicolas
Thome. Murel: Multimodal relational reasoning for visual
question answering. In CVPR , 2019. 3,7
[7] Myung Jin Choi, Antonio Torralba, and Alan S Willsky. A
tree-based context model for object recognition. PAMI , 2012.
2
[8] Bo Dai, Yuqi Zhang, and Dahua Lin. Detecting visual re-
lationships with deep relational networks. In CVPR , 2017.
3
[9] Santosh K Divvala, Ali Farhadi, and Carlos Guestrin. Learn-
ing everything about anything: Webly-supervised visual con-
cept learning. In CVPR , 2014. 2
[10] Santosh K Divvala, Derek Hoiem, James H Hays, Alexei A
Efros, and Martial Hebert. An empirical study of context in
object detection. In CVPR , 2009. 2
[11] Haoqi Fan and Jiatong Zhou. Stacked latent attention for
multimodal reasoning. In CVPR , 2018. 1,2
[12] Hao Fang, Saurabh Gupta, Forrest Iandola, Rupesh K Sri-
vastava, Li Deng, Piotr Doll ´ar, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong He,
Margaret Mitchell, John C Platt, et al. From captions to vi-
sual concepts and back. In CVPR , 2015. 2
[13] Ali Farhadi, Mohsen Hejrati, Mohammad Amin Sadeghi, Pe-
ter Young, Cyrus Rashtchian, Julia Hockenmaier, and David
Forsyth. Every picture tells a story: Generating sentences
from images. In ECCV , 2010. 2
[14] Pedro F Felzenszwalb, Ross B Girshick, David McAllester,
and Deva Ramanan. Object detection with discriminatively
trained part-based models. PAMI , 2010. 2
[15] Akira Fukui, Dong Huk Park, Daylen Yang, Anna Rohrbach,
Trevor Darrell, and Marcus Rohrbach. Multimodal com-
pact bilinear pooling for visual question answering and vi-
sual grounding. In EMNLP , 2016. 2
[16] Carolina Galleguillos, Andrew Rabinovich, and Serge Be-
longie. Object categorization using co-occurrence, location
and appearance. In CVPR , 2008. 2[17] Stephen Gould, Jim Rodgers, David Cohen, Gal Elidan, and
Daphne Koller. Multi-class segmentation with relative loca-
tion prior. IJCV , 2008. 2
[18] Priya Goyal, Piotr Doll ´ar, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noord-
huis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola, Andrew Tulloch,
Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large mini-
batch sgd: training imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.02677 , 2017. 6
[19] Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Ba-
tra, and Devi Parikh. Making the v in vqa matter: Elevating
the role of image understanding in visual question answer-
ing. In CVPR , 2017. 6
[20] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In CVPR ,
2016. 6
[21] Han Hu, Jiayuan Gu, Zheng Zhang, Jifeng Dai, and Yichen
Wei. Relation networks for object detection. In CVPR , 2018.
2,3,5
[22] Yu Jiang, Vivek Natarajan, Xinlei Chen, Marcus Rohrbach,
Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Pythia v0. 1: the win-
ning entry to the vqa challenge 2018. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.09956 , 2018. 7
[23] Justin Johnson, Ranjay Krishna, Michael Stark, Li-Jia Li,
David Shamma, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Image
retrieval using scene graphs. In CVPR , 2015. 2
[24] Jin-Hwa Kim, Jaehyun Jun, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Bilin-
ear attention networks. In NeurIPS , 2018. 2,6,7
[25] Jin-Hwa Kim, Kyoung-Woon On, Woosang Lim, Jeonghee
Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Hadamard
product for low-rank bilinear pooling. In ICLR , 2017. 2
[26] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classi-
ﬁcation with graph convolutional networks. In ICLR , 2017.
3
[27] Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson,
Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis Kalan-
tidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, Michael Bernstein, and
Li Fei-Fei. Visual genome: Connecting language and vision
using crowdsourced dense image annotations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.07332 , 2016. 4,6
[28] Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson,
Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie Chen, Yannis Kalan-
tidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, et al. Visual genome:
Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense
image annotations. IJCV , 2017. 3
[29] Guohao Li, Hang Su, and Wenwu Zhu. Incorporating exter-
nal knowledge to answer open-domain visual questions with
dynamic memory networks. In CVPR , 2018. 2
[30] Qing Li, Jianlong Fu, Dongfei Yu, Tao Mei, and Jiebo Luo.
Tell-and-answer: Towards explainable visual question an-
swering using attributes and captions. In EMNLP , 2018. 2
[31] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays,
Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll ´ar, and C Lawrence
Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In
ECCV , 2014. 6
[32] Cewu Lu, Ranjay Krishna, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-
Fei. Visual relationship detection with language priors. In
ECCV , 2016. 3
10321


==== Page 10 ====
[33] Jiasen Lu, Jianwei Yang, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh.
Hierarchical question-image co-attention for visual question
answering. In NIPS , 2016. 1,2
[34] Pan Lu, Lei Ji, Wei Zhang, Nan Duan, Ming Zhou, and Jiany-
ong Wang. R-vqa: Learning visual relation facts with se-
mantic attention for visual question answering. In SIGKDD ,
2018. 2
[35] Chao Ma, Chunhua Shen, Anthony Dick, Qi Wu, Peng
Wang, Anton van den Hengel, and Ian Reid. Visual question
answering with memory-augmented networks. In CVPR ,
2018. 2
[36] Mateusz Malinowski, Carl Doersch, Adam Santoro, and Pe-
ter Battaglia. Learning visual question answering by boot-
strapping hard attention. In ECCV , 2018. 2
[37] Roozbeh Mottaghi, Xianjie Chen, Xiaobai Liu, Nam-Gyu
Cho, Seong-Whan Lee, Sanja Fidler, Raquel Urtasun, and
Alan Yuille. The role of context for object detection and se-
mantic segmentation in the wild. In CVPR , 2014. 2
[38] Hyeonseob Nam, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jeonghee Kim. Dual
attention networks for multimodal reasoning and matching.
InCVPR , 2017. 1,2
[39] Will Norcliffe-Brown, Stathis Vafeias, and Sarah Parisot.
Learning conditioned graph structures for interpretable vi-
sual question answering. In NeurIPS , 2018. 3,7
[40] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory
Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zeming Lin, Al-
ban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic
differentiation in pytorch. 2017. 6
[41] Badri Patro and Vinay P Namboodiri. Differential attention
for visual question answering. In CVPR , 2018. 2
[42] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher Man-
ning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In
EMNLP , 2014. 6
[43] Vignesh Ramanathan, Congcong Li, Jia Deng, Wei Han,
Zhen Li, Kunlong Gu, Yang Song, Samy Bengio, Charles
Rosenberg, and Li Fei-Fei. Learning semantic relationships
for better action retrieval in images. In CVPR , 2015. 2
[44] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun.
Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object detection with region
proposal networks. In NIPS , 2015. 6
[45] Mohammad Amin Sadeghi and Ali Farhadi. Recognition us-
ing visual phrases. In CVPR , 2011. 2
[46] Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G Barrett, Mateusz
Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter Battaglia, and Timothy
Lillicrap. A simple neural network module for relational rea-
soning. In NIPS , 2017. 3
[47] Sebastian Schuster, Ranjay Krishna, Angel Chang, Li Fei-
Fei, and Christopher D Manning. Generating semantically
precise scene graphs from textual descriptions for improved
image retrieval. In Proceedings of the fourth workshop on
vision and language , 2015. 2
[48] Zhou Su, Chen Zhu, Yinpeng Dong, Dongqi Cai, Yurong
Chen, and Jianguo Li. Learning visual knowledge memory
networks for visual question answering. In CVPR , 2018. 2
[49] Damien Teney, Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, and Anton
van den Hengel. Tips and tricks for visual question answer-
ing: Learnings from the 2017 challenge. In CVPR , 2018. 1,
2,7[50] Damien Teney, Lingqiao Liu, and Anton van den Hengel.
Graph-structured representations for visual question answer-
ing. In CVPR , 2017. 3
[51] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS , 2017. 5
[52] Peng Wang, Qi Wu, Jiewei Cao, Chunhua Shen, Lianli Gao,
and Anton van den Hengel. Neighbourhood watch: Refer-
ring expression comprehension via language-guided graph
attention networks. In CVPR , 2019. 3
[53] Peng Wang, Qi Wu, Chunhua Shen, and Anton van den Hen-
gel. The vqa-machine: Learning how to use existing vision
algorithms to answer new questions. In CVPR , 2017. 2
[54] Qi Wu, Chunhua Shen, Peng Wang, Anthony Dick, and An-
ton van den Hengel. Image captioning and visual ques-
tion answering based on attributes and external knowledge.
PAMI , 2017. 2
[55] Qi Wu, Peng Wang, Chunhua Shen, Anthony Dick, and
Anton van den Hengel. Ask me anything: Free-form vi-
sual question answering based on knowledge from external
sources. In CVPR , 2016. 2
[56] Zichao Yang, Xiaodong He, Jianfeng Gao, Li Deng, and
Alex Smola. Stacked attention networks for image question
answering. In CVPR , 2016. 1,2
[57] Zhuoqian Yang, Jing Yu, Chenghao Yang, Zengchang Qin,
and Yue Hu. Multi-modal learning with prior visual relation
reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09681 , 2018. 3,7
[58] Ting Yao, Yingwei Pan, Yehao Li, and Tao Mei. Exploring
visual relationship for image captioning. In ECCV , 2018. 2,
3,4,6
[59] Dongfei Yu, Jianlong Fu, Tao Mei, and Yong Rui. Multi-
level attention networks for visual question answering. In
CVPR , 2017. 2
[60] Zhou Yu, Jun Yu, Chenchao Xiang, Jianping Fan, and
Dacheng Tao. Beyond bilinear: Generalized multimodal
factorized high-order pooling for visual question answering.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-
tems, 2018. 2,7
[61] Hanwang Zhang, Zawlin Kyaw, Shih-Fu Chang, and Tat-
Seng Chua. Visual translation embedding network for visual
relation detection. In CVPR , 2017. 3
[62] Yan Zhang, Jonathon S. Hare, and Adam Pr ¨ugel-Bennett.
Learning to count objects in natural images for visual ques-
tion answering. In ICLR , 2018. 7
[63] Chen Zhu, Yanpeng Zhao, Shuaiyi Huang, Kewei Tu, and Yi
Ma. Structured attentions for visual question answering. In
ICCV , 2017. 2
10322


