==== Page 1 ====
https://doi.org /10.31449/inf.v 44i3.2828  Informatica 44 (2020 ) 291–302 291 
 Reminder of the First Paper  on Transfer Learning in Neural Networks, 
1976  
Stevo Bozinovski  
South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, SC, USA  
E-mail: sbozinovski@scsu.edu  
Overview paper  
Keywords:  transfer learning, neural networks  
Received:  June  10, 201 9 
This paper describes a work on trans fer learning in neural networks  carried out in 1970s  and early 
1980 s, which produc ed its first publication  in 1976 . In the contempor ary res earch on transf er learning 
there is a belief that pioneering work on transfer le arning took place in early 1990 s, and t his paper 
updates that knowledge,  pointing out that the transfer learning research started more than a decade 
earlier. This paper review s the pioneering  1970s research , and addresses important issues relevant for 
the current tr ansfer learning research. It gives a mathematical model and geometric interpretation of 
transfer learning , and a measure of tra nsfer learning in dicating  positi ve, neg ative, and no transfer 
learnin g. It presents experiment al investigation in the mentioned types of transfer learning. And it gives 
an application of transfer learning in pattern recognition using dataset s of images.  
Povzetek: Ta članek opisuje delo na področju prenosa uč enja v nevronsk ih omrežjih, opravljeno v 
sedemdeseti h in zgodnjih osemdesetih letih prejšnjega stoletja, ki je prvo publikacijo izdalo leta 1976. V 
sodobni raziskavi o transfernem učenju obstaja prepričanje, da je pionirsko delo na po dročju 
transfernega uč enja potekalo v  začetku devetdesetih let, in ta član ek to znanje posodablja. poudarja, da 
so se raziskave o transfernem učenju transfernem učenju začele 15 let prej. Ta članek pregleduje 
raziskave in obravnava p omembna vprašanja za se danje raziskave o tran sfernem učenju.  Daje 
matematični model in geometrijs ko razlago transfernega učenja. Daje merilo transfernega učenja, 
vključno s pozitivnim, negativnim in tabula rasa prenosnim učenjem. Predstavlja eksperimentaln o 
raziskovanje omenjeni h vrst transfernega uč enja. Uporablja  prenosno učenje pri prepoznavanju na bora 
podatkov.  
 
1 Introduction
Transfer learning is a machine learning method where a 
learning model developed for a first learning task is 
reused as the starting point for a learning  model in a 
second lea rning task (Tan  et al. 2018). It is a research 
problem in machine learning  that focuses on storing  
knowledge gained while solving one problem and 
applying it to a different but related problem (Wikipedia  
> Transfer Learning, October  2020). Often pr evious 
learning is refe rred to as source and the next lear ning as 
target (Pratt 1993, Pan and Yang  2010 , Weiss et al. 
2016) . Basically it is using a pre -trained neural ne twork 
(trained for Task 1) for achieving shorter training time  
(positive transfer learning) in learning Task 2. Transfer 
learning is an emphasized way of learning in 
contemporary multistage neural n etworks named deep 
neural networks (e.g., Goodfellow et al . 2016).  
According to (Wikipedia  > Transfer Learning, 
October  2020), the e arliest work on transf er in machine 
learning is attributed to Lorien Pratt  (1993) . That work 
points out the earlier work on the subject ( Pratt et al. 
1991). After 1993 , as pointed in Pan and Yan g (2010 ) the 
fundamental motivation for transfer learning  in the fiel d of machine le arning was discussed at a NIPS -95 
workshop on “Learning to Learn” (Baxter et al. 1995 ).  
In the contex t described above, this paper informs on 
an explicit work on transfer learning which took place 
fifteen years before the Pratt et a l. (1991 ) work. That 
research,  reviewed here , started 1972 producing  some 
unpublished reports (Bozinovski 1972, 1974)  and a 
published report in 1976 (Bozinovski and Fulgo si, 1976 ) 
which explicitly in the title addressed the transfer 
learning  concept . Resear ch continued after tha t, and 
reports were given in (Bozinovski et al. 1977, 
Bozinovski 1978, 1981, 1985 a, 1985b, 1995) .  
That initial research on transfer learning  is important 
to the current effort in transfer learning , because in 
addition of presenting i nitial concept of tran sfer learning 
in neural networks, it  describes an early approach of 
defining a measure of transfer lea rning which is of 
interest to current efforts in transfer learning (Tan et al. 
2018 ). The review presented here, in addition to 
math ematical tre atment of transfer learni ng, describes the 
experimental investigation on transfer learning  which 
took place dur ing 1976 -1981. This paper also gives an 

==== Page 2 ====
292 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 application of transfer learning , in obtaining shorter 
training sequences in learning a data set of images 
represen ting letters.   
In the sequel the paper first reviews the neural 
network used in early research o n tra nsfer learning, 
during 1972 -1981. Then it gives a mathematical model of 
supervised learning , in which it explicitly introduces 
trans fer learning. Then it gives a g eometr ical model of 
transfer learning , including positive , negative , and no 
transfer learning . Then, in Section 5, it defines a 
mathematical index, a measure of transfer learning. In 
Section 6 the paper discusses a search for  a solution of 
pattern  classification  problem in case of negative transfer  
learning . In Section 7 the paper discusses the mu lti-class 
multi -template problem of transfer learning. Section 8  
shows results of experimental investigation in transfer 
learning . It first shows experime nts with small set of low 
resolution images representing lette rs, demonstrating 
experimentally the eff ect of tabula rasa, positive, and 
negative transfer. The paper the n extends to an 
application of transfer learning in case of learni ng a 
dataset of three sets each containing  26 images 
representing letters . The section 9 reviews the related 
work by other authors w hich appeared after 1986, 
influenced by the renewed interest in neural networks 
due to the book of Rumelhart, McClelland , and the PD P 
Group (1986) , includ ing the work of  Pratt et al. (1991) 
and Pratt (1993). The paper ends with a discussion and 
conclusion section . 
2 The neural network  
The neural network used in our study (Bozinovski 1972, 
1974, 1995)  is shown in Figure  1. 
The network co ntains 5 compu tational  stages 
(layers ). The first one, M, is the sens or layer,  with 
sensors arranged according to a need, for example as a 
matrix retina. Sensors are binary giving values 0 or 1.  
Second layer, Z, is a feature extractio n layer . Feature 
is a pattern which is used as input in rec ognition of a 
higher level pattern. Examp les of features might be 
"horizontal line",  "circle" , "upper left corner" , or a rather 
complex feature . Important is that the feature is a first stage in re cognizing a pattern , which is a set of featu res. 
One way of  defining a feature is to pre -wire all sensors in 
a horizontal line and to create an output from Z layer, 
with interpretation "horizontal line". The other way is to 
add a Z -element with trainable w eights and produce an 
output with in terpreta tion "horizonta l line". The number 
of output s from Z -layer is often  larger than the number 
of input sensors. For example each sensor can be 
considered a feature, plus some needed features such as 
"middle horizo ntal line", "left corn er" or "square ".  
The outputs of the layer Z are inputs to the third  
layer, the A -layer . It contains A -elements, or associative 
units, as named originally by Rosenblatt (1958 , 1962) , 
and used in early neural learning research (e.g. Gl ushkov , 
1967) . We will  use that term , but we will also use the 
term associative weights . A weight represents the 
relevance of the feature in creating the concept of a 
pattern. They are divided into subsets A 1, A 2, ..., A n, each 
subset having inputs from th e feature layer  Z. The 
subsets are as sociate d to a cognitiv e concept, a class  to 
which input patterns are classified. If there are n possible 
classes and N s possible features , then each A element can 
be represented by values w is, i=1,..,n; j=1,..,N s. They are 
in gene ral real nu mbers. Each cla ss of A  elements 
repre sent a concept, a cognitive class, that will be learned 
in the pattern classification process. For example, i f a 
task is to classify images, then one set of A elements will 
be devoted to recognize image  "E", another to recognize 
the image  "F" etc.  
Next lay er, S, are elements that perform some 
computation over the subsets of A elements  representing 
cognitive classes . An S element s i comput es some 
function y(w ij) over the elements w ij , i = 1,..,n; j =1,.., 
Ns. Most often these elements compute  a weighted and  
thresholded sum y i = jwij xj - pi where pi  is named 
threshold of the element s i. Further in the text we will use 
the -notation for threshold , i.e. p i = i. There are n S -
elements in this lay er, s 1, s2, ..., s n. A subset of A 
elements and the corresp onding S element i s named a 
neuron of the neural network.  
The next layer, D, is an arbiter layer , which chooses 
an S-element out of n alternative S -elements. Usual way 
is computing a maximum functi on. This layer can be 
comp osed by set of neurons which have  a common  
threshold. Such an Isothreshold Neural Network (e.g . 
Bozinovski 1985 a) has a common threshold value equal 
to maximal value of the individual neuron thresholds. 
Such a network provides a mechanism for computin g 
maximal valu e in neu ral networks. I n addition, the 
maximal value might be normalized to 1, and the 
maximum computing network can be viewed as 
computing fuzzy union if the input values are also 
normalized between 0 and 1 . The output of this layer is 
an integer from 0  to n. For example, outpu t d = 2 means 
that the observed pattern belongs to class 2 out of the 
considered n classes. The output d = 0  means that the 
classification is undecided, possibly there are two S -
elements computing the same largest value , so there is no 
singl e maximal value .  
The next layer E, is output interface layer. It 
activates some device that is controlled by this neural 
 
Figure 1: A 5-layer  neural ne twork used in supervised 
learni ng for pattern recognition in the research 
described here (Bozinovski 1974, 1995) . 

==== Page 3 ====
Reminder of the First Paper on...   Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 293 
 network. For example if d=2 is computed , then this layer 
may activate a speech device tell ing the sound 
represen tation of the class 2.   
The neural ne twork presented in Figure 1 was the 
one we started our research in neural networks with. The 
first task we considered was distinguishing a horizontal 
vs vertical line on a matrix retina (Bozinovski  1972 ). 
That is not re viewed here. T his pape r is focused on  
modeling transfer learning.  
3 Mathematical modeling of transfer 
learning in a neural network  
For purpose of presenting the concept of transfer 
learning, here we use a simplified version of the 5 -layer 
network on Figure 1. Let the layer M consists of m 
synapses or sensors. Let layer Z does not compute any 
additional feature besides the sensor inputs , so it just 
represents connection s from sensors to A -elements. Let 
each subset of A elements has the s ame connections to 
the sensors as th e other subset of A -elements. The A -
elements will be named synaptic weights, such that the 
weight w is represents the s-th synapse element in the i -th 
class of A elements. Then the S -element s i computes the 
function yi = swisxs - i. Let the layer D is rep resented  
by a maximum s elector function : (di = 1 if yi = max i{yi} 
otherwise d i = 0). Other way of denoting a maximum 
selector is d = indmax{y i} where indmax{ } returns the 
index of the maximal element in the considered s et. In 
the literature this function is usual ly written as d  = 
argmax{ }, but we use our original notation (Bozinovski 
and Fulgosi, 1976).  
3.1 An approach toward modeling 
supervised learning in neural networks  
The principal learning concept of the neural networ k 
approach toward mach ine learning is the co ncept of 
(synap tic) weights  (e.g. Rumelhart et al . 1986 , 
Goodfellow et al . 2016 ). In pattern classification with 
neural networks the principal  representation spaces are 
the pattern feature space  and weights space . However, it 
should b e noted that w hile in artificial neur al nets 
synaptic weights are observable, in real biological 
systems the y are not observable. So it is interesting to use 
a representation of the supervised learning problem 
which will not deal with  synaptic weights as p rimary 
represe ntation concept. Here w e will describe such a 
representation which is a weights -free and we call it 
teaching space  (Bozinovski 1981 , 1985b) . 
Let us not e that in a supervised learning there is a 
system named teacher who h as a reference model o f the 
knowledg e to be transferred in the other system named 
learner or student. The teaching space approach is based 
on the foll owing notation:  
Let x be a body of knowledge to be learned  by the 
student . For example x might be a visua l pattern to be 
classi fied in a clas s. The s upervised learn ing procedure 
(training) contains both teaching trials (where the teacher 
presents the knowledge about x ), and examination trial s 
(where the student presents its knowledge about x ). After the training is completed there  will be many exploita tion 
trials, wh ere the l earner will show its knowledge in an 
application.  
Let !(x) denote s a teaching (or advising) trial , 
representing the teacher’s reference model knowledge 
about x. Let ?(x) denote s a test (or examination) trial , 
representing th e curren t learner’s kno wledge about x.  
Then, the goal of the teaching process becomes  
?(x) =  !(x) for all considered x.   (1) 
The learner we use  is a maximum selector classifier  
(Figure 1) . For each input pattern x in an test trial, the 
learner computes n alterna tives , i.e., co mputes n 
functions y1(x),.., yn(x), and chooses the one with 
maximal value. If there is no maximal value the learner 
gives special answer meaning "undecided ", for example 
value 0.  
Lets define a set X of N objects  (patter ns), 
X={x 1,..,xi,..,xj,..,xN}, to be classified into n classes, 
C1,..,C k,..,C q,..,C n, where N > n. Let , by teachers 
reference model , the i-th pattern belongs to the k -th class 
and j -th pattern belongs to the q -th class. That can be 
written as  
!(xi)= C k;  i=1, …, N; k=1 ,...,n; (2.1) 
!(xj)= C q;  j = 1, …, N, q=1,...,n ; j  i, qk; (2.2) 
In an examination trial it is computed  the maximum  
value , which means that the correct classification is 
achieved if the following pair of inequalities h olds 
?(x i) = !(x i) = C k   yk(xi ) > yq(xi )       (3.1) 
?(xj) = !(x j) = C q   yq(xj ) > yk(xj )       (3.2) 
Further, we assume that the patterns are represented 
as feature vectors x1,..,xN and that the weight  vectors are 
represented with w1,..,wn, where wk is associated with the 
class C k.  
The lea rning process i s governed by a  consequence 
driven teaching process with an error correction learning 
rule  
 if  ?(x i)   is different th an   (!(xi) = C k ) 
 then correct wk toward xi:  wk = wk + cxi  (4) 
where c is a constant . In words , if the classi fier 
erroneously classifies the pattern xi in an test trial, a 
teaching trial is introduced in which the pattern xi is 
added to the weight wk, lecturing that xi belongs to C k.  
Here c is a learning rate which is a constant and we 
use th e value c=1.  
3.2 Introd ucing transfer le arning  
Consider neural network from Fig ure 1 which has 
capability to classify N patterns into n classes , N > n. 
Consider the simplest task,  two patterns xi and xj to be 
classified into two classes  Ck and C q. The proble m is 
stated with relations (3). Howev er let us emphasize that k 
and q are arbitrary  in the set of {1,..., n| kq}, and also i 
and j are arbitrary  in the set {1,...,N | ij}. 
Now we introduce transfer learning . Let assume the 
considered neural network has bee n subject of a learn ing 
task which we call first learning task . After th at first 
learning task the neural network learner is now subject to 

==== Page 4 ====
294 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 a second learnin g task . The second lea rning task will be 
carried out by a s upervised learning (or teaching) process 
represented by a tea ching sequence L. The teaching 
sequence contains both teaching and test (examination) 
trials. However,  the memory of the learner is upda ted 
only during the te aching trials. The test trials demons trate 
the knowledge already stored in the memory  of the 
neura l network  learner . 
Let y k(xi) be the output of S k element of the neural 
network at the completion of the first learning task. It is 
the initial knowledge as d emonstrated by this ne ural 
network be fore the second learning task. We emphasize 
that with notatio n y k0(xi) := y k(xi), pointing out with a 
superscript 0 that it is initial knowledge for the second 
learning task.  So the output  y k0(xi) manifests the transfe r 
learning from the fi rst teaching ta sk about the concept 
class k,  before the second teaching task  with teaching 
sequence L is applied.  
Let y k(xi/L) be the output of S k element representing 
class k when shown pattern xi after the learning in the 
second ta sk with the learning s equence L. So t he second 
learning task will be modeled with the following ou tputs 
from  elements S k and S q 
 yk(xi/L) = y k0(xi)+ a ijpi   (5.1) 
 yq(xj/L) = y q0(xj)+ a jipj   (5.2) 
where  pi is the number of appeara nce of pattern x in a 
teaching trial of the tea ching sequence L, i.e. the number 
of application of the learning rule (4), and aij is the inner 
product between patterns, a ij = xiTxj. 
So, in order a correct pattern classification to be 
achieved in the secon d task, by a neural network  with 
maximum selector  as in Figure 1 , it is necessary and 
sufficient that the following system o f inequalities hold s 
 yk(xi/L) > y q(xi/L)   (6.1) 
 yq(xj/L) >  y k(xj/L)   (6.2) 
which leads to  
 aii pi - aij pj > - yk0(xi) + yq0(xi) (7.1) 
 -aji pi + ajj pj  > y k0(xj) - yq0(xj) (7.2) 
That reason ing leads to the following Theorem : 
Theorem 1. ( Transfer lea rning in case of learning 
arbitrary two patterns  from a set of patterns ) Let xi and xj 
be arbitrary patterns from a set X ={ x1,..,xi,..,xj,..,xN} of 
N patterns , which a maximum sele cting  neural cl assifier 
should learn to classify into given two classes C k and C m 
respectively, from a set C={C 1,..,C k,..,C m,..,C n} of n 
classes . Let a ij = xiTxj. Let the lecture (teaching trial)  !x i 
= C k is presented p i times , and l et !x j = C m  is presen ted p j  
times  in the teaching sequence  L. Then, the problem of 
correct clas sification learning is equivalent to the 
problem of finding p i  and p j  which satisfy the pair of 
inequalities  
      aii  -aji       pi      qk(xi)  
         >    (8) 
      - aij   ajj     pj            kq(xj)   
which in compact form can be written as   
 Ap >      ( 9) where   
        = qk(xi)   =   yq0(xi) -yk0(xi)               (10) 
 kq(xj)        yk0(xj) - yq0(xj) 
is named transfer learning vector . 
Before we present the proof of the Theorem 1 we 
will give interpretation of the variables which appear  in 
the theorem.   
First we point out that the left side of the inequalities 
(8) contain a matrix of all inner products between 
patterns. The inner produ ct a ij  between two pat terns xi 
and xj shows how much their features overlap. It can be 
viewed as c ovariance, a manifestation of pattern 
similarity. We denote that matrix A = [aij], and name it a 
matrix of mutual similarity  between patterns . Note that 
this matrix is invariant to the teaching pr ocess , it simply 
describes relation between the given patter ns.  
The vector p=(p i pj)T  shows how many times 
patterns were shown in a teaching trial in the teaching 
sequence L. It i s a training vector of the second learning 
task.  
The rig ht side of ineq ualities contain the variables 
are due to transfer learning  from a learning task prior to 
this considered task of training using curriculum L. It 
contains differences  of outputs of S -elements for each 
pattern shown in the teaching process, i .e. yqk0(xi) = 
yq0(xi) - yk0(xi) for shown pattern xi, and y kq0(xj) = y k0(xj) 
- yq0(xj) for shown pattern xj.  
So the left side of matrix inequalities, Ap, contains 
all controllable and observable pa rameters of the 
teaching process. If patterns are known, the matrix A is 
known . The teaching sequence L is the one it is looked 
for, an d after it is found, the vector p will be known. 
However, the right side of inequalities, vector  , which 
represents transfer learning , is in general case not 
known. Teaching of a biological br ain does not assume 
that initial values of weights are known. O ften the task is 
to teach a learner regardless the transfer learning. 
However, because of unknown transfer learning teach ing 
process might converge in a lo nger time.  
The proof of  the Theorem ca n be expressed using a 
reasoning flow diagram as shown in Fig ure 2. The 
equations and inequalities used have been already 
described in the text.  
Note that if all thresholds in the network  are equal, 
then the transfer l earning can be expresse d as 
kq(xj) = (wk0-wq0)xj    (11) 
3.3 Modeling positive and negative 
transfer lea rning  
In this section we will address formally the following 
questions.  
Given a neural network that has be en subject to a  
learning Task1 , is it possible to find a teaching sequ ence 
L which wi ll solve the teaching Task2 regardless the 
transfer learning fr om Task1?  
 
 
 

==== Page 5 ====
Reminder of the First Paper on...   Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 295 
  
!(xi) = C k  yk(xi)|L > y m(xi)|L 
!(xj) = C q..  yq(xj)|L > y k(xj)|L 
 
yk(xi)|L = (wk|L)xi -k 
 
   (wk|L)xi - k > (wq|L)xi - q 
   (wq|L)xj - q > (wk|L)xj - k 
 
 
wk|L = wk0 + cp ixi 
 
aij := xixj 
          cpiaii – cpjaji > (wq0xi- q) – (wk0xi-k) 
          cpjajj – cpiaii > (wk0xj- k) – (wq0xj-q ) 
 
yq0(xi) := wq0xi-q 
 
qk0(xi) = y q0(xi)-yk0(xi) 
 
 c=1 
 
  aii -aji pi qk0(xi) 
          > 
  -aij ajj pj kq0(xj) 
 
Figure 2: Proof of  the Theorem 1 in a reasoning flow 
representation . 
Case of positive transfer of learning. Is it possible 
that Task1 helps achieving shorter sequence L  in Tas k2, 
than if starting fro m no previous t ransfer of learni ng?  
Case of negative transfer of learning.  Is it possible 
that Task1 will produce a longer sequence L in Task2, 
than if starting from no previous transfer of learning ?  
In order to answer those questions w e will  further 
elabor ate on the inequalities ( 7). We repeat them here for 
clarity and renumbe r them (12) for keeping the sequence : 
 aii pi - aij pj > - yk0(xi) + yq0(xi) (12.1) 
 -aji pi + ajj pj  > y k0(xj) - yq0(xj) (12.2) 
The inequalities (12) can be rewr itten to see 
explicit ly how p j depen ds on p i. To see that , we move 
terms with p i on the right  side of the inequalit ies (12) and 
we obtain the following system of inequali ties: 
 - aij pj > - aii pi - yk0(xi) + y q0(xi) (13.1) 
   ajj pj  >   aji pi + y k0(xj) - yq0(xj) (13.2) 
Now we multiply equ ation (13 .1) with -1, which 
changes the inequality sign f rom > to < . We obtain the 
following system of inequalities:  
 aij pj < a ii pi + y k0(xi) - yq0(xi) (14.1) 
 ajj pj > a ji pi + yk0(xj) - yq0(xj) . (14.2) 
where from  
 pj < (a ii / aij) pi + (yk0(xi) - yq0(xi))/a ij      (15.1)  pj > (a ji / ajj) pi + (y k0(xj) - yq0(xj))/a jj      (15.2) 
and finally  
 pj < (a ii / aij) pi + kq(xi) / aij   (16.1) 
 pj > (a ji / ajj) pi + kq(xj) / ajj  (16.2) 
These inequalities can be observed g eometrically as 
in Figure 3 . 
 
         Pj  
 
 
 
 
kq(xj)/ajj            
 
 
           kq(xi)/aij  
 
      pi  
Figure 3: Geometric interpretation of Theorem 1.  
Note that because a ij =xiTxj, the coefficie nt a ii/aij > 1, 
and the  coefficient a ji/ajj < 1. Because xi  xj those 
coefficients are never at the same time equal 1. Because 
coefficients a ii/aij > 1 and a ji/ajj < 1 are slopes of the 
boundaries of the solution region, it means because 
patterns are diff erent , xi  xj, the ang le  on Figure 3 
always exists , and the solution points for (p i, pj) inside 
the shaded region defined by the angle  always exist.  
So we can formulate the following statement.  
Theorem 2. It is always possible t o chose a teaching 
sequence L which will con tains patterns xi and xj (xi  
xj), such that aft er training with L the learner is able to 
correctly classify the patterns regardless transfer of 
learning from a previous learning task.  
The proof is given in the  previo us reasoning u sing 
equations (12)-(16).  
The teaching space in which we observe transf er 
training is an integer space . The components pi and p j are 
non-negative integers. In Fig ure 3 it is shown that only 
the integer points are solutions for correct  classification 
of xi and xj. 
4 Geomet ric interpretation of 
transfer learning : positive, 
negati ve, and tabula rasa   
From Figure 3 we can see that the solution region of the 
teaching process is a convex cone defined by two 
parameters: 1) the position of the c oordinate origin 
relative to the ver tex of the cone, and 2) the angle of the 
convex cone. The  orientation of the cone is always such 
that most of it lies within the first quadrant, although the 
vertex may be in any quadrant. We call this a positive 
convex cone.  
The angle of th e convex cone i s determined solely by 
inner products between patterns . The angle represents the 
similarity between patterns in a sense of overlapping 
features.  

==== Page 6 ====
296 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 Transfer learning is geometrically represented by the 
position of origin of  the coordinate space  (pi, pj) relat ive 
to the convex cone. That is illustrated in Figure 4.  
               pj  
 
 
                T4 
  
            T2  pi 
             T0 
 
        T-2  
        T-4 
 
Figure 4: A geometric inte rpretation of transfer learning. 
The plane ( pi, p j), the conve x cone, an d various 
coordinate origins representing trans fer learning from a 
previous learning task.   
As Figure 4 shows, if the peak of the convex cone is 
in the coordinate origin (coordinate sy stem T 0), then 
there is no transfer learning . The learner  starts from 
tabula rasa initial conditions . It means that the memory 
values are all equal , for example all zero. However they 
are not necessary zero, they need only to be all eq ual 
(homogenous initi al conditions).  In this condition a 
learning process must take  place for both patterns (or 
lessons) xi and xj in order the learner to correctly 
recognize th ose patterns .  
If the coordinate origin is inside the solution region 
(coordina te system T 4) the lea rner has positi ve transfer 
learning.  There is no need of addit ional lear ning. The 
previous learning is enough for the correct recognition of 
the patterns .  
If the  coordinate origi n is in region sym metrically 
opposite the solution regio n, (negative convex c one), it is 
an example of negative transfer learning . Coordina te 
system T-4 is such a case. Both patterns xi and xj have 
been previously , in Task1 , classified in to classes which 
are incorrect according to the new Task2. So the new 
learning process must inc lude both patte rns. The learning 
process will be longer than i n case of tabula rasa 
condition.  
If the coordinate system is in the area outside the 
positive and negative convex cones (examples T 2 and T -2 
coordinate systems), then there are situations in whi ch 
for one patt ern there is positive transfer learning and for  
the other  is negative.  
5 Defining an index o f transfer 
learning in a neural network  
Based on the geometrical interpretation of transfer 
learning in Fig ure 4 we will now defi ne an index  of 
transf er learning , a numerical representation of transfer 
learning. Measure of  negative transfer as well as 
transferability mea sure are emphasized in contemporary 
transfer learning research (Tan et al. 2018 ). The index 
which we will discuss here is proposed in ( Bozinovski  
and Fulgosi  1976).   The mathematical measure of tra nsfer lear ning was 
introduced using the following reasoning. Observe th e 
segments the lines in Figure 4  define inter cepting with 
ordinate p j. For T 0 coordinate system both l ines have 
intercept 0 . For coordinat e system T 4, one intercept is 
positive (for the  boundary line p j > pi) and the other is 
negative  (for the boundary line p j < p i). For coordinate 
system T 2 one intercept is posit ive and the other is 
negative. For T 1 both intercepts are negati ve. For T 3 both 
intercepts are positive. Note that also in Fig ure 3 abov e, 
it is shown a case of both positive intercepts. So we will 
only observe the sign of the intercepts, positive, negative, 
or zero, and w e will define index of tra nsfer learning.   
Note that the inte rcepts are defined as kq(xi)/aij and 
kq(xj)/ajj  and co nsequently their signs are defined as 
sign(kq(xi)/aij) and sign( kq(xj)/ajj) where sign( ) is a 
function that gives 1 for positive, 0 for zero, and -1 for 
negativ e argument. Now we ca n define a n index, a 
measure of transfer learning on the basis  of signs of 
intercepts of the boundary lines for patterns xi and xj. 
TL(kq(xi), kq(xj)) = 3sign (kq(xi) -sign(kq(xj)       (17) 
According to this index , if both signs a re pos itive 
then TL = 2. That corresp onds to a coordinate system T 2 
in Fig. 4. If both are neg ative, then TL  = -2 and that 
corresponds to the coordinate system T -2 is Fig 4. If both 
are zero, then TL=0, which corresponds to coordinate 
system T 0 in Fig. 4. If sign (kq(xi) =1 an d sign(kq(xj) = -
1, then TL = 4 which corresponds to coordin ate system 
T4 in Fig. 4.  
Note that the index TL considers all the integer 
values in the interval [ -4,+4]. Figure 5 shows the TL 
values and their geometric interpretation.  
 
 
     4 
 
      1    3 
  -2 
   0  
    +2 
  -3    
       - 4     -1 
 
Figure 5: A geometric interpretation of index TL, a 
numerical index of transfer learning . It shows the values 
of the regions of the (p i, pj) plane where a learner finds 
itself af ter the first learning task Task1, and facing the 
second  learning task  Task2 .  
The in troduced index of transfer learning shows 
position of the coordinate origin in the plane (p i, pj) 
relative to the peak of the vertex in side which is a 
solut ion of the patt ern recognition problem. It shows 
where in the (p i, pj) plane is the starting point t o learn 
Task2 by a learner with transfer learning from previous 
Task1. From Fig. 5 we can give following interpretations 
for transfer l earning index TL:  
 If TL = 4 the lea rner correctly classifies both 
patterns, without need fo r additional learning. It is a 
positive transfer  learning  from a previous Task1 .  

==== Page 7 ====
Reminder of the First Paper on...   Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 297 
  If TL = 1 or 3 the learner recognizes one 
pattern but is undecided about the ot her. The coordinate 
origin l ies on a  boundary line of inequalities.  For 
example, if TL=3 the  coordinate origin lies on th e right 
boundary line of the positive convex cone. In such a 
case, if the convex cine angle is not too small. then only 
one presentatio n of the pattern xj in a teaching tr ial is 
enough that the learner correctly classify both p atterns.  
 If TL = 0 the lear ner is undecided about both 
patterns . There is no transfer of a previous learning, the 
learner is in tabula rasa condition. . 
 If TL=  - 4 the leaner incorrec tly classifies both 
patterns. It is example of negative transfer learni ng. 
 If TL=  2 the learner co rrectly classifies one 
pattern but incorrectly the other one. In this case there is 
a transfer learning, positive for one pattern but n egative 
for other one .  
 The conside red index of transfer learning (17) 
can be normalized fo r value between -1 and  1 if the right 
side of equation (17) is divid ed by 4.  
6 Search for a learning solution in 
case of negative transfer learning   
To illustrate further the learning pr ocess including  
transfer learning, we will consider the search for a 
learning solution in case of n egative transfer learning. 
Figure 6 shows such an illustration.   
First let us note that the orientation  of the solution 
convex cone in space is regardless  of the transfer 
learning . The solution cone orientation depends solely on  
the considered patterns  and their mutual position on a 
medium they are shown. If the patterns are digital image s 
on a binary retina, then their mutual overlapping aij = a ji 
and self ov erlapping a ii and ajj will define the solution 
region. As example , imag ine image patterns  E, T, an d F 
on the retina of 7x5 binary sensors.  
The considered learning Task 2 in Fig ure 6 can have 
different coordinate origins, due to a tran sfer learning. Conseq uently, a learn ing process will have different 
trajectory i n the T ask2 teaching space,  depending o n 
transfer learning from T ask1.  
It can be seen from Fig ure 6 that due to a negative 
transfer learning it is possible that a teaching  sequence L 
never finds a  pattern classi fication solution, as is the case 
with learning trajecto ry starting with initial condition A. 
The other cases o f negative transfer learning can be 
compensated with  carefully chosen teaching sequence  L, 
as shown with teaching sequences B, C, and D.  In case  
of initial condition B, it is enough that only the patt ern xi 
is shown several times until a solution point is found. On 
case of initial condition C both patterns must be shown 
for correct classification. In case of  initial condition D, it 
is shown that a  teaching sequence containing equal 
number of xi and xj will eventually reach a solution 
region. However, one can observe that also a sequence 
containing only xj will eventually reach the solution 
region.  
7 Multi-class, m ulti-template  task  
Pattern classific ation usually assumes several template 
patterns for each  class to be included in the teaching 
process. In the test task (or in exploitation task) there 
might be patterns that are not shown as template patterns.  
In this s ection we will discus s two topics . First is 
how the model given by Theorem 1 applies in case  of 
several templates for a class, and second is how transfer 
learning is represented in the synaptic weights in an 
artificial neural network. As opposite to natura l neural 
networks whe re weights are not observable, in artificial 
neural networks usually it is assumed that the synaptic 
weights are observable .  
Consider a task in which three patterns are to be 
classified into two classes: x1, x2C1, x3  C2. The two 
neurons associated with  the two classe s have weight 
vectors w1 and w2, and thresholds 1 and 2 respectively.  
The maximum selector layer  for each presented pattern 
computes the following inequalities:  
(x1C1): w1x1 –1 > w2x1 –2   
(x2C1): w1x2 –1 > w2x2 –2                             (18) 
(x3C2): w2x3 –2 > w1x3 –1   
In case of transfer lear ning, where weights have 
initial values w0i   (i=1,2) we have  
(x1/L): ( w01+p1x1+p2x2)x1 - 1 > (w02 + p 3x3)x1 - 2  
(x2/L): ( w01+p1x1+p2x2)x2 - 1 > (w02+p3x3)x2 - 2     (19) 
(x3/L): (w02+p3x3)x3    - 2 > (w01+p1x1+p2x2)x3 - 1 . 
After rearrangement, and  introducing w0kq = w0k-w0q 
and kq = k - q, where k , q  {1, 2} and kq, we obtain 
matrix representation of the classification  problem which 
includes transfer we ights  
(x1/L):  a11 a21  -a31    p1   w021    0      0      x1    12  
(x2/L):  a 12  a22 -a32     p2    >  0      w021   0      x2 + 12   (20) 
(x3/L): -a13 -a23 a33     p3  0      0    w012     x3     21  
The shaded areas are diagonal sub-matrices o f 
classes. Each class sub-matrix ha s number of rows (and 
 
Figure 6: Some learning trajectories in teaching 
space of Task2, due to transfer lear ning from a 
Task1 ( Bozinovski  1981) . 

==== Page 8 ====
298 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 columns) equal to number of templat es for that class.  In 
case of inequalities (20 ), the first class contains two 
templates and the second contains one template pattern. 
From this case study we can ge neralize the trans fer 
learning model  for a multi -class and multi -template per 
class case as  
(X/L): Ap > W0X +                   (21) 
where X ={x1,..,xN}is the set of patterns which should be 
learned in the second task with the curriculum sequence 
L.  
Note th at the mathematica l m odel of tran sfer 
learning (21 ) divides the  left side of relation to be a 
teacher's side , and right side a learner's side .  
At the teacher side are similarity matrix A and 
distribution vector p showing how many time s each 
pattern appear ed in a teaching t rial of the cur riculum L. 
Matrix A shows that what  matters in the teach ing process 
are not the patterns themselves but rather their 
correlations, inner products, which can be interpreted as 
similarities.  
At the learner side, W0 represents  difference of 
initial conditions  of the memory due to transfer learning, 
X is the vector  of template vectors, a matrix contain ing 
patterns to be classified, and  represents difference 
between thresholds of neurons representing classes. Note 
that the matrix W0 contains blo cks showing which 
template is assigne d to which class.  
As pointed befo re, the space p  = (p1,..,p N) is an 
integer space. Dealing with neural network learning  is 
actually an integer programming problem . We are 
interested in the most effici ent training, and we are 
looking for a training sequence L of the minimal length. 
So we l ook for a criterion   
p1+p2+...+p N = min                   (22) 
Such a criterion will observe the appearance of 
patterns only in a teaching trial. If we are interested in 
minimal seque nce that includes test trials, then the 
optimality criterion is  
(p1+q1 ) + (p 2+q2) +...+(p N+qN) = min       (23 ) 
where q i is number of appearances of the pattern xi in a 
test trial, which does not change the memory of the 
learner, but affects the length of the training seq uence L.   
8 Experimental investigation on 
transfer learni ng  
Experimental investigation on transfer learning was 
carried out in the period 1976 -1981. Initial experiments 
was with a dataset  containing images of letters A, B, E, 
F, and T taken from the termin al IBM29 card puncher. 
Those experiments were carried ou t on the computer 
IBM 1130. Later experiments were carried out with two 
datasets. One dataset contained 40 images, consisting of 
26 letters, 10 numbers, and 4 special symbols from t he 
terminal IBM29. The other dataset can be described as  
Computer T erminal s dataset, consisting of 3x26= 78 
images, taken from three computer terminals : IBM29 
card puncher, VR14 video screen , and VT5 0 video screen. The experiments were carried out on a co mput er 
VAX/VMS. Figure 7 shows the Computer Terminals 
dataset. As can be se en, the letters of the three terminals 
are mostly identical on an image with resolution 7x5, 
with differences in letters A, B, D, G, J, M, N, O, V, and 
W. 
 
 IBM29   VR14   VT50  
Figure 7: The dataset Co mputer Terminals used in 
experi mental investigation . 
8.1 An experiment in tabula rasa condition , 
showing influence of pattern similarity  
Here we will show an experiment in tabula rasa learning , 
to see the influence of s imilarity (over lapping pattern 
features) on the learning process. Consi der the patterns 
E, T, F, shown in Fig. 7. They are the same for al l 
considered terminals . Figure 8 shows the search through 
the (p E, pT, pF ) space that th e learning process performs.  
 
Figure 8: Learning trajectory in case of tab ula rasa 
learner, learning similar patterns E and F, together with 
the pattern T (Bozinovski  1981, 1985b) . 
As Fig. 8 shows, t he problem is the distinction 
between the patterns  F and E.  The convex con e angle is 
narrow, and it is possible that in some searc h steps the 
cone does not contain an integer point. The search for an 
integer solution is what makes necessary  to repeat 
images E and F several times until they are distinguished 
by the  learner.   
This experiment emphasizes the p roblem of feature 
overlappin g and the problem of one image included in 
another image. To emphasize the image -subimage 
relation, a measure of similarity between patterns  is 
introduced in (Bozinovski and Fulgosi 1976). The 
followi ng index   

==== Page 9 ====
Reminder of the First Paper on...   Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 299 
 SL(xi, xj) = xiTxj/min{ xiTxi, xjTxj} (24) 
has value s between 0 and 1. If SL = 0 the solution 
convex cone covers the entire first quadrant of the 
teaching space  (p i, pj). If 0  < SL < 1, the convex cone 
includes the line p j=pi. If S L = 1, one of t he cone 
boundaries is the  line p j = p i.  
Such a measure is used to predict the length of the 
teaching sequence L. and with that the efficiency of the 
training.  
8.2 Experimental investigation in positive  
and negative transfer learning  
Experiments  show n here are  carried out during 19 76-
1978 on a IBM1130 computer. Table I shows the  results  
of the transfer learn ing experiments which show both 
positive and negative transfer. (Bozinovski et a l. 1977 , 
Bozinovski 1978 ). 
Task 1  
Images  Task 2  
Images  Task  2  
Teaching se quence 
No transfer lea rning, tabula rasa  
 A, B  AB. 
 A, B, T  ABT.  
 E, F EFFEFEFEF.  
 E, F, T  EFFEFEFEFTTT.  
Negative transfer learning  
E, F A, B  ABABABAB.  
Positive transfer learning  
A, B, T  E, F, T  EFT.  
Table 1: Experiments in transfer learning. Cases of tabula 
rasa, negative,  and positive transfer learning . 
In presenting the results of the experiments with 
transfer learning here we introduce the notation L D2/D1, 
meaning training sequence of Task2 , trained with  a set of 
patte rns D2, after the Task1 in which the learner is  
trained with a set of patterns  D1. For a tabula rasa 
training, we use notation L D2/. 
Experiment with no transfer learning. As can be seen 
from the presented experiments, learning the patterns 
E,T, and F with no transfer learning  need s the teaching 
seque nce L ETF/ = EFFEFEFEFTTT. The length of the 
sequence is due to similarity between E and F.  
Experiment showing  positive transfer learning. If the 
neural network is previously exposed to the Task1  where 
it learn ed to recognize A and B, and after that is exposed 
to Ta sk2 to learn E,  T, and F, then the teaching sequence 
for Task2 is LEFT/ABT  = EFT. The teaching sequence for 
learning E,  T, F in this case is shorter than in case of 
tabula rasa . That is  experimental evidence of positive 
transfer learning.  
Expe riment showin g negative transfer learning.  If 
the neural network is previously exposed to a Task1 to 
learn E and F , and after that in Task2 to learn A and B , 
the teaching sequence for learning A and  B is L AB/EF = 
ABABABAB . It is longer than in case of lear ning A and 
B in tabula rasa condition , LAB/ = AB.  That is an 
experimental evidence of negative transfer learning.  8.3 Application of transfer learning   
Here we show results of experiments carried out during 
1980 -1981 on a VAX/VMS computer  (Bozinovski 
1981) . The experimen ts consider real application, 
learning to recognize letters from computer terminals . 
Consider the dataset Computer Terminals from 
Figure 7. The question we would like to answer 
experime ntally is: If i n the Task1 we teach a learner to 
recogni ze the letters from the terminal VR14, how faster 
the learner will be able to learn in Task2 to recognize the 
letters from the terminal IBM29, comparatively to 
learning from tabula rasa condition.  
In these experimen ts we use d the following teaching 
strate gy (Bozinovski 1 981) named perceptron teaching 
strategy :  
Procedure PerceptronTeachingStrategy  
iteration: teachflag = 0 ; 
 i:=0; n=26 ; 
 while i < n do  
  i:=i+1  
  grade = test(xi); 
  if grade = 'incorrec t"  
   then teach(xi), teachflag=1 ; 
 endwhile ; 
 if tea chflag = 1 goto i teration ; 
end. 
This strategy performs test trials on all n=26 images , 
and only when needed , a teaching trial is applied for a 
particular image . After such an iteration (or epoch) , 
anoth er iteration ta kes place, and so on, until no teachin g 
trial appeared i n an iteration  (teachflag=0) . That means 
there were only test trials in the last iteration and the 
learner now recognizes all the patterns correctly.  
Using this strategy  applied to the set of letters  
IBM29, in case of tabula rasa , it gives the 9 iterations  as 
shown in Fig ure 9. 
 
Figure 9: Teaching sequence of learning the set of letters 
IBM29 with no transfer learning . 
With T* we denote the solution teaching seq uence  in 
which only the teaching trials appear. With |T*| we 
denote its length, in trials . With C* we denote teaching 
sequence containing both teaching and test trials, and 
with |C*| its length.  For the experiment on Fig. 9 we 
obtained  
|T*|IBM29 / = 135  and | C*|IBM29 / = 395.   
If before learning the set IBM 29 in Task2, the set 
VR14 was learned i n Task1, then in Task2 the teaching 
process completes in 4 iterations, with the teaching 
sequence shown in Fig. 10.  

==== Page 10 ====
300 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 
 
Figure 10: The tea ching sequence in case when set 
IBM29 is leaned, providing that previou sly was learned 
the set VR14 . 
In the experiment shown in Fig. 10 we obtained  
|T*|IBM29 /VR14 = 48 and | C*|IBM29 /VR14 =178.   
The experiment show n in Figure 9 and 10 shows a n 
application of positive tra nsfer learning. We obtained 
shorter training sequence  
|C*| IBM29 /VR14 =178  <  |C*| IBM29 / = 395.  
The teaching time is 178/395 = 0.45  of the tabula 
rasa teaching time , and the speed of learning increases 
1/0.45 = 2.2 times.  
When we carried out an experime nt of learning the 
set VT50 if previously learned the set VR14 , the result 
was 
|T*| VT50/ =207,   |T*| VT50/VR14  = 43,  
|C*| VT50/VR14  =199  <  |C*| VT50/ = 545  
The transfer learning teaching time is 199/545 = 0.36  
of the tabula rasa teaching t ime, and the sp eed of learning 
increases 1/0.36 = 2.8 times.  
This appli cation s hows the reaso n of use of transfer 
learning. If you have a knowledge of a dataset 
classification stored in a neural network in Task1, then 
transfer that knowledge to a different  task which lea rns 
classification of a similar dataset. The training ti me will 
be shorter.  
Here in this application subsection we give also the 
result of learning a dataset IBM29(40) of 40 images, 
defined as  
IBM29(40) = IBM2 9{+, -, =, /}{0,1,... ,9} 
starting with tabula  rasa condition.  
The result we obtained is : 10 iteratio ns,  
|T*| IBM29 (40)/ = 204 and |C*| IBM29 (40)/ =604.   
This is an example of a 1981 machine learning 
experiment with 40 patterns (Bozinovski 1981).   
9 Transfer learning research  after 
1986 
The main focu s of this paper is to give a review of the 
initial work on transfer learning  in neural networks  
which took place between 1972  (Bozinovski 1972) and 
1985 (Bozinovski 1985 a, 1985b) . To the best of our 
knowledge durin g that time period, there w as no other 
work on transfer learning in neural networks. That was 
the period when neural n etworks were not the main topic 
in Artificial I ntelligence , due to the book of Minsky and 
Papert (1969) which pointed out some limitations of 
perceptron type neural networks. Altho ugh during 1970's 
and 1980's there were works on multila yered neural 
network s (e.g. Fukushima, 1975, 1980) , the interest in 
multilayered neural networks  significantly increased after 
1986 , due to appearance of the book by the Parallel 
Distr ibuted Processin g (PDP) Group (Rumelhart  et al. 
1986). Th at book reignit ed the interest i n neural 
networks,  and after some time , the interest in transfer learning  in neural networks . Here we will give a short 
review on the works on transfer learning after 1 986.  
Early wor ks after 1986 used other terms to describe 
transfer lear ning. One such term was "sequential 
learning" , where negativ e transfer learning was covered 
with the term "interference" (McCloskey and Cohen, 
1989). Other term s used w ere "adaptive gen eralization " 
(Sharkey and Sharkey, 1992 ), 'learning by learning" 
(Naik and Mammone, 1993), and "lifelong learning" 
(Thrun and Mitchell, 1993) .  
In 1991 the term transfer learning related to neural 
networks reappeared in literature. That was the work of 
Pratt. Mostow, and  Kamm (1991). That paper  introduced 
a framework of trans fer learning , poin ting out various 
types of transfer learning . That framework was also 
descr ibed in the work of Pratt  (1993).  The framework is 
shown in Figure 11.  
 
expert        symbol ic  
         representation  
 
knowledge  
extraction   insertion  
 
     source  literal      target    additional  trained  
   network  transfer   network   training      network  
 
direct transfer  
 
   multiple source transfer  
problem  
decomposition       subnet1      subnet2 
 
Figure 11. A general fra mework for transfer learning  
(adopted from Pr att et al. , 1991) . 
As can be seen from Fig. 11 , the gen eral framework 
for transfer learning proposed in 1991 include s four  types 
of transfer .  
One is named  literal transfer learning,  and it is the 
transfer learn ing we used in our work (Bozinovski and 
Fulgo si, 1976), and is reviewed in this paper .  
The second type is a transfer learning which uses 
direct intervention in the weights of a neural network. 
We cal l this direct memory access (DMA) type transfer  
of knowl edge. It is an intervention in a neural netwo rk 
knowledge without a process of incremental learning. 
The wei ghts change is named weights perturbation . An 
example of direct weight change  described in (Pratt at al. 
1991 ) is w = w+rw, where r is a random numb er between 
(-0.6, 0.6). Weights perturbation method was also used in 
the work (Agarwal  et al. 1992)  
The third type uses problem decomposition into 
subproblems , represented by subnetwork s, and training 
the subnetworks for the subproblems, and then insert th e 
subproblem knowledge into the target networ k.  
The fourth  type of transfer is indirect transfer , where 
the weight -based knowledge  is extracted, then it is 
represented as a rule -based knowledge, then  it is update d 
using rule based representation, and then it is insert ed in 
a target neural network  as weights -based knowledge.  

==== Page 11 ====
Reminder of the First Paper on...   Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 301 
 A review of transfer learning in t he early 1990's is 
given by Pratt and Jennings  (1996). A review by Pan and 
Yang  (2010)  covers the period after that.  Tan et al. 
(2018) review the deep  transfer learning.  
10 Discussi on and c onclusio n 
The con tribution of this paper is a  review of a n early 
period of transfer learning research , a period which was 
not known to the current r esearchers in t ransfer learning. 
In current history part of transfer learning , as covered by 
Wikipedia >Transfer Lea ning >History (2020) there is 
information which suggests that the beginning of transfer  
learning research is in 1993. This paper gives 
infor mation on the transfer learning research during 
1970's and early 1980's .  
In this discussion let us mention that the  original 
1976 paper was published in the Proceedings of the 
symposium Informatica 1976, which took place in Bled, 
Slovenia, one year before  appearance of the first issue of 
the journal Informatica, in 1977. The paper was 
published in Croatian , not in Engl ish, which is the main 
reason why  the paper was not known for a rather long 
time.  
In the review of the period 1990 - 2000  given in this 
paper, we can noti ce that the research during that period 
was focused  on forms that transfer learning can take , and 
directions it can go. The fundamental conce pts like a 
measure of transfer learning was not covered. The 
interest of fundamental notions was poi nted out again in 
2000s ( Tan et al, 2018) . That relates the research in  
1970's to t he contemporary research in trans fer learning.  
Let us mention that the application of transfer 
learning with real datasets of images described here , such 
as Computer Termina ls dataset cont aining 3x 26 letters 
and the IBM29(40) containing 40 characters on a matrix  
7x5 is an early use of datasets of characters in machine  
learning . An example of a character dataset used in 
contemporary research (e.g. Wang et al. 2019)  contains 9 
characters (dig its 0 to 9) on a matrix 28x28, with variety 
of templates .  
In conclusion, this paper extends the know ledge in 
transfer learning with a relation between the pioneering 
work (in 1970's and early  1980's ) and the current 
research on transfer lea rning, giving a lso a review of the 
period in early 1990's. Important pa rt of that relation is 
the reminder of the theoretical 1976 paper, which 
presented the first mathematical and geometrical 
modeling, and a measure of transfer learning . The 
experimental work during 197 6-1981 with datasets 
representing images of characters a lso relates to the 
contemporary research in machine  learning.   
11 Acknowledgement  
The author wishes to thank professor Gjorgi Cupona 
from Mathematical Institute with Numeric Center of the 
University of S kopje, who  in 1968 encouraged the author 
to prepare a ma tural thesis from the Glushkov's book. He 
also wishes to thank professor Ante Santic from 
Electrical Engineering Department of University of Zagreb, who in 1972 allowed author's work on  
perceptrons. Professor Ante Fulgosi from Psychology 
department of Univ ersity of Zagreb was coauthor of the 
first published paper on transfer learning in 1976. The 
author also wishes to thank professors Michael Arbib and 
Nico Spinelli  who enabled him to wo rk on the resea rch 
related to this paper at the Computer and Informatio n 
Sciences (COINS) Department of the Universi ty of 
Massachu setts at Amherst for the period 1980 -81, and to 
thank professor Andrew Barto for the period 1995 -96. 
The work at University of  Massachusetts in both periods 
was supported by Fulbright grants. Part of th e research 
reported here was supported b y a Sigma Xi grant -in-aid 
in 1981. The author also wishes to thank the reviewers of 
this paper for their valuable comments.  
12 References  
[1] A. Agarwal, R. Mamm one, and D. Naik  (1992)  An 
on-line training algorithm to  overcome catastrophic 
forgetting. In Intelli gence Engineering Systems 
through Artificial Neural Networks. volume 2, 
pages 239 -244. Th e American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers, AS~IE P ress. 
[2] J. Baxter , R. Caruana, T . Mitchell, L . Pratt, D . 
Silver,  S. Thrun  (organizers) Learning to Learn: 
Knowledge Co nsolidation  and Transfer in Inductive 
Systems , NIPS *95 Post -conference w orkshop, Vail, 
Colorado http ://socrates.acadiau.ca/courses/ comp/  
dsilver/NIPS95ltl. nips95.workshop.pdf  
[3] S. Bozinovski  (1972) Perceptrons: Tr aining in 
patte rn recognition. (original in Croatian : 
Perceptroni i obucavanje u prepoznavanju oblika ) 
unpublished s tudent scientific competition paper, 
University of Zagreb  
[4] S. Bozinovs ki (1974).  Perceptrons and possibility 
of simulation of a teaching proc ess ( original in  
Croatian : Perceptroni i mog ucnost simuliranja 
procesa obucavanja ), unpublished M.Sc. thesis, 
Electrical Engineering Department, University of 
Zagreb  
[5] S. Bozinovski, A. Fulgosi  (1976) . The influence of 
pattern similarity and transfer of lea rning upon 
training of a base perceptron B2 . (original i n 
Croatian : Utjecaj slicnosti likova i transfera ucenja 
na obucavanje baznog perceptrona B2 ), Proc. 
Symp. Informatica 3-121-5, Bl ed. 
[6] S. Bozinovs ki, A. Santic, A. Fulgosi  (1977). 
Normal teaching strate gy in pair -association in the 
case teacher:hu man-learner:machine.  (original in 
Croatian : Normalna strategija obicavanja u  
obucanju asocojaci je parova u slucaju 
ucitelj:covjek -ucenik:mas ina), Proc. Con f. ETAN , 
21:IV -341-346, Banja Luka , [available online].  
[7] S. Bozinovski (1978). Experiments with non-
biological systems teaching.  (original in 
Macedonian : Eksperimenti na obucuvanje na 
nebioloski sistemi ) Proc. Conf ETAN, 22 :IV-371-
379, Zadar  [available onli ne]. 
[8] S. Bozinovski  (1981). Teaching space: A 
representat ion concept for adaptive pattern 

==== Page 12 ====
302 Informatica  44 (2020 ) 291–302 S. Bozinovski  
 classificati on. COINS Technical Report, University 
of Massachusetts at Amherst,  No 81 -28 [available 
online: UM -CS-1981 -028.pdf]  
[9] S. Bozinovski (1985a). A daptation and t raining: A 
viewpoint. Automatika 26  (3-4) 137 -144 
[10] S. Boz inovski (1985b). A representation theorem 
for linear pattern classifier training. IEEE 
Tran sactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
15(1) : 159 -161 
[11] S. Bozinovski  (1995). Neuro -genetic a gents and a 
structural theory of self -reinforcement learning 
systems . CMPSCI Technical Report 95 -107, 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst  [available 
online : UM -CS-1995 -107.pdf ]. 
[12] K. Fukushima (1975) Cognitron: A self organizing 
multilayered neural networ k. Biological 
Cybernetics 20: 121-136  
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF0 0342633  
[13] K. Fukushima (1980) Neocognitron: A self -
organizing neural network model for a mechanism 
of pattern recognition unaffected by shift  in 
position. Biological Cybernetics 36 : 193 -202, doi: 
10.1007/BF003442 51. 
[14] V. Glushkov (1967) Introduction to Cybern etics 
(original in Serbian: Uvod u Kibernetiku, translated 
from Russian, published by Zavod za izdavanje 
udzbenika Srbije)  
[15] I. Goodfellow, Y . Be ngio, A. Co urville (2016) 
Deep Learning,  MIT Press , DOI: 10.1007/s10710 -
017-9314 -z 
[16] M. McCloskey, N. Cohen (1989) Catastrophic 
interf erence in connectio nist networks: the 
sequential learning problem. The Psyc hology of 
Learning and Motivation, 24  DOI: 10.1016/S0079 -
7421(08)60536 -8 
[17] M. Minsky, S. Papert (1969) Perceptrons.  The MI T 
Press, 1969  
[18] D. Naik, R. Mammone (1993)  Learning by 
learning in neura l networks, In R. Mammone (ed.) 
Artificial Ne ural Networks for Speech and Vision , 
Chapman and Hall, London.  
[19] S. Pan, Q. Yang  (2010). A survey on transfer 
learning. IEEE Transactions on K nowledge and 
Data Engineering, 22 (10), 1345 – 1359  
DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2009.191  
[20] L. Pratt, J. Mostow, C. Kamm (1991). Direct 
transfer of learned information among neural 
networks. In Proceedings of the Ninth Na tional 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI -91), p.  
584-589, Anaheim, CA.  
[21] L. Pratt (1993). Di scriminability -based transfer 
between neural networks. In NIPS Conference: 
Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 5  Morgan Kaufm ann Publishers.  pp. 204-
211 
[22] L. Pratt, B. Jennings (1996) A survey of tr ansfer 
between connectionist n etworks, Connec tion 
Science 8 (2) 163 -184. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/095400996116866  
[23] F. Rosenblatt (19 58). The percep tron: a 
probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain. Psychological Revi ew 65 : 
386-408. DOI: 10.1037/h0042519  
[24] F. Rosenblatt (1962). Principles of Neurodynamics . 
Spartan Books . DOI:10.2307/ 1419730  
[25] D. Rumelhart, J. McClelland, and the  PDP Group 
(1986) . Parallel Distributed Processing . MIT Press.  
[26] N. Sharkey and A. Sharkey (1992) Adaptive 
generalisation and the transfer of knowledge, 
Proceedings of the Second Irish Neural Networks 
Conference, Belfast.  
[27] C. Tan, F. Sun, T. Kong , W. Zhang, C . Yang, and 
C. Liu  (2018). A Survey on Deep Transfer 
Learning, arXiv:1808.01974v1 [cs.LG] 6 Aug 2018.  
DOI: 10.1007/978 -3-030-01424 -7_27  
[28] S. Th run, T. Mi tchell (1993) Lifelong robot 
learning, Techni cal Report IAI -TR-93-7, Institute 
for Informatics III, University of Bonn.  
https ://doi.org/10.1 016/0921 -8890(95)00004 -Y 
[29] H. Wang, C. Li, X. Zhen, W. Ya ng, B. Zhang 
(2019) Gaussian Transfer Convolutional Neural 
Networks, IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics 
in Computational Intelligence 3  (5) 360 -368. 
DOI:10.1109/TETCI.2018.2881225  
[30] K. Weiss, T. Khosh goftaar, D. Wang (2016) A 
survey of transfer learning. Journal of  Big Data 3 :9. 
DOI: 10.1186/s40537 -016-0043 -6 
[31] Wikipedia > Transfer Learning  (October  2020) 
https://en .wikipedia.org /wiki/Transfer_l earning  

