==== Page 1 ====
HAL Id: hal-01796729
https://hal.science/hal-01796729v2
Submitted on 13 Sep 2019
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in F rance or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Residual Networks as Flows of Diffeomorphisms
F rançois Rousseau, Lucas Drumetz, Ronan F ablet
T o cite this version:
F rançois Rousseau, Lucas Drumetz, Ronan F ablet. Residual Networks as Flows of Diffeomorphisms.
Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision, 2019, ￿10.1007/s10851-019-00890-3￿. ￿hal-01796729v2￿

==== Page 2 ====
Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms
Fran cois Rousseau Lucas Drumetz 
Ronan Fablet
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract This paper addresses the understanding and characterization of
residual networks (ResNet), which are among the state-of-the-art deep learn-
ing architectures for a variety of supervised learning problems. We focus on
the mapping component of ResNets, which map the embedding space towards
a new unknown space where the prediction or classication can be stated
according to linear criteria. We show that this mapping component can be
regarded as the numerical implementation of continuous ows of dieomor-
phisms governed by ordinary dierential equations. Especially, ResNets with
shared weights are fully characterized as numerical approximation of exponen-
tial dieomorphic operators. We stress both theoretically and numerically the
relevance of the enforcement of dieormorphic properties and the importance
of numerical issues to make consistent the continuous formulation and the dis-
cretized ResNet implementation. We further discuss the resulting theoretical
and computational insights on ResNet architectures.
Keywords Residual Network DieomorphismDynamical systems
1 Introduction
Deep learning models are the reference models for a wide range of machine
learning problems. Among deep learning (DL) architectures, Residual net-
works (also called ResNets) have become state-of-the-art ones [15,16] . Ex-
perimental evidences emphasize critical aspects in the specication of these
F. Rousseau
IMT Atlantique
Technop^ ole Brest Iroise, 29239 Brest, France
E-mail: francois.rousseau@imt-atlantique.fr
R. Fablet and L. Drumetz
IMT Atlantique

==== Page 3 ====
2 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
architectures for instance in terms of network depths or combination of ele-
mentary layers as well as in their stability and genericity. The understanding
and the characterization of ResNets and more widely DL architectures from a
theoretical point of view remains a key issue despite recent advances for CNN
[24].
Interesting insights on ResNets have recently been presented in [25,12,
31] from an ordinary/partial dierential equation (ODE/PDE) point of view.
ResNets can be regarded as numerical schemes of dierential equations. Es-
pecially, in [25], this PDE-driven setting stresses the importance of numerical
stability issues depending on the selected ResNet conguration. Interestingly,
it makes explicit the interpretation of the ResNet architecture as a depth-
related evolution of an input space towards a new space where the prediction
of the expected output (for instance classes) is solved according to a linear
operator. This interpretation is also pointed out in [13] and discussed in terms
of Riemannian geometry.
In this work, we deepen this analogy between ResNets and deformation
ows to relate ResNet and registration problems [27], especially dieomorphic
registration [30,5,3,2]. Our contribution is three-fold: (i) we restate ResNet
learning as the learning of a continuous and integral dieomorphic opera-
tor and investigate dierent solutions, especially the exponential operator of
velocity elds [2], to enforce dieomorphic properties; (ii) we make explicit
the interpretation of ResNets as numerical approximations of the underlying
continuous dieomorphic setting governed by ordinary dierential equations
(ODE); (iii) we provide theoretical and computational insights on the speci-
cation of ResNets and on their properties.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 relates ResNets to dieomor-
phic registrations. We introduce in Section 3 the proposed dieomorphism-
based learning framework. Section 4 reports experiments. Our key contribu-
tions are further discussed in Section 5.
2 From ResNets to dieomorphic registrations
ResNets [15,16] have become state-of-the-art deep learning architectures for
a variety of problems, including for instance image recognition [15] or super-
resolution [18]. This architecture has been proposed in order to explore per-
formance of very deep models, without training degradation accuracy when
adding layers. ResNets proved to be easier to optimize and made it possible
to learn very deep models (up to hundreds layers).
As illustrated in Fig.1, ResNets can be decomposed into three main build-
ing blocks:
{the embedding block which aims to extract relevant features from the input
variables for the targeted task (such as classication or regression). In [15],
the block consists in a set of 64 convolution lters of size 7 7 followed by
non-linear activation function such as ReLU.

==== Page 4 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 3
Fig. 1 A schematic view of ResNet architecture [15], decomposed into three blocks: embed-
ding, mapping and prediction. 'conv' means convolution operations followed by non linear
activations, and 'fc' means fully connected layer.
{the mapping block, which aims to incrementally map the embedding space
to a new unknown space, in which the data are, for instance, linearly separa-
ble in the classication case. In [15], this block consists in a series of residual
units. A residual unit is dened as y=F(x;fWig) +xwhere the function
Fis the residual mapping to be learned. In [15], F(x) =W2(W1x) where
denotes the activation function (biases are omitted for simplifying nota-
tions). The operation F(x) +xis performed by a shortcut connection and
element-wise addition.
{the prediction block, which addresses the classication or regression steps
from the mapped space to the output space. This prediction block is ex-
pected to involve linear models. In [15], this step is performed with a fully
connected layer.
In this work, we focus on the denition and characterization of the map-
ping block in ResNets. The central idea of ResNets is to learn the additive
residual function Fsuch that the layers in the mapping block are related by
the following equation:
xl+1=xl+F(xl;Wl) (1)
where xlis the input feature to the lthresidual unit. Wlis a set of weights
(and biases) associated with the lthresidual unit. In [16], it appears that
such formulation exhibits interesting backward propagation properties. More
specically, it implies that the gradient of a layer does not vanish even when
the weights are arbitrarily small.
Here, we relate the incremental mapping dened by these ResNets to dieo-
morphic registration models [27]. These registration models, especially Large
Deformation Dieomorphic Metric Mapping (LDDMM) [30,5], tackle the reg-
istration issue from the composition of a series of incremental dieomorphic
mappings, each individual mapping being close to the identity. Conversely, in
ResNet architectures, the lthresidual block provides an update of the form

==== Page 5 ====
4 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
xl+F(xl;Wl). Under the assumption that kF(xl;Wl)kk xlk, the deforma-
tion ows generated by ResNet architectures may be expected to implement
the composition of a series of incremental dieomorphic mappings.
In [15,16], it is mentioned that the form of the residual function Fis exi-
ble. Several residual blocks have been proposed and experimentally evaluated
such as bottleneck blocks [15], various shortcut connections [16] or aggregated
residual transformations [32]. However, by making the connection between
ResNets and dieomorphic mappings, it appears here that the function Fis a
parametrization of an elementary deformation ow, constraining the space of
admissible residual unit architectures.
We argue this registration-based interpretation motivates the denition of
ResNet architectures as the numerical implementation of continuous ows of
dieomorphisms. Section 3 details the proposed dieomorphism-based learn-
ing framework in which dieomorphic ows are governed by ODEs as in the
LDDMM setting. ResNets with shared weights relate to a particularly inter-
esting case yielding the denition of exponential dieomorphism subgroups
in the underlying Lie algebra. Overall, the proposed framework results in: i)
a theoretical characterization of the mapping block as an integral dieomor-
phic operator governed by an ODE, ii) in considering deformation ows and
Jacobian maps for the analysis of ResNets, iii) the derivation of ResNet archi-
tectures with additional dieomorphic constraints.
3 Dieomorphism-based learning
3.1 Dieomorphisms and driving velocity vector elds
Registration issues have been widely stated as the estimation of dieomor-
phic transformations between input and output spaces, especially in medi-
cal imaging [27]. Dieomorphic properties guarantee the invertibility of the
transformations, which includes the conservation of topological features. The
parametrization of dieomorphic transformations according to time-varying
velocity vector elds has been shown to be very eective in medical imaging
[21]. Beyond its computational performance, this framework embeds the group
structure of dieomorphisms and results in ows of dieomorphisms governed
by an Ordinary Dierential Equation (ODE):
d(t)
dt=Vt((t)) (2)
with(t) the dieomorphism at time t, andVtthe velocity vector eld at
timet.(0) is the identity and (1) the registration transformation between
embedding space Xand output space X, such that for any element XinXits
mapped version in Xis(1)(X). Given velocity elds ( Vt)t, the computation
of(1)(X) comes from the numerical integration of the above ODE.
A specic class of dieomorphisms refers to stationary velocity elds, that
is to say velocity elds which do not depend on time ( Vt=V;8t). As introduced

==== Page 6 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 5
in [2], in this case, the resulting dieomorphisms dene a subgroup structure in
the underlying Lie group and yield the denition of the exponential operators.
We here only briey detail these key properties. We let the reader refer to [1]
for a detailed and more formal presentation of their mathematical derivation.
For a stationary velocity eld, the resulting dieomorphisms belong to the
one-parameter subgroup of dieomorphisms with innitesimal generator V. In
particular, they verify the following property: 8s;t; (t)(s) =(s+t), where
stands for the composition operator in the underlying Lie group. This implies
for instance that computing (1) boils down to applying ntimes(1=2n)
for any integer value n. Interestingly, this one-parameter subgroup yields the
denition of dieomorphisms ( (t))tas exponentials of velocity eld Vdenoted
by (exp(tV))tand governed by the stationary ODE
d(t)
dt=V((t)) (3)
Conversely, any one-parameter subgroup of dieomorphisms is governed by an
ODE with a stationary velocity eld. It may be noted that the above deni-
tion of exponentials of velocity elds generalizes the denition of exponential
operators for matrices and nite-dimensional spaces.
3.2 Dieomorphism-based supervised learning
In this section, we view supervised learning issues as the learning of dieomor-
phisms according to some predened loss function. Let us consider a typical
supervised classication issue which the goal is to predict a class Yfrom an
N-dimensional real-valued observation X. LetLbe a linear classier model
with parameter . Within a neural network setting, Ltypically refers to a
fully-connected layer with softmax activations and parameter vector to the
weight and bias parameters of this layer. Let Dbe the group of dieomor-
phisms in RN. We state the supervised learning as the joint estimation of an
embeddingE, a dieomorphic mapping 2D and linear classication model
Laccording to:
bE;b;b= arg min
E;;loss(fL((E(Xi)));Yigi) (4)
withfXi;Yigithe considered training dataset and loss an appropriate loss
function, typically a cross entropy criterion. Considering the ODE-based parametriza-
tion of dieomorphisms, the above minimization leads to an equivalent esti-
mation of velocity eld sequence ( Vt)
bE;d(Vt);b= arg min
E;(Vt);loss(fL((1) (E(Xi)));Yigi) (5)
subject to8
><
>:d(t)
dt=Vt((t))
(0) =I(6)

==== Page 7 ====
6 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
When considering stationary velocity elds [2,3], this minimization simplies
as
bE;bV;b= arg min
E;(V);loss(fL(exp(V) (E(Xi)));Yigi) (7)
We may point out that this formulation diers from the image registration
problem in the considered loss function. Whereas image registration usually
involves the minimization of the prediction error Yi (1) (E(Xi)) with any
pairXi;Yi2RN, we here state the inference of the registration operator (1)
according to classication-based loss function. It may also be noted that the
extension to other loss functions ( e.g.for regression tasks) is straightforward.
3.3 Derived NN architecture
To solve for minimization issues (5) and (7), additional priors on the velocity
elds can be considered. One may consider the introduction of an additional
term in the minimization, which typically involves the integral of the norm of
the gradient of the velocity elds and favors small registration displacements
between two time steps [5,33]. Parametric priors may also be considered. They
come to set some parametrization for the velocity elds. In image registration
studies, spline-based parametrization has for instance been explored [3].
Here, we combine these two types of priors. We exploit a parametric ap-
proach and consider neural-network based representations of the driving veloc-
ity elds in ODEs (2) and (3). More specically, the discrete parametrization
of the velocity eld, Vt(x), can be considered as a linear combination of basis
functions:
Vj;t(x) =X
it;j;ift;i(x) (8)
whereVj;tdenotes component j(a scalar) of the learned velocity eld, and
thet;j;iare the weights learned by the 1D convolutional layer.
Various types of shortcut connections and various usages of activation func-
tions experimented in [16] correspond to various forms of the parametriza-
tion of the velocity eld. Understanding residual units in a registration-based
framework allows to provide a methodological guide to propose new valid resid-
ual units. Figure 2 shows 3 residual block units: original ResNet [15], improved
ResNet [16] and the residual block studied in this work. For instance, it can
be noticed that adding an activation function such as ReLU after the shortcut
connection ( i.e.after the addition layer) as in [15] (see Figure 2(a)) makes
the mapping no longer bijective, and thus such an architecture may be less
ecient, as shown experimentally in [16].
One way to build dieomorphisms is to compose small perturbations of the
identity. Using the same notations as in [33], let 
Rdbe open and bounded.
We denote by C1
0(
;Rd) the Banach space of continuously dierentiable vector
eldsvon
such thatvandDvvanish on@
and at innity. Let 1
1(T;
) be
the set of absolutely integrable functions from [0 ;T] toC1
0(
;Rd). It can be

==== Page 8 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 7
Fig. 2 Various residual units: (a) original ResNet [15], (b) improved ResNet [16], (c) pro-
posed residual unit.
shown that the ow associated to the time-dependent vector eld v21
1(T;
)
is a dieomorphism of 
[33].
In this work, we propose a residual block suitable to build ows of dieo-
morphisms. In the two case studies considered in this paper, two parametriza-
tions of the basis functions are considered. For the case of the experiments of
section 4.1, on the CIFAR-10 dataset, where the inputs are images, the basis
functionsft;iare parametrized with one convolutional layer and one ReLU
layer. The linear combination of these basis functions can be represented as
a second one dimensional convolutional layer, with a lter size of 1 1. In the
experiments of section 4.2, on the spiral datasets, the inputs are two dimen-
sional. In that case, the basis functions are modeled through the output of a
dense layer, followed by a tanh activation function. It has to be noticed that
no biases are considered for the two convolutional layers. In order to control
the magnitude of the velocity eld, we propose to use in the residual block a
tanh layer and a scaling layer. Finally, to ensure that v21
1(T;
), we intro-
duce a windowing layer such that vandDvvanish on@
and at innity. This
ensures that vis a Lipschitz continuous mapping [33]. This proposed residual
block is shown in Figure 2(c).
In the registration-based framework considered so far, the transformation
is only applied to the embedding of the observation X. This can introduce
an undesirable asymmetry in the optimization process and have a signicant
impact on the registration performance. Inverse consistency, rst introduced
by Thirion in [29], can be performed by adding a penalty term. In order to
implement inverse consistent algorithms, it is useful to be able to integrate
backwards as well as forwards. In the dieomorphic framework, the inverse

==== Page 9 ====
8 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
consistency can be written as follows:
(1)( 1) =( 1)(1) =(0) (9)
This inverse consistency can then be achieved by adding the following term in
the overall loss function:
bE;b;b= arg min
E;; loss (fL((E(Xi)));Yigi) + (1 )X
i(E(Xi) ( 1)(E(Xi)))2
(10)
whereE(Xi)=(1)(E(Xi)),Xi2Xandis a weighting parameter. We may
stress that this term does not depend on the targeted task ( i.e.classication
or regression) and only constraint the learning of the mapping block. Thus,
this regularization term can be extended to data points that do not belong to
the learning set, and more generally to points in a given domain, such that the
inverse consistency property does not depend on the sampling of the learning
dataset.
4 Experiments
In this section, we investigate experimentally the potential of the proposed
architecture of residual blocks using the image classication dataset CIFAR-
10 [22] and synthetic 2D data (spiral dataset). CIFAR-10 is used to explore
the performance of the proposed residual unit with respect to other ResNet
architectures. The 2D spiral dataset helps to further investigate properties
of dieomorphism-based networks and provides geometrical insights on the
estimated ows.
4.1 CIFAR-10
4.1.1 Experimental setting
The CIFAR-10 dataset contains 60,000 32 32 color images in 10 dierent
classes. 10,000 images are used for testing purpose. The overall architecture is
decomposed into three main parts: embedding, mapping and prediction. First,
the embedding is performed using the following layers: 1) a 5 5 convolutional
layer with 128 lters, 2) batch normalization, 3) tanh activation layer (which
ensures thatE(Xi)2] 1;1[p, an open and bounded interval). Then, the
network consists in several residual blocks as depicted in Figure 2(c) (3 3
convolutions without bias, with 128 lters). The scaling factor of the residual
units is learned and shared for every unit. At the end of the mapping block, a
tanh activation layer is used to ensure that (E(Xi))2] 1;1[p, an open and
bounded interval. Finally, the prediction step is performed using the following
layers: 1) a 33 convolutional layer with 128 lters, 2) batch normalization,
3)tanh activation layer, 4) 32 32 average pooling, 5) fully connected layer.

==== Page 10 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 9
Methods #params 1k 2.5k 5k 10k 20k 30k 40k 50k
ResNet d56 1.6M 0.45 0.57 0.69 0.80 0.87 0.90 0.91 0.92
DieoNet d5 0.53 0.64 0.73 0.81 0.86 0.89 0.90 0.91
DieoNet d10 0.54 0.67 0.74 0.81 0.88 0.89 0.91 0.92
DieoNet d20 0.53 0.65 0.75 0.82 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.93
Stationary Velocity Fields
DieoNet d5 0.52 0.63 0.70 0.75 0.83 0.86 0.87 0.88
DieoNet d10 0.51 0.63 0.70 0.77 0.83 0.86 0.89 0.89
DieoNet d20 0.53 0.64 0.70 0.77 0.84 0.87 0.89 0.89
Stationary Velocity Fields and Inverse Consistency
DieoNet d5 0.52 0.63 0.69 0.75 0.82 0.86 0.88 0.90
DieoNet d10 0.51 0.64 0.70 0.76 0.84 0.87 0.88 0.90
DieoNet d20 0.52 0.64 0.70 0.77 0.85 0.86 0.88 0.90
Table 1 Accuracy on CIFAR10 for ResNet and proposed approaches (DieoNet : proposed
residual unit, stationary velocity elds correspond to the use of shared weights) with respect
to the number of training samples (1000 up to 50 000). Depths (d5, d10, d20) and number
of parameters are reported to perform a fair comparison.
Weights are initialized with a truncated normal distribution centered on 0 [14].
We use`2weight-decay regularization set to 2 :10 4and SGD optimization
method with a starting learning rate of 0 :1, minibatch of 128, 100 epochs.
The goal of this experiment is to study the eciency of the proposed resid-
ual unit with respect to original ResNet. The baseline architecture used for
comparison is the ResNet architecture proposed in [16]. In this experiment,
we use the Keras1implementation of ResNet for reproductibility purpose:
ResNet56v2 (depth of 56 with increasing number of convolution lters [16]),
with about 1.6M of trainable parameters.
Fig. 3 Performance of various non-stationary ResNet architectures on CIFAR10, with vary-
ing size of the training dataset (left: from 1000 to 50000 images, right: zoom version for very
small dataset size).
1F. Chollet et al. Keras, 2015. https://keras.io

==== Page 11 ====
10 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
4.1.2 Results
In this work, the dimension of the embedding space is constant throughout
the mapping block. We rst compare ResNet56v2 with the proposed approach
with the same number of parameters, which corresponds to a network depth
of 5 ( i.e.5 residual units). It can be seen in Figure 3 that the performance of
these two networks is similar when using the entire training dataset. Resid-
ual units of the Keras ResNet are built using three layers: convolution, batch
normalization and ReLU. ReLU units are crucial to promote ecient sparse
parametrizations of the velocity elds. However, the obtained results show that
batch normalization in the residual units is not required to reach satisfactory
classication accuracy. Instead, we use a tanh activation layer to restrict the
embedding set to be open and bounded for the whole ow of dieomorphisms.
It has to be noted that in the proposed network, the dimension of the trans-
formed embedding space is constant. Similarly to [17], the experimental re-
sults show that progressive dimension changes of the embedding space are not
required, contrary to popular belief that the performance of deep neural net-
works are based on progressive removal of uninformative variability. To study
the generalization performance of the proposed residual unit, we conduct ex-
periments with decreasing number of training samples (see Table 1 for detailed
results). It appears that the use of the proposed residual unit makes the model
more robust to small training sets compared to the Keras ResNet.
We also investigate the impact of the network depth on the classication re-
sults. Increasing the depth leads to more complex models (in term of trainable
parameters). It can thus be expected to observe overtting when using very
small training datasets. However, Figure 3 shows that increasing the depth of
the proposed network does not lead to accuracy decrease. From a dynamical
point of view, increasing the depth corresponds to smaller integration steps
and then to smoother variations of velocity elds. The proposed residual ar-
chitecture is not subject to overtting for small datasets even with a deep
dieomorphic network.
4.2 Spiral data
In this section, we propose to further deepen the understanding of behavior of
networks based on ows of dieomorphisms. Following the work on dierential
geometry analysis of ResNet architectures of Hauser et al. in [13], we consider
a classication task of 2-dimensional spiral data.
4.2.1 Experimental setting
No embedding layer is required in this experimental setup. The purpose of the
mapping block is then to warp the input data points Xiinto an unknown space
Xwhere the transformed data Xare linearly separable. We have considered
the following setting: the loss function is the binary cross-entropy between the

==== Page 12 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 11
output of a sigmoid function applied to the transformed data points Xand
the true labels. Each network is composed of 20 residual units for which non-
linearities are modeled with tanh activation functions and 10 basis functions
(modeled by dense layers) are used for the parametrization of the velocity
elds. Weights are initialized with the Glorot uniform initializer (also called
Xavier uniform initializer) [9]. We use `2weight-decay regularization set to
10 4and the ADAM optimization method [20] with a learning rate of 0 :001,
1= 0:9,2= 0:999, minibatch of 300, 1000 epochs.
We consider four ResNet architectures: a) a ResNet without shared weights
(corresponding to time-varying velocity elds modeling), b) ResNet with shared
weights (corresponding to the stationary velocity elds modeling), c) Data-
driven Symmetric ResNet with shared weights (considering also the inverse
consistency criterion is computed over training data) and d) Domain-driven
Symmetric ResNet with shared weights (where the inverse consistency crite-
rion is computed over the entire domain using a random sampling scheme).
4.2.2 Characterization of ResNet properties
ResNet architectures have been recently studied from the point of view of
dierential geometry in [13]. In this article, Hauser et al. studied the impact
of residual-based approaches (compared to non-residual networks) in term of
dierentiable coordinate transformations. In our work, we propose to go one
step further by considering the characterization of the estimated deformation
elds leading to an adapted conguration for the considered classication task.
More specically, we consider in this work the maps of Jacobian values.
The Jacobian ( i.e.the determinant of the Jacobian matrices of the defor-
mations) is dened in a 2-dimensional space as follows:
J(x) =@1(x)
@x1@1(x)
@x2@2(x)
@x1@2(x)
@x2(11)
From a physical point of view, the value of the Jacobian represents the
local volume variation induced by the transformation. A transformation with
a Jacobian value equal to 1 is a transformation that preserves volumes. A
Jacobian value greater than 1 corresponds to a local expansion and a value
less than 1 corresponds to a local contraction. The case where the Jacobian
is zero means that several points are warped onto a single point: this case
corresponds to the limit case from which the bijectivity of the transformation
is not veried anymore, thus justifying the constraint on the positivity of the
Jacobian in several registration methods [27].
4.2.3 Results
Classication algorithms are usually only evaluated using the classication
accuracy (as the number of correct predictions from all predictions made).
However, the classication rate is not enough to characterize the performance

==== Page 13 ====
12 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
of a specic algorithm. In all the experiments shown in this work, the clas-
sication rate is greater than 99%. Visualization of the decision boundary is
an alternative way to provide complementary insights on the regularity of the
solution in the embedding space. Figure 4 shows the decision boundary for the
four considered ResNets. Although all methods achieved very high classica-
tion rates, it can be seen that adding constraints such as the use of stationary
velocity elds ( i.e.shared weights) and inverse consistency constraints lead to
smoother decision boundaries with no eect on the overall accuracy. This is
regarded as critical for generalization and adversarial robustness [28].
Fig. 4 Decision boundaries for the classication task of 2-dimensional spiral data. From
left to right: ResNet without shared weights, ResNet with shared weights, Data-driven Sym-
metric ResNet with shared weights, Domain-driven Symmetric ResNet with shared weights.
We refer the reader to the main text for the correspondence between ResNet architectures
and dieomorphic ows.
Decision boundaries correspond to the projection of the estimated linear
decision boundary in the space Xinto the embedding space X. The visual-
ization of decision boundaries does not however provide information regarding
the topology of the manifold in the output space X. We also study the de-
formation ow through the spatial conguration of data points through the
network layers as in [13]. Figure 5 shows how each network untangles the spiral
data. Networks with shared weights exhibit smoother layer-wise transforma-
tions. More specically, this visualization provides insights on the geometrical
properties (such as topology preservation / connectedness) of the transformed
set of input data points.
To evaluate the quality of the estimation warping transformation, Figure 6
shows the Jacobian maps for each considered network. Local Jacobian sign
changes correspond to locations where bijectivity is not satised. It can be
seen that adding constraints such as stationary velocity elds and inverse con-
sistency leads to more regular geometrical shapes of the deformed manifold.
The domain-driven regularization applied to a ResNet with shared weights
leads to the most regular geometrical pattern. Adding the symmetry consis-
tency leads to positive Jacobian values over the entire domain, guaranteeing
the bijectivity of the estimated mapping.

==== Page 14 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 13
Fig. 5 Evolution of the spatial conguration of data points through the 20 residual units.
From top to bottom: ResNet without shared weights, ResNet with shared weights, Data-
driven Symmetric ResNet with shared weights, Domain-driven Symmetric ResNet with
shared weights.
Fig. 6 Jacobian maps for the four ResNet architectures. From left to right: ResNet without
shared weights ( Jmin= 5:59,Jmax = 6:34), ResNet with shared weights ( Jmin= 1:41,
Jmax = 2:27), Data-driven Symmetric ResNet with shared weights ( Jmin= 0:55,Jmax =
5:92), Domain-driven Symmetric ResNet with shared weights ( Jmin= 0:30,Jmax = 1:44).
(colormap : Jmin = 2:5,Jmax = 2:5, so dark pixels correspond to negative Jacobian
values).
5 Discussion: Insights on ResNet architectures from a
dieomorphic viewpoint
As illustrated in the previous section, the proposed dieomorphic formula-
tion of ResNets provides new theoretical and computational insights for their
interpretation and characterization as discussed below.
5.1 Theoretical characterization of ResNet architectures
In this work, we make explicit the interpretation of the mapping block of
ResNet architectures as a discretized numerical implementation of a contin-
uous dieomorphic registration operator. This operator is stated as an inte-
gral operator associated with an ODE governed by velocity elds. Moreover,
ResNet architectures with shared weights are viewed as the numerical imple-
mentation of the exponential of velocity elds, equivalently dened as dieo-
morphic operators governed by stationary velocity elds. Exponentials of ve-
locity elds are by construction dieomorphic under smoothness constraints on
the generating velocity elds. Up to the choice of the ODE solver implemented
by ResNet architecture (in our case an Euler scheme), ResNet architectures

==== Page 15 ====
14 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
with shared weights are then fully characterized from a mathematical point of
view.
The dieomorphic property naturally arises as a critical property in reg-
istration problems, as it relates to invertibility properties. Such invertibility
properties are also at the core of the denition of kernel approaches, which
implicitly denes mapping operators [26]. As illustrated for the reported clas-
sication experiments, the dieomorphic property prevents the mapping oper-
ator from modifying the topology of the manifold structure of the input data.
When not imposing such properties, for instance in unconstrained ResNet ar-
chitectures as well as, the learned deformation ows may present unexpected
topology changes.
The dieomorphic property may be regarded as a regularization criterion
on the mapping operator, so that the learned mapping enables a linear sep-
aration of the classes while guaranteeing the smoothness of the classication
boundary and of the underlying deformation ow. It is obvious that a ResNet
architecture with shared weights is a special case of an unconstrained ResNet.
Therefore, the training of a ResNet architecture with shared weights may be
viewed as the training of an unconstrained ResNet within a reduced search
space. The same holds for the symmetry property which further constrains
the search space during training. The later constraint is shown to be numer-
ically important so that the discretized scheme complies with the theoretical
dieomorphic properties.
Overall, this analysis stresses that over an innity of mapping operators
reaching optimal training performance one may favor those depicting dif-
feomorphic properties so that key properties such as generalization perfor-
mance, prediction stability and robustness to adversarial examples may be
greatly improved. Numerical schemes which fulll such dieomorphic proper-
ties during the training process could be further investigated and could ben-
et from the registration literature, including for dieomorphics ows gov-
erned by non-stationary velocity elds [30,5,4]. In particular, the impact of
the dieomorphism-based network building on adversarial example estimation
is a open research direction for further studies.
5.2 Computational issues
Besides theoretical aspects, computational properties also derive from the pro-
posed dieomorphism-based formulation. Within this continuous setting, the
depth of the network relates to the integration time step and the precision of
the integration scheme. The deeper the network, the smaller the integration
step. Especially, a large integration time step, i.e.a shallower ResNet archi-
tecture, may result in numerical integration instabilities and hence in non-
dieomorphic transformations. Therefore, deep enough architectures should
be considered to guarantee numerical stability and dieomorphic properties.
The maximal integration step relates to the regularity of the velocity elds
governing the ODEs. In our experiments, we only consider an explicit rst-

==== Page 16 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 15
order Euler scheme. Higher-order explicit schemes, for instance the classic
fourth-order Runge-Kutta scheme, seem of great interest as well as implicit
integration schemes [8]. Given the spatial variabilities of the governing velocity
elds, adaptive integration schemes also appear as particularly relevant.
Using dieomorphism-based framework leads to specic architectures of
residual units. In this work, for instance, tanh activation layers are used to
constraint the domain 
to be open and bounded. Such activation layer guar-
antees the dieomorphic properties of the mapping block. The popular use
of ReLU activation in the embedding block cannot provide such guarantee.
Several other reversible architectures have been recently proposed [7,10,17],
showing the potential of such frameworks for the analysis of residual networks.
In the LDDMM framework [5], the parametrization of the velocity eld is often
carried out with Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS). Recent works
have been done in this direction connecting RKHS and deep networks [6].
In our work, vandDvvanish on@
and at innity. This property guaran-
tees that the learned residual units are Lipschitz continuous, which is related
to recent works investigating explicit constraints on Lipschitz continuity in
neural networks [11]. Moreover, this condition implies that the Hilbert space
of admissible velocity elds is a RKHS [34]. Further work could focus on the
parametrization of the velocity elds ( i.e.residual units) using suitable kernels.
Dieomorphic mapping dened as exponential of velocity elds were shown
to be computationally more stable with smoother integral mappings. They lead
to ResNet architectures with shared weights, which greatly lowers the com-
putational complexity and memory requirements compared with the classic
ResNet architectures. They can be implemented as Recurrent Neural Net-
works [19,23]. Importantly, the NN-based specication of the elementary of
velocity eld V(8) becomes the bottleneck in terms of modeling complexity.
The parametrization (Equation 8) may be critical to reach good prediction
performance. Here, we considered a two-layer architecture regarded as a pro-
jection ofVonto basis function. Higher-complexity architecture, for instance
with larger convolution supports, more lters or layers, might be considered
while keeping the numerical stability of the overall ResNet architectures. By
contrast, considering higher-complexity elementary blocks in a ResNet archi-
tectures without shared weights would increase numerical instabilities and may
required complementary regularization constraints across network depth [15,
25].
Regarding training issues, our experiments exploited a classic backpropa-
gation implementation with a random initialization. From the considered con-
tinuous log-Euclidean prospective, the training may be regarded as the pro-
jection of the random initialization onto the manifold of acceptable solutions,
i.e.solutions satisfying both the minimization of the training loss and dieo-
morphic constraints. In the registration literature [27], the numerical schemes
considered for the inference of the mapping usually combine a parametric
representation of the velocity elds and a multiscale optimization strategy in
space and time. The combination of such multiscale optimization strategy to
backpropagation schemes appears as a promising path to improve convergence

==== Page 17 ====
16 Fran cois Rousseau et al.
properties, especially the robustness to the initialization. The dierent solu-
tions proposed to enforce dieomorphic properties are also of interest. Here,
we focused on the invertibility constraints, which result in additional terms to
be minimized in the training loss.
6 Conclusion
This paper introduces a novel registration-based formulation of ResNets. We
provide a theoretical interpretation of ResNets as numerical implementations
of continuous ows of dieomorphisms. Numerical experiments support the
relevance of this interpretation, especially the importance of the enforcement
of dieomorphic properties, which ensure the stabilityof a trained ResNet. This
work opens new research avenues to explore further dieomorphism-based for-
mulations and associated numerical tools for ResNet-based learning, especially
regarding numerical issues.
Acknowledgements We thank B. Chapron and C. Herzet for their comments and sugges-
tions. The research leading to these results has been supported by the ANR MAIA project,
grant ANR-15-CE23-0009 of the French National Research Agency, INSERM and Institut
Mines T el ecom Atlantique (Chaire Imagerie m edicale en th erapie interventionnelle) and Fon-
dation pour la Recherche M edicale (FRM grant DIC20161236453), Labex Cominlabs (grant
SEACS), CNES (grant OSTST-MANATEE) and Microsoft trough AI-for-Earth EU Oceans
Grant (AI4Ocean). We also gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation
with the donation of the Titan Xp GPU used for this research.
References
1. Arsigny, V.: Processing Data in Lie Groups: An Algebraic Approach. Application to
Non-Linear Registration and Diusion Tensor MRI. Ph.D. thesis, Ecole Polytechnique
(2006)
2. Arsigny, V., Commowick, O., Pennec, X., Ayache, N.: A Log-Euclidean Framework for
Statistics on Dieomorphisms. International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention: MICCAI 9(Pt 1), 924{931 (2006)
3. Ashburner, J.: A fast dieomorphic image registration algorithm. NeuroImage 38(1),
95{113 (2007)
4. Avants, B., Gee, J.C.: Geodesic estimation for large deformation anatomical shape av-
eraging and interpolation. NeuroImage 23, S139{S150 (2004)
5. Beg, M.F., Miller, M.I., Trouv e, A., Younes, L.: Computing Large Deformation Metric
Mappings via Geodesic Flows of Dieomorphisms. International Journal of Computer
Vision () 61(2), 139{157 (2005)
6. Bietti, A., Mairal, J.: Group Invariance, Stability to Deformations, and Complexity of
Deep Convolutional Representations. arXiv.org (2017)
7. Chang, B., Meng, L., Haber, E., Ruthotto, L., Begert, D., Holtham, E.: Reversible
Architectures for Arbitrarily Deep Residual Neural Networks. Neural Networks cs.CV
(2017)
8. Davis, P.J., Rabinowitz, P.: Methods of Numerical Integration. Academic Press (1984)
9. Glorot, X., Bengio, Y.: Understanding the diculty of training deep feedforward neural
networks. AISTATS (2010)
10. Gomez, A.N., Ren, M., Urtasun, R., Grosse, R.B.: The Reversible Residual Network -
Backpropagation Without Storing Activations. NIPS (2017)

==== Page 18 ====
Residual Networks as Flows of Dieomorphisms 17
11. Gouk, H., Frank, E., Pfahringer, B., Cree, M.J.: Regularisation of Neural Networks by
Enforcing Lipschitz Continuity. Neural Networks stat.ML (2018)
12. Haber, E., Ruthotto, L.: Stable Architectures for Deep Neural Networks. arXiv.org (1),
014004 (2017)
13. Hauser, M., Ray, A.: Principles of Riemannian Geometry in Neural Networks. NIPS
(2017)
14. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Delving Deep into Rectiers: Surpassing Human-
Level Performance on ImageNet Classication. arXiv.org (2015)
15. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.
In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
770{778. IEEE (2016)
16. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Identity Mappings in Deep Residual Networks.
arXiv.org (2016)
17. Jacobsen, J.H., Smeulders, A., Oyallon, E.: i-RevNet: Deep Invertible Networks.
arXiv.org (2018)
18. Kim, J., Lee, J.K., Lee, K.M.: Accurate Image Super-Resolution Using Very Deep Con-
volutional Networks. CVPR (2016)
19. Kim, J., Lee, J.K., Lee, K.M.: Deeply-Recursive Convolutional Network for Image Super-
Resolution. CVPR (2016)
20. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv.org (2014)
21. Klein, A., Andersson, J., Ardekani, B.A., Ashburner, J., Avants, B., Chiang, M.C.,
Christensen, G.E., Collins, D.L., Gee, J., Hellier, P., Song, J.H., Jenkinson, M., Lepage,
C., Rueckert, D., Thompson, P., Vercauteren, T., Woods, R.P., Mann, J.J., Parsey,
R.V.: Evaluation of 14 nonlinear deformation algorithms applied to human brain MRI
registration. NeuroImage 46(3), 786{802 (2009)
22. Krizhevsky, A., Hinton, G.: Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images (2009)
23. Liao, Q., Poggio, T.A.: Bridging the Gaps Between Residual Learning, Recurrent Neural
Networks and Visual Cortex. Neural Networks cs.LG (2016)
24. Mallat, S.: Understanding deep convolutional networks. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 374(2065),
20150203{16 (2016)
25. Ruthotto, L., Haber, E.: Deep Neural Networks motivated by Partial Dierential Equa-
tions. arXiv.org (2018)
26. Scholkopf, B., Smola, A.J.: Learning with Kernels. Support Vector Machines, Regular-
ization, Optimization, and Beyond. MIT Press (2002)
27. Sotiras, A., Davatzikos, C., Paragios, N.: Deformable medical image registration: a sur-
vey. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 32(7), 1153{1190 (2013)
28. Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I., Fergus,
R.: Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv.org (2013)
29. Thirion, J.: Image matching as a diusion process: an analogy with Maxwell's demons.
Medical Image analysis 2(3), 243{260 (1998)
30. Trouv e, A.: Dieomorphisms Groups and Pattern Matching in Image Analysis. Inter-
national Journal of Computer Vision () 28(3), 213{221 (1998)
31. Weinan, E., 2017: A proposal on machine learning via dynamical systems. Communi-
cations in Mathematics and Statistics 5(1), 1{11 (2017)
32. Xie, S., Girshick, R.B., Doll ar, P., Tu, Z., He, K.: Aggregated Residual Transformations
for Deep Neural Networks. CVPR pp. 5987{5995 (2017)
33. Younes, L.: Shapes and Dieomorphisms, Applied Mathematical Sciences , vol. 171.
Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin, Heidelberg (2010)
34. Younes, L.: Dieomorphic Learning. arXiv.org (2018)

