==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy (2022) 25:11–22 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11019-021-10062-z
SCIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills 
for AI‑driven digital personal assistants
Marianna Capasso1  · Steven Umbrello2 
Accepted: 16 November 2021 / Published online: 25 November 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
Traditional medical practices and relationships are changing given the widespread adoption of AI-driven technologies across 
the various domains of health and healthcare. In many cases, these new technologies are not specific to the field of healthcare. 
Still, they are existent, ubiquitous, and commercially available systems upskilled to integrate these novel care practices. 
Given the widespread adoption, coupled with the dramatic changes in practices, new ethical and social issues emerge due to 
how these systems nudge users into making decisions and changing behaviours. This article discusses how these AI-driven 
systems pose particular ethical challenges with regards to nudging. To confront these issues, the value sensitive design (VSD) 
approach is adopted as a principled methodology that designers can adopt to design these systems to avoid harming and 
contribute to the social good. The AI for Social Good (AI4SG) factors are adopted as the norms constraining maleficence. 
In contrast, higher-order values specific to AI, such as those from the EU High-Level Expert Group on AI and the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals, are adopted as the values to be promoted as much as possible in design. The use 
case of Amazon Alexa's Healthcare Skills is used to illustrate this design approach. It provides an exemplar of how designers 
and engineers can begin to orientate their design programs of these technologies towards the social good.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Nudging · Medical AI · Technoethics
Introduction
Digital health provides clinicians, patients, caregivers, and 
care-receivers, generally construed, as well as the whole 
health system with new tools and possibilities, ranging from 
the use of wearables and connected medical devices such 
as smartwatches and activity trackers (Lu et al. 2019) to 
the spread of AI decision-making systems, such as chatbots, 
digital personal assistants or persuasive apps that can help in 
monitoring health metrics (Valtolina et al. 2020; Zhang and 
Wan 2019). The future potential for such systems in health-
care seems high due to the far-reaching implications that the diagnosis and prevention capabilities of AI-driven systems 
may have in integrating or even replacing more traditional 
medical practices and relationships.
Now, during the pandemic, AI is also helping to provide 
personalised information and recommendations for patients 
who have symptoms of COVID-19 (Buoy Health 2021). 
Specifically, AI-driven digital personal assistants—e.g., 
Google Assistant, Apple Siri, Amazon Alexa—are now used 
in a wide variety of scenarios—such as consumer markets, 
work, smart homes and others—and with advanced intelli-
gence and interaction capabilities, they assist users in their 
tasks (Maedche et al. 2016). The novelty of such technolo-
gies is that they have also begun to prove their potential as 
digital health tools for monitoring, consulting, and providing 
tips and guidance, thus as intermediaries between the health-
care system as a whole and the public (Sezgin et al. 2020).
The scope of this paper is to analyse AI-driven digital 
personal assistants that are now upskilled with healthcare 
capabilities by looking at a particular case study, that is, 
Amazon Alexa's new Healthcare Skills. This will be done 
with the help of a multi-tiered value sensitive design (VSD) 
approach by evaluating a specific case of a new Amazon  * Steven Umbrello 
 s.umbrello@tudelft.nl
 Marianna Capasso 
 marianna.capasso@santannapisa.it
1 Scuola Superiore Sant’ Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33, 
56127 Pisa, Italia
2 Department of Values, Technology, & Innovation, School 
of Technology, Policy & Management, Delft University 
of Technology, Jaffalaan 5, 2628 BX Delft, The Netherlands

==== Page 2 ====
12 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
Alexa’s Healthcare Skill: i.e., the provision of digital health 
nudges—or recommended courses of action and sugges-
tions—that are personalised to users. To do this, this paper is 
divided into the following sections. §2 explores the notion of 
nudging and its application in digital environments. §3 intro-
duces a multi-tiered value sensitive design (VSD) approach 
as a means of designing AI-driven digital personal assistants 
that incorporate digital health nudges to not only avoid doing 
harm by operationalising the AI for Social Good (AI4SG) 
principles as norms but to actively promote social good. It 
does this by operationalising higher-order values such as the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 
the EU High-Level Expert Group on AI (HLEG AI) values. 
The case study of Amazon Alexa’s new Healthcare Skills 
is illustrated through the four-stage iterative process of a 
combined AI4SG-VSD approach, which are respectively: 
(1) context, (2) value identification, (3) formulating design 
requirements, and (4) prototyping. Finally, §4 provides some 
conclusions.
Digital nudging in healthcare
The notion of nudging derives from the work of Thaler and 
Sunstein (2009), which advocates a liberal and paternalistic 
choice architecture. A nudge is described as "any aspect of 
the choice architecture that predictably alters people's behav -
iour without forbidding any options or significantly changing 
their economic incentive" (Thaler and Sunstein 2009, p. 6). 
Nudging uses behavioural sciences and economics princi-
ples to elicit beneficial behaviours from individuals, without 
undermining their deliberative choice and freedom. A nudge 
overcomes agents' cognitive defects, or lack of information 
and behavioural biases, and steers them towards target acts 
that are deemed to be good for them (Sunstein 2017).
The term "digital nudging" emerged only recently in 
engineering and computer systems literature and is defined 
as the "use of user-interface design elements to guide peo-
ple's behaviour in digital choice environments" (Weinmann 
et al. 2016). There are several technological systems in 
healthcare that use and rely on the assumptions of nudging. 
Among these, there are apps that send notifications based 
on nudge design to prevent the progression of mild cogni-
tive impairment in elderly patients (Pietrabissa et al. 2019). 
Other examples that fall more squarely in digital nudging 
in the healthcare context include AI-driven digital personal 
assistants to support diagnosis and monitoring. Such systems 
influence and manage users' behaviours and have a signifi-
cant impact on both caregivers and care receivers, as well 
as their families.
Indeed, market-driven corporations such as Apple, 
Google or Amazon are now incorporating data-driven and 
personalised nudges in their products. AI-driven digital personal assistants are an example of such products. For 
example, users can be ‘nudged’ by Amazon’s Alexa, 
which can collect users’ data and preferences, shape differ -
ent aspects of their choice environment and push towards 
desired results, thus having considerable power in affect-
ing decision-making processes in a vast realm of contexts, 
from business and markets to other sensitive domains such 
as healthcare (Cai 2020).
However, little research has been conducted on whether 
digital nudges improve the efficacy of healthcare (Byambas -
uren et al. 2018). Conversely, a growing concern has been 
raised that apps and other AI medical tools may track, col-
lect, and share data in opaque and potentially misaligned 
ways (Loria 2019).
Digital nudges follow the same principles and modali-
ties of nudges as such. However, the fundamental difference 
between traditional nudges and digital nudges lies in the 
latter allowing for greater versatility and opportunities for 
choice architects due to the more dynamic, informational, 
and automated character of the digital environment (Meske 
et al. 2019). In addition, new digital patient-centric nudges, 
with tools such as simplifications, default settings, deci-
sion staging, feedback, reminders and others, offer virtual 
medical care and assistance in and outside hospitals and 
in domestic or commercial care practices even outside the 
healthcare domain (Meske et al. 2019).
Using Big Data and Predictive Analytics techniques, a 
digital nudge is ubiquitous, emergent, interconnected, and 
capable of continuously reconfiguring itself due to its feed-
back from its environment and interactions with users and 
other systems. As a matter of fact, Big Data nudges have 
been defined as a special kind of nudge: hypernudges due to 
their networked and dynamic nature (Yeung 2017).
Nudging is not merely a value-free and neutral tool: 
indeed, scholars have already recognised that nudges always 
contain value judgements and deal with a dominant under -
standing of societal values or norms that are considered mor -
ally or politically acceptable by choice architects (Prainsack 
2020; McMahon 2015; Jones et al. 2013).
In the digital realm, tech companies or private actors 
may constitute choice-architects with an external, inde-
pendent and, in some instances, unaligned values-metrics 
relative to those of their nudgees' goals and values. Indeed, 
in certain cases, digital nudges could steer the behaviour 
of human users away from what may benefit them, leading 
to a disparity between their actions and goals (Burr et al. 
, 2018). In particular, in the healthcare context, the intro-
duction of new actors and new digital practices mediated 
by AI-driven systems can shape the responsibility, roles 
and credibility of both health professionals and patients, 
leading to a reconfiguration of the entire healthcare sys-
tem (van Wynsberghe and Li 2019). Scholars have raised 
concern about the "Googlization of health” research that 

==== Page 3 ====
13
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
opened the way to tech companies such as Google, Ama-
zon, and Facebook to collect, track, and store health data 
(Sharon 2016; 2021). Health data are not solely created by 
clinicians in electronic medical records but now extend to 
encompass data from fitness and health apps, behavioural 
data tracked in digital environments, data based on online 
interactions, and the contents amassed on social networks, 
among others.
Therefore, a question of crucial importance in collect-
ing and using healthcare data is the nature and value of 
those data as inherently public data (c.f., Prainsack 2020). 
Whereas individual health data would (and should) continue 
to be treated as private (i.e., individual) health data, the data 
can also be read as public data, given that its collection and 
use in AI-driven systems have a public impact. Despite pro-
ponents of nudging tend to focus on individuals and their 
freedom of choice—since nudges are primarily described as 
individual interventions that help to promote more rational 
and healthy behaviours—the use of nudges may profoundly 
impact institutional and social structures (see Lepenies and 
Małecka 2015). On the extensive literature on nudging in 
healthcare, very little engage with social determinants of 
health and often mislead the public nature of nudges (Mac-
Kay and Quigley 2018).
Behavioural influences such as nudging techniques are 
always positioned in a more extensive system, where poli-
cymakers or private actors and governments layout values 
and norms, preferences, and political or social factors. The 
effects of digital nudges within the healthcare field are thus 
not merely visible on an individual level; they are equally 
effective and persistent on a collective level and need a jus-
tification on the values they underpin and promote.
Thus, it is essential to make explicable the values that are 
articulated by digital nudges – general social values or val-
ues tailored for the individual (c.f., Barton and Grüne-Yanoff 
2015) or a specific group (stakeholder contextual values) 
– and align AI-driven systems in the field of healthcare to 
not only avoid doing harm (nonmaleficence) but to actively 
contribute to social good (beneficence). Specifically, in the 
healthcare domain, there is a need to identify and regulate 
the different sources of influences such as digital nudges 
in the broader social environment and to assess ex-ante the 
peculiarities and the relevant values inherent to the care 
practices that such influences are going to interfere with.
It is not only the public nature of digital nudges at stake, 
but the question about the public nature and value of health 
that should benefit society as a whole and prevent persons 
or groups of people from experiencing undue harm. In this 
sense, when engaging in a discourse on AI-driven systems 
that incorporate digital health nudges that should actively 
contribute to social good, one cannot disregard the question 
of what may count as a just healthcare system and the recon-
sideration of an individualistic approach to health.The COVID-19 pandemic has shown the need to initi-
ate a thorough discussion on health and healthcare's role 
in citizens’ lives. For example, the necessity of thinking 
public health as a social good has been in the recent efforts 
of the World Health Organization, which was engaged in 
providing countries all over the globe equitable access to 
vaccines (WHO 2020). Furthermore, in recent years, many 
scholars have tried to frame health in terms of a global pub-
lic good, seeing in it not a private good but rather a con-
cept that requires innovative collective action at the global 
level (Moon et al. 2017; Abdalla et al. 2020). Public goods 
are non-excludable and non-rival, meaning that no one is 
excluded from their consumption, and one person’s con-
sumption does not prevent anyone else from benefiting them 
(Smith 2003). If we translate this discourse on health and 
healthcare’s role in citizens lives, the access to healthcare 
and treatments should not be arbitrarily limited but consid-
ered inherently public: i.e., no one is excluded from it and 
is not-rivalrous. The healthcare ecosystem is increasingly 
becoming an ‘e-health ecosystem’. This e-health ecosys-
tem can be understood as a socio-technical system that is 
composed of an entanglement of technical, social, and insti-
tutional dimensions and stakeholders that in collaboration 
provide values and services (Nykänen 2017). For this rea-
son, society as a whole is expected to create and maintain a 
healthcare ecosystem that can correctly evolve, approximate 
towards being a public good, and can assist individuals in 
the above sense. However, beyond such consideration on 
individual access to healthcare and treatments, health can 
also be understood as public, aimed to fit the characteristics 
of non-excludability and non-rivalry. Although there are 
many different conceptualisations of public health through 
the lens of the conception of public goods, these have also 
led to criticisms (Bernstein and Randall 2020). Still, the 
importance of the concept and practice of public health pri-
marily depend on structural conditions and on the collective 
call for action to address and provide health-related public 
goods, public health programs, and policies (Giubilini and 
Savulescu 2019; Anomaly 2021).
In particular, the proposal of framing health as a global  
public good can be a means to include other sectors and 
regulators beyond the healthcare system itself in the design 
and justification of health policies, strategies and plans. The 
social determinants of health and their implications should 
be included in a new and more comprehensive approach to 
monitoring, implementing and evaluating health, understood 
not as the sum of individual goods of specific persons but as 
both the outcome and pre-condition of much broader socio-
economic processes and practices. To ensure global access 
and benefit concerning health and healthcare, it would be 
effective to identify a rationale, methodologies, and means to 
account for the challenge of fair and democratic redistribu-
tion, as well as social justice.

==== Page 4 ====
14 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
A multi-tiered value sensitive design (VSD) approach 
that operationalises higher-order values such as the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and the EU High-Level Expert Group on AI (HLEG AI) 
values can constitute a reasonable solution to the issue 
of strengthening global responsibility and governance to 
improve health. Higher-order values like those expressed 
by SDGs and those higher-level values specific to AI, 
like those described by HLEG AI, can serve as a good 
approximation of what we consider a collective action 
to individuate public goods to be promoted at the global 
level.
This approach has two aims. First, it aims to reconfig-
ure the healthcare system by introducing new actors and 
indicators that determine and make explicit the values to 
be promoted as public and collectively beneficial. Sec-
ond, it aims to identify norms and design requirements 
for AI-driven systems—in this specific case, AI-driven 
digital personal assistants—to better monitor and promote 
health equity and an inclusive, transparent and account-
able development of socio-technical systems globally.Towards AI for social good
As already mentioned, digital nudging is a continually grow -
ing practice within the domain of health care, technology, 
and their intersection. However, given the potentially delete-
rious consequences of misaligned digital nudging, as well as 
its potential boons if employed responsibly, it makes sense 
that the responsible innovation of AI-driven digital per -
sonal assistants in the field of healthcare to be aligned with 
a design approach that is principled on similar commitments 
to avoid harm and actively contribute to doing good. There-
fore, many scholars are now attempting to identify techni -
cal requirements for AI-driven systems to ensure that these 
technologies are designed to protect and promote relevant 
ethical and societal values in healthcare (Mittelstadt et al. 
2016; London 2019; Vayena et al. 2018).
Floridi et al. (2020) provide what is arguably the most 
comprehensive set of norms for guiding designers of AI-
driven systems to avoid (most) harms (Umbrello and van 
de Poel 2021). The seven factors—AI4SG norms—are a set 
of principles that are particularly relevant for the design of 
AI towards social good (Floridi et al. 2020). Table  1 lists 
the AI4SG factor along with a summative imperative that 
Table 1  AI for social good meaning and factors
AI4SG factor AI4SG factor imperative
1. Falsifiability and incremental deployment AI4SG designers should identify falsifiable requirements and test them in 
incremental steps from the lab to the “outside world” (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 
7)
2. Safeguards against the manipulation of predictors AI4SG designers should adopt safeguards that (i) ensure that non-causal 
indicators do not inappropriately skew interventions and (ii) limit, when 
appropriate, knowledge of how inputs affect outputs from AI4SG systems to 
prevent manipulation (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 8)
3. Receiver-contextualised intervention AI4SG designers should build-decision-making systems in consultation with 
users
interacting with and impacted by these systems; with understanding of users’
characteristics, of the methods of coordination, and the purposes and effects 
of an
intervention, and with respect for users’ right to ignore or modify interventions 
(Floridi et al. 2020, p. 9)
4. Receiver-contextualised explanation and transparent purposes AI4SG designers should choose a Level of Abstraction for AI explanation that 
fulfils the desired explanatory purpose and is appropriate to the system and 
the receivers; then deploy arguments that are rationally and suitably persua-
sive for the receivers to deliver the explanation and ensure that the goal (the 
system’s purpose) for which an AI4SG system is developed and deployed is 
knowable to receivers of its outputs by default (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 14)
5. Privacy protection and data subject consent AI4SG designers should respect the threshold of consent established for the 
processing of datasets of personal data (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 16)
6. Situational fairness AI4SG designers should remove from relevant datasets variables and proxies 
that are irrelevant to an outcome, except when their inclusion supports inclu-
sivity, safety, or other ethical imperatives (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 18)
7. Human-friendly semanticisation AI4SG designers should not hinder the ability for people to semanticise (that 
is, to give meaning to and make sense of) something (Floridi et al. 2020, p. 
19)

==== Page 5 ====
15
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
Floridi et alia state that designers must follow to put these 
factors into practice.
The seven norms should not be read as rank-ordered, 
but mutually co-varying and co-constituting one another in 
design paradigms. Similarly, and more relevant to the spe-
cific types of technologies in question, they seamlessly map 
onto the higher-level, more abstract values of the EU High-
Level Expert Group on Artificial intelligence (HLEG AI): 
human autonomy, prevention of harm, fairness and explica-
bility (see Fig.  1) (High-Level Expert Group on AI 2019).
For the sake of space, this article does not discuss in 
depth the definitions or examples of the seven factors; 
Floridi et alia do so already at length (Floridi et al. 2020). 
However, what is important here is that the AI4SG fac-
tors function like norms as per van de Poel's (2013) char -
acterisation of norms as being framed as 'maximising' or 
'minimising' specific values or design requirements, thus 
bridging the gap between abstract values (e.g., HLEG AI, 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and concrete design requirements (van de Poel 2013). More 
clearly stated, the above shows that the norms via AI4SG 
factors provide a bridge between higher-level AI values like 
those of the HLEG AI and more technical design require-
ments. However, for this approach to be operationalised by 
designers, a principled design methodology is required to 
allow this bridging between abstract values and norms to be 
adopted systematically. For this reason, we adopt the value 
sensitive design (VSD) approach to technology design as 
the methodology of choice. VSD is a principled approach to technology design that seamlessly incorporates the 'val-
ues-norms-design requirements' structure as a foundational 
method (van de Poel 2013).
Value sensitive design
As mentioned, this article aims to adopt and illustrate a 
multi-tiered VSD methodology to design AI-driven digi-
tal personal assistants that responsibly incorporate digital 
nudges within healthcare. Thus, the HLEG AI principles 
are understood as the more general values from which more 
specific values can be derived for doing good. At the same 
time, the normative AI4SG factors are used as the bound-
ary conditions for avoiding harm (c.f., Umbrello and van 
de Poel 2021).
Currently, there are over two decades worth of scholarship 
directly on the VSD approach that explore its philosophical 
foundations (Winkler and Spiekermann 2018 ), methodologi -
cal issues and capabilities (Le Dantec et al. 2009), as well 
as its potential applications to existing and future technolo-
gies (Umbrello and De Bellis 2018). Value sensitive design 
is often defined as "a theoretically grounded approach to 
the design of technology that accounts for human values 
in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the 
design process" (Friedman et al. 2013, p. 2). The primary 
methodological objective of VSD is an explicit investiga-
tion and incorporation of moral values in design. It does 
this through the recursive feedback of three iterative stages 
Human 
Autonomy
(1)Receiver-
contextualized  
intervention (AI4SG  
#3)
(1)Privacy 
protec tion and data 
subject consent 
(AI4SG #5 )
(1)Human-friendly 
semanticisation 
(AI4SG #7 )Prevention 
of Harm
(1)Falsifiability and 
incremental 
deployme nt
(2)(AI4SG #1)
(1)Privacy 
protec tion and data 
subject consent 
(AI4SG #5 )Fairness
(1)Safeguards 
against the 
manipulations of 
predictors (AI4SG  
#2)
(1)Situational  
fairness (AI4SG #6 )Explicability
(1)Receiver-
contextualized  
explanation and 
transparent 
purposes (AI4SG  
#4)
(1)Human-friendly 
semanticisation 
(AI4SG #7 )
Fig. 1  Relationship between higher-order values of the EU HLEG on AI and AI4SG norms. 2021 Source: Umbrello and van de Poel (2021)

==== Page 6 ====
16 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
or 'investigations': conceptual, empirical and technical, as 
shown in Fig.  2.
Conceptual investigations involve (1) identifying both 
direct and indirect stakeholders that are or will be affected 
by the system and (2) formulating working definitions and 
prima facie value tensions that may arise. Empirical investi-
gations examine stakeholders' contexts and emerging values, 
eliciting their values and reformulating the working defini-
tions of the conceptual investigations as necessary. Finally, 
technical investigations look at the discrete technology in 
question, determining how the architecture of the technology 
can support or constrain the values in question.
Tools like the values hierarchy formulated by van de Poel 
(2013) are useful in helping designers to translate what are 
often abstract values into more tangible design requirements 
(see Fig.  3). A values hierarchy is fundamentally built on 
three primary layers: 1) values, which are often general and 
understood as needing to be promoted and designed for as 
much as possible; 2) norms, which are boundary conditions 
or prescriptions for action, and 3) design requirements, as 
specific technical requirements that should be designed for 
as much as possible.VSD for responsible nudging
To illustrate how the VSD approach can be used to design 
responsible nudging, we take up the example of Amazon's 
Alexa digital personal assistant as the use case. Likewise, 
given work that has already been done on adapting the VSD 
approach to AI-driven technologies, we adopt the general 
design program formulated by Umbrello and van de Poel 
(2020) as the starting point (Umbrello and van de Poel 
2021 ). Figure  4 outlines how designers can begin their inves-
tigations in their design program. Albeit differing from one 
project to another, the proposed framework provides the gen-
eral outline that practitioners can follow to ensure they touch 
on the fundamental points presented in this framework.
The four stages of the iterative process are: (1) context, 
(2) value identification, (3) formulating design requirements, 
and (4) prototyping. For the sake of space, we take up the 
approach directly and illustrate its application to the use case 
of Amazon's Alexa. In the last part of the article, we aim to 
discuss and explore the design of the Amazon Alexa Health-
care Skills prototype, albeit ex post facto in this case, using 
the framework described above (Fig.  4).
Fig. 2  The recursive VSD 
tripartite framework employed 
in this study. Source, Umbrello 
(2020)Conceptual Investigations
Valu es from both the relevant  
philosop hical lit erature and those 
explicitly elicit ed from stakeh olders are 
determin ed and investig ated. 
Technical Investigations
The technical limitation s of the 
techno logy itself are evaluated for how 
they support or co nstrain identified 
values and design requirem entsEmpirical Investigations
Stakeholder valu es are empirically 
evaluated through socio-cultural norms 
and transl ated into potential design 
requiremen ts
Design Requirement sNorm sValuesValu e
Norm
Design  
Requir ementDesign  
Requir ementDesign  
Requir ementDesign  
Requir ementNorm Norm Norm
Fig. 3  Values hierarchy. Source: van de Poel (2013)

==== Page 7 ====
17
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
Context analysis
In 2019 Amazon announced a new partnership with the UK's 
National Health Service (NHS). This partnership enabled 
Amazon's digital personal assistant Alexa to offer NHS 
health advice to users at home (Department of Health and 
Social Care 2019). Moreover, in the new Alexa Healthcare 
Skills announced in collaboration with six health companies, 
Amazon says that now Alexa can follow the US Health Insur -
ance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
and transmit and receive protected health information. These 
new Alexa Skills are designed to help users manage different 
healthcare needs such as the coordination and scheduling 
of appointments, care plans, healthcare account informa-
tion, the tracking and monitoring of vitals and symptoms, 
and, finally, the receiving of insights and Health Nudges—or 
recommended courses of action and suggestions—that are 
personalised to them (Jiang 2019). Furthermore, during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, Amazon released additional Alexa 
features to help users stay at home, providing information 
and guidance about the virus (Amazon 2020).
The sociocultural contexts in which a technology is being 
developed is crucial to assess its design and deployment. For 
example, Amazon is not a healthcare company but can now 
handle health data and patient information. Likewise, Alexa 
is a general AI-driven digital personal assistant, commonly 
used for a wide variety of purposes, like playing music or 
giving information about the weather, among many other 
things. In the case of Alexa's new Healthcare Skills, the 
context of use, which can be understood as the motivating 
force beyond its development, includes a diverse range of 
factors: the need to reduce the pressure and burden on NHS, 
healthcare companies and clinicians, mainly by providing information on common illness, the need to render easily 
accessible and valuable health information and tools espe-
cially to vulnerable groups such as elderly and frail patients 
at home and in residential and nursing homes, differently-
abled patients, or, generally, to those who cannot always get 
access to care or know how and when to get such access, 
the need to improve patients' adherence to their medicines 
(Beaney and Kalorai 2020), and for more accurate, preven-
tive and personalised medicine and more beneficial health 
outcomes (Chan et al. 2019). As such, with the addition of 
healthcare skills, it might be argued that this blurs the line 
between different contexts, namely recreational contexts and 
those of healthcare. The introduction of AI-driven digital 
personal assistants can improve the effectiveness of health 
communication and monitoring. Still, concerns may arise 
during their use in practice, based on the need for a com-
prehensive infrastructure that helps the integration between 
different contexts and health systems and health organisa-
tions, the compliance to exchange health data and personal 
information, and so on.
Value identification
Values that are to be promoted by the design Ensuring that 
the AI4SG-VSD approach avoids harming and actively 
contributing to social good requires gearing the approach 
towards collective socially desirable ends. This type of 
explicit adaptation is currently lacking in the existent pro-
posals for AI4SG. In a similar fashion to Umbrello and 
van de Poel ( 2020 ), we adopt an explicit gearing towards 
the SDGs as the best estimation of collectively beneficial 
societal ends given that the UN developed them to favour 
collective action for all countries (UN Task Team on the Fig. 4  AI4SG-VSD design 
process. 2021 Source: Umbrello 
and van de Poel (2021)


==== Page 8 ====
18 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
Post 2015 Agenda 2013). Amazon's Alexa new Healthcare 
Skills design can be said to be part of an extensive network 
to support UN SDG #3, Ensuring healthy lives and promot-
ing well-being at all ages. In particular, it may encourage 
SDG target 3.8: the achievement of universal health cov -
erage, including financial risk protection, access to quality 
essential healthcare services and access to safe, effective, 
quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for 
all (United Nations n.d.).
Values that should be respected, in particular, those 
values that have been identified concerning AI: respect for 
human autonomy, prevention of harm (nonmaleficence), 
fairness and explicability This second level of values are 
values that are to be promoted, especially concerning AI. 
First, a classic tenet of bioethics is the principle of auton-
omy, understood as the right that individuals have to make 
free and meaningful decisions about their treatments. With 
AI, this principle is blurred, according to Floridi et al. 
(2018) because it implies a balance between the decision-
making power that individuals retain for themselves and 
what they decide to delegate to systems such as AI (Floridi 
et al. 2018). The access to health data sets and the provision 
of medical advice and information are no longer restricted 
to the dynamics of the healthcare system nor the recipro-
cal relationship between clinicians and patients. Indeed, big 
tech corporations such as Amazon can answer and suggest 
health-related questions and behaviours. AI-driven sys-
tems can store, archive, collect, and analyse data in new 
and unprecedented modalities, which we already defined as 
hypernudges, raising concerns about privacy and individual 
autonomy. Without explicit informed consent, Amazon can 
monitor users' routine to improve its service (Cuthbertson 
2019) and thus has the potential capacity to utilise and share 
data even for commercial and marketing purposes not related 
to health issues. The involvement of such private actors and 
automated systems in healthcare can thus entail a loss of 
control on personal data and a downplaying of care receivers' 
meaningful choices concerning treatments and assistance.
In this scenario, the emphasis on the value of human 
autonomy can help address the issue of data management on 
the part of external providers and explore the role that digi-
tal nudges may have in the decision-making processes and 
cognitive capabilities of their nudgees. For example, a pilot 
study in Staffordshire has explored the potential of Amazon 
Alexa for patients with diabetes or with other health and 
dependence needs such as anxiety and depression. The study 
has reported that Alexa can have hugely positive effects for 
both patients and family carers, such as an increased sense 
of independence and management of long-term conditions 
(Chambers and Beaney 2020).
Nonmaleficence involves understanding systems' capabili-
ties and limitations to avoid possible harms caused by over -
using or misusing AI technologies (Floridi et al. 2018). In the case of Amazon Alexa, privacy concerns are just one of 
the possible harms. Strictly related to the case under exami-
nation, we may also include other risks such as the unnec-
essary appointments and concerns on the part of patients, 
the possible disappearance of certain medical and caregiver 
professions, the reconfiguration of expertise and responsi-
bilities in and outside the healthcare system, the intercon-
nection of different domains and different values-metrics, 
and the predominant and potential worrisome impact that 
a market-driven system such as a private tech corporation 
may have on shaping healthcare agendas and research (see 
Sharon 2016; 2021).
The value of fairness aims to eliminate unfair discrimi-
nation and ensure that the use of AI creates shared ben-
efits (or at least sharable) and avoids further harms, such 
as the undermining of existing social structures (Floridi 
et al. 2018). Amazon Alexa or similar digital personal 
assistants may exacerbate existing (digital) health divides 
between those who can afford them and those who cannot 
(Stokes-Lampard 2019). Moreover, there is no safeguard to 
prevent the possibility for third parties or hackers and mali-
cious actors to steal data. Beyond the individual level of 
the nudgee and their right to privacy and healthcare, what 
is at stake is the collective dimension of justification on the 
means and modalities of possible interventions in health-
care. Therefore, there is reason to frame the issue of digital 
nudging also in terms of its socio-political relevance, with 
the aim to regulate and promote relational and equal forms 
of accessibility to digital health data and democratic—as 
open to discussion and contestation—modalities of control 
on those latter.
Finally, the value of explicability implies a need to under -
stand AI-driven systems and thus make them intelligible 
and not opaque. There is also a need to hold to account the 
decision-making processes of AI, finding at least one agent 
that can be considered accountable for how the system works 
(Floridi et al. 2018). This is a complex issue due to the vast 
number of people and organisations that deploy and develop 
such technologies and to the fact that AI working is often 
difficult to understand and interpret by those agents.
In cases that involve AI, predictive analytics, profil-
ing and hypernudges, generally understood, traditional 
informed consent or the manifest and transparent charac-
ter of the publicity principle are often not sufficient ele-
ments to preserve and respect users' deliberative choices 
and freedom (Yeung 2015 ; Sunstein 2017). Beyond the 
individual level of users' behaviours, what is at stake in 
the use of digital health nudging is the nature and public 
value of health data and the social, economic and political 
consequences and factors this may entail, as some schol-
ars have recently suggested (Prainsack 2020). And beyond 
the issues of transparency and publicity, we should 
assess and promote modalities that make the adoption 

==== Page 9 ====
19
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
of AI-driven systems and technological influences-types 
such as digital nudges also explainable by public agencies 
and stakeholders to citizens (Pasquale 2015; Santoni de 
Sio and Mecacci 2021).
Context-specific values that are not covered by (1) 
and (2) and derive from the analysis of the specific con-
text in phase, particularly values held by stakeholders  
The last class of values is related to stakeholders' values 
and preferences. In the healthcare domain, the nature of 
care activity is conceived as a response to the needs of 
the 'other' or care receiver to determine the values to be 
included in systems design (see van Wynsberghe 2016). 
Digital personal assistants such as Alexa may mediate 
and radically change the patient-provider relationship and 
the specific care practice that the latter aims to enforce. 
For example, as a virtual clinician at home, Amazon 
Alexa can be used to overcome loneliness and isolation 
and provide social support (Chambers and Beaney 2020). 
Or, more broadly, digital personal assistants can affect 
the users' willingness to disclose aspects of personal and 
clinical life in various ways compared to the more tra-
ditional interaction that a patient may have with human 
caregivers (Debajyoti et al. 2020). Therefore, the value 
of social companionship—and, consequently, considering 
technological systems as social agents or entities—as a 
context-specific value should be put in a sharper focus. 
According to the recent work of Friedman et al. (2019), in 
the possible VSD tools, which are appropriated from the 
social sciences and can be used to investigate and recon-
struct stakeholders' experiences, are included the use of 
values scenarios or sketches, or value-oriented semi-
structured interviews or even the deployment of models 
for informed consent online (Friedman and Hendry 2019). 
These may be appropriate methods for identifying new 
emerging values or validating design solutions that can 
consider different descriptions and understandings of care 
practices and the different usage patterns and perceptions 
across age groups (Oh et al. 2020).Design requirements
Among the host of VSD methodologies available for value 
analysis, a values hierarchy (Fig.  3) is particularly apt at 
visualising how higher-level values can be translated through 
norms and into design requirements. Naturally, the hierar -
chy can function both top-down (values →  norms →  design 
requirements) as well as bottom-up (design requirements → 
norms→  values) depending on the specifics of the design 
programs in which it is used. Figure  5 is an example of how 
a higher-level value can be translated through two of the 
AI4SG norms that are most relevant to it (c.f., Fig.  1) and 
into more tangible design requirements.
In Fig.  5, the value of Fairness is chosen as the exemplar 
of how to illustrate the usefulness of a values hierarchy as 
a tool for translating abstract values into concrete design 
requirements. As one of the higher-level values of the EU 
HLEG, fairness here can be translated through at least two 
AI4SG norms (2 and 6), illustrated in Fig.  1, and into some 
example design requirements that align with this value 
and its associated norms. Naturally, this is one of a host of 
examples of how this translation can be done. Of course, the 
design requirements or even values (depending on the direc-
tion of the hierarchy being undertaken) changes as a function 
of the various contextual factors of any given design domain. 
Simply put, the illustration is not an exhaustive exercise but 
rather 'opens up' the design space for multiple ways that 
designers can reach common goals. Receiver-contextual-
ised intervention (AI4SG #3) and Receiver-contextualised 
explanation and transparent purposes (AI4SG #4) over -
lap into the value of Fairness  also, given that it can come 
into delicate tension with the requirements on the limits of 
transparency as such for the safeguard against the manipu-
lation of predictors (AI4SG #2). This is to say that both 
the values and the norms co-vary and co-constitute one 
another and, to reiterate, are not rank-ordered but actually 
operationalise each other. For this reason, such exercises 
like this allow engineers to more clearly delimit the possible 
requirements needed for a salient design aligned with the 
Design RequirmentsNorm sValuesFairne ss
(1)Safeguards 
against the 
manipulations of 
predictors  
(AI4SG #2)
Limit access to 
ex-post facto data 
modification s 
after results 
displa yEarly detection 
of user future 
engage ment level  
viz. supervised 
learningautomation of ex 
post facto user 
personalisation  
(system 
responsiveness)(1)Situa tional  
fairness [AI4SG  
#6]
(1)end-to-end 
encyrption between 
caregiver and care 
reciever-
pseudonymizati on 
of subject data with 
central processing 
archetecture(1)M odality for data 
subjiect information 
Rectification and 
erasure (e.g., GDPR 
Article 17)Clear terms of use 
and UI/UX 
integration
Fig. 5  Translating the value of Fairness to design requirements through AI4SG norms

==== Page 10 ====
20 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
norms characteristic of AI4SG and the more abstract values 
that are often difficult to conceptualise as concrete design 
requirements.
Prototyping
The prototyping stage does not merely involve testing the 
technical aspects and functioning of technological systems 
but also, in a more fundamental way, the analysis of the ethi-
cal and social effects that can emerge from their deployment 
and field of use. This should include the development and 
co-creation of mock-ups, prototypes or field deployments 
that aims to identify value tensions and other factors and 
implications for the direct and indirect stakeholders and the 
technology at stake (Friedman and Hendry 2019). The case 
of Amazon Alexa is relevant, given its ubiquity, accessibil-
ity, and ease of adoption and implementation into existing 
health domains, in both caregivers and receivers. Alexa's 
pervasiveness exacerbates the technology's systemic inter -
actions that follow from its widespread adoption. Technolo-
gies, like Alexa, can become pervasive across multiple vec-
tors such as those of geography, culture, and demographics, 
among other factors (Friedman et al. 2017). At this stage, 
given its limited deployment, both technical and social/ethi-
cal functioning according to the guidelines can be pen tested 
securely. Emergent issues or misalignment can then result 
in the triggering of another iteration of this four-stage cycle.
Conclusions
Digitisation of medicine brings with it a host of boons such 
as increased efficiency and accessibility. However, with 
these benefits may also emerge public concerns due to the 
specific capabilities of AI-driven systems and the possible 
sources of AI-influences on stakeholders and environments. 
This article proposes that AI-driven digital personal assis-
tants that incorporate digital health nudging can be designed 
to avoid doing harm and promote social good. To do this, 
we suggest that the AI4SG norms form strong normative 
guidelines that designers can adopt to prevent (most) harms. 
Similarly, we show how these norms help translate more 
abstract values such as those of the HLEG AI and SDGs into 
tangible design requirements, thus actively promoting social 
good (as much as possible). Finally, the VSD approach is 
adopted as the general design methodology to encompass 
this multi-tiered strategy. If successful, the VSD approach 
provides, at least, a strong starting point for engineers and 
designers to design AI-driven systems that incorporates 
digital health nudges for  human values and thus not only 
ameliorating potentially misaligned behaviour but actually 
contributing to the social good.Code availability Not applicable.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Ethical approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Anomaly, J. 2021. What is public health? Public goods, publicized 
goods, and the conversion problem. Public Choice . https://  doi. 
org/ 10. 1007/ s11127- 021- 00908-8.
Abdalla, S.M., N. Maani, C.K. Ettman, and S. Galea. 2020. Claiming 
health as a public good in the post-COVID-19 era. Development  
63 (2): 200–204. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1057/ s41301- 020- 00255-z.
Amazon. 2020. Alexa and Amazon Devices COVID-19 resources. 
Amazon https:// blog. about  amazon. com/ devic es/ alexa- and- ama-
zon- devic es- covid- 19- resou rces.
Barton, A., and T. Grüne-Yanoff. 2015. From libertarian paternalism 
to nudging—and beyond. Review of Philosophy and Psychology 6 
(3): 341–359. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s13164- 015- 0268-x.
Beaney, P., H. Kalirai, and R. Chambers. 2020. Alexa… what pills do 
I need to take today? The Prescriber 31: 20–23. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1002/ psb. 1849.
Bernstein, Justin, and Pierce Randall. 2020. Against the public goods 
conception of public health. Public Health Ethics 13 (3): 225–233. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ phe/ phaa0 21.
Buoy Health. 2021. COVID-19: What you need to know about the 
coronavirus. Buoy Health. https:// www. buoyh ealth. com/ learn/  
coron avirus.
Burr, C., N. Cristianini, and J. Ladyman. 2018. An analysis of the 
interaction between intelligent software agents and human users. 
Minds and Machines 28 (4): 735–774. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s11023- 018- 9479-0.
Byambasuren, O., S. Sanders, E. Beller, and P. Glasziou. 2018. Pre-
scribable mHealth apps identified from an overview of systematic 
reviews. NPJ Digital Medicine. 1 (1): 1–12. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1038/ s41746- 018- 0021-9.
Cai, C.W. 2020. Nudging the financial market? A review of the nudge 
theory. Account Finance 60: 3341–3365. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/  
acfi. 12471.

==== Page 11 ====
21
Responsible nudging for social good: new healthcare skills for AI‑driven digital personal…
1 3
Chambers, R., and P. Beaney. 2020. The potential of placing a digital 
assistant in patients’ homes. British Journal of General Practice  
70 (690): 8–9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3399/ bjgp2 0X707 273.
Chan, J., T. Rea, S. Gollakota, et al. 2019. Contactless cardiac arrest 
detection using smart devices. NPJ Digital Medicine. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1038/ s41746- 019- 0128-7.
Cuthbertson, A. 2019. Amazon admits employees listen to Alexa con-
versations. The Independent. https://  www.  indep endent. co. uk/  
life- style/ gadge  ts- and- tech/ news/ amazon- alexa- echo- liste ning-  
spy- secur  ity- a8865 056. html.
Debajyoti, P., C. Arpnikanondt, and M.A. Razzaque. 2020. Personal 
information disclosure via voice assistants: The personalization-
privacy paradox. SN Computer Science. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s42979- 020- 00287-9.
Department of Health and Social Care. 2019. NHS Health Infor -
mation available through Amazon's Alexa. https:// www. gov.  
uk/ gover  nment/ news/ nhs- health- infor  mation- avail able- throu  
gh- amazon- s- alexa.
Floridi, L., J. Cowls, M. Beltrametti, R. Chatila, P. Chazerand, V. Dig-
num, E. Vayena, et al. 2018. AI4People - An ethical framework 
for a good AI society: Opportunities, risks, principles, and recom -
mendations. Minds and Machines. 28: 689–707. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s11023- 018- 9482-5.
Floridi, L., J. Cowls, T.C. King, and M. Taddeo. 2020. Designing AI for 
social good: Seven essential factors. Science and Engineering Eth-
ics. 26: 1771–1796. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11948- 020- 00213-5.
Friedman, B., P.H. Kahn Jr., A. Borning, and A. Huldtgren. 2013. 
Value sensitive design and information systems. In Early engage-
ment and new technologies: Opening up the laboratory, ed. N. 
Doorn, D. Schuurbiers, I. van de Poel, and M.E. Gorman, 55–95. 
Dordrecht: Springer.
Friedman, B., L.P. Nathan, S.K. Kane, and J. Lin. 2017. Envisioning 
cards. University of Washington, Value Sensitive Design Research 
Lab. Retrieved from https:// envis ionin gcards. com/.
Friedman, B., and D.G. Hendry. 2019. Value sensitive design: Shaping 
technology with moral imagination. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Giubilini, A., and J. Savulescu. 2019. Demandingness and public health 
ethics. Moral Philosophy and Politics 6 (1): 65–81. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1515/ mopp- 2018- 0057.
High-Level Expert Group on AI. 2019. Ethics guidelines for trust-
worthy AI | Shaping Europe's digital future. https:// ec. europa. eu/  
digit al- single- market/ en/ news/ ethics- guide lines- trust worthy- ai .
Jiang, R. 2019. Introducing New Alexa Healthcare Skills. Amazon. 
https:// devel oper. amazon. com/ en- US/ blogs/ alexa/ alexa- skills- kit/ 
2019/ 04/ intro ducing- new- alexa- healt  hcare- skills.
Jones, R., J. Pykett, and M. Whitehead. 2013. Changing behaviours: 
On the rise of the psychological state . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Le Dantec, C.A., Poole, E.S., & Wyche, S.P. (2009). Values as lived 
experience: Evolving value sensitive design in support of value 
discovery. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1141–1150. New York: ACM. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 15187 01. 15188 75
Lepenies, R., and M. Małecka. 2015. The institutional consequences 
of nudging–nudges, politics, and the law. Review of Philoso -
phy and Psychology. 6 (3): 427–437. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s13164- 015- 0243-6.
London, A.J. 2019. Artificial intelligence and black-box medical deci-
sions: Accuracy versus explainability. Hastings Center Report 49 
(1): 15–21. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ hast. 973.
Loria, K. 2019. Are health apps putting your privacy at risk? Consumer 
Reports. Retrieved October 9, 2020 from https:// www. consu merre  
ports. org/ health- priva cy/ are- health- apps- putti ng- your- priva  
cy- at- risk/.
Lu, T.-C., Y.-T. Chang, T.-W. Ho, Y. Chen, Y.-T. Lee, Y.-S. Wang, 
C.-C. Fang, et al. 2019. Using a smartwatch with real-time feed-
back improves the delivery of high-quality cardiopulmonary resuscitation by healthcare professionals. Resuscitation  140: 
16–22. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. resus citat ion. 2019. 04. 050.
Maedche, A., S. Morana, S. Shacht, D. Werth, and J. Krumeich. 
2016. Advanced user assistance systems. Business & Informa-
tion Systems Engineering 58 (5): 367–370. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1007/ s12599- 016- 0444-2.
MacKay, K., and M. Quigley. 2018. Exacerbating inequalities? 
Health policy and the behavioural sciences. Health Care Analy -
sis 26: 380–397. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10728- 018- 0357-y .
McMahon, John. 2015. Behavioral economics as neoliberalism: 
Producing and governing “Homo Economicus.” Contemporary 
Political Theory 14 (2): 137–158. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1057/ cpt.  
2014. 14.
Meske, C., I. Amojo, A.-S. Poncette, and F. Balzer. 2019. The potential 
role of digital nudging in the digital transformation of the health -
care industry. In HCII 2019: Design, user experience, and usabil -
ity: Application domains, ed. A. Marcus and W. Wang, 323–336. 
Cham: Springer.
Mittelstadt, B.D., P. Allo, M. Taddeo, S. Wachter, and L. Floridi. 2016. 
The ethics of algorithms: Mapping the debate. Big Data & Soci-
ety. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ F2053 95171 66796 79.
Moon, S., J.A. Røttingen, and J. Frenk. 2017. Global public goods for 
health: Weaknesses and opportunities in the global health system. 
Health Economics, Policy and Law 12 (2): 195–205. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1017/ S1744 13311 600045.
Nykänen, P. 2017. Implementation and evaluation of E-health ecosys-
tems in two-sided markets. In E-Health two-sided markets, ed. V. 
Vimarlund, 125–141. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Oh, Y., K. Chung, and D. Ju. 2020. Differences in interactions with 
a conversational agent. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health. 17: 3189. https://  doi. org/ 10. 3390/  
ijerp h1709 3189.
Pasquale, F. 2015. The black box society. Boston, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Pietrabissa, Giada, Italo Zoppis, Giancarlo Mauri, Roberta Ghiretti, 
Emanuele Maria Giusti, Roberto Cattivelli, Chiara Spatola, Gian 
Mauro Manzoni, and Gianluca Castelnuovo. 2019. System of 
nudge theory-based ICT applications for older citizens: The SEN-
IOR Project. In International Symposium on Pervasive Computing 
Paradigms for Mental Health, ed. Pietro Cipresso, Silvia Serino, 
and Daniela Villani, 29–42. Cham: Springer.
Prainsack, B. 2020. The value of healthcare data: To nudge, or not? 
Policy Studies. 41 (5): 547–562. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01442  
872. 2020. 17235 17.
Santoni de Sio, F., and G. Mecacci. 2021. Four responsibility gaps 
with artificial intelligence: Why they matter and how to address 
them. Philosophy and Technology . https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s13347- 021- 00450-x.
Sezgin, E., Y. Huang, U. Ramtekkar, and S. Lin. 2020. Readiness for 
voice assistants to support healthcare delivery during a health 
crisis and pandemic. NPJ Digital Medicine 3 (1): 1–4. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1038/ s41746- 020- 00332-0.
Sharon, T. 2016. The Googlization of health research: From disruptive 
innovation to disruptive ethics. Personalized Medicine. 13 (6): 
563–574. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2217/ pme- 2016- 0057.
Sharon, T. 2021. From hostile worlds to multiple spheres: Towards a 
normative pragmatics of justice for the Googlization of health. 
Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s11019- 021- 10006-7.
Smith, R.D. 2003. Global public goods and health. Bulletin of the 
World Health Organization 81 (7): 475. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/  
S0042- 96862 00300 07000 04.
Stokes-Lampard H. 2019. Voice-assisted technology has potential, 
but we must not create a 'digital divide' between patients, says 
College. Royal College of General Practitioners. https:// www.  
rcgp. org. uk/ about- us/ news/ 2019/ july/ voice- assis  ted- techn  

==== Page 12 ====
22 M. Capasso, S. Umbrello 
1 3
ology- has- poten tial- but- we- must- not- create- a- digit  al- divide-  
betwe en- patie nts. aspx .
Sunstein, C.R. 2017. Human agency and behavioral economics: Nudg-
ing fast and slow. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Thaler, R.H., and C.R. Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: How to make smart 
decisions. Berlin: Ullstein eBooks.
Umbrello, S., and A.F. De Bellis. 2018. A value-sensitive design 
approach to intelligent agents. In Artificial intelligence safety and 
security, ed. R.V. Yampolskiy, 395–410. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Umbrello, S. 2020. Meaningful human control over smart home sys -
tems: A value sensitive design approach. Humana: Mente Journal 
of Philosophical Studies. 13 (37): 40–65.
Umbrello, S., and I. van de Poel. 2021. Mapping value sensitive design 
onto AI for social good principles. AI and Ethics. 1 (3): 283–296. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s43681- 021- 00038-3.
United Nations. n.d.. Goal #3 Health – United Nations Sustainable 
Development. United Nations. https:// www. un. org/ susta inabl  
edeve lopme nt/ health/.
UN Task Team on the Post 2015 Agenda (March 2013). Report of 
the UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN Development 
Agenda. United Nations. p. 1. Archived from the original on 30 
December 2020. Retrieved 06 July 2021. https:// www. un. org/  
devel opment/ desa/ dpad/ publi cation/ report- of- the- un- system- task-  
team- on- the- post- 2015- devel opment- agenda/.
Valtolina, S., B.R. Barricelli, and S. Di Gaetano. 2020. Communi-
cability of traditional interfaces VS chatbots in healthcare and 
smart home domains. Behaviour & Information Technology. 39 
(1): 108–132. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01449 29X. 2019. 16370 25.
van de Poel, I. 2013. Translating values into design requirements. In 
Philosophy and engineering: Reflections on practice, principles 
and process, ed. D.P. Michelfelder, N. McCarthy, and D.E. Gold-
berg, 253–266. Dordrecht: Springer.
van Wynsberghe, A. 2016. Service robots, care ethics, and design. 
Ethics and Information Technology 18 (4): 311–321. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1007/ s10676- 016- 9409-x.van Wynsberghe, A., and S. Li. 2019. A paradigm shift for robot ethics: 
From HRI to human–robot–system interaction (HRSI). Medicole-
gal and Bioethics  9: 11–21. https://  doi. org/ 10. 2147/  MB. S1603  48.
Vayena, E., A. Blasimme, and I.G. Cohen. 2018. Machine learning in 
medicine: Addressing ethical challenges. PLoS Medicine 15 (11): 
e1002689. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pmed. 10026 89.
Weinmann, M., C. Schneider, and J. vom Brocke. 2016. Digital nudg-
ing. Business & Information Systems Engineering  58: 433–436. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12599- 016- 0453-1.
WHO. 2020. 172 Countries and Multiple Candidate Vaccines Engaged 
in COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility. WHO. https:// www.  
who. int/ news- room/ detail/ 24- 08- 2020- 172- count ries- and- multi  
ple- candi date- vacci nes- engag  ed- in- covid- 19- vacci ne- global-  
access- facil ity .
Winkler, T., and S. Spiekermann. 2018. Twenty years of value sensitive 
design: A review of methodological practices in VSD projects. 
Ethics and Information Technology 23: 17–21. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1007/ s10676- 018- 9476-2.
Yeung, K. 2015. Design for the value of regulation. In Handbook of 
ethics, values, and technological design: Sources, theory, values 
and application domains, ed. J. van den Hoven, P.E. Vermaas, and 
I. van de Poel, 447–472. Dordrecht: Springer.
Yeung, K. 2017. “Hypernudge”: Big Data as a mode of regulation by 
design. Information, Communication & Society. 20 (1): 118–136. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13691 18X. 2016. 11867 13.
Zhang, C., and L. Wan. 2019. The extraction process of durative per -
suasive system design characteristics for healthcare-related mobile 
applications. International Journal of Advanced Smart Conver -
gence. 8 (2): 18–29. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7236/ IJASC. 2019.8. 2. 18.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

