==== Page 1 ====
1
Revisiting Multi-Task Learning in the
Deep Learning Era
Simon Vandenhende, Stamatios Georgoulis, Marc Proesmans, Dengxin Dai and Luc Van Gool
Abstract —Despite the recent progress in deep learning, most approaches still go for a silo-like solution, focusing on learning each
task in isolation: training a separate neural network for each individual task. Many real-world problems, however, call for a multi-modal
approach and, therefore, for multi-tasking models. Multi-task learning (MTL) aims to leverage useful information across tasks to
improve the generalization capability of a model. In this survey, we provide a well-rounded view on state-of-the-art MTL techniques
within the context of deep neural networks. Our contributions concern the following. First, we consider MTL from a network architecture
point-of-view. We include an extensive overview and discuss the advantages/disadvantages of recent popular MTL models. Second,
we examine various optimization methods to tackle the joint learning of multiple tasks. We summarize the qualitative elements of these
works and explore their commonalities and differences. Finally, we provide an extensive experimental evaluation across a variety of
datasets to examine the pros and cons of different methods, including both architectural and optimization based strategies.
Index Terms —Multi-Task Learning, Optimization, Dense Prediction Tasks, Neural Networks.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
OVER the last decade, neural networks have shown
impressive results for a multitude of tasks, such as
semantic segmentation [1], instance segmentation [2] and
monocular depth estimation [3]. Traditionally, these tasks
are tackled in isolation, i.e. a separate neural network is
trained for each task. Yet, many real-world problems are
inherently multi-modal. For example, an autonomous car
should be able to detect all objects in the scene, localize
them, understand what they are, estimate their distance
and trajectory, etc., in order to safely navigate itself in its
surroundings. Similarly, an intelligent advertisement system
should be able to detect the presence of people in its view-
point, understand their gender and age group, analyze their
appearance, track where they are looking at, etc., in order
to provide personalized content. At the same time, humans
are remarkably good at solving many tasks concurrently.
Biological data processing appears to follow a multi-tasking
strategy too: instead of separating tasks and tackling them
in isolation, different processes seem to share the same early
processing layers in the brain (see V1 in macaques [4]). The
aforementioned observations have motivated researchers to
develop multi-task learning (MTL) models that given an
input image can infer all desired task outputs.
Before the deep learning era, MTL works tried to model
the common information among tasks in the hope that
a joint task learning could result in better generalization
Simon Vandenhende and Marc Proesmans are with the Center for
Processing Speech and Images, Department Electrical Engineering, KU
Leuven. E-mail:fsimon.vandenhende,marc.proesmans g@kuleuven.be
Stamatios Georgoulis and Dengxin Dai are with the Computer
Vision Lab, Department Electrical Engineering, ETH Zurich. E-mail:
fgeorgous,daidg@ee.ethz.ch
Luc Van Gool is with both the Center for Processing Speech and
Images, KU Leuven and the Computer Vision Lab, ETHZ. E-mail:
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.chperformance. To achieve this, they placed assumptions on
the task parameter space, such as: task parameters should
lie close to each other w.r.t. some distance metric [5], [6],
[7], [8], share a common probabilistic prior [9], [10], [11],
[12], [13], or reside in a low dimensional subspace [14],
[15], [16] or manifold [17]. These assumptions work well
when all tasks are related [5], [14], [18], [19], but can lead
to performance degradation if information sharing happens
between unrelated tasks. The latter is a known problem in
MTL, referred to as negative transfer . To mitigate this prob-
lem, some of these works opted to cluster tasks into groups
based on prior beliefs about their similarity or relatedness.
In the deep learning era, MTL translates to designing
networks capable of learning shared representations from
multi-task supervisory signals. Compared to the single-task
case, where each individual task is solved separately by its
own network, such multi-task networks theoretically bring
several advantages to the table. First, due to their inherent
layer sharing, the resulting memory footprint is substan-
tially reduced. Second, as they explicitly avoid to repeatedly
calculate the features in the shared layers, once for every
task, they show increased inference speeds. Most impor-
tantly, they have the potential for improved performance
if the associated tasks share complementary information,
or act as a regularizer for one another. Evidence for the
former has been provided in the literature for certain pairs
of tasks, e.g. detection and classiﬁcation [20], [21], detection
and segmentation [2], [22], segmentation and depth estima-
tion [23], [24], while for the latter recent efforts point to
that direction [25]. These remarks led to the development
of the ﬁrst deep multi-task networks that were historically
classiﬁed into soft or hard parameter sharing techniques.
In soft parameter sharing, each task is assigned its own
set of parameters (i.e. task-speciﬁc networks) and feature
sharing mechanisms handle the cross-task talk. For example,
cross-stitch networks [26] used a linear combination of the
activations in every layer of the task-speciﬁc networks as aarXiv:2004.13379v1  [cs.CV]  28 Apr 2020

==== Page 2 ====
2
means for soft feature fusion. Sluice networks [27] extended
this idea by allowing to learn the selective sharing of lay-
ers, subspaces and skip connections. NDDR-CNN [28] also
incorporated dimensionality reduction techniques into the
feature fusion layers. Differently, MTAN [29] used an at-
tention mechanism to share a general feature pool amongst
the task-speciﬁc networks. A concern with soft parameter
sharing approaches is scalability, as the size of the multi-task
network tends to grow linearly with the number of tasks.
In hard parameter sharing, the parameter set is divided
into shared and task-speciﬁc operations. UberNet [30] was
one of the ﬁrst such architectures that hosted a multi-head
design across different network layers and scales. Still, the
most characteristic hard parameter sharing design consists
of a shared encoder that branches out into task-speciﬁc
decoding heads [31], [32], [33], [34]. Multilinear relationship
networks [35] extended this design by placing tensor normal
priors on the parameter set of the fully connected layers. In
these works the branching points in the network are deter-
mined ad hoc, which can lead to suboptimal task group-
ings. To alleviate this issue, tree-based approaches [36], [37]
started from a thin network where tasks initially share all
layers, but the ﬁnal one, and dynamically branched the
model by determining the optimal task groupings in a layer-
by-layer fashion. Similarly, stochastic ﬁlter groups [38] re-
purposed the convolution kernels in each layer to support
shared or task-speciﬁc behaviour.
Despite the progress reported by these or similar works,
the joint learning of multiple tasks is prone to negative
transfer if the task dictionary contains unrelated tasks.
The latter has been well documented in [30], where an
improvement in estimating normals leads to a decline in
object detection, or in [2] where the multi-task version un-
derperforms the single-task ones. To remedy this situation,
a group of methods carefully balanced the learning of the
individual tasks in an attempt to ﬁnd an equilibrium where
no task declines signiﬁcantly. For example, Kendall et al. [32]
used the homoscedastic uncertainty of each individual task
to re-weigh the losses. Gradient normalization [33] was
proposed to balance the losses by adaptively normalizing
the magnitude of each task’s gradients. Similarly, Sinha et
al. [39] tried to balance the losses by adapting the gradients
magnitude, but differently, they employed adversarial train-
ing to this end. Dynamic task prioritization [40] proposed to
dynamically sort the order of task learning, and prioritized
’difﬁcult’ tasks over ’easy’ ones. Zhao et al. [41] introduced
a modulation module to encourage feature sharing among
’relevant’ tasks and disentangle the learning of ’irrelevant’
tasks. Sener and Koltun [34] proposed to cast multi-task
learning into a multi-objective optimization scheme, where
the weighting of the different losses is adaptively changed
such that a Pareto optimal solution is achieved.
Recently, Maninis et al. [42] followed a ’single-tasking’
route for MTL, i.e. in a multi-tasking framework they per-
formed separate forward passes, one for each task, that ac-
tivate shared responses among all tasks, plus some residual
responses that are task-speciﬁc. Furthermore, to suppress
the negative transfer issue they applied adversarial training
on the gradients level that enforces them to be statistically
indistinguishable across tasks during the update step.
All works presented so far follow a common pattern:they directly predict all task outputs from the same input in
one processing cycle (i.e. all predictions are generated once,
in parallel or sequentially, and are not reﬁned afterwards).
In contrast, a few recent works ﬁrst employed a multi-task
network to make initial task predictions, and then leveraged
features from these initial predictions to further improve
each task output – in a one-off or recursive manner. PAD-
Net [24] proposed to distil information from the initial pre-
dictions of other tasks, by means of spatial attention, before
adding it as a residual to the task of interest. JTRL [43] opted
for sequentially predicting each task, with the intention to
utilize information from the past predictions of one task to
reﬁne the features of another task at each iteration. PAP-
Net [44] extended upon this idea, and used a recursive
procedure to propagate similar cross-task and task-speciﬁc
patterns found in the initial task predictions. To do so, they
operated on the afﬁnity matrices of the initial predictions,
and not on the features themselves, as was the case be-
fore [24], [43]. MTI-Net [45] adopted a multi-scale multi-
modal distillation procedure to explicitly model the unique
task interactions that happen at each individual scale.
Related work. MTL has been the subject of several
surveys [47], [48], [49], [50]. In [47], Caruana showed that
MTL can be beneﬁcial as it allows for the acquisition of
inductive bias through the inclusion of related additional
tasks into the training pipeline. The author showcased the
use of MTL in artiﬁcial neural networks, decision trees and
k-nearest neighbors methods, but this study is placed in the
very early days of neural networks rendering it outdated in
the deep learning era. Ruder [48] gave an overview of recent
MTL techniques (e.g. [26], [27], [32], [36]) applied in deep
neural networks. In the same vein, Zhang and Yang [49]
provided a survey that includes feature learning, low-rank,
task clustering, task relation learning, and decomposition
approaches for MTL. Yet, both works are rather literature
review studies without an empirical evaluation or compar-
ison of the presented techniques. Finally, Gong et al. [50]
benchmarked several task balancing approaches (e.g. ﬁxed,
uncertainty [32], DWA [29]) using different hard parameter
sharing networks (shared trunk, task-speciﬁc heads) across
three MTL datasets. Still, the scope of this study is rather
limited, and explicitly focuses on the task balancing aspect.
In this survey, we provide a well-rounded view on state-
of-the-art MTL techniques within the context of deep neu-
ral networks. From a network architecture point-of-view,
we analyze both encoder- and decoder-based approaches
as well as other designs. From an optimization strategy
point-of-view, we consider the majority of task balancing,
adversarial and modulation techniques. We provide exten-
sive experimental evaluation across different datasets both
within the scope of each group of methods (e.g. encoder-
based approaches) as well as across groups of methods (e.g.
encoder- vs decoder-based approaches). Note that, in our
experiments we emphasize on multiple dense prediction
tasks, rather than multiple classiﬁcation tasks, an arguably
harder case1that has been mostly under-explored in MTL.
To the best of our knowledge this is the ﬁrst survey on MTL
1. As jointly learning multiple dense prediction tasks is governed by
the use of different loss functions, unlike classiﬁcation tasks that mostly
use cross-entropy losses, additional consideration is required to avoid
a scenario where some tasks overwhelm the others during training.

==== Page 3 ====
3
Multi-Task Learning Methods
Deep Multi-Task
Architectures (Sec. 2)
Encoder-Based
(Sec. 2.2)
Cross-Stitch Networks [26]
Sluice Networks [27]
NDDR-CNN [28]
MTAN [29]
Tree-Based [36], [37]Decoder-Based
(Sec. 2.3)
PAD-Net [24]
PAP-Net [44]
JTRL [43]
MTI-Net [45]Other
(Sec. 2.4)
ASTMT [42]Optimization Strategy
Methods (Sec. 3)
Task Balancing
(Sec. 3.1)
Fixed
Uncertainty [32]
GradNorm [33]
DWA [29]
DTP [40]
MGDA [34]Other
(Sec. 3.2)
Adversarial [39], [42], [46]
Modulation [41]
Fig. 1: A taxonomy of multi-task learning approaches in the deep learning era.
Task A Task B Task C
SharedTask
speciﬁc
(a) Hard parameter sharing.
Task A Task B Task C
Cross-talk (b) Soft parameter sharing.
Fig. 2: Multi-task learning using deep neural networks.
that explicitly explores such a wide range of subtopics and
experimentally veriﬁes their impact. Upon publication, all
code will be made publicly available to ease the adoption of
MTL techniques within deep neural networks.
Paper overview. Section 2 describes different deep
multi-task architectures, subdivided into two main groups:
encoder-based and decoder-based approaches. Section 3
surveys various optimization techniques for balancing the
inﬂuence of the tasks when updating the network’s weights.
In Section 4 we provide an extensive experimental com-
parison between different MTL methods, including both
architectural and optimization based techniques, across a
variety of datasets. Section 5 discusses the relations of MTL
with other ﬁelds. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 D EEPMULTI-TASKARCHITECTURES
In this section, we discuss deep multi-task architectures
from different groups of works, and analyze their ad-
vantages and disadvantages from a theoretical point-of-
view. An experimental comparison is also provided later
in Section 4. Note that, as a detailed presentation of each
architecture is beyond the scope of this survey, in each case
we refer the reader to the corresponding paper for further
details that complement the following descriptions.
2.1 A New Taxonomy of MTL Approaches
As explained in Section 1, multi-task networks have histor-
ically been classiﬁed into soft or hard parameter sharing
techniques. In hard parameter sharing , the parameter set isdivided into shared and task-speciﬁc parameters (see Fig-
ure 2a). MTL models using hard parameter sharing typically
consist of a shared encoder that branches out into task-
speciﬁc heads [31], [32], [33], [34]. In soft parameter sharing ,
each task is assigned its own set of parameters and a feature
sharing mechanism handles the cross-talk (see Figure 2b).
Several recent MTL works took inspiration from both
hard and soft parameter sharing schemes to jointly solve
multiple dense prediction tasks. As a consequence, it is
debatable whether the soft vs hard parameter sharing
paradigm should still be used as the main framework for
classifying MTL architectures. In this survey, we propose an
alternative taxonomy that discriminates between different
architectures on the basis of where the task interactions take
place, i.e. the locations in the network where information
or features are exchanged or shared between tasks. Given
this criterion, we distinguish between two types of models:
encoder-based and decoder-based MTL architectures.
In the former case, the tasks share or exchange features
during the encoding stage, after which a set of task-speciﬁc
heads predict the output for each task. Note that, there is no
further interaction between the task-speciﬁc heads during
the decoding stage. In the latter case, the tasks share or
exchange features during the decoding stage (i.e. after the
task-speciﬁc heads) to reﬁne the initial predictions for every
task. Figure 1 gives an overview of the proposed taxonomy,
listing representative works in each case.
2.2 Encoder-Based Architectures
Encoder-based architectures share the task features in the
encoding stage, before they process them with a set of
independent task-speciﬁc heads. A number of works [31],
[32], [33], [34], [51] followed an ad hoc strategy by sharing an
off-the-shelf backbone network in combination with small
task-speciﬁc heads (see Figure 2a). This model relies on the
encoder (i.e. backbone network) to learn a generic represen-
tation of the scene. The features from the encoder are then
used by the task-speciﬁc heads to get the predictions for
every task. While this simple model shares the full encoder
amongst all tasks, recent works have considered where and
how the feature sharing should happen in the encoder. We
discuss such sharing strategies in the following sections.

==== Page 4 ====
4
Task A
Cross-Stitch Unit / NDDR-LayerTask B
Fig. 3: The architecture of
cross-stitch networks [26] and
NDDR-CNNs [28]. The acti-
vations from all single-task
networks are fused across
several encoding layers. Dif-
ferent feature fusion mecha-
nisms were used in each case.
Shared Encoder
Task B
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention Module
Task A
Attention Module
Attention Module
Attention ModuleFig. 4: The architecture of
MTAN [29]. Task-speciﬁc at-
tention modules select and
reﬁne features from several
layers of a shared encoder.
2.2.1 Cross-Stitch Networks
Cross-stitch networks [26] shared the activations amongst
all single-task networks in the encoder. Assume we are
given two activation maps xA;xBat a particular layer, that
belong to tasks AandBrespectively. A learnable linear
combination of these activation maps is applied, before
feeding the transformed result ~xA;~xBto the next layer in the
single-task networks. The transformation is parameterized
by learnable weights , and can be expressed as
~xA
~xB
=AAAB
BABBxA
xB
: (1)
As illustrated in Figure 3, this procedure is repeated at
multiple locations in the encoder. By learning the weights
, the network can decide the degree to which the features
are shared between tasks. In practice, we are required to
pre-train the single-task networks, before stitching them
together, in order to maximize the performance. A disadvan-
tage of cross-stitch networks is that the size of the network
increases linearly with the number of tasks. Furthermore, it
is not clear where the cross-stitch units should be inserted in
order to maximize their effectiveness. Sluice networks [27]
extended this work by also supporting the selective sharing
of subspaces and skip connections.
2.2.2 Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction
Neural Discriminative Dimensionality Reduction CNNs
(NDDR-CNNs) [28] used a similar architecture with cross-
stitch networks (see Figure 3). However, instead of utilizing
a linear combination to fuse the activations from all single-
task networks, a dimensionality reduction mechanism is
employed. First, features with the same spatial resolution
in the single-task networks are concatenated channel-wise.
Second, the number of channels is reduced by processing
the features with a 1 by 1 convolutional layer, before feeding
the result to the next layer. The convolutional layer allows
to fuse activations across all channels. Differently, cross-
stitch networks only allow to fuse activations from channels
that share the same index. The NDDR-CNN behaves as a
cross-stitch network when the non-diagonal elements in the
weight matrix of the convolutional layer are zero.
Due to their similarity with cross-stitch networks,
NDDR-CNNs are prone to the same problems. First, thereis a scalability concern when dealing with a large number
of tasks. Second, NDDR-CNNs involve additional design
choices, since we need to decide where to include the NDDR
layers. Finally, both cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs
only allow to use limited local information when fusing
the activations from the different single-task networks. We
hypothesize that this is suboptimal cause the use of sufﬁ-
cient context is very important during encoding – as already
shown for the tasks of image classiﬁcation [52] and semantic
segmentation [53], [54], [55]. This is backed up by certain
decoder-based architectures in Section 2.3 that overcome the
limited receptive ﬁeld by predicting the tasks at multiple
scales and by sharing the features repeatedly at every scale.
2.2.3 Multi-Task Attention Networks
Multi-Task Attention Networks (MTAN) [29] used a shared
backbone network in conjunction with task-speciﬁc atten-
tion modules in the encoder (see Figure 4). The shared back-
bone extracts a general pool of features. Then, each task-
speciﬁc attention module selects features from the general
pool by applying a soft attention mask. The attention mech-
anism is implemented using regular convolutional layers
and a sigmoid non-linearity. Since the attention modules
are small compared to the backbone network, the MTAN
model does not suffer as severely from the scalability issues
that are typically associated with cross-stitch networks and
NDDR-CNNs. However, similar to the fusion mechanism in
the latter works, the MTAN model can only use limited local
information to produce the attention mask.
2.2.4 Tree-Based Encoders
The models presented in Sections 2.2.1-2.2.3 softly shared
the features amongst tasks during the encoding stage.
Differently, tree-based encoders followed a hard-parameter
sharing scheme. Before presenting these methods, consider
the following observation: deep neural networks tend to
learn hierarchical image representations [56]. The early lay-
ers tend to focus on more general low-level image features,
such as edges, corners, etc., while the deeper layers tend
to extract high-level information that is more task-speciﬁc.
Motivated by this observation, tree-based encoders opted to
learn similar hierarchical encoding structures [36], [37], [57].
These ramiﬁed networks typically start with a number of
shared layers, after which different (groups of) tasks branch
out into their own sequence of layers. In doing so, the dif-
ferent branches gradually become more task-speciﬁc as we
move to the deeper layers. This behaviour aligns well with
the hierarchical representations learned by deep neural nets.
However, as the number of possible network conﬁgurations
are combinatorially large, deciding what layers to share and
where to branch out becomes cumbersome. The following
works tried to automate the procedure of hierarchically
clustering the tasks to form tree-based encoders.
Fully-Adaptive Feature Sharing (FAFS) [36] started from
a thin network, where tasks initially shared all layers, and
dynamically grew the model in a greedy layer-by-layer fash-
ion. The procedure for constructing the tree-based encoder is
illustrated in Figure 5. The task groupings at each layer are
decided based on the probability of concurrently ’simple’
or ’difﬁcult’ examples across tasks. This strategy assumes
that it is preferable to solve two tasks in an isolated manner

==== Page 5 ====
5
Layer L 
Layer L-1
Layer L-2Layer L 
Layer L-1
Layer L-2
Fig. 5: Fully-adaptive feature sharing (FAFS) builds a tree-
based encoder online during training [36]. (Left) The model
initially shares all layers up to layer L, where we have a
junction with 6 branches, one per task. Next, FAFS decides
the task groupings at layer L.(Right) The 6 tasks are divided
into 3 clusters. At layer L 1, we create 3 new branches, i.e.
one per cluster. The weights at the newly created junction
are initialized by replicating the current weights. In the next
step, we determine how to group the tasks at layer L 1.
The procedure ﬁnishes when no new branches are created.
(i.e. different branches) when the majority of examples are
’simple’ for one task, but ’difﬁcult’ for the other2. Interest-
ingly, during the tree construction phase the FAFS method
allows ﬂexibility by ﬁnding a trade-off between generating
new branches for separating dissimilar (groups of) tasks,
and minimizing the number of network parameters.
A considerable advantage of the FAFS method is that the
computational overhead to determine the task groupings is
negligible. However, the use of sample difﬁculty as a task
afﬁnity measure suffers from strong dataset dependency.
Consider the example where we solve two separate tasks,
monocular depth estimation and semantic segmentation, in
an autonomous driving dataset. Estimating depth is known
to be increasingly difﬁcult at larger distances [31]. At the
same time, there is typically an imbalance in the semantic
labels. For example, only a limited number of scenes show
examples of motorbikes, making it harder to predict their
semantic label correctly. As a result, depending on where
the motorbike examples are located in the scene, close by or
far away, the semantic segmentation and monocular depth
estimation tasks will be judged more or less related. The task
afﬁnity measure in FAFS is thus very sensitive to the bias
that is present in the dataset, possibly ignoring the actual
task relationships in the process.
Branched Multi-Task Networks [37] deﬁned the task
groupings based on feature afﬁnity scores, rather than sam-
ple difﬁculty. The main assumption is that two tasks are
strongly related, if their single-task models rely on a similar
set of features. An efﬁcient method, i.e. Representation
Similarity Analysis [58], is used to quantify this property. In
particular, the task afﬁnity scores are found by computing
correlations between image features that are extracted by a
set of pretrained single-task networks.
Similarly to FAFS, it is possible to optimize a trade-off
between network size and task similarity. Differently, the
tree structure is determined ofﬂine using the pre-calculated
2. In practice, the decision of whether an example is considered ’easy’
or ’difﬁcult’ for a certain task is tied to a predetermined performance
metric, e.g. a threshold w.r.t. to the task’s loss function.
Backbone
Multi-Modal
Distillation
Initial T ask
PredictionsFig. 6: The architecture in PAD-Net [24]. Features extracted
by a backbone network are passed to task-speciﬁc heads
to make initial task predictions. The task features from the
different heads are then combined through a distillation
unit to make the ﬁnal predictions. Note that, auxiliary tasks
can be used in this framework, i.e. tasks for which initial
predictions are only generated, but not ﬁnal ones.
afﬁnities for the whole network, and not online in a greedy
layer-by-layer fashion. This strategy promotes task group-
ings that are optimal in a global, rather than local, sense.
Most importantly, as the task afﬁnity scores are based on
feature similarity, rather than sample difﬁculty, they do not
suffer from strong dataset dependency as in [36].
Yet, a disadvantage of the approach is that a set of single-
task networks need to be pretrained ofﬂine to determine the
task groupings, which might render the tree construction
phase time-consuming or computationally expensive. In
contrast, FAFS determines the task groupings online during
the tree construction phase.
2.3 Decoder-Based Architectures
The encoder-based architectures in Section 2.2 follow a
common pattern: they directly predict all task outputs from
the same input in one processing cycle (i.e. all predictions
are generated once, in parallel or sequentially, and are not
reﬁned afterwards). By doing so, they fail to capture com-
monalities and differences among tasks, that are likely fruit-
ful for one another (e.g. depth discontinuities are usually
aligned with semantic edges). Arguably, this might be the
reason for the moderate only performance improvements
achieved by the encoder-based approaches to MTL (see
Section 4.2). To alleviate this issue, a few recent works
ﬁrst employed a multi-task network to make initial task
predictions, and then leveraged features from these initial
predictions in order to further improve each task output –
in an one-off or recursive manner. As these MTL approaches
also share or exchange information during the decoding
stage, we refer to them as decoder-based architectures.
2.3.1 PAD-Net
PAD-Net [24] was one of the ﬁrst decoder-based architec-
tures. The model itself is visualized in Figure 6. As can be
seen, the input image is ﬁrst processed by an off-the-shelf

==== Page 6 ====
6
backbone network. The backbone features are further pro-
cessed by a set of task-speciﬁc heads that produce an initial
prediction for every task. These initial task predictions add
deep supervision to the network, but they can also be used
to exchange information between tasks, as will be explained
next. The task features in the last layer of the task-speciﬁc
heads contain a per-task feature representation of the scene.
PAD-Net proposed to re-combine them via a multi-modal
distillation unit, whose role is to extract cross-task informa-
tion, before producing the ﬁnal task predictions.
PAD-Net performs the multi-modal distillation by
means of a spatial attention mechanism. Particularly, the
output features Fo
kfor taskkare calculated as
Fo
k=Fi
k+X
l6=k Wk;lFi
lFi
l; (2)
where Wk;lFi
l
returns a spatial attention mask that is ap-
plied to the initial task features Fi
lfrom taskl. The attention
mask itself is found by applying a convolutional layer Wk;l
to extract local information from the initial task features.
Equation 2 assumes that the task interactions are location
dependent, i.e. tasks are not in a constant relationship across
the entire image. This can be understood from a simple ex-
ample. Consider two dense prediction tasks, e.g. monocular
depth prediction and semantic segmentation. Depth discon-
tinuities and semantic boundaries often coincide. However,
when we segment a ﬂat object, e.g. a magazine, from a ﬂat
surface, e.g. a table, we will still ﬁnd a semantic boundary
where the depth map is rather continuous. In this particular
case, the depth features provide no additional information
for the localization of the semantic boundaries. The use
of spatial attention explicitly allows the network to select
information from other tasks at locations where its useful.
The encoder-based approaches in Section 2.2 shared fea-
tures amongst tasks using the intermediate representations
in the encoder. Differently, PAD-Net models the task inter-
actions by applying a spatial attention layer to the features
in the task-speciﬁc heads. In contrast to the intermediate
feature representations in the encoder, the task features
used by PAD-Net are already disentangled according to the
output task. We hypothesize that this makes it easier for
other tasks to distill the relevant information. This multi-
step decoding strategy from PAD-Net is applied and reﬁned
in other decoder-based approaches.
2.3.2 Pattern-Afﬁnitive Propagation Networks
Pattern-Afﬁnitive Propagation Networks (PAP-Net) [44]
used an architecture similar to PAD-Net (see Figure 7), but
the multi-modal distillation in this work is performed in
a different manner. The authors argue that directly work-
ing on the task features space via the spatial attention
mechanism, as done in PAD-Net, might be a suboptimal
choice. As the optimization still happens at a different
space, i.e. the task label space, there is no guarantee that
the model will learn the desired task relationships. Instead,
they statistically observed that pixel afﬁnities tend to align
well with common local structures on the task label space.
Motivated by this observation, they proposed to leverage
pixel afﬁnities in order to perform multi-modal distillation.
To achieve this, the backbone features are ﬁrst processed
by a set of task-speciﬁc heads to get an initial prediction
p BackboneC x H x WPer-T ask Pixel
Afﬁnity
Initial T ask
PredictionsAdaptive Combination
Diffusion
Multi-Modal DistillationDiffusion
Per-T ask Pixel
Afﬁnty
HW x HWFig. 7: The architecture in PAP-Net [44]. Features extracted
by a backbone network are passed to task-speciﬁc heads
to make initial task predictions. The task features from the
different heads are used to calculate a per-task pixel afﬁnity
matrix. The afﬁnity matrices are adaptively combined and
diffused back into the task features space to spread the cross-
task correlation information across the image. The reﬁned
features are used to make the ﬁnal task predictions.
for every task. Second, a per-task pixel afﬁnity matrix MTj
is calculated by estimating pixel-wise correlations upon the
task features coming from each head. Third, a cross-task
information matrix ^MTjfor every task Tjis learned by
adaptively combining the afﬁnity matrices MTifor tasksTi
with learnable weights Tj
i
^MTj=X
TiTj
iMTi: (3)
Finally, the task features coming from each head jare
reﬁned using the cross-task information matrix ^MTj. In
particular, the cross-task information matrix is diffused into
the task features space to spread the correlation information
across the image. This effectively weakens or strengthens
the pixel correlations for task Tj, based on the pixel afﬁnities
from other tasks Ti. The reﬁned features are used to make
the ﬁnal predictions for every task.
All previously discussed methods only use limited local
information when fusing features from different tasks. For
example, cross-stitch networks and NDDR-CNNs combine
the features in a channel-wise fashion, while PAD-Net only
uses the information from within a 3 by 3 pixels window
to construct the spatial attention mask. Differently, PAP-
Net also models the non-local relationships through pixel
afﬁnities measured across the entire image.
2.3.3 Joint Task-Recursive Learning
Joint Task-Recursive Learning (JTRL) [43] recursively pre-
dicts two tasks at increasingly higher scales in order to grad-
ually reﬁne the results based on past states. The architecture
is illustrated in Figure 8. Similarly to PAD-Net and PAP-Net,
a multi-modal distillation mechanism is used to combine
information from earlier task predictions, through which
later predictions are reﬁned. Differently, the JTRL model
predicts two tasks sequentially, rather than in parallel, and
in an intertwined manner. The main disadvantage of this
approach is that it is not straightforward, or even possible,
to extent this model to more than two tasks given the
intertwined manner at which task predictions are reﬁned.

==== Page 7 ====
7
Backbone
Step t - 1 Step t Step t + 1
Fig. 8: The architecture in Joint Task-Recursive Learn-
ing [43]. The features of two tasks are progressively reﬁned
in an intertwined manner based on past states.
Backbone
Scale
1/32Distillation
Scale 1/32Scale
1/16Distillation
Scale 1/16Scale
1/8Distillation
Scale 1/8Scale
1/4 Initial T ask Predictions Distillation
Scale 1/4
Feature
Propagation Module
Feature
Propagation ModuleInitial T ask Predictions
Feature
Propagation ModuleInitial T ask PredictionsFeature
Aggregation
Feature
Aggregation 
Multi-Scale
Multi-Modal
Distillation
Fig. 9: The architecture in Multi-Scale Task Interaction Net-
works [45]. Starting from a backbone that extracts multi-
scale features, initial task predictions are made at each scale.
These task features are then distilled separately at every
scale, allowing the model to capture unique task interactions
at multiple scales, i.e. receptive ﬁelds. After distillation, the
distilled task features from all scales are aggregated to make
the ﬁnal task predictions. To boost performance, a feature
propagation module is included to pass information from
lower resolution task features to higher ones.
2.3.4 Multi-Scale Task Interaction Networks
In the decoder-based architectures presented so far, the
multi-modal distillation was performed at a ﬁxed scale,
i.e. the features of the backbone’s last layer. This rests on
the assumption that all relevant task interactions can solely
be modeled through a single ﬁlter operation with speciﬁc
receptive ﬁeld. However, Multi-Scale Task Interaction Net-
works (MTI-Net) [45] showed that this is a rather strict as-
sumption. In fact, tasks can inﬂuence each other differently
at different receptive ﬁelds.
To account for this restriction, MTI-Net explicitly took
into account task interactions at multiple scales. Its architec-
ture is illustrated in Figure 9. First, an off-the-shelf backbone
network extracts a multi-scale feature representation from
the input image. From the multi-scale feature representation
an initial prediction for every task is made at each scale. The
task predictions at a particular scale are found by applying
a task-speciﬁc head to the backbone features extracted at
that scale. Similarly to PAD-Net, the features in the last
layer of the task-speciﬁc heads are combined and reﬁned tomake the ﬁnal predictions. Differently, in MTI-Net the per-
task feature representations can be distilled at each scale
separately. This allows to have multiple task interactions,
each modeled within a speciﬁc receptive ﬁeld. The distilled
multi-scale features are upsampled to the highest scale and
concatenated, resulting in a ﬁnal feature representation for
every task. The ﬁnal task predictions are found by decoding
these ﬁnal feature representations in a task-speciﬁc manner
again. The performance was further improved by also prop-
agating information from the lower resolution task features
to the higher ones using a Feature Propagation Module.
The experimental evaluation in [45] shows that distilling
task information at multiple scales increases the multi-
tasking performance compared to PAD-Net where such
information is only distilled at a single scale. Furthermore,
since MTI-Net distills the features at multiple scales, i.e.
using different pixel dilations, it overcomes the issue of
using only limited local information to fuse the features,
which was already shown to be beneﬁcial in PAP-Net.
2.4 Other Approaches
A number of approaches that fall outside the aforemen-
tioned categories have been proposed in the literature. For
example, multilinear relationship networks [35] used ten-
sor normal priors to the parameter set of the task-speciﬁc
heads to allow interactions in the decoding stage. Yang et
al. [59] generalized matrix factorisation approaches to MTL
in order to learn cross-task sharing structures in every layer
of the network. Routing networks [60] proposed a princi-
pled approach to determine the connectivity of a network’s
function blocks through routing. Piggyback [61] showed
how to adapt a single, ﬁxed neural network to a multi-
task network by learning binary masks. Huang et al. [57]
introduced a method rooted in neural architecture search for
the automated construction of a tree-based multi-attribute
learning network. Stochastic ﬁlter groups [38] re-purposed
the convolution kernels in each layer of the network to
support shared or task-speciﬁc behaviour. In a similar vein,
feature partitioning [62] presented partitioning strategies to
assign the convolution kernels in each layer of the network
into different tasks. In general, these works have a different
scope within MTL, e.g. automate the network architecture
design. Moreover, they mostly focus on solving multiple
(binary) classiﬁcation tasks, rather than multiple dense pre-
dictions tasks. As a result, they fall outside the scope of this
survey, with one notable exception that is discussed next.
Attentive Single-Tasking of Multiple Tasks (ASTMT) [42]
proposed to take a ’single-tasking’ route for the MTL prob-
lem. That is, within a multi-tasking framework they per-
formed separate forward passes, one for each task, that ac-
tivate shared responses among all tasks, plus some residual
responses that are task-speciﬁc. Furthermore, to suppress
the negative transfer issue they applied adversarial training
on the gradients level that enforces them to be statistically
indistinguishable across tasks. An advantage of this ap-
proach is that shared and task-speciﬁc information within
the network can be naturally disentangled. On the negative
side, however, the tasks can not be predicted altogether, but
only one after the other, which signiﬁcantly increases the
inference speed and somehow deﬁes the purpose of MTL.

==== Page 8 ====
8
3 O PTIMIZATION IN MTL
In the previous section, we discussed about the construction
of network architectures able to learn multiple tasks con-
currently. Still, a signiﬁcant challenge in MTL stems from
the optimization procedure itself. In particular, we need to
carefully balance the joint learning of all tasks to avoid a
scenario where one or more tasks have a dominant inﬂuence
in the network weights. In this section, we discuss several
methods that have considered this task balancing problem.
3.1 Task Balancing Approaches
Without loss of generality, the optimization objective in a
MTL problem, assuming task-speciﬁc weights wiand task-
speciﬁc loss functions Li, can be formulated as
LMTL =X
iwiLi: (4)
When using stochastic gradient descent to minimize the
objective from Equation 4, which is the standard approach
in the deep learning era, the network weights in the shared
layersWshare updated by the following rule
Wsh=Wsh X
iwi@Li
@Wsh: (5)
From Equation 5 we can draw the following conclusions.
First, the network weight update can be suboptimal when
the task gradients conﬂict, or dominated by one task when
its gradient magnitude is much higher w.r.t. the other tasks.
This motivated researchers [29], [32], [33], [40] to balance the
gradient magnitudes by setting the task-speciﬁc weights wi
in the loss. To this end, other works [34], [41], [63] have also
considered the inﬂuence of the direction of the task gradi-
ents. Second, each task’s inﬂuence on the network weight
update can be controlled, either indirectly by adapting the
task-speciﬁc weights wiin the loss, or directly by operating
on the task-speciﬁc gradients@Li
@Wsh. A number of methods
that tried to address these problems are discussed next.
3.1.1 Uncertainty Weighting
Kendall et al. [32] used the homoscedastic uncertainty to
balance the single-task losses. The homoscedastic uncer-
tainty or task-dependent uncertainty is not an output of the
model, but a quantity that remains constant for different
input examples of the same task. The optimization pro-
cedure is carried out to maximise a Gaussian likelihood
objective that accounts for the homoscedastic uncertainty.
In particular, they optimize the model weights Wand the
noise parameters 1,2to minimize the following objective
L(W; 1;2) =1
22
1L1(W) +1
22
2L2(W) + log12:(6)
The loss functions L1,L2belong to the ﬁrst and second
task respectively. By minimizing the loss Lw.r.t. the noise
parameters 1,2, one can essentially balance the task-
speciﬁc losses during training. The optimization objective in
Equation 6 can easily be extended to account for more than
two tasks too. The noise parameters are updated through
standard backpropagation during training.
Note that, increasing the noise parameter ireduces
the weight for task i. Consequently, the effect of task ion the network weight update is smaller when the task’s
homoscedastic uncertainty is high. This is advantageous
when dealing with noisy annotations since the task-speciﬁc
weights will be lowered automatically for such tasks.
3.1.2 Gradient Normalization
Gradient normalization (GradNorm) [33] proposed to con-
trol the training of multi-task networks by stimulating the
task-speciﬁc gradients to be of similar magnitude. By doing
so, the network is encouraged to learn all tasks at an equal
pace. Before presenting this approach, we introduce the
necessary notations in the following paragraph.
We deﬁne the L2 norm of the gradient for the weighted
single-task loss wi(t)Li(t)at steptw.r.t. the weights W,
asGW
i(t). We additionally deﬁne the following quantities,
the mean task gradient w.r.t. the weights Wat stept:
GW(t) =EtaskGW
i(t)
;
the loss ratio for task iat stept, which can be viewed
as a measure for the inverse training rate of task i:
~Li(t) =Li(t)=Li(0);
the relative inverse training rate of task iat stept:
ri(t) =~Li(t)=Etaskh
~Li(t)i
.
GradNorm aims to balance two properties during the
training of a multi-task network. First, balancing the gradi-
ent magnitudes GW
i. To achieve this, the mean gradient GW
is considered as a common basis from which the relative gra-
dient sizes across tasks can be measured. Second, balancing
the pace at which different tasks are learned. The inverse
training rate ri(t)is used to this end. When the inverse
training rate ri(t)increases, the gradient magnitude GW
i(t)
for taskishould increase as well to stimulate the task to
train more quickly. GradNorm tackles both objectives by
minimizing the following loss
GW
i(t) GW(t)ri(t): (7)
Remember that, the gradient magnitude GW
i(t)for taski
depends on the weighted single-task loss wi(t)Li(t). As
a result, the objective in Equation 7 can be minimized by
adjusting the task-speciﬁc weights wi. In practice, during
training these task-speciﬁc weights are updated in every
iteration using backpropagation. After every update, the
task-speciﬁc weights wi(t)are re-normalized in order to
decouple the learning rate from the task-speciﬁc weights.
Note that, calculating the gradient magnitude GW
i(t)
requires a backward pass through the task-speciﬁc layers
of every task i. However, savings on computation time can
be achieved by considering the task gradient magnitudes
only w.r.t. the weights in the last shared layer.
Different from uncertainty weighting, GradNorm does
not take into account the task-dependent uncertainty to re-
weight the task-speciﬁc losses. Rather, GradNorm tries to
balance the pace at which tasks are learned, while avoiding
gradients of different magnitude.
3.1.3 Dynamic Weight Averaging
Similarly to GradNorm, Liu et al. [29] proposed a technique,
termed Dynamic Weight Averaging (DWA), to balance the
pace at which tasks are learned. Differently, DWA only
requires access to the task-speciﬁc loss values. This avoids

==== Page 9 ====
9
having to perform separate backward passes during train-
ing in order to obtain the task-speciﬁc gradients. In DWA,
the task-speciﬁc weight wifor taskiat steptis set as
wi(t) =Nexp (ri(t 1)=T)P
nexp (rn(t 1)=T);rn(t 1) =Ln(t 1)
Ln(t 2);
(8)
withNbeing the number of tasks. The scalars rn()estimate
the relative descending rate of the task-speciﬁc loss values
Ln. The temperature Tcontrols the softness of the task
weighting in the softmax operator. When the loss of a task
decreases at a slower rate compared to other tasks, the task-
speciﬁc weight in the loss is increased.
Note that, the task-speciﬁc weights wiare solely based
on the rate at which the task-speciﬁc losses change. Such
a strategy requires to balance the overall loss magnitudes
beforehand, else some tasks could still overwhelm the others
during training. GradNorm avoids this problem by balanc-
ing both the training rates and the gradient magnitudes
through a single objective (see Equation 7).
3.1.4 Dynamic Task Prioritization
The task balancing techniques in Sections 3.1.1-3.1.3 opted to
optimize the task-speciﬁc weights wias part of a Gaussian
likelihood objective [32], or in order to balance the pace at
which the different tasks are learned [29], [33]. In contrast,
Dynamic Task Prioritization (DTP) [40] opted to prioritize
the learning of ’difﬁcult’ tasks by assigning them a higher
task-speciﬁc weight. The motivation is that the network
should spend more effort to learn the ’difﬁcult’ tasks. Note
that, this is opposed to uncertainty weighting, where a
higher weight is assigned to the ’easy’ tasks. We hypothesize
that the two techniques do not necessarily conﬂict, but
uncertainty weighting seems better suited when tasks have
noisy labeled data, while DTP makes more sense when we
have access to clean ground-truth annotations.
To measure the task difﬁculty, one could consider the
progress on every task using the loss ratio ~Li(t)deﬁned
by GradNorm. However, since the loss ratio depends on
the initial loss Li(0), its value can be rather noisy and
initialization dependent. Furthermore, measuring the task
progress using the loss ratio might not accurately reﬂect the
progress on a task in terms of qualitative results. Therefore,
DTP proposes the use of key performance indicators (KPIs)
to quantify the difﬁculty of every task. In particular, a KPI
iis selected for every task i, with 0< i<1. The KPIs
are picked to have an intuitive meaning, e.g. accuracy for
classiﬁcation tasks. For regression tasks, the prediction error
can be thresholded to obtain a KPI that lies between 0 and
1. DTP sets the task-speciﬁc weight wifor taskiat steptas
wi(t) = (1 i(t))ilogi(t): (9)
Note that, Equation 9 employs a focal loss expression [64] to
down-weight the task-speciﬁc weights for the ’easy’ tasks.
In particular, as the value for the KPI iincreases, the weight
wifor taskiis being reduced.
DTP requires to carefully select the KPIs. For example,
consider choosing a threshold to measure the performance
on a regression task. Depending on the threshold’s value,
the task-speciﬁc weight will be higher or lower during
training. We conclude that the choice of the KPIs in DTP isnot determined in a straightforward manner. Furthermore,
similar to DWA, DTP requires to balance the overall magni-
tude of the loss values beforehand. After all, Equation 9 does
not take into account the loss magnitudes to calculate the
task-speciﬁc weights. As a result, DTP still involves manual
tuning to set the task-speciﬁc weights.
3.1.5 MTL as Multi-Objective Optimization
A global optimum for the multi-task optimization objective
in Equation 4 is hard to ﬁnd. Due the complex nature of
this problem, a certain choice that improves performance for
one task could lead to performance degradation for another
task. The task balancing methods discussed beforehand try
to tackle this problem by setting the task-speciﬁc weights
in the loss according to some heuristic. Differently, Sener
and Koltun [34] view MTL as a multi-objective optimization
problem, with the overall goal of ﬁnding a Pareto optimal
solution among all tasks.
In MTL, a Pareto optimal solution is found when the
following condition is satisﬁed: the loss for any task can be
decreased without increasing the loss on any of the other
tasks. A multiple gradient descent algorithm (MGDA) [65]
was proposed in [34] to ﬁnd a Pareto stationary point. In
particular, the shared network weights are updated by ﬁnd-
ing a common direction among the task-speciﬁc gradients.
As long as there is a common direction along which the
task-speciﬁc losses can be decreased, we have not reached
a Pareto optimal point yet. An advantage of this approach
is that since the shared network weights are only updated
along common directions of the task-speciﬁc gradients, con-
ﬂicting gradients are avoided in the weight update step.
3.1.6 Discussion
In Section 3.1, we described several methods for balanc-
ing the inﬂuence of each task when training a multi-task
network. Table 1 provides a qualitative comparison of the
described methods. We summarize some conclusions below.
(1) We ﬁnd discrepancies between these methods, e.g. un-
certainty weighting assigns a higher weight to the ’easy’
tasks, while DTP advocates the opposite. The latter can
be attributed to the experimental evaluation of the differ-
ent task balancing strategies that was often done in the
literature using different datasets or task dictionaries. We
suspect that an appropriate task balancing strategy should
be decided for each case individually. (2) We also ﬁnd
commonalities between the described methods, e.g. uncer-
tainty weighting, GradNorm and MGDA opted to balance
the loss magnitudes as part of their learning strategy. In
Section 4.5, we provide extensive ablation studies under
more common datasets or task dictionaries to verify what
task balancing strategies are most useful to improve the
multi-tasking performance, and under which circumstances.
(3) A number of works (e.g. DWA, DTP) still require careful
manual tuning of the initial hyperparameters, which can
limit their applicability when dealing with a larger number
of tasks.
3.2 Other Approaches
The task balancing works in Section 3.1 can be plugged
in to most existing multi-task architectures to regulate the

==== Page 10 ====
10
TABLE 1: A qualitative comparison between task balancing techniques. First, we consider whether a method balances the
loss magnitudes ( Balance Magnitudes ) and/or the pace at which tasks are learned ( Balance Learning ). Second, we show
what tasks are prioritized during the training stage ( Prioritize ). Third, we show whether the method requires access to
the task-speciﬁc gradients ( Grads Required ). Fourth, we consider whether the tasks gradients are enforced to be non-
conﬂicting ( Non-Competing Grads ). Finally, we consider whether the proposed method requires additional tuning, e.g.
manually choosing the weights, KPIs, etc. ( No Extra T uning ). For a detailed description of each technique see Section 3.
Method Balance
MagnitudesBalance
LearningPrioritizeGrads
RequiredNon-Competing
GradsNo Extra
T uningMotivation
Uncertainty [32] X Low Noise X Homoscedastic uncertainty
GradNorm [33] X X X X Balance learning and magnitudes
DWA [29] X Balance learning
DTP [40] Difﬁcult Prioritize difﬁcult tasks
MGDA [34] X X X X X Pareto Optimum
task learning. Another group of works also tried to regulate
the training of multi-task networks, albeit for more speciﬁc
setups. We touch upon several of these approaches here.
Note that, some of these concepts can be combined with
task balancing strategies too.
Zhao et al. [41] empirically found that tasks with gra-
dients pointing in the opposite direction can cause the
destructive interference of the gradient. This observation is
related to the update rule in Equation 5. They proposed to
add a modulation unit to the network in order to alleviate
the competing gradients issue during training.
Liu et al. [46] considered a speciﬁc multi-task architec-
ture where the feature space is split into a shared and a task-
speciﬁc part. They argue that the shared features should
contain more common information, and no information that
is speciﬁc to a particular task only. The network weights
are regularized by enforcing this prior. More speciﬁcally, an
adversarial approach is used to avoid task-speciﬁc features
from creeping into the shared representation. Similarly, [39],
[42] added an adversarial loss to the single-task gradients in
order to make them statistically indistinguishable from each
other in the shared parts of the network.
4 E XPERIMENTS
This section provides an extensive comparison of the pre-
viously discussed methods. In particular, Section 4.1 intro-
duces the employed datasets, followed by the evaluation
criterion. Section 4.2 compares the encoder-based architec-
tures, while the decoder-based ones are discussed in Sec-
tion 4.3. Note that, we ﬁrst opted for a separate analysis
of the encoder-based and decoder-based approaches, as
a direct joint comparison is impractical3. However, we
provide a separate comparison between encoder-based and
decoder-based approaches in Section 4.4. Finally, Section 4.5
considers the inﬂuence of the task balancing strategies.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Our experiments were conducted on a variety of datasets.
As we need to compare a large number of works, including
different MTL architectures and task balancing techniques,
the datasets were selected separately for the encoder-based
3. For example, some works rely on the use of particular backbones,
or were designed for tackling speciﬁc task dictionaries, etc.approaches, the decoder-based approaches and the task-
balancing techniques. In each case, we opted for datasets
that provide us with a rich and diverse group of settings
and allow us to scrutinize the pros and cons of the meth-
ods under consideration. We additionally took into account
what datasets were used in the original works. Note that, for
every experiment we describe the most important elements
of the experimental setup. However, further details to repro-
duce the reported results can be found in the supplementary
materials. Next we discuss the employed datasets, followed
by a presentation of the evaluation criterion.
4.1.1 Datasets
The PASCAL dataset [66] is a popular benchmark for dense
prediction tasks. We use the split from PASCAL-Context [67]
which has annotations for semantic segmentation, human
part segmentation and semantic edge detection. Addition-
ally, we consider the tasks of surface normals prediction and
saliency detection. The annotations were distilled by [42]
using pre-trained state-of-the-art models [68], [69].
The Cityscapes dataset [70] considers the scenario of
urban scene understanding. The train, validation and test
set contain 2975, 500 and 1525 images respectively, taken by
driving a car in European cities. We consider a number of
dense prediction tasks on the Cityscapes dataset: semantic
segmentation, instance segmentation and monocular depth
estimation. The depth maps were generated with SGM [71].
The NYUD-v2 dataset [72] considers indoor scene un-
derstanding. The dataset contains 795 train and 654 test
images annotated for semantic segmentation and monocular
depth estimation. Other works have also considered surface
normal prediction [24], [42], [44] and semantic edge detec-
tion [24], [42] on the NYUD-v2 dataset. The annotations for
these tasks can be directly derived from the semantic and
depth ground truth. In this work we focus on the semantic
segmentation and depth estimation tasks.
The Taskonomy dataset [73] contains semi-real images
of indoor scenes, annotated for 26 (dense prediction, clas-
siﬁcation, etc.) tasks. Out of all available tasks, we select
scene categorization, semantic segmentation, edge detec-
tion, monocular depth estimation and keypoint detection
for our experiments. The task dictionary was selected to be
as diverse as possible, while still keeping the total number
of tasks reasonably low for all required computations. We
use the tiny split of the dataset, containing 275k train, 52k
validation and 54k test images.

==== Page 11 ====
11
TABLE 2: MTL benchmarks used in the experiments section. Distilled task labels are marked with *.
Dataset # Train # Val # Test Seg. Depth Inst. H. Parts Normals Saliency Edges Keypoints Scene Attr.
PASCAL 10,581 1,449 - X X X * X* X
Cityscapes 2,975 500 500 X X * X
NYUD-v2 795 654 - X X X X
Taskonomy 275k 52k 54k X* X X * X* X*
CelebA 160k 20k 20k X
The CelebA dataset [74] contains over 200k images of
celebrities labeled with 40 facial attribute categories. The
training, validation and test set contain 160k, 20k and 20k
images respectively. While this dataset is mainly suitable
for multi-attribute learning, prior works [34], [36], [37] used
it for MTL by treating the prediction of each facial attribute
as a separate binary classiﬁcation task. This universal use of
a binary cross-entropy loss across all tasks makes CelebA an
interesting setting to compare the loss balancing strategies,
thus we chose to also include it in our experiments.
Table 2 gives an overview of the used datasets. We
marked tasks for which the annotations were obtained
through distillation with an asterik.
4.1.2 Evaluation Criterion
It is not straightforward to validate the overall performance
of a model when optimizing for multiple tasks. This is par-
ticularly true when each task is evaluated through its own
speciﬁc metric, e.g. semantic segmentation and depth are
evaluated using mIoU and rmse respectively. Surprisingly,
the vast majority of works on MTL provides little insight
into how the best model is selected during the validation
phase. In this paper, we measure the multi-task performance
mas in [42]. For consistency reasons, we encourage future
works to adopt the same protocol. In particular, the multi-
task performance of model mis deﬁned as the average per-
task drop in performance w.r.t. the single-task baseline b:
m=1
TTX
i=1( 1)li(Mm;i Mb;i)=Mb;i; (10)
whereli= 1 if a lower value means better performance
for metricMiof taski, and 0 otherwise. The single-task
performance is measured for a fully-converged model that
uses the same backbone network only for that task.
To achieve a fair comparison, all results were obtained
after performing a grid search on the hyperparameters.
This ensures that every model is trained with comparable
amounts of ﬁnetuning. In addition to a performance eval-
uation, we also include the model resources, i.e. number
of parameters and FLOPS, when comparing the multi-task
architectures. Finally, a good MTL model should be able to
improve over a set of strong single-task baselines. Therefore,
all experiments are performed using performant backbones
in combination with strong task-speciﬁc decoders.
4.2 Encoder-Based Architectures
We ﬁrst consider the encoder-based architectures [26], [28],
[29], [36], [37]. Our experiments are performed on the
NYUD-v2, Cityscapes and Taskonomy datasets which in-
clude two, three and ﬁve tasks respectively. On NYUD-v2,TABLE 3: Comparison of the encoder-based architectures for
MTL on the NYUD-v2 validation set. For more details about
the experimental setup visit Section 4.2.1.
Method S
(IoU)"D
(rmse)##P
(M)FLOPS
(G)MTL
(%)"
Single task 44.5 60.1 79 383 + 0.00
MTL baseline 44.4 58.7 56 267 + 1.11
MTAN 44.5 58.8 214 1064 + 1.11
Cross-stitch 44.6 58.9 79 383 + 1.14
NDDR-CNN 44.0 58.5 101 413 + 0.80
we consider the tasks of semantic segmentation and depth
estimation. This pair of tasks is strongly related, since both
semantic segmentation and depth estimation reveal similar
characteristics about a scene, such as the layout and object
shapes or boundaries. Differently, Cityscapes and Taskon-
omy include a larger and more diverse task dictionary.
4.2.1 NYUD-v2
Setup. The encoder is a ResNet-50 model [75] with dilated
convolutions [76]. The task-speciﬁc heads use an Atrous
Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP) [69] module. The results
are summarized in Table 3.
Single-Task vs Multi-Task. The MTL baseline improves
over the set of single-task networks ( +1:11% ), while it
reduces the number of parameters and FLOPS. Similar
results have been reported for other pairs of well-correlated
tasks, e.g. depth and ﬂow estimation [77], detection and
classiﬁcation [21], detection and segmentation [2], [22].
Multi-Task Models. Surprisingly, none of the encoder-
based architectures shows signiﬁcant improvements over
the MTL baseline in this setup. This observation seems to
contradict the results obtained in prior works [26], [28],
[29]. However, looking closer we see that the experimen-
tal evaluation in those works was limited to the use of
weaker backbones, e.g. AlexNet [78], VGG [79], etc. Sharing
a ResNet backbone in combination with strong task-speciﬁc
head units seems to provide a more viable alternative for
solving a pair of well-correlated dense prediction tasks, like
semantic segmentation and depth estimation.
Discussion. As documented in other works [2], [21], [22],
[77], we observe that MTL proves an effective strategy
for solving a pair of tasks, provided that they are well-
correlated. In this setup, the MTL baseline obtains better
results, while using fewer resources compared to the single-
task models. Furthermore, we found that the MTL baseline
with ResNet backbone and strong task-speciﬁc heads out-
performs other encoder-based approaches. We encourage
researchers to use this model as a baseline for future work.

==== Page 12 ====
12
TABLE 4: Comparison of the encoder-based architectures for
MTL on the Cityscapes validation set. The Branched models
refer to generating the task groupings with the method
from [37]. We refer the reader to Section 4.2.2 for more
details about the experimental setup.
Method S
(IoU)"I
(px)#D
(px)##P
(M)FLOPS
(G)MTL
(%)"
Single task 65.2 11.7 2.57 138 266 + 0.00
MTL baseline 61.5 11.8 2.66 92 166 - 3.33
MTAN 63.1 11.9 2.66 330 676 - 2.67
Cross-stitch 65.1 11.6 2.55 140 266 + 0.42
NDDR-CNN 65.6 11.6 2.54 190 372 + 0.89
Branched-1 62.1 11.7 2.66 107 196 - 2.68
Branched-2 62.7 11.7 2.62 114 211 - 1.84
Branched-3 64.1 11.6 2.62 116 213 - 0.96
4.2.2 Cityscapes
Setup. As in prior works [32], [34], we use a ResNet-50
encoder with dilated convolutions, followed by a Pyramid
Spatial Pooling (PSP) [52] head. Every input image is scaled
to 512 x 256 pixels. For the instance segmentation task we
reuse the approach from [32], i.e. we consider the proxy
task of regressing each pixel to the center of the instance
it belongs to. The results can be found in Table 4.
Single-Task vs Multi-Task. In contrast to the results on
NYUD-v2 in Section 4.2.1, the MTL baseline reports lower
performance when compared against the trio of single-task
models ( 3:33% ). There are several possible explanations
for this. First, we consider a larger task dictionary. Second,
the semantic segmentation task requires a feature repre-
sentation that is invariant for instances of the same class,
while the instance segmentation task needs to disentangle
instances of the same class. It has been shown [30], [42] that
a diverse task dictionary is more prone to task interference.
Third, the Cityscapes dataset contains more labeled exam-
ples compared to NYUD-v2. Prior work [50] observed that
the multi-task performance gains can be lower when more
annotations are available.
Tree-Based Encoders. First, we compare the performance of
the tree-based encoders (i.e. task groupings) generated by
Branched Multi-Task Networks against those generated by
FAFS. In both cases, we trained all possible task groupings
that can be derived from branching the ResNet-50 encoder
in the last three ResNet blocks. Figure 10 visualizes the
multi-task performance (y-axis) vs number of parameters (x-
axis) for the trained architectures. Depending on the avail-
able parameter budget, both methods generate a speciﬁc
task grouping. We visualize these generated groupings as a
continuous path in Figure 10, when gradually increasing the
parameter budget. Note that, a similar analysis can be made
when increasing the number of available ﬂoating points
operations. We ﬁnd that, for a given parameter budget,
the task groupings from Branched Multi-Task Networks
achieve higher performance compared to the ones from
FAFS. Furthermore, for a ﬁxed parameter budget, in the
majority of cases Branched Multi-Task Networks are capable
of selecting the best task groupings w.r.t the ’multi-task per-
formance vs number of parameters’ metric. Given the results
on the Cityscapes dataset, it seems that the task clustering
method from FAFS is better suited for the multi-attribute
80 100 120 140 160 180 200-3.5-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.00.51.0
Number of parameters (M)∆MTL (%)
Branched-MTL
FAFS
Other Trees
ST MTL Baseline Cross-stitch
NDDR-CNN MTAN Tree-BasedFig. 10: We compare different encoder-based approaches for
MTL on the Cityscapes validation set in terms of number of
parameters and multi-task performance.
learning problem, for which it was originally tested.
Second, we compare the tree-based encoders against the
single-task networks. We observe that, even with a strong
task grouping criterion [37], the tree-based encoders do not
improve over the single-task networks. This is to be ex-
pected as tree-based encoders are not performance-oriented
MTL approaches by design. They rather act as a proxy be-
tween a fully-shared MTL model (hard parameter sharing)
and a task-speciﬁc MTL model (soft parameter sharing),
conditioned on the model size. As a result, they are better
geared towards resource-constrained environments, where
the model size needs to fall within an upper threshold.
Multi-Task Models. Consider again Table 4. We observe
that both cross-stitch networks ( +0:42% ) and NDDR-CNNs
(+0:89% ) improve over the single-task networks. However,
the NDDR-CNN requires more parameters and FLOPS com-
pared to the single-task networks. Differently, the MTAN
model decreases the multi-task performance (  2:67% ) de-
spite requiring more computational resources compared to
the single-task networks in this setup. Table 4 also includes
tree-based encoders generated by Branched Multi-Task Net-
works. The used task groupings can be found in the sup-
plementary materials. As discussed earlier, the performance
of the Branched Multi-Task Networks improves when we
increase the computational budget - parameters and FLOPS.
We see that the Branched MTL-1 model performs on par
with the MTAN model (  2:68% ), but requires signiﬁcantly
less parameters and FLOPS. We observe that tree-based
encoders can provide a viable alternative to other multi-task
models when the computational resources are scarce.
Discussion. Depending on the available computational
budget, different models can be deployed to maximize
the multi-task performance (see Table 4). In general, the
encoder-based approaches improve the multi-task perfor-
mance over the MTL baseline at the cost of more parameters

==== Page 13 ====
13
TABLE 5: Comparison of the encoder-based architectures for MTL on the tiny Taskonomy test set. We use the following task
abbreviations: depth estimation (D), semantic segmentation (S), scene categorization (C), edge detection (E) and keypoints
detection (K). Note that, the results for edge and keypoints detection were multiplied by a factor of 100 for better readability.
Method D
(L1)#S
(IoU)"C
(Top-5)"E
(L1)#K
(L1)##P
(M)FLOPS
(G)"MTL
(%)"
Single task 0.60 43.5 66.0 0.99 0.23 224 136 + 0.00
MTL baseline 0.75 47.8 56.0 1.37 0.34 130 70 - 22.50
MTAN 0.71 43.8 59.6 1.86 0.40 525 365 -37.36
Cross-stitch 0.61 44.0 58.2 1.35 0.50 224 135 - 32.29
NDDR-CNN 0.66 45.9 64.5 1.05 0.45 258 176 - 21.02
FAFS - 1 0.74 46.1 62.7 1.30 0.39 174 93 - 24.5
FAFS - 2 0.80 39.9 62.4 1.68 0.52 188 101 - 48.32
FAFS - 3 0.74 46.1 64.9 1.05 0.27 196 105 - 8.48
Branched - 1 0.76 47.6 63.3 1.12 0.29 174 93 - 11.88
Branched - 2 0.74 48.0 63.6 0.96 0.35 188 101 - 12.66
Branched - 3 0.74 47.9 64.5 0.94 0.26 196 105 - 4.93
and FLOPS. Currently, there is no encoder-based model
that improves both in terms of computational resources and
multi-task performance when compared against the single-
task models on Cityscapes. This is different from the results
on NYUD-v2, where we found that for a speciﬁc pair of
well-correlated tasks, i.e. semantic segmentation and depth
estimation, the MTL baseline improved the performance
while consuming fewer resources at the same time.
4.2.3 Taskonomy
Setup. We reuse the architecture and training setup
from [73]: the encoder is based on ResNet-50; a 15-layer
fully-convolutional head is used for the pixel-to-pixel pre-
diction tasks. The results can be found in Table 5.
Single-Task vs Multi-Task. Similar to the results reported
on Cityscapes in Section 4.2.2, the MTL baseline obtains
lower performance compared to the single-task networks,
but with more noticeable drops (  22:50% ). The reason is
arguably the larger and more diverse task dictionary.
Tree-Based Encoders. We compare Branched Multi-Task
Networks against FAFS. The candidate branching points are
again located after every ResNet block. Since the number
of tasks increased to ﬁve, it is very expensive to train all
task groupings exhaustively, as done on Cityscapes. Instead,
we limit ourselves to three architectures that are generated
when gradually increasing the parameter budget. The gen-
erated task groupings are shown in the supplementary ma-
terials. Compared to the results reported on Cityscapes (cf.
Figure 10), we ﬁnd that in this setup the multi-task perfor-
mance is more susceptible to the employed task groupings,
possibly due to task interference. Overall, we observe that
using the task grouping criterion from Branched Multi-Task
Networks leads to better multi-task performance compared
to the task groupings generated by the FAFS approach.
Multi-Task Models. We observe that cross-stitch networks,
NDDR-CNNs and MTAN can not handle the larger, more
diverse task dictionary: the multi-task performance de-
creases when using these models, while the number of
parameters and FLOPS increases. Branched Multi-Task Net-
works seem to handle the diverse set of tasks rather posi-
tively, when compared against other encoder-based models.
More speciﬁcally, they are able to strike a good compromise
between the multi-tasking performance and the computa-
tional resources that are required. We argue that tree-basedencoders, like Branched Multi-Task Networks, might be
better suited for handling task interference as they explicitly
assign dissimilar tasks to separate branches.
Discussion. Jointly tackling a task dictionary that contains
ﬁve or more tasks proves challenging in practice, as also
noted by [30], [42]. Existing encoder-based approaches do
not seem to provide an efﬁcient solution to this problem.
In particular, a number of MTL models decreases the multi-
task performance, while increasing the number of parame-
ters and FLOPS compared to the single-task networks. Tree-
based encoders can be more useful in this setup, since they
strike a better trade-off between the amount of computa-
tional resources and the multi-task performance.
4.2.4 Discussion
We compared several encoder-based architectures across a
variety of datasets. In most cases, the encoder-based archi-
tectures do not outperform the set of single-task networks.
This is particularly the case when we consider a large or
diverse task dictionary, e.g. Cityscapes or Taskonomy. Still,
for speciﬁc pairs of tasks, e.g. depth estimation and se-
mantic segmentation, we can boost the overall performance
through MTL. Notably, there was no encoder-based model
that consistently outperformed the other architectures. In-
stead, an appropriate MTL model should rather be decided
on a per case basis, also taking into account the amount
of available computational resources. Finally, we could not
ﬁnd a principled way to predict in advance the possible
gains when using a particular architecture. Encoder-based
architectures could beneﬁt from further investigation.
4.3 Decoder-Based Architectures
The decoder-based architectures presented in Section 2.3
were designed to tackle dense prediction tasks. Therefore,
we perform our comparison on two dense labeling datasets,
NYUD-v2 and PASCAL. As before, the semantic segmen-
tation and depth estimation tasks are considered on the
NYUD-v2 dataset. On PASCAL we tackle a larger and more
diverse task dictionary that contains semantic segmentation,
human parts segmentation, surface normals estimation, se-
mantic edge detection, and saliency estimation.
The following experiments provide a comparison be-
tween PAD-Net [24], PAP-Net [44], JTRL [43], ASTMT [42],
and MTI-Net [45]. However, a direct comparison between

==== Page 14 ====
14
TABLE 6: Comparison of the decoder-based architectures
for MTL on the NYUD-v2 validation set using a single-scale
backbone network. Task abbreviations as before.
Method S
(IoU)"D
(rmse)##P
(M)FLOPS
(G)MTL
(%)"
Single Task 44.5 60.1 79 383 + 0.00
MTL Baseline 44.4 58.7 56 267 + 1.11
JTRL 46.4 50.1 295 660 + 10.45
PAP-Net 50.4 53.0 52 4800 + 12.53
PAD-Net 50.2 58.2 52 256 + 7.99
all models is not straightforward. There are several reasons
behind this. First, MTI-Net operates on top of a multi-scale
feature representation of the input image, which assumes a
multi-scale backbone, unlike the other approaches that were
originally designed with a single-scale backbone network
in mind. Second, JTRL was strictly designed for a pair of
tasks, without any obvious extension to the MTL setting.
Finally, PAP-Net behaves similarly to PAD-Net, but operates
on the pixel afﬁnities to perform the multi-modal distillation
through a recursive diffusion process.
Based on these observations, we organize the compar-
isons as follows. We compare PAD-Net, PAP-Net and JTRL
on the NYUD-v2 dataset using a single-scale backbone. We
draw a separate comparison between MTI-Net and PAD-
Net on NYUD-v2 using a multi-scale backbone. Finally, we
conduct a comparison between PAD-Net, ASTMT and MTI-
Net on PASCAL using both single-scale and multi-scale
backbones to verify how well the decoder-based approaches
handle a larger and more diverse task dictionary.
4.3.1 NYUD-v2
Single-Scale Setup. We reuse the setup from Section 4.2.1.
The single-tasking models are based on a ResNet-50 with
dilated convolutions in combination with an ASPP head to
decode the output. The results can be found in Table 6.
Single-Scale Architectures. All decoder-based architectures
report signiﬁcant gains over the single-task networks on
NYUD-v2. PAP-Net achieves the highest multi-task perfor-
mance ( +12:53% ), but consumes a large number of FLOPS.
This is due to the use of task-afﬁnity matrices, which require
to calculate the feature correlation between every pair of
pixels in the image. A similar improvement is seen for
JTRL ( +10:45% ). JTRL recursively predicts the two tasks at
increasingly higher scales. Therefore, a large number of ﬁlter
operations is performed on high resolution feature maps,
leading to an increase in the computational resources. Op-
posed to JTRL and PAP-Net, PAD-Net does not come with a
signiﬁcant increase in the number of computations. Yet, we
still observe a relatively large improvement over the single-
task networks ( +7:99% ). Arguably, PAD-Net shows more
promising when it comes to tackling larger task dictionaries.
Multi-Scale Setup. We use an HRNet-18 backbone [80] to
produce a multi-scale feature representation of the input
image. The task-speciﬁc heads simply upsample and con-
catenate the multi-scale features before feeding them to two
consecutive convolutional layers to get the task output. We
use the different output scales of the HRNet backbone to
perform multi-scale operations. This translates to four scales
(1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32). The results are reported in Table 7.TABLE 7: Comparison of the decoder-based architectures
for MTL on the NYUD-v2 validation set using a multi-scale
backbone network. Task abbreviations as before.
Method S
(IoU)"D
(rmse)##P
(M)FLOPS
(G)MTL
(%)"
Single task 33.2 66.7 8 22 + 0.00
MTL Baseline 32.1 66.8 4 12 - 1.71
PAD-Net 33.9 65.8 7 44 + 1.65
MTI-Net 37.5 60.7 13 20 + 10.91
Multi-Scale Architectures. Different from the results ob-
tained with a single-scale backbone in Table 6, the multi-
scale performance decreases for the MTL baseline. We argue
that this is due to the smaller task-speciﬁc heads that are
used in conjunction with HRNet, while before we used the
bulkier ASPP heads after ResNet-50 for the decoding. Again,
PAD-Net outperforms the single-task networks ( +1:65% ),
but MTI-Net further improves the performance ( +10:91% ).
We conclude that it is beneﬁcial to distill task information
at a multitude of scales, instead of a single scale. We also
compare the models in terms of the number of parameters
and FLOPS. MTI-Net consumes fewer FLOPS compared to
the single-task networks. However, the amount of param-
eters increases. This is due to the use of a rather shallow
backbone, and a small number of tasks. As a consequence,
the overhead introduced by adding the additional layers
in MTI-Net is relatively large compared to the resources
used by the backbone. PAD-Net reduces the number of
parameters, but increases the number of FLOPS compared
to MTI-Net. This is due to the fact that PAD-Net performs
the multi-modal distillation at a single higher scale (1/4)
with 4Cchannels,Cbeing the number of backbone chan-
nels at a single scale. Instead, MTI-Net performs most of
the computations at smaller scales (1/32, 1/16, 1/8), while
operating on only Cchannels at the higher scale (1/4).
4.3.2 PASCAL
The analysis on NYUD-v2 suggested that both PAD-Net
and MTI-Net are promising options to tackle a larger and
more diverse set of tasks. More speciﬁcally, both models
signiﬁcantly outperform their single-task counterparts with
limited computational overhead. We provide an additional
comparison on the PASCAL dataset to verify this hypoth-
esis. We additionally include ASTMT into the comparison.
Remember that, ASTMT uses a single-tasking approach to
MTL that requires a separate forward pass to be performed
for every task (see Section 2.4). Below, we present our results
using both a single-scale and a multi-scale backbone.
Single-Scale Setup. We reuse the Deeplab-v3+ model
from [42]. The backbone is a ResNet-26 model with dilated
convolutions. Table 8 summarizes the results.
Single-Scale Architectures. We see that PAD-Net obtains
lower multi-task performance compared to the single-task
networks ( 7:38% ) and MTL baseline (  0:76% ). Although
it performs better or on par for four out of ﬁve tasks
compared to the MTL baseline, it performs signiﬁcantly
worse on the semantic edge prediction task. This can be
attributed to not using skip connections in our model. In
contrast, ASTMT seems better suited to handle the larger
task dictionary, and performs on par with the single-task
networks ( 0:11% ), while requiring fewer parameters.

==== Page 15 ====
15
TABLE 8: Comparison of the decoder-based architectures for MTL on PASCAL using a single-scale backbone.
Method Seg (mIoU)" Parts (mIoU)" Sal (mIoU)" Edge (odsF)" Norm (mErr)# #P (M) FLOPS (G) MTL (%)
Single Task 64.9 57.1 64.2 71.3 14.9 103 130 + 0.00
MTL Baseline 60.2 54.1 62.1 69.2 17.0 19 24 - 6.62
ASTMT 64.6 57.3 64.7 71.0 15.0 31 132 - 0.11
PAD-Net 61.8 56.5 62.1 58.4 16.4 32 36 -7.38
TABLE 9: Comparison of the decoder-based architectures for MTL on PASCAL using a multi-scale backbone.
Method Seg (mIoU)" Parts (mIoU)" Sal (mIoU)" Edge (odsF)" Norm (mErr)# #P (M) FLOPS (G) MTL (%)
Single Task 60.1 60.7 67.2 69.7 14.6 20 48 + 0.00
MTL Baseline 53.6 58.5 65.1 70.6 15.1 4 10 - 3.70
PAD-Net 53.6 59.6 65.8 72.5 15.3 17 225 -3.08
MTI-Net 64.3 62.1 68.0 73.4 14.8 27 31 + 2.74
Multi-Scale Setup. We reuse the HRNet-18 backbone from
our earlier experiments on NYUD-v2. The results for this
multi-scale backbone can be found in Table 9.
Multi-Scale Architectures. Similar to the results obtained
with a single-scale backbone, PAD-Net lowers the per-
formance compared to the single-task networks, but less
( 3:08% ). Differently, MTI-Net improves the performance
(+2:74% ), while consuming fewer FLOPS and only slightly
more parameters compared to the single-task networks. The
consistent ﬁndings in the larger task dictionary backup our
previous assumption about the importance of performing
the multi-modal distillation at a multitude of scales.
4.3.3 Discussion
We compared several decoder-based architectures across
two dense labeling datasets. On NYUD-v2, the performance
on both semantic segmentation and depth estimation can be
signiﬁcantly improved by employing one of the decoder-
based models. However, both PAP-Net and JTRL incur
a large increase in the number of FLOPS. MTI-Net and
PAD-Net provide more viable alternatives when we wish
to limit the number of FLOPS. On PASCAL, a multi-scale
approach, like MTI-Net, seems better ﬁtted for increasing
the multi-scale performance while retaining the computa-
tional resources low. We conclude that the decoder-based
architectures obtain promising results on the MTL problem.
4.4 Encoder-Based vs Decoder-Based Architectures
So far, we considered the encoder-based and decoder-based
architectures in isolation. In this section, we compare models
from both paradigms against each other on NYUD-v2. This
is followed by a qualitative discussion, also taking into
account the experimental results from Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
4.4.1 NYUD-v2
Setup. We reuse the setup from our earlier experiments
in Sections 4.2.1 and 4.3.1. We exclude the decoder-based
approaches that were trained with a multi-scale backbone
in order to enable a fair comparison. As a consequence, all
models use an identical ResNet-50 backbone with dilated
convolutions. The results can be found in Table 10.
Discussion. We ﬁnd that the decoder-based architectures
signiﬁcantly outperform the encoder-based ones in terms
of multi-tasking performance on NYUD-v2. We argue that
each architecture paradigm serves different purposes. TheTABLE 10: Comparison between encoder-based ( top) and
decoder-based ( bottom ) architectures for MTL on the NYUD-
v2 validation set. Task abbreviations as before.
Method S
(IoU)"D
(rmse)##P
(M)FLOPS
(G)MTL
(%)"
Single task 44.5 60.1 79 383 + 0.00
MTL baseline 44.4 58.7 56 267 + 1.11
MTAN 44.5 58.8 214 1064 + 1.11
Cross-stitch 44.6 58.9 79 383 + 1.14
NDDR-CNN 44.0 58.5 101 413 + 0.80
JTRL 46.4 50.1 295 660 + 10.45
PAP-Net 50.4 53.0 52 4800 + 12.53
PAD-Net 50.2 58.2 52 256 + 7.99
encoder-based architectures aim to learn richer feature rep-
resentations of the image by sharing information during the
encoding process. Differently, the decoder-based ones focus
on improving dense prediction tasks by repeatedly reﬁning
the predictions through cross-task interactions. Since the
interactions take place near the output of the network, they
allow for a better alignment of common cross-task patterns,
which in turn, greatly boosts the performance.
4.4.2 Discussion
We saw that the decoder-based architectures can obtain
better performance when solving a pair of well-correlated
dense prediction tasks, i.e. depth estimation and semantic
segmentation. Similarly, a state-of-the-art model, i.e. MTI-
Net, was able to improve over its single-task counterparts
when solving as much as ﬁve dense prediction tasks on
the PASCAL dataset (see Table 9). As explained, this can be
attributed to the alignment of common cross-task patterns
that is key to dense prediction tasks. Differently, we did
not observe improvements over the single-task networks
when employing the encoder-based architectures to tackle
ﬁve dense predictions tasks on the Taskonomy dataset (see
Table 5). Nonetheless, we believe that the encoder-based
architectures are valuable too, as they allow to learn richer
image representations. The latter is arguably more impor-
tant when dealing with multiple classiﬁcation tasks, where
the alignment of common cross-task patterns is obsolete.
Finally, based on their complementary behavior, we hope
to see both paradigms integrated in future works.
4.5 Task Balancing
We compare the task balancing techniques from Section 3.1.
We analyze the use of ﬁxed weights, uncertainty weight-

==== Page 16 ====
16
TABLE 11: Effect of applying different loss balancing strate-
gies for MTL on three different datasets.
(a) CelebA. We learn 40 person attribute classiﬁcation tasks.
Method Accuracy (%)"
Single-task 91.52
Fixed 91.91
Uncertainty 91.62
GradNorm 91.76
DWA 91.84
MGDA 91.30
(b) NYUD-v2. We shift to dense prediction tasks, and learn the
semantic segmentation (S) and depth estimation (D) tasks.
Method S(IoU)" D (rmse)#MTL (%)"
Single-task 44.6 60.1 + 0.00
Fixed 44.4 58.7 + 1.11
Uncertainty 43.8 58.8 + 0.38
GradNorm 44.2 58.1 + 1.45
DWA 44.1 59.1 + 0.43
MGDA 43.2 57.6 + 0.71
(c) Cityscapes. We learn the semantic segmentation (S), instance
segmentation (I) and depth estimation (D) tasks.
Method S (IoU)" I (px)# D (px)#MTL (%)"
Single-task 65.2 11.7 2.57 + 0.00
Fixed 61.5 11.8 2.66 - 3.33
Uncertainty 63.3 11.7 2.59 - 1.40
GradNorm 63.4 12.1 2.52 - 1.63
DWA 62.8 11.9 2.66 - 2.29
MGDA 63.8 12.1 2.76 - 4.30
ing [32], GradNorm [33], DWA [29] and MGDA [34]. We
did not include DTP [40], as this technique requires to deﬁne
additional key performance indicators (see Section 3.1.4).
The experiments are performed on three datasets:
CelebA, NYUD-v2 and Cityscapes. The CelebA dataset re-
quires to jointly solve 40 person attribute classiﬁcation tasks.
All attributes are learned through a binary cross-entropy
loss function. Differently, on the NYUD-v2 dataset we learn
two dense prediction tasks - semantic segmentation and
depth estimation - that use different loss functions. On
Cityscapes, the task dictionary size is further increased to
three dense prediction tasks, i.e. semantic segmentation,
instance segmentation and depth estimation.
4.5.1 CelebA
Setup. We reuse the setup from [34]. A ResNet-18 backbone
is used. We attach a separate linear head for every attribute.
Different from the setup in [34], the input is rescaled to 224
by 224 pixels. The ﬁxed weights scheme simply sums the
task-speciﬁc losses together, i.e. the task-speciﬁc weights are
set to one. The results are shown in Table 11a.
Discussion. The multi-task model trained with ﬁxed
weights outperforms the single-task networks ( 91:91% vs
91:52% ). We argue that the additional supervisory sig-
nals from other attributes can act as a regularizer for the
backbone features. Surprisingly, none of the proposed task
balancing strategies improves over the model trained with
ﬁxed uniform weights on CelebA, although all methods are
very close. We conclude that the uniform weighting scheme
is already close to optimal in case of multi-attribute learning,TABLE 12: Comparison of state-of-the-art techniques for
multi-attribute classiﬁcation on the CelebA dataset.
Method Accuracy (%)" #P (M)
LNet+ANet [81] 87 -
Walk and Learn [81] 88 -
MOON [82] 90.94 119.73
Independent Group [83] 91.06 -
MCNN [83] 91.26 -
MCNN-AUX [83] 91.29 -
VGG-16 [36] 91.44 134.41
FAFS [36] 90.79 2.09
GNAS [83] 91.63 7.73
Branched MTL [37] 91.73 7.73
ResNet18 + MGDA [34] 91.75 11.1
ResNet18 + Uniform (Ours) 91.91 11.1
where all individual losses are binary cross-entropy losses.
Note that, a similar experiment was performed in [34], but
different conclusions were reported. First, they found that
the multi-task model trained with ﬁxed weights performs
worse when compared against the single-task networks.
Second, the authors observed that the loss balancing strate-
gies improve over the uniform weights. In this paper, we
ﬁnd that with sufﬁcient and comparable amounts of hyper-
parameter tuning both conclusions no longer stand.
We perform an additional comparison with prior work in
Table 12. We report state-of-the-art performance on CelebA
using an off-the-shelf ResNet-18 model trained with uni-
form weights. We encourage future works to use this simple,
yet effective model as a baseline for multi-attribute learning.
4.5.2 NYUD-v2
Setup. The experiments are performed using the model
from Section 4.2.1. The results are reported in Table 11b.
Discussion. The MTL baseline with ﬁxed weights improves
over the single-task networks ( +1:11% forMTL , see also
Section 4.2.1). GradNorm can further boost the performance
by adjusting the task-speciﬁc weights in the loss during
training ( +1:45% ). We conclude that uniform weights are
suboptimal for training a multi-task model when the tasks
employ different loss functions. Similar to GradNorm, DWA
tries to balance the pace at which tasks are learned, but does
not equalize the gradient magnitudes. From Table 11b, we
conclude that the latter is important as well ( +0:43% with
DWA vs +1:45% with GradNorm). Uncertainty weight-
ing results in lower performance compared to GradNorm
(+0:38% vs1:45% ). Uncertainty weighting assigns a smaller
weight to noisy or difﬁcult tasks. Since the annotations on
NYUD-v2 were not distilled, the noise levels are rather
small. When we have access to clean ground-truth anno-
tations, it seems better to balance the learning of tasks
rather than lower the weights for the difﬁcult tasks. Finally,
MGDA reports lower performance compared to GradNorm
(+0:71% vs+1:45% ). MGDA only updates the weights
along directions that are common among all task-speciﬁc
gradients. The results suggest that it is better to allow
some competition between the task-speciﬁc gradients in the
shared layers, as this could help to avoid local minima.
4.5.3 Cityscapes
Setup. We reuse the model from our earlier experiments in
Section 4.2.2. The results are shown in Table 11c.

==== Page 17 ====
17
Discussion. The MTL baseline with ﬁxed weights reports
lower performance when compared against the single-task
networks ( 3:33% forMTL , see also Section 4.2.2). Fur-
thermore, methods that balance the loss magnitudes dur-
ing training (GradNorm  1:63% and Uncertainty 1:40% )
generally report higher performance compared to other
optimization techniques (Fixed  3:33% , DWA 2:29% ).
However, this is not the case for MGDA (  4:30% ). This
is another indication (cf. NYUD-v2 results) that avoiding
competing gradients by only back propagating along a com-
mon direction in the shared layers does not necessarily im-
prove performance. Different from the results on NYUD-v2,
uncertainty weighting achieves higher performance com-
pared to GradNorm (  1:40% vs. 1:63% ). We argue that
the annotations on Cityscapes contain more noise, because
the depth maps were labeled through SGM. Uncertainty
weighting addresses this by assigning a smaller weight to
tasks with higher homoscedastic uncertainty. Finally, the
improvements when using an automated loss balancing
scheme are larger on Cityscapes compared to NYUD-v2. We
hypothesize that this is due to the larger and more diverse
task dictionary. As a consequence, the ﬁxed uniform weights
are not well-suited to optimize the network weights. Task
balancing methods that try to equalize the gradient or loss
magnitudes provide a better alternative in this case.
4.5.4 Discussion
Several experiments were performed to compare the task
balancing strategies under a number of different settings.
We found that ﬁxed uniform weights are sufﬁcient to train
a multi-attribute model. Differently, when the tasks are
more diverse and use their own speciﬁc loss function, the
MTL performance can be increased by using a technique
that automatically balances the gradient magnitudes during
training. Examples are GradNorm and uncertainty weight-
ing. GradNorm proves the better choice when we have ac-
cess to clean ground-truth annotations. However, when we
are dealing with noisy annotations, uncertainty weighting
provides a more viable alternative as it down-weighs the
tasks with higher homoscedastic uncertainty. We conclude
that there is not a single solution that ﬁts all problems.
Note that, a number of techniques performed worse
than anticipated. However, Gong et al. [50] obtained similar
results with ours, albeit only for a few loss balancing strate-
gies. Also, Maninis et al. [42] found that performing a grid
search for the weights could outperform a state-of-the-art
loss balancing scheme. Based on these works and our own
ﬁndings, we argue that the optimization problem in MTL is
still poorly understood (see also Section 3.1.6). We hope that
our results stimulate further investigation into this problem.
5 R ELATED DOMAINS
So far, we focused on the application of MTL to jointly solve
multiple vision tasks under a fully-supervised setting. In
this section, we consider the MTL setup from a more gen-
eral point-of-view, and analyze its connection with several
related domains. The latter could potentially be combined
with the MTL setup and improve it, or vice versa.5.1 Transfer Learning
Transfer learning [84] makes use of the knowledge obtained
when solving one task, and applies it to tackle another task.
Different from MTL, transfer learning does not consider
solving all tasks concurrently. An important question in
both transfer learning and MTL is whether visual tasks
have relationships, i.e. they are correlated. Ma et al. [85]
modeled the task relationships in a MTL network through
a Multi-gate Mixture-of-Experts model. Zamir et al. [73]
provided a taxonomy for task transfer learning to quantify
the task relationships. Similarly, Dwivedi and Roig [58] used
Representation Similarity Analysis to obtain a measure of
task afﬁnity, by computing correlations between models
pretrained on different tasks. Vandenhende et al. [37] then
used these task relationships for the construction of tree-
based encoders for MTL. Standley et al. [25] also relied on
task relationships to deﬁne what tasks should be learned
together in a MTL setup.
5.2 Neural Architecture Search
The experimental results in Section 4 showed that the
success of MTL strongly depends on the use of a proper
network architecture. Typically, such architectures are hand-
crafted by human experts. However, given the size and com-
plexity of the problem, this manual architecture exploration
likely exceeds human design abilities. To automate the con-
struction of the network architecture, Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) [86] has been proposed in the literature.
Yet, most existing NAS works are limited to task-speciﬁc
models [87], [88], [89], [90], [91]. This is to be expected as
using NAS for MTL assumes that layer sharing has to be
jointly optimized with the layers types, their connectivity,
etc., rendering the problem considerably expensive.
To alleviate the heavy computational burden associated
with NAS, a recent work [92] implemented an evolutionary
architecture search for MTL, while other researchers ex-
plored alternatives, like routing [60], stochastic ﬁlter group-
ing [38], and feature partitioning [62]. These methods do
not build the architecture from scratch, but rather start from
a predeﬁned backbone network for which a cross-task layer
sharing scheme is automatically determined. So far, NAS for
MTL focused on how to share features across tasks in the
encoder. We hypothesize that NAS could also be applied for
the discovery of decoder-based MTL models.
5.3 Other
MTL has been applied to other problems too. This in-
cludes various domains, such as language [46], [93],
[94], robotics [95], [96] and video [97], [98], as well as
with different learning paradigms, such as reinforcement
learning [99], [100], self-supervised learning [101], semi-
supervised learning [102], [103] and active learning [104],
[105]. Surprisingly, in the deep learning era, very few works
have considered MTL under the semi-supervised or active
learning setting. Nonetheless, we believe that these are
interesting directions for future research.
For example, a major limitation of the fully-supervised
MTL setting that we consider here is the requirement for all
samples to be annotated for every task. Prior work [106]

==== Page 18 ====
18
showed that the standard update rule from Equation 5
gives suboptimal results if we do not take precautions when
annotations are missing. To alleviate this problem, Kim
et al. [107] proposed to use an alternate learning scheme
by updating the network weights for a single task at a
time. A knowledge distillation term [108] is included, in
order to avoid loosing relevant information about the other
tasks. Differently, Nekrasov et al. [106] proposed to use
the predictions from an expert model as synthetic ground-
truth when annotations are missing. Although, these early
attempts have shown encouraging results, we believe that
this problem could beneﬁt from further investigation.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we reviewed recent methods for MTL within
the scope of deep neural networks. First, we presented an
extensive overview of both architectural and optimization
based strategies for MTL. For each method, we described
its key aspects, discussed the commonalities and differences
with related works, and presented the possible advantages
or disadvantages. Finally, we conducted an extensive ex-
perimental analysis of the described methods that led us to
several key ﬁndings. We summarize some of our conclu-
sions below, and present some possibilities for future work.
First, the performance of MTL strongly varies depending
on the task dictionary. Its size, task types, label sources,
etc., all affect the ﬁnal outcome. As a result, an appropri-
ate architecture and optimization strategy should better be
selected on a per case basis. Although we provided concrete
observations as to why some methods work better for
speciﬁc setups, MTL could generally beneﬁt from a deeper
theoretical understanding to maximize the expected gains
in every case. For example, these gains seem dependent on
a plurality of factors, e.g. amount of data, task relationships,
noise, etc. Future work should try to isolate and analyze the
inﬂuence of these different elements.
Second, when it comes to tackling multiple dense predic-
tion tasks using a single MTL model, decoder-based archi-
tectures currently offer more advantages in terms of multi-
task performance, and with limited computational overhead
compared to the encoder-based ones. As explained, this is
due to an alignment of common cross-task patterns that
decoder-based architectures promote, which naturally ﬁts
well with dense prediction tasks. Encoder-based architec-
tures still offer certain advantages within the dense pre-
diction task setting, but their inherent layer sharing seems
better ﬁtted to tackle multiple classiﬁcation tasks.
Finally, we analyzed multiple task balancing strategies,
and isolated the elements that are most effective for balanc-
ing task learning, e.g. down-weighing noisy tasks, balancing
task gradients, etc. Yet, many optimization aspects still
remain poorly understood. For example, opposed to recent
works, our analysis indicates that avoiding gradient com-
petition between tasks can hurt performance. Furthermore,
our study revealed that some task balancing strategies still
suffer from shortcomings, and highlighted several discrep-
ancies between existing methods. We hope that this work
stimulates further research efforts into this problem.
Acknowledgment. The authors acknowledge support
by Toyota via the TRACE project and MACCHINA (KULeuven, C14/18/065). This work is also sponsored by the
Flemish Government under the Artiﬁciele Intelligentie (AI)
Vlaanderen programme.
Simon Vandenhende received his MSE degree
in Electrical Engineering from the KU Leuven,
Belgium, in 2018. He is currently studying to-
wards a PhD degree at the Center for Process-
ing Speech and Images at KU Leuven. His re-
search focuses on multi-task learning and self-
supervised learning. He won a best paper award
at MVA’19. He is co-organizing the ﬁrst Com-
mands For Autonomous Vehicles workshop at
ECCV’20.
Stamatios Georgoulis is a post-doctoral re-
searcher at the CVL group of ETH Zurich.
His current research interests include multi-task
learning, unsupervised learning, and image gen-
eration. Before coming to Zurich, he was a doc-
toral student at the PSI group of KU Leuven,
where he received his PhD under the supervi-
sion of Prof. Van Gool and Prof. Tuytelaars, fo-
cusing on extracting surface characteristics and
lighting from images. Further back, he received
his diploma in Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and participated
in Microsoft’s Imagine Cup Software Design Competition. He regularly
serves as a reviewer in major Computer Vision and Machine Learning
conferences (CVPR, NeurIPS, ICCV, ECCV, etc.) with distinctions.
Marc Proesmans is a research associate at
the Center for Processing Speech and Images
at KU Leuven, where he leads the TRACE
team. He has an extensive research experience
on various aspects in image processing, e.g.
early vision processes, 3D reconstruction, op-
tical ﬂow, stereo, structure from motion, recog-
nition. He has been involved in several Euro-
pean research projects, such as VANGUARD,
IMPROOFS, MESH, MURALE, EUROPA, ROV-
INA. From 2000-2011, he has been CTO for a
KU Leuven spin-off company specialized in special effects for the movie
and game industry. He won several prizes, Golden Egg, Tech-Art, a
European IST, tech. Oscar nomination, European seal of Excellence.
From 2015 he s leading the research on automotive driving as Research
expert, and co-founded TRACE vzw to drive the technology transfer
from academia to the real R&D environment for autonomous driving in
cooperation with Toyota.
Dengxin Dai is a senior scientist working with
the Computer Vision Lab at ETH Zurich. In 2016,
he obtained his PhD in Computer Vision at ETH
Zurich. Since then he is the Team Leader of the
TRACE-Zurich team, working on Autonomous
Driving in collaboration with Toyota. His research
interests lie in autonomous driving, robust per-
ception in adverse weather and lighting condi-
tions, automotive sensors, and learning under
limited supervision.

==== Page 19 ====
19
Luc Van Gool is a full professor for Computer
Vision at ETH Zurich and the KU Leuven. He
leads research and teaches at both places. He
has authored over 300 papers. Luc Van Gool
has been a program committee member of sev-
eral, major computer vision conferences (e.g.
Program Chair ICCV’05, Beijing, General Chair
of ICCV’11, Barcelona, and of ECCV’14, Zurich).
His main interests include 3D reconstruction and
modeling, object recognition, and autonomous
driving. He received several Best Paper awards
(eg. David Marr Prize ’98, Best Paper CVPR’07). He received the
Koenderink Award in 2016 and ‘Distinguished Researcher’ nomination
by the IEEE Computer Society in 2017. In 2015 he also received they
5-yearly Excellence Prize by the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Research.
He was the holder of an ERC Advanced Grant (VarCity). Currently, he
leads computer vision research for autonomous driving in the context of
the Toyota TRACE labs in Leuven and at ETH, and has an extensive col-
laboration with Huawei on the issue of image and video enhancement.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional net-
works for semantic segmentation,” in CVPR , 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[2] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P . Doll ´ar, and R. Girshick, “Mask r-cnn,” in
ICCV , 2017, pp. 2961–2969.
[3] D. Eigen, C. Puhrsch, and R. Fergus, “Depth map prediction from
a single image using a multi-scale deep network,” in NIPS , 2014,
pp. 2366–2374.
[4] M. Gur and D. M. Snodderly, “Direction selectivity in v1 of alert
monkeys: evidence for parallel pathways for motion processing,”
The Journal of physiology , vol. 585, no. 2, pp. 383–400, 2007.
[5] T. Evgeniou and M. Pontil, “Regularized multi–task learning,” in
KDD , 2004.
[6] Y. Xue, X. Liao, L. Carin, and B. Krishnapuram, “Multi-task
learning for classiﬁcation with dirichlet process priors,” JMLR ,
vol. 8, no. Jan, pp. 35–63, 2007.
[7] L. Jacob, J.-p. Vert, and F. R. Bach, “Clustered multi-task learning:
A convex formulation,” in NIPS , 2009, pp. 745–752.
[8] J. Zhou, J. Chen, and J. Ye, “Clustered multi-task learning via
alternating structure optimization,” in NIPS , 2011, pp. 702–710.
[9] B. Bakker and T. Heskes, “Task clustering and gating for bayesian
multitask learning,” JMLR , vol. 4, no. May, pp. 83–99, 2003.
[10] K. Yu, V . Tresp, and A. Schwaighofer, “Learning gaussian pro-
cesses from multiple tasks,” in ICML , 2005, pp. 1012–1019.
[11] S.-I. Lee, V . Chatalbashev, D. Vickrey, and D. Koller, “Learning
a meta-level prior for feature relevance from multiple related
tasks,” in ICML , 2007, pp. 489–496.
[12] H. Daum ´e III, “Bayesian multitask learning with latent hierar-
chies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:0907.0783 , 2009.
[13] A. Kumar and H. Daume III, “Learning task grouping and
overlap in multi-task learning,” 2012.
[14] A. Argyriou, T. Evgeniou, and M. Pontil, “Convex multi-task
feature learning,” Machine learning , vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 243–272,
2008.
[15] J. Liu, S. Ji, and J. Ye, “Multi-task feature learning via efﬁcient
l2, 1-norm minimization,” in Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
2009, pp. 339–348.
[16] A. Jalali, S. Sanghavi, C. Ruan, and P . K. Ravikumar, “A dirty
model for multi-task learning,” in NIPS , 2010.
[17] A. Agarwal, S. Gerber, and H. Daume, “Learning multiple tasks
using manifold regularization,” in NIPS , 2010.
[18] R. K. Ando and T. Zhang, “A framework for learning predictive
structures from multiple tasks and unlabeled data,” JMLR , vol. 6,
no. Nov, pp. 1817–1853, 2005.
[19] P . Rai and H. Daum ´e III, “Inﬁnite predictor subspace models for
multitask learning,” in AISTATS , 2010, pp. 613–620.
[20] R. Girshick, “Fast r-cnn,” in ICCV , 2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[21] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-
time object detection with region proposal networks,” in NIPS ,
2015, pp. 91–99.
[22] N. Dvornik, K. Shmelkov, J. Mairal, and C. Schmid, “Blitznet: A
real-time deep network for scene understanding,” in ICCV , 2017,
pp. 4154–4162.
[23] D. Eigen and R. Fergus, “Predicting depth, surface normals
and semantic labels with a common multi-scale convolutional
architecture,” in ICCV , 2015, pp. 2650–2658.[24] D. Xu, W. Ouyang, X. Wang, and N. Sebe, “Pad-net: Multi-
tasks guided prediction-and-distillation network for simultane-
ous depth estimation and scene parsing,” in CVPR , 2018, pp.
675–684.
[25] T. Standley, A. R. Zamir, D. Chen, L. Guibas, J. Malik, and
S. Savarese, “Which tasks should be learned together in multi-
task learning?” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07553 , 2019.
[26] I. Misra, A. Shrivastava, A. Gupta, and M. Hebert, “Cross-stitch
networks for multi-task learning,” in CVPR , 2016.
[27] S. Ruder, J. Bingel, I. Augenstein, and A. Søgaard, “Latent multi-
task architecture learning,” in AAAI , 2019.
[28] Y. Gao, J. Ma, M. Zhao, W. Liu, and A. L. Yuille, “Nddr-cnn: Lay-
erwise feature fusing in multi-task cnns by neural discriminative
dimensionality reduction,” in CVPR , 2019, pp. 3205–3214.
[29] S. Liu, E. Johns, and A. J. Davison, “End-to-end multi-task
learning with attention,” in CVPR , 2019.
[30] I. Kokkinos, “Ubernet: Training a universal convolutional neural
network for low-, mid-, and high-level vision using diverse
datasets and limited memory,” in CVPR , 2017.
[31] D. Neven, B. De Brabandere, S. Georgoulis, M. Proesmans, and
L. Van Gool, “Fast scene understanding for autonomous driv-
ing,” in IV Workshops , 2017.
[32] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using
uncertainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,”
inCVPR , 2018.
[33] Z. Chen, V . Badrinarayanan, C.-Y. Lee, and A. Rabinovich, “Grad-
norm: Gradient normalization for adaptive loss balancing in deep
multitask networks,” in ICML , 2018.
[34] O. Sener and V . Koltun, “Multi-task learning as multi-objective
optimization,” in NIPS , 2018.
[35] M. Long, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and S. Y. Philip, “Learning multiple
tasks with multilinear relationship networks,” in NIPS , 2017, pp.
1594–1603.
[36] Y. Lu, A. Kumar, S. Zhai, Y. Cheng, T. Javidi, and R. Feris, “Fully-
adaptive feature sharing in multi-task networks with applica-
tions in person attribute classiﬁcation,” in CVPR , 2017.
[37] S. Vandenhende, S. Georgoulis, B. De Brabandere, and
L. Van Gool, “Branched multi-task networks: Deciding what
layers to share,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02920 , 2019.
[38] F. J. Bragman, R. Tanno, S. Ourselin, D. C. Alexander, and M. J.
Cardoso, “Stochastic ﬁlter groups for multi-task cnns: Learning
specialist and generalist convolution kernels,” in ICCV , 2019.
[39] A. Sinha, Z. Chen, V . Badrinarayanan, and A. Rabinovich, “Gra-
dient adversarial training of neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.08028 , 2018.
[40] M. Guo, A. Haque, D.-A. Huang, S. Yeung, and L. Fei-Fei,
“Dynamic task prioritization for multitask learning,” in ECCV ,
2018.
[41] X. Zhao, H. Li, X. Shen, X. Liang, and Y. Wu, “A modulation mod-
ule for multi-task learning with applications in image retrieval,”
inECCV , 2018.
[42] K.-K. Maninis, I. Radosavovic, and I. Kokkinos, “Attentive single-
tasking of multiple tasks,” in CVPR , 2019, pp. 1851–1860.
[43] Z. Zhang, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Z. Jie, X. Li, and J. Yang, “Joint task-
recursive learning for semantic segmentation and depth estima-
tion,” in ECCV , 2018, pp. 235–251.
[44] Z. Zhang, Z. Cui, C. Xu, Y. Yan, N. Sebe, and J. Yang, “Pattern-
afﬁnitive propagation across depth, surface normal and semantic
segmentation,” in CVPR , 2019, pp. 4106–4115.
[45] S. Vandenhende, S. Georgoulis, and L. Van Gool, “Mti-net: Multi-
scale task interaction networks for multi-task learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.06902 , 2020.
[46] P . Liu, X. Qiu, and X. Huang, “Adversarial multi-task learning
for text classiﬁcation,” in ACL , 2017, pp. 1–10.
[47] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Machine learning , vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 41–75, 1997.
[48] S. Ruder, “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098 , 2017.
[49] Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “A survey on multi-task learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1707.08114 , 2017.
[50] T. Gong, T. Lee, C. Stephenson, V . Renduchintala, S. Padhy,
A. Ndirango, G. Keskin, and O. H. Elibol, “A comparison of
loss weighting strategies for multi task learning in deep neural
networks,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 141 627–141 632, 2019.
[51] M. Teichmann, M. Weber, M. Zoellner, R. Cipolla, and R. Urtasun,
“Multinet: Real-time joint semantic reasoning for autonomous
driving,” in IV. IEEE, 2018, pp. 1013–1020.

==== Page 20 ====
20
[52] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Spatial pyramid pooling
in deep convolutional networks for visual recognition,” TP AMI ,
vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1904–1916, 2015.
[53] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L.
Yuille, “Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep con-
volutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,”
TP AMI , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, 2017.
[54] H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia, “Pyramid scene parsing
network,” in CVPR , 2017, pp. 2881–2890.
[55] Y. Yuan and J. Wang, “Ocnet: Object context network for scene
parsing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00916 , 2018.
[56] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable
are features in deep neural networks?” in NIPS , 2014, pp. 3320–
3328.
[57] S. Huang, X. Li, Z. Cheng, A. Hauptmann et al. , “Gnas: A greedy
neural architecture search method for multi-attribute learning,”
2018.
[58] K. Dwivedi and G. Roig, “Representation similarity analysis for
efﬁcient task taxonomy & transfer learning,” in CVPR , 2019, pp.
12 387–12 396.
[59] Y. Yang and T. Hospedales, “Deep multi-task representa-
tion learning: A tensor factorisation approach,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.06391 , 2016.
[60] C. Rosenbaum, T. Klinger, and M. Riemer, “Routing networks:
Adaptive selection of non-linear functions for multi-task learn-
ing,” in ICLR , 2018.
[61] A. Mallya, D. Davis, and S. Lazebnik, “Piggyback: Adapting a
single network to multiple tasks by learning to mask weights,”
inECCV , 2018, pp. 67–82.
[62] A. Newell, L. Jiang, C. Wang, L.-J. Li, and J. Deng, “Feature
partitioning for efﬁcient multi-task architectures,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.04339 , 2019.
[63] M. Suteu and Y. Guo, “Regularizing deep multi-task networks us-
ing orthogonal gradients,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06844 , 2019.
[64] T.-Y. Lin, P . Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P . Doll ´ar, “Focal loss
for dense object detection,” in ICCV , 2017.
[65] J.-A. D ´esid ´eri, “Multiple-gradient descent algorithm (mgda) for
multiobjective optimization,” Comptes Rendus Mathematique , vol.
350, no. 5-6, pp. 313–318, 2012.
[66] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn, and
A. Zisserman, “The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge,”
IJCV , vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303–338, 2010.
[67] X. Chen, R. Mottaghi, X. Liu, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun, and A. Yuille,
“Detect what you can: Detecting and representing objects using
holistic models and body parts,” in CVPR , 2014, pp. 1971–1978.
[68] A. Bansal, X. Chen, B. Russell, A. Gupta, and D. Ramanan,
“Pixelnet: Representation of the pixels, by the pixels, and for the
pixels,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.06506 , 2017.
[69] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for seman-
tic image segmentation,” in ECCV , 2018, pp. 801–818.
[70] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler,
R. Benenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele, “The cityscapes
dataset for semantic urban scene understanding,” in CVPR , 2016.
[71] H. Hirschmuller, “Stereo processing by semiglobal matching and
mutual information,” TP AMI , vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 328–341, 2008.
[72] N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, P . Kohli, and R. Fergus, “Indoor seg-
mentation and support inference from rgbd images,” in ECCV .
Springer, 2012, pp. 746–760.
[73] A. R. Zamir, A. Sax, W. Shen, L. J. Guibas, J. Malik, and
S. Savarese, “Taskonomy: Disentangling task transfer learning,”
inCVPR , 2018.
[74] Z. Liu, P . Luo, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “Deep learning face
attributes in the wild,” in ICCV , 2015.
[75] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in CVPR , 2016, pp. 770–778.
[76] F. Yu and V . Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated
convolutions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122 , 2015.
[77] Y. Zou, Z. Luo, and J.-B. Huang, “Df-net: Unsupervised joint
learning of depth and ﬂow using cross-task consistency,” in
ECCV , 2018, pp. 36–53.
[78] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁ-
cation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in NIPS , 2012,
pp. 1097–1105.
[79] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional net-
works for large-scale image recognition,” in ICLR , 2015.[80] K. Sun, B. Xiao, D. Liu, and J. Wang, “Deep high-resolution
representation learning for human pose estimation,” in CVPR ,
2019, pp. 5693–5703.
[81] J. Wang, Y. Cheng, and R. Schmidt Feris, “Walk and learn:
Facial attribute representation learning from egocentric video
and contextual data,” in CVPR , 2016.
[82] E. M. Rudd, M. G ¨unther, and T. E. Boult, “Moon: A mixed objec-
tive optimization network for the recognition of facial attributes,”
inECCV , 2016.
[83] E. M. Hand and R. Chellappa, “Attributes for improved at-
tributes: A multi-task network utilizing implicit and explicit
relationships for facial attribute classiﬁcation.” in AAAI , 2017.
[84] S. J. Pan, Q. Yang et al. , “A survey on transfer learning,” TKDE ,
vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, 2010.
[85] J. Ma, Z. Zhao, X. Yi, J. Chen, L. Hong, and E. H. Chi, “Modeling
task relationships in multi-task learning with multi-gate mixture-
of-experts,” in KDD , 2018, pp. 1930–1939.
[86] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter, “Neural architecture search:
A survey.” JMLR , vol. 20, no. 55, pp. 1–21, 2019.
[87] B. Zoph and Q. V . Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforce-
ment learning,” in ICLR , 2017.
[88] C. Liu, B. Zoph, M. Neumann, J. Shlens, W. Hua, L.-J. Li, L. Fei-
Fei, A. Yuille, J. Huang, and K. Murphy, “Progressive neural
architecture search,” in ECCV , 2018.
[89] H. Pham, M. Y. Guan, B. Zoph, Q. V . Le, and J. Dean, “Efﬁcient
neural architecture search via parameter sharing,” in ICML , 2018.
[90] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang, “Darts: Differentiable architec-
ture search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055 , 2018.
[91] E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y. Huang, and Q. V . Le, “Regularized
evolution for image classiﬁer architecture search,” in AAAI , 2019.
[92] J. Liang, E. Meyerson, and R. Miikkulainen, “Evolutionary archi-
tecture search for deep multitask networks,” in GECCO , 2018.
[93] D. Dong, H. Wu, W. He, D. Yu, and H. Wang, “Multi-task learning
for multiple language translation,” in ACL , 2015, pp. 1723–1732.
[94] B. McCann, N. S. Keskar, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “The natural
language decathlon: Multitask learning as question answering,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08730 , 2018.
[95] M. Wulfmeier, A. Abdolmaleki, R. Hafner, J. T. Springenberg,
M. Neunert, T. Hertweck, T. Lampe, N. Siegel, N. Heess, and
M. Riedmiller, “Regularized hierarchical policies for composi-
tional transfer in robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11228 , 2019.
[96] K. Hausman, J. T. Springenberg, Z. Wang, N. Heess, and M. Ried-
miller, “Learning an embedding space for transferable robot
skills,” 2018.
[97] A. Diba, M. Fayyaz, V . Sharma, M. Paluri, J. Gall, R. Stiefelhagen,
and L. Van Gool, “Holistic large scale video understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11451 , 2019.
[98] R. Pasunuru and M. Bansal, “Multi-task video captioning with
video and entailment generation,” in ACL , 2017, pp. 1273–1283.
[99] L. Espeholt, H. Soyer, R. Munos, K. Simonyan, V . Mnih, T. Ward,
Y. Doron, V . Firoiu, T. Harley, I. Dunning et al. , “Impala: Scal-
able distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures,” in ICML , 2018.
[100] A. Wilson, A. Fern, S. Ray, and P . Tadepalli, “Multi-task reinforce-
ment learning: a hierarchical bayesian approach,” in ICML , 2007,
pp. 1015–1022.
[101] C. Doersch and A. Zisserman, “Multi-task self-supervised visual
learning,” in ICCV , 2017, pp. 2051–2060.
[102] Q. Liu, X. Liao, and L. Carin, “Semi-supervised multitask learn-
ing,” in NIPS , 2008, pp. 937–944.
[103] Y. Zhang and D.-Y. Yeung, “Semi-supervised multi-task regres-
sion,” in KDD . Springer, 2009, pp. 617–631.
[104] A. Acharya, R. J. Mooney, and J. Ghosh, “Active multitask learn-
ing using both latent and supervised shared topics,” in ICDM .
SIAM, 2014, pp. 190–198.
[105] R. Reichart, K. Tomanek, U. Hahn, and A. Rappoport, “Multi-
task active learning for linguistic annotations,” in ACL , 2008, pp.
861–869.
[106] V . Nekrasov, T. Dharmasiri, A. Spek, T. Drummond, C. Shen,
and I. Reid, “Real-time joint semantic segmentation and depth
estimation using asymmetric annotations,” in ICRA . IEEE, 2019,
pp. 7101–7107.
[107] D.-J. Kim, J. Choi, T.-H. Oh, Y. Yoon, and I. S. Kweon, “Dis-
joint multi-task learning between heterogeneous human-centric
tasks,” in WACV . IEEE, 2018, pp. 1699–1708.
[108] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in
a neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.

==== Page 21 ====
21
[109] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al. , “Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in
NIPS , 2019, pp. 8024–8035.
A S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS - INTRODUCTION
The supplementary materials provide additional informa-
tion to reproduce the experimental results reported in the
paper. The majority of our results were obtained after
performing a grid search on the hyperparameter space to
ensure fair comparison. Furthermore, all models use pre-
trained ImageNet weights. We used PyTorch [109] to imple-
ment the different methods. The supplementary materials
follow the same structure as the experiments section in the
main paper.
Hyperparameters Search As mentioned previously, the
majority of our experiments was performed using a grid
search on the hyperparameter space. In particular, we tested
batches of three different sizes, poly learning rate decay vs
step learning rate decay with decay factor 10, and Adam
(initial learning rates 2e-4, 1e-4, 5e-5, 1e-5) vs stochastic
gradient descent with momentum 0.9 (initial learning rates
5e-2, 1e-2, 5e-3, 1e-3). This results in 48 hyperparameter
settings in total. The batch sizes were selected based on prior
works and depending on the dataset. The hyperparameter
search procedure was repeated for every experiment, unless
noted otherwise. The remaining hyperparameters were set
in accordance with the original works.
B E NCODER -BASED APPROACHES
B.1 NYUD-v2
A ResNet-50 [75] backbone with dilated convolutions [76]
is used to encode the images. The task-speciﬁc heads use
an Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling module [69]. The depth
task is learned using an L1 loss. A standard cross-entropy
loss is used for the semantic segmentation task. The RGB
and depth images were randomly scaled with the selected
ratio inf1;1:2;1:5g, and randomly horizontally ﬂipped.
The hyperparameters were optimized using the grid search
procedure described before. We tested batches of size 4, 6
and 8. Note that, our experimental setup is essentially the
same as in prior works [24], [44], [45].
B.2 Cityscapes
We followed the experimental setup from [37]. All models
were trained following the hyperparameter search proce-
dure described earlier. We show the tree-based encoders
from Branched Multi-Task Networks in Figure S1 for com-
pleteness.
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4Sem. Seg.
DepthTask Speciﬁc DecoderInst. Seg.(a) Branched MTL-1
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3Inst. Seg.ResNet-50-Block 4Sem. Seg.Task Speciﬁc DecoderDepth (b) Branched MTL-2
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3Inst. Seg.ResNet-50-Block 4Sem. Seg.Task Speciﬁc DecoderDepth (c) Branched MTL-3
Fig. S1: Task groupings generated with the procedure from
Branched Multi-Task Networks [37] on Cityscapes.
B.3 Taskonomy
We followed the experimental setup from [37]. The task
groupings generated by FAFS are shown in Figure S2, while
the ones obtained by Branched Multi-Task Networks [37]
are shown in Figure S3.
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4E
K
D
STask Speciﬁc DecoderC
(a) FA - 1
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4D
E
K
STask Speciﬁc DecoderC (b) FA - 2
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4E
K
S
DTask Speciﬁc DecoderC (c) FA - 3
Fig. S2: Task groupings generated by FAFS [36] on Taskon-
omy.
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4S
D
C
KTask Speciﬁc DecoderE
(a) Branched MTL-1
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4S
D
C
KTask Speciﬁc DecoderE (b) Branched MTL-2
ResNet-50-Block 1
ResNet-50-Block 2
ResNet-50-Block 3
ResNet-50-Block 4S
D
C
KTask Speciﬁc DecoderE (c) Branched MTL-3
Fig. S3: Task groupings generated with the procedure from
Branched Multi-Task Networks [37] on Taskonomy.
C D ECODER -BASED APPROACHES
C.1 NYUD-v2
We reuse the single-task networks and MTL baseline from
Section B.1. Note that, the experimental setting, i.e. back-
bone, loss functions, augmentation strategy, etc., in Sec-
tion B.1 is essentially the same as the one employed by prior
works on decoder-based architectures [24], [44], [45]. This
facilitates a direct comparison between the models from
Section B.1 and the results reported by the decoder-based
architectures on NYUD-v2.
C.2 PASCAL
We reuse the results from ASTMT [42] and MTI-Net [45].
PAD-Net was re-implemented using the code base provided
by [42]. In particular, we reuse the backbone, augmentation
strategy, and loss weighting. Other hyperparameters were
set in accordance with the original work [24].

==== Page 22 ====
22
D T ASKBALANCING
D.1 CelebA
We used a standard ResNet-18 backbone. We attach a sep-
arate linear head for every attribute. The input images are
rescaled to 224 by 224 pixels, and augmented with random
crops and horizontal ﬂips. We follow the hyperparameter
search from Section A, including batches of size 32, 128
and 256. The attributes were learned using a binary cross-
entropy loss.
D.2 NYUD-v2
We follow the procedure from Section B.1. Additional hy-
perparameters were set in accordance to the original works.
D.3 Cityscapes
We follow the procedure from Section B.2. Additional hy-
perparameters were set in accordance to the original works.

