==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Qin, H.; Shao, S.; Wang, T.;
Yu, X.; Jiang, Y.; Cao, Z. Review of
Autonomous Path Planning
Algorithms for Mobile Robots.
Drones 2023 ,7, 211. https://doi.org/
10.3390/drones7030211
Academic Editor: Mostafa
Hassanalian
Received: 13 February 2023
Revised: 15 March 2023
Accepted: 17 March 2023
Published: 18 March 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
drones
Review
Review of Autonomous Path Planning Algorithms for
Mobile Robots
Hongwei Qin1,2,3, Shiliang Shao2,3,*
, Ting Wang2,3,*, Xiaotian Yu2,3,4, Yi Jiang2,3,4and Zonghan Cao1,2,3
1School of Software, Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang 110870, China
2State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shenyang 110016, China
3Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110169, China
4University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
*Correspondence: shaoshiliang@sia.cn (S.S.); wangting@sia.cn (T.W.)
Abstract: Mobile robots, including ground robots, underwater robots, and unmanned aerial vehicles,
play an increasingly important role in people’s work and lives. Path planning and obstacle avoidance
are the core technologies for achieving autonomy in mobile robots, and they will determine the
application prospects of mobile robots. This paper introduces path planning and obstacle avoid-
ance methods for mobile robots to provide a reference for researchers in this ﬁeld. In addition, it
comprehensively summarizes the recent progress and breakthroughs of mobile robots in the ﬁeld
of path planning and discusses future directions worthy of research in this ﬁeld. We focus on the
path planning algorithm of a mobile robot. We divide the path planning methods of mobile robots
into the following categories: graph-based search, heuristic intelligence, local obstacle avoidance,
artiﬁcial intelligence, sampling-based, planner-based, constraint problem satisfaction-based, and
other algorithms. In addition, we review a path planning algorithm for multi-robot systems and
different robots. We describe the basic principles of each method and highlight the most relevant
studies. We also provide an in-depth discussion and comparison of path planning algorithms. Finally,
we propose potential research directions in this ﬁeld that are worth studying in the future.
Keywords: mobile robot; autonomous underwater robot; unmanned aerial robot; path planning;
multi-robot cooperative
1. Introduction
Mobile robots have been effectively used in various ﬁelds over the past few decades,
including the military, industry, and security settings, to carry out important unmanned
duties [ 1,2]. In recent years, robots have been given increasingly more applications, which
can improve production efﬁciency, reduce manpower, and improve the working environ-
ment [ 3]. Ground robots are usually used to automate tasks, such as materials handling in
warehouses, luggage picking up in airports, and mobile security inspection robots. Under-
water robots are usually used to take samples, carry out testing, installation, maintenance,
and overhaul of underground water environments, marine environments, and lake and
river water environments. Aerial robots are usually used to conduct airborne search and
rescue, search terrain data collection, aerial remote sensing, and other tasks [ 4,5]. The
development of robot applications is bringing more and more innovations. The practicality
of robots is dependent on their autonomous navigation planning capability. Hence, they
need to not only understand the environment they face but also autonomously navigate
and plan paths in given areas to meet task requirements. The capability of autonomous
navigation and path planning is critical for robot applications, which can not only speed up
the running speed of robots but also effectively avoid their blind spots and achieve more
efﬁcient task completion. One of the most fundamental issues that need to be resolved
before mobile robots can move and explore on their own in complex surroundings is path
Drones 2023 ,7, 211. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones7030211 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones

==== Page 2 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 2 of 37
planning [ 6]. According to a given robotic machine’s working environment, a mobile robot
searches for an optimal or suboptimal path from the starting state to the goal state based on
speciﬁc performance criteria. This is known as the path planning problem [ 7]. For mobile
robots, effective path planning strategies can save signiﬁcant time and minimize wear, tear,
and capital expenditure. Therefore, the correct choice of a navigation technique is the most
important step in robot path planning.
It is necessary to conduct a comprehensive investigation of mobile robot path planning
owing to the recent technological progress and breakthroughs in the ﬁeld. The purpose
of this review is to summarize the path planning work of mobile robots and the technical
details of some representative algorithms and discuss some open problems to be solved
in this ﬁeld. Articles on the path planning of the mobile robot were retrieved from the
databases of Engineering Village and the Web of Science. The search terms during the
data retrieval process were “path planning” and “mobile robot.” We selected well-known
publications and articles from conferences in the ﬁeld of robotics, with a focus on the path
planning algorithms of mobile robots. In addition, we provide an in-depth discussion and
comparison of path planning algorithms. Finally, we hope that this paper will provide a
preliminary understanding of mobile robots and path planning for researchers who have
just entered this ﬁeld.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the path
planning algorithms for mobile robots. Section 3 introduces the path planning algorithms
for multiple robots. Section 4 introduces a path planning algorithm for the cooperation
of different robots. Section 5 discusses and summarizes the study. The conclusions are
presented in Section 6.
2. Path Planning Algorithm
We will introduce the following different types of path planning algorithms: graph-
based search, heuristic intelligence, local obstacle detection, artiﬁcial intelligence, sampling,
path planners, constraint problem satisfaction algorithms, and other algorithms. For the
classiﬁcation of the above path planning algorithms, we consider that some traditional
path planning algorithms can be applied to ground, underwater, and aerial robots. The
following path planning algorithms [8] are then categorized based on how they work.
2.1. Algorithms Based on Graph Search
2.1.1. A* Algorithm
The A* algorithm, which is typically used for static global planning, is an efﬁcient
search method for obtaining the shortest paths and is also a typical heuristic algorithm.
The effect of the A* algorithm is shown in Figure 1. The yellow box represents the starting
point, the black box represents the obstacle, the pink box represents the end-point, and the
blue polyline represents the path. The A* algorithm is used to realize the path planning
from the starting point (yellow grid) to the ending point (pink grid) in an environment
with obstacles.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 3 of 40 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the path pla nning algorithm based on the A*. 
However, there are issues associated with the A* algorithm that limit its use. The 
system path planning has an excessive number of in ﬂection points and turns, which 
makes it di ﬃcult for the robot to move in its actual surroundings. In [9], the T * algorithm, 
which combines the A* search algorithm with li near time logic path planning and uses the 
search process of the A* algorithm to generate  the optimal path satisfying the time logic 
search, was proposed. The ﬁnal experimental results reveal that the T * algorithm reduces 
the number of nodes and the generation time  of the path compared with the existing 
algorithms when solving the temporal logical path planning problem in two- and three-
dimensional spaces in a large workspace. In [1 0], the concept of optimality was introduced 
on a weighted color graph, which expresses the geometric and semantic information in 
the search space. On this basis, the class-ordered A (COA*) algorithm that ﬁnds the 
globally optimal path in the weighted color gr aph by heuristic construction of the optimal 
search tree was proposed. Compared with the tr aditional A* algorithm, this algorithm is 
better at ﬁnding uncertain paths. As the A* algorithm faces challenges in real-time path 
planning and collision-free path planning in a large-scale dynamic environment, in [11], 
the calculation of the distance cost of the risk cost function was simpli ﬁed, key path points 
were extracted, and the number of nodes was reduced. Finally, combined with the 
adaptive window method, path tracking, and obstacle avoidance were achieved. The 
simulation results reveal that the algorithm ca n meet the real-time re quirements of mobile 
robots in large–scale environments.  
Owing to the low accuracy of existing terr ain matching methods in areas with small 
eigenvalues, this study [12] proposed a se abed terrain matching navigation algorithm 
based on the A* algorithm, which mainly uses terrain information to analyze the area 
matching performance. It also proposed a search length and a dynamic matching 
algorithm to reduce time consumption. The simulations showed that this method can 
avoid obstacles with less-than-perfect matching and shorten the length of the path. As the 
traditional A* algorithm does not consider th e turning cost and redundant path points, it 
cannot guarantee the safety of the mobile robo t. The turning cost function was added in 
[13] to avoid the detour and frequent turning of  the mobile robot. Additionally, the search 
points near the obstacles were reduced to ensure a safe distance, determine whether the 
point is redundant by judging whether there are obstacles around each path point, and 
optimize the generated trajectory. Compared to the traditional A* algorithm, it reduces the path length, search time, and several nodes. 
To address the problem of global navigati on satellite systems (GNSS) positioning 
map errors for unmanned aerial robots, an im proved path planning  algorithm based on 
the GNSS error distribution fusion A* was proposed [14]. The e ﬀectiveness of the 
improved A* algorithm was tested at di ﬀerent altitudes using a quadcopter in an actual 
urban environment. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that, compared to the 
traditional A* and arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF) algorithms, the revised A* algorithm 
oﬀers safe pathways based on position erro r prediction at a low cost. The RiskA* 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on the A*.

==== Page 3 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 3 of 37
However, there are issues associated with the A* algorithm that limit its use. The
system path planning has an excessive number of inﬂection points and turns, which makes
it difﬁcult for the robot to move in its actual surroundings. In [ 9], the T * algorithm, which
combines the A* search algorithm with linear time logic path planning and uses the search
process of the A* algorithm to generate the optimal path satisfying the time logic search, was
proposed. The ﬁnal experimental results reveal that the T * algorithm reduces the number
of nodes and the generation time of the path compared with the existing algorithms when
solving the temporal logical path planning problem in two- and three-dimensional spaces
in a large workspace. In [ 10], the concept of optimality was introduced on a weighted color
graph, which expresses the geometric and semantic information in the search space. On
this basis, the class-ordered A (COA*) algorithm that ﬁnds the globally optimal path in the
weighted color graph by heuristic construction of the optimal search tree was proposed.
Compared with the traditional A* algorithm, this algorithm is better at ﬁnding uncertain
paths. As the A* algorithm faces challenges in real-time path planning and collision-free
path planning in a large-scale dynamic environment, in [ 11], the calculation of the distance
cost of the risk cost function was simpliﬁed, key path points were extracted, and the number
of nodes was reduced. Finally, combined with the adaptive window method, path tracking,
and obstacle avoidance were achieved. The simulation results reveal that the algorithm can
meet the real-time requirements of mobile robots in large–scale environments.
Owing to the low accuracy of existing terrain matching methods in areas with small
eigenvalues, this study [ 12] proposed a seabed terrain matching navigation algorithm
based on the A* algorithm, which mainly uses terrain information to analyze the area
matching performance. It also proposed a search length and a dynamic matching algorithm
to reduce time consumption. The simulations showed that this method can avoid obstacles
with less-than-perfect matching and shorten the length of the path. As the traditional
A* algorithm does not consider the turning cost and redundant path points, it cannot
guarantee the safety of the mobile robot. The turning cost function was added in [ 13] to
avoid the detour and frequent turning of the mobile robot. Additionally, the search points
near the obstacles were reduced to ensure a safe distance, determine whether the point is
redundant by judging whether there are obstacles around each path point, and optimize
the generated trajectory. Compared to the traditional A* algorithm, it reduces the path
length, search time, and several nodes.
To address the problem of global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) positioning map
errors for unmanned aerial robots, an improved path planning algorithm based on the
GNSS error distribution fusion A* was proposed [ 14]. The effectiveness of the improved
A* algorithm was tested at different altitudes using a quadcopter in an actual urban
environment. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that, compared to the traditional A*
and artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF) algorithms, the revised A* algorithm offers safe pathways
based on position error prediction at a low cost. The RiskA* algorithm was presented for
unmanned aerial robot path planning optimization in urban environments [ 15]. The
path length and risk cost are both considered while designing the cost function, and the
ﬁnal path minimizes the sum of these two costs. According to the simulation ﬁndings,
the RiskA* algorithm performs well and can account for the risk posed by the ground
population, a crucial element in urban areas, to determine the best solution. For rotary-wing
unmanned aerial robots performing low-altitude missions in three-dimensional complex
mountain environments, a fusion algorithm of the sparse A* algorithm and bio-inspired
neurodynamic model was proposed [ 16]. This improved the A* algorithm in terms of
the process structure and evaluation function. It also mitigated the computationally large
problem of the A* algorithm in the three-dimensional (3D) trajectory planning process.
Based on experimental ﬁndings, the fusion algorithm enables a rotary-wing unmanned
aerial robot to design a safe, quick, and economical course in challenging mountainous
terrain by reducing the complexity and time requirements of the A* algorithm.
In short, the A* algorithm is the most effective search algorithm in a static environment.
However, it has many disadvantages, such as an excessive number of redundant nodes.

==== Page 4 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 4 of 37
Therefore, in recent years, scholars have mostly chosen to improve the cost function or re-
duce the number of nodes in its path. Moreover, it can meet the needs of different scenarios
through different cost functions. However, in large environments, the A* algorithm still
exhibits slow path planning. In [ 10,11], scholars also provided solutions to this problem.
Therefore, in future research on the A* algorithm, enabling the A* algorithm to plan the
optimal path in real-time in large environments is a possible direction.
2.1.2. Dijkstra’s Algorithm
Dijkstra’s algorithm was proposed by E.W. Dijkstra in 1959 [ 17]. It is a typical algorithm
for solving the shortest-path problem in directed graphs. The algorithm sets the point
where the mobile robot is located as the initial node and traverses the remaining nodes. It
then adds the node with the closest distance to the initial node to the set of nodes, which
spreads outward from the initial node in layers until all the nodes in the graph are traversed.
Subsequently, it ﬁnds the shortest path from the initial node to the target node according to
the magnitude of the path weight.
Owing to the uncertainty of odometer positioning, which offsets the path planning
of a mobile robot [ 18], a path planning algorithm considering the minimum cumulative
error of the sensor offset is proposed. Through statistical, qualitative, and quantitative
analyses of the accumulated error of odometer positioning, the planning path with the
minimum accumulated error is generated. Through simulations and comparative analysis,
this method effectively reduces the cumulative error under complex conditions. Similarly,
an improved Dijkstra algorithm was proposed for Dijkstra’s non-adaptation to complex
environments. This introduces the concept of equivalent paths, analyzes the inﬂuencing
factors and weights of equivalent paths, and ﬁnally obtains the conversion formula between
equivalent paths and actual paths [ 19]. Combined with engineering examples, the shortest
water avoidance path for a mine was calculated.
For dynamic obstacles in the ocean, the Dijkstra algorithm was improved by adding
additional functions [ 20]. Furthermore, the algorithm alters the course according to the
current dynamics.
The Dijkstra algorithm is a classic algorithm for ﬁnding the shortest path of a single
source and is mainly used to ﬁnd the optimal path of a geographic information system.
However, with the massive growth of data, the operational efﬁciency of the classic Dijkstra
algorithm has been unable to meet people’s needs, and it needs to be optimized from all
aspects.
2.2. Heuristic Intelligent Search Algorithm
2.2.1. Genetic Algorithm
The genetic algorithm (GA), also known as the evolutionary algorithm, is a heuristic
search algorithm. It generates an optimal solution to a problem by simulating the evolution
of organisms using the principle of survival of the ﬁttest. A population consists of a certain
number of individuals, each carrying a certain number of coded genes, and the population
is equivalent to a set of solutions to the problem. A diagram of the genetic algorithm
is shown in Figure 2. It includes initializing the population randomly, selecting suitable
individuals, carrying out the selection, crossover, and mutation genetic operations, and
constantly updating the population.

==== Page 5 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 5 of 37
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 5 of 40 
 
2.2. Heuristic Intelligent Search Algorithm 
2.2.1. Genetic Algorithm 
The genetic algorithm (GA), also known as th e evolutionary algorithm, is a heuristic 
search algorithm. It generates an optimal solution to a problem by simulating the 
evolution of organisms using the principle of survival of the ﬁttest. A population consists 
of a certain number of indivi duals, each carrying a certain number of coded genes, and 
the population is equivalent to a set of solu tions to the problem. A diagram of the genetic 
algorithm is shown in Figure 2. It includes initializing the population randomly, selecting 
suitable individuals, carrying out the selection, crossover, and mutation genetic operations, and constantly updating the population. 
 
Figure 2. Flow chart of genetic al gorithm evolution [21]. 
Genetic algorithms have a low computatio nal rate and consume a large number of 
computer resources in the process, which is also a major constraint to their development. 
A static global path planning method usin g a genetic algorithm was proposed, followed 
by dynamic obstacle avoidance using a Q-learning algorithm [21]. The entire method is 
an “oﬄine” and then “online” hierarchical path planning method that successfully 
achieved the path planning of mobile  robots. In [22], a new genetic modi ﬁcation operator 
was proposed to address the shortcomings  of the GA algorithm, which has poor 
convergence and neglects inter-population  cooperation. The improved algorithm can 
better avoid the local optimum problem and has a faster convergence speed. To address 
the multi-robot cooperation problem, a co-evolutionary mechanism is proposed to achieve collision-free obstacle avoidance planning for multiple robots. The e ﬃciency of 
the algorithm is demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings.  
The GA was used [23] to generate o ﬄine optimal 3D paths, and the degree of path 
optimization was considered to provide a planning approach appropriate for 3D 
underwater environments. In [24], a path planner combining a GA and dynamic planning was proposed. In this algorithm, the random  crossover operator from the traditional 
genetic algorithm is replaced by a crossover operator that is always the same and is based 
on dynamic planning. The path planner simultaneously optimized the path length, minimized the turning angle, and maximized the elevation rate. Compared to traditional 
genetic algorithms, this path planner is more adaptable and has a faster rate of 
convergence. 
Reference [25] combined mixed integer li near programming (MILP) with genetic 
algorithms to propose a new method for improving unmanned aerial robot path planning in complex environments, and the e ﬀectiveness of the proposed method was validated 
using two, ﬁve, and seven unmanned aerial robots in urban and mountainous areas, 
respectively. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that in terms of cost-e ﬀectiveness 
Figure 2. Flow chart of genetic algorithm evolution [21].
Genetic algorithms have a low computational rate and consume a large number of
computer resources in the process, which is also a major constraint to their development. A
static global path planning method using a genetic algorithm was proposed, followed by
dynamic obstacle avoidance using a Q-learning algorithm [ 21]. The entire method is an
“ofﬂine” and then “online” hierarchical path planning method that successfully achieved
the path planning of mobile robots. In [ 22], a new genetic modiﬁcation operator was
proposed to address the shortcomings of the GA algorithm, which has poor convergence
and neglects inter-population cooperation. The improved algorithm can better avoid
the local optimum problem and has a faster convergence speed. To address the multi-
robot cooperation problem, a co-evolutionary mechanism is proposed to achieve collision-
free obstacle avoidance planning for multiple robots. The efﬁciency of the algorithm is
demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings.
The GA was used [ 23] to generate ofﬂine optimal 3D paths, and the degree of path
optimization was considered to provide a planning approach appropriate for 3D under-
water environments. In [ 24], a path planner combining a GA and dynamic planning was
proposed. In this algorithm, the random crossover operator from the traditional genetic
algorithm is replaced by a crossover operator that is always the same and is based on
dynamic planning. The path planner simultaneously optimized the path length, minimized
the turning angle, and maximized the elevation rate. Compared to traditional genetic
algorithms, this path planner is more adaptable and has a faster rate of convergence.
Reference [ 25] combined mixed integer linear programming (MILP) with genetic
algorithms to propose a new method for improving unmanned aerial robot path planning
in complex environments, and the effectiveness of the proposed method was validated
using two, ﬁve, and seven unmanned aerial robots in urban and mountainous areas,
respectively. The experimental ﬁndings demonstrate that in terms of cost-effectiveness and
energy optimization environments, the proposed method outperforms the ant colony and
genetic algorithms. Reference [ 26] proposed a dynamic genetic algorithm by optimizing
the crossover and variation operators of the genetic algorithm to automatically adjust the
crossover and variation probabilities using individual ﬁtness. To quickly and effectively
reject maladapted individuals and increase the search efﬁciency in the early phases of the
algorithm, these operators are dynamically changed in real-time using individual ﬁtness
values. According to the experimental results, the GA optimization method can signiﬁcantly
increase search speed. Genetic algorithms and fuzzy logic have been combined [ 27] to
increase path planning accuracy. This study interprets the path planning problem as a
multi-traveler problem, solving the problem of returning each unmanned aerial robot to its
starting point at the end of its action.
A GA can obtain multiple solutions through multiple runs. These solutions can be
compared, and the best solutions can be selected. However, the operation process of GA is

==== Page 6 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 6 of 37
relatively complex, and it is necessary to select appropriate parameters. If inappropriate
parameters are selected, the performance of the algorithm may deteriorate. Improvements
can be made to its genetics. The future direction of improvement is still related to machine
learning and other technologies to further improve the adaptive ability and intelligence
level of the algorithm.
2.2.2. Ant Colony Algorithm
The ant colony algorithm (ACO) is a positive feedback mechanism algorithm proposed
by the Italian scholar Dorigol in 1992, in which a pheromone-focused path has a heuristic
inﬂuence on the search for the next node. Each ant produces a secretion as a reference
along its walking path and senses the secretions generated by other ants when they are
seeking food. This is the underlying concept behind the ACO algorithm. The mechanism
of the ant colony algorithm is shown in Figure 3. The ants can communicate and make
decisions based on this secretion, often referred to as pheromone. The colony migrates to a
path where there are more pheromones than on other paths and releases more secretions
as it moves, increasing the concentration of the pheromone and drawing more ants to the
path, generating a positive feedback process. The pheromone concentration on the short
road steadily increases over time, leading to an increase in the number of ants choosing
it, whereas the pheromone concentration on other paths gradually diminishes until it
disappears. The entire colony eventually focuses on the best route. The act of foraging by
the ants is comparable to that of robotic path planning. The ants will choose the quickest
route to the food if there are a sufﬁcient number of them in the nest to overcome the barriers.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 7 of 40 
 
 
Figure 3. The mechanism of the ant colony algorithm. 
An ant colony technique with particle swarm optimization was proposed [31] for the 
autonomous underwater robot to discover the ideal path through a complicated sea ﬂoor. 
To enhance the pheromone update rule, the particle swarm optimization technique was 
added to the path-length heuristic function. Th e strategy also restricts the initialization 
range of particular populations, considerably enhancing the search e ﬃciency and 
preventing a series of super ﬂuous pitches and undulations, considering how challenging 
it is for autonomous underwater robots to lo cate pathways in a three-dimensional space. 
Unlike the conventional “ant colony” algorithm, path optimization is signi ﬁcantly 
reduced. For the problem of autonomous underwater robots needing to traverse complex 
environments with dense obstacles, an AC O-A* algorithm was proposed by combining 
the ACO algorithm with the A* search algori thm [32]. Here, the ACO is responsible for 
determining the target travel order based on th e cost map, and A* performs pairwise path 
planning based on the se arch map obtained from ﬁne-grained modeling. Simulation 
results demonstrate that the time e ﬃciency of the ACO-A* is veri ﬁed. 
An improved multi-objective swarm intelligence method was used to plan an 
accurate unmanned aerial robot 3D path (APPMS) [33]. The path planning problem is 
transformed in the APPMS approach into a multi-objective optimization task with 
numerous restrictions. In addition, a precis e swarm intelligence search technique based 
on enhanced ant colony optimization was introduced to ﬁnd the best unmanned aerial 
robot 3D ﬂight path. This technique uses preferenti al search directions and a stochastic 
neighborhood search mechanism to enhance both global and local search capabilities. The 
simulation results demonstrate that the superi ority of the proposed approach is supported 
by three sets of digital terrain (three, four , and eight threats) and genuine DEM data for 
the simulated disaster response missions.  Another study suggested using [34] a 2-
OptACO approach that builds on the 2-op t algorithm to enhance the ant colony 
optimization algorithm and is used to optimize the unmanned aerial robot path for search 
and rescue missions. According to the simulation ﬁndings, the 2-OptACO approach 
converges more quickly than the GA and ACO approaches. Be tter global optimal solutions 
are attained. Reference [35] presented a method  based on ant colony optimization to 
determine the minimum time search path for multiple unmanned aerial robots (minimum 
time search-ant colony optimization MTS-ACO). Two di ﬀerent pheromone table 
encodings were proposed for MTS-ACO. A mini mum–time search heuristic function was 
designed that enables the ant colony optimi zation algorithm to generate high-quality 
solutions at the initial stage and accelerate the convergence of the algorithm. 
The ant colony algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal path in a known static large-scale 
environment and is also suitable for multi-objective optimization problems. However, it 
easily falls into the local optimal solution, resulting in a slow convergence speed of the 
algorithm. Scholars have also improved its convergence speed. Nonetheless, its 
convergence speed and global searchability can be improved further. 
Figure 3. The mechanism of the ant colony algorithm.
A new pheromone updating technique was proposed in a dynamic environment to
avoid unnecessary loops and achieve faster convergence [ 28]. An improved algorithm with
an adaptive search step size and pheromone waving strategy was proposed to address the
problem of the ACO algorithm being prone to a local optimum and inefﬁcient search [ 29].
For the path conﬂict problem caused by the over-concentration of multiple robot paths, a
load-balancing strategy to avoid path conﬂict is proposed. Simulation results demonstrate
that the proposed strategy is feasible and efﬁcient. A hybrid approach based on the regres-
sion analysis-adaptive ant colony optimization (RA-AACO) humanoid robot navigation
method was proposed [ 30], and a Petri net controller was designed to prevent multiple
robots from colliding with one another in a re-simulation. The controller successfully
implemented single and multi-robot navigation. This process can be applied as a reliable
solution for humanoid robot navigation and other robotic applications.
An ant colony technique with particle swarm optimization was proposed [ 31] for the
autonomous underwater robot to discover the ideal path through a complicated seaﬂoor. To
enhance the pheromone update rule, the particle swarm optimization technique was added
to the path-length heuristic function. The strategy also restricts the initialization range

==== Page 7 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 7 of 37
of particular populations, considerably enhancing the search efﬁciency and preventing
a series of superﬂuous pitches and undulations, considering how challenging it is for
autonomous underwater robots to locate pathways in a three-dimensional space. Unlike
the conventional “ant colony” algorithm, path optimization is signiﬁcantly reduced. For the
problem of autonomous underwater robots needing to traverse complex environments with
dense obstacles, an ACO-A* algorithm was proposed by combining the ACO algorithm
with the A* search algorithm [ 32]. Here, the ACO is responsible for determining the target
travel order based on the cost map, and A* performs pairwise path planning based on the
search map obtained from ﬁne-grained modeling. Simulation results demonstrate that the
time efﬁciency of the ACO-A* is veriﬁed.
An improved multi-objective swarm intelligence method was used to plan an accurate
unmanned aerial robot 3D path (APPMS) [ 33]. The path planning problem is transformed
in the APPMS approach into a multi-objective optimization task with numerous restric-
tions. In addition, a precise swarm intelligence search technique based on enhanced ant
colony optimization was introduced to ﬁnd the best unmanned aerial robot 3D ﬂight path.
This technique uses preferential search directions and a stochastic neighborhood search
mechanism to enhance both global and local search capabilities. The simulation results
demonstrate that the superiority of the proposed approach is supported by three sets of
digital terrain (three, four, and eight threats) and genuine DEM data for the simulated
disaster response missions. Another study suggested using [ 34] a 2-OptACO approach that
builds on the 2-opt algorithm to enhance the ant colony optimization algorithm and is used
to optimize the unmanned aerial robot path for search and rescue missions. According
to the simulation ﬁndings, the 2-OptACO approach converges more quickly than the GA
and ACO approaches. Better global optimal solutions are attained. Reference [ 35] pre-
sented a method based on ant colony optimization to determine the minimum time search
path for multiple unmanned aerial robots (minimum time search-ant colony optimization
MTS-ACO). Two different pheromone table encodings were proposed for MTS-ACO. A
minimum–time search heuristic function was designed that enables the ant colony opti-
mization algorithm to generate high-quality solutions at the initial stage and accelerate the
convergence of the algorithm.
The ant colony algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal path in a known static large-scale
environment and is also suitable for multi-objective optimization problems. However,
it easily falls into the local optimal solution, resulting in a slow convergence speed of
the algorithm. Scholars have also improved its convergence speed. Nonetheless, its
convergence speed and global searchability can be improved further.
2.2.3. Particle Swarm Optimization
The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm mimics the behavior of birds in
their search for food, sharing information regarding their current location as the ﬂock
forages. The entire ﬂock can reach its ﬁnal food source through proper communication
between the individuals and group members. The basic principle is that individuals and
groups collaborate and share information to obtain optimal solutions. This algorithm was
proposed by Eberhart and Kennedy [ 36] in 1995 to determine the global optimum in terms
of the current search for the optimum. It has the advantages of easy implementation, high
accuracy, and quick convergence, and is not only suitable for multi-robot path planning
but also capable of single-robot route planning. Figure 4 shows a schematic that mimics the
behavior of birds seeking food. By communicating with the group, ﬁnd the closest bird to
the food and travel with it to ﬁnd the ultimate largest food source. The circle represents the
bird. The green vegetation represents food; most food is in the grove, and most food is in
the forest.

==== Page 8 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 8 of 37
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 8 of 40 
 
2.2.3. Particle Swarm Optimization 
The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algo rithm mimics the behavior of birds in 
their search for food, sharing information regarding their current location as the ﬂock 
forages. The entire ﬂock can reach its ﬁnal food source through proper communication 
between the individuals and group members. Th e basic principle is that individuals and 
groups collaborate and share information to ob tain optimal solutions. This algorithm was 
proposed by Eberhart and Kennedy [36] in 1995 to determine the global optimum in terms 
of the current search for the optimum. It has the advantages of easy implementation, high 
accuracy, and quick convergence, and is not only suitable for multi-robot path planning but also capable of single-rob ot route planning. Figure 4 sh ows a schematic that mimics 
the behavior of birds seeking food. By communicating with the group, ﬁnd the closest 
bird to the food and travel with it to ﬁnd the ultimate largest food source. The circle 
represents the bird. The green vegetation represents food; most food is in the grove, and 
most food is in the forest. 
 
Figure 4. The bird’s swarm searching for the optimal f ood source represents the particle swarm 
optimization process. 
The performance of the proposed partic le swarm algorithm depends on how its 
parameters are adjusted, managed, and chan ged. A robot path smoothing strategy was 
proposed to address the problem of unne cessary turns caused by unsmoothed paths 
generated by the PSO algorithm [37]. The stra tegy is based on the PSO algorithm, which 
introduces adaptive fractional-order velocities to improve the ability to search the space 
and increase the “smoothness” of the mobile  robot path by using higher-order Bessel 
curves. Experiments show that the modi ﬁed PSO algorithm is be tter than several existing 
PSO algorithms on several benchmark function s. The superiority of the new approach is 
supported by numerous thorough  simulations of smooth path planning for mobile robots. 
A study [38] presented a new method for dete rmining the optimal path of a multi-robot 
in a clu ttered environment using a combination of the improved particle swarm 
optimization algorithm (IPSO) and the improv ed gravitational search algorithm (IGSA). 
The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms other 
algorithms used for the navigation of multiple mobile robots. 
To reduce energy usage for autonomous underwater robot path planning, a distance 
evolutionary nonlinear particle swarm optimization (DENPSO) algorithm was suggested 
[39]. The approach uses penalty functions to set the energy optimization goals under obstacles and in the ocean. It also changes linear inertial weight factors and learning 
factors into nonlinear ones so that the partic les can fully explore the 3D underwater world 
during the evolution process. In the 3D  simulated underwater environment, the 
simulation results demonstrate that DENPSO uses signi ﬁcantly less energy than the linear Forest
Grove
Bird Food
The most food in the grove The most food in the forest
Figure 4. The bird’s swarm searching for the optimal food source represents the particle swarm
optimization process.
The performance of the proposed particle swarm algorithm depends on how its
parameters are adjusted, managed, and changed. A robot path smoothing strategy was
proposed to address the problem of unnecessary turns caused by unsmoothed paths
generated by the PSO algorithm [ 37]. The strategy is based on the PSO algorithm, which
introduces adaptive fractional-order velocities to improve the ability to search the space
and increase the “smoothness” of the mobile robot path by using higher-order Bessel
curves. Experiments show that the modiﬁed PSO algorithm is better than several existing
PSO algorithms on several benchmark functions. The superiority of the new approach is
supported by numerous thorough simulations of smooth path planning for mobile robots.
A study [ 38] presented a new method for determining the optimal path of a multi-robot in
a cluttered environment using a combination of the improved particle swarm optimization
algorithm (IPSO) and the improved gravitational search algorithm (IGSA). The simulation
results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms other algorithms used for the
navigation of multiple mobile robots.
To reduce energy usage for autonomous underwater robot path planning, a dis-
tance evolutionary nonlinear particle swarm optimization (DENPSO) algorithm was sug-
gested [ 39]. The approach uses penalty functions to set the energy optimization goals under
obstacles and in the ocean. It also changes linear inertial weight factors and learning factors
into nonlinear ones so that the particles can fully explore the 3D underwater world during
the evolution process. In the 3D simulated underwater environment, the simulation results
demonstrate that DENPSO uses signiﬁcantly less energy than the linear PSO algorithm.
An evolutionary-based docking-path optimization technique was suggested [ 40]. The ﬁrst
step is the analysis and modeling of the ocean environment and its restrictions. The second
design goal of the control points was to satisfy the model constraints. To accomplish global
time optimization, adaptive rules, and quantum behavior were included in PSO. Finally,
the proposed technique was assessed using Monte Carlo simulations. The experimental
ﬁndings revealed considerable improvements to this approach.
A 3D path planning method based on adaptive sensitivity decision operators and
particle swarm optimization was presented [ 41], where an adaptive sensitivity decision area
was built to address the drawbacks of local optimality and slow convergence. To increase
computational efﬁciency, alternative possibilities are eliminated, and prospective particle
sites with a high probability are found by employing this deﬁned region. In addition,
the relative particle directionality obtained from the current position enhances the search
accuracy. In terms of the path cost and path generation, the simulation results demonstrate
that the upgraded PSO algorithm performs better than the GA and PSO approaches. For
modern warfare, the ability of unmanned aerial robots to avoid enemy radar reconnaissance

==== Page 9 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 9 of 37
and artillery ﬁre at the lowest cost has become an important research problem in unmanned
aerial robot path planning. An algorithm (SHOPSO) combining a selﬁsh herd optimizer
(SHO) and a particle swarm optimizer (PSO) was proposed [ 42]. By combining SHO
and PSO, the structure of SHO is simpliﬁed, and the SHO search capability is improved.
In the simulation experiments, ﬁve two-dimensional complex battleﬁeld environments
and ﬁve three-dimensional complex battleﬁeld environments were designed, and the
proposed algorithm was compared with other algorithms that have better optimization
performance. The results of the experiments demonstrate that this strategy offers the best
path for unmanned aerial robots. For the 3D path planning issue of unmanned aerial
robots in complex environments, an improved particle swarm optimization algorithm
(called DCA*PSO) was proposed [ 43]. It is based on the dynamic divide-and-conquer
(DC) strategy and the improved A* algorithm, and divides the entire path into multiple
segments and evolves the paths of these segments using the DC strategy. The intricate,
high-dimensional challenge is divided into numerous parallel, low-dimensional issues.
According to the experimental results, the proposed DCA*PSO method can ﬁnd workable
pathways in complex landscapes with several waypoints.
Particle swarm optimization has no crossover or mutation operations and only requires
the adjustment of some parameters. Additionally, it has a memory function that can ﬁnd
the best path in a short time. However, because of its randomness, a globally optimal
solution cannot be guaranteed. Scholars have also improved their search abilities. Particle
swarm optimization can be combined with a machine-learning algorithm to improve its
performance and accuracy.
2.3. Algorithm Based on Local Obstacle-Avoidance
2.3.1. Dynamic Window Approach
The dynamic window approach (DWA) [ 44] is a technique that immediately samples
the environment and determines the state of activity of the robot at the following instant.
This approach permits quick access to the desired location while preventing robot collisions
with objects in the search area. As shown in Figure 5, the surrounding circles represent
walls, the inner circles represent dynamic obstacles, and the small circle represents a robot.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 10 of 40 
 
 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the path pla nning algorithm based on the DWA. 
An improved DWA algorithm based on Q-le arning was proposed  [45]. The method 
modi ﬁed and extended the original evaluation function of the DWA, added two new 
evaluation functions, enhanc ed its global navigation capability, and adaptively de-
adjusted the weights of the evaluation func tion through Q-learning. The experimental 
results demonstrate that the method has a high navigation e ﬃciency and success rate in 
complex and unknown environments. A dynamic collision model that can predict future 
collisions with the environment by simultaneously considering the motion of other objects was designed [46]. According to experimental ﬁndings, this approach reduces the 
likelihood of robot collisions in dynamic environments. A global dynamic window 
navigation scheme ba sed on model predictive control with unweighted objective 
functions was proposed in [47]  to address the problem of most planning methods treating 
the robot as a single point, which leads to the inability of passing through narrow bands. 
The dynamic window method is suitable for real-time path planning because of its 
speed, and it can also optimize the algorithm’s performance by adjusting the window 
parameters. However, it is sensitive to changes in the environment and requires frequent updates of obstacle information around the mobile robot. Therefore, in the future, it can 
be combined with a machine learning algorithm to predict the distribution of obstacles in 
an environment and optimize the accuracy and e ﬃciency of path planning. 
2.3.2. Arti ﬁcial Potential Field Method 
The physical concept of a potential ﬁeld, which considers the motion of an object as 
the product of two forces, is the source of the idea of an arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld [48]. As 
shown in Figure 6, the gravitational pull of a goal point pulls on a robot in the planning 
space, and an obstacle repels it. Under the combined in ﬂuence of these two forces, the 
robot advances in the direction of the goal point and can successfully navigate around any 
obstacle in its path to reach its destination without incident. The black box represents the starting point, the red circle represents the ending point, and the green circle represents 
the obstacle. 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on the DWA.
An improved DWA algorithm based on Q-learning was proposed [ 45]. The method
modiﬁed and extended the original evaluation function of the DWA, added two new
evaluation functions, enhanced its global navigation capability, and adaptively de-adjusted
the weights of the evaluation function through Q-learning. The experimental results
demonstrate that the method has a high navigation efﬁciency and success rate in complex
and unknown environments. A dynamic collision model that can predict future collisions
with the environment by simultaneously considering the motion of other objects was
designed [ 46]. According to experimental ﬁndings, this approach reduces the likelihood of
robot collisions in dynamic environments. A global dynamic window navigation scheme

==== Page 10 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 10 of 37
based on model predictive control with unweighted objective functions was proposed
in [47] to address the problem of most planning methods treating the robot as a single point,
which leads to the inability of passing through narrow bands.
The dynamic window method is suitable for real-time path planning because of its
speed, and it can also optimize the algorithm’s performance by adjusting the window
parameters. However, it is sensitive to changes in the environment and requires frequent
updates of obstacle information around the mobile robot. Therefore, in the future, it can be
combined with a machine learning algorithm to predict the distribution of obstacles in an
environment and optimize the accuracy and efﬁciency of path planning.
2.3.2. Artiﬁcial Potential Field Method
The physical concept of a potential ﬁeld, which considers the motion of an object as
the product of two forces, is the source of the idea of an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld [ 48]. As
shown in Figure 6, the gravitational pull of a goal point pulls on a robot in the planning
space, and an obstacle repels it. Under the combined inﬂuence of these two forces, the
robot advances in the direction of the goal point and can successfully navigate around any
obstacle in its path to reach its destination without incident. The black box represents the
starting point, the red circle represents the ending point, and the green circle represents the
obstacle.
Drones  2023 , 7, 211 11 of 40 
 
 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on APF. 
Another study [49] presents a bacterial potential ﬁeld method that ensures a feasible, 
optimal, and safe path for a robot in both static and dynamic environments. The bacterial 
potential ﬁeld method combines an arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld method with a bacterial 
evolutionary algorithm, thereby fully utilizing the APF method. According to experimental results, the bacterial potential ﬁeld approach exhibits signi ﬁcant local and 
global controllability in dynamic and complex situations. To solve the problem of optimal 
motion planning, a continuous, deterministic, provable, and safe solution based on a 
parametric arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld has been proposed [50]. Reinforcement learning was 
used to properly adjust the parameters of the arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld to minimize the 
Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman (HJB) error. In the simulation experiment, the cost function 
value and running time were be tter than with the fast search random tree algorithm
. 
A real-time path planning algorithm with an upgraded APF algorithm was proposed 
to solve the path planning problem for static and dynamic environments with unidenti ﬁed obstacles (static and dynamic) [51]. This technique augm ents the repulsive 
potential ﬁeld function with a distance adjustment factor to address the target 
unreachability issue based on the conventional  APF. The relative velocity technique, 
which not only considers the relative distance but also the relative velocity between the 
autonomous underwater robot and moving  objects, addresses the local minimum 
problem by combining the positive hexagonal guidance method and the APF. The 
experimental results demonstrate that this method reduces the computational e ﬀort 
required for navigation. To resolve the poor  dynamic obstacle avoidance performance in 
the autonomous path of an underwater 3D autonomous underwater robot, a local obstacle 
avoidance techni que based on the vectorial arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld method was proposed 
[52], and the space vector method was empl oyed to enhance the calculation of the 
direction of the combined force and the computational e ﬀectiveness of the algorithm. 
Eventually, by using the vector arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld approach, the key path points were 
employed as local target location s to avoid nearby obstacles. The ﬁndings of the 
simulation demonstrate that the strategy can help the autonomous underwater robot 
eﬃciently avoid di ﬀerent obstacles and lower the cost. 
Reference [53] provides a technique for avoiding local minima in an arti ﬁcial 
potential ﬁeld and maneuvering around the closest obstacle, allowing an unmanned aerial 
vehicle to successfully escape from the local minima without hi tting any obstacles. The 
study suggests a parallel search technique th at requires the unmanned aerial robot to 
navigate around the nearest obstacle to appr oach the target while detecting the obstacle 
between the current location and the target being too far away and having too many 
obstacles to reach it. Simulation results show that the path planning algorithm and 
controller that were suggested are useful. Refe rence [54] addresses the problem that most 
unmanned aerial robot path planning tec hniques do not consider, which is wind 
interference. A new 3D online APF path planni ng technique that enhances the sensitivity Goal
StartObstacle
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of the path planning algorithm based on APF.
Another study [ 49] presents a bacterial potential ﬁeld method that ensures a feasible,
optimal, and safe path for a robot in both static and dynamic environments. The bacterial
potential ﬁeld method combines an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method with a bacterial evo-
lutionary algorithm, thereby fully utilizing the APF method. According to experimental
results, the bacterial potential ﬁeld approach exhibits signiﬁcant local and global controlla-
bility in dynamic and complex situations. To solve the problem of optimal motion planning,
a continuous, deterministic, provable, and safe solution based on a parametric artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld has been proposed [ 50]. Reinforcement learning was used to properly adjust
the parameters of the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld to minimize the Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman
(HJB) error. In the simulation experiment, the cost function value and running time were
better than with the fast search random tree algorithm.
A real-time path planning algorithm with an upgraded APF algorithm was proposed
to solve the path planning problem for static and dynamic environments with unidentiﬁed
obstacles (static and dynamic) [ 51]. This technique augments the repulsive potential ﬁeld
function with a distance adjustment factor to address the target unreachability issue based
on the conventional APF. The relative velocity technique, which not only considers the
relative distance but also the relative velocity between the autonomous underwater robot
and moving objects, addresses the local minimum problem by combining the positive
hexagonal guidance method and the APF. The experimental results demonstrate that
this method reduces the computational effort required for navigation. To resolve the

==== Page 11 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 11 of 37
poor dynamic obstacle avoidance performance in the autonomous path of an underwater
3D autonomous underwater robot, a local obstacle avoidance technique based on the
vectorial artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method was proposed [ 52], and the space vector method
was employed to enhance the calculation of the direction of the combined force and the
computational effectiveness of the algorithm. Eventually, by using the vector artiﬁcial
potential ﬁeld approach, the key path points were employed as local target locations to
avoid nearby obstacles. The ﬁndings of the simulation demonstrate that the strategy can
help the autonomous underwater robot efﬁciently avoid different obstacles and lower
the cost.
Reference [ 53] provides a technique for avoiding local minima in an artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld and maneuvering around the closest obstacle, allowing an unmanned aerial vehicle
to successfully escape from the local minima without hitting any obstacles. The study
suggests a parallel search technique that requires the unmanned aerial robot to navigate
around the nearest obstacle to approach the target while detecting the obstacle between
the current location and the target being too far away and having too many obstacles to
reach it. Simulation results show that the path planning algorithm and controller that
were suggested are useful. Reference [ 54] addresses the problem that most unmanned
aerial robot path planning techniques do not consider, which is wind interference. A new
3D online APF path planning technique that enhances the sensitivity of the unmanned
aerial robot to wind speed and direction was proposed. This is performed by presenting
a new, improved attractor with a modiﬁed wind resistance gravitational function that
considers any small changes in the relative displacement caused by the wind. This causes
the unmanned aerial robot to drift in a certain direction. The proposed path planning
technique is evaluated for various simulation scenarios. Its performance is superior in
handling wind disturbances. Reference [ 55] describes an enhanced artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld method incorporating the chaotic bat algorithm. It uses an artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld
to accelerate the convergence of bat position updates. It proposes an optimal success rate
strategy with adaptive inertia weights and a chaotic strategy to prevent hitting a local
optimum. The method is particularly robust for dealing with path planning issues, and the
simulation results demonstrate that it considerably improves the success rate of discovering
suitable planning paths and reduces the convergence time.
The artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method has great advantages in avoiding unknown obsta-
cles. However, it can easily fall into the local minimum in complex environments, and it is
also sensitive to noise interference. In the future, a complex artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld could
be designed to improve the adaptability of the algorithm.
2.3.3. Time Elastic Banding Algorithm
The timed elastic band algorithm (TEB) [ 56] is a classical local obstacle avoidance
algorithm for two-wheeled differential robots. The method explicitly augments the “elastic
band” with temporal information, thus allowing the dynamic constraints of the robot to
be considered and the trajectory to be modiﬁed directly, transforming the traditional path
planning problem into a graph optimization problem [57].
An active trajectory planning technique has been proposed for autonomous mobile
robots operating in dynamic situations [ 58]. The proactive timed elastic band (PTEB) model,
as suggested in this method, focuses on integrating the hybrid reciprocal velocity obstacle
model (HRVO) into the goal function of the TEB algorithm. According to the simulation
ﬁndings, the proposed motion planning model can control the mobile robot to actively
avoid dynamic impediments and provide safe navigation. An improved TEB algorithm was
proposed to address the anomalous behavior of the conventional TEB algorithm in cluttered
scenarios where planning is prone to backward and large steering. Here, a hazard penalty
factor constraint that can plan a safer motion trajectory, an acceleration jump suppression
constraint to reduce large shocks in motion, and an end-smoothing constraint to reduce end
shocks were added; the improved TEB achieved a smooth and accurate arrival of the target
points [ 59]. The simulation ﬁndings demonstrate that the enhanced TEB algorithm may

==== Page 12 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 12 of 37
produce a more logical robot motion and create a safe and smooth course in challenging
situations.
The time-elastic band algorithm considers the continuity of time, making the path
smoother, but it cannot deal with complex scenes, such as large-scale scenes and high-
dimensional space. In the future, it could be combined with a machine learning algorithm
to improve the accuracy of path planning.
2.4. Algorithm Based on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
2.4.1. Neural Networks
An artiﬁcial neural network is an information processing system that mimics the
structure and operation of a neural network in the brain. It is a complex network structure
comprising several interconnected processing units (neurons) [ 60]. A typical artiﬁcial
neural network has the following three components: input, hidden input, and hidden
output. The input, hidden, and output layers are the ﬁrst, intermediate, and last layers,
respectively. The number of neurons in the input layer is determined by the input data,
and the number of neurons in the other layers is altered to reﬂect the current condition.
The concealed layers may have any number of layers, occasionally having multiple layers.
A guided autowave pulse coupled neural network (GAPCNN) was proposed to ad-
dress the fact that most fast collision-free path planning algorithms cannot guarantee the
superiority of paths, and it signiﬁcantly improves the path query time by introducing a
directed automatic wave control and accelerated discharge of neurons based on dynamic
thresholding techniques [ 61]. The temporal effects of the algorithm demonstrate that it
may be utilized for route planning in static as well as dynamic contexts. The simulation
and testing ﬁndings demonstrate that the GAPCNN is a reliable and quick path planning
technique. A multi-robot path planning algorithm based on a combination of Q-learning
and convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithms was proposed for the problem of
conﬂict-free path planning for multiple robots caused by practical tasks [ 62]. This technol-
ogy enables many mobile robots to quickly design courses in various surroundings while
successfully accomplishing the mission, according to experimental data. A new Fast Simul-
taneous Localization and Mapping (FastSLAM) algorithm based on the Jacobi-free neural
network was proposed [ 63], which utilizes a multilayer neural network to compensate for
the measurement error online and train the neural network online during Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM). The third integration rule of the Gaussian weight-
ing method is also utilized to calculate the nonlinear leap density before the Gaussian
third-order nonlinearity, estimate the state of the SLAM state (robot path and environment
map), and train the neural network compensator online. According to simulation data, the
mobile robot’s ability to navigate in unfamiliar areas and avoid collisions with objects was
improved; SLAM performance was also improved.
An approach that combines a bio-inspired neural network and the potential ﬁeld
was suggested [ 64] to address the safety issue of autonomous underwater robot path
planning in dynamic and uncertain situations. A bio-inspired neural network uses the
environment to determine the best course for an autonomous underwater robot. The path
of the bio-inspired neural network is modiﬁed by the potential ﬁeld function such that
the autonomous underwater robot can avoid obstructions. The experimental ﬁndings
demonstrate that the strategy strikes a balance between autonomous underwater robot
safety and path logic. The intended routes can accommodate the need for navigation in
dynamic and unpredictable surroundings. Based on the excellent performance of deep
learning, a hybrid recurrent neural network framework was proposed to estimate the
position of an autonomous underwater robot [ 65]. In this approach, the raw sensor readings
are processed in a single computational cycle using unidirectional and bidirectional long
short-term memory networks (LSTM) with numerous memory units. The completely
linked layer can then determine the displacement of the autonomous underwater robot
using the output of the LSTM and the time interval of the previous cycle. The simulation

==== Page 13 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 13 of 37
results demonstrate that the approach presents signiﬁcant navigational usefulness and high
accuracy while minimizing sensor bias interference.
2.4.2. Reinforcement Learning
The basic principle of reinforcement learning [ 66] is that intelligence is continuously
learned under the stimulus of environmental feedback rewards or punishments and contin-
uously adjusts its strategy based on the feedback to eventually reach reward maximization
or a speciﬁc goal. A deep Q-learning algorithm for experience replay and heuristic knowl-
edge was proposed [ 67]. In this algorithm, neural networks are used to solve the problem of
the dimensional catastrophe of Q-tables in reinforcement learning. This makes the most of
the robot’s ability to collect data based on its experience as it moves. Heuristic knowledge
helps avoid blind exploration by the robot and provides more efﬁcient data for training
the neural net for faster convergence on the optimal action strategy. Considering the local
path planning problem in complicated dynamic environments, a fast extended random
tree path planning method based on reinforcement learning SARSA( ) optimization has
been suggested [ 68]. This method increases the selection of expansion points, introduces
the concept of biased goals, uses task return functions, goal distance functions, and an-
gle constraints to improve the performance of the rapidly-exploring random tree (RRT)
algorithm, decreases the number of invalid nodes, and ensures the randomness of the RRT
algorithm. Reinforcement learning aims to train the intelligence to take action to maximize
its reward with strong decision-making capabilities. Deep learning can extract high-level
features from the raw mass of data and has a strong perceptual capability. Deep reinforce-
ment learning [ 69] is an artiﬁcial intelligence program that combines the perceptual and
decision-making abilities of reinforcement learning to make a more accurate model of the
human mind. A learning-based map-free motion planner is proposed for obstacle-free
maps and sparse distance information by considering the sparse ten-dimensional range
results and the position of the target relative to the coordinate system of the mobile robot as
the input and a continuous steering command as the output [ 70]. An asynchronous deep
reinforcement learning technique can be used to train a mapless motion planner from one
end to the other. This methodology is more reliable in excessively complex contexts.
For autonomous underwater robots to ﬁnd a feasible collision-free path in complex
underwater environments, the use of deep reinforcement learning algorithms to learn
processed sonar data for autonomous underwater robot navigation in complicated situa-
tions has been proposed as an active sonar technique [ 71]. The process of switching the
trajectory is accelerated by the addition of line-of-sight guidance. The performance of this
approach was compared with that of genetic algorithms and deep learning algorithms in
three environments: random static, hybrid static, and complicated dynamic, and it was
found that the algorithm surpassed the other algorithms in terms of success rate, obstacle
avoidance performance, and generalization capability. An enhanced deep deterministic
policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm for real-time obstacle avoidance and 3D path tracking
has also been suggested [ 72]. To address the problem of DDPG requiring a large training
set to explore the strategy, a line-of-sight guidance-based approach is used to generate the
target angle for path tracking and the error relative to the carrier coordinate system, which
facilitates the ﬁltering of irrelevant environmental information and generates the corre-
sponding strategy. The method provides a more accurate approximation of the approach
than the original DDPG algorithm, according to the simulation ﬁndings.
A deep reinforcement learning method for unmanned aerial robot path planning
based on global situational information was proposed [ 73]. In this method, a situational
evaluation model was developed based on the simulation environment provided by the
Stage Scenario software. In this model, the probability of an unmanned aerial robot’s
survival under enemy radar detection and missile attack was considered. Using a com-
peting dual-depth Q network, the algorithm obtains a set of situational maps as input to
approximate the Q values corresponding to all the candidate operations, which results in
higher cumulative rewards and success rates compared to the dual-depth Q network. A

==== Page 14 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 14 of 37
distributed deep reinforcement learning framework that divides the unmanned aerial robot
navigation task into two simple subtasks, each solved by a designed LSTM-based deep
reinforcement learning network, was developed [ 74]. The simulation results demonstrate
that the unmanned aerial robot performance of this method outperforms other state-of-the-
art deep reinforcement learning methods in highly dynamic and uncertain environments.
In [75], an interpretable deep neural network path planner was proposed for the automatic
navigation problem of small unmanned aerial robots in unknown environments. The
method models the navigation problem as a Markovian decision process that uses deep
reinforcement learning to train the path planner in a simulation environment and proposes
a feature attribute-based model interpretation method to better train the model. Based
on experimental results in a genuine setting, the path planner can be directly used in a
real environment. In reference [ 76], a 3D coverage map was ﬁrst created, which stores the
estimated disruption probability at each point to solve the communication interference
from overhead buildings in unmanned aerial robot 3D path planning. Using the created
coverage map, an approach based on multi-step dueling DDQN (multi-step D3QN) is
suggested to build locally optimal unmanned aerial robot pathways. The unmanned aerial
robot functions act as an agent in this algorithm, learning the proper course of action to
perform the ﬂight task.
Reinforcement learning can be used to learn the optimal strategy independently in
a complex environment and can adaptively adjust the path planning scheme. However,
reinforcement learning requires many calculations and also requires the adjustment of
many parameters, which may have a signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁnal path. In the future,
we will consider introducing this model to reinforcement learning. Additionally, to meet
the interpretability of the reinforcement learning algorithm for path planning, we can
investigate interpretable path planning.
2.4.3. Brain-like Navigation
As one of the research directions of artiﬁcial intelligence technology, brain-like navi-
gation involves several interdisciplinary aspects such as brain science and control science.
Brain-like navigation is a new navigation technology that mimics biological cognitive
characteristics by sensing environmental information through multiple sensors and us-
ing intelligent and exogenous technologies to achieve navigation information fusion and
cognitive map construction with knowledge memory, learning, and reasoning character-
istics, as well as real-time intelligent path planning with cognitive characteristics [ 77].
Current studies regarding brain-like navigation have been conducted considering various
aspects, including brain-like environmental perception, brain-like spatial cognition, and
goal-oriented brain-like navigation. An integrated research system for modeling, simula-
tions, and experimental validation has been initially formed. However, it remains in the
exploration and improvement stage. Brain-like environmental perception mainly focuses
on the extraction of multidimensional features from the navigation information of the
carrier and the surrounding environment, drawing on the rich biological structures of the
auditory, visual, olfactory, and sensory information processing mechanisms of animals. The
University of California, Berkeley [ 78] designed an insect-like lightweight micro-unmanned
aerial robot hardware platform for the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DAPPA) research. It also integrated multimodal bionic sensors such as compound eyes,
insect balance bar gyroscopes, optical ﬂow sensors, and U-shaped magnetometers. It has
various advantages, such as retrieving rich environmental perception information, strong
adaptation to the dynamic ﬂight environment, accurate measurements, and energy savings.
In 1948, Tolman [ 79] proposed a cognitive map by studying rats walking in a maze. In 1948,
Tolman proposed the concept of a cognitive map by studying rats walking in mazes and
suggested that rats use a certain spatial representation formed inside the brain to guide
themselves in path planning, obstacle avoidance, and other navigational behaviors. The
brain-inspired spiking neural network (SNN) is closer to the actual biological structure than
other artiﬁcial neural network models. The output of its neurons has a pulse sequence en-

==== Page 15 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 15 of 37
coded in the temporal dimension, and multiple neurons can achieve the ability to represent
a two-dimensional space in time–space. Most of the connections of SNN-based brain-like
spatial cognition models are predeﬁned by brain structures, and less parameter learning
is required to better model clusters of brain navigation cells, such as position cells, grid
cells, and head orientation cells, which encode navigation information to map the envi-
ronment [ 80]. The Google DeepMind team’s [ 81] dual-path deep reinforcement learning
navigation architecture uses a two-path deep circulation neural network to remember the
kernel of common navigation pathﬁnding strategies in different environments and present
positions in different environments. Convolutional neural networks are then used to get
visual input in real-time. The destination was successfully reached in an ofﬂine street view
without reference to a map library and with only a few points (mission reward).
2.5. Sampling-Based Algorithms
2.5.1. Rapidly-Exploring Random Tree
The rapid-exploration random tree algorithm is built by randomly generating a tree
starting from a starting point and connecting the generated tree to the trunk of the starting
point to form a search tree. This continues until all of the branches of the tree lead to the
target point. This algorithm is commonly used in the static path planning of mobile robots.
In [82], based on the RRT* algorithm, a motion planning algorithm called Smooth RRT* that
provided a smoother solution for robots with nonlinear dynamic constraints and could be
used to reconnect two nodes in a given state was proposed. Compared with the traditional
RRT algorithm and the Kinedynamic-RRT (Kino-RRT) [ 83] algorithm, the Smooth RRT*
algorithm in this study is based on the number of nodes, and its path length and path
smoothness are better than those of the previous two algorithms. In [ 84], the neural RRT*
(NRRT*) algorithm, which is based on a convolutional neural network, was proposed as
a new way to plan the best path. In this study, the optimal path and map information
generated by the A* algorithm were used as datasets, and a large number of optimal paths
generated by the A* algorithm were used to train the CNN model. Compared with the
traditional RRT* algorithm and the informed RRT* [ 85] algorithm, the algorithm proposed
in this paper is more effective with regard to path generation time and memory usage. As
some path planning algorithms cannot guarantee the optimization memory and smoothness
of the trajectory when a mobile robot completes a complex task, a bidirectional RRT (KB-
RRT) algorithm based on kinematic constraints is proposed [ 86]. This algorithm limits the
number of generated nodes without affecting its accuracy and uses kinematic constraints to
generate a smoother trajectory. Compared to the bidirectional RRT [ 54] algorithm in three
highly cluttered environments, the KB-RRT algorithm reduces the number of nodes and
the running time and signiﬁcantly improves memory utilization.
A Q-RRT* algorithm was suggested [ 87], which may be used with a sampling tech-
nique to further enhance the performance and demonstrates superior initial solution and
convergence speed than the RRT* algorithm. A dual-tree expansion approach called Bi-RRT
has been suggested [ 88] as being more effective than single-tree expansion. The initial
and target points serve as the starting points for the expansion of the random tree by the
algorithm. After choosing a random node, two trees are chosen one at a time, randomly
extended on top of that, and their expansion orders are exchanged in the following iteration.
A closed-loop stochastic dynamic path planning algorithm based on incremental sampling
techniques was described in [ 89] as a closed-loop rapid exploration random tree (CL-RRT)
algorithm. Here, in the autonomous underwater robot model, three fuzzy controllers were
used to assess the scope of the search tree and whether the vertices satisfy the incomplete
dynamic constraints of the autonomous underwater robot. The ability of CL-RRT to locate
collision-free pathways in 3D environments with crowded obstacles was demonstrated
using an Extended PC (xPC) target generator. According to the experimental results on
terrain barriers and ﬂoating objects, AUVs can approach the ideal path considerably more
quickly, and a study [ 90] suggests that a concentrated search employing heuristic ellipsoidal
subset sampling improves the RRT* method.

==== Page 16 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 16 of 37
An informed RRT* (IRRT*) algorithm was developed [ 91], which integrates the skewed
cylindrical subset integration method into the RRT* algorithm for optimal unmanned
aerial robot path planning. According to the experimental ﬁndings, the IRRT* algorithm
is superior to the traditional RRT* method in terms of optimizing the path length and
ensuring safe ﬂying over a larger search region. A study [ 92] proposes a biased sampling
potentially guided intelligent bidirectional RRT* (BPIB-RRT*) algorithm, which combines
the bidirectional artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method with the idea of bi-directional biased
sampling. This technique adapts the sample space with ﬂexibility, considerably minimizing
incorrect spatial sampling, and accelerating convergence. The advantage of the BPIB-RRT*
algorithm suggested in this study is demonstrated by the simulation results.
The fast search random tree algorithm can efﬁciently explore the path and ﬁnd the
optimal solution in a complex environment, but its path quality is unstable, and there may
be jitters. In the future, it can be combined with fuzzy control and machine learning to
improve path stability.
2.5.2. Probabilistic Roadmap Method
The probabilistic roadmap method (PRM) algorithm is based on state–space sampling.
It ﬁrst uses random sampling to build a path network graph in the environment, converts
continuous space into discrete space, and then performs path planning on the path network
graph to solve the problem of low search efﬁciency in high-dimensional space. As it is
difﬁcult to use ofﬂine path planning to plan available paths in a dynamic and complex
environment with narrow corridors when mobile robots perform tasks, a probabilistic
path map algorithm based on obstacle potential ﬁeld sampling strategy called the obstacle
potential ﬁeld probabilistic path map algorithm (OP-PRM) has been proposed [ 93]. The
speciﬁc area of the obstacle is determined by introducing the potential ﬁeld of the obstacle.
The area of a certain range near the obstacle is taken as the target sampling area, and the
number of sampling points in the narrow area is increased. After constructing the random
road map, the incremental heuristic D* Lite algorithm is used to search for the shortest
path between the starting point and target point on the road map. The simulation results
reveal that this method can enable a robot to pass through a narrow corridor in a dynamic
and complex environment. In [ 94], a hierarchical planning method for remote navigation
tasks was proposed by combining PRM with reinforcement learning (PRM-RL). PRM-RL
uses reinforcement learning to build a road map to ensure its connectivity instead of using
collision-free linear interpolation in the C space of ships, and the road map built by PRM-RL
follows robot dynamics and task constraints. This method can complete a planning task in
a large environment.
Compared to the RRT algorithm, the PRM algorithm has a path that is less likely to
jump around and is more stable. However, it takes a long time to calculate, so it is not good
for real-time applications. In the future, we plan to develop methods that can quickly build
a road map to reduce calculation time.
2.6. Planner-Based Algorithms
2.6.1. Covariant Hamilton Optimization Motion Planning
The covariance Hamiltonian optimal motion planning (CHOMP) is a gradient-based
trajectory optimization program that makes many daily motion planning problems simple
and trainable. Although most high-dimensional motion planners divide trajectory genera-
tion into different planning and optimization stages, the algorithm uses covariant gradient
and functional gradient methods to design a motion planning algorithm that is completely
based on trajectory optimization in the optimization stage. In [ 95], several methods for
adapting CHOMP to vehicles with incomplete constraints were presented. These included
using a separate objective function to constrain the curvature, integrating CHOMP with
a smooth target, and introducing sliding and rolling constraints on the trajectory. In this
study, experiments were carried out in real-world scenarios to help trucks with trailers
avoid obstacles. In [ 96], an improved CHOMP algorithm was used for local path planning

==== Page 17 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 17 of 37
in automatic driving. An objective function that took into account the path’s deviation and
the vehicle’s kinematic constraints was also added to create the right path. The research
in this paper shows that, compared with traditional methods, the CHOMP algorithm has
obvious advantages in terms of time and cost when used for path planning in automatic
driving.
2.6.2. Trajectory Optimization for Motion Planning
Trajectory optimization (TrajOpt) is a sequential convex optimization algorithm for
motion-planning problems. It relaxes non-convex, non-radial equality, and inequality
constraints and uses approximate linearization and convexity to create an objective function.
In [97], a new navigation framework was proposed that uses an enhanced version of TrajOpt
for rapid 3D path planning of autonomous underwater vehicles. This study was also the
ﬁrst to apply TrajOpt to the 3D path planning of mobile robots.
2.7. Constraint Satisfaction Problem-Based Algorithms
2.7.1. Chance Constrained Programming
Chance–constrained programming is a method that achieves the best performance
with a certain sense of probability. This is a random programming method that is suitable
for a problem in which constraint conditions contain random variables and the decision
must be made before the realization of the random variables is observed. In [ 98], a general
chance–constrained trajectory planning formula was proposed that can deal with the non-
Gaussian mixture distribution of the agent position. To strengthen the chance–constraint, a
framework is proposed to generate an expression using a symbolic function. Based on the
statistical moment of the basic distribution, the generated expression sets the upper limit
of the polynomial chance–constraint. However, this study produced overly conservative
results. In [ 99], a real-time method was proposed to solve a chance–constrained motion-
planning problem with dynamic obstacles. The obstacles were considered to have uncertain
locations, models, and interference in the form of additive Gaussian noise. In addition,
this study developed a closed-form differentiable bound on the set probability to safely
approximate the disjunction chance–constrained optimization problem to a nonlinear
program. Experimental results revealed that, compared with other real-time methods, it
reduces the degree of conservatism relatively and can still effectively control a mobile robot
when considering multiple obstacles.
2.7.2. Model Predictive Control
Model predictive control is an advanced control method of the control process in
process control that is mainly used for tracking the lane line in automatic driving to keep
the vehicle track relatively stable when speciﬁc constraints are met. The MPC reconstructs
the task of lane tracking into the problem of ﬁnding the optimal solution. The optimal
solution to the optimization problem is the optimal trajectory. Every step we take will
solve an optimal trajectory based on the current state, then the trajectory, and then the
optimal trajectory will be solved again based on the new value from the sensor. This is
performed to make sure that the trajectory and the lane line we want to track ﬁt together
as well as possible. Because autonomous vehicles exhibit poor performance in emergency
obstacle avoidance, in [100], a new model predictive controller combined with a potential
function was proposed to deal with complex trafﬁc scenarios. To improve the security of
the potential function, a sigmoid-based secure channel (SPMPC) was embedded in the
MPC constraint, and a speciﬁc trigger analysis algorithm for monitoring trafﬁc emergencies
was designed. In two-lane and three-lane simulation experiments, the methods proposed in
this study can successfully avoid obstacles that suddenly change lanes. In [ 101], an optimal
guidance method based on MPC considering the current disturbance was proposed, and
a path-tracking controller was designed by combining it with adaptive dynamic sliding
mode control technology. This method can be applied not only to autonomous underwater
vehicles but also to the path planning of other unmanned vehicles.

==== Page 18 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 18 of 37
2.7.3. Quadratic Programming
Quadratic programming is used to solve nonlinear programming problems. The
objective function is quadratic. The constraint conditions are the same as those of the linear
programming problem, that is, linear or linear inequalities. As UAVs need to operate safely
at high speeds in unknown environments, yet the realization of this operation usually
leads to a slow and conservative trajectory, a fast and safe trajectory planner was proposed
in [102] to solve these problems. The fast–safe trajectory planner obtains a high-speed
trajectory by optimizing the local planner in known and unknown space and proposes a
mixed integer quadratic programming formula. Finally, in the simulation ﬂight experiment
and an actual ﬂight experiment, it was determined that the UAV successfully reached
3.6 m/s. In [ 103], an autonomous motion planning framework, including path planning
and path generation, was proposed. In this framework, the PRM algorithm was used to ﬁrst
plan a safe path, and then the problem of minimizing the differential thrust and positioning
clearance polynomial path was converted into unconstrained quadratic programming,
which was solved in a two-step optimization. Compared with other methods, this method
achieves higher computational efﬁciency and plans a safe trajectory.
2.7.4. Soft-Constrained Programming
The soft constraint generates a force on the robot to keep it away from obstacles.
The most intuitive representation is the distance description. The Euclidean symbolic
distance ﬁeld (ESDF) is very important for evaluating the gradient size and direction in
the gradient planner of a four-rotor UAV . However, it only covers a very limited subspace
during trajectory optimization. In [ 104], a gradient-free programming framework based
on ESDF was proposed. The collision term in the penalty function is established by
comparing the collision trajectories and collision-free guidance paths. We introduce an
anisotropic curve-ﬁtting algorithm to change the high-order derivative of the trajectory
without changing its shape. Experiments in the real world have veriﬁed its robustness
and efﬁciency. In [ 105], a four-rotor UAV motion-planning system for rapid ﬂight in a
complex three-dimensional environment was proposed. The dynamic path search method
was used to ﬁnd a safe, dynamic, feasible, and minimum-time initial trajectory in the
discrete control space. We improve the smoothness and clearance of the trajectory through
B-spline optimization, which combines the gradient information and dynamic constraints
of the Euclidean distance ﬁeld and effectively utilizes the convex hull characteristics of the
B-spline. Finally, by representing the ﬁnal trajectory as a nonuniform B-spline, the iterative
time adjustment method was adopted to ensure a dynamic, feasible, and nonconservative
trajectory. This method was veriﬁed for real, complex scenes.
2.8. Other Algorithms
2.8.1. Differential Evolutionary Algorithm
Differential evolution (DE) is an effective global optimization approach. In addition, it
uses a population-based heuristic search technique in which each member of the population
represents a solution vector. This is similar to genetic algorithms. DE is another global
optimization technique that comprises operations for selection, crossover, and compilation.
DE also differs from genetic algorithms in that the variance vectors in the different evolution
are generated from the variance vectors of the parents. Additionally, it directly chooses
from the parent individuals and intersects the parent’s vectors to create a new individual
vector. A new prediction-based path evaluator was designed to assess the ﬁtness of
possible paths by introducing a differential evolution algorithm as an optimizer [ 106].
The experimental results demonstrate that this method helps autonomous underwater
robots make full use of ocean currents and effectively avoid collisions. Additionally, the
control points produced by the B-spline were optimized using a differential evolutionary
method [ 107]. This enables the autonomous underwater robot to successfully navigate
a variety of obstacles in 3D space. The cost function used for methodology in this study
accounted for the kinematic restrictions placed on the autonomous underwater robots’

==== Page 19 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 19 of 37
sway, yaw, and pitch components. The results of the experiments were reported. The
projected trend can be fully utilized for autonomous underwater robot path planning based
on a differential evolutionary algorithm to address unforeseen perturbations.
The differential evolution algorithm has a strong global optimization ability and can
ﬁnd the global optimal solution or a solution close to the optimal solution. However,
compared with those of other algorithms, its convergence speed is low. In the future, we
need to focus on improving its efﬁciency and accuracy.
2.8.2. Biogeography Optimization Algorithm
Dan Simon proposed the Biogeography-Based Optimization (BBO) algorithm in
2008 [ 108], which has the same characteristics as other biology-based optimization methods
(genetic algorithms and particle swarm optimization). Therefore, BBO can be used to solve
many of the same problems that GA and PSO can, including high-dimensional problems
with multiple local optima. A two-stage recursive task planning system for autonomous
underwater robots based on the BBO algorithm was designed, and simulation experiments
were conducted for three scenarios, which demonstrated that the algorithm is signiﬁcantly
effective in real-time [109].
2.8.3. Level Set Approach
The level set method (LSM) is a numerical technique for interface tracing and shape
modeling [ 110]. The beneﬁts of using the LSM are that evolving curved surfaces can be
numerically calculated on a cartesian grid without the need to parameterize the surfaces,
and the topological changes of an object can be easily tracked. Therefore, this approach
can be utilized to address issues caused by underwater dynamics. LSM was used in
studies [ 111,112] to reconcile the ocean-current problem with the planning time. A time-
optimized LSM and a 3D ocean modeling optimization technique were combined [ 113]. This
plan makes it possible to predict ocean currents and makes it easier to quickly coordinate
autonomous underwater robot dynamic control plans. Stochastic dynamic orthogonal
level set equations that can be used in dynamically varying current ﬁelds were derived,
and a simpliﬁed form for numerical implementation was obtained [ 114]. The results
demonstrate that the new algorithm is accurate and efﬁcient. To address the problems
of low computational efﬁciency and long planning times in autonomous underwater
robot multiterminal route planning, the traditional level set function was localized, and
a polynomial distance regularized (P-DRE) term was introduced to derive a new discrete
iterative equation that improves the computational efﬁciency of the level set algorithm.
2.8.4. Fast Marching Method
The fast marching (FM) algorithm [ 115] is comparable to Dijkstra’s algorithm, except
that Dijkstra’s algorithm updates with the Euclidean distance between two nodes, whereas
the FM method updates a rough partial differential equation simpliﬁed by a non-linear
Eikonal equation. The FM algorithm is applied in a large 3D environment for autonomous
underwater robots and solves the pathﬁnding problems of autonomous underwater robots
in terms of navigation, safety, and energy consumption. A hybrid search fast marching
method (HSFM) based on the FM algorithm has been proposed [ 116]. The algorithm takes
into account underwater undercurrents based on the relationship between the gradient
lines and feature lines in a velocity proﬁle. It also takes into account several constraints
and decision criteria, such as currents, shoals, reefs, dynamic obstacles, and navigation
rules, while reducing the paths and time. Thus, autonomous underwater robots are now
more competitive in dynamic underwater obstacle avoidance. A novel FM method paired
with the A* algorithm has been suggested [ 117] as a way to improve search precision and
produce a ﬁnite curvature that can be used by autonomous underwater robots of all sizes.

==== Page 20 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 20 of 37
2.8.5. Fuzzy Logic Method
By mimicking the ability of the human brain to evaluate uncertainty and make deci-
sions based on environmental data and fuzzy rules, fuzzy logic can solve the path planning
problem. To solve the problem of autonomous underwater robots being prone to receive
sea-current interference when performing underwater path planning, a fuzzy optimization
technique based on auto-disturbance rejection control (ADRC) was suggested to increase
the adaptation of autonomous underwater robots to the marine environment by including
ADRC to manage sea-current interference [ 118]. The ﬁndings of this trial demonstrate
that the autonomous underwater robot can exert superior control in a challenging marine
environment. An optimized fuzzy control algorithm was proposed for the autonomous
underwater robot 3D path planning problem [ 119]. Horizontal and vertical sonar planes
were used to collect the environmental data. A fuzzy system with an acceleration module
was used to calculate the acceleration values, and an optimal fuzzy set was created by
contrasting the two optimization techniques to determine the best course of action. The
results of the experiments demonstrate that the method can complete the path planning
of a 3D autonomous underwater robot. The change in distance between the autonomous
underwater robot and obstacles was employed as an extra input to the fuzzy afﬁliation
function [ 120] because it is challenging to determine the speed of obstacles moving in the
actual world. When obstacles move quickly, the results demonstrate that the proposed
method performs noticeably better than the conventional fuzzy logic algorithm.
The biggest advantage of the fuzzy logic algorithm is that it does not require an
accurate mathematical model, and its operation principle is basically similar to human
cognition. However, its deﬁnition of fuzzy rules depends on people’s experiences, and
it cannot adapt to complex environments. Future research needs to focus on developing
more intelligent path planning algorithms so that robots can adjust their paths intelligently
according to environmental changes and user needs.
2.9. Discussion
Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each path planning algo-
rithm. Both the A* and Dijkstra algorithms are classic algorithms based on graph search that
are used to solve the shortest path problem. They can deal with path planning problems
in a static environment, but the A* algorithm can ﬁnd the optimal solution faster with
the introduction of a heuristic function. Their disadvantage is that they cannot effectively
address the path planning problem in a dynamic environment. Genetic algorithms typically
perform many evolutionary operations. Therefore, they take up a considerable amount of
storage space, and there are more parameters to be adjusted, resulting in a slower conver-
gence speed. The advantage of the genetic algorithm is that it has a strong global search
ability and can overcome the suboptimal solution of the A* algorithm. Similar to genetic
algorithms, differential evolution algorithms also have genetic operators such as selective
crossover mutations, which can be deﬁned in different ways. The excellent robustness of
differential evolution algorithms in a wide range of path planning applications has been
proven in practice.

==== Page 21 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 21 of 37
Table 1. Summary of robot path algorithms.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
A*Find the shortest
path to the
current node but
to the destination[9] 2020Incorporate the A* algorithm
into linear time logic.Reduces the number
of nodes and the time
to generate paths./
[11] 2019The risk cost and distance cost
functions are simpliﬁed, and
the critical path points are
extracted, which are combined
with the window methodReduces the number
of A* nodes and
eliminates the need
for speed space
modelingMost parameters
are determined in
simulation
experiments
[13] 2021The turning cost function is
added, the generated
trajectory is optimized, and
the maximum search distance
and maximum path length are
limitedReduces search time,
path length, and
number of nodes/
[14] 2019New cost function designed
using ray tracing technique to
simulate reﬂection pathsProvides a safe path
based on position
error predictionEnergy loss to the
unmanned aerial
robot when there
are sharp turns in
the path
[15] 2019A cost function is designed
that considers both path
length and risk costMinimizing the risk to
the crowdThere is no
guarantee that the
path is the
optimal solution
[16] 2016Fusing sparse A* algorithms
with bio-inspired
neurodynamic modelsMitigates the
computational bulk of
the A* algorithm
during 3D track
planningMore complex
dynamic
impediments
such as air
resistance are not
taken into
account
GAPopulations
generate new
populations
through crossover
and mutation[21] 2017Combined with Q-learning
algorithms and designed for
continuous environments
with R-values and actionsAutonomously
ﬁnding suitable
obstacle avoidance
routes and using
Q-learning algorithms
for dynamic obstacle
avoidanceQ-learning
algorithms need
to learn from
mistakes and
robots need to
experience
failures to ﬁnd a
route
[22] 2013Combining co-evolutionary
mechanisms with improved
genetic algorithmsFaster convergence by
avoiding local
optimum problemsCurrently only
running in
known static
environments
[23] 2015Combines genetic algorithms
and particle swarm
optimization algorithms for
global path planning in
autonomous underwater
robots and uses current factors
as evaluation factors for
genetic algorithmsReduces energy
consumption of
autonomous
underwater robots
when navigating in a
wide range of marine
environmentsNo consideration
of the impact of
autonomous
underwater robot
movement on the
performance
assessment
[24] 2010Combined with dynamic
planning, use a B-spline curve
to optimize the pathOptimizes path
length, minimum
turning call, and a
maximum pitch angle/
[25] 2018Combining mixed integer
linear programming with
genetic algorithmsBetter paths can be
achieved through
lower energy costs/
[27] 2016Combining genetic algorithms
and fuzzy logicImproving the
accuracy of route
planningIts cost function
takes slightly
longer to run

==== Page 22 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 22 of 37
Table 1. Cont.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
ACOAnts move
toward areas of
high pheromone
concentration[28] 2017Introduced probability
multiplication factorReduced
computational effort
and smoother pathsThe planned path
closely follows
the edge of
obstacles
[29] 2020Propose an adaptive
pheromone volatility factor
strategy; propose a load
balancing strategyImproved efﬁciency
of algorithm
operationPlanned paths
through the
corners of
adjacent obstacles
[30] 2018RA and AACO navigation
controller designed;
RA-AACO hybrid controller
designed using the logic RA
and AACO logicEnabling path
planning for
humanoid robots6–7% error in the
planned path
length and time
spent
[31] 2020Introduction of particle swarm
optimization algorithms to
improve pheromone update
rulesImproved search
efﬁciency and shorter
optimization pathsSlow convergence
rate
[32] 2018Combined with the A*
algorithmThe optimal path is
obtainedAs the number of
search
dimensions
increases, there is
a risk of falling
into a local
optimum
[33] 2022Transformation of the path
planning task into a
multi-objective optimization
task with multiple constraints,
introducing an exact
population intelligence search
method that improves ant
colony optimizationImproving the
effectiveness of
unmanned aerial
robot mission
planning/
[35] 2017Two different pheromone
table encodings for MTS-ACO
are proposed and a minimum
time search heuristic function
is designedBetter route planning
solutions in less timeThe trajectories
obtained can only
be ﬂown directly
by drones with
speciﬁc
capabilities
PSOIndividual and
group
collaboration and
information
sharing[37] 2021Introduction of adaptive
fractional speedEnhanced ability to
step out of the local
optimum solutionComputationally
intensive,
unstable
numerical
oscillations, and
difﬁculty in
model
optimization
[38] 2016Combination of improved
particle swarm optimization
algorithm and gravitational
search algorithmOptimized path
length, number of
turns, and arrival
eventsFocusing only on
evacuation path
optimization
problems with a
single evacuation
path
[39] 2019Converts inertial weighting
factors and learning factors
from linear to non-linear to
describe the obstacle with a
penalty functionReduced energy
consumption of
autonomous
underwater robots in
underwater
environmentsMay fall into a
local optimum
solution
[40] 2019Introduction of adaptive laws
and quantum behavior for
global time optimizationImproved search
performanceSlow convergence
at later stages

==== Page 23 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 23 of 37
Table 1. Cont.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
PSOIndividual and
group
collaboration and
information
sharing[42] 2022A combination of a selﬁsh
population optimizer and a
particle swarm optimizer is
proposedSimpliﬁes the
structure of SHO and
improves SHO search
capabilities/
[43] 2021Parallel evolution of
segmented paths using DC
strategies to transform
high-dimensional problems
into multiple parallel
low-dimensional problemsAbility to search for
viable routes in
complex
environments with a
large number of
waypoints, providing
better stability/
DijkstraFinding the
shortest path in a
directed graph[18] 2022The error caused by the sensor
is consideredGenerates the
planning path with
the minimum
cumulative errorInadequate
handling in large
environments
[19] 2019Introduction of equivalent
pathsOptimal paths were
calculatedNo experimental
results for
veriﬁcation
DWASampling of the
surroundings
(robot speed,
motion
parameters, and
position) at the
current moment[45] 2020Add two new evaluation
functions that use Q-learning
to adaptively learn the
parameters of DWAThe shortcomings of
the original
evaluation function
have been modiﬁed to
enhance global
navigation with
strong self-learning
and self-adaptationThe planned path
is not optimal
[46] 2019A dynamic collision model is
proposedConsider the
movement of other
obstacles and predict
future environmental
collisionsMay provide
incorrect
modeling when
dealing with a
large number of
dynamic
obstacles
[47] 2012Abandoned weighted
objective function and used
model predictive controlThe navigation
function is deﬁned as
the optimization
objective based on the
conﬁguration spaceLimitations when
applied to robots
with constrained
kinematics
APFChanging the
direction of
motion of a robot
by repulsive and
gravitational
forces[49] 2015Combining the bacterial
evolutionary algorithm with
the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld
method the bacterial potential
ﬁeld method is proposedNo need to calculate
the global optimal
path enhancing the
local and global
controllability of the
robot in dynamic
environmentsTrajectory
planning is highly
dependent on the
hardware
architecture of the
robot
[50] 2020Use reinforcement learning to
adjust the parameters of a
potential ﬁeldIt has better running
time and cost function
value/
[51] 2020Addition of a distance
correction factor to the
repulsive potential ﬁeld
function; combined with the
positive hexagonal bootstrap
methodReduced calculations
during navigationObstacle
avoidance in 3D
environments
was not
considered in the
experiment
[52] 2022Improved calculation of the
direction of combined forces
using the space vector methodImproved
computational
efﬁciency of
algorithms and
reduced cost of
obstacle avoidance for
autonomous
underwater robotsNo consideration
of the mechanical
constraints of the
autonomous
underwater robot
and the size of the
obstacle

==== Page 24 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 24 of 37
Table 1. Cont.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
APFChanging the
direction of
motion of a robot
by repulsive and
gravitational
forces[53] 2021A method of moving around
the nearest obstacle is
introduced, and a parallel
search algorithm is proposedAvoiding the trap of
local minima in
artiﬁcial potential
ﬁelds/
[54] 2022Proposing a new and
improved attraction to
enhance the sensitivity of
unmanned aerial robots to
wind speed and directionA modiﬁed wind
resistance
gravitational function
that takes into
account any small
changes in relative
displacement caused
by the wind causing
the unmanned aerial
robot to drift in a
certain direction/
Neural
NetworkAn information
processing system
that mimics the
structure and
function of the
brain’s neural
networks[61] 2014Introduction of directional
automatic wave control and
accelerated neuronal
discharge based on dynamic
thresholding techniquesImproved path query
times, the model uses
parameters
independent of
conﬁguration space
and neuron propertiesTraining neural
networks ofﬂine
is
time-consuming
[62] 2019Combining Q-learning
algorithms with convolutional
neural networksImproved path
planning performanceLimited to a
single scenario, if
the target changes
it will not work
without a large
amount of
additional
training data
[63] 2015Online compensation of range
errors using multilayer neural
networks and estimation of
robot paths and states of
environmental maps using
Gaussian weighted
integration of third-order
volume rulesMitigation of error
accumulation caused
by inaccurate
linearization of the
SLAM non-linear
functions and
incorrect range
models/
TEBStart point and
target point states
are speciﬁed by
the global
planner, with N
robot poses
inserted between,
and movement
times deﬁned
between points[58] 2020Proposing actively timed
elastic bands, incorporating a
hybrid inverse velocity barrier
model into the objective
function of the TEB algorithmDrive mobile robots
to actively avoid
dynamic obstaclesThere is a
tendency to
oversteer in
corners with
partial
meandering
[59] 2022Add penalty function factor
constraint, acceleration jump
suppression constraint,
end-smoothing constraintReduced maximum
impact on the robot,
smooth and accurate
arrival at the target
point and reduced
end impactSmall
improvement
compared to
static weights
reinforcement
learningTrain intelligence
to take action to
maximize their
returns[67] 2020Combining deep Q-learning
with experience replay
mechanisms and heuristic
knowledgeSolves the
“dimensional
catastrophe” problem,
avoiding blind
exploration and faster
convergence to the
optimal action
strategyOnly possible in
idealized
environments
[68] 2020Increase the choice of
extension points, introduce
the idea of biased targets, use
task return functions, target
distance functions, and angle
constraintsReduces the number
of invalid nodes and
improves the
performance of the
RRT algorithmThe algorithm has
limited
generalization
capabilities

==== Page 25 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 25 of 37
Table 1. Cont.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
reinforcement
learningTrain intelligence
to take action to
maximize their
returns[70] 2017Designed a learning-based
mapless path plannerTraining the planner
by asynchronous
deep reinforcement
learning methods so
that training and
sample collection can
be performed in
parallelInsufﬁcient
theoretical
support and low
sample sampling
rate
[72] 2022A line-of-sight-based
guidance method is used to
generate the target angle for
path tracking and to generate
the error relative to the carrier
coordinate systemFacilitates the ﬁltering
of irrelevant
environmental
information and the
generation of
corresponding
policies, enabling
more efﬁcient policy
approximationConsiders the
effect of only a
single
environmental
variable
[73] 2020A deep reinforcement learning
method for unmanned aerial
robot path planning based on
global situational information
is proposed, using competing
dual-depth Q networksHigher cumulative
rewards and success
rates can be achievedFor most winged
tactical drones,
this option is not
suitable
[76] 2021A multi-step competitive
DDQN-based algorithm is
proposed to design locally
optimal unmanned aerial
robot paths using the
constructed coverage graphImproved stability
and faster
convergence of the
algorithm/
Rapid-
exploration
Random TreeBuilt by the
random spanning
tree method,
connecting the
generated tree to
the trunk of the
starting point[87] 2019Extending the retrospective
scope of the two optimization
processes of the RRT*
algorithm; combined with a
sampling strategyGuaranteed better
paths and faster
convergence with the
same time and space
complexityMore computing
resources
required
[89] 2019Assessing the feasibility of
RRT extensions and
exploration through fuzzy
controllers combined with
six-degree-of-freedom
nonlinear modelsHandling of random
and uncertain
information
Highly competentHigh chance and
low accuracy
[91] 2018Combining bi-directional
artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld
methods with the idea of
bi-directional bias samplingReduced invalid
spatial sampling and
increased
convergence speed/
Other
Algorithms[106] 2022 Designed path evaluatorHelps autonomous
underwater robots
use ocean currents to
avoid collisionsNo consideration
of the cost of local
paths
[107] 2018Using differential
evolutionary algorithms to
optimize control points for B
spline generationEffective handling of
obstacles in
three-dimensional
spaceFailure to
consider the
complexity of the
underwater
terrain
[113] 2016Derivation of stochastic
dynamic orthogonal level set
equations that can be used in
dynamically varying current
ﬁeldsMinimises energy
consumption and
optimizes the optimal
pathThe ﬁnal path is
vulnerable to
currents

==== Page 26 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 26 of 37
Table 1. Cont.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
Other
Algorithms[114] 2020A new discrete iterative
equation is derived by
localizing the traditional level
set function and introducing a
polynomial distance
regularisation (P-DRE) termImproved
computational
efﬁciency of the level
set algorithmThe simulation
does not provide
performance
results in the case
of obstacle
avoidance
[116] 2015Introduction of multiple
constraints and decision
criteria to process water ﬂows
according to velocity proﬁlesReduces path search
time and generates
3D smooth paths/
[118] 2019Introduction of ADRC to
manage current disturbancesImproved
adaptability of
autonomous
underwater robots to
the marine
environmentIf the initial
values are not set
correctly, the
control system
will be unstable
[119] 2018Optimizing the value of the
afﬁliation function for fuzzy
logic using the quantum
particle swarm algorithmPresents a certain
resistance to
interference and does
not require an
accurate
mathematical modelInsufﬁcient
steady-state
accuracy in
practical
applications
The ant colony and particle swarm algorithms are bionic methods inspired by the
behavior mechanisms of natural biological groups. They can adapt to the environment
in a short time with the cooperation of individual organisms. The ant colony algorithm
guides the search process by simulating the behavior of ants when searching for food
through the role of pheromones and the process of pheromone volatilization, ﬁnally ﬁnding
the optimal solution. The particle swarm algorithm simulates the collective behavior
of birds and ﬁsh and ﬁnds the optimal solution by constantly adjusting the position of
the particles. However, both the ant colony and particle swarm algorithms have their
limitations, resulting in slow convergence. The RRT and PRM algorithms are sampling-
based random algorithms that can be used to solve path planning problems in spaces with a
lot of dimensions and complex shapes. Among them, the RRT algorithm leverages random
sampling and can obtain feasible paths in a short time, but it is difﬁcult to guarantee the
quality of the paths. However, it can obtain better paths by building a road network;
however, it requires a longer calculation time to achieve this.
The artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method is a path planning method based on a physical
model that is suitable for path planning in a dynamic environment. It describes the
environment and target location by deﬁning the physical potential ﬁeld to avoid obstacles
and determine the optimal path. However, they can easily fall into a locally optimal
solution in a complex environment. The dynamic window method is a path planning
method based on control theory that can quickly give path planning results. It combines
the motion model of the robot with the environment model and uses the window model to
describe the motion state of the robot to evaluate the feasible motion trajectory. However,
the calculation time increases with an increase in the dimensions of the robot’s state space.
The TEB algorithm is based on time-space path planning and can deal with the motion and
obstacle avoidance of robots in complex environments. Using the time expansion method,
it changes the robot’s movement path into a time-space manifold. This makes it easier to
optimize the path and avoid obstacles. However, this requires considerable computing
resources and time. Reinforcement learning has a strong decision-making ability and can
be used to plan an optimal path without any prior knowledge. Additionally, reinforcement
learning exhibits strong adaptability and ﬂexibility in complex and uncertain environments.
Compared with other traditional path planning algorithms, such as the A* and Dijkstra
algorithms, reinforcement learning does not require speciﬁc forms of objective functions.
In addition, reinforcement learning can learn and adjust adaptively to optimize path
planning. Traditional algorithms, such as swarm intelligence algorithms, typically need

==== Page 27 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 27 of 37
to set parameters manually and lack self-adaptability. However, reinforcement learning
requires considerable training data, computing resources, and long training times.
3. Multi-Robot
Multi-robot collaboration technology remains of signiﬁcant interest in robotics. When
multiple robots share the same environment, collisions between them must be considered.
To solve the problems of obstacle avoidance and collisions between the robots in multi-
robot systems during formation, a method for obstacle avoidance and consistent formation
control based on the improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method (IAPF) was proposed [ 121].
To solve the local minimum and target unreachability problems in the artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld method, a rotating potential ﬁeld was established. To avoid the collision problem
between multi-robot systems, a repulsive potential function, and a robot priority model
are set, and the consistency-based formation principle is used to design a stable topology
for multi-robot formation control. The simulation results demonstrate that the method
can effectively solve the obstacle avoidance problem of a multi-robot system during the
formation process. To solve the control problem during multi-robot navigation, a shortest
distance algorithm was proposed [ 122], which uses the current positions and directions of
other robots to calculate collision-free trajectories and is based on the concept of relative
orientation to ensure smooth and collision-free trajectories. To address the poor robustness
and low exploration efﬁciency of traditional robotic collaborative exploration algorithms, a
multi-robot collaborative spatial exploration method based on a rapidly expanding random
tree-greedy frontier search (RRT-GFE) was proposed in [ 123]. The boundary points in the
environment map were reﬁned by proposing an improved boundary exploration algorithm
to improve the maximum gain of exploring the target points. The exploration target
points are dynamically assigned by introducing an improved task assignment algorithm,
thus reducing the time required and improving the efﬁciency of multi-robot exploration.
Simulations and prototype experiments were used to prove that the proposed method
works and is reliable.
An elite group-based evolutionary algorithm (EGEA) that combines the key beneﬁts
of both approaches while integrating a group-based framework and an elite selection
method for evolutionary path planning was proposed [ 124]. Due to the group-based
architecture, each descendant of the evolutionary algorithm is allowed to provide its own
set of novel solutions with a speciﬁed probability. The PSO and SA approaches are also
presented to address the adaptive ocean sampling issue. According to the simulation
results, the EGEA-based planner was superior and more reliable. A non-stop collision-free
path planning system was proposed [ 125], which consists of a combination of a novel
B-spline data frame and a particle swarm optimization-based solution engine. Using the
unique B-spline data frame structure, candidate points can be intelligently sampled without
having to suspend the sampling job. For several unmanned surface vehicles (USVs) to
complete the sampling task from the starting point to the rendezvous point, the PSO-based
solution engine creates optimal, smooth, constraint-aware path proﬁles. The applicability
and reliability of the proposed path planning system for non-stop ocean sampling jobs are
conﬁrmed by simulation results.
A distributed velocity-aware algorithm and a method for avoiding collisions between
multiple unmanned aerial robots have been proposed [ 126]. These are used to plan the
paths of many unmanned aerial robots and prevent them from running into each other. The
acceleration vectors on the pathways created by the velocity-aware algorithm converged at
a preset location. When path conﬂicts are anticipated, the collision avoidance algorithm is
activated to safeguard unmanned aerial robots from collisions. Compared to the hierarchi-
cal control model and the Lyapunov control method, this method improves the success rate
of unmanned aerial robot mission execution and shortens the path. In [ 127], a time-stamped
partitioning model was used to make it easier to process coordination costs between un-
manned aerial robots. This was conducted to solve the problem of planning an optimal
path for multiple unmanned aerial robots in a limited mission environment. A novel hybrid

==== Page 28 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 28 of 37
method (called HIPSO-MSOS) was subsequently proposed by fusing the improved particle
swarm algorithm (IPSO) and modiﬁed symbiotic organisms research (MSOS). The experi-
mental results demonstrate that the HIPSO-MSOS algorithm has considerable advantages
in terms of accuracy, convergence speed, and stability and can successfully construct feasi-
ble and efﬁcient pathways for each unmanned aerial robot. For the collaborative detection
problem of avoiding collisions in three-dimensional space, a method based on adaptive DE
and distributed model predictive control was proposed [ 128]. The control scheme incorpo-
rates an adaptive improvement of the DE algorithm and introduces an adaptive selection
of the prediction range. In addition, the asymptotic convergence of the rolling optimization
is analyzed. The simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed control
strategy. For the problem of path planning and formation control of multiple unmanned
aerial robots in three-dimensional space, a multi-unmanned aerial robot path planning
method based on an improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method [ 129] was proposed, which
can effectively avoid local minima by introducing a rotating potential ﬁeld. Using the
leader-follower model, a formation controller based on the potential ﬁeld function method
is designed to ensure that the expected angle and distance between the follower unmanned
aerial robot and the leader unmanned aerial robot are maintained. The simulation results
demonstrate that the method is signiﬁcantly effective in achieving path planning and for-
mation control for multi-unmanned aerial robot systems. A multi-unmanned aerial robot
path planning model with an energy constraint (MUPPEC) has been suggested [ 130] as a
solution to the problem of multi-unmanned aerial robot energy consumption constraints
when conducting monitoring activities. To reduce the monitoring time, MUPPEC primarily
considers the unmanned aerial robot in various energy-consuming modes, such as accelerat-
ing and hovering. For the MUPPEC issue, a hybrid discrete grey wolf optimizer (HDGWO)
based on grey wolf optimization is suggested. In HDGWO, a discrete grey wolf update op-
erator is implemented, and the discrete problem space and grey wolf space are transformed
using integer encoding and the greedy method. According to the experimental results,
HDGWO can successfully solve the MUPPEC problem. In reference [ 131], a multi-objective
optimization algorithm, called the angle-coded particle swarm optimization ( -PSO), is
proposed for multi-unmanned aerial robots performing infrastructure surface inspection
tasks to ﬁnd feasible obstacle-free paths for the entire formation by minimizing a cost
function that combines multiple constraints on the shortest path and safe unmanned aerial
robot operations. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness and feasibility of
the method. A study [ 132] suggests a two-stage reinforcement-learning-based algorithm
for collision-free path planning for many unmanned aerial robots. The policy is optimized
using supervised training with a loss function that encourages the intelligence to follow a
shared collision-free policy in the ﬁrst stage. In the second stage, a policy gradient was used
to hone the policy. The technique may produce time-effective and collision-free pathways
in environments that are aware of uncertainty, according to the simulation data.
Table 2 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of multi-robot cooperative
path planning. In the ﬁeld of robot technology, multi-robot cooperative path planning is
an important area of research. In the future, multi-robot cooperative path planning may
develop in the following aspects: Given the problems of high computational complexity
and long running time in multi-robot cooperative path planning, it is necessary to study
how to improve efﬁciency and real-time path planning in the future. Dynamic changes
often occur in the working environment of robots, such as the emergence of new obstacles
and the actions of other robots. Therefore, future multi-robot cooperative path planning
needs to consider the dynamic changes of the environment and be able to respond and
adapt in time. In addition to path planning, cooperation between robots is also a very
important part of a multi-robot cooperation system. In the future, cooperation strategies
among robots will need to be studied to achieve more efﬁcient and intelligent multi-robot
cooperation.

==== Page 29 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 29 of 37
Table 2. Summary of multi-robot path algorithms.
Algorithms Mechanism References Year Improvements Advantages Limitations
Multi-robotCooperation
between multiple
robots to
complete a
predetermined
task[121] 2022Constructed a motion
situational awareness map,
created a rotational potential
ﬁeld, set up a rejection
potential function and a robot
priority modelThe situational
awareness map
ensures that the robot
makes the best
decisions at all times,
solving the local
minima and targeting
unreachability
problems of the
artiﬁcial potential
ﬁeld methodRobot control
methods are not
optimal
[122] 2016Proposed shortest distance
algorithm based on the
relative orientationEnsures smooth and
collision-free robot
trajectoriesThe simulation
does not provide
performance
results in the case
of obstacle
avoidance
[123] 2022Thiessen polygons are used to
model and partition the
environment, the GRF
algorithm is introduced to
reﬁne the search, and a
multi-robot task allocation
method based on an improved
market mechanism is used to
dynamically allocate
exploration target pointsThe ability to achieve
rapid deployment of
functional modules
and rapid portability
of algorithms between
various types of
multi-robot systems.Error between
simulation results
and prototype
experimental
results
[124] 2020Integration of
population-based frameworks
and elite selection methods
into evolutionary path
planning; introduction of
simulated annealing methods
and particle swarm
optimizationGenerates trajectories
with higher sampling
values, a lower
standard deviation,
and shorter execution
timesThe method is not
applied to 3D
workspaces
[125] 2022Combines a novel B-spline
data framework with a
particle swarm
optimization-based solution
engineRobust for handling
interference and
abnormal operation,
providing fast
obstacle avoidance/
[131] 2018An angle-coded particle
swarm optimization
algorithm is proposed to
design multiple constraints
that combine the shortest path
and safe unmanned aerial
robot operationAccelerated particle
swarm convergence
that generates safe
and reliable paths for
each unmanned aerial
robot in a formation/
4. Ground Robot, Unmanned Aerial Robots Cooperative
Owing to the numerous applications in target tracking, intelligent surveillance, auto-
mated package delivery missions, and disaster rescue, research regarding unmanned aerial
robot/ground robot cooperative detection systems has gained considerable momentum.
For unmanned aerial robots and ground robots to simultaneously function in a system to
complete missions, path planning for unmanned aerial robot/ground robot cooperative
systems is a critical yet challenging problem. The path planning problem was modeled as a
constrained optimization problem that attempted to minimize the overall execution time
to complete an illegal urban building inspection task. Then, a two-level modal algorithm
(called Two-MA) was proposed to solve the path planning problem for unmanned aerial
robots and ground robots, ﬁnding the path with the shortest task execution time from
both the node and cluster levels [ 133]. The experimental results validate that Two-MA
outperforms classical algorithms in ﬁnding the path with the shortest task execution time
to detect nonstandard buildings in cities. A collaborative unmanned aerial robot–ground
robot system was developed [ 134] to implement unmanned aerial robot-assisted ground
robot path planning. First, the unmanned aerial robot performs target detection by seman-

==== Page 30 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 30 of 37
tic segmentation, extracts information regarding ground obstacles, presents the obstacles
in a circular approximation, and proposes an algorithm to derive the optimal collision
avoidance trajectory for unattended ground robots using strict concave-convex planning
techniques. According to the simulation ﬁndings, the path developed by the suggested
path planning algorithm can successfully minimize ground robot collisions while attaining
good energy efﬁciency. To decouple their routing based on air-ground cooperation, a
two-step technique combining ant colony optimization and evolutionary algorithms was
demonstrated [ 135] for the path planning problem of heterogeneous robotic systems used
to deliver parcels in urban environments. ACO is utilized in the initial stage to identify
the routes for the ground robots. Once the ground robot route has been predetermined in
the ﬁrst stage, the unmanned aerial robot route is solved using a genetic algorithm in the
second stage. The simulation ﬁndings demonstrate the ability of the method to successfully
address the issue of unmanned aerial robot heterogeneous distribution and choose the
best course for unmanned aerial robots. A collaborative unmanned aerial robot-ground
robot path planning method for dynamic environments was proposed by performing a
semantic segmentation of images acquired from the perspective of an unmanned aerial
robot through deep neural networks [ 136]. The method was evaluated in a car parking
scenario to provide path planning for ground robots leading to empty parking spaces. For
heterogeneous ground air robots, a tightly connected perception and navigation paradigm
was suggested [ 137]. The primary contributions of this study are the derivation of high-level
coordination methods and low-level goal-directed navigation in a completely integrated
manner, as well as the provision of a uniﬁed framework for formulating collaborative navi-
gation issues. The ability of the system to execute collaborative mapping and navigation in
both structured and unstructured domains was demonstrated by the experimental ﬁndings.
5. Discussion
Path planning is an important research branch for improving the autonomy of mobile
robots and has attracted the attention of researchers all over the world in recent decades.
Although many path planning algorithms have been proposed and implemented in mobile
robots, they have several drawbacks and limitations that need to be further explored.
(1) Although a variety of classical algorithms are widely used for traditional path
planning, they have several shortcomings. Their adaptability to complex environments
is unsatisfactory, and their ability to model and process an environment is limited to a
certain extent. This is especially true in complex environments, which are hard to adapt
to and process, which makes path planning less efﬁcient and accurate. For example, in
practical applications such as human–machine cooperation, multi-robot cooperation, and
other scenarios, often involving a complex environment and a variety of different robots,
the traditional A* and Dijkstra algorithms are not appropriate. Some traditional algorithms
have problems such as endless cycles and perform repeated searches in the process of path
search. This leads to low efﬁciency of the algorithm and affects its practical application.
Traditional algorithms are often based on static environment modeling and path search.
This means that they cannot be adaptively adjusted based on the actual environment and
robot behavior, resulting in insufﬁcient robustness and adaptability in path planning.
(2) Most of the current algorithms are based on improving their characteristics and
demonstrating good results. However, the results are better when used with different
algorithms as opposed to individual algorithm improvements. No single path planning
algorithm can solve all the path planning problems in practical applications, especially in
complex environments. Moreover, it is difﬁcult to research new algorithms, so it is expected
that more combined path planning algorithms will appear in the future to make up for
each other’s deﬁciencies.
(3) The development of path planning techniques based on reinforcement learning
and the derived deep reinforcement learning has important implications. Based on the
current state of development and the needs for future development, the following are
some possible directions for future research on path planning techniques based on rein-

==== Page 31 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 31 of 37
forcement learning methods: designing reward functions, studying combinations with
conventional path planning methods, and applying reinforcement learning to collaborative
path planning for multiple intelligences. However, reinforcement learning, which involves
trial-and-error learning and state generalization, consumes a lot of resources. Recently,
brain science and brain-like intelligence have become hot spots for research and compe-
tition all around the world. Brain-like intelligence is capable of intelligent information
acquisition, intelligent information processing and communication, and intelligent human–
computer interaction. This meets the needs of intelligent path planning. By mimicking
and interacting with the environment to carry out actions and plan, brain-like intelligence
has the ability of autonomous development and can learn with a small number of samples,
thus solving the defect of resource waste in reinforcement learning and making robots have
the developmental capacity, gradually improving the intelligence level of path planning.
(4) Research on multi-robot cooperative path planning is gaining more attention
as the robotic working environment is being extended, task complexity is increasing,
and the application area is being enlarged. The system must efﬁciently, rapidly, and
precisely coordinate several robots to cooperate and execute multiple tasks in tandem. This
system entails not only path planning but also communication between each robot and the
cooperative control, on the basis that members exchange messages.
(5) The possible future research directions and hotspots for mobile robot path plan-
ning are as follows: (1) Multi-robot cooperative path planning. With an increase in the
number of robots, multi-robot cooperative path planning has become an important re-
search direction. Future research will focus on cooperative actions among multiple robots,
such as collaboration on industrial production lines and search and rescue missions in the
wild; (2) performance improvement of path planning algorithms. Presently, many path
planning algorithms take a long time to ﬁnd the global optimal solution; thus, improving
the efﬁciency of the algorithm has become a research hotspot. Future research will focus
on improving the efﬁciency of the algorithm, reducing computation time, and adopting a
new algorithm framework to solve this problem; (3) path planning based on reinforcement
learning. Reinforcement learning has achieved great success in many ﬁelds and has great
potential for use in mobile robot path planning. Future research will focus on how to use
deep learning to plan routes and move from lab experiments to real-world applications;
(4) planning routes by combining data from multiple sensors. The continuous development
of sensor technology provides more information sources for robot path planning. Future
research will pay more attention to how to fuse information from multiple sensors for path
planning and verify its effect in practical applications.
6. Conclusions
With the development of intelligent techniques and industrial automation, path plan-
ning for mobile robots is one of the hot research topics in the ﬁeld of robotics both do-
mestically and internationally. This paper reviews the application ﬁelds of the current
path planning algorithms and their improvement/optimization of them in four aspects,
including ground robots, underwater robots, aerial robots, and collaborative robots. For
each aspect, the path planning algorithms are analyzed, and their improvement measures,
advantages, and disadvantages are discussed. Finally, a summary discussion is made to
provide a reference for path planning for mobile robots.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.S.; methodology, S.S. and H.Q.; investigation, H.Q.;
resources, S.S. and T.W.; writing—original draft preparation, H.Q.; writing—review and editing,
H.Q., S.S. and X.Y.; supervision, Y.J.; project administration, Z.C.; funding acquisition, S.S. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant
number U20A20201), the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province (grant number 2021-MS-
032), the Independent Project of the State Key Laboratory of Robotics (grant number 2022-Z02 and
2022-Z19).

==== Page 32 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 32 of 37
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Tang, B.W.; Zhu, Z.X.; Luo, J.J. Hybridizing particle pswarm optimization and differential evolution for the mobile robot global
path planning. Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst. 2016 ,13, 86. [CrossRef]
2. Wahab, M.N.A.; Nefti-Meziani, S.; Atyabi, A. A comparative review on mobile robot path planning: Classical or meta-heuristic
methods? Annu. Rev. Control 2020 ,50, 233–252. [CrossRef]
3. Lin, S.; Liu, A.; Wang, J.; Kong, X. A Review of Path-Planning Approaches for Multiple Mobile Robots. Machines 2022 ,10, 773.
[CrossRef]
4. Gul, F.; Mir, I.; Abualigah, L.; Sumari, P .; Forestiero, A. A Consolidated Review of Path Planning and Optimization Techniques:
Technical Per-spectives and Future Directions. Electronics 2021 ,10, 2250. [CrossRef]
5. Liu, C.; Zhao, J.; Sun, N. A Review of Collaborative Air-Ground Robots Research. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2022 ,106, 60. [CrossRef]
6. Klanˇ car, G.; Zdešar, A.; Krishnan, M. Robot Navigation Based on Potential Field and Gradient Obtained by Bilinear Interpolation
and a Grid-Based Search. Sensors 2022 ,22, 3295. [CrossRef]
7. Contreras-Cruz, M.A.; Ayala-Ramirez, V .; Hernandez-Belmonte, U.H. Mobile robot path planning using artiﬁcial bee colony and
evolutionary programming. Appl. Soft Comput. 2015 ,30, 319–328. [CrossRef]
8. An, D.; Mu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Li, B.; Wei, Y. Intelligent Path Planning Technologies of Underwater Vehicles: A Review. J. Intell. Robot.
Syst. 2023 ,107, 22. [CrossRef]
9. Khalidi, D.; Gujarathi, D.; Saha, I.T. A heuristic search based path planning algorithm for temporal logic speciﬁcations. In
Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Paris, France, 31 May–31 August
2020; pp. 8476–8482.
10. Lim, J.; Tsiotras, P . A generalized A* algorithm for ﬁnding globally optimal paths in weighted colored graphs. In Proceedings
of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an, China, 30 May 2021–5 June 2021; pp.
7503–7509.
11. Zhong, X.; Tian, J.; Hu, H.; Peng, X. Hybrid path planning based on safe A* algorithm and adaptive window approach for mobile
robot in large-scale dynamic environment. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2020 ,99, 65–77. [CrossRef]
12. Li, Y.; Ma, T.; Chen, P .; Jiang, Y.; Wang, R.; Zhang, Q. Autonomous underwater vehicle optimal path planning method for seabed
terrain matching navigation. Ocean Eng. 2017 ,133, 107–115. [CrossRef]
13. Sang, H.; You, Y.; Sun, X.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, F. The hybrid path planning algorithm based on improved A* and artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld
for unmanned surface vehicle formations. Ocean Eng. 2021 ,223, 108709. [CrossRef]
14. Zhang, G.; Hsu, L.T. A new path planning algorithm using a GNSS localization error map for UAVs in an urban area. J. Intell.
Robot. Syst. 2019 ,94, 219–235. [CrossRef]
15. Primatesta, S.; Guglieri, G.; Rizzo, A. A risk-aware path planning strategy for UAVs in urban environments. J. Intell. Robot. Syst.
2019 ,95, 629–643. [CrossRef]
16. Yewei, Z.; Jianhao, T.; Yaonan, W. Highly time-efﬁcient trajectory planning strategy for rotorcraft in 3-dimensional complex
mountain environment. Robotics 2016 ,38, 727–737.
17. Dijkstra, E.W. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numer. Math. 1959 ,1, 269–271. [CrossRef]
18. Wang, C.; Cheng, C.; Yang, D.; Pan, G.; Zhang, F. Path Planning in Localization Uncertaining Environment Based on Dijkstra
Method. Front. Neurorobotics 2022 ,16, 821991. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Balado, J.; D íaz-Vilariño, L.; Arias, P .; Lorenzo, H. Point clouds for direct pedestrian pathﬁnding in urban environments. ISPRS J.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2019 ,148, 184–196. [CrossRef]
20. Kirsanov, A.; Anavatti, S.G.; Ray, T. Path planning for the autonomous underwater vehicle. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Swarm, Evolutionary, and Memetic Computing, Chennai, India, 19–21 December 2013; Volume 8298, pp. 476–486.
21. Naigong, Y.; Chen, W.; Fanfan, M. Dynamic environmental path planning based on Q-learning algorithm and genetic algorithm.
J. Beijing Univ. Technol. 2017 ,43, 1009–1016.
22. Qu, H.; Xing, K.; Alexander, T. An improved genetic algorithm with co-evolutionary strategy for global path planning of multiple
mobile robots. Neurocomputing 2013 ,120, 509–517. [CrossRef]
23. Ataei, M.; Youseﬁ-Koma, A. Three-dimensional optimal path planning for waypoint guidance of an autonomous underwater
vehicle. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2015 ,67, 23–32. [CrossRef]
24. Cheng, C.-T.; Fallahi, K.; Leung, H.; Tse, C.K. An AUVs path planner using genetic algorithms with a deterministic crossover
operator. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Anchorage, AK, USA, 3–7 May
2010; pp. 2995–3000.
25. Dai, R.; Fotedar, S.; Radmanesh, M.; Kumar, M. Quality-aware UAV coverage and path planning in geometrically complex
environments. Ad Hoc Netw. 2018 ,73, 95–105. [CrossRef]
26. Liu, Y.; Zhang, P .; Ru, Y.; Wu, D.; Wang, S.; Yin, N.; Meng, F.; Liu, Z. A scheduling route planning algorithm based on the dynamic
genetic algorithm with ant colony binary iterative optimization for unmanned aerial vehicle spraying in multiple tea ﬁelds. Front.
Plant Sci. 2022 ,13, 998962. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 33 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 33 of 37
27. Sathyan, A.; Ernest, N.D.; Cohen, K. An efﬁcient genetic fuzzy approach to UAV swarm routing. Unmanned Syst. 2016 ,4, 117–127.
[CrossRef]
28. Rajput, U.; Kumari, M. Mobile robot path planning with modiﬁed ant colony optimisation. Int. J. Bio Inspired Comput. 2017 ,9,
106–113. [CrossRef]
29. Luo, Q.; Wang, H.; Zheng, Y.; He, J. Research on path planning of mobile robot based on improved ant colony algorithm. Neural
Comput. Appl. 2020 ,32, 1555–1566. [CrossRef]
30. Cheng, C.; Sha, Q.; He, B.; Li, G. Path planning and obstacle avoidance for AUV: A review. Ocean Eng. 2021 ,235, 109355.
[CrossRef]
31. Che, G.; Liu, L.; Yu, Z. An improved ant colony optimization algorithm based on particle swarm optimization algorithm for path
planning of autonomous underwater vehicle. J. Ambient Intell. Hum. Comput. 2020 ,11, 3349–3354. [CrossRef]
32. Yu, X.; Chen, W.N.; Gu, T.; Yuan, H.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, J. ACO-A*: Ant colony optimization plus A* for 3-D traveling in
environments with dense obstacles. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 2018 ,23, 617–631. [CrossRef]
33. Wan, Y.; Zhong, Y.; Ma, A.; Zhang, L. An accurate UAV 3-D path planning method for disaster emergency response based on an
improved multiobjective swarm intelligence algorithm. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2022 ,53, 2658–2671. [CrossRef]
34. Ji, X.; Hua, Q.; Li, C.; Tang, J.; Wang, A.; Chen, X.; Fang, D. 2-OptACO: An improvement of ant colony optimization for UAV
path in disaster rescue. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Networking and Network Applications (NaNA),
Kathmandu, Nepal, 16–19 October 2017; pp. 225–231.
35. Perez-Carabaza, S.; Besada-Portas, E.; Lopez-Orozco, J.A.; de la Cruz, J.M. Ant colony optimization for multi-UAV minimum
time search in uncertain domains. Appl. Soft Comput. 2018 ,62, 789–806. [CrossRef]
36. Eberhart, R.; Kennedy, J. A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. In Proceedings of the Mhs95 Sixth International
Symposium on Micro Machine & Human Science, Nagoya, Japan, 4–6 October 1995.
37. Song, B.; Wang, Z.; Zou, L. An improved PSO algorithm for smooth path planning of mobile robots using continuous high-degree
Bezier curve. Appl. Soft Comput. 2021 ,100, 106960. [CrossRef]
38. Das, P .K.; Behera, H.S.; Panigrahi, B.K. A hybridization of an improved particle swarm optimization and gravitational search
algorithm for multi-robot path planning. Swarm Evol. Comput. 2016 ,28, 14–28. [CrossRef]
39. Wu, J.; Song, C.; Fan, C.; Hawbani, A.; Zhao, L.; Sun, X. DENPSO: A distance evolution nonlinear PSO algorithm for energy-
efﬁcient path planning in 3D UASNs. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 105514–105530. [CrossRef]
40. Li, Z.; Liu, W.; Gao, L.E.; Li, L.; Zhang, F. Path planning method for AUV docking based on adaptive quantum-behaved particle
swarm optimization. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 78665–78674. [CrossRef]
41. Liu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Guan, X.; Delahaye, D. Adaptive sensitivity decision based path planning algorithm for unmanned aerial
vehicle with improved particle swarm optimization. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2016 ,58, 92–102. [CrossRef]
42. Zhao, R.; Wang, Y.; Xiao, G.; Liu, C.; Hu, P .; Li, H. A method of path planning for unmanned aerial vehicle based on the hybrid of
selﬁsh herd optimizer and particle swarm optimizer. Appl. Intell. 2022 ,52, 16775–16798. [CrossRef]
43. Huang, C. A novel three-dimensional path planning method for ﬁxed-wing UAV using improved particle swarm optimization
algorithm. Int. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2021 ,2021 , 7667173. [CrossRef]
44. Fox, D.; Burgard, W.; Thrun, S. The dynamic window approach to collision avoidance. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 1997 ,4, 23–33.
[CrossRef]
45. Chang, L.; Shan, L.; Jiang, C.; Dai, Y. Reinforcement based mobile robot path planning with improved dynamic window approach
in unknown environment. Auton. Robot. 2021 ,45, 51–76. [CrossRef]
46. Missura, M.; Bennewitz, M. Predictive collision avoidance for the dynamic window approach. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Montreal, QC, Canada, 20–24 May 2019; pp. 8620–8626. [CrossRef]
47. Kiss, D.; Tevesz, G. Advanced dynamic window based navigation approach using model predictive control. In Proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Methods & Models in Automation & Robotics, Miedzyzdroje, Poland, 27–30 August 2012.
48. Kathib, O. Real-Time Obstacle Avoidance for Manipulators and Mobile Robots ; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 1986.
49. Montiel, O.; Orozco-Rosas, U.; Sep úlveda, R. Path planning for mobile robots using Bacterial Potential Field for avoiding static
and dynamic obstacles. Expert Syst. Appl. 2015 ,42, 5177–5191. [CrossRef]
50. Rousseas, P .; Bechlioulis, C.P .; Kyriakopoulos, K.J. Optimal robot motion planning in constrained workspaces using reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Las Vegas, NV ,
USA, 24 October 2020–24 January 2021; pp. 6917–6922.
51. Fan, X.; Guo, Y.; Liu, H.; Wei, B.; Lyu, W. Improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method applied for AUV path planning. Math. Probl.
Eng. 2020 ,2020 , 6523158. [CrossRef]
52. Hao, K.; Zhao, J.; Li, Z.; Liu, Y.; Zhao, L. Dynamic path planning of a three-dimensional underwater AUV based on an adaptive
genetic algorithm. Ocean Eng. 2022 ,263, 112421. [CrossRef]
53. Huang, T.; Huang, D.; Qin, N.; Li, Y. Path planning and control of a quadrotor UAV based on an improved APF using parallel
search. Int. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2021 ,2021 , 5524841. [CrossRef]
54. Jayaweera, H.M.P .C.; Hanoun, S. Path planning of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in windy environments. Drones 2022 ,6, 101.
[CrossRef]
55. Lin, N.; Tang, J.; Li, X.; Zhao, L. A novel improved bat algorithm in UAV path planning. J. Comput. Mater. Contin. 2019 ,61,
323–344. [CrossRef]

==== Page 34 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 34 of 37
56. Roesmann, C.; Feiten, W.; Woesch, T.; Hoffmann, F.; Bertram, T. Trajectory modiﬁcation considering dynamic constraints of
autonomous robots. In Proceedings of the ROBOTIK 2012: 7th German Conference on Robotics, Munich, Germany, 21–22 May
2012; Volume 2012.
57. Rosmann, C.; Feiten, W.; Wosch, T.; Hoffmann, F.; Bertram, T. Efﬁcient trajectory optimization using a sparse model. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Mobile Robots, Barcelona, Spain, 25–27 September 2013.
58. Lan, A.N.; Pham, T.D.; Ngo, T.D.; Truong, X.T. A proactive trajectory planning algorithm for autonomous mobile robots in
dynamic social environments. In Proceedings of the 2020 17th International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots (UR), Kyoto, Japan,
22–26 June 2020.
59. Wen, Y.; Jiangshuai, H.; Tao, J.; Xiaojie, S. Improved time-elastic band trajectory planning algorithm for safe smoothing. Control.
Decis. Mak. 2022 ,37, 2008–2016.
60. Patle, B.K.; Pandey, A.; Parhi, D.R.K.; Jagadeesh, A. A review: On path planning strategies for navigation of mobile robot. Def.
Technol. 2019 ,15, 582–606. [CrossRef]
61. Syed, U.A.; Kunwar, F.; Iqbal, M. Guided Autowave Pulse Coupled Neural Network (GAPCNN) based real time path planning
and an obstacle avoidance scheme for mobile robots. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2014 ,62, 474–486. [CrossRef]
62. Bae, H.; Kim, G.; Kim, J.; Qian, D.; Lee, S. Multi-robot path planning method using reinforcement learning. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9,
3057. [CrossRef]
63. Li, Q.L.; Song, Y.; Hou, Z.G. Neural network based FastSLAM for autonomous robots in unknown environments. Neurocomputing
2015 ,165, 99–110. [CrossRef]
64. Cao, X.; Chen, L.; Guo, L.; Han, W. AUV global security path planning based on a potential ﬁeld bio-inspired neural network in
underwater environment. Intell. Autom. Soft Comput. 2021 ,27, 391–407. [CrossRef]
65. Mu, X.; He, B.; Zhang, X.; Song, Y.; Shen, Y.; Feng, C. End-to-end navigation for autonomous underwater vehicle with hybrid
recurrent neural networks. Ocean Eng. 2019 ,194, 106602. [CrossRef]
66. Sutton, R.S. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Mach. Learn. 1988 ,3, 9–44. [CrossRef]
67. Jiang, L.; Huang, H.; Ding, Z. Path planning for intelligent robots based on deep Q-learning with experience replay and heuristic
knowledge. IEEE CAA J. Autom. Sin. 2020 ,7, 1179–1189. [CrossRef]
68. Zou, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, S. A path planning algorithm based on RRT and SARSA ( ) in unknown and complex conditions. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Chinese Control and Decision Conference (CCDC), Hefei, China, 22–24 August 2020.
69. Mnih, V .; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A.A.; Veness, J.; Bellemare, M.G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.; Fidjeland, A.K.;
Ostrovski, G.; et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 2015 ,518, 529–533. [CrossRef]
70. Tai, L.; Paolo, G.; Liu, M. Virtual-to-real deep reinforcement learning: Continuous control of mobile robots for maples navigation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Vancouver, BC, Canada,
24–28 September 2017; Volume 2017, pp. 31–36.
71. Yuan, J.; Wang, H.; Zhang, H.; Lin, C.; Yu, D.; Li, C. AUV obstacle avoidance planning based on deep reinforcement learning. J.
Mar. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,9, 1166. [CrossRef]
72. Zhang, C.; Cheng, P .; Du, B.; Dong, B.; Zhang, W. AUV path tracking with real-time obstacle avoidance via reinforcement learning
under adaptive constraints. Ocean Eng. 2022 ,256, 111453. [CrossRef]
73. Yan, C.; Xiang, X.; Wang, C. Towards real-time path planning through deep reinforcement learning for a UAV in dynamic
environments. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2020 ,98, 297–309. [CrossRef]
74. Guo, T.; Jiang, N.; Li, B.; Zhu, X.; Wang, Y.; Du, W. UAV navigation in high dynamic environments: A deep reinforcement learning
approach. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 2021 ,34, 479–489. [CrossRef]
75. He, L.; Aouf, N.; Song, B. Explainable Deep Reinforcement Learning for UAV autonomous path planning. Aerosp. Sci. Technol.
2021 ,118, 107052. [CrossRef]
76. Xie, H.; Yang, D.; Xiao, L.; Lyu, J. Connectivity-aware 3D UAV path design with deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. 2021 ,70, 13022–13034. [CrossRef]
77. Wu, D.; He, J.; Han, K.; Hui, L. Cognitive navigation and its thought of brain-inspired realization in unmanned combat platform.
J. Air Force Eng. Univ. (Nat. Sci. Ed.). 2018 ,19, 33–38.
78. Wu, W.C. Biomimetic Sensor Modeling and Simulations for Flight Control of a Micromechanical Flying Insect ; University of California
Berkeley: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2006.
79. Tolman, E.C. Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychol. Rev. 1948 ,55, 189–208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Hwu, T.; Krichmar, J.; Zou, X. A complete neuromorphic solution to outdoor navigation and path planning. In Proceedings of the
2017 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Baltimore, MD, USA, 28–31 May 2017.
81. Mirowski, P .; Grimes, M.; Malinowski, M.; Hermann, K.M.; Anderson, K.; Teplyashin, D.; Simonyan, K.; Kavukcuoglu, K.;
Zisserman, A.; Hadsell, R. Learning to navigate in cities without a map. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2018 ,31, 1–9.
82. Kang, Y.; Yang, Z.; Zeng, R.; Wu, Q. Smooth-RRT*: Asymptotically Optimal Motion Planning for Mobile Robots under Kinody-
namic Constraints. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an, China,
30 May–5 June 2021; pp. 8402–8408.
83. Webb, D.J.; Van den Berg, J. Kinodynamic RRT*: Asymptotically optimal motion planning for robots with linear dynamics. In
Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Karlsruhe, Germany, 6–10 May 2013; pp.
5054–5061.

==== Page 35 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 35 of 37
84. Wang, J.; Chi, W.; Li, C.; Wang, C.; Meng, M.Q.-H. Neural RRT*: Learning-based optimal path planning. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci.
Eng. 2020 ,17, 1748–1758. [CrossRef]
85. Gammell, J.D.; Srinivasa, S.S.; Barfoot, T.D. Informed RRT*: Optimal sampling-based path planning focused via direct sampling
of an admissible ellipsoidal heuristic. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, Chicago, IL, USA, 14–18 September 2014; pp. 2997–3004.
86. Ghosh, D.; Nandakumar, G.; Narayanan, K.; Honkote, V .; Sharma, S. Kinematic constraints based bi-directional RRT (KB-RRT)
with parameterized trajectories for robot path planning in cluttered environment. In Proceedings of the 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Montreal, QC, Canada, 20–24 May 2019; pp. 8627–8633.
87. Jeong, I.B.; Lee, S.J.; Kim, J. Quick-RRT*: Triangular inequality-based implementation of RRT* with improved initial solution and
convergence rate. Expert Syst. Appl. 2019 ,123, 82–90. [CrossRef]
88. Bekris, K.E.; Chen, B.Y.; Ladd, A.M.; Plaku, E.; Kavraki, L.E. Multiple query probabilistic roadmap planning using single query
planning primitives. In Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS
2003) (Cat. No. 03CH37453), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–31 October 2003.
89. Taheri, E.; Ferdowsi, M.H.; Danesh, M. Closed-loop randomized kinodynamic path planning for an autonomous underwater
vehicle. Appl. Ocean Res. 2019 ,83, 48–64. [CrossRef]
90. Fu, X.; Zhang, L.; Chen, Z.; Wang, H.; Shen, J. Improved rrt* for fast path planning in underwater 3d environment. In Proceedings
of the 2019 International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Computer Science, Wuhan, China, 12–13 July 2019; pp. 504–509.
91. Meng, J.; Pawar, V .M.; Kay, S.; Li, A. UAV path planning system based on 3d informed rrt* for dynamic obstacle avoidance.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 12–15
December 2018; Volume 2018, pp. 1653–1658.
92. Wu, X.; Xu, L.; Zhen, R.; Wu, X. Biased sampling potentially guided intelligent bidirectional RRT* algorithm for UAV path
planning in 3D environment. Math. Probl. Eng. 2019 ,2019 , 5157403. [CrossRef]
93. Ye, L.; Chen, J.; Zhou, Y. Real-time path planning for robot using OP-PRM in complex dynamic environment. Front. Neurorobot.
2022 ,16, 910859. [CrossRef]
94. Faust, A.; Oslund, K.; Ramirez, O.; Francis, A.; Tapia, L.; Fiser, M.; Davidson, J. PRM-RL: Long-range Robotic Navigation Tasks by
Combining Reinforcement Learning and Sampling-Based Planning. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Brisbane, QLD, Australia, 21–25 May 2018; pp. 5113–5120.
95. David, J.; Valencia, R.; Philippsen, R.; Bosshard, P .; Iagnemma, K. Gradient based path optimization method for autonomous
driving. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Vancouver, BC,
Canada, 24–28 September 2017; pp. 4501–4508.
96. Schitz, D.; Bao, B.; Rieth, D.; Aschemann, H. Shared autonomy for teleoperated driving: A real-time interactive path planning
approach. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an, China, 30 May–5
June 2021; pp. 999–1004.
97. Xanthidis, M.; Karapetyan, N.; Damron, H.; Rahman, S.; Johnson, J.; O’Connell, A.; O’Kane, J.M.; Rekleitis, I. Navigation in the
presence of obstacles for an agile autonomous underwater vehicle. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Paris, France, 31 May–31 August 2020; pp. 892–899.
98. Wang, A.; Jasour, A.; Williams, B.C. Non-gaussian chance-constrained trajectory planning for autonomous vehicles under agent
uncertainty. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2020 ,5, 6041–6048. [CrossRef]
99. Castillo-Lopez, M.; Ludivig, P .; Sajadi-Alamdari, S.A.; Sanchez-Lopez, J.L.; Olivares-Mendez, M.A.; Voos, H. A real-time approach
for chance-constrained motion planning with dynamic obstacles. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2020 ,5, 3620–3625. [CrossRef]
100. Lin, P .; Tsukada, M. Model predictive path-planning controller with potential function for emergency collision avoidance on
highway driving. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2022 ,7, 4662–4669. [CrossRef]
101. Wang, X.; Yao, X.; Zhang, L. Path planning under constraints and path following control of autonomous underwater vehicle with
dynamical uncertainties and wave disturbances. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2020 ,99, 891–908. [CrossRef]
102. Tordesillas, J.; Lopez, B.T.; How, J.P . FASTER: Fast and safe trajectory planner for ﬂights in unknown environments. In Proceedings
of the 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Macau, China, 3–8 November 2019; pp.
1934–1940.
103. Li, Y.; Liu, C. Efﬁcient and safe motion planning for quadrotors based on unconstrained quadratic programming. Robotica 2021 ,
39, 317–333. [CrossRef]
104. Zhou, X.; Wang, Z.; Ye, H.; Xu, C.; Gao, F. EGO-Planner: An ESDF-Free gradient-based local planner for quadrotors. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. 2021 ,6, 478–485. [CrossRef]
105. Zhou, B.; Gao, F.; Wang, L.; Liu, C.; Shen, S. Robust and efﬁcient quadrotor trajectory generation for fast autonomous ﬂight. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett. 2019 ,4, 3529–3536. [CrossRef]
106. Zhang, J.; Liu, M.; Zhang, S.; Zheng, R. AUV path planning based on differential evolution with environment prediction. J. Intell.
Robot. Syst. 2022 ,104, 23. [CrossRef]
107. MahmoudZadeh, S.; Powers, D.M.W.; Yazdani, A.M.; Sammut, K.; Atyabi, A. Efﬁcient AUV path planning in time-variant
underwater environment using differential evolution algorithm. J. Mar. Sci. Appl. 2018 ,17, 585–591. [CrossRef]
108. Simon, D. Biogeography-Based Optimization. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 2008 ,12, 702–713. [CrossRef]

==== Page 36 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 36 of 37
109. Zadeh, S.M.; Powers, D.M.; Sammut, K. An autonomous reactive architecture for efﬁcient AUV mission time management in
realistic dynamic ocean environment. Robot. Auton. Syst. 2017 ,87, 81–103. [CrossRef]
110. Kimmel, R.; Amir, A.; Bruckstein, A.M. Finding shortest paths on surfaces using level set methods. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 1995 ,17, 635–640. [CrossRef]
111. Lolla, T.; Haley, P .J., Jr.; Lermusiaux, P .F.J. Path planning in multi-scale ocean ﬂows: Coordination and dynamic obstacles. Ocean
Model. 2015 ,94, 46–66. [CrossRef]
112. Lolla, T.; Ueckermann, M.; Yi˘ git, K.; Haley, P .J.; Lermusiaux, P .F. Path planning in time dependent ﬂow ﬁelds using level set
methods. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Saint Paul, MN, USA,
14–18 May 2012; pp. 166–173.
113. Liang, S.; Qiu, Z.; Yu, S.; Jiao, J. A Novel Distance Regularized Hybrid Level Set Method for AUV Multi-destination Route
Planning. Acta Armamentarii 2020 ,41, 750–762.
114. Subramani, D.N.; Lermusiaux, P .F.J. Energy-optimal path planning by stochastic dynamically orthogonal level-set optimization.
Ocean Model. 2016 ,100, 57–77. [CrossRef]
115. Petres, C.; Pailhas, Y.; Petillot, Y.; Lane, D. Underwater path planing using fast marching algorithms. In Proceedings of the Oceans
2005-Europe, Brest, France, 20–23 June 2005; Volume 2, pp. 814–819.
116. Yu, H.; Shen, A.; Su, Y. Continuous motion planning in complex and dynamic underwater environments. Int. J. Robot. Autom.
2015 ,30, 192–204. [CrossRef]
117. Petres, C.; Pailhas, Y.; Patron, P .; Petillot, Y.; Evans, J.; Lane, D. Path Planning for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles. Robot. IEEE
Trans. 2007 ,23, 331–341. [CrossRef]
118. Li, H.; He, B.; Yin, Q.; Mu, X.; Zhang, J.; Wan, J.; Wang, D.; Shen, Y. Fuzzy optimized MFAC based on ADRC in AUV heading
control. Electronics 2019 ,8, 608. [CrossRef]
119. Sun, B.; Zhu, D.; Yang, S.X. An optimized fuzzy control algorithm for three-dimensional AUV path planning. Int. J. Fuzzy Syst.
2018 ,20, 597–610. [CrossRef]
120. Li, X.; Wang, W.; Song, J.; Liu, D. Path planning for autonomous underwater vehicle in presence of moving obstacle based on
three inputs fuzzy logic. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE 4th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Intelligent Robot Systems (ACIRS),
Nagoya, Japan, 13–15 July 2019; pp. 265–268.
121. Lei, F.; Yijie, Q.; Dingxin, H.; Wei, L. Multi-robot formation obstacle avoidance based on improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method.
Control Eng. 2022 ,29, 9.
122. Ali, A.A.; Rashid, A.T.; Frasca, M.; Fortuna, L. An algorithm for multi-robot collision-free navigation based on shortest distance.
Robot. Auton. Syst. 2016 ,75, 119–128. [CrossRef]
123. Yuming, N.; Uniting, L.I.; Cong, Y.A.O.; Jisheng, S. A collaborative multi-robot space exploration method based on fast extended
random tree-greedy boundary search. Robotics 2022 ,44, 708–719.
124. Xiong, C.; Lu, D.; Zeng, Z.; Lian, L.; Yu, C. Path planning of multiple unmanned marine vehicles for adaptive ocean sampling
using elite group-based evolutionary algorithms. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2020 ,99, 875–889. [CrossRef]
125. MahmoudZadeh, S.; Abbasi, A.; Yazdani, A.; Wang, H.; Liu, Y. Uninterrupted path planning system for Multi-USV sampling
mission in a cluttered ocean environment. Ocean Eng. 2022 ,254, 111328. [CrossRef]
126. Hu, Y.; Yao, Y.; Ren, Q.; Zhou, X. 3D multi-UAV cooperative velocity-aware motion planning. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2020 ,
102, 762–774. [CrossRef]
127. He, W.; Qi, X.; Liu, L. A novel hybrid particle swarm optimization for multi-UAV cooperate path planning. Appl. Intell. 2021 ,51,
7350–7364. [CrossRef]
128. Zhang, B.; Sun, X.; Liu, S.; Deng, X. Adaptive differential evolution-based distributed model predictive control for multi-UAV
formation ﬂight. Int. J. Aeronaut. Space Sci. 2020 ,21, 538–548. [CrossRef]
129. Pan, Z.; Zhang, C.; Xia, Y.; Xiong, H.; Shao, X. An improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method for path planning and formation
control of the multi-UAV systems. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II 2021 ,69, 1129–1133. [CrossRef]
130. Huang, G.; Cai, Y.; Liu, J.; Qi, Y.; Liu, X. A novel hybrid discrete grey wolf optimizer algorithm for multi-UAV path planning. J.
Intell. Robot. Syst. 2021 ,103, 49. [CrossRef]
131. Hoang, V .T.; Phung, M.D.; Dinh, T.H.; Ha, Q.P . Angle-encoded swarm optimization for UAV formation path planning. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Madrid, Spain, 1–5 October
2018; Volume 2018, pp. 5239–5244.
132. Wang, D.; Fan, T.; Han, T.; Pan, J. A two-stage reinforcement learning approach for multi-UAV collision avoidance under imperfect
sensing. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2020 ,5, 3098–3105. [CrossRef]
133. Li, J.; Sun, T.; Huang, X.; Ma, L.; Lin, Q.; Chen, J.; Leung, V .C.M. A memetic path planning algorithm for unmanned air/ground
vehicle cooperative detection systems. IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. Eng. 2021 ,19, 2724–2737. [CrossRef]
134. Niu, G.; Wu, L.; Gao, Y.; Pun, M. Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-assisted path planning for unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs)
via disciplined convex-concave programming. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2022 ,71, 6996–7007. [CrossRef]
135. Chen, Y.; Chen, M.; Chen, Z.; Cheng, L.; Yang, Y.; Li, H. Delivery path planning of heterogeneous robot system under road
network constraints. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2021 ,92, 107197. [CrossRef]
136. Vasi´ c, M.K.; Drak, A.; Bugarin, N.; Kruži´ c, S.; Musi´ c, J.; Pomrehn, C.; Schöbel, M.; Johenneken, M.; Stanˇ ci´ c, I.; Papi´ c, V .; et al. Deep
semantic image segmentation for UAV-UGV cooperative path planning: A car park use case. In Proceedings of the International

==== Page 37 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 211 37 of 37
Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), Split, Croatia, 17–19 September 2020; Volume
2020, pp. 1–6.
137. Yue, Y.; Wen, M.; Putra, Y.; Wang, M.; Wang, D. Tightly-coupled perception and navigation of heterogeneous land-air robots in
complex scenarios. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Xi’an, China, 30
May–5 June 2021; Volume 2021, pp. 10052–10100.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

