==== Page 1 ====
applied  
sciences 
Review
Review of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Adversarial Attack
and Defense Technologies
Shilin Qiu†
, Qihe Liu *,†, Shijie Zhou†and Chunjiang Wu†
The School of Information and Software Enginerring, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 610054, China; qiushilin@std.uestc.edu.cn (S.Q.); sjzhou@uestc.edu.cn (S.Z.);
chunjiangwu@126.com (C.W.)
*Correspondence: qiheliu@uestc.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-1520-829-2978
† Current address: No. 4, Section 2, Jianshe North Road, Chenghua District, Chengdu 610054, China.
Received: 19 January 2019; Accepted: 22 February 2019; Published: 4 March 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: In recent years, artiﬁcial intelligence technologies have been widely used in computer vision,
natural language processing, automatic driving, and other ﬁelds. However, artiﬁcial intelligence
systems are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which limit the applications of artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) technologies in key security ﬁelds. Therefore, improving the robustness of AI systems against
adversarial attacks has played an increasingly important role in the further development of AI.
This paper aims to comprehensively summarize the latest research progress on adversarial attack
and defense technologies in deep learning. According to the target model’s different stages where the
adversarial attack occurred, this paper expounds the adversarial attack methods in the training stage
and testing stage respectively. Then, we sort out the applications of adversarial attack technologies
in computer vision, natural language processing, cyberspace security, and the physical world.
Finally, we describe the existing adversarial defense methods respectively in three main categories,
i.e., modifying data, modifying models and using auxiliary tools.
Keywords: artificial intelligence; deep learning; adversarial sample; adversarial attack; defense method
1. Introduction
The applications of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies in various ﬁelds have been rapidly
developed recently. Due to high performance, high availability and high intelligence, artiﬁcial
intelligence technologies have been applied in image classiﬁcation, object detection, voice control,
machine translation and more advanced ﬁelds, such as drug composition analysis [ 1], brain circuit
reconstruction [2], particle accelerator data analysis [3,4], and DNA mutation impact analysis [5].
Since Szegedy et al. [ 6] proposed that neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks,
the research on artiﬁcial intelligence adversarial technologies has gradually become a hotspot,
and researchers have constantly proposed new adversarial attack methods and defense methods.
According to the different stages of the target model, the adversarial attacks can be divided into
three categories: attacks in the training stage, attacks in the testing stage and attacks in the model
deployment stage. Since the attack methods in the model deployment stage are very similar to the
methods in the testing stage, for the sake of simplicity, this paper only discusses the attacks in the
training stage and attacks in the testing stage.
The training stage adversarial attacks refer to the fact that, in the training stage of the target model,
the adversaries carry out attacks by modifying the training dataset, manipulating input features or
data labels. Barreno et al. [ 7] changed the original distribution of the training dataset by modifying or
deleting training data, which belongs to modifying the training dataset. The method of manipulating
labels is shown in the work of Biggio et al. [ 8], and they reduced the performance of the Support Vector
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909; doi:10.3390/app9050909 www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

==== Page 2 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 2 of 29
Machine (SVM) classiﬁer by randomly ﬂipping 40% of training labels. In the works of Kloft et al. [ 9,10],
Biggio et al. [ 11,12] and Mei et al. [13] , the adversaries injected malicious data generated carefully
into the training dataset to change the decision boundary, which can be divided into manipulating
input features.
The testing stage adversarial attacks can be divided into white-box attacks and black-box attacks.
In white-box scenarios, the adversaries have access to the parameter, algorithms, and structure of
the target model. Adversaries can construct adversarial samples to carry out attacks by utilizing
this knowledge. Papernot et al. [ 14] introduced an adversarial crafting framework, which can be
divided into the direction sensitivity estimation step and perturbation selection step. On this basis,
the researchers have proposed a variety of different attack methods. Szegedy et al. [ 6] proposed a
method called Large-BFGS (here, BFGS is the initial of four people names: Broy-den, C. G., Fletcher, R.,
Goldforb, D., and Shanno, D. F.), to search for adversarial samples. Goodfellow et al. [ 15] proposed a
Fast Gradient Sign method (FGSM) which calculates the gradient of the cost function relative to the
inputs. Kurakin et al. [ 16] proposed three variants of FGSM, named One-step Target Class method,
Basic Iterative method, and Iterative Least-likely Class method, respectively. Papernot et al. [ 17]
proposed a method to ﬁnd a sensitivity direction by using the Jacobian matrix of the model. Su et al. [ 18]
showed an attack method, which only changes one pixel in the image. Moosavi-dezfooli et al. [ 19]
proposed to compute a minimal norm adversarial perturbation for a given image in an iterative
manner, to ﬁnd the decision boundary closest to the normal sample and ﬁnd the minimal adversarial
samples across the boundary. Cisse et al. [ 20] proposed a method called HOUDINI, which deceives
gradient-based machine learning algorithms.
Instead, in the black-box scenarios, the adversaries cannot obtain information about the target
model, but they can train a local substitute model by querying the target model, utilizing the
transferability of adversarial samples or using a model inversion method. Papernot et al. [ 21] ﬁrstly
used synthetic input to train a local substitute model, and then used the adversarial samples generated
for the substitute model to attack the target model, which utilizes cross-model transferability of
adversarial samples. Fredrikson et al. [ 22] carried out a model inversion attack, which uses machine
learning (ML) application programming interfaces (APIs) to infer sensitive features. Tramèr et al. [ 23]
demonstrated a successful model extraction attack against online ML service providers such as BigML
and Amazon Machine Learning.
Adversarial attack technologies have been gradually applied in academia and industry. In this
paper, we summarize applications in four ﬁelds. In the computer vision ﬁeld, there are adversarial
attacks in image classiﬁcation [ 15,17,24–26], semantic image segmentation, and object detection [ 27,28].
In natural language processing ﬁelds, there are adversarial attacks in machine translation [ 29] and
text generation [ 30]. In the cyberspace security ﬁeld, there are adversarial attacks in cloud service [ 21],
malware detection [ 31–33], and network intrusion detection [ 34]. The adversarial attacks in the physical
world were showed in road sign recognition [ 35], spooﬁng camera [ 16], machine vision [ 36], and face
recognition [37,38].
In order to improve the robustness of neural network against the adversarial attack, researchers
have proposed a mass of adversarial defense methods, which can be divided into three main categories:
modifying data, modifying models and using auxiliary tools.
The methods of modifying data refer to modifying the training dataset in the training stage or
changing the input data in the testing stage. There are ﬁve methods to modify data. Adversarial
training is a widely used method of modifying data; Szegedy et al. [ 6] injected adversarial samples
and modiﬁed their labels to improve the robustness of the target model. By using adversarial training,
Goodfellow et al. [15] reduced the misidentiﬁcation rate on the Mixed National Institute of Standards
and Technology (MNIST) [ 39] dataset from 89.4% to 17.9%, Huang et al. [ 40] increased the robustness of
target model by punishing misclassiﬁed adversarial samples. However, it is unrealistic to introduce all
unknown attack samples into the adversarial training. The second method is called gradient hiding [ 41];
it hides gradient information of the target model from the adversaries. However, by learning the

==== Page 3 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 3 of 29
proxy black-box model with gradient and using the adversarial samples generated by this model
[21], this method can easily be fooled. Since the transferability attribute holds even if the neural
networks have different architectures or trained on the disjoint dataset, the third method is blocking the
transferability to prevent the black-box attack. Hosseini et al. [ 42] proposed a Three-step Null Labeling
method to prevent the transferability of adversarial samples. The advantage of this method is marking
the perturbation input as an empty label rather than classifying it as the original label. The fourth
method is data compression, which improves the robustness by compressing data. Dziugaite et al. [ 43]
and Das et al. [ 44] used JPG compression and a JPEG compression method to prevent FGSM attacks,
respectively. The limitation of this method is that a large amount of compression will lead to an
accuracy decrease of original image classiﬁcation, while a small compression is often not enough
to remove the impact of disturbance. The last one of modifying data is data randomization [ 45].
Wang et al. [46] used a data conversion module separated from the network model to eliminate the
possible adversarial disturbance in the image, and conducted data expansion operations in the training
process, which could slightly improve the robustness of the target model.
Modifying model refers to modifying the target neural networks and can be divided into six types.
The ﬁrst method is regularization, which aims to improve the generalization ability of the target model
by adding regular terms. Biggio et al. [ 8] used a regularization method to limit the vulnerability of
data when training an SVM model. The works [ 47–49] used the regularization method to improve the
robustness of the algorithm and achieved good results. The second method is defensive distillation [ 14],
which produced a model with a smoother output surface and less sensitivity to disturbance, so as
to improve the robustness of the model, and can reduce the success rate of adversarial attack by
90%. Moreover, Papernot et al. [ 50] proposed extensible defense distillation technology to guarantee
the effectiveness in black-box attacks. The third method is feature squeezing [ 51], which aims to
reduce the complexity of the data representation and reduce the adversarial interference due to low
sensitivity. For image data, there are two kinds of methods, reducing the color depth at the pixel level
and using a smooth ﬁlter on the image. Although this method can effectively prevent adversarial
attacks, it reduces the accuracy of the classiﬁcation of real samples. The fourth method is using a
deep contractive network (DCN) [ 52], which uses noise reduction automatic encoder to reduce the
adversarial noise. The ﬁfth method is inserting a mask layer before processing the classiﬁed network
model [ 53]. The mask layer is used to encode the differences between original images and the output
features of the previous network model layers. The last method of modifying model is using Parseval
networks [ 20]. This network adopts hierarchical regularization by controlling the global Lipschitz
constant of the network.
Using an auxiliary tool refers to using additional tools as an auxiliary tool for the neural network
model. Samangouei et al. [ 54] proposed a mechanism, called Defense Generative Adversarial
Nets (defense-GAN), applicable to both white-box and black-box attacks to reduce the efﬁciency
of adversarial perturbance. This method utilizes the power of a generative adversarial network [ 55];
the main idea is to “project” input images onto the range of the generator Gby minimizing the
reconstruction errorG(z) x2
2, prior to feeding the image xto the classiﬁer. However, the training
of GAN is challenging, i.e., without proper training, the performance of defense-GAN will obviously
decline. Meng et al. [ 56] proposed a framework called MagNet, which reads the output of the last
layer of the classiﬁer as a black-box. MagNet uses a detector to identify legal and adversarial samples.
The detector measures the distance between a given sample under test and the manifold and rejects the
sample if the distance exceeds the threshold. Liao et al. [ 57] introduced the High-Level Representation
Guided Denoiser (HGD) to design a robust target model against white-box and black-box adversarial
attacks. The author proposed three different HGD training methods. The advantage of using HGD is
that it can be trained on a relatively small dataset and can be used to protect models other than the one
guiding it.
In this paper, we review recent studies on an artiﬁcial intelligence adversarial attack and defense
technologies. In Section 2, we introduce the causes and characteristics of the adversarial samples,

==== Page 4 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 4 of 29
as well as the adversarial capabilities and goals; in Section 3, we analyze the adversarial attack
methods in training stage and testing stage, respectively. In Section 4, we sort out the applications of
adversarial attack technologies in four ﬁelds, including computer vision, natural language processing,
cyberspace security, and physical world. In Section 5, we conclude the existing defense methods
against adversarial attacks. We conclude in Section 6.
2. Adversarial Samples and Adversarial Attack Strategies
In this section, we mainly introduce the adversarial samples and the adversarial attack strategies,
including the causes and characteristics of adversarial samples, as well as the capabilities and goals of
the adversarial attacks.
2.1. Adversarial Example (AE)
Szegedy et al. [ 6] ﬁrstly proposed the concept of adversarial samples, which are constructed by
adding tiny perturbations that could not be recognized by human eyes to the input samples of the
model, and caused the adversarial images to be misclassiﬁed by the target model with high conﬁdence.
Suppose there is a machine learning model Mand an original sample xthat can be classiﬁed correctly,
i.e.,M(x) =ytrue; by adding a slight perturbation to x, the adversary could construct an adversarial
sample x0which is similar to xbut can be misclassiﬁed by M, i.e., M(x0)6=ytrue. Figure 1 shows the
adversarial process [15].
Figure 1. The model considers the original image as a “panda” (57.7%). Indeed, the image added a
tiny perturbation is classiﬁed as a “gibbon” by the same model (99.3%), while the human eyes cannot
identify the difference (Image Credit: Goodfellow et al. [15]).
2.1.1. Causes of Adversarial Examples
Researchers have proposed some explanations for the existence of adversarial samples. Some [ 58]
believe that the reason is the over-ﬁtting or under-regularization of the model led to the insufﬁcient
generalization ability that learning models predict unknown data, while others [ 21] consider that the
adversarial samples are caused by the extreme nonlinearity of the deep neural network. However,
Goodfellow et al. [ 15] added perturbation to the input of a regularization model and a linear model
which has enough dimensions, and demonstrated that both models’ effectiveness of defending
adversarial attacks were not signiﬁcantly improved.
Goodfellow et al. [ 15] believe that the cause of adversarial samples is the linear behavior in high
dimensional space. In a high dimensional linear classiﬁer, each input feature is normalized, so that
slight perturbation for one dimension of each input will not change the overall prediction of the
classiﬁer, while small perturbations to all dimensions of the inputs will lead to effective change. As is
shown in Figure 2, the score of class “1” is increased from 5% to 88% by adding or subtracting 0.5 from

==== Page 5 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 5 of 29
each dimension in a speciﬁc direction of the original sample x, which proves that the linear models are
vulnerable to the adversarial samples.
Figure 2. The probability of class “1” before and after perturbation. Before perturbating, the score of
class “1” is 5%; however, the score is increased to 88% by adding or subtracting 0.5 from each dimension
in a speciﬁc direction of the original sample (Image Credit: Zhang et al. [59]).
2.1.2. Characteristics of Adversarial Examples
Adversarial samples have three basic characteristics [ 59], i.e., transferability, regularization effect,
and adversarial instability.
 Transferability. When constructing adversarial samples for an attack against one target model
M1, it is unnecessary to obtain the architecture or parameters of model M1if the adversary has
knowledge of M2, as long as model M2is trained to perform the task that model M1performs as
well.
 Advsarial instability. After physical transformation, such as translation and rotation, it is easy to
lose its own adversarial for adversarial samples. In this case, adversarial samples will be correctly
classiﬁed by target models.
 Regularization effect. Adversarial training [ 15] is a regularization method that can reveal the
defects of models and improve the robustness of samples. Compared to other regularization
methods, the cost of constructing adversarial samples is expensive.
2.2. Adversarial Capabilities and Goals
The security of machine learning models is measured by the capabilities and goals of adversaries.
This section describes the adversarial capabilities and goals, respectively.
2.2.1. Adversarial Capabilities
The term Adversarial Capabilities refers to the amount of information about the target model
that can be obtained and used by the adversary. Obviously, the adversaries who have access to more
information are strictly “stronger” than others. The classiﬁcation of adversarial capabilities is shown in
Figure 3. We discuss the range of adversarial capabilities as they relate to training and testing stages.

==== Page 6 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 6 of 29
Figure 3. The classiﬁcation of adversarial capabilities.
Training Stage Capabilities
Attacks in the training stage attempt to inﬂuence or corrupt a target model directly by changing
the dataset used for training. In this case, the most straightforward and weakest attack is to access
part or all of the training data. The attack strategies in the training stage based on the adversarial
capabilities can be divided into three categories:
 Data Injection. The adversary does not have any access to the training data and learning
algorithms but has the ability to add new data to the training dataset. The adversary can corrupt
the target model by inserting adversarial samples into the training dataset.
 Data Modiﬁcation. The adversary does not have access to the learning algorithms but has access
to full training data. The adversary can poison the training data by modifying the data before it is
used for training the target model.
 Logic Corruption. The adversary has access to meddle with the learning algorithms of the
target model.
Testing Stage Capabilities
The adversarial attacks during the testing stage do not tamper with the target model but force it to
produce incorrect outputs. In addition, the effectiveness of such attacks mainly depends on the amount
of information about the model available to the adversaries. In testing time, the attacks can be divided
into white-box attacks and black-box attacks. Before discussing these attacks, we suppose that there is
a target model fthat is trained on input pair (X,y)from the data distribution mwith a randomized
training procedure train having randomness r(e.g., random weight initialization, dropout, etc.).
The model parameters qare learned after training, i.e.,
q train (f,X,y,r) (1)
Now, we describe the white-box attacks and black-box attacks in the testing stage in
detail, respectively.
White-box Attacks In white-box attacks, the adversaries have total knowledge about the target
model f, including algorithm train , data distribution m, and model parameters q. The adversaries
identify the most vulnerable feature space of target model fby utilizing available information, and then

==== Page 7 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 7 of 29
alter an input by using adversarial samples generating methods. The accessing of the model’s internal
weight for white-box attacks corresponds to a strong adversarial capability.
Black-box Attacks The adversaries have no knowledge about target model fin black-box
attacks. They instead analyze the model’s vulnerability by using information about the past
input/output pairs, e.g., the adversaries attack a model by inputting a series of adversarial samples and
observing corresponding outputs. Black-box Attacks can be divided into non-adaptive, adaptive and
strict black-box attacks.
 Non-Adaptive Black-Box Attack. The adversaries can only access to the training data distribution
mof target model f. Therefore, adversaries choose a training procedure train0for model f0,
and train a local model on samples from the data distribution mto approximate the target model.
Then, adversaries generate adversarial samples by using white-box attack strategies on model f0
and apply these samples to model fto lead misclassiﬁcation.
 Adaptive Black-Box Attack. The adversaries cannot access to any information about the target
model but can access the model fas an oracle. In this case, adversaries query the target model
to obtain output label yby inputting data X, and then adversaries choose a training procedure
train0and a model f0to train a local model on tuples (X,y)obtained from querying the target
model. Finally, adversaries apply adversarial samples generated by the white-box attack on local
model f0to the target model.
 Strict Black-Box Attack. The adversaries cannot access to the data distribution qbut can collect
input–output pairs (X,y)from the target model. It differs from the adaptive black-box attack in
that it cannot change the inputs to observe the changes in outputs.
Compared with the white-box attacks, the black-box attacks do not need to learn the randomness
ror parameters qof the target model. The target for adversaries is using data distribution mto train
a local model f0in non-adaptive attacks and querying the target model by using carefully selected
dataset in adaptive attacks.
2.2.2. Adversarial Goals
The adversarial goals can be inferred from the uncertainties of models. According to the impact
on models’ output integrity, adversarial goals can be divided into four categories, i.e., conﬁdence
reduction, misclassiﬁcation, targeted misclassiﬁcation, and source/target misclassiﬁcation.
 Conﬁdence Reduction. The adversaries attempt to reduce the conﬁdence of prediction for the
target model, e.g., the adversarial samples of a “stop” sign is predicted with lower conﬁdence.
 Misclassiﬁcation. The adversaries attempt to change the output classiﬁcation of input to any
class different from the original class, e.g., an adversarial sample of a “stop” sign is predicted to
be any class different from the “stop” sign.
 Targeted Misclassiﬁcation. The adversaries attempt to change the output classiﬁcation of the
input to a special target class, e.g., any adversarial samples inputted into a classiﬁer is predicted
to be a “go” sign.
 Source/Target Misclassiﬁcation. The adversaries attempt to change the output classiﬁcation of a
special input to a special target class, e.g., a “stop” sign is predicted to be a “go” sign.
3. Adversarial Attacks
Unlike other attack techniques, adversarial attack techniques mainly occur in the adversarial
samples generation process. Since adversarial attacks can occur in the training and testing stages,
this section describes adversarial attack techniques in detail in the training and testing stages,
respectively.

==== Page 8 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 8 of 29
3.1. Training Stage Adversarial Attacks
As shown in Section 2.2.1, the adversarial capabilities in the training stage can be divided as data
injection, data modiﬁcation, and logical corruption. Corresponding to different capabilities, training
stage adversarial attacks can generally be carried out in three ways:
 Modify Training Dataset. Barreno et al. [ 7] ﬁrstly proposed the term poisoning attacks, a common
adversarial attack method. They changed the original distribution of training data by modifying
or deleting training data or injecting adversarial samples, in order to make the learning algorithm
logically changed. Kearns et al. [ 60] showed that, when the model’s prediction error is smaller
than #, the probability bof maximum tolerance to modify the training dataset should satisfy:
b#
#+1(2)
 Label Manipulation. If an adversary only has the capabilities to modify the training labels with
some or all knowledge of the target model, he needs to ﬁnd the most vulnerable labels. Perturbing
labels randomly, one of the most basic methods to modify labels, refers to select a label from the
random distribution as the label of training data. Biggio et al. [ 8] showed that randomly ﬂipping
40% of training labels is enough to reduce the performance of classiﬁers using SVMs.
 Input Feature Manipulation. In this case, the adversaries are powerful enough to manipulate
labels as well as the input features of training points analyzed by the learning algorithm.
This scenario also assumes that the adversaries have knowledge of the learning algorithm.
Biggio et al. [11] and Mei et al. [13] showed the adversaries injected malicious data generated
carefully to change the distribution of training dataset. Therefore, the decision boundary of the
trained model changes accordingly, which reduces the accuracy of the model in the test stage,
even, leads the model to output the speciﬁed misclassiﬁcation labels. Kloft et al. [ 9] showed that
inserting malicious points into a training dataset can gradually change the decision boundary of
an anomaly detection classiﬁer. Similar works have been done in articles [10,12].
3.2. Testing Stage Adversarial Attacks
In the testing stage, the adversaries cannot modify the training dataset but can access the target
model to obtain effective information, so as to attack the model and lead the model to misclassify in
prediction. According to the amount of target model knowledge an adversary obtains, the adversarial
attacks in the test stage can be divided into white-box attacks and black-box attacks.
3.2.1. White-Box Attacks
In white-box attacks, the adversaries know the structure and parameters of the target model,
although it is difﬁcult to achieve in practice, once the adversaries access to the target model, it will
pose a great threat to a machine learning model, as an adversary can construct adversarial samples
by analyzing the structure of the target model to carry out attacks. Papernot et al. [ 14] introduced
an adversarial crafting framework, which can be divided into two steps, i.e., direction sensitivity
estimation and perturbation selection—as is shown in Figure 4.

==== Page 9 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 9 of 29
Figure 4. Adversarial crafting framework. This is an adversarial sample generative process for image
classiﬁcation using the Deep Neural Network (DNN), which can be generalized for any supervised
learning algorithm (Image Credit: Papernot et al. [14]).
Suppose Xis an input sample, fis a trained DNN classiﬁcation model, the objective of the
adversary is to generate an adversarial sample X0=dX+Xby adding a perturbation dXwith X,
so that f(X0) =Y0where Y06=f(X)is the target output that depends on the adversary’s objective.
This framework includes two steps:
 Direction Sensitivity Estimation. The adversary evaluates the sensitivity of the change to each
input feature by identifying directions in the data manifold around sample Xin which the model
fis most sensitive and likely to result in a class change.
 Perturbation Selection. The adversary then exploits the knowledge of sensitive information to
select a perturbation dXin order to obtain an adversarial perturbation which is most efﬁcient.
Note that both two steps replace XbydX+Xat the beginning of each new iteration until the
disturbed sample is satisﬁed with the adversarial goal.
The total perturbation used to generate an adversarial sample from an original sample needs
to be as small as possible, which is the key to ensure that the adversarial sample is not recognized
by human eyes. Suppose the norm kkis used to describe the differences between points in the
DNN input ﬁeld, the adversarial samples in model fcan be formalized as a solution to the following
optimization problem:
X=X+arg min
dXfkdXk:f(X+dX)6=f(X)g (3)
It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd closed solutions since most DNN models make Formula (3) nonlinear and
non-convex. Now, we discuss the methods used in the two steps above in detail.
Direction Sensitivity Estimation
Direction sensitivity estimation aims to ﬁnd the dimensions of Xthat produce expected adversarial
performance with minimal disturbance, which can be generally achieved by changing the input
components of Xand evaluating the sensitivity of the trained DNN model fto these changes. Some
current techniques of direction sensitivity estimation are described below.
 L-BFGS. Szegedy et al. [ 6] ﬁrstly introduced the term adversarial sample and formalized the
minimization problem, as shown in Formula (3) to search for an adversarial sample. Since this
problem is complex, they turned to solve a simpliﬁed problem, that is, to ﬁnd the minimum loss
function additions, so that the neural network could make a false classiﬁcation, which transformed
the problem into a convex optimization process. Although this method has good performance, it
is expensive to calculate the adversarial samples.

==== Page 10 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 10 of 29
 Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM). Goodfellow et al. [ 15] proposed a Fast Gradient Sign
method, which calculates the gradient of the cost function relative to the neural network input.
Adversarial samples are produced by the following formula:
X0=X+esign (rxJ(X,ytrue)) (4)
Here, Jis the cost function of model f,rxindicates the gradient of the model with respect to
a normal sample Xwith correct label ytrue,edenotes the hyper-parameter which controls the
amplitude of the disturbance. Although this is an approximate solution based on linear hypothesis,
it also enables the target model to achieve 89.4% misclassiﬁcation on the MNIST dataset.
 One-Step Target Class Method [16]. This method, a variant of FGSM, maximizes the probability
P(ytargetjX)of some speciﬁc target class ytarget , which is unlikely to be a true class for a given
sample. For a model with cross-entropy loss, the adversarial samples could be made following
Formula (5) in the one-step target class method:
X0=X esign rxJ 
X,ytarget
(5)
 Basic Iterative Method (BIM) [16]. This is a straightforward extension of FGSM to apply FGSM
multiple times with small step size:
X0
0=X,X0
n+1=Clip X,en
X0
n+asign
rXJ
X0
n,ytrueo
(6)
Here, the adenotes step length, and Clip X,efAgis the element-wise clipping of X. This method
generally does not rely on the approximation of the model and produces additional harmful
adversarial samples when this algorithm runs for more iterations. The articles [ 26,61] have
conducted research on this basis and produced good results.
 Iterative Least-Likely Class Method (ILCM) [16]. By using the class with the smallest recognition
probability (target class) to replace the class variable in the disturbance, and get adversarial
examples which are misclassiﬁed in more than 99% of the cases:
X0
0=X,X0
n+1=Clip X,en
X0
n asign
rXJ
X0
n,ytrueo
(7)
 Jacobian Based Saliency Map (JSMA). Papernot et al. [ 17] proposed a method to ﬁnd the
sensitivity direction by using the Jacobian matrix of the model. This method directly provides the
gradient of the output component relative to each input component, and the obtained knowledge
is used in the complex saliency map method to produce the adversarial samples. This method
limits the l0norm of the perturbations, which means only a few pixels of the image need to be
modiﬁed. This method is especially useful for source/target misclassiﬁcation attacks.
 One Pixel Attack. Su et al. [ 18] proposed an extreme attack method, which can be achieved by
changing an only one-pixel value in the image. They used the differential evolution algorithm to
iteratively modify each pixel to generate a sub-image and compared it with the parent image to
retain the sub-image with the best attack effect according to the selection criteria to realize the
adversarial attacks.
 DeepFool. Moosavi-dezfooli et al. [ 19] proposed to compute a minimal norm adversarial
perturbation for a given image in an iterative manner, in order to ﬁnd the decision boundary
closest to the normal sample Xand ﬁnd the minimal adversarial samples across the boundary.
They solved the problem of choosing the parameter eunder FGSM [ 15] and carried out the
attack against the general nonlinear decision functions by using multiple linear approximations.
They demonstrated that the perturbations they generate are smaller than FGSM and have a similar
deception rate.
 HOUDINI. Cisse et al. [ 20] proposed a method called HOUDINI, which deceives gradient-based
machine learning algorithms. It realized the adversarial attack by generating adversarial sample

==== Page 11 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 11 of 29
speciﬁc to the task loss function, i.e., using the gradient information of the differentiable loss
function of the network to generate disturbance. They demonstrated that HOUDINI can be used
to deceive not only an image classiﬁcation network but also a speech recognition network.
Perturbation Selection
An adversary can use the target model’s sensitivity for input information to evaluate the
dimension of target misclassiﬁcation that is most likely to cause minimal disturbance. The methods of
disturbing input dimension can be of two categories:
 Perturb all the input dimensions. Goodfellow et al. [ 15] proposed a method to interfere with
each input dimension, but the amount of interference to calculate the gradient sign direction by
the FGSM method is small. This method effectively reduces the Euclidean distance between the
original samples and the corresponding adversarial samples.
 Perturb the selected input dimension. Papernot et al. [ 17] chose a more complex process
involving the saliency map and only selected a limited number of input dimensions to perturb.
This method effectively reduces the amount of perturbation with the input features when
generating adversarial samples.
The ﬁrst method is suitable for rapidly generating a large number of adversarial samples, but
it is more easily detected because of its relatively large disturbance. The second method reduces the
perturbation at the price of higher calculation cost.
3.2.2. Black-Box Attacks
As shown in Section 2.2.1, black-box attacks can be divided into non-adaptive, adaptive and strict
black-box attacks.
In the non-adaptive and strict black-box scenario, the adversaries cannot access the internal
structure and parameters of the target model but can train a local substitute model which approximates
the decision boundary of the target model by accessing the target model through the API interfaces.
In particular, the machine learning models in the cloud environment are more accessible by API
interfaces. Once the substitute model is trained with high conﬁdence, any white box attack strategies
can be applied to the substitute model to generate adversarial samples and then deceives the target
model by using the transferability of adversarial samples.
In the adaptive black-box scenario, adversaries cannot access the model but can observe the
output corresponding to speciﬁc input and establish a substitute model similar to the target model by
querying the target model as an oracle. The effectiveness of Oracle attack is closely related to the input
and query times of asking the target model.
There are mainly three categories of black-attack methods:
 Utilizing Transferability. Papernot et al. [ 21] used cross-model transferability of adversarial
samples to carry out black-box attack, which used synthetic input generated by the adversary
to train a local substitute model and used this substitute model to make adversarial samples,
which could be misclassiﬁed by the original target model. The articles [ 14,62] demonstrated
that adversarial attacks can lead the misclassiﬁcation reach 84.24% on MetaMind, an online
DNN training model, and then the author used this method on the Amazon cloud service which
achieves logical regression, and the misclassiﬁcation can reach 96%. The greedy heuristic followed
by the adversaries is to prioritize the samples when querying oracle labels to obtain a substitute
DNN model that approximates decision boundaries of the target model.
 Model Inversion. Fredrikson et al. [ 22] tried to eliminate the limitations of their previous
work [ 63] and proved that, for a black-box model, adversaries also can predict the genetic markers
of patients. These model inversion attacks use machine learning (ML) APIs to infer sensitive
features that are used as decision tree models for lifestyle surveys and as input to recover images

==== Page 12 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 12 of 29
from API access to facial recognition services. The attack successfully tested facial recognition
using multiple neural network models, including softmax regression, multilayer perceptron
(MLP), and stacked denoising autoencoder network (DAE). When accessing to the model and
the name, the adversaries can recover the face images. The reconstruction results of these three
algorithms are shown in Figure 5. Because of the richness of the deep learning model structure,
the model inversion attacks can only recover a small number of prototype samples that are similar
to the actual data of the deﬁned classes.
 Model Extraction. Tramèr et al. [ 23] proposed a simple attack method, a strict black-box attack,
to extract the target model for popular models, such as logistic regression, neural network,
and decision tree. Adversaries can build a local model which has a similar function with the target
model. The author demonstrated the model extraction attack against online ML service providers
such as BigML and Amazon Machine Learning. The ML APIs provided by the ML-as-Service
providers return exact conﬁdence values and class labels. Since the adversaries do not have
any information about the model or the distribution of training data, he can attempt to solve
mathematically for unknown parameters or features given the conﬁdence value and equations by
querying d+1 random d-dimensional inputs for unknown d+1 parameters.
Figure 5. The reconstruction results of model inversion attacks (Image Credit: Fredrikson et al. [22]).
4. Adversarial Attack Applications
Since adversarial attack technologies have been applied to academia and industry, this section
describes the applications of adversarial attack in several ﬁelds, including computer vision, natural
language processing, cyberspace security, and the physical world.
4.1. Computer Vision
In this section, we discuss the applications of adversarial attack in computer vision ﬁeld. We will
describe the applications of adversarial attack in image classiﬁcation, semantic image segmentation,
and object detection, respectively.
4.1.1. Image Classiﬁcation
In image classiﬁcation, researchers have proposed a large number of adversarial attack methods.
We list the relevant articles and their main ideas of their methods in Table 1.

==== Page 13 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 13 of 29
Table 1. Applications of adversarial attack in image classiﬁcation ﬁeld.
Articles Methods Main Ideas
Szegedy et al. [6] L-BFGS using L-BFGS algorithm to optimize the objective equation
arg min
rf(x+r)=l s.t.(x+r)2D.
Goodfellow et al. [15] FGSM FGSM is used to calculate the gradient of the cost function relative
to the input of the neural network, calculate Formula (4) to get
adversarial samples and lead the target model to achieve 89.4%
misclassiﬁcation on the MNIST dataset.
Kurakin et al. [16] One-Step Target Class Calculating the Formula (5) to get adversarial samples.
Kurakin et al. [16] BIM The adversarial samples generated by FGSM are used in each
iteration to generate ﬁnal adversarial samples by small step length
iteration.
Kurakin et al. [16] ILCM Replacing the target label in the BIM method with the most
unlikely labels predicted by the classiﬁer.
Papernot et al. [17] JSMA Directly providing the gradient of the output component to each
input component, and the resulted knowledge is used in complex
saliency map methods to generate adversarial samples.
Su et al. [18] One Pixel Only modifying one pixel per image to generate adversarial
samples.
Carlini et al. [24] Carlini & Wagner Limiting the l0norm, l2norm and l¥norm of the perturbations.
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [19] DeepFool Calculating the minimum norm adversarial perturbation iterative
method.
Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. [64] Universal perturbation Generating image independent general adversarial perturbation
for many different models.
Sarkar et al. [65] UPSET Universal Perturbations for Steering to Exact Targets (UPSET)
introduced residual generation network, whose input is target
class tand output is image unknown disturbance R(t).
Sarkar et al. [65] ANGRI Antagonistic Network for Generating Rogue Images (ANGRI)
calculated image detail perturbation in a closely related way.
Cisse et al. [20] HOUDINI Deceiving the gradient-based learning machine by generating
adversarial samples that can be customized for task loss.
Baluja et al. [66] ANTs The Adversarial Transformation Networks (ATNs) used a
feed-forward neural network to generate adversarial samples.
Chen et al. [25] ZOO Using the zero-order (ZOO) random coordinate descent method
combined with dimensionality reduction, hierarchical attack, and
importance sampling technique to carry out black-box attacks
effectively.
Ilyas et al. [67] variant of NES The variant of Natural Evolution Strategies (NES) Proposing the
adversarial sample generation method under query limit setting,
partial information setting and label only setting respectively.
Li et al. [68] Active learning Using the white-box attack method to generate samples
for queries, and introducing an active learning strategy to
signiﬁcantly reduce the number of queries required.
Adate et al. [69] GAN-based Using GAN to generate adversarial noise and classify the
individual image.
Dong et al. [26] Momentum Proposing an iterative algorithm based on momentum to enhance
the success rate of adversarial attack.
4.1.2. Semantic Image Segmentation and Object Detection
Xie et al. [ 45] extended the adversarial attacks to more difﬁcult semantic image segmentation and
object detection. The author thinks that segmentation and detection are based on the classiﬁcation
of multiple objects on the image. Based on this idea, they proposed a new algorithm called Dense
Adversary Generation (DAG), which produces large categories of adversarial samples suitable for
segmentation and detection in the most advanced deep network. The authors also pointed out that
adversarial disturbances can be transmitted through networks based on different architectures with
different training data, even for different identiﬁcation tasks. Figure 6 shows a typical example of a
network spooﬁng that uses the methods in [45] for image segmentation and detection.

==== Page 14 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 14 of 29
Figure 6. Adversarial example of image semantic segmentation and object detection. Left column
(top-down): Clean image, normal segmentation (the purple region is predicted as a dog) and detection
results. Right column (top-down): Perturbation 10x, fooled segmentation (the light green region is
predicted as train and the pink region as a person) and detection results (Image Credit: Xie et al. [ 45]).
Xiao et al. [ 27] proposed a method to characterize adversarial samples based on spatial background
information in semantic segmentation. They pointed out that semantic segmentation requires
additional components, such as extended convolution and multiscale processing. They observed
that, even though powerful adaptive adversaries can access models and detection strategies, we can
use spatial consistency information to effectively detect adversarial samples. The authors demonstrated
that the adversarial samples based on the attacks considered in this article [ 27] hardly move from
model to model.
Wei et al. [ 28] proposed a method to generate adversarial images and videos based on generative
adversarial network (GAN) framework [ 55] combined the high-level class loss and low-level feature
loss to jointly train the adversarial sample generator. In order to enhance the transferability of the
adversarial samples, they broke the feature graph extracted from the feature network. The overall
framework of their framework is shown in Figure 7. Experiments conducted on PASCAL VOC
and ImageNet VID datasets showed that the author’s method could effectively generate images
and video adversarial samples with good transferability, which could simultaneously attack two
representative object detection models: proposed based models, such as the Faster Region-based
Convolutional Neural Network method (Faster-RCNN), and regressive based models, such as the
Single Shot multiBox Detector (SSD).

==== Page 15 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 15 of 29
Figure 7. The overall framework of the Uniﬁed and Efﬁcient Adversary (UEA). They formulate the
high-level class loss [ 45] with the proposed low-level multi-scale feature loss into GAN framework
to jointly train a better generator. For the coming images or video frames, the generator is to output
the corresponding adversarial images or frames to simultaneously fool the different kinds of object
detectors (Image Credit: Wei et al. [28]).
4.2. Natural Language Processing
We discuss the applications of adversarial attacks in testing classiﬁcation and machine translation
of natural language processing ﬁeld.
4.2.1. Text Classiﬁcation
Liang et al. [ 30] proposed an algorithm to generate adversarial text samples using character-level
CNN [ 70]. They demonstrated the problem of directly using algorithms like FGSM to produce
adversarial text samples, i.e., the output result is scrambled text which is easily recognized as a noise
sample by human eyes. The Shared TextFool code base [ 71] can be used to produce adversarial text
samples, with the main idea of modifying existing words in the text samples through their synonyms
and spelling errors.
Hossein et al. [ 72] showed that the strategic insertion of punctuation marks with selected words
can deceive classiﬁers and that toxic annotations can be bypassed when the model is used as a ﬁle
manager.
Samanta et al. [ 73] proposed a new method for generating adversarial text samples by modifying
the original samples. This method modiﬁes the original text sample by deleting or replacing important
or prominent words in the text and introducing new words into the text samples. Experimental results
conducted by the authors on IMDB movie review datasets for emotion analysis and Twitter datasets
for gender detection show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
4.2.2. Machine Translation
Belinkov et al. [ 29] showed that character-level neural machine translation (NMT) was too
sensitive to random character manipulation, and they used a black-box heuristic to generate
character-level adversarial examples. The author showed that the most advanced models are
vulnerable to advertisement adversarial attacks even after the deployment of spell checkers. However,
Zhao et al. [ 74] searched and generated black-box adversarial samples in the coding sentence space by
perturbation of potential representation.
Ebrahimi et al. [ 75] proposed to use gradient estimation method to sort the adversarial operations
and use a greedy search or beam search method to search the adversarial samples. The authors also
proposed two speciﬁc types of attacks to remove or change a word in a translation.

==== Page 16 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 16 of 29
4.3. Cyberspace Security
4.3.1. Cloud Service
Papernot et al. [ 21] launched one of the attacks on deep neural network classiﬁers in cyberspace.
They trained a substitute network to replace the target black-box classiﬁer on the synthetic data and
carried out attacks on Meta Mind, Amazon and Google remote hosted neural networks. The results
show that the classiﬁcation error rates of the target networks are 84.24%, 96.19%, and 88.94%,
respectively, for the adversarial samples generated by their methods, which are black-box attacks.
Liu et al. [ 76] showed that, while transferable non-targeted adversarial examples are easy to
ﬁnd, targeted adversarial examples generated using existing approaches almost never transfer with
their target labels. They proposed an ensemble-based approach to generating transferable adversarial
examples which can successfully attack Clarifai.com, which is a black-box image classiﬁcation system;
the results are shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8. Original images and adversarial images evaluated over Clarifai.com. For labels returned
from Clarifai.com, the authors sort the labels ﬁrstly by rareness: how many times a label appears in
the Clarifai.com results for all adversarial images and original images, and secondly by conﬁdence.
Only the top ﬁve labels are provided (Image Credit: Liu et al. [76]).
4.3.2. Malware Detection
Compared to image recognition, the malware classiﬁcation ﬁeld introduces additional constraints,
i.e., hostile settings, such as replacing continuous input domain with discrete input domain, similar

==== Page 17 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 17 of 29
visual conditions. Hu et al. [ 77] proposed a model called MalGAN to generate malware adversarial
samples. As is shown in Figure 9, this model contains three DNN models, i.e., generator, discriminator
and substitute model. By utilizing the transitivity of the adversarial samples, MalGAN constructs a
substitute model that can simulate the target model and generates the adversarial malware samples
composed of API call sequences to bypass the malware detection systems.
Figure 9. The architecture of MalGAN (Image Credit: Hu et al. [77]).
In the articles [ 31,32], they replaced DNN in MalGAN with RNN. Grosse et al. [ 33] showed
how to build an effective adversarial attack method on the neural network used as the classiﬁcation
of Android malware. In articles [ 78,79], successful cases of adversarial attacks against the malware
classiﬁcation based on deep learning are proposed.
4.3.3. Intrusion Detection
Huang et al. [ 34] carried out the experiments of adversarial attacks on the software deﬁned
networking (SDN) based deep learning detection system. They proposed a new kind of adversarial
attack, which takes advantage of the vulnerability of deep learning classiﬁer in an SDN environment.
Three typical deep learning models combined with four different adversarial tests have been conducted
in the simulation for complete analysis in their work.
4.4. Attack in Physical World
4.4.1. Spooﬁng Camera
Kurakin et al. [ 16] ﬁrst demonstrated that the threat of adversarial attack also exists in the physical
world. To prove it, they printed out adversarial images and took snapshots with the phone’s camera.
These images were input into the TensorFlow Camera Demo app using the Inception model of Google
for object classiﬁcation. The results showed that these images were largely misclassiﬁed even seen
by the camera. As is shown in Figure 10, they took a clean image from the dataset (a) and used it to
generate adversarial images with various sizes of adversarial perturbation. Then, they printed clean
and adversarial images and used the TensorFlow Camera Demo app to classify them. A clean image (b)
is recognized correctly as a “washer” when perceived through the camera, while adversarial images (c)
and (d) are misclassiﬁed.

==== Page 18 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 18 of 29
Figure 10. Demonstration of a black-box attack on a phone app for image classiﬁcation using physical
adversarial examples (Image Credit: Akhtar et al. [80]).
4.4.2. Road Sign Recognition
Eykholt et al. [ 35] proposed a white-box adversarial sample generation method to attack their
own trained road sign recognition models, including LISA-CNN models used LISA [ 81], a U.S. trafﬁc
sign dataset containing 47 different road signs, and GTSRB-CNN models, which trained on the German
Trafﬁc Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB) [ 82]. They proposed two effective kinds of disturbance
installation methods for road sign recognition scenarios, i.e., posters and stickers, as shown in Figure 11.
They followed Sharif et al. [ 37] in constructing the loss function and took into account the printability
and location limitations. Their assessment showed that they had achieved a 100% success rate in the
poster installation driving test.
Figure 11. The effect of generating and evaluating physical adversarial perturbations in the real world
(Image Credit: Eykholt et al. [35]).
However, in the work of Lu et al. [ 16], detectors such as YOLO 9000 [ 36] and FasterRCNN [ 6] are
not fooled currently by the attacks introduced by Eykholt et al. [35].
Gu et al. [ 83] demonstrated an attack framework called BadNets in a real-world scenario,
where they created a street sign classiﬁer that recognizes a stop sign as a speed limit when a special

==== Page 19 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 19 of 29
sticker was added to the stop sign. Their most challenging attack was in a transfer learning setting;
the attack setup is shown in Figure 12. In this setting, a BadNet trained on U.S. trafﬁc signs was
downloaded by a user who unwittingly uses the BadNet to train a new model to detect Swedish trafﬁc
signs using transfer learning. In addition, the study found that, even after the network was ﬁne-tuned
with additional training data, this method still performs well.
Figure 12. Illustration of the transfer learning attack setup (Image Credit: Gu et al. [83]).
4.4.3. Machine Vision
Melis et al. [ 36] used the technology in [ 6] to prove the vulnerability of the robots to the input
image under the adversarial operation. Xu et al. [ 84] launched an adversarial attack for Visual Turing
test, known as Visual Question Answer (VQA). The result shows that the combined and non-combined
VQA architectures using deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
4.4.4. Face Recognition
Sharif et al. [ 37] focused on facial biometric systems, which are widely used in surveillance and
access control. They develop a systematic method to automatically carry out attacks, which are realized
through printing a pair of eyeglass frames. When the eyeglass frame is worn by an adversary whose
image is supplied to a state-of-the-art face-recognition algorithm, the eyeglasses allow him to evade
being recognized or to impersonate another individual. Figure 13 shows impersonation using the
frame. Their investigation focuses on white-box face-recognition systems, but they also demonstrate
how similar techniques can be used in black-box scenarios, as well as to avoid face detection.
Figure 13. An impersonation using frames. Left: Actress Reese Witherspoon [ 85]. Image classiﬁed
correctly with probability 1. Middle: Perturbing frames to impersonate (actor) Russel Crowe. Right:
The target [86] (Image Credit: Sharif et al. [37]).

==== Page 20 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 20 of 29
Zhou et al. [ 38] studied an interesting example of an actual adversarial attack and found that
infrared light completely invisible to humans can also be used to generate disturbances. As is shown
in Figure 14, the adversary installed some infrared LED on the cap peak, which could illuminate the
attacker’s face with some points from the camera angle, but people nearby would not notice. With this
technique, they successfully attacked the facial authentication system in white-box settings.
Figure 14. The cap with some infrared LED (Image Credit: Zhou et al. [38]).
This method differs from other attack methods in two aspects. Firstly, this method does not
directly optimize perturbation. They established a model describing the infrared points generated by
LED lamps with position, radius, and brightness of the points as parameters. Therefore, the optimizer
optimized the model parameters to accurately search for disturbances close to the real infrared points.
Secondly, they developed a real-time feedback system for adversaries to adjust the LED position to
help adversaries better achieve disturbance. Therefore, adversaries do not need to print disturbance
for each target; instead, they only need to adjust the device to attack different targets.
5. Defense Strategy
Researchers have proposed a number of adversarial attack defense strategies, which can be
divided into the three main categories, i.e., modifying data, modifying models and using auxiliary
tools. We describe them in details, respectively.
5.1. Modifying Data
These strategies refer to modifying the training dataset in the training stage or changing the input
data in the testing stage, including adversarial training, gradient hiding, blocking the transferability,
data compression, and data randomization.
5.1.1. Adversarial Training
The adversarial samples are introduced into the training dataset to improve the robustness of
the target model by training model with the legalized adversarial samples. Szegedy et al. [ 6] ﬁrstly
injected the adversarial samples and modiﬁed its labels to make the model more robust in the face
of the adversaries. Goodfellow et al. [ 15] reduced the misidentiﬁcation rate on the MNIST dataset

==== Page 21 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 21 of 29
from 89.4% to 17.9% by using adversarial training. Huang et al. [ 40] increased the robustness of
the model by punishing misclassiﬁed adversarial samples. Tramèr et al. [ 41] proposed ensemble
adversarial training which can increase the diversity of adversarial samples. However, it is unrealistic
to introduce all unknown attack samples into the adversarial training, which leads to the limitation of
adversarial training.
5.1.2. Gradient Hiding
A natural defense against gradient based attacks presented in [41] and attacks using adversarial
crafting method such as FGSM. This method hides information about model gradient from the
adversaries, i.e., if a model is non-differentiable (e.g., a decision tree, a nearest neighbor classiﬁer, or a
random forest), the gradient-based attack is invalid. However, by learning the proxy black-box model
with gradient and using the adversarial samples generated by this model [ 21], the method can easily
be fooled in this case.
5.1.3. Blocking the Transferability
Since the transferability attribute holds even if the classiﬁers have a different architecture or are
trained on the disjoint dataset, the key to preventing the black-box attack is to prevent the transferability
of adversarial samples. Hosseini et al. [ 42] proposed a three-step NULL Labeling method, in order to
prevent the adversarial samples from one network to another network. Its main idea is adding a new
NULL label to the dataset, and classify them to NULL label by training classiﬁer to resist adversarial
attacks. This method generally includes three main steps, i.e., initial training target classiﬁer, computing
NULL probabilities, and adversarial training, as is shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15. Illustration of the original and null labeling methods on an image from the MNIST dataset,
and three adversarial examples with different perturbations. The classiﬁer assigns a probability vector
to each image. With more perturbation, the NULL labeling method assigns a higher probability to
the NULL label, while the original labeling increases the probabilities of other labels (Image Credit:
Hosseini et al. [42]).
The advantage of this method is marking the perturbation input as an empty label rather than
classifying it as the original label. At present, this method is one of the most effective defense methods

==== Page 22 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 22 of 29
against the adversarial attacks, which accurately resists the adversarial attacks, as well as does not
affect the classiﬁcation accuracy of the original data.
5.1.4. Data Compression
Dziugaite et al. [ 43] found that JPG compression method can improve a large number of network
model recognition accuracy declined caused by FGSM attack disturbance. Das et al. [ 44] used a
similar JPEG compression method to study a defense method against FGSM and DeepFool attacks.
However, these image compression technologies still cannot serve as an effective defense against
more powerful attacks, such as Carlini & Wagner attacks [ 24]. Similarly, the Display Compression
Technology (DCT) compression method [ 44] used in the ﬁght against universal disturbance attacks [ 87]
has also been proved to be insufﬁcient. The biggest limitation of these defense methods based on data
compression is that a large amount of compression will lead to a decrease in the accuracy of original
image classiﬁcation, while a small amount of compression is often not enough to remove the impact of
disturbance.
5.1.5. Data Randomization
Xie et al. [ 45] demonstrated that the operation of random resizing adversarial samples can reduce
the effectiveness of adversarial samples. Similarly, adding some random textures to the adversarial
samples can also reduce their deception to the network model. Wang et al. [ 46] used a data conversion
module separated from the network model to eliminate the possible adversarial disturbance in the
image, and conducted data expansion operations in the training process, such as adding some Gaussian
randomization processing, which could slightly improve the robustness of the network model.
5.2. Modifying Model
We can modify the neural network model, such as regularization, defensive distillation, feature
squeezing, deep contractive network and mask defense.
5.2.1. Regularization
This method aims to improve the generalization ability of the target model by adding regular
terms which are known as penalty terms to the cost function and make the model have good
adaptability to resist attacks on an unknown dataset in prediction. Biggio et al. [ 8] used a regularization
method to limit the vulnerability of data when training the SVM model. The articles [ 47–49] used
regularization method to improve the robustness of the algorithm and achieved good results in
resisting adversarial attacks.
5.2.2. Defensive Distillation
Papernot et al. [ 14] proposed a defensive distillation method to resist attacks on the basis of
distillation technology [ 88]. The original distillation technology aims to compress the large-scale model
into small-scale and retain the original accuracy, while the defensive distillation does not change
the scale of the model, and produces a model with a smoother output surface and less sensitivity to
disturbance to improve the robustness of the model. As is shown in Figure 16, they ﬁrstly trained an
initial network Fon data Xwith a softmax temperature of T, and then used the probability vector F(X),
which includes additional knowledge about classes compared to a class label, predicted by network F
to train a distilled network Fdat temperature Ton the same data X. The authors demonstrated using
defensive distillation can reduce the success rate of adversarial attack by 90%.

==== Page 23 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 23 of 29
Figure 16. An overview of defense mechanism based on a transfer of knowledge contained in
probability vectors through distillation (Image Credit: Papernot et al. [14]).
However, the effectiveness of defense distillation cannot be guaranteed in black-box attacks.
Therefore, Papernot et al. [50] proposed extensible defense distillation technology.
5.2.3. Feature Squeezing
Feature squeezing is a model enhancement technique [ 51], whose main idea is to reduce
the complexity of the data representation, thereby reducing the adversarial interference due to
low sensitivity. There are two heuristic methods, one is to reduce the color depth at the pixel
level, i.e., to encode the color with fewer values; the other is using a smooth ﬁlter on the image,
i.e., multiple inputs are mapped to a single value, thus making the model safer under noise and
confrontational attack. Although this technique can effectively prevent adversarial attacks, it also
reduces the accuracy of the classiﬁcation of real samples.
5.2.4. Deep Contractive Network (DCN)
Gu et al. [ 52] introduced a kind of deep compression network, which uses noise reduction
automatic encoder to reduce the adversarial noise. Based on this phenomenon, DCN adopted a
smoothing penalty similar to a Convolutional Autoencoder (CAE) [ 89] in the training process, and was
proved to have a certain defensive effect against attacks such as L-BGFS [6].
5.2.5. Mask Defense
Gao et al. [ 53] proposed to insert a mask layer before processing the classiﬁed network model.
This mask layer trained the original images and corresponding adversarial samples and encoded the
differences between these images and the output features of the previous network model layer. It is
generally believed that the most important weight in the additional layer corresponds to the most
sensitive feature in the network. Therefore, in the ﬁnal classiﬁcation, these features are masked by
forcing the additional layers with a primary weight of zero. In this way, the deviation of classiﬁcation
results caused by adversarial samples can be shielded.
5.2.6. Parseval Networks
Cisse et al. [ 20] proposed a network called Parseval as a defensive method against adversarial
attacks. This network adopts hierarchical regularization by controlling the global Lipschitz constant of
the network. Considering the network can be viewed as a combination of functions at each layer, it is
possible to have robust positive ions for small input perturbations by maintaining a small Lipschitz
constant for these functions, they proposed to control the spectral norm of the network weight matrix

==== Page 24 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 24 of 29
by parameterizing the spectral norm of the network weight matrix through Parseval tight frames [ 90],
so it was called “Parseval” network.
5.3. Using Auxiliary Tool
This approach refers to using additional tools as an auxiliary tool to the neural network model,
including defense-GAN, MagNet and high-level representation guided denoiser.
5.3.1. Defense-GAN
Samangouei et al. [ 54] proposed a mechanism applicable to both white-box and black-box attacks
to reduce the efﬁciency of adversarial perturbance. This method utilizes the power of generative
adversarial network [ 55], and the main idea is to “project” input images onto the range of the generator
Gby minimizing the reconstruction errorG(z) x2
2, prior to feeding the image xto the classiﬁer.
Therefore, compared with the adversarial samples, the legitimate samples are closer to the range
ofG, thus greatly reducing the potential adversarial perturbance. The process of the defense-GAN
mechanism is shown in Figure 17. Although defensive-GAN has been proved to be quite effective
in defense against attacks, its success depends on GAN’s expressiveness and generative ability.
In addition, the training of GAN is challenging, i.e., without proper training, the performance of
defense-GAN will obviously decline.
Figure 17. Overview of the Defense-GAN algorithm (Image Credit: Samangouei et al. [54]).
5.3.2. MagNet
Meng et al. [ 56] proposed a framework called MagNet, which reads the output of the last layer
of the classiﬁer as a black-box without reading any data of the inner layer or modifying the classiﬁer.
MagNet uses a detector to identify legal and adversarial samples. The detector measures the distance
between a given sample under test and the manifold and rejects the sample if the distance exceeds the
threshold. It also uses a reformer to transform the adversarial sample through an automatic encoder
into a similar legal sample. In white-box attacks, the performance of MagNet decreases signiﬁcantly
because the adversaries know the parameters of MagNet. Therefore, the author proposed the idea
of using multiple automatic encoders and randomly selecting one at a time to make it difﬁcult for an
adversary to predict which automatic encoder is used.
5.3.3. High-Level Representation Guided Denoiser (HGD)
Different from the standard de-noising device such as pixel-level reconstruction loss function,
which has the problem of error ampliﬁcation, HGD can effectively overcome this problem by using
a loss function to compare the outputs of the target model to the clean image and de-noising image.
Liao et al. [ 57] introduced HGD to design a robust target model against white-box and black-box
adversarial attacks. The author proposed three different HGD training methods, as shown in Figure 18.
Another advantage of using HGD is that it can be trained on a relatively small dataset and can be used
to protect models other than the one guiding it.

==== Page 25 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 25 of 29
Figure 18. Three different training methods for HGD. The square boxes stand for data blobs, the circles
and ovals stand for networks. D stands for denoiser. The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is the
model to be defended. The parameters of CNN are shared and ﬁxed (Image Credit: Liao et al. [57]).
6. Conclusions
Since Szegedy et al. proposed that machine learning algorithms are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, researchers have conducted a large number of studies on adversarial attacks and defense
methods and produced good results. In this paper, the causes and characteristics of adversarial samples,
as well as the adversarial capabilities and goals of the adversaries, are ﬁrst described. In addition,
we review the adversarial attacks carried out in the training stage and the testing stage of the target
model, respectively. Among them, the training stage adversarial attacks can be implemented in
three ways: modifying the training dataset, label manipulation, and input feature manipulation.
However, such attacks, which occur during the training stage, are not common in the real world.
There are two kinds of the testing stage adversarial attacks: the white-box attacks and black-box attacks.
For the white-box attacks, in the process of carrying out the attacks, the adversaries can obtain the
algorithm, parameters, structure, and other information of the target model and use this information
to generate the adversarial samples. Hence, compared with the black-box attacks, the white-box
attacks have higher success rates, which can enable the target model to achieve an error rate of
approximately 89–99%. Although the attack success rates of black-box attacks, which lead to an
error rate of roughly 84–96%, are not as good as that of white-box attacks, since black-box attacks
do not need to know any information of the target model, the adversarial attacks can be carried out
by utilizing the transferability of adversarial samples, model inversion and model extraction. As a
consequence, the black-box attacks have better applicability in the real world and may well become a
research focus in future research. Furthermore, we summarize the application of adversarial attacks in
four ﬁelds and existing defense methods against adversarial attacks. Although some defense methods
have been proposed by researchers to deal with adversarial attacks and achieved good results, which
can reduce the success rate of adversarial attack by 70%–90%, they are generally aimed at a speciﬁc
type of adversarial attacks, and there is no defense method to deal with multiple or even all types
of attacks. Therefore, the key to ensuring the security of AI technology in various applications is to
deeply research the adversarial attack technology and propose more efﬁcient defense strategies.
Author Contributions: Writing—original draft preparation, S.Q.; writing—review and editing, Q.L.; supervision,
S.Z.; project administration, C.W.
Funding: This research was funded by the Sichuan Science and Technology Program (Grant No. 2018FZ0097,
No. 2018GZDZX0006, No. 2017GZDZX0002 and No. 2018GZ0085).
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Goodfellow et al., Zhang et al., Papernot et al., Fredrikson et al.,
Xie et al., Wei et al., Liu et al., Hu et al., Akhtar et al., Eykholt et al., Gu et al., Zhou et al., Hosseini et al.,
Samamgouei et al.and Liao et al. for their pictures cited in our paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

==== Page 26 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 26 of 29
References
1. Ma, J.; Sheridan, R.P .; Liaw, A.; Dahl, G.E.; Svetnik, V . Deep neural nets as a method for quantitative
structure–activity relationships. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2015 ,55, 263–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Helmstaedter, M.; Briggman, K.L.; Turaga, S.C.; Jain, V .; Seung, H.S.; Denk, W. Connectomic reconstruction
of the inner plexiform layer in the mouse retina. Nature 2013 ,500, 168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Ciodaro, T.; Deva, D.; De Seixas, J.; Damazio, D. Online particle detection with neural networks based on
topological calorimetry information. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. IOP Publ. 2012 ,368, 012030. [CrossRef]
4. Adam-Bourdarios, C.; Cowan, G.; Germain, C.; Guyon, I.; Kégl, B.; Rousseau, D. The Higgs boson machine
learning challenge. In Proceedings of the NIPS 2014 Workshop on High-Energy Physics and Machine
Learning, Montreal, QC, Canada, 8–13 December 2014; pp. 19–55.
5. Xiong, H.Y.; Alipanahi, B.; Lee, L.J.; Bretschneider, H.; Merico, D.; Yuen, R.K.; Hua, Y.; Gueroussov, S.;
Najafabadi, H.S.; Hughes, T.R.; et al. The human splicing code reveals new insights into the genetic
determinants of disease. Science 2015 ,347, 1254806. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Szegedy, C.; Zaremba, W.; Sutskever, I.; Bruna, J.; Erhan, D.; Goodfellow, I.; Fergus, R. Intriguing properties
of neural networks. arXiv 2013 , arXiv:1312.6199
7. Barreno, M.; Nelson, B.; Sears, R.; Joseph, A.D.; Tygar, J.D. Can machine learning be secure? In Proceedings
of the 2006 ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications Security, Taipei, Taiwan,
21–24 March 2006; pp. 16–25.
8. Biggio, B.; Nelson, B.; Laskov, P . Support vector machines under adversarial label noise. In Proceedings of
the Asian Conference on Machine Learning, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 13–15 November 2011; pp. 97–112.
9. Kloft, M.; Laskov, P . Online anomaly detection under adversarial impact. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, Sardinia, Italy, 13–15 May 2010; pp. 405–412.
10. Kloft, M.; Laskov, P . Security analysis of online centroid anomaly detection. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2012 ,
13, 3681–3724.
11. Biggio, B.; Nelson, B.; Laskov, P . Poisoning attacks against support vector machines. arXiv 2012 ,
arXiv:1206.6389.
12. Biggio, B.; Didaci, L.; Fumera, G.; Roli, F. Poisoning attacks to compromise face templates. In Proceedings of
the 2013 International Conference on Biometrics (ICB), Madrid, Spain, 4–7 June 2013; pp. 1–7.
13. Mei, S.; Zhu, X. Using Machine Teaching to Identify Optimal Training-Set Attacks on Machine Learners.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Austin, TX, USA, 25–30
January 2015; pp. 2871–2877.
14. Papernot, N.; McDaniel, P .; Wu, X.; Jha, S.; Swami, A. Distillation as a defense to adversarial perturbations
against deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
San Jose, CA, USA, 22–26 May 2016; pp. 582–597.
15. Goodfellow, I.J.; Shlens, J.; Szegedy, C. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. arXiv 2014 ,
arXiv:1412.6572.
16. Kurakin, A.; Goodfellow, I.; Bengio, S. Adversarial machine learning at scale. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1611.01236.
17. Papernot, N.; McDaniel, P .; Jha, S.; Fredrikson, M.; Celik, Z.B.; Swami, A. The limitations of deep learning
in adversarial settings. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
(EuroS&P), Saarbrucken, Germany, 21–24 March 2016; pp. 372–387.
18. Su, J.; Vargas, D.V .; Kouichi, S. One pixel attack for fooling deep neural networks. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1710.08864.
19. Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.M.; Fawzi, A.; Frossard, P . Deepfool: A simple and accurate method to fool deep neural
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas,
NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 2574–2582.
20. Cisse, M.; Adi, Y.; Neverova, N.; Keshet, J. Houdini: Fooling deep structured prediction models. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1707.05373
21. Papernot, N.; McDaniel, P .; Goodfellow, I.; Jha, S.; Celik, Z.B.; Swami, A. Practical black-box attacks against
machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2–6 April 2017; pp. 506–519.

==== Page 27 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 27 of 29
22. Fredrikson, M.; Jha, S.; Ristenpart, T. Model inversion attacks that exploit conﬁdence information and basic
countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, Denver, CO, USA, 12–16 October 2015; pp. 1322–1333.
23. Tramèr, F.; Zhang, F.; Juels, A.; Reiter, M.K.; Ristenpart, T. Stealing Machine Learning Models via Prediction
APIs. In Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium, Austin, TX, USA, 10–12 August 2016; pp. 601–618.
24. Carlini, N.; Wagner, D. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2017
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Jose, CA, USA, 22–26 May 2017; pp. 39–57.
25. Chen, P .Y.; Zhang, H.; Sharma, Y.; Yi, J.; Hsieh, C.J. Zoo: Zeroth order optimization based black-box attacks
to deep neural networks without training substitute models. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security, Dallas, TX, USA, 3 November 2017; pp. 15–26.
26. Dong, Y.; Liao, F.; Pang, T.; Su, H.; Hu, X.; Li, J.; Zhu, J. Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum.
arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1710.06081.
27. Xiao, C.; Deng, R.; Li, B.; Yu, F.; Liu, M.; Song, D. Characterizing adversarial examples based on spatial
consistency information for semantic segmentation. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1810.05162.
28. Wei, X.; Liang, S.; Cao, X.; Zhu, J. Transferable Adversarial Attacks for Image and Video Object Detection.
arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1811.12641.
29. Belinkov, Y.; Bisk, Y. Synthetic and natural noise both break neural machine translation. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1711.02173
30. Liang, B.; Li, H.; Su, M.; Bian, P .; Li, X.; Shi, W. Deep text classiﬁcation can be fooled. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1704.08006.
31. Katz, G.; Barrett, C.; Dill, D.L.; Julian, K.; Kochenderfer, M.J. Towards proving the adversarial robustness of
deep neural networks. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1709.02802.
32. Krotov, D.; Hopﬁeld, J.J. Dense associative memory is robust to adversarial inputs. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1701.00939.
33. Grosse, K.; Papernot, N.; Manoharan, P .; Backes, M.; McDaniel, P . Adversarial perturbations against deep
neural networks for malware classiﬁcation. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1606.04435.
34. Huang, C.H.; Lee, T.H.; Chang, L.H.; Lin, J.R.; Horng, G. Adversarial Attacks on SDN-Based Deep Learning
IDS System. In International Conference on Mobile and Wireless Technology ; Springer: Hong Kong, China,
2018; pp. 181–191.
35. Eykholt, K.; Evtimov I.; Fernandes E.; Li B.; Rahmati A.; Xiao C.; Prakash A.; Kohno T.; Song D. Robust
physical-world attacks on deep learning visual classiﬁcation. In the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018, pp. 1625–1634
36. Melis, M.; Demontis, A.; Biggio, B.; Brown, G.; Fumera, G.; Roli, F. Is deep learning safe for robot vision?
adversarial examples against the icub humanoid. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW), Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 751–759.
37. Sharif, M.; Bhagavatula, S.; Bauer, L.; Reiter, M.K. Accessorize to a crime: Real and stealthy attacks on
state-of-the-art face recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, Vienna, Austria, 24–28 October 2016.
38. Zhou, Z.; Tang, D.; Wang, X.; Han, W.; Liu, X.; Zhang, K. Invisible Mask: Practical Attacks on Face
Recognition with Infrared. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1803.04683.
39. Yann, L.; Corinna, C.; Christopher, J. MNIST. Available online: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
(accessed on 6 May 2017).
40. Huang, R.; Xu, B.; Schuurmans, D.; Szepesvári, C. Learning with a strong adversary. arXiv 2015 ,
arXiv:1511.03034.
41. Tramèr, F.; Kurakin, A.; Papernot, N.; Goodfellow, I.; Boneh, D.; McDaniel, P . Ensemble adversarial training:
Attacks and defenses. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1705.07204.
42. Hosseini, H.; Chen, Y.; Kannan, S.; Zhang, B.; Poovendran, R. Blocking transferability of adversarial
examples in black-box learning systems. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1703.04318.
43. Dziugaite, G.K.; Ghahramani, Z.; Roy, D.M. A study of the effect of jpg compression on adversarial images.
arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1608.00853.
44. Das, N.; Shanbhogue, M.; Chen, S.T.; Hohman, F.; Chen, L.; Kounavis, M.E.; Chau, D.H. Keeping the bad
guys out: Protecting and vaccinating deep learning with jpeg compression. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1705.02900.

==== Page 28 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 28 of 29
45. Xie, C.; Wang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Xie, L.; Yuille, A. Adversarial examples for semantic segmentation and
object detection. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1703.08603.
46. Wang, Q.; Guo, W.; Zhang, K.; Ororbia, I.; Alexander, G.; Xing, X.; Liu, X.; Giles, C.L. Learning
adversary-resistant deep neural networks. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1612.01401.
47. Lyu, C.; Huang, K.; Liang, H.N. A uniﬁed gradient regularization family for adversarial examples.
In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), Atlantic City, NJ, USA.
14–17 November 2015; pp. 301–309.
48. Zhao, Q.; Grifﬁn, L.D. Suppressing the unusual: Towards robust cnns using symmetric activation functions.
arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1603.05145.
49. Rozsa, A.; Gunther, M.; Boult, T.E. Towards robust deep neural networks with BANG. arXiv 2016 ,
arXiv:1612.00138.
50. Papernot, N.; McDaniel, P . Extending defensive distillation. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1705.05264.
51. Xu, W.; Evans, D.; Qi, Y. Feature squeezing: Detecting adversarial examples in deep neural networks.
arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1704.0115.
52. Gu, S.; Rigazio, L. Towards deep neural network architectures robust to adversarial examples. arXiv 2014 ,
arXiv:1412.5068.
53. Gao, J.; Wang, B.; Lin, Z.; Xu, W.; Qi, Y. Deepcloak: Masking deep neural network models for robustness
against adversarial samples. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1702.06763.
54. Samangouei, P .; Kabkab, M.; Chellappa, R. Defense-GAN: Protecting classiﬁers against adversarial attacks
using generative models. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1805.06605.
55. Goodfellow, I.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.; Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; Bengio, Y.
Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Proceedings of the
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Lake Tahoe, NV, USA, 5–10 December 2013 ;
Curran Associates, Inc.: Red Hook, NY, USA, 2014; pp. 2672–2680.
56. Meng, D.; Chen, H. Magnet: A two-pronged defense against adversarial examples. In Proceedings of the
2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Dallas, TX, USA, 30 October–3
November 2017; pp. 135–147.
57. Liao, F.; Liang, M.; Dong, Y.; Pang, T.; Zhu, J.; Hu, X. Defense against adversarial attacks using high-level
representation guided denoiser. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1712.02976.
58. Taga, K.; Kameyama, K.; Toraichi, K. Regularization of hidden layer unit response for neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE Paciﬁc Rim Conference on Communications, Computers and signal
Processing, Victoria, BC, Canada, 28–30 August 2003; Volume 1, pp. 348–351.
59. Zhang, J.; Jiang, X. Adversarial Examples: Opportunities and Challenges. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1809.04790.
60. Kearns, M.; Li, M. Learning in the presence of malicious errors. SIAM J. Comput. 1993 ,22, 807–837.
[CrossRef]
61. Miyato, T.; Maeda, S.i.; Ishii, S.; Koyama, M. Virtual adversarial training: A regularization method for
supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2018 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Papernot, N.; McDaniel, P .; Goodfellow, I. Transferability in machine learning: From phenomena to black-box
attacks using adversarial samples. arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1605.07277.
63. Fredrikson, M.; Lantz, E.; Jha, S.; Lin, S.; Page, D.; Ristenpart, T. Privacy in Pharmacogenetics: An End-to-End
Case Study of Personalized Warfarin Dosing. In Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium, San Diego,
CA, USA, 20–22 August 2014; pp. 17–32.
64. Moosavi-Dezfooli, S.M.; Fawzi, A.; Fawzi, O.; Frossard, P . Universal adversarial perturbations. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1610.08401v3.
65. Sarkar, S.; Bansal, A.; Mahbub, U.; Chellappa, R. UPSET and ANGRI: Breaking High Performance Image
Classiﬁers. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1707.01159.
66. Baluja, S.; Fischer, I. Adversarial transformation networks: Learning to generate adversarial examples. arXiv
2017 , arXiv:1703.09387.
67. Ilyas, A.; Engstrom, L.; Athalye, A.; Lin, J. Black-box Adversarial Attacks with Limited Queries and
Information. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1804.08598.
68. Li, P .; Yi, J.; Zhang, L. Query-Efﬁcient Black-Box Attack by Active Learning. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1809.04913.

==== Page 29 ====
Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 909 29 of 29
69. Adate, A.; Saxena, R. Understanding How Adversarial Noise Affects Single Image Classiﬁcation.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Information Technologies, Chennai, India,
20–22 December 2017; pp. 287–295.
70. Zhang, X.; Zhao, J.; LeCun, Y. Character-level convolutional networks for text classiﬁcation. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems; Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada, 7–12 December 2015 ; Curran Associates, Inc.: Red Hook, NY, USA,
2016; pp. 649–657.
71. Kulynych, B. TextFool. Available online: https://github.com/bogdan-kulynych/textfool (accessed on
6 May 2017).
72. Hosseini, H.; Kannan, S.; Zhang, B.; Poovendran, R. Deceiving Google’s Perspective API Built for Detecting
Toxic Comments. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1702.08138.
73. Samanta, S.; Mehta, S. Generating Adversarial Text Samples. In Advances in Information Retrieval, Proceedings
of the 40th European Conference on Information Retrieval Research, Grenoble, France, 26–29 March 2018 ; Springer
International Publishing: Basel, Switzerland, 2018.
74. Zhao, Z.; Dua, D.; Singh, S. Generating natural adversarial examples. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1710.11342.
75. Ebrahimi, J.; Lowd, D.; Dou, D. On Adversarial Examples for Character-Level Neural Machine Translation.
arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1806.09030.
76. Liu, Y.; Chen, X.; Liu, C.; Song, D. Delving into transferable adversarial examples and black-box attacks.
arXiv 2016 , arXiv:1611.02770.
77. Hu, W.; Tan, Y. Generating adversarial malware examples for black-box attacks based on GAN. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1702.05983.
78. Rosenberg, I.; Shabtai, A.; Rokach, L.; Elovici, Y. Generic Black-Box End-to-End Attack Against State of the
Art API Call Based Malware Classiﬁers. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Research in
Attacks, Intrusions, and Defenses, Heraklion, Greece, 10–12 September 2018; pp. 490–510.
79. Grosse, K.; Papernot, N.; Manoharan, P .; Backes, M.; McDaniel, P . Adversarial examples for malware
detection. In Proceedings of the European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, Oslo, Norway,
11–15 September 2017; pp. 62–79.
80. Akhtar N, Mian A. Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning in computer vision: A survey. IEEE Access
2018 ,6, 14410–14430. [CrossRef]
81. Mogelmose A., Trivedi M., Moeslund T. Vision-based trafﬁc sign detection and analysis for intelligent driver
assistance systems: Perspectives and survey. Trans. Intell. Transport. Syst .2012 ,3, 1484–1497. [CrossRef]
82. Stallkamp J., Schlipsing M., Salmen J., Igel C. Man vs. computer: Benchmarking machine learning algorithms
for trafﬁc sign recognition. Neural Netw. 2012 ,32, 323–332. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Gu, T.; Dolan-Gavitt, B.; Garg, S. Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the machine learning model supply
chain. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1708.06733.
84. Xu, X.; Chen, X.; Liu, C.; Rohrbach, A.; Darell, T.; Song, D. Can you fool AI with adversarial examples on a
visual Turing test? arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1709.08693.
85. Rinaldi. Actress Reese Witherspoon. By Eva Rinaldi/CC BY-SA/cropped. Available online: https:
//goo.gl/a2sCdc (accessed on 6 May 2011).
86. Rinaldi The Target. Eva Rinaldi/CC BY-SA/Cropped. Available online: https://goo.gl/AO7QYu
(accessed on 21 December 2012).
87. Akhtar, N.; Liu, J.; Mian, A. Defense against Universal Adversarial Perturbations. arXiv 2017 ,
arXiv:1711.05929.
88. Hinton, G.; Vinyals, O.; Dean, J. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv 2015 , arXiv:1503.02531.
89. Rifai, S.; Vincent, P .; Muller, X.; Glorot, X.; Bengio, Y. Contractive auto-encoders: Explicit invariance during
feature extraction. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on International Conference on
Machine Learning, Bellevue, WA, USA, 28 June–2 July 2011; pp. 833–840.
90. Kovaˇ cevi´ c, J.; Chebira, A.; et al. An introduction to frames. Found. Trends Signal Process. 2008 ,2, 1–94.
[CrossRef]
c2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

