==== Page 1 ====
 Review of Swarm Intelligence -based Feature 
Selection Methods  
 
Mehrdad Rostami1, Kamal Berahmand2, Saman Forouzandeh3 
Department of Computer Engineering, University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, Iran1 
2Technology, Brisbane, Australia Department of Science and Engineering, Queensland University of 
Department of Computer Engineering University of Applied Science and Technology, Center of Tehran Municipality ICT org.Tehran , Iran3 
M.rostami@eng.uok.ac.ir1, kamal.berahmand@hdr.qut.edu.au2, Saman.forouzandeh@gmail.com3 
 
Abstract: 
In the past decades, the rapid growth of computer and database technologies has led to the rapid growth of 
large -scale datasets. On the other hand, data mining  applications with high dimensional datasets that 
require high speed and accuracy are rapidly inc reasing.  An important issue with these  applications is the 
curse of dimensionality , where the number of features is much higher than the number of patterns . One of 
the dimensionality reduction approaches is feature selection that can increase the accuracy of the data 
mining task  and reduce its computational complexity . The feature selection method aims at selecting a 
subset of features with the lowest inner similarity and highest relevancy to the target class. It reduces the 
dimensionality of the data by el iminating irrelevant, redundant, or noisy data.  In this paper , a comparative 
analysis of different feature selection methods  is presented , and a general categorization of these methods is 
performed. Moreover, in this paper , state-of-the-art swarm intelligence - are studied , and the recent feature 
selection methods based on these algorithms  are reviewed . Furthermore, the strengths and weaknesses of 
the different studied swarm intelligence -based feature selection methods are evaluated . 
Keywords:  Machine learning, dimensionality reduction, feature selection, evolutionary algorithms, 
swarm intelligence . 
 
 
1. Introduction  
Pattern recognition is one of the most important applications of machine learning in different  sciences. 
Machine learning methods  utilized in  the many areas of medical diagnosis  (Liu, Gu et al. 2017 , Li, Wu et 
al. 2019 ), marketing  (Cheng -Lung Huang and Tsai 2009 , Yuan, Yuan et al. 2020 ), image processing 
(Liang, Zhang et al. 2017 , Zhou, Gao et al. 2017 ), text mining  (Wang and Hong 2019 , Kou, Yang et al. 
2020 ), information retrieval  (Chuen -Horng Lin, Huan -Yu Chen et al. 2014 , Ji, Shen et al. 2019 ), 
Identification  (Bi, Suen et al. 2019 , Koide, Miura et al. 2020 ), etc. One of the significant goals of modeling 
and classification of data is to predict based on the train data  and available features.  Huge  datasets with 
high dimensional features  space  and a relatively smaller number  of samples  are critical issue s for machine 
learning tasks. Once there are a number of irrelevant and redundant features among the initial feature set , 
dimensionality  reduction is one of the essential techniques  to eliminate these features.  (Chen, Li et al. 
2019 ). It is an efficient technique for improving  accuracy  performance, lowering computational 
complexity, building more generalized models, and decreasing the requi red storage (Tang, Dai et al. 2019 , 
Wang, Zhang et al. 2019 ). During the past few  years, two major techniques have been proposed for the 
reduction of dimensionality : Feature extraction and feature selection (Ahmed K. Farahat, Ali Ghodsi et al. 
2013 ). In feature extraction, the primary feature space is mapped to a s maller space. In fact, in this 
technique, by combining existing features, fewer features are created so that these features contain all (or 
most of) the information contained in the primary features . Moreover , in feature selection, a subset of initial 
features is selected by removing the irrelevant and redundant feature .  
In general, the feature selection process consists of four main stages: subset generation, subset evaluation, 
stopping criteria, and validation of results. In each iteration of the search process, a subset of the candidate 
feature set is generated from the  original features , and its appropriateness  is measured by an evaluation 

==== Page 2 ====
criterion. The subset generation process and its evaluation are repeated until a predetermined stop criterion 
is reached. At the end of this process, the best subset of the selected f eature is validated on the test data set. 
Feature selection has been an active research area in data mining, pattern recogniti on, and statistics 
communities (Liu, Nie et al. 2019 ). The total search space to find the most relevant and non -redundant 
features, including all possible subsets, is 2𝑛, where 𝑛 is the number of original features. Comprehensive 
search ensures that the most appropriate features are found , but usually , this i s not computationally feasible, 
even for medium -sized datasets . Since the evaluation of all possible subsets is very costly, a solution must 
be searched that is both computationally feasible and useful in terms of quality. Many feature selection 
methods us e metaheuristic algorithms  to avoid increasing computational complexity  (Alshamlan, Badr et 
al. 2015 , Welikala, Fraz et al. 2015 , Singh and Singh 2019 ). These algorithms  will be able to optimize the 
problem of feature selection with appropriate accuracy within an acceptable time . Metaheuristic algorithms  
can be classified into two main categories: Swarm intelligence (SI) and Evolutionary Algorithms (EA). SI 
is a relatively new category of evolutionary computation comparing with EAs and other single -solution 
based approaches. SI algorithms utilized approxi mate and non -deterministic techniques to effectively and 
efficiently explore and exploit the search space in order to find near -optimal solutions The most popular 
nature -inspired meta -heuristic group is swa rm-based techniques.  Swarm Intelligence (SI) is a type of 
artificial intelligence that is based on collective behaviors in decentralized and self -organized systems. 
These systems usually consist of a population of simple actors who interact locally and with their 
environment.   
In recent decades,  many SI-based  algorithms  have been employed to feature section (Figueiredo, Macedo et 
al. 2019 ). Despite the highly acceptable performance of these methods, there are only a few papers 
reviewing SI based feature selection me thods. In (Basir and Ahmad 2014 ) a comparison of swarm 
intelligence -based feature selection method is conducted. The authors of this paper focused only on the 
well-known and traditional SI algorithm, and only the feature selection methods based on these algorithms 
studied.  Moreover, in (Brezočnik, Fister et al. 2018 ) a comprehensive literature review of SI algorithms for 
feature selection is performed.  One of the  limitations of this paper  is that it lacks experiment results  and 
only states the strengths and weaknesses of different SI-based feature selection methods.  With the lack of 
comprehensive review of SI -based feature selection methods, the main purpose of this paper is to fill the 
gap in coverage of SI algorithms for feature selection.  This paper  seeks to provide a comprehensive 
overview of SI -based feature selection methods and their categorization and try to review the state -of-the-
art and most well -known  SI-based method used to feature selection. Also, in this paper, various 
experiments have been designed to compare the performance of different SI -based methods to allow a more 
accurate evaluation of these algorithms.  
The remainder of this paper is organiz ed as follows: Section 2 presents the introduction  of the feature 
selection problem,  Section 3 reviews SI based feature selection methods . Section 4 reports the experimental 
results of different SI -based method s. Finally, Section 5 presents the conclusion.  
2. Background  
An essential issue with machine learning  techniques  is the high -dimensionality problem of a dataset where 
the feature subset size  much greater than pattern size . For example, in the medical applications that include 
very high -dimensional datasets, the classification parameters are also increased. Therefore , the performance 
of the classifier declines significantly  (Liu and Yu 2005 , Saeys, Inza et al. 2007 , Chandrashekar and Sahin 
2014 ). According to a general rule for a classification problem with 𝑛 dimension and 𝐶 class, at least 10×
𝑛×𝐶 training data is required  (Anil K. Jain, Robert P. W. Duin et al. 2000 , Liu and Zheng 2006 , Cadenas, 
Garrido et al. 2013 ). When it is not possible to provide this number of training data practically, reducing the 
feature subset size,  reduces the number of required training data. As a result, the performance of the 
classification algorithm increases (Gokalp, Tasci et al. 2020 , Shu, Qian et al. 2020 ). 
From a general point of view, feature selection methods are divi ded into two categories supervised and 
unsupervised feature selection methods (Tang, Liu et al. 2018 ). In supervised methods, a set of train data is 

==== Page 3 ====
available, each of which is described by taking features values along with the class label, while in 
unsupervised methods , and tr ain data lacks class tags.  In general, it can be said that feature selection 
methods have better efficiency and more reliable performance in the supervised mode due to the use of 
class labels. Therefore, it is more difficult to select a feature in the unsu pervised  mode, and in many 
studies, this area has been considered  (Zhang, Zhang et al. 2019 , Ding, Yang et al. 2020 ).  
Feature selection methods generally search through the solution space to optimize two conflicting 
objectives: maximiz ing the relevancy to the target class and minimizing the redundancy of selected 
features. Many search strategies are employed to optimize these objectives. These methods are generally 
categorized into single -objective and multi -objective methods  (Senawi, Wei et al. 2017 , Hu, Gao et al. 
2018 ). In the single -objective methods, the population is optimized using only one objective in the fitness 
function.  As a result, the choice of objective  and definition of the  fitness function will greatly affect the 
accuracy of the optimization algorithm . Also, there are usually several objectives in many optimization 
issues, and defining a fitness function with just one goal reduces optimization performance . One approach  
to overcome these challenges is to consider is to consider  several different objectives in the fitness function 
of the feature selection problem . Modeling feature selection as a multi -objective problem can obtain a set of 
non-dominated feature subsets to meet different requirements in real -world applications. Most of the 
previous ly proposed  feature selection methods are utilized single -objective  function , and there are only a 
few methods  of multi -objective function , such as MOPSO (Xue, Zhang et al. 2013 ), MOGA (Morita, 
Sabourin et al. 2003 ), MOFSEF (Wu, Liu et al. 2020 ), MOFSEEG (Martín -Smith, Ortega et al. 2017 ) and 
MOFSGADM (Li, Xue et al. 2020 ). 
Previous methods for select optimal  feature set s can be categorized  into four groups  consist of  filter, 
wrapper, embedded, and hybrid models . Also, in recent years, graph theoretic -based techniques have been 
used in many feature selection methods. These categories are explained in the following subsections.  
2.1. Filter model  
The filter model uses statistical and probabilistic data properties to calculate the feature relevance and 
performs the feature selection process independently of machine learning algorithms. In other words, this 
model uses the inherent properties of data to evaluate features (Labani, Moradi et al. 2018 ). The filter 
model based on how features are evaluated is divided into two univariate and multivariate categories . In the 
univariate feature selection approaches , the relevance of each feature is calculated in accordance with a 
given measure such as the Information Gain (IG) (Raileanu and Stoffel 2004 ), Gain Ratio (GR) (Mitchell 
1997 ), Term Variance (TV) (S. Theodoridis and Koutroumbas 2009 ), Mutual information (MI) (Xu, Jones 
et al. 2007 ), Gini Index (GI) (Raileanu and Stoffel 2004 ), Laplacian score (LS) (Xiaofei He, Deng Cai et al. 
2005) and Fisher score (FS) (Quanquan Gu, Zhenhui Li et al. 2011 ). In these univariate methods, it is 
assumed that features independent of each other and possible dependencies between features are not 
considered. This simple default assumption is wrong and , in many cases , may reduce  the efficiency of 
feature selection methods . On the other hand, multivariate methods measure the appropriateness  of features 
with regard to their interdependence. Therefore, multivariate methods have more computational complexity 
than univariate methods, but they also have higher performance.  There are some multivariate methods, 
including Minimal Redundancy Maximal Relevance (mRMR) (Peng, Long et al. 2005 ), Relevance 
redundancy feature selection (RRFS) (Ferreira and Figueiredo 2012 ), MIFS (Battiti 1994 ), Normalized 
Mutual Information Feature S election (NMIFS) (Estévez, Tesmer et al. 2009 ), MIFS -U (Kwak and Choi 
2002 ), Unsupervised Feature S election based on Ant Colony Optimization (UFSACO) (Tabakhi, Moradi et 
al. 2014 ), and Multivariate RDC (MRDC) (Labani, Moradi et al. 2018 ). 
2.2. Wrapper model  
The wrapper -based methods  use a classifier  to measure  the efficiency of the selected feature subset. In this 
approach, a search method is used to find the optimal feature subset , and at each stage of the searching 
strategy , a subset of features  is generated and measured  by a classifier or another learning model. Finally, 
the best-produced feature subset is selected as the final feature subset. (Liu and Yu 2005 , Chandrashekar 

==== Page 4 ====
and Sahin 2014 ). Although the wrappers model may select  a better feature subset , they are expensive to run 
and can break down with high dimensional medical dataset . This is due to the use of learning algorithms in 
the feature subset quality calculation.   
2.3. Hybrid model  
The hybrid model attempts to take advantage of both the filter and wrapper models and to provide a model 
that balances the computational efficiency of the filter model and the accuracy of the wrapper model. In 
fact, the purpose of this model is to provide a method that is both efficient and effective .  
2.4. Embedded model  
Moreover, in the embedded model, the feature selection process is considered as part of the learning 
algorithm. In other words, in this model , a learning algorithm  is utilized for searching the optimal feature 
set (Zhang, Wu et al. 2015 ). 
 
 
2.5. Graph -based methods  
Moreover, recently, graph -based methods are used in machine learning techniques to extract the similarity 
relationships among the data. In feature selection, graph -based methods provide an underlying manifold 
structure as a universal framework to reflect t he relationships between features. Several research efforts 
employed graph -based methods for solving the feature selection problem. For example, in 
(Bandyopadhyay, Bhadr a et al. 2014 ), a dense subgraph finding approach is adopted for the unsupervised 
feature selection problem. Another clustering -based feature subset selection algorithm for high dimensional 
data is proposed in (Song, Ni et al. 2013 ). This work utilizes a graph -theoretic clustering method f or similar 
grouping  features. In (Zhang and Hancock 2012 ), a hypergraph -based method is proposed for feature 
selection. This work uses an information -theoretic criterion to evaluate  the appropriateness  of different 
feature s by considering the related class label of each sample . In (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), the concept 
of graph clustering with the node centrality measure is integrated with the unsupervised feature selection 
process.  This work is extended by the authors of (Ghaemi and Feizi -Derakhshi 2016 ) to choose more 
informative features. In (Henni, Mezghani et al. 2018 ), the authors employed Google’s PageRank centrality 
measure to rank features based on their importance. Hashemi et al. (Hashemi, Dowlatshahi et al. 2020 ) 
propose another graph -based feature selection method for the multi -label high dimensional dataset. The 
authors of this paper utilize the PageRank centrality measure to rank the features based on their value in the 
graph. Also, in this paper, the correlation distance criterion is used to remove irrelevant features.  In (Li, 
Tang et al. 2019 ), an unsupervised graph -based feature selection method for high dimensional data is 
proposed. In this paper, Laplacian graph and local geometrical structure are used for better repres entation 
of the features space . In (Zhu, Zhu et al. 2017 ), a subspace clustering guided unsupervised feature selection 
method is proposed. This work uses the subspace clustering to learning of the clustering and then those 
features with good preservation ability of the cluster labels are selected.  
In Table 1 th e main characteristic of different feature selection method s is summarized. In this table , six 
attributes (i.e. , the number of objectives, Type of method, search strategy, application, weakness , and 
strength) of different feature selection method s are reported. 
 
Table 1 : The main characteristics  of different feature selection meth ods. The synonyms used in this T able are: MOP : 
Multi -Objective Optimization, SOP : Single -Objective Optimization, RB: Ranking -Based, SSB: Subset selection -based, 
ACO:  Ant Colony Optimization, GA: Genetic Algorithm,  ABC:  Artificial Bee Colony, DE: Differential Evolution, 
NSGA:  Nondominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm  
Methods  Number of 
Objectives  Type  
 Search 
Strategy  Application  Weakness  Strength  
RDC (Rehman, 
Javed et al. 
2015 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual  Ignoring feature 
dependency,  
Low performance  Fast,  
Independent of 
classifier  
DFS (Uysal and SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual  

==== Page 5 ====
Gunal 2012 ) 
NDM (Rehman, 
Javed et al. 
2017 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual  
FS (Quanquan 
Gu, Zhenhui Li 
et al. 2011 ) SOP Filter-RB Univariate  Textual/Numeric  
GI (Raileanu 
and Stoffel 2004 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual/Numeric  
MI (Xu, Jones et 
al. 2007 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual/Numeric  
LS (Xiaofei He, 
Deng Cai et al. 
2005 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Numeric  
IG (Raileanu 
and Stoffel 2004 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual/Numeric  
CHI (Sebastiani 
2002 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Textual/Numeric  
GR (Mitchell 
1997 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Numeric  
TV (S. 
Theodoridis and 
Koutroumbas 
2009 ) SOP Filter -RB Univariate  Numeric  
RRFS (Ferreira 
and Figueiredo 
2012 ) SOP Filter  
 Multivariate  
Greedy  Numeric  Using greedy 
search strategy and 
easily trapping into 
the local optima.  Having higher 
computational 
complexity than 
univariate methods  
 mRMR (Peng, 
Long et al. 2005 ) SOP Filter  
 Multivariate  
Greedy  Numeric  
RSM (Carmen 
Lai, Marcel J.T. 
Reinders et al. 
2006 ) SOP Filter  
 Multivariate  
Greedy  Numeric  
GUFS (Ahmed 
K. Farahat, Ali 
Ghodsi et al. 
2013 ) SOP Filter  
 Multivariate  
Greedy  Numeric  
MECY_FS 
(Wang, Li et al. 
2015 ) MOP  Filter  GA Numeric   Only applicable to 
numeric datasets ,  
Having lower 
performance in text 
datasets.  Using information 
theoretic methods to 
evaluate the objective 
function that has made 
them fast.  
RRFSACO (Tab
akhi and Moradi 
2015 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
ACO  Numeric  Being single -
objective,  
Forcing the 
evolving population 
to form a particular 
feature set due to 
the use of a single 
quality function.  Considering  the feature 
dependency  
GCACO (Morad
i and Rostami 
2015 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
ACO  Numeric  
MGCACO (Ghi
matgar, Kazemi 
et al. 2018 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
ACO  Numeric  
FASTFS (Song, 
Ni et al. 2013 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
Graph -based  Textual/Numeric  
GCNC (Moradi 
and Rostami 
2015 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
Graph -based  Numeric  
FSGA (Wenzhu 
Yang, Daoliang 
Li et al. 2011 )   SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
GA Foreign Fiber  
MICGSOFS 
(Lyu, Wan et al. 
2017 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Multivariate  
Sequential  Biomedical 
Datasets  
MBFFS (Hua, 
Zhou et al. 2020 ) SOP Filter/SSB  Markov 
Blanket  Numeric  
BT-SFS (Yan, 
Ma et al. 2018 ) SOP Wrapper  Sequential  Fault  Detection  depending on the 
initial solutions and 
easily trapping into 
the local optima  having low 
computational 
complexity  

==== Page 6 ====
MOABC 
(Hancer, Xue et 
al. 2015 ) MOP  Wrapper  ABC  Numeric  Inefficient for high -
dimensional 
datasets due to high 
computational 
complexity.  Low probability of 
trapping into the local 
optimum,  
High classification 
accuracy  TMABC -
FS(Zhang, 
Cheng et al. 
2019 ) MOP  Wrapper  ABC  Numeric  
MOPSOFS (Xue, 
Zhang et al. 
2013 ) MOP  Wrapper  PSO Numeric  
MOACO (Ke, 
Feng et al. 2010 ) MOP  Wrapper  ACO  Numeric  
MOWGA 
(Vignolo, Milone 
et al. 2013 ) MOP  Wrapper  GA Face Recognition   
MODEFS 
(Mlakar, Fister 
et al. 2017 ) MOP  Wrapper  DE  Face Recognition   
MONSGA 
(González, 
Ortega et al. 
2019 ) MOP  Wrapper  NSGA -II Motor imagery  
Nested GA 
(Sayed, Nassef et 
al. 2019 ) MOP  Wrapper  NSGA -II Microarray  
 
3. Swarm intelligence -based feature selection  
Feature selection methods based on how to evaluate the features are classified into two categories: feature 
ranking and subset selection  methods . Feature ranking methods, based on a specified criterion, assign a 
score to each feature. Then the features that did not get enough scores are removed. But in subset selection 
methods, the space of possible subsets is searched to find the optimal subset. If the number of initial 
features is 𝑛, the search space for the optimal subset contains all the subsets of the features, which is equal 
to 2𝑛 different states. In other words, in the property r anking methods, the value of each property is 
evaluated independently , and the relationship between features  is not considered.  In these methods, it is 
assumed that the features  are independent of each other and that a possible dependence between the 
features  is not considered. Although this simplistic assumption reduces the computational complexity of the 
feature selection method, in many cases , it may reduce the performance of the feature selection method.  
Feature subset selection  is an NP-Hard probl em. In the simplest way, the best subset can be found by 
evaluating all possible subsets with an exhaustive search strategy. Although this method guarantees an 
optimal feature subset , finding the optimal solution is very time consuming and even impract ical even for 
medium -sized dataset s. Since it is very costly to evaluate all possible subsets, a feature subset  must be 
searched, that, it is acceptable  both in terms of computational complexity and in terms of appropriateness. 
(Li, Chen et al. 2020 , Santucci, Baioletti et al. 2020 ). One approach to solve complex optimization and NP -
Hard problems is meta -heuristics algorithms . Meta -heuristic algorithms are approximate approaches that 
can find satisfactory solutions over acceptable time instead of finding the optimal solution (Zhang, Lee et 
al. 2015 ). These algorithms are one of the categories of approximate optimization algorithms that have s  
strategies to escape from local optima  and can be used in a wide range of optimization problems.   
Many feature selection methods use meta -heuristics  to avoid increasing computational complexity in the 
high dimensional dataset. These algorithms  use primitive mechanisms and operations to solve an 
optimization problem  and search for the optimal solution over a number of iterations  (Barak, Daho oie et al. 
2015 ). These algorithms often start with a population containing random solutions and try to improve the 
optimality of these solutions during each iteration step. At the beginning of most of the meta -heuristic 
algorithms, a number of initial solutions are randomly generated, and then a fitness function is utilized to 
calculate the optimality of the individual solutions of the generated population. If none of the termination 

==== Page 7 ====
criteria are met, production new generation  will begin. This cycle is repeated until one of the termination 
criteria is met  (Hu, Zheng et a l. 2020 , Wang, Pan et al. 2020 ). 
Meta -heuristic approaches can be classified into two categories: The  Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) and 
Swarm Intelligence (SI)  (Zhang, Lee et al. 2015 ). An EA uses mechanisms inspired by biological 
evolution, such as reproduction, mutation, recombination, and selection. Candidate solutions to the 
optimization problem play the role of individuals in a population , and the fitness function determines the 
quality of this solutions. After repetitions of the evolutionary algorithm, the initial population evolves and 
moves toward global optimization (Gong, Xu et al. 2020 ). On the other, SI algorithms usually consist of a 
simple population of artificial agents locally with the environment. This concept is usually inspired by 
nature , and each agent performs an easy job, but local i nteractions and partly random interactions between 
these agents lead to the emergence of "intelligent" global behavior, which is unknown to individual 
agents (Yong, Dun -wei et al. 2016 ).  
In the remainder of this section, SI -based feature selection methods, such as Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO), Artificial Bee Colony optimization (ABC), Differential Evolution 
(DE), Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA), Firefly Algori thm (FA), Bat Algorithm (BA), Cuckoo 
Optimization Algorithm (COA), Gray Wolf Optimization (GWO), Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) 
and Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA) are  reviewed and outlined in Table 2. 
 
3.1. PSO -based methods  
Particle Swarm Optimization is an efficient swarm intelligence -based evolutionary algorithm, introduced 
by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 (J. Kenn edy and Eberhart 1995 ). The PSO algorithm, inspired by the 
social behavior of birds and fish, has recently  been utilized in many studies to solve the feature selection 
problem. Under et al. (Unler, Murat et al. 2011 ) proposed a feature selection method, which combined the 
univariate filter model within the PSO -based wrapper model. In (Inbarani, Azar et al. 2014 ), another hybrid 
model is proposed to feature selection in the medical application. In this method, hybrid feature selection 
based on PSO and rough sets theory are utilized to improve disease diagnosis in the medical dataset. 
Moreover, Huang and Dun (Huang and Dun 2008 ) propose a hybrid model for feature selection and 
parameter optimization integration , the PSO algorithm , and support vector machines (SVM) classifier. To 
overcome th e high computational complexity in the high dimensional dataset, in this paper the combined 
PSO–SVM is implemented with a distributed parallel architecture. Furthermore, in (Xue, Zhang et al. 
2014 ) propose new different initialization st rategies and new best particle updating mechanisms are 
proposed to improve feature selection accuracy in the classification task. The purpose of this proposed 
method is to reduce the number of selected features and thus reduce the computational complexity of the 
data classification process. In (Banka and Dara 2015 ), a Hamming distance -based binary particle swarm 
optimization (HDBPSO) algorithm is proposed to reduce data dimensions . In this method, a hamming 
distance is utilized  to update the velocity of particles in a binary PSO search strategy to select the essentia l 
features . In (Yong, Dun -wei et al. 2016 ), and improved multi -objective PSO algorithm is proposed for 
unreliable data classification. In this paper , two new operator s of the reinforced memory and the hybrid 
mutation are introduced to improve the search  ability of the PSO algorithm.  In (Moradi and Gholampour 
2016 ), and efficient PSO -based feature selection method  is proposed by the integration of filter and 
wrapper approaches . The proposed method, called HPSO -LS, introduce d a new local search to select the 
subset of non -redundant and relevant features . In (Zhang, Gong et al. 2017 ) a multi -Objective particle 
swarm optimization approach is developed for cost -based feature selection in classification. The main goal 
of this method is to produce a Pareto front of nondomi nated solutions, that is, feature set, to meet different 
prerequisites of decision -makers in real -world applications. In (Jain, Jain et al. 2018 ), integration of 
correlation feature selection with modified binary PSO algorithm is used for gene selection and cancer 
classification. This method selects a high relevant feature subset by eliminating the irrelevant and 
redundant features. In (Zhang, Ding et al. 2018 ), a combination method of improved mRMR and Shuffled 

==== Page 8 ====
Frog Leaping Algorithm is developed to improve the acoustic defect detection accuracy. In this method, to 
reduce the dimensions of the original features, a single -objective function is defined using the MRMR 
criterion and then this function is optimized using the PSO algorithm. Finally, after selecting the final 
feature subset, the final acoustic defect detection is made using the neu ral network classifier. The authors of 
(Qasim and Algamal 2018 ) proposed a PSO -based regression model for dimensionality reduction in 
medical dataset. This method makes use of the advantages of both PSO and the logistic regression with 
Bayesian information criterion as a fitness function. In (Prasad, B iswas et al. 2018 ), a recursive PSO 
scheme for feature selection in DNA microarray datasets is proposed. In this method, various filter -based 
ranking methods with the proposed recursive PSO based wrapper approach are integrated. Pashaei et al. 
(Pashaei, Pashaei et al. 2019 ) proposed the hybrid feature selection method in cancer classificatio n using 
binary black hole algorithm and modified binary particle swarm optimization. In this method, the binary 
black hole algorithm is embedded in the PSO algorithm to make this more effective and to facilitate the 
exploration and exploitation of the PSO to improve the performance further.  Moreover, in (Gunasundari, 
Janakiraman et al. 2018 ), a multi swarm sophisticated binary particle swarm optimization algorithm using a 
Win-Win approach for feature selection of liver and kidney cancer data is pro posed. Moreover, In (Yan, 
Liang et al.  2019 ), a hybrid feature selection method based on PSO was proposed to improve the accuracy 
of Laser -induced breakdown spectroscopy analysis. This method integrates the advantages of the filter and 
wrapper model. The filter model first eliminated the un correlated and redundant features, and then the 
selected features were further refined by a more accurate wrapper method PSO . In (Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ) a 
PSO-based feature selection with multiple classifiers is proposed for improve for increasing the 
classification accuracy and reducing computational complexity. In this paper, a ne w Self -Adaptive 
Parameter and Strategy are used to deal with the issue of feature selection in high -dimensional dataset. The 
reported results showed that the use of these mechanisms greatly increased the search ability of particle 
optimization algorithms f or high -dimensional datasets.  
 
3.2. ACO -based methods  
In the early 1990s, an algorithm called the Ant System (AS) was proposed as a new heuristic for solving 
difficult optimization problems by Dorigo and his colleagues and was first applied to the TSP prob lem. The 
Ant Colony Optimization Algorithm (ACO) was proposed by Dorrigo and his colleagues as a multi -agent 
to solve the optimization problems (M. Dorigo  and Caro 1999 ). This algorithm is inspired by the behavior 
of ants that are able to find the shortest path between the nest and the food source and also adapt to 
environmental changes. Moreover, ACO has been successfully applied in several studies to feature 
selection. Kabir et al. (Monirul Kabir, Shahjahan b et al. 2012 ) propose a new ACO -based feature selection 
method by the integration of neural network and information gain to select a subset of salient features of 
reduced size. In  (Ying Li, Gang Wang et al. 2013 ), a framework based on the ACO algorithm for gene 
selection in the DNA microarray dataset, which consists of two stages of pivotal genes c hoosing by 
modified ant system and the most important genes selecting by the modifie d ant colony system. Moreover, 
Chen et al. (Chen, Chen et al. 2013 ) propose a feature selection method based on the ACO algorithm. In 
this paper, different from previous ACO -based methods, the feature space represented as a directed graph. 
In (Forsati, Moayedikia et al. 2014 ), a novel variant of ACO was introduced to select the most relevant and 
non-redundant features. This algorithm is combined with a local search strategy to overcome the 
entrapment in local optima by searching the neighborhood of the globally optimal solution. On the other 
hand, in (Ke, Feng et al. 2008 ), an ACO -based  filter model is proposed for feature selection in rough set 
theory. Tabakhi et al. (Tabakhi, Moradi et al. 2014 ) propose an unsupervised feature selection method 
based on ant colony optimizat ion. In this method, the final features are selected considering the similarity 
between the features and without using a learning algorithm. Moreover, in (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), a 
feature selection method using the ant colony  algorithm and social network analysis technique is proposed. 
In this method, that a clustered graph is used to represent the feature selection problem, no learning 

==== Page 9 ====
algorithm is used to evaluate the generated feature subset , and the appropriateness of each  solution is 
evaluated using a filter criterion. Zamani Dadaneh et al. (Dadaneh, Markid et al. 2016 ) proposed 
unsupervised probabilistic feature selection using ACO algorithm. The algorithm looks for the optimal 
feature subset in an iterative process by utilizing the similarity between the features.  In (Liu, Wang et al. 
2019 ) combination of feature selection and ant colony optimization is proposed for improve the 
classification accuracy of imbal anced data.  In this method, instead of using a single -objective fitness 
function, a multi -objective ant colony optimization algorithm is used to improve the performance feature 
selection. The reported results showed acceptable performance of the proposed m ethod in classifying 
imbalanced and high -dimensional datasets.  
 
3.3. ABC -based methods  
The A rtificial Bee Colony algorithm (ABC) is an optimization algorithm based on swarm intelligence and 
intelligent behavior of the bee population that simulates the food search behavior of bee groups. In the early 
version of this algorithm, it performs a kind of local se arch that is combined with a random search and can 
be used for hybrid optimization or functional optimization. This SI -based algorithm has been utilized in 
many studies to search for the optimal feature subset. In (Mauricio Schiezaro and Pedrini 2013 ), an ABC -
based data feature selection is proposed to improve the classification accu racy. In this method, when the 
feature selection problem is represented as a binary vector, the classification accuracy in the classifier is 
used as a fitness function. In (Hancer, Xue et al. 2015 ), a modified artificial bee colony algorithm for 
feature selection problems is proposed. In this method, similarity search mechanisms with existing binary 
ABC variant is integrated for improving the feature selection accuracy. In (Shunmugapriya and Kanmani 
2017 ), Artificial Bee Colony with Ant Colony Optimization is integrated to optimize feature subset 
selection. This hybrid algorithm makes use of the advantages of both ACO and the ABC algorithm, and the 
results show the promising behavior of the proposed algori thm. Cancer et al. (Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) 
proposed a feature selection  method by the combination of the ABC algorithm and the pareto -optimal front 
surface. The authors of this paper used a multi -objective fitness function and genetic operators to improve 
the accuracy of the feature selection method and the convergence of the ABC algorithm . The authors of 
(Arslan and Ozturk 2019 ) proposed a Multi Hive Artificial Bee Colony Programming for high dimensional 
feature selection. In this method, the ability of automatic  programming methods to select truly relevant 
features is investigated in training and test data sets. In (Zhang, Cheng et  al. 2019 ), a feature selection 
method using a two -archive multi -objective artificial bee colony algorithm is proposed. In this method, two 
new operators and are utilized  to enhance its search capability and convergence.  In (Wang, Zhang et al. 
2020 ), an ABC -based feature selection is proposed by integrating  of multi -objective optimization algorithm 
with a sample reduction strategy.  This proposed method has both increased classification accuracy and 
reduced computational complexity.  
 
3.4. DE -based methods  
The Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is an evolutionary algorithm based on swarm intelligence that 
has been proposed to solve various optimization problems. This optimization algorithm is proposed to 
overcome the main flaw of the genetic algorithm, namely the lack of local search in this algo rithm and the 
main difference between it and the genetic algorithms is in the genetic selection operators. DE algorithm is 
utilized in different application s of pattern recognition and feature selection. For example, Al -Ani et al. 
(Al-Ani, Alsukker et al. 2013 ) proposed a wrapper -based feature subset selection using differential 
evolution and a wheel based search strategy. Hancer et al. (Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) developed a multi -
objective differential evolution -based method to select the most relevant feature set and improving 
classification accuracy by eliminating irrelevant and redun dant feat ures. In (Zhang, Gong et al. 2020 ), a 
multi -objective feature selection approach called the Binary Differential Evolution with self -learning 
(MOFS -BDE) is proposed. In this method, a new mutation operator  is introduced to escape the local 

==== Page 10 ====
optimal  based. Furthermore, in  (Hancer 2020 ), a new multi -objective differe ntial evolution approach 
feature selection is proposed to feature selection and improve the performance of  the clustering algorithm 
simultaneously.  
 
3.5. GSA -based methods  
Moreover, some Swarm Intelligence algorithms have been inspired by physical laws. Gravitational Search 
Algorithm  (GSA) is (Rashedi, Nezamabadi -pour et al. 2009 ) a physics -based algorithm inspired by 
Newton’s law of universal gravitation. GSA, a popular swarm intelligence technique, has been widely 
employed in data management, and recently, many feature selection methods have been proposed using this 
optimization algorithm. Han et al. (Han, C hang et al. 2014 ) developed a feature selection method by the 
integration of the GSA algorithm with a linear chaotic map for improving classification accuracy. In 
(Xiang, Han et al. 2015 ), a hybrid system for feature sele ction based on an improved gravitational search 
algorithm and k -NN method is proposed. In this method, a piecewise linear chaotic map for exploration, 
and sequential quadratic programming for exploitation are utilized. In (Taradeh, Mafarja et al. 2019 ), and 
efficient hybrid feature selection method is introduced to utilized the advantages of the Swarm Intelligence 
algorithms and the genetic algorithm for improving the performance of the gravitational search algorithm.  
 
3.6. FA -based methods  
The Firefly Algorithm  (FA)  was introduced by Xin -She Yang, in 20 10 (Yang 2010 ), that, the main idea 
was inspired by the optical connection between fireflies. The Firefly Algorithm is a sensible example of 
swarm intelligence in which low -performance agents can work together to achie ve great results with high 
performance . In (Zhang, Song et al. 2017 ) a novel FA -based feature selection method, called return -cost-
based binary FFA is developed. The authors of t his paper provide a variety of strategies to prevent 
premature convergence of the FA algorithm and thus improve the accuracy of feature selection.  In (Zhang, 
Mistry et al. 2018 ), a feature selection method is developed  using the firefly optimization algorithm to 
increase the accuracy of classification and regression models.  In this method , to improve convergence and 
prevent trapping in loca l optimization, some variation is added to standard FA, which improves the 
accuracy of final feature selection.  Moreover, in (Larabi Marie -Sainte and Alalyani 2020 ) FA-based feature 
selection method is proposed . In this method, after selecting the final features, these features are utilized to 
classify Arabic texts using an SVM classifier. Furthermore, in  (Selvakumar and Muneeswaran 2019 ), 
another FA -based feature selection method is presented for network intrusion detection. In this method, a 
combination of filter -based feature selection method (i.e. , Mutual Information) and wrapper -based feature 
selection method (i.e. , C4.5 and Bayesian network) has been utilized to select the final features . 
 
3.7. BA -based methods  
The Bat Algorithm (BA) (Yang 2010 ) is an algorithm inspired by the collective behavior of bats in the 
natural environment, introduced by Yang in 2010. The bat algorithm is a kind of swarm intelligence -based 
algorithm that is inspired by the echolocation behavior of bats. Bats find the exac t path and location of their 
prey by sending sound waves and receiving reflections. When the sound waves return to the transmitter of 
the bat waves, the bird can draw an audio image of the obstacles in front of its surroundings and see the 
surroundings wel l. In (Tawhid and Dsouza 2018 ), a hybrid variant of bat algorithm and improved PSO 
algorithm is to improve the feature selection performance. In thi s proposed method, the PSO algorithm is 
used to improve the convergence power of the hybrid algorithm. Moreover, in (Liu, Yan et al. 2020 ), a 
binary  BA-based feature selection method for im age steganalysis is proposed.  This method select s the most 
relevant feature from raw features extracted to improve the final detection accuracy.  Furthermore, Azmi 
Al-Betara et al. (Al-Betar, Alomari et al. 2020 ) used the bat algorithm to search optimal features subset to 
increase the accuracy of cancer classification. In this method, a combination of filter and wrapper approach 
was used to improve the performance of feature selection. In this method, robust mRMR as  a filter to select 

==== Page 11 ====
the most relevant  features  and an improved BA algorithm  as a search strategy  in the wrapper approach is 
presented  to select the final feature subset. 
 
3.8. COA -based methods  
The Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm (COA) is another algorithm based on swarm intelligence, inspired by 
the special lifestyle of a bird called the cuckoo  (Rajabioun 2011 ). The specific habitude of laying eggs and 
the reproduction of this bird has been the basis for the formation of this optimization algorithm.  Like other 
evolutionary algorithms, the cuckoo optimization algorithm begins with an initial population of cuckoos. 
This early population of cuckoos has a number of eggs that are placed in the nest of the host bird. Some 
eggs, which  are more similar to host bird eggs, have a better chance of growing into adult birds. The other 
eggs are identified and destroyed by the host butterfly. Grown eggs show that the nest is a better place in 
the search space , and the usefulness of that area i s higher. The goal of the cuckoo optimization algorithm, 
which is the optimization function, is to find the place where most eggs have a more chance to survive. In 
(Elyasigomari, Lee et al.  2017 ), a COA -based feature selection method is developed to improve the cancer 
classification accuracy . In this method, first, the irrelevant features are removed using a simple and fast 
filter -based feature selection. Then, from these relevant feature s, the final features are selected by 
integration wrapper -based feature selection and COA algorithm. In (Jayaraman and Sultana 2019 ), a 
combination method of cuckoo search algorithm and neural network is developed for feature selection.  In 
this method, after selecting a feature subset of non -redundant a nd relevant features, the final chosen 
features are sent to the classifier , and heart disease is classified.  Moreover, in (Prabukumar, Agilandeeswari 
et al. 2019 ), another cuckoo search -based feature selection method is proposed for improving the disease 
diagnosis accura cy. In this method, the process of feature subset selection is optimized using the cuckoo 
search optimization, and then these selected features are sent to the SVM classifier to identify lung cancer.  
 
3.9. GWO -based methods  
Gray Wolf Optimization (GWO) is  a new meta -heuristic algorithm inspired by grey wolves  (Mirjalili, 
Mirjalili et al. 2014 ). This algorithm is one of the latest bio -inspired techniq ues, which simulate the hunting 
process of a pack of gray wolves in nature. The GWO algorithm mimics the leadership hierarchy and 
hunting mechanism of grey wolves in nature. Recently, some GWO -based method has been used as a tool 
for feature selection in d ata mining. In (Emary, Yamany et al. 2015 ), a Multi -Objective GWO was 
employed to search the search most relevant and non -redundant features. This proposed hybrid method uses 
the low computational complexity of the filt er model to improve the performance of the wrapper model. In 
(Emary, Zawbaa et al. 2016 ), a binary version of the GWO is proposed to select the optimal feature subs et 
for classification tasks. In the wrapper -based feature selection method, classification accuracy, and the 
number of selected features are utilized for the fitness function. In (Tu, Chen et al. 2019 ), to improve the 
previous GWO -based method, a multi -strategy ensemble GWO is proposed for feature selection. Moreover, 
Abdel -Basset et al. (Abdel -Basset, El -Shahat et al. 2020 ) proposed a Grey Wolf Opt imizer wrapper -based 
feature selection method integrated with a Mutation operator for data classification. The mutation operator 
presented in this paper tries to reduce the features that increase the redundancy between the selected 
features and add the fea tures that increase the classification accuracy.  
 
3.10. WOA -based methods  
Whale Optimization Algorithm  (WOA)  is another new swarm -based optimization algorithm inspired by the 
hunting behavior of humpback whales (Mirjalili and Lewis 2016 ). This algorithm included three operators 
to simulate the search for prey, encircling prey , and bubble -net foragin g behavior of humpback whales. 
Recently, the Whale Optimization Algorithm is successfully utilized in many different optimization 
problems. In (Mafarja and Mirjalili 2017 ), a hybrid WOA with a simulated annealing method is proposed 
for feature selection. The goal of using simulated annealing in this hybrid method is to enhance the 

==== Page 12 ====
exploitation by searching the most promising regions loca ted by the WOA algorithm. In (Mafarja and 
Mirjalili 2018 ), a wrapper feature selection approach is proposed based on WOA. In this work, tournament 
and roulette wheel selection strategy  and also crossover and mutation operators are utilized  to enhance  the 
exploration and exploitation of the search process of swarm intelligence algorithm s. Nematzadeh et al. 
(Nematzadeh, Enayatifar et al. 2019 ) proposed a frequency -based filter feature selection method using 
whale algorithm on high dimensional medical datasets. In this method, a filter criterion is used to discard 
the irrelevant features using the WOA. T hen, the reminder features are ranked based on another filtering 
method, namely, Mutual Congestion.  
 
3.11. SSA-based methods  
Salp Swarm Algorithm  (SSA)  (Mirjalili, Gandomi et al. 2017 ) another bio -inspired algorith m based on 
swarm intelligence is proposed for solving optimization problems. This algorithm is inspired by the 
swarming behavior of salps when moving and forage in the oceans.  In (Faris, Mafarja et al. 2018 ) an 
efficient binary Salp Swarm Algorithm with crossover scheme is proposed to improve the accuracy of 
feature selection.  Moreover, i n (Ibrahim, Ewees et al. 2019 ) a hybrid optimization method for  the feature 
selection problem is proposed by integration of the slap swarm algorithm with the particle swarm 
optimization. this combination between both swarm optimization algorithms improved the efficacy of the 
exploration and the exploitation steps.  In (Tubishat, Idris et al. 2020 ), integration of Improved SSA and 
novel local search algorithm is developed for the feature selection problem. In this method, the accuracy of 
the classification accuracy of KNN classifier on the training data is used as a fitness function , and the final 
features are selected in a repetitive process.  Also, in this method, to create the initial population, a method 
based on Opposition Based Learning is presented, which has caused d iversity in the initial solutions.  
Furthermore, in (Al-Zoubi, Heidari et al. 2020 ) a Salp Swarm A lgorithm -based feature weighting method is 
developed to predict the presence of liver disorder, heart, and Parkinson’s disease.  Also, i n (Hegazy, 
Makhlouf et al. 2020 ) solution accuracy, reliability and convergence speed of basic SSA is improved by 
adding a new control parameter and inertia weight.  Then this improved algorithm i s tested in feature 
selection problem.  Moreover, in (Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ), a new variant of SSA optimization algorithm 
is proposed for feature selection. In this method, an additional phase is utilized to overcome the problem of 
being stuck in local optima by encouraging the exploration of the search.  
 
 
 
Table 2: Outlining the reviewed swarm intelligence based feature selection method s 
Authors  SI method  Number of Objectives  Type  Application  
(Unler, Murat et al. 2011 ) PSO Single Objective  Hybrid  Numerical  
(Inbarani, Azar et al. 2014 ) PSO Single Objective  Hybrid  Medical  
(Huang and Dun 2008 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Xue, Zhang et al. 2014 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Banka and Dara 2015 ) PSO Multi  Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Yong, Dun -wei et al. 2016 ) PSO Multi  Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Moradi and Gholampour 2016 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Zhang, Gong et al. 2017 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Jain, Jain et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Hybrid  DNA microarray  
(Zhang, Ding et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Filter  Signal  
(Qasim and Algamal 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Prasad, Biswas et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  DNA microarray  
(Pashaei, Pashaei et al. 2019 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Gunasundari, Janakiraman et al. 2018 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Yan, Liang et al. 2019 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  spectroscopy  
(Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ) PSO Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Monirul Kabir, Shahjahan b et al. 2012 ) ACO  Single Objective  Hybrid  Numerical  
(Ying Li, Gang Wang et al. 2013 ) ACO  Single Objective  Wrapper  DNA mi croarray  

==== Page 13 ====
(Chen, Chen et al. 2013 ) ACO  Single Objective  Wrapper  Image  
(Forsati, Moayedikia et al. 2014 ) ACO  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Ke, Feng et al. 2008 ) ACO  Single Objective  Filter  Numerical  
(Tabakhi, Moradi et al. 2014 ) ACO  Single Objective  Filter  Numerical/Medical  
(Moradi and Rostami 2015 ) ACO  Single Objective  Filter  Numerical/Medical  
(Dadaneh, Markid et al. 2016 ) ACO  Single Objective  Filter  Numerical/Medical  
(Liu, Wang et al. 2019 ) ACO  Multi Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Mauricio Schiezaro and Pedrini 2013 ) ABC  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Hancer, Xue et al. 2015 ) ABC  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Shunmugapriya and Kanmani 2017 ) ABC  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) ABC  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Arslan and Ozturk 2019 ) ABC  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Zhang, Cheng et al. 2019 ) ABC  Multi -Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Wang, Zhang et al. 2020 ) ABC  Multi -Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Al-Ani, Alsukker et al. 2013 ) DE Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) DE Multi Objective  Filter  Numerical/Medical  
(Zhang, Gong et al. 2020 ) DE Multi Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Hancer 2020 ) DE Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Han, Chang et al. 2014 ) GSA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Xiang, Han et al. 2015 ) GSA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Taradeh, Mafarja et al. 2019 ) GSA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Zhang, Song et al. 2017 ) FA Multi -Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Zhang, Mistry et al. 2018 ) FA Single Objective  Wrapper  Facial expression  
(Larabi Marie -Sainte and Alalyani 2020 ) FA Single Objective  Wrapper  Text 
(Selvakumar and Muneeswaran 2019 ) FA Single Objective  Hybrid  Network Intrusion  
(Tawhid and Dsouza 2018 ) BA Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Liu, Yan et al. 2020 ) BA Single Objective  Wrapper  Image Steganalysis  
(Al-Betar, Alomari et al. 2020 ) BA Single Objective  Hybrid  Medical  
(Elyasigomari, Lee et al. 2017 ) COA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Jayaraman and Sultana 2019 ) COA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Prabukumar, Agilandeeswari et al. 
2019 ) COA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Gene expression  
(Emary, Yamany et al. 2015 ) GWO  Multi -Objective  Hybrid  Numerical/Medical  
(Emary, Zawbaa et al. 2016 ) GWO  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Tu, Chen et al. 2019 ) GWO  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Abdel -Basset, El -Shahat et al. 2020 ) GWO  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Mafarja and Mirjalili 2017 ) WOA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Mafarja and Mirjalili 2018 ) WOA  Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Nematzadeh, Enayatifar et al. 2019 ) WOA  Single Objective  Filter  Medical  
(Faris, Mafarja et al. 2018 ) SSA Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Ibrahim, Ewees et al. 2019 ) SSA Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical  
(Tubishat, Idris et al. 2020 ) SSA Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Al-Zoubi, Heidari et al. 2020 ) SSA Single Objective  Wrapper  Medical  
(Hegazy, Makhlouf et al. 2020 ) SSA Multi -Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
(Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ) SSA Single Objective  Wrapper  Numerical/Medical  
 
4. Experimental result s 
In this section, the performances of the different swarm intelligence -based feature selection methods are  
evaluated. The results are shown in terms of the number of selected features  and the classification accuracy 
(ACC). The classification accuracy calculated as follows:  

==== Page 14 ====
TP TNACCTP TN FP FN   (1) 
Where  TP, TN, FP, and FN stand for the number of true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false 
negatives, respectively.  
In each experiment, each feature selection method is run ten times , and the mean  and standard deviation 
(square root of its vari ance)  of ten different run s is used to compare different methods. Moreover, in each 
run, each dataset is normalized, and it is randomly divided into a training set (66 % of the dataset) and a test 
set (34 % of the dataset). The training set is utilized for  the feature selection process, while the test set is 
applied for evaluating the proposed feature selection method. To fulfill fair experiments, all evaluated 
methods are carrying out on the same train/test dataset. Due to the randomness of the train and t est set, both 
the average and the standard deviation of the result are reported . In the rem ainder of this section , used 
datasets, utilized  classifiers, evaluated methods , results , and discussion are explained in the following 
subsections.  
 
 4.1. Datasets  
In this study, several datasets, with different specifications, were utilized to evaluate different SI -based 
feature selection methods and compare their performance with each other.  These datasets include 
SpamBase, Sonar, Arrhythmia, Madelon, Isolet , and C olon taken from the UCI repository (Asuncion and 
Newman 2007 ) and have been extensively used in the literature. The basic characteristics of these datasets 
are summarized in Table 3. These datasets have been chosen considering diverse characteristics such as the 
number of features and number of different classes. Fo r example, Colon is a very high dimensional dataset 
with a small sample size, while SpamBase is the example of a low dimensional, with a large sample size 
dataset. Again Isolet is a multi -class dataset that has 26 different kinds of classes.  
In some of the se datasets, different features have different values. In this situation, features with a larger 
value range may dominate the features with a smaller value range, and maybe more likely to be selected. 
To overcome this challenge, before the feature selectio n process, all different datasets are normalized using 
the Max -Min normalization . Using this normalization method, the range of values of all used datasets is 
changed to [0 1] range.  
Moreover, in some of the used datasets, there are several missing values.  To overcome this difficulty, the 
miss values in these features are inserted by averaging the available data corresponding to the available 
features . 
 
 
Table 3: Characteristics of the used medical datasets  
Dataset  Features  Classes  Patterns  
SpamBase  57 2 4601  
Sonar  60 2 208 
Arrhythmia  279 16 351 
Madelon  500 2 4400  
Isolet  617 26 1559  
Colon  2000  2 62 
 
 
4.2. The utilized  Classifier  
To evaluate the generalizability of the proposed methods in different classifiers, in these experiments , three  
classifiers , including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Naïve Bayes (NB), and AdaBoost (AB) are utilized.  

==== Page 15 ====
Support vector machine SVM is one of the supervised learning algorithm s that was proposed  by Vapnik . 
The goal of SVM is to maximize the margin between data samples , and in recent years it has shown good 
performance for classification and regression problem s. Naïve Bayes  (NB)  is a group of simple 
probabilistic classification algorithms based on the probability that classifies data by assuming the 
independence of rando m variables and using the base theorem. AdaBoost (AB), short for "Adaptive 
Boosting ", which is a machine learning meta -algorithm formulated by Yoav Freund and Robert Schapire . 
An AdaBoost classifier is a meta -estimator that begins by fitting a classifier a nd then fits additional copies 
of it on the same dataset, and then the weights of incorrectly classified instances are adjusted such that 
subsequent classifiers focus more on severe cases.  
The experimental workbench is Weka (Waikato environment for knowle dge analysis) (Hall, Frank et al. ), 
which is a collection of data mining  methods . In this work, SMO, Naïve Bayes , and AdaBoostM1 as the 
WEKA implementation of SVM, NB , and AB were used.  
4.3. The evaluated methods  
In these experiments, to compare the performance of different methods of selecting a feature based on, 
from each SI -based algorithm, one feature selection method was chosen and evaluated in the experimental 
result. For a fair evaluation, all of the methods  examined in this section were selected from among wrapper -
based methods. Due to the inherent differences between filter -based and wrapper -based feature selection 
methods, which usually filter -based model have lower computational complexity and wrapper -based 
models have higher accuracy, it is not possible to compare these methods . For a fairer comparison, the 
performed experiments in this section are divided into two separate parts, in the first part the wrapper -based 
methods and in the second part the filt er-based methods were compared with each other.  
These wrapper -based methods include  PSO-based (Xue, Tang  et al. 2020 ), ACO -based (Liu, Wang et al. 
2019 ), AB C-based (Wang, Zhang et al. 2020 ), DE-based (Hancer 2020 ), GSA -based (Taradeh, Mafarja et 
al. 2019 ), FA-based (Selvakumar and Muneeswaran 2019 ), BA -based (Tawhid and Dsouza 2018 ), COA -
based (Elyasigomari, Lee et al. 2017 ), GWO -based (Abdel -Basset, El -Shahat et al. 2020 ), WOA -based 
(Mafarja and Mirjalili 2018 ) and SSA -based (Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ). Furthermore , filter -based 
methods include PSO -based (Zhang, Ding et al. 2018 ), ACO -based (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), DE-based. 
(Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) and WOA -based (Nematzadeh, Enayatifar et al. 2019 ). 
 Moreover,  all these meth ods are implemented using C# on an Intel Core -i7 CPU with 8GB of RAM.  
4.4. Results  
In these  experiments, the  classification  accuracy  and feature subset size are used as the performance 
evaluation criteria . In the experiments, first , the performances of different  wrapper  SI-based feature 
selection  method s are compared  over different classifiers. Tables 4 summarize the average classification 
accuracy (in %) over ten independent runs of the different SI-based wrapper feature selection  methods  
using SVM, NB , and AB classifiers.  Each entry of the Tables 4 denotes the mean value as well as standard 
deviation (shown in parenthesis) of ten independent runs. The best result is indicated in bold face and 
underlined , and the second -best is in bold face . Table 4 reveals that , in most cases , the PSO-based  method 
performs better than the other  SI-based  feature selection method. For example, in SpamBase dataset on the 
SVM classifier, PSO -based method obtained a 92.84 % classification accuracy . In contrast,  for ACO, A BC, 
DE, GSA, FA, BA, COA, GWO, WOA , and SSA -based method, these values were reported.91.87, 90.32, 
88.78,  88.09, 87.91, 90. 83, 91.16, 91.73, 88.64 and 90.19, correspondingly.  
Table 4: Average classification accuracy rate and as standard deviation (shown in parenthesis) over ten runs of the 
wrapper -based feature selection methods using SVM, Naive Bayes , and AdaBoost classifier.  The best result is 
indicated in bold face and underlined , and the second -best is in bold face.  
Dataset  Method  Classifier  

==== Page 16 ====
SVM  Naive Bayes  AdaBoost  
SpamBase  PSO 92.84 (2.83)  92.31 (1.56)  92.75 (2.35)  
ACO  91.87 (1.83)  89.76 (2.82)  90.66 (2.91)  
ABC  90.32 (2.09)  89.91 (1.93)  91.91 (3.13)  
DE 88.78 (2.54)  88.32 (2.19)  89.94 (2.87)  
GSA  88.09 (1.96)  87.98 (2.02)  88.27 (2.62)  
FA 87.91 (2.17)  92.04 (1.82)  90.45 (1.93)  
BA 90. 83 (2.94)  89.73 (2.37)  90.65 (1.76)  
COA  91.16 (1.65)  90.83 (2.74)  90.77 (1.84)  
GWO  91.73 (1.87)  91.85 (3.09)  91.84 (2.90)  
WOA  88.64 (2.37)  88.93 (2.18)  90.38 (1.45)  
SSA 90.19 (2.26)  90.06 (1.78)  90.19 (2.89)  
Sonar  PSO 88.14 (2.47)  87.91 (2. 29) 86.93 (3.11)  
ACO  88.78 (2.87)  87.32 (3. 42) 85.81 (2.63)  
ABC  87.93 (1.82)  87.12 (2.81)  86.78 (1.15)  
DE 85.15 (2.78)  85.19 (2.22)  84.93 (2.81)  
GSA  84.71 (1.69)  85.11 (1.34)  85.62 (1.83)  
FA 84.92 (2.38)  84.19 (2.41)  86.62 (3.19)  
BA 84.03 (1.83)  84.66 (3.83)  85.92 (2.58 ) 
COA  84.73 (2.48)  89.84 (2.14)  85.28 (1.94)  
GWO  85.42 (1.19)  85.31 (2.27)  85.73 (2.08)  
WOA  86.11 (2.78)  85.65 (2.48)  85.98 (2.69)  
SSA 87.04 (3.02)  87.26 (2.19)  86.12 (2.73)  
Arrhythmia  PSO 86.41 (2.71)  86.05 (2.61)  85.94 (2.37)  
ACO  84.92 (2.38)  86.23 (2.75)  85.71 (2.83)  
ABC  85.14 (2.83)  85.72 (1.85)  84.31 (1.86)  
DE 82.28 (3.07)  84.78 (2.39)  83.81 (2.35)  
GSA  81.79 (2.47)  84.18 (2.61)  84.21 (2.66)  
FA 82.29 (1.74)  83.28 (1.95)  82.18 (1.97)  
BA 83.36 (2.85)  84.73 (2.91)  83.46 (2.74)  
COA  83.91 (2.79)  88.91 (2.63)  82.31 (2.81)  
GWO  82.05 (1.96)  85.34 (1.79)  84.92 (1.70)  
WOA  83.38 (1.45)  83.61 (2.94)  83.38 (2.44)  
SSA 81.84 (2.93)  82.29 (2.09)  82.86 (2.39)  
Madelon  PSO 86.67 (3.17)  86.63 (2.47)  86.16 (1.74)  
ACO  86.19 (2.28)  85.95 (1.38)  86.03 (2.18)  
ABC  87.54 (2.73)  87.18 (1.81)  86.08 (2.91)  
DE 85.14 (2.16)  85.05 (2.81)  85.92 (3.15)  
GSA  84.38 (3.19)  84.88 (1.92)  84.67 (2.72)  
FA 85.08 (2.82)  86.95 (1.19)  85.81 (2.38)  
BA 84.93 (1.84)  85.07 (2.39)  84.91 (1.96)  
COA  85.26 (2.62)  85.19 (1.83)  85.83 (2.67)  
GWO  84.27 (2.81)  85.19 (1.92)  85.37 (2.49)  
WOA  84.93 (2.37)  84.64 (2.37)  85.04 (2.38)  
SSA 85.09 (1.98)  84.94 (1.64)  84.77 (1.63)  
Isolet  PSO 85.61 (1.33)  85.37 (1.92)  85.41 (2.31)  
ACO  85.21 (1.91)  85.18 (1.82)  85.31 (2.39)  
ABC  84.32 (2.93)  84.91 (2.36)  84.51 (1.77)  
DE 83.81 (2.92)  83.04 (1.73)  83.71 (2.37)  
GSA  84.04 (1.86)  84.23 (2.28)  83.81 (1.73)  
FA 84.78 (2.33)  84.01 (1.82)  84.66 (2.53)  
BA 83.91 (1.87)  83.19 (1.69)  83.81 (1.48)  
COA  85.01 (1.82)  84.81 (2.83)  85.01 (2.91)  
GWO  84.32 (2.76)  84.48 (1.91)  84.39 (2.71)  
WOA  84.51 (1.64)  84.01 (2.19)  83.92 (3.38)  
SSA 85.19 (2.81)  85.09 (2.31)  84.93 (2.61)  
Colon  PSO 96.41 (2.81)  96.19 (2.31)  96.33 (2.39)  
ACO  96.11 (1.72)  95.72 (1.81)  96.15 (1.81 ) 
ABC  93.71 (2.82)  92.81 (3.92)  92.81 (2.62)  
DE 92.29 (2.38)  91.18 (2,73)  90.91 (1.88)  
GSA  93.72 (1.84)  92.19 (1.92)  92.01 (1.03)  
FA 90.37 (1.39)  90.09 (2.71)  91.26 (1.81)  
BA 92.28 (1.67)  91.26 (1.77)  91.25 (2.70)  
COA  96.57 (3.19)  95.88 (2.98)  96.42 (1.78)  
GWO  93.33 (2.82)  92.85 (2.71)  92.91 (3.11)  

==== Page 17 ====
WOA  91.19 (3.26)  90.88 (1.61)  91.27 (2.66)  
SSA 95.91 (2.18)  94.81 (2.60)  95.81 (2.36)  
 
Moreover, Figures 1 to 3 show the average classification accuracy over all datasets on the SVM, Naive Bayes , 
and AdaBoost classifiers, respectively. As can be seen in these figures, on SVM and AB  classifiers , the PSO -based 
method had the highe st average classification accuracy , and on the Naive Bayes classifier , COA -based method won 
the highest rank. T he results of Figure 1 show that the PSO -based obtained 89.35  % average classification accuracy 
and achieved the first rank with a margin of 0.50 percent compared to the ACO -based method , which obtained the 
second -best average classification accuracy . Moreover, from the Figure 2 results , it can be seen that the differences 
between the obtained classification accuracy  of the COA -based method and the second -best ones  (PSO -based)  and 
third -best ones  (ACO -based)  on Naive Bayes classifier  were reported 0.16 (i.e., 89.24 – 89.08 ) and 0.88 (89.24 -
88.36) percent . Furthermore, on the AB classifier , the PSO -based feature selection method gained the first rank with 
an average classification accuracy of 88.92 %, and the ACO -based and ABC -based feature selection methods  were 
ranked second and third with an average classification accuracy of 88.28 % and  87.73 % , respectively.  
 
 
Figure 1: Average classification accuracy over all datasets on the SVM classifier  (wrapper -based methods) . 
 
 8384858687888990
PSO ACO ABC DE GSA FA BA COA GWO WOA SSAAverage Classification Accuracy (in 
%)
Different SI -Based Methods
84.58585.58686.58787.58888.58989.5
PSO ACO ABC DE GSA FA BA COA GWO WOA SSAAverage Classification Accuracy (in 
%)
Different SI -Based Methods

==== Page 18 ====
Figure 2: Average classification accuracy over all datasets on the Naive Bayes classifier  (wrapper -based methods).  
 
 
Figure 3: Average classification accuracy over all datasets on the AdaBoost  classifier  (wrapper -based methods).  
 
 
 
Table 5 records the number of  selected features of the eleven wrapper SI-based feature selection methods 
for each dataset. It can be observed that, generally, all the eleven methods achieve a significant reduction of 
dimensionality by selecting only a small portion of the original features. Among the various methods, in the 
Arrhythmia, Madelon, Isolet , and Colon dataset s, the PSO -based method has the best performance among 
the other SI -based, selecting only  7.21,  14.87, 22.95 , and 0.58 %, respectively . Moreover, in the SpamBase  
and Sonar  dataset s, the ACO -base method selected  an average of 8.18  and 7.11  features,  respectively.  
 
Table 5: Average number of selected features of the different wrapper SI-based methods . (Minimum number of 
selected features is indicated in bold face and underlined and the second best is in bold face)  
Dataset  Number of the 
original feature  Method  Number of 
selected features  The ratio of the 
selected features to 
the original features  
(in %)  
SpamBase  57 PSO 8.91 15.63  
ACO  8.18 14.35  
ABC  8.98 15.75  
DE 9.32 16.35  
GSA  10.12  17.75  
FA 10.03  17.60  
BA 10.78  18.91  
COA  9.64 16.91  
GWO  10.73  18.82  
WOA  11.62  20.39  
SSA 9.17 16.09  
Sonar  60 PSO 7.32 12.20  
ACO  7.11 11.85  
ABC  7.89 13.15  
DE 8.19 13.65  
GSA  8.28 13.80  
FA 7.98 13.30  
BA 8.08 13.47  
COA  7.26 12.10  
GWO  9.71 16.18  
WOA  8.48 14.13  
SSA 8.31 13.85  858687888990
PSO ACO ABC DE GSA FA BA COA GWO WOA SSAAverage Classification Accuracy (in %)
Different SI -Based Methods

==== Page 19 ====
Arrhythmia  279 PSO 20.12 7.21 
ACO  21.88  7.84 
ABC  20.96  7.51 
DE 23.14  8.29 
GSA  22.61  8.1 
FA 24.08  8.63 
BA 22.83  8.18 
COA  21.39  7.67 
GWO  23.94  8.58 
WOA  22.06  7.91 
SSA 23.70  8.49 
Madelon  500 PSO 74.35  14.87  
ACO  68.91  13.78  
ABC  75.19  15.04  
DE 77.84  15.57  
GSA  81.56  16.31  
FA 82.93  16.59  
BA 88.48  17.70  
COA  82.38  16.48  
GWO  79.19  15.84  
WOA  85.73  17.15  
SSA 78.03  15.61  
Isolet  617 PSO 141.63  22.95  
ACO  142.56 23.10  
ABC  172.78  28.00  
DE 163.98  26.58  
GSA  159.62  25.87  
FA 152.83  24.77  
BA 143.48  23.25  
COA  145.85  23.64  
GWO  158.61  25.71  
WOA  164.92  26.73  
SSA 147.67  23.93  
Colon  2000  PSO 11.63  0.58 
ACO  12.98 0.64 
ABC  13.26  0.66 
DE 13.64  0.68 
GSA  12.76  0.64 
FA 12.29  0.61 
BA 13.61  0.68 
COA  12.06  0.60 
GWO  14.98  0.75 
WOA  13.21  0.66 
SSA 12.45  0.62 
 
Also, several experiments were conducted to compare the execution time of different wrapper SI-
based feature selection methods. In these experiments, corresponding execution times (in second ) 
for each method, were reported in Table 6. Due to the fact that the feature selection process and 
the final classification process are independent, only the  execution time for feature selection is 
reported in the data in this Table. It can be seen from the results that generally the single objective 
SI-based feature selection methods are much faster than the multi objective SI -based feature 
selection methods (i.e., ACO -based and ABC -based ). This is due to the fact that in multi 
objective methods, several different criteria are usually considered to calculate the fitness of 
solutions ; thus, these methods can be computationally more  expensive than the single obj ective  
methods. Moreover, the reported results revealed that the PSO -based feature selection method has 
the lowest average execution time over all dataset  among all other methods. After the PSO -based  
method, WOA -based  and GSA -based  methods ranked second and third, respectively . 
 

==== Page 20 ====
Table 6: Average execution time (in second ) of wrapper feature selection methods over ten independent runs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All of the methods evaluated in the first part of this subsection were in the category of wrapper -based 
feature selection methods. In the reminder of this subsection, some SI -based methods that use filter 
approaches  to search the final feature subset will be evaluated.  These methods include PSO -based (Zhang, 
Ding et al. 2018 ), ACO -based (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ), DE-based (Hancer, Xue et al. 2018 ) and WOA -
based (Nematzadeh, Enayatifar et al. 2019 ). 
In the first experiments, the performances of different filter -based methods are evaluated over different 
classifiers. Tables 7 record the average classification accuracy (in %) over ten independent runs of the 
different filter SI-based feature selection methods using SVM, NB, and AB classifiers.  Each entry of the 
Tables 7 shows  the mean value as well as standard deviation (shown in parenthesis) of ten independent 
runs. The reported results of this Table shows  that, in most cases, the ACO -based method performs better 
than the other  filter  SI-based feature selection method. For example, in colon  dataset on the SVM classifier, 
ACO -based method obtained 84.53  % classification accuracy. In contrast, for PSO, DE and  WOA -based 
method, these values were reported  81.42 , 79.37 , and 78.81 , respectively . 
 
Table 7: Average classification accuracy rate and as standard deviation (shown in parenthesis) over ten runs of the 
filter -based feature selection methods using SVM, Naiv e Bayes, and AdaBoost classifier. The best result is indicated in 
bold face and underlined, and the second -best is in bold face.  
Dataset  Method  Classifier  
SVM  Naive Bayes  AdaBoost  
SpamBase  PSO 87.32 (1.83)  86.51 (2.35)  87.98 (3.24)  
ACO  88.54 (2.11)  87.67 (2.29)  88.20 (1.78)  
DE 88.13 (1.64)  88.01 (2.81)  87.62 (2.71)  
WOA  87.06 (1.82)  86.69 (2.95)  86.17 (1.94)  
Sonar  PSO 86.03 (2.13) 86.79 (2.43) 85.93 (3.72) 
ACO  87.74 (1.67) 86.28 (3.17) 85.28 (2.39) 
DE 86.21 (2.28) 85.63 (2.38) 85.89 (2.25) 
WOA  86.13 (3.15) 86.12 (2.92) 84.93 (2.59) 
Arrhythmia  PSO 61.32 (1.98)  61.84 (2.39)  60.95 (1.71)  
ACO  60.73 (2.93)  60.08 (2.19)  61.38 (2.48)  
DE 60.85 (4.86)  60.13 (2.36)  59.22 (2.70)  
WOA  60.01 (2.72)  59.94 (2.73)  60.03 (1.94)  
Madelon  PSO 75.61 (2.84)  74.58 (2.16)  74.86 (2.66)  
ACO  75.32 (3.06)  75.12 (2.81)  74.93 (2.87)  
DE 73.28 (2.93)  72.98 (3.09)  73.38 (1.72)  
WOA  73.71 (1.69)  73.14 (2.62)  72.86 (2.39)  
Isolet  PSO 81.23 (2.75)  80.72 (2.31)  81.43 (2.38)  
ACO  80.28 (2.94)  80.46 (1.98)  80.98 (1.16)  
DE 81.09 (2.98)  80.02 (2.72)  81.16 (2.61)  
WOA  80.14 (3.11)  79.81 (1.08)  80.02 (1.09)  
Colon  PSO 81.42 (2.19)  80.98 (3.81)  81.38 (1.98)  
ACO  84.53 (1.92)  84.13 (2.63)  84.77 (2.13)  Dataset  Wrapper -based feature selection method  
PSO  ACO  ABC  DE GSA  FA BA COA  GWO  WOA  SSA 
SpamBase  6.78 8.41 8.93 9.44 6.82 7.68 7.83 9.12 8.73 7.11 8.64 
Sonar  4.19 7.81 8.27 7.93 6.54 6.08 7.18 7.19 8.63 5.09 7.62 
Arrhythmia  21.93  27.81  29.98 27.18 22.38  24.71  23.49  25.62  26.03  24.78 26.61  
Madelon  89.51  98.32  108.67 109.67  99.32  101.56  105.84  99.53  104.86  88.73  101.78  
Isolet  48.18  51.4 58.90 55.09  48.91  55.78  54.32  48.18  56.71  48.36 52.07  
Colon  59.81  78.42  61.76  60.31  54.78  58.17  59.46  53.77  59.14  58.92 54.05  
Average  38.4 45.36  46.09  44.94  39.79  42.33  43.02  40.57  44.02  38.83  41.8 

==== Page 21 ====
DE 79.37 (2.83)  79.14 (3.17)  79.06 (2.41)  
WOA  78.81 (1.08)  79.56 (2.62)  78.12 (1.81)  
 
Also, Figures 4 indicates the average classification accuracy over all datasets on the SVM, Naive Bayes,  and 
AdaBoost classifiers . As can be seen in these reported results, on all classifiers , the ACO -based method had the 
highest average classification accuracy. For example, this figure  show s that the ACO -based obtained 79.52  % 
average classification accuracy  on SVM classifier  and achieved the first rank with a margin of 0. 70 percent 
compared to the PSO-based method, which obtained the second -best average classification accuracy.  Furthermore, 
on the AB classifiers, the ACO -based feature selection method gained the first rank with an average classification 
accuracy of 79.26 %, and the PSO-based and DE-based feature selection methods were ranked second and third with 
an average classification accuracy of 78.76 % and 77.72 %, respectively.  
 
 
Figure 4: Average classification accuracy over all datasets  on different classifiers  (wrapper -based methods).  
 
Moreover , in the Table 8 corresponding execution times (in second) for each filter SI -based 
feature selection method, were reported. Similar to previous execution time table, only the time of 
the feature selection process is considered as the execution tim e, in the Table 8. It can be seen that 
the multi  objective wrapper feature selection method (i.e. DE -based method)  has a higher 
execution time than other single objective methods . Moreover, the reported results revealed that 
the PSO -based feature selection method has the lowest average execution time over all dataset  
among all other methods. After the PSO -based method, ACO -based methods ranked second.  
 
Table 8: Average execution t ime (in second) of filter feature selection methods over ten independent runs.  75.57676.57777.57878.57979.580
SVM Naive Bayes AdaBoostAverage Classification Accuracy (in %)
ClassifierPSO ACO DE WOA
Dataset  Filter -based feature selection method  
PSO  ACO  DE WOA  
SpamBase  3.47 4.19 4.97 4.32 
Sonar  0.17 0.43 0.79 0.36 
Arrhythmia  5.42 7.81 11.47  9.54 

==== Page 22 ====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.5. Discussion  
In this section, the strengths and weaknesses of the methods studied will be evaluated, and the factors that 
can lead to the superiority of a feature selection method will be analyzed . 
1- Since each classifier has certain properties, the single classifiers ar e usually less accurate and 
generalization than the wrapper -based feature selection model that uses a combination of multiple 
classifiers. In other words, multiple -classifiers are usually highly accurate due to the diversity of used 
classifiers and the pre diction performance of each single classifier.  Unlike other compared  wrapper  SI-
based feature selection methods that utilize a single classifier in their feature selection process to 
calculate the quality of a generated feature set, in the wrapper PSO-based feature selection method  
(Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ), four different classifiers include SVM , LDA, KNN, and  ELM, are used as 
evaluation functions.  
2- Given that in a large data set, the number of unrelated and redundant features has also increased, it is 
possible that evolutionary algorithms will be stuck in the local optimal. Moreover, m any SI -based 
methods that use wrapper approaches to search for the optimal features subset are usually highly 
computationally complex and inefficient in high -dimensional datasets. Among the evaluated wrapper 
SI-based feature selection methods in this secti on, the PSO-based (Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ), ACO -based 
(Liu, Wang et al. 2019 ) COA -based (Elyasigomari, Lee et al. 2017 ), and SSA-based (Neggaz, Ewees 
et al. 2020 ) feature selection method s, highly accurate in the high-dimensional dataset (i.e. , colon 
dataset with 2000 features), while other evaluated SI -based methods were only effective in low -
dimensional data sets.  
3- One of the main goals of an efficient feature selection method is to ident ify the optimal number of 
required features for the machine learning task  and prevent the selection of too many or too few 
features during their feature selection process. If too many features are selected in a feature selection 
method, the probability of selecting redundant and irrelevant features will be increased ; as a result, the 
prediction accuracy will be decreased. On the other hand, if too few features are selected, they will not 
be able to represent all the information of original features . Among t he studied methods in this paper, 
multi -objective methods and methods that took into account the number of selected features in their 
fitness function showed better performance , and the number of final selected features by these methods 
were fewer.  
4- Exploration of the search space and exploitation of the best solutions found are two conflicting 
objectives  that must be taken into account when using a swarm intelligence -based method.  Exploration 
means to generate diverse solutions so as to explore the s earch space on a global scale, while 
exploitation means to focus the search in a good solution region. A good balance between these two 
objectives will improve the performance of the searching method.  Good SI -based feature selection 
methods should  employ d ifferent strateg ies for their search process es, in order to develop a powerful 
method with a better balance between exploration and exploitation capabilities and better convergence 
speed.  Among the studied wrapper methods in this paper, PSO-based (Xue, Tang et al. 2020 ), ACO -Madelon  11.34  14.87  12.38  12.98  
Isolet  9.65 10.32  11.94  10.62  
Colon  16.81  19.41  22.67  17.42  
Average  7.81 9.50 10.70  9.20 

==== Page 23 ====
based (Liu, Wang et al. 2019 ), ABC -based , SSA-based (Neggaz, Ewees et al. 2020 ) method, 
demonstrated better performance in balancing the factors of exploration and exploitation.  Furthermore, 
among the evaluated filter -based methods, the A CO-based  method (Moradi and Rostami 2015 ) showed 
the best performance for the balance between exploration and exploitation . 
5- A feature selection method can be evaluated from two aspects: efficiency and effectiveness. The  
efficiency of a feature selection method depends on the required time to find the final feature subset. 
While effectiveness depends on the quality of the selected feature subset. These two criteria have been 
in conflict with each other, and usually, the i mprovement of one of them leads to the reduction of the 
other. Therefore, balancing these two criteria is an important and necessary issue in feature selection. 
Wrapper -based feature selection methods, due to the use of the learning algorithm in the featur e 
selection process, will be able to effectively select a feature subset of relevant and non -redundant 
features. Therefore, these wrapper -based methods are usually highly accurate. On the other, these 
methods have high computational complexity and will hav e a high execution time in high -dimensional 
datasets. Also, filter -based methods are much more efficient than wrapper -based methods in terms of 
computational complexity due to the lack of learning algorithms in the feature selection process. But 
most filte r-based methods converge to local optimal, and the quality of the selected subset in this 
approach is usually less than the wrapper -based methods.  
 
5. Conclusion s 
With the advancement of data collection technologies and the increasing capacity of data storage over the last decades, 
high-dimensional datasets have grown significantly. Usually, many features of these datasets are irrelevant or 
redundant , which reduce s the performance of the prediction model . Feature selection plays an essential role in mac hine 
learning and , more specifically , in the high-dimensional dataset . Reducing the size of the medical dataset , on the one 
hand,  reduces the computational complexity and , on the other hand, decrees the parameters of the classification 
algorithm. As a resu lt, the accuracy of the prediction model  will be  increased.  In the past decades, the rapid growth 
of computer and database technologies has led to the rapid growth of large -scale datasets. On the other 
hand, data mining applications with high dimensional datasets that require high speed and accuracy are 
rapidly increasing.  An important issue with these applications is the curse of dimensionality , where the 
number of features is much greater than the number of patterns . One of the dimensionality reduction 
approaches is feature selection that can increase the accuracy of the data mining task and reduce its 
computational complexity. The feature selection method aims at selecting a subset of features with the 
lowest inner similarity and highest relevancy to the  target class. It reduces the dimensionality of the data by 
eliminating irrelevant, redundant, or noisy data.  
In this paper , comparative analysis and categorization of different feature selection methods are presented . 
Moreover, in this paper, wrapper and filter SI-based method  (i.e., PSO, ACO, ABC. DE, GSA, FA, BA, 
COA, GWO, WOA , and SSA)  and its application in feature selection  are studied . Furthermore, the 
strengths and weaknesses of the different studied SI-based feature selection methods are evaluated, and the 
factors that can lead to the superiority of these methods  are analyzed.  
 
References  
Abdel -Basset, M., D. El -Shahat, I. El -henawy, Victor  Hugo  C. de  Albuquerque and S. Mirjalili (2020). 
"A new fusion of grey wolf optimizer algorithm with a two -phase mutation for feature selection." Expert 
Systems with Applications 139: 112824.  
Ahmed K. Far ahat, Ali Ghodsi and M. S. Kamel (2013). "Efficient greedy feature selection for 
unsupervised learning." Knowledge and Information Systems 35(2): 285 -310. 

==== Page 24 ====
Al-Ani, A., A. Alsukker and R. N. Khushaba (2013). "Feature subset selection using differential evolu tion 
and a wheel based search strategy." Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 9: 15-26. 
Al-Betar, M. A., O. A. Alomari and S. M. Abu -Romman (2020). "A TRIZ -inspired bat algorithm for gene 
selection in cancer classification." Genomics 112(1): 114 -126. 
Al-Zoub i, A. M., A. A. Heidari, M. Habib, H. Faris, I. Aljarah and M. A. Hassonah (2020). Salp Chain -
Based Optimization of  Support Vector Machines and Feature Weighting for Medical Diagnostic 
Information Systems. Evolutionary Machine Learning Techniques: Algorith ms and Applications. S. 
Mirjalili, H. Faris and I. Aljarah. Singapore, Springer Singapore : 11-34. 
Alshamlan, H. M., G. H. Badr and Y. A. Alohali (2015). "Genetic Bee Colony (GBC) algorithm: A new 
gene selection method for microarray cancer classification."  Computational Biology and Chemistry 56: 
49-60. 
Anil K. Jain, Robert P. W. Duin and J. Mao (2000). "Statistical pattern recognition: a review." Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on 22(1): 4 -37. 
Arslan, S. and C. Ozturk (2019). "M ulti Hive Artificial Bee Colony Programming for high dimensional 
symbolic regression with feature selection." Applied Soft Computing 78: 515 -527. 
Asuncion, A. and D. Newman (2007). "UCI repository of machine learning datasets." Availablefrom: 
<http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.html >. 
Bandyopadhyay, S., T. Bhadra, P. Mitra and U. Maulik (2014). "Integration of dense subgraph finding 
with feature clustering for unsupervised feature selection." P attern Recognition Letters 40: 104 -112. 
Banka, H. and S. Dara (2015). "A Hamming distance based binary particle swarm optimization 
(HDBPSO) algorithm for high dimensional feature selection, classification and validation." Pattern 
Recognition Letters 52: 94-100. 
Barak, S., J. H. Dahooie and T. Tichý (2015). "Wrapper ANFIS -ICA method to do stock market timing 
and feature selection on the basis of Japanese Candlestick." Expert Systems with Applications 42(23): 
9221 -9235.  
Basir, M. A., & Ahmad, F. (2014). Compa rison on Swarm Algorithms for Feature Selections Reductions. 
Int. J. Sci. Eng. Res , 5, 479 -486. 
Battiti, R. (1994). "Using mutual information for selecting features in supervised neural net learning." 
Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on 5(4): 537 -550. 
Bi, N., C. Y. Suen, N. Nobile and J. Tan (2019). "A multi -feature selection approach for gender 
identification of handwriting based on kernel mutual information." Pattern Recognition Letters 121: 123 -
132. 
Brezočnik, L., I. Fister and V. Podgorelec (2018). "S warm intelligence algorithms for feature selection: a 
review." Applied Sciences 8(9): 1521.  
Cadenas, J. M., M. C. Garrido and R. Martínez (2013). "Feature subset selection Filter –Wrapper based on 
low quality data." Expert Systems with Applications 40(16): 6241 -6252.  
Carmen Lai, Marcel J.T. Reinders and L. Wessels (2006). "Random subspace method for multivariate 
feature selection." Pattern Recognition Letters 27(10): 067 –1076.  

==== Page 25 ====
Chandrashekar, G. and F. Sahin (2014). "A survey on feature selection methods." Co mputers & Electrical 
Engineering 40(1): 16 -28. 
Chen, B., L. Chen and Y. Chen (2013). "Efficient ant colony optimization for image feature selection." 
Signal Processing 93(6): 1566 -1576.  
Chen, H., T. Li, X. Fan and C. Luo (2019). "Feature selection for imbalanced data based on neighborhood 
rough sets." Information Sciences 483: 1-20. 
Cheng -Lung Huang and C. -Y. Tsai (2009). "A hybrid SOFM -SVR with a filter -based feature selection for 
stock market forecasting." Expert Systems with Applications 36(2): Pages 1529 -1539.  
Chuen -Horng Lin, Huan -Yu Chen and Y. -S. Wua (2014). "Study of image retrieval and classification 
based on adaptive features using genetic algorithm feature selection." Expert Sys tems with Applications 
41(15): 6611 –6621.  
Dadaneh, B. Z., H. Y. Markid and A. Zakerolhosseini (2016). "Unsupervised probabilistic feature 
selection using ant colony optimization." Expert Systems with Applications 53: 27-42. 
Ding, D., X. Yang, F. Xia, T. Ma , H. Liu and C. Tang (2020). "Unsupervised feature selection via 
adaptive hypergraph regularized latent representation learning." Neurocomputing 378: 79-97. 
Elyasigomari, V., D. A. Lee, H. R. C. Screen and M. H. Shaheed (2017). "Development of a two -stage 
gene selection method that incorporates a novel hybrid approach using the cuckoo optimization algorithm 
and harmony search for cancer classification." Journa l of Biomedical Informatics 67: 11-20. 
Emary, E., W. Yamany, A. E. Hassanien and V. Snasel (2015). "Multi -Objective Gray -Wolf Optimization 
for Attribute Reduction." Procedia Computer Science 65: 623 -632. 
Emary, E., H. M. Zawbaa and A. E. Hassanien (2016). "Binary grey wolf optimization approaches for 
feature selection." Neurocomputing 172: 371 -381. 
Estévez, P. A., M. Tesmer, C. A. Perez and J. M. Zurada (2009). "Normalized mutual information feature 
selection." Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on 20(2): 1 89-201. 
Faris, H., M. M. Mafarja, A. A. Heidari, I. Aljarah, A. M. Al -Zoubi, S. Mirjalili and H. Fujita (2018). "An 
efficient binary Salp Swarm Algorithm with crossover scheme for feature selection problems." 
Knowledge -Based Systems 154: 43-67. 
Ferreira, A . J. and M. A. Figueiredo (2012). "An unsupervised approach to feature discretization and 
selection." Pattern Recognition 45(9): 3048 -3060.  
Figueiredo, E., M. Macedo, H. V. Siqueira, C. J. Santana, A. Gokhale and C. J. A. Bastos -Filho (2019). 
"Swarm intell igence for clustering — A systematic review with new perspectives on data mining." 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 82: 313 -329. 
Forsati, Moayedikia, Jensen, Shamsfard and Meybodi. (2014). "Enriched ant colony optimization and its 
applic ation in feature selection." Neurocomputing 142: 354 -371. 
Ghaemi, M. and M. -R. Feizi -Derakhshi (2016). "Feature selection using Forest Optimization Algorithm." 
Pattern Recognition 60: 121 -129. 

==== Page 26 ====
Ghimatgar, H., K. Kazemi, M. S. Helfroush and A. Aarabi (2018).  "An improved feature selection 
algorithm based on graph clustering and ant colony optimization." Knowledge -Based Systems 159: 270 -
285. 
Gokalp, O., E. Tasci and A. Ugur (2020). "A novel wrapper feature selection algorithm based on iterated 
greedy metaheuri stic for sentiment classification." Expert Systems with Applications 146: 113176.  
Gong, D., B. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Guo and S. Yang (2020). "A Similarity -Based Cooperative Co -
Evolutionary Algorithm for Dynamic Interval Multiobjective Optimization Problems." IE EE Transactions 
on Evolutionary Computation 24(1): 142 -156. 
González, J., J. Ortega, M. Damas, P. Martín -Smith and J. Q. Gan (2019). "A new multi -objective 
wrapper method for feature selection – Accuracy and stability analysis for BCI." Neurocomputing 333: 
407-418. 
Gunasundari, S., S. Janakiraman and S. Meenambal (2018). "Multiswarm heterogeneous binary PSO 
using win -win approach for improved feature selection in liver and kidney disease diagnosis." 
Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 70: 135 -154. 
Hall, M., E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann and I. Witten "The WEKA data mining 
software." Available from: < http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka >. 
Han, X., X. Chang, L. Quan, X. Xiong, J. Li, Z . Zhang and Y. Liu (2014). "Feature subset selection by 
gravitational search algorithm optimization." Information Sciences 281: 128 -146. 
Hancer, E. (2020). "A new multi -objective differential evolution approach for simultaneous clustering and 
feature selec tion." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 87: 103307.  
Hancer, E., B. Xue, D. Karaboga and M. Zhang (2015). "A binary ABC algorithm based on advanced 
similarity scheme for feature selection." Applied Soft Computing 36: 334 -348. 
Hancer, E., B. Xue and M. Zhang (2018). "Differential evolution for filter feature selection based on 
information theory and feature ranking." Knowledge -Based Systems 140: 103 -119. 
Hancer, E., B. Xue, M. Zhang, D. Karaboga and B. Akay (2015). A multi -objective artific ial bee colony 
approach to feature selection using fuzzy mutual information. 2015 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary 
Computation (CEC), IEEE.  
Hancer, E., B. Xue, M. Zhang, D. Karaboga and B. Akay (2018). "Pareto front feature selection based on 
artificial bee c olony optimization." Information Sciences 422: 462 -479. 
Hashemi, A., M. B. Dowlatshahi and H. Nezamabadi -pour (2020). "MGFS: A multi -label graph -based 
feature selection algorithm via PageRank centrality." Expert Systems with Applications 142: 113024.  
Hegaz y, A. E., M. A. Makhlouf and G. S. El -Tawel (2020). "Improved salp swarm algorithm for feature 
selection." Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences 32(3): 335 -344. 
Henni, K., N. Mezghani and C. Gouin -Vallerand (2018). "Unsupervis ed graph -based feature selection via 
subspace and pagerank centrality." Expert Systems with Applications 114: 46-53. 
Hu, L., W. Gao, K. Zhao, P. Zhang and F. Wang (2018). "Feature selection considering two types of 
feature relevancy and feature interdepend ency." Expert Systems with Applications 93: 423 -434. 

==== Page 27 ====
Hu, Y., J. Zheng, J. Zou, S. Yang, J. Ou and R. Wang (2020). "A dynamic multi -objective evolutionary 
algorithm based on intensity of environmental change." Information Sciences 523: 49-62. 
Hua, Z., J. Zh ou, Y. Hua and W. Zhang (2020). "Strong approximate Markov blanket and its application 
on filter -based feature selection." Applied Soft Computing 87: 105957.  
Huang, C. -L. and J. -F. Dun (2008). "A distributed PSO –SVM hybrid system with feature selection and  
parameter optimization." Applied Soft Computing 8(4): 1381 -1391.  
Ibrahim, R. A., A. A. Ewees, D. Oliva, M. Abd Elaziz and S. Lu (2019). "Improved salp swarm algorithm 
based on particle swarm optimization for feature selection." Journal of Ambient Intelligence and 
Humanized Computing 10(8): 3155 -3169.  
Inbarani, H. H., A.  T. Azar and G. Jothi (2014). "Supervised hybrid feature selection based on PSO and 
rough sets for medical diagnosis." Comput Methods Programs Biomed 113(1): 175 -185. 
J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart (1995). "Particle swarm optimization." in: The Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE 
International Conference on Neural Network: pp. 1942 –1948.  
Jain, I., V. K. Jain and R. Jain (2018). "Correlation feature selection based improved -Binary Particle 
Swarm Optimization for gene selection and cancer classification." Applied Soft C omputing 62: 203 -215. 
Jayaraman, V. and H. P. Sultana (2019). "Artificial gravitational cuckoo search algorithm along with 
particle bee optimized associative memory neural network for feature selection in heart disease 
classification." Journal of Ambient I ntelligence and Humanized Computing.  
Ji, X., H. Shen, A. Ritter, R. Machiraju and P. Yen (2019). "Visual Exploration of Neural Document 
Embedding in Information Retrieval: Semantics and Feature Selection." IEEE Transactions on 
Visualization and Computer Gr aphics 25(6): 2181 -2192.  
Ke, L., Z. Feng and Z. Ren (2008). "An efficient ant colony optimization approach to attribute reduction 
in rough set theory." Pattern Recognition Letters 29(9): 1351 -1357.  
Ke, L., Z. Feng, Z. Xu, K. Shang and Y. Wang (2010). A mul tiobjective ACO algorithm for rough feature 
selection. 2010 Second Pacific -Asia Conference on Circuits, Communications and System, IEEE.  
Koide, K., J. Miura and E. Menegatti (2020). "Monocular person tracking and identification with on -line 
deep feature se lection for person following robots." Robotics and Autonomous Systems 124: 103348.  
Kou, G., P. Yang, Y. Peng, F. Xiao, Y. Chen and F. E. Alsaadi (2020). "Evaluation of feature selection 
methods for text classification with small datasets using multiple cri teria decision -making methods." 
Applied Soft Computing 86: 105836.  
Kwak, N. and C. -H. Choi (2002). "Input feature selection for classification problems." Neural Networks, 
IEEE Transactions on 13(1): 143 -159. 
Labani, M., P. Moradi, F. Ahmadizar and M. Jalil i (2018). "A novel multivariate filter based feature 
selection method for text classification problems." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 70: 
25-37. 
Labani, M., P. Moradi, F. Ahmadizar and M. Jalili (2018). "A novel multivariate filter m ethod for feature 
selection in text classification problems." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 70: 25-37. 

==== Page 28 ====
Larabi Marie -Sainte, S. and N. Alalyani (2020). "Firefly Algorithm based Feature Selection for Arabic 
Text Classification." Journal  of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences 32(3): 320 -
328. 
Li, A. -D., B. Xue and M. Zhang (2020). "Multi -objective feature selection using hybridization of a 
genetic algorithm and direct multisearch for key quality characteristic selection." Information Sciences 
523: 245 -265. 
Li, J., G. Chen, M. Li and H. Chen (20 20). "An enhanced -indicator based many -objective evolutionary 
algorithm with adaptive reference point." Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 55: 100669.  
Li, J., L. Wu, G. Wen and Z. Li (2019). "Exclusive feature selection and multi -view learning for 
Alzheime r’s Disease." Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation 64: 102605.  
Li, S., C. Tang, X. Liu, Y. Liu and J. Chen (2019). "Dual graph regularized compact feature 
representation for unsupervised feature selection." Neurocomputing 331: 77-96. 
Liang, Y., M. Zhang and W. N. Browne (2017). "Image feature selection using genetic programming for 
figure -ground segmentation." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 62: 96-108. 
Liu, F., X. Yan and Y. Lu (2020). "Feature Selection for Image St eganalysis Using Binary Bat 
Algorithm." IEEE Access 8: 4244 -4249.  
Liu, H. and L. Yu (2005). "Toward Integrating Feature Selection Algorithms for Classification and 
Clustering." IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 17(4): 491 - 
502  
Liu, Q., Q. Gu and Z. Wu (2017). "Feature selection method based on support vector machine and shape 
analysis for high -throughput medical data." Computers in Biology and Medicine 91: 103 -111. 
Liu, Y., F. Nie, Q. Gao, X. Gao, J. Han and L. Shao (2019). "Flexible uns upervised feature extraction for 
image classification." Neural Networks 115: 65-71. 
Liu, Y., Y. Wang, X. Ren, H. Zhou and X. Diao (2019). "A Classification Method Based on Feature 
Selection for Imbalanced Data." IEEE Access 7: 81794 -81807.  
Liu, Y. and Y. F . Zheng (2006). "FS_SFS: A novel feature selection method for support vector 
machines." Pattern Recognition 39(7): 1333 -1345.  
Lyu, H., M. Wan, J. Han, R. Liu and C. Wang (2017). "A filter feature selection method based on the 
Maximal Information Coefficien t and Gram -Schmidt Orthogonalization for biomedical data mining." 
Computers in Biology and Medicine 89: 264 -274. 
M. Dorigo  and G. D. Caro (1999). "Ant colony optimization: a new meta -heuristic." in: Proceeding of the 
Congress on Evolutionary Computing.  
Mafarja, M. and S. Mirjalili (2018). "Whale optimization approaches for wrapper feature selection." 
Applied Soft Computing 62: 441 -453. 
Mafarja, M. M. and S. Mirjalili (2017). "Hybrid Whale Optimization Algorithm with simulated annealing 
for feature selection." Neurocomputing 260: 302 -312. 

==== Page 29 ====
Martín -Smith, P., J. Ortega, J. Asensio -Cubero, J. Q. Gan and A. Ortiz (2017). "A supervised filter 
method for multi -objective feature selection in EEG classification based on multi -resolution analysis for 
BCI." Neurocomputing 250: 45-56. 
Mauricio Schiezaro and H. Pedrini (2013). "Data feature selection based on Artificial Bee Colony 
algorithm." EURASIP J ournal on Image and Video Processing 2013:47  
Mirjalili, S., A. H. Gandomi, S. Z. Mirjalili, S. Saremi, H. Faris and S. M. Mirjalili (2017). "Salp Swarm 
Algorithm: A bio -inspired optimizer for engineering design problems." Advances in Engineering 
Software 114: 163 -191. 
Mirjalili, S. and A. Lewis (2016). "The Whale Optimization Algorithm." Advances in Engineering 
Software 95: 51-67. 
Mirjalili, S., S. M. Mirjalili and A. Lewis (2014). "Grey Wolf Optimizer." Advances in Engineering 
Software 69: 46-61. 
Mitchell , T. M. (1997). "Machine Learning." McGraw -Hill,NewYork.  
Mlakar, U., I. Fister, J. Brest and B. Potočnik (2017). "Multi -Objective Differential Evolution for feature 
selection in Facial Expression Recognition systems." Expert Systems with Applications 89: 129-137. 
Monirul Kabir, Shahjahan b and K. M; (2012). "A new hybrid ant colony optimization algorithm for 
feature selection." Expert Systems with Applications 39(3): 3747 -3763.  
Moradi, P. and M. Gholampour (2016). "A hybrid particle swarm optimization for f eature subset selection 
by integrating a novel local search strategy." Applied Soft Computing 43: 117 -130. 
Moradi, P. and M. Rostami (2015). "A graph theoretic approach for unsupervised feature selection." 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligenc e 44: 33-45. 
Moradi, P. and M. Rostami (2015). "Integration of graph clustering with ant colony optimization for 
feature selection." Knowledge -Based Systems 84: 144 -161. 
Morita, M., R. Sabourin, F. Bortolozzi and C. Y. Suen (2003). Unsupervised feature sel ection using 
multi -objective genetic algorithms for handwritten word recognition. null, IEEE.  
Neggaz, N., A. A. Ewees, M. A. Elaziz and M. Mafarja (2020). "Boosting salp swarm algorithm by sine 
cosine algorithm and disrupt operator for feature selection." Expert Systems with Applications 145: 
113103.  
Nematzadeh, H., R. Enayatifar, M. Mahmud and E. Akbari (2019). "Frequency based feature selection 
method using whale algorithm." Genomics.  
Pashaei, E., E. Pashaei and N. Aydin (2019). "Gene selection using hybr id binary black hole algorithm 
and modified binary particle swarm optimization." Genomics 111(4): 669 -686. 
Peng, H., F. Long and C. Ding (2005). "Feature selection based on mutual information criteria of max -
dependency, max -relevance, and min -redundancy." Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE 
Transactions on 27(8): 1226 -1238.  
Peng, H., F. Long and C. Ding (2005). "Feature selection based on mutual information: criteria of max -
dependency, max -relevance, and min -redundancy." IEEE Transactions on Pat tern Analysis & Machine 
Intelligence(8): 1226 -1238.  

==== Page 30 ====
Prabukumar, M., L. Agilandeeswari and K. Ganesan (2019). "An intelligent lung cancer diagnosis system 
using cuckoo search optimization and support vector machine classifier." Journal of Ambient Intelligen ce 
and Humanized Computing 10(1): 267 -293. 
Prasad, Y., K. K. Biswas and M. Hanmandlu (2018). "A recursive PSO scheme for gene selection in 
microarray data." Applied Soft Computing 71: 213 -225. 
Qasim, O. S. and Z. Y. Algamal (2018). "Feature selection using  particle swarm optimization -based 
logistic regression model." Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 182: 41-46. 
Quanquan Gu, Zhenhui Li and J. Han (2011). "Generalized Fisher Score for Feature Selection." In: 
Proceedings of the International Con ference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.  
Raileanu, L. E. and K. Stoffel (2004). "Theoretical comparison between the Gini index and information 
gain criteria." Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 41: 77 -93. 
Rajabioun, R. (2011). "Cuckoo Optimization Algorit hm." Applied Soft Computing 11(8): 5508 -5518.  
Rashedi, E., H. Nezamabadi -pour and S. Saryazdi (2009). "GSA: A Gravitational Search Algorithm." 
Information Sciences 179(13): 2232 -2248.  
Rehman, A., K. Javed and H. A. Babri (2017). "Feature selection based on  a normalized difference 
measure for text classification." Information Processing & Management 53(2): 473 -489. 
Rehman, A., K. Javed, H. A. Babri and M. Saeed (2015). "Relative discrimination criterion –A novel 
feature ranking method for text data." Expert S ystems with Applications 42(7): 3670 -3681.  
S. Theodoridis and C. Koutroumbas (2009). "Pattern Recognition, 4th Edn." Elsevier Inc.  
Saeys, Y., I. Inza and P. Larranaga (2007). "A review of feature selection techniques in bioinformatics." 
Bioinformatics 23(19): 2507 -2517.  
Santucci, V., M. Baioletti and A. Milani (2020). "An algebraic framework for swarm and evolutionary 
algorithms in combinatorial optimization." Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 55: 100673.  
Sayed, S., M. Nassef, A. Badr and I. Farag (2019) . "A Nested Genetic Algorithm for feature selection in 
high-dimensional cancer Microarray datasets." Expert Systems with Applications 121: 233 -243. 
Sebastiani, F. (2002). "Machine learning in automated text categorization." ACM computing surveys 
(CSUR) 34(1): 1-47. 
Selvakumar, B. and K. Muneeswaran (2019). "Firefly algorithm based feature selection for network 
intrusion detection." Computers & Security 81: 148 -155. 
Senawi, A., H. -L. Wei and S. A. Billings (2017). "A new maximum relevance -minimum multicollin earity 
(MRmMC) method for feature selection and ranking." Pattern Recognition 67: 47-61. 
Shu, W., W. Qian and Y. Xie (2020). "Incremental feature selection for dynamic hybrid data using 
neighborhood rough set." Knowledge -Based Systems: 105516.  
Shunmugapriy a, P. and S. Kanmani (2017). "A hybrid algorithm using ant and bee colony optimization 
for feature selection and classification (AC -ABC Hybrid)." Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 36: 27-
36. 

==== Page 31 ====
Singh, U. and S. N. Singh (2019). "A new optimal feature selecti on scheme for classification of power 
quality disturbances based on ant colony framework." Applied Soft Computing 74: 216 -225. 
Song, Q., J. Ni and G. Wang (2013). "A Fast Clustering -Based Feature Subset Selection Algorithm for 
High -Dimensional Data." IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING 
25(1): 1 - 14. 
Tabakhi, S. and P. Moradi (2015). "Relevance –redundancy feature selection based on ant colony 
optimization." Pattern Recognition 48(9): 2798 -2811.  
Tabakhi, S., P. Moradi and F. Akhlaghian (2014) . "An unsupervised feature selection algorithm based on 
ant colony optimization." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 32: 112 -123. 
Tang, C., X. Liu, M. Li, P. Wang, J. Chen, L. Wang and W. Li (2018). "Robust unsupervised feature 
selection via dual self -representation and manifold regularization." Knowledge -Based Systems 145: 109 -
120. 
Tang, X., Y. Dai and Y. Xiang (2019). "Feature sele ction based on feature interactions with application to 
text categorization." Expert Systems with Applications 120: 207 -216. 
Taradeh, M., M. Mafarja, A. A. Heidari, H. Faris, I. Aljarah, S. Mirjalili and H. Fujita (2019). "An 
evolutionary gravitational sea rch-based feature selection." Information Sciences 497: 219 -239. 
Tawhid, M. A. and K. B. Dsouza (2018). "Hybrid Binary Bat Enhanced Particle Swarm Optimization 
Algorithm for solving feature selection problems." Applied Computing and Informatics.  
Tu, Q., X.  Chen and X. Liu (2019). "Multi -strategy ensemble grey wolf optimizer and its application to 
feature selection." Applied Soft Computing 76: 16-30. 
Tubishat, M., N. Idris, L. Shuib, M. A. M. Abushariah and S. Mirjalili (2020). "Improved Salp Swarm 
Algorithm  based on opposition based learning and novel local search algorithm for feature selection." 
Expert Systems with Applications 145: 113122.  
Unler, A., A. Murat and R. B. Chinnam (2011). "mr2PSO: A maximum relevance minimum redundancy 
feature selection metho d based on swarm intelligence for support vector machine classification." 
Information Sciences 181(20): 4625 -4641.  
Uysal, A. K. and S. Gunal (2012). "A novel probabilistic feature selection method for text classification." 
Knowledge -Based Systems 36: 226 -235. 
Vignolo, L. D., D. H. Milone and J. Scharcanski (2013). "Feature selection for face recognition based on 
multi -objective evolutionary wrappers." Expert Systems with Applications 40(13): 5077 -5084.  
Wang, C., H. Pan and Y. Su (2020). "A many -objective ev olutionary algorithm with diversity -first based 
environmental selection." Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 53: 100641.  
Wang, H. and M. Hong (2019). "Supervised Hebb rule based feature selection for text classification." 
Information Processing & Managemen t 56(1): 167 -191. 
Wang, H., Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, T. Li and L. Peng (2019). "A factor graph model for unsupervised feature 
selection." Information Sciences 480: 144 -159. 

==== Page 32 ====
Wang, X. -h., Y. Zhang, X. -y. Sun, Y. -l. Wang and C. -h. Du (2020). "Multi -objective featu re selection 
based on artificial bee colony: An acceleration approach with variable sample size." Applied Soft 
Computing 88: 106041.  
Wang, Z., M. Li and J. Li (2015). "A multi -objective evolutionary algorithm for feature selection based 
on mutual informati on with a new redundancy measure." Information Sciences 307: 73-88. 
Welikala, R. A., M. M. Fraz, J. Dehmeshki, A. Hoppe, V. Tah, S. Mann, T. H. Williamson and S. A. 
Barman (2015). "Genetic algorithm based feature selection combined with dual classification  for the 
automated detection of proliferative diabetic retinopathy." Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics 
43: 64-77. 
Wenzhu Yang, Daoliang Li and L. Zhu (2011). "An improved genetic algorithm for optimal feature 
subset selection from multi -character f eature set." Expert Systems with Applications 38: 2733 –2740.  
Wu, H., H. Liu and Z. Duan (2020). "PM2.5 concentrations forecasting using a new multi -objective 
feature selection and ensemble framework." Atmospheric Pollution Research.  
Xiang, J., X. Han, F. Duan, Y. Qiang, X. Xiong, Y. Lan and H. Chai (2015). "A novel hybrid system for 
feature selection based on an improved gravitational search algorithm and k -NN method." Applied Soft 
Computing 31: 293 -307. 
Xiaofei He, Deng Cai and P. Ni yogi1 (2005). "Laplacian Score for Feature Selection." Adv. Neural Inf. 
Process. Syst 18: 507 -514. 
Xu, Y., G. J. Jones, J. Li, B. Wang and C. Sun (2007). "A study on mutual information -based feature 
selection for text categorization." Journal of Computatio nal Information Systems 3(3): 1007 -1012.  
Xue, B., M. Zhang and W. N. Browne (2013). "Particle swarm optimization for feature selection in 
classification: A multi -objective approach." Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on 43(6): 1656 -1671.  
Xue, B., M. Zhang and  W. N. Browne (2014). "Particle swarm optimisation for feature selection in 
classification: Novel initialisation and updating mechanisms." Applied Soft Computing 18: 261 -276. 
Xue, Y., T. Tang, W. Pang and A. X. Liu (2020). "Self -adaptive parameter and stra tegy based particle 
swarm optimization for large -scale feature selection problems with multiple classifiers." Applied Soft 
Computing 88: 106031.  
Yan, C., J. Liang, M. Zhao, X. Zhang, T. Zhang and H. Li (2019). "A novel hybrid feature selection 
strategy in quantitative analysis of laser -induced breakdown spectroscopy." Analytica Chimica Acta 
1080 : 35-42. 
Yan, K., L. Ma, Y. Dai, W. Shen, Z. Ji and D. Xie (2018). "Cost -sensitive and sequential feature selection 
for chiller fault detection and diagnosis." Inter national Journal of Refrigeration 86: 401 -409. 
Yang, X. -S. (2010). Firefly Algorithm, Lévy Flights and Global Optimization, London, Springer London.  
Yang, X. -S. (2010). A New Metaheuristic Bat -Inspired Algorithm. Nature Inspired Cooperative Strategies 
for Optimization (NICSO 2010). J. R. González, D. A. Pelta, C. Cruz, G. Terrazas and N. Krasnogor. 
Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer Berlin Heidelberg : 65-74. 
Ying Li, Gang Wang, Huiling Chen, Lian Shi and Lei Qin (2013). "An Ant Colony Optimization Based 
Dimension  Reduction Method for High -Dimensional Datasets." Journal of Bionic Engineering 10(2): 
231-241. 

==== Page 33 ====
Yong, Z., G. Dun -wei and Z. Wan -qiu (2016). "Feature selection of unreliable data using an improved 
multi -objective PSO algorithm." Neurocomputing 171: 1281 -1290. 
Yuan, X., J. Yuan, T. Jiang and Q. U. Ain (2020). "Integrated Long -Term Stock Selection Models Based 
on Feature Selection and Machine Learning Algorithms for China Stock Market." IEEE Access 8: 22672 -
22685.  
Zhang, H., R. Zhang, F. Nie and X. Li (2019). "An efficient framework for unsupervised feature 
selection." Neurocomputing 366: 194 -207. 
Zhang, L., K. Mistry, C. P. Lim and S. C. Neoh (2018). "Feature selection using firefly optimization for 
classification and regression models." Decision Support Syste ms 106: 64-85. 
Zhang, S., C. K. M. Lee, H. K. Chan, K. L. Choy and Z. Wu (2015). "Swarm intelligence applied in green 
logistics: A literature review." Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 37: 154 -169. 
Zhang, T., B. Ding, X. Zhao and Q. Yue ( 2018). "A Fast Feature Selection Algorithm Based on Swarm 
Intelligence in Acoustic Defect Detection." IEEE Access 6: 28848 -28858.  
Zhang, X., G. Wu, Z. Dong and C. Crawford (2015). "Embedded feature -selection support vector 
machine for driving pattern recog nition." Journal of the Franklin Institute 352(2): 669 -685. 
Zhang, Y., S. Cheng, Y. Shi, D. -w. Gong and X. Zhao (2019). "Cost -sensitive feature selection using two -
archive multi -objective artificial bee colony algorithm." Expert Systems with Applications 137: 46-58. 
Zhang, Y., D. -w. Gong, X. -z. Gao, T. Tian and X. -y. Sun (2020). "Binary differential evolution with self -
learning for multi -objective feature selection." Information Sciences 507: 67-85. 
Zhang, Y., D. Gong and J. Cheng (2017). "Multi -Objective P article Swarm Optimization Approach for 
Cost-Based Feature Selection in Classification." IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics 14(1): 64 -75. 
Zhang, Y., X. -f. Song and D. -w. Gong (2017). "A return -cost-based binary firefly algori thm for feature 
selection." Information Sciences 418-419: 561 -574. 
Zhang, Z. and E. R. Hancock (2012). "Hypergraph based information -theoretic feature selection." Pattern 
Recognition Letters 33(15): 1991 -1999.  
Zhou, X., X. Gao, J. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Wang and Z. Chi (2017). "Eye tracking data guided feature 
selection for image classification." Pattern Recognition 63: 56-70. 
Zhu, P., W. Zhu, Q. Hu, C. Zhang and W. Zuo (2017). "Subspace clustering guided unsupervised feature 
selection." Pattern Recognition 66: 364-374. 
 

