==== Page 1 ====
Road Damage Detection and Classiﬁcation with
Detectron2 and Faster R-CNN
Vung Pham
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, USA
vung.pham@ttu.eduChau Pham
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, USA
chaupham@ttu.eduTommy Dang
Computer Science Department
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, USA
tommy.dang@ttu.edu
Abstract —The road is vital for many aspects of life, and road
maintenance is crucial for human safety. One of the critical
tasks to allow timely repair of road damages is to quickly
and efﬁciently detect and classify them. This work details the
strategies and experiments evaluated for these tasks. Speciﬁcally,
we evaluate Detectron2’s implementation of Faster R-CNN using
different base models and conﬁgurations. We also experiment
with these approaches using the Global Road Damage Detection
Challenge 2020, A Track in the IEEE Big Data 2020 Big Data
Cup Challenge dataset. The results show that the X101-FPN base
model for Faster R-CNN with Detectron2’s default conﬁgurations
are efﬁcient and general enough to be transferable to different
countries in this challenge. This approach results in F1 scores of
51.0% and 51.4% for the test1 and test2 sets of the challenge,
respectively. Though the visualizations show good prediction
results, the F1 scores are low. Therefore, we also evaluate the
prediction results against the existing annotations and discover
some discrepancies. Thus, we also suggest strategies to improve
the labeling process for this dataset.
Index Terms —Object detection, Detectron2, Road damage
detection, Faster R-CNN and classiﬁcation, Transferable learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
The road is crucial in different aspects of life, from eco-
nomic development and social beneﬁts to safety. Therefore,
road maintenance is vital for all countries in the world. One of
the road maintenance tasks is to accurately detect damages and
then to devote efﬁcient repairs in a timely manner. However,
for most countries, road crack detection and classiﬁcation
are currently based on human manual works or expensive
sensors. Therefore, automatic detection and classiﬁcation of
road damage types are getting popular recently. Also, deep
learning, with its recent advancements, is gaining traction and
has state-of-the-art results in various computer vision tasks [1].
Therefore, many works in the literature use deep learning
approaches to detect and classify road damages.
Using deep learning for road damage detection and clas-
siﬁcation often involves three sub-tasks: 1) collecting image
data, 2) creating labels for the data, and 3) building deep
learning models from the labeled data. While collecting data
can be done efﬁciently using mobile devices with GPS and
camera [2], the labeling process takes time, and the detec-
tion/classiﬁcation results are still limited. Also, the models
learned from the data coming from one country often are notgeneralized enough to be transferable to different countries [3].
Additionally, providing bounding boxes and labels for road
damages is error-prone and demands a massive amount of
human labor to have accurate results.
Therefore, this work explores state-of-the-art object de-
tection methods to ﬁnd general road damage detection and
classiﬁcation model that is usable for different territories. We
then apply the selected approaches to the Global Road Damage
Detection Challenge 2020, A Track in the IEEE Big Data 2020
Big Data Cup Challenge [4] dataset. Furthermore, we also
evaluate the quality of the currently labeled data and propose a
strategy to generate more labeled data. Thus, our contributions
are:
Exploring current state-of-the-art object detection meth-
ods and their applicability to road damage detection and
classiﬁcation tasks.
Experimenting with these approaches using the Global
Road Damage Detection Challenge 2020 dataset to ﬁnd
one single model that is efﬁcient and can be transferable
to different territories.
Visualizing the prediction results and qualitatively evalu-
ating the existing annotations follows by giving sugges-
tions to improve the labeling process for this dataset.
II. D ATASET AND EVALUATION METHOD
The dataset used in this work is from the Global Road
Damage Detection Challenge 2020 [4]. This dataset consists
of one train set ( train ) and two test sets ( test1 and test2 ).
Speciﬁcally, the training and testing sets contain road damage
images, bounding boxes, and damage types (for training set)
from three countries (i.e., Czech, India, and Japan). Fur-
thermore, for this dataset, there are four types of labelled
road damage types namely Longitudinal Crack, Transverse
Crack, Aligator Crack, and Pothole (labelled D00,D10,D20,
and D40, respectively). For this section’s brevity, we defer
further details about the number of images and damage type
distributions in the individual countries and the whole dataset
to Section IV-A.
For this challenge, the evaluation method is based on the
F1score deﬁned to balance the precision ( p) and recall ( r).arXiv:2010.15021v1  [cs.CV]  28 Oct 2020

==== Page 2 ====
These are deﬁned as:
p=Cd
Pd; r=Cd
Ad; F1 =2pr
p+r
where Cd,Pd, and Adare the numbers of correctly predicted
damages, the predicted damages, and all the ground-truth
damages from the evaluating set, respectively. Furthermore,
the deﬁnition of correctly predicted damage has two criteria.
They are 1) the predicted bounding box must match, and 2)
the predicted label is correct. The latter is obvious, and the
former is deﬁned by the Intersection over Union ( IoU) score,
which is deﬁned as follows:
IoU=area(Pb\Gb)
area(Pb[Gb)
where PbandGbare a predicted box and a ground-truth box,
respectively. Also, area(Pb\Gb)andarea(Pb[Gb)means
the areas of the intersection and the union between the two
boxes, correspondingly. In this case, if IoU > = 0:5, then it
is a match, and it is not otherwise.
III. R ELATED WORK
Object detection using deep neural networks is an emerging
ﬁeld, and it is not the purpose of this work to review all the
recent results in this ﬁeld. Also, object detection techniques
are continually evolving, and comparisons might be outdated
quickly. Instead, we brieﬂy survey families of current state-
of-the-art object detection methods in general and methods
related to road damage detection and classiﬁcation speciﬁcally.
A. Deep learning based object detection
Deep learning-based object detection is gaining initial suc-
cess, and there are many works in the literature regarding
this. We refer interested readers to [5] for a good survey of
these methods. Recent techniques are generally related to two
prominent families, namely Region-Based Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (R-CNNs) and You Only Look Once (YOLO).
Ross Girshick et al. [6] propose R-CNNs approach with
three main modules. The ﬁrst one is a region proposal mod-
ule that generates candidate regions (bounding boxes) using
computer vision techniques. The second one is the feature
extraction module. This second module uses convolutional
neural networks to extract the features from the candidate
regions. Finally, the last module is a classiﬁer that predicts the
classes of the proposed candidates using the extracted features.
R-CNNs takes a long time to train because training is done
in multiple stages. Besides training, the prediction stage is
also slow. Therefore, Girshick proposes another model called
Fast R-CNN [7] to tackle these issues. Fast R-CNN is trained
as a single model instead of three separate modules. This
architecture takes the images and proposes candidate regions,
then passes them through a popular, pre-trained image classiﬁ-
cation model (e.g., ResNet [8], VGG-16 [9]) to extract features
from the candidates. The extracted features then undergo a
Region of Interest (RoI) pooling layer, followed by two fully
connected layers. Finally, there are two other fully connectedheads for bounding box regression and label classiﬁcation
purposes.
Though Fast R-CNN improves the training and predicting
time, it still needs the region proposal as the inputs. In other
words, the region proposals for each image still needs to
be done separately (e.g., using image processing techniques).
Therefore, Ren et al., [10] propose Faster R-CNN to tackle
this issue. Its main improvement is the ability to incorporate
region proposals as a part of the ﬁnal model using Region
Proposal Network (RPN). In other words, there are two smaller
networks in this architecture. The ﬁrst one is a Region Proposal
Network (RPN), and the second one is the Fast R-CNN.
These two sub-networks are trained simultaneously, though for
two different tasks: 1) region proposals and 2) bounding box
classiﬁcation and regression. These strategies help to improve
the training and object detection time and accuracy.
Another famous family of object detection is YOLO
with different versions such as YOLO [11], YOLOv2 [12],
YOLOv3 [13], and YOLOv4 [14]. Different YOLO versions
may differ in terms of architectures and techniques used.
However, generally, it involves a single neural network with
the input being the images and ground-truth boxes/segments
and labels (while training). The outputs are the bounding boxes
and corresponding labels of the detected objects from the
image. Speciﬁcally, it divides an image into a grid of cells.
Feature extracted from each cell is used to predict objects
with centers of the bounding boxes that fall into the cell. The
advantage of this method is that it is faster to train and predict.
However, the beneﬁt comes with a slightly lower accuracy
compared to Faster R-CNNs.
While YOLO mainly has its advantage for speed and
Faster R-CNN is better at accuracy, Single Short Detection
(SSD) [15] allows a better balance between speed and ac-
curacy. SSD runs a convolutional neural network on input
image only one time and computes a feature map. It also uses
anchor boxes at different sizes and aspects as Faster R-CNN.
Regarding bounding box sizes, SSD predicts them at different
convolutional layers. The reason is that convolutional layers
have different receptive ﬁelds of the inputs. In other words,
the deeper a convolutional layer is, the larger its receptive ﬁeld
will be. Thus, the deeper convolutional layer features are used
to predict larger bounding boxes and vice versa.
B. Deep learning based road damage detection
Deep learning is gaining success in various areas, and road
damage detection and classiﬁcation is no exception. Various
works in the literature use deep learning for these tasks. With
the help of GPS- and camera-enabled mobile devices, it is
now relatively easy to collect road images for this purpose.
For instance, Maeda et al., [2] propose using a smartphone
placed on a car’s dashboard to collect pictures of road cracks,
label them, and make them available for the public. Based on
this dataset, Yanbo Wang et al., [16] propose to use Faster
R-CNN and SSD with pre-trained ResNet and VGG as bases
to tackle the damage detection and classiﬁcation tasks. Also,
they aggregate up to 14 Faster R-CNN models and 2 SSD

==== Page 3 ====
models to improve the detection result. Similarly, Wenzhe
Wang et al., [17] also propose to use Faster R-CNN with data
exploration step to adjust appropriate hyperparameters such as
anchor boxes and ratios. Furthermore, they use different aug-
mentation types (such as contrast transformation, brightness
adjustment, and Gaussian blur) to improve their results.
On the other hand, [18] uses YOLOv3 with darknet53 as the
base model to tackle these tasks. They also experiment with
two augmentation strategies. The ﬁrst strategy is to generate
more images for damage types with lower number occurrences
using brightening or gray-scale, and the second strategy is
to use cropping. However, in general, augmentations do not
help. Additionally, Kluger et al., [19] utilize Faster R-CNN,
RetinaNet [20], and Convolutional Neural Network combined
with Random Forest to solve the tasks. The use of Random
Forest is due to the assumption that it helps in case there
are few samples in the training data [21]. Furthermore, they
propose (without validating the impacts of the proposal) to use
Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks (CycleGAN) [22] for
data augmentation. Their experiments also show that Faster R-
CNN works best for road damage classiﬁcation and detection.
In a recent study, Maeda et al., [23] use Generative Ad-
versarial Nets (GAN) [24] to generate damages with a lower
number of occurrences to improve the detection results for this
speciﬁc type of damages. Speciﬁcally, they use Progressive
Growing GAN (PG-GAN) [25] to artiﬁcially generate more
damages of pothole damage type and improve prediction
results for this type of cracks in Japan. The reason is that
Japan has a low number of pothole damages. Furthermore,
they also use Poisson blending [26] to place the generated
damages to the existing images to make the artiﬁcial patches
look more natural to its containers. In another work, Arya et
al., [3] suggest that the current techniques are not transferable
from one country to another. Therefore, such a model is needed
to save data collection, data labeling, and training time.
All in all, these works show that Faster R-CNN seems to be
a useful technique for road damage detection and classiﬁcation
with a good trade-off between time and accuracy. These works
also indicate that except when we only focus on a damage type
with a small number of occurrences (i.e., pothole damages
in Japan), data augmentations (other than the obvious ones
such as horizontal ﬂipping and resizing) do not generally help.
Furthermore, several of these works use ensembles to improve
their prediction results. Though ensembles help improve the
results, they also signiﬁcantly increase training and prediction
time and are not encouraged in this year’s challenge.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
Our general methodology is that we start with the data
exploration stage to understand the dataset. We then proceed
by splitting the training dataset further into the training and
evaluation sets. The validation enables us to evaluate the
hyper-parameters for our architectures quantitatively. Regard-
ing deep learning model architectures, we start with the com-
monly used model architectures for road damage detection and
classiﬁcation tasks. We then proceed with strategies to improvethe base models, such as changing hyper-parameters, train data
augmentations, and test time augmentations. It’s worth noting
that ensembles and individual models for individual countries
would have better prediction results. However, it is restricted
by the challenge that we should have a single-algorithm and
single-model approach. Therefore, we do not attempt these
directions.
A. Data exploration and train/evaluation splits
This dataset consists of one training set ( train ) and two
test sets ( test1 and test2 ). The training set contains 21,041
images (2,829, 7,706, and 10,506 for Czech, India, and
Japan, respectively). The two test sets contain 2,631 and
2,664 images, correspondingly. There are 34,702 ground-truth
labels (bounding boxes and damage types) in the training set.
Speciﬁcally, Figure 1 shows the damage type distributions
(of the four corresponding types) over the three countries. In
general, Japan has higher numbers of images and damages, and
the pothole damage type has the lowest number of occurrences.
On the other hand, India has fewer images and dam-
age labels. Also, D04 is the one with the highest number
of occurrences, while there are only a few D01 damages
in India. Finally, Czech has fewest number of images and
damage samples (a total of 1,745 labels). It’s worth noting
that due to different numbers of images, different damage
types distributions over different countries, it is difﬁcult to
have a transferable model for all three countries. In other
words, having different models for different countries (with
a sufﬁcient number of images like Japan and India) should
have better accuracy compared to a single model for all three
countries.
Fig. 1. Damage type distributions over three countries (Czech, India, and
Japan).
We also split the training dataset into training and validation
sets with the stratify as the origin of the damage types (i.e.,
country). Speciﬁcally, we keep 90% of the images for training
and 10% for evaluation. This 10% for the evaluation split
is reasonable because it results in 1,221 images in this set.
More than a thousand images are general enough to evaluate
the performance of the learned models. This evaluation set

==== Page 4 ====
is used to quantitatively evaluate our model’s performance
and the hyperparameter selection process during training (such
as prediction score threshold and number of train iterations).
Figure 2 shows the distributions of the damage types after
splitting. Generally, though different countries have different
damage type distributions, the combined distribution has a
better balance among damage types. Also, using the origins
of damage types as a stratiﬁed ﬁeld seems sufﬁcient since the
train vs. evaluation distributions are somewhat similar.
Fig. 2. Damage type distributions of the training dataset after splitting it into
training and evaluation sets.
B. Base models
As discussed in Section III-B, most of the successful road
damage detection and classiﬁcation techniques trained using
the Road Damage Detection dataset (version 2018) use the
Faster R-CNN technique. Therefore, we ﬁrst explore this
approach to tackle this year’s challenge. Instead of developing
a Faster R-CNN model from scratch, we use Detectron2 [27] to
speed up our development cycle. Detectron2 is Facebook AI
Research’s next-generation software system that implements
state-of-the-art object detection algorithms.
It is also a common practice to use a base model pre-trained
on a large image set (such as ImageNet [28]) as the feature
extractor part of the network. Detectron2 provides many such
base-models [29]. However, for Faster R-CNN, two commonly
used models are R101-FPN [30] and X101-FPN [31]. We se-
lect to explore these two pre-trained models because they have
good Faster R-CNN box Average Precision (AP) compared to
others. They are 42% and 43%, respectively. Though X101-
FPN has better box AP on the ImageNet benchmark, it takes
longer to train/predict and might be overﬁtting in some cases.
That is the reason why we also explore R101-FPN.
There are many hyper-parameters to be tuned while train-
ing a Faster R-CNN model. Thus, it is nearly impossible
in terms of time and computation resources to explore all
the conﬁgurations. Therefore, we ﬁrst stick with the default
and obvious, common-sense conﬁgurations. Speciﬁcally, we
set ‘cfg.SOLVER.REFERENCE WORLD SIZE’ (number of
GPUs) to 2, both ‘cfg.SOLVER.IMS PER BATCH’ (imagesper batch) and ‘cfg.DATALOADER.NUM WORKERS’ to 16,
‘cfg.SOLVER.BASE LR’ (base learning rate) as 0.00025,
and ‘cfg.MODEL.ROI HEADS.NUM CLASSES’ (number
of classes) is 4 (as correspond to four different types of
damages). All other conﬁgurations are kept as default from
Detectron2. Interested readers can refer to this page1for
further details about these default conﬁgurations.
Although it is faster to train a Faster R-CNN using R101-
FPN as the base model, it has a slightly lower accuracy than
using X101-FPN as the base model (52.85% vs. 54.25% on
the evaluation set at the test time prediction score thresholds of
0.65 and 0.71, respectively). Speciﬁcally, it takes 0.82 seconds
to train an iteration when using R101-FPN while it takes 1.67
seconds when using X101-FPN (using the speciﬁed conﬁg-
uration). The former also takes fewer iterations to converge
than the latter (85,000 vs. 105,000). It takes time to do all the
experiments with these models. Therefore, in the next sections,
we only explore further experiments using the X101-FPN as
the Faster R-CNN base.
C. Data augmentations
As discussed in Section IV-A, though the training dataset
has a good number of images and damage types, they are
imbalanced among damage types and are distributed differ-
ently for different countries. Therefore, besides the apparent
augmentation techniques (such as image resizing and horizon-
tal ﬂipping, called ‘default augmentations’ hereafter), we also
explore other augmentation techniques. Speciﬁcally, Maeda et
al., [23] suggest that using GAN to generate synthetic damage
types with fewer occurrences helps predict that speciﬁc type of
damages (e.g., ‘pothole’ type of damages). Generating images
using GAN often involves three processes: 1) generating a
patch for damage, 2) ﬁnding places in an existing image to
blend the patch, and 3) making the synthetic patch as natural
to (as if it really belongs to) the container image as possible.
The synthetic damage patch generation step using GAN
takes a long time to train. Additionally, we can manually place
the patches to an existing image [23] or use another object
detection model to detect the road areas and automatically
position the artiﬁcial patches [19] to these areas. However,
both of these approaches take time to complete. Therefore,
in the following sections we detail our strategies to quickly
evaluate the efﬁciency of this augmentation method before
developing and training complicated models for these tasks,
in case this direction is promising.
Instead of using GAN to generate the synthetic damage
patches, we randomly extract and select existing patches using
the given ground-truth boxes. We also apply some simple
augmentations to the selected patches (such as horizontal
ﬂipping, slight rotating, or scaling) to increase the varieties of
the damage patches. Furthermore, we also randomly sample
the locations from all existing damages of the same type to
position the artiﬁcial patch into an existing image. The reason
is that we assume that similar damage types would appear in
1https://detectron2.readthedocs.io/modules/conﬁg.html

==== Page 5 ====
similar locations. This heuristic does not always hold, but it
would be fast and easy to implement.
Furthermore, instead of using Poisson blending [26] to place
the synthetic damage patches into an existing image, we use a
fast color transfer technique [32] to make the artiﬁcial patches
look more natural to the placing image. Figure 3 shows an
example of the resulted image. D01 (green box) and D10 (blue
box) damage boxes are the real ones, while D40 (yellow box)
is the synthesized one. Though not all the artiﬁcial patches
generated this way look natural or in the correct place, it
helps to quickly generate augmented data and check if this
augmentation strategy worth exploring.
Fig. 3. Damage augmentation: D00 (green-box) and D10 (blue box) are
the real damages. D40 (yellow box) is the augmented one. This patch was
randomly selected from existing D40 damages then slightly modiﬁed and
placed into a position randomly sampled from all positions of this crack type.
Furthermore, in this case, we are not focusing on any
speciﬁc type of damages but would like to balance the num-
ber of damages among the four damage types per country.
Thus, we set different augmentation probabilities for different
damage types in each country. Speciﬁcally, based on data
exploration as shown in Figure 1, we set the augmentation
probabilities as in Table I. Finally, we train the model (with
the selected architecture described above) using the augmented
data. It takes longer training iterations to converge, and the
resulted model does not perform better. This result might
indicate that though individual countries may have different
numbers of damages per type, the combined dataset (with three
different countries) does not pose a big issue about damage
type unbalancing (as shown in Figure 2).
TABLE I
AUGMENTATION PROBABILITIES FOR DIFFERENT DAMAGE TYPES AND
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES .
Country D01 D10 D20 D40
Czech 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.4
India 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.0
Japan 0.0 0.6 0.3 0.5
We also experiment with several other augmentation meth-
ods such as random cutout, random brightness/contrast, and
cropping image augmentations, using albumentations package
[33]. Speciﬁcally, for cutout augmentation, we randomly set
up to 8 random areas with maximum sizes of 3232with
the random probability of 0.5 (i.e., there is a 0.5 chance
of augmenting for every one of the eight cutout areas). For
brightness/and contrasts, we experiment both with a limit
of 0.3 and a random probability of 0.5. Also, for cropping,we set the min and max sizes to 512 and 540, respectively.
The cropping probability used is 0.1. However, all these
augmentations take a higher number of training iterations to
converge, and none of them help to increase the validation
accuracy.
The cutout augmentation technique does not work might
due to the reason that there are already built-in dropout
layers in the Detectron2 Faster R-CNN implementation. The
brightness/contrast technique does not help might indicate that
the training data itself already contains images with different
light and weather conditions. Thus, they already have images
with different brightness/contrast levels. Lastly, the cropping
augmentation technique does not work might due to the reason
that Faster R-CNN uses only the regions of interests of each
training image (i.e., ground-truth boxes) rather than the entire
image [18].
We explore also test time augmentation (TTA). Speciﬁcally,
we apply ﬂipping, resizing, and brightness/contrast augmenta-
tion techniques. We only apply horizontal ﬂipping for ﬂipping
augmentation since the vertical ﬂipping does not make sense
in this case. For resizing, we use the following sizes (400,
500, 600, 700, 800, 900, 1000, 1100, 1200). TTA takes a
longer time to make predictions because they have to make
predictions for several augmented images, then combine them
to produce ﬁnal predictions for each image. However, neither
of these approaches helps to improve prediction accuracy.
D. Other hyperparameters
Batch normalization is one of the breakthroughs in deep
learning. It allows faster and more stable training by making
the output distribution from one layer stable before forwarding
to the next layer. This strategy also helps gradient descent
by avoiding vanishing gradients. It normalizes the previous
layer’s output by subtracting the empirical means over the
batch divided by the observed standard deviations. Therefore,
there are options to change the pixel means and standard
deviations over the 3 image channels (i.e., Red, Green, and
Blue).
Since Detectron2 recommends not to change the
standard deviations, we look into the pixel means
(cfg.MODEL.PIXEL MEAN) from all the images in
the training set as [122:190;122:639;117:788] (in Blue,
Green, and Red channels, respectively) and use them instead
of the default values (generated from ImageNet dataset) as
[103:530;116:280;123:675]. However, this approach does
not help to enhance performance. This result might indicate
that the calculated means for this dataset and those from
ImageNet are not very different. Another indication would
be the base model was trained with the default means and
standard deviations, so changing them impacts the extracted
features from the base model used.
Furthermore, Faster R-CNN has a module to generate
anchor boxes. These anchor boxes are generated with dif-
ferent sizes and ratios. Therefore, we explore our data to
ﬁnd appropriate box sizes and ratios. Speciﬁcally, Figure
4 shows the histogram of the areas of all ground-truth

==== Page 6 ====
bounding boxes for the training set’s road damages. It is
observable that the areas are distributed mostly around 0
to 400 squared pixels. Therefore, we set the anchor gener-
ator sizes (cfg.MODEL.ANCHOR GENERATOR.SIZES) to
[[32;64;128]] instead of the default [[32;64;128;256]] .
Fig. 4. Bounding box area distributions using a histogram with the number
of bins as 20 (range of a bin is approximately 45.6). It is observable that the
areas distributed mostly around 0 to 400 squared pixels.
The ratios of the anchor boxes are calculated
by their heights over their widths. Therefore, we
also explore the height=width distribution of all
the ground-truth bounding boxes. It is observable
from Figure 5 that a high number of the ratios are
distributed at the lower end. Therefore, we set the ratios
(cfg.MODEL.ANCHOR GENERATOR.ASPECT RATIOS)
to these values [[0:1;0:5;1:0;1:5]]instead of the default
[[0:5;1:0;2:0]] ratios. Training our model with these
parameters does not help to improve the results. However, it
helps make the learning process converges faster (around the
iterations 70,000 instead of 105,000). These results indicate
that specifying appropriate sizes for the anchor boxes helps
the learning speed. However, the model is complicated
enough to learn the boxes though the candidates are not very
close to the predicted ones.
E. EfﬁcientDet model
As discussed, the object detection research ﬁeld is emerg-
ing, and related techniques evolve consistently. Speciﬁcally,
Google Brain team recently published EfﬁcientDet [34], which
claims to achieve a state-of-the-art result on Common ob-
jects in context (COCO) test-dev [35]. Therefore, we also
implement and train a model using EfﬁcientDet. However, the
prediction result is not as good as Faster R-CNN. Though it
takes a similar amount of time to train, it does not produce
a better prediction performance. This result might indicate
either EfﬁcientDet is not suitable for this dataset or need more
experiments to tune its parameters for this speciﬁc case.
Fig. 5. Bounding box ratios (height/width) distributions with the number of
bins as 30 (the width of a bin is approximately 0.55). It’s observable that this
distribution is skewed toward the lower end.
V. E VALUATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
We also visualize the predicted bounding boxes with corre-
sponding labels and scores to qualitatively evaluate the results.
In general, predictions and ground-truth match pretty well.
However, we also discover several discrepancies and found
some wrong/missing ground-truth bounding boxes. Figure
6 shows a few of these discrepancies. The red boxes are
ground-truth, and the blue boxes are predicted ones. The
predicted boxes also have corresponding labels and prediction
probabilities (ranging from 0 to 1.0 exclusively as low to high
conﬁdence). We only show three examples in this case, and we
also crop and keep only the lower parts of these pictures due to
space limitations. For clarity of these pictures, we recommend
interested readers to check these pictures in their original sizes
from the training folder using the image ﬁle names listed on
top of the pictures.
Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst picture is Japan 008976 , while the
D00 prediction matches the ground-truth, another detected
damage of type D20 is obvious but is not in the annotations
provided by the dataset. On the other hand, there are two
horizontal cracks detected with high conﬁdences in the picture
Czech 001957 , but there are no annotations for these in the
training set. Finally, there is a pothole ( D40) damage detected
inJapan 012722 without a corresponding ground-truth. It’s
also worth noting from this picture ( Japan 012722 ) that there
are currently two overlapping bounding boxes with the same
damage type ( D20), but one with 0.99 and another with 0.60
conﬁdence scores, respectively. The predictive score threshold
and the non-maximum suppression step will remove the one
with lower prediction score. Thus, the predicted one bounding
box for D20 matches the ground-truth one.
In many cases, especially in darker light conditions, machine
learning models can perform better than humans. For instance,
Figure 7 shows the picture India 009632 from test1 set. Our
model predicts that there is a D02 type of damage in the
picture (the red box in panel (A)). However, this is not clear
to humans. We might think that was a wrong prediction as

==== Page 7 ====
Fig. 6. Examples of missing bounding boxes and labels in the training set. In
this case, the red boxes are ground-truth, and the blue boxes are the predicted
ones. Both have corresponding labels (for damage types), and there is also
the predicted scores for the predictions.
one can visibly check in the top panel. However, it turns
out to be a correct prediction when we set the brightness of
this picture to 150 (e.g., using Photoshop) and zoom into this
region (200%), as shown in panel (B). Similar story happens
to image Japan 012412 and the detected D00 damage type in
the panels (C) and (D). These examples imply that the human
manual labeling approach might not be sufﬁcient for this type
of dataset. In other words, there should be a combination of
both human and machine learning supports for this task.
Deep learning needs a massive amount of labeled data, and
manual labeling of road damages takes so much time and is
error-prone. The reasons for errors might due to different light
conditions, precisions of the bounding boxes are difﬁcult to
set, or even the confusion between damage types. Kluger et
al., [19] suggest using a learned model to predict the bounding
boxes and classify damage types of the unlabeled, collected
images. These predictions then undergo the human manual
checks to validate/change the bounding boxes or the labels.
Fig. 7. Examples of the case that the machine learning model outperforms
humans. Panel (A) shows that our machine learning model detects a D02 type
of damage in the image India 009632 , and it is not visible to humans. It is
only perceptible when we change the brightness of the picture and zoom into
the region, as in panel (B). Similar story happens to the image Japan 012412
for damage type D00 in panels (C) and (D).
However, it still takes time, and there is a lot of room for
errors with human manual label checks. Figure 8, shows an
example of such mistakes. Image Japan 002970 (from the
train set) has a wrong pothole damage bounding box. This
wrong label is obvious to humans and less clear to machine
learning models. This type of error also indicates that several
labels in this current training set were generated automatically
and did not get validated carefully by humans. This error
would also indicate that the labeling process depends on one
model learned on the initial limited amount of data.
On the other hand, in a recent study, Xie et al., [36] claim
to have state-of-the-art ImageNet classiﬁcation results using
self-learning with noisy student technique. We suggest using
this approach with the following steps. First, train a model
on existing images with labeled bounding boxes and classes.
Use it as a teacher to generate annotations for other unlabeled
images. Combine the newly predicted annotations (with higher
conﬁdences) with the existing annotations, then train a larger
model called a student model. Use this learned student as a
teacher and repeat the process. This approach incrementally
increases the labeled data instead of training on a single model

==== Page 8 ====
Fig. 8. An image ( Japan 002970 ) with wrong pothole damage bounding
box in the training set for Japan. This mistake is obvious to humans and
less clear to machine learning models. Thus, it might indicate that a machine
learning model generates this label, and the error was slipped through the
human quality check step.
then uses that single model to predict labels as in the previous
approach.
It would always be useful to ﬁnally pass the pseudo,
predicted labels through another human inspection to validate
or adjust the bounding boxes and labels as a quality check.
However, it’s worth noting that one should also change the
brightness and zoom into the predicted regions for better qual-
ity checks if they are not apparent to humans. These cases can
be done manually or detected (using overall light conditions)
automatically adjust the pictures to help the validation process.
VI. S ELECTED MODEL ,RESULTS ,AND LIMITATIONS
Finally, we selected Faster R-CNN with X101-FPN as
the architecture to tackle the tasks of this competition. This
approach (with the parameters described above) results in
F1 scores of 51.0% and 51.4% for the test1 and test2 sets
of the challenge, respectively. The low F1 score is arguably
acceptable due to several issues with the ground-truth in the
training sets, as detailed in the previous section. However, the
main limitation of using Faster R-CNN with X101-FPN is that
it is slower to train and has a longer prediction time than other
model types such as YOLO and SSD.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This work explores different state-of-the-art object detection
methods and their applicability for road damage detection
and classiﬁcation tasks. Speciﬁcally, we experiment with De-
tectron2’s Faster R-CNN implementation with different basemodels and conﬁgurations using the Global Road Damage
Detection Challenge 2020 dataset. We also examine other
state-of-the-art object detection methods and various tech-
niques like training time, testing time augmentations, context
information, and post-processing. However, these methods are
not suitable for the damaged road objects, and their effects are
not satisfactory. In other words, the results indicate that Faster
R-CNN with X101-FPN base model and Detectron2’s default
conﬁgurations produce good prediction results for these tasks
(F1 score of approximately 51.0% for both test sets) and is
also general enough to be used in different countries. We
also visualize and qualitatively evaluate the existing labeling
quality and suggest using the noisy student approach to
improve the road damage labeling process.
The source codes of the experiments are available
at the Github page of this project: https://github.com/
iDataVisualizationLab/roaddamagedetector.
REFERENCES
[1] V . Pham, N. V . Nguyen, and T. Dang, “Scagcnn: Estimating visual
characterizations of 2d scatterplots via convolution neural network,”
inProceedings of the 11th International Conference on Advances
in Information Technology , ser. IAIT2020. New York, NY , USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3406601.3406644
[2] H. Maeda, Y . Sekimoto, T. Seto, T. Kashiyama, and H. Omata, “Road
damage detection using deep neural networks with images captured
through a smartphone,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09454 , 2018.
[3] D. Arya, H. Maeda, S. K. Ghosh, D. Toshniwal, A. Mraz, T. Kashiyama,
and Y . Sekimoto, “Transfer learning-based road damage detection for
multiple countries,” 2020.
[4] IEEE BigData 2020, “Global road damage detection challenge 2020,”
https://rdd2020.sekilab.global/, accessed: 2020–10-16.
[5] K. Tong, Y . Wu, and F. Zhou, “Recent advances in small object detection
based on deep learning: A review,” Image and Vision Computing , p.
103910, 2020.
[6] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich feature
hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,”
inProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , 2014, pp. 580–587.
[7] R. Girshick, “Fast r-cnn,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , 2015, pp. 1440–1448.
[8] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 770–778.
[9] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556 , 2014.
[10] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks,” in Advances in neural
information processing systems , 2015, pp. 91–99.
[11] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 779–
788.
[12] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “Yolo9000: better, faster, stronger,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , 2017, pp. 7263–7271.
[13] ——, “Yolov3: An incremental improvement,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.02767 , 2018.
[14] A. Bochkovskiy, C.-Y . Wang, and H.-Y . M. Liao, “Yolov4: Op-
timal speed and accuracy of object detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10934 , 2020.
[15] W. Liu, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, C. Szegedy, S. Reed, C.-Y . Fu, and A. C.
Berg, “Ssd: Single shot multibox detector,” in European conference on
computer vision . Springer, 2016, pp. 21–37.

==== Page 9 ====
[16] Y . J. Wang, M. Ding, S. Kan, S. Zhang, and C. Lu, “Deep proposal
and detection networks for road damage detection and classiﬁcation,” in
2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . IEEE,
2018, pp. 5224–5227.
[17] W. Wang, B. Wu, S. Yang, and Z. Wang, “Road damage detection and
classiﬁcation with faster r-cnn,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference
on Big Data (Big Data) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 5220–5223.
[18] A. Alfarrarjeh, D. Trivedi, S. H. Kim, and C. Shahabi, “A deep learning
approach for road damage detection from smartphone images,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . IEEE, 2018,
pp. 5201–5204.
[19] F. Kluger, C. Reinders, K. Raetz, P. Schelske, B. Wandt, H. Ackermann,
and B. Rosenhahn, “Region-based cycle-consistent data augmentation
for object detection,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 5205–5211.
[20] T.-Y . Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Doll ´ar, “Focal loss
for dense object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[21] C. Reinders, H. Ackermann, M. Y . Yang, and B. Rosenhahn, “Object
recognition from very few training examples for enhancing bicycle
maps,” in 2018 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) . IEEE, 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[22] J.-Y . Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-image
translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , 2017, pp.
2223–2232.
[23] H. Maeda, T. Kashiyama, Y . Sekimoto, T. Seto, and H. Omata, “Gener-
ative adversarial network for road damage detection,” Computer-Aided
Civil and Infrastructure Engineering , 2020.
[24] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y . Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems , 2014, pp. 2672–
2680.
[25] T. Karras, T. Aila, S. Laine, and J. Lehtinen, “Progressive growing
of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.10196 , 2017.
[26] P. P ´erez, M. Gangnet, and A. Blake, “Poisson image editing,” in ACM
SIGGRAPH 2003 Papers , 2003, pp. 313–318.
[27] Y . Wu, A. Kirillov, F. Massa, W.-Y . Lo, and R. Girshick, “Detectron2,”
https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2, 2019.
[28] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “Imagenet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in 2009 IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition . Ieee, 2009, pp. 248–255.
[29] Detectron2, “Detectron2 model zoo,” https://github.com/
facebookresearch/detectron2/blob/master/MODEL ZOO.md, accessed:
2020-10-16.
[30] ——, “R101-fpn,” https://dl.fbaipublicﬁles.com/detectron2/
COCO-Detection/faster rcnn R101 FPN 3x/137851257/model
ﬁnal f6e8b1.pkl, accessed: 2020-10-16.
[31] ——, “X101-fpn,” https://dl.fbaipublicﬁles.com/detectron2/
COCO-Detection/faster rcnn X101 32x8d FPN 3x/139173657/
model ﬁnal 68b088.pkl, accessed: 2020-10-16.
[32] Rosebrock, Adrian, “Super fast color transfer between images,” https://
www.pyimagesearch.com/2014/06/30/super-fast-color-transfer-images/,
accessed: 2020-10-16.
[33] A. Buslaev, V . I. Iglovikov, E. Khvedchenya, A. Parinov, M. Druzhinin,
and A. A. Kalinin, “Albumentations: Fast and ﬂexible image
augmentations,” Information , vol. 11, no. 2, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/11/2/125
[34] M. Tan, R. Pang, and Q. V . Le, “Efﬁcientdet: Scalable and efﬁcient
object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020, pp. 10 781–10 790.
[35] T.-Y . Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan,
P. Doll ´ar, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft coco: Common objects in
context,” in European conference on computer vision . Springer, 2014,
pp. 740–755.
[36] Q. Xie, M.-T. Luong, E. Hovy, and Q. V . Le, “Self-training with
noisy student improves imagenet classiﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
2020, pp. 10 687–10 698.

