==== Page 1 ====
Robot as Legal Person: Electronic
Personhood in Robotics and Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence
Sergio M. C. Avila Negri*
Department of Private Law, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil
This paper seeks to investigate the proposal to create a legal (electronic) personhood for
robots with arti ﬁcial intelligence based on the European Parliament resolution with
recommendations on Civil Law and Robotics. To this end, we highlight the variousrisks and problems present in this type of initiative, especially in view of the currenttrend of expanding legal subjectivity in various jurisdictions. In addition to ananthropomorphic rhetoric, we can observe the prevalence of a pragmatic line thatseeks to be guided, mainly, by the model of corporations, without taking into account,however, problems present in the process of embodiment of companies and the particularfunction of the term legal person in the grammar of Law.
Keywords: arti ﬁcial intelligence, legal personhood, robotics, electronic personhood, legal person
INTRODUCTION
In his essay The Sphere of Pascal , the writer Jorge Luis Borges reports that the Greek philosopher
Xenophanes, master of Parmenides, was tired of the Homeric verses that dressed the Gods as humanbeings. In opposition to anthropomorphic traits, he proposed to the Greeks one God, who was in factan eternal sphere. History followed its course and the exaggeratedly human gods were relegated to
poetic ﬁctions.
The anthropomorphic metaphor is not restricted to mythical or religious imagery. Sophia, a
humanoid robot with Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI), developed by the Hanson Robotics company,
received citizenship from Saudi Arabia in 2017. Although several interviewers were impressed withthe sophistication of its responses, the robot follows a simple algorithm and most of its statements arecredited to a previously prepared text ( Parviainen and Coeckelbergh, 2020 ).
As in Borges ’essay, Robotics can also be thought of without any anthropomorphic resource, with
other metaphors, as a sphere. Roomba is a ﬂat, round domestic robot. Even though it does not have
social skills like Sophia, the fact that this robotic vacuum cleaner moves on its own, following a simplealgorithm, causes some people to give it a name, talk to it and feel bad when the appliance gets stuckunder the sofa ( Darling, 2016 ).
If, for a long time, the idea that robots and human beings should be separated was in force, an opposite
trend has been accentuated, especially in the last d ecade: human beings can and should share the same
environment as robotic artefacts. As escorts of the elderly —and even children with autism —surgical
apparatus, deliverers or secu rity guards, robots have already begun to enter people ’s homes and lives.
Because of the lack of ontological and legal de ﬁnition about this emerging technology, the Law is
forced to resort to old ﬁgures, already-known metaphors, which help us to approach with a certain
familiarity what is new and unknown. In 2017, the European Parliament put forward a resolutionwith guidelines on Robotics, with a proposal to create an electronic personhood for “intelligent ”
robotic artefacts (European Union, 2017).Edited by:
David Gunkel,
Northern Illinois University,
United States
Reviewed by:
Jaana Parviainen,
Tampere University, Finland
Andreas Theodorou,
Umeå University, Sweden
*Correspondence:
Sergio M. C. Avila Negri
sergio.negri@ufjf.br
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Ethics in Robotics and Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Robotics and AI
Received: 04 October 2021
Accepted: 02 December 2021
Published: 23 December 2021
Citation:
Avila Negri SMC (2021) Robot as Legal
Person: Electronic Personhood in
Robotics and Arti ﬁcial Intelligence.
Front. Robot. AI 8:789327.
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.789327
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 1HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 23 December 2021
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2021.789327

==== Page 2 ====
In the verbalized legal world, the term “legal person ”refers to
an autonomous centre of legal relations. The ascription of legalpersonhood is based on the assumptions that all legal relationstake place among natural person and arti ﬁcial legal person, such
as corporations. Following that, the term natural person refers to
a human being. By contrast, the term “legal person ”or“legal
entity ”will be often used in this paper when referring to the
artiﬁcial legal person.
According to Gurnkel (2018a ,2018b) ,i ti si m p o r t a n tt o
separate certain questions that are confused in the debatesabout the legal personhood of robots. First, there is a relevantd i f f e r e n c eb e t w e e nt h et w ov e r b st h a tc o m p r i s et h eq u e s t i o n :“can”and “should ”AI be persons ( Gurnkel, 2018a .) On the
other hand, there is another relevant difference, betweennatural person and legal person. Following that, if legal
personhood is already dissociated from the human
substrate, there would be no way to deny that AI can be alegal person. But, just because it is possible, that does notmean it should be a good idea.
Just as it is important to separate the idea of moral
personhood from the concept of legal personality, itshould also be noted that the moral community is notlimited to the ﬁgure of moral agents, currently reaching
the ﬁgure of moral patients, who are affected by the
actions of ( “rational ”) agents. This means that rights must
not be confused with moral personhood. Likewise, courts
might recognize certain legal rights without this implying the
recognition of a moral per sonhood or a general legal
personality.
In dialogue with these important elements of the debate on the
legal personality of robots, I would like to highlight in this work adistinct aspect, very sensitive to the practice of Law: the legalentity presents itself as a decision structure, which allows theidenti ﬁcation of problems and normative solutions used in
previous cases. In this sense, it is important to understand theheuristic function of the term legal entity, that is, a mentalshortcut that allows, with simpli ﬁed information, quick
judgments.
In the debate on electronic personhood, it is commonly
observed that the legal person is presented as if there were noproblems in the process of attributing legal personhood tocorporations and companies. The analogy with the legalperson requires, however, an understanding of the function ofthis term in legal grammar. This paper seeks to investigate theproposal to create a legal (electronic) personhood for robotsbased on the European Parliament resolution withrecommendations on Civil Law and Robotics. To this end, wehighlight the various risks and problems present in this type
of initiative, especially in view of the current trend of
expanding legal subjectivity in various jurisdictions. Inaddition to an anthropomorphic rhetoric, we can observet h ep r e v a l e n c eo fap r a g m a t i cl i n et h a ts e e k st ob eg u i d e d ,mainly, by the model of corporations, without taking intoaccount, however, problems present in the process ofembodiment of companies and the particular function ofthe term legal person in the grammar of Law.PRIVATE LAW AND ROBOTICS
The architecture of digital platforms is capable, in certain cases, ofinﬂuencing society more directly and ef ﬁciently than Law itself. In
the growing scenario of technical regulation, it is important tonote that programmers and engineers may have dif ﬁculty
translating ethical and fundamental values into demands thatdecisively affect people ’s lives. In this sense, Langdon Winner
(1985) ,a sLeenes (2011) recalls, was already working with the
political dimension of artefacts and cited, for example, the absurd,
structurally elitist urban constructions of Robert Moses in New
York, which were designed to physically impede the passage ofpublic transport to noble areas of the city, since it waspredominantly used by the black population.
With the emergence of cyberspace, Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs) have come to beunderstood as instruments capable of conditioningbehaviours. The relationship between Law and thenormative effects of technology has been consolidated as aﬁeld of study. Lessig (2006) presents the “code ”—in his words,
the hardware and software that make up cyberspace —as a new
form of regulation, since it de ﬁnes the terms in which
interactions in cyberspace take place. Thus, as the codechanges, so does the character of cyberspace. Technologyalways incorporates certain rules, which allow a certainbehaviour and inhibit another. Therefore, the rules incyberspace are increasingly shaped by technology ratherthan by Law.
Robotics cannot be seen as a novelty. In industry, with
emphasis on automobile manufacturing, Robotics represents atechnique already incorporated into production, mainly inrelation to the performance of routine tasks. As Pagallo (2018)
points out, more than 50 years ago “robots have already
materialised as a reprogrammable machine, operating semi orfully automatically in manufacturing operations and otherindustrial tasks ”(Pagallo, 2018 ). Although Robotics should not
be confused with AI, it is undeniable that today these ﬁelds are
more and more closely intertwined, mainly due to theimprovement of probabilistic methods, the increasingavailability of huge amounts of data and the increase incomputational power. One cannot forget, either, the morerecent transformation of places and spaces into environmentsmore receptive to information technology, as occurs with the
imagery of intelligent cities.
The European Parliament Resolution of February 16, 2017
established that a robot shall be considered intelligent when it hasthe following characteristics: 1) the existence of sensors capable ofallowing it to exchange data with the environment; 2) the abilityto learn from experience and interact with the environment; 3)the existence of material support; 4) the ability to adapt and 5) theabsence of life in the biological sense (European Union, 2017).
Among the recommendations on the constitution of a suitable
registry, the formation of insurance schemes and compensationfunds is the suggestion of the creation of a legal status of robotsfor more complex artefacts, which would then be endowed with a
legal (electronic) personhood.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 2Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 3 ====
Electronic personhood is presented as an answer to the
problems of liability in view of possible damage that could becaused by robotic artefacts. Indeed, we can discern someconfusion in this form of approach: the attribution of a
supposed legal personhood for robots is treated as an
automatic consequence of the debate on liability. As Pagallo
(2018) noted, just as we should not confuse apples with
oranges, it is important to separate apples from liability andoranges from personhood. In addition to polarising the debates, itshould be noted that the defence or criticism of legal personhoodfor robots necessarily involves an understanding of the process ofconferring legal personhood on business companies andcorporations. If the law does not restrict the attribution oflegal personhood to human beings, how could we criticize theattribution of legal personhood to a robot ? Should we approach
robotic artefacts by means of old categories, as if robots were
people for the law?
THE ANDROID FALLACY AND
ANTHROPOMORPHIC RHETORIC
Robots as Natural Persons
Tracing the relationship between Law and new technologies is not
an easy task and, generally, this harmonisation does not occur in asimple way. This link is often made possible through the use of
metaphors, which serve as an instrument for the achievement of a
rhetorical effect, directly comparing different concepts. Richards
and Smart (2013) explain that, when dealing with different types
of robots, there are a series of competing metaphors, so choosingwhich ones to use generates consequences of great importance forthe success or failure of an attempt to regulate Robotics.
Calo (2015) asserts that currently we are already dealing with
the choice of metaphors for robots, as drones have already beenequated with “aircraft ”, leading to severe limitations of usage. In
addition, regulatory agencies in the United States have alreadycompared surgical robots to laparoscopic surgery, which is
minimally invasive, speeding up the process of approval.
A particularly seductive metaphor, not only for the law but
also for other ﬁelds of study of Robotics, is to think of robots
based on anthropomorphic rhetoric, as if they were people. If theimagery about robots is marked by the presence ofanthropomorphic artefacts, such as the androids of ﬁlms and
literature, what would be the problem for the law to resort to thissubtle comparison as well? To understand the risks of thisrhetoric, which projects human qualities on robots with AI,we need, ﬁrst, to better understand this technology.
Faced with the challenges brought by the spread of intelligent
robots, which are gradually coming onto the market and
consequently are becoming more and more present in people ’s
lives, also impacting the sphere of Law, Calo (2015) presents three
distinctive characteristics of robots: embodiment, emergence andsocial meaning. One of the main characteristics of a robot is to bephysically incorporated into the world, which allows it to sharethe physical environment with human beings. As Mataric (2014)
points out, corporeality also means perceiving other bodies andobjects around it, because one of the ﬁrst things a robot mustinternalize when programmed is how to avoid collisions, which is
done with the help of sensors, physical devices that allow a robotto receive information about itself and the objects around it. Inthis sense, contrary to what it may seem, uncertainty is part of
Robotics and arises from the fact that robots are physical
mechanisms that operate in situations in which it will bedifﬁcult to know exactly their own state and that of their
environment.
Materiality is not just a purely aesthetic issue. The way we
think about robots (and their human operators) will also affecttheir design. In this context, Richards and Smart (2013) question
what society expects of robots based on metaphors: are theyvirtual butlers, virtual pets, or virtual children? The answerschosen for these questions will affect the physical presentationof the robot and its con ﬁguration. According to Coeckelbergh
(2009) , ascribing responsibility to such agents is to experience,
feel and perceive a form and performance. In this sense, one couldspeak of “virtual agency ”and “virtual responsibility ”to refer to
“the responsibility that humans attribute to each other and to
(some) non-humans based on how the other is experienced andappears to them ”(Coeckelbergh, 2009 ).
Despite its anthropomorphic traits, Sophia, the humanoid
robot, follows a simple program. On this point, the metaphorcan be transmuted into a fallacy: human appearance can lead usto think of robots as people. Thus, since not all robots areandroids, the illusion caused by anthropomorphism of form
can be dangerous when we think of regulatory initiatives
based on false assumptions about the capacity of roboticartefacts themselves.
The projection of human characteristics on robots does not
depend on their form. Even when a robotic artefact has noanthropomorphic shape, people project onto thesetechnologies human qualities such as consciousness andintelligence. As the autonomy of the system increases, makingconnections between the inputs (its commands) and thebehaviour of the robot dif ﬁcult, analogies with human beings
are reinforced, which, in turn, can hinder any normative attempt,
whether in terms of ethical debate, or in legal matters, such as the
determination of who would be liable for possible damage causedby robotic artefacts.
The Naturalisation of Autonomy and
Consciousness in Robotics and in AI
In the debate on electronic personhood, it is commonly observed
that already existing legal norms would be incapable of portrayingand, consequently, disciplining autonomous, intelligent robots.Since it is admitted that today ’s robots can perform unanticipated
behaviour, we would only have to recognise their legal
(electronic) personhood. This kind of reasoning has severalﬂaws. The ﬁrst is the lack of determination of the meaning of
autonomy. At the same time, autonomy is confused withunpredictability of the result. Machines operated by directhuman control can bring about unpredictable results. From atechnological perspective, could the term “autonomy ”be used in
robotic applications where teleoperation, telepresence or humansupervision are found at some point? Could a robot acting
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 3Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 4 ====
without constant human monitoring, but controlled at a time of
need, be quali ﬁed as autonomous ( Bertonili, 2013 )? In this sense,
the absence of speci ﬁcation of the term “autonomy ”contributes
to its own naturalization, that is, autonomy is presented as a
given, as if it were a necessary consequence of the supposed
intelligence of these systems.
In an attempt to dispel this imprecision, Bertolini (2013)
highlights three meanings for the term autonomy whendiscussing robotic applications: 1) autonomy as consciousnessor self-consciousness, which would lead us to the idea of free willand, consequently, to the identi ﬁcation of a moral agent; 2) the
capacity to interact independently in the operationalenvironment; 3) the capacity to learn.
In philosophical terms, autonomy, in a strong sense, is related
to the idea that responsibility can only be attributed to a moral
agent. Like subjectivity, autonomy, in that sense, is part of the
philosophical discourse of modern times. Moral concepts in“modern times ”have come to be shaped to recognize the
subjective freedom of the individual in discerning as validwhat they should do. By breaking with the paradigm ofmorality as obedience, Kant practically invented the concept ofmorality as autonomy ( Schneewind, 1998 ). The rejection of the
inequality of moral quality makes each one their own legislator, tothe extent that every person would be capable of evaluating theirown action, without the need for any external interference.Although the strong anthropocentric component of this idea
of autonomy can be criticised, there is currently no robotic
artefact that meets these described conditions, which would inprinciple rule out qualifying robots as autonomous agents in astrong sense. Since the law does not restrict legal personhood, asan aptitude to acquire duties and rights, to the human substrate,the ontological debate ends up losing space when confronted withmore pragmatic arguments, such as the attribution of legalpersonhood to corporations and other business associations.
In another sense, autonomy could be understood as the ability
to perform tasks without human supervision. This is autonomy ina weak sense. From the autonomous drone, to vehicles without a
driver, to the robotic vacuum cleaner, one can speak, in these
cases, of autonomy at various levels, even if the robotic artefact isassociated with performing a certain activity due to a goalpreviously de ﬁned by a programmer. Although far from the
idea of a strong agency concept, it is undeniable that this is anappearance of agency, which, as we have seen, has its importance.In the classic de ﬁnition of Richards and Smart (2013) , robotic
artefacts are analysed from this sense of agency, which is not to beconfused with its strong sense. In this aspect, a robot can beunderstood as a built system that displays, even if only apparently,a physical and mental agency, but is not alive in the biological
sense, that is, it is something manufactured, that moves around
the world (materiality), seems to make rational decisions aboutwhat to do (weak or apparent autonomy) and is a machine.
To avoid anthropomorphic rhetoric, Calo (2015) avoids the
use of the term “autonomy ”and prefers to use the term
emergence. This behaviour is found in complex adaptivesystems where there is a global behaviour resulting fromindividual interaction. Some examples can be seen in theanimal world, such as the ﬂock of birds, the school of ﬁsh andthe swarm of bees, which show the creation of patterns without
the existence of a central command. Emergent behaviour is acharacteristic phenomenon of complex adaptive systems(Doneda et al., 2018 ). It is a type of global behaviour, which
can result from hundreds and thousands of simple individual
interactions. They create the illusion of central coordination. Wespeak of emergence when we observe a behaviour that is notexplicitly programmed, but which results from the interaction ofsimple mechanisms.
The notion of emergence is associated with a holistic
perspective, in which the robot ’s behaviour is not confused
with the simple sum of its parts, creating, in some situations,the sensation that the artefact performed an unexpected, non-programmed behaviour. It is interesting to realize that surprisecan depend on the subjective expectation of the expecter. Even so,
even if one adopts the perspective of the programmer, there is no
way to establish beforehand all the behaviours that emerge fromthe interaction that occurs only in a certain time and space of theexecution. As Mataric (2014) points out, the fact that we cannot
predict everything in advance does not mean that we cannotpredict anything, such as the risks associated with the use ofartefacts, such as surgical robots, in a context of a particular use.Thus, the input received by the robot continues to be determinantfor the behaviour it will produce, even if the latter is unexpected.
Autonomy can also be associated with a supposed ability to
learn. Could the ability of a robot to acquire and elaborate data to
perform its activities be equated to real learning? There are
already robotic artefacts capable of deciding independently onthe course of an action without any human intervention. Couldthe rules that determine the action and decisions be changed bythe robotic artefact itself? What does this machine learningconsist of? AI systems need the ability to acquire their ownknowledge by extracting patterns from raw data. This resource isknown as machine learning. The learning process, which may ormay not be supervised, allows the system itself to do the same taskmore ef ﬁciently with each attempt, thus automatically improving
its experience. Among the types of learning, the outstanding one
today is deep learning, which attains great power and ﬂexibility in
the attempt to represent the outside world with an alignedhierarchy of concepts, allowing the classi ﬁcation of images,
speech recognition and object detection, among other uses.
AsGoodfellow et al. (2016) point out, the ﬁrst deep learning
algorithms we recognize today were thought of as computationalmodels of biological learning, that is, models of how learninghappens or can happen in the brain. Deep learning is closelyassociated with the architecture of arti ﬁcial neural networks. Here
it is noted that anthropomorphism is not a unique characteristic
of Robotics. AI has also been historically conceptualised in
anthropomorphic terms. As Watson (2019) points out, besides
the fact that people always talk about machines that think andlearn, the name itself (arti ﬁcial intelligence) challenges us to
repeatedly compare human ways of reasoning with algorithms.In the same way as with legal entities, it is not always clearwhether this language is used in a literal or metaphorical sense.
The anthropomorphic metaphor conceals functional aspects
of arti ﬁcial intelligence, so that this rhetoric, which mimics
human qualities and attributes, may compromise the response
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 4Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 5 ====
to the complex ethical challenges posed by emerging
technologies. In fact, it is a mistake to suppose that thesealgorithms can be confused with human intelligence, since,although they surpass human intelligence in certain aspects,
they also fall short in others ( Watson, 2019 ). Even though
one cannot criticize simple inspiration in human models forthe development of arti ﬁcial intelligence, it is always important
to be careful when differences are erased and one begins tothink of metaphors and analogies in their literal sense.Consequently, when thinking about any attempt todiscipline or regulate Robotics, it is fundamental not toconfuse the existence of real autonomy or agency with thesensation of autonomy or agency. Unfortunately, theconfusion between the supposed agency of the artefacts andthe sensation provoked by the emerging technology leads to a
naturalization of the autonomy itself, as if every robot with AI
necessarily was, as happens w ith human beings, making a
decision in a speci ﬁc and independent way.
Social Robots, Vulnerability and Social
Valence
It is important to separate certain issues that are confused in the
debates about the legal personhood of robots.Anthropomorphism does not depend on the beliefs peoplemay have about the ontological nature of artefacts. Even
acknowledging that current questioning about the status of
“intelligent ”robots may impact on how people re ﬂect and
relate to these artefacts, the debates about the supposed agencyof robots, or about the technical possibility of developing acomplex arti ﬁcial intelligence system, called strong AI, may
not condition people ’s willingness to continue to explain the
behaviour of a robotic artefact based on the assignment of mentalstates. This happens on account of the particular social valence ofthis technology.
Moreover, social meaning (or social valence) relates to the fact
that humans show greater social commitment and provide
different stimuli when dealing with robots compared to other
goods. This characteristic can be linked to embodiment, since thephysical embodiment of the robot tends to make a person treatthat moving object as if it were alive. This is even more observablewhen the robot has anthropomorphic characteristics, since theresemblance to the human body causes people to start projectingemotions, feelings of pleasure, pain and care, as well as desires toconstitute relationships. Balkin (2015) understands that the
projection of human emotions on inanimate objects is not arecent phenomenon in human history, but when applied torobots, it entails numerous consequences.
Calo (2015) lists some consequences that can be generated by
social valence, amongst which Balkin (2015) highlights four: 1)
the more anthropomorphic a robot is, the more people blame therobot, rather than the person who uses it; 2) the presence ofrobots in a surveillance system increases the subjective feelingthat someone is being watched; 3) humans take greater risks topreserve the integrity of anthropomorphic robots than for thingsdesignated as tools; and 4) humans may suffer distinct emotionaldamage from the loss of robotic fellows.Robotics is no longer restricted to the factory and the
laboratory. So-called social robots are designed precisely tointeract with humans in uncontrolled environments. To thisend, studies and projects have been intensi ﬁed to develop
artefacts capable of interacting with people as naturally as
possible. Social robots are characterized by the possibility,albeit apparent, to transmit emotions, encourage and formsocial relationships, demonstrate personality, use natural cluesof communication and interact socially with people. There isalready a particular ﬁeld of study called human-robot interaction
(HRI), which seeks, based on social valence, to replicate in roboticartefacts a variety of cues and markers present in humancommunication, such as facial expressions and even language.
Along with social robots, assistive and rehabilitation Robotics
also stand out. Pearl, the Nursebot, is a prototype of a personal
mobile robotic assistant that can recognize speech, accompany
patients and communicate via touch screen. Designed at CarnegieMellon University, the nurse robot is being prepared to remindpeople to take their medicine and help them move around in oldpeople ’s homes. Rehabilitation robots were initially designed to
assist in the movement of patients in recovery. Assistive Roboticshas always had a wide reach, including rehabilitation robots,wheelchair robots, companion robots and manipulative arms. Wecan also speak of a Socially Assisted Robotics, a term used todescribe artefacts whose central focus, instead of physical contact,is some form of social interaction. Robots are already used to help
stroke (CVA) patients to do their exercises, to assist the elderly
and to care for and educate children and adolescents, especially incases of speci ﬁc conditions, as has been advocated in situations of
autism.
According to Sharkey and Sharkey (2008) , there are several
ethical problems related to the use of social robots by people invulnerable situations. With regard to the elderly, the following arenoteworthy: 1) potential reduction in human contact; 2)increased sense of objecti ﬁcation and loss of control; 3) loss of
privacy; 4) loss of personal freedom; 5) deceit and infantilisation;6) uncertainty regarding the circumstances in which the elderly
can and should have permission to control robots. For Sparrow
and Sparrow (2006) , the use of social robots with the elderly
reveals a serious ethical problem, as it is based, mainly in the caseof anthropomorphic artefacts, on the illusion of genuine socialinteraction. Even in the case of relatively simple assistive robots,introduced in old people ’s homes to monitor their behaviour, one
can speak of a technology that decisively affects the choices ofthese people, which can result in authoritarian Robotics.
When we think of robots as if they were people, we envisage
for the artefact a degree of agency and autonomy that is notsimply exaggerated, it is actually a transference, in which we lose
part of our own autonomy. The proposal of an electronic
personhood does nothing to help deal with this problem. Itmay, in fact, aggravate it, since, even if it is restricted to Law,legal personhood reinforces the concealed equivalence that issymbolically projected towards other ﬁelds. But if we move the
artefacts away from the idea of natural person, would we not runthe risk of abandoning our own ethics in these interactions, as canbe seen, for example, with the advance of sexual robots thatreproduce misogynistic stereotypes present in society? The social
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 5Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 6 ====
valence of robots shows us exactly the opposite, that is, that ethics
can and must precede the de ﬁnition of the nature of these
technologies, by the simple fact that we are human beings,“with autonomy and moral rules, dealing with these
ontologically inde ﬁnite artefacts ”(Cortese, 2018 ).
A virtue ethics approach can thus offer an interesting way of
dealing with the problems generated by the interaction betweenhumans and social robots. To avoid the risk of an individualistsolution, Coeckelbergh (2010 ,2020) highlights the importance of
thinking about a relational and socially oriented ethics of virtue,that is, “virtue in its history and in its concrete bodily
performances ”(Coeckelbergh, 2020 ).
The “individualist solutions ”, which also mark the
philosophical discourse of modernity, have also beentransposed to legal discourse. The emphasis placed on the
subjective centre of abstract imputation stems from the
transposition of an illusion: the individual-subject of law withall his attributes would be capable of shaping the whole juridicalsystem ( Alcaro, 1976 ). While, on the philosophical level, the
philosophy of conscience favoured the immediacy of subjectiveexperience over discursive mediation ( Habermas, 2007 ), on the
juridical level, processes of social interaction, such as the union ofpersons around a certain initiative, also came to be portrayed bythe interposition of a transcendental subjectivity: the legal person.
ELECTRONIC PERSONS AS LEGAL
ENTITIES
Legal Entity and Calculation With Concepts
The main argument for the defence of electronic personhood is
associated with a pragmatic or functional analysis of legalpersonhood. In the verbalized legal world, the term “legal
person ”refers to an autonomous centre of legal relations. If
legal personhood is already dissociated from the human substrate,there would be no way to deny personhood to robots due to thenon-existence of any human characteristic in these artefacts. In
that narrative, the legal person is presented as if there were no
problems in the process of attributing legal personhood tocompanies. The analogy with the legal person requires,however, an understanding of the function of this term inlegal grammar.
The philosophical discourse of modernity is not structured
only in subjectivity. The rationalization that crystallizes aroundthe organization of the capitalist enterprise and the bureaucraticapparatus of the state also appears as an essential characteristic ofthose “new times ”, with the institutionalization of economic and
administrative action with regard to the aims. Law is also going
through a process of rationalization, the central idea of which is
the differentiation and institutionalisation of autonomous socialsystems, thought of as machines, since they are founded onthemselves and governed by a particular procedural reason.The consolidation of this formal law is not limited to theexternal foresight of the administration of justice or to theseparation of powers, but also requires an internal, predictablecontrol, embodied in the idea that it is “calculated with concepts ”,
as in mathematics.The term legal person was perfectly suited to the context of
formal Law internally controllable by means of abstract concepts.Even today, when we perceive that this pretension of a legalmachine has always been illusory and Law is incalculable, as Irti
(2018) pointed out, we can also see that the legal person retains, to
a certain extent, its original inspiration: calculation mediated byconcepts.
Functions and Illusions of the Legal Person
According to Solaiman (2017) , being a legal person entails the
ability to exercise rights and to perform duties. For Bryson et al.
(2017) , there are three issues related to legal personality that
directly interest the debate on electronic personality. First, legalpersonality is a ﬁction. Legal personality is not necessarily
correlated with an ethical notion of moral personhood.
Second, legal personality is divisible. A legal system might
treat differently legal entities in respect of some rights andsome obligations. Third, the rights and obligations that a legalperson may have as a matter of law may not match those it has asa matter of fact ( Bryson, 2018 ). Even agreeing with the points
presented, we believe that the heuristic function of the term legalperson has a decisive role in the analysis of the proposal to createan electronic personality.
The legal person represents a mental shortcut, a trigger that
facilitates access to a set of complex situations. The actsperformed by shareholders and directors are uni ﬁed around
abstract subjectivity, and there is no need, in each situation, to
refer to the whole set of people who are contemplated by the legalentity ’s particular framework. In this sense, it is important to
perceive the heuristic function of the term legal person, that is, amental shortcut that enables, with simpli ﬁed information, rapid
judgements.
As a mental shortcut, legal personhood allows the allocation of
the patrimony in autonomous centres, different from the complexof legal relations of each partner. The creation of the new subject(legal person) facilitates the understanding of the separation ofassets according to a particular purpose. This, however, creates
the illusion that patrimonial segregation is dependent on legal
personhood, as if patrimonial autonomy could only be explainedwith the mediation of the legal person. In addition to thesimpli ﬁcation of the complex of relationships and the
autonomous allocation of assets, recourse to corporationpersonhood also allows access to a model of privateimputation of acts practiced by shareholders and directorsand, at the same time, gives stability to the model ofcoordination that develops within the legal person.
In the debate on electronic personhood, the process of
conferring legal personhood on companies is presented as a
model that would justify the recognition of legal personality
for robots with arti ﬁcial intelligence, as argued, for example,
byTurner (2018) , who even maintains that possible abuses, such
as the lack of accountability of programmers and engineers, couldbe fought by disregarding legal personhood ( “piercing the
corporate veil ”). This type of argument demonstrates how the
analogy with corporate law is mobilized without, for this purpose,pointing out the problems present in the model of the corporatepersonality.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 6Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 7 ====
AsGalgano (2010) had already reported in Italian law, there
are several disadvantages in the process of conferring legalpersonhood on companies, which are not, to this day,properly measured. Galgano (2010) pointed out that the term
legal person was used, both by courts and lawyers, as if there was a
single entity to be protected behind the label of the legal person.This form of approach generated a serious problem: unitarytreatment. Besides distorting the function of the institute, itmasked the diversity of phenomena that articulated aroundthat term. Similarly, Ferro-Luzzi (2001) demonstrated how the
idea of activity, fundamental to the understanding of the termenterprise, was mistakenly absorbed by the notion of abstractsubjectivity, which, in turn, compromised the very regulation ofthe business phenomenon by the law. According to the Italianauthor, the concept of activity depends on a new legal grammar,
which reveals itself capable of culturally disassociating the action
from the ﬁgure of the abstract subject that has rights and duties.
The model of the corporate personality has also contributed to
an improper understanding of the limitation of the shareholder ’s
liability by concealing the unequal transfer of entrepreneurial riskto third parties. If, on the one hand, there are creditors who canprotect their own interests by renegotiating the risk with thecompany, as happens with a ﬁnancial institution; there are, on the
other hand, creditors who are unable to do so, as is sometimesseen with victims of environmental damage, such as thoseaffected by mining. The prevalence of the abstract model of
subjectivity has given rise to a unitary reading of patrimonial
autonomy itself and, consequently, of the limitation ofresponsibility, which are indifferent to the different credits.
If the electronic personhood has been conceived according to
the problems generated by the need to be accountable for possibledamages, it should be remembered that there is a mismatchbetween the legal format of the isolated corporation and theeconomic protagonism of the multinational enterprise groups.This is an internal contradiction of Law, materialized in theparadoxical tension between legal diversity and economic unity.To minimize this problem, Law has sought a new grammar,
coming closer to the ﬁgure of control and direction, breaking with
the model of an abstract subject as the central point in the processof accountability.
The creation of an electronic personhood may end up
repeating the same problems. Instead of recognizing thepeculiarities of the different areas of operation of robots, thesedifferent relationships are uni ﬁed in a single legal model, based
exclusively on the ﬁgure of an abstract subject. This is a frequent
mistake when the law tries to approach new technologies. Insteadof their ownership, the artefacts are in fact determined by theirspeciﬁc destinies. Thus, they do not include abstract
generalizations and unitary reductions, regardless of their
various uses. Is it possible to compare the problems caused bythe use of Robotics in medicine with the use of drones for militaryand security purposes? Similarly, the use of social robots withvulnerable people raises speci ﬁc ethical problems, which cannot
be compared with the use of Robotics for the transport of goodsand people.
Accountability focused on the personhood of this new subject,
supported by a still debatable concept of autonomy, may concealthose who are truly responsible for the damage and for the
development of the artefacts, transferring the risks of theactivity carried out by programmers and computer engineersto third parties who share the same spaces with the robots.
Contrary to what Turner (2018) states, “piercing the corporate
veil doctrine ”(disregard of legal entity) does not represent an
adequate instrument to remedy these problems, but represents, infact, a technique that is the main manifestation of theunitarianism that marks the whole discourse of the legalperson. There can be seen in the European Parliament ’s
particular Resolution with recommendations on Civil Law onRobotics, confusion between the attribution of personhood andthe separation of patrimony. The creation of a speci ﬁc fund for
any damage caused does not depend on the creation of a newsubject, since the legal person, even if associated with patrimonial
autonomy, does not have a monopoly on the disposition of
property. Nor does criticism of the personi ﬁcation make the
disposition of property the main solution to the problem. It isfundamental to come up with differentiated liability mechanisms,sensitive to the different uses of robotic artefacts and the diversetypes of damage that may possibly be caused.
On April 21, 2021, the European Commission presented
the Proposal for a Regulation on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, which
seeks to establish a uniform legal framework for the development,commercialization, and use of arti ﬁcial intelligence within the
scope of the European Union. The current proposal moved
away from the creation of an electronic legal personality.
The text relies on a risk-based approach, which modulates thecontent of standards according to the intensity of risks created byAI systems.
Taking Metaphors Seriously: New Subjects
and the “Imitation Game ”
The proposal to create an electronic personhood is part of a wider
debate: the recognition of new subjectivities and, consequently,new legal actors ( Gellers, 2020 ).Teubner (2006) recalls that in
1,522 rats were submitted to a trial in the ecclesiastical court of
Autun. The methodological individualism that has informed legalpersonhood since modern times has prevented the recognition ofanimal rights. In ﬂuenced by the process of rationalization of
science and nature, the number of actors in the legal world was, asthe German author maintains, drastically reduced by adevelopment of the philosophical discourse of modernity. Indialogue with Luhmann ’s Theory of Systems and with Latour ’s
sociology, Teubner (2006) rejects the anthropocentrism that
underlies the psychological and sociological analysis of anintentional action in which the only plausible actor is the
human individual.
In 2017, a river in New Zealand was given legal personhood.
In the same year, in India, a court recognized the legalpersonhood of the rivers Ganges and Yamuna. Unlike theIndian case and the New Zealand case, the Constitution ofEcuador made a more daring proposal. The projection of therights of nature was presented as a way of trying to move from ananthropocentrism to a biocentrism based on the idea of goodliving. This openness to new forms of subjectivity has the merit of
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 7Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 8 ====
trying to dissociate oneself from the individualistic model that
underlies both the natural person and the legal person. But mightit be possible to combat anthropocentrism by making use of aninstrument such as the legal personhood, the main representative
of methodological individualism in legal grammar? Even if these
initiatives are of great importance, in a symbolic and culturaldimension, by recognising the wisdom of traditional andindigenous populations with a new cosmovision, the newpersonalities may end up imprisoned in an old grammar stillinspired by an anthropocentric model, such as the ideas ofsubjective rights and individual ownership. The same canhappen with the supposed electronic personhood. Even if theassociation with the dichotomy natural person and legal personis avoided, the new subjects are articulated by means ofold models, which reinforce the already classic subjective
modulation of legal discourse.
In the lesson of Rodotà (2015) , the problem lies in the
perspective of the very idea of an abstract subject that informsany process of attribution of legal personhood. This constructionallowed the juridical discourse to formally liberate the person,artiﬁcially detaching him or her from his or her economic, social
and natural conditions. As a response to the contempt for theconcrete, we note the attempt to reconnect the person, in amaterial sense, to his or her context, with the reinvention ofthe person, now socio-environmentally situated and embodied.
The pitfall of the metaphor of the abstract subject is precisely
that it tends to merge person and juridical subjectivity by not
demonstrating the differences and thus hiding them. In Serick ’s
classic study (1958), there is reference to the teratological casePeople ’s Pleasure Park Co. v. Rohleder, in which a Virginia court
in 1908 asked itself what the colour of the legal person would bewhen faced with the following question: whether a society, as anautonomous centre of juridical relations, could be constrained bythe racist laws of the state which prohibited blacks from acquiringland. In Germany, with the rise of Nazism, the courts also had toexamine whether the anti-Semitic laws could be applied tocompanies controlled by Jews ( Serick, 1958 ).
In the case Santa Clara County v. Southern Paci ﬁc Railroad,
the term “person ”, provided for in the 14th amendment of the US
Constitution, was also associated with a corporation, which couldbe seen as an example of a subject for Law ( Hall, 2005 ). In 2014, in
a controversial decision, the US Supreme Court resorted to theargument that an entrepreneurial society, Hobby Lobby, couldinvoke religious freedom in order not to collaborate with thepayment of a health plan that would allow employees access toemergency contraceptive drugs, with high doses of oestrogen,popularly known as morning-after pills.
The accommodation of the religious freedom of a for-pro ﬁt
business society comes up against an important point, however:
thousands of women employed by Hobby Lobby may not sharethe same belief as the main shareholders in the company. In viewof this situation, did the court decide to protect the legal positionof the company ’s controlling shareholders to the detriment of
the private autonomy of the female employees? For JudgeGinsburg, the casting vote at the time of the trial, there was nodoubt: the choice to extend religious freedom to a pro ﬁt-making
organisation generated a serious imbalance within the companyby favouring the belief of the controllers over the protection of
the rights of women working in the company in question.
In the debate on the rights of the personhood of legal persons
and on the moral damage to legal persons in Brazil, there is a
sometimes problematic approach between natural persons and
legal persons. This equalisation may, as already highlighted,ignore the diversity of interests that justi ﬁed the
personi ﬁcation of the human being in relation to the
embodiment of companies, foundations and associations. Justas it is important to criticize the disguised fusion between personand legal person, we should also separate person and legalpersonhood and recognize that the expansion of new subjectsrefers only to the latter, to juridical subjectivity.
In this context of new subjectivities, what should be done?
Albeit controversial, the very origin of the term legal personhood,
derived from the term persona , is associated with a metaphor, the
mask used in theatre, allowing the actor to impose his voice.Despite this remote use, people still believe today in the illusorypossibility that metaphors, even those already incorporatedwithin legal grammar, can be prohibited. Italian nominalism,recognising that the legal person would represent a linguisticinstrument, almost suggested its end, thus underestimating thepower and function of metaphors. Even if there is no way toeliminate them, it will always be possible to monitor theirnormative use, reporting, in speci ﬁc situations, the abuses
related to the use of metaphors and analogies in a literal sense.
AsTurner (2018) , one of the enthusiasts of the attribution of
legal personhood to robots, points out, the accreditation ofelectronic personhood to robots in the United States or theEuropean Union is likely to in ﬂuence other legal decisions.
The electronic personhood may thus be adopted by countriesthat traditionally import legal models, as is the case of Brazil,whose model of legal personhood for natural persons has neverbeen fully achieved. Political, economic and social challenges haveprevented, and still prevent, the construction of a completecitizenship in several peripheral countries. Although in ﬂuenced
by the philosophical discourse of modernity, the adoption of legal
models in Brazil has occurred, in various situations, in a
particular and partial way, as in a real game of imitation, anincomplete and untimely simulacrum of never-realisedexpectations. We cannot move on to new subjectivitieswithout confronting old promises, such as the problems ofsubjects whose human rights have not yet been achieved, atthe risk of confusing people and legal entities. Perhaps robotswith arti ﬁcial intelligence can wait for their controversial rights.
Perhaps the only task, no less important, left for us to carry out isthat of adjusting subjects, putting back on the masks and takingthe metaphors seriously, that is, continuing to report the non-
problematised convergence between the contemplated metaphor
and the disguised comparison.
CONCLUSION
The sentence “the robots are coming ”, which has already become
a cliché, does not accurately portray the evolution of thistechnology. If robots, in fact, have already arrived, what is this
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 8Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 9 ====
so loudly proclaimed Robotics revolution? Robotic artefacts, in
contrast to what used to happen, are increasingly integrated intothe same environments as human beings, which, in turn, can havegreat impacts, not yet fully measured, as can be seen in the use of
these technologies in medical care and care for the elderly and
children. The imaginary about robots is intensely marked by theassociation with anthropomorphic artefacts, such as androids,which appear in ﬁlms and literature. A particularly dangerous
metaphor for the law is to yield to this symbolism, projectingautonomy, consciousness and other human attributes intorobotic artefacts. Often the different concepts, originally fusedaround the metaphor, disappear, so that differences are erasedand metaphors and analogies come to life, coming to be thoughtof in their literal sense.
The discussion about the ontological foundations that separate
people and robots has been seen to be insuf ﬁcient to remove the
defence of legal personhood from robotic artefacts with arti ﬁcial
intelligence. If the law confers legal personhood on assetsintended for certain purposes, such as foundations, there canbe no doubt that the aptitude to acquire rights and duties is notexclusively one of human beings. In fact, we note the prevalenceof a pragmatic or functional line of the electronic personhood,which, by distancing itself from the philosophical debate centredon ontological analyses, seeks to base itself mainly on the model ofthe corporate legal personality. This change of focus, with robotsas legal persons, also involves problems, which in most cases are
neglected even by critics of the electronic personhood. This is
mainly on account of the incorrect understanding of the reasonspresent in the process of embodiment of companies and theparticular role of the term “legal person ”in the grammar of Law.
In Jorge Luis Borges ’ﬁctional essay, the substitution of the
anthropomorphic metaphor by a sphere inspired several thinkers,until it became a labyrinth and an abyss for Pascal, who, feeling
the incessant weight of the physical world, adjusted his metaphor,going on to claim that “nature is an in ﬁnite sphere, whose centre
is everywhere and its circumference nowhere ”. Blaise Pascal,
whose studies were fundamental for computing, was also
known for his wager as to the in ﬁnite. In this single player
game, we can re ﬂect ethically on the existence of the
indeﬁnite, even if it is rationally inaccessible. In the same way,
we do not need to wait for ontological de ﬁnitions or these
robotic artefacts to de ﬁnitively become part of people ’s
everyday lives to question ethical problems related to thisprocess. Should we be concerned about social robots? Whatare the main risks associated with the so-called SociallyAssistive Robotics? If, on the one hand, the electronicpersonhood contributes very little to the problems generated
by the not at all metaphorical approximation between robots
and humans; on the other hand it reinforces dangerously theconnection, not always questioned, between anthropomorphicrhetoric and concealed imitation.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included inthe article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can bedirected to the corresponding author.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author con ﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work and
has approved it for publication.
REFERENCES
Alcaro, F. (1976). Riﬂessioni critice intorno alla soggettività giuridicha: signi ﬁcato di
una evoluzione . Milan: Giuffrè.
Balkin, Jack. (2015). The Path of Robotics Law , 06. Berkeley: California Law Review
Circuit, 45 –60., v.
Bertolini, A. (2013). Robots as Products: The Case for a Realistic Analysis of
Robotic Applications and Liability Rules. L. Innovation Techn. 2, 214 –247.
doi:10.5235/17579961.5.2.214
Bryson, J. J., Diamantis, M. E., and Grant, T. D. (2017). Of, for, and by the People:
The Legal Lacuna of Synthetic Persons. Artif. Intell. L. 25 (3), 273 –291.
doi:10.1007/s10506-017-9214-9
Bryson, J. J. (2018). Patiency Is Not a Virtue: the Design of Intelligent Systems and
Systems of Ethics. Ethics Inf. Technol. 20, 15 –26. doi:10.1007/s10676-018-
9448-6
Calo, Ryan. (2015). Robotics and the Lessons of Cyberlaw. California Law Review .
1033. 513 –563. v. n.
Coeckelbergh, M. (2020). How to Use Virtue Ethics for Thinking about the Moral
Standing of Social Robots: A Relational Interpretation in Terms of Practices,Habits, and Performance. Int. J. Soc. Robotics 13, 31 –40. doi:10.1007/s12369-
020-00707-z
Coeckelbergh, M. (2010). Robot Rights? towards a Social-Relational Justi ﬁcation of
Moral Consideration. Ethics Inf. Technol. 12 (3), 209 –221. doi:10.1007/s10676-
010-9235-5
Coeckelbergh, M. (2021). Three Responses to Anthropomorphism in Social
Robotics: Towards a Critical, Relational, and Hermeneutic Approach. Int.
J. Soc. Robotics 1. doi:10.1007/s12369-021-00770-0Coeckelbergh, M. (2009). Virtual Moral agency, Virtual Moral
Responsibility: on the Moral Signi ﬁcance of the Appearance,
Perception, and Performance of Arti ﬁcial Agents. AI Soc. 24, 181 –189.
doi:10.1007/s00146-009-0208-3
Cortese, J. (2018). Interação, indistinguibilidade e alteridade na Inteligência
Artiﬁcial, 17. Teccogs: Revista Digital de Tecnologias Cognitivas . São Paulo,
Brazil: TIDD | PUC-SP, 95 –112.
Darling, K. (2016). in Extending Legal protection to Social Robots: The Effects of
Anthropomorphism, Empathy, and Violent Behavior towards Robotic Objects .
Editors R. Law., R. Calo, and A. M. Froomkin (MA: Edward Elgar Publishing),
213–231.
Doneda, D., et al. (2018). Considerações iniciais sobre inteligência arti ﬁcial, ética e
autonomia pessoal. Pensar - Revista de Ciências Jurídicas. V. 23–17.
doi:10.5020/2317-2150.2018.8257
Galgano, F. (2010).
Trattato di Diritto Civile, I. (Milan: CEDAM).
Ferro-Luzzi, P. (2001). Icontratti associativi. Milan: Giuffrè, 1 –16.
Gellers, J. (2020). Rights for Robots: Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, Animal and
Environmental Law . Abingdon: Routledge.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courvile, A. (2016). Deep Learning . Cambridge:
MIT PRESS.
Gunkel, D. J. (2018b). Robot Rights . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Gunkel, D. J. (2018a). The Other Question: Can and Should Robots Have Rights?
Ethics Inf. Technol. 20 (2), 87 –99. doi:10.1007/s10676-017-9442-4
Habermas, J. (2007). The Philosophical Discourse Of Modernity. Twelve Lectures.
Fredrick Lawrence (Translator) . Cambridge: MIT PRESS.
Hall, K. L. (2005). The Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of the United
States . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Irti, N. (2018). Un Diritto Incalcolabile . Torino: Giappichelli.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 9Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

==== Page 10 ====
Leenes, R. (2011). Framing Techno-Regulation: An Exploration of State and Non-
state Regulation by Technology. Legisprudence 52, 143 –169. doi:10.5235/
175214611797885675
Mataric, M. J. (2014). Introdução à robótica. Humberto Ferasoli Filho, José Reinaldo
Silva e Silas Franco((Translator) . São Paulo: Editora Unesp.
Pagallo, U. (2018). Vital, Sophia, and Co.-The Quest for the Legal Personhood of
Robots. Information 9, 230. doi:10.3390/info9090230
Parviainen, J., and Coeckelbergh, M. (2020). The Political Choreography of the
Sophia Robot: Beyond Robot Rights and Citizenship to Political Performancesfor the Social Robotics Market. AI & SOCIETY 36, 715 –724. doi:10.1007/
s00146-020-01104-w
Richards, N. M., and Smart, W. (2013). How Should the Law Think about Robots?
Available at SSRN 2263363.
Rodotà, S. (2015). Il diritto di avere diritto . Roma: Editori Laterza.
Schneewind, J. B. (1998). The Invention of Autonomy . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Serick, R. (1958). Apariencia y realidad en las sociedades mercantiles: el abuso de derecho por
medio de la persona jurídicaJosé Puig Brutau . Translator. Barcelona: Ediciones Ariel.
Sharkey, A., and Sharkey, N. (2010). Granny and the Robots: Ethical Issues in Robot Care
for the Elderly. Ethics Inf. Technol. 141, 27 –40. doi:10.1007/s10676-010-9234-6
Solaiman, S. M. (2017). Legal Personality of Robots, Corporations, Idols and
Chimpanzees: a Quest for Legitimacy. Artif. Intell. L. 25 (2), 155 –179.
doi:10.1007/s10506-016-9192-3
Sparrow, R., and Sparrow, L. (2006). The Hands of Machines? The future of Aged
Care. Minds Machines 16, 141 –161. doi:10.1007/s11023-006-9030-6Teubner, G. (2006). Rights of Non-humans? Electronic Agents and Animals as
New Actors. J. L. Soc. 33, 497 –521.
Turner, J. (2018). Robot Rules: Regulating Arti ﬁcial Intelligence . Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
Watson, D. (2019). The Rhetoric and Reality of Anthropomorphism in Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence . Minds & Machines. doi:10.1007/s11023-019-09506-6
WINNER (1985). “Do Artifacts Have Politics, ”inThe Social Shaping of Technology
(Philadelphia: Open University Press).
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential con ﬂict of interest.
Publisher ’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their af ﬁliated organizations, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated inthis article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed orendorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2021 Avila Negri. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distributionor reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and thecopyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal iscited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution orreproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org December 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 789327 10Avila Negri Robot as Legal Person

