==== Page 1 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 1
RSVQA: Visual Question Answering for Remote
Sensing Data
Sylvain Lobry, Member, IEEE, Diego Marcos, Jesse Murray, Devis Tuia, Senior Member, IEEE
This is the pre-acceptance version, to read the ﬁnal version pub-
lished in the journal IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing, please go to: https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2020.2988782.
Abstract —This paper introduces the task of visual question
answering for remote sensing data (RSVQA). Remote sensing
images contain a wealth of information which can be useful
for a wide range of tasks including land cover classiﬁcation,
object counting or detection. However, most of the available
methodologies are task-speciﬁc, thus inhibiting generic and easy
access to the information contained in remote sensing data. As
a consequence, accurate remote sensing product generation still
requires expert knowledge. With RSVQA, we propose a system to
extract information from remote sensing data that is accessible to
every user: we use questions formulated in natural language and
use them to interact with the images. With the system, images
can be queried to obtain high level information speciﬁc to the
image content or relational dependencies between objects visible
in the images. Using an automatic method introduced in this
article, we built two datasets (using low and high resolution data)
of image/question/answer triplets. The information required to
build the questions and answers is queried from OpenStreetMap
(OSM). The datasets can be used to train (when using supervised
methods) and evaluate models to solve the RSVQA task. We
report the results obtained by applying a model based on
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for the visual part and on
a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) for the natural language part
to this task. The model is trained on the two datasets, yielding
promising results in both cases.
Index Terms —Visual Question Answering, Deep learning,
Dataset, Natural Language, Convolution Neural Networks, Re-
current Neural Networks, Very High Resolution, OpenStreetMap
I. I NTRODUCTION
REMOTE sensing data is widely used as an indirect
source of information. From land cover/land use to
crowd estimation, environmental or urban area monitoring,
remote sensing images are used in a wide range of tasks
of high societal relevance. For instance, remote sensing data
can be used as a source of information for 6 of the 17 sus-
tainable development goals as deﬁned by the United Nations
[1]. Due to the critical nature of the problems that can be
addressed using remote sensing data, signiﬁcant effort has
been made to increase its availability in the last decade. For
instance, Sentinel-2 satellites provide multispectral data with
a relatively short revisiting time, in open-access. However,
while substantial effort has been dedicated to improving the
means of direct information extraction from Sentinel-2 data
Sylvain Lobry, Diego Marcos, Jesse Murray and Devis Tuia are with
Laboratory of Geo-Information Science and Remote Sensing, Wageningen
University, The Netherlands email: work@sylvainlobry.com
Classification
Is it a rural or urban area?Regression
How many buildings are there?
Detection
Is there a road?Classical tasks
Regression
What is the area covered by small
buildings?Detection
Is there a road at the top of the image?Specific tasks
Regression / Detection
What is the number of roads next to a
park?Detection
Is there a building next to a parking?Mix of tasksFig. 1. Example of tasks achievable by a visual question answering model
for remote sensing data.
in the framework of a given task (e.g. classiﬁcation [2], [3]),
the ability to use remote sensing data as a direct source of
information is currently limited to experts within the remote
sensing and computer vision communities. This constraint,
imposed by the technical nature of the task, reduces both the
scale and variety of the problems that could be addressed with
such information as well as the number of potential end-users.
This is particularly true when targeting speciﬁc applications
(detecting particular objects, e.g.thatched roofs or buildings in
a developing country [4]) which would today call for important
research efforts. The targeted tasks are often multiple and
changing in the scope of a project calls for strong expert
knowledge, limiting the information which can be extracted
from remote sensing data. To address these constraints, we
introduce the problem of visual question answering (VQA)
for remote sensing data.arXiv:2003.07333v2  [cs.CV]  14 May 2020

==== Page 2 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 2
VQA is a new task in computer vision, introduced in its
current form by [5]. The objective of VQA is to answer a
free-form and open-ended question about a given image. As
the questions can be unconstrained, a VQA model applied
to remote sensing data could serve as a generic solution
to classical problems involving remote sensing data (e.g.
”Is there a thatched roof in this image?” for thatched roof
detection), but also very speciﬁc tasks involving relations
between objects of different nature (e.g. ”Is there a thatched
roof on the right of the river?”). Examples of potential
questions are shown in Figure 1.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time (after
the ﬁrst exploration in [6]) that VQA has been applied to
extract information from remote sensing data. It builds on the
task of generating descriptions of images through combining
image and natural language processing to provide the user
with easily accessible, high-level semantic information. These
descriptions are then used for image retrieval and intelligence
generation [7]. As seen in this introduction, VQA systems rely
on the recent advances in deep learning. Deep learning based
methods, thanks to their ability to extract high-level features,
have been successfully developed for remote sensing data as
reviewed in [8]. Nowadays, this family of methods is used to
tackle a variety of tasks; for scene classiﬁcation, an early work
by [9] evaluated the possibility to adapt networks pre-trained
on large natural image databases (such as ImageNet [10]) to
classify hyperspectral remote sensing images. More recently,
[11] used an intermediate high level representation using recur-
rent attention maps to classify images. Object detection is also
often approached using deep learning methods. To this effect,
[12] introduced an object detection dataset and evaluated clas-
sical deep learning approaches. Methods taking into account
the speciﬁcity of remote sensing data have been developed,
such as [13] which proposed to modify the classical approach
by generating rotatable region proposal which are particularly
relevant for top-view imagery. Deep learning methods have
also been developed for semantic segmentation. In [14], the
authors evaluated different strategies for segmenting remote
sensing data. More recently, a contest organized on the dataset
of building segmentation created by [15] has motivated the
development of a number of new methods to improve results
on this task [16]. Similarly, [17] introduced a contest including
three tasks: road extraction, building detection and land cover
classiﬁcation. Best results for each challenge were obtained
using deep neural networks: [18], [19], [20].
Natural language processing has also been used in remote
sensing. For instance, [21] used a convolutional neural
network (CNN) to generate classiﬁcation probabilities for a
given image, and used a recurrent neural network (RNN) to
generate its description. In a similar fashion, [7] used a CNN
to obtain a multi semantic level representation of an image
(object, land class, landscape) and generate a description
using a simple static model. More recently, [22] uses an
encoder/decoder type of architecture where a CNN encodes
the image and a RNN decodes it to a textual representation,
while [23] projects the textual representation and the image to
a common space. While these works are use cases of naturallanguage processing, they do not enable interactions with the
user as we propose with VQA.
A VQA model is generally made of 4 distinct components:
1) a visual feature extractor, 2) a language feature extractor, 3)
a fusion step between the two modalities and 4) a prediction
component. Since VQA is a relatively new task, an important
number of methodological developments have been published
in both the computer vision and natural language processing
communities during the past 5 years, reviewed in [24]. VQA
models are able to beneﬁt from advances in the computer
vision and automatic language processing communities for
the features extraction components. However, the multi-modal
fusion has been less explored and therefore, an important
amount of work has been dedicated to this step. First VQA
models relied on a non-spatial fusion method, i.e.a point-wise
multiplication between the visual and language feature vectors
[5]. Being straightforward, this method does not allow every
component from both feature vectors to interact with each
other. This interaction would ideally be achieved by multiply-
ing the ﬁrst feature vector by the transpose of the other, but
this operation would be computationally intractable in practice.
Instead, [25] proposed a fusion method which ﬁrst selects
relevant visual features based on the textual feature (attention
step) and then, combines them with the textual feature. In [26],
the authors used Tucker decomposition to achieve a similar
purpose in one step. While these attention mechanisms are
interesting for ﬁnding visual elements aligned with the words
within the question, they require the image to be divided in a
regular grid for the computation of the attention, and this is not
suitable to objects of varying size. A solution is presented in
[27], which learns an object detector to select relevant parts of
the image. In this research, we use a non-spatial fusion step to
keep the model part relatively simple. Most traditional VQA
works are designed for a speciﬁc dataset, either composed
of natural images (with questions covering an unconstrained
range of topics) or synthetic images. While interesting for
the methodological developments that they have facilitated,
these datasets limit the potential applications of such systems
to other problems. Indeed, it has been shown in [28] that
VQA models trained on a speciﬁc dataset do not generalize
well to other datasets. This generalization gap raises questions
concerning the applicability of such models to speciﬁc tasks.
A notable use-case of VQA is helping visually impaired
people through natural language interactions [29]. Images
acquired by visually impaired people represent an important
domain shift, and as such a challenge for the applicability
of VQA models. In [30], the authors conﬁrm that networks
trained on generic datasets do not generalize to their speciﬁc
one. However, they manage to obtain much better results
by ﬁne-tuning or training models from scratch on their
task-speciﬁc dataset.
In this study, we propose a new application for VQA,
speciﬁcally for the interaction with remote sensing images.
To this effect, we propose the ﬁrst remote sensing-oriented
VQA datasets, and evaluate the applicability of this task on
remote sensing images. We propose a method to automatically

==== Page 3 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 3
Elements catalog
Road
Water area
Commercial building
Industrial building
Residential area
Retail
Religious areaLand usages
...Attributes catalog
Relations catalog
PositionalSizeShape Count
PresenceComparison
Area
Rural/UrbanQuestions catalog
(a) Question construction procedure. Dash lines represent optional paths
Road"How many roads are present in the image?"
"Is there a small retail place?"
"Is there more buildings at the top of a circular religious place than roads in the image?"Road Count Base question
Retail Size Presence Base question
Building
Religious ShapePositional
Comparison Base question
(b) Construction path for sample questions.
Fig. 2. Illustration of the question construction procedure.
generate remote sensing-oriented VQA datasets from already
available human annotations in section II and generate two
datasets. We then use this newly-generated data to train
our proposed RSVQA model with a non-spatial fusion step
described in section III. Finally, the results are evaluated and
discussed in section IV.
Our contribution are the following:
a method to generate remote sensing-oriented VQA
datasets;
2 datasets;
the proposed RSVQA model.
This work extends the preliminary study of [6] by considering
and disclosing a second larger dataset consisting of very high
resolution images. This second dataset helps testing the spatial
generalization capability of VQA and provides an extensive
discussion highlighting remaining challenges. The method to
generate the dataset, the RSVQA model and the two datasets
are available on https://rsvqa.sylvainlobry.com/.
II. D ATASETS
A. Method
As seen in the introduction, a main limiting factor for
VQA is the availability of task-speciﬁc datasets. As such,
we aim at providing a collection of remote sensing images
with questions and answers associated to them. To do so,
we took inspiration from [31], in which the authors build
a dataset of question/answer pairs about synthetic images
following an automated procedure. However, in this study
we are interested in real data (discussed in subsection II-B).
Therefore, we use the openly accessible OpenStreetMap data
containing geo-localized information provided by volunteers.
By leveraging this data, we can automatically extract theinformation required to obtain question/answer pairs relevant
to real remotely sensed data and create a dataset made of
(image, question, answer) triplets.
The ﬁrst step of the database construction is to create
the questions. The second step is to compute the answers
to the questions, using the OSM features belonging to the
image footprint. Note that multiple question/answer pairs are
extracted for each image.
1) Question contruction: Our method to construct the
questions is illustrated in Figure 2. It consists of four main
components:
1) choice of an element category (highlighted in red in
Figure 2(a));
2) application of attributes to the element (highlighted in
green in Figure 2(a));
3) selection based on the relative location to another ele-
ment (highlighted in green in Figure 2(a))
4) construction of the question (highlighted in blue in
Figure 2(a)).
Examples of question constructions are shown in Figure 2(b).
These four components are detailed in the following.
Element category selection : First, an element category is ran-
domly selected from the element catalog. This catalog is built
by extracting the elements from one of the following OSM
layers: road,water area ,building andland use . While roads
and water areas are directly treated as elements, buildings
and land use related objects are deﬁned based on their ”type”
ﬁeld, as deﬁned in the OSM data speciﬁcation. Examples of
land use objects include residential area, construction area,
religious places, . . . Buildings are divided in two categories:
commercial (e.g. retail, supermarket, ...) and residential (e.g.
house, apartments, . . . ).
Attributes application : The second (optional) step is to
reﬁne the previously selected element category. To do so,
we randomly select from one of the two possible attribute
categories:
Shape : each element can be either square, rectangular
or circular. Whether an element belongs to one of these
shape types is decided based on basic geometrical prop-
erties (i.e. hard thresholds on area-to-perimeter ratio and
area-to-circumscribed circle area ratio).
Size: using hard thresholds on the surface area, elements
can be considered ”small”, ”medium” or ”large”. As we
are interested in information at different scales in the
two datasets, we use different threshold values, which
are described in Table I.
Relative position : Another possibility to reﬁne the element is
to look at its relative position compared to another element.
We deﬁne 5 relations: ”left of”, ”top of”, ”right of”, ”bottom
of”, ”next to”. Note that these relative positions are understood
in the image space (i.e. geographically). The special case of

==== Page 4 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 4
Scale Small Medium Large
Low resolution <3000m2<10000m210000m2
High resolution <100m2<500m2500m2
TABLE I
THRESHOLDS FOR SIZE ATTRIBUTES ACCORDING TO THE DATASET
SCALE . W HEN DEALING WITH LOW RESOLUTION DATA ,VISIBLE OBJECTS
OF INTEREST ARE LARGER . TO DEAL WITH THIS DISPARITY ,WE ADAPT
THE SIZE THRESHOLDS TO THE RESOLUTION OF THE IMAGES .
”next to” is handled as a hard threshold on the relative distance
between the two objects (less than 1000m). When looking at
relative positions, we select the second element following the
procedure previously deﬁned.
Question construction : At this point of the procedure, we
have an element (e.g. road), with an optional attribute (e.g.
small road) and an optional relative position (e.g. small road
on the left of a water area). The ﬁnal step is to generate
a ”base question” about this element. We deﬁne 5 types of
questions of interest (”Question catalog” in Figure 2(a)), from
which a speciﬁc type is randomly selected to obtain a base
question. For instance, in the case of comparison questions, we
randomly choose among ”less than”, ”equals to” and ”more
than” and construct a second element.
This base question is then turned into a natural language
question using pre-deﬁned templates for each question type
and object. For some question types (e.g. count), more than
one template is deﬁned (e.g. ’How many are there?’,
’What is the number of ?’ or ’What is the amount of ?’).
In this case, the template to be used is randomly selected. The
stochastic process ensures the diversity, both in the question
types and the question templates used.
2) Answer construction: : To obtain the answer to the
constructed question, we extract the objects from the OSM
database corresponding to the image footprint. The objects b
corresponding to the element category and its attributes are
then selected and used depending on the question type:
Count : In the case of counting, the answer is simply the
number of objects b.
Presence : A presence question is answered by comparing
the number of objects bto 0.
Area : The answer to a question about the area is the sum
of the areas of the objects b.
Comparison : Comparison is a speciﬁc case for which
a second element and the relative position statement is
needed. This question is then answered by comparing the
number of objects bto the ones of the second element.
Rural/Urban : The case of rural/urban questions is han-
dled in a speciﬁc way. In this case, we do not cre-
ate a speciﬁc element, but rather count the number of
buildings (both commercial or residential). This number
of buildings is then thresholded to a predeﬁned number
depending on the resolution of the input data (to obtain
a density) to answer the question. Note that we are using
a generic deﬁnition of rural and urban areas but this can
be easily adapted using the precise deﬁnition of each
Fig. 3. Images selected for the LR dataset over the Netherlands. Each point
represent one Sentinel-2 image which was later split into tiles. Red points
represent training samples, green pentagon represents the validation image,
and blue triangle is for the test image. Note that one training image is not
visible (as it overlaps with the left-most image).
country.
B. Data
Following the method presented in subsection II-A, we
construct two datasets with different characteristics.
Low resolution (LR) : this dataset is based on Sentinel-2
images acquired over the Netherlands. Sentinel-2 satellites
provide 10m resolution (for the visible bands used in this
dataset) images with frequent updates (around 5 days) at a
global scale. These images are openly available through ESA’s
Copernicus Open Access Hub1.
To generate the dataset, we selected 9 Sentinel-2 tiles cover-
ing the Netherlands with a low cloud cover (selected tiles are
shown in Figure 3). These tiles were divided in 772images of
size 256256(covering 6:55km2) retaining the RGB bands.
From these, we constructed 770232 questions and answers
following the methodology presented in subsection II-A. We
split the data in a training set ( 77:8%of the original tiles), a
validation set ( 11:1%) and a test set ( 11:1%) at the tile level
(the spatial split is shown in Figure 3). This allows to limit
spatial correlation between the different splits.
High resolution (HR) : this dataset uses 15cm resolution aerial
RGB images extracted from the High Resolution Orthoim-
agery (HRO) data collection of the USGS. This collection
1https://scihub.copernicus.eu/

==== Page 5 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 5
Fig. 4. Extent of the HR dataset with a zoom on the Portland, Manhattan (New
York City) and Philadelphia areas. Each point represent one image (generally
of size 50005000 ) which was later split into tiles. The images cover the
New York City/Long Island region, Philadelphia and Portland. Red points
represent training samples, green pentagons represent validation samples, and
blue indicators are for the test sets (blue triangles for test set 1, blue stars for
test set 2).
covers most urban areas of the USA, along with a few areas
of interest (e.g. national parks). For most areas covered by the
dataset, only one tile is available with acquisition dates ranging
from year 2000 to 2016, with various sensors. The tiles are
openly accessible through USGS’ EarthExplorer tool2.
From this collection, we extracted 161 tiles belonging to
the North-East coast of the USA (see Figure 4) that were split
into100659images of size 512512(each covering 5898m2).
We constructed 100660316questions and answers following the
methodology presented in subsection II-A. We split the data
in a training set ( 61:5%of the tiles), a validation set ( 11:2%),
and test sets ( 20:5%for test set 1, 6:8%for test set 2). As it
can be seen in Figure 4, test set 1 covers similar regions as
the training and validation sets, while test set 2 covers the city
of Philadelphia, which is not seen during the training. Note
that this second test set also uses another sensor (marked as
unknown on the USGS data catalog), not seen during training.
Differences between the two datasets :
Due to their characteristics, the two datasets represent two
different possible use cases of VQA:
The LR dataset allows for large spatial and temporal
coverage thanks to the frequent acquisitions made by
Sentinel-2. This characteristic could be of interest for
future applications of VQA such as large scale queries
(e.g. rural/urban questions) or temporal (which is out of
the scope of this study). However, due to the relatively
low resolution (10m), some objects can not be seen on
such images (such as small houses, roads, trees, . . . ).
This fact severely limits the questions to which the model
2https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/could give an accurate answer.
Thanks to the much ﬁner resolution of the HR dataset,
a quantity of information of interest to answer typical
questions is present. Therefore, in contrast to the LR
dataset, questions concerning objects’ coverage or count-
ing relatively small objects can possibly be answered
from such data. However, data of such resolution is
generally less frequently updated and more expensive to
acquire.
Based on these differences, we constructed different types
of questions for the two datasets. Questions concerning the
area of objects are only asked in the HR dataset. On the other
hand, questions about urban/rural area classiﬁcation are only
asked in the LR dataset, as the level of zoom of images from
the HR dataset would prevent a meaningful answer from being
provided.
To account for the data distributions and error margins we
also quantize different answers in both datasets:
Counting in LR: as the coverage is relatively large
(6.55km2), the number of small objects contained in one
tile can be high, giving a heavy tailed distribution for the
numerical answers, as shown in Figure 6. More precisely,
while 26.7% of the numerical answers are ’0’ and 50%
of the answers are less than ’7’, the highest numerical
answer goes up to ’17139’. In addition to making the
problem complex, we can argue that allowing such a
range of numerical answer does not make sense on data
of this resolution. Indeed, it would be in most cases
impossible to distinguish 17139 objects on an image of
65536 pixels. Therefore, numerical answers are quantized
into the following categories:
–’0’;
–’between 1 and 10’;
–’between 11 and 100’;
–’between 101 and 1000’;
–’more than 1000’.
In a similar manner, we quantize questions regarding
the area in the HR dataset. A great majority (60.9%) of
the answer of this type are ’0m2’, while the distribution
also presents a heavy tail. Therefore, we use the same
quantization as the one proposed for counts for the LR
dataset. Note that we do not quantize purely numerical
answers (i.e. answers to questions of type ’count’) as
the maximum number of objects is 89 in our dataset.
Counting answers therefore correspond to 89 classes in
the model in this case (see section III).
C. Discussion
Questions/Answers distributions :
We show the ﬁnal distribution of answers per question type
for both datasets in Figure 5. We can see that most question
types (with the exception of ’rural/urban’ questions in the
LR dataset, asked only once per image) are close to evenly
distributed by construction. The answer ’no’ is dominating
the answers’ distribution for the HR dataset with a frequency
of 37.7%. In the LR dataset, the answer ’yes’ occurs 34.9%
of the time while the ’no’ frequency is 34.3%. The strongest

==== Page 6 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 6
(a) Distribution of answers for the LR dataset
yesno
yes
no0m2between 10m2 and 100m2more than 1000m2presencecount
comparea (b) Distribution of answers for the HR dataset (numerical answers are ordered,
and 0 is the most frequent)
Fig. 5. Distributions of answers in the Low resolution (LR) and High resolution (HR) datasets.
Fig. 6. Frequencies of exact counting answers in the LR dataset. Only the
left part of the histogram is shown (until 200 objects), the largest (single)
count being 17139. 50% of the answers are less than 7 objects in the tile.
imbalance occurs for the answer ’0’ in the HR dataset
(with a frequency of 60.9% for the numerical answer). This
imbalance is greatly reduced by the quantization process
described in the previous paragraph.
Limitations of the proposed method :
While the proposed method for image/question/answer triplets
generation has the advantage of being automatic and easily
scalable while using data annotated by humans, a few lim-
itations have been observed. First, it can happen that some
annotations are missing or badly registered [4]. Furthermore,
it was not possible to match the acquisition date of the imagery
to the one of OSM. The main reason being that it is impossible
to know if a newly added element appeared at the same time
in reality or if it was just entered for the ﬁrst time in OSM.
As OSM is the main source of data for our process, errors in
OSM will negatively impact the accuracy of our databases.
Furthermore, due to the templates used to automatically
construct questions and provide answers, the set of questions
and answers is more limited than what it is in traditional VQA
datasets (9 possible answers for the LR dataset, 98 for the HRdataset).
III. VQA M ODEL
We investigate the difﬁculty of the VQA task for remote
sensing using a basic VQA model based on deep learning. An
illustration of the proposed network is shown in Figure 7. In
their simple form, VQA models are composed of three parts
[24]:
A. feature extraction;
B. fusion of these features to obtain a single feature vector
representing both the visual information and the question;
C. prediction based on this vector.
As the model shown in Figure 7 is learned end-to-end, the
vector obtained after the fusion (in green in Figure 7) can be
seen as a joint embedding of both the image and the question
which is used as an input for the prediction step. We detail
each of these 3 parts in the following.
A. Feature extraction
The ﬁrst component of our VQA model is the feature extrac-
tion. Its purpose is to obtain a low-dimensional representation
of the information contained in the image and the question.
1) Visual part: To extract information from a 2D image,
a common choice is to use a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Speciﬁcally, we use a Resnet-152 model [32] pre-
trained on ImageNet [10]. The principal motivation for this
choice is that this architecture manages to avoid the un-
desirable degradation problem (decreasing performance with
deeper networks) by using residual mappings of the layers’
inputs which are easier to learn than the common choice of
direct mappings. This architecture has been succesfully used
in a wide range of work in the remote sensing community
(e.g. [8], [17], [33]). The last average pooling layer and fully
connected layer are replaced by a 112D convolution which
outputs a total of 2048 features which are vectorized. A ﬁnal

==== Page 7 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 7
⊙B. Fusion A. Features extraction
CNN
ResNet-152
"Is there a building?" RNN
skip-thoughts
2048 1200
1200 2400
1200 256Output
vector
Yes
No
89 ...
A. 1) Visual part
 A. 2) Language partC. Prediction
⊙
Fully connected layer
Point wise multiplication
Legend
Fig. 7. Framework of the proposed Visual Question Answering model.
fully connected layer is learned to obtain a 1200 dimension
vector.
2) Language part: The feature vector is obtained using the
skip-thoughts model [34] trained on the BookCorpus dataset
[35]. This model is a recurrent neural network, which aims at
producing a vector representing a sequence of words (in our
case, a question). To make this vector informative, the model
is trained in the following way: it encodes a sentence from a
book in a latent space, and tries to decode it to obtain the two
adjacent sentences in the book. By doing so, it ensures that
the latent space embeds semantic information. Note that this
semantic information is not remote sensing speciﬁc due to the
BookCorpus dataset it has been trained on. However, several
works, including [36], have successfully applied non-domain
speciﬁc NLP models to remote sensing. In our model, we use
the encoder which is then followed by a fully-connected layer
(from size 2400 elements to 1200).
B. Fusion
At this step, we have two feature vectors (one representing
the image, one representing the question) of the same size. To
merge them into a single vector, we use a simple strategy: a
point-wise multiplication after applying the hyperbolic tangent
function to the vectors’ elements. While being a ﬁxed (i.e.
not learnt) operation, the end-to-end training of our model
encourages both feature vectors to be comparable with respect
to this operation.
C. Prediction
Finally, we project this 1200 dimensional vector to the
answer space by using a MLP with one hidden layer of 256
elements. We formulate the problem as a classiﬁcation task, in
which each possible answer is a class. Therefore, the size of
the output vector depends on the number of possible answers.D. Training procedure
We train the model using the Adam optimizer [37] with a
learning rate of 10 5until convergence (150 epochs in the
case of the LR dataset, and 35 epochs in the case of the HR
dataset). We use a dropout of 0.5 for every fully connected
layer. Due to the difference of input size between the two
datasets (HR images are 4 times larger), we use batches of
70 instances for the HR dataset and 280 for the LR dataset.
Furthermore, when the questions do not contain a positional
component relative to the image space (i.e. ”left of”, ”top of”,
”right of” or ”bottom of”, see subsection II-A), we augment the
image space by randomly applying vertical and/or horizontal
ﬂipping
IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We report the results obtained by our model on the test sets
of the LR and HR datasets. In both cases, 3 model runs have
been trained and we report both the average and the standard
deviation of our results to limit the variability coming from
the stochastic nature of the optimization.
The numerical evaluation is achieved using the accuracy,
deﬁned in our case as the ratio of correct answers. We report
the accuracy per question type (see subsection II-A), the
average of these accuracies (AA) and the overall accuracy
(OA).
We show some predictions of the model on the different
test sets in Figure 8 and Figure 9 to qualitatively assess the
results. Numerical performance of the proposed model on the
LR dataset is reported in Table II and the confusion matrix
is shown in Figure 10. The performance on both tests sets of
the HR dataset are reported in Table III and the confusion
matrices are shown in Figure 11.
General accuracy assessment:
The proposed model achieves an overall accuracy of 79%

==== Page 8 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 8
What is the area covered by residential buildings?
0 m² 0 m²Ground truth Prediction
(a) HR, test set 1
What is the area covered by rectangular buildings?
Between 100 and
1000 m²Between 100 and
1000 m²Ground truth Prediction
(b) HR, test set 1
Is there a residential building at the bottom
of the place of worship?
yes yesGround truth Prediction
(c) HR, test set 1
How many residential buildings at the bottom
of a road are there?
4 3Ground truth Prediction
(d) HR, test set 1
What is the amount of large buildings?
3 1Ground truth Prediction
(f) HR, test set 1
How many buildings on the left of a road
are there in the image?
38 0Ground truth Prediction
(e) HR, test set 1
What is the area covered by rectangular parkings?
between 100m2 and
1000m2between 100m2 and
1000m2Ground truth Prediction
(g) HR, test set 2
What is the amount of small buildings?
9 0Ground truth Prediction
(h) HR, test set 2
What is the amount of large residential buildings?
2 1Ground truth Prediction
(i) HR, test set 2
Fig. 8. Samples from the high resolution test sets: (a)-(f) are from the ﬁrst set of the HR dataset, (g)-(i) are from the second set of the HR dataset.

==== Page 9 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 9
TABLE II
RESULTS ON THE TEST SET OF THE LOW RESOLUTION DATASET . THE
STANDARD DEVIATION IS REPORTED IN BRACKETS .
Type Accuracy
Count 67.01% (0.59%)
Presence 87.46% (0.06%)
Comparison 81.50% (0.03%)
Rural/Urban 90.00% (1.41%)
AA 81.49% (0.49%)
OA 79.08% (0.20%)
TABLE III
RESULTS ON BOTH TEST SETS OF THE HIGH RESOLUTION DATASET . THE
STANDARD DEVIATION IS REPORTED IN BRACKETS .
Type Accuracy Accuracy
Test set 1 Test set 2
Count 68.63% (0.11%) 61.47% (0.08%)
Presence 90.43% (0.04%) 86.26% (0.47%)
Comparison 88.19% (0.08%) 85.94% (0.12%)
Area 85.24% (0.05%) 76.33% (0.50%)
AA 83.12% (0.03%) 77.50% (0.29%)
OA 83.23% (0.02%) 78.23% (0.25%)
on the low resolution dataset (see Table II) and of 83% on
the ﬁrst test set of the high resolution dataset (Table III),
indicating that the task of automatically answering question
based on remote sensing images is possible. When looking at
the accuracies per question type (in Tables II and III), it can
be noted that the model performs inconsistently with respect
to the task the question is tackling: while a question about the
presence of an object is generally well answered (87.46% in
the LR dataset, 90.43% in the ﬁrst test set of the HR dataset),
counting questions gives poorer performances (67.01% and
68.63% respectively). This can be explained by the fact that
presence questions can be seen as simpliﬁed counting ques-
tions to which the answers are restricted to two options: ”0”
or ”1 or more”. Classical VQA models are known to struggle
with the counting task [38]. An issue which partly explains
these performances in the counting task is the separation of
connected instances. This problem has been raised for the case
of buildings in [33] and is illustrated in Figure 8(f), where the
ground truth is indicating three buildings, which could also be
only one. We found another illustration of this phenomenon
in the second test set in Figure 8(i). This issue mostly arises
when counting roads or buildings.
Thanks to the answers’ quantization, questions regarding the
areas of objects are generally well answered with an accuracy
of 85.24% in the ﬁrst test set of the HR dataset. This is
illustrated in Figures 8(a,b), where presence of buildings (by
the mean of the covered area) is well detected.
However, we found that our model performs poorly with
questions regarding the relative positions of objects, such
as those illustrated in Figures 8(c-e). While Figure 8(c)
is correct, despite the question being difﬁcult, Figure 8(d)
shows a small mistake from the model and Figure 8(e) is
completely incorrect. These problems can be explained by
the fact that the questions are on high semantic level and
therefore difﬁcult for a model considering a simple fusion
scheme, as the one presented in section III.
Is it a rural or an urban area?
Rural RuralGround truth Prediction
Is it a rural or an urban area?
Urban UrbanGround truth Prediction
(a) LR, test set (b) LR, test set
Are there more water areas than
commercial buildings?
Yes NoGround truth Prediction
Are there less buildings than water areas?
No NoGround truth Prediction
(c) LR, test set (d) LR, test setFig. 9. Samples from the low resolution test set.
Regarding the low resolution dataset, rural/urban questions
are generally well answered (90% of accuracy), as shown
in Figure 9(a,b). Note that the ground truth for this type
of questions is deﬁned as a hard threshold on the number
of buildings, which causes an area as the one shown in
Figure 9(b) to be labeled as urban.
However, the low resolution of Sentinel-2 images can be
problematic when answering questions about relatively small
objects. For instance, in Figures 9(c,d), we can not see any
water area nor determine the type of buildings, which causes
the model’s answer to be unreliable.
Generalization to unseen areas:
The performances on the second test set of the HR dataset
show that the generalization to new geographic areas
is problematic for the model, with an accuracy drop of
approximately 5%. This new domain has a stronger impact
on the most difﬁcult tasks (counting and area computation).
This can be explained when looking at Figures 8(g-i). We can
see that the domain shift is important on the image space, as
a different sensor was used for the acquisition. Furthermore,
the urban organization of Philadelphia is different from that
of the city of New York. This causes the buildings to go

==== Page 10 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 10
Yes No Rural Urban 0 1-10 101-1000 1000+
Yes
No
Rural
Urban
0
1-10
11-100
101-1000
1000+11-100True
Predicted06544022980
Fig. 10. Confusion matrix for the low resolution dataset (logarithm scale)
on the test set. Red lines group answers by type (”Yes/No”, ”Rural/Urban”,
numbers).
undetected by the model in Figure 8(h), while the parkings
can still be detected in Figure 8(g) possibly thanks to the
cars. This decrease in performance could be reduced by
using domain adaptation techniques. Such a method could
be developed for the image space only (a review of domain
adaptation for remote sensing is done in [39]) or at the
question/image level (see [40], which presents a method for
domain adaptation in the context of VQA).
Answer’s categories:
The confusion matrices indicate that the models generally
provide logical answers, even when making mistakes
(e.g. it might answer ”yes” instead of ”no” to a question
about the presence of an object, but not a number). Rare
exceptions to this are observed for the ﬁrst test set of the
HR dataset (see Figure 11(a)), on which the model gives 23
illogical answers (out of the 316941 questions of this test set).
Language biases:
A common issue in VQA models, raised in [41], is the fact
that strong language biases are captured by the model. When
this is the case, the answer provided by the model mostly
depends on the question, rather than on the image. To assess
this, we evaluated the proposed models by randomly selecting
an image from the test set for each question. We obtained an
overall accuracy of 73.78% on the LR test set, 73.78% on
the ﬁrst test set of the HR dataset and 72.51% on the second
test set. This small drop of accuracy indicates that indeed,
the models rely more on the questions than on the image to
provide an answer. Furthermore, the strongest drop of accuracy
is seen on the HR dataset, indicating that the proposed model
extracts more information from the high resolution data.
Importance of the number of training samples:
We show in Figure 12 the evolution of the accuracies when the
model is trained with a fraction of the HR training samples.
When using only 1% of the available training samples, the
model already gets 65% in average accuracy (vs 83% for themodel trained on the whole training set). However, it can be
seen that, for numerical tasks (counts and area estimation),
larger amounts of samples are needed to achieve the perfor-
mances reported in Table III. This experiment also shows that
the performances start to plateau after 10% of the training data
is used: this indicates that the proposed model would not proﬁt
substantially from a larger dataset.
Restricted set of questions:
While not appearing in the numerical evaluation, an important
issue with our results is the relative lack of diversity in the
dataset. Indeed, due to the source of our data (OSM), the
questions are only on a speciﬁc set of static objects (e.g.
buildings, roads, . . . ). Other objects of interest for applications
of a VQA system to remote sensing would also include differ-
ent static objects (e.g. thatched roofs mentioned in section I),
moving objects (e.g. cars), or seasonal aspects (e.g. for crop
monitoring). Including these objects would require another
source of data, or manual construction of question/answer
pairs.
Another limitation comes from the dataset construction
method described in subsection II-A. We deﬁned ﬁve types
of questions (count, comparison, presence, area, rural/urban
classiﬁcation). However, they only start to cover the range of
questions which would be of interest. For instance, questions
about the distance between two points (deﬁned by textual
descriptions), segmentation questions (e.g. ”where are the
buildings in this image?”) or higher semantic level question
(e.g. ”does this area feel safe?”) could be added.
While the ﬁrst limitation (due to the data source) could be
tackled using other databases (e.g. from national institutes) and
the second limitation (due to the proposed method) could be
solved by adding other question construction functions to the
model, it would be beneﬁcial to use human annotators using
a procedure similar to [5] to diversify the samples.
V. C ONCLUSION
We introduce the task of Visual Question Answering from
remote sensing images as a generic and accessible way of ex-
tracting information from remotely sensed data. We present a
method for building datasets for VQA, which can be extended
and adapted to different data sources, and we proposed two
datasets targeting different applications. The ﬁrst dataset uses
Sentinel-2 images, while the second dataset uses very high
resolution (30cm) aerial orthophotos from USGS.
We analyze these datasets using a model based on deep
learning, using both convolutional and recurrent neural
networks to analyze the images and associated questions. The
most probable answer from a predeﬁned set is then selected.
This ﬁrst analysis shows promising results, suggesting the
potential for future applications of such systems. These re-
sults outline future research directions which are needed to
overcome language biases and difﬁcult tasks such as counting.
The former can be tackled using an attention mechanism [24],
while the latter could be tackled by using dedicated compo-
nents for counting questions [33] in a modular approach.

==== Page 11 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 11
0654402298022025162754True
PredictedYesNo0m²1m² - 10m²10m² - 100m²100m² - 1000m²1000m²+012345678910
Yes
No
0m²
1m² - 10m²
10m² - 100m²
1000m²+
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10100m² - 1000m²
(a) Test set 1
0654402298022025True
PredictedYesNo0m²1m² - 10m²10m² - 100m²100m² - 1000m²1000m²+012345678910
Yes
No
0m²
1m² - 10m²
10m² - 100m²
1000m²+
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10100m² - 1000m²
 (b) Test set 2
Fig. 11. Subsets of the confusion matrices for the high resolution dataset (counts are at logarithm scale) on both test sets. Red lines group answers by type
(”Yes/No”, areas, numbers).
Fig. 12. Evolution of the accuracies (evaluated on the ﬁrst HR test set) after
training with subsets of different size of the HR training set.
Issues regarding the current database raised in section IV
also need to be addressed to obtain a system capable of
answering a more realistic range of questions. This can be
done by making the proposed dataset construction method
more complex or by using human annotators.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank CNES for the funding of
this study (R&T project ”Application des techniques de Visual
Question Answering `a des donnes d’imagerie satellitaire”).
REFERENCES
[1] K. Anderson, B. Ryan, W. Sonntag, A. Kavvada, and L. Friedl, “Earth
observation in service of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development,”
Geo-spatial Information Science , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 77–96, 2017.
[2] Y . Gu, J. Chanussot, X. Jia, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Multiple kernel
learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: A review,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 6547–
6565, Nov 2017.
[3] S. Li, W. Song, L. Fang, Y . Chen, P. Ghamisi, and J. A. Benediktsson,
“Deep learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: An overview,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , pp. 1–20, 2019.[4] J. E. Vargas-Mu ˜noz, S. Lobry, A. X. Falc ˜ao, and D. Tuia, “Correcting
rural building annotations in openstreetmap using convolutional neural
networks,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , vol.
147, pp. 283–293, 2019.
[5] S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. L. Zitnick,
and D. Parikh, “VQA: Visual Question Answering,” in International
Conference on Computer Vision , 2015.
[6] S. Lobry, J. Murray, D. Marcos, and D. Tuia, “Visual question answering
from remote sensing images,” in IEEE International Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Symposium , July 2019.
[7] Z. Shi and Z. Zou, “Can a machine generate humanlike language descrip-
tions for a remote sensing image?” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing , vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3623–3634, June 2017.
[8] X. X. Zhu, D. Tuia, L. Mou, G. Xia, L. Zhang, F. Xu, and F. Fraundorfer,
“Deep learning in remote sensing: A comprehensive review and list of
resources,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine , vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 8–36, Dec 2017.
[9] F. Hu, G.-S. Xia, J. Hu, and L. Zhang, “Transferring deep convolutional
neural networks for the scene classiﬁcation of high-resolution remote
sensing imagery,” Remote Sensing , vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 14 680–14 707,
2015.
[10] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2009.
[11] Q. Wang, S. Liu, J. Chanussot, and X. Li, “Scene classiﬁcation with
recurrent attention of VHR remote sensing images,” IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 1155–1167, Feb
2019.
[12] G.-S. Xia, X. Bai, J. Ding, Z. Zhu, S. Belongie, J. Luo, M. Datcu,
M. Pelillo, and L. Zhang, “DOTA: A large-scale dataset for object
detection in aerial images,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp. 3974–3983.
[13] Q. Li, L. Mou, Q. Xu, Y . Zhang, and X. X. Zhu, “R3-Net: A deep
network for multioriented vehicle detection in aerial images and videos,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , pp. 1–15, 2019.
[14] M. V olpi and D. Tuia, “Dense semantic labeling of subdecimeter reso-
lution images with convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 881–893, 2016.
[15] E. Maggiori, Y . Tarabalka, G. Charpiat, and P. Alliez, “Can semantic
labeling methods generalize to any city? the INRIA aerial image labeling
benchmark,” in IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium . IEEE, 2017, pp. 3226–3229.
[16] B. Huang, K. Lu, N. Audeberr, A. Khalel, Y . Tarabalka, J. Malof,
A. Boulch, B. Le Saux, L. Collins, K. Bradbury et al. , “Large-scale
semantic classiﬁcation: outcome of the ﬁrst year of INRIA aerial image
labeling benchmark,” in IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium . IEEE, 2018, pp. 6947–6950.
[17] I. Demir, K. Koperski, D. Lindenbaum, G. Pang, J. Huang, S. Basu,
F. Hughes, D. Tuia, and R. Raskar, “Deepglobe 2018: A challenge to

==== Page 12 ====
PRE-PRINT. FINAL VERSION IN IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 12
parse the earth through satellite images,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops . IEEE, 2018.
[18] L. Zhou, C. Zhang, and M. Wu, “D-linknet: Linknet with pretrained
encoder and dilated convolution for high resolution satellite imagery
road extraction.” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops , 2018, pp. 182–186.
[19] R. Hamaguchi and S. Hikosaka, “Building detection from satellite
imagery using ensemble of size-speciﬁc detectors,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops
(CVPRW) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 223–2234.
[20] C. Tian, C. Li, and J. Shi, “Dense fusion classmate network for land
cover classiﬁcation.” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition Workshops , 2018, pp. 192–196.
[21] X. Zhang, X. Li, J. An, L. Gao, B. Hou, and C. Li, “Natural language
description of remote sensing images based on deep learning,” in IEEE
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium , July 2017,
pp. 4798–4801.
[22] X. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Tang, H. Zhou, and C. Li, “Description gener-
ation for remote sensing images using attribute attention mechanism,”
Remote Sensing , vol. 11, no. 6, p. 612, 2019.
[23] B. Wang, X. Lu, X. Zheng, and X. Li, “Semantic descriptions of
high-resolution remote sensing images,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters , 2019.
[24] Q. Wu, D. Teney, P. Wang, C. Shen, A. Dick, and A. v.d. Hengel, “Visual
question answering: A survey of methods and datasets,” Computer Vision
and Image Understanding , 2017.
[25] A. Fukui, D. H. Park, D. Yang, A. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, and
M. Rohrbach, “Multimodal compact bilinear pooling for visual question
answering and visual grounding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01847 ,
2016.
[26] H. Ben-Younes, R. Cadene, M. Cord, and N. Thome, “MUTAN: Multi-
modal tucker fusion for Visual Question Answering,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 2612–
2620.
[27] P. Anderson, X. He, C. Buehler, D. Teney, M. Johnson, S. Gould, and
L. Zhang, “Bottom-up and top-down attention for image captioning and
visual question answering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 6077–6086.
[28] R. Shrestha, K. Kaﬂe, and C. Kanan, “Answer them all! toward universal
visual question answering models,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2019, pp. 10 472–10 481.
[29] J. P. Bigham, C. Jayant, H. Ji, G. Little, A. Miller, R. C. Miller, R. Miller,
A. Tatarowicz, B. White, S. White et al. , “VizWiz: nearly real-time
answers to visual questions,” in ACM symposium on User interface
software and technology . ACM, 2010, pp. 333–342.
[30] D. Gurari, Q. Li, A. Stangl, A. Guo, C. Lin, K. Grauman, J. Luo,
and J. Bigham, “VizWiz Grand Challenge: Answering visual questions
from blind people,” IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2018.
[31] J. Johnson, B. Hariharan, L. van der Maaten, L. Fei-Fei, C. Zitnick, and
R. Girshick, “CLEVR: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language
and elementary visual reasoning,” IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2017.
[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , 2016.
[33] S. Lobry and D. Tuia, “Deep Learning Models to Count Buildings
in High-Resolution Overhead Images,” in Joint Urban Remote Sensing
Event , 2019.
[34] R. Kiros, Y . Zhu, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Zemel, A. Torralba, R. Urtasun,
and S. Fidler, “Skip-thought vectors,” Neural Information Processing
Systems , 2015.
[35] Y . Zhu, R. Kiros, R. Zemel, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Urtasun, A. Torralba,
and S. Fidler, “Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual
explanations by watching movies and reading books,” in IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision , 2015, pp. 19–27.
[36] A. Li, Z. Lu, L. Wang, T. Xiang, and J.-R. Wen, “Zero-shot scene
classiﬁcation for high spatial resolution remote sensing images,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , vol. 55, no. 7, pp.
4157–4167, 2017.
[37] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2015.
[38] Y . Zhang, J. Hare, and A. Prgel-Bennett, “Learning to count objects
in natural images for visual question answering,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[39] D. Tuia, C. Persello, and L. Bruzzone, “Domain adaptation for the
classiﬁcation of remote sensing data: An overview of recent advances,”IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 41–
57, June 2016.
[40] W.-L. Chao, H. Hu, and F. Sha, “Cross-dataset adaptation for visual
question answering,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , 2018, pp. 5716–5725.
[41] Y . Goyal, T. Khot, D. Summers-Stay, D. Batra, and D. Parikh, “Making
the V in VQA matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in
Visual Question Answering,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , 2017.
Sylvain Lobry (S16 - M17) received the Engi-
neering degree from Ecole pour l’Informatique et
les Techniques Avanc ´ees (EPITA), Kremlin Bic ˆetre,
France in 2013, the Masters degree in science and
technology from the University Pierre et Marie Cur-
rie (Paris 6), Paris in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree
from Telecom Paris, Paris, France, in 2017. He is
currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Geo-
Information Science and Remote Sensing Labora-
tory, Wageningen University, The Netherlands. His
research interests include radar image processing
and multimodal processing of heterogeneous satellite data.
Diego Marcos Diego Marcos obtained an MSc
degree on Computational Sciences and Engineering
from the Ecole Polytechnique F ´ed´erale de Lausanne,
Switzerland, in 2014 and a Ph.D. degree in environ-
mental sciences from Wageningen University, The
Netherlands, in 2019. He is currently a Post-Doctoral
Researcher with the Geo-Information Science and
Remote Sensing Laboratory, at Wageningen Univer-
sity. His research interests include computer vision
and deep learning interpretability applied to geospa-
tial data.
Jesse Murray received an MSc degree in Geo-
Information Science from Wageningen University,
Wageningen, The Netherlands, in 2019. He is cur-
rently a Ph.D. candidate with the Geodetic Engineer-
ing Laboratory, at the Ecole Polytechnique Fdrale
de Lausanne, Switzerland. His research interests
include image processing and 3D geometry recon-
struction using computer vision and spatio-temporal
data.
Devis Tuia Devis Tuia (S07 - M09 - SM15) re-
ceived the Ph.D. degree from the University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, in 2009. He was
a Post-Doctoral Researcher in Valncia, Boulder, CO,
USA, and ´Ecole polytechnique f ´ed´erale de Lausanne
(EPFL), Lausanne. From 2014 to 2017, he was an
Assistant Professor with the University of Zurich,
Zrich, Switzerland. He is currently a Full Professor
with the Geo-Information Science and Remote Sens-
ing Laboratory, Wageningen University, Wagenin-
gen, The Netherlands. His research interests include
algorithms for data fusion of geospatial data (including remote sensing) using
machine learning and computer vision.

