==== Page 1 ====
Front. Comput. Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-019-8452-2
Safe semi-supervised learning: a brief introduction
Yu-Feng LI
1,2, De-Ming LIANG1,2
1 National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2 Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing 210023, China
c/circlecopyrtHigher Education Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019
Abstract Semi-supervised learning constructs the predic-
tive model by learning from a few labeled training exam-ples and a large pool of unlabeled ones. It has a wide range
of application scenarios and ha s attracted much attention in
the past decades. However, it is noteworthy that although thelearning performance is expected to be improved by exploit-ing unlabeled data, some empir ical studies show that there are
situations where the use of unlabeled data may degenerate the
performance. Thus, it is advisable to be able to exploit unla-
beled data safely. This article reviews some research progressof safe semi-supervised learning, focusing on three types ofsafeness issue: data quality, where the training data is risky
or of low-quality; model uncertainty, where the learning algo-
rithm fails to handle the uncertainty during training; measurediversity, where the safe performance could be adapted to di-verse measures.
Keywords machine learning, semi-supervised learning,
safe
1 Introduction
Machine learning has achieved great success in numeroustasks, particularly in supervised learning tasks such as clas-siﬁcation and regression. Typically, machine learning algo-
rithms learn from a training data set with a certain amount of
training examples. Each traini ng example has a feature vector
to describe the corresponding instance, and a label indicat-ing the ground-truth output (the class to which the trainingexample belongs in classi ﬁcation or the real-valued response
Received December 27, 2018; accepted March 5, 2019
E-mail: liyf@nju.edu.cncorresponding to the example in regression). The most fa-
mous technique in recent years, deep learning [1], makesenormous commercial success in computer vision based on
the fact that ground-truth labels for a broad training data set
are provided. However, in various tasks such as disease diag-nosis, auto-vehicle, physical system, it is hard to attain con-siderable ground-truth information due to the cost of time orexpense. Thus, it is desirable to be able to learn a good model
with a few labeled data. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [2]
is a promising direction which attempts to exploit labeleddata (often of limited amount) and a huge pool of unlabeleddata for optimizing machine learning models. Existing semi-
supervised approaches can be roughly grouped into four cat-
egories, including generative models [3, 4], semi-supervisedSVMs [5, 6], graph-based semi-supervised methods [7–11]and disagreement-based methods [12, 13].
It is generally recognized that by using unlabeled data,
semi-supervised learning can help improve the performance,
particularly when the number of labeled data is limited. How-ever, it is noteworthy that although the learning performanceis expected to be improved by exploiting unlabeled data,
some empirical studies [4,9,14–20] show that there are cases
in which the use of the unlabeled data may degenerate theperformance, making it even worse after semi-supervisedlearning. This phenomenon prevents the deployment of semi-supervised learning in real-w orld applications because the
cost of utilizing unlabeled data may not be rewarded some-
times. It is desirable to have safe semi-supervised learning
approaches which never reduce learning performance signif-icantly when using unlabeled data. Safe, here means that the
generalization performance is never statistically signi ﬁcantly
worse than methods using only labeled data. It is meaning-

==== Page 2 ====
2 Front. Comput. Sci.
less to talk about a single trial because for a single trial, even
exploiting more labeled data might result in a worse per-formance. The issue of safeness has been raised and stud-ied for many years [21]; however, only recently some solid
progress has been reported. In this article, we will discuss
some progress in this line of research.
Existing studies try to improve the safeness of algorithms
from three aspects: data quality, model uncertainty and mea-
sure diversity. As for data quality, the graph used in graph-
based SSL and risky unlabeled samples may degenerate theperformance [22–24]. In the model part, we now understandthat the exploitation of unlabeled data naturally leads to morethan one model option, and inadequate choice may lead to
poor performance [25]; In practical applications, the perfor-
mance measures are often diverse, so the safeness should alsobe considered under di ﬀerent measures [26].
For simplicity, in this article we consider binary classi ﬁca-
tion concerning two exchangeable classes YandN. Formally,
letXbe the input space and Y={±}be the label space.
Given a set of llabeled instances{x
i,yi}l
i=1anduunlabeled
instances{xj}l+u
j=l+1, semi-supervised learning algorithms aim
toﬁnd a decision function f:X→{± 1}and a label assign-
ment on unlabeled instances yu={yl+1,..., yl+u}∈B .W e
use identi ﬁerper f(·) as the target performance measure. Fig-
ure 1 provides an illustration of three aspects of the safenessproblem in semi-supervised learning, which we will discuss
in this article. Note that although they are discussed sepa-
rately for clarity, they often occur simultaneously.
2 Data quality
Semi-supervised learning algorithms try to exploit vast unla-beled data to help machine learning models to improve per-formance. Actually, there are two basic assumptions in semi-supervised learning, i.e., the cluster assumption and the man-
ifold assumption ; both concerns about data distribution. The
former assumes that data have inherent cluster structure and
instances falling into the same cluster have the same class la-bel. The latter assumes that the data lie on a manifold andnearby instances have similar predictions. Semi-supervised
learning helps when the assumption matches the inherent
structure of the data. In other words, when it was broken,semi-supervised learning algorithms would not perform asthe user wish.
Some progress has been made in the ﬁeld of graph-based
semi-supervised learning (GSSL). GSSL attracts signi ﬁcant
attention since it was proposed. Many works have been pre-sented on optimizing the label prediction of the unlabeleddata [5,7–9,11,27]. Besides, various kinds of graphs and met-
rics have been considered [27–29]. It is now widely accepted
that the quality of the graph seriously a ﬀects the performance
of GSSL methods [8, 27, 29, 30], and many empirical studieshave shown that an inappropriate graph can even cause a de-generated performance [11,30–32]. At a deep level, di ﬀerent
graphs have diverse manifold structures. When the manifold
structure of the graph breaks the manifold assumption in one
Fig. 1 Semi-supervised learning pipeline that displays the sources of uns afeness: data quality, model uncer tainty, and measure diversity

==== Page 3 ====
Yu-Feng LI et al. Safe semi-supervised learning: a brief introduction 3
dataset, GSSL will make a poor performance. In order to im-
prove safeness, an important problem is the way to identifythe quality of the graph before we get the ultimate perfor-mance.
Li et al. [22] ﬁrstly study the quality of the graph. They
propose a large margin based method for graph-judging. Thebasic idea is that given a set of candidate graphs, when onegraph has a high quality, its predictive results may have a
large margin separation as shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, given
multiple graphs with unknown quality, one should encourageto use the graphs with a large margin, rather than the graphswith a small margin, and reduce the chances of performance
degradation consequently. They propose a stacking method,
which ﬁrst regenerates a new SSL data set with the predic-
tive results of GSSL on candidate graphs, and then formu-lates safe GSSL as the classical Semi-Supervised SVM opti-mization on the regenerated dataset. The experimental results
demonstrate that a large margin principle is helpful in judging
the graph quality and improving the safeness of GSSL.
Later, Liang and Li [33] formulate the safe graph construc-
tion as a minimax optimization problem. They optimize the
worst-case nearest-neighbor error on candidate graphs, and
the optimal solution can be re garded as conventional GSSL
methods on a “safe” graph. Guo et al. [34] propose a graphconstruction method based on the large margin principle.
They optimize a margin-type loss to learn a graph that has
a large margin on its prediction.
Apart from the large margin principle in graph quality
judgment, there are some e ﬀorts focusing on data selection.
Wang et al. [23] proposed a safe GSSL method named GsslIs
concentrating on sample sel ection. The basic idea is that
given a set of unlabeled instances, it is not the best to exploitall the unlabeled instances; Ins tead, the unlabeled instances
which are highly possible to help improve the performance,while do not take the ones with high risk into account. GsslIs
constructed multiple GSSL classi ﬁers to identify the risky un-
labeled samples and tried to reduce the degeneration proba-bility. Li and Zhou [24] propose S3VM with unlabeled data
selection. It uses hierarchical clustering to estimate the relia-
bility of unlabeled instances and then removes the ones withthe lowest reliability. Only the unlabeled instances with highconﬁdence by hierarchical clustering are predicted by TSVM,
and the rest are predicted by SVM.
3 Model uncertainty
From the model view, the uncertainty of the SSL model
makes it unstable in di ﬀerent trials and incorrect selection
under uncertainty degenerate the performance of SSL. Forexample, for generative methods, Cozman et al. [21] conjec-
tured that the performance degradation is caused by the use of
incorrect model assumption in the generative methods; how-ever, it is almost impossible to ﬁnd the correct model assump-
tion without adequate domain knowledge. For disagreement-
based methods [35], such as co-training [12], Zhou and Li
[13] realized that incorrect pseudo-labels used in the SSLprocess are the root of performance degradation. For semi-supervised SVMs (S3VMs), Li and Zhou [36] showed thatthe existence of multiple low-density separators and the in-
correct selection will lead to pe rformance degradation. Fig-
ure 3 visualizes the uncertainty of S3VM: there is more thanone large margin separator, and these separators are usuallydiverse. Conventional S3VMs select one of them as the out-
put, while incorrect selection d egenerates the performance.
The uncertainty of separator results in unsafeness.
Li et al. [25, 36] ﬁrstly develop the safe S3VM (S4VM)
method. S4VMs ﬁrst generate a pool of diverse large mar-
gin low-density separators, and then optimizes the label
Fig. 2 Large margin principle for graph quality judgement

==== Page 4 ====
4 Front. Comput. Sci.
Fig. 3 Example of model uncertainty: there are multiple candidate large
margin separators for S3VM
assignment for the unlabeled data in the worse case un-
der the assumption that the ground-truth label assignmentcan be realized by one of the obtained low-density sepa-
rators. Formally, let y
∗
ube the ground-truth label assign-
ment and ˆysvm
ube the predictive labels of inductive SVM
on unlabeled instances. A pool of Tlow-density predictions
{ˆyt
u}T
t=1is employed by existing S3VMs. For any label assign-
ment of unlabeled instances ˆyu, denote gain(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u)a n d
loss(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u) as the gained and lost accuracies compared
to the inductive SVM. The goal is to learn a label assignment
ˆyusuch that the improved performance against the inductive
SVM is maximized,
max
ˆyu∈{±1}ugain(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u)−loss(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u), (1)
whereλis a parameter for trading-o ﬀhow much risk the
user would like to undertake. Denote gain(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u)−
loss(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u)a sJ(ˆyu,y∗
u,ˆysvm
u) for simplicity notations.
Because the ground-truth y∗
uis unknown, S4VM assumes
that the ground-truth y∗
uis realized by a low-density separator,
i.e.,y∗
u∈M/defines{ˆyt
u}T
t=1. Without further domain knowledge in
distinguishing these separators, the worst−case improvement
over inductive SVM is maximized and the optimal solution
¯yu=arg max
yu∈{±1}umin
ˆyu∈MJ(yu,ˆyu,ˆysvm
u). (2)
Considering that cluster assumption cannot re ﬂect the real-
data distribution adequately in some case, Wang et al. [37]
suggested a modi ﬁed cluster assumption that similar in-
stance should share similar class memberships rather thana crisp class label and accordingly developed a new Semi-Supervised Classi ﬁcation method based on class member-
ships (SSCCM). In SSCCM, each instance can belong to mul-
tiple classes with the corresponding class membership, and
each instance and its local weight mean share the same labelmembership vector. However, SSCCM also yields worse per-formance than its supervised baseline. Later, they improve
SSCCM with a safety-control mechanism for safe semi-
supervised classi ﬁcation by adaptively controlling the trade-oﬀbetween semi-supervised and supervised classi ﬁcation in
terms of the existing unlabeled data [38]. They expect theﬁnal prediction to approach to that of the supervised counter-
parts (LS-SVM) when given unreliable unlabeled data, and
approach to that of the semi-supervised method (SSCCM)
when given reliable unlabeled data.
There are some other related studies trying to improve the
stability of semi-supervised learning: Balsubramani and Fre-und [39] propose a new method to utilize unlabeled exam-
ples by combining an ensemble of classi ﬁers. They formulate
the task as a game played over a set of unlabeled data, andthe supervised information is encoded as the constraint onthe game. The minimax solution of the game is assured tobe signi ﬁcantly better than any single base classi ﬁer. Niu et
al. [40] give a theoretical study about when positive unlabeled
learning outperforms positive negative learning. Kawakitaand Takeuchi [41] propose a safe semi-supervised learningmethod based on the weighted likelihood which was expected
to be safe in any situation. They prove that their proposal is
asymptotically safe under certain conditions.
The works mentioned above focus on semi-supervised
classi ﬁcation. For semi-supervised regression (SSR), Li et
al. [42] focus on performance degradation when using un-
labeled data. They try to learn a safe prediction given a set of
SSR predictions obtained in various ways. They cast the safesemi-supervised regression problem as a geometric projec-tion issue. When the ground-truth label assignment is real-
ized by a convex linear combination of base regressors, the
proposal is probably safe and achieve the maximal worst-case performance gain. Figure 4 illustrates the intuition ofthe proposed method via the viewpoint of geometric pro-jection. f
0is certain direct supervised regression prediction,
{fi}b
i=1are multiple SSR predictions, f∗∈Ωis the ground-
truth label assignments, where Ω={f|/summationtextb
i=1αifi,α∈M } ,
M={α|/summationtextb
i=1αi=1,αi/greaterorequalslant0},a n d ¯fis the target prediction of
the proposal./bardbl¯f−f∗/bardbl2/lessorequalslant/bardblf0−f∗/bardblis true, which reveals that
the proposal is probably safe [42].
Fig. 4 The projection viewpoint of safe SSR: ¯f, the projection of f0onto
the convex feasible set Ω,i sc l o s e rt o f∗thanf0is

==== Page 5 ====
Yu-Feng LI et al. Safe semi-supervised learning: a brief introduction 5
4 Measure diversity
In the classi ﬁcation and regression task, square loss is usu-
ally employed. But in many practical applications, the per-formance measures are usually diverse. For example, in text
categorization, the F1-score a nd precision-recall are typically
used; in information retrieval , precision and recall are more
preferred; in ranking applications, the area under the ROCcurve (AUC) and Top-k precision are more popular. One
needs to develop a safe SSL method which can work with
such a diversity of performance measures.
Li et al. [26] propose a method named UMVP which inte-
grates multiple semi-supervised learners and maximizes theworst-case performance gain to derive the ﬁnal prediction,
where the performance gain (with respect to various mul-
tivariate performance criteria) is maximized relative to thebaseline supervised model in the worst-case scenario. Then,a tight minimax convex relaxation technique is adopted to
solve the optimization problem. They show that when the per-
formance measure is the Top- kPrecision, F
βscore or AUC,
this convex relaxation problem can be solved in closed-formsolutions and small linear programs.
Specially, the UMVP method uses bsemi-supervised
learners to construct safe predictions (they can be obtainedby running diﬀerent SSL algorithms with di ﬀerent parame-
ters) and assume that the ground-truth label assignment canbe realized by a convex linear combination of base regressors.
Letper f be the performances measure (e.g., Top- kprecision,
F
β, AUC). Without loss of generality, assume that the larger
theper f value, the better the performance. The goal is to ﬁnd
a prediction ˆyuwhich maximally aligns with predictions from
thebsemi-supervised learners, and also performs better than
a given baseline learner whose prediction is ˆy0
u. The goal can
be formulated as the following optimization problem
max
ˆyu∈Yb/summationdisplay
i=1αi/parenleftBig
per f(ˆyu,yi
u)−per f(ˆy0
u,yi
u)/parenrightBig
, (3)
where{y1
u,..., yb
u}are predictions of the bsemi-supervised
learners on the unlabeled instances, yi
u=/bracketleftBig
yi
l+1,..., yi
l+u/bracketrightBig
∈{0,1}u.I fyiis the ground-truth label assignment, then/parenleftBig
per f(ˆyu,yi
u)−per f(ˆy0
u,yi
u)/parenrightBig
is the performance gain of ˆ yrelative to y0.αcaptures the relative importance of the b
learners and it is in the simplex M={α|/summationtextb
i=1αi=1,αi/greaterorequalslant0}.
The relative importance of base learners is unknown. To
address the problem, UMVP considers the worst-case, adver-sarial setting of αand get the following maximin optimiza-
tion problem:
max
ˆyu∈Ymin
α∈Mb/summationdisplay
i=1αi/parenleftBig
per f(ˆyu,yi
u)−per f(ˆy0
u,yi
u)/parenrightBig
. (4)
When one of the semi-supervised learners realizes the
ground-truth label assignment, the UMVP solution is safe.It is challenging to see which assumption is more suitable fora particular dataset when doing SSL. Equation (4) shows that
as long as one of these assumptions realizes a perfect solu-
tion, a safe SSL method can be obtained.
Brieﬂy, after convex relaxation and using the cutting-plane
algorithm, we need to solve the following optimization prob-
lem given the current α,
arg max
ˆyu∈Yb/summationdisplay
i=1αi/parenleftBig
per f(ˆyu,yi
u)−per f(ˆy0
u,yi
u)/parenrightBig
, (5)
then the problem can be ﬁnally reduced to the simpler one:
max
ˆyu∈Yb/summationdisplay
i=1αiper f(ˆyu,yi). (6)
When the performance measure is either the Top- kPrecision,
Fβscore or AUC, Eq. (6) has the closed-form optimal so-
lutions displayed in Table 1 (refer to [26] for more details),whereπ
sis the ranking vector given prediction s, constant
c=ˆyi
u/prime1,PyuandNyuare the numbers of positive and nega-
tive labels in yu, respectively.
It is worthy to note that existing solutions all focus on mak-
ing a safe prediction under a single measure. A common safe
semi-supervised algorithm whose performance is probablysafe under diﬀerent measures remains an open question now.
5R e l a t e d ﬁ e l d s
In this section, we discuss some related ﬁelds with safe semi-
supervised learning.
Table 1 Summaries of safe optimal solutions with di ﬀerent measures
Optimal safe output ˆy∗
uwith diﬀerent measure
InputsTop- kPrecision FβScore AUC
Predictions of base any ˆyuranks the unlabeled ˆy∗
u=[ˆy∗
j],ˆy∗
j=1,ifπs
j>u−c, anyˆyuthat ranks the unlabeled instances
learners{y1
u,···,yb
u} instances as s=/summationtextb
i=1αiyi
u s=/summationtextb
i=1αi(1+β2)
c+β2Pyiuyi
u ass=/summationtextb
i=1αi
PyiuNyiuyi
u


==== Page 6 ====
6 Front. Comput. Sci.
Weakly supervised learning is closely related to semi-
supervised learning. Semi-supervised learning can be in-cluded in weakly supervised learning as a type of machinelearning under incomplete supervision [43], i.e., only a sub-
set of training data is given with labels. Other types of weak
supervision include inexact supervision, i.e., only coarse-grained labels are given, and inaccurate supervision, i.e., thegiven labels are not always ground-truth. Weakly supervised
learning covers a variety of studies which attempt to build
predictive models under weak supervision. Weakly super-vised data are widespread in r eal-world applications apart
from semi-supervised learning, such as label noise learning[44], domain adaptation [45] and so on. Similarly, learning
with the help of weakly supervised data may also cause per-
formance degradation. For example, label noise learning maybe worse than learning from only a small number of noise-free data [44]; domain adaptation methods may have the phe-
nomenon of negative transfer [45]. The way to safely exploit-
ing weakly supervised data thus is an important problem.
There are some studies on safe weakly supervised learn-
ing in recent years. Existing wor k focuses on integrating
base learners to improve safeness. Guo and Li [46] present
a general scheme that builds the ﬁnal prediction results by
integrating several weakly supervised learners. The proposedformulation provides safeness guarantees for commonly usedloss functions (i.e., square loss, hinge loss) supposing that theground-truth can be constructed by the base learners. Wei et
al. [47] study safe multi-label learning of weakly labeled
data. They optimize multi-label evaluation metrics ( F1s c o r e
and Top- kprecision) given that the ground-truth label assign-
ment is realized by a convex combination of base multi-label
learners. In the scenarios of large-scale multi-label learning,
labels have diﬀerent impacts on the commonly used perfor-
mance metric, and there are a few studies utilizing this featureto reduce the model size [48,49]. However, the impact of dis-
tinct labels on safeness when exploiting weakly supervised
information remains uncertain.
Clustering analysis plays an important role in unsupervised
learning and aims to discover a group structure of the dataset,which can be helpful when learning with few labels. Simi-
larly, without prior-knowledge about a dataset, it is hard to
judge the quality of results generated by di ﬀerent clustering
methods, and there is still much room for improving the clus-tering performance for categorical data. Some e ﬀort has been
paid in this line of research [50, 51].
Automated machine learning (AutoML) [52, 53], whichseeks to build an appropriate machine learning model for an
unseen dataset in an automatic manner (without human inter-vention), has received increas ing attention recently. However,
existing AutoML systems focus on supervised learning, and
existing AutoML techniques could not directly be used for
the automated SSL problem. E ﬀorts on automated SSL re-
main limited right now. Automated SSL introduces somenew challenges, i.e., various meta-features extracted from a
number of labeled examples are no longer available and suit-
able [53]; the use of auxiliary unlabeled instances may some-times even be outperformed by direct supervised learning.Therefore, safeness is one of the crucial aspects of AutoSSL,since it is not desirable to have an automated yet perfor-
mance degenerated SSL system. Li et al. [54] ﬁrst present
an automated learning system for SSL. They incorporatemeta-learning with enhanced meta-features to help searchingwell-perform instantiations, and a large margin separation
method to ﬁne-tune the hyperparameters as well as alleviate
performance deterioration.
Learning in dynamic environments is far more diﬃcult than
in static ones. The challenges come from distribution drift,
new class emerging, feature space change and so on. Thereare some studies trying to tackle these problems [55–57]when learning in data streams, however, the issue of safeness
remains an open problem for semi-supervised learning in dy-
namic environments, i.e., an interesting problem is when theunlabeled data are useful in online learning.
6C o n c l u s i o n
Semi-supervised learning has a wide range of application sce-
narios and has attracted considerable attention in the past
decades. However, phenomena of performance degenerationhinder the deployment of semi-supervised learning in real ap-plications. It is desirable to be able to exploit unlabeled datasafely.
This article focuses on three viewpoints to tackle the issue
of safeness in semi-supervised learning: data quality, modeluncertainty, and measure diversity. Although we considerthem separately, in practice they often occur simultaneously.
Note that due to the space limit, this article actually serves
more like a literature index rather than a comprehensive re-view. Readers interested in some details are encouraged toread the corresponding references. In the future, it will be
worth understanding the boundary of safe SSL and making
valuable decisions for SSL data.

==== Page 7 ====
Yu-Feng LI et al. Safe semi-supervised learning: a brief introduction 7
Acknowledgements This research was supported by the National Key
R&D Program of China (2017YFB1001903), t he National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 61772262) and the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities.
References
1. Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A. Deep Learning. MA: MIT Press,
2016
2. Chapelle O, Schölkopf B, Zien A. Semi-supervised Learning. MA:
MIT Press, 2006
3. Miller D J, Uyar H S. A mixture of experts classi ﬁer with learning
based on both labelled and unlabelled data. In: Proceedings of the 10th
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 1996,
571–577
4. Nigam K, McCallum A, Thrun S, Mitchell T M. Text classi ﬁcation
from labeled and unlabeled documents using EM. Machine Learning,
2000, 39(2–3): 103–134
5. Joachims T. Transductive inference for text classi ﬁcation using support
vector machines. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Machine Learning. 1999, 200–209
6. Bennett K P, Demiriz A. Semi-supervised support vector machines. In:
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems. 1998, 368–374
7. Zhu X J, Ghahramani Z, La ﬀerty J D. Semi-supervised learning using
gaussian ﬁelds and harmonic functions. In: Proceedings of the 20th
International Conference on Machine Learning. 2003, 912–919
8. Belkin M, Niyogi P, Sindhwani V . Manifold regularization: a geomet-
ric framework for learning from labeled and unlabeled examples. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 2006, 7(Nov): 2399–2434
9. Blum A, Chawla S. Learning from labeled and unlabeled data using
graph mincuts. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Machine Learning. 2001, 19–26
10. Liu W, Wang J, Chang S F. Robust and scalable graph-based semi-
supervised learning. Proceedings of the I EEE, 2012, 100(9): 2624–
2638
11. Zhou D, Bousquet O, Lal T N, Weston J, Schölkopf B. Learning with
local and global consistency. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 2004, 16: 321–328
12. Blum A, Mitchell T M. Combining labeled and unlabeled data with
co-training. In: Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference on Com-
putational Learning Theory. 1998, 92–100
13. Zhou Z H, Li M. Tri-training: exploiting unlabeled data using three
classi ﬁers. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
2005, 17(11): 1529–1541
14. Singh A, Nowak R D, Zhu X. Unlabeled data: now it helps, now it
doesn’t. In: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems. 2008, 1513–1520
15. Yang T, Priebe C E. The e ﬀect of model misspeci ﬁcation on semi-
supervised classi ﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 2011, 33(10): 2093–2103
16. Chapelle O, Sindhwani V , Keerthi S S. Optimization techniques for
semi-supervised support vector machines. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research, 2008, 9: 203–23317. Chawla N V, Karakoulas G I. Learning from labeled and unlabeled
data: an empirical study across techniques and domains. Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 2005, 23: 331–366
18. Chen K, Wang S. Semi-supervised learning via regularized boosting
working on multiple semi-supervised assumptions. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2011, 33(1): 129–143
19. Cozman F G, Cohen I, Cirelo M C. Semi-supervised learning of mix-
ture models. In: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Machine Learning. 2003, 99–106
20. Grandvalet Y. Semi-supervised lear ning by entropy minimization. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2005, 17: 529–536
21. Cozman F G, Cohen I, Cirelo M. Unlabeled data can degrade classi ﬁca-
tion performance of generative classi ﬁers. In: Proceedings of the 15th
International Florida Arti ﬁcial Intelligence Research Society Confer-
ence. 2002, 327–331
22. Li Y F, Wang S B, Zhou Z H. Graph quality judgement: a large margin
expedition. In: Proceedings of the 25th International Joint Conference
on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. 2016, 1725–1731
23. Wang H, Wang S B, Li Y F. Instance selection method for improving
graph-based semi-supervised lear ning. Frontiers of Computer Science,
2018, 12(4): 725–735
24. Li Y F, Zhou Z H. Improving semi-supervised support vector ma-
chines through unlabeled instances selection. In: Proceedings of the
25th AAAI Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. 2011, 386–391
25. Li Y F, Zhou Z H. Towards making unlabeled data never hurt. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2015,
37(1): 175–188
26. Li Y F, Kwok J T, Zhou Z H. Towards safe semi-supervised learning for
multivariate performance measures. In: Proceedings of the 30th AAAI
Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. 2016, 1816–1822
27. Jebara T, Wang J, Chang S F. Graph construction and b-matching for
semi-supervised learning. In: Pro ceedings of the 26th Annual Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning. 2009, 441–448
28. Carreira-Perpi nán M Á, Zemel R S. Proximity graphs for clustering
and manifold learning. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2004, 225–232
29. Zhu X. Semi-supervised learning literature survey. Computer Science,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2006, 2(3): 4
30. Wang F, Zhang C. Label propagation through linear neighborhoods.
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2008, 20(1):
55–67
31. Belkin M, Niyogi P. Semi-supervis ed learning on riemannian mani-
folds. Machine Learning, 2004, 56(1-3): 209–239
32. Karlen M, Weston J, Erkan A, Coll obert R. Large scale manifold trans-
duction. In: Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning. 2008, 448–455
33. Liang D M, Li Y F. Learning safe graph construction from multiple
graphs. In: Proceedings of the International CCF Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence. 2018, 41–54
34. Guo L Z, Wang S B, Li Y F. Large margin graph construction for semi-
supervised learning. In: Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Large Scale Graph Representation Learning and Applications. 2018,
1030–1033
35. Zhou Z H, Li M. Semi-supervised learning by disagreement. Knowl-

==== Page 8 ====
8 Front. Comput. Sci.
edge and Information Systems, 2010, 24(3): 415–439
36. Li Y F, Zhou Z H. Towards making unlabeled data never hurt. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning.
2011, 1081–1088
37. Wang Y , Chen S, Zhou Z H. New semi-supervised classi ﬁcation
method based on modi ﬁed cluster assumption. IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2012, 23(5): 689–702
38. Wang Y , Meng Y , Fu Z, Xue H. Towards safe semi-supervised classi-
ﬁcation: adjusted cluster assumption via clustering. Neural Processing
Letters, 2017, 46(3): 1031–1042
39. Balsubramani A, Freund Y. Optimally combining classi ﬁers using un-
labeled data. In: Proceedings of the 28th Conference on Learning The-
ory. 2015, 211–225
40. Niu G, Plessis d M C, Sakai T, Ma Y, Sugiyama M. Theoretical com-
parisons of positive-unlabeled learning against positive-negative learn-
ing. In: Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2016, 1207–1215
41. Kawakita M, Takeuchi J. Safe semi-supervised learning based on
weighted likelihood. Neural Networks, 2014, 53: 146–164
42. Li Y F, Zha H W, Zhou Z H. Learning safe prediction for semi-
supervised regression. In: Proceedings of the 31st AAAI Conference
on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. 2017, 2217–2223
43. Zhou Z H. A brief introduction to weak ly supervised learning. National
Science Review, 2017, 5(1): 44–53
44. Frénay B, Verleysen M. Classi ﬁcation in the presence of label noise: a
survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
2014, 25(5): 845–869
45. Pan S J, Yang Q. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2010, 22(10): 1345–1359
46. Guo L Z, Li Y F. A general formulation for safely exploiting weakly
supervised data. In: Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence. 2018, 3126–3133
47. Wei T, Guo L Z, Li Y F, Gao W. Learning safe multi-label prediction
for weakly labeled data. Machine Learning, 2018, 107(4): 703–725
48. Wei T, Li Y F. Does tail label help for large-scale multi-label learning.
In: Proceedings of the 27th International Joint Conference on Arti ﬁcial
Intelligence. 2018, 2847–2853
49. Wei T, Li Y F. Learning from semi-supervised weak-label data. In:
Proceedings of the 33rd AAAI Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence.
2019
50. Li F, Qian Y, Wang J, Dang C, Liu B. Cluster’s quality evaluation and
selective clustering ensemble. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Dis-
covery from Data, 2018, 12(5): 60
51. Qian Y , Li F, Liang J, Liu B, Dang C. Space structure and clustering of
categorical data. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems, 2016, 27(10): 2047–2059
5 2 . Y a oQ ,W a n gM ,C h e nY ,D a iW ,H uYQ ,L iYF ,T uWW ,Y a n gQ ,Y u
Y. Taking human out of learning applications: a survey on automatedmachine learning. 2018, ArXiv preprint ArXiv: 1810.13306
53. Feurer M, Klein A, Eggensperger K, Springenberg J T, Blum M, Hut-ter F. Eﬃcient and robust automated machine learning. In: Proceedings
of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. 2015, 2755–2763
54. Li Y F, Wang H, Wei T, Tu W W. Towards automated semi-supervised
learning. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelli-
gence. 2019
55. Da Q, Yu Y, Zhou Z H. Learning with augmented class by exploiting
unlabeled data. In: Proceedings of the 28th AAAI Conference on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence. 2014, 1760–1766
56. Zhu Y, Ting K M, Zhou Z H. New class adaptation via instance gen-
eration in one-pass class incremental learning. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conferen ce on Data Mining. 2017, 1207–1212
57. Zhu Y, Ting K M, Zhou Z H. Multi-label learning with emerging new
labels. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2018,30(10): 1901–1914
Yu-Feng Li received the BSc and PhD de-
grees in computer science from Nanjing
University, China in 2006 and 2013, re-
spectively. He joined the Department ofComputer Science & Technology at Nan-jing University as an Assistant Researcher
in 2013, and is currently associate pro-
fessor of the National Key Laboratory for
Novel Software Technology, China. He is a member of the LAMDA
group. His research interests are mainly in machine learning. Par-
ticularly, he is interested in semi-supervised learning, statisticallearning and optimization. He has published over 30 papers in top-tier journal and conferences such as JMLR, TPAMI, AIJ, ICML,
NIPS, AAAI, etc. He is the senior program committee member of
top-tier AI conferences such as IJCAI15, IJCAI17, AAAI19, andan editorial board member of machine learning journal special is-
sues. He has received outstanding doctoral dissertation award from
China Computer Federation (CCF), outstanding doctoral disserta-tion award from Jiangsu Province and Microsoft Fellowship Award.
De-Ming Liang received the BSc degree in2017. He is currently a master student inthe Department of Computer Science and
Technology at Nanjing University, China.
His research interests are mainly in ma-chine learning. Particularly, he is interested
in weakly supervised learning.

