==== Page 1 ====
HAL Id: hal-03099878
https://inria.hal.science/hal-03099878v1
Submitted on 6 Jan 2021
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in F rance or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution
Cédric Colas, V ashisht Madhavan, Joost Huizinga, Jeff Clune
T o cite this version:
Cédric Colas, V ashisht Madhavan, Joost Huizinga, Jeff Clune. Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neu-
roevolution. GECCO 2020 - Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, Jul 2020, Cancun /
Virtual, Mexico. ￿10.1145/3377930.3390217￿. ￿hal-03099878￿

==== Page 2 ====
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution
Cédric Colas∗
INRIAJoost Huizinga
Uber AI Labs
Vashisht Madhavan
Element Inc.Jeff Clune
OpenAI
ABSTRACT
Quality-Diversity (QD) algorithms, and MAP-Elites (ME) in par-
ticular, have proven very useful for a broad range of applications
including enabling real robots to recover quickly from joint damage,
solving strongly deceptive maze tasks or evolving robot morpholo-
gies to discover new gaits. However, present implementations of
ME and other QD algorithms seem to be limited to low-dimensional
controllers with far fewer parameters than modern deep neural net-
work models. In this paper, we propose to leverage the efficiency of
Evolution Strategies (ES) to scale MAP-Elites to high-dimensional
controllers parameterized by large neural networks. We design and
evaluate a new hybrid algorithm called MAP-Elites with Evolution
Strategies (ME-ES) for post-damage recovery in a difficult high-
dimensional control task where traditional ME fails. Additionally,
we show that ME-ES performs efficient exploration, on par with
state-of-the-art exploration algorithms in high-dimensional control
tasks with strongly deceptive rewards.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies →Evolutionary robotics ;
KEYWORDS
Quality-Diversity, Evolution Strategies, Map-Elites, Exploration
ACM Reference Format:
Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune. 2020.
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution. In Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference (GECCO ’20), July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3377930.3390217
1 INTRODUCTION
The path to success is not always a straight line. This popular
saying describes, in simple terms, a key problem of non-convex
optimization. When optimizing a model for a non-convex objective
function, an algorithm that greedily follows the gradient of the
objective might get stuck in local optima. One can think of an agent
in a maze with numerous walls. An algorithm that minimizes the
∗Corresponding author: cedric.colas@inria.fr. Work conducted during an internship at
Uber AI Labs. All authors were affiliated to Uber AI Labs at the time.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
©2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7128-5/20/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377930.3390217distance between the position of the agent and the maze center will
surely lead to the agent getting stuck in a corner. Based on this ob-
servation, Lehman and Stanley [30] proposed a thought-provoking
idea: ignore the objective and optimize for novelty instead. Novelty
search ( NS) continually generates new behaviors without consid-
ering any objective and, as such, is not subject to the local optima
encountered by algorithms following fixed objectives. In cases like
our maze example, NScan lead to better solutions than objective-
driven optimization [30].
Despite the successes of NS, objectives still convey useful in-
formation for solving tasks. As the space of possible behaviors
increases in size, NScan endlessly generate novel outcomes, few
of which may be relevant to the task at hand. Quality-Diversity
(QD) algorithms address this issue by searching for a collection
of solutions that is both diverse and high-performing [ 14,31,34].
MAP-E lites, in particular, was used to generate diverse behavioral
repertoires of walking gaits on simulated and physical robots, which
enabled them to recover quickly from joint damage [13].
InQDalgorithms like MAP-E lites or NSLC , a Genetic Algorithm
(GA) is often used as the underlying optimization algorithm. A
candidate controller is selected to be mutated and the resulting
controller is evaluated in the environment, leading to a perfor-
mance measure (fitness) and a behavioral characterization (low-
dimensional representation of the agent’s behavior). QDalgorithms
usually curate some form of a behavioral repertoire , a collection of
high-performing and/or diverse controllers experienced in the past
(sometimes called archive [14,31] or behavioral map [34]). Each
newly generated controller can thus be added to the behavioral
repertoire if it meets some algorithm-dependent conditions. From
a parallel line of work, Intrinsically Motivated Goal Exploration
Processes ( IMGEP ) also curate behavioral repertoires and are often
based on GA-like optimizations [ 3,18]. Agents are able to set their
own goals in the behavioral space, and try to reach them by com-
bining controllers that reached behavioral characterizations ( BCs)
close to these goals. Uniform goal selection here triggers a novelty
effect where controllers reaching sparse areas are used more often,
while learning-progress-based sampling implements a form of QD
where quality is defined as the ability to reliably achieve goals [ 3].
Thus far, the most successful demonstrations of QDalgorithms
have been on robotics problems with relatively simple, low-dimen-
sional controllers [ 14,30,31,34]. Modern robot controllers such as
ones based on neural networks can have millions of parameters,
which makes them difficult –though not impossible– to optimize
with Evolutionary Algorithms [ 47]. Such large controllers are usu-
ally trained through Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), where
an agent learns to perform a sequence of actions in an environment
so as to maximizes some notion of cumulative reward [ 48]. DRL is
concerned with training deep neural networks (DNNs), typicallyarXiv:2003.01825v3  [cs.NE]  5 Jun 2020

==== Page 3 ====
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
via stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to facilitate learning in robot
control problems. Unlike in supervised learning, training data in
DRL is generated by having the agent interact with the environ-
ment. If the agent greedily takes actions to maximize reward –a
phenomenon known as exploitation – it may run into local optima
and fail to discover alternate strategies with larger payoffs. To avoid
this, RL algorithms also need exploration . RL algorithms usually
explore in the action space, adding random noise on a controller’s
selected actions ( ϵ-greedy) [ 20,32,33]. More directed exploration
techniques endow the agent with intrinsic motivations [4,37,44].
Most of the time, the reward is augmented with an exploration
bonus , driving the agent to optimize for proxies of uncertainty such
as novelty [ 5], prediction error [ 9,38], model-disagreement [ 46],
surprise [1] or expected information gain [26].
In contrast with QDalgorithms however, DRL algorithms are
usually concerned with training a single controller to solve tasks
[20,32,33,38]. The agent thus needs to rely on a single controller
to adapt to new environments [ 36,39], tasks [ 16], or adversarial
attacks [ 22]. Kume et al . [28] outlines perhaps the first RL algorithm
to form a behavioral repertoire by training multiple policies. Opti-
mizing for performance, this algorithm relies on the instabilities of
the underlying learning algorithm (Deep Deterministic Policy Gra-
dient [ 32]) to generate a diversity of behaviors that will be collected
in abehavioral map . Although the performance optimization of this
QDalgorithm leverages DRL, exploration remains incidental.
In recent years, Deep Neuroevolution has emerged as a powerful
competitor to SGD for training DNNs. Salimans et al . [43] , in par-
ticular, presents a scalable version of the Evolution Strategies ( ES)
algorithm, achieving performances comparable to state-of-the-art
DRL algorithms on high-dimensional control tasks like Mujoco [ 8]
and the Atari suite [ 6]. Similarly, Genetic Algorithms ( GA) were
also shown to be capable of training DNN controllers for the Atari
suite, but failed to do so on the Mujoco suite [ 47].ES, in contrast
with GA, combines information from many perturbed versions of
the parent controller to generate a new one. Doing so allows the
computation of gradient estimates, leading to efficient optimization
in high-dimensional parameter spaces like DNNs [ 43]. Recent im-
plementations also utilize the resources of computing clusters by
parallelizing the controller evaluations, making ESalgorithms com-
petitive with DRL in terms of training time [ 43]. Since Such et al .
[47] showed that even powerful, modern GAs using considerable
amounts of computation could not solve continuous control tasks
like those from the Mujoco suite, we propose to unlock QDfor
high-dimensional control tasks via a novel QD- EShybrid algorithm.
Doing so, we aim to benefit from the exploration abilities and re-
sulting behavioral repertoires of QDalgorithms, while leveraging
the ability of ESto optimize large models.
NS-ES made a first step in this direction by combining NSwith
ES: replacing the performance objective of ESwith a novelty ob-
jective [ 12]. Two variants were proposed to incorporate the perfor-
mance objective: NSR-ES , which mixes performance and novelty
objectives evenly and NSRA-ES , which adaptively tunes the ratio be-
tween the two. These methods –like most RL exploration methods–
use a mixture of exploitation and exploration objectives as a way
to deal with the exploitation-exploration tradeoff . While this might
work when the two objectives are somewhat aligned, it may beTable 1: Classification of related algorithms
Gradient-Based Mutation-Based
Pure ES GA
Exploitation
Pure NS-ES NS
Exploration
Exploration & Coupled: NSR-ES ,NSRA-ES ME-GA
Exploitation Decoupled: ME-ES
inefficient when they are not [ 40]. Several works have started to in-
vestigate this question and some propose to disentangle exploration
and exploitation into distinct phases [ 7,11,52].QDpresents a natu-
ral way of decoupling the optimization of exploitation (quality) and
exploration (diversity) by looking for high-performing solutions in
local niches of the behavioral space, leading to local competition
between solutions instead of a global competition [14, 31, 34].
Contributions. In this work, we present ME-ES , a version of
the powerful QDalgorithm MAP-E lites that scales to hard, high-
dimensional control tasks by leveraging ES. Unlike NS-ES and its
variants, which optimize a small population of DNN controllers
(e.g. 5) [12],ME-ES builds a large repertoire of diverse controllers.
Having a set of diverse, high-performing behaviors not only enables
efficient exploration but also robustness to perturbations (either
in the environment itself or in the agent’s abilities). In behavioral
repertoires, the burden of being robust to perturbations can be
shared between different specialized controllers, one of which can
solve the new problem at hand. Algorithms that train a single con-
troller, however, need this controller to be robust to all potential
perturbations. We present two applications of ME-ES . The first is
damage recovery in a high-dimensional control task: after building
a repertoire of behaviors, the agent is damaged (e.g. disabled joints)
and must adapt to succeed. We show that ME-ES can discover
adaptive behaviors that perform well despite the damage, while
a previous implementation of MAP-E lites based on GAfails. The
second application is exploration in environments with strongly
deceptive rewards. We show that agents trained with ME-ES per-
form on par with state-of-the-art exploration algorithms ( NS-ES
and variants). Table 1 presents a classification of ME-ES and re-
lated algorithms presented in this paper along three dimensions:
1) whether they use pure exploration, pure exploitation or both, 2)
whether they rely on gradient-based or mutation-based learning
algorithms and 3) whether they couple or decouple the trade-off be-
tween exploration and exploitation (if applicable). As EScomputes
natural gradient estimations through Monte-Carlo approximations
[50], we refer to ES-powered methods as gradient-based .
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 MAP-Elites
MAP-E lites was first presented in Mouret and Clune [34]. In addi-
tion to an objective function –or fitness function(F)– which mea-
sures the performance of an agent, MAP-E lites assumes the defini-
tion of a behavioral characterization (BC)mapping the state-action

==== Page 4 ====
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
trajectory of an agent in its environment to a low-dimensional em-
bedding lying in a behavioral space .MAP-E lites keeps track of an
archive of individuals (controllers) tried in the past along with their
associated fitness values and behavioral characterizations. The aim
is to curate a repertoire of behaviorally diverse and high-performing
agents. To this end, the behavioral space is discretized into cells
representing behavioral niches , where each niche maintains the
highest performing individual whose behavioral characterization
falls into its cell. Individuals in each niche optimize for the fit-
ness objective, yet implicitly have a pressure for diversity, as they
are driven towards empty and under-optimized cells to avoid the
selection pressure of cells with highly optimized individuals.
After initializing the archive with a few randomly initialized
controllers, MAP-E lites repeats the following steps:
(1) Select a populated cell at random,
(2)Mutate the cell’s controller ( GA) to obtain a new controller,
(3)Gather a trajectory of agent-environment interactions with
the new controller and obtain its fitness and BC,
(4)Update the archive: add the controller to the cell where the
BCfalls if Rule 1 ) the cell is empty or Rule 2 ) the fitness is
higher than that of the controller currently in the cell.
The two rules guiding additions to the archive implement a de-
coupling between exploitation (quality) and exploration (diversity).
Rule 1 implements exploration, as it ensures the preservation of con-
trollers that exhibit novel behavior (i.e. mapped to empty cells). Rule
2implements exploitation, as it enforces local competition and re-
tains only the highest performing solution in each behavioral niche.
In this manner, the exploration and exploitation objectives cannot
contradict each other. We call the traditional implementation of
MAP-E lites based on GAME-GA while MAP-E lites encompasses
both ME-GA andME-ES variants.
2.2 Evolution Strategies
Evolution Strategies ( ES) is a class of black box optimization algo-
rithms inspired by natural evolution [ 2,42]. For each generation,
an initial parameter vector (the parent ), is mutated to generate a
population of parameter vectors (the offspring ). The fitness of each
resultant offspring is evaluated and the parameters are combined
such that individuals with high fitness have higher influence than
others. As this process is repeated, the population tends towards
regions of the parameter space with higher fitness, until a conver-
gence point is reached.
We use a version of ESintroduced in Salimans et al . [43] , which
itself belongs to the subcategory of Natural Evolution Strategies
(NES) [45,50]. In NES, the population of parameter vectors θis
represented by a distribution pψ(θ), parameterized by ψ. Given an
objective function F,NES algorithms optimize the expected objec-
tive value Eθ∼pψF(θ)using stochastic gradient ascent. Recently,
Salimans et al . [43] proposed a version of the NES algorithm able to
scale to the optimization of high-dimensional parameters ( ≈105).
In their work, they address the RL problem, for which θrefers to
the parameters of a controller while the fitness function is the re-
ward obtained by the corresponding controller over an episode of
environment interactions. Given the parent controller parameters
θ, the offspring population (θi∀i∈[1..n]) is sampled from the
isotropic multivariate Gaussian distribution θi∼N(θ,σ2I)withfixed variance σ2. As in reinforce [51],θis updated according to
the following gradient approximation:
∇ψEθ∼pψ[F(θ)]≈1
nnÕ
i=1F(θi)∇ψloдpψ(θ),
where nis the offspring population size, usually large to compensate
for the high variance of this estimate. In practice, any θican be
decomposed as θi=θ+σϵi, and the gradient is estimated by:
∇ψEϵ∼N( 0,I)[F(θ+σϵ)]≈1
nσnÕ
i=1F(θi)ϵi.
As in Salimans et al . [43] , we use virtual batch normalization of
the controller’s inputs and rank-normalize the fitness F(θi). The
version of NES used in this paper is strictly equivalent to the one
proposed in Salimans et al . [43] . We simply refer to it as EShereafter.
3 METHODS
3.1 ME-ES
TheME-ES algorithm reuses the founding principles of MAP-E lites
leading to damage robustness and efficient exploration, while lever-
aging the optimization performance of ES.ME-ES curates a behav-
ioral map(BM), an archive of neural network controllers parame-
terized byθ. Every n_optim_gens generations, a populated cell and
its associated controller θcellare sampled from the archive. This
controller is then copied to θд, which is subsequently evolved for
n_optim_gens generations using ES. At each generation, offspring
parameters θiд∼N(θд,σ2I)are only used to compute an update
forθд. We only consider θдfor addition to the BMto ensure robust
evaluations ( 30episodes) and a fair comparison with competing
algorithms such as NS-ES . Algorithm 1 provides a detailed outline
of the way ME-ES combines principles from MAP-E lites and ES.
Algorithm 1 ME-ES Algorithm
1:Input: n_gens, pop_size, σ, n_optim_gens, empty behavioral
map BM, n_eval
2:Initialize: BM←(θ0∼initnormc(),F(θ0),BC(θ0))
3:forд=[0,n_gens]do
4: ifg % n_optim_gens == 0 then
5: mode←explore_or_exploit()
6: ifmode == ‘explore’ then
7: θcell←sample_explore_cell()
8: else if mode == ‘exploit’ then
9: θcell←sample_exploit_cell()
10:θд←θcell
11:θд←ES_optim(θд, pop_size, σ, objective=mode)
12: F(θд),BC(θд)←Evaluate(θд, n_eval)
13: Update_BM(θд,F(θд),BC(θд))
ME-ES variants. We define three variants of ME-ES that differ
in the objective optimized by ES:
•InME-ES exploit , the objective is the fitness function F.
F(θ)is computed by running the agent’s controller in the
environment for one episode ( directed exploitation ).

==== Page 5 ====
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
•InME-ES explore , the objective is the novelty function
N(θ,k), which we define as the average Euclidean distance
between a controller’s BCand its knearest neighbors in an
archive storing all previous θд, regardless of their addition to
theBM(one per generation). Because the novelty objective
explicitly incentivizes agents to explore their environment,
we call it a directed exploration objective.
•Finally, ME-ES explore-exploit alternates between both
objectives, thus implementing a decoupled exploration and
exploitation procedure. Because it explicitly optimizes for
both objectives, ME-ES explore-exploit conducts both di-
rected exploration anddirected exploitation .
Note that ME-ES explore performs undirected exploitation; while
theESsteps do not directly optimize for fitness, performance mea-
sures are still used to update the BM(Rule 2 of the map updates).
In the same way, ME-ES exploit also performs undirected explo-
ration, as the BMis updated with novel controllers (Rule 1 of map
updates). Like ME-GA , all versions of ME-ES thus perform forms
of exploration and exploitation. Only optimization steps with ES,
however, enable agents to perform the directed version of both
exploitation and exploration.
Cell sampling. The number of generations performed by ME-ES
is typically orders of magnitude lower than MAP-E lites, as each gen-
eration of ME-ES involves a greater number of episodes of environ-
ment interaction ( 104instead of 1forME-GA ). Thus, the sampling
of the cell from which to initiate the next n_optim_gens generations
is crucial (see Algorithm 1). Here, we move away from the cell
selection via uniform sampling used in MAP-E lites, towards biased
cell sampling. We propose two distinct strategies. For exploitation
steps, we select from cells with high fitness controllers, under the
assumption that high fitness cells may lead to even higher fitness
cells. For exploration steps, we select from cells with high novelty
scores. By definition, novel controllers are in under-explored areas
of the search space and mutating these controllers should lead to
novel areas of the behavior space [ 30,31]. In practice, as the number
of cells populated increases with each generation, the bias towards
selecting cells with higher performance or novelty score diminishes.
For instance, if cells are selected proportional to their novelty, the
best controller of two that have novelty 2and 1will have a 2/3
chance of being selected, while the same controller in a group of 3
controllers with novelties [2,1,1]will only have probability 1/2of
being selected. To fight this phenomenon, we propose to restrict the
novelty-proportional selection to the five most novel cells. Similarly,
for exploitation steps, we sample either uniformly from the two
highest fitness cells ( p=0.5), which promotes exploitation from the
current best cells, or uniformly from the two highest fitness cells
from the last five updated ( p=0.5), which promotes exploitation
from newly discovered cells. We considered sampling cells with
high performance progress, but this often led to the selection of sub-
optimal controllers, as starting to move forward from a controller
going backward is one of the best way to make progress.
Hyperparameters. We use fully connected neural network con-
trollers with two hidden layers of size 256,tanh non-linearities,
Xavier initialization [ 23], an Adam optimizer [ 27] with learning
rate 0.01and a l2-coefficient of 0.005for regularization. We runESforn_optim _дens=10consecutive generations with a pop-
ulation size of n=104and a noise parameter σ=0.02. After
each step, we evaluate the average fitness F(θд), average behav-
ioral characterization BC(θд)and associated novelty score N(θд)
ofθдover n_eval=30episodes. Novelty is computed as the av-
erage distance between the controller’s BCand its k=10nearest
neighbors in the archive of all past BCs, regardless of whether they
were added to the BM. The code and environment are provided at
https://github.com/uber-research/Map-Elites-Evolutionary.
3.2 Damage Recovery
The Intelligent Trial and Error (IT&E) algorithm integrates the
evolution of a behavioral map using MAP-E lites and a subsequent
procedure enabling agents to recover from damage by searching
theBMfor efficient recovery controllers [ 13]. Here, we reuse this
setting to compare the traditional implementation of MAP-E lites
based on GAand our proposed ME-ES variants, see Fig. 1. Once the
behavioral map has been filled by ME-GA orME-ES , we can use it
for damage adaptation (e.g. loss of control for one or several joints).
As adaptation procedure, we use the map-based Bayesian optimiza-
tion algorithm ( M-BOA ), part of the original IT&E [ 13]. Bayesian
optimization is especially suitable to find the maximum of an un-
known objective function for which it is costly to obtain samples.
We define the objective function as F:BC→F.M-BOA initializes
a model ofFusing the behavioral map filled by MAP-E lites and
updates the model using Gaussian Process (GP) regression. Data
acquisition boils down to the evaluation of a controller θin the per-
turbed environment, providing a new pair (BC(θ),F(θ))to update
the modelF. We follow the implementation of Cully et al . [13]
and use a Matérn kernel function with parameters ν=5/2and
ρ=0.03as well as hyperparameters κ=0.3andσ2
noise=0.01as
Upper Confidence Bound exploration parameter and noise prior
respectively (see code).
MAP-ElitesMap updates
Interactions
Interactions
Model 
InitializationPhase 1: Map Building
Phase 2: Damage Adaptation
Damaged
Environment
M-BOABehavioral Map
Environment
Figure 1: Building repertoires for damage adaptation.
Phase 1: MAP-E lites builds a repertoire of diverse and high-
performing behaviors. Phase 2: M-BOA builds a model of the
objective function under the perturbed conditions to find a
controller robust to the damage.
3.3 Baselines and Controls
In this paper, we test ME-ES in two applications. The first is the con-
struction of behavioral repertoires for damage adaptation and the

==== Page 6 ====
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
second is exploration in deceptive reward environments ( deep ex-
ploration ). The two applications have different baselines and control
treatments, which are described in the following sections.
3.3.1 MAP-Elites with Genetic Algorithm. We use the traditional
implementation of MAP-E lites based on GA(ME-GA ) as a base-
line in the damage adaptation experiments in order to highlight
the lift from using ESinstead of GAto power MAP-E lites in high-
dimensional control tasks. To ensure a fair comparison, it is im-
portant to keep the number of episodes constant between ME-GA
andME-ES . Here, ME-ES requires 10,030episodes for each new
controller ( 104evaluations for the offsprings and 30evaluations of
the final controller to get a robust performance estimate). As such,
we enable ME-GA to add up to 334new controllers per generation,
each being evaluated 30times.
We do not use ME-GA as a baseline in the deep exploration exper-
iments because the task builds on the Humanoid-v1 environment
where Such et al . [47] demonstrated that GAs were not competitive
with ES, even with 150x more environment interactions.
3.3.2 Novelty Search and Evolution Strategies. We compare ME-
EStoNS-ES and its variants [ 12] for the deep exploration experi-
ments. Since these baselines do not build behavioral repertoires,
they are not used for the damage adaptation application. NS-ES
replaces the performance objective of ESby the same novelty ob-
jective as ME-ES explore . Instead of a behavioral map, NS-ES and
its variants keep a population of 5parent controllers optimized in
parallel via ES.NS-ES never uses fitness for optimization and thus
is a pure exploration algorithm. We also compare against two vari-
ants of NS-ES that include a fitness objective: (1) NSR-ES optimizes
the average of the fitness and novelty objectives, while (2) NSRA-
ESimplements an adaptive mixture where the mixing weight is
updated during learning. For NSRA-ES , the mixing weight leans
towards exploration (novelty objective) when the best fitness stag-
nates and shifts back towards exploitation (fitness objective) when
new behaviors are discovered that lead to higher performance.
The weight adaptation strategy of NSRA-ES was modified in this
paper. In the original work, the weight starts at 1(pure exploita-
tion), decreases by 0.05every 50generations if fitness does not
improve and increases by 0.05at every improvement. In practice,
we found this cadence too slow to adapt properly, as the mixing
weight can only go to 0after 1000 generations in the best case.
Thus, we increase the update frequency to every 20generations
and remove the bias towards exploitation at the start by setting the
mixing weight to 0.5initially.
4 EXPERIMENTS
Our two experiments are presented in the next sections. Recall that
controllers are implemented by fully-connected neural networks
with 2hidden layers of size 256(about 105parameters). This results
in search spaces that have orders of magnitude more dimensions
than those used in traditional QDstudies [ 14,30,31,34]. For each
treatment, we report the mean and standard deviations across 5
seeds, except for ME-GA , for which we present 3seeds. ME-GA
is about 3times slower to run ( >3days) and does not manage to
learn recovery controllers in the damage adaptation task.4.1 Building Repertoires for Damage
Adaptation
We compare the quality of the BMgenerated by the different ver-
sions of MAP-E lites for damage recovery. In the first phase we build
a behavioral map with each of the MAP-E lites algorithms and in
the second phase we use the behavioral map created in phase 1 to
help the agent recover from damage to its joints via M-BOA (Fig. 1).
The damage applied to joints, indexed by Ji, include:
•One joint cannot be controlled (Ji∈[0. .7]).
•One full leg cannot be controlled (J0,1,J2,3,J4,5,J6,7).
4.1.1 Domain. We evolve a repertoire of walking gaits in the
Mujoco Ant-v2 environment [ 8]. The BCis a 4-D vector, where
each dimension represents the proportion of episode steps where
each leg is in contact with the floor ( [0,1]4). This behavioral space
is discretized into 10bins along each dimension, for a total of 104
cells. The fitness is a mixture of the current xposition and a cost
on the torque for each joint. This incentivizes the agent to move as
far along the x-axis as possible, without exerting too much energy.
0 100 200 300 400 500
Generations10002000300040005000Performance
ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
ME-GA
(a)
0 100 200 300 400 500
Generations100101102103104# populated cells
ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
ME-GA
(b)
Figure 2: Antbehavioral map. a: Map performance (best per-
formance in map). b: Map coverage (# populated cells), log
scale ony-axis.
4.1.2 Results - Map Building. Fig. 2a shows the evolution of the
map’s best performance and 2b shows the map’s coverage. As ME-
GAadds up to 334times more controllers to the map per generation,
its coverage is orders of magnitude higher than ME-ES variants.
However, the best performance found in the map is quite low for
ME-GA .ME-ES explore also shows poor performances across its
map. In contrast, ME-ES exploit andME-ES explore-exploit show
high performance, on par with Twin-Delayed Actor Critic ( ≈4200)
[20] but below Soft-Actor Critic ( ≈6000) [24], two state-of-the-art
DRL algorithms for this task.

==== Page 7 ====
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
752066,74134,52,30,1
Damage id01000200030004000 PerformanceME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
ME-GA
(a)
752066,74134,52,30,1
Damage id050010001500Δ performance (post - pre) ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
ME-GA (b)
Figure 3: Damage adaptation. a: Performance of the best recovery controller. The joint damage is represented as Jiwhere iis
the identifier of the broken joint or joints ( i∈[1..8]). Dashed line represent the score of an agent that does not move forward
but does not fall. b: Difference in performance, post- and pre-behavioral adaptation.
4.1.3 Results - Damage Adaptation. M-BOA is run on the behav-
ioral maps from each experiment. Recovery controllers extracted
from ME-GA andME-ES explore maps do not achieve high scores
(Fig. 3a). The scores are around 1000, which correspond to a motion-
less Ant (not moving forward, but not falling either). In contrast,
ME-ES explore-exploit andME-ES exploit are able to recover
from joint damage and the ant is able to move in all damage scenar-
ios (Fig. 3a). In Fig. 3b, we highlight the difference in performance
before and after adaptation. Pre-adaptation performance is com-
puted by evaluating the highest performing pre-damage controller
in each of the post-damage environments. The post-adaption per-
formance is computed by evaluating the recovery controller in each
of the damaged joint environments. In most cases, ME-ES explore-
exploit andME-ES exploit are able to significantly improve upon
the pre-damage controller (Fig. 3b). In both figures, averages and
standard errors are computed over different runs of MAP-E lites
+M-BOA (different seeds). The performance of a given recovery
controller is averaged over 30episodes.
4.1.4 Interpretation. ME-GA does not scale to the high-dimen-
sional Ant-v2 task, probably because it relies on random parameter
perturbations (i.e. a GA) for optimization, which does not scale to
high-dimensional controllers [ 47].ME-ES explore performs poorly,
as it is not interested in performance, but only in exploring the be-
havioral space, most of which is not useful. The exploitation ability
ofME-ES explore only relies on its directed exploration compo-
nent to find higher-performing solutions by chance. Indeed, neither
ME-GA norME-ES explore leverages directed exploitation. ME-ES
exploit only focuses on exploitation, but still performs undirected
exploration by retaining novel solutions that fill new cells. While
ME-ES explore-exploit targets performance only half of the time,
it still finds a BMthat is good for damage recovery. Its exploration
component enables better coverage of the behavioral space while
its exploitation component ensures high performing controllers are
in the map. Note that a good BCspace coverage is a poor indica-
tor of adaptation performance, whereas having a high-performing,
somewhat populated map is a good indicator. Directed exploitation
seems to be required to achieve good performance in the Ant-v2
task. Undirected exploration –as performed by ME-ES exploit – is
sufficient to build a behavioral map useful for damage recovery, asits recovery performance is similar to that of variants using directed
exploration and exploitation ( ME-ES explore-exploit ).
4.2 Deep Exploration
4.2.1 Domains. We use two modified domains from OpenAI
Gym based on Humanoid-v2 andAnt-v2 (Fig. 4). In Deceptive Hu-
manoid , the humanoid robot faces a U-shaped wall (like in [ 12]),
while in Ant Maze the Ant is placed in a maze similar to [ 19]. Both
environments possess a strongly deceptive reward, whose gradient
leads the agent directly into a trap. For both environments, we
use the final(x,y)position of the agent as the BC. In Deceptive
Humanoid , the fitness is defined as the cumulative reward, a mix-
ture of velocity along the x-axis and costs for joint torques. See
Brockman et al . [8] for more details. In Ant Maze , the fitness is the
Euclidean distance to the goal (green area). Controllers are run for
3000 timesteps in Ant Maze and up to 1000 timesteps in Deceptive
Humanoid , less if the agent falls over.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 4: Domains for the deep exploration study. a: Decep-
tive Humanoid domain. b: Ant Maze domain. Here the goal
is the green area and the trap is in the cul-de-sac to the right
of the agent’s starting position.
4.2.2 Results - Deceptive Humanoid. Undirected exploration
(ME-ES exploit ) is insufficient to get out of the trap and directed
exploration alone ( ME-ES explore ) falls short as well (Fig. 5a). That
said, like NS-ES ,ME-ES explore eventually explores around the
wall, as indicated by its greater than 3000 performance. Algorithms

==== Page 8 ====
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
implementing directed exploration and directed exploitation man-
age to go around the wall and achieve high performance (Fig. 5a),
regardless of whether they use decoupled ( ME-ES explore-exploit )
or coupled ( NSR-ES ,NSRA-ES ) exploration-exploitation. Surpris-
ingly, ME-ES explore displays poor map coverage despite its focus
on exploration (Fig. 5b).
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Generations05101520Performance (x103)
ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
NSRA-ESNSR-ES
(a)
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Generations050100150200250# populated cells
ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
NSRA-ESNSR-ES
(b)
Figure 5: Deceptive Humanoid behavioral map. a: Map per-
formance (best in map). Being stuck in the trap corresponds
to around 3000. b: Map coverage (# populated cells).
4.2.3 Results - Ant Maze. In the Ant Maze , both ME-ES exploit
andNSR-ES get stuck in the deceptive trap, as indicated by a score of
−27. All other methods ( ME-ES explore ,NS-ES ,ME-ES explore-
exploit , and NSRA-ES ) are able to avoid the trap and obtain a
score closer to 0. Examining the exploitation ratio of NSRA-ES ,
we observe that all runs quickly move towards performing mostly
exploration. That said, some runs have a ratio that falls to pure ex-
ploration and stays there, whereas in others the algorithm manages
to find a high-performing controller, which triggers an increase in
preference towards performance (Fig. 7)
4.2.4 Interpretation.
Deceptive Humanoid. In this environment, simply following the
fitness objective can only lead the agent into the U-shaped trap.
Because the environment is open-ended, pure exploration does not
guarantee the discovery of a high performing behavior either, as
it is possible to endlessly explore in directions misaligned with
performance, a phenomenon previously encountered with NS-ES
in Conti et al . [12] . This explains the poor performance of both ME-
ES explore andME-ES exploit . However, combining exploration
and exploitation provides the best of both worlds, and we observe
that all algorithms that do so navigate around the wall ( NSR-ES ,
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Generations−60−50−40−30−20−100Performance
ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
NSRA-ESNSR-ES
NS-ES(a)
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Generations020406080# populated cells
ME-ES explore-exploit
ME-ES exploitME-ES explore
NSRA-ESNSR-ES
NS-ES
(b)
Figure 6: Ant Maze behavioral map. a: Map performance
(negative distance to the goal area in map). The trap corre-
sponds to−27. b: Map coverage (# populated cells).
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Generations0.00.20.40.60.81.0NSRA-ES exploitation weight
Seed 1
Seed 2Seed 3
Seed 4Seed 5
Figure 7: NSRA-ES weight adaptation . Evolution of NSRA-ES
weight tuning the ratio between the performance (exploita-
tion) and the novelty (exploration) objectives for 5runs.
Higher values correspond to higher levels of exploitation.
NSRA-ES ,ME-ES explore-exploit ). As there is no need to fol-
low gradients orthogonal to those of the performance objective
to succeed, coupling exploration and exploitation (e.g. NSR-ES ) is
sufficient to achieve high fitness. The poor map coverage of ME-ES
explore may be a result of it only optimizing for performance
indirectly via MAP-E lites map updates. As a result, it is never en-
couraged to learn to walk efficiently, and thus unable to fill large
portions of the map. In Conti et al . [12] however, NS-ES manages
to make the humanoid walk using pure directed exploration. This
may be because NS-ES only updates a population of 5controllers,
whereas any controller in the behavioral map of ME-ES explore
can be updated. A given ME-ES explore controller will thus be
updated less frequently than any of the 5NS-ES controllers. This
dilution of the number of updates of each controller might explain
why ME-ES explore is less efficient at exploring than NS-ES in
this environment. Because the environment is unbounded, different

==== Page 9 ====
GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico Cédric Colas, Joost Huizinga, Vashisht Madhavan, and Jeff Clune
runs may explore different direction of the BC space, resulting in
high standard deviations.
Ant Maze. In the Ant Maze task, pure exploitation will lead the
agent to the deceptive trap (Fig. 4a). However, the environment
is enclosed by walls so the agent cannot explore endlessly. Thus,
performing pure exploration will eventually lead to the goal. This
explains the success of directed exploration algorithms ( NS-ES ,ME-
ES explore ) and the poor performance of directed exploitation
algorithms ( ME-ES exploit ). This environment requires a more
extensive exploration procedure to achieve the goal than Decep-
tive Humanoid . InAnt Maze , the agent needs to avoid two traps
and needs to make turns to achieve its goal, while in Humanoid
Deceptive , the agent can simply walk with an angle of 45degrees
to achieve high scores. As such, an even mix of the performance
and novelty objectives ( NSR-ES ) fails, as we try to average two
contradicting forces. NSRA-ES has a better chance of getting out
of the trap by adding more and more exploration to the mix until
the agent escapes. In doing so, however, the mixing weight can go
down to w=0and only consider the exploration objective, thus
losing sight of the goal (Fig. 7). ME-ES explore-exploit is able
to escape the trap because of its decoupled objectives; exploration
steps will lead it to explore the environment until it reaches a point
where exploitation steps allow it to reach the goal.
5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this paper we present ME-ES , a new QDalgorithm scaling the
powerful MAP-E lites algorithm to deep neural networks by lever-
aging ES. We present three variants of this algorithm: (1) ME-ES
exploit , where EStargets a performance objective, (2) ME-ES ex-
plore , where EStargets a novelty objective, and (3) ME-ES explore-
exploit , where EStargets performance and novelty objectives in
an alternating fashion. Because the MAP-E lites behavioral map
implicitly implements undirected exploration (update rule 1) and
undirected exploitation (update rule 2), these variants implement
directed exploitation with undirected exploration, directed explo-
ration with undirected exploitation, and decoupled directed explo-
ration and exploitation, respectively.
In a first application, we use ME-ES to curate an archive of
diverse and high-performing controllers that is subsequently used
for damage adaptation. We show that ME-ES manages to recover
from joint damage in a high-dimensional control task while ME-GA
does not. In a second application, we use ME-ES to solve strongly
deceptive exploration tasks. Here, we show that ME-ES explore-
exploit performs well in both open and closed domains, on par
with the state-of-the-art exploration algorithm NSRA-ES . As in
most DRL control tasks, the controllers optimized in this work
contain about 105parameters [ 24,43]. Previous work showed ES
could scale to even larger controllers (e.g. ≈106in Atari games)
[43], which suggests ME-ES could as well.
Others have conducted work similar to ours. Frans et al . [19] tack-
les an environment similar to Ant Maze with hierarchical RL. Their
method pre-trains independent low-level controllers to crawl in
various directions before learning a high-level control to pick direc-
tions to find the goal. On top of requiring some domain knowledge
to train low-level controllers, hierarchical RL has trouble composing
sub-controllers, a problem that is solved by resetting the agent to adefault position between sub-sequences. In this work, however, we
learn to solve the deep exploration problem by directly controlling
joints.
Concurrently to our work, Fontaine et al . [17] proposed a similar
algorithm called CMA-ME , in which MAP-E lites is combined with
CMA-ES , another algorithm from the ESfamily [ 25]. In addition
to a performance objective, CMA-ME considers two others. The
improvement objective selects for controllers that discovered new
cells or improved over already populated cells. The random direction
objective rewards controllers for minimizing the distance between
their BCand a behavioral target vector randomly sampled from
the behavioral space. Although the last objective does encourage
exploration, it is not explicitly directed towards novelty as in ME-
ES explore and is not decoupled from performance. Additionally,
although CMA-ES is generally recognized as a very powerful algo-
rithm, in practice it is limited to comparatively low-dimensional
parameter spaces due to the algorithmic complexity induced by its
covariance matrix updates (O(n2)).
Because ME-ES only affects the optimization procedure of MAP-
Elites, any application leveraging behavioral maps could benefit
from its improved optimization efficiency. In addition to the demon-
strated applications for exploration (Section 4.2) or damage adapta-
tion (Section 4.1), previous works have used MAP-E lites for maze
navigation [ 41] or to explore the behavioral space of soft robotic
arms and the design space of soft robots [ 34]. It can also co-evolve
a repertoire of diverse images matching each of the ImageNet cate-
gories [35] or generate diverse collections of 3Dobjects [29].
ME-ES could also leverage advances proposed for either MAP-
Elites or ES. Vassiliades et al . [49] , for example, propose to use a cen-
troidal Voronoi tessellation to scale MAP-E lites to high-dimensional
behavioral spaces, while Chatzilygeroudis et al . [10] improve on the
behavioral adaptation procedure to enable adaptation without the
need to reset the environment (or for humans to intervene in the
case of real robots). Finally, Gajewski et al . [21] recently proposed
to replace the performance objective of ESby an evolvability objec-
tive, which aims to maximize the effect of parameter perturbations
on behavior. Evolvability can make a good exploration objective
because perturbing evolvable controllers is likely to increase the
speed at which a behavioral map can be explored.
More generally, ME-ES could leverage a set of various objectives
in parallel. As the bottleneck lies in the computation of the 104
offspring, various objectives can be computed and optimized for
simultaneously (novelty, performance, combinations of them as in
NSR-ES , evolvability etc.). Each resulting controller can be tested 30
times and considered a candidate for the behavioral map updates,
at a negligible increase in cost of Nobjectives×30≪104.
In the deep exploration experiment, ME-ES could also be extended
to perform hierarchical evolution. In such an algorithm, solutions
arechains of controllers, where each link is a controller run for
a given amount of time. After sampling a cell and retrieving the
associated chain, the algorithm can either mutate the last controller
of the chain or add a new controller to it. This would implement
thego-explore strategy proposed in Ecoffet et al . [15] , where the
agent first returns to a behavioral cell before exploring further.
The addition of ME-ES and its variants to the QDfamily opens
new avenues, as the exploration and diversity properties of QD
algorithms can now be scaled to high-dimensional problems.

==== Page 10 ====
Scaling MAP-Elites to Deep Neuroevolution GECCO ’20, July 8–12, 2020, CancÃžn, Mexico
Implementation. A python implementation or ME-ES is avail-
able at https://github.com/uber-research/Map-Elites-Evolutionary.
REFERENCES
[1]Joshua Achiam and Shankar Sastry. 2017. Surprise-based intrinsic motivation
for deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01732 (2017).
[2]Thomas Back, Frank Hoffmeister, and Hans-Paul Schwefel. 1991. A survey of
evolution strategies. In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on genetic
algorithms , Vol. 2. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers San Mateo, CA.
[3]Adrien Baranes and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2013. Active learning of inverse models
with intrinsically motivated goal exploration in robots. Robotics and Autonomous
Systems 61, 1 (2013), 49–73.
[4]Andrew G Barto. 2013. Intrinsic motivation and reinforcement learning. In
Intrinsically motivated learning in natural and artificial systems . Springer, 17–47.
[5]Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Sax-
ton, and Remi Munos. 2016. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic
motivation. In Advances in neural information processing systems . 1471–1479.
[6]Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. 2013. The
arcade learning environment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal
of Artificial Intelligence Research 47 (2013), 253–279.
[7]Lucas Beyer, Damien Vincent, Olivier Teboul, Sylvain Gelly, Matthieu Geist, and
Olivier Pietquin. 2019. MULEX: Disentangling Exploitation from Exploration in
Deep RL. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00868 (2019).
[8]Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schul-
man, Jie Tang, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Openai gym. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.01540 (2016).
[9]Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. 2018. Exploration
by random network distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894 (2018).
[10] Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis, Vassilis Vassiliades, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret.
2018. Reset-free trial-and-error learning for robot damage recovery. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 100 (2018), 236–250.
[11] Cédric Colas, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2018. Gep-pg: Decoupling
exploration and exploitation in deep reinforcement learning algorithms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.05054 (2018).
[12] Edoardo Conti, Vashisht Madhavan, Felipe Petroski Such, Joel Lehman, Kenneth
Stanley, and Jeff Clune. 2018. Improving exploration in evolution strategies
for deep reinforcement learning via a population of novelty-seeking agents. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 5027–5038.
[13] Antoine Cully, Jeff Clune, Danesh Tarapore, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret. 2015.
Robots that can adapt like animals. Nature 521, 7553 (2015), 503.
[14] Antoine Cully and Yiannis Demiris. 2017. Quality and diversity optimization: A
unifying modular framework. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 22,
2 (2017), 245–259.
[15] Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune.
2019. Go-explore: a new approach for hard-exploration problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1901.10995 (2019).
[16] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017. Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 . JMLR. org, 1126–1135.
[17] Matthew C Fontaine, Julian Togelius, Stefanos Nikolaidis, and Amy K Hoover.
2019. Covariance Matrix Adaptation for the Rapid Illumination of Behavior Space.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02400 (2019).
[18] Sébastien Forestier, Yoan Mollard, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2017. Intrinsically
motivated goal exploration processes with automatic curriculum learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.02190 (2017).
[19] Kevin Frans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. 2017.
Meta learning shared hierarchies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09767 (2017).
[20] Scott Fujimoto, Herke Van Hoof, and David Meger. 2018. Addressing function
approximation error in actor-critic methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09477
(2018).
[21] Alexander Gajewski, Jeff Clune, Kenneth O Stanley, and Joel Lehman. 2019.
Evolvability ES: scalable and direct optimization of evolvability. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference . 107–115.
[22] Adam Gleave, Michael Dennis, Neel Kant, Cody Wild, Sergey Levine, and Stuart
Russell. 2019. Adversarial policies: Attacking deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.10615 (2019).
[23] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Understanding the difficulty of training
deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international
conference on artificial intelligence and statistics . 249–256.
[24] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2018. Soft
actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a
stochastic actor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01290 (2018).
[25] Nikolaus Hansen. 2016. The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1604.00772 (2016).
[26] Rein Houthooft, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman, Filip De Turck, and Pieter
Abbeel. 2016. Vime: Variational information maximizing exploration. In Advancesin Neural Information Processing Systems . 1109–1117.
[27] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[28] Ayaka Kume, Eiichi Matsumoto, Kuniyuki Takahashi, Wilson Ko, and Jethro Tan.
2017. Map-based multi-policy reinforcement learning: enhancing adaptability of
robots by deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06117 (2017).
[29] Joel Lehman, Sebastian Risi, and Jeff Clune. 2016. Creative generation of 3D
objects with deep learning and innovation engines. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Computational Creativity .
[30] Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. 2008. Exploiting open-endedness to solve
problems through the search for novelty.. In ALIFE . 329–336.
[31] Joel Lehman and Kenneth O Stanley. 2011. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures
through novelty search and local competition. In Proceedings of the 13th annual
conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation . ACM, 211–218.
[32] Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez,
Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. 2015. Continuous control with
deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 (2015).
[33] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis
Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. 2013. Playing atari with deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[34] Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. 2015. Illuminating search spaces by mapping
elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909 (2015).
[35] Anh Mai Nguyen, Jason Yosinski, and Jeff Clune. 2015. Innovation engines:
Automated creativity and improved stochastic optimization via deep learning. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computa-
tion. 959–966.
[36] Alex Nichol, Vicki Pfau, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, and John Schulman.
2018. Gotta learn fast: A new benchmark for generalization in rl. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.03720 (2018).
[37] Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V Hafner. 2007. Intrinsic mo-
tivation systems for autonomous mental development. IEEE transactions on
evolutionary computation 11, 2 (2007), 265–286.
[38] Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. 2017.
Curiosity-driven exploration by self-supervised prediction. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops . 16–17.
[39] Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. 2019.
Teacher algorithms for curriculum learning of Deep RL in continuously parame-
terized environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07224 (2019).
[40] Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, and Kenneth O Stanley. 2016. Searching for quality
diversity when diversity is unaligned with quality. In International Conference on
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature . Springer, 880–889.
[41] Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, Paul A Szerlip, and Kenneth O Stanley. 2015. Con-
fronting the challenge of quality diversity. In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual
Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation . 967–974.
[42] Ingo Rechenberg. 1973. EvolutionsstrategieâĂŤOptimierung technischer Systeme
nach Prinzipien der biologischen Information. Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt: Friedrich
Frommann Verlag (1973).
[43] Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. 2017.
Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1703.03864 (2017).
[44] Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1991. A possibility for implementing curiosity and boredom
in model-building neural controllers. In Proc. of the international conference on
simulation of adaptive behavior: From animals to animats . 222–227.
[45] Frank Sehnke, Christian Osendorfer, Thomas Rückstieß, Alex Graves, Jan Peters,
and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2010. Parameter-exploring policy gradients. Neural
Networks 23, 4 (2010), 551–559.
[46] Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. 2018. Model-based
active exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12162 (2018).
[47] Felipe Petroski Such, Vashisht Madhavan, Edoardo Conti, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O
Stanley, and Jeff Clune. 2017. Deep neuroevolution: Genetic algorithms are a
competitive alternative for training deep neural networks for reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06567 (2017).
[48] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. 2018. Reinforcement learning: An intro-
duction . MIT press.
[49] Vassilis Vassiliades, Konstantinos Chatzilygeroudis, and Jean-Baptiste Mouret.
2017. Using centroidal voronoi tessellations to scale up the multidimensional
archive of phenotypic elites algorithm. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-
putation 22, 4 (2017), 623–630.
[50] Daan Wierstra, Tom Schaul, Jan Peters, and Juergen Schmidhuber. 2008. Natural
evolution strategies. In 2008 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (IEEE
World Congress on Computational Intelligence) . IEEE, 3381–3387.
[51] Ronald J Williams. 1992. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8, 3-4 (1992), 229–256.
[52] Jingwei Zhang, Niklas Wetzel, Nicolai Dorka, Joschka Boedecker, and Wolfram
Burgard. 2019. Scheduled intrinsic drive: A hierarchical take on intrinsically
motivated exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.07400 (2019).

