==== Page 1 ====
91Security Modeling of Autonomous Systems: A Survey
FARHAJAHANand WEIQING SUN, Universityof Toledo
QUAMAR NIYAZ, PurdueUniversityNorthwest
MANSOOR ALAM, Universityof Toledo
Autonomoussystemswillsoonbeintegratingintoourlivesashomeassistants,deliverydrones,anddriverless
cars.Theimplementationofthelevelofautomationinthesesystemsfrombeingmanuallycontrolledtofully
autonomouswoulddependupontheautonomyapproachchosentodesignthesesystems.Thisarticlereviews
the historical evolution of autonomy, its approaches, and the current trends in related fields to build robust
autonomous systems. Toward such a goal and with the increased number of cyberattacks, the security of
these systems needs special attention from the research community. To gauge the extent to which research
has been done in this area, we discuss the cybersecurity of these systems.It is essential to model the system
from a security perspective, identify the threats and vulnerabilities, and then model the attacks. A survey in
thisdirectionexploresthetheoretical/analyticalsystemandattackmodelsthathavebeenproposedoverthe
years andidentifies the research gap that needs tobeaddressedby theresearch community.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Modeling and simulation ;Model development and
analysis;•Computer systems organization →Robotic autonomy ;Evolutionary robotics ;•Security
and privacy →Systems security ; Security services; • Human-centered computing →Human computer
interaction(HCI) ;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Cybersecurity, modeling, autonomous system (AS), Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs),driverless car,robots
ACM Reference format:
FarhaJahan,WeiqingSun,QuamarNiyaz,andMansoorAlam.2019.SecurityModelingofAutonomousSys-
tems:ASurvey. ACM Comput.Surv. 52,5, Article 91(September 2019), 34 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3337791
1 INTRODUCTION
With the advancement in the field of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) in the
last few decades, the increased usage of autonomous systems is evident in almost every domain.
Thedesignanddevelopmentofautonomousvehiclesinseveraldevelopedcountriestoeasetrans-
portation is no secret. On the other hand, domains such as agriculture, healthcare, military, and
spaceexplorationhavefoundmanyusecasesforthesesystems.Thedriverlesscarrevolutionhas
Authors’ addresses: F. Jahan, W. Sun, and M. Alam, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, 43606; emails: farha.jahan@
rockets.utoledo.edu, {weiqing.sun, mansoor.alam2}@utoledo.edu; Q. Niyaz, Purdue University Northwest, Hammond, IN,
46323;email:qniyaz@pnw.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2019Association forComputingMachinery.
0360-0300/2019/09-ART91$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3337791
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 2 ====
91:2 F. Jahan et al.
already begun, and the self-driving technology has been embraced by Tesla, Uber, and Waymo
(McBride 2018). Robots will soon be integrated into our lives as a home assistant, a pet (Dormehl
2017),or afriend like Sophia(theAI)(Galeon 2017).
Theprimaryobjectivetodevelopanautonomoussystemistocollaboratewithhumansandas-
sisttheminvarioustasks.Thesetaskscouldbetheonesthatrequire:precisionsuchassurgeries;
operation in challenging and life-threatening situations, such as space exploration, search and
rescuemissions,ornuclearpowerplants;orassistancetoeldersathome.However,improperim-
plementationormaliciousintentmayleadtodisasters.AnincidentwasreportedinaSanFrancisco
mallwhereapatrollingrobotfailedtorecognizeatoddlerandaccidentallyattackedhim(Kashmir
Hill2016). Recently, a self-driving Uber vehicle was caught up in a fatal accident (Wakabayashi
2018).Armedandautonomousweaponsaremanufacturedbyhigh-techmilitaryorganizationsin
the USA, China, and South Korea. Sci-Fi novels and movies like “I, Robot” and “Terminator” have
created a negative image and fear for these systems that they may go against humans and harm
them.Thereisanongoingcampaignagainstkillerrobots(fullyautonomousweapons)thatwould
have complete decision controls on their target (CCW 2018). If malicious users hack or control
suchsystemsbyexploitingtheirvulnerabilities,machinesturningagainsthumanswouldnotjust
be concepts and scenes from movies. These autonomous systems are still in the evolving stage.
Analyzing the security and safety issues associated with these machines and thoroughly testing
thembeforetheyaremade partof ourlives (Caughill 2017;Galeon2017)becomeessential.
The researchers from different focus groups have put a lot of effort to bring us to the current
level of understandingregardingautonomy.Inthelast fewyears,excellentsurveysonautonomy
havebeenpublished(Baxteretal. 2012;Beeretal. 2014;Mostafaetal. 2017).Goodrichetal.( 2007)
presentedan overview of human-robot interaction(HRI).Huanghas describedautonomy related
terminologies and jargon in Huang ( 2004). Level of trust could be a significant factor in deciding
theautonomylevelsinautonomoussystems—discussedinShahrdaretal.( 2017).However,tothe
best of our knowledge, the research community lacks literature that discusses the cybersecurity
of autonomous systems in general. The primary objective of this work is to provide an in-depth
study of cybersecurity modeling of different classes of autonomous systems. The work can help
carry out further research on the security modeling of a generalized autonomous system archi-
tecture. In addition, we discuss the historical evolution of the concepts and factors that define
autonomyanditslevels.Ingeneral,theterm“autonomy”discussestherepresentationandimple-
mentationofitslevelsdeterminedbyfactorsandfunctionalityofthesystemfrombeingmanualto
fully-autonomous and in-between. Having a perspective of the application domain and the scope
of implementation may provide a different look to the security modeling of these systems. The
following are the key contributions of the article toward the body of knowledge on autonomous
systems:
—Adiscussionon thehistoricalevolution ofautonomy and thecurrenttrendsin thisarea,
—Adiscussiononthecybersecurityofthesesystemsthatarebeingexploredinindustryand
academiaalike,
—Threats,vulnerabilities,andattackmodelingof variousautonomoussystems.
Thisarticleisorganizedasfollows.Section 3reflectsonthehistoricalevolutionofautonomy,ap-
proaches, and current trends in this domain. Section 4discusses cybersecurity issues related to
thesesystems.Section 5discussesthesystemmodelingalongwiththreats,vulnerabilities,andat-
tacksmodeling.Section 6summarizestheoverallconceptofthearticle.Finally,wediscusssomeof
theresearchchallengesandfuturedirectionsinSection 7andconcludeinSection 8.Thecomplete
structureofthearticleisshownin Figure 1.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 3 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:3
Fig. 1. Structureof thearticle.
2M E T H O D
2.1 Keywordsand Databases
Basedontheindustrialandacademicdomainsthatfocusonautonomoussystems,agroupofkey-
wordswaschosentolimitthescopeofthissurvey.Theautonomoussystemsthatwehaveexplored
inthisstudyincludeunmannedvehicles(U XVs),robots,driverlesscars,swarms,andautonomous
Internet of Things (IoT), focusing more on the former three. The survey was restricted to secu-
rity(threats,vulnerabilities,andattacks)andapplicationsofthesesystemsinthedomainssuchas
home assistants, healthcare, surveillance, search and rescue missions, and space exploration. The
keywords used for the search process are listed in Table 1and the resources availed for literature
searchinclude Google Scholar,ACM, andIEEEXplorerdigitallibraries,andScienceDirect.
2.2 Selection Criteria
After adetailedsearch,we evaluatedthearticlesbasedonthefollowing criteria:
—thehistoryof automationand itslevels
—approachesof autonomy and currenttrends
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 4 ====
91:4 F. Jahan et al.
Table 1. Keywords Used
Core Concepts Primarykeywords
Autonomy autonomoussystems,level of automation(LoA),autonomy
approaches,U XVs,driverlesscars,
ArtificialIntelligence robots,softwareagents,IoT
Human MachineTeaming swarms,transferof control
Autonomous SystemModeling analyticaland theoreticalsystemmodeling; threats,
vulnerabilities,andattackmodeling
Autonomous SystemSecurity DDoS,jamming, ransomware,stealthydeceptionattack
Secondarykeywords
supervisorycontrol,mixed-initiative, goal-driven,
collaborativecontrol,sliding scale,hierarchical,healthcare,
home-assistants,industrialrobots
—cybersecurityof anautonomoussystem
—modelingof anautonomoussystem,vulnerabilities,threats,and attacks
We further refined the selected articles using primary and secondary keywords for each section.
We identified the theoretical and analytical security modeling of the autonomous systems and
carriedoutanotherleveloffiltrationtoobtainthemostappropriateresearchwork.Experimental
modelingandevaluationofthesesystemswerebeyondourscopeofresearch.Hundredsofarticles
were narrowed out in the search process based on the keywords and objectives. Out of these, a
total of 88 articles were considered to discuss the cybersecurity of the autonomous systems and
26 articlesto discussthecybersecuritymodelingof thesesystems.
2.3 Limitations
A fundamental constraint that we found during the review process is the lack of literature that
discusses the security of individual as well as generalized autonomous systems. The study of cy-
bersecurity is new in this domain and so is its implementation. This resulted in a limited number
of primary articles reviewed for the security and modeling sections of the survey. The discussion
focuses on the security of three autonomous systems (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), robots
and driverless cars) that are worth a detailed review because of their popularity. Swarms are an
extensionofthesesystems,andAutonomousInternetofThings(AIoT)isanewconceptyettobe
explored.Webelieveinhavingstudiedthemostapplicableworksavailableinthisareaofresearch.
3 HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF AUTONOMY, APPROACHES, ANDCURRENT
TRENDS
3.1 HistoricalEvolution
In the last few decades, concepts and modeling of automation have evolved considerably. Fields
such as HRI, Human Machine Teaming (HMT), AI, and Unmanned Systems (UMS) share the
concepts of autonomy. As with many inconceivable technologies of the current era, the ideation
of such systems can be dated back to religious myths (Origins 2013), poets (Homer n.d.; Yeats
1933), artists (Rosheim 2006), and storytellers (Wiener and Others 1964), thereby materializing
into remote-controlled inventions (Turi 2014a,2014b), movies (Wold and Staff 2015; ZDNet
2018), and science fiction literature (Newitz 2013). With the advancement in associated areas and
state-of-the-art technologies like robot mechanics, sensors and actuators, processors, navigation
and communication, the definition and levels of autonomy (LoA) have gone through multiple
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 5 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:5
revisionsandmodificationstobeup-to-datewiththeotheremergingandadvancingtechnologies
sothatit canbeadaptedfor morerobustuse.
The word “Robotics” was first invented by Isaac Asimov in the story “Liar” in 1941 while “Au-
tomation”wasfirstcoinedbyDalHarder,aFordexecutive,in1947.AsrecountedinSheridanand
Verplank ( 1978), vehicles remotely controlled by human operators were called master-slave ma-
nipulatorsintheearlyhistory(1954)ofrobotics.Inthe1950s,whenindustrieslikeGeneralElectric
(GE)wasworkingtobuildindustrialrobotssuchas“YesMan”and“Handyman,”theUSArmywas
exploringtheideasof teleoperatedrovers (MOBOT)and ProjectHorizon(Turi 2014a).
In 1978, Sheridan and Verplank ( 1978) discussed the idea of supervisory control and explained
how it is different from teleoperators and manipulators, listing the 10-level scale of autonomy
(LoA),whichhasbeenabackgroundworkforfurtherresearchinthisareatilltoday(Farooquiand
Niazi2016; Goodrich et al. 2008; Navarro 2018; Parasuraman et al. 2000; van der Kleij et al. 2018).
Asmoresystemsweregainingautonomy,operators’rolesweregettingreducedtoasupervisoror
passive monitor of these systems and performance problems on human out-of-the-loop emerged
because of many failure incidents of these systems (Bainbridge 1983;N o r m a n 1990; Wiener and
Curry1980).Theauthorsrealizedthelackoffeedback,poorcommunicationinterfaces,andlower
levelsofsituationawareness(Norman 1990).Anewapproachtoautomationwasasolutiontothese
problemswithnewrolesforautomation,optingforadaptiveautomation,incorporatingsituational
awarenessinthedesignprocess,andrevisitingtheLoA(Endsley 1995).Endsleyetal.( 1987,1988)
focused their research on improving situational awareness. They worked on bringing human-
in-the-loop(Endsley 1987),movingtowardadaptiveautonomyandenhancingtheLoA(McDaniel
1988).Adaptiveautonomy,proposedbackin1976byRouse,isanautonomoussysteminwhichthe
LoA changes, initiated by particular events in the task environment, physiological methods, task
load,orbychangesinoperatorperformance(Parasuramanetal. 1992).Aninitialsurvey(Sheridan
1992) on telerobotic, supervisory control, and automation tried to address questions arising in
thosefieldsatthattime;providedapplicationhistoryofsuchsystemsinthefieldofaircraft,nuclear
power,andintelligentvehiclehighway(IVH),broughtforththeareasthatwerestillimmatureand
theprospects.
In Parasuraman et al. ( 1992), the authors took a step back and did extensive research on the
issues related to adaptive autonomy and how it should be approached in design. They outlined
what,when,andhowtheadaptationwouldbeinvoked.Woulditbeameasurement-ormodeling-
based adaptive system? What would be the logic of implementation? And so on. The idea was
thatadaptiveautomationwouldaidinsolvinghumanout-of-the-loopperformanceproblemsand
provide a dynamic allocationof tasksbetweentheoperatorand thesystem, asand whenneeded.
It could increase the operator’s performance thereby increasing management load, which would,
inturn,affecttheoperator’ssituationawareness(Endsley 1995).AsrecountedinBeeretal.( 2014),
Endsley and Kaber ( 1999) proposed a revised 10-scale taxonomy based on input functions rather
thanfixed-taskallocation,organizedaccordingtofourgenericfunctionsof“monitoringdisplays,”
generating various courses of action or “strategies to meet goals,” deciding on a course of action,
and then implementing the selected one. A year later, Parasuraman et al. proposed an extension
oftheirpreviouswork(Parasuramanetal. 1992),suggestingasimilarmodeltoEndsleyandKaber
(1999)andadoptinga“four-stageviewofhumaninformationprocessing(Informationacquisition,
Information analysis, Decision and action selection, Action implementation)” where automation
canbe appliedto eachof thesestagestodifferent degreesand levels (Parasuramanet al. 2000).
Bythebeginningofthe21stcentury,theDepartmentofDefense(DoD)wasactivelyemploying
UAVs on different “dull, dirty, and dangerous” missions and had long-term innovative programs
for deploying these UAVs in various areas. One of the focus areas, along with the development
of several other technological requirements for the enhancement of UAVs’ reliability and
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 6 ====
91:6 F. Jahan et al.
survivability was autonomy (DC 2001). Within the next decade, ongoing research and goals of
the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) were to demonstrate the autonomous capability of
level8outof10basedonautonomouscapabilitylevel(ACL)metrics(Clough 2002).TheNational
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) realized the need for some standard definitions
for autonomous levels based on system specifications and performance measurements. They
assembled an ad hoc group for the generic framework development of unmanned systems’
autonomy level specification called Autonomy Levels for Unmanned Systems (ALFUS) (Huang
et al.2003a).Theresultsoftheirvariousworkshopsinclude:
—acompletelist of terminologiesand definitions(Huang 2004),
—a set of metrics for ALFUS detailed model identifying “mission complexity, environmental
difficulty,andHRI”asthecombinationoffactorsindicatingLoA(Huangetal. 2003b,2004a,
2004b),
—an executive model showing general trends in the transitions of levels of aforementioned
factors(Huangetal. 2005),and
—illustrating applications of ALFUS in military, homeland security, and manufacturing
(Huang2007).
Meanwhile, research communities were moving toward “adjustable autonomy” where the hu-
man user, autonomous system, or another system itself can adjust the LoA during the operation.
Afterthecomebackfromasevere“AIwinter”(Cognilytica 2018),AIcreatedaboominintelligent
and smart systems such as smartphones, smart home appliances, and assisted technologies. In AI
research domain, these intelligent autonomous systems are referred to as “agents.” Research in
the areas of adaptive and advanced interfaces facilitated the easy deployment and operations of
adjustableautonomousagentsprovidingmultiplechannelsofcommunicationbetweenthehuman
user and the system such as gestures, voice, and touch. Social acceptability, trust, reliability, mu-
tual situation awareness, coordination of tasks among users and agents, and transfer of control
strategies formed the elements of the new set of concerns for the researchers along with safety
and robustness. Efforts were made to include these variables in the LoA framework (Beer et al.
2014).
Insummary,industrialandacademicresearchonroboticsandautomationstartedinthe1950s.
However, the progress was slow for more than a decade due to the lack of proper understanding
and implementation of autonomy; trained operators that had good situational awareness in case
of failures; and resources such as high-computing processors, cameras, and sensors. Supervisory
controladvancedtoadaptiveandadjustableautonomy.AsummaryofvarioustaxonomyforLoA
that various researchers proposed over the years, listed in Table 2, shows the work done to over-
comethechallengesraisedbydesignapproachesofautonomoussystems.Researchadvancement
intheareasofAIandHMTalsopavedthewayformoretrustandsocialacceptancetowardthese
systems.
3.2 ApproachesofAutonomy
ThechallengesinanautonomoussystemarehowtoimplementtheLoAandwhowouldhavethe
controltoadjustitandinwhatscenarios.Itwouldfundamentallymeanwhat,when,who,andhow
the necessary actions need to be taken. Various works have been done to recognize the balance
between the flexibility of control over the autonomy levels such that HMT outperforms either
the human or machine working alone. Comparative studies were also done to test the efficiency,
robustness, and workload in various modes of an autonomy spectrum (Heger and Singh 2006;
Hegeretal. 2005).Asystematicliteraturereviewonadjustableautonomyhasbeendone(Mostafa
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 7 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:7
Table 2. Level of Automation(LoA) Frameworks Summary
LevelLoA (Sheridanand
Verplank 1978)LoA(Endsleyand
Kaber1999)ACL (AFRL)
(Clough 2002)ALFUS(NIST)
(Huanget al. 2005)
1Lo w/
Remote
ControlNo assistancefrom
system/Humans
decideManualControl Remotely guided —High-level HRI
—Low-level tactical
Behaviour
—Simple environment 2 Systemoffers set of
decision alternativesActionSupport Real-time
Health/Diagnosis
3 Narrows selection
down tofewBatchProcessing Adapt tofailureand
flight conditions
4 Suggests one
alternativeSharedControl Onboard route
replan—Mid-level HRI
—Midcomplexity,
multi-functional
missions
—Moderate
environment5E x e c u t e s t h e
suggestionif human
approvesDecision Support GroupCoordination
6 Allows human
restrictedtimeto
veto before
automatic executionBlendedDecision
MakingGroup tactical replan
7E x e c u t e s
automatically,
informshumanRigidSystem Group tactical goals —Low-level HRI
—Collaborative, high
complexity missions
—Difficult
environment8 Informshuman if
askedAutomated Decision
MakingDistributedcontrol
9 Informshumanifthe
systemdecides toSupervisoryControl GroupStrategic
goals
10 High/
FullyAu-
tonomousSystem acts
autonomously,
ignores humanFullAutomation Fully autonomous
swarms—Approaching 0HRI
—Highcomplexity
—Extr e me
environment
et al.2019) that listed approaches to autonomy. We have an updated list here with additional
referencesand a comparativestudyof differentapproachesin Table 3.
3.2.1 Supervisory Control/Task-based Approach. Theuseractsasasystemsupervisorwhomon-
itorstheactivitiesofthesystemandhastheprivilegetomodifythesystembehaviordynamically
without taking over complete control of the system, which could be necessary to avoid task fail-
ure (Reed 2005). In this approach, both the user and the system may have individual subtasks to
performintheentiremission,andthesystempassescontrolwhenitisdonewithitssubtask.For
example, mission and payload management in a UAV requires monitoring of sensors and mak-
ing knowledge-based decisions to meet overall mission requirements (Cummings et al. 2007). In
thesesituations,thehumanpowerofjudgment,experience,andintuitionexceedsintelligenceal-
gorithms while the system is better controlling the navigation and motion controls (Cummings
2014).
3.2.2 System-Initiative Approach. Some research has been done in the area where the au-
tonomousroboticteamrequestsforhelpfromthehumanoperator.Thesystemonlypassescontrol
whenitisstuckandnolongercanperformitsassignedtaskandneedshumaninterventiontotake
further action. The efficiency of such type of adjustable autonomy depends on how rapidly and
accuratelythehumanoperatorrespondstothesituationwhileengagedindifferentunrelatedtasks
(Sellner et al. 2006). For example, Roomba vacuum cleaner can serve as an excellent example of
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 8 ====
91:8 F. Jahan et al.Table 3. Comparison of Different Approaches of Autonomy
Approach Authority Pros ConsSituation Awareness
(SA) Goal Achievement RepresentativeWork
Supervisory
Control/Task-
based
ApproachUser Easier to modeland
implementUserrolereduced toa monitor
causingboredom.Recognizing
andresponding tocyberattacks
difficult.Lo wSAforne wor
inattentivemonitor/userUser skill/expertise level
dependant(Reed2005) (Cummings
et al.2007) (Cummings
2014)
System-
Initiative
ApproachSystem Relatively easier to
model and implement.Waitfortheuser totake
actionsthatneed user
authorizationUser distracted with
unrelated tasks.User skill/expertise level and
response time dependant(Sellner et al. 2006)
(Dias etal. 2008)
(Cummings 2014)
Mixed-
Initiative/
Teamwork-
centered
ApproachDecision-makingis
shared between the user
and the systemReactiontimewouldbe
lessDifficulttorealizea certain
levelofautonomyin terms of
taskassignment. Smooth
transferof controlis a
challengeDepends onthe
interface, whichwould
remind theuser of the
system’s state, time-off
period,anduser’s
expertiseUser’sskill-leveland the
system should complement
eachother(Clough2002)
(Wray et al. 2016)
(Moffitt et al. 2006)( D e
Brun et al. 2008)( H a r d i n
andGoodrich 2009)
SlidingScale
ApproachUser’s controlinversely
proportionaltothe
systemAutonomylevels
between the
pre-programmed levels
couldbeachieved.
Increases robustness and
adaptabilitySwiftlyattainingsituational
awareness is a challengefor
theuserDepends onthe
autonomy levelthe
system is workingon
and howengaged the
user is withthe systemCombinestheforteofuser and
autonomy:each does what
theyaregood at.(Lin et al. 2012)
(Desai and Yanco 2005)
(Goodrich and Schultz
2007)( D e s a i2007)
(Dias etal. 2008)
Hierarchical
ApproachUser/Highest levelin the
hierarchicalarchitecture
determines objectives
and controlcriteriaEasier to manage and
coordinatemultiple
systems. When lower
levelsystems are
compromised, higher
levelscan disablethem
until issue resolutionHigherlevelsrely onlower
leveloutputs.When a higher
leveliscompromised, the
wholesystem wouldbedown.Singleoperator, multiple
autonomous systems
wouldincrease workload
and hencedecrease
situation awareness.GroupCoordinationis
necessaryforthecompletionof
thetask(Wakulicz-Dejaand
Przybyła-Kasperek 2007)
(Cummings et al. 2007)
(Proscevicius et al. 2011)
Policy-based
ApproachUser/Policies Increased trust inthe
system as the user can
set boundsMakingpoliciesforall
situationsis a challenge.On apolicy-by-policy
basis.Completionoftask depends on
thepossible actionsasystem
cantakedefined by thepolicy( B r a d s h a we ta l . 2004b)
(De Brun et al. 2008)
(Scerri et al. 2003)
( B r a d s h a we ta l . 2005)
Goal-driven
ApproachUser/Goals Moreself-sufficient Highdegree ofdifficulty.
Hackerscan manipulatethe
goalitself.Shouldn’trequire human
interventionGoal-drivenAIalgorithms
shouldbeinteractivewiththe
environment(Weber et al. 2012)
(Klenket al. 2013)
(Wilsonet al. 2016)
Collaborative
ApproachMultipleindividual
systemsMultiple systems serve
towardcompletinga
higher goalCollaboratingmultiplesystems
withouthuman interventionis
achallengeShouldn’trequire human
interventionIndividual systems must
completetheirrespective goals
toachievea higher goal(Dufrene 2005)
(Lacerda et al. 2018)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 9 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:9
such a system that would need human intervention when stuck in a corner (Zilberstein 2010).
In peer-to-peer human-robot teams, maintaining coordination and learning from “interactions at
different levels of granularity” would increase the situational awareness of the team and, in turn,
increasetheoverall productivity(Diasetal. 2008).
3.2.3 Mixed-Initiative/Teamwork-centered Approach. In this approach,the userand thesystem
smoothlyexchangecontrolsthroughoutthemission.Theideaofsuchasystemwherehumanand
robotscomplementeachotherandcollaborateinasafe,productive,andcost-efficientenvironment
isnotnovel.TheaimofNASA’sAstronaut-Rover(ASRO)project,firsttestedin1999(Clough 2002),
is to bring together human and planetary rovers to work together seamlessly, communicating
throughoutthemissionandbeascout,technicalfieldassistant,infrastructureassistant,andmuch
more to the crew (Fong et al. 2001), with adjustable LoA during system operation (Dorais et al.
1999).Insuchsystems,theback-and-forthtransferofcontrolbetweenthesystemandthehuman
should be smooth and quick, along with the guarantee that each entity would be able to handle
itspartcompetently(Wrayetal. 2016).Thisapproachwouldbeabletoaddressseveralchallenges,
includingmaintainingconsistentandstableoperation,usertrust,andsituationawarenessduring
the transfer of control at different LoA (De Brun et al. 2008; Moffitt et al. 2006). Research in the
areaofurbansearchandrescuemissionsutilizingmixed-initiativecontrolautonomyshowsthata
robotwasabletomakebetternavigationdecisions(Bruemmeretal. 2002).Itholdsforalarge-scale
team of robots as well indicating that theoretical benefits of this approach could be met if system
andoperatorshavecomplementaryabilitiesinsuchawaythatthesystemsmustbeabletomake
progresswithoutwaitingforhuman intervention(Hardin and Goodrich 2009).
3.2.4 Sliding Scale Approach. Inslidingscaleautonomy,theintermediateLoAbetweenthedis-
crete modes: teleoperation, safe, shared, and fully autonomous, can be achieved. It is more of a
continuousmodeofautonomywheretheautonomyofthesystemincreaseswiththeproportional
decrease of user’s control on the system. It is achieved by blending human and system’s desired
characteristicsorvariables.Theusercanguidetheactions/operationsoftheautonomoussystems
indifferentmodesordimensions,whichprovidesauthorityandflexibilitytotheuserinmanaging
the autonomous systems (Desai and Yanco 2005; Lin et al. 2012). In these works, variables that
characterizethesystemsareprovidedonaslidingscale,whichwouldinfluencetheautonomylev-
els.InGoodrichandSchultz( 2007)andDesai( 2007),theauthorsdesignedatrustscaletoadjustthe
autonomy level (Dias et al. 2008). Another work implements sliding autonomy to develop a coor-
dinatedteamofrobotstodockbothendsofasuspendedbeaminassemblingofstructures.These
robotsinteractwitha humanoperatorin casetheyneedhelpif stuckor toimprove efficiency.
3.2.5 Hierarchical Approach. It is comparatively easy for two systems or a human and a ma-
chinetocooperateandcoordinate.Asthenumberofsystemsoragentsincreases,coordinationand
managementconflictsarisebetweenthem.Inthisapproach,systemsarestructuredinahierarchy
through which a global problem can be solved based on the knowledge of lower level systems
(Wakulicz-Deja and Przybyła-Kasperek 2007). It helps to localize specific tasks to systems based
ongoals,control,durationofexecution,thecomplexityoftasks,andtheamountofinteractionor
supervision needed by the operator, hence, defining the autonomy levels. A group of researchers
proposed a “hierarchical control loop” architecture for single user-multiple UAVs as three loops
(“Motion control inner loop,” “navigation,” and “mission management outer loop”) (Cummings
etal.2007).TheircasestudiesconcludethatanoperatorcancontrolanincreasednumberofUAVs
if the automation is increased in the “control and navigation loops” with good user-system col-
laborative decision making in the mission management loop. Similarly, Proscevicius et al. ( 2011)
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 10 ====
91:10 F.Jahan et al.
suggestsafive-levelcontrolhierarchyforautonomousmobilerobotstospeedupcommunications
and controlin thehierarchylevels.
3.2.6 Policy-based Approach. Policies are a set of guidelines defined by the designer that an
autonomous system must abide by in any given situation. They are permissions given to the au-
tonomous system for the adjustment of autonomy in changing operational environment without
changing the code. Such an approach increases the trust of the user in the system as he/she can
setboundsonthesystembasedonhiscompetencylevel.Moreover,apolicy-basedapproachpro-
vides re-usability, efficiency, extensibility, context-sensitivity, verifiability, protection from mal-
ware, poorly-designed or buggy agents, and reasoning about agent’s behavior (Bradshaw et al.
2004b).Onesuchworkbasedonpoliciesisthedrivingmissionforthehuman-robotteam(DeBrun
etal.2008)inwhichoneofthepoliciescouldbe“iftheroadisslippery,thehumanshoulddrive.”
AnotherexampleistheElectricElves,amulti-agentsystemactingasapersonalassistanttoagroup
ofresearchersfortheirdailyactivitiessuchasordering,schedulingmeetings,selectingpresenters
intheresearchgroup,andorganizinglunchmeetings.Thissystemisbasedonpoliciestothestrate-
gictransferofcontrol(Scerrietal. 2003).TheKnowledgeableAgent-orientedSystem(KAoS)isan
example of platform-independent policy services (Bradshaw et al. 2003) used in areas like model-
ing human-machine team, military, and space applications (Bradshaw et al. 2004a), which enable
users to define policies of autonomous systems or agents that govern the autonomy and adjust
themdynamicallysothatthesystemcouldadapttothechangingsituation(Bradshawetal. 2005).
3.2.7 Goal-driven Approach. It is a conceptual model to build an autonomous agent that ob-
serves a set of expectations during the execution of a plan, detects discrepancies if they occur,
details the reasons of failures, and creates new goals to pursue if the execution of a current plan
fails(Weberetal. 2012).Itincorporatesamodelforgoalreasoningandhasbeenappliedinvarious
domainssuchasrespondingtounexpectedeventsinstrategysimulations(Klenketal. 2013),Star-
Craftgameforstrategicplanning,andsoon.Agroupofresearchersdemonstratedthisconceptual
framework through Autonomous Response to Unexpected Events (ARTUE) in a navy training
simulation—Tactical Action Officer (TAO) Sandbox—and showed that it could perform well in a
complexdynamicenvironment(Molineauxetal. 2010).PreliminaryworksbyWilsonetal.( 2016)
showthatagoal-drivenautonomousunderwatervehiclecansuccessfullydetectapotentiallyhos-
tile surfacevehiclewhenpursuinga different goalof surveyinga bayarea.
3.2.8 Collaborative Approach. Incollaborativeautonomy,multipleindividualagents,eachhav-
ingtheirownspecificindividualtasktocomplete,collaboratetoservetowardcompletingahigher
collectivegoal.Themultipleindividualagentsformacomplexsystemwhoseautonomyisdecided
based on the autonomous actions of the collective individual agents depending on sharing infor-
mation and goals (Dufrene 2005). A conceptual example of this approach could be seen in the
system design for Mars exploration with a UAV and a ground vehicle in collaboration. The goal
is that UAV would have the capability to dock to a charging station on the ground rover without
humanintervention.Thegroundroverwouldserveasamobile-basethatwouldprovidecharging,
communication,and dockingcapabilitiestotheUAV(Lacerda etal. 2018).
3.3 Current Trends
Inrecentyears,theresearchfocushasmovedtoimplementadjustableautonomyintherealworld,
and other more challenging areas such as transfer-of-control, goal reasoning, deliberation, and
collaboration with multiple heterogeneous agents and individuals. Companies like Google and
Nissan are predictedto launchtheir self-driving cars by 2020,while GM’s Cruiseand Waymo are
notbehind.AlthoughcarslikeTesla,Navya,andothershaveadvancedautonomousfeatures,there
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 11 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:11
are still significant challenges to make them completely driverless. Automated path and motion
planningwithefficientcomputationalparadigmandawell-plannedexecutionmodelwouldfacil-
itate a smooth transfer of control between the user and the system. As discussed in Zilberstein
(2010), to build robust autonomous systems, a human action model, a user’s state monitoring, in-
tent recognition techniques, and efficient interfaces to facilitate collaboration between the user
and the system are required. These emerging fields of AI and HMT are gaining momentum and
works are being done in facial and emotion recognition (Corneanu et al. 2016; Mehta et al. 2018)
that would be helpful in monitoring a user’s state while augmented reality devices, gesture, and
voiceuserinterfacewould facilitateeasycommunication.
Autonomous systems operating in the complex dynamic environment need to make informed
decisions promptly to react safely and reliably in complex dynamic situations based on an accu-
rate perception of its surrounding. More than one sensor is employed in these systems to assess
the surrounding environment accurately. The fusion of data from multiple sensors and multiple
modalities has become crucialin the perceptionprocessof autonomous systems in various appli-
cation fields and can be used in image registration (Giering et al. 2015) along with the detection
and mapping of static and dynamic obstacles along the trajectory (Korthals et al. 2018). A recent
surveydiscussesthecurrentdevelopmentsintheareasofperception,planning,coordination,and
controlof autonomoussystems(Pendletonetal. 2017).
Thefastpaceofresearchadvancementsinautonomoussystemsrequirethatdifferentaspectsof
thesesystemshaveabenchmarkandapropermetricdesignatedforeachofthem.Itwouldnotonly
set a standard for the development of an autonomous system with a certain degree of autonomy
butwouldbehelpfulaswelltorecognizeappropriatesystemsforparticularscenariosthatrequirea
certainlevelofautonomy(Hrabiaetal. 2015).Someearlierworksweredonetoestablishacommon
metricforautonomoussystemsbygovernmentagencies(Clough 2002;Huangetal. 2004b).Inthe
field of HRI, common metrics for autonomous systems concerning five categories of “navigation,
perception,management,manipulation,andsocial”havebeenpresentedinSteinfeldetal.( 2006),
while another work addresses the benchmarking of socially assistive robots on aspects of robot
technology, social interaction, and assistive technology (Feil-Seifer et al. 2007). A review of these
works is presented in Damacharla et al. ( 2018) to identify common metrics and set a benchmark
in the field of HMT. Most recent works reviewed autonomy measures to compare and contrast
autonomy approachesanddiscussedthecapabilitiesofautonomoussystems(Bihletal. 2018).
4 CYBERSECURITYOF AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS
Autonomoussystemscanbebroadlyseenasatypeofcyber-physicalsystemsthathasembedded
computers and physical elements connected and controlled by sophisticated software, exhibiting
distinctbehaviorsthroughmultiplemeansofcommunicationwiththeoutsideworld.Mostofthese
systems are deployed in critical areas such as nuclear power plants, automatic pilot avionic, and
warzones.Someofthesesystemsarehighlyvulnerabletocyberattacks;hence,thesecurityofthese
systems poses significant concerns if they are entrusted with our lives. Complete failure of these
systems through cyberattacks, failure to correctly respond to critical missions, or even a slight
change in the desired output data can leave the operator in a confused or ignorant state. Some
researchworkhasbeendoneonthecomprehensivereviewofthreats,vulnerabilities,attacks,and
controloncyber-physicalsystems(Abdul-Ghanietal. 2018;Alguliyevetal. 2018;Dingetal. 2018;
Huang et al. 2003a; Lin et al. 2016;W ue ta l . 2016). Extrapolated from these works, we present a
taxonomyofcommonattacksonautonomoussystemsinFigure 2andabriefdescriptionofsome
of these attacks and their effects in Table 4. A comprehensive list of cyberattacks and its detailed
surveyonautonomoussystemsisbeyondthescopeofthearticle.Inthissection,wediscusssome
of thehighlyresearchedautonomoussystems(Figure 3)and workdoneon theircybersecurity.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 12 ====
91:12 F.Jahan et al.
Fig.2. Taxonomy of attacks onautonomous systems.
4.1 U XVs
Theincreasingpopularityofunmannedsystems(UAVs,UnmannedGroundVehicles(UGVs),Un-
mannedUnderwaterVehicles(UUVs))invariousmission-criticaltaskshaveforcedtheresearchers
toworkontheirautonomy-levelrelatedtotaskcomplexity,humaninteraction,environmentaldif-
ficulty,andsoforth(Behzadan 2017;GoodrichandSchultz 2007;Huang2007).Commercialization
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 13 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:13
Table 4. Effects of Cyberattacks onAutonomousSystems
Attack Types DescriptionEffectson Autonomous
Systems Works
Jamming Causedbyintentional
interference, e.g., GPS
JammingLoss orcorruption of packets
disruptingcommunication(Bhattacharyaand Basar
2010; Javaid et al. 2015)
Spoofing Masqueradingas a legitimate
source,e.g., GPS SpoofingGain access tothesystem,
information,etc.(Humphrey 2012; Javaid
et al.2017; Petit et al. 2015)
Flooding Flooding of packets thereby
overloading thehost,e.g.,
DoS, DDoSLoss of communication
throughnetworkcongestion(Javaidet al. 2015;
Vasconcelos et al. 2016)
Side-channel
AttackAttack basedonthe extra
information gained bythe
physical analysisLeakage of sensitive
information without
exploiting anyflaw or
weakness in thecomponents(Akram et al. 2016;
Corneliuset al. 2017)
Stealthy
Deception
AttackTamperingsystem
component or dataMislead thesystemtotake
undesirable action(Kwonet al. 2013)
Sensor input
spoofingManipulate environment to
formimplicit controlchannelExercise direct control over
system’sactions(Davidson et al. 2016)
Fig.3. Autonomous systems.
of UAVs, a.k.a drones, is gaining momentum as multiple industries are planning to use them for
theirbusinessfunctions.Door-to-doordeliveryandhaulingcargosasfaras300mileswithaweight
ofupto200poundsisnotadistantdream.IndustrieslikeBellLabsareworkingonprototypesthat
can use gas or electric power and convert to a plane during mid-flight, addressing some aerody-
namic concerns (Joe Pappalardo 2018). These systems are at a higher risk of becoming targets of
cyberattacks. One of the earliest works to identify vulnerabilities in a UAV auto-pilot system was
doneinKimetal.( 2012).Agroupofresearchersanalyzedsystemsafety(Kwonetal. 2013)andde-
velopedareal-timesafetyassessmentalgorithm(Kwonetal. 2016)toinvestigatetheperformance
of suchsystemsagainst stealthydeceptionattacks.
AreviewofallrecentmajorattacksonUAVshasbeenpresentedinKrishnaandMurphy( 2017).
Global Positioning System (GPS) Jamming and Spoofing are the two most common attacks on
UAVs’ navigation. GPS jamming is a type of interference that specifically restricts GPS signals. In
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 14 ====
91:14 F.Jahan et al.
Table 5. DriverlessCar Technology Trend
Proposed Launch ManufacturerPilot
Project Features Works
2005 2021 Ford – Level 4Automation, no gas
pedal, nosteeringwheel(Chad Vander
Veen2015)
2009 2020 Google Waymo Fullyself-driving,no
steeringwheel, no
accelerator andbrake pedal(Chad Vander
Veen2015)
2014 2015 Tesla Model S Autopilot,360 degree view,
real-timetrafficupdates,
automatic parking(FredLambert
2018)
2014 2025 Mercedes-Benz Future
Truck 2025Autonomous Driving (ChadVander
Veen2015)
2015 2021 Volvo Drive Me Level 4Automation,
IntelliSafeAuto Pilot lets
useractivate and deactivate
autonomous mode(Tom
Huddleston Jr.
2018)
2015 2020 Nissan ProPILOT Automatic lanechange on
highways,autonomous
drivingon urban roads and
intersections(Chad Vander
Veen2015)
2016 2019 General Motors Super
CruiseHands-Off lane following,
brake,and speedcontrol(JoeWilliams
2018)
2014 2016 Induct
TechnologyNavya Autonomous shuttle,
deployed inspecific loops,
closedenvironment, and
half-mileradius(Navya2018)
2016 2018 Drive.ai – Autonomous driving,remote
monitoring,LEDscreens
displaycar’s next action to
pedestrian(Alex Davies
2018)
2016 2021 BMW-Intel-
MobileyeBMW
iNEXTDevelop open standard
platformforhighlyand fully
automated driving(Sarah Sloat
2016)
a GPS spoofing attack, a false GPS signal is transmitted to the GPS receiver of the autonomous
systemtointroduceanunnoticeableerrorintheposition,navigation,andtime(PNT)calculation,
whichresultsinthedeviationofthesystemfromitsoriginalpathtowardamaliciousdestination.
US Maritime Administration reported a recent incident of GPS spoofing where around 20 ships
off the Russian port of Novorossiysk found themselves in the wrong spot—more than 32 kilome-
tersinland,atGelendzhikAirport(Hambling 2017).WhilethemilitaryGPSsignalsareencrypted,
civilianGPSsignalsarepubliclyknown.Hence,theGPSspoofingattackposesasignificantthreat
to critical infrastructure and public lives in case spoofed systems are used maliciously. Some re-
searchers have tried to demonstrate these attacks on a small, but sophisticated UAV (Humphrey
2012). Other researchers have simulated those attacks on academic testbeds (Jahan et al. 2015;
Javaid etal. 2017,2015).
4.2 Driverless Cars
MajorcarmanufacturingcompanieslikeGoogle,Audi,BMW,Ford,GM,andUberhaveenvisioned
a future of autonomous vehicles on the road. Table 5lists some of the major autonomous car
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 15 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:15
manufacturers and their pilot projects. By the end of 2018, Waymo tested about 5 million miles
nationwide while Cruise racked up second (David Welch, Keith Naughton 2019). The year 2019
may be the year of the driverless car as GM prepares to launch its fleet (Joe Williams 2018)w h i l e
Waymo is already on the streets of Phoenix, Arizona opening initially to early-riders (Matthew
DeBord2018). Another startup, Drive.ai, launched its self-driving shuttle service around a geo-
fenced area of Frisco, Texas (Alex Davies 2018). In the effort of envisioning a “smart city,” Lake
Nona, Florida would soon see AUTONOM, a self-driving bus deployed by Beep in partnership
withtheFrenchcompanyNavya(JoeyRoulette 2019).CompanieslikeNissanareplanningtoput
driverlesscarsonthestreetsofTokyoby2020(Greenberg 2015).Today,manynewcarsalreadyin-
corporatestate-of-the-artdriver-assistancefeaturessuchasautopilot,self-parking,andsummon-
ing, blind spot, and lane-monitoring systems. Future autonomous vehicles need to be connected
throughsophisticatedvehicularnetworkssuchastheVehicularAdhocNetwork(VANET)sothat
they may exchange traffic and routine information such as speed, location, or notification of any
traffic collision. It increases the potential for cyberattacks. In 2015, Wired documented a hacking
experimentonJeepCherokeewhereanintrudertookthecarcontrolfromthedriveronthehigh-
way. In the beginning, the hackers toyed with air conditioning, radio, and windshield wipers. It
became scary for the driver when the accelerator stopped working on the long overpass with no
shouldertoescape.Itwouldhavebeenalotworseiftheintruderhadabruptlyengagedthebrakes
ordisabledthemalltogether(Mejrietal. 2014).
The communication over VANET would help the vehicles to plan for better driving decisions
andperformance.However,asignificantamountofconfidentialdatawouldalsobecirculatingon
thenetwork.Asimpleattacksuchaseavesdroppingonauser’shabitofcommutingcanrevealalot
of valuable information about the user to the attackers. Also, the next-level of cyberattacks such
asransomwareattackcouldbeexecutedinthemiddleofthecommute.Asecurednetworkwould
throttleallthepossibleattacksatthepointofentry.Manyresearchershavereviewedthecontribu-
tionofothersinthisareabyidentifyingandclassifyingthevulnerabilitiesandsecuritychallenges
in VANETs (Al-Kahtani 2012; Azees et al. 2016; Bariah et al. 2015; Dhamgaye and Chavhan 2013;
Elsadig and Fadlalla 2016; Gillani et al. 2013; La Vinh and Cavalli 2014; Mejri et al. 2014; Saini
et al.2015; Sumra et al. 2011). As these vehicles will communicate with nearby devices and in-
frastructure, it is important to explore the architecture and main characteristics of these systems,
and analyze the corresponding countermeasures against the possible attacks (Hamida et al. 2015;
MejriandHamdi 2015).AuthenticatingvehiclesenteringintoVANETthroughdualauthentication
methodsorhighlysecuremechanismsshouldbethefirstlineofdefense(Vijayakumaretal. 2015).
Authors have dedicated their research to individual attack detection such as DoS (Lyamin et al.
2014; Mejri and Ben-Othman 2014a), jamming (Hamieh et al. 2009; Puñal et al. 2012), and greedy
behavior (Mejri and Ben-Othman 2014b). Sending false congestion messages to the vehicles by
exploiting congestion avoidance mechanisms (Bauza et al. 2010; Fontanelli et al. 2010)i nV A N E T
wouldbeaneasywayforattackerstore-routeandpositiontheminzonesofinterest(Garipetal.
2015).
4.3 Robotics
Robotsaremarkingtheirplaceinourliveswiththesignificantinvestmentsinroboticstechnology
(Waters and Bradshaw 2016), advancement in cutting-edge technologies like 5G, Augmented Re-
ality(AR),IoT(Fearn 2018),reducedcostofelectronicdevices,andpeople’sneedforassistancein
mundane activities. Being an evolutionary industry, they are designed based on the environment
they would be deployed in and work side-by-side with humans. Their reach varies from space to
manufacturing, from home to war front. Surgical or industrial robots need to have an extremely
high level of accuracy while rescue robots should be fast and efficient in locating survivors in
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 16 ====
91:16 F.Jahan et al.
inaccessibleareas.Home-assistiverobotssuchasCare-O-Botshouldbeabletohelpinhousehold
tasks, be a mobility aid for the elderly and needy, and a medium for communication and social
integration(Hans etal. 2002).
Several cybersecurity issues and vulnerabilities identified by researchers pose serious threats
that can be easily exploited by malicious users. Industrial and academic researchers have demon-
strated attacks on industrial robots that can be hacked and manipulated to introduce a few mil-
limetersofadefectinamanufacturedproduct,whichcouldresultinacatastrophicfailureofthat
system (Quarta et al. 2017). They analyzed the standard architecture of an industry robot from a
securitypoint-of-viewanddevelopedanattackmodelbasedontheattacker’sgoal,anaccesslevel
to the system, and their capabilities (Maggi et al. 2017). An independent security firm took the
initiativetoevaluatecurrentlyavailablerobotsinthemarketfromdifferentvendors.Theirinitial
search report reflects several cybersecurity vulnerabilities in robot technology (Cerrudo and Apa
2017).Althoughsomeofthesevulnerabilitiesarecommoncybersecurityproblems,vendorsshould
implement and addressthemfrom thevery firstphaseof thesoftwaredevelopment process.
Surgical robots are the new trends in the medical industry, even in third world countries such
as India, which reported 26 da Vinci systems in 2015 (Ians 2015). These robotic surgeries result
in small incisions, minimal loss of blood, and faster recovery of patients with less post-operative
pain.Theserobotsworkverycloselywithhumans.Itisessentialtoensurethesecurityandsafety
ofrobotsthatoperatearoundpeopleandanimalsinhomeandorganizationsalike.Variousattacks
were reported that compromised a potential entry point to get into the hospital network in the
lastfewyears(Snell 2015;Zetter2014).Networkvulnerabilitiescouldeasilybeexploitedtoaccess
surgicalsystems,bypassingintrusiondetectionsystemsand firewalls (Alemzadeh et al. 2016).
Thesamegoesforhouseholdrobotsonahomenetworkaswell.Sincesuchtypesofrobotsare
nearchildrenandadultsinthehouse,itismorelikelythatanonboardcameracanbeexploitedto
capture inappropriate audio/video streams (Denning et al. 2009) by pedophiles and online sexual
offenders(Yongetal. 2011).Besidesprivacyissues,thehomerobot’ssensorscanbeusedtocollect
sensitivedatathatcanbeusedtolaunchdifferenttypesofcyberorphysicalenvironmentattacks.
For example, a home robot acting as a scheduler would know when the owners would be away
from home, and a planned burglary could be attempted or a family member could be physically
harmed in the worst-case scenario. A group of researchers investigated possible attacks on these
servicerobots,analyzedthethreat,andlisteddifferentavailabledefensemechanismsagainstsuch
attacks(Corneliusetal. 2017).
4.4 Internet of AutonomousThings (IoAT)/Autonomous Internet ofThings (AIoT)
There are two future concepts that are more or less intertwined in researchers’ opinions. One is
theInternetofAutonomousThings(IoAT)wheresmartautonomousdeviceswouldbeconnected
throughthenetworkandwouldbeabletosolvetheproblemsoradaptthemselvesthroughinfor-
mation exchange with peers. The other concept is an AIoT connecting smart devices that would
“activelymanagedataanddecisionsonbehalfofusers”(UniversityofNottingham-MixedReality
Laboratory 2016). These two concepts overlap each other in the sense that smart devices would
have some autonomous decision-making and would be connected through a network. The future
isnotsofarawayfromwhereIoTdeviceswillbeinformationgenerators,andtheedgedeviceswill
beconsumerswithcloud-basedcontrol.ThestatisticsgeneratedbyStatistashowninFigure 4pre-
dictsthatthenumberofconnecteddeviceswouldbe75billionby2025(Statista 2018).Mostofthese
deviceswouldbeautonomous(orsemi-autonomous).InEngineering( 2016),TomKeeleydiscussed
the market of IoAT and how they will be able to solve newer problems through self-organization
andteamoperation.Marketslikepersonalsecurity,homeautomation,andhealthcarewillleadthe
way withIoAT.Intelligent actuatorswillbethetools,arms,and handsforIoAT devices.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 17 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:17
Fig. 4. Statistics of the number of devices connected worldwide from 2015 to 2025 (in billions) published in
Statista,2016 (Statista 2018). Note: Datais aforecast from 2017–2025.
As big data, machine learning, and Blockchain technologies advance alongside the innovation
of IoT devices, it would be sooner than expected that these devices would achieve autonomy at
the level of human actors (Industry 2017). Future IoT infrastructures should be able to support
heterogeneous platforms, locations, and environments. For smart and reliable autonomous IoT
infrastructures, it should be easily scalable via decentralized management mechanisms and self-
adaptingtothechangesintheenvironmentalcontext(KyriazisandVarvarigou 2013).Moreover,it
shouldsupportconfidentialityandpreventpersonalinformationinfringement,allowingtheusers
tokeeptheirconfidentialdata“in-house.”Forexample,anAIoTwouldrangefromthesmartpantry
forautomaticinventorytrackingorwashingmachinesthatwouldorderdetergentoncethesupply
isabouttofinish(UniversityofNottingham-MixedRealityLaboratory 2016).Again,sincethisarea
itself calls for further research, cybersecurity and privacy of data should be one of the primary
goals in the architectural design of such a network. For sure, a list of cyberattacks that could be
performedonIoTdevices (Abdul-Ghani etal. 2018)would beapplicableonAIoTdevices aswell.
4.5 Swarms
An emerging area of research is swarm robotics. It is directly inspired by nature where, for ex-
ample, a swarm of insects or a flock of birds perform tasks beyond individual capabilities. It has
foundapplicationsinvariedareas(Sahin 2005)suchasdetectinglivesindisasterrescuemissions,
an inspection of industrial machinery (Correll and Martinoli 2009), mapping agricultural fields
(Albani et al. 2017), and monitoring for undesired environmental events. Swarm robotics is much
researched for military applications as well. Since individual entities that make the swarm are
dispensableandredundant,theycanbeappliedinminingorplacesdangerous/inaccessibletohu-
mans. Also, swarms of robots can complete a particular task faster than an individual robot as
they are self-organized and work in parallel with a distributed command and control structure of
communication.
Currently,researchersmainlyfocusonmodelingmethodsandalgorithmsofswarmroboticsof
flocking,foraging(WinfieldandT. 2010),navigating,andsearchingapplications(Haqueetal. 2018;
Tan, Ying and Zheng 2013). The papers of Higgins et al. ( 2009) and Sharma and Bagla ( 2009)a r e
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 18 ====
91:18 F.Jahan et al.
early works on considering security challenges in swarm robotics and analyzing possible threats
to the swarms. They also compare the specific characteristics of the swarms with other similar
systems such as multi-robots, multi-agent systems, mobile sensor networks, and Mobile Ad hoc
Network(MANET).Thisareaofresearchisstillraw,andnotmuchworkhasbeendonerelatedto
individualattacksontheswarmroboticnetwork.
5 MODELING SYSTEM,VULNERABILITIES, THREATS, ANDATTACKS
It is of utmost importance to have a clear picture of what an autonomous system can do, when it
needs to send an alarm signal to the user, when it must transfer the control altogether, or when
it is under attack. At the same time, the operator should also be aware of the cues the system is
sending.Researchershavetriedtomodeldifferentaspectsofthesystemusingdifferenttechniques.
Fromasecuritypointofview,itisessentialtoanalyzethesystemmodeltofindthevulnerabilities
and threats to each part of the system, which can be further utilized to create an attack model.
Theseareashavebeenstudied,andvarioustheoreticalandanalyticalmodelshavebeenproposed.
We have tried to capture these works concerning UAVs, robots, and driverless cars as these au-
tonomous systemsarewidely beingresearchedand incorporatedintotherealworld.
5.1 SystemModeling
System modeling describes an abstract view of a system, ignoring its details. It can be used to
illustrate the functions, behavior, or architecture of the system without going into other details.
It reflects how the system reacts at certain events or how it communicates with sub-parts and its
environment.
5.1.1 Theoretical Model.
—UAVs: Significant parts of a UAV architecture, which make up the guidance, navigation,
and control systems, have been described in Kim et al. ( 2012). Modeling a UAV from the
communication network perspective has been discussed in Javaid et al. ( 2012), detailing
communicationamongvariousmodules.Themodeldescribedinthepaperhassixmodules
starting from the data acquisition module, which collects data from the sensors and sends
the required information to respective modules such as altitude data to the Altitude and
Heading Reference System (AHRS) module, and camera data to the telemetry module. The
navigation module provides PNT information while the control module sends speed and
orientation control signals to actuators of the system. These systems also have a data log-
ging module that logs flight details such as PNT data to keep track of the missions and for
further analysis in case of failure. Another work proposed a hierarchical model for coor-
dinatedcontrol of multiple UAVsand used differential game theoryfor collision avoidance
andformation controlas apursuit-evasivegame (Vachtsevanosand Reimann 2004).
—Autonomous Vehicles : DARPA Urban Challenge accelerated the research for full-sized
autonomousvehicles.AteamfromMITwasoneofthemwhocompletedtherace.Theydis-
cussedtheirautonomousvehiclearchitectureinLeonardetal.( 2008)wheretherequirement
wastoperceiveandnavigatearoadnetworksegmentinaGPS-deniedandhighlydynamic
environment. Another team designed the autonomous vehicle based on the “Sense-Plan-
Act”modelofanautonomoussystem(Urmsonetal. 2007).Basedontheseworks,Guoetal.
modeled a mobile robot system that consists of a robotic platform and a planner to detect
sensorandactuatorattacks.Sensorsaretheeyesandearsofanautonomoussystemtothe
outsideworldwhileactuatorscanbecomparedtothelimbsthatexecutecontrolcommands
transmittedby thesensors(Guo etal. 2017).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 19 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:19
—Robots:Gage(1985)wasthefirstworktopresentagenericmodelofanautonomousrobot
related to security modeling. Recently, some industrial researchers presented the architec-
ture of an industrial robot for security and threat modeling. In this architecture, a pro-
grammer communicates with the robot controller over the network, which, in turn, sends
the command signals to the sensors and actuators of the robot to accomplish the assigned
task(Maggi et al. 2017).
5.1.2 Analytical Model. Each autonomous system has some unique system dynamics, and a
generalizedstudyofsuchsystemscouldbelimitedtostandardparts.Goppertetal.( 2012)modeled
the dynamics of a UAV system using JSBSim and Scios for the control, guidance, and navigation
system of the UAV, which was used to simulate the response of the UAVs to several identified
cyberattackssuchasafuzzingattackanddigitalupdaterateattack,whereanincreasedsampling
rate would make the system unstable. Some of the works describe a UAV as a linear transitional
time-invariant dynamic system with zero-mean Gaussian white noise and a constant co-variance
matrix (Kwon et al. 2016;S ue ta l . 2016). Authors have also used game theory to describe the
kinematicmodelofaUAVusingvariablestoexpressthe3-Dcoordinateframe(Bhattacharyaand
Basar2010).Guoetal.( 2017)modeledamobilerobotasanonlineardiscrete-timedynamicsystem
where the robot states evolve from xk−1toxkafter the robot actuators execute the command
generatedbytheplanner.
5.2 Threat Modeling
Threat modeling is a process of identifying and understanding the threats to a system and then
defining countermeasures to mitigate the threats. Not only does it helps to visualize the system
model through potential adversaries’ eyes, but it also helps to evaluate security risks and coun-
termeasures in the case of possible attacks (Oladimeji et al. 2006). Envisioning potential threats
is a daunting task. Modeling strategies like STRIDE (Spoofing, Tampering, Repudiation, Informa-
tion Disclosure, Denial of Service, and Elevation of Privilege) can help to analyze the data flow
throughthesystem(Madanetal. 2016).AnotherthreatmodelingapproachisPersonaNon-Grata
thatfocuseson attackers,theirmotivations,andabilities(Shull 2016).
AnalyzingeachpartofthesystemforadifferentaspectofsecuritybyfollowingtheCIAmodel
(Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability) lays the foundation for researchers to identify certain at-
tacks(Javaidetal. 2012).Astechnologyadvances,sodotheattackers’strategiesandattackvectors
(TomasFoltyn 2018).BasedonthevulnerabilitiesoftheUAV’sauto-pilot,threatsindifferentcom-
ponents and the effect on the proper functioning of the UAV were analyzed in Kim et al. ( 2012).
These were preliminary works in this field that lacked identification of hardware vulnerabilities
orinsiderthreatstothesystem.Anothergroupofresearchersdevelopedathreatmodelforsmart
devicegroundcontrolstation(aportablehand-heldgroundcontrolstationsforUAVs)thatallows
soldiers to pilot UAVs in the battlefield. The key components addressed in the model are attack
motivation,vulnerabilitiesinthesesystems,cybersecuritythreats,andmitigationstepsincaseof
attacksonthesedevices(Mansfieldetal. 2013).Theypresentedariskanalysissummaryofthreats
andtheirimpactbasedonhardware,software,communicationnetwork,andhumanerrors.Similar
discussionbasedonpoliciestodefendagainstCIAthreatsinthecontextofunmannedautonomous
systems has been done in Madan et al. ( 2016) along with threat modeling and risk analysis using
the STRIDE approach. Some software products like Microsoft Threat Modeling Tool and Threat-
Modeler automate threat modeling, with the latter offering more sophisticated features (Beyst
2016).
The study of cybersecurity issues in robotics is also gaining pace in academia and industries.
Mostpreliminaryworkintheidentificationofdirectandindirectthreatstoroboticsystemscould
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 20 ====
91:20 F.Jahan et al.
Fig.5. Vulnerabilities of anautopilot systemreproducedfromKimet al.( 2012).
befoundinGage( 1985).Gagediscusseddirectthreatsonthesensor,actuator,communicationnet-
work, and processing elements along with some derived threats. Cornelius et al. ( 2017) identified
four threat vectors in a mobile service robot: attacks on sensor data, hardware attacks, software
attacks,andattacksoninfrastructure.WhileClarketal.( 2017)discussescyberthreatstorobotsat
“hardware, firmware/OS, and application levels,” Lera et al. ( 2017) models cybersecurity threats,
risks, and safety issues of using robots. They grouped the threats based on the origin of attack
(natural, accidental, or intentional), the target (physical, cyber, or both), the impact on robot and
external entities, and the risk associated with them. Threat scenarios based on the vulnerabilities
found in the security analysis of an industrial robot have been discussed in Maggi et al. ( 2017).
An attacker could alter the production outcome, introduce defects in the products, cause physi-
cal damage to the robot, or cause harm to coworkers. They can also be used as an entry point to
extract companysensitivedataor hackedtoperformransomwareattacks.
5.3 VulnerabilityModeling
Kim et al. ( 2012) identified control system security and application logic security as the two vul-
nerabilities of an autopilot system in UAVs and categorized the identified threats under them, as
s h o w ni nF i g u r e 5. In control system vulnerability, the attackers exploit the vulnerabilities in the
hardware or software programs such as buffer overflow attack and malware installation. Attacks
inwhichmanipulatedinputdataarefedintothecontrolsystemsexploittheapplicationlogicvul-
nerability such as GPS spoofing and automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) attack.
ThemodeofcommunicationamongUAVsorwithgroundcontrolstationisoverwirelesscommu-
nication networks. It widens the grounds for cyber-physical attacks ranging from the disruption
of communication links to the capture and use of one of the UAVs as an adversary. In Behzadan
(2017), the author emphasized on the vulnerabilities of different layers (physical layer, link layer,
network layer) of a communication network of UAVs. Krishna and Murphy ( 2017)r e v i e w e dt h e
cybervulnerabilitiesof UAVsbasedon recentrealand simulatedattacks.
There are more than 100 built-in or installed Electronic Control Units (ECUs) within a mod-
ern car, listed in Koscher et al. ( 2010), to control and regulate various functions of the vehicle.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 21 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:21
These ECUs are connected through an in-vehicular network of sensors, processors, control sys-
tems,andcommunicationapplicationsalongwithawirelessgatewayforexternalcommunications
with other vehicles and infrastructure. Each system in the automated vehicle has some vulnera-
bilities. A group of researchers extensively reviewed the vulnerabilities in an autonomous vehi-
cle. They highlighted the vulnerabilities based on sensors and control modules, behavioral and
privacy aspects of humans, and connection infrastructure (Parkinson et al. 2017). An indepen-
dent security firm evaluated the robots, currently available in the market from different vendors,
to show how insecure robot technology is and reported nearly 50 cybersecurity vulnerabilities
(CerrudoandApa 2017).Maggi etal.( 2017)wereabletoidentifyseveralweaknessesofanindus-
trial robot. Lack of mandatory user authentication, unsecured network, and naive cryptography
aresomeofthevulnerabilitiesidentifiedinthecomputerinterfaceusedtointeractwiththerobot.
Anattackercouldeasilybypassordisableuserauthentication,tamperexistingaccounts,orexploit
bufferoverflow memory error.
5.4 Attack Modeling
With the increase in cyberattacks, it has become the need of the hour for government, organiza-
tions,andresearcherstobereadywithplanningsothatfutureattackscanbehandledrapidlyand
efficiently.Attackmodelinghelpstorealizetheattacksbeforetheyhappenandpreparetheorga-
nizationwithmitigationstepsthatneedtobetakenifanattackhappens.Therearevariousattack
modeling techniques to analyze the cyberattacks such as the attack graph or tree, the diamond
model, attackvectors,and attacksurfaces(Al-Mohannadi etal. 2016).
5.4.1 Theoretical Model. Guoetal.( 2017)gavetheattackermodelforamobilerobotwherethe
attackercanlaunchactuatororsensorattacks.Potentialcyberattacksonautomatedvehicleshave
been discussed in Petit and Shladover ( 2015) in which the authors have identified attack surfaces
andthepossibleattacksonautomatedandconnectedvehicles.Theyextendtheirresearchbyper-
forming real and effective blinding, jamming, relaying, and spoofing attacks on the camera and
LiDARsensorsofautomatedvehicles(Petitetal. 2015).Oneoftheworksinthisareaclassifiescy-
berattacksaspassiveandactiveattacks.Apassiveattackistoextractinformationfromthesystem
without affecting the system resources, like eavesdropping. An active attack objective is to harm
thesysteminsomewaysliketheDoSattackthatcompromisestheavailabilityofcommunication
channel(Yağderelietal. 2015).Ataxonomyofattacksonautonomousvehicleshasbeenpresented
inThingandWu( 2016),whichcategorizedthestudybasedonattacker,attackvector,target,mo-
tive,andpotentialconsequences.ThistaxonomywasmodifiedtoreflectattacktaxonomyofaUAV
inKrishnaandMurphy( 2017)withminormodificationssuchastheadditionofanewsubcategory
of “communication stream”and listingreferencesof actualinstancesofattacks.
Asstatedearlier,robotshavealreadyenteredourlivesandaremakingaplacearoundhumans.
These robots assist us in our daily lives, including medical services in hospitals, battlefields or
emergency response, factories, and homes. Lives could be put in danger if such robots are at-
tacked.Variousworkshavebeendonetoanalyzethepossiblecybersecurityattacksagainstthem.
InBonacietal.( 2015),authorspresentedanattackermodelofateleoperatedsurgicalrobot.They
identified possible attacks and classified them as intention modification, intention manipulation,
and hijacking attacks. Robots are connected to a network through an interface used for operator
interaction such as joystick or I/O diagnostic ports. An attacker model of an industrial robot dis-
cussedinMaggietal.( 2017)profilesanattackerbasedonaccesslevel,technicalcapabilities,access
toequipment,an attacker’sbudget,andthetypeof attacksthatcouldbe performed.
5.4.2 Analytical Model. Akinematicmodelforsensorandactuatorattackshasbeenpresented
in Guo et al. ( 2017) where sensor attacks result in wrong sensor readings that might generate
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 22 ====
91:22 F.Jahan et al.
erroneous control commands, and actuator attacks could directly alter the control com-
mands. Kwon et al. ( 2013) modeled the stealthy deception attack and analyzed the security of a
cyber-physical system in case of a deception attack on sensors, actuators, or both, which causes
anunboundestimationerrorwithoutbeingdetectedbythemonitoringsystemusingasteady-state
KalmanFilter.Theyextendedtheirworktomodeladirectcontrolacquisitionattackandonboard
navigation attack, which includes individual as well as combined stealthy deception attacks on
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and GPS. They further proposed a real-time safety assessment
algorithm to verify the safety of the UAV subject to cyberattacks based on reachability analy-
sis (Kwon et al. 2016). Su et al. ( 2016) define the UAV model under a GPS spoofing attack where
falsifieddatacouldbeinjectedintothenavigationcomponenteitherthroughaGPSsignalsimula-
tor or by injecting a data level GPS spoofing attack in a hacked onboard navigation system. They
formulated a real-time manipulation method for the UAV under the GPS spoofing attack to drive
the UAV toward a malicious destination without triggering the fault detector, and computed the
attainablelocationsetof theUAVundersuchattacks.
Decision-makingtheorieshavealsobeenusedbymanyresearcherstomodelattackstrategiesas
games(BhattacharyaandBasar 2010;Merricketal. 2016;Sanjabetal. 2017;SourabhBhattacharya
andTamerBasar 2012).BhattacharyaandBasar( 2010)analyzedthecoordinationofmultipleUAVs
incaseofajammingattackonthecommunicationchannelbyanaerialjammerandmodeledthis
scenario as a zero-sum pursuit-evasive game. A zero-sum network interdiction game between a
vendorofadeliverydroneandattackerwasmodeledusingtheprospecttheory(Sanjabetal. 2017).
Here,theattacker’sobjectivewastopreventthegoodsdeliverydronefromtakingtheoptimalpath
from thewarehouseto thecustomer’slocationchosenby thevendor.
6 DISCUSSION
The technological world is progressing from smart gadgets to smart homes, smart vehicles, and
smartcities.Therehavebeensomereal-worldattacksexploitingthevulnerabilitiesofthecurrent
cyber-physicalsystemsandnetwork.Withtheadvancementintechnologiestowardautonomous
systems, the rate of attacks is bound to increase. It has become more important than ever before
that the security challenges and concerns related to autonomous systems are addressed in the
development phaseitself.
Inthisarticle,westartedwithaglimpseintothehistoricalevolutionofautonomyandthepro-
gressive work done in this broad field. An idea of the background behind complex topics always
clearsthequestionsofhowandwhenfornewresearchers,andgivesacomprehensiveunderstand-
ing of the subject. The different approaches to implement autonomy in intelligent systems could
be a good start to thinking about how the system’s autonomy is going to work. A supervisory
approachcanverywellbeusedforrobotsthatwouldneedsupervisionatsomepointthroughthe
task completion process. A goal-driven autonomy could be applied to driverless cars. Depending
uponthetrafficsituationorroadblocks,itcouldalteritsroutetothedestination.Itcoulddecideto
pickupafellowriderina“Share-a-Ride”businessmodelwhileonitswaytodropoffitscustomer
and update its goal. The mixed-initiative approach is also one of the better approaches toward
autonomyinasemi-autonomouscar.Thesmoothtransferofcontrolbetweenthevehicleandthe
driver is a challenge and a topic of further research where each can take control if one feels that
other is not in a situation to make a better decision. For example, if the driver is sleepy or in a
drunken state, the car can take control of the driving. In a weather condition like heavy rain or
a blizzard, it would be difficult to rely on optical sensors. In such a scenario, the car will not be
in a good state to be driven autonomously, and the driver should take control of the vehicle to
avoid mishaps. In the same scenario, an autonomous vehicle with sliding scale autonomy would
loweritsautonomyandgivemorecontroltotheuser,andastheweatherclears,itcouldtakeback
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 23 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:23
Table 6. Listof System,Vulnerabilities,Threat,andAttack ModelingStudies
Representative
Works Modeling Description
UAV
Vachtsevanos and
Reimann( 2004)Presented hierarchical modelcontrol for multipleUAVs, gametheory based
pursuit-evasive gameforcollision avoidanceandformation control
BhattacharyaandBasar
(2010)Kinematicmodelof aUAV using gametheory in 3-Dframe,attackstrategies
as zero-sum game
Kimetal.( 2012) Discussed architecture andvulnerabilitiesof UAV autopilotsystem
Javaidetal.( 2012) UAV CommunicationNetwork Threatassessment
Goppertetal.( 2012) Dynamicsof UAV system—Control guidanceandnavigation
Kwon et al. ( 2013) Modeled theattackandanalyzed thesecurity of thesystem incase of
deceptionattackon sensors, actuators,or both
Mansfieldetal.( 2013) Attack motivation,system vulnerabilities,threats, andmitigationsteps
Yağderelietal.( 2015) Classifies cyberattacksaspassive attacksandactiveattacks.
Kwon et al. ( 2016) Analyticalsafety-assessmentalgorithm for unmannedaircraftduring
stealthycyberattacks
Su etal.( 2016) Definedthe UAV modelunder GPS spoofing attack,formulatedareal-time
manipulationmethod andcomputedthe attainablelocation setof the UAV
under such attacks.
Madanetal.( 2016) Analyzed CIA threats of U XVs andrisk assessment using STRIDE
Sanjabetal.( 2017) Modeled zero-sum gamebetweenadelivery drone vendor andattacker
Krishna and Murphy
(2017)Presented attacktaxonomyof aUAV
AutonomousVehicle
Urmson etal.( 2007) Autonomous vehicledesign basedon “Sense-Plan-Act”
Leonard etal.( 2008) Autonomous vehiclearchitecture
PetitandShladover
(2015)Attack Surfaces andpotentialcyberattacks on“autonomous automated
vehicle” and“Cooperative automatedvehicle”
ThingandWu ( 2016) Presented attacktaxonomyof autonomous vehicles
Parkinson etal.( 2017) Highlighted vulnerabilitiesbasedon sensors andcontrol modules, behavioral
andprivacy aspectsof humans, andconnection infrastructure
Robot
Gage(1985) Presented genericrobot model,identifieddirect/indirect threats
Bonacietal.( 2015) Presented teleoperatedsurgical robots’ attackermodel,possible attacksas
intentionmodification,manipulation,and hijackingattacks
Guo etal.( 2017) Presented mobilerobot’s design,sensor, and actuatorattackermodel
CerrudoandApa( 2017) IdentifiedCybersecurity vulnerabilities
Cornelius et al.( 2017) Identifiedpossible attacks,threatvectors, anddefensemechanisms
Clark etal.( 2017) Discusses cyberthreats athardware,firmware/OS,andapplicationlevels
Leraetal.( 2017) Models cybersecurity threats, risks, andsafetyissues
Maggietal.( 2017) Discussed industrial robotarchitecture, vulnerabilities,threats, andattacks
System Modeling VulnerabilityModeling
ThreatModeling Attack Modeling
the full control of the vehicle. We explored some of the trending areas in the development and
enhancementofautonomoussystemsin the“currenttrends”sectionaswell.
Our next discussion was on cybersecurity of autonomous systems where we threw some light
on the work done in the industry as well as academia on some of the latest autonomous systems
related to security listed in Table 6. We focused our work on the system, threats, vulnerabilities,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 24 ====
91:24 F.Jahan et al.
and attack modeling of a few widely researched autonomous systems, which show how much
work has been done in these areas. Our insight into these discussions is that cybersecurity and
modeling of individual autonomous systems are at a very early stage. As per our findings and
to the best of our knowledge, UAV is the most active field of research concerning the system
modelingandattackscenarios.SystemmodelingofautonomousvehiclesstartedwiththeDARPA
challenge.Whilelotsofworkrelatedtonetworksecurityofvehicle-to-vehicle(V2V)andvehicle-
to-infrastructure(V2I)VANETnetworkhasbeendone,themodelingofthreatandattackvectorsof
autonomous vehicles needs lots of attention. Identification of vulnerabilities and threats on robot
security started very recently, which can be inferred from Table 6, as most of the work on robot
securitywaspublishedin2017.Thereisavastscopeofresearchandsimulation/implementationin
theseareas.Ageneralizedstudyonthecybersecurityoftheseindividualsystemscouldbeanarea
of research. New modeling techniques like game theory and machine learning could be applied
intheseareasaswell.Also,theautonomyapproachshouldbetakenintoaccountwhilemodeling
threatsandattackscenariosfor theseautonomoussystems.
7 RESEARCHCHALLENGESANDFUTURE DIRECTIONS
To ensure and assure that these systems are safe and secure to be used by humans, a new ap-
proachtowardcybersecurityandautonomyisneeded.Theresearchcommunityinthisarealacks
algorithmic solutionstoaddress:
—uncertaintiesin modeling
—securityof autonomoussystemsfrommaliciousattacks
—accomplishinghighergoals throughcooperationandcollaboration
Autonomy is a dynamic property that needs to adapt to varying unknown situations, depending
on the mission complexity. We need a resilient system that performs well over its lifetime. Rig-
orous mathematical modeling could provide a basis for a framework that would help in the early
development study of various capabilities, factors, and tradeoffs between human interaction and
machineautomation.Itcouldfurtherbeusedinthedevelopmentofanautonomyassessmenttool,
keepingfactorslikesecurityinmind.Thoughwearemovingaheadtowardanautonomousfuture,
therearemanyresearchchallengesthatresearcheshavetoface.Wehavetriedtosummarizeafew
of themasfollows:
—BuildingHumanTrust: AfterUber’sself-drivingcarcrashin2018,asurveyperformedby
Statistashowsthattrustinself-drivingcarsdroppedto27%(FelixRichter 2018).Thisisthe
most intimidating challenge the developer of autonomous systems is about to face. While
these systems promise a more comfortable and efficient life, safety and security measures
needtobetakenbeforedeploymentamongthepublic.Theworldshouldbereadyinlegal,
social, economic, and ethical context before these systems are incorporated in our lives,
as failures of these systems are inevitable at some point in time, either through known or
unknown causes. The trust in these systems could only be built by thorough analysis and
testing.Theserviceprovidersandmanufacturersofthesesystemsshouldbestringentwhen
talkingaboutsecurityandbe readywithcountermeasureswhenitis compromised.
—Diverse Training Dataset : Autonomous systems need to be trained on a large, diverse,
and complete dataset to be secure and safe. A simulated dataset is incomplete as it fails to
capture critical conditions in the real world. Its relevancy and integrity are questionable
as it lacks the human factor. Machine learning is an area that could be applied to enhance
the cybersecurity of autonomous vehicles. As discussed in Causevic ( 2018), if a car’s in-
vehicular network logs are monitored and analyzed by a machine learning-based system,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 25 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:25
itcandetectmaliciousactivityearlyandalertthedriverortakesomepreventivemeasures
tosaveitselffromfatalaccidents.Withthecollecteddata,machinelearningalgorithmscan
beusedtodetectmalwareactivities,networkattacks,orunusualcommands.Theycanalso
be used to establish behavioral profiles of any potential attacker (Critchley 2018). It would
alsoimprovetheeffectivenessofthesecurityalgorithmsasthedatawouldbecontinuously
updatedand would beunbiasedof anytechnicalorhumanintentions.
—DataSecurity :Alotmoreresearchneedstobedoneintheareaofsecurityofcommunica-
tiondataandover-the-airupdates.Blockchainisanemergingtechnologythatcanbeused
to provide a more secure and robust solution for these autonomous systems. Blockchain,
devisedinitiallyfordigitalcurrency(Bitcoin),isachainofblockslinkedthroughacrypto-
graphic hash from the previous block with a timestamp and distributed over the network,
whichmakesitresistanttomodificationofthedata.Ferrer( 2016)showsthatBlockchainhas
the necessary capabilities for swarm robotics operations to be more secure, autonomous,
and flexible. This technology would not only provide a private and reliable communica-
tionamongswarmagents,butitwouldalsoovercomethevulnerabilities,potentialthreats,
andattacksassociatedwiththem(Aggarwal 2017).ThedecentralizedstorageofBlockchain
wouldguaranteetheconfidentialityandintegrityofthedriver’sdatawithnodowntimein
networkconnectivityofautonomousvehicles.Itwouldalsoensuretheaccuracyofdatain
a V2VorV2Icommunication (Williamson 2018).
—Computing Power and Network Management : Current status of autonomous systems
lacks the computational capability to perform computationally intensive tasks on large
datasets such as encryption of collected data to be shared securely over the network. The
end controller of these systems in many cases would be handheld devices such as mobile
phonesandcontrollers,whichlackthecomputationalpowertorunadvancedsecurityalgo-
rithms. One solution is to embed security into the hardware design. Another solution is to
securethenetworkagainstcyberattacksbynetworksoftwarizationsuchasNetworkFunc-
tionVirtualization(NFV)andSoftwareDefinedNetworking(SDN)(Shakhatrehetal. 2018).
SDNprovidesefficientnetworkmanagement,programmability,andeaseofreconfiguration
(Zhangetal. 2017).Itprovidesaflexibleanddynamicenvironmentwithaviewoftheentire
network topology, which helps to block specific attacks such as DDoS based on network’s
policy (Niyaz et al. 2016; Ydenberg et al. 2018). A group of researchers proposed a secure
mobility model between UAVs and ground Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) nodes where
communication would be through the SDN controller for authentication and coordination
(Kumaretal. 2017).SDNprovidesavirtual,centralized,software-basedcontrolthatallows
easyintegrationofsecurity-relevantfunctionsintoanSDNcontroller.Alongwiththeholis-
tic view of security, SDN provides an improved response in case of any security incidents,
which would otherwise take a long time to respond to in a traditional network (Edward
Amoroso 2019).
8 CONCLUSION
This article presents a survey on security modeling of autonomous systems. We looked at the
history of automation and the various approaches of autonomy to get a deeper understanding
of the scope of automation in these systems. We also highlighted significant research done to-
ward the study of security in some widely researched systems both in the industry as well as
academia, followed by identification of survey papers regarding the modeling of the systems and
possible attacks. Finally, we provided an overall analysis of the surveyed papers and concluded
withadiscussiononfutureresearchdirectionsandchallengestoenhancetheautomationandse-
curityofthesesystems.Adoptionofautonomoussystemsdiscussedabovewillusheraneweraof
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 26 ====
91:26 F.Jahan et al.
technological advances and economic growth. Driverless cars are expected to reduce road acci-
dents,fuelconsumption,trafficcongestion,andairpollution(DarrellM.West 2017).Robotswould
bedeployedinhomesandvariousindustrialsectorstoprovideassistanceandefficiencyinarou-
tineaswellashigh-precisionjobs.Thequestionis,howsecureandsafearethesetechnologiesto
be adopted into society? With every new revolution in transportation, there are risk factors in-
volved.Thesesystemsshouldnotbeimmaturelydeployedintothepublic.Researchersinindustry
andacademiaalikehavetoshouldertheresponsibilityofaddressingthesecurityflaws.Theman-
ufacturershavetoensurethesafetyofitsusers,consideringeventheremotescenariosofmishaps
andattacks.Also,thegovernmenthastohaveproperlegalpoliciesandsupportinginfrastructure
in place(Kaur andRampersad 2018).
REFERENCES
Hezam Akram Abdul-Ghani, Dimitri Konstantas, and Mohammed Mahyoub. 2018. A comprehensive IoT attacks survey
basedon abuilding-blocked referencemodel. Int.J.Adv.Comput.Sci. Appl.(IJACSA) 9,3(2018).
ManujAggarwal.2017.BlockchaininRobotics—ASneakPeekintotheFuture.RetrievedJuly18,2018from https://tinyurl.
com/y5flry5n .
RajaNaeemAkram,Pierre-FrançoisBonnefoi,SergeChaumette,KonstantinosMarkantonakis,andDamienSauveron.2016.
SecureautonomousUAVsfleetsbyusingnewspecificembeddedsecureelements.In Proceedingsofthe2016IEEETrust-
com/BigDataSE/ISPA . IEEE, 606–614.
Mohammed Saeed Al-Kahtani. 2012. Survey on security attacks in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). In Proceedings of
the6th International ConferenceonSignal Processing andCommunication Systems (ICSPCS’12) .IEEE, 1–9.
Hamad Al-Mohannadi, Qublai Mirza, Anitta Namanya, Irfan Awan, Andrea Cullen, and Jules Disso. 2016. Cyber-attack
modeling analysis techniques: An overview. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 4th International Conference on Future In-
ternetof Thingsand CloudWorkshops(FiCloudW) .IEEE, 69–76.
DarioAlbani,JorisI.Jsselmuiden,RamonHaken,andVitoTrianni.2017.Monitoringandmappingwithrobotswarmsfor
agricultural applications. In Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based
Surveillance (AVSS) .IEEE, 1–6.
Homa Alemzadeh, Daniel Chen, Xiao Li, Thenkurussi Kesavadas, Zbigniew T. Kalbarczyk, and Ravishankar K. Iyer. 2016.
Targetedattacksonteleoperatedsurgicalrobots:Dynamicmodel-baseddetectionandmitigation.In Proceedingsofthe
46th Annual IEEE/IFIPInternational ConferenceonDependable Systems and Networks (DSN’16) . IEEE, 395–406.
RasimAlguliyev,YadigarImamverdiyev,andLyudmilaSukhostat.2018.Cyber-physicalsystemsandtheirsecurityissues.
Comput.Ind. 100(2018),212–223.
Edward Amoroso. 2019. Security Advantages of Software Defined Networking (SDN). Retrieved February 26, 2019 from
http://tinyurl.com/yynq6gpg .
Maria Azees, Pandi Vijayakumar, and Lazarus Jegatha Deborah. 2016. Comprehensive survey on security services in ve-
hicular ad-hoc networks. IETIntel.TransportSyst. 10,6(2016),379–388.
LisanneBainbridge.1983.Ironiesofautomation.In Analysis,DesignandEvaluationofMan–MachineSystems1982 .Elsevier,
129–135.
Lina Bariah, Dina Shehada, Ehab Salahat, and Chan Yeob Yeun. 2015. Recent advances in VANET security: A survey. In
Proceedings ofthe2015 IEEE 82ndVehicular TechnologyConference(VTC Fall) .IEEE, 1–7.
RamonBauza,JavierGozalvez,andJoaquinSanchez-Soriano.2010.Roadtrafficcongestiondetectionthroughcooperative
vehicle-to-vehicle communications. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 35th Conference Local Computer Networks (LCN) .
IEEE, Denver,CO. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5735780/ .
Gordon D. Baxter, John Rooksby, Yuanzhi Wang, and Ali Khajeh-Hosseini. 2012. The ironies of automation: still going
strong at30?In ECCE.65–71.
Jenay M. Beer, Arthur D. Fisk, and Wendy A. Rogers. 2014. Toward a framework for levels of robot autonomy in human-
robotinteraction. J.Human-RobotInteract. 3,2(2014),74–99. DOI:https://doi.org/10.5898/JHRI.3.2.Beer arxiv:15334406
VahidBehzadan.2017.Cyber-physicalattacksonUASnetworks—Challengesandopenresearchproblems.arxiv:1702.01251
http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.01251 .
Brian Beyst. 2016. Comparing ThreatModeler to Microsoft Threat Modeling Tool (TMT). Retrieved May 26, 2018 from
https://tinyurl.com/y379hnrb .
Sourabh Bhattacharya and Tamer. Basar. 2010. Game-theoretic analysis of an aerial jamming attack on a UAV com-
munication network. In Proceedings of the American Control Conference (ACC) . IEEE, 818–823. DOI:https://doi.org/
978-1-4244-7427-1
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 27 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:27
Sourabh Bhattacharya and Tamer Basar. 2012. Multi-layer hierarchical approach to double sided jamming games among
teams of mobile agents. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (2012). 5774–5779. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1109/CDC.2012.6426411
Trevor J. Bihl, Chad Cox, and Todd Jenkins. 2018. Finding common ground by unifying autonomy indices to understand
needed capabilities. In Sensors and Systems for Space Applications XI , Vol. 10641. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 106410G.
Tamara Bonaci, Jeffrey Herron, Tariq Yusuf, Junjie Yan, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Howard Jay Chizeck. 2015. To make a
robot secure: An experimental analysis of cyber security threats against teleoperated surgical robots. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.04339 (2015).
Jeffery Bradshaw, Andrzej Uszok, Renia Jeffers, Niranjan Suri, Patric Hayes, Mark Burstein, Alessandro Acquisti, Brett
Benyo,M.Breedy,MarcoCarvalho,etal.2003.RepresentationandreasoningforDAML-basedpolicyanddomainser-
vicesinKAoSandNomads.In Proceedingsofthe2ndInternationalJointConferenceonAutonomousAgentsandMultiagent
Systems.ACM, 835–842.
Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, Alessandro Acquisti, James Allen, Maggie R. Breedy, Larry Bunch, Nate Chambers, Paul Feltovich,
Lucian Galescu, Michael A. Goodrich, Renia Jeffers, et al. 2004a. Teamwork-centered autonomy for extended human-
agentinteraction inspaceapplications.In Proceedings oftheAAAI2004 Spring Symposium . 22–24.
Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, Patrick Beautement, Maggie R. Breedy, Larry Bunch, Sergey V. Drakunov, Paul J. Feltovich, Robert
R. Hoffman, Renia Jeffers, Matthew Johnson, Shriniwas Kulkarni, et al. 2004b. Making agents acceptable to people. In
IntelligentTechnologies forInformation Analysis .Springer, 361–406.
Jeffrey M. Bradshaw, Hyuckchul Jung, Shri Kulkarni, Matthew Johnson, Paul Feltovich, James Allen, Larry Bunch,
Nathanael Chambers, Lucian Galescu, Renia Jeffers, et al. 2005. Kaa: Policy-based explorations of a richer model for
adjustable autonomy. In Proceedings of the 4th International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems.ACM, 214–221.
David J. Bruemmer, Donald D. Dudenhoeffer, and Julie L. Marble. 2002. Dynamic-autonomy for urban search and rescue.
InAAAIMobile Robot Competition .33–37.
Patrick Caughill. 2017. An Artificial Intelligence Has Officially Been Granted Residency. Retrieved May 26, 2018 from
http://tinyurl.com/y9q3zpz4 .
DinoCausevic.2018.HowMachineLearningCanEnhanceCybersecurityforAutonomousCars.RetrievedOctober1,2018
fromhttp://tinyurl.com/yyrhhsg7 .
CCW. 2018. Five Years of Campaigning, CCW Continues. Retrieved June 09, 2018 from https://www.stopkillerrobots.org/
2018/03/fiveyears/ .
Cesar Cerrudo andLucasApa.2017.Hacking robots beforeskynet. IOActive Website 2017(2017),1–17.
George W. Clark, Michael V. Doran, and Todd R. Andel. 2017. Cybersecurity issues in robotics. In IEEE Conference on
Cognitiveand Computational Aspects ofSituation Management (CogSIMA’17) . IEEE, 1–5.
Bruce T. Clough. 2002. Metrics, Schmetrics! How the Heck Do You Determine a UAV’s Autonomy Anyway ? Techni-
cal Report 990. Air Force Research Lab, Wright-Patterson AFB OH. 313–319 pages. http://oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?verb=
getRecord&metadataPrefix=html&identifier=ADA515926 .
Cognilytica. 2018. Will There Be Another AI Winter? Retrieved June 26, 2018 from https://www.cognilytica.com/2018/02/
22/will-another-ai-winter/ .
CiprianAdrianCorneanu,MarcOliuSimón,JeffreyF.Cohn,andSergioEscaleraGuerrero.2016.Surveyonrgb,3D,thermal,
andmultimodalapproachesforfacialexpressionrecognition:History,trends,andaffect-relatedapplications. IEEETrans.
PatternAnal.Mach. Intell. 38,8(2016),1548–1568.
GaryCornelius,PatriceCaire,NicoHochgeschwender,MiguelA.Olivares-Mendez,PauloEsteves-Verissimo,MarcusVölp,
and Holger Voos. 2017. A perspective of security for mobile service robots. In Proceedings of ROBOT 2017: 3rd Iberian
Robotics Conference .88–100. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70833-1_8
NikolausCorrellandAlcherioMartinoli.2009.Multirobotinspectionofindustrialmachinery. IEEERob.Autom.Mag. 16,1
(2009),103–112. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4799452/ .
Liam Critchley. 2018. How Machine-Based Learning Will Protect Automobiles from Cyber Attacks. Retrieved October 1,
2018from https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=15659 .
MaryL.Cummings,SylvainBruni,S.Mercier,andP.J.Mitchell.2007. AutomationArchitectureforSingleOperator,Multiple
UAVCommand and Control .Technical Report.Massachusetts Inst. of Tech Cambridge.
Mary Missy Cummings.2014.Manversus machineor man+machine? IEEEIntell.Syst. 29,5(2014),62–69.
Praveen Damacharla, Ahmad Y. Javaid, Jennie J. Gallimore, and Vijay K. Devabhaktuni. 2018. Common metrics to bench-
markhuman-machineteams(HMT):A review. IEEEAccess 6(2018),38637–38655.
Drew Davidson, Hao Wu, Robert Jellinek, Thomas Ristenpart, and Vikas Singh. 2016. Controlling UAVs with sensor input
spoofing attacks.In Proceedings ofthe10th USENIX Conferenceon OffensiveTechnologies (WOOT’16) .221–231.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 28 ====
91:28 F.Jahan et al.
Alex Davies. 2018. The Self-Driving Startup Teaching Cars to Talk. Retrieved February 26, 2019 from https://www.wired.
com/story/driveai-self-driving-design-frisco-texas/ .
OfficeoftheSecretaryofDefense,WashingtonD.C.2001. UnmannedAerialVehiclesRoadmap2000-2025 .TechnicalReport.
DefensePentagon,Washington, D.C.
MeghannLomasDeBrun,VeraZaychikMoffitt,JerryL.Franke,DimitriYiantsios,TrevorHousten,AdriaHughes,Shannon
Fouse,andDrewHousten.2008.Mixed-initiativeadjustableautonomyforhuman/unmannedsystemteaming.In AUVSI
Unmanned Systems NorthAmerica Conference .
Matthew DeBord. 2018. Waymo Has Launched Its Commercial Self-driving Service in Phoenix and It’s Called “Waymo
One”.RetrievedFebruary 26,2019from http://tinyurl.com/y25d4g9x .
TamaraDenning,CynthiaMatuszek,KarlKoscher,JoshuaR.Smith,andTadayoshiKohno.2009.Aspotlightonsecurityand
privacyriskswithfuturehouseholdrobots.In Proceedingsofthe11thInternationalConferenceonUbiquitousComputing
- Ubicomp’09 . ACM, 105. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1620545.1620564
MunjalDesai.2007. Sliding Scale Autonomyand Trustin Human-robotInteraction . Master’s thesis. 1442064.
MunjalDesaiandHollyA.Yanco.2005.Blendinghumanandrobotinputsforslidingscaleautonomy.In Proceedingsofthe
IEEEInternational Workshopon Robotand Human Interactive Communication (ROMAN’05) . IEEE, 537–542.
A. Dhamgaye and N. Chavhan. 2013. Survey on security challenges in VANET. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Network 2, 1 (2013), 1.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2015.2453114
M. Bernardine Dias, Balajee Kannan, Brett Browning, E. Gil Jones, Brenna Argall, M. Freddie Dias, Marc Zinck, Manuela
M. Veloso, and Anthony J. Stentz. 2008. Sliding autonomy for peer-to-peer human-robot teams. Intell. Auton. Syst. 10,
IAS2008(2008),332–341. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-58603-887-8-332
DeruiDing,Qing-LongHan,YangXiang,XiaohuaGe,andXian-MingZhang.2018.Asurveyonsecuritycontrolandattack
detectionfor industrial cyber-physicalsystems. Neurocomput. 275(2018),1674–1683.
Gregory A. Dorais, R. Peter Bonasso, David Kortenkamp, Barney Pell, and Debra Schreckenghost. 1999. Adjustable au-
tonomyforhuman-centeredautonomoussystems.In Proceedingsofthe16thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificial
IntelligenceWorkshoponAdjustable Autonomy Systems .16–35.
Luke Dormehl. 2017. MiRo Is the Robot Dog that Promises to Be a Geek’s Best Friend. Retrieved May 20, 2019 from
https://tinyurl.com/yxz74w93 .
WarrenR.Dufrene.2005.Anapproachforautonomy:Acollaborativecommunicationframeworkformulti-agentsystems.
InWorkshoponRadical Agent Concepts .Springer, 147–159.
Muawia Abdelmagid Elsadig and Yahia A. Fadlalla. 2016. VANETs security issues and challenges: A survey. Indian J. Sci.
Technol.9,28(2016).
Mica R. Endsley. 1987. The application of human factors to the development of expert systems for advanced cockpits. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , Vol. 31. SAGE Publications Sage CA, Los
Angeles,CA, 1388–1392.
Mica R. Endsley. 1988. Design and evaluation for situation awareness enhancement. In Proceedings of the Human Factors
Society AnnualMeeting , Vol. 32.SAGE Publications SageCA: LosAngeles, CA,97–101.
Mica R. Endsley. 1995. Towards a new paradigm for automation: Designing for situation awareness. IFAC Proceedings
Volumes28,15(1995),365–370. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-6670(17)45259-1
MicaR.EndsleyandDavidB.Kaber.1999.Levelofautomationeffectsonperformance,situationawarenessandworkload
inadynamiccontrol task. Ergon.42,3(1999),462–492.
Control Engineering. 2016. IoT to IoAT: Internet of Autonomous Things Devices Provides Solutions. Retrieved June 18,
2018from https://tinyurl.com/y5nlonp8 .
Aisha D. Farooqui and Muaz A. Niazi. 2016. Game Theory Models for Communication between Agents: A Review .V o l .4 .1 3
pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1186/s40294-016-0026-7 arxiv:1708.01636.
Nicholas Fearn. 2018. The Cutting-Edge Tech Set to Define 2018. Retrieved from http://www.techx365.com/author.asp?
section_id=686&doc_id=739321 .
DavidFeil-Seifer,KristineSkinner,andMajaJ.Matarić.2007.Benchmarksforevaluatingsociallyassistiverobotics. Interact.
Stud.8,3(2007),423–439.
EduardoCastellóFerrer.2016.Theblockchain:Anewframeworkforroboticswarmsystems. arXivpreprintarXiv:1608.00695
(2016).
TomasFoltyn.2018.CybersecurityTrends2019:PrivacyandIntrusionintheGlobalVillage. CheckPointResearch .Retrieved
fromhttp://tinyurl.com/yxeph2cb .
T. Fong, N. Cabrol, C. Thorpe, and C. Baur. 2001. A personal user interface for collaborative human-robot exploration. In
6th International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence,Robotics, and Automation in Space (iSAIRAS’01) .
StefanoFontanelli,EnricoBini,andPaoloSanti.2010.Dynamicrouteplanninginvehicularnetworksbasedonfuturetravel
estimation. In Proceedings of the 2010 Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC) . IEEE, Jersey City, NJ. https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/abstract/document/5698247/ .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 29 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:29
Douglas M. Gage. 1985. Security considerations for autonomous robots. In 1985 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy .
IEEE, 224–224.
Dom Galeon. 2017. World’s First AI Citizen in Saudi Arabia is Now Calling for Women’s Rights. Retrieved May 26, 2018
fromhttp://tinyurl.com/yyqcksxq .
MevlutTurker Garip,MehmetEmre Gursoy, PeterReiher, andMario Gerla.2015.Congestion attacksto autonomous cars
usingvehicular botnets.In NDSSWorkshopon Security ofEmerging Networking Technologies (SENT),San Diego, CA .
MichaelGiering,VivekVenugopalan,andKishoreReddy.2015.Multi-modalsensorregistrationforvehicleperceptionvia
deep neuralnetworks. In Proceedings ofthe2015 High Performance ExtremeComputing Conference(HPEC) .IEEE, 1–6.
Saira Gillani, Farrukh Shahzad, Amir Qayyum, and Rashid Mehmood. 2013. A survey on security in vehicular ad hoc
networks. In International WorkshoponCommunication Technologies forVehicles .Springer, 59–74.
MichaelA.Goodrich,AlanC.Schultz,etal.2008.Human—robotinteraction:asurvey. FoundationsandTrendsRinHuman—
ComputerInteraction 1,3(2008),203–275.
JamesGoppert,WeiyiLiu,AndrewShull,VincentSciandra,InseokHwang,andHalAldridge.2012.Numericalanalysisof
cyberattacksonunmannedaerialsystems. AIAAInfotechatAerospaceConferenceandExhibit2012 .DOI:https://doi.org/
10.2514/6.2012-2437
Andy Greenberg. 2015. Hackers Remotely Kill a Jeep on the Highway—With Me In It. Retrieved May 26, 2018 from
http://tinyurl.com/o9coyn4 .
PinyaoGuo,HunminKim,NuraliVirani,JunXu,MinghuiZhu,andPengLiu.2017.Exploitingphysicaldynamicstodetect
actuatorandsensor attacksin mobilerobots. CoRRabs/1708.01834(2017).
David Hambling. 2017. Ships Fooled in GPS Spoofing Attack Suggest Russian Cyberweapon. Retrieved July 18, 2018 from
http://tinyurl.com/ycuzl3pz .
Elyes Ben Hamida, Hassan Noura, and Wassim Znaidi. 2015. Security of cooperative intelligent transport systems: Stan-
dards,threats analysis,and cryptographic countermeasures. Electron.4,3(2015),380–423.
Ali Hamieh, Jalel Ben-Othman, and Lynda Mokdad. 2009. Detection of radio interference attacks in VANET. In Proceed-
ingsoftheGlobalTelecommunicationsConference,2009(GLOBECOM) .IEEE,Honolulu,HI. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/
GLOCOM.2009.5425381
M.Hans,B.Graf,andR.D.Schraft.2002.Robotichomeassistantcare-o-bot:Past-present-future.In Proceedingsofthe11th
IEEEInternational Workshopon Robot andHuman Interactive Communication, 2002 . 380–385.
Musad Haque, Electa Baker, Christopher Ren, Douglas Kirkpatrick, and Julie A. Adams. 2018. Analysis of biologically
inspiredswarm communicationmodels. In Advances in Hybridization ofIntelligentMethods .Springer,17–38.
BenjaminHardinandMichaelA.Goodrich.2009.Onusingmixed-initiativecontrol:Aperspectiveformanaginglarge-scale
roboticteams.In Proceedingsofthe4thACM/IEEEInternationalConferenceonHumanRobotInteraction .ACM,165–172.
F. W. Heger and S. Singh. 2006. Sliding autonomy for complex coordinated multi-robot tasks: Analysis & experiments. In
Proceedings, Robotics: Systems and Science, Philadelphia .http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.148.
9892&rep=rep1&type=pdf .
Frederik W. Heger, Laura M. Hiatt, Brennan Sellner, Reid Simmons, and Sanjiv Singh. 2005. Results in sliding autonomy
formulti-robot spatialassembly. European Space Agency, (Special Publication) ESA SP 603(2005),489–496.
Fiona Higgins, Allan Tomlinson, and Keith M. Martin. 2009. Threats to the swarm: Security considerations for swarm
robotics.Int.J.Adv.Secur. 2,2&3 (2009),288–297.
Kashmir Hill.2016.Security robot accidentallyattackschild. RetrievedApril03,2018from https://tinyurl.com/yynv5se3 .
Homer. [n.d.].The Iliad.In Vol.Book XVIII .circa.
Christopher-EykHrabia,NilsMasuch,andSahinAlbayrak.2015.Ametricsframeworkforquantifyingautonomyincom-
plexsystems. In German Conferenceon Multiagent System Technologies .Springer, 22–41.
H. M. Huang. 2004. Autonomy levels for unmanned systems (ALFUS) framework Volume I : Terminology version 2.0.
TechnicalReport.
Hui-Min Huang. 2007. Autonomy levels for unmanned systems (ALFUS) framework: Safety and application issues. In
Proceedings of 2007 Workshop on Performance Metrics for Intelligent Systems (PerMIS’07) . 48–53. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1145/1660877.1660883
Hui-Min Huang, James S. Albus, Elena R. Messina, Robert L. Wade, and R. W. English. 2004a. Specifying autonomy levels
for unmanned systems: Interim report. In Proceedings of SPIE Defense and Security Symposium 2004 . 386–397. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.552074
Hui-MinHuang,ElenaMessina,andJamesAlbus.2003b.Autonomylevelspecificationforintelligentautonomousvehicles:
Interim progress report. In 2003 Performance Metrics for IntelligentSystems (PerMIS) September(2003).1–7.
Hui-MinHuang,ElenaMessina,andJamesAlbus.2003a. TowardaGenericModelforAutonomyLevelsforUnmannedSystems
(ALFUS).TechnicalReport.NationalInstituteof Standards andTechnology,Gaithersburg, MD.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 30 ====
91:30 F.Jahan et al.
Hui-Min Huang, Elena Messina, Robert Wade, Ralph English, Brian Novak, and James Albus. 2004b. Autonomy measures
forrobots.In ASME2004InternationalMechanicalEngineeringCongressandExposition .AmericanSocietyofMechanical
Engineers, 1241–1247.
Hui-Min Huang, Kerry Pavek, James Albus, and Elena Messina. 2005. Autonomy levels for unmanned systems (ALFUS)
framework:An update. Proc. SPIE 5804,June(2005),439–448. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1117/12.603725
TomHuddlestonJr.2018.MoveOverTesla,ThisSelf-drivingCarWillLetYouSleeporWatchaMovieduringYourHighway
Commute.RetrievedFebruary 26,2019from http://tinyurl.com/yad58cgj .
Todd Humphrey. 2012. Todd Humphreys’ Research Team Demonstrates First Successful GPS Spoofing of UAV. Retrieved
July 18,2018from http://tinyurl.com/yydz75x5 .
Ians. 2015. Surgical Robots to Become Ubiquitous in Indian Hospitals. Retrieved September 13, 2018 from http://tinyurl.
com/y2rfp2es .
Smart Industry. 2017. Blockchain Makes IoT Devices Autonomous. Retrieved 2018-06-19 from https://tinyurl.com/
y5w784re .
FarhaJahan,AhmadY.Javaid,WeiqingSun,andMansoorAlam.2015.GNSSim:AnopensourceGNSS/GPSframeworkfor
unmannedaerialvehicular networksimulation. EAIEndorsedTrans.Mobile Commun. Appl. 2,6(2015),1–13.
Ahmad Y. Javaid, Farha Jahan, and Weiqing Sun. 2017. Analysis of global positioning system-based attacks and a novel
global positioning system spoofing detection/mitigation algorithm for unmanned aerial vehicle simulation. Simul.93,
5(2017),427–441.
AhmadY.Javaid,WeiqingSun,andMansoorAlam.2015.SingleandmultipleUAVcyber-attacksimulationandperformance
evaluation. EAIEndorsedTrans. Scalable Inf.Syst. 2,4(2015),1–11.
AhmadY.Javaid,WeiqingSun,VijayK.Devabhaktuni,andMansoorAlam.2012.Cybersecuritythreatanalysisandmod-
elingofanunmannedaerialvehiclesystem.In 2012IEEEConferenceonTechnologiesforHomelandSecurity(HST) .IEEE,
585–590.
KanwaldeepKaurandGiselleRampersad.2018.Trustindriverlesscars:Investigatingkeyfactorsinfluencingtheadoption
of driverless cars. J.Eng.Tech.Manage. 48(2018),87–96.
AlanKim,BrandonWampler,JamesGoppert,InseokHwang,andHalAldridge.2012.Cyberattackvulnerabilitiesanalysis
for unmannedaerialvehicles. Infotech@Aerospace 2012 (2012),1–30. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2012-2438
MatthewKlenk,MattMolineaux,andDavidW.Aha.2013.Goal-drivenautonomyforrespondingtounexpectedeventsin
strategysimulations. Comput.Intell. 29,2(2013),187–206.
TimoKorthals, Mikkel Kragh,PeterChristiansen, Henrik Karstoft,RasmusN.Jørgensen,andUlrich Rückert. 2018.Multi-
modal detection and mapping of static and dynamic obstacles in agriculture for process evaluation. Front. Rob. AI 5
(2018),28.
Karl Koscher, Alexei Czeskis, Franziska Roesner, Shwetak Patel, Tadayoshi Kohno, Stephen Checkoway, Damon McCoy,
Brian Kantor, Danny Anderson, Hovav Shacham, et al. 2010. Experimental security analysis of a modern automobile.
InProceedings oftheIEEESymposium on Security andPrivacy (SP’10) . IEEE, 447–462.
C. G. Leela Krishna and Robin R. Murphy. 2017. A review on cybersecurity vulnerabilities for unmanned aerial vehicles.
InProceedings oftheIEEEInternational Symposium on Safety, Security andRescue Robotics (SSRR’17) . IEEE, 194–199.
Rajesh Kumar, Mohd Abuzar Sayeed, Vishal Sharma, and Ilsun You. 2017. An SDN-based secure mobility model for UAV-
ground communications.In Proceedings of theInternational Symposium on Mobile InternetSecurity . Springer,169–179.
Cheolhyeon Kwon, Weiyi Liu, and Inseok Hwang. 2013. Security analysis for cyber-physical systems against stealthy de-
ceptionattacks.In Proceedings ofthe2013 American ControlConference(ACC) .IEEE, 3344–3349.
Cheolhyeon Kwon, Scott Yantek, and Inseok Hwang. 2016. Real-time safety assessment of unmanned aircraft systems
againststealthycyberattacks. J.Aerosp.Inf. Syst. 13,1(2016),27–45. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2514/1.I010388
DimosthenisKyriazisandTheodoraVarvarigou.2013.Smart,autonomousandreliableInternetofThings. ProcediaComput.
Sci.21(2013),442–448.
HoaLaVinhandAnaRosaCavalli.2014.Securityattacksandsolutionsinvehicularadhocnetworks:Asurvey. Int.J.Ad
Hoc Networking Syst.(IJANS) 4,2(2014),1–20.
MichelLacerda,DongjinPark,SrujalPatel,andDanielSchrage.2018.AMarsexplorationconceptsystemsdesignwithan
innovativeunmannedautonomousvehicleand“carrier”groundroverconfiguration.PartI:Systemdesign.In Proceed-
ings ofthe2018 Aviation Technology,Integration, and Operations Conference .3262.
Fred Lambert. 2018. Watch What Tesla Autopilot Can See in Incredible 360 ºVideo. Retrieved 2018-11-26 from
https://electrek.co/2018/11/26/tesla-autopilot-360-video/ .
John Leonard, Jonathan How, Seth Teller, Mitch Berger, Stefan Campbell, Gaston Fiore, Luke Fletcher, Emilio Frazzoli,
Albert Huang, Sertac Karaman, et al. 2008. A perception-driven autonomous urban vehicle. J. Field Rob. 25, 10 (2008),
727–774.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 31 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:31
FranciscoJ.RodríguezLera,CaminoFernándezLlamas,ÁngelManuelGuerrero,andVicenteMatellánOlivera.2017.Cyber-
securityofroboticsandautonomoussystems:Privacyandsafety.In Robotics-Legal,EthicalandSocioeconomicImpacts .
InTech. DOI:https://doi.org/10.5772/46845
HuiLin,HomaAlemzadeh,DanielChen,ZbigniewKalbarczyk,andRavishankarK.Iyer.2016.Safety-criticalcyber-physical
attacks: Analysis, detection, and mitigation. In Proceedings of the Symposium and Bootcamp on the Science of Security .
ACM,82–89.
Lanny Lin, Michael A. Goodrich, and Spencer Clark. 2012. Sliding autonomy for UAV path planning: Adding new dimen-
sions to autonomymanagement. J.Hum.-Rob. Interact. 1,1(2012),78–95. DOI:https://doi.org/10.5898/JHRI.1.1.Tanaka
NikitaLyamin,AlexeyVinel,MagnusJonsson,andJonathanLoo.2014.Real-timedetectionofdenial-of-serviceattacksin
IEEE 802.11p vehicular networks. IEEECommun. Lett. 18,1(2014),110–113.
Bharat B. Madan, Manoj Banik, and Doina Bein. 2019. Securing unmanned autonomous systems from cyber threats. J.
DefenseModel. Simul. 16,2 (2019),119–136.
Federico Maggi, Davide Quarta, Marcello Pogliani, Mario Polino, Andrea M. Zanchettin, and Stefano Zanero. 2017. Rogue
Robots:TestingtheLimits ofan Industrial Robot’s Security . TechnicalReport. TrendMicro, Politecnico di Milano.
Katrina Mansfield, Timothy Eveleigh, Thomas H. Holzer, and Shahryar Sarkani. 2013. Unmanned aerial vehicle smart
devicegroundcontrolstationcybersecuritythreatmodel.In IEEEInternationalConferenceonTechnologiesforHomeland
Security (HST’13) . IEEE, 722–728.
Stephen McBride. 2018. The Driverless Car Revolution Has Begun—Here’s How To Profit. Retrieved from http://tinyurl.
com/ydzby4yr .
Joe W. McDaniel. 1988. Rules for fighter cockpit automation. In Proceedings of the IEEE 1988 National Aerospace and Elec-
tronics Conference(NAECON’88) .IEEE, 831–838.
DhwaniMehta,MohammadFaridulHaqueSiddiqui,andAhmadY.Javaid.2018.Facialemotionrecognition:Asurveyand
real-worlduser experiencesin mixedreality. Sens.18,2(2018),416.
Mohamed Nidhal Mejri and Jalel Ben-Othman. 2014b. Detecting greedy behavior by linear regression and watchdog in
vehicular ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) . IEEE,
Austin, TX. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOM.2014.7037603
Mohamed Nidhal Mejri and Jalel Ben-Othman. 2014a. Entropy as a new metric for denial of service attack detection in
vehicularad-hocnetworks.In Proceedingsofthe17thACMInternationalConferenceonModeling,AnalysisandSimulation
ofWireless andMobile Systems .ACM, 73–79.
MohamedNidhalMejri,JalelBen-Othman,andMohamedHamdi.2014.SurveyonVANETsecuritychallengesandpossible
cryptographic solutions. Veh.Commun. 1,2 (2014),53–66.
Mohamed Nidhal Mejri and Mohamed Hamdi. 2015. Recent advances in cryptographic solutions for vehicular networks.
InInternational Symposium Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC’15) . IEEE. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISNCC.2015.7238573
Kathryn Merrick, Medria Hardhienata, Kamran Shafi, and Jiankun Hu. 2016. A survey of game theoretic approaches to
modellingdecision-making in informationwarfarescenarios. FutureInternet 8,3 (2016),34.
Vera Zaychik Moffitt, Jerry L. Franke, and Meghann Lomas. 2006. Mixed-initiative adjustable autonomy in multi-vehicle
operations.In Proceedings ofAUVSI,Orlando,Florida (2006).
Matthew Molineaux, Matthew Klenk, and David W. Aha. 2010. Goal-driven autonomy in a navy strategy simulation. In
AAAI.1548–1554.
Salama A. Mostafa, Mohd Sharifuddin Ahmad, and Aida Mustapha. 2017. Adjustable autonomy: A systematic literature
review.Artif.Intell.Rev. (2017),1–38. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-017-9560-8
Salama A. Mostafa, Mohd Sharifuddin Ahmad, and Aida Mustapha. 2019. Adjustable autonomy: A systematic literature
review.Artif.Intell.Rev. 51,2(2019),149–186.
JordanNavarro.2018.Astateofscienceonhighlyautomateddriving. TheoreticalIssuesinErgonomicsScience 20,3(2019),
366–396.
Navya.2018.Navya History. RetrievedMarch 2,2019from https://www.navya-corp.com/index.php/fr/navya/histoire .
Annalee Newitz. 2013. 15 Books That Will Change the Way You Look at Robots. Retrieved March 03, 2018 from
http://tinyurl.com/yy2mkkwg .
QuamarNiyaz,WeiqingSun,andAhmadY.Javaid.2016.AdeeplearningbasedDDoSdetectionsysteminsoftware-defined
networking(SDN). arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07400 (2016).
Donald A. Norman. 1990. The problem with automation: Inappropriate feedback and interaction, not over-automation.
Phi l.T r a ns.R .S oc .Lond.B 327,1241(1990),585–593.
UniversityofNottingham–MixedRealityLaboratory.2016.FutureEverydayInteractionwiththeAutonomousInternetof
Things(A-IoT). RetrievedJune19,2018from https://tinyurl.com/yylnuarh .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 32 ====
91:32 F.Jahan et al.
EbenezerA.Oladimeji,SamSupakkul,andLawrenceChung.2006.Securitythreatmodelingandanalysis:Agoal-oriented
approach.In Proceedingsofthe10thIASTEDInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineeringandApplications(SEA’06) .
Citeseer,13–15.
Ancient Origins. 2013. Talos Crete. Retrieved March 05, 2018 from http://www.ancient-origins.net/myths-legends/
talos-crete-00157 .
Joe Pappalardo. 2018. The Dream of Drone Delivery Just Became Much More Real. Retrieved February 26, 2019 from
http://tinyurl.com/yylzkvqs .
Raja Parasuraman, Toufik Bahri, John E. Deaton, Jeffrey G. Morrison, and Michael Barnes. 1992. Theory and Design of
Adaptive Automation in Aviation Systems . Technical Report. Catholic Univ of America, Washington D.C., Cognitive
Science Lab. http://books.google.com.my/books?id=DEtSOwAACAAJ .
R.Parasuraman,T.B.Sheridan,andC.D.Wickens.2000.Amodelfortypesandlevelsofhumaninteractionwithautoma-
tion.IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part A Syst. Humans 30, 3 (May 2000), 286–297. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/3468.
844354
Simon Parkinson, Paul Ward, Kyle Wilson, and Jonathan Miller. 2017. Cyber threats facing autonomous and connected
vehicles: Future challenges. IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst. 18,11(2017),2898–2915.
Scott Drew Pendleton, Hans Andersen, Xinxin Du, Xiaotong Shen, Malika Meghjani, You Hong Eng, Daniela Rus, and
MarceloH.Ang.2017.Perception,planning,control,andcoordinationforautonomousvehicles. Machines 5,1(2017),6.
JonathanPetitandStevenE.Shladover.2015.Potentialcyberattacksonautomatedvehicles. IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst.
16,2(2015),546–556. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2014.2342271
JonathanPetit,BasStottelaar,MichaelFeiri,andFrankKargl.2015.Remoteattacksonautomatedvehiclessensors:Exper-
imentson cameraand lidar. Black Hat Europe 11(2015),2015.
T. Proscevicius, A. Bukis, V. Raudonis, and M. Eidukeviciute. 2011. Hierarchical control approach for autonomous mobile
robots.Elektronika ir Elektrotechnika 110,4(2011),101–104.
OscarPuñal,AnaAguiar,andJamesGross.2012.InVANETswetrust?:CharacterizingRFjamminginvehicularnetworks.
InProceedings of the 9th ACM International Workshop on Vehicular Inter-Networking, Systems, and Applications .A C M ,
83–92.
Davide Quarta, Marcello Pogliani, Mario Polino, Federico Maggi, Andrea Maria Zanchettin, and Stefano Zanero. 2017.An
experimental security analysis of an industrial robot controller. In 2017 38th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP).IEEE, 268–286.
Nancy E. Reed. 2005. A user controlled approach to adjustable autonomy. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii Inter-
national Conferenceon System Sciences . 295b–295b. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2005.61
Felix Richter. 2018. Fatal Accidents Damage Trust in Autonomous Driving. Retrieved May 26, 2018 from https://tinyurl.
com/y3lbkx8a .
M. E.Rosheim. 2006.Leonardo’s Lost Robot.Springer Verlag,Berlin.
Joey Roulette. 2019. Self-driving Buses Roll into Orlando’s Lake Nona, a Growing Testbed for “Smart City” Technology.
RetrievedFebruary 26,2019from http://tinyurl.com/yy3kc8kh .
WilliamB.Rouse.1976.Adaptiveallocationofdecisionmakingresponsibilitybetweensupervisorandcomputer.In Moni-
toring Behavior andSupervisory Control .Springer, 295–306.
Erol Sahin. 2005. Swarm robotics: From sources of inspiration to domains of application. In Swarm Robotics ,E r o l\cSahin
andWilliam M.Spears (Eds.).Springer, Berlin,10–20.
MukeshSaini,AbdulhameedAlelaiwi,andAbdulmotalebElSaddik.2015.HowclosearewetorealizingapragmaticVANET
solution? A meta-survey. ACMComput. Surv. (CSUR) 48,2(2015),29.
AnibalSanjab,WalidSaad,andTamerBaşar.2017.Prospecttheoryforenhancedcyber-physicalsecurityofdronedelivery
systems: A networkinterdiction game.In 2017 IEEEInternational ConferenceonCommunications (ICC’17) .IEEE, 1–6.
Sarah Sloat. 2016. BMW, Intel, Mobileye Link Up in Self-Driving Tech Alliance. Retrieved February 26, 2019 from
http://tinyurl.com/y56bwcd2 .
Paul Scerri, David V. Pynadath, and Milind Tambe. 2003. Adjustable autonomy for the real world. In Agent Autonomy .
Springer, 211–241.
Brennan P. Sellner, Laura M. Hiatt, Reid Simmons, and Sanjiv Singh. 2006. Attaining situational awareness for sliding
autonomy.In Proceedings of the1stACMSIGCHI/SIGARTConferenceonHuman-Robot Interaction . ACM, 80–87.
ShervinShahrdar,LuizaMenezes,andMehrdadNojoumian.2017.Asurveyontrustinautonomoussystems.In Intelligent
Computing .
Hazim Shakhatreh, Ahmad Sawalmeh, Ala Al-Fuqaha, Zuochao Dou, Eyad Almaita, Issa Khalil, Noor Shamsiah Othman,
Abdallah Khreishah, and Mohsen Guizani. 2018. Unmanned aerial vehicles: A survey on civil applications and key
research challenges. arXiv preprintarXiv:1805.00881 (2018).
YogeshKumarSharmaandAshishBagla.2009.Securitychallengesforswarmrobotics. SECURITYCHALLENGES 2,1(2009),
45–48.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 33 ====
Security Modelingof Autonomous Systems: A Survey 91:33
ThomasB.Sheridan. 1992. Telerobotics,Automation, and Human Supervisory Control .MIT Press, Cambridge,MA.
Thomas B. Sheridan and William L. Verplank. 1978. Human and computer control of undersea teleoperators. Technical
Report.Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. CambridgeMan-Machine Systems Lab.
ForrestShull.2016.CyberThreatModeling:AnEvaluationofThreeMethods.RetrievedMay26,2018from https://tinyurl.
com/y3j56guz .
Elizabeth Snell. 2015. Phishing Attack Affects 3,300 Partners HealthCare Patients. Retrieved June 08, 2018 from
http://tinyurl.com/y3v8on9f .
Statista. 2018. Internet of Things (IoT) Connected Devices Installed Base Worldwide from 2015 to 2025 (in Billions). Re-
trievedJune 18,2018from http://tinyurl.com/j3t9t2w .
Aaron Steinfeld, Terrence Fong, David Kaber, Michael Lewis, Jean Scholtz, Alan Schultz, and Michael Goodrich. 2006.
Common metrics for human-robot interaction. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conference on Human-
RobotInteraction . ACM, 33–40.
JieSu,JianpingHe,PengCheng,andJimingChen.2016.AstealthyGPSspoofingstrategyformanipulatingthetrajectory
of anunmannedaerialvehicle. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49,22(2016),291–296.
IrshadAhmedSumra,IftikharAhmad,HalabiHasbullah,andJamalul-lailbinAbManan.2011.ClassesofattacksinVANET.
InProceedingsoftheSaudiInternationalElectronics,CommunicationsandPhotonicsConference(SIECPC’11) .IEEE,Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/SIECPC.2011.5876939
Zhong-yang Tan, Ying, and Zheng. 2013. Research advance in swarm robotics. Defence Technol. 9, 1 (2013), 18–39.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221491471300024X .
VrizlynnL.L.ThingandJiaxiWu.2016.Autonomousvehiclesecurity:Ataxonomyofattacksanddefences.In Proceedings
ofthe2016IEEEInternationalConferenceonInternetofThings(iThings)andIEEEGreenComputingandCommunications
(GreenCom)andIEEECyber,PhysicalandSocialComputing(CPSCom)andIEEESmartData(SmartData) .IEEE,164–170.
Jon Turi. 2014a. GE’s Bringing Good Things, and Massive Robots, to Life. Retrieved March 03, 2018 from https://www.
engadget.com/2014/01/26/ge-man-amplifying-robots/ .
Jon Turi. 2014b. Tesla’s Toy Boat: A Drone before Its Time. Retrieved March 03, 2018 from https://www.engadget.com/
2014/01/19/nikola-teslas-remote-control-boat/ .
Chris Urmson, Joshua Anhalt, Drew Bagnell, Christopher Baker, Robert Bittner, John Dolan, Dave Duggins, Dave Fer-
guson, Tugrul Galatali, Chris Geyer, Michele Gittleman, Sam Harbaugh, Martial Hebert, Tom Howard, Alonzo Kelly,
David Kohanbash, Maxim Likhachev, Nick Miller, Kevin Peterson, Raj Rajkumar, Paul Rybski, Bryan Salesky, Sebas-
tianScherer,YoungWoo-seo,ReidSimmons,SanjivSingh,JarrodSnider,AnthonyStentz,WilliamRedWhittaker,Jason
Ziglar,JoshuaStruble,andMichaelTaylor.2007.Tartanracing:Amulti-modalapproachtotheDARPAurbanchallenge.
Defense94,4(2007),386–387. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.20251
George Vachtsevanos and Johan Reimann. 2004. An intelligent approach to coordinated control of multiple unmanned
aerialvehicles. In Proceedings oftheAmerican Helicopter Society 60th AnnualForum, Baltimore, MD .
Rick van der Kleij, Tom Hueting, and Jan Maarten Schraagen. 2018. Change detection support for supervisory controllers
ofhighlyautomatedsystems:Effectsonperformance,mentalworkload,andrecoveryofsituationawarenessfollowing
interruptions. Int.J.Ind.Ergon. 66(2018),75–84.
GabrielVasconcelos,GabrielCarrijo,RodrigoMiani,JeffersonSouza,andVitorGuizilini.2016.TheimpactofDoSattacks
on the AR. Drone 2.0. In Proceedings of the 2016 13th Latin American Robotics Symposium and 4th Brazilian Robotics
Symposium (LARS/SBR) .IEEE, 127–132.
ChadVanderVeen.2015.10Years,10MilestonesforDriverlessCars.RetrievedFebruary26,2019from https://tinyurl.com/
y4wb3qwt .
Pandi Vijayakumar, Maria Azees, and Arputharaj Kannan. 2015. Dual authentication and key management techniques
for secure data transmission in vehicular ad hoc networks. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 17, 4 (2015), 1015–1028.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2015.2492981
DaisukeWakabayashi.2018.Uber’sSelf-DrivingCarsWereStrugglingBeforeArizonaCrash.RetrievedSeptember13,2018
fromhttp://tinyurl.com/y83sc39o .
Alicja Wakulicz-Deja and Małgorzata Przybyła-Kasperek. 2007. Hierarchical multi-agent system. Stud. Inf. 28, 4 (2007),
63–80.
RichardWatersandTimBradshaw.2016.RiseoftheRobotsIsSparkinganInvestmentBoom.RetrievedMay26,2018from
http://tinyurl.com/yymnbxrt .
Ben George Weber, Michael Mateas, and Arnav Jhala. 2012. Learning from demonstration for goal-driven autonomy. In
AAAI.
DavidWelchandKeithNaughton.2019.GMFallsMillionsofMilesShortonCruiseDrivingProjection.RetrievedFebruary
26,2019from http://tinyurl.com/y5w4zpm7 .
Darrell M. West. 2017. Securing the Future of Driverless Cars. Retrieved February 26, 2019 from https://www.brookings.
edu/research/securing-the-future-of-driverless-cars/ .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

==== Page 34 ====
91:34 F.Jahan et al.
EarlL.WienerandRenwickE.Curry.1980.Flight-deckautomation:Promisesandproblems. Ergon.23,10(1980),995–1011.
Norbert Wiener andOthers. 1964. God andGolem,Inc .
Joe Williams. 2018. 2019 May Be Year of the Driverless Car: Here’s Where Top Automakers Stand. Retrieved February 26,
2019from http://tinyurl.com/yxgjhhrh .
SadieWilliamson.2018.BlockchainMayBetheAnswertoMakingSelfDrivingCarsSafer.RetrievedOctober1,2018from
http://tinyurl.com/y3xv467u.
Mark A. Wilson, James McMahon, Artur Wolek, David W. Aha, and Brian H. Houston. 2016. Toward goal reasoning for
autonomous underwater vehicles: Responding to unexpected agents. In Proceedings of Goal Reasoning: Papers from the
IJCAIWorkshop .
Wenguo Liu Winfield and Alan F. T. 2010. Modeling and optimization of adaptive foraging in swarm robotic systems. Int.
J.Rob. Res. 29,14(2010),1743–1760. https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364910375139
ScottWoldandPasteStaff.2015.The100GreatestMovieRobotsofAllTime.RetrievedMarch04,2018from http://tinyurl.
com/y3zbsxyk .
KyleHollinsWray,LuisPineda,andSholoZilberstein.2016.Hierarchicalapproachtotransfercontrolinsemi-autonomous
systems.In Proceedingsofthe25thInternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence .517–523. http://www.ijcai.org/
Proceedings/16/Papers/080.pdf .
GuangyuWu,JianSun,andJieChen.2016.Asurveyonthesecurityofcyber-physicalsystems. ControlTheoryTechnol. 14,
1(2016),2–10.
ErayYağdereli,CemalGemci,andA.ZiyaAktaş.2015.Astudyoncyber-securityofautonomousandunmannedvehicles.
J.DefenseModel.Simul. 12,4(2015),369–381.
AndrewYdenberg,NavtejHeir,andBobGill.2018.Security,SDN,andVANETtechnologyofdriver-lesscars.In Proceedings
ofthe2018 IEEE8th Annual Computing andCommunication Workshopand Conference(CCWC) .IEEE, 313–316.
W. B.Yeats.1933.The windingstairs andother poems.ReprintedbyKessinger Publishing.
SiewYong,DaleLindskog,RonRuhl,andPavolZavarsky.2011.RiskmitigationstrategiesformobileWi-Firobottoysfrom
onlinepedophiles.In 2011IEEE3rdInternationalConferenceonPrivacy,Security,RiskandTrust(PASSAT)and2011IEEE
3rd International Conferenceon Social Computing (SocialCom) . IEEE, 1220–1223.
ZDNet.2018.15of the BestMovies About AI,Ranked. RetrievedMarch 03,2018from https://tinyurl.com/yculsjxp .
Kim Zetter. 2014. Hospital Networks Are Leaking Data, Leaving Critical Devices Vulnerable. WIRED. Retrieved from
http://tinyurl.com/y5kxsfol .
NingZhang,ShanZhang,PengYang,OmarAlhussein,WeihuaZhuang,andXueminShermanShen.2017.Softwaredefined
space-air-ground integratedvehicular networks: Challengesandsolutions. IEEECommun.Mag. 55,7(2017),101–109.
Shlomo Zilberstein.2010.Buildingstrong semi-autonomous systems. Chaffins 2008(2010),1–20.
Received November 2018; revised April 2019; accepted May 2019
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 52,No. 5,Article 91.Publicationdate:September2019.

