==== Page 1 ====
Artif Intell Rev (2019) 52:857–900
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-017-9611-1
Selecting training sets for support vector machines:
a review
Jakub Nalepa1·Michal Kawulok1
Published online: 3 January 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Abstract Support vector machines (SVMs) are a supervised classiﬁer successfully applied
in a plethora of real-life applications. However, they suffer from the important shortcomings
of their high time and memory training complexities, which depend on the training set size.
This issue is especially challenging nowadays, since the amount of data generated every
second becomes tremendously large in many domains. This review provides an extensive
survey on existing methods for selecting SVM training data from large datasets. We divide
the state-of-the-art techniques into several categories. They help understand the underlying
ideas behind these algorithms, which may be useful in designing new methods to deal with this
important problem. The review is complemented with the discussion on the future research
pathways which can make SVMs easier to exploit in practice.
Keywords Support vector machine ·Training set selection ·Data reduction ·Classiﬁcation
1 Introduction
Support vector machine (SVM) (Cortes and Vapnik 1995 ) is a supervised classiﬁer which
has been proved highly effective in solving a wide range of pattern recognition and computer
vision problems (Arana-Daniel and Bayro-Corrochano 2006 ; Cyganek 2008 ; Arana-Daniel
et al. 2009 ; Bayro-Corrochano and Arana-Daniel 2010 ; Cyganek et al. 2015 ;L ie ta l . 2016 ;
Rodan et al. 2016 ). Nowadays, in the era of big data, the machine learning community
faces new challenges concerned with applying SVMs in real-life scenarios, which result
from data variety, volume, velocity, and veracity. The amount of data (of varying quality)
which is being generated every day grows tremendously in the majority of scientiﬁc and
B Jakub Nalepa
jakub.nalepa@polsl.pl
Michal Kawulok
michal.kawulok@polsl.pl
1Institute of Informatics, Silesian University of Technology, Akademicka 16, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland
123

==== Page 2 ====
858 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
engineering domains, including, among others, medical imaging, text categorization, com-
putational biology, genomics and banking. Although it may appear quite beneﬁcial at theﬁrst glance—more data could mean more possibilities of extracting and revealing usefulunderlying knowledge—training SVMs from extremely large and difﬁcult datasets becamea pivotal issue due to the high time and memory complexity of the SVM training (Liu et al.2016 ; Qiu et al. 2016 ).
SVM training consists in determining a hyperplane to separate the training data belonging
to two classes. Its position is deﬁned with a (usually small) subset of vectors from thetraining set ( T), called support vectors (SVs). Knowing which vectors are selected as SVs
increases the interpretability of the SVM decisions. Though the hyperplane separates the datalinearly, SVMs are applicable to non-linear problems, thanks to mapping the data into higher-dimensional spaces, in which they are linearly separable—this mapping is achieved usingkernel functions . A crucial drawback of SVMs lies in their high O(t
3)time and O(t2)memory
training complexities, where tis the cardinality of T. This problem has attracted signiﬁcant
attention from the researchers—developed techniques are aimed either at improving thetraining phase, or at extracting reduced (signiﬁcantly smaller) SVM training sets from whichSVs are likely to be determined. This review summarizes the achievements in this ﬁeld. Tothe best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst review of methods devoted to selecting the SVMtraining sets reported in the literature so far.
1.1 Broader context
To better contextualize this review in the literature, we highlight the main problems relatedto SVMs which are actively being tackled and should be inevitably resolved—they reachfar beyond dealing with large datasets. These problems concern selecting the SVM hyper-parameters (Sect. 1.1.1 ) and learning SVMs from data of questionable quality (Sect. 1.1.2 ).
Both issues, along with selecting SVM training data from large datasets, signiﬁcantly affectthe applicability of the SVM classiﬁer in practice. Addressing them successfully will helpexploit this classiﬁer in emerging big data scenarios.
1.1.1 Model selection for SVMs
Model selection for SVMs—being a problem of determining the SVM hyperparameters,including a kernel function and its parameters—is a pivotal, yet computationally expensivetask (Gold and Sollich 2003 ; Ding et al. 2015 ). Automatic model selection is a crucial issue,
since improperly tuned parameters can affect the SVM performance. Although there existtechniques tailored to tune pre-deﬁned kernels (Tang et al. 2009 ), the research effort is put
into designing algorithms which determine the desired kernels.
Friedrichs and Igel ( 2005 ) proposed the covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy
to determine a kernel from a parameterized kernel space. Their experimental study showedthat this strategy easily outperforms a standard grid-search approach for selecting thesehyperparameters (which is obviously not scalable for large numbers of parameters). Lessmannet al. ( 2006 ) incorporated the model selection criterion into the ﬁtness function of their genetic
technique. In the hybrid genetic algorithm (GA), the evolutionary optimization was combinedwith the gradient descent method (Zhou and Xu 2009 ). GAs were recently used for the
smooth twin parametric-margin SVMs (Wang et al. 2013b ). In the latest algorithm by Chou
et al. ( 2014 ), the SVM parameters were optimized using a fast messy Ali and Smith-Miles
(2006 ) explored the possibility of applying rule-based classiﬁers to generate SVM models.
Other interesting approaches include tabu searches (Lebrun et al. 2008 ), compression-based
123

==== Page 3 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 859
techniques (Luxburg et al. 2004 ), and genetic-programming-based systems (Sullivan and
Luke 2007 ). Zhang and Song ( 2015 ) noticed that various kernels may perform equally well
for a certain dataset, and proposed a multi-label kernel recommendation method built on thedata characteristics. An interesting model adaptation, which combines the swarm intelligencewith a grid search, was proposed by Kapp et al. ( 2012 ).
To speed up the process of model selection for SVMs, a number of parallel algorithms
have been proposed (Devos et al. 2014 ). However, their underpinning approaches are often
very simple (Shi and Liu 2012 ;R i p e p ie ta l . 2015 ). A promising research direction includes
algorithms to construct new kernels tailored for a problem at hand (Lessmann et al. 2006 ).
Such approaches include neuro-fuzzy systems which construct kernels from scratch (Simi´ nski
2014 ). This algorithm was used in the preliminary research on parameter-less SVMs (Nalepa
et al. 2015b ). It is worth mentioning that determining the desired SVM model should be
coupled with techniques for training SVMs from large datasets (especially for reducing thecardinality of SVM training sets), because the best-performing kernel may be dependenton the outcome of a training set selection algorithm. This research direction has not beenexploited so far, and we believe it will signiﬁcantly change in the nearest future.
1.1.2 Learning from weakly-labeled, noisy, and poor-quality data
Retrieving correctly labeled datasets is an expensive and challenging task, because it mayinvolve repeating experiments or performing time-consuming annotation procedures (e.g., inthe ﬁeld of medical imaging). Therefore, learning from weakly-labeled data became an
important issue. All weak-label problems are divided into several groups, based on the labelcharacteristics. They include problems with (i) partially-known labels (most of the train-ing set vectors are unlabeled and only some of them are labeled), (ii) implicitly-knownlabels (training vectors are grouped into bags for which the labels are known
1—the labels
of the training set vectors are implicit and they are based on their bag membership), and
(iii) unknown labels (Li et al. 2013 ). Other potential issues concerned with the data quality
relate to the label and/or feature noise, which can adversely impact the classiﬁer performance.It is especially visible in practical medical applications, in which a majority of diagnostictests are not 100% accurate, and cannot be considered a gold standard (Frenay and Verleysen2014 ) (e.g., there may be discrepancies between the segmentation of the same medical image
analyzed by two independent radiology experts). The consequences of the label noise onthe behavior of a classiﬁer can be very severe. First, its performance may be signiﬁcantlydeteriorated, the learning requirements can be easily affected (e.g., an appropriate cardinalityof the training set can notably increase to compensate mislabeled or noisy data points), theﬁnal model can be much more complex than it should be, and the other algorithms (e.g., forfeature selection) may be polluted as well. Frenay and Verleysen ( 2014 ) indicate that the
label noise affects the observed frequencies of medical test results, hence leads to incorrectconclusions on population characteristics.
There exist three main groups of approaches for dealing with noisy sets (manual analysis
should not be considered, because it is unacceptably time-consuming and infeasible for real-life data). First, there are classiﬁers that are said to be robust against the noise (however, theunderlying nature and model of such noise is not considered in these techniques at all) (Duanand Wu 2017 ). Alternatively, it is possible to build a noise model (typically, it is retrieved
1In most applications, a bag is labeled positive if it contains at least one positive-class vector—it is negative
otherwise. Therefore, the implicit labels of all negative-class vectors belonging to a positive-class bag are infact incorrect (Li et al. 2013 ).
123

==== Page 4 ====
860 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
in parallel with the learned classiﬁer, and they are ﬁnally coupled for the higher-quality
classiﬁcation). Such embedded data cleansing was used for SVMs (Xu et al. 2006 ), also
for adversarial label noise (Xiao et al. 2015 ). The last group encompasses algorithms which
ﬁlter noisy and/or mislabeled vectors from the input set. Although it appears quite tempting(and natural), since it resembles removing outliers and anomalies from the data, it is nottrivial. These ﬁltering algorithms include various graph- and ensemble-based methods, andthose which detect mislabeled vectors by analyzing their impact on the learning procedure.There are works indicating that evolutionary techniques can effectively detect and remove(or just identify) the noise (Ghoggali and Melgani 2009 ; Han and Chang 2013 ). A generic
solution for learning SVMs from weak labels was introduced by Li et al. ( 2013 )—labels
are subject to the optimization. This is effective, if vectors belonging to the opposite classesform well-separated clusters in the kernel space, but this assumption may not hold in manyscenarios (Cour et al. 2009 ; Tapaswi et al. 2015 ).
Handling poor quality data attracts more and more research attention nowadays (Zhu et al.
2014 ). It concerns not only dealing with noisy and weakly-labeled sets, but also with detecting
ambiguous or duplicated data (with overlapping feature values), and outliers (Tsyurmastoet al. 2014 ; Kourou et al. 2015 ). As mentioned by Frenay and Verleysen ( 2014 ), most of
the algorithms make assumptions concerning the data, and are characterized by difﬁcult-to-tune parameters. These approaches should be validated using a larger number of real-lifescenarios to ﬁnd the real noise characteristics. Evolving labels can signiﬁcantly improvethe SVM performance for weakly-labeled sets, as shown by Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2015 ).
An interesting research direction involves algorithms which evolve both labels and reducedtraining sets. Such methods could address the problems of training SVMs from large datasetsand coping with low-quality data comprehensively.
1.2 Motivation and goals
The problem of training SVMs from large datasets is becoming increasingly important sincethe amount of data grows extremely rapidly (note that the term large dataset is very ambigu-
ous in the literature—sizes of such datasets range from hundreds to millions of trainingvectors). There exist generic training set selection techniques [also referred to as instance
selection algorithms in the literature (Olvera-López et al. 2010 )], and those designed for
other classiﬁers [ k-nearest neighbors (Angiulli 2005 ), neural networks (Reeves and Taylor
1998 ), and many other (Hernandez-Leal et al. 2013 ; Wenyuan et al. 2013 )], but—due to the
speciﬁc characteristics of the SVM training process and operation—the majority of SVMtraining set selection algorithms are crafted for this classiﬁer. In this review, we summarizethe state-of-the-art algorithms for selecting SVM training data from large datasets.
The purpose of this review is twofold:
– We present an extensive review of the state-of-the-art methods for selecting SVM training
sets. Not only do we report these methods, but we also discuss their potential weaknesses,strengths, and ideas behind them. This will allow for better understanding (i) how to copewith massive real-life sets, and (ii) how to select an appropriate method for a problem athand.
– We believe that this review will notably help in developing new approaches for select-
ing SVM training sets. The presented taxonomy should be useful in identifying thepotential pitfalls of emerging training set selection algorithms, and in determining whichtechniques could be successfully combined into hybrid algorithms to further boost allavailable knowledge concerning the Tvectors (e.g., those methods which utilize com-
plementary sources of information in search of valuable training vectors). The literature
123

==== Page 5 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 861
in this ﬁeld is very diverse—we hope that this review will clearly highlight the areas
which should (orshould not ) be further explored.
1.3 Structure of the review
Section 2serves as a short theoretical introduction to SVMs. Section 3begins with the pro-
posed taxonomy to classify the methods of selecting SVM training data from large datasets.We discuss in detail techniques which help reduce the size of the SVM training sets, andhighlight their most important characteristics. Section 4concludes the review and serves as
an outlook to the future work.
2 Theoretical background
Consider a set Tofttraining feature vectors xi∈RD,i=1,..., t, and the corresponding
class labels yi∈{ + 1,−1}(for the binary classiﬁcation). Vectors with the class label +1a r e
the positive ones (class C+), whereas the others belong to the negative class C−.
2.1 Linear SVMs
Linear SVMs separate data in the D-dimensional input space with the use of the decision
hyperplane deﬁned as
f(x):wTx+b=0, (1)
where wis the hyperplane normal vector, w∈RD,a n d b/||w||is the perpendicular distance
between the hyperplane and the origin ( ||·||is the 2-norm), b∈ R. This hyperplane is
positioned such that the distance between the closest vectors of the opposite classes to thehyperplane is maximal.
For two linearly separable classes (as already mentioned, with the class labels y
i∈
{+1,−1}), the training data must satisfy the following conditions:
wTxi+b≥1yi=+ 1( 2 )
wTxi+b≤− 1yi=− 1( 3 )
which can be re-written as:
yi(wTxi+b)−1≥0yi∈{ + 1,−1}. (4)
The equalities from Eq. ( 4) hold for the vectors positioned on two parallel hyperplanes, with
the distance to the origin given as |1−b|/||w||and|−1−b|/||w||, respectively. There are
no vectors between these two planes, and the distance between the separating hyperplane andeach of these planes is 1 /||w||. Hence, the maximal theoretical margin possible to generate
by the decision hyperplane is
ϕ(w)=2
||w||. (5)
Since we intend to maximize the separating margin, the value of ||w||=√
wTwshould be
minimized:
min
w,b||w||. (6)
123

==== Page 6 ====
862 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
To simplify the calculations, it can be given as the quadratic term:
min
w,b||w||2
2. (7)
The optimization is performed with respect to the constraints in Eq. ( 4)—it becomes a
quadratic programming (QP) problem. This formulation of the problem is called the primal
form . The resulting hyperplane is exploited to classify the incoming data based on the decision
function
f(a)=sgn(wTa+b), (8)
where ais a feature vector to be classiﬁed.
If we re-write Eqs. ( 4)a n d( 7) to get the Lagrangian in its primal form, we have
L(w,b,α)=||w||2
2−t/summationdisplay
i=1αiyi(wTxi+b)+t/summationdisplay
i=1αi, (9)
where αiare the Lagrange multipliers. This transformation allows for representing the con-
straints given in Eq. ( 4) as the constraints on the Lagrange multipliers. In this formulation,
the data in both training and test sets will appear in the form of the dot product between thevectors (Burges 1998 ).
Since retrieving the SVM hyperplane is a convex optimization problem, determining the
hyperplane is equivalent to ﬁnding a solution to the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) condi-tions (Fletcher 2013 ). The KKT conditions for Eq. ( 9)a r e :
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩∂
∂wL(w,b,α)=w−t/summationtext
i=1αiyixi=0
∂
∂bL(w,b,α)=−t/summationtext
i=1αiyi=0(10)
such that
yi(wTxi+b)−1≥0i=1,2,..., t (11)
αi≥0∀i (12)
αi(yi(wTxi+b)−1)=0∀i (13)
Incorporating the equation for wfrom Eq. ( 10) into Eq. ( 9)
w=t/summationdisplay
i=1αiyixi (14)
and knowing that
t/summationdisplay
i=1αiyi=0, (15)
we have
LD(α)=t/summationdisplay
i=1αi−1
2t/summationdisplay
i=1t/summationdisplay
j=1αiαjyiyjxT
ixj, (16)
where LDdenotes the dual form of the Lagrangian. The dual problem may be solved by
maximizing LDwith respect to α, subject to the constraints given in Eqs. ( 11)–(13) (this is
the Wolfe dual of the problem) (Burges 1998 ; Fletcher 2013 ). Only a small subset (containing
123

==== Page 7 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 863
svectors) of the entire T(i.e., SVs) contributes to the position of the hyperplane. The Lagrange
multipliers αicorresponding to the SVs are greater than zero. Finally, the decision function
becomes:
f(a)=sgn/parenleftBiggt/summationdisplay
i=1αiyixT
ia+b/parenrightBigg
. (17)
In order to apply the above reasoning for non-separable cases, it is necessary to relax
the constraints given in Eqs. ( 2)a n d( 3), and to introduce an additional cost of this opera-
tion (Cortes and Vapnik 1995 ):
wTxi+b≥1−ξiyi=+ 1 (18)
wTxi+b≤− 1+ξiyi=− 1 (19)
ξi≥0∀i (20)
where ξidenotes a positive slack variable. The objective function should be modiﬁed to take
into account the classiﬁcation errors:
min
w,b,ξ||w||2
2+Ct/summationdisplay
i=1ξi (21)
such that
yi(wTxi+b)≥1−ξii=1,..., t (22)
ξi≥0i=1,..., t (23)
where Cis the parameter that controls the trade-off between the margin and the slack penalty
(the larger the value of C, the higher penalty to the errors). Considering this trade-off allows
for introducing the soft-margin SVMs. As in the separable case, Eq. ( 21) can be easily
transformed into its Wolfe’s dual form:
LD(α)=t/summationdisplay
i=1αi−1
2t/summationdisplay
i=1t/summationdisplay
j=1αiαjyiyjxT
ixj. (24)
It is to be maximized, subject to
0≤αi≤Candt/summationdisplay
i=1αiyi=0. (25)
F i n a l l y ,w eh a v e
w=s/summationdisplay
i=1αiyixi. (26)
As in the separable case, we can retrieve the Lagrangian in its primal form:
L(w,b,α)=||w||2
2+Ct/summationdisplay
i=1ξi−t/summationdisplay
i=1αi/bracketleftBig
yi(wTxi+b)−1+ξi/bracketrightBig
−t/summationdisplay
i=1μiξi, (27)
where μienforces the positivity of ξi. The KKT conditions can be retrieved for the non-
separable case following the reasoning presented for the separable one.
123

==== Page 8 ====
864 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
2.2 Non-linear SVMs
Many real-life recognition problems are not linearly solvable and require a non-linear decision
function. The kernel trick was introduced to obtain a non-linear hyperplane in SVMs (Boser
et al. 1992 ). It consists in deﬁning a kernel function [which must satisfy the conditions
presented by Mercer ( 1909 )] that computes the inner product of two feature vectors in a
derived non-linear feature space:
K(a,a/prime)=φ(a)Tφ(a/prime), (28)
where φ:RD→ Fis a mapping of a vector afrom the input into a non-linear (possibly
inﬁnitely dimensional) feature space F, in which vectors are linearly separable, and K:
RD×RD→ R. The kernel does not require calculating the φmapping explicitly (note that
the kernel matrix which contains all of the kernel values computed between every pair of t
vectors, is of a t×tsize). The non-linear decision function is
f(a)=sgn/parenleftBiggt/summationdisplay
i=1αiyiK(xT
ia)+b/parenrightBigg
, (29)
where αiis a Lagrange multiplier (Tayal et al. 2014 ). To determine the SVM response in a
non-linear kernel space, it is not necessary to calculate the mapping φof any vector given
the kernel function K.
An example of mapping a dataset from (a) a two-dimensional space into a (b) higher-
dimensional one is rendered in Fig. 1. In the original input space, feature vectors belonging
to two classes (visualized as red and blue dots) are not linearly separable. However, whenthese vectors are mapped into a three-dimensional space, then it is possible to determine ahyperplane (shown in yellow) which separates vectors, and it is used for classiﬁcation.
Determining the SVM decision hyperplane is a constrained QP optimization problem—
s e eE q s .( 21)a n d( 22). This QP problem can be solved in O(t
3)time with O(t2)
memory, where tis the cardinality of T, using a standard QP solver (Zeng et al.
(b) (a)
x1x2
Fig. 1 Example of determining the decision hyperplane for a non-linear case— ablue and red dots visualize
vectors belonging to two classes, bvectors are mapped into a higher-dimensional space, where they can be
separated using an SVM hyperplane (in yellow). (Color ﬁgure online)
123

==== Page 9 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 865
2008b ). It quickly becomes infeasible for massively large, real-life datasets. Although there
exist techniques aimed at accelerating the SVM training which include—among others—decomposition-based (Joachims 1999 ), parallel (Li et al. 2011 ; Ferragut and Laska 2012 )
and approximation (Le et al. 2014 ) approaches, many of them introduce additional memory
burden during the optimization (Alamdar et al. 2016 ). Hence, algorithms for reducing the size
of SVM training sets are considered an immediate remedy to the problem of learning SVMsfrom large datasets. Also, the SVM classiﬁcation time is linearly dependent on the numberof SVs [see Eqs. ( 17)a n d( 29)—only those vectors for which the Lagrange multipliers are
greater than zero contribute to the decision]. Therefore, the number of SVs should be keptlow to speed up the classiﬁcation of incoming (unseen) vectors. The number of SVs indirectlydepends on the cardinality of a training set—the smaller the number of vectors in T,t h el e s s
SVs are determined in the training process. A more extensive background information onSVMs, complemented with numerous examples and analogies which further illustrate theconcepts behind SVMs are explained in an excellent tutorial by Burges ( 1998 ).
3 Selecting SVM training sets
All algorithms for dealing with training SVMs from large datasets can be divided into two
main categories including techniques which (i) speed up the SVM training , and (ii) reduce
the size of training sets by selecting candidate vectors (i.e., those vectors which are likely to
be annotated as SVs). In the ﬁrst case, existing techniques are applied to either reduce thecomplexity of the underlying optimization problem, or to handle the optimization processmore efﬁciently. However, this approach still induces the problem of high memory com-plexity of the SVM training process which is challenging and has to be endured in big dataproblems (Guo and Boukir 2015 ;W a n ga n dX u 2004 ). The algorithms from the second cat-
egory select vectors from Tto form signiﬁcantly smaller training sets—in this review, we
focus on approaches for selecting SVM training sets from large datasets.
There are a number of various techniques to reduce the cardinality of a training set which
may be classiﬁed into several categories, based on the underpinning optimization strategy. Ahigh-level classiﬁcation of the algorithms for selecting SVM training sets is given in Fig. 2.
Selecting SVM training sets
Data
geometry
analysis
methods
(Sect. 3.1)Neighborhood
analysis
methods
(Sect. 3.2)Evolutionary
methods
(Sect. 3.3)Active
learning
methods
(Sect. 3.4)Random
sampling
methods
(Sect. 3.5)
Clustering-
based
methods
(Sect. 3.1.1)Non-
clustering
methods
(Sect. 3.1.2)
Fig. 2 General categories of approaches for selecting SVM training sets
123

==== Page 10 ====
866 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Fig. 3 Flowchart of a basic clustering-based method to select reﬁned training sets. The dashed line annotates
the step which may be omitted in algorithms which analyze all clusters
This section gathers the algorithms which extract reﬁned SVM training sets in order to
reduce the computational and storage burden of the training. We divide these techniques intoﬁve main categories: (i) data geometry analysis algorithms (investigating the geometry of T
in search of candidate vectors that should be included into the reﬁned sets T
/prime’s), (ii) neigh-
borhood analysis methods (exploiting the statistical properties of Tand investigating the
local neighborhoods of Tvectors), (iii) evolutionary techniques (evolving reﬁned training
sets), (iv) active learning, and (v) random sampling techniques.
3.1 Data geometry analysis methods
The following section discusses approaches which exploit the information about the trainingset structure to extract SV candidates (i.e., such vectors, which are likely to be selected asSVs in the training process). These vectors are then used to form reﬁned training sets ofsigniﬁcantly smaller sizes than the original dataset. All approaches can be divided into twogroups—the ﬁrst encompasses clustering-based techniques, whereas the second contains theremaining geometry-based algorithms.
3.1.1 Clustering-based methods
Clustering-based algorithms have been intensively studied for selecting reﬁned training sets.Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) indicate their theoretical advantages: (i) clustering-based techniques
can always eliminate the useless vectors from T, (ii) they are applicable to multi-class prob-
lems, (iii) their cost objectives may be freely established for a given problem. However,these methods suffer from a difﬁcult problem of determining a potentially large number ofparameters (the clustering parameters, and the number of vectors annotated as important foreach cluster are the most important parameters).
A ﬂowchart visualizing a standard training set selection algorithm which utilizes clustering
is given in Fig. 3. After setting the algorithm parameters, vectors from Tare clustered using
a given clustering technique
2. Then, the clusters to be further analyzed are selected (this
step may be omitted for algorithms investigating all clusters, thus it is annotated with thedashed line in the ﬂowchart), and the SV candidates are ﬁnally included in a reﬁned set. Thisprocedure is most often performed for each class in Tindependently.
Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) applied the frequency-sensitive competitive learning to cluster
training set vectors (Scheunders and Backer 1999 ), with various numbers of centroids for
each class. Once centroids are determined, they are further analyzed to extract the mostimportant (critical) centroids. First, each of them is visited and the nearest opposite-classcentroid is found. If two centroids (denoted as the centroids A and B) are the nearest toone another in both senses (thus when the centroid A is the closest centroid for B and viceversa), then they are put into the pool of critical centroids. Finally, the already selected
2It was shown that the choice of the clustering technique does not inﬂuence the next T/primeselection steps
signiﬁcantly (Lyhyaoui et al. 1999 ).
123

==== Page 11 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 867
critical centroids are utilized to classify the remaining ones using the 1-nearest neighbor
algorithm, and the wrongly classiﬁed centroids are considered important and annotated ascritical (they will most likely lay near the decision hyperplane). The authors developed fourdifferent sample selection mechanisms to extract the ﬁnal vectors which are to be included inthe reﬁned training set. These approaches are based on: (i) analysis of the dispersion of thevectors, (ii) the vector’s neighborhood analysis (i.e., the nearest opposite-class vector of theone added to T
/primeis added to T/primeas well), (iii) the combination of (i) and (ii), and (iv) analysis
of the relations between vectors and centroids. The authors concluded that applying differentselection algorithms does not drastically inﬂuence the classiﬁcation score (however, the two-class training set used in the experiments was very small).
Thek-means clustering has been utilized by Barros de Almeida et al. ( 2000 )i nt h e i rr e ﬁ n e d
training set selection algorithm referred to as SVM-KM. In SVM-KM, kclusters (where kis
a user-deﬁned input parameter of the algorithm) are formed for the entire training set ( notfor
vectors belonging to different classes independently). Then, the one-class clusters (i.e., thosecontaining vectors belonging to a single class) are disregarded and only their centroids survivein a reﬁned set, whereas all vectors from the heterogeneous clusters (containing vectorsfrom different classes) are appended to T
/prime. It is worth noting that the data distribution may
signiﬁcantly affect the performance of SVM-KM (it is suitable for dense datasets and maymisbehave for the sparse ones). Also, the value of kshould be set with care, since it can
easily jeopardize the algorithm behavior.
In the clustering-based SVMs (abbreviated as CB-SVMs), Yu et al. ( 2003 ) applied a
hierarchical micro-clustering (Zhang et al. 1996 ), which scans a training set in search of
valuable vectors. CB-SVM builds a micro-cluster tree (referred to as the clustering feature
[CF] tree) by adding the incoming Tvectors to clusters. It does not allow for backtracking,
thus the data distribution may inﬂuence its capabilities, but the CF trees can still extract maindata distribution patterns. A clustering feature (for a given cluster c
i) is given as the following
triple:
CF=(ti,LS,SS), (30)
where tidenotes the number of vectors in this cluster, LS and SS are the linear and the square
sums of tivectors in cigiven as
LS=ti/summationdisplay
j=ixj (31)
and
SS=ti/summationdisplay
j=ix2
j, (32)
respectively. A CF tree is a height-balanced tree characterized by two parameters: the branch-
ing factor ( bCF), and the threshold ( tCF). Each non-leaf node encompasses at most bCFentries
of the form (CFj,child j),w h e r e j=1,2,..., bCF, whereas the leaf nodes do not have chil-
dren. Thus, each non-leaf node may be interpreted as a cluster composed of the subclustersrepresented by its children. The threshold t
CFis the maximal cluster radius in any leaf node.
The CF trees are built following procedures resembling those applied in the B +− trees. A
noteworthy feature and the advantage of this clustering is a possibility of handling outliersand noisy vectors—those leaf entries which contain signiﬁcantly smaller number of vectorsthan the other ones are considered as outliers.
In CB-SVM, the CF trees are constructed for both classes separately, and SVMs are trained
using centroids of the root entries (there is at least one entry in the root, each entry being a
123

==== Page 12 ====
868 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
cluster, therefore there is at least one centroid) of both trees. If there are too few vectors in this
set, then the second level entries of the trees are included in a reﬁned set. Then, the entriespositioned near the hyperplane (so-called the low margin clusters ) are de-clustered, and the
child entries de-clustered from the parents are added to T
/primealong with the non-de-clustered
parents. Another SVM is ﬁnally trained using the centroids of T/primeentries—this process is
continued until there are no entries to be de-clustered. Although the method appeared to bewell-scalable for large datasets, the authors pointed out that it is currently limited to linearkernels since the hierarchical micro-clusters will not be isomorphic to high-dimensionalfeature spaces. Also, the algorithm parameters ( b
CFandtCF) should be selected with care for
an analyzed dataset.
Koggalage and Halgamuge ( 2004 ) proposed a very interesting approach similar to SVM-
KM—ﬁrst, the k-means clustering is applied to ﬁnd the initial clusters, then the crisp clusters
are determined (i.e., those clusters containing one-class vectors), and ﬁnally vectors to berejected from Tare determined. The authors showed that some vectors from the crisp clusters
may be annotated as SVs, thus they should not be automatically removed from reﬁned sets.Therefore, for each crisp cluster, there is a safety region deﬁned which contains its crucialvectors (positioned near the cluster border). The process of rejecting internal vectors from acrisp cluster is visualized in Fig. 4. The width of the safety region (in yellow) is determined
based on the number of vectors in a cluster and the radius of the cluster, therefore it is variablefor different clusters.
Wang and Xu ( 2004 ) proposed a heuristic SVM (HSVM), in which the vector similarity
measure ( s
HSVM ) is deﬁned at ﬁrst, and then vectors are grouped into kHSVM groups. The
similarity function is given as
sHSVM =f/parenleftBigg
1/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleai−aj/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
2/parenrightBigg
, (33)
where ai/negationslash=aj,a n d f(x)=x—the larger the value of the similarity measure, the closer
(geometrically) the corresponding vectors are. For each group, the average vector is foundand used to remove other training vectors, if their s
HSVM values (with respect to the average
vector) are larger than the assumed threshold. As in other methods which exploit somepre-deﬁned thresholds, this threshold must be selected very carefully (sensitivity to thesethreshold values is a disadvantage of such techniques).
In the algorithm proposed by Cervantes et al. ( 2008 ), the concept of the minimum enclosing
ball (MEB) clustering has been introduced. The MEB of a given set S
MEB is the smallest
ball enclosing all balls and vectors in SMEB. The ball is denoted as B(cB,rB),w h e r e cBand
rBare the center and the radius of B. Since ﬁnding an optimal ball for a given set is very
challenging, the authors proposed to use the (1+/epsilon1)—approximation of MEBs. After the
Fig. 4 Removing the internal
vectors from a crisp cluster (a),
based on the safety region(annotated with yellow) (b).T h e
removed vectors are grayed.(Color ﬁgure online)(a) (b)
123

==== Page 13 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 869
(b) (a)
Fig. 5 Creating the reﬁned set using SR-DSA: athe entire T(two colors indicate two classes), bvectors are
grouped into clusters—the interior vectors and the exterior vectors are rejected (they are rendered in gray andblack, respectively). This ﬁgure is inspired by Wang and Shi ( 2008 ). (Color ﬁgure online)
MEB clustering, a reﬁned set contains all the vectors from mixed-class clusters, along with
centroids of one-class clusters. After the SVM training, an additional de-clustering is appliedto recover other potentially valuable Tvectors which lay near the decision hyperplane and
to append them to T
/prime.
A similar approach (named SebSVM) was proposed by Zeng et al. ( 2008 ). Here, the
convex hull vectors are selected to form reﬁned training sets in the feature space. This isperformed by solving the MEB problem in the feature space: at ﬁrst, data are mapped into ahigher-dimensional kernel space, and two MEBs are created (for both classes independently).Based on those MEBs, the convex hull vectors from Tare extracted. Similar to Koggalage
and Halgamuge ( 2004 ), the safety region is utilized in SebSVM to avoid removing useful
vectors from T
/prime.
Wang and Shi ( 2008 ) proposed an algorithm for reducing the size of training sets by data
structure analysis (abbreviated as SR-DSA). In their approach, the authors used the Ward-linkage clustering (Ward 1963 ), which enables obtaining ellipsoidal clusters. The Ward’s
linkage for two clusters ( c
1andc2) is given as
W(c1,c2)=|c1|·|c2|
|c1|+|c2|·||µ1−µ2||2, (34)
where µ1and µ2are the average vectors. Initially, each vector is a separate cluster, and
these clusters are subsequently merged. The value of the Ward’s linkage increases once thenumber of clusters is decreased during the clustering process. This may be visualized in themerge distance curve which is usually used to ﬁnd the knee point (utilized to determine thedesired number of clusters). After this procedure, a reﬁned training set is elaborated—theinterior vectors from each cluster are removed along with those vectors which are distantfrom other-class clusters based on the Mahalanobis metric. Each class is processed separatelyusing SR-DSA. A visualization of this process is shown in Fig. 5. The main disadvantage of
this method is the necessity of selecting its various parameters (the ﬁnal number of clusters orthe number of internal vectors removed from each cluster being the most important). Thesevalues should be investigated independently for each incoming training set.
An interesting technique which combines the k-means clustering with edge detection
within the entire training set has been proposed by Li et al. ( 2009 ). In this algorithm, the
123

==== Page 14 ====
870 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
(a) (b) (c) ( d)
Fig. 6 Example of the Tvectors selection to the reﬁned set: aone-class cluster of vectors, bthe convex hull
determined for this cluster, cthe concave hull determined for this cluster for a given value of k,dthe vectors
which are rejected from T/primea r er e n d e r e di ng r a y
training set is interpreted as a color image (there are two distinct colors for binary classiﬁcation
denoting two classes). Relying on image processing techniques, a pixel’s neighborhood isscanned to detect strong changes of brightness and color which may correspond to edges.In the edge detection exploited by Li et al. ( 2009 ), vectors from Tare analyzed—if at least
one neighboring vector is of a different class than the investigated one ( a), then asurvives in
T
/prime(the neighboring vectors are rejected). This process is complemented with the k-means
clustering which aims at ﬁnding the centroids from T, which are also appended to the reﬁned
training set.
Chau et al. ( 2013 ) proposed the convex-concave hull analysis algorithm to select T/prime
(referred to as CCHSVM). The authors pointed out that in the linearly non-separable case,
convex hulls which encompass two classes in a training set will overlap thus it is necessaryto “shrink” convex hulls (CHs) to avoid the overlapping. In the proposed algorithm, a CHgenerated for each class independently is not modiﬁed, however the concave hull is utilizedto extract vectors which are closest to the exterior boundary of the CH (all vectors lie onthe same side of the CH edge). Since the “closeness” to the CH may be varying acrossdifferent Tvectors, the authors search for knearest points for the edge deﬁned using two
adjacent reference points on the CH. It is worth noting that various values of kmay affect
the shape of the ﬁnal convex-concave hull (Lopez-Chau et al. 2012 ). Also, the set of CH
points is a subset of the convex-concave hull which implies that the algorithm will performwell in the linearly separable cases. The authors pointed out that the method will performwell for uniformly distributed data. The distribution is usually not known beforehand, thusthey perform the Tpre-processing in which Tis partitioned using the grid-based clustering.
In the higher-dimensional cases, principal component analysis (PCA) is used to reduce thenumber of dimensions. Then, the convex-concave analysis is applied to data partitions, andthe boundary convex-concave vectors are included in T
/prime. An example is presented in Fig. 6.
The analysis of convex hulls have been applied in numerous other algorithms for select-
ing reﬁned training sets (also for e.g., artiﬁcial neural networks) (Wang et al. 2007 ). These
approaches include interesting analyses of CHs exploited for the online classiﬁer train-ing (Khosravani et al. 2013 ;W a n ge ta l . 2013a ). In these techniques, SVMs are updated
dynamically when new vectors arrive to the system (based on the skeleton samples—beingthe vertices of convex hulls—extracted either ofﬂine or online, when new vectors appear).The authors indicated that the algorithm may not be applicable in the case of noisy datasets,and they suggest to incorporate de-noising methods before the ofﬂine selection of the T
/prime
vectors (removing noisy vectors in the online update step still requires investigation).
In a recent redundant data reduction algorithm, Shen et al. ( 2016 ) proposed to remove
unnecessary training set vectors via the analysis of cluster boundaries complemented with theinvestigation of other inter-cluster relations. For each cluster ( k-means clustering is exploited
123

==== Page 15 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 871
(b) (a)
Fig. 7 Removal of unnecessary training set vectors from aone-class cluster— bthe rejected vectors are
annotated in gray
to cluster the entire T), the distance density set is calculated (the distance density counts the
number of vectors which fall into a circle centered in the cluster centroid and having theradius equal to the distance between the centroid and a given Tvector). It is assumed that
vectors situated near the centroid are “dense”, whereas those positioned far from the centroidare sparse. Finally, the Fisher’s discriminant analysis is utilized to ﬁnd the boundary betweenthe dense and the sparse parts of each cluster (Makris et al. 2011 )—only the sparse vectors
are included in T
/prime. A removal of the internal cluster vectors is shown in Fig. 7.
An additional technique introduced by Shen et al. ( 2016 ) concerns removing redundant
clusters. The initial clusters retrieved using k-means clustering are further divided into one-
class and heterogeneous clusters. The latter ones are then sub-clustered to distinguish one-class inner clusters. The authors point out that SVs will be derived from the heterogeneousclusters with a higher probability, and some Tvectors can be safely deleted from one-
class clusters. Redundant one-class clusters are removed using the max-min cluster distancealgorithm, and the vectors belonging to these clusters are rejected from T
/prime.
Since clustering techniques may become quite time-consuming, there appeared approaches
which utilize various parallel architectures (e.g., graphics processing units) in order to speedup the T
/primeselection process (Yuan et al. 2015 ), and they were applied to real-life problems.
Another important issue of these methods which needs to be addressed is a proper selectionof their crucial parameters, which can easily affect reﬁned training sets. Finally, in manycases it is still necessary to analyze the entire Tto extract useful information.
3.1.2 Non-clustering methods
Apart from clustering-based methods, there are a number of approaches which exploit the
geometrical information about a training set without grouping the data. Abe and Inoue ( 2001 )
estimate which Tvectors are positioned near the SVM decision boundary using a classiﬁer
based on the Mahalanobis distance. This approach is especially suitable for polynomial kernelfunctions, since the decision boundaries are expressed by polynomials when the Mahalanobisdistance (which is invariant for linear transformations of the input variables) is applied.First, the centers and the covariance matrices are found for all Tvectors (for both classes
independently). Then, for each vector, the relative difference of distances (r
MD) is calculated.
For a positive-class vector, it becomes
rMD(a)=MD−(a)−MD+(a)
MD+(a)≤ηMD, (35)
123

==== Page 16 ====
872 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
where MD +(a)denotes the Mahalanobis distance between aand the average positive-class
vector, MD −(a)is the Mahalanobis distance between aand the average negative-class vec-
tor, and ηMD,w h e r e ηMD>0, is the parameter controlling the “nearness” to the decision
boundary. If the value of rMD(a)is negative, then ais misclassiﬁed and it is most likely
positioned near the SVM decision hyperplane, thus should be included in a reﬁned trainingset. All Tvectors are ﬁnally sorted according to their r
MDvalues, and t/prime
MDones with the
lowest values are selected to form T/prime(t/prime
MD/2 are therefore retrieved for each class to avoid
biasing T/primewith one-class vectors).
The lune-based β-skeleton algorithm for extracting useful Tvectors was applied by Zhang
and King ( 2002 ). The β-skeleton is a parameterized family of neighborhood graphs—let Vβ
denote the set of points in RD,δβ(a,a/prime)be the distance between aand a/prime,a n d Bβ(a,rβ)be
the circle centered in awith the radius rβ. The neighborhood N(a,a/prime)(β)is then deﬁned for
anyβ,w h e r e1 ≤β≤∞ , as the intersection of two spheres:
N(a,a/prime)(β)=B1∩B2, (36)
where
B1=B((1−β/2)·a+(β/2)·a/prime,( β/ 2)·δβ(a,a/prime)) (37)
and
B2=B((1−β/2)·a/prime+(β/2)·a,( β/ 2)·δβ(a,a/prime)). (38)
Theβ-skeleton of Vβis a neighborhood graph with the following set of edges:
/angbracketlefta,a/prime/angbracketright∈E (39)
if and only if
N(a,a/prime)∩Vβ=∅. (40)
It means that two points aand a/primeare connected with an edge if and only if there are no
points in the set Vβ\/braceleftbig
a,a/prime/bracerightbig
which belong to the neighborhood N(a,a/prime)(β) [as deﬁned
in Eq. ( 36)]. Zhang and King ( 2002 ) claim that various proximity graphs (e.g., Gabriel
graphs) provide geometrical information about a training set and may be effectively usedto ﬁnd the decision boundary. The β-skeleton algorithm can be therefore applied to locate
potential SVs, and to reduce the size of the training set. It is worth mentioning that bothGabriel and relative neighborhood graphs may be described using the β-skeleton algorithm
with an appropriate parameter setting ( β=1a n d β=2, respectively). Also, the authors
highlighted the monotonicity feature of this parameterized family of graphs (with respectto the βparameter): V
β1⊂Vβ2,i fβ1>β 2. Although different classes of graphs may be
obtained by updating the βparameter (e.g., for different β,1≤β≤2, different nearest
neighbor rules will be generated), it is unclear how to tune βfor a new dataset (the authors
exploited the trial-and-error techniques in their study). For more details on the β-skeleton
algorithms, see the paper by Kowaluk and Majewska ( 2015 ).
Angiulli and Astorino ( 2010 ) proposed an interesting technique which utilizes the fast
nearest neighbor condensation classiﬁcation rule (FCNN) (Angiulli 2007 ). In their algorithm
(abbreviated as FCNN-SVM), SVMs are coupled with the FCNN—unlike clustering-basedmethods, the vector selection criteria are guided by the decision boundary. The FCNN rulesstart with an initial reﬁned training set composed of the centroids generated for each classindependently. Then, for each vector ainT
/prime, a point belonging to the V oronoi cell (i.e., the
V oronoi cell of ais a set of Tvectors that are positioned closer to acompared with any
other vector in the current T/prime)o f a, but annotated with an opposite-class label is included in a
reﬁned set. The algorithm continues until there are no more vectors from Tto be appended to
123

==== Page 17 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 873
T/prime. Although the algorithm is quite simple, it proved to be efﬁcient and retrieves high-quality
reﬁned training sets.
3.2 Neighborhood analysis methods
A signiﬁcant research effort has been put into proposing techniques which exploit statisticalproperties of the training set vectors (or their neighborhoods) in search of high-quality reﬁnedtraining sets. Shin and Cho ( 2002 ) proposed a k-nearest neighbors ( k-NN) based pattern
selection algorithm which aims at selecting correctly-labeled patterns near the SVM decisionhyperplane. The authors introduced two notions: the proximity andcorrectness . Vectors that
are close to the boundary will likely have mixed-class neighbors, and their proximity maybe estimated using entropy of their k-nearest neighbors. The entropy calculated for a vector
afor its k-nearest neighbors is
E(a,k)=−/summationdisplay
i∈{C+,C−}Pi·log Pi, (41)
where
Pi=ki
k(42)
and kidenotes the number of neighboring vectors belonging to the i-th class. Vectors with
positive proximity ( E>0) tend to lay near the hyperplane and are processed. Only the
correctly labeled vectors from the set extracted in the previous step are included in T/prime.T h e
correctness is deﬁned as the k-NN voting probability of the neighboring vectors. If this
probability is larger than a threshold, then the corresponding vector survives in a reﬁned set.
The k-NN analysis may become quite computationally intensive. The same authors
improved this technique to speed up the computation (Shin and Cho 2003 ). The improved
algorithm is based on a simple observation, that the neighbors of a vector which is positionednear the hyperplane are also situated in its vicinity. This observation has been used to reducethe search space—a signiﬁcant number of Tvectors can be pruned once some of vectors
positioned near the hyperplane are found. The kvalue notably affects the performance of this
technique, therefore it should be carefully tuned (Shin and Cho 2007 ).
Guo et al. ( 2010 ) exploited ensemble classiﬁers in their training set selection algorithm.
Using a standard margin deﬁnition (Schapire et al. 1998 ) for the binary classiﬁcation, the
margin ( φ
M) of a positive-class vector ais given as
φM(a)=vC+−vC−
vC++vC−, (43)
where vC+denotes the number of votes (of the base classiﬁers) for the true class C+,vC−is
the number of votes for the opposite class, and −1≤φM(a)≤1. IfφM(a)is positive, then it
means that ahas been correctly classiﬁed (it is annotated with an incorrect class otherwise).
Also, a large value of φM(a)indicates that the majority of the base classiﬁers have classiﬁed
this vector correctly, therefore it is most likely positioned in the center of the positive classdistribution (and perhaps surrounded by the same-class vectors). On the other hand, if thevalue of φ
M(a)is large negative, then ais probably an outlier (or a noisy vector). Finally,
ifφM(a)≈0, then ais positioned near the decision boundary, since a similar number of
base classiﬁers classiﬁed this vector to two opposite classes. Guo et al. modiﬁed the originalmargin concept and introduced a new one in which the information about the correct classof a sample ais omitted:
123

==== Page 18 ====
874 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
φ/prime
M(a)=vC1−vC2
vC1+vC2, (44)
where C1is the more voted class (not necessarily the correct one). Therefore, 0 ≤φ/prime
M(a)≤1,
and the smaller values of φ/prime
M(a)indicate that the vector is close to the hyperplane. Based on
that, the authors build an ensemble classiﬁer with all Tvectors, calculate the margin of each
vector, sort them according to the margin values and select vectors with the smallest φ/prime
M(a)’s
as SV candidates to form a reﬁned training set. The base classiﬁers were the classiﬁcationand regression trees (Loh 2011 ) (bagging was used to create an ensemble). This approach is
suitable also for imbalanced datasets.
A simple yet effective neighborhood analysis of each Tvector was proposed by Wang
et al. ( 2005 ). For each training vector, the largest sphere which contains only vectors of the
same class is determined, and the number of vectors encompassed by this sphere is veriﬁed(N
afor each a). Then, all Tvectors are sorted ascendingly according to the Navalues— t/prime/2
vectors with the lowest Na’s (for each class) are appended to a reﬁned set, since vectors
surrounded by the same-class vectors will most likely not be SVs and can be safely removedfrom T
/prime. The rejected Tvectors are thus characterized by large Navalues. This approach
slightly resembles the MEB-based techniques.
In a recent paper, Guo and Boukir ( 2015 ) extended their ensemble margin-based
algorithm—they pointed out that classic bagging trees are not effective in the case of largetraining sets and the large dimensionality of the input data. They proposed to exploit morepowerful ensemble methods including random forests and a very small ensemble referredto as the small votes instance selection (SVIS). In SVIS, the authors decreased the size of
the classiﬁer committee. Ensemble classiﬁers were utilized in other algorithms to tacklereal-world problems, e.g., selecting reﬁned training sets from biomedical data (Oh et al.2011 ).
Li (2011 ) proposed a technique for selecting training sets for one-class SVMs, which can
be adapted for two-class SVMs. In this algorithm, vectors belonging to a single class clusterare contained in a surface—this surface may consist of convex and concave shapes, and itis so “tight” that it passes through all extreme datapoints of the cluster. An example of acluster is visualized in Fig. 8. Depending on the shape curvature, all neighboring vectors of
the extreme vectors will be positioned on the same side of the tangent plane (rendered as thedotted line for the extreme points P
1and P2in Fig. 8), or the majority of neighbors will be
positioned on the same side of this plane. The authors proposed an approximation algorithmwhich analyzes the neighboring vectors of a given one (say a) in search of the normal vector
of the tangent plane at a. When all of the extreme vectors are found, they should survive in
a reﬁned set.
Li and Maguire ( 2011 ) proposed a method for selecting critical patterns from the input
dataset which combines various techniques. First, the surface which passes through allextreme points and encompassing one-class vectors is created, and then the hyperplane is
Fig. 8 One-class cluster
contained in a surface built withconvex and concave shapes (a),
andbtwo tangent planes at
points P
1and P2. The extreme
vectors are rendered in black(a) (b)
P1P2
123

==== Page 19 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 875
positioned at the tangent to this surface. The position of the vectors will depend on the curva-
ture of the surface (if it is convex, then all vectors will appear on the same size of the plane).To deal with the overlapping patterns in the input space, the authors enhanced the algorithmwith a remedy which removes the class overlap in the set. This strategy is based on the Bayesposterior probability of a vector abelonging to a class
C, denoted as P(C,a). For two-class
sets, both P(C+,a)and P(C−,a)are estimated. If the larger probability is obtained for the
class which adoes not belong to, then this vector is removed from the training set. Finally,
any duplicated patterns from Tare removed from the dataset during the pre-processing. The
authors showed that their algorithm is competitive to four state-of-the-art techniques and isapplicable to other classiﬁers.
In a recent paper, Cervantes et al. ( 2015 ) incorporated an induction tree to reduce the size
of SVM training sets. The main idea behind the proposed technique is to train SVMs usingsigniﬁcantly smaller reﬁned training sets, and then to label vectors from Tas those which are
close or far from the decision hyperplane. A decision tree is utilized to identify vectors whichhave similar characteristics to those annotated as SVs. The initial selection of a small subsetofTis accomplished with a very simple heuristics in which the level of dataset imbalance is
investigated. The authors classify the incoming dataset (based on two pre-deﬁned thresholds,
τ
u=0.1a n d τb=0.25, and the imbalance ratio Iof the dataset, given as I=min{t+,t−}
t,
where t+andt−denote the numbers of vectors from each class in T) to one out of the following
classes: (i) balanced, (ii) slightly imbalanced (if τb≤I≤0.5), (iii) moderately imbalanced
(τu≤I<τ b), or (iv) highly imbalanced ( I<τ u). If a dataset is balanced, then the initial
subset is retrieved using random sampling. Otherwise, if a dataset is slightly or moderatelyimbalanced, the inverse probability proportional to the dataset cardinality is applied (e.g., if80% of vectors come from the negative class, hence
I=0.2, then random sampling draws
80% of positive-class vectors). If a dataset is highly imbalanced, then all vectors from theless numerous class survive in T
/prime. Based on the decision hyperplane obtained using T/prime,a
decision tree is induced to model the distribution of SVs. This tree is used to retrieve thosevectors which were not annotated as SVs, but follow a similar distribution—they are includedinT
/prime.
He et al. ( 2011 ) introduced a neighborhood-based rough set model (FARNeM) to search
for boundary vectors in T. This model is used to divide the vectors into three regions: (i) the
positive region, (ii) the noisy region, and (iii) the boundary region. Additionally, all inputdata features are partitioned into: (i) strongly relevant features, (ii) weakly relevant andindispensable features, (iii) weakly relevant and redundant features, and (iv) irrelevant ones.The authors ﬁnd a feature space based on these feature groups, and then look for important
Tvectors which should be added to T
/prime. The aim of the feature selection algorithm is to
retrieve the minimum number of attributes which characterize the input data as good as allattributes, thus it incrementally increases the subset of attributes until the dependence is notboosted. FARNeM proceeds with the analysis of training set vectors to distinguish betweenSV candidates (those vectors positioned in the boundary region are probable SVs), uselessvectors and noisy ones based on the neighborhood rough set model. The authors use twoimportant thresholds which affect the performance of FARNeM—they should be tuned withcare since their improper selection can quite easily jeopardize the algorithm performance.
3.3 Evolutionary methods
Although evolutionary algorithms (EAs) have been shown very effective in solving a widerange of pattern recognition and optimization tasks (Pietruszkiewicz and Imada 2013 ;L ie ta l .
2007 ; Wrona and Pawełczyk 2013 ; Acampora et al. 2015 ; Nalepa et al. 2015a ), they have
123

==== Page 20 ====
876 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
not been extensively explored to select reﬁned SVM training sets so far (Kawulok 2007 ).
Nishida and Kurita ( 2008 ) proposed a hybrid algorithm (RANSAC–SVM) which couples
random sampling, consensus approach (Fischler and Bolles 1981 ) and a simple evolutionary
technique to retrieve T/prime’s. In their approach, several reﬁned training sets of a small size are
randomly drawn at ﬁrst. Then—based on the classiﬁcation scores of SVMs learned usingthe corresponding reﬁned sets—the best T
/primeis determined (by means of the best consensus).
Additionally, the authors employed a simple GA with a multi-point crossover to furtherimprove the reﬁned sets (pairs of these reﬁned sets are crossed over to form child solutionswhich inherit random training set vectors from both parents). The entire procedure (includingrandom selection of SVM training sets and their evolution) is repeated multiple times, hencenumerous potentially uncorrelated populations are processed.
In the genetic algorithm (GASVM) proposed by Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2012 ), a population
of individuals (chromosomes), representing reﬁned training sets of a given size, evolvesin time. This evolution encompasses standard genetic operators—selection, crossover, andmutation. The ﬁtness of each individual is the area under receiver operating characteristiccurve (or the classiﬁcation accuracy) retrieved for T. Although this algorithm appeared very
effective, and outperformed random sampling techniques, it was unclear how to select thesize of individuals (which could not be changed later). This issue was tackled in the adaptivegenetic algorithm (AGA) suggested by the same authors (Nalepa and Kawulok 2014a )—
the size of individuals, along with the population size and the selection scheme, have beenadapted on the ﬂy to respond to the evolution progress as best as possible. This adaptation wassteered by the parameters set ap r i o r i . Hence, improperly tuned parameter values could easily
jeopardize the search (e.g., exploiting smaller reﬁned sets and exploring larger ones couldhave been not balanced). The dynamically adaptive genetic algorithm (DAGA) (Kawulok andNalepa 2014a ) introduced the adaptation scheme which can be updated during the evolution,
based on the characteristics of best individuals (i.e., the expected ratio of SVs within thereﬁned sets). The expected ratio has to be determined beforehand, which is non-trivial.
Memetic algorithms (MA) combine EAs with reﬁnement procedures to boost the solu-
tions already found. They can exploit the knowledge attained during the evolution or extractedbeforehand. Such techniques have been shown extremely effective in solving numerous chal-lenging problems (Nalepa and Blocho 2016 ). Nalepa and Kawulok ( 2014b ) proposed the ﬁrst
MA (termed MASVM) for selecting reﬁned SVM training sets. The pool of important vectors(which were selected as SVs during the evolution) is maintained and used to educate the pop-ulation, and to introduce super individuals —reﬁned sets composed of SVs only. Hence, the
knowledge gained dynamically is exploited in MASVM. This algorithm was utilized in theparameter-less SVMs proposed by Nalepa et al. ( 2015b ). In the above-mentioned algorithms,
initial populations were sampled randomly from T.
In the adaptive MA (PCA
2MA), Nalepa and Kawulok ( 2016a ,b) introduced a pre-
processing step, in which the geometry of Tis analyzed in search of potentially valuable
vectors (before the evolution). This set of candidate vectors is used not only to create the
initial population (it helps generate higher-quality reﬁned sets which later undergo the evolu-tion), but also to compensate children (if they contain less vectors than expected—in Fig. 9,
the process of generating a child for a pair of chromosomes (p
a,pb), representing reﬁned
sets, is presented), and to create new chromosomes during the execution (to diversify thesearch). Also, the pool of SVs is used in PCA
2MA. Hence, PCA2MA exploits the knowl-
edge attained during the evolution, and extracted beforehand. Moreover, the parameter-lessadaptation scheme was introduced, which does not require any parameters to be given ap r i -
ori. The experimental study performed on various types of data revealed that EAs (especially
123

==== Page 21 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 877
Fig. 9 Creating a child in PCA2MA. This ﬁgure was inspired by Nalepa and Kawulok ( 2016a )
PCA2MA) outperform other state-of-the-art techniques, and reﬁned sets obtained using these
algorithms allow for training well-performing SVMs (with smaller numbers of SVs).
Other works on EAs for this task have been reported recently. Fernandes et al. ( 2015 )
applied a multi-objective evolutionary technique in order to evolve balanced reﬁned train-ing sets extracted from imbalanced datasets. The objectives were to elaborate diverse andwell-performing classiﬁers, and to combine them into the classiﬁer ensemble. The experi-ments performed for several benchmark sets showed that the evolutionary approach is able tooutperform other state-of-the-art techniques for dealing with large and imbalanced datasets.
Pighetti et al. ( 2015 ) enhanced a genetic evolution with the locality sensitive hashing (to
ﬁnd the nearest vector in Tfor any generated vector during the optimization) (Gorisse et al.
2010 ), and used it for tackling multi-class classiﬁcation problems (one-versus-all strategy was
exploited). Although the approach is promising, it is unclear when to stop the optimizationfor multi-class tasks (the authors terminated the evolution once 60 vectors from each categoryhave been retrieved).
Verbiest et al. ( 2016 ) recently investigated the performance of different evolutionary tech-
niques for selection of SVM training sets: (i) a standard genetic algorithm, (ii) the adaptivegenetic algorithm, which dynamically updates the crossover threshold [only notably differentparents can be crossed over (Eshelman 1991 )], and (iii) the steady state genetic algorithm
[two parents are selected to generate offspring (Cano et al. 2003 )]. Interestingly, the ﬁtness
involved not only the classiﬁcation accuracy of the SVM classiﬁer, but also the reductionratio, indicating how much the input Thas been shrunk. These wrapper techniques were ini-
tially used for the k-NN classiﬁcation, and the extensive experimental study clearly proved
that they can be easily tailored for SVMs as well.
In their recent paper, Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2015 ) showed that evolving both training
vectors and labels can be effectively used to handle learning SVMs from weakly-labeledtraining sets. In their memetic approach, the best individual in a population is an expert ,
a n di ti su s e di nt h e tuition operation. The training set is relabeled if necessary, and the
other individuals are reﬁned (the vectors which changed the label during the tuition arereplaced). Albeit the algorithm performed very well for mislabeled datasets, its performancedeteriorated for correctly labeled T’s—this issue requires further investigation.
An interesting alternating genetic algorithm (abbreviated as ALGA) for optimizing the
SVM model alongside SVM training sets has been proposed by Kawulok et al. ( 2017 ). The
authors observed that different SVM models (i.e., kernel functions and their hyper-parameter
123

==== Page 22 ====
878 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
values) may be optimal for different training sets. In ALGA, two independent populations
(one representing reﬁned training sets, and the other the SVM models) are alternately evolvedto solve two optimization problems having a common ﬁtness function (classiﬁcation accuracyover the validation set obtained using an SVM trained with the best reﬁned training set andkernel function). The alternating process continues as long as at least one of these twosubsequent optimization phases manages to improve the average population ﬁtness. Theexperiments performed for both artiﬁcially generated and benchmark datasets revealed thatALGA can effectively select an SVM training set without the necessity to tune the SVMhyper-parameters beforehand. Although the authors focused on the radial-basis function(RBF) kernel, this method can be easily tailored to any other kernel function. An interestingresearch direction would be to enhance ALGA with an additional step of selecting featuresfor high-dimensional datasets.
3.4 Active learning methods
In active learning models, vectors are initially not labeled, and the goal of an active learner isto infer a predictor of labels from the input data. It is accomplished in an interactive manner, inwhich the learner may request a label of a particular vector (this operation is associated withan appropriate cost). Hence, active learning may be interpreted as the process of obtaininglabels for unlabeled data, and it can be applied for the entirely unlabeled datasets, as well asfor those sets which encompass vectors with missing labels.
An active learning technique for selecting reﬁned sets was proposed by Schohn and Cohn
(2000 )—they utilized a computationally efﬁcient heuristics to label vectors lying near the
SVM decision hyperplane. The authors exploit the selective sampling approach (being a form
of active learning), in which learners are presented with a large unlabeled dataset, and aregiven the opportunity of labeling these vectors themselves (labeling of each vector “costs”some artiﬁcial fee). The learners attempt to minimize the error on the data which will appearin the system in the future. In the heuristic algorithm suggested by Schohn and Cohn ( 2000 ),
one active learning criterion is to search for vectors which are orthogonal to the space spannedby the current reﬁned training set. Additionally, the information about the already known datadimensions is boosted by narrowing the existing margin—only those vectors which are closeto the decision hyperplane are effectively retrieved.
SVMs enhanced with active learning algorithms have been successfully applied in many
real-life applications (Tong and Koller 2002 ). Tong and Chang ( 2001 ) exploited such tech-
niques in their system to conduct effective relevance feedback
3for image retrieval, and
proposed the pool-based active learning approach. A pool contains unlabeled Tvectors
which are analyzed and appended to T/primeif necessary. The classiﬁer is trained using a labeled
set (if it is the ﬁrst feedback round, then the user is asked to label a number of randomly drawnvectors; otherwise, the user labels some pool images which are the closest to the decisionboundary).
3.5 Random sampling methods
In random sampling techniques for selecting reﬁned SVM training sets, the Tvectors are
drawn randomly, and—based on additional heuristics—are appended to T/prime’s or not. The
simplicity of such methods makes them straightforward to implement and becomes theirbiggest advantage in practical scenarios. Also, they appear sufﬁcient in a number of real-
3This process interactively extracts the desired content for a user based on the user feedback—the user decides
whether the presented data are relevant or not.
123

==== Page 23 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 879
life circumstances (when the size of the desired reﬁned sets can be estimated), and they
are not dependent on the cardinality of T. However, they can easily misbehave for very
large and noisy datasets, since removing mislabeled vectors from T/prime’s (affecting the SVM
performance) is often quite time-consuming (Nalepa and Kawulok 2016a ).
A simple approach to reduce tis to sample t/primevectors from Trandomly (Balcázar et al.
2001 ). In this sampling algorithm, a random subset of Tis drawn according to the weights
assigned to the training set vectors4(the higher the weight, the larger the probability of
including the corresponding vector in T/prime). Then, an SVM classiﬁer is trained using this
subset, and Tis analyzed to verify which vectors were correctly classiﬁed using the resulting
decision hyperplane. The weights of those vectors which were misclassiﬁed are doubled sothat they are more likely to be selected and included in T
/primein the next sampling round. If the
number of rounds is sufﬁciently large, then the important vectors (hopefully including SVs)will have higher weights than the other vectors, and a reﬁned set will be composed of theseSVs. The “optimal” size of T
/primeis not known beforehand, thus the number of sampled vectors
should be determined carefully (usually in a time-consuming trial-and-error fashion). Thisbecomes a signiﬁcant drawback of this algorithm especially in the case of massively largedatasets. Also, random sampling approaches may ignore important (and useful) relationswhich occur within the dataset—if these training set features were exploited during theexecution, the convergence time of such techniques could be greatly reduced (e.g., only thevectors lying near the boundary of one-class vector groups could be sampled because theywould likely inﬂuence the position of the SVM hyperplane).
3.6 Summary of the SVM training set reduction methods
Table 3summarizes the algorithms for reducing the size of the SVM training sets. They
have been split into several categories, based on the optimization strategies. Additionally, wereport the most important characteristics of the approaches discussed at length in the previoussections. These features include:
–Type —indicates whether the method is one-pass oriterative . In the iterative approaches,
the initial reﬁned training set is gradually improved in order to include better vectorsfrom T. Such methods encompass algorithms which (i) keep enhancing the reﬁned sets
of a given (constant) size, and those which (ii) decrease or (iii) increase reﬁned sets toboost their quality.
–Source —being the underlying source of information concerning a training set. The
knowledge extracted from this source is then used for generating reﬁned sets during theoptimization process. We distinguish ﬁve possible sources of information which can beutilized for this purpose—they are summarized in Table 1. Note that there exist methods
which exploit several sources of information.
–Randomized —shows whether the algorithm is randomized ordeterministic .
–Dependent on t —shows whether the algorithm is dependent on the cardinality of T.I fs o ,
it may require analyzing the entire training set which is often not possible in massivelylarge real-life datasets. Hence, the techniques which are independent from tshould be
preferred in practical applications.
–Data —indicates which types of datasets were used to validate the corresponding algo-
rithm (A—artiﬁcially generated, B—benchmark, R—real-life datasets).
–Maximum t —indicates (roughly) the maximum size of the dataset for which the method
was tested in the referenced paper. As mentioned in Sect. 1,t h et e r m large dataset is
4All Tvectors have the same weight at the beginning of the algorithm execution.
123

==== Page 24 ====
880 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Table 1 Sources of information used for generating SVM reﬁned training sets
Source Description
Local The local neighborhood of a training vector is analyzed, and based on the outcome of this
analysis, this vector may be classiﬁed as important (i.e., likely to be selected as a SV), or
useless . The latter vectors are usually not appended to the reﬁned sets
Global The global layout and characteristics of a training set are investigated in search of important
vectors which should be included in the reﬁned set
Wrapper In this approach, the SVM classiﬁer is trained using a retrieved reﬁned set (or sets, in the case
of population-based algorithms), and the quality of this reﬁned set is quantiﬁed using theclassiﬁcation performance of the learned SVM—see Sect. 3.7for details (commonly, all
vectors from T, or a subset of Tvectors are classiﬁed to verify the SVM performance—in
the latter case, wrapper techniques may be independent from the cardinality of the entiretraining set). The classiﬁer is often treated as a “black box” in these wrapper techniques
SVM As in wrapper techniques, the SVM classiﬁer is learned using the reﬁned training set at ﬁrst.
However, the Tvectors are assessed based on the speciﬁc features of the trained SVM
(e.g., the vectors selected as SVs in the training process are considered important)
Theory The theory behind the SVM classiﬁer or the desired training data characteristics are used to
estimate the importance of a given training vector. Contrary to the “SVM” informationsource, the classiﬁer is nottrained before the training set vectors can be assessed in this case
quite ambiguous in the literature (the cardinality of large sets may vary from hundreds
to millions of Tvectors).
3.7 Assessing SVM training set selection algorithms
Assessing the quality of emerging SVM training set selection algorithms is a difﬁcult and
multi-fold task. These techniques can be investigated both quantitatively and qualitatively
(e.g., by visualizing the extracted reﬁned sets together with SVs and verifying whether theyform any speciﬁc geometrical patterns). In this section, we discuss the quantitative measureswhich are used to assess new and existing training set selection algorithms alongside thestandard experimental setup and datasets (together with their characteristics) that are usuallyadopted in the experiments. Finally, we present several practical applications in which variousalgorithms for selecting reﬁned SVM training sets have been utilized.
3.7.1 Quantitative measures
The following quantitative measures have been widely adopted in the literature to assess theperformance of new training set selection techniques—for each measure we indicate whetherits value is to be maximized ( ↑) or minimized ( ↓):
–Classiﬁcation performance of an SVM trained using a reﬁned set (↑) The performance
of classiﬁers (including SVMs) is assessed based on ratios derived from the number of(a) correctly classiﬁed positive-class vectors— true positives (TP), (b) correctly classi-
ﬁed negative-class vectors— true negatives (TN), (c) incorrectly classiﬁed negative-class
vectors— false positives (FP), and (d) incorrectly classiﬁed positive-class vectors— false
negatives (FN) obtained for a test set which was not used during the training (see Table 2).
Utilizing the unseen dataset allows for verifying the generalization capabilities of a clas-siﬁer.
123

==== Page 25 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 881
Table 2 Predicted versus real
conditions—bold text shows theerroneous classiﬁcationPredicted
Positive Negative
Real Positive True positive False negative
Negative False positive True negative
The derived ratios include, among others, the true positive rate:
TPR=TP
TP+FN(45)
and the false positive rate:
FPR=FP
FP+TN.(46)
TPR and FPR are often presented in a form of receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves (Fawcett 2006 ). Each point in this curve is the performance of an SVM for a given
decision threshold (Yu et al. 2015 ). Calculating the area under this curve (AUC) reduces
a ROC curve into a single scalar value representing the classiﬁer performance (the higherthe AUC values, the better, and 0 ≤AUC≤1). The area under the ROC curve and the
accuracy (ACC):
ACC=TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN(47)
are the most widely used measures exploited to quantify the performance of training set
selection algorithms (the classiﬁcation performance of an SVM trained using a reﬁnedset should be maximized). Other common measures include precision, recall and theF-measure (Khosravani et al. 2013 ).
–Size of the reﬁned training set (↓) The main objective of training set selection algorithms
is to minimize the cardinality of the training set (ideally without decaying the SVMclassiﬁcation performance). Hence, the number of vectors in the reﬁned sets elaboratedusing such approaches is almost always investigated. To make this measure easier tointerpret for datasets of different sizes, it is very often presented as the reduction rate
(
R):
R=t
t/prime, (48)
where t/primeis the cardinality of the reﬁned training set, and tis the size of the original
dataset. This reduction rate should be maximized.
–The number of support vectors (↓) As already mentioned, the number of SVs inﬂuences
(linearly) the SVM classiﬁcation time. Therefore, it should be minimized to speed up theoperation of a trained classiﬁer.
–The percentage of vectors in a reﬁned training set selected as support vectors (↑Deter-
mining the desired cardinality of reﬁned sets is often a critical step in training set selectionalgorithms. Such reﬁned sets should be small and should include important vectors which
are likely to be selected as SVs during the SVM training. In several works, the percent-age of vectors in reﬁned training sets selected as SVs has been investigated (Nalepa andKawulok 2016a ; Verbiest et al. 2016 ). This percentage should be maximized to keep the
number of “useless” vectors in a reﬁned set as small as possible. However, this measurecan easily become misleading—selecting all training set vectors as SVs can be a sign ofoverﬁtting and lack of generalization capabilities.
123

==== Page 26 ====
882 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
–Training set selection, SVM training and classiﬁcation times (↓) In all state-of-the-art
approaches, the execution time of a training set selection algorithm should be minimized.Also, the SVM training and classiﬁcation times are to be minimized (these times arecorrelated with the size of a reﬁned training set and the number of determined SVs).
–Combined quality measure (↑) Although the above-mentioned measures are usually
investigated separately, this approach becomes infeasible in several practical scenarios,e.g., in real-time systems in which a trained SVM should work extremely fast evenif it delivers slightly worse results (i.e., minimizing the number of SVs may be moreimportant than maximizing the classiﬁcation accuracy). In such cases, the problem ofselecting SVM training sets can be considered as a two- (or multi-) objective optimizationproblem: the ﬁrst objective is to maximize the classiﬁcation accuracy of an SVM trainedwith a reﬁned set, and the second is to minimize the number of SVs. Nalepa ( 2016 )
transformed these two objectives into a single quality function
Q(AUC,s)=q·AUC
AUCB+(1−q)·sB
s, (49)
where AUCBdenotes the best (the largest) AUC obtained for the test set (note that AUC
can be replaced by any other classiﬁcation performance measure in this formula), sB
is the best (the lowest) number of determined SVs across the investigated training set
selection algorithms, and qdenotes the importance of the ﬁrst objective (0 <q≤1).
The largest Qvalue is retrieved for the best training set selection algorithm.
3.7.2 Standard experimental setup
In a standard experimental setup, each new training set selection algorithm is compared
with (i) a number of existing selection techniques, and (ii) SVMs trained using the entiretraining set (it may be impossible for extremely large datasets). Randomized approaches (seeTable 3) are often executed multiple times (usually at least 30 ×) and then the quantitative
results are averaged. To deeply investigate the generalization abilities of the algorithms, theexperiments are almost always performed following the k-fold cross-validation strategy (a
dataset is divided into a training and a test set ktimes without any overlaps—a training set
includes (k−1)data chunks, whereas a test set only one chunk; then, the results obtained
for each fold are averaged). The experiments are divided into two groups:
–Sensitivity analysis The impact of the most important components of a new algorithm
on its overall performance is veriﬁed in the sensitivity analysis. Usually, one (or more)components are enabled (the other components are disabled), and the experiments arerepeated for each conﬁguration.
–Comparison with other training set selection algorithms and SVMs trained using the
entire set The comparison with the state of the art is always crucial for new training set
selection algorithms. Also, they are commonly compared qualitatively and quantitatively(using the measures discussed in the previous section) with SVMs trained using the entireset—without any training set selection applied (however, it may be impossible due to thecardinality of this set) and other techniques from the literature (very often from differentcategories).
Since the number of algorithms that are being compared is usually large and each of them
can perform differently for different datasets, executing appropriate (non-parametric) statis-tical tests to investigate the statistical importance of the obtained results became a standard
123

==== Page 27 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 883Table 3 Summary of the state-of-the-art methods for reducing the cardinality of SVM training sets
Algorithm Year References Type Source Rand.? Dep. t? Data Max. t
Data geometry analysis methods
Clustering-based methods
Clustering and 1-nearest neighbor
cluster analysis1999 Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) One-pass Global No Yes AR 500
Analysis of k-means clusters in the
training set2000 Barros de Almeida et al.
(2000 )One-pass Global Yes Yes A 103
Hierarchical micro-clustering 2003 Yu et al. ( 2003 ) Iterative Global, SVM No Yes AR 5 ×106
Clustering and processing of the
crisp clusters2004 Koggalage and
Halgamuge ( 2004 )Iterative Global Yes Yes B 5 ×103
Analysis of similarities between
training vectors2004 Wang and Xu ( 2004 ) One-pass Global No Yes A 105
Analysis of Hausdorff distances
between vectors and convex hulls2007 Wang et al. ( 2007 ) One-pass Global No Yes B 615
Minimum enclosing ball clustering 2008 Cervantes et al. ( 2008 ) One-pass Global, SVM Yes Yes ABR 5 ×105
Hierarchical clustering and mutual
cluster analysis2008 Wang and Shi ( 2008 ) One-pass Global No Yes AB 3 .7×103
Smallest enclosing ball support
vector machines2008 Zeng et al. ( 2008 ) One-pass Global No Yes B 5 ×105
Edge detection and analysis of
clusters2009 Li et al. ( 2009 ) One-pass Local, global Yes Yes ABR 5 ×103
Analysis of convex-concave hulls 2012 Lopez-Chau et al. ( 2012 );
Chau et al. ( 2013 )One-pass Global No Yes AB 2 .5×105
Analysis of convex hulls 2013 Wang et al. ( 2013a ) Iterative Global Yes Yes ABR 1 .6×105
Modiﬁed analysis of convex hulls 2013 Khosravani et al. ( 2013 ) Iterative Global No Yes A 4 ×103
Analysis of cluster boundaries and
cluster independencies2016 Shen et al. ( 2016 ) Iterative Global, theory Yes Yes ABR 5 .7×105
123

==== Page 28 ====
884 J. Nalepa, M. KawulokTable 3 continued
Algorithm Year References Type Source Rand.? Dep. t? Data Max. t
Non-clustering methods
Extraction of boundary data using
the Mahalanobis distance2001 Abe and Inoue ( 2001 ) One-pass Global No Yes B 800
β-skeleton analysis of the training
set2002 Zhang and King ( 2002 ) One-pass Global No Yes B 4 .4×103
Nearest neighbor condensation 2010 Angiulli and Astorino
(2010 )Iterative Global No Yes ABR 106
Neighborhood analysis methods
Pattern selection using k-nearest
neighbors2002 Shin and Cho ( 2002 ) One-pass Local No Yes A 600
Analysis of the vector’s
neighborhood heterogeneity2003 Shin and Cho ( 2003 ) One-pass Local Yes Yes AB 1 .3×104
Sphere-based neighborhood analysis
of training vectors2005 Wang et al. ( 2005 ) One-pass Local No Yes B 547
Analysis of the vector’s
neighborhood properties2007 Shin and Cho ( 2007 ) Iterative Local Yes Yes ABR 1 .2×104
Analysis of ensemble margins of
training vectors2010 Guo et al. ( 2010 ) One-pass Theory No Yes AB 2 ×103
Neighborhood-based rough set model 2011 He et al. ( 2011 ) One-pass Local No Yes AB 5 ×103
Extreme vectors selection using the
data boundaries2011 Li ( 2011 ) One-pass Local No Yes AB 1 .4×105
Border-edge pattern selection 2011 Li and Maguire ( 2011 ) One-pass Local No Yes AB 5 ×104
Improved analysis of ensemble
margins of each vector2015 Guo and Boukir ( 2015 ) One-pass Theory No Yes AB 104
Decision trees 2015 Cervantes et al. ( 2015 ) One-pass Local, SVM Yes No AB 106
123

==== Page 29 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 885Table 3 continued
Algorithm Year References Type Source Rand.? Dep. t? Data Max. t
Evolutionary methods
Initial work on genetic algorithms to
select T/prime’s2007 Kawulok ( 2007 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No R 2 .9×105
Random sampling enhanced with
crossover2008 Nishida and Kurita ( 2008 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No AB 6 ×104
Genetic algorithm (GASVM) 2012 Kawulok and Nalepa
(2012 )Iterative Wrapper Yes No AR 7 ×106
Adaptive genetic algorithm (AGA) 2014 Nalepa and Kawulok
(2014a )Iterative Wrapper Yes No ABR 3 ×105
Dynamically adaptive genetic
algorithm (DAGA)2014 Kawulok and Nalepa
(2014a )Iterative Wrapper, SVM Yes No ABR 9 ·104
Memetic algorithm (MASVM) 2014 Nalepa and Kawulok
(2014b )Iterative Wrapper, SVM Yes No ABR 4 ×106
Multi-objective evolutionary
sampling for imbalanced data2015 Fernandes et al. ( 2015 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No B 1484
Multi-objective evolutionary
algorithm2015 Pighetti et al. ( 2015 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No R 3 ×104
Memetic algorithm for evolving
training sets and labels2015 Kawulok and Nalepa
(2015 )Iterative Wrapper, SVM Yes No ABR 4 ×106
123

==== Page 30 ====
886 J. Nalepa, M. KawulokTable 3 continued
Algorithm Year References Type Source Rand.? Dep. t? Data Max. t
Parameter-less SVMs 2015 Nalepa et al. ( 2015b ) Iterative Wrapper, SVM Yes No AB 4 ×106
Evolutionary wrapper approaches for
training set selection2016 Verbiest et al. ( 2016 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No B 1728
Adaptive memetic algorithm
enhanced with geometry analysis(PCA
2MA)2016 Nalepa and Kawulok
(2016a )Iterative Wrapper, SVM Yes Yes ABR 4 ×106
An alternating genetic algorithm for
selecting SVM model and trainingset2017 Kawulok et al. ( 2017 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No AB 2 .7×10
4
Active learning methods
Active learning-based heuristic
algorithm2000 Schohn and Cohn ( 2000 ) Iterative SVM Yes Yes BR 6 ×103
Pool-based active learning 2001 Tong and Chang ( 2001 ) Iterative Wrapper, theory Yes No R 2 ×103
Guided active learning 2002 Tong and Koller ( 2002 ) Iterative Wrapper, theory Yes No BR 3 .3×103
Ensemble learning with active
example selection2011 Oh et al. ( 2011 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No R 768
Random sampling methods
Random sampling 2001 Balcázar et al. ( 2001 ) Iterative Wrapper Yes No – –
123

==== Page 31 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 887
procedure in the machine learning ﬁeld. A standard null hypothesis saying that applying
the algorithm A leads to obtaining the results of the same quality as those elaborated bythe algorithm B is often veriﬁed with the two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (Woolson
2007 )( S h i na n dC h o( 2007 ) exploited the McNemar’s test for this purpose). In experiments
encompassing multiple datasets, the Friedman test is executed to check which algorithmoutperforms other techniques taking into account all investigated datasets (Friedman 1937 ).
3.7.3 Datasets and practical applications
The effectiveness of emerging training set selection algorithms is commonly tested using
three kinds of datasets:
–Artiﬁcially generated datasets Vectors in artiﬁcial datasets are usually generated to follow
a known distribution (e.g., the Gaussian distribution). Therefore, the underlying datacharacteristics are known (which is not always achievable in the case of benchmarkand real-life sets). Additionally, artiﬁcially generated sets are often straight-forward tovisualize. Such datasets are used to understand the behavior of new training set selectionalgorithms (e.g., whether the vectors in the reﬁned sets are positioned near the decisionhyperplane or whether there are any vectors that could be removed from the reﬁned setsas they are not selected as SVs). Several artiﬁcially generated datasets are available athttp://sun.aei.polsl.pl/~jnalepa/SVM/ (see example datasets in Fig. 10—white and black
pixels visualize vectors from the positive T
+and negative T−classes; training set vectors
are grouped into clusters in the αversions of these 2D sets).
–Benchmark datasets Such datasets (of different characteristics) are exploited to compare
the performance of training set selection algorithms (benchmark sets were used in morethan 70% of papers presented in this review). These datasets can be downloaded fromthe following repositories:
–UC Irvine (UCI) machine learning repository https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.
php
5.
–Knowledge Extraction based on Evolutionary Learning (KEEL) repository :http://
www.keel.es/ .
–LibSVM repository :https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvmtools/datasets/ .
In Table 4, we gather the characteristics of ten most frequently used (in the analyzed
papers) benchmark sets alongside the repository name (the same dataset can be oftendownloaded from more than one repository). For multi-class sets (e.g., Yeast ), pairwise
coupling is performed—the multi-class classiﬁcation problem is decomposed into two-class problems and the majority voting principle is used (a number of binary SVMs votefor the ﬁnal class label for an incoming vector). Although the sizes of these benchmarkdatasets are not very large, they are widely used in the literature to compare training setselection algorithms (also thanks to a well-deﬁned experimental protocol which is oftenpresented at a repository website—it makes the comparisons much easier).
–Practical applications and real-life datasets Although the amount of generated data
is steadily growing nowadays and the size of training sets became a real obstacle inexploiting SVMs in practice, only less than 45% of all investigated training set selection
5All repositories and datasets discussed in this section were accessed on July 7th, 2017.
123

==== Page 32 ====
888 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
2D–randomα2D–chessboardα
2D–chessboardβ—a part of this dataset is zoomed for clarity
Fig. 10 Examples of artiﬁcially generated 2D datasets
Table 4 Summary of the most frequently used benchmark datasets
Dataset t #features Types of features #classes Repository
Adult 15 ,082 14 Categorical, integer 2 UCI
Breast 277 9 Categorical, integer, real 2 KEELBupa 345 6 Categorical, integer, real 2 KEELGerman 1000 20 Categorical, integer 2 UCIIonosphere 351 34 Integer, real 2 UCIIris 150 4 Real 2 UCIMushroom 8124 22 Categorical 2 UCISonar 208 60 Categorical, integer, real 2 KEELWisconsin 683 9 Integer 2 KEELYeast 1484 8 Real 10 UCI
algorithms were tested using real-life datasets.6The most interesting practical scenarios
in which training set selection algorithms have been tested and utilized include:
6Numerous benchmark datasets are derived for practical problems, however their cardinalities are often much
smaller compared with real-life scenarios.
123

==== Page 33 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 889
–Hand-written digits classiﬁcation In several works (Shin and Cho 2003 ,2007 ;
Nishida and Kurita 2008 ), the authors tackled the multi-class hand-written digits clas-
siﬁcation problem and exploited the MNIST dataset ( http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/
mnist/ ). They applied SVM training set selection algorithms to retrieve useful data
from 6 ×105training images (hand-written digits belonging to 10 classes, see Fig. 11).
Important applications of the automated analysis of the digitalized hand-written textinclude bank check processing, postal address identiﬁcation, analysis of historicaldocuments or biometric authentication.
–Skin detection and segmentation Detecting pixels representing human skin in color
images (which is a preliminary step of the skin region segmentation process whoseaim is to determine the boundaries of skin regions) is a difﬁcult and important patternrecognition task. Its applications include content ﬁltering, hand and face detectionand tracking, human-computer interaction and many more (Kawulok et al. 2014 ).
Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2012 ) generated the Skin dataset of skin and non-skin pixels
(in the YC
bCrcolor space; 4 ×106pixels in total)—they exploited images from
the ECU face and skin detection database elaborated by Phung et al. ( 2005 )( s e e
example images in Fig. 12—note that skin pixels expose different color and intensity
characteristics), and used this set to test their several SVM training set selection algo-rithms (Nalepa and Kawulok 2014a ,b,2016a ; Kawulok and Nalepa 2014a ; Nalepa
2016 ).
–Hand pose estimation Kawulok and Nalepa ( 2014b ) applied SVMs to recognize hand
poses based on the shape context descriptors (Belongie et al. 2002 ). In their approach,
vectors of differences between two hand shapes are classiﬁed to determine whetherthey represent the same pose (hence, the class decision is indirect). The authorsshowed that training sets can become very large even for a relatively small numberof gestures (i.e., for ngestures,
n!
2·(n−2)!feature vectors are obtained). To make SVMs
applicable in this scenario, a genetic technique was utilized for selecting reﬁned SVMtraining sets (Kawulok and Nalepa 2012 ).
–Face detection Kawulok ( 2007 ) and Wang et al. ( 2013a ) veriﬁed their SVM training
set selection algorithms in the face detection problem—Wang et al. ( 2013a ) exploited
a dataset with almost 3500 images, whereas Kawulok ( 2007 ) used 1000 images
from the famous Feret database presented by Phillips et al. ( 1998 ). Face detection
is a pattern recognition task aimed at determining whether or not an input imagecontains a human face. Face detection algorithms are being exploited in surveillancesystems, human–computer interaction and entertainment applications, human gaitcharacterization, gender classiﬁcation and many more (Paul and Haque 2013 ).
–Detection of deceptive facial expressions Facial image analysis is an active topic—
new research directions focus on facial dynamics recognition and understanding fordeception detection, behavioral analysis and diagnosis of psychological disorders.Kawulok et al. ( 2016 ) used fast smile intensity detectors to elaborate textural facial
features that are fed into the SVM classiﬁcation pipeline to distinguish between posedand spontaneous expressions in video sequences from the UvA-NEMO databasecontaining 1240 sequences, including 643 posed and 597 spontaneous smiles (Dibek-lio˘glu et al. 2012 )—see examples in Fig. 13. Since these features are extracted for
each frame (also those which are neutral , without any features exposing the smile
characteristics), SVM training sets may become very large and often contain “use-less” vectors. To deal with these issues, the authors utilized their memetic trainingset selection algorithm (Nalepa and Kawulok 2016a ).
123

==== Page 34 ====
890 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Fig. 11 Example MNIST (hand-written digits) images
Fig. 12 Examples of images used for generating the Skin dataset
–Image retrieval Tong and Chang ( 2001 ) showed that their SVM active learning train-
ing set selection algorithm can be successfully applied for image retrieval. It selectsthe most informative images to effectively query a user and quickly learn the deci-sion hyperplane which should separate unlabeled Timages to satisfy the user’s query.
With the use of real-life datasets (encompassing up to 2000 images collected fromthe Internet), the authors proved their technique to be outperforming other state-of-the-art image retrieval approaches. Such image retrieval techniques are commonlyapplied in the textiles industry, nudity-detection ﬁltering engines, picture and artarchives, and even medical diagnosis (Trojacanec et al. 2009 ).
–Biomedical applications Selecting appropriate training sets is an important problem
in biomedical applications since the data quality and volume are big issues in thisﬁeld. The following points summarize the most interesting biomedical applicationsin which SVM training set selection algorithms have been tested and utilized.
•RNA classiﬁcation SVMs have been successfully applied to detect non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs) in sequenced genomes (Uzilov et al. 2006 ). However, RNA
datasets are very large which affects the SVM training. Cervantes et al. ( 2008 )
exploited their clustering-based training set selection algorithm for two RNAdatasets (the ﬁrst one included almost 5 ×10
5vectors with 8 features, and the
second—2 ×103vectors with 84 features) and showed that is it quite competitive
123

==== Page 35 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 891
(a)
Frame no.: 8 17 22 74 188
(b)
Frame no.: 22 32 120 157 271
Fig. 13 Examples of aposed and bspontaneous smiles (selected frames). This ﬁgure is inspired by Kawulok
et al. ( 2016 )
with the state of the art for such large-scale data. Wang et al. ( 2013a ) tested their
training set selection algorithm on an interesting problem of deciding whether theincoming vector represents RNA of cod ﬁsh (the entire training set encompassedmore than 3 ×10
5vectors with 8 features).
•Diseases classiﬁcation (e.g., leukemia, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, hepatitis)
There are a bunch of approaches that have been tested on various disease classi-ﬁcation tasks. In a standard medical image analysis scenario, the cardinality ofa training set is not very large, but such datasets are highly imbalanced (usually,there are much more healthy examples compared with the pathological ones).
Therefore, applying an appropriate approach for selecting desired training setsis inevitable. Oh et al. ( 2011 ) investigated their SVM training set selection using
such imbalanced sets for various diseases (leukemia, diabetes, Parkinson’s dis-ease, hepatitis, breast cancer and cardiac diseases). These datasets included upto 800 vectors ( Diabetes dataset), and the number of features was up to almost
7200 in the Leukemia dataset.
–Network intrusion detection Yu et al. ( 2003 ) focused on an important network intru-
sion detection problem. Its aim is to build a classiﬁer which is able to distinguishbetween “bad” connections (intrusions and/or attacks) and normal connections. Totest their approaches, the authors exploited a dataset containing a variety of intru-sions simulated in a military network environment (42 features, 4 ×10
6vectors). This
dataset is available at http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html ,a n d
it was used as a benchmark at the Third International Knowledge Discovery andData Mining Tools Competition, which was held in conjunction with The FifthInternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-99).Interestingly, the test data does not follow the same probability distribution as thetraining data (it includes 14 speciﬁc attack types that are not present in Tin which
123

==== Page 36 ====
892 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
24 training attack types are given). Yu et al. ( 2003 ) showed that their clustering-
based training set selection technique can easily outperform random sampling in thisscenario.
–Text classiﬁcation Text classiﬁcation, being the problem of determining to which topic
a given text document belongs (it may be in one, multiple or no category becauseof the overlaps across these categories), is an important research topic which hasbeen accelerated by the rapid growth of online information. Its applications includespam ﬁltering, language identiﬁcation, e-mail routing, readability assessment andmore. Schohn and Cohn ( 2000 ) and Tong and Koller ( 2002 ) tackled this problem
to verify the capabilities of their active-learning SVM approaches. They exploitedthe Reuters-21578 dataset ( http://www.daviddlewis.com/resources/testcollections/
reuters21578/ )i nt h e ModApte data split conﬁguration (there are several pre-deﬁned
training-test splits provided by the authors of this dataset) with almost 1 .3×10
4
articles (about 104features each) and considered 10 most frequently occurring cat-
egories. Another commonly used text-classiﬁcation dataset is Newsweeder (Lang
1995 ), also investigated in these papers.
–Credit screening Lyhyaoui et al. ( 1999 ) tested their SVM training set selection using a
dataset of 690 examples (15 features, 2 classes) reﬂecting customer creditworthiness.Although this dataset is known to be noisy (Quinlan 1999 ), the authors were able
to surpass 90% of the classiﬁcation accuracy with the use of their clustering-basedtechnique.
4 Conclusions and outlook
The amount of data produced every day grows tremendously in most real-life domains, includ-ing medical imaging, genomics, text categorization, computational biology, and many others.Although it appears beneﬁcial at the ﬁrst glance (more data could mean more possibilitiesof extracting and revealing useful underlying knowledge), handling massively large datasetsbecame a challenging issue and attracts attention of researchers from multiple ﬁelds, espe-cially in the era of big data. This big data revolution affected many research ﬁelds, includingstatistics, machine learning, parallel computing, and computer systems in general (Haykinet al. 2016 ). Albeit SVMs have proved extremely effective in solving a variety of pattern
recognition tasks, their main drawback lies in huge time and memory complexities, depend-ing on the training set size cardinality. This is a severe shortcoming (it may be even impossibleto train the classiﬁer using a dataset encompassing a very large number of vectors), and itmay prevent users from using SVMs in real-life scenarios which often require processingmassively large datasets. Finally, the classiﬁcation time grows linearly with the number ofSVs, which indirectly depends on the training set size (as already mentioned, the number ofSVs is notably smaller for reduced sets, hence the classiﬁcation is much faster).
In this review, we analyzed the current advances in selecting the SVM training data from
large datasets. We divided all the methods into several classes, comprising algorithms utilizingsimilar approaches (e.g., for extracting information about SV candidates) in their core, as wellas exposing similar characteristics. We believe that this taxonomy can be effectively usedfor emerging techniques, and will help highlight and understand their potential strengths andweaknesses. We presented the main sources of information concerning training set vectors,which are commonly used to assess the importance of these vectors (only important vectorsshould be assembled into reﬁned sets, because they are likely to be selected as SVs). As
123

==== Page 37 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 893
presented in Sect. 3.6, the number of algorithms for selection of reﬁned sets is quite large,
but their underpinning strategies for extracting such information can be classiﬁed into just ﬁvecategories. Although some methods combine different information sources (see Table 1), they
are in the minority, and this approach has not been intensively investigated in the literatureso far.
Training SVMs from large datasets remains an open research problem. A plethora of meth-
ods for tackling the SVM training from such datasets are an excellent point of departure forfurther research. We believe that emerging metaheuristics (especially population-based ones),combined with reﬁnement procedures should be intensively investigated towards parameter-less SVMs. Such engines would be extremely useful, since determining appropriate parametervalues of an algorithm at hand is very time-consuming for massive sets, especially if the trial-and-error approach is exploited. It will be beneﬁcial to construct hybrid algorithms, whichcouple methods for selecting reﬁned training sets, and for enhancing the SVM training. It hasnot been explored in the literature—we believe that it could become an immediate answerto some of the big data problems, where the data veracity, velocity, volume, and variety playthe pivotal role and should be treated comprehensively.
An important research direction encompasses creating algorithms, which utilize various
information sources in search of important training set vectors. We believe that such tech-niques (ideally independent from the cardinality of T) will be the main stream of development
soon, since they allow for extracting various bits of information about the dataset, and forcombining them into the solid knowledge about the Tvectors. On the other hand, incorporat-
ing those methods which beneﬁt from the same source of information into hybrid approacheswill most likely not result in boosting the quality of the reﬁned sets. Due to the wide avail-ability of a variety of parallel architectures, it will be beneﬁcial to develop algorithms whichanalyze datasets in the complementary ways in parallel. Then, the results could be merged inthe ﬁnal decision engine, used for assessing the Tvectors. Finally, algorithms which target
learning SVMs from imbalanced and weakly-labeled datasets are becoming crucial due tothe nature of the available data (Sáez et al. 2016 ).
Finally, the research summarized in this survey needs to be confronted with deep
learning—a very powerful classiﬁcation tool for a variety of pattern recognition tasks (LeCunet al. 2016 ). However, it has also been criticized for being difﬁcult to tune and easy to fool,
domain-agnostic, and hard to interpret (Nguyen et al. 2015 ). A very interesting research direc-
tion includes coupling deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with SVMs (alongsidetraining set selection algorithms) in a comprehensive classiﬁcation engine. Convolutionallayers of CNNs are in fact feature extractors—features automatically elaborated in suchlayers could be classiﬁed using SVMs. This would allow for omitting a tedious process ofpreparing hand-engineered features (which is particularly important in the case of image andvideo data).
Acknowledgements JN and MK were supported by the National Science Centre, Poland, under Research
Grant No. DEC-2017/25/B/ST6/00474, and JN was supported by the Silesian University of Technology under
the Grant for young researchers (BKM-509/RAu2/2017). The authors are grateful to the anonymous Reviewers
for their constructive and valuable comments that helped improve the paper.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Ethical approval This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by
any of the authors.
123

==== Page 38 ====
894 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Interna-
tional License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Abe S, Inoue T (2001) Fast training of support vector machines by extracting boundary data. In: Proceedings
of the international conference on artiﬁcial neural networks. Springer, Berlin, pp 308–313. https://doi.
org/10.1007/3-540-44668-0_44
Acampora G, Pedrycz W, Vitiello A (2015) A competent memetic algorithm for learning fuzzy cognitive maps.
IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst 23(6):2397–2411. https://doi.org/10.1109/TFUZZ.2015.2426311
Alamdar F, Ghane S, Amiri A (2016) On-line twin independent support vector machines. Neurocomputing
186:8–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2015.12.062
Ali S, Smith-Miles KA (2006) A meta-learning approach to automatic kernel selection for support vector
machines. Neurocomputing 70(13):173–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2006.03.004
Angiulli F (2005) Fast condensed nearest neighbor rule. In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference
on machine learning, ACM, New York, NY , USA, ICML ’05, pp 25–32. https://doi.org/10.1145/1102351.
1102355
Angiulli F (2007) Fast nearest neighbor condensation for large data sets classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans Knowl
Data Eng 19(11):1450–1464. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2007.190645
Angiulli F, Astorino A (2010) Scaling up support vector machines using nearest neighbor condensation. IEEE
Trans Neural Netw 21(2):351–357. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2009.2039227
Arana-Daniel N, Bayro-Corrochano E (2006) MIMO SVMs for 3D object classiﬁcation. In: The 2006 IEEE
international joint conference on neural network proceedings, pp 1628–1635. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IJCNN.2006.246629
Arana-Daniel N, López-Franco C, Bayro-Corrochano E (2009) Improving recurrent CSVM performance for
robot navigation on discrete labyrinths. In: Bayro-Corrochano E, Eklundh JO (eds) Proceedings onprogress in pattern recognition, image analysis, computer vision, and applications: 14th Iberoamericanconference on pattern recognition, CIARP 2009. Springer, Berlin, pp 834–842. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-10268-4_98
Balcázar JL, Dai Y , Watanabe O (2001) A random sampling technique for training support vector machines. In:
Proceedings of the international conference on algorithmic learning theory. Springer, Berlin, pp 119–134.https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45583-3_11
Barros de Almeida M, De Padua Braga A, Braga J (2000) SVM-KM: speeding SVMs learning with a priori
cluster selection and k-means. In: Proceedings of the sixth Brazilian symposium on neural networks, pp
162–167. https://doi.org/10.1109/SBRN.2000.889732
Bayro-Corrochano EJ, Arana-Daniel N (2010) Clifford support vector machines for classiﬁcation, regres-
sion, and recurrence. IEEE Trans Neural Netw 21(11):1731–1746. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNN.2010.
2060352
Belongie S, Malik J, Puzicha J (2002) Shape matching and object recognition using shape contexts. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 24(4):509–522. https://doi.org/10.1109/34.993558
Boser BE, Guyon IM, Vapnik VN (1992) A training algorithm for optimal margin classiﬁers. In: Proceedings
of the ﬁfth annual workshop on computational learning theory, ACM, COLT ’92, pp 144–152. https://
doi.org/10.1145/130385.130401
Burges CJ (1998) A tutorial on support vector machines for pattern recognition. Data Min Knowl Discov
2(2):121–167. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009715923555
Cano JR, Herrera F, Lozano M (2003) Using evolutionary algorithms as instance selection for data reduction
in KDD: an experimental study. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 7(6):561–575. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEVC.
2003.819265
Cervantes J, Li X, Yu W, Li K (2008) Support vector machine classiﬁcation for large data sets via minimum
enclosing ball clustering. Neurocomputing 71(46):611–619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2007.07.
028
Cervantes J, Lamont FG, López-Chau A, Mazahua LR, Ruíz JS (2015) Data selection based on decision tree
for SVM classiﬁcation on large data sets. Appl Soft Comput 37:787–798. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.
2015.08.048
Chau AL, Li X, Yu W (2013) Convex and concave hulls for classiﬁcation with support vector machine.
Neurocomputing 122:198–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2013.05.040
123

==== Page 39 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 895
Chou JS, Cheng MY , Wu YW, Pham AD (2014) Optimizing parameters of support vector machine using fast
messy genetic algorithm for dispute classiﬁcation. Expert Syst Appl 41(8):3955–3964. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.eswa.2013.12.035
Cortes C, Vapnik V (1995) Support-vector networks. Mach Learn 20(3):273–297. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF00994018
Cour T, Sapp B, Jordan C, Taskar B (2009) Learning from ambiguously labeled images. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE computer vision and pattern recognition conference, pp 919–926. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.
2009.5206667
Cyganek B (2008) Color image segmentation with support vector machines: applications to road signs detec-
tion. Int J Neural Syst 18(04):339–345. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0129065708001646
C y g a n e kB ,K r a w c z y kB ,W o ´ zniak M (2015) Multidimensional data classiﬁcation with chordal distance based
kernel and support vector machines. Eng Appl Artif Intell 46:10–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.
2015.08.001
Devos O, Downey G, Duponchel L (2014) Simultaneous data pre-processing and SVM classiﬁcation model
selection based on a parallel genetic algorithm applied to spectroscopic data of olive oils. Food Chem148:124–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.10.020
Dibeklio˘ glu H, Salah AA, Gevers T (2012) Are you really smiling at me? Spontaneous versus posed enjoyment
smiles. In: Proceedings of the 12th European conference on computer vision—volume part III, ECCV’12.Springer, Berlin, pp 525–538. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33712-3_38
Ding Y , Cheng L, Pedrycz W, Hao K (2015) Global nonlinear kernel prediction for large data set with a particle
swarm-optimized interval support vector regression. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 26(10):2521–2534. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2015.2426182
Duan Y , Wu O (2017) Learning with auxiliary less-noisy labels. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst
28(7):1716–1721. https://doi.org/10.1109/tnnls.2016.2546956
Eshelman LJ (1991) The CHC adaptive search algorithm: How to have safe search when engaging in non-
traditional genetic recombination. Foundations of genetic algorithms, vol 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp265–283. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-050684-5.50020-3
Fawcett T (2006) An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recogn Lett 27(8):861–874. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.patrec.2005.10.010
Fernandes ERQ, de Carvalho ACPLF, Coelho ALV (2015) An evolutionary sampling approach for classiﬁca-
tion with imbalanced data. In: 2015 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp 1–7.https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2015.7280760
Ferragut E, Laska J (2012) Randomized sampling for large data applications of SVM. In: Proceedings of
IEEE international conference on machine learning and applications, vol 1, pp 350–355. https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICMLA.2012.65
Fischler MA, Bolles RC (1981) Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model ﬁtting with applications
to image analysis and automated cartography. Commun ACM 24(6):381–395. https://doi.org/10.1145/
358669.358692
Fletcher R (2013) Quadratic programming. In: Practical methods of optimization. Wiley, New York, pp 229–
258. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118723203.ch10
Frenay B, Verleysen M (2014) Classiﬁcation in the presence of label noise: a survey. IEEE Trans Neural Netw
Learn Syst 25(5):845–869. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2013.2292894
Friedman M (1937) The use of ranks to avoid the assumption of normality implicit in the analysis of variance.
J Am Stat Assoc 32(200):675–701. https://doi.org/10.2307/2279372
Friedrichs F, Igel C (2005) Evolutionary tuning of multiple SVM parameters. Neurocomputing 64:107–117.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2004.11.022
Ghoggali N, Melgani F (2009) Automatic ground-truth validation with genetic algorithms for multispectral
image classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 47(7):2172–2181. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.
2009.2013693
Gold C, Sollich P (2003) Model selection for support vector machine classiﬁcation. Neurocomputing
55(12):221–249. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-2312(03)00375-8
Gorisse D, Cord M, Precioso F (2010) Scalable active learning strategy for object category retrieval. In: 2010
ieee international conference on image processing, pp 1013–1016. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIP.2010.
5653635
Guo L, Boukir S (2015) Fast data selection for SVM training using ensemble margin. Pattern Recogn Lett
51:112–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2014.08.003
Guo L, Boukir S, Chehata N (2010) Support vectors selection for supervised learning using an ensemble
approach. In: 2010 20th international conference on pattern recognition (ICPR), pp 37–40. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICPR.2010.18
123

==== Page 40 ====
896 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Han X, Chang X (2013) An intelligent noise reduction method for chaotic signals based on genetic algorithms
and lifting wavelet transforms. Inf Sci 218:103–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2012.06.033
Haykin S, Wright S, Bengio Y (2016) Big data: theoretical aspects. Proc IEEE 104(1):8–10. https://doi.org/
10.1109/JPROC.2015.2507658
He Q, Xie Z, Hu Q, Wu C (2011) Neighborhood based sample and feature selection for SVM classiﬁcation
learning. Neurocomputing 74(10):1585–1594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2011.01.019
Hernandez-Leal P, Carrasco-Ochoa JA, Martí-nez-Trinidad J, Olvera-Lopez JA (2013) InstanceRank based
on borders for instance selection. Pattern Recogn 46(1):365–375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2012.
07.007
Joachims T (1999) Making large-scale SVM learning practical. In: Schölkopf B, Burges CJC, Smola AJ (eds)
Advances in kernel methods. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 169–184. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
299094.299104
Kapp MN, Sabourin R, Maupin P (2012) A dynamic model selection strategy for support vector machine
classiﬁers. Appl Soft Comput 12(8):2550–2565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2012.04.001
Kawulok M (2007) Genetic algorithms for classiﬁers’ training sets optimization applied to human face recog-
nition. J Med Inform Technol 11:135–143. http://jmit.us.edu.pl/cms/jmitjrn/11/MIT_2007-13.pdf
Kawulok M, Nalepa J (2012) Support vector machines training data selection using a genetic algorithm.
In: Gimel’farb G, Hancock E, Imiya A, Kuijper A, Kudo M, Omachi S, Windeatt T, Yamada K (eds)Structural, syntactic, and statistical pattern recognition. Lecture notes in computer science, vol 7626.Springer, Berlin, pp 557–565. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-34166-3_61
Kawulok M, Nalepa J (2014a) Dynamically adaptive genetic algorithm to select training data for SVMs.
In: Bazzan ALC, Pichara K (eds) Advances in artiﬁcial intelligence - IBERAMIA 2014: 14th Ibero-American conference on AI, Santiago de Chile, Chile, November 24–27 2014, Proceedings. Springer,Cham, pp 242–254. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12027-0_20
Kawulok M, Nalepa J (2014b) Hand pose estimation using support vector machines with evolutionary training.
In: 2014 international conference on systems, signals and image processing (IWSSIP), pp 87–90. http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6837637/ . Accessed 31 Dec 2017
Kawulok M, Nalepa J (2015) Towards robust SVM training from weakly labeled large data sets. In: 2015
3rd IAPR Asian conference on pattern recognition (ACPR), pp 464–468. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACPR.
2015.7486546
Kawulok M, Kawulok J, Nalepa J (2014) Spatial-based skin detection using discriminative skin-presence
features. Pattern Recogn Lett 41:3–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2013.08.028
Kawulok M, Nalepa J, Nurzynska K, Smolka B (2016) In search of truth: analysis of smile intensity dynamics
to detect deception. In: Montes y Gómez M, Escalante HJ, Segura A, Murillo JdD (eds) Advances inartiﬁcial intelligence—IBERAMIA 2016: 15th Ibero-American conference on AI, proceedings. SpringerInternational Publishing, Cham, pp 325–337. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47955-2_27
Kawulok M, Nalepa J, Dudzik W (2017) An alternating genetic algorithm for selecting SVM model and
training set. In: Carrasco-Ochoa JA, Martínez-Trinidad JF, Olvera-López JA (eds) Pattern recognition:9th Mexican conference, MCPR 2017, proceedings. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 94–104.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-59226-8_10
Khosravani H, Ruano A, Ferreira P (2013) A simple algorithm for convex hull determination in high dimen-
sions. In: 2013 IEEE 8th international symposium on intelligent signal processing (WISP), pp 109–114.https://doi.org/10.1109/wisp.2013.6657492
Koggalage R, Halgamuge S (2004) Reducing the number of training samples for fast support vector
machine classiﬁcation. Neural Inf Process Lett Rev 2(3):57–65. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/8530/
7b7ac9c559537b6e43ef024888050512a10f.pdf
Kourou K, Exarchos TP, Exarchos KP, Karamouzis MV , Fotiadis DI (2015) Machine learning applications
in cancer prognosis and prediction. Comput Struct Biotechnol 13:8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.
2014.11.005
Kowaluk M, Majewska G (2015) β-skeletons for a set of line segments in R
2. In: Kosowski A, Walukiewicz
I (eds) Fundamentals of computation theory: 20th international symposium, FCT 2015, proceedings.Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 65–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22177-9_6
Lang K (1995) Newsweeder: learning to ﬁlter netnews. In: Proceedings of the twelfth international conference
on machine learning. Morgan Kaufmann, pp 331–339. https://doi.org/10.1.1.22.6286
Le QV , Sarlós T, Smola AJ (2014) Fastfood: approximate kernel expansions in loglinear time, pp 1–8. CoRR
http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.3060
Lebrun G, Charrier C, Lezoray O, Cardot H (2008) Tabu search model selection for SVM. Int J Neural Syst
18(01):19–31. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0129065708001348
LeCun Y , Bengio Y , Hinton G (2016) Deep learning. Nature 521:436–555. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature14539
123

==== Page 41 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 897
Lessmann S, Stahlbock R, Crone SF (2006) Genetic algorithms for support vector machine model selection.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE international joint conference on neural networks, pp 3063–3069. https://
doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2006.247266
Li Y (2011) Selecting training points for one-class support vector machines. Pattern Recogn Lett 32(11):1517–
1522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2011.04.013
Li Y , Maguire L (2011) Selecting critical patterns based on local geometrical and statistical information. IEEE
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 33(6):1189–1201. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2010.188
Li R, Bhanu B, Krawiec K (2007) Hybrid coevolutionary algorithms versus SVM algorithms. In: Proceedings
of the 9th annual conference on genetic and evolutionary computation, ACM, New York, NY , USA,
GECCO ’07, pp 456–463. https://doi.org/10.1145/1276958.1277057
Li YF, Tsang IW, Kwok JT, Zhou ZH (2013) Convex and scalable weakly labeled SVMs. J Mach Learn Res
14(1):2151–2188. www.jmlr.org/papers/volume14/li13a/li13a.pdf
Li J, Fong S, Zhuang Y , Khoury R (2016) Hierarchical classiﬁcation in text mining for sentiment analysis of
online news. Soft Comput 20(9):3411–3420. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-015-1812-4
Lin Y , Lv F, Zhu S, Yang M, Cour T, Yu K, Cao L, Huang T (2011) Large-scale image classiﬁcation: fast feature
extraction and SVM training. In: 2011 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition(CVPR), pp 1689–1696. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2011.5995477
Liu P, Choo KKR, Wang L, Huang F (2016) SVM or deep learning? A comparative study on remote sensing
image classiﬁcation. Soft Comput. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-2247-2
Li B, Wang Q, Hu J (2009) A fast SVM training method for very large datasets. In: International joint conference
on neural networks, IJCNN 2009, pp 1784–1789. https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2009.5178618
Loh WY (2011) Classiﬁcation and regression trees. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: data mining and knowl-
edge discovery 1(1):14–23. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.8
Lopez-Chau A, Li X, Yu W (2012) Convex-concave hull for classiﬁcation with SVM. In: Proceedings of
international conference on data mining, pp 431–438. https://doi.org/10.1109/icdmw.2012.76
Luxburg UV , Bousquet O, Schölkopf B (2004) A compression approach to support vector model selection. J
Mach Learn Res 5:293–323. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1005343
Lyhyaoui A, Martinez M, Mora I, Vaquez M, Sancho JL, Figueiras-Vidal A (1999) Sample selection via
clustering to construct support vector-like classiﬁers. IEEE Trans Neural Netw 10(6):1474–1481. https://
doi.org/10.1109/72.809092
Makris A, Kosmopoulos D, Perantonis S, Theodoridis S (2011) A hierarchical feature fusion framework for
adaptive visual tracking. Image Vis Comput 29(9):594–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imavis.2011.07.
001
Mercer J (1909) Functions of positive and negative type, and their connection with the theory of integral
equations. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 209:415–446. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.1909.0016
Nalepa J (2016) Genetic and memetic algorithms for selection of training sets for support vector machines.
Ph.D. thesis, Silesian University of Technology
Nalepa J, Blocho M (2016) Adaptive memetic algorithm for minimizing distance in the vehicle routing problem
with time windows. Soft Comput 20(6):2309–2327. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-015-1642-4
Nalepa J, Kawulok M (2014a) Adaptive genetic algorithm to select training data for support vector machines.
In: Esparcia-Alcazar AI, Mora AM (eds) Applications of evolutionary computation. Lecture notes in
computer science. Springer, Berlin, pp 514–525. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-45523-4_42
Nalepa J, Kawulok M (2014b) A memetic algorithm to select training data for support vector machines. In:
Proceedings of the 2014 conference on genetic and evolutionary computation, ACM, GECCO ’14, pp573–580. https://doi.org/10.1145/2576768.2598370
Nalepa J, Kawulok M (2016a) Adaptive memetic algorithm enhanced with data geometry analysis to select
training data for SVMs. Neurocomputing 185:113–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2015.12.046
Nalepa J, Kawulok M (2016b) The smaller, the better: selecting reﬁned SVM training sets using adaptive
memetic algorithm. In: Proceedings of the 2016 on genetic and evolutionary computation conferencecompanion, ACM, New York, NY , USA, GECCO ’16 Companion, pp 165–166. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2908961.2930950
Nalepa J, Cwiek M, Kawulok M (2015a) Adaptive memetic algorithm for the job shop scheduling problem.
In: 2015 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ijcnn.2015.7280409
Nalepa J, Siminski K, Kawulok M (2015b) Towards parameter-less support vector machines. In: 2015 3rd
IAPR Asian conference on pattern recognition (ACPR), pp 211–215. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACPR.
2015.7486496
Nguyen A, Yosinski J, Clune J (2015) Deep neural networks are easily fooled: high conﬁdence predictions for
unrecognizable images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE computer vision and pattern recognition conference,pp 427–436. https://doi.org/10.1109/cvpr.2015.7298640
123

==== Page 42 ====
898 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Nishida K, Kurita T (2008) RANSAC–SVM for large-scale datasets. In: 19th International conference on
pattern recognition, ICPR 2008, pp 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/icpr.2008.4761280
Oh S, Lee MS, Zhang BT (2011) Ensemble learning with active example selection for imbalanced biomedical
data classiﬁcation. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 8(2):316–325. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TCBB.2010.96
Olvera-López JA, Carrasco-Ochoa JA, Martínez-Trinidad JF, Kittler J (2010) A review of instance selection
methods. Artif Intell Rev 34(2):133–143. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-010-9165-y
Paul M, Haque SME, Chakraborty S (2013) Human detection in surveillance videos and its applications: a
review. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 1:176. https://doi.org/10.1186/1687-6180-2013-176
Phillips P, Wechsler H, Huang J, Rauss PJ (1998) The FERET database and evaluation procedure
for face-recognition algorithms. Image Vis Comput 16(5):295–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0262-
8856(97)00070-X
Phung S, Bouzerdoum A, Chai D (2005) Skin segmentation using color pixel classiﬁcation: analysis and
comparison. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 27(1):148–154. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2005.
17
Pietruszkiewicz W, Imada A (2013) Artiﬁcial intelligence evolved from random behaviour: departure from
the state of the art. Springer Berlin, pp 19–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-29694-9_2
Pighetti R, Pallez D, Precioso F (2015) Improving SVM training sample selection using multi-objective
evolutionary algorithm and LSH. In: Proceedings of the IEEE symposium on computational intelligence,pp 1383–1390. https://doi.org/10.1109/ssci.2015.197
Qiu J, Wu Q, Ding G, Xu Y , Feng S (2016) A survey of machine learning for big data processing. EURASIP
J Adv Signal Process 1:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13634-016-0355-x
Quinlan J (1999) Simplifying decision trees. Int J Hum Comput Stud 51(2):497–510. https://doi.org/10.1006/
ijhc.1987.0321
Reeves CR, Taylor SJ (1998) Selection of training data for neural networks by a genetic algorithm. In:
Eiben AE, Bäck T, Schoenauer M, Schwefel HP (eds) Parallel problem solving from nature—PPSN V:5th international conference, 1998 proceedings. Springer, Berlin, pp 633–642. https://doi.org/10.1007/
bfb0056905
Ripepi G, Clematis A, DAgostino D (2015) A hybrid parallel implementation of model selection for support
vector machines. In: Proceedings of the Euromicro international conference on parallel, distributed, andnetwork-based processing, pp 145–149. https://doi.org/10.1109/PDP.2015.97
Rodan A, Sheta AF, Faris H (2016) Bidirectional reservoir networks trained using SVM + privileged infor-
mation for manufacturing process modeling. Soft Comput. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-2232-
9
Sáez JA, Krawczyk B, Wo´ zniak M (2016) Analyzing the oversampling of different classes and types of exam-
ples in multi-class imbalanced datasets. Pattern Recogn 57:164–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.
2016.03.012
Schapire RE, Freund Y , Bartlett P, Lee WS (1998) Boosting the margin: a new explanation for the effectiveness
of voting methods. Ann Stat 26(5):1651–1686. https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1024691352
Scheunders P, Backer SD (1999) High-dimensional clustering using frequency sensitive competitive learning.
Pattern Recogn 32(2):193–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0031-3203(98)00136-8
Schohn G, Cohn D (2000) Less is more: active learning with support vector machines. In: Proceedings of
the international conference on machine learning, ICML, pp 839–846. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=657802 . Accessed 31 Dec 2017
Shen XJ, Mu L, Li Z, Wu HX, Gou JP, Chen X (2016) Large-scale support vector machine classiﬁcation
with redundant data reduction. Neurocomputing 172:189–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2014.
10.102
Shi GY , Liu S (2012) Model selection of RBF kernel for C-SVM based on genetic algorithm and multithreading.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on machine learning and cybernetics, vol 1, pp 382–386. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLC.2012.6358944
Shin H, Cho S (2002) Pattern selection for support vector classiﬁers. In: Yin H, Allinson N, Freeman R, Keane
J, Hubbard S (eds) Intelligent Data engineering and automated learning IDEAL 2002. Lecture notes incomputer science, vol 2412. Springer, Berlin. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45675-9_70
Shin H, Cho S (2003) Fast pattern selection for support vector classiﬁers. In: Whang KY , Jeon J, Shim K,
Srivastava J (eds) Advances in knowledge discovery and data mining. Lecture notes in computer science,vol 2637. Springer, Berlin, pp 376–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36175-8_37
Shin H, Cho S (2007) Neighborhood property-based pattern selection for SVMs. Neural Comput 19(3):816–
855. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.2007.19.3.816
123

==== Page 43 ====
Selecting training sets for support vector machines: a review 899
Simi´ nski K (2014) Neuro-fuzzy system based kernel for classiﬁcation with support vector machines. In:
Gruca A, Czachorski T, Kozielski S (eds) Man–machine interactions, advances in intelligent systemsand computing, vol 3. Springer, Berlin, pp 415–422. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-02309-0_45
Sullivan KM, Luke S (2007) Evolving kernels for support vector machine classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of
GECCO, ACM, New York, NY , USA, pp 1702–1707. https://doi.org/10.1145/1276958.1277292
Tang Y , Guo W, Gao J (2009) Efﬁcient model selection for support vector machine with Gaussian kernel
function. In: Proceedings of the IEEE symposium on computational intelligence and data mining, pp40–45. https://doi.org/10.1109/CIDM.2009.4938627
Tapaswi M, Bäuml M, Stiefelhagen R (2015) Improved weak labels using contextual cues for person identi-
ﬁcation in videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE face and gesture recognition conference, vol 4, pp 1–8.https://doi.org/10.1109/fg.2015.7163083
Tayal A, Coleman TF, Li Y (2014) Primal explicit max margin feature selection for nonlinear support vector
machines. Pattern Recogn 47(6):2153–2164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2014.01.003
Tong S, Chang E (2001) Support vector machine active learning for image retrieval. In: Proceedings of the
ninth ACM international conference on multimedia, ACM, New York, NY , USA, MULTIMEDIA ’01,pp 107–118. https://doi.org/10.1145/500156.500159
Tong S, Koller D (2002) Support vector machine active learning with applications to text classiﬁcation. J Mach
Learn Res 2:45–66. https://doi.org/10.1162/153244302760185243
Trojacanec K, Dimitrovski I, Loskovska S (2009) Content based image retrieval in medical applications: an
improvement of the two-level architecture. In: IEEE EUROCON 2009, pp 118–121. https://doi.org/10.
1109/EURCON.2009.5167614
Tsyurmasto P, Zabarankin M, Uryasev S (2014) Value-at-risk support vector machine: stability to outliers. J
Comb Optim 28(1):218–232. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10878-013-9678-9
Uzilov A V , Keegan JM, Mathews DH (2006) Detection of non-coding RNAs on the basis of predicted secondary
structure formation free energy change. BMC Bioinform 7(1):173. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-
7-173
Verbiest N, Derrac J, Cornelis C, Garcí-a S, Herrera F (2016) Evolutionary wrapper approaches for training set
selection as preprocessing mechanism for support vector machines: experimental evaluation and supportvector analysis. Appl Soft Comput 38:10–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.09.006
Wang D, Shi L (2008) Selecting valuable training samples for SVMs via data structure analysis. Neurocom-
puting 71:2772–2781. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2007.09.008
Wang W, Xu Z (2004) A heuristic training for support vector regression. Neurocomputing 61:259–275. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2003.11.012
Wang J, Neskovic P, Cooper L (2005) Training data selection for support vector machines. In: Wang L, Chen
K, Ong Y (eds) Advances in natural computation, lecture notes in computer science, vol 3610. Springer,Berlin, pp 554–564. https://doi.org/10.1007/11539087_71
Wang J, Neskovic P, Cooper LN (2007) Selecting data for fast support vector machines training. In: Chen
K, Wang L (eds) Trends in neural computation, studies in computational intelligence, vol 35. Springer,Berlin, pp 61–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-36122-0_3
Wang D, Qiao H, Zhang B, Wang M (2013a) Online support vector machine based on convex hull vertices
selection. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 24(4):593–609. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2013.
2238556
Wang Z, Shao YH, Wu TR (2013b) A GA-based model selection for smooth twin parametric-margin support
vector machine. Pattern Recogn 46(8):2267–2277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2013.01.023
Ward J (1963) Hierarchical grouping to optimize an objective function. J Am Stat Assoc 58(301):236–244.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1963.10500845
Wenyuan L, Jing M, Changwu W, Baowen W, Yongqiang L (2013) The training set selection methods of
microRNA precursors prediction based on machine learning approaches. In: 2013 third internationalconference on intelligent system design and engineering applications (ISDEA), pp 1566–1569. https://
doi.org/10.1109/ISDEA.2012.376
Woolson RF (2007) Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Wiley, New York, pp 4739–4740. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9780471462422.eoct979
Wrona S, Pawełczyk M (2013) Controllability-oriented placement of actuators for active noise-vibration
control of rectangular plates using a memetic algorithm. Arch Acoust 38(4):529–536. https://doi.org/10.
2478/aoa-2013-0062
Xiao H, Biggio B, Nelson B, Xiao H, Eckert C, Roli F (2015) Support vector machines under adversarial label
contamination. Neurocomputing 160:53–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2014.08.081
Xu L, Crammer K, Schuurmans D (2006) Robust support vector machine training via convex outlier ablation.
In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, pp 536–542. http://dl.acm.org/citation.
cfm?id=1597625 . Accessed 31 Dec 2017
123

==== Page 44 ====
900 J. Nalepa, M. Kawulok
Yu H, Mu C, Sun C, Yang W, Yang X, Zuo X (2015) Support vector machine-based optimized decision
threshold adjustment strategy for classifying imbalanced data. Knowl Based Syst 76:67–78. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.knosys.2014.12.007
Yuan X, Song M, Zhou F, Wang Y , Chen Z (2015) A novel fast training method for SVM and its application
in fault diagnosis of service robot. Int J Online Eng 11(6):4–9. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v11i6.4846
Yu H, Yang J, Han J (2003) Classifying large data sets using SVMs with hierarchical clusters. In: Proceedings
of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, ACM,New York, NY , USA, KDD ’03, pp 306–315. https://doi.org/10.1145/956750.956786
Zeng ZQ, Xu HR, Xie YQ, Gao J (2008a) A geometric approach to train SVM on very large data sets. In:
Proceedings of the international conference on intelligent systems and knowledge engineering, vol 1, pp991–996. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISKE.2008.4731074
Zeng ZQ, Yu HB, Xu HR, Xie YQ, Gao J (2008b) Fast training support vector machines using parallel sequen-
tial minimal optimization. In: 2008 3rd international conference on intelligent system and knowledgeengineering, vol 1, pp 997–1001. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISKE.2008.4731075
Zhang W, King I (2002) Locating support vectors via β-skeleton technique. In: Proceedings of the inter-
national conference on neural information processing, pp 1423–1427. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICONIP.
2002.1202855
Zhang X, Song Q (2015) A multi-label learning based kernel automatic recommendation method for support
vector machine. PLoS One. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0120455
Zhang T, Ramakrishnan R, Livny M (1996) BIRCH: an efﬁcient data clustering method for very large databases.
In: Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGMOD international conference on management of data, ACM,New York, NY , USA, SIGMOD ’96, pp 103–114. https://doi.org/10.1145/233269.233324
Zhou X, Xu J (2009) A SVM model selection method based on hybrid genetic algorithm and empirical error
minimization criterion. In: Wang H, Shen Y , Huang T, Zeng Z (eds) Proceedings of the international sym-
posium on neural networks. Springer, Berlin, pp 245–253. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-01216-7_
26
Zhu J, Mao J, Yuille AL (2014) Learning from weakly supervised data by the expectation loss SVM (e-SVM)
algorithm. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS, pp 1125–1133. http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id=2968952 . Accessed 31 Dec 2017
123

