==== Page 1 ====
Self-Critical Reasoning
for Robust Visual Question Answering
Jialin Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
jialinwu@utexas.eduRaymond J. Mooney
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
mooney@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract
Visual Question Answering (VQA) deep-learning systems tend to capture superﬁ-
cial statistical correlations in the training data because of strong language priors
and fail to generalize to test data with a signiﬁcantly different question-answer
(QA) distribution [ 1]. To address this issue, we introduce a self-critical training
objective that ensures that visual explanations of correct answers match the most
inﬂuential image regions more than other competitive answer candidates. The
inﬂuential regions are either determined from human visual/textual explanations or
automatically from just signiﬁcant words in the question and answer. We evaluate
our approach on the VQA generalization task using the VQA-CP dataset, achiev-
ing a new state-of-the-art i:e:; 49.5% using textual explanations and 48.5% using
automatically annotated regions.
1 Introduction
Recently, Visual Question Answering (VQA) [ 4] has emerged as a challenging task that requires
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems to compute answers by jointly analyzing both natural language
questions and visual content. The state-of-the-art VQA systems [ 8,2,1,3,12,33,25,29,14,15,21]
achieve high performance when the training and test question-answer (QA) pairs are sampled from the
same distribution. However, most of these systems fail to generalize to test data with a substantially
different QA distribution. In particular, their performance drops catastrophically on the recently
introduced Visual Question Answering under Changing Priors (VQA-CP) [ 1] dataset. The strong
language priors encourage systems to blindly capture superﬁcial statistical correlations in the training
QA pairs and simply output the most common answers, instead of reasoning about the relevant image
regions on which a human would focus. For example, since about 40% of questions that begin with
“what sport” have the answer “tennis”, systems tend to learn to output “tennis” for these questions
regardless of image content.
A number of recent VQA systems [28, 35, 25, 20] learn to not only predict correct answers but also
be “right for the right reasons” [ 23,25]. These systems are trained to encourage the network to focus
on regions in the image that humans have somehow annotated as important (which we will refer to as
“important regions.”). However, many times, the network also focuses on these important regions
even when it produces a wrong answer. Previous approaches do nothing to actively discourage this
phenomenon, which we have found occurs quite frequently.1For example, as shown in Figure 1, we
ask the VQA system, “What is the man eating?”. The baseline system predicts “hot dog” but focuses
on the banana because hot dog appears much more frequently in the training data. What’s worse, this
error is hard to detect when only analyzing the correct answer “banana” that has been successfully
grounded in the image.
1We exam these situations by designing a metric called false sensitivity rate ( FSR ) in Sec. 5.2.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

==== Page 2 ====
       Hot dog 
    (baseline)>Banana 
(self-critical) Hot dog 
(self-critical)
Human Visual 
    AttentionBanana 
(baseline) <4139
30
20
Pizza   Hot  Donut  Sand
           Dog             wich1312
4
2
Cake   Banana  No  burritoQuestion: What is the man eating?                 Baseline Prediction: Hot Dog (wrong)                                           Our Prediction: Banana (correct)    
Test Answer 
DistributionTraining Answer 
    Distribution
(a) (g)(f)(e)(d)(c)(b)Figure 1: Example of a common answer misleading the prediction even though the VQA system
has the right reasons for the correct answer. Figure (a) shows the important regions extracted from
human visual attention. Figure (b), (e) show the answers’ distribution for the question “What is the
man eating?” in the training and test dataset. Figure (c), (d) show the most inﬂuential region for the
prediction “hot dog” and “banana” using the baseline UpDn VQA system and Figure (f), (g) show the
inﬂuential region for the prediction “hot dog” and “banana” using the VQA system after being trained
with our self-critical objective. The number on the bounding box shows the answer’s sensitivity to
the object.
To address this issue, we present a “self-critical” approach that directly criticizes incorrect answers’
sensitivity to the important regions. First, for each QA, we determine the important region that most
inﬂuences the network’s prediction of the correct answer. We then penalize the network for focusing
on this region when its predicted answer for this question is wrong .
Our self-critical approach is end-to-end trainable and only requires that the base VQA system be
differentiable to the visual content, and thus can be applied to most current state-of-the-art systems.
We investigated three approaches to determining important regions. First, like the previous work
[28,35,25,20], we used regions that humans have explicitly marked as important. However, this
requires a fair bit of extra human effort to provide such detailed annotations. So we also explored
using human textual VQA explanations from the VQA-X [ 18] dataset to determine important objects
which are then grounded to important regions in the image. Finally, we tried determining important
regions by only using objects mentioned in the question or answer and grounding them in the image,
which requires noadditional human annotation of the VQA training data.
We evaluate our approach using the UpDn VQA system [ 2] on the VQA-CP dataset [ 1] and achieve
a new state-of-the-art performance (currently 47.7%): i:e:49.5% overall score with VQA-X [ 18]
textual explanations, 49.1 % with VQA-HAT [ 7] visual explanations and 48.5% using just mentioned
objects in the questions and answers. Our code is available at https://github.com/jialinwu17/
Self_Critical_VQA .
2 Related Work
2.1 Human Explanations for VQA
There are two main kinds of human explanations available for the most popular VQA dataset [ 4],
i:e:; visual and textual explanations. The VQA-HAT dataset [ 7] is a visual explanation dataset that
collects human attention maps by giving human experts blurred images and asking them to determine
where to deblur in order to answer a given visual question. Alternatively, [ 18] presents the VQA-X
dataset that associates a textual explanation with each QA pair, which a human has provided to justify
an answer to a given question. In this work, we utilize both of these kinds of explanations to provide
the important regions.
2.2 Language Priors in VQA
Language priors [ 1,9] in VQA refer to the fact that question types and their answers are highly
correlated. For instance, questions that begin with “How many” are usually answered by either two
2

==== Page 3 ====
or three. These language priors allow VQA systems to take a shortcut when answering questions
by only focusing on the questions without reasoning about the visual content. In order to prevent
this shortcut, VQA v2 [ 4] balances the answer distribution so that there exist at least two similar
images with different answers for each question. Recently, [ 1] introduce a diagnostic reconﬁguration
of the VQA v2 dataset called VQA-CP where the distribution of the QA pairs in the training set
is signiﬁcantly different from those in the test set. Most state-of-the-art VQA systems are found
to highly rely on language priors and experience a catastrophic performance drop on VQA-CP. We
evaluate our approach on VQA-CP in order to demonstrate that it generalizes better and is less
sensitive to distribution changes.
2.3 Improving VQA using Human Explanations
The desired property for VQA systems is to not only infer the correct answers to visual questions
but also base the answer on image regions that a human believes are important, i:e:; right for the
right reasons. The VQA systems that address this issue can be classiﬁed into two categories. The
ﬁrst trend is to build a system whose model is inherently interpretable. For example, GVQA [ 1]
explicitly disentangles the vision and language components by introducing a separate visual concept
veriﬁer and answer cluster classiﬁers. The other trend is to align a systems’ explanation to human
experts’ explanations for the correct answers. [ 35,20] align the internal attention weights over the
image to the human attention maps. The work most related to ours is HINT [ 25], which enforces the
system’s gradient-based importance scores for each detected object to have the same rankings as its
human importance scores. In contrast to prior work, our approach not only encourages the systems to
be sensitive to the important regions identiﬁed by humans, but also decrease the incorrect answers’
sensitivity to these regions.
3 Preliminaries
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce our base Bottom-up Top-down (UpDn) VQA system2[2]. Then, we
describe our method for constructing a proposed object set that covers the most inﬂuential objects on
which a human would focus when answering the question.
3.1 Bottom-Up Top-Down VQA
A large number of previous VQA systems [ 8,5,21] utilize a trainable Top-Down attention mechanism
over convolutional features to recognize relevant image regions. [ 2] introduced complementary
bottom-up attention that ﬁrst detects common objects and attributes so that the top-down attention
can directly model the contribution of higher-level concepts. This UpDn approach is heavily used in
recent work [25, 31, 14, 32, 26] and signiﬁcantly improves VQA performance.
Technically, on the vision side, for each image, UpDn systems ﬁrst extract a visual feature set V=
fvi;:::;vjVjgfor each image whose element viis a feature vector for the i-th detected object. On
the language side, UpDn systems sequentially encode each question Qto produce a question vector
qusing a standard single-layer GRU [ 6] denoted by h,i:e:q=h(Q). Letfdenote the answer
prediction operator that takes both visual features and question features as input and predicts the
conﬁdence for each answer ain the answer candidate set A,i:e:P (ajV;Q) =f(V;q). The VQA
task is framed as a multi-label regression problem with the gold-standard soft scores as targets in
order to be consistent with the evaluation metric. In particular, the standard binary cross entropy loss
Lvqais used to supervise the sigmoid-normalized outputs.
3.2 Proposed Inﬂuential Object Set Construction
Our approach ideally requires identifying important regions that a human considers most critical
in answering the question. However, directly obtaining such a clear set of inﬂuential objects from
either visual or textual explanations is hard, as the visual explanations also highlight the neighbor
objects around the most inﬂuential one, and grounding textual explanations in images is still an active
research ﬁeld. We relax this requirement by identifying a proposed set of inﬂuential objects Ifor
each QA pair. This set may we noisy and contain some irrelevant objects, but we assume that it at
2The key approach used by the VQA-challenge winning entries in the last two years.
3

==== Page 4 ====
What utensil is pictured? 
∇"𝑝(𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑘|𝑄,𝒱)Influence StrengthenLossORThere is a fork near the cake.Self Critical LossAnswer Prediction∇"𝑝(𝑘𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑒|𝑄,𝒱)
Knife(0.72)Fork(0.66)
Proposal object setExplaining prediction “fork”Explaining prediction “knife”
Extracting the most influential objectVisual feature set 𝒱Original image
Human visual explanationHuman textual explanation
The most influential objectFigure 2: Model overview. In the left top block, the base UpDn VQA system ﬁrst detects a set
of objects and predicts an answer. We then analyze the correct answer’s sensitivity (Fork) to the
detected objects via visual explanation and extract the most inﬂuential one in the proposal object set
as the most inﬂuential object, which is also further strengthened via the inﬂuence strengthen loss
(left bottom block). Finally, we analyze the competitive incorrect answers’ sensitivities (Knife) to
the most inﬂuential object and criticize the sensitivity until the VQA system answers the question
correctly (right block). The number on a bounding box is the answer’s sensitivity to the given object.
least includes the most relevant object. As previously mentioned, we explore three separate methods
for constructing this proposal set, as described below:
Construction from Visual Explanations . Following HINT [ 25], we use the VQA-HAT dataset
[7] as the visual explanation source. HAT maps contain a total of 59;457image-question pairs,
corresponding to approximately 9% of the VQA-CP training and test set. We also inherit HINT’s
object scoring system that is based on the normalized human attention map energy inside the proposal
box relative to the normalized energy outside the box. We score each detected object from the
bottom-up attention and build the potential object set by selecting the top jIjobjects.
Construction from Textual Explanations . Recently, [ 18] introduced a textual explanation dataset
that annotates 32;886image-question pairs, corresponding to 5% of the entire VQA-CP dataset.
To extract the potential object set, we ﬁrst assign part-of-speech (POS) tags to each word in the
explanation using the spaCy POS tagger [ 11] and extract the nouns in the sentence. Then, we select
the detected objects whose cosine similarity between the Glove embeddings [ 19] of their category
names and any of the extracted nouns’ is greater than 0:6. Finally, we select the jIjobjects with the
highest similarity.
Construction from Questions and Answers . Since the above explanations may not be available in
other datasets, we also consider a simple way to extract the proposal object set from just the training
QA pairs alone. The method is quite similar to the way we construct the potential set from textual
explanations. The only difference is that instead of parsing the explanations, we parse the QA pairs
and extract nouns from them.
4 Approach
In this section, we present our self-critical approach to prevent the most common answer from
dominating the correct answer given the proposal sets of inﬂuential objects. Figure 2 shows an
overview of our approach. Besides the UpDn VQA system (left top block), our approach contains
two other components, we ﬁrst recognize and strengthen the most inﬂuential objects (left bottom
block), and then we criticize incorrect answers that are more highly ranked than the correct answer
and try to make them less sensitive to these key objects (right block). As recent research suggests that
4

==== Page 5 ====
gradient-based methods more faithfully represent a model’s decision making process [ 25,34,30,13],
we use a modiﬁed GradCAM [ 24] to compute the answer a’s sensitivity to the i-th object features vi
as shown in Eq. 1.3
S(a;vi):= 
rviP(ajV;q)T1 (1)
There are two modiﬁcations to GradCAM: (1) ReLU units are removed, (2) gradients are no longer
weighted by their feature vectors. This is because negative gradients on the inputs to a ReLU are
valuable evidence against the current prediction. Therefore, there is no need to zero them out with
a ReLU. Also, before they are weighted by the feature vectors, the gradients indicate how small
changes in any direction inﬂuence the ﬁnal prediction. If weighted by the feature vectors, the output
tends to reﬂect the inﬂuence caused only byexisting attributes of the objects, thereby ignoring other
potential attributes that may appear in the test data.
4.1 Recognizing and Strengthening Inﬂuential Objects
Given a proposal object set Iand the entire detected object set V, we identify the object that the
correct answer is most sensitive to and further strengthen its sensitivity. We ﬁrst introduce a sensitivity
violation termSV(a;vi;vj)for answeraand thei-th andj-th object features viandvjas the amount
of sensitivity that vjsurpasses vi, as shown in Eq. 2.
SV(a;vi;vj) = max 
S(a;vj) S(a;vi);0
(2)
Based on the assumption that the proposal set contains at least one inﬂuential object that a human
would use to infer the answer, we impose the constraint that the most sensitive object in the proposal
set should not be less sensitive than any object outside the proposal set. Therefore, we introduce the
inﬂuence strengthen loss Linflin Eq. 3:
Linfl= min
vi2IX
vj2VnISV(agt;vi;vj)
(3)
where theagtdenotes the ground truth answer. The key differences between our inﬂuence strengthen
loss and the ranking-based HINT loss are that (1) we relax the unnecessary constraint that the objects
should follow the exact human ranking, and (2) it is easier to adapt to different types of explanation
(e:g:textual explanations) where such detailed rankings are not available.
4.2 Criticizing Incorrect Dominant Answers
Next, for the incorrect answers ranked higher than the correct answer, we attempt to decrease the
sensitivity of the inﬂuential objects. For example, in VQA-CP, bedrooms are the most common room
type. Therefore, during testing, systems frequently incorrectly classify bathrooms (which are rare in
the training data) as bedrooms. Since humans identify a sink as an inﬂuential object when identifying
bathrooms, we want to decrease the inﬂuence of sinks on concluding bedroom.
In order to address this issue, we design a self-critical objective to criticize the VQA systems’
incorrect but competitive decisions based on the most inﬂuential object vto which the correct answer
is most sensitive as deﬁned in Eq. 4.
v= arg min
vi2IX
vj2VnISV(agt;vi;vj)
(4)
Speciﬁcally, we extract a bucket of at most Bpredictions with higher conﬁdence than the correct
answerB=fa1;a2;:::;ajBjgand utilize the proposed self-critical loss Lcritto directly minimize the
weighted sensitivities of the answers in the bucket Bto the selected most inﬂuential object, as shown
in Eq. 5.
Lcrit=X
a2Bw(a)(S(a;v) S(agt;v)) (5)
whereagtdenotes the ground truth answer. Because several answer candidates could be similar ( e:g:
cow andcattle ), we weight the sensitivity gaps in Eq. 5 by the cosine distance between the answers’
300-dGlove embeddings [ 19],i:e:w (a) =cosine _dist(Glove (agt); Glove (a)). In the multi-word
answer case, the Glove embeddings of these answers are computed as the sum of the individual
word’s Glove embeddings.
31denotes a vector with all 1’s.
5

==== Page 6 ====
4.3 Implementation and Training Details
In this section, we describe the detailed implementation and training procedure of our self-critical
approach to VQA using VQA-X explanations.
Training Details. We ﬁrst pre-train our base UpDn VQA system on the VQA-CP training set using
standard VQA loss Lvqa(binary cross-entropy loss with soft scores as supervision) with the Adam
optimizer [ 16] for at most 20 epochs. As suggested in [ 27], the learning rate is ﬁxed to 10e-3 with a
batch size of 384 during the pre-training process, and we use 1;280hidden units in the base UpDn
VQA system. Then, we ﬁne-tune our system to recognize important objects using Lvqa+inflLinfl
with a learning rate of 10e-5 for at most 15epochs on the intersection of VQA-X and VQA-CP
training set. We initialize the model with the best model from the pre-train stage. In this stage, we
also ﬁnd the best inﬂuence strengthening loss weight ?
infl. Finally, we ﬁne-tune the system with the
joint lossL=Lvqa+?
inflLinfl+critLcritfor at most 15epochs with a learning rate of 10e-5 on
the intersection of VQA-X and VQA-CP training set. The bucket size jBjof the competitive answers
is set to 5 because we observed that the top- 5overall score of the pre-trained system on the VQA-CP
dataset achieves 80.4%, and increasing the bucket size only marginally improves the score.
Implementation. We implemented our approach on top of the original UpDn system. The base
system utilizes a Faster R-CNN head [ 22] in conjunction with a ResNet-101 base network [ 10]
as the object detection module. The detection head is pre-trained on the Visual Genome dataset
[17] and is capable of detecting 1;600objects categories and 400attributes. UpDn takes the ﬁnal
detection outputs and performs non-maximum suppression (NMS) for each object category using an
IoU threshold of 0:7. Then, the convolutional features for the top 36objects are extracted for each
image as the visual features, i:e:a2;048dimensional vector for each object. For question embedding,
following [ 2], we perform standard text pre-processing and tokenization. In particular, questions are
ﬁrst converted to lower case and then trimmed to a maximum of 14words, and the words that appear
less than 5times are replaced with an “ <unk>” token. A single layer GRU [ 6] is used to sequentially
process the word vectors and produce a sentential representation for the pre-processed question. We
also use Glove vectors [ 19] to initialize the word embedding matrix when embedding the questions.
The size of proposal object set is set to 6.
5 Experimental Results
First, we present experiments on a simple synthetic dataset to illustrate basic aspects of our approach.
We then present experimental results on the VQA-CP (Visual Question Answering with Changing
Priors) [ 1] dataset where the QA pairs in the training data and test data have signiﬁcantly different
distributions. We also present experimental results on the VQA v2 validation set for completeness.
We compare our self-critical system’s VQA performance with the start-of-the-art systems via the
standard evaluation metric. After that, we perform ablation studies to verify the contribution of
strengthening the inﬂuential objects and criticizing competitive answers. Finally, we show some
qualitative examples to illustrate the effectiveness of criticizing the incorrect answers’ sensitivity.
5.1 Results on Synthetic Data
We manually created a dataset where the inputs are drawn from a mixture of two Gaussians, i.e.
N1=N([ 3;3]T;2I2)andN2=N([3;3]T;2I2), where each distribution deﬁnes a category. In
order to ensure the training and test data have different category distributions, we intentionally assign
different weights to the two components. In particular, during training, the examples are drawn from
N1with probability p, and during test, the examples are drawn from N1with probability 1 p.
We examine the effectiveness of our self-critical approach varying pfrom 0.05 to 0.5 ( i:e:0.05,
0.1, 0.2, 0.5) (0.5 means no train/test difference). In these experiments, we use the obvious human
explanation that the ﬁrst channel (x-axis) is important for all training examples. We use a 15-layer
feed-forward neural network with 256 hidden units and 1000 examples for both training and test
in all of our experiments. We use Adam to optimize our model with a learning rate of 1e-3 during
pre-training (100 epochs) with binary cross-entropy loss, and 1e-5 during ﬁne-tuning (50 epochs)
with our self-critical approach. The inﬂuence strengthening loss weight and self-critical loss weight
are set to 20 and 1000, respectively. The results in Fig. 3 shows that the self-critical approach helps
6

==== Page 7 ====
   Baseline: 77.4%       Self-critical: 79.8%       Baseline: 80.3%     Self-critical: 86.2%         Baseline: 88.5%      Self-critical: 89.6%       Baseline: 95.1%     Self-critical: 95.0%
Figure 3: Decision boundaries and test set accuracies on synthetic data with various class ratios p,
which is varied from 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, to 0.5 from left to right. The training data is shown in the top row,
testing in the bottom. Red and blue colors denote different categories. Dashed lines and solid lines
denote the boundaries of the pretrained and ﬁne-tuned models, respectively.
Expl. VQA-CP v2 test VQA v2 val
All Yes/No Num Other All Yes/No Num Other
GVQA[1] 31.3 58.0 13.7 22.1 48.2 72.0 31.2 34.7
UpDn [2] 39.7 42.7 11.9 46.1 63.5 81.2 42.1 55.7
UpDn+AttAlign [25] 38.5 42.5 11.4 43.8 61.0 78.9 38.4 53.3
UpDn+AdvReg. [21] 41.2 65.5 15.5 35.5 62.8 79.8 42.4 55.2
UpDn+SCR (ours) QA 48.47 70.41 10.42 47.29 62.3 77.4 40.9 56.5
UpDn+HINT [25] HAT 47.7 70.0 10.7 46.3 62.5 80.5 41.8 54.0
UpDn+SCR (ours) HAT 49.17 71.55 10.72 47.49 62.2 78.9 41.4 54.3
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 49.45 72.36 10.93 48.02 62.2 78.8 41.6 54.5
Table 1: Comparison of the results on VQA-CP test and VQA v2 validation dataset with the state-of-
the-art systems. The upper part includes VQA systems without human explanations during training,
and the VQA systems in the bottom part use either visual or textual human explanations. The “Expl.”
column shows the source of explanations for training the VQA systems. SCR is the short hand for
our self-critical reasoning approach. The results with a precision of 2 decimal points denote the mean
of three runs with different random initial seeds.
shift the decision boundary towards the correct, unbiased position, increasing robustness and accuracy
on the test data.
5.2 Results on VQA Data
VQA Performance on VQA-CP and VQA v2 datasets
Table 1 shows results on the VQA-CP generalization task, comparing our results with the state-of-
the-art methods. We also report our system’s performance on the balanced VQA v2 validation set for
completeness.
Our system signiﬁcantly outperforms other state-of-the-art system (e.g., HINT [ 25]) by 1:5%on
the overall score for VQA-CP when using the same human visual explanations (VQA-HAT), which
indicates the effectiveness of directly criticizing the competitive answers’ sensitivity to the most
inﬂuential objects. Using human textual explanations as supervision is even a bit more effective.
With only about half the number of explanations compared to VQA-HAT, these textual explanations
improve VQA performance by an additional 0:3%on the overall score, achieving a new state-of-the-
art of 49:5%.
Without human explanations, our approach that only uses the QA proposal object set as supervision
clearly outperforms all of the previous approaches, even those that use human explanations. We
further analyzed the quality of the inﬂuential object proposal sets extracted from the QA pairs by
comparing them to those from the corresponding human explanations. On average, the QA proposal
sets contain 57.1% and 54.3% of the objects in the VQA-X and VQA-HAT proposal object sets,
respectively, indicating a signiﬁcant but not perfect overlap.
Note that our self-critical objective particularly improves VQA performance in the ’Yes/No’ and
’Other’ question categories; however, it does not do as well in the ’Num’ category. This is understand-
7

==== Page 8 ====
Expl.inflcrit VQA-CP v2 test
All Yes/No Num Other
UpDn [2] 39.7 42.7 11.9 46.1
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 5 0 46.6 62.2 12.1 47.9
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 20 0 47.8 67.9 12.4 47.0
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 60 0 47.2 65.0 11.9 47.6
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 80 0 47.0 64.3 11.8 47.5
Table 2: Ablation study on various inﬂuence-strengthening loss weights on VQA-CP test data (. The
“Expl.” column shows the source of explanations for training the VQA systems. The “ infl” column
shows the inﬂuence-strengthening loss weight. The “ crit” column shows the self-critical loss weight.
SCR is the short hand for our self-critical reasoning approach.
Expl.inflcrit VQA-CP v2 test
All Yes/No Num Other
UpDn [2] 39.7 42.7 11.9 46.1
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 20 500 48.7 70.0 10.4 47.8
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 20 2000 49.5 72.2 11.0 48.1
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 20 4000 49.4 71.9 11.0 48.1
UpDn+SCR (ours) VQA-X 20 6000 49.0 71.6 10.9 47.8
Table 3: Ablation study on various self-critical loss weights on VQA-CP test data. The “Expl.”
column shows the source of explanations for training the VQA systems. The “ crit” column shows
the self-critical loss weight. SCR is the short hand for our self-critical reasoning approach.
able because counting problems are generally harder than the other two types, and requires the VQA
system to consider allof the objects jointly. Therefore, criticizing only the most sensitive ones does
not improve the performance.
For the VQA v2 test dataset, our self-critical methods are competitive with previous approaches. This
indicates that criticizing the wrong answers’ sensitivities at least does not hurt performance when the
training and test data have the same distribution.
Ablation Study on the Loss Weights
Tables 2 and 3 evaluate the impact of varying the weight of the inﬂuence strengthening loss and
self-critical loss on the VQA-CP test data using VQA-X textual explanations. Table 2 shows that
withoutLcritto criticize the false sensitivity, our inﬂuence-strengthening still improves the UpDn
VQA system 8:1%on the overall score. As shown Table 3, combining with the Lcritloss, our
approach sets a new state-of-the-art score ( 49:5%) on the VQA-CP test set using textual explanations.
We also notice that our approach is fairly robust to changes in the weight of both losses Linfl,Lcrit
and consistently improves VQA performance for a wide range of loss weights.
Study on Proposal Inﬂuential Object Set Size
Table 4 reports results with various set sizes indicating the two objectives are fairly robust. We use
VQA-HAT visual explanations to construct the inﬂuential object sets and both losses to ﬁne-tune our
model.
jIj 4 5 6 7 8 10
VQA-CP v2 test 48.8% 49.1% 49.2% 49.1% 48.7% 48.3%
Table 4: Ablation study on the size of the proposal inﬂuential object set.
Effectiveness of Criticizing False Sensitivity
In this section, we quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed self-critical objective.
In particular, we evaluate the fraction of false sensitivity where the predicted incorrect answer’s
sensitivity to the inﬂuential object (to which the correct answer is most sensitive) is greater than the
8

==== Page 9 ====
  
What is the sitting on?
Key object for “bench”
(Self-Critical, Predicted)
Key object for “ground”
(Self-Critical)Key object for “bench”
(Baseline, GT)key object for “ground”
(Baseline, Predicted)What color is the net?
Key object for “blue”
(Self-Critical, Predicted)Key object for “white”
(Self-Critical)Key object for “blue”
(Baseline, GT)Key object for “white”
(Baseline, Predicted)
What is the man holding?
Key object for “kite”
(Self-Critical, Predicted)Key object for “tennis racket”
(Self-Critical)Key object for “kite”
(Baseline, GT)Key object for “tennis racket”
(Baseline, Predicted)
Figure 4: Positive examples are showing that our self-critical reasoning approach prevents the
incorrectly predicted answer in the UpDn baseline system from being sensitive to the most inﬂuential
object. For each example, the top two ﬁgures show the object to which the ground truth (left) and
incorrectly predicted (right) answers are sensitive. The bottom two ﬁgures show the corresponding
most inﬂuential object after our self-critical training. Note that the attention for the incorrect answer
shifts to a more relevant part of the image for that answer. The number around the bounding box is
the answer’s sensitivity to the object.
correct answer’s sensitivity. We formally deﬁne the false sensitivity rate in Eq. 6:
FSR =P
Q;V1[S(apred;v) S(agt;v)>0;score (apred) = 0]P
Q;V1(6)
where 1[]denote the function that returns 1 if the condition is satisﬁed and returns 0 otherwise.
For the original UpDn VQA system, we observe a false sensitivity rate of 35.5% among all the test
QA pairs in the VQA-CP. After the self-critical training, the false sensitivity rate reduces to 20.4%
using the VQA-HAT explanations, and to 19.6% using VQA-X explanations. This indicates that false
sensitivity is a common problem in VQA systems and shows the utility of addressing it.
Some examples of how our self-critical approach mitigates false sensitivity are shown in Figure 4.
Note that for the correct answer, our approach increases the inﬂuence of the most inﬂuential object,
which we attribute to the inﬂuence strengthening part. More importantly, we observe that this object’s
inﬂuence on the incorrect answer decreases and sometimes falls below other objects.
UpDn UpDn + QA UpDn + HAT UpDn + VQA-X
FSR 35.5% 22.6% 20.4% 19.6%
Table 5: False sensitivity rate ( FSR ) comparison of using different types of human explanations.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we have explored how to improve VQA performance by criticizing the sensitivity of
incorrect answers to the most inﬂuential object for the correct answer. Our “self-critical” approach
helps VQA systems generalize to test data where the distribution of question-answer pairs is sig-
niﬁcantly different from the training data. The inﬂuential objects are selected from a proposal set
extracted from human visual or textual explanations, or simply from the mentioned objects in the
questions and answers. Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art VQA systems on the VQA-CP
dataset by a clear margin even without human explanations as additional supervision. In the future,
we would like to combine the visual and the textual explanations together to better train VQA systems.
This is difﬁcult because the proposal object sets for these two types of explanations contain different
types of noise (i.e., question-irrelevant objects), and therefore different biases.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the DARPA XAI program under a grant from AFRL.
9

==== Page 10 ====
References
[1]A. Agrawal, D. Batra, D. Parikh, and A. Kembhavi. Don’t Just Assume; Look and Answer:
Overcoming Priors for Visual Question Answering. In CVPR , 2018.
[2]P. Anderson, X. He, C. Buehler, D. Teney, M. Johnson, S. Gould, and L. Zhang. Bottom-Up
and Top-Down Attention for Image Captioning and VQA. In CVPR , 2018.
[3] J. Andreas, M. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, and D. Klein. Neural Module Networks. In CVPR , 2016.
[4]S. Antol, A. Agrawal, J. Lu, M. Mitchell, D. Batra, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and D. Parikh. VQA:
Visual Question Answering. In ICCV , 2015.
[5]H. Ben-Younes, R. Cadene, M. Cord, and N. Thome. MUTAN: Multimodal Tucker Fusion for
Visual Question Answering. In ICCV , 2017.
[6]K. Cho, B. Van Merriënboer, C. Gulcehre, D. Bahdanau, F. Bougares, H. Schwenk, and
Y . Bengio. Learning Phrase Representations Using RNN Encoder-Decoder for Statistical
Machine Translation. In EMNLP , 2014.
[7] A. Das, H. Agrawal, L. Zitnick, D. Parikh, and D. Batra. Human Attention in Visual Question
Answering: Do Humans and Deep Networks Look at the Same Regions? In Computer Vision
and Image Understanding , 2017.
[8]A. Fukui, D. H. Park, D. Yang, A. Rohrbach, T. Darrell, and M. Rohrbach. Multimodal Compact
Bilinear Pooling for Visual Question Answering and Visual Grounding. EMNLP , 2016.
[9]Y . Goyal, T. Khot, D. Summers-Stay, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Making the V in VQA matter:
Elevating the role of image understanding in Visual Question Answering. In CVPR , 2017.
[10] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In CVPR ,
2016.
[11] M. Honnibal and I. Montani. spacy 2: Natural language understanding with bloom embeddings,
convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. 2017.
[12] R. Hu, J. Andreas, T. Darrell, and K. Saenko. Explainable Neural Computation via Stack Neural
Module Networks. In ECCV , 2018.
[13] S. Jain and B. C. Wallace. Attention is not Explanation. In NAACL , 2019.
[14] Y . Jiang, V . Natarajan, X. Chen, M. Rohrbach, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Pythia v0. 1: the
Winning Entry to the VQA Challenge 2018. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.09956 , 2018.
[15] J.-H. Kim, J. Jun, and B.-T. Zhang. Bilinear Attention Networks. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[16] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In ICLR , 2015.
[17] R. Krishna, Y . Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz, S. Chen, Y . Kalantidis, L.-J. Li,
D. A. Shamma, et al. Visual Genome: Connecting Language and Vision Using Crowdsourced
Dense Image Annotations. IJCV .
[18] D. H. Park, L. A. Hendricks, Z. Akata, A. Rohrbach, B. Schiele, T. Darrell, and M. Rohrbach.
Multimodal Explanations: Justifying Decisions and Pointing to the Evidence. In CVPR , 2018.
[19] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. Manning. Glove: Global Vectors for Word Representation. In
EMNLP , 2014.
[20] T. Qiao, J. Dong, and D. Xu. Exploring Human-Like Attention Supervision in Visual Question
Answering. In AAAI , 2018.
[21] S. Ramakrishnan, A. Agrawal, and S. Lee. Overcoming Language Priors in Visual Question
Answering with Adversarial Regularization. In NeurIPS , 2018.
[22] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-time Object Detection
with Region Proposal Networks. In NIPS , 2015.
[23] A. S. Ross, M. C. Hughes, and F. Doshi-Velez. Right for the Right Reasons: Training Differen-
tiable Models by Constraining Their Explanations. In IJCAI , 2017.
[24] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, D. Batra, et al. Grad-CAM:
Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-Based Localization. In ICCV , 2017.
[25] R. R. Selvaraju, S. Lee, Y . Shen, H. Jin, D. Batra, and D. Parikh. Taking a HINT: Leveraging
Explanations to Make Vision and Language Models More Grounded. In ICCV , 2019.
[26] M. Shah, X. Chen, M. Rohrbach, and D. Parikh. Cycle-Consistency for Robust Visual Question
Answering. In CVPR , 2019.
[27] D. Teney, P. Anderson, X. He, and A. v. d. Hengel. Tips and Tricks for Visual Question
Answering: Learnings from the 2017 Challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02711 , 2017.
[28] A. Trott, C. Xiong, and R. Socher. Interpretable Counting for Visual Question Answering. 2018.
10

==== Page 11 ====
[29] J. Wu, Z. Hu, and R. J. Mooney. Generating Question Relevant Captions to Aid Visual Question
Answering. In ACL, 2019.
[30] J. Wu, D. Li, Y . Yang, C. Bajaj, and X. Ji. Dynamic Filtering with Large Sampling Field for
Convnets. ECCV , 2018.
[31] J. Wu and R. J. Mooney. Faithful Multimodal Explanation for Visual Question Answering. In
ACL BlackboxNLP Workshop , 2019.
[32] N. Xie, F. Lai, D. Doran, and A. Kadav. Visual Entailment: A Novel Task for Fine-Grained
Image Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06706 , 2019.
[33] Z. Yang, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, and A. Smola. Stacked Attention Networks for Image Question
Answering. In CVPR , 2016.
[34] J. Zhang, S. A. Bargal, Z. Lin, J. Brandt, X. Shen, and S. Sclaroff. Top-Down Neural Attention
by Excitation Backprop. IJCV .
[35] Y . Zhang, J. C. Niebles, and A. Soto. Interpretable Visual Question Answering by Visual
Grounding from Attention Supervision Mining. In WACV , 2019.
11

