==== Page 1 ====
Self-supervised Learning in Remote Sensing: A
Review
Yi Wang, Student Member, IEEE, Conrad M Albrecht, Member, IEEE, Nassim Ait Ali Braham, Lichao Mou,
Xiao Xiang Zhu, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —In deep learning research, self-supervised learning
(SSL) has received great attention triggering interest within both
the computer vision and remote sensing communities. While there
has been a big success in computer vision, most of the potential
of SSL in the domain of earth observation remains locked. In this
paper, we provide an introduction to, and a review of the concepts
and latest developments in SSL for computer vision in the context
of remote sensing. Further, we provide a preliminary benchmark
of modern SSL algorithms on popular remote sensing datasets,
verifying the potential of SSL in remote sensing and providing
an extended study on data augmentations. Finally, we identify a
list of promising directions of future research in SSL for earth
observation (SSL4EO) to pave the way for fruitful interaction of
both domains.
Index Terms —Deep learning, self-supervised learning, com-
puter vision, remote sensing, Earth observation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
ADV ANCES of deep neural networks to model the rich
structure of large amounts of data has led to major
breakthroughs in computer vision, natural language process-
ing, automatic speech recognition, and time series analysis [1].
However, the performance of deep neural networks is very
sensitive to the size and quality of the training data. Thus,
a plurality of annotated datasets (e.g. ImageNet [2]) have
been generated for supervised training in the last decade,
driving progress in many ﬁelds. Unfortunately, annotating
large-scale datasets is an extremely laborious, time-consuming,
and expensive procedure. This limitation of the supervised
learning paradigm strongly impedes the applicability of deep
learning in real-world scenarios.
A lot of research efforts have been deployed to tackle the
challenge of data annotation in the machine learning literature.
The work is jointly supported by the Helmholtz Association through the
Framework of Helmholtz AI (grant number: ZT-I-PF-5-01) - Local Unit
“Munich Unit @Aeronautics, Space and Transport (MASTr)” and Helmholtz
Excellent Professorship “Data Science in Earth Observation - Big Data
Fusion for Urban Research”(grant number: W2-W3-100), by the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the framework of
the international future AI lab ”AI4EO – Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Earth
Observation: Reasoning, Uncertainties, Ethics and Beyond” (grant number:
01DD20001) and by German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action in the framework of the ”national center of excellence
ML4Earth” (grant number: 50EE2201C).
(Corresponding author: Xiao Xiang Zhu.)
Y . Wang, N.A.A. Braham, L. Mou and X. Zhu are with the Remote
Sensing Technology Institute (IMF), German Aerospace Center (DLR), Ger-
many and with the Chair of Data Science in Earth Observation, Technical
University of Munich (TUM), Germany (e-mails: yi.wang@dlr.de; Nas-
sim.aitalibraham@dlr.de; lichao.mou@dlr.de; xiaoxiang.zhu@dlr.de).
C. M Albrecht is with the Remote Sensing Technology Institute (IMF),
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Germany (e-mail: conrad.albrecht@dlr.de).In fact, numerous alternatives to vanilla supervised learning
have been studied, such as unsupervised learning [3], semi-
supervised learning [4], weakly supervised learning [5] and
meta-learning [6]. Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL)
did raise considerable attention in computer vision (see Fig.
1) and achieved signiﬁcant milestones towards the reduction
of human supervision. Indeed, by distilling representative
features from unlabeled data, SSL algorithms are already
outperforming supervised pre-training on many problems [7].
Meanwhile, the success of deep learning did also spark
remarkable progress in remote sensing [8]. Yet, data annotation
remains a major challenge for earth observation as well. In
that regard, self-supervised learning is a promising avenue of
research for remote sensing. While there exist comprehensive
surveys of SSL in computer vision [9, 10, 11, 12], a didactic
and up-to-date introduction to the remote sensing community
is missing. This review aims at bridging this gap, documenting
progress in self-supervised visual representation learning, and
how it did get applied in remote sensing to date. Speciﬁcally:
To the remote sensing community, we provide a com-
prehensive introduction and literature review on self-
supervised visual representation learning.
We summarize a taxonomy of self-supervised methods
covering existing works from both computer vision and
remote sensing communities.
We provide quantiﬁcation of performance benchmarks
on established SSL methodologies utilizing the ImageNet
dataset [2], and extend the analysis to three multi-
spectral satellite imagery datasets: BigEarthNet [13],
SEN12MS [14], and So2Sat-LCZ42 [15].
We discuss the link of natural imagery and remotely
sensed data, providing insights for future work in self-
supervised learning for remote sensing and earth obser-
vation.
A. Supervision: Data vs. Labels
A signiﬁcant fraction of real-world applications of machine/
deep learning methodologies calls for massive amounts of
training data. Fortunately, the increasing adoption of open ac-
cess in earth observation provides remote sensing researchers
with a plethora of such. However, annotation of such vast
amounts of earth observation data implies signiﬁcant human
interaction with frequent updates needed every single day.
For example, apart from the large amounts of sampled data
to label, a single large-scale dataset may require separate
annotation depending on downstream applications. Moreover,
© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.arXiv:2206.13188v2  [cs.CV]  2 Sep 2022

==== Page 2 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 2
1191873854571107
6 9 16 2075
020040060080010001200
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
SSL SSL in RS
Fig. 1. The number of recent publications related to self-supervised learning
(SSL). While a clear trend of increased efforts to advance SSL is observed,
activity in remote sensing lags behind.
datasets sensing the physical world get outdated over time
due to both natural and man-made changes. Both aspects
signiﬁcantly amplify the efforts in annotating remotely sensed
data of the Earth.
Another big challenge of machine learning in remote sens-
ing is label noise. Due to the quality of remotely sensed
images and the complexity of various speciﬁc applications, it is
very difﬁcult to generate perfect labels during large-scale data
annotation. Therefore, there always exists a trade-off between
the number of annotations and their quality: large but noisy
labeled datasets can bias the model, whereas small amounts
of good-quality labels usually lead to overﬁtting.
In addition, it has become popular to execute pre-training
on established benchmark datasets before ﬁne-tuning deeply
learned models for downstream tasks that do not have enough
labels. This procedure is commonly referred to as transfer
learning [16]. However, the performance of supervised pre–
training depends on the domain difference between source and
target data. A good pre–trained model renders well on a similar
dataset but is not as useful on a very different one.
All the above challenges emphasize the growing gap be-
tween an increasing amount of remote sensing data and the
shortage of good-quality labels, calling for techniques to ex-
ploit the corpus of unlabeled data to learn valuable information
that easily transfers to multiple applications. Self-supervised
learning offers a paradigm to approach this dilemma.
B. Self-supervision: Learning Task-agnostic Representations
of Data
Fig. 2 schematically depicts the general underlying principle
of self-supervised learning. Based on a certain self-produced
objective (the so-called self-supervision ), a large amount of
unlabeled data is exploited to train a model f1by optimizing
this objective without requiring any manual annotation. With a
carefully designed self-supervised problem, the model fgets
the ability to capture high-level representations of the input
1Typically a convolutional neural network (CNN), e.g. ResNet [17]. Recent
work also show promising results with vision transformers (ViT) [18].
𝑥1
𝑥𝑛Self-supervision
Downstream 
taskUnlabeled data {𝑥}
Labeled data {𝑥′,𝑦′}
…
𝑥′1
𝑥′𝑛…Fig. 2. The general pipeline of self-supervised learning. The visual represen-
tation is learned through self-supervision that comes from the unlabeled data.
The learned parameters serve as a pre-trained model and are transferred to
supervised downstream tasks for ﬁne-tuning.
data. Afterward, the model fcan be further transferred to
supervised downstream tasks for real-world applications.
The most common strategies to design such self-supervision
typically exploit three types of objectives: (1)reconstructing
input datax,f(x)!x,(2)predicting a self-produced label
cwhich usually comes from contextual information and data
augmentation (e.g., predicting the rotation angle of a rotated
image),f(x)!c,(3)contrasting semantically similar inputs
x1andx2(e.g., the encoded features of two augmented views
of the same image should be identical), jf(x1) f(x2)j!0.
Given self-supervised training succeeded, the pre-trained
modelfmay get transferred to downstream tasks. As Op-
posed to supervised pre-training, models pre-trained by self-
supervision bear the potential to leverage more general repre-
sentations and offer a paradigm to mitigate the shortcomings
of supervised learning: (1)no human annotation is needed
for pre-training, (2)small amounts of labels are sufﬁcient for
good performance on downstream tasks, (3)little domain gap
between pre-training and downstream dataset can be ensured
by collecting unlabeled data from the target application.
Link to semi-supervised learning. Self-supervised learning
algorithms may be considered as part of semi-supervised
learning—a branch of machine learning concerned with la-
beled and unlabelled data. Van Engelen et al. [4] proposed
a comprehensive taxonomy of semi-supervised classiﬁcation
algorithms based on conceptual and methodological aspects
for processing unlabelled data. Within that scheme, self-
supervised learning may get categorized as unsupervised pre-
processing : in the ﬁrst step, unlabeled data gets transformed
to extract feature representations; labeled data is then utilized
to adapt the model to speciﬁc tasks.
Within the remote sensing community, semi-supervised
learning has been long studied and enjoys applications in,
e.g., hyperspectral image recognition and processing [19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28], multi-spectral image

==== Page 3 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 3
segmentation [29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35] and SAR-optical
data fusion [36].
Link to unsupervised learning. Self-supervised learning
is also a discipline in the realm of unsupervised learning—
the general set of machine learning methods that are indepen-
dent of human annotation. However, it is very ambiguous in
various communities the difference between self-supervised
and unsupervised learning. In this paper, we separate them
in terms of methodology. Traditional unsupervised algorithms
tend to utilize statistics of the input data and generate groups
by dimensionality reduction [37, 38] or clustering [39]. On the
other hand, self-supervised learning is a recent terminology
that refers to approaches in which a model (e.g., a neural
network) is trained to learn good data representations using
supervision signals that are automatically generated from the
data itself.
In remote sensing, unsupervised learning has also been
actively employed in various applications, e.g., in scene clas-
siﬁcation [40, 38, 41], semantic segmentation [42, 43, 44],
change detection [45, 46] and multi-sensor data analysis [47,
48].
C. Performance Evaluation in Self-Supervised Learning
To evaluate the performance of self-supervised learning
methods, downstream tasks are commonly deﬁned in order
to transfer the pre-trained model fto speciﬁc applications,
such as scene classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation, and object
detection. The performance of transfer learning on these high-
level vision tasks estimates the generalizability of the model f.
In practice, three common procedures are used for quantitative
evaluation:
Linear probing (or linear classiﬁcation) : refers to ﬁxing
the parameters of the learned model f(frozen encoder),
and training a linear classiﬁer gon top of the generated
representations. This approach measures how linearly
separable the embeddings produced by the pre-trained
modelfare.
Knearest neighbors (KNN) : refers to applying
weighted voting of the Knearest neighbors of the input
test imagexin the feature space. This approach is non-
parametric and can be used for classiﬁcation tasks.
Fine-tuning : refers to training a model on the down-
stream task by using the parameters of the pre-trained
modelfas an initialization. It is the most general
procedure since it is not only limited to classiﬁcation.
In addition to quantitative evaluation, qualitative visualiza-
tion methods can also be used to derive insights on the features
learnt during the self-supervised training of the encoder f.
Among these, two popular techniques are kernel visualiza-
tion [49, 50, 51] for CNN and feature map visualization [49,
52, 53] for both CNN and ViT. Kernel visualization plots
kernels of the ﬁrst convolutional layer of fand compares it
with kernels from corresponding fully supervised training. The
similarity of kernels learned by supervised and self-supervised
training sheds light on the efﬁcacy of self-supervision. Along
the lines, feature map visualization displays hidden layer
feature maps of fin order to analyze the spatial attention of
Self-supervised learningGenerative
Predictive
ContrastiveAutoencoder
GAN
Spatial context
Spectral context
Temporal context
Negative sampling
Clustering
Knowledge distillation
Redundancy reductionFig. 3. A taxonomy of self-supervised learning.
fon the input x. Once again, the feature maps are compared
with their counterparts of supervised training for reference.
II. G ENERATIVE , PREDICTIVE ,AND CONTRASTIVE : A
TAXONOMY OF SELF -SUPERVISED LEARNING
In this section, we review works in self-supervised learning
following an extended taxonomy: generative ,contrastive , and
predictive methods, as displayed in Fig. 3. Generative methods
learn to reconstruct or generate input data, predictive methods
learn to predict self-generated labels, and contrastive methods
learn to maximize the similarity between semantically identi-
cal inputs. While some existing categorizations solely classify
self-supervised methods into generative and contrastive [10,
11], we add the predictive category conceptually based on the
processing level of supervision (i.e., the self-supervision for
generative methods is raw input, while for predictive meth-
ods it is carefully designed labels with high-level semantic
information that come after processing of the input). Adopting
such categorization also provides a historical perspective to
the development of self-supervised learning. In the following
sub-sections, we introduce in detail the three types of self-
supervised methodologies in computer vision and link them
to works in remote sensing for a side-by-side comparison.
A. Generative Methods
Generative self-supervised methods learn representations by
reconstructing or generating input data. A prominent set of
methods in this category are autoencoders (AE), which train
an encoderEto map input xto a latent vector z=E(x), and
a decoderDto reconstruct x=D(z)fromz. WhileEserves
the purpose of f(the feature extractor), the joint function DE
contributes to a self-supervised loss:jjx D(E(x))jj. Another
class of methods, generative adversarial networks (GAN),
approach the data generation problem from a game theory
perspective. In a nutshell, a GAN consists of two models:
a generatorGand a discriminator D. The generator takes
as input a random vector zand outputs a synthetic sample
x=G(z). At the same time, the discriminator is trained
to distinguish between real samples fxgfrom the training
dataset and synthetic samples generated by G. By doing so,
the distribution Pzof synthetic data gradually converges to
the distribution Pzof the training dataset, thereby leading to

==== Page 4 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 4
TABLE I
A GALLERY OF REPRESENTATIVE SELF -SUPERVISED METHODS .
Category Sub-category Representative methods
GenerativeAutoencoderAutoencoder (AE) [54]: encode and reconstruct the input.
Sparse AE [55]: sparsity constraints on the hidden units.
Denoising AE [56]: reconstruct clear image from noisy input.
V AE [57]: encode the input to a normal distribution.
MAE [58]: reconstruct randomly masked patches with vision transformer.
GANGAN [59]: adversarial training with a generator and a discriminator.
AAE [60]: adversarial variational autoencoder.
BiGAN [61]: an additional encoder to map samples to representations.
PredictiveSpatialRelative position [62]: predict relative position of random patch pairs.
Jigsaw [63]: predict the correct order of a jigsaw puzzle.
Rotation [49]: predict the rotation angle of rotated images.
Inpainting [64]: recover a missing patch of the input image.
Spectral Colorization [65]: predict colorful image from gray-scale input.
Temporal Frame order [66]: predict the order of frame sequences.
OthersCounting [67]: count the visual primitives within the input image.
Artifact [68]: spot and predict artifacts.
Audio [69]: predict a statistical summary of the sound associated with a video.
ContrastiveNegative samplingTriplet loss [70]: learn a similarity metric discriminatively with triplet loss.
CPC [71]: contrastive predictive coding with InfoNCE loss.
DIM [72]: maximize mututal information between global-local feature pairs.
InstDisc [73]: maximally scatter the features of different images over a unit sphere.
PIRL [74]: pretext tasks as data augmentation.
MoCo [75]: store negative samples in a queue and momentum-update the key encoder.
SimCLR [76]: end-to-end contrastive structure with large batchsize and strong data augmentation.
MoCo-v3 [77]: introduce vision transformer as the encoder backbone for MoCo-v2 [78].
ClusteringDeepCluster [51]: iteratively leverage k-means clustering to yield pseudo labels for prediction.
LocalAgg [79]: optimize a local soft-clustering metric.
SeLa [80]: solve an optimal transport problem to obtain the pseudo-labels.
SwA V [81]: contrastive learning with online clustering.
PCL [82]: perform iterative clustering and representation learning in an EM-based framework.
Knowledge distillationBYOL [83]: mean-teacher network with a predictor on top of the teacher encoder.
SimSiam [84]: explore the simplest design of contrastive self-supervised learning.
DINO [52]: explores the self-distillation scheme with vision transformer backbones.
EsViT [85]: improve DINO with additional region-level contrastive task.
iBOT [86]: cross-view and in-view self-distillation with masked image modeling.
Redundancy reductionBarlow Twins [87]: redundancy reduction on the cross-correlation matrix between features.
VICReg [88]: variance-invariance-covariance regularization.
realistic data generation. The vanilla GAN was not designed
for feature extraction, but since formally G 1=f, there exist
GAN-inspired methods to construct representations z.
1) Autoencoder (AE): The concept of autoencoders was in-
troduced as early as in [54] to serve as pre-training of artiﬁcial
neural networks. Conceptually, an autoencoder DEis a feed-
forwardEncoder–Decoder network trained to reproduce its
input at the output layer. However, one can easily imagine an
autoencoder to fail: should E=D= 1, the autoencoder will
learn a trivial identity mapping, DE= 1. Thus demanding
the latent vector zto retain information on x, by itself, is
not sufﬁcient to yield expressive representations. Constraints
are needed to prevent such scenarios. For example, in early
practices, the encoder Etypically resembles a bottleneck-
like structure such that the dimension of the input data gets
compressed down, i.e. dimx>dimz. This links autoencoders
to dimensionality reduction. In fact, a loose relation between
linear autoencoders and Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
[89] has previously been studied in the literature [90].
Constraining a small dimension of zis not a must to prevent
identity mapping. It is also an option to construct DEsuch
that the dimension of zis greater than the input’s xdimension
with additional sparsity constraints, building so-called sparse
autoencoder [55]. Other popular approaches include: denois-
ing autoencoder [56] and variational autoencoder (V AE) [57].Denoising autoencoder is trained to enforce robustness
against noise in data. Its reconstruction loss gets modiﬁed to
jjx D(E(x+))jj, witha noise modelling term.
V AE decouples the encoder and the decoder by encoding a
latent distribution. For each input sample xi, instead of a single
deterministic latent representation zi, the encoder Egenerates
two latent vectors iandirepresenting the mean and
variance of a latent Gaussian distribution. The decoder then
randomly samples a representation vector zisampled from
the Gaussian distribution N(i;i)exp
 (zi i)2=2
i
to reconstruct xi, (see Fig. 4).
The required mathematical machinery to properly deﬁne
the V AE training loss builds on variational inference [91].
However, in practice, it amounts to adding a loss term
that forces the latent distribution to a unit Gaussian, i.e.,
N(i;i)!N (0;1)for all training samples xi. This can
be realized by minimizing the KL divergence between the two
distributions:
KL(N(;2)kN(0;1)) =1
2( log2+2+2 1)(1)
Together with the reconstruction term, the total loss of the
V AE reads:

==== Page 5 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 5
𝑁1 𝑥1
𝑥2
𝑥3
𝑥4𝜇1
𝜎1
𝜇2
𝜎2
𝜇3
𝜎3
𝜇4
𝜎4𝑁2
𝑁3
𝑁4𝑧1
𝑧2
𝑧3
𝑧4ො𝑥1
ො𝑥2
ො𝑥3
ො𝑥4Encoder
Decoder𝑁(0,1)
reconstructionReal input Generated output
Fig. 4. Variational AutoEncoder (V AE) [57]. Instead of encoding the input X
to a ﬁxed latent vector, V AE maps input (x1;x2;:::)to a multi-dimensional
Gaussian distribution with non-zero mean = (1;2;:::)and diagonal
covariance matrix  = diag(2
1;2
2;:::). Reconstruction works through
decoding sampled latent vectors (z1;z2;:::)from this distribution.
LV AE=jx D(E(x))j+( log2+2+2 1) (2)
whereis a weighting parameter.
Most recently, masked autoencoder (MAE) [58] raised
great attention in the computer vision community with a
breakthrough in autoencoding self-supervised pre-training of
vision transformers. Inspired by denoising autoencoder, MAE
masks out random patches of the input image, sends visible
patches to the encoder, and reconstructs the missing patches
from the latent representation and masked tokens. This work
proves the potential of transformer-based autoencoders for
self-supervised visual representation learning.
Remote sensing. Autoencoders have been widely used to
learn representation from various remote sensing data like
multispectral images [92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99], hyper-
spectral images [100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107] and
SAR images [108, 109, 110, 111]. Lu et al. [92] proposed a
combination of a shallowly weighted de-convolution network
with a spatial pyramid model in order to learn multi-layer
feature maps and ﬁlters for input images. In a subsequent step,
these get classiﬁed by a support vector machine (SVM) for
scene classiﬁcation. Zhang et al. [93] utilized a stacked denois-
ing autoencoder to learn image features for change detection
of imagery with various spatial resolutions. In hyperspectral
image analysis, autoencoders are either exploited for pre-
training [101], or become ingredients in common downstream
tasks, such as hyperspectral image classiﬁcation [100], hyper-
spectral image denoising [112], hyperspectral image restora-
tion [102, 113], and hyperspectral image unmixing [103, 99,
107].
2) Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN): Generative ad-
versarial networks [59, 114] proposed the adversarial training
framework —a strategy ruled by minimax optimization [115].
GAN training may be viewed as a two players game: the
generatorGgenerates fake samples x=G(z)from random
latent vector z, and the discriminator Daims to distinguish x
from real data samples x.
𝑧
𝐸(𝑥)
G𝒢(𝑧)G𝑥E𝑥,𝑥G𝒢
𝐸𝑃(𝑦)feature data
𝒟𝒢𝑧,𝑧Fig. 5. Bidirectional Generative Adversarial Networks (BiGAN) [61]. BiGAN
includes an encoder Ewhich maps data xto latent representations z. The
BiGAN discriminator Djointly acts in data and latent space: xversus G(z)),
andE(x)versusz, respectively.
When the discriminator’s output is interpreted as probability
distribution, i.e.D(x)2[0;1], a widely adopted, uniﬁed form
of the GAN-loss reads
max
Dmin
GLGAN= logD(x) + log[1 D(G(z))] (3)
wherexrepresents a real sample and G(z)represents a
fake sample. During training, Gis optimized to fool the
discriminator by maximizing D(G(z))for anyz, whileD
is tuned to minimize D(x)for fake data xand maximize
D(x)for real data x. Accordingly, the parameters of Gand
Dget simultaneously tuned to minimize and maximize LGAN,
respectively.
Contrarily to autoencoders where z=E(x), a GAN’s latent
representation zis implicitly modeled through the inverse of
the generator,G 1. To approximate G 1and obtainzfor a
given sample x,adversarial autoencoders (AAE) [60] can be
used. For real samples x,Ggets fed byz=E(x)of a (trained)
autoencoder DE. The discriminator contributes to the loss
by distinguishing fakes x=G(z)from real samples ~x=
G(E(x)). OnceG,D, andDEare simultaneously optimized,
Eserves to encode data points xinto learnt representations z.
To make GAN’s training scheme more symmetric, Bi-
GAN [61, 116] and ALI[117] have been proposed. As depicted
by Fig. 5, in addition to generating fake data x=G(z)
throughG, an encoder Egenerates latent space representations
z=E(x). A discriminator D=D(x;z)is trained to
distinguish tuples of fakes (x;z)from real ones, (x;z).
Remote sensing. While GAN-based methods in remote
sensing are few for self-supervised pre-training, several works
tend to integrate such methods to target applications. Zhu et
al.[118] presented a ﬁrst work to explore the potential of
GAN for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation. Jin et al. [119]
proposed to use adversarial autoencoder for unsupervised
hyperspectral unmixing. Hughes et al. [108] proposed a GAN-
based framework to generate similar, but novel samples from a
given image. Subsequently, these are deﬁned as hard-negative
samples to match imagery derived from radar and optical
sensors. Also, replacing the generator branch of the GAN with
a variational auto-encoder improves the quality of negative
samples. In another study, Alvarez et al. [120] employed
the discriminatorDof a GAN for binary change detection,
while the generator Gis optimized to induce the distribution
of unaltered samples. Walter et al. [121] experimented with
and evaluate the performance of the BiGAN approach for

==== Page 6 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 6
remote sensing image retrieval based on the similarity of image
features. Cheng et al. [122] proposed perturbation-seeking
GAN in a defense framework for remote sensing image scene
classiﬁcation. Ozkan et al. [123] proposed to use Wasserstein
GAN loss to optimize the multinomial mixture model for
hyperspectral unmixing.
B. Predictive Methods
While most generative methods perform pixel-level recon-
struction or generation, predictive self-supervised methods are
based on auto-generated labels. In fact, one may argue that
being able to generate very high dimensional data points, such
as images, is not necessary to learn useful representations for
many downstream tasks. Instead, one can focus on predicting
speciﬁc properties of the data, which is the general idea behind
predictive methods. To this end, the so-called pretext tasks2get
utilized. A predictive method ﬁrstly designs a suitable pretext
task for the dataset, prepares self-generated labels, and trains
a model to predict such labels and learn data representations.
Predictive self-supervised learning targets two possible
drawbacks associated with generative methods that perform
pixel-level reconstruction: (1)pixel-level loss functions may
overly focus on low-level details whereas in practice such
details are irrelevant for a human to recognize the contents
of an image, (2)pixel-based reconstruction typically do not
involve pixel-to-pixel (long-range) correlations that can be
important for image understanding. Based on the assumption
that providing the network with relevant high-level pretext
tasks, the network may learn high-level semantic information.
In general, the design of different pretext tasks harnesses
various context information of the input data. According
to distinct context attributes, we categorize pretext tasks as
follows: spatial context, spectral context, temporal context, and
other semantic contexts.
1) Spatial Context: Images contain rich spatial information
for designing self-supervised pretext tasks. Doersch et al. [62]
proposed the ﬁrst example of such methods, predicting the
relative position of pairs of randomly cropped image patches
drawn from a given input sample. It is assumed that doing
well on this task requires a global understanding of the
scene and its objects contained. Accordingly, a valuable visual
representation is expected to extract the composition of objects
in order to reason about their relative spatial location.
Following this paradigm, the literature reveals a multitude
of methods to learn image features solving an increasingly
complex set of spatial puzzles [63, 124, 50, 125, 126]. For
example, Noroozi et al. [63] built a jigsaw puzzle from
randomly ordered tiles of an image. The network was then
trained to predict the correct order of tiles. However, given 9
image patches, there are 9! = 362;880 distinct permutations
and a network is unlikely to recognize all of them due to
visual ambiguity. To limit the number of permutations, the
Hamming distance [127] was employed to pick a subset of
2We note that the term pretext task can also represent any generic objective
associated with self-supervised methods. In this paper, we restrict such notion
to predictive approaches (where the term originally came from) to make the
taxonomy more clear.permutations that are signiﬁcantly diverse. Borrowed from
information theory, here the Hamming distance essentially
measures the minimum number of tile permutations required
in order to recover the image. Further works building on this
approach tried to improve the jigsaw puzzles baseline [124]
by introducing tiles from other images [50, 126], and by
extending to larger-size puzzles [125]. Along this line, one
important thing to be taken into account is that if carelessly
designed, the model can ”cheat” from low-level details like
edges.
Another set of spatial-context-based pretext tasks exploit
geometric transformations of input imagery. Among others,
predicting rotation angles [49, 128] and image inpainting [64,
129] are popular approaches. In [49], the input image was
transformed by four separate rotation angles, which then
served as the label for the network to predict. [64] cut a patch
from the input for the network to recover. We note that this
set of image inpainting strategies have also close relation to
generative self-supervised methods—as discussed in Fig. II-A.
Remote sensing. Zhao et al. [130] proposed a multi-task
framework to simultaneously learn from rotation pretext and
scene classiﬁcation to distill task-speciﬁc features adopting a
semi-supervised perspective. Zhang et al. [131] proposed to
predict a set of rotation angles from a sequence of rotated
SAR-probed targets for object detection. Singh et al. [132]
utilized image inpainting as a pretext task for semantic seg-
mentation arguing for spatial correlation of the pretext task
to the downstream task. In [133] the authors exercised both
relative position and inpainting as pretext tasks for remote
sensing scene classiﬁcation. The study added a contrastive
self-supervised component referred to as instance discrimina-
tion which we discuss in the following section. Ji et al. [134]
tackled the few-shot scene classiﬁcation problem by incor-
porating two pretext tasks into training: rotation prediction
and contrastive prediction. An additional adversarial model
perturbation term is also used for regularization.
Notably, jigsaw puzzles are rarely leveraged in remote
sensing. Potentially, spatial correlation in overhead imagery
is less dominant. Indeed, translational invariance is prominent
in blocks of urban areas, across water surfaces, and many other
kinds of natural scenes (desert, forest, mountain ranges, etc.).
2) Spectral Context: Spectral information is another basis
for the design of pretext tasks which is inspired by image
colorization in computer vision. Zhang et al. [65] proposed
one of the ﬁrst of such tasks: a self-supervised network
learns channel-speciﬁc representations by predicting a spectral
channel taking other channels as input in CIELAB color
space [136]. It turned out that the effectiveness of the color
space roots in encoding according to human perception: the
distance of two points reﬂects the amount of visually perceived
change of the corresponding colors. The work was further
extended to hue/chroma color space, and per-pixel color his-
tograms were applied for better representation learning [137].
While these two works learn the representation of a single
channel (the gray-scale intensity), a cross-channel representa-
tion learning method was proposed in [138]. Two sub-encoders
got utilized to extract distinctive color channel representations,
which are then concatenated to provide full-channel represen-

==== Page 7 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 7
X  =
Y = (9,5,8,3,2,4,7,1,6)
X  =
Y  =X  =
Y  =
X =
Y = (B, D, A, C)X = Y = 8
X =
Y = (0, 90, 180, 270)
(a) Relative position (b) Jigsaw puzzle (c) Rotation
(d) Inpainting (e) Colorization (f) Frame order
Fig. 6. Examples of different predictive pretext tasks. (a),(b),(c), and (d) are based on spatial contexts; (e) is based on spectral context; (f) illustrates temporal
context.
tations. Larsson et al. [139] proposed a systematic analysis on
image colorization as a pretext task.
Remote sensing. Given remote sensing imagery contains
spectral bands beyond the standard RGB color space, there
may not exist straightforward extensions to the multi/hyper-
spectral domain based on methods established in computer
vision. Indeed, sensing data with increased spectral resolution
imprints ﬁne details of the physical properties of the earth’s
surface. Thus, designing pretext tasks related to spectral bands
is a subtle exercise to be treated with scientiﬁc care. A
recent work established by Vincenzi et al. [135] provided an
initial attempt to leverage spectral context for self-supervised
learning (Fig. 7). Close to an autoencoder, it predicts CIELAB-
encoded RGB imagery of a scene from multi-spectral bands
for extraction of representations zs. At the same time, a second
encoder pre-trained on ImageNet generates representations
zcfrom the RGB imagery. Downstream classiﬁcation tasks
ﬁne-tune corresponding linear layers Ls=csuch that the ﬁnal
prediction reads [Lc(zc)+Ls(zs))]=2. Wu et al. [140] perform
hyperspectral dimensionality reduction using self-supervised
learning by training a model to predict low-dimensional repre-
sentations generated by classic nonlinear manifold embedding
methods (e.g., LLE).
3) Temporal Context: Among others, temporal context is
very important, for example, in video understanding. Without
the cut, footage clearly carries temporal correlation from
frame to frame. With a similarity to both spatial and spectral
predictive methods, temporal pretext tasks can be designed in
two ways: (1)shufﬂing timestamps of frames to let a neural
network predict the correct sequence, (2)masking one or
several frames for the network to predict the missing frame.Missing frame prediction in self-supervised learning typi-
cally estimates future snapshots from a short clip of video
recordings. Provided its superior performance to model tem-
poral dynamics, LSTM [127] or LSTM variants dominate
existing methods to encode temporal correlation in video
data [141, 142, 143].
Frame order prediction in self-supervised learning can be
further divided into two distinct approaches: (1)temporal
order veriﬁcation [144, 145, 146, 147], and (2)temporal
order recognition [148, 149, 66]. While the former amounts to
binary classiﬁcation whether or not a sequence of frames is in
temporal order, the latter goes beyond by explicitly assigning
timestamps to a set of given frames.
One important thing to note for video understanding is that
efﬁcient self-supervised training of footage data may involve
various steps of preprocessing. For example, the frames of a
video may have different importance for the understanding of
the event. Along this line, frame sampling strategies play a
big role to boost the performance of temporal pretext tasks. A
representative method was proposed by Misra et al. [144] that
sampled video recordings from frames with signiﬁcant motion
as indicated by the magnitude of the optical ﬂow [150].
Remote sensing. Though having a promising future,
satellite-based video recording is not yet common in remote
sensing. However, temporal stamps of remote sensing data
are very important for applications like change detection or
crop type classiﬁcation. Dong et al. [151] quantiﬁed temporal
context by coherence in time, proposing a self-supervised
representation learning technique for remote sensing change
detection. The model gets optimized to identify sample patches
in two snapshots of the same geospatial area. The identiﬁcation

==== Page 8 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 8
Fig. 7. The color out of space [135]. CIELAB-encoded RGB imagery of a scene is predicted from other spectral bands for the extraction of representations.
©[2021] IEEE.
network (snapshot one vs. two) is designed to imitate the
discriminatorDof generative adversarial networks with G
generating the self-supervised data representation, as displayed
in Section II-A. The method yields improved, robust differ-
entiation for change detection. Yuan et al. [152] proposed a
Transformer-based self-supervised methods for satellite time
series classiﬁcation. By predicting randomly contaminated
observations given an entire time series of a pixel, the model is
trained to leverage the inherent temporal structure of satellite
time series to learn general-purpose spectral-temporal repre-
sentations. The work was further improved in [153], where the
network is asked to regress the central pixels of the masked
patches for patch-based representation learning.
4) Other Semantic Contexts: Apart from the above three
types of contexts, there are also other semantic contexts
that can be seen using integrated information of the above-
mentioned contexts. Noroozi et al. [67] proposed an artiﬁcial
supervision signal based on counting visual primitives from an
input image and the sum of primitives from cropped tiles. Jenni
et al. [68] proposed a self-supervised learning method based
on spotting and predicting artifacts in an adversarial manner.
To generate images with artifacts, the authors pre-train a
high-capacity autoencoder and then implement a damage-and-
repair strategy. A discriminator is ﬁnally trained to distinguish
artifact images and predict what entries in the feature were
dropped when damaging and repairing.
Multi-sensor or multi-modal self-supervised learning gath-
ers another set of semantic contexts. Owens et al. [69] pro-
posed to predict a statistical summary of the sound associated
with a video frame. By deﬁning explicit sound categories,
the authors formulate this visual recognition problem as a
classiﬁcation task. Ren et al. [154] trained an encoder-decoder
network to predict depth map, surface normal map, and
instance contour map from a synthetic image, and a discrimi-
nator network is trained to distinguish between features from
the synthetic image and the real image.With various pretext tasks proven to be useful for self-
supervised representation learning, there’s also a trend of
gathering different pretext tasks together. A direct example
can be seen in [155], where the authors investigated the com-
bination of four self-supervised tasks: relative position [62],
colorization [65], exemplar [156] (creating a pseudo-class
from the augmented view of a single image and predicting
the class, this is rather a contrastive method which will be
discussed in the next section) and motion segmentation [157]
(the network learns to classify which pixels of a single frame
will move in subsequent frames). It was shown that combining
self-supervised tasks will in general improve the performance
and lead to faster training.
Remote sensing. Due to the difference between remote
sensing data and common images studied in the computer
vision community, there’s also a large potential for designing
remote sensing-speciﬁc pretext tasks. Hermann et al. [158]
proposed to predict different views (pose, projection, and
depth) as well as reconstruction of the input for monocular
depth estimation. Gao et al. [159] proposed to train the model
to realize envelope data extrapolation from a frequency band
to its adjacent low frequency band. He et al. [160] proposed
to reconstruct the corrupted Seismic data with consecutively
missing traces, in which the pseudolabels are automatically
created from the uncorrupted parts of the observed data. Ayush
et al. [161] designed a pretext task based on predicting the
geo-location of the input image. Li et al. [162] made use of
GlobeLand30 [163], a global land cover product that divides
the earth into different areas and includes ten different land
cover types. By aligning the geo-location of the input image
with the land cover map from GlobeLand30, the land cover
class of the input image is then used as a pretext task for
self-supervised learning. However, it has also to be noted that
pretexts like geo-location itself are usually too simple to learn
a good representation, thus they are often used as auxiliary

==== Page 9 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 9
𝑥0 ො𝑥0 E
𝑥0 E 𝑦0
𝑥0 E
𝑥1 ESimilarity ContrastiveD Generative
Predictive
Fig. 8. A comparison of the general structures between generative, predictive,
and contrastive self-supervised learning. EandDrefer to the encoder and
decoder network. While generative and predictive methods calculate the loss
in the output space, contrastive methods calculate the loss in the representation
space.
tasks for self-supervised learning (as in the two examples
above). In general, how to design or integrate a suitable pretext
task is still an important research question to be explored.
C. Contrastive Methods
The performance of predictive self-supervised learning de-
pends largely on a good pretext task, which is often very
difﬁcult to design and may even lead to pretext-speciﬁc
representation, decreasing the network’s generalizability. To
tackle this problem, contrastive methods come into play, giving
the network more freedom to learn high-level representations
that do not rely on a single pretext task. As the name implies,
contrastive methods3train a model by contrasting semantically
identical inputs (e.g., two augmented views of the same image)
and pushing them to be close-by in the representation space.
Therefore, by design, contrastive methods usually follow
a common Siamese-like architecture design. A side-by-side
comparison with generative and predictive methods is provided
in Fig. 8.
However, only enforcing similarity between pairs of input
can easily lead to a trivial solution. Indeed, a constant mapping
would be a valid solution to the problem since every pair of
input would have identical representations, and thus a maxi-
mum similarity. This phenomenon is often referred to as model
collapse and many solutions have been proposed in the SSL
literature to mitigate it. In fact, depending on how collapsing
is handled, one can form a sub-taxonomy of contrastive self-
supervised learning: negative sampling, clustering, knowledge
distillation, and redundancy reduction.
1) Negative Sampling: A basic strategy to avoid model
collapse is to include and utilize dissimilar samples to have
both positive and negative pairs. This strategy is the ﬁrst one
that has been used in contrastive representation learning. For
any data point x(the anchor), the encoder fis trained such
that:
sim 
f(x);f 
x+
sim 
f(x);f 
x 
(4)
3In some literature, the term contrastive is only used to denote methods
that include negative samples. Yet, we follow the more common terminology
in which contrastive methods also include the recent works without negative
samples.
EAR
EAR
EAR
EAR
E
Anchor Positive𝑥𝑡−3𝑥𝑡−2𝑥𝑡−1𝑥𝑡𝑥𝑡+1E
Negative𝑥𝑡∗InfoNCE−𝐸𝑙𝑜𝑔exp
exp+σexpFig. 9. Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC) [71]. Take time series as an
example, the consecutive time stamp is a positive sample, while clips sampled
from other scenes are negative samples.
wherex+is a data point similar to x(positive sample), x 
is a data point dissimilar to x(negative sample), and sim
represents a metric that measures the similarity between two
pairs of features encoded by f. Positive samples need to be
generated in a way that preserves the semantics of the anchor x
(e.g., using data augmentation). Negative samples on the other
hand come from other data points in the dataset. The intuition
is that, in order to output similar representations for visually
different, yet semantically similar inputs, while repulsing
negative samples in the embedding space, the network has to
learn useful high-level representations of the input data. Once
pre-trained, the encoder fcan be further transferred to extract
representative features of downstream datasets.
A lot of methods have been developed based on the general
objective of Eq. 4, of which the earliest works [70, 164,
165] proposed triplet losses using a max-margin approach to
separate positive from negative examples:
L 
x;x+;x 
= max 
0;x x+
2 x x 
2+ 1
(5)
wherex,x+,x represent the anchor, the positive sample and
the negative sample, respectively. Noroozi et al. [67] extended
this triplet scheme for better transfer learning performance
by solving an additional pretext task: counting the visual
primitives of tiled patches.
Inspired by noise-contrastive estimation (NCE) [166] and
word2vec [167, 168], Oord et al. [71] started another set of
contrastive methods with negative sampling by introducing
contrastive predictive coding (CPC) with InfoNCE loss:
LN= EX"
logexp 
f(x)Tf(x+)
PN
j=1exp (f(x)Tf(xj))#
(6)
whereNis the number of samples, and the denominator
consists of one positive and N 1negative samples (see Fig.
9). This is indeed the cross-entropy loss for an N-way softmax
classiﬁer that classiﬁes positive and negative samples, with the
dot product as the score function in Eq. 4. Take a piece of time
series as an example, a consecutive time stamp is a positive
sample, while clips randomly sampled from other scenes are
negative samples (see Fig. 9). This work was further improved
speciﬁcally for image recognition in [169].

==== Page 10 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 10
Fig. 10. Instance Discrimination (InstDisc) [73]. A backbone CNN is used to encode each image as a feature vector, which is projected to a 128-dimensional
space and L2 normalized. The optimal feature embedding is learned via instance-level discrimination, which tries to maximally scatter the features of training
samples over the 128-dimensional unit sphere. ©[2018] IEEE.
InfoNCE loss is also connected to mutual information, as
minimizing the InfoNCE loss can be seen as maximizing
a lower bound of the mutual information between f(x)
andf(x+)[170]. This bridges the connection to mutual-
information-based contrastive learning which comes out in
parallel with CPC. Deep information maximization (DIM) [72]
for example, learns image representations by classifying
whether a pair of global features and local features are from
the same image. The global features are the ﬁnal output of
a convolutional encoder and local features are the output of
an intermediate layer in the encoder. This work was further
improved by enhancing the association of positive pairs in
augmented multi-scale DIM (AMDIM) [171], where a positive
sample is sampled from an augmented view of the input image.
Some further empirical evidence [172] claimed that the
success of the models mentioned above (maximizing mutual
information) is only loosely connected to mutual information.
Instead, an upper bound on mutual information estimator
leads to ill-conditioned and lower performance representations.
Therefore, more attention should be attributed to the encoder
architecture and a negative sampling strategy related to metric
learning [173]. Along this line, instance-instance contrastive
learning discards mutual information and directly studies
the relationships between different samples’ instance-level
representations. A prototype work is instance discrimination
(InstDisc, see Fig. 10) [73], which extended the idea of
exemplar [156] with non-parametric NCE loss (both utilize
instance-level discrimination). In fact, both mutual information
and instance discrimination are useful for representation learn-
ing, and further works tend to combine both of them implicitly.
There are mainly two questions to consider for a contrastive
method with negative sampling: (1) what to compare; (2) how
to choose positive/negative pairs. Though different methods
vary slightly in the contrasting level (mainly context-level like
CPC [71] and DIM [72] or instance level like InstDisc [73]),
what to compare is commonly the encoded features f(x)
of positive/negative samples. The choice of positive/negative
samples then leads to a range of different methods. While
CPC [71] and DIM [72] deﬁned features from the same input
image as positive pairs and those from other images as negative
pairs, AMDIM [171] extended the choice of the positive
sample by sampling from an augmented view of the input im-age. Contrastive multiview coding (CMC) [174] extended the
idea to several different views (depth, luminance, luminance,
chrominance, surface normal, and semantic labels) of one im-
age and samples another irrelevant image as the negative. This
work was further improved by InfoMin [175] studying how
to choose best views. In addition, Misra et al. [74] proposed
pretext-invariant representation learning (PIRL), using pretext
tasks in predictive self-supervised learning to transform the
input image and let the model learn the invariances.
Contrastive methods tend to work better with more negative
examples, since a presumably larger number of negative ex-
amples may cover the underlying distribution more effectively.
However, the number of negative samples is usually restricted
to the size of the mini-batch as the gradients ﬂow back
through the encoders of both the positive and negative samples.
Consequently, larger mini-batches are preferable, but this in
turn is going to be limited by hardware memory constraints.
A possible solution is to maintain a separate dictionary, called
memory bank , which stores and updates the embeddings
of samples with the most recent ones at regular intervals.
The memory bank contains a feature representation mxfor
each sample xin datasetX. The representation mxis an
exponentially moving average of feature representations that
were computed in prior epochs. It enables replacing negative
samplesmx by their memory bank representations without
increasing the batch size. PIRL [74] and InstDisc [73] are
two representative methods that use a memory bank to boost
performance.
However, maintaining a memory bank during training can
be a complicated task, as (1) it can be computationally
expensive to update the representations in the memory bank
as the representations get outdated quickly in a few passes; (2)
the representations in the memory bank are always one step
behind the current encoding, which might bring unnecessary
mismatches. To address these issues, the memory bank got
replaced by a separate module called momentum encoder in
MoCo [75]. The momentum encoder generates a dictionary as
a queue of encoded keys with the current mini-batch enqueued
and the oldest mini-batch dequeued. The dictionary keys are
deﬁned on the ﬂy by a set of data samples in the batch
during training. MoCo also abandons the traditional end-to-
end training framework by updating the momentum encoder

==== Page 11 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 11
Fig. 11. Conceptual comparison of MoCo [75] with two previous contrastive
mechanisms. Rather than end-to-end back-propagation or sampling from a
memory bank, MoCo encodes the new keys (key representation) on the ﬂy by
a momentum-updated encoder and maintains a queue of keys (a dictionary) for
storing negative samples. The size of the dictionary can be much larger than
a typical mini-batch size, and the samples in the dictionary are progressively
replaced. ©[2020] IEEE.
(a) Original (b) Crop & resize (c) Crop, resize & flip (d) Color drop (e) Color jitter
(f) Rotate (g) Cutout (h) Gaussian noise (i) Gaussian blur (i) Sobel filter
Fig. 12. Data augmentation operators studied in SimCLR [76]. The
selected best group of data augmentations (”random cropping, color jittering,
grayscaling, Gaussian blurring and horizontal ﬂipping”) are widely referenced
in following self-supervised studies.
based on the query encoder (Fig. 11):
k mk+ (1 m)q (7)
wheremis the momentum coefﬁcient and k,qrepresent key
encoder (momentum encoder, no back-propagation) and query
encoder (back-propagation) respectively. As a result, it does
not require training two separate models and there is no need
to maintain a memory bank.
Based on previous works, Chen et al. [76] proposed a
milestone of contrastive learning: A simple framework for con-
trastive learning of visual representations (SimCLR). SimCLR
follows the end-to-end training framework and chooses a batch
size as large as 8196 to handle the performance bottleneck of
the number of negative samples. The main contribution of Sim-
CLR is that it illustrates the importance of a hard positive sam-
pling strategy by introducing data augmentation in 10 forms,
and provides a standard scheme of data augmentation for
most further works (see Fig. 12). SimCLR also provides some
other practical techniques for contrastive learning, including
an additional learnable nonlinear transformation between the
representation and the contrastive loss (the projection head),
doubling negative samples and more training steps. Following
the strategies of SimCLR, the authors of MoCo proposed
an improved version MoCo-v2 [78] by improving the data
augmentation, adding a projection head, and adapting cosine
Anchor
PositiveNegativeFig. 13. Tile2Vec [177]. A triplet loss is optimized to move neighbour patches
close and distant patches far away in the feature space.
decay on the learning rate. The authors also proposed a trans-
former version MoCo-v3 [77] by replacing the ResNet [17]
backbone of the encoder to a vision transformer [18]. Mean-
while, the authors of SimCLR improved their model to a
second version SimCLR-v2 [176] for better performance on
semi-supervised learning using distillation, with larger encoder
networks, larger batch size, and deeper projection heads.
Remote sensing. While contrastive self-supervised learning
is relatively new, the wide use of contrastive loss in remote
sensing [178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183] can date back to
[184], where the authors imposed a supervised contrastive
regularization term on the CNN features for remote sensing
scene classiﬁcation. The ﬁrst self-supervised work making use
of contrastive learning for remote sensing image representation
learning is Tile2Vec proposed by Jean et al. [177]. Similar
to CPC [71], this work was also inspired by word2vec [167,
168]. The authors trained a convolutional neural network on
triplets of tiles, where each triplet consists of an anchor tile ta,
a neighbor tile tnthat is close geographically, and a distant
tiletdthat is farther away. A triplet loss is used to move
closer neighbour tiles and move further distant tiles in feature
space. Jung et al. [185] later reformulated the triplet loss to bi-
nary classiﬁcation loss and added no-updated fully connected
layers to improve robustness. Leenstra et al. [186] proposed
a combination of triplet loss and binary cross-entropy loss
(positive pair as 1 and negative pair as 0) for self-supervised
change detection. Inspired by DIM, Li et al. [187] proposed
a deep mutual information subspace clustering (DMISC) net-
work for hyperspectral subspace clustering. Hou et al. [188]
rely on contrastive learning, following a design similar to
SimCLR, to pre-train an HSI classiﬁcation model on a single
scene and reduce the need for dense annotations. Contrastive
learning is used on the unlabeled pixels with spectral-spatial
feature extraction followed by a ﬁne-tuning stage. Similarly,
Zhao et al. [189] also apply SimCLR for HSI classiﬁcation
showing promising results with very limited labels. In the
same line of works, Zhu et al. [190] leverage SimCLR
for HSI classiﬁcation using a multi-scale feature extraction
approach. PuHong et al. [191] utilized MoCo for oil spill
detection in hyperspectral images. It is worth mentioning that
all these hyperspectral data related works rely on simple spatial

==== Page 12 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 12
and spectral augmentations (e.g., random cropping, Gaussian
noise, etc.) for view generation. We believe there is room for
improvement in this direction.
Jung et al. [192] combined the sampling idea of tile2vec
and contrastive architecture of SimCLR, utilizing smoothed
representation of three neighbor tiles as a positive sample.
Montanaro et al. [193] proposed to use SimCLR for represen-
tation learning of the encoder and perturbation invariant au-
toencoder for segmentation training of the decoder to perform
land cover classiﬁcation. Scheibenreif et al. [194] tackled land
cover classiﬁcation and segmentation problems using SimCLR
with Swin Transformers and by contrasting optical Sentinel 2
and SAR Sentinel 1 patches. Stevenson et al. [195] proposed
to use SimCLR for representation learning of LiDAR elevation
data. Kang et al. [196] deﬁne spatial augmentation criteria to
uncover semantic relationships among land cover tiles and use
MoCo for contrastive self-supervised learning. Li et al. [197]
added one local matching contrastive loss (between patches
within an image) to commonly used global contrastive loss
(between different images) to learn rich pixel-level informa-
tion for semantic segmentation. All above-mentioned methods
consider the spatial contexts of remote sensing images and
based on that build positive/negative pairs. Apart from these
methods, contrastive multi-view coding (CMC) is used in [198,
199] and [200] for multispectral and hyperspectral repre-
sentation learning, and seasonal contrast (SeCo) is proposed
in [201] to utilize temporal (season) information to create
different views. Heidler et al. [202] proposed a combination
of triplet loss and all possible pairings (called batch triplet
loss) for audio-visual multi-modal self-supervised learning,
and Ayush et al. [161] combined contrastive learning and
predictive learning, proposing a combination of MoCo-v2 [78]
and geo-location as a pretext task for better representation
learning of geo-related images. Guan et al. [203] proposed to
integrate contrastive NCE loss and masked image modeling
for cross-domain hyperspectral image classiﬁcation.
2) Clustering: Referring back to one of the earliest un-
supervised learning algorithms, the series of clustering-based
self-supervised methods learn data representation by using
a clustering algorithm to group similar features together in
the embedding space. In supervised learning, this pulling-
near process is accomplished via label supervision; in self-
supervised learning, however, we do not have such labels. To
solve the problem, DeepCluster [51] proposed to iteratively
leverageK-means clustering to yield pseudo labels and ask a
discriminator to predict the labels. This is also the ﬁrst work
towards clustering-based self-supervised learning.
Self-labeling [80] and local aggregation [79] further pushed
forward the boundary of clustering-based methods. Like Deep-
Cluster [51], local aggregation and self-labeling also use an
iterative training procedure, but the speciﬁc process within
each iteration differs signiﬁcantly. In self-labeling, instead of
K-means clustering, an optimal transport problem is solved
to obtain the pseudo-labels. In local aggregation, unlike the
clustering step of DeepCluster where all examples are divided
into mutually-exclusive clusters, the method identiﬁes neigh-
bors separately for each example, allowing for more ﬂexible
statistical structures. In addition, local aggregation employs
𝑥𝑥1
𝑥2𝐸𝜃
𝐸𝜃𝑧1
𝑧2𝑄1
𝑄2𝐶 Swap prediction prototypescodes
codes𝑇1
𝑇2Fig. 14. Swapping Assignments between Views (SwA V) [81]. “Codes” are
obtained by assigning features to learnable prototype vectors, a “swapped”
prediction problem is then solved wherein the codes obtained from one data
augmented view are predicted using the other view.
an objective function that directly optimizes a local soft-
clustering metric, requiring no extra readout layer and only a
small amount of additional computation on top of the feature
representation training.
Despite the early success of clustering-based self-
supervised learning, the two-stage training paradigm is time-
consuming and poor-performing compared to later instance-
discrimination-based methods such as SimCLR [76] and
MoCo [75], which have gotten rid of the slow clustering
stage and introduced efﬁcient data augmentation strategies to
boost the performance. In light of these problems, the authors
of DeepCluster [51] brought the idea of online clustering
and multi-view data augmentation into the clustering-based
contrastive self-supervised approach, proposing to learn fea-
tures by swapping assignments between multiple views of the
same image (SwA V) [81]. The intuition is that, given some
(clustered) prototypes, different views of the same images
should be assigned to the same prototypes. Meanwhile, an
online computing strategy was designed to accelerate code
(cluster assignment) computing (see Fig. 14). Based on SwA V ,
SEER [7] trained a RegNetY [204] with 1.3B parameters on
1B random images, which for the ﬁrst time surpassed the best
supervised pre-trained model. In addition, some recent works
presented other efforts towards bridging contrastive learning
and clustering, such as Prototypical Contrastive Learning
(PCL) [82], Jigsaw clustering [126] and Contrastive Clustering
(CC) [205].
Remote sensing. Saha et al. [206] proposed to use Deep-
Cluster and triplet contrastive learning to encode multi-modal
multi-temporal remote sensing images for change detection.
The authors further integrate DeepCluster, BYOL and MoCo-
v2 in the pixel-level to produce segmentation maps [207].
Walter et al. [121] presented a comparison between Deep-
Cluster, V AE, clolorization as pretext task and BiGAN for
remote sensing image retrieval. Similarly, Cao et al. [208]
presented a comparison between V AE, AAE and PCL for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation. Hu et al. [209] proposed
spatial-spectral subspace clustering for hyperspectral images
based on contrastive clustering [205]. Liu et al. [210] proposed
dual dynamic graph convolutional network (DDGCN), con-
tributing a novel clustering-based contrastive loss to capture
the structures of views and scenes. In addition to naive
contrastive learning on views, scene structures are added into
the loss term by clustering scene indexes within the minibatch.

==== Page 13 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 13
𝑥𝑥1
𝑥2𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡
𝐸𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑟contrastivegrad
sg𝑇1
𝑇2Proj . Pred.
Proj .projector predictor
online
targetema
Fig. 15. Bootstrap Your Own Latent (BYOL) [83]. A similarity loss is
minimized between features from the online (student) and the target (teacher)
branch. A stop-gradient ( sg) operator is applied on the teacher whose
parameters are updated with an exponential moving average ( ema ) of the
student parameters.
3) Knowledge Distillation: Another set of methods for
contrastive self-supervised learning is based on knowledge
distillation [211]. These methods commonly use a teacher-
student network (still Siamese-like structure) and optimize
a similarity metric of two augmented views of the same
input image. Either asymmetric learning rules or asymmetric
architectures are utilized to transfer knowledge between the
student network and the teacher network, and thus no negative
samples are necessary.
Grill et al. [83] proposed a ﬁrst milestone called BYOL
(bootstrap your own latent, see Fig. 15) for self-supervised
learning based on knowledge distillation. The general architec-
ture is similar to MoCo [75] but without the usage of negative
samples. It was shown that, if a ﬁxed randomly initialized
network (which would not collapse because it is not trained)
is used to serve as the key encoder, the representation produced
by the query encoder would still be improved during training.
If then the target encoder is set to be the trained query encoder
and iterates this procedure, it will progressively achieve better
performance. Therefore, BYOL proposed an architecture with
an exponential moving average strategy to update the target
encoder just as MoCo does, and used mean square error as the
similarity measurement. Additionally, BYOL is also similar to
mean teacher [212] (a semi-supervised method including also
a classiﬁcation loss), which would collapse if removing the
classiﬁcation loss. To prevent collapse, BYOL introduced an
additional predictor on top of the online (teacher) network.
SimSiam [84] presented a systematic study on the impor-
tance of different tricks in avoiding collapse and proposed a
simpliﬁed version of the previous self-supervised contrastive
methods, arguing that the additional predictor of BYOL is
helpful but not necessary to prevent model collapse. Instead,
the stop gradient operation of the teacher (target) network
is the most critical component to make target representation
stable. In addition, the authors showed the relationship be-
tween SimSiam and other popular contrastive methods: (1)
SimSiam can be thought of as “SimCLR without negatives”;
(2) SimSiam is conceptually analogous to “SwA V without on-
line clustering”; (3) SimSiam can be seen as ”BYOL without
the momentum encoder”.
DINO [52] further explored the self-distillation scheme with
vision transformer backbones, proposing a new state-of-the-
art self-supervised learning algorithm. Following a common
teacher-student network architecture, the output of the teacher
𝑥𝑥1
𝑥2𝐸𝜃
𝐸𝜃𝑇1
𝑇2𝑧1
𝑧2
P
Pprojector
Empirical
Cross -corr.
Feature 
dimensionTarget
Cross -corr.Fig. 16. Barlow Twins [87]. The objective function measures the cross-
correlation matrix between the embeddings of two identical networks fed
with distorted versions of a batch of samples and tries to make this matrix
close to the identity. This causes the embedding vectors of distorted versions
of a sample to be similar while minimizing the redundancy between the
components of these vectors.
network is centered with a mean computed over the batch.
Each network outputs a K dimensional feature that is normal-
ized with a temperature softmax over the feature dimension
and their similarity is then measured with a cross-entropy
loss. Stop gradient and momentum update are used to improve
the performance. A following work EsViT [85] improved
DINO by introducing additional region-level contrastive task
apart from commonly used global view-level task. Recently,
Zhou et al. [86] integrated masked image modeling into the
contrastive self-distillation scheme with vision transforms,
proposing image BERT pre-training with Online Tokenizer
(iBOT).
Remote sensing. Guo et al. [213] proposed to combine
GAN and BYOL for better discriminative representation learn-
ing. Following a normal GAN structure, a generator is used to
generate fake images and a discriminator is used to distinguish
them from real images. An additional similarity loss is com-
bined with the discriminator loss by seeing the discriminator
as a self-supervised encoder, which encodes both fake and real
images as two input views to a BYOL-like Siamese network.
In addition, gated self-attention and pyramidal convolution are
proposed to be used in both the generator and the discrimina-
tor. Chen et al. [214, 215] utilized Siamese ResUNet to distill
related representations from different modalities (SAR and
optical), and a shift transformation to learn pixel-wise feature
representations. Hu et al. [216] utilized transformer as encoder
backbone and BYOL as baseline structure for hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation. Dong et al. [217] employed SimSiam for
ViT based PolSAR image classiﬁcation. Wang et al. [218]
leverage BYOL for SAR ship detection. Jain et al. [219]
perform pre-training by contrasting SAR and optical images
using BYOL. Wang et al. [220] proposed DINO-MM, a
joint SAR-optical representation learning approach with vision
transformers. Following the main self-supervised mechanism
as DINO, the authors introduced RandomSensorDrop to let
the model see all possible combinations of both modalities
during training. Zhang et al. [221] introduced a self-supervised
spectral–spatial attention-based vision transformer (SSVT),
where global and local augmented views are contrasted based
on self-distillation [222]. Muhtar et al. [223] proposed In-
dexNet, a dense self-supervised method for remote sensing
image segmentation. Their approach is built on BYOL and
performs contrastive at image and pixel level to preserve
spatial information. In a similar fashion, Chen et al. [224]

==== Page 14 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 14
Encoder Encoder
imagecontrastive
grad grad
Encoder Encoder
imageredundancy 
grad grad
Encoder Encoder
imagesimilarity
grad
sinkhorn
student teacher
imagesimilaritygrad
predictor
(a) Contrasting negative samples (b) Clustering (c) Distillation (d) Redundancy reduction
Fig. 17. A comparison of contrastive self-supervised methods.
Method Architecture Params (M) Top-1 acc
BigBiGAN [116] R50 24 56.6
MAE [58] ViT-L/16 307 73.5
RelativePosition [62] R50w2X 94 51.4
Jigsaw [63] R50w2X 94 44.6
Rotation [49] Rv50w4X 86 55.4
Colorization [65] R101 28 39.6
CPC-v1 [71] R101 28 48.7
CPC-v2 [169] R161 305 71.5
AMDIM [171] R-custom 194 63.5
CMC [174] R50 47 66.2
InstDisc [73] R50 24 54.0
PIRL [74] R50 24 63.6
MoCo [75] R50 24 60.6
MoCo-2X R50w2X 94 65.4
SimCLR [76] R50 24 69.3
SimCLR-2X R50w2X 94 74.2
MoCo-v2 [78] R50 24 71.1
SimCLR-v2 [176] R50 24 71.7
MoCo-v3 (ViT-B) [77] ViT-B/16 86 76.7
MoCo-v3 (ViT-L) ViT-L/16 304 81.0
DeepCluster [51] VGG 15 48.4
LocalAgg [79] R50 24 60.2
SwA V [81] R50 24 75.3
SwA V-2X R50w2X 94 77.3
BarlowTwins [87] R50 24 73.2
VICReg [88] R50 24 73.2
BYOL [83] R50 24 74.3
SimSiam [84] R50 24 71.3
DINO (RN) [52] R50 24 75.3
DINO (ViT) ViT-B/16 85 78.2
EsViT [85] Swin-B 87 81.3
iBOT [86] ViT-L/16 307 81.7
Supervised (ResNet) R50 24 76.5
Supervised (ViT) ViT-B/16 85 79.9
Fig. 18. Comparison of SSL methods under the linear classiﬁcation protocol on ImageNet [2]. All are reported as unsupervised pre-training on the ImageNet-
1M training set, followed by supervised linear classiﬁcation trained on frozen features, evaluated on the validation set. The parameter counts are those of the
feature extractors which are commonly ResNet [17] or ViT [18].
propose a pixel-level self supervised learning approach for
change detection. Their method is based on SimSiam with the
objective of enforcing point-level consistency across views.
They also propose a background-swap augmentation to focus
on the foreground.
4) Redundancy Reduction: The idea of redundancy reduc-
tion for self-supervised learning comes from neuroscience.
Indeed, H. Barlow [225] states that the goal of sensory
processing is to record highly redundant sensory inputs into
a factorial code (a code with statistically independent com-ponents). Inspired by this principle, Zbontar et al. proposed
Barlow Twins [87], a method that uses redundancy reduction
as a way to avoid trivial solution in contrastive learning
without explicit (e.g. MoCo [75] and SimCLR [76]) or implicit
(e.g. DeepCluster [51] and SwA V [81]) negative samples. With
the main network architecture similar to previous contrastive
learning, Barlow Twins’ objective function measures the cross-
correlation matrix between the embeddings of two identical
networks fed with distorted versions of a batch of samples, and
tries to make this matrix close to the identity (Fig. 16). This

==== Page 15 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 15
causes the embedding vectors of distorted versions of a sample
to be similar while minimizing the redundancy between the
components of these vectors. The loss function of Barlow
Twins is:
LBT,X
i(1 Cii)2
|{z}
invariance term+X
iX
j6=iC2
ij
|{z}
redundancy reduction term(8)
whereis a trade-off parameter and Cis the cross-correlation
matrix computed between the outputs of the two identical
networks along the batch dimension:
Cij,P
bzA
b;izB
b;jr
P
b
zA
b;i2r
P
b
zB
b;j2(9)
wherebindexes batch samples, i,jindex the vector dimension
of the networks’ outputs, and A,Brepresent two different
views.
Bardes et al. [88] borrowed the decorrelation mechanism
from Barlow Twins, proposing a new redundancy-reduction-
based self-supervised method VICReg (variance-invariance-
covariance regularization). VICReg follows common con-
trastive learning architecture, and avoids the trivial solution
by introducing variance along the batch dimension (a hinge
loss which constrains the standard deviation), invariance cross
different views (mean-squared euclidean distance), and co-
variance along feature dimension (penalizing the off-diagonal
coefﬁcients of the covariance matrix of the embeddings).
Remote sensing. Since redundancy-reduction-based algo-
rithms (Barlow Twins [87] and VICReg [88]) are relatively
new, there are only works using these methods in the remote
sensing community. Marsocci et al. [226] proposed to use
Barlow-Twins in a continual learning setting to pre-train a
model on a set of heterogeneous datasets while avoiding
catastrophic forgetting. Their approach is evaluated on seg-
mentation problems. Ait Ali Braham et al. [227] used Barlow-
Twins for few-shot HSI classiﬁcation in a two-stages approach.
They propose two pair sampling strategies for pixel and patch
level classiﬁcation using spatial information from the scene to
generate positive pairs, along with a set of data augmentations.
Their results support the effectiveness of redundancy reduction
methods on hyperspectral images. In the next section, we
further discuss the conceptual idea of redundancy reduction
and how it could be beneﬁcial for remote sensing image
understanding. We believe there is a large potential to be
explored.
III. F ROM IMAGE NET TO REMOTE SENSING IMAGERY :
SELF -SUPERVISED LEARNING ON GEOSPATIAL EARTH
OBSERVATION DATA
Self-supervised learning is a data-driven methodology that
learns the representation of a dataset without human annota-
tion. However, most existing self-supervised methods in the
computer vision community deal with natural RGB images
(e.g., ImageNet [2]) which are different from remote sensing
imagery, and there are various types of data from various types
Fig. 19. Geography-aware self-supervised learning [161]. Spatially aligned
images over time are used to construct temporal positive pairs in contrastive
learning, and geo-location is used as an additional pre-text task to boost
representation learning for remote sensing images. ©[2021] IEEE.
of sensors that require speciﬁc considerations. In addition,
though intended to learn common representations for various
downstream tasks, there’s an unignorable gap between pixel-
level, patch-level and image-level tasks that may beneﬁt from
different designs of self-supervision. In this section, we dig
into the implementation of self-supervised methods on differ-
ent types of remote sensing data and image-/patch-/pixel-level
applications.
A. Characterisics and Challenges of Remote Sensing Data
Remote-sensing data contains multiple modalities, e.g.,
from optical (multi- and hyperspectral), Lidar, and synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) sensors, where the imaging geometries
and contents are completely different [8]. Yet before we dis-
cuss those different modalities, there exist some characteristics
that all data types share as a common remote sensing speciﬁc
property compared to natural images.
First, remote sensing data are geolocated, which means
each image pixel corresponds to a geospatial coordinate. This
information provides additional chances for the design of self-
supervised pretext tasks (e.g., predicting the geo-location of an
input image [161], see Fig. 19), as well as indirect cooperation
with geographical resources (e.g., land cover database [162]).
Second, remote sensing data are geodetic measurements and
usually correspond to speciﬁc physical meanings. If not well
analyzed, this characteristic can raise issues with data aug-
mentation. Speciﬁcally, data augmentation is very important
especially for contrastive methods to help the network learn
semantic invariance, yet a careless design of data augmentation
might change certain physical properties which are indeed
important to recognize the objects in a remote sensing image.
Third, remote sensing images usually contain many more
objects than natural images (e.g., compared to an image from
ImageNet which generally contains one main object, a remote
sensing image usually includes multiple repeated objects). This
difference inﬂuences both pretext tasks and data augmentation.
For example, jigsaw puzzles can be expected to be difﬁcult
for representation learning on low-resolution satellite images,
and rotation can affect the shadows of buildings which are
important for the model to learn relative heights. On the other

==== Page 16 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 16
TABLE II
AGALLERY OF RECENT SELF -SUPERVISED WORKS IN REMOTE SENSING .
Modality Application Method
Multi-spectralRepresentation learningVincenzi et al. [135]: colorization as pretext task.
tile2vec [177]: contrastive learning with triplet loss.
Jung et al. [185]: replace triple loss of tile2vec to binary cross entropy loss.
Stojnic et al. [198]: contrastive multiview coding.
CSF [228]: contrastive multiview coding.
Jung et al. [192]: SimCLR with smoothed view.
GeoMoCo [161]: MoCo + geo-location as pretext task.
SauMoCo [196]: MoCo with spatial augmentation.
SeCo [201]: MoCo + seasonal contrast.
GeoKR [162]: geo-supervision (landcover map) + teacher-student network.
Scene classiﬁcationLuet al. [92]: autoencoder.
Zhao et al. [130]: rotation as pretext task + classiﬁcation loss.
Taoet al. [133]: inpainting, relative position and instance discrimination.
SGSAGANs [213]: BYOL + GAN.
Semantic segmentationLiet al. [229]: inpainting/rotation as pretext tasks + contrastive learning.
Singh et al. [132]: GAN + inpainting as pretext task.
Liet al. [197]: global and local contrastive learning.
Change detectionZhang et al. [93]: denoising Autoencoder.
S2-cGAN [120]: conditional GAN discriminator + reconstruction loss.
Dong et al. [151]: GAN discriminator for temporal prediction.
Caiet al. [230]: clustering for hard sample mining.
Leenstra et al. [186]: triplet loss + binary cross entropy loss.
Chen et al. [199]: contrastive multiview coding + BYOL.
Time series classiﬁcation Yuan et al. [152]: transformer + temporal pretext task.
Object detection DUPR [231]: patch re-identiﬁcation + multi-level contrastive loss
Image retrieval Walter et al. [121]: DeepCluster/BiGAN/V AE/Colorization.
Depth estimation Madhuanand et al. [95]: autoencoder + multi-task prediction + triplet loss.
HyperspectralImage classiﬁcationMou et al. [101]: autoencoder.
Liet al. [106]: autoencoder + subspace clustering.
Liuet al. [200]: contrastive multi-view coding.
Huet al. [209]: spatial-spectral contrastive clustering.
Cao et al. [208]: V AE/AAE/PCL.
Huet al. [216]: BYOL + transformer.
Unmixing EGU-Net [103]: autoencoder + Siamese weight-sharing network.
Target detection Yao et al. [232]: clustering + pseudo-label + contrastive N-pair loss.
Denoising SHDN [233]: noise prediction as pretext task.
Restoration Imamura et al. [102]: denoising autoencoder.
Super-resolution CUCaNet [104]: autoencoder + Siamese cross-attention.
SARDespecklingBDSS [110]: autoencoder, predict another speckled view.
Speckle2V oid [109]: blind-spot CNN + physical regression.
Wang et al. [234]: Siamese contrastive loss + pseudo label.
Scene classiﬁcation MI-SSL [235]: PolSAR modal similarity + instance contrastive.
Image retrieval Park et al. [236]: MoCo.
Target recognitionRR-SSL [131]: rotation as pretext task.
UACL [237]: adversarial contrastive learning.
multi-modalSAR-optical fusionCha et al. [238]: contrastive multiview coding.
UniFeat&CoRe [193]: SimCLR + inpainting as pretext.
Chen et al. [214]: instance discrimination + multiview & shift invariance.
SAR-optical change detectionChen et al. [199]: contrastive multiview coding + BYOL.
Chen et al. [215]: instance discrimination + multiview & shift invariance.
Saha et al. [206]: DeepCluster + bitemporal multi-sensor contrastive.
SAR-optical matching Hughes et al. [108]: V AE+GAN, hard negative sample mining.
Audio-image fusion Heidler et al. [202]: audio-visual contrastive triplet loss.
hand, when image-level representation is important for nat-
ural images, patch-level and pixel-level representation can be
equally important for remote sensing images (e.g., considering
the spatial relationship of neighboring and distant patches to
sample positive/negative pairs [177, 196] as shown in Fig. 13
and 20).
Last but not least, the time variable is becoming increasingly
important despite the modality. This raises the interest of
getting inspiration from video self-supervised learning, yet
time stamps in remote sensing images are quite different from
frames in videos, as well as the special objectives (e.g. change
detection in remote sensing). Therefore, how to make the best
of temporal information is a common question to be answeredin all modalities. An early progress is shown in Fig. 21 where
seasonal information is used for data augmentation [201].
Apart from these important common characteristics, below
we discuss different modalities of remote sensing data. A
list of recent self-supervised works classiﬁed w.r.t modality
is shown in Table II.
1) Multispectral Images: Multispectral images are captured
within speciﬁc wavelengths ranging across the electromagnetic
spectrum, which allows for the extraction of information
covering or beyond the perception range of human eyes.
Compared to hyperspectral imaging, multispectral imaging
measures light in a small number (typically 3 to 15) of
spectral bands with relatively low spectral resolution but

==== Page 17 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 17
Fig. 20. Spatially augmented momentum contrast [196]. Following the underlying assumption of Tile2Vec [177], nearby cropped tiles are seen as spatial
augmentation for the anchor tile, and a similarity loss is optimized based on momentum contrast [75]. ©[2020] IEEE.
𝐸
𝐸 ℎ0
ℎ1 𝐸
ℎ2 𝐸Invariant
Invariant
Invariant𝑇0
𝑇1
𝑇2+
+
Fig. 21. Seasonal Contrast (SeCo) [201]. Three embedding subspaces are
trained to be invariant to temporal (seasonal), synthetic and both temporal
and synthetic transforms T1,T2andT0, respectively.
high spatial resolution. Multispectral images are the most
commonly used remote sensing data, as they are relatively
easy to acquire, and are close to natural images which enable
easier human perception and convenient technology transfer
from the computer vision community. Due to the popularity
and the similarity of multispectral images to natural images, a
lot of self-supervised methods have been directly transferred to
the remote sensing ﬁeld (see Fig. 23). Generally, all categories
of self-supervised methods in CV can be extended to remote
sensing multi-spectral image analysis, but there is some special
attention to pay: (1) the common characteristics of remote
sensing data for all modalities need to be considered as
have been discussed above, (2) spectral contexts of predictive
methods (e.g., colorization) now have possibly more channel
information that can be used to design the pretext tasks, (3)
color-related data augmentations (e.g., color distortions shown
in Fig. 12) which are very important for contrastive self-
supervised learning need to be carefully modiﬁed to ﬁt into
multiple channels.
2) Hyperspectral Images: Hyperspectral imaging also cap-
tures images across the electromagnetic spectrum, but lights
in a far bigger number (up to hundreds) of spectral bands than
multispectral imaging with a trade-off on the spatial resolution.This very high spectral resolution enables us to identify the
materials contained in the pixel via spectroscopic analysis,
yet, on the other hand, requires special care about band-wise
analysis. In fact, with a basic objective of dimensionality
reduction, PCA/ICA/clustering and manifold-learning-based
methods have been widely studied in the ﬁeld before the era
of neural networks. Along the lines, deep-learning-based self-
supervised methods have been focusing on autoencoders and
3D convolution to compress spectral representations. Because
of the large number of spectral channels, the network usually
takes a single-pixel or a small patch as input. In both cases,
spatial contexts for pretext tasks or data augmentations tend
to consider intra-sample instead of inner-sample information
(e.g., neighboring patches or pixels can be seen as positive
samples in contrastive negative sampling). Meanwhile, spectral
contexts have a large potential to be explored because of
the high spectral dimensionality of hyperspectral data. For
example, two spectrally divided parts of a hyperspectral image
can be two augmented views.
3) SAR Images: Synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) is a form
of radar that is used to create two-dimensional images or three-
dimensional reconstructions of objects. Due to the imaging
principle, SAR images are substantially different from mul-
tispectral and hyperspectral images in characteristics like dy-
namic range, speckle statistics, imaging geometry and complex
domain information. While self-supervised learning with SAR
images is also a new research direction and has not been
widely explored, there’s one fact that makes it a valuable topic:
the prevailing lack of ground truth for regression-type tasks.
Though simulators can be used to provide training data for
supervised learning, this bears the risk that the networks will
learn models that are far too simpliﬁed. Therefore, it would
be very beneﬁcial if we can use self-supervised techniques
to learn representations from real SAR data. In addition, the
general self-supervised schemes can also be easily transferred
to SAR images with speciﬁc considerations. For example, the
data augmentation of color distortion is not suitable for SAR
data, the speckle noise of SAR images has a similar effect
as Gaussian blurring, and the ascending and descending order
may serve as a natural augmentation strategy.

==== Page 18 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 18
Fig. 22. Shift invariance [214]. The two inputs have an offset but keep an
overlap. A shift transformation is included in the one branch for aligning
representations between two branches which are optimized by a contrastive
loss.
Publications w.r.t different modalities
multispectral
hyperspectral
SAR
multimodalPublications w.r.t different SSL types
Generative
Predictive
Contrastive
(a) modality (b) SSL type
Fig. 23. Statistics of recent publications related to self-supervised learning
in remote sensing.
4) Multi-sensor Fusion: As a result of the multi-modality
of remote sensing data, multi-sensor fusion is always an
important task for various objectives, which can beneﬁt from
multi-modal self-supervised learning. There are generally two
ways of combining multi-modal inputs: (1) similar to various
input channels, different modalities can be seen as augmented
views of semantically the same input which can be used
for designing pretext tasks or speciﬁc data augmentation in
contrastive self-supervised learning; (2) two encoders are used
separately to encode features from two different modalities and
then concatenated together for a joint representation learning.
Regarding remote sensing data, a common multi-modality is
from optical and SAR images, leading to the important topic
SAR-optical data fusion, which has been shown by some
recent works that beneﬁts from self-supervised representation
learning [214] (see Fig. 22) and [220]. In addition, the fusion
of other modalities like audio and social media data is also
raising increasing interest [202].
B. Applications
Though the general goal of self-supervised learning is to
perform task-independent representation learning which can
beneﬁt various downstream tasks, it has to be noted that
different self-supervision can have different inﬂuences on
different tasks. Therefore, it is necessary to pre-consider the
choice of self-supervised methods when we are targeting a
speciﬁc application in the end. In fact, so far a large number
of self-supervised works in the remote sensing ﬁeld are based
on a speciﬁc application. In general, the various applications
can be separated into three categories: image-level tasks ,pixel-
level tasks andpatch-level tasks . A list of representative recent
self-supervised works classiﬁed w.r.t applications is shown inTable II. We refer the interested reader to the numerous surveys
on machine learning and deep learning in remote sensing [8,
239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244] for more details about common
downstream tasks and available datasets.
1) Image-level Tasks: Image-level tasks correspond to the
applications that expect the recognition of the whole image
or image patches, focusing more on global knowledge. The
most common image-level task is scene classiﬁcation for mul-
tispectral [92, 130, 133, 213], SAR [235] and other possible
modalities. Scene classiﬁcation is directly related to natural
image classiﬁcation and is usually the default downstream
task for the evaluation of a self-supervised method. Like
most of the above-mentioned predictive and contrastive self-
supervised methods, an image-level task requires focusing
on a global representation that can be done by predicting
high-level pretexts or contrasting the encoded features of two
augmented image views. Other image-level tasks include time
series classiﬁcation [152] and image retrieval [121].
2) Pixel-level Tasks: Pixel-level tasks correspond to the
applications that expect the recognition of each image pixel,
focusing more on the local details. The most common pixel-
level task is semantic segmentation [245, 229, 132, 197],
which requires ﬁner representation in pixel level. Generative
self-supervised methods like autoencoder and pretext tasks
/ data augmentations like image inpainting and pixel based
contrastive learning can be helpful. Change detection [93, 120,
151, 98, 230, 199, 215, 186, 186] is usually also a pixel-
level task which utilizes multitemporal information to detect
changing pixels. In hyperspectral image analysis, most of the
tasks are based on pixel level, including hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation4[106, 100, 101], image denoising [233], spectral
unmixing [99], target detection [232], image restoration [102]
and super-resolution [105, 104]. Other pixel-level tasks include
depth estimation [158, 95] and SAR despeckling [110, 109].
3) Patch-level Tasks: Patch-level tasks mainly correspond
to object detection, lying in-between image-level and pixel-
level applications. When requiring both the location and the
label of the object in the image, patch-level tasks beneﬁt
from both global representation and local details. Hence for
good performance in the application of object detection, an
integrated representation learning pipeline deserves considera-
tion [231]. In addition, patch-based change detection considers
comparisons between tiles of images (change or no change)
rather than pixels due to reasons like possible misalignment
between time stamps [246], or the requirement of fast pre-
processing to retrieve region of interest and limited band-
width for data communication [247]. We note that patch-level
change detection can also be classiﬁed into image-level tasks.
However, we put them here as there is a stronger correlation
between the small patches and the big scene.
IV. A P RELIMINARY BENCHMARK
As a milestone along the road of large-scale unsupervised
pre-training in the image domain, the past two years have
4Note that with the goal to classify the center pixel, hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation tends to work on a small patch to beneﬁt from spatial relation-
ships, linking towards image and patch level tasks.

==== Page 19 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 19
0102030405060708090
BigEarthNet So2Sat-LCZ42 SEN12MSClassification score (%)
Random MoCo-v2 SwAV Simsiam BarlowTwins Supervised
(a)
epochsloss
                              
                      (b)
Fig. 24. (a)A preliminary benchmark of four popular contrastive self-supervised methods (each representing one category in section II-C) on Sentinel-2
images of BigEarthNet [13], SEN12MS [14] and So2Sat-LCZ42 [15] (culture-10 version) datasets. We use ResNet-18 as encoder backbones, follow the ofﬁcial
settings of the models for self-supervised pre-training, and evaluate the performance by training a linear classiﬁer on frozen features. (b)The ”collapsing”
training curve of SimSiam. The loss goes down quickly in the beginning 10 epochs and becomes very unstable in the following epochs.
witnessed big advances with contrastive self-supervised learn-
ing. However, as most of the recent representative methods
are developed and veriﬁed on natural images, there lacks
a comprehensive study about their performance on remote
sensing imagery. Therefore, with the hope to build a reference
for the remote sensing community, we provide in this section
a preliminary benchmark of recent contrastive self-supervised
methods on several popular remote sensing datasets. Codes are
available at https://github.com/zhu-xlab/SSL4EO-Review.
A. Methods, Datasets and Implementation Details
1) Methods and Datasets: We consider four representative
contrastive self-supervised methods to provide the bench-
mark: MoCo-v2 [78], SwA V [81], SimSiam [84] and Barlow
Twins [87], each representing one sub-category of modern
contrastive self-supervised learning: negative sampling, clus-
tering, knowledge distillation and redundancy reduction. We
use three popular remote sensing datasets for pre-training and
evaluation: BigEarthNet [13], SEN12MS [14] and So2Sat-
LCZ42 [15]. BigEarthNet is a multi-label scene classiﬁcation
dataset, containing 590,326 non-overlapping Sentinel-2 image
patches of size 128*128 covering 10 European countries.
SEN12MS is a global dataset with 180,662 256*256 triplets of
Sentinel-1, Sentinel-2 and MODIS land cover maps. So2Sat-
LCZ42 is a dataset built for local climate zone classiﬁcation,
containing 400,673 32*32 Sentinel-1/2 pairs covering 42 cities
in the world. They are all large-scale datasets with different
geographical coverage and built for different tasks, which we
believe provide solid diversity for evaluation of the gener-
alizability of self-supervised methods. In addition, we use
EuroSAT [248] for transfer learning evaluation, which is a
small single-label land cover classiﬁcation dataset containing
27,000 64*64 Sentinel-2 patches.
2) Implementation Details: We pre-train ResNet-18 en-
coders for 100 epochs using each of the four methods on each
of the three pre-training datasets. Our experiments are based
on Sentinel-2 only. In terms of pre-training, we use 311,667
patches for pre-training on BigEarthNet; for SEN12MS, all
images are cropped to 128*128 to avoid the 50% overlap be-tween neighbouring patches of the original dataset; for So2Sat-
LCZ42 (culture-10 version), we pre-train on the 352,366
training split. In terms of downstream evaluation, we do linear
probing or ﬁne-tuning on the training split and report testing
split accuracy.
We mainly follow the default implementation in the ofﬁcial
repositories of the four self-supervised methods. Importantly,
the queue size is 65536 and the feature dimension is 128
for MoCo-v2; the number of prototypes is 60 for SwA V;
the feature dimension is 2048 for the encoder and 512 for
the projector in SimSiam; three projectors with dimension
2048 are used for Barlow Twins. The data augmentations
include cropping, grayscaling, Gaussian blurring, horizontal
ﬂipping and channel dropping. For simplicity, we do not
include color jitterring for the main benchmark (except for
SimSiam due to collapse which will be discussed later) as it
is designed for natural RGB images. 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs
are used for the experiments, on which the batch size is in
total 256. Links to the four methods’ ofﬁcial sites and details
of all the hyperparameters we use can be found in our code
repository. In downstream tasks, we transfer 100-epoch pre-
trained encoders for MoCo, SwA V and Barlow Twins, and 10-
epoch pre-trained encoders for SimSiam (the model collpases
afterwards). In addition, we report the performance of fully
supervised learning and training with randomly initialized
encoders for more thorough comparison.
B. Benchmark Results
1) General Comparsion of SSL Methods: The general
benchmark results with linear probing evaluation are shown
in Fig. 24 (a). A ﬁrst conclusion is that with pure simple
transfer from natural images to satellite images, all the self-
supervised methods provide meaningful representations for
all datasets (compared to random initialization). With frozen
features that come from label-independent pre-training, we can
train much fewer parameters (e.g. a full ResNet-18 has 10M
parameters while the last linear layer contains only 500K) with
comparable performance towards fully supervised training.
The second observation is that MoCo-v2 [78], which repre-
sents contrastive negative sampling, generally outperforms the

==== Page 20 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 20
45505560657075808590
baseline no_crop crop_only (0.2) crop_only (0.5) crop_only (0.8)
MoCo-v2 SwAV SimSiam BarlowTwins
Fig. 25. A study of data augmentation on BigEarthNet. The baseline includes
all augmentations, ”no crop” means all augmentations except cropping, and
”crop only” means only using cropping as the augmentation with minimum
cropping size 0:2,0:5and0:8of the original size, respectively.
other methods across datasets. This proves the robustness and
transferability of using negative samples for self-supervised
learning in remote sensing, which is also consistent with the
fact that most of the recent self-supervised works in the remote
sensing community prefer MoCo [75] and MoCo-v2 [78] as
a baseline structure.
A third observation is that compared to the other methods,
the training of SimSiam [84] is very unstable. As can be
seen from the training curves in Fig. 24 (b), the training
loss of SimSiam drops very quickly and signiﬁcantly in the
beginning epochs, and starts vibrating in the following epochs.
This can be attributed to SimSiam’s simpliﬁed design (as has
been described in section II-C), which makes the similarity
matching task easy to solve for the models. When utilizing
checkpoints of the later epochs to serve as pre-trained weights,
the model fails to beat even random initialization. That is to
say, SimSiam gets collapsed after 10 epochs. Thus in real
applications, it is better to add a momentum encoder or other
tricks for better performance and more stable training.
2) Data Augmentation: In this subsection, we provide an
extended study on the impact of data augmentations which
have been proved very important for natural images [76].
Focusing on BigEarthNet, we do self-supervised pre-training
considering a rich set of augmentations: ”RandomResized-
Crop”, ”RandomColorJitter” (a simpliﬁed version which only
changes contrast and brightness), ”RandomGrayscale”, ”Ran-
domGaussianBlur”, ”RandomHorizontalFlip” and ”Random-
ChannelDrop” (replacing one or several channels by zero).
As can be seen in Fig. 25, the results show both common and
different trends compared to the computer vision community.
When dropping only the ”RandomResizedCrop” transform,
SwA V and Barlow Twins collapse immediately and MoCo-v2
and SimSiam see a signiﬁcant performance drop. All methods
conﬁrm the importance of cropping which is in line with natu-
ral images. Surprisingly, almost no visible performance drop is
observed when using only cropping as the data augmentation
for all four methods. This is a signiﬁcant difference compared
to natural images, where other augmentations (especially color
distortion) bear big importance as well. Therefore, apart from
cropping which is a key augmentation, further study is re-
Fig. 26. BigEarthNet linear classiﬁcation and ﬁne-tuning results using differ-
ent amounts of labels pre-trained with MoCo-v2. Self-supervision outperforms
supervision when reducing the number of labels.
Fig. 27. EuroSAT linear classiﬁcation and ﬁne-tuning results pre-trained
with MoCo-v2 on BigEarthNet. Self-supervision with 50% labels outperforms
supervised learning with full labels.
quired on the design of other augmentations to work well on
remote sensing multispectral images. In addition, to further
analyze the impact of cropping, we explore different settings
for the minimum cropping size. The results show that, the
bigger the minimum size (less aggressive cropping), the worse
the performance is. This is inline with the computer vision
literature which emphasizes the importance of having stronger
augmentations to make the training task hard enough for the
network.
3) Regime of Limited Labels: Though Fig. 24 proves the
capability of self-supervised pre-trained models, the linear
probing results are still below the upper bound of fully su-
pervised learning with full labels. Thus, we wonder how these
pre-trained models behave when reducing the number of labels
and turning on ﬁne-tuning. We pre-train ResNet18 with MoCo-
v2 for 100 epochs and evaluate on BigEarthNet. Fig. 26 shows
the linear classiﬁcation and ﬁne tuning performance when
reducing the amount of labeled samples to 50%, 10%, 1%
and 0.1%. The general trend of the ﬁgure proves the potential
of self-supervised pre-training when we do not have enough
labels: linear classiﬁcation with self-supervision outperforms
vanilla supervised learning when reducing the amount of
available labels to 1%. The advantage is more signiﬁcant

==== Page 21 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 21
for ﬁne-tuning, which outperforms supervised learning on all
scenarios and provide huge improvements on tiny amount of
labels. In general, the fewer labels we use, the bigger the
advantage of self-supervised pre-training is.
4) Transfer Learning: In addition, we report transfer learn-
ing performance by linear classiﬁcation and ﬁne-tuning on
EuroSat with a ResNet18 pre-trained on BigEarthNet. As
is shown in Fig. 27, the performance plots are similar to
Fig. 26, proving the pre-trained models transfer well the data
representations across datasets. Promisingly, ﬁne tuning on
50% of labels outperforms supervised learning with full labels.
In fact, ﬁne tuning on 10% of labels gives already very close
performance compared to full-label supervised learning.
V. C HALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Self-supervised learning has been achieving great success
in various vision tasks, yet it is still a relatively new branch
of technologies in both computer vision and remote sensing
communities. In this section, we summarize the challenges of
self-supervised learning in remote sensing and discuss possible
future directions.
Model collapse. Model collapse is one of the main chal-
lenges along with the development of self-supervised learning,
especially for modern contrastive learning. Though it has
been shown that contrastive self-supervised learning achieved
great success in the ﬁeld, the fundamental theory behind
those contrastive methods (especially those using no negative
samples) is still not well understood. There are already some
works like SimSiam [84] and [249] that try to investigate the
underline theory, yet they are not enough. In fact, as has been
mentioned in section IV, SimSiam easily gets collapsed in
Earth observation data. Future works need to go deeper into
self-supervised representation learning and explore the theo-
retical foundations behind model collapse in remote sensing
data.
Pretext tasks and data augmentations. Pretext tasks and
data augmentations play a similar and very important role in
self-supervised learning, as they correspond directly to what
invariance the networks need to learn and what information
is important for image understanding. There have been some
early studies on the evaluation of different pretext tasks and
data augmentations and possible improvements [250, 251], yet
they mainly focus on natural images and evaluate on image-
level classiﬁcation tasks. As has been proved in section IV,
the ﬁndings from common computer vision benchmarks may
not completely hold for multispectral imagery, not to mention
other modalities. In section III, we discussed the characteristics
of different remote sensing data, yet still experiments are
needed. Therefore, in general more studies on pretext tasks and
data augmentations are required to better understand which
ones are useful for different types of remote sensing data.
Pre-training datasets. Most of existing remote sensing
datasets are intended for supervised learning. Though they
can also be used for self-supervised pre-training by discarding
the labels, the amount of data is limited and the data is
usually biased towards the tasks of the datasets. Therefore,
it needs to be studied the necessity of self-supervised pre-
training on large-scale uncurated datasets. There have beensome early contributions following this thread: Leenstra et
al.[186] proposed a Sentinel-2 multitemporal cities pairs
dataset for change detection; Manas et al. [201] proposed
a large-scale self-supervised Sentinel-2 dataset; Heidler et
al.[202] proposed an audio-visual dataset for multi-modal
self-supervised learning. However, there is still much space
to explore and contribute (e.g., dataset size, image sampling
strategies, and the availability of more modalities).
Multi-modal/temporal self-supervised learning. As one
of the most important characteristics of remote sensing data,
multi-modality is a signiﬁcant aspect to be explored in self-
supervised representation learning [214, 220, 151]. On the
other hand, multi-temporal image analysis is raising more
interest because of the increasing frequency of data acquisition
and transferring. Without the need for any human annotation,
self-supervised representation learning has a big advantage to
performing big data analysis which is usually a challenge for
multi-modal and multi-temporal data. However, adding modal-
ities and time stamps will also bring complexity to the model
to be trained. Thus how to balance different modalities or time
stamps such that the model can learn good representations
from both modalities is a challenging task to be explored.
Computing efﬁcient self-supervised learning. Self-
supervised pre-training usually requires a large amount of
computing resources because of big pre-training data, various
data augmentations, the requirement of large batch sizes and
more training epochs than supervised learning, etc. Few efforts
have been made towards reducing computational cost, which
is however an important factor for practical usage. Therefore,
efﬁcient data compression [252], data loading, model design
[58] and hardware acceleration are necessary to be explored.
Network backbones. Most of existing self-supervised
methods utilize ResNet [17] as their model backbones, while
there has been a hot trend towards vision transformers
(ViT) [18]. Since ViT has shown promising results in self-
supervised learning [77, 52, 85], and recent advances are
exploring the link between large-scale pretraining for both
language and vision [58, 86], it deserves more exploration
in remote sensing images as well. In addition, the speciﬁc
encoder architecture itself is also important to study, as most
existing methods tend to keep it unchanged with a focus on
the conceptual design of self-supervision.
Task-oriented weakly-supervised learning. Last but not
least, in parallel to the progress of task-agnostic self-
supervised learning, there’s also the need to integrate ”few
labels” or ”weak labels” for better task-dependant weakly-
supervised learning in practice. In other words, not only
can self-supervised learning provide a pre-trained model for
downstream tasks, but there’s also the possibility of bringing
representation learning online. For example, both data rep-
resentations and the supervised task can be learned together,
where the self-supervised branch helps the model capture more
useful information. This scenario is especially important when
moving to extreme applications that do not have a common
large dataset for pre-training. In addition, this can also be
a way to mitigate the generally high computational cost of
training SSL algorihtms.

==== Page 22 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 22
VI. C ONCLUSION
This article provides a systematic introduction and literature
review of self-supervised learning for the remote sensing
community. We summarize three main categories of self-
supervised methods, introduce representative works and link
them from natural images to remote sensing data. Moreover,
we provide a preliminary benchmark and extened analysis of
four modern contrastive self-supervised learning on three pop-
ular remote sensing datasets. Finally, fundamental problems
and future directions are listed and discussed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was jointly supported by the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 re-
search and innovation programme (grant agreement No. [ERC-
2016-StG-714087], Acronym: So2Sat and grant agreement No.
[957407], Acronym: DAPHNE ), by the Helmholtz Association
through the Framework of Helmholtz AI (grant number: ZT-I-
PF-5-01) - Local Unit “Munich Unit @Aeronautics, Space and
Transport (MASTr)”, the Helmholtz Klimainitiative (HICAM)
and Helmholtz Excellent Professorship “Data Science in Earth
Observation - Big Data Fusion for Urban Research” (grant
number: W2-W3-100)) and by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research (BMBF) in the framework of the
international future AI lab “AI4EO – Artiﬁcial Intelligence for
Earth Observation: Reasoning, Uncertainties, Ethics and Be-
yond” (grant number: 01DD20001). The computing resources
were supported by the Helmholtz Association’s Initiative and
Networking Fund on the HAICORE@FZJ partition.
REFERENCES
[1] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton.
“Deep learning”. In: nature 521.7553 (2015), pp. 436–
444 (cit. on p. 1).
[2] Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchi-
cal image database”. In: 2009 IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition . Ieee. 2009,
pp. 248–255 (cit. on pp. 1, 14, 15).
[3] Happiness Ugochi Dike et al. “Unsupervised learning
based on artiﬁcial neural network: A review”. In: 2018
IEEE International Conference on Cyborg and Bionic
Systems (CBS) . IEEE. 2018, pp. 322–327 (cit. on p. 1).
[4] Jesper E Van Engelen and Holger H Hoos. “A survey
on semi-supervised learning”. In: Machine Learning
109.2 (2020), pp. 373–440 (cit. on pp. 1, 2).
[5] Zhi-Hua Zhou. “A brief introduction to weakly super-
vised learning”. In: National science review 5.1 (2018),
pp. 44–53 (cit. on p. 1).
[6] Joaquin Vanschoren. “Meta-learning”. In: Automated
Machine Learning . Springer, Cham, 2019, pp. 35–61
(cit. on p. 1).
[7] Priya Goyal et al. “Self-supervised pretraining of
visual features in the wild”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.01988 (2021) (cit. on pp. 1, 12).
[8] Xiao Xiang Zhu et al. “Deep learning in remote sens-
ing: A comprehensive review and list of resources”.
In:IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine
5.4 (2017), pp. 8–36 (cit. on pp. 1, 15, 18).[9] Longlong Jing and Yingli Tian. “Self-supervised visual
feature learning with deep neural networks: A survey”.
In:IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence (2020) (cit. on p. 1).
[10] Ashish Jaiswal et al. “A survey on contrastive self-
supervised learning”. In: Technologies 9.1 (2021), p. 2
(cit. on pp. 1, 3).
[11] Xiao Liu et al. “Self-supervised learning: Generative
or contrastive”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering (2021) (cit. on pp. 1, 3).
[12] Kriti Ohri and Mukesh Kumar. “Review on self-
supervised image recognition using deep neural net-
works”. In: Knowledge-Based Systems 224 (2021),
p. 107090 (cit. on p. 1).
[13] Gencer Sumbul et al. “Bigearthnet: A large-scale
benchmark archive for remote sensing image under-
standing”. In: IGARSS 2019-2019 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium . IEEE.
2019, pp. 5901–5904 (cit. on pp. 1, 19).
[14] Michael Schmitt et al. “SEN12MS–A Curated Dataset
of Georeferenced Multi-Spectral Sentinel-1/2 Imagery
for Deep Learning and Data Fusion”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.07789 (2019) (cit. on pp. 1, 19).
[15] Xiao Xiang Zhu et al. “So2Sat LCZ42: A benchmark
dataset for global local climate zones classiﬁcation”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.12171 (2019) (cit. on
pp. 1, 19).
[16] Fuzhen Zhuang et al. “A comprehensive survey on
transfer learning”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 109.1
(2020), pp. 43–76 (cit. on p. 2).
[17] Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image
recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition . 2016,
pp. 770–778 (cit. on pp. 2, 11, 14, 21).
[18] Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “An image is worth 16x16
words: Transformers for image recognition at scale”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020) (cit. on
pp. 2, 11, 14, 21).
[19] Inmaculada D ´opido et al. “Semisupervised self-
learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation”. In:
IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote sensing
51.7 (2013), pp. 4032–4044 (cit. on p. 2).
[20] Fr ´ed´eric Ratle, Gustavo Camps-Valls, and Jason We-
ston. “Semisupervised neural networks for efﬁcient
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 48.5 (2010),
pp. 2271–2282 (cit. on p. 2).
[21] Yuebin Wang et al. “Self-supervised low-rank rep-
resentation (SSLRR) for hyperspectral image classi-
ﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 56.10 (2018), pp. 5658–5672 (cit. on
p. 2).
[22] Danfeng Hong et al. “Wu-net: A weakly-supervised
unmixing network for remotely sensed hyperspectral
imagery”. In: IGARSS 2019-2019 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium . IEEE.
2019, pp. 373–376 (cit. on p. 2).

==== Page 23 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 23
[23] Danfeng Hong et al. “Learning to propagate labels on
graphs: An iterative multitask regression framework
for semi-supervised hyperspectral dimensionality re-
duction”. In: ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and
remote sensing 158 (2019), pp. 35–49 (cit. on p. 2).
[24] Danfeng Hong et al. “Joint and progressive subspace
analysis (JPSA) with spatial-spectral manifold align-
ment for semisupervised hyperspectral dimensional-
ity reduction”. In: IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics
(2020) (cit. on p. 2).
[25] Yun Cao et al. “SDFL-FC: Semisupervised Deep Fea-
ture Learning With Feature Consistency for Hyper-
spectral Image Classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing (2020) (cit. on
p. 2).
[26] Zeyu Cao et al. “3D convolutional siamese network
for few-shot hyperspectral classiﬁcation”. In: Journal
of Applied Remote Sensing 14.4 (2020), p. 048504 (cit.
on p. 2).
[27] Yu Li et al. “Deep Self-Supervised Learning for Few-
Shot Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁcation”. In: IGARSS
2020-2020 IEEE International Geoscience and Re-
mote Sensing Symposium . IEEE. 2020, pp. 501–504
(cit. on p. 2).
[28] Jun Yue et al. “Self-Supervised Learning With Adap-
tive Distillation for Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁca-
tion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Re-
mote Sensing (2021) (cit. on p. 2).
[29] Danfeng Hong et al. “CoSpace: Common subspace
learning from hyperspectral-multispectral correspon-
dences”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 57.7 (2019), pp. 4349–4359 (cit. on
p. 3).
[30] Danfeng Hong et al. “Learnable manifold alignment
(LeMA): A semi-supervised cross-modality learning
framework for land cover and land use classiﬁcation”.
In:ISPRS journal of photogrammetry and remote
sensing 147 (2019), pp. 193–205 (cit. on p. 3).
[31] Danfeng Hong et al. “X-ModalNet: A semi-supervised
deep cross-modal network for classiﬁcation of remote
sensing data”. In: ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry
and Remote Sensing 167 (2020), pp. 12–23 (cit. on
p. 3).
[32] Jingliang Hu, Lichao Mou, and Xiao Xiang Zhu.
“Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Using a Teacher-
Student Network for Cross-City Classiﬁcation of
SENTINEL-2 Images”. In: The International Archives
of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial In-
formation Sciences 43 (2020), pp. 1569–1574 (cit. on
p. 3).
[33] Yuansheng Hua et al. “Semantic segmentation of re-
mote sensing images with sparse annotations”. In:
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters (2021)
(cit. on p. 3).
[34] Yuansheng Hua et al. “Aerial scene understanding in
the wild: Multi-scene recognition via prototype-based
memory networks”. In: ISPRS Journal of Photogram-metry and Remote Sensing 177 (2021), pp. 89–102
(cit. on p. 3).
[35] Sudipan Saha et al. “Semisupervised change detec-
tion using graph convolutional network”. In: IEEE
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 18.4 (2020),
pp. 607–611 (cit. on p. 3).
[36] Jingliang Hu, Danfeng Hong, and Xiao Xiang Zhu.
“MIMA: MAPPER-induced manifold alignment for
semi-supervised fusion of optical image and polarimet-
ric SAR data”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing 57.11 (2019), pp. 9025–9040
(cit. on p. 3).
[37] Herv ´e Abdi and Lynne J Williams. “Principal com-
ponent analysis”. In: Wiley interdisciplinary reviews:
computational statistics 2.4 (2010), pp. 433–459 (cit.
on p. 3).
[38] Anil M Cheriyadat. “Unsupervised feature learning for
aerial scene classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 52.1 (2013), pp. 439–
451 (cit. on p. 3).
[39] Anil K Jain, M Narasimha Murty, and Patrick J Flynn.
“Data clustering: a review”. In: ACM computing sur-
veys (CSUR) 31.3 (1999), pp. 264–323 (cit. on p. 3).
[40] Yansheng Li et al. “Unsupervised multilayer feature
learning for satellite image scene classiﬁcation”. In:
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 13.2
(2016), pp. 157–161 (cit. on p. 3).
[41] Adriana Romero, Carlo Gatta, and Gustau Camps-
Valls. “Unsupervised deep feature extraction for re-
mote sensing image classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 54.3 (2015),
pp. 1349–1362 (cit. on p. 3).
[42] Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay, Ujjwal Maulik, and
Anirban Mukhopadhyay. “Multiobjective genetic clus-
tering for pixel classiﬁcation in remote sensing im-
agery”. In: IEEE transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 45.5 (2007), pp. 1506–1511 (cit. on
p. 3).
[43] Jianchao Fan, Min Han, and Jun Wang. “Single point
iterative weighted fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm
for remote sensing image segmentation”. In: Pattern
Recognition 42.11 (2009), pp. 2527–2540 (cit. on p. 3).
[44] Sudipan Saha et al. “Unsupervised deep joint segmen-
tation of multitemporal high-resolution images”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
58.12 (2020), pp. 8780–8792 (cit. on p. 3).
[45] Ashish Ghosh, Niladri Shekhar Mishra, and Susmita
Ghosh. “Fuzzy clustering algorithms for unsupervised
change detection in remote sensing images”. In: In-
formation Sciences 181.4 (2011), pp. 699–715 (cit. on
p. 3).
[46] Christopher Munyati. “Use of principal component
analysis (PCA) of remote sensing images in wetland
change detection on the Kafue Flats, Zambia”. In:
Geocarto International 19.3 (2004), pp. 11–22 (cit. on
p. 3).
[47] Jaime Zabalza et al. “Novel folded-PCA for improved
feature extraction and data reduction with hyperspec-

==== Page 24 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 24
tral imaging and SAR in remote sensing”. In: ISPRS
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 93
(2014), pp. 112–122 (cit. on p. 3).
[48] Wen Cao, Bicheng Li, and Yong Zhang. “A remote
sensing image fusion method based on PCA transform
and wavelet packet transform”. In: International Con-
ference on Neural Networks and Signal Processing,
2003. Proceedings of the 2003 . V ol. 2. IEEE. 2003,
pp. 976–981 (cit. on p. 3).
[49] Spyros Gidaris, Praveer Singh, and Nikos Komodakis.
“Unsupervised representation learning by predicting
image rotations”. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) . 2018 (cit. on pp. 3,
4, 6, 14).
[50] Mehdi Noroozi et al. “Boosting self-supervised learn-
ing via knowledge transfer”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 2018, pp. 9359–9367 (cit. on pp. 3, 6).
[51] Mathilde Caron et al. “Deep clustering for unsuper-
vised learning of visual features”. In: Proceedings of
the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) .
2018, pp. 132–149 (cit. on pp. 3, 4, 12, 14).
[52] Mathilde Caron et al. “Emerging properties in self-
supervised vision transformers”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.14294 (2021) (cit. on pp. 3, 4, 13, 14, 21).
[53] Alaaeldin El-Nouby et al. “XCiT: Cross-
Covariance Image Transformers”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.09681 (2021) (cit. on p. 3).
[54] Dana H Ballard. “Modular learning in neural net-
works.” In: AAAI . V ol. 647. 1987, pp. 279–284 (cit. on
p. 4).
[55] Andrew Ng et al. “Sparse autoencoder”. In: CS294A
Lecture notes 72.2011 (2011), pp. 1–19 (cit. on p. 4).
[56] Pascal Vincent et al. “Stacked denoising autoencoders:
Learning useful representations in a deep network with
a local denoising criterion.” In: Journal of machine
learning research 11.12 (2010) (cit. on p. 4).
[57] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-encoding
variational bayes”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114
(2013) (cit. on pp. 4, 5).
[58] Kaiming He et al. “Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable
Vision Learners”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06377
(2021) (cit. on pp. 4, 5, 14, 21).
[59] Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial nets”. In:
Advances in neural information processing systems 27
(2014) (cit. on pp. 4, 5).
[60] Alireza Makhzani et al. “Adversarial autoencoders”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05644 (2015) (cit. on
pp. 4, 5).
[61] Jeff Donahue, Philipp Kr ¨ahenb ¨uhl, and Trevor Dar-
rell. “Adversarial feature learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1605.09782 (2016) (cit. on pp. 4, 5).
[62] Carl Doersch, Abhinav Gupta, and Alexei A Efros.
“Unsupervised visual representation learning by con-
text prediction”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision . 2015, pp. 1422–
1430 (cit. on pp. 4, 6, 8, 14).[63] Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. “Unsupervised
learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
puzzles”. In: European conference on computer vision .
Springer. 2016, pp. 69–84 (cit. on pp. 4, 6, 14).
[64] Deepak Pathak et al. “Context encoders: Feature learn-
ing by inpainting”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition .
2016, pp. 2536–2544 (cit. on pp. 4, 6).
[65] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros.
“Colorful image colorization”. In: European confer-
ence on computer vision . Springer. 2016, pp. 649–666
(cit. on pp. 4, 6, 8, 14).
[66] Dahun Kim, Donghyeon Cho, and In So Kweon. “Self-
supervised video representation learning with space-
time cubic puzzles”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence . V ol. 33. 2019,
pp. 8545–8552 (cit. on pp. 4, 7).
[67] Mehdi Noroozi, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Paolo Favaro.
“Representation learning by learning to count”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision . 2017, pp. 5898–5906 (cit. on pp. 4,
8, 9).
[68] Simon Jenni and Paolo Favaro. “Self-supervised fea-
ture learning by learning to spot artifacts”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition . 2018, pp. 2733–2742 (cit. on
pp. 4, 8).
[69] Andrew Owens et al. “Ambient sound provides super-
vision for visual learning”. In: European conference on
computer vision . Springer. 2016, pp. 801–816 (cit. on
pp. 4, 8).
[70] Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, and Yann LeCun. “Learn-
ing a similarity metric discriminatively, with applica-
tion to face veriﬁcation”. In: 2005 IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR’05) . V ol. 1. IEEE. 2005, pp. 539–
546 (cit. on pp. 4, 9).
[71] Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals.
“Representation learning with contrastive predictive
coding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 (2018)
(cit. on pp. 4, 9–11, 14).
[72] R Devon Hjelm et al. “Learning deep representations
by mutual information estimation and maximization”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06670 (2018) (cit. on
pp. 4, 10).
[73] Zhirong Wu et al. “Unsupervised feature learning
via non-parametric instance discrimination”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition . 2018, pp. 3733–3742 (cit. on
pp. 4, 10, 14).
[74] Ishan Misra and Laurens van der Maaten. “Self-
supervised learning of pretext-invariant representa-
tions”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2020,
pp. 6707–6717 (cit. on pp. 4, 10, 14).
[75] Kaiming He et al. “Momentum contrast for unsuper-
vised visual representation learning”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and

==== Page 25 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 25
Pattern Recognition . 2020, pp. 9729–9738 (cit. on
pp. 4, 10–14, 17, 20).
[76] Ting Chen et al. “A simple framework for con-
trastive learning of visual representations”. In: Interna-
tional conference on machine learning . PMLR. 2020,
pp. 1597–1607 (cit. on pp. 4, 11, 12, 14, 20).
[77] Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. “An em-
pirical study of training self-supervised vision trans-
formers”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02057 (2021)
(cit. on pp. 4, 11, 14, 21).
[78] Xinlei Chen et al. “Improved baselines with mo-
mentum contrastive learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.04297 (2020) (cit. on pp. 4, 11, 12, 14,
19, 20).
[79] Chengxu Zhuang, Alex Lin Zhai, and Daniel Yamins.
“Local aggregation for unsupervised learning of vi-
sual embeddings”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision . 2019,
pp. 6002–6012 (cit. on pp. 4, 12, 14).
[80] Yuki Markus Asano, Christian Rupprecht, and An-
drea Vedaldi. “Self-labelling via simultaneous clus-
tering and representation learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1911.05371 (2019) (cit. on pp. 4, 12).
[81] Mathilde Caron et al. “Unsupervised learning of visual
features by contrasting cluster assignments”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.09882 (2020) (cit. on pp. 4, 12,
14, 19).
[82] Junnan Li et al. “Prototypical contrastive learning
of unsupervised representations”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.04966 (2020) (cit. on pp. 4, 12).
[83] Jean-Bastien Grill et al. “Bootstrap your own latent: A
new approach to self-supervised learning”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.07733 (2020) (cit. on pp. 4, 13,
14).
[84] Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. “Exploring simple
siamese representation learning”. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition . 2021, pp. 15750–15758 (cit. on
pp. 4, 13, 14, 19–21).
[85] Chunyuan Li et al. “Efﬁcient Self-supervised Vision
Transformers for Representation Learning”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.09785 (2021) (cit. on pp. 4, 13,
14, 21).
[86] Jinghao Zhou et al. iBOT: Image BERT Pre-Training
with Online Tokenizer . 2021. arXiv: 2111 . 07832
[cs.CV] (cit. on pp. 4, 13, 14, 21).
[87] Jure Zbontar et al. “Barlow twins: Self-supervised
learning via redundancy reduction”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.03230 (2021) (cit. on pp. 4, 13–15, 19).
[88] Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun.
“Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization
for self-supervised learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.04906 (2021) (cit. on pp. 4, 14, 15).
[89] Svante Wold, Kim Esbensen, and Paul Geladi. “Prin-
cipal component analysis”. In: Chemometrics and in-
telligent laboratory systems 2.1-3 (1987), pp. 37–52
(cit. on p. 4).[90] Elad Plaut. “From principal subspaces to princi-
pal components with linear autoencoders”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.10253 (2018) (cit. on p. 4).
[91] David M Blei, Alp Kucukelbir, and Jon D McAuliffe.
“Variational inference: A review for statisticians”.
In:Journal of the American statistical Association
112.518 (2017), pp. 859–877 (cit. on p. 4).
[92] Xiaoqiang Lu, Xiangtao Zheng, and Yuan Yuan. “Re-
mote sensing scene classiﬁcation by unsupervised rep-
resentation learning”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geo-
science and Remote Sensing 55.9 (2017), pp. 5148–
5157 (cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).
[93] Puzhao Zhang et al. “Change detection based on deep
feature representation and mapping transformation for
multi-spatial-resolution remote sensing images”. In:
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sens-
ing116 (2016), pp. 24–41 (cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).
[94] Ram C Sharma and Keitarou Hara. “Self-Supervised
Learning of Satellite-Derived Vegetation Indices for
Clustering and Visualization of Vegetation Types”. In:
Journal of Imaging 7.2 (2021), p. 30 (cit. on p. 5).
[95] Logambal Madhuanand, Francesco Nex, and Michael
Ying Yang. “Self-supervised monocular depth estima-
tion from oblique UA V videos”. In: ISPRS Journal
of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 176 (2021),
pp. 1–14 (cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).
[96] Bo Peng et al. “Urban Flood Mapping With Bitem-
poral Multispectral Imagery Via a Self-Supervised
Learning Framework”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote
Sensing 14 (2020), pp. 2001–2016 (cit. on p. 5).
[97] Ngoc Long Nguyen et al. “Self-Supervised Multi-
Image Super-Resolution for Push-Frame Satellite Im-
ages”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2021,
pp. 1121–1131 (cit. on p. 5).
[98] F Figari Tomenotti et al. “Heterogeneous change
detection with self-supervised deep canonically cor-
related autoencoders”. In: IGARSS 2020-2020 IEEE
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Sympo-
sium . IEEE. 2020, pp. 680–683 (cit. on pp. 5, 18).
[99] Burkni Palsson, Johannes R Sveinsson, and Magnus O
Ulfarsson. “Blind hyperspectral unmixing using au-
toencoders: A critical comparison”. In: IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and
Remote Sensing 15 (2022), pp. 1340–1372 (cit. on
pp. 5, 18).
[100] Ronald Kemker and Christopher Kanan. “Self-taught
feature learning for hyperspectral image classiﬁca-
tion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Re-
mote Sensing 55.5 (2017), pp. 2693–2705 (cit. on
pp. 5, 18).
[101] Lichao Mou, Pedram Ghamisi, and Xiao Xiang Zhu.
“Unsupervised spectral–spatial feature learning via
deep residual Conv–Deconv network for hyperspectral
image classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geo-
science and Remote Sensing 56.1 (2017), pp. 391–406
(cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).

==== Page 26 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 26
[102] Ryuji Imamura, Tatsuki Itasaka, and Masahiro Okuda.
“Self-supervised Hyperspectral Image Restoration us-
ing Separable Image Prior”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.00651 (2019) (cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).
[103] Danfeng Hong et al. “Endmember-Guided Unmix-
ing Network (EGU-Net): A General Deep Learning
Framework for Self-Supervised Hyperspectral Unmix-
ing”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
Learning Systems (2021) (cit. on pp. 5, 16).
[104] Jing Yao et al. “Cross-attention in coupled un-
mixing nets for unsupervised hyperspectral super-
resolution”. In: European Conference on Computer
Vision . Springer. 2020, pp. 208–224 (cit. on pp. 5, 16,
18).
[105] Wenjing Chen, Xiangtao Zheng, and Xiaoqiang
Lu. “Hyperspectral image super-resolution with self-
supervised spectral-spatial residual network”. In: Re-
mote Sensing 13.7 (2021), p. 1260 (cit. on pp. 5, 18).
[106] Kun Li et al. “Self-Supervised Deep Subspace Clus-
tering for Hyperspectral Images With Adaptive Self-
Expressive Coefﬁcient Matrix Initialization”. In: IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observa-
tions and Remote Sensing 14 (2021), pp. 3215–3227
(cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).
[107] Savas Ozkan, Berk Kaya, and Gozde Bozdagi Akar.
“Endnet: Sparse autoencoder network for endmem-
ber extraction and hyperspectral unmixing”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 57.1
(2018), pp. 482–496 (cit. on p. 5).
[108] Lloyd Haydn Hughes, Michael Schmitt, and Xiao Xi-
ang Zhu. “Mining hard negative samples for SAR-
optical image matching using generative adversarial
networks”. In: Remote Sensing 10.10 (2018), p. 1552
(cit. on pp. 5, 16).
[109] Andrea Bordone Molini et al. “Speckle2V oid: Deep
self-supervised SAR despeckling with blind-spot con-
volutional neural networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing (2021) (cit. on pp. 5,
16, 18).
[110] Ye Yuan, Jian Guan, and Jianguo Sun. “Blind SAR
image despeckling using self-supervised dense di-
lated convolutional neural network”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.01608 (2019) (cit. on pp. 5, 16, 18).
[111] Wei Pu. “SAE-net: A deep neural network for SAR
autofocus”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 60 (2022), pp. 1–14 (cit. on p. 5).
[112] Xinyu Wang et al. “A Self-Supervised Denoising
Network for Satellite-Airborne-Ground Hyperspectral
Imagery”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 60 (2022), pp. 1–16. DOI: 10.1109/
TGRS.2021.3064429 (cit. on p. 5).
[113] Yuntao Qian et al. “Hyperspectral Image Restoration
With Self-Supervised Learning: A Two-Stage Training
Approach”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 60 (2021), pp. 1–17 (cit. on p. 5).
[114] Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala.
“Unsupervised representation learning with deep con-volutional generative adversarial networks”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1511.06434 (2015) (cit. on p. 5).
[115] Dimitris Bertsimas, Ebrahim Nasrabadi, and Sebastian
Stiller. “Robust and adaptive network ﬂows”. In: Op-
erations Research 61.5 (2013), pp. 1218–1242 (cit. on
p. 5).
[116] Jeff Donahue and Karen Simonyan. “Large scale ad-
versarial representation learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.02544 (2019) (cit. on pp. 5, 14).
[117] Vincent Dumoulin et al. “Adversarially learned in-
ference”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00704 (2016)
(cit. on p. 5).
[118] Lin Zhu et al. “Generative adversarial networks for
hyperspectral image classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 56.9 (2018),
pp. 5046–5063 (cit. on p. 5).
[119] Qiwen Jin et al. “Adversarial autoencoder network for
hyperspectral unmixing”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems (2021) (cit. on
p. 5).
[120] Jose Luis Holgado Alvarez, Mahdyar Ravanbakhsh,
and Beg ¨um Demir. “S2-cGAN: Self-supervised adver-
sarial representation learning for binary change detec-
tion in multispectral images”. In: IGARSS 2020-2020
IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium . IEEE. 2020, pp. 2515–2518 (cit. on pp. 5,
16, 18).
[121] Kane Walter, Matthew J Gibson, and Arcot Sowmya.
“Self-Supervised Remote Sensing Image Retrieval”.
In: IGARSS 2020-2020 IEEE International Geo-
science and Remote Sensing Symposium . IEEE. 2020,
pp. 1683–1686 (cit. on pp. 5, 12, 16, 18).
[122] Gong Cheng et al. “Perturbation-seeking generative
adversarial networks: A defense framework for remote
sensing image scene classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60 (2021),
pp. 1–11 (cit. on p. 6).
[123] Savas Ozkan and Gozde Bozdagi Akar. “Spectral un-
mixing with multinomial mixture Kernel and Wasser-
stein generative adversarial loss”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.06859 (2020) (cit. on p. 6).
[124] Chen Wei et al. “Iterative reorganization with weak
spatial constraints: Solving arbitrary jigsaw puzzles for
unsupervised representation learning”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition . 2019, pp. 1910–1919 (cit. on
p. 6).
[125] Rodrigo Santa Cruz et al. “Visual permutation learn-
ing”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence 41.12 (2018), pp. 3100–3114
(cit. on p. 6).
[126] Pengguang Chen, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. “Jigsaw Clus-
tering for Unsupervised Visual Representation Learn-
ing”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
2021, pp. 11526–11535 (cit. on pp. 6, 12).
[127] R. W. Hamming. “Error detecting and error correcting
codes”. In: The Bell System Technical Journal 29.2

==== Page 27 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 27
(1950), pp. 147–160. DOI: 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.
tb00463.x (cit. on pp. 6, 7).
[128] Zeyu Feng, Chang Xu, and Dacheng Tao. “Self-
supervised representation learning by rotation feature
decoupling”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
2019, pp. 10364–10374 (cit. on p. 6).
[129] Satoshi Iizuka, Edgar Simo-Serra, and Hiroshi
Ishikawa. “Globally and locally consistent image com-
pletion”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)
36.4 (2017), pp. 1–14 (cit. on p. 6).
[130] Zhicheng Zhao et al. “When self-supervised learning
meets scene classiﬁcation: Remote sensing scene clas-
siﬁcation based on a multitask learning framework”.
In:Remote Sensing 12.20 (2020), p. 3276 (cit. on pp. 6,
16, 18).
[131] Shuai Zhang et al. “Rotation Awareness Based Self-
Supervised Learning for SAR Target Recognition”.
In: IGARSS 2019-2019 IEEE International Geo-
science and Remote Sensing Symposium . IEEE. 2019,
pp. 1378–1381 (cit. on pp. 6, 16).
[132] Suriya Singh et al. “Self-Supervised Feature Learning
for Semantic Segmentation of Overhead Imagery”. In:
BMVC . V ol. 1. 2018, p. 4 (cit. on pp. 6, 16, 18).
[133] Chao Tao et al. “Remote sensing image scene clas-
siﬁcation with self-supervised paradigm under limited
labeled samples”. In: IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters (2020) (cit. on pp. 6, 16, 18).
[134] Hong Ji et al. “Few-shot Scene Classiﬁcation of Op-
tical Remote Sensing Images Leveraging Calibrated
Pretext Tasks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing (2022) (cit. on p. 6).
[135] Stefano Vincenzi et al. “The color out of space:
learning self-supervised representations for Earth Ob-
servation imagery”. In: 2020 25th International Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) . IEEE. 2021,
pp. 3034–3041 (cit. on pp. 7, 8, 16).
[136] Bernhard Hill, Th Roger, and Friedrich Wilhelm
V orhagen. “Comparative analysis of the quantization
of color spaces on the basis of the CIELAB color-
difference formula”. In: ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG) 16.2 (1997), pp. 109–154 (cit. on p. 6).
[137] Gustav Larsson, Michael Maire, and Gregory
Shakhnarovich. “Learning representations for
automatic colorization”. In: European conference
on computer vision . Springer. 2016, pp. 577–593
(cit. on p. 6).
[138] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros.
“Split-Brain Autoencoders: Unsupervised Learning by
Cross-Channel Prediction”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) . 2017 (cit. on p. 6).
[139] Gustav Larsson, Michael Maire, and Gregory
Shakhnarovich. “Colorization as a proxy task
for visual understanding”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 2017, pp. 6874–6883 (cit. on p. 7).[140] Xin Wu, Danfeng Hong, and Di Zhao. “Hyper-
Embedder: Learning a Deep Embedder for Self-
Supervised Hyperspectral Dimensionality Reduction”.
In:IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 19
(2021), pp. 1–5 (cit. on p. 7).
[141] Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan
Salakhudinov. “Unsupervised learning of video rep-
resentations using lstms”. In: International conference
on machine learning . PMLR. 2015, pp. 843–852 (cit.
on p. 7).
[142] Ruben Villegas et al. “Decomposing motion and con-
tent for natural video sequence prediction”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.08033 (2017) (cit. on p. 7).
[143] Chelsea Finn, Ian Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine.
“Unsupervised learning for physical interaction
through video prediction”. In: Advances in neural
information processing systems 29 (2016), pp. 64–72
(cit. on p. 7).
[144] Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Martial Hebert.
“Shufﬂe and learn: unsupervised learning using tem-
poral order veriﬁcation”. In: European Conference on
Computer Vision . Springer. 2016, pp. 527–544 (cit. on
p. 7).
[145] Donglai Wei et al. “Learning and using the arrow
of time”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2018,
pp. 8052–8060 (cit. on p. 7).
[146] Basura Fernando et al. “Self-supervised video rep-
resentation learning with odd-one-out networks”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition . 2017, pp. 3636–3645
(cit. on p. 7).
[147] Ishan Misra, C Lawrence Zitnick, and Martial
Hebert. “Unsupervised learning using sequential ver-
iﬁcation for action recognition”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1603.08561 2.7 (2016), p. 8 (cit. on p. 7).
[148] Hsin-Ying Lee et al. “Unsupervised representation
learning by sorting sequences”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision .
2017, pp. 667–676 (cit. on p. 7).
[149] Dejing Xu et al. “Self-supervised spatiotemporal learn-
ing via video clip order prediction”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition . 2019, pp. 10334–10343 (cit. on
p. 7).
[150] Denis Fortun, Patrick Bouthemy, and Charles
Kervrann. “Optical ﬂow modeling and computation:
A survey”. In: Computer Vision and Image
Understanding 134 (2015), pp. 1–21 (cit. on
p. 7).
[151] Huihui Dong et al. “Self-supervised representation
learning for remote sensing image change detection
based on temporal prediction”. In: Remote Sensing
12.11 (2020), p. 1868 (cit. on pp. 7, 16, 18, 21).
[152] Yuan Yuan and Lei Lin. “Self-Supervised Pretrain-
ing of Transformers for Satellite Image Time Series
Classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in

==== Page 28 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 28
Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 14
(2020), pp. 474–487 (cit. on pp. 8, 16, 18).
[153] Yuan Yuan et al. “SITS-Former: A pre-trained spatio-
spectral-temporal representation model for Sentinel-2
time series classiﬁcation”. In: International Journal of
Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation 106
(2022), p. 102651 (cit. on p. 8).
[154] Zhongzheng Ren and Yong Jae Lee. “Cross-domain
self-supervised multi-task feature learning using syn-
thetic imagery”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
2018, pp. 762–771 (cit. on p. 8).
[155] Carl Doersch and Andrew Zisserman. “Multi-task self-
supervised visual learning”. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision .
2017, pp. 2051–2060 (cit. on p. 8).
[156] Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “Discriminative unsuper-
vised feature learning with convolutional neural net-
works”. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems 27 (2014), pp. 766–774 (cit. on pp. 8, 10).
[157] Deepak Pathak et al. “Learning features by watching
objects move”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
2017, pp. 2701–2710 (cit. on p. 8).
[158] Max Hermann et al. “Self-Supervised Learning for
Monocular Depth Estimation from Aerial Imagery”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07246 (2020) (cit. on
pp. 8, 18).
[159] Zhaoqi Gao et al. “Self-Supervised Deep Learning
For Nonlinear Seismic Full Waveform Inversion”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
(2022) (cit. on p. 8).
[160] He Huang et al. “Self-Supervised Deep Learning to
Reconstruct Seismic Data With Consecutively Missing
Traces”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 60 (2022), pp. 1–14 (cit. on p. 8).
[161] Kumar Ayush et al. “Geography-aware self-supervised
learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09980 (2020)
(cit. on pp. 8, 12, 15, 16).
[162] Wenyuan Li et al. “Geographical Knowledge-driven
Representation Learning for Remote Sensing Images”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05276 (2021) (cit. on
pp. 8, 15, 16).
[163] Chen Jun, Yifang Ban, and Songnian Li. “Open access
to Earth land-cover map”. In: Nature 514.7523 (2014),
pp. 434–434 (cit. on p. 8).
[164] Kilian Q Weinberger and Lawrence K Saul. “Distance
metric learning for large margin nearest neighbor clas-
siﬁcation.” In: Journal of machine learning research
10.2 (2009) (cit. on p. 9).
[165] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James
Philbin. “Facenet: A uniﬁed embedding for face recog-
nition and clustering”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion. 2015, pp. 815–823 (cit. on p. 9).
[166] Michael Gutmann and Aapo Hyv ¨arinen. “Noise-
contrastive estimation: A new estimation principle for
unnormalized statistical models”. In: Proceedings ofthe thirteenth international conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence and statistics . JMLR Workshop and Con-
ference Proceedings. 2010, pp. 297–304 (cit. on p. 9).
[167] Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efﬁcient estimation of word
representations in vector space”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.3781 (2013) (cit. on pp. 9, 11).
[168] Tomas Mikolov et al. “Distributed representations of
words and phrases and their compositionality”. In:
Advances in neural information processing systems .
2013, pp. 3111–3119 (cit. on pp. 9, 11).
[169] Olivier Henaff. “Data-efﬁcient image recognition with
contrastive predictive coding”. In: International Con-
ference on Machine Learning . PMLR. 2020, pp. 4182–
4192 (cit. on pp. 9, 14).
[170] Ben Poole et al. “On variational bounds of mutual
information”. In: International Conference on Machine
Learning . PMLR. 2019, pp. 5171–5180 (cit. on p. 10).
[171] Philip Bachman, R Devon Hjelm, and William Buch-
walter. “Learning representations by maximizing mu-
tual information across views”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.00910 (2019) (cit. on pp. 10, 14).
[172] Michael Tschannen et al. “On mutual information
maximization for representation learning”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.13625 (2019) (cit. on p. 10).
[173] Brian Kulis et al. “Metric learning: A survey”. In:
Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning 5.4
(2013), pp. 287–364 (cit. on p. 10).
[174] Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola.
“Contrastive multiview coding”. In: Computer Vision–
ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow,
UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XI 16 .
Springer. 2020, pp. 776–794 (cit. on pp. 10, 14).
[175] Yonglong Tian et al. “What makes for good
views for contrastive learning?” In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.10243 (2020) (cit. on p. 10).
[176] Ting Chen et al. “Big self-supervised models are
strong semi-supervised learners”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.10029 (2020) (cit. on pp. 11, 14).
[177] Neal Jean et al. “Tile2vec: Unsupervised representa-
tion learning for spatially distributed data”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence . 2019, pp. 3967–3974 (cit. on pp. 11, 16, 17).
[178] Lili Zhang et al. “A Semisupervised Convolution Neu-
ral Network for Partial Unlabeled Remote-Sensing Im-
age Segmentation”. In: IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Letters 19 (2022), pp. 1–5 (cit. on p. 11).
[179] Juntao Yang et al. “A laboratory open-set Martian rock
classiﬁcation method based on spectral signatures”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
(2022) (cit. on p. 11).
[180] Weiqiang Rao et al. “Transferable network with
Siamese architecture for anomaly detection in hyper-
spectral images”. In: International Journal of Applied
Earth Observation and Geoinformation 106 (2022),
p. 102669 (cit. on p. 11).
[181] He Jing et al. “Radar Target Detection With Multi-Task
Learning in Heterogeneous Environment”. In: IEEE

==== Page 29 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 29
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 19 (2022),
pp. 1–5 (cit. on p. 11).
[182] Lamei Zhang et al. “Unsupervised deep representa-
tion learning and few-shot classiﬁcation of PolSAR
images”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing 60 (2020), pp. 1–16 (cit. on p. 11).
[183] Wanxuan Geng, Weixun Zhou, and Shuanggen
Jin. “Multi-View Urban Scene Classiﬁcation with
a Complementary-Information Learning Model”. In:
Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 88.1
(2022), pp. 65–72 (cit. on p. 11).
[184] Gong Cheng et al. “When deep learning meets metric
learning: Remote sensing image scene classiﬁcation
via learning discriminative CNNs”. In: IEEE transac-
tions on geoscience and remote sensing 56.5 (2018),
pp. 2811–2821 (cit. on p. 11).
[185] Heechul Jung and Taegyun Jeon. “Self-supervised
learning with randomised layers for remote sensing”.
In:Electronics Letters 57.6 (2021), pp. 249–251 (cit.
on pp. 11, 16).
[186] Marrit Leenstra et al. “Self-supervised pre-training
enhances change detection in Sentinel-2 imagery”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08122 (2021) (cit. on
pp. 11, 16, 18, 21).
[187] Tiancong Li et al. “Deep Mutual Information Subspace
Clustering Network for Hyperspectral Images”. In:
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters (2022)
(cit. on p. 11).
[188] Sikang Hou et al. “Hyperspectral Imagery Classi-
ﬁcation Based on Contrastive Learning”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60
(2021), pp. 1–13 (cit. on p. 11).
[189] Lin Zhao et al. “Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁca-
tion With Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning Under
Limited Labeled Samples”. In: IEEE Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Letters 19 (2022), pp. 1–5 (cit. on
p. 11).
[190] Mingzhen Zhu et al. “SC-EADNet: A Self-Supervised
Contrastive Efﬁcient Asymmetric Dilated Network for
Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 60 (2021),
pp. 1–17 (cit. on p. 11).
[191] PuHong Duan et al. “Self-supervised learning-based
oil spill detection of hyperspectral images”. In: Science
China Technological Sciences 65.4 (2022), pp. 793–
801 (cit. on p. 11).
[192] Heechul Jung et al. “Contrastive Self-Supervised
Learning With Smoothed Representation for Remote
Sensing”. In: IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Letters (2021) (cit. on pp. 12, 16).
[193] Antonio Montanaro et al. “Self-supervised learning for
joint SAR and multispectral land cover classiﬁcation”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.09075 (2021) (cit. on
pp. 12, 16).
[194] Linus Scheibenreif et al. “Self-Supervised Vision
Transformers for Land-Cover Segmentation and Clas-
siﬁcation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
2022, pp. 1422–1431 (cit. on p. 12).
[195] Matthew Stevenson, Christophe Mues, and Cristi ´an
Bravo. “Deep residential representations: Using un-
supervised learning to unlock elevation data for geo-
demographic prediction”. In: ISPRS Journal of Pho-
togrammetry and Remote Sensing 187 (2022), pp. 378–
392 (cit. on p. 12).
[196] Jian Kang et al. “Deep unsupervised embedding for
remotely sensed images based on spatially augmented
momentum contrast”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geo-
science and Remote Sensing 59.3 (2020), pp. 2598–
2610 (cit. on pp. 12, 16, 17).
[197] Haifeng Li et al. “Remote Sensing Images Semantic
Segmentation with General Remote Sensing Vision
Model via a Self-Supervised Contrastive Learning
Method”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10605 (2021)
(cit. on pp. 12, 16, 18).
[198] Vladan Stojnic and Vladimir Risojevic. “Self-
Supervised Learning of Remote Sensing Scene Repre-
sentations Using Contrastive Multiview Coding”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2021, pp. 1182–
1191 (cit. on pp. 12, 16).
[199] Yuxing Chen and Lorenzo Bruzzone. “Self-supervised
Change Detection in Multi-view Remote Sensing Im-
ages”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05969 (2021)
(cit. on pp. 12, 16, 18).
[200] Bing Liu et al. “Deep multiview learning for hyper-
spectral image classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing (2020) (cit. on
pp. 12, 16).
[201] Oscar Ma ˜nas et al. “Seasonal Contrast: Unsupervised
Pre-Training from Uncurated Remote Sensing Data”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16607 (2021) (cit. on
pp. 12, 16, 17, 21).
[202] Konrad Heidler et al. “Self-supervised Audiovisual
Representation Learning for Remote Sensing Data”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.00688 (2021) (cit. on
pp. 12, 16, 18, 21).
[203] Peiyan Guan and Edmund Y Lam. “Cross-domain
Contrastive Learning for Hyperspectral Image Clas-
siﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing (2022) (cit. on p. 12).
[204] Ilija Radosavovic et al. “Designing network design
spaces”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2020,
pp. 10428–10436 (cit. on p. 12).
[205] Yunfan Li et al. “Contrastive clustering”. In: 2021
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) .
2021 (cit. on p. 12).
[206] Sudipan Saha, Patrick Ebel, and Xiao Xiang Zhu.
“Self-supervised Multisensor Change Detection”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05102 (2021) (cit. on
pp. 12, 16).
[207] Sudipan Saha et al. “Unsupervised Single-Scene Se-
mantic Segmentation for Earth Observation”. In: IEEE

==== Page 30 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 30
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
(2022) (cit. on p. 12).
[208] Zeyu Cao et al. “ContrastNet: Unsupervised feature
learning by autoencoder and prototypical contrastive
learning for hyperspectral imagery classiﬁcation”. In:
Neurocomputing 460 (2021), pp. 71–83 (cit. on pp. 12,
16).
[209] Xiang Hu et al. “Deep Spatial-Spectral Subspace Clus-
tering for Hyperspectral Images Based on Contrastive
Learning”. In: Remote Sensing 13.21 (2021), p. 4418
(cit. on pp. 12, 16).
[210] Fang Liu et al. “Contrastive Learning-Based Dual Dy-
namic GCN for SAR Image Scene Classiﬁcation”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems (2022) (cit. on p. 12).
[211] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. “Dis-
tilling the knowledge in a neural network”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (2015) (cit. on p. 13).
[212] Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. “Mean teachers are
better role models: Weight-averaged consistency tar-
gets improve semi-supervised deep learning results”.
In:arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01780 (2017) (cit. on
p. 13).
[213] Dongen Guo, Ying Xia, and Xiaobo Luo. “Self-
Supervised GANs With Similarity Loss for Remote
Sensing Image Scene Classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and
Remote Sensing 14 (2021), pp. 2508–2521 (cit. on
pp. 13, 16, 18).
[214] Yuxing Chen and Lorenzo Bruzzone. “Self-supervised
SAR-optical Data Fusion of Sentinel-1/-2 Images”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
(2021) (cit. on pp. 13, 16, 18, 21).
[215] Yuxing Chen and Lorenzo Bruzzone. “Self-supervised
Remote Sensing Images Change Detection at Pixel-
level”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.08501 (2021)
(cit. on pp. 13, 16, 18).
[216] Xiang Hu et al. “Contrastive Learning Based on Trans-
former for Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁcation”. In:
Applied Sciences 11.18 (2021), p. 8670 (cit. on pp. 13,
16).
[217] Hongwei Dong, Lamei Zhang, and Bin Zou. “Explor-
ing vision transformers for polarimetric SAR image
classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing 60 (2021), pp. 1–15 (cit. on p. 13).
[218] Deyi Wang, Chengkun Zhang, and Min Han. “FIAD
net: a Fast SAR ship detection network based on
feature integration attention and self-supervised learn-
ing”. In: International Journal of Remote Sensing 43.4
(2022), pp. 1485–1513 (cit. on p. 13).
[219] Pallavi Jain, Bianca Schoen-Phelan, and Robert Ross.
“Self-Supervised Learning for Invariant Representa-
tions from Multi-Spectral and SAR Images”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.02049 (2022) (cit. on p. 13).
[220] Yi Wang, Conrad M Albrecht, and Xiao Xiang Zhu.
“Self-supervised Vision Transformers for Joint SAR-
optical Representation Learning”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05381 (2022) (cit. on pp. 13, 18, 21).[221] Xin Zhang et al. “The Self-Supervised Spectral–
Spatial Vision Transformer Network for Accurate Pre-
diction of Wheat Nitrogen Status from UA V Imagery”.
In:Remote Sensing 14.6 (2022), p. 1400 (cit. on p. 13).
[222] Linfeng Zhang et al. “Be your own teacher: Improve
the performance of convolutional neural networks via
self distillation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision . 2019,
pp. 3713–3722 (cit. on p. 13).
[223] Dilxat Muhtar, Xueliang Zhang, and Pengfeng Xiao.
“Index Your Position: A Novel Self-Supervised Learn-
ing Method for Remote Sensing Images Semantic
Segmentation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing (2022) (cit. on p. 13).
[224] Hao Chen et al. “Semantic-aware Dense Representa-
tion Learning for Remote Sensing Image Change De-
tection”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13769 (2022)
(cit. on p. 13).
[225] Horace B Barlow et al. “Possible principles underlying
the transformation of sensory messages”. In: Sensory
communication 1.01 (1961) (cit. on p. 14).
[226] Valerio Marsocci and Simone Scardapane. “Contin-
ual Barlow Twins: continual self-supervised learning
for remote sensing semantic segmentation”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.11319 (2022) (cit. on p. 15).
[227] Nassim Ait Ali Braham et al. “Self Supervised Learn-
ing For Few Shot Hyperspectral Image Classiﬁcation”.
In:International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Sym-
posium (IGARSS) 2022 . IEEE. 2022 (cit. on p. 15).
[228] Aidan M Swope, Xander H Rudelis, and Kyle T
Story. “Representation Learning for Remote Sensing:
An Unsupervised Sensor Fusion Approach”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.05094 (2021) (cit. on p. 16).
[229] Wenyuan Li, Hao Chen, and Zhenwei Shi. “Semantic
Segmentation of Remote Sensing Images With Self-
Supervised Multitask Representation Learning”. In:
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Ob-
servations and Remote Sensing 14 (2021), pp. 6438–
6450 (cit. on pp. 16, 18).
[230] Zhinan Cai, Zhiyu Jiang, and Yuan Yuan. “Task-
related self-supervised learning for remote sensing
image change detection”. In: ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE. 2021, pp. 1535–
1539 (cit. on pp. 16, 18).
[231] Jian Ding et al. “Unsupervised Pretraining for Ob-
ject Detection by Patch Reidentiﬁcation”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.04814 (2021) (cit. on pp. 16, 18).
[232] Can Yao, Yuan Yuan, and Zhiyu Jiang. “Self-
supervised spectral matching network for
hyperspectral target detection”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.04078 (2021) (cit. on pp. 16, 18).
[233] Xinyu Wang et al. “A Self-Supervised Denoising
Network for Satellite-Airborne-Ground Hyperspectral
Imagery”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing (2021) (cit. on pp. 16, 18).
[234] Chenchen Wang, Hong Gu, and Weimin Su. “SAR
Image Classiﬁcation Using Contrastive Learning and

==== Page 31 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 31
Pseudo-Labels With Limited Data”. In: IEEE Geo-
science and Remote Sensing Letters (2021) (cit. on
p. 16).
[235] Bo Ren et al. “A Mutual Information-Based Self-
Supervised Learning Model for PolSAR Land Cover
Classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing (2021) (cit. on pp. 16, 18).
[236] Seonho Park et al. “Homography augumented momen-
tum constrastive learning for SAR image retrieval”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10329 (2021) (cit. on p. 16).
[237] Yanjie Xu et al. “Adversarial Self-Supervised Learn-
ing for Robust SAR Target Recognition”. In: Remote
Sensing 13.20 (2021), p. 4158 (cit. on p. 16).
[238] Keumgang Cha, Junghoon Seo, and Yeji Choi. “Con-
trastive Multiview Coding With Electro-Optics for
SAR Semantic Segmentation”. In: IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Letters (2021) (cit. on p. 16).
[239] Lei Ma et al. “Deep learning in remote sensing ap-
plications: A meta-analysis and review”. In: ISPRS
journal of photogrammetry and remote sensing 152
(2019), pp. 166–177 (cit. on p. 18).
[240] Ying Li et al. “Deep learning for remote sensing image
classiﬁcation: A survey”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 8.6
(2018), e1264 (cit. on p. 18).
[241] Xiaohui Yuan, Jianfang Shi, and Lichuan Gu. “A
review of deep learning methods for semantic segmen-
tation of remote sensing imagery”. In: Expert Systems
with Applications 169 (2021), p. 114417 (cit. on p. 18).
[242] Lazhar Kheliﬁ and Max Mignotte. “Deep learning for
change detection in remote sensing images: Compre-
hensive review and meta-analysis”. In: IEEE Access 8
(2020), pp. 126385–126400 (cit. on p. 18).
[243] Alberto Signoroni et al. “Deep learning meets hyper-
spectral image analysis: A multidisciplinary review”.
In:Journal of Imaging 5.5 (2019), p. 52 (cit. on p. 18).
[244] Xiao Xiang Zhu et al. “Deep learning meets SAR:
Concepts, models, pitfalls, and perspectives”. In: IEEE
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 9.4 (2021),
pp. 143–172 (cit. on p. 18).
[245] Peri Akiva et al. “H2O-Net: Self-Supervised Flood
Segmentation via Adversarial Domain Adaptation and
Label Reﬁnement”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision
(WACV) . 2021, pp. 111–122 (cit. on p. 18).
[246] Sudipan Saha and Xiao Xiang Zhu. “Patch-level unsu-
pervised planetary change detection”. In: IEEE Geo-
science and Remote Sensing Letters 19 (2021), pp. 1–5
(cit. on p. 18).
[247] V ´ıt R˚uˇziˇcka et al. “Unsupervised Change Detection
of Extreme Events Using ML On-Board”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2111.02995 (2021) (cit. on p. 18).
[248] Patrick Helber et al. “Eurosat: A novel dataset and
deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover
classiﬁcation”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 12.7
(2019), pp. 2217–2226 (cit. on p. 19).[249] Yuandong Tian, Xinlei Chen, and Surya Ganguli. “Un-
derstanding self-supervised learning dynamics without
contrastive pairs”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06810
(2021) (cit. on p. 21).
[250] T Nathan Mundhenk, Daniel Ho, and Barry Y Chen.
“Improvements to context based self-supervised learn-
ing”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition . 2018, pp. 9339–
9348 (cit. on p. 21).
[251] Chaitanya K Ryali, David J Schwab, and Ari S Mor-
cos. “Leveraging background augmentations to en-
courage semantic focus in self-supervised contrastive
learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.12719 (2021)
(cit. on p. 21).
[252] Yun-Hao Cao and Jianxin Wu. “Rethinking self-
supervised learning: Small is beautiful”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.13559 (2021) (cit. on p. 21).
Yi Wang received his B.E. degree in remote sensing science and technology
from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2018 and his M.Sc. degree in
geomatics engineering from University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, in
2021. He is pursuing his Ph.D. degree at the German Aerospace Center,
Wessling, 82234, Germany, and at Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. In 2020, he spent three months at perception system group,
Sony Corporation, Stuttgart, Germany. His research interests include remote
sensing, deep learning, computer vision and self-supervised learning.
Conrad M Albrecht (M’17) received an undergraduate degree in physics
from Technical University Dresden, Germany, in 2007 and a Ph.D. degree
in physics with an extra certiﬁcation in computer science from Heidelberg
University, Germany, in 2014. Spanning the ﬁelds of physics, mathematics
and computer science, among others, he was a visiting scientist with CERN,
Switzerland, in 2010, and with the Dresden Max Planck Institute for the
Physics of Complex Systems, Germany, in 2007. In 2015 he became research
scientist with the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY ,
USA. Currently, since April 2021, he leads a HelmholtzAI-funded team for
”Large-Scale Data Mining in Earth Observation” at the German Aerospace
Center, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany. Conrad’s research agenda interconnect
physical models and numerical analysis, employing Big Data technologies
and machine learning. As part of the ”Data Intensive Physical Analytics”
team in IBM Research, he signiﬁcantly contributed to industry-level solutions
processing geospatial information with focus on machine-learning driven
remote sensing applications. He co-organized workshops at the IEEE BigData
conference and the AAAS annual meeting. Home to the US and the EU,
Conrad’s scientiﬁc agenda aims to strengthen transatlantic collaboration of
corporate research and academia.
Nassim Ait Ali Braham received his M.Sc. degree in computer science
from Ecole nationale Sup ´erieure d’Informatique (ESI), Algiers, Algeria, in
2019 and M.Sc. degree in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data Science from
Universit ´e Paris Dauphine-PSL, Paris, France, in 2020. He is pursuing his
Ph.D. degree at the German Aerospace Center, Wessling, Germany, and at
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. In 2019, he spent six
months at the LIRIS-CNRS laboratory, Lyon, France. In 2020, he spent six
months at the LAMSADE-CNRS laboratory, PSL Research University, Paris,
France. His research interests include deep learning, computer vision, self-
supervised learning and remote sensing.

==== Page 32 ====
ACCEPTED BY IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING MAGAZINE, 2022 32
Lichao Mou received the Bachelor’s degree in automation from the Xi’an
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an, China, in 2012, the
Master’s degree in signal and information processing from the University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), China, in 2015, and the Dr.-Ing.
degree from the Technical University of Munich (TUM), Munich, Germany,
in 2020. He is currently a Guest Professor at the Munich AI Future Lab
AI4EO, TUM and the Head of Visual Learning and Reasoning team at the
Department “EO Data Science”, Remote Sensing Technology Institute (IMF),
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany. Since 2019, he is
a Research Scientist at DLR-IMF and an AI Consultant for the Helmholtz
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Cooperation Unit (HAICU). In 2015 he spent six months
at the Computer Vision Group at the University of Freiburg in Germany. In
2019 he was a Visiting Researcher with the Cambridge Image Analysis Group
(CIA), University of Cambridge, UK. He was the recipient of the ﬁrst place in
the 2016 IEEE GRSS Data Fusion Contest and ﬁnalists for the Best Student
Paper Award at the 2017 Joint Urban Remote Sensing Event and 2019 Joint
Urban Remote Sensing Event.
Xiao Xiang Zhu (S’10–M’12–SM’14–F’21) received the Master (M.Sc.)
degree, her doctor of engineering (Dr.-Ing.) degree and her “Habilitation” in
the ﬁeld of signal processing from Technical University of Munich (TUM),
Munich, Germany, in 2008, 2011 and 2013, respectively.
She is the Chair Professor for Data Science in Earth Observation at
Technical University of Munich (TUM) and the Head of the Department
“EO Data Science” at the Remote Sensing Technology Institute, German
Aerospace Center (DLR). Since 2019, Zhu is a co-coordinator of the Munich
Data Science Research School (www.mu-ds.de). Since 2019 She also heads
the Helmholtz Artiﬁcial Intelligence – Research Field “Aeronautics, Space and
Transport”. Since May 2020, she is the PI and director of the international fu-
ture AI lab ”AI4EO – Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Earth Observation: Reasoning,
Uncertainties, Ethics and Beyond”, Munich, Germany. Since October 2020,
she also serves as a co-director of the Munich Data Science Institute (MDSI),
TUM. Prof. Zhu was a guest scientist or visiting professor at the Italian
National Research Council (CNR-IREA), Naples, Italy, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan and University
of California, Los Angeles, United States in 2009, 2014, 2015 and 2016,
respectively. She is currently a visiting AI professor at ESA’s Phi-lab. Her main
research interests are remote sensing and Earth observation, signal processing,
machine learning and data science, with their applications in tackling societal
grand challenges, e.g. Global Urbanization, UN’s SDGs and Climate Change.
Dr. Zhu is a member of young academy (Junge Akademie/Junges Kolleg) at
the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities and the German
National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina and the Bavarian Academy of
Sciences and Humanities. She serves in the scientiﬁc advisory board in
several research organizations, among others the German Research Center
for Geosciences (GFZ) and Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
(PIK). She is an associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing and serves as the area editor responsible for special issues
of IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. She is a Fellow of IEEE.

