==== Page 1 ====
electronics
Article
Sentiment Analysis Based on Deep Learning:
A Comparative Study
Nhan Cach Dang1
, Mar ía N. Moreno-Garc ía2
and Fernando De la Prieta3,*
1Department of Information Technology, HoChiMinh City University of Transport (UT-HCMC),
Ho Chi Minh 70000, Vietnam; tucach@hcmutrans.edu.vn
2Data Mining (MIDA) Research Group, University of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain;
mmg@usal.es
3Biotechnology, Intelligent Systems and Educational Technology (BISITE) Research Group,
University of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain
*Correspondence: fer@usal.es; Tel.: +34-677-522-678
Received: 31 January 2020; Accepted: 10 March 2020; Published: 14 March 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: The study of public opinion can provide us with valuable information. The analysis
of sentiment on social networks, such as Twitter or Facebook, has become a powerful means of
learning about the users’ opinions and has a wide range of applications. However, the e ciency
and accuracy of sentiment analysis is being hindered by the challenges encountered in natural
language processing (NLP). In recent years, it has been demonstrated that deep learning models are a
promising solution to the challenges of NLP . This paper reviews the latest studies that have employed
deep learning to solve sentiment analysis problems, such as sentiment polarity. Models using term
frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) and word embedding have been applied to a series
of datasets. Finally, a comparative study has been conducted on the experimental results obtained for
the di erent models and input features.
Keywords: sentiment analysis; deep learning; machine learning; neural network; natural
language processing
1. Introduction
Web 2.0 has led to the emergence of blogs, forums, and online social networks that enable users to
discuss any topic and share their opinions about it. They may, for example, complain about a product that
they have bought, debate current issues, or express their political views. Exploiting such information
about users is key to the operation of many applications (such as recommender systems), in the survey
analyses conducted by organizations, or in the planning of political campaigns. Moreover, analyzing
public opinions is also very important to governments because it explains human activity and behavior
and how they are inﬂuenced by the opinions of others. In the area of recommender systems and
personalization, the inference of user sentiment can be very useful to make up for the lack of explicit
user feedback on a provided service. In addition to machine learning, other methods, such as those
based on the similarity of results, can be used for this purpose [ 1]. The sources of data for sentiment
analysis (SA) are online social media, the users of which generate an ever-increasing amount of
information. Thus, these types of data sources must be considered under the big data approach,
given that additional issues must be dealt with to achieve e cient data storage, access, and processing,
and to ensure the reliability of the obtained results [2].
The problem of automatic sentiment analysis (SA) is a growing research topic. Although SA is an
important area and already has a wide range of applications, it clearly is not a straightforward task
and has many challenges related to natural language processing (NLP). Recent studies on sentiment
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483; doi:10.3390 /electronics9030483 www.mdpi.com /journal /electronics

==== Page 2 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 2 of 29
analysis continue to face theoretical and technical issues that hinder their overall accuracy in polarity
detection [ 3,4]. Hussein et al. [ 4] studied the relationship between those issues and the sentiment
structure, as well as their impact on the accuracy of the results. This work veriﬁes that accuracy is a
matter of high concern among the latest studies on sentiment analysis and proves that it is a ected by
some challenges, such as addressing negation or domain dependence.
Social media are important sources of data for SA. Social networks are continuously expanding,
generating much more complex and interrelated information.
In this context, Thai et al. suggested not to focus solely on the structure and correlations of data,
but on a lifelong learning approach to dealing with data presentation, analysis, inference, visualization,
search and navigation, and decision making in complex networks [2].
Several studies focus on building powerful models to solve the continuously increasing complexity
of big data, as well as to expand sentiment analysis to a wide range of applications, from ﬁnancial
forecasting [ 5,6] and marketing strategies [ 7] to medicine analysis [ 8,9] and other areas [ 10–18].
However, few of them pay attention to evaluating di erent deep learning techniques in order to
provide practical evidence of their performance [5,17,19,20].
When examining the performance of a single method on a single dataset in a particular domain,
the results show a relatively high overall accuracy [ 15,19,20] for Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). Hassan and Mahmood [ 15] proved that CNN and
RNN models can overcome shortcoming of short text in deep learning models. Qian et al. [ 10]
showed that Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) behaves e ciently when used on di erent text levels
of weather-and-mood tweets.
Li et al. [ 17] studied the impact of data quality on sentiment classiﬁcation performance.
They considered three criteria, namely informativeness, readability, and subjectivity, to assess the
quality of online product reviews. The study highlighted two factors that a ect the level of accuracy of
sentiment analysis—readability and length of the reviews. Higher readability and shorter text datasets
yielded higher quality of sentiment classiﬁcation. However, when the size or domain of the data varies,
the reliability of the proposed method is questionable
In comparison studies, most papers focus on reliability metrics, such as overall accuracy or F-score,
and leave out processing time. In addition, the evaluations of the models are conducted on a small
number of datasets. This research addresses that gap by means of a comprehensive comparison of
sentiment analysis methods in the literature, and an experimental study to evaluate the performance of
deep learning models and related techniques on datasets about di erent topics. Our research question
aims to determine whether it is possible to present outperforming methods for multiple types and sizes
of datasets. We build upon on previous studies of improvement of SA performance by evaluating the
results from the viewpoint of a combination of three criteria: overall accuracy, F-score, and processing
time. The purpose of this comparative study is to give an objective overview of di erent techniques
that can guide researchers towards the achievement of better results
In recent years, several studies have proposed deep-learning-based sentiment analyses, which have
diering features and performance. This work looks at the latest studies that have used deep learning
models, such as deep neural networks (DNN), recurrent neural networks (RNN), and convolutional
neural networks (CNN), to solve di erent problems related to sentiment analysis (e.g., sentiment
polarity and aspect-based sentiment). We applied deep learning models with TF-IDF and word
embedding to Twitter datasets and implemented the state-of-the-art of sentiment analysis approaches
based on deep learning.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background knowledge on this
research area. Section 3 discusses related work. Section 4 describes the comparative study. Section 5
outlines the experimental results, followed by the conclusions in Section 6.

==== Page 3 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 3 of 29
2. Background
2.1. Deep Learning
Deep learning adapts a multilayer approach to the hidden layers of the neural network.
In traditional machine learning approaches, features are deﬁned and extracted either manually
or by making use of feature selection methods. However, in deep learning models, features are
learned and extracted automatically, achieving better accuracy and performance. In general, the hyper
parameters of classiﬁer models are also measured automatically. Figure 1 shows the di erences in
sentiment polarity classiﬁcation between the two approaches: traditional machine learning (Support
Vector Machine (SVM), Bayesian networks, or decision trees) and deep learning. Artiﬁcial neural
networks and deep learning currently provide the best solutions to many problems in the ﬁelds of
image and speech recognition, as well as in natural language processing. Several types of deep learning
techniques are discussed in this section.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 29 
 making use of feature selection methods. However, in deep learning models, features are learned and 
extracted automatically, achieving better accuracy and performance. In general, the hyper parameters  
of classifier models are also measured automatically . Figure 1  shows the differences in sentiment 
polarity classification between the two approaches: traditional machine learning ( Support Vector 
Machine ( SVM), Bayesian network s, or decision tree s) and deep learning. Artificial neural networks 
and deep learning currently provide the best solutions to many problems in the fields of image and 
speech recognition , as well as in natural language processing. Several types of deep learning  
techniques  are discussed in this section.  
 
Figure 1.  Differences between two classification approaches of sentiment polarity, machine learning 
(top), and deep learning (bottom).  Part of Speech (POS); Named Entity Recognition (NER);  Term 
Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency  (TF-IDF). 
2.1.1. Deep Neural Networks (DNN)  
A deep neural network [21] is a neural network with more than two layers, some of which are  
hidden layers ( Figure 2). Deep neural networks use sophisticated mathematical modeling to process 
data in many different ways. A neural network is an adjustable model of outputs as functions of 
inputs, which consists of several layers: an input layer , including input data; hidden layers, including 
processing nodes called neurons; and an output layer , including one or several neurons, whose 
outputs are the network outputs.  
 
Figure 2.  Deep neural network (DNN). 
Figure 1. Dierences between two classiﬁcation approaches of sentiment polarity, machine
learning (top), and deep learning (bottom). Part of Speech (POS); Named Entity Recognition (NER);
Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF).
2.1.1. Deep Neural Networks (DNN)
A deep neural network [ 21] is a neural network with more than two layers, some of which
are hidden layers (Figure 2). Deep neural networks use sophisticated mathematical modeling to
process data in many di erent ways. A neural network is an adjustable model of outputs as functions
of inputs, which consists of several layers: an input layer, including input data; hidden layers,
including processing nodes called neurons; and an output layer, including one or several neurons,
whose outputs are the network outputs.
2.1.2. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
A convolutional neural network is a special type of feed-forward neural network originally
employed in areas such as computer vision, recommender systems, and natural language processing.
It is a deep neural network architecture [ 22], typically composed of convolutional and pooling or
subsampling layers to provide inputs to a fully-connected classiﬁcation layer. Convolution layers
ﬁlter their inputs to extract features; the outputs of multiple ﬁlters can be combined. Pooling or
subsampling layers reduce the resolution of features, which can increase the CNN’s robustness to
noise and distortion. Fully connected layers perform classiﬁcation tasks. An example of a CNN

==== Page 4 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 4 of 29
architecture can be seen in Figure 3. The input data was preprocessed to reshape it for the embedding
matrix. The ﬁgure shows an input embedding matrix processed by four convolution layers and two
max pooling layers. The ﬁrst two convolution layers have 64 and 32 ﬁlters, which are used to train
dierent features; these are followed by a max pooling layer, which is used to reduce the complexity of
the output and to prevent the overﬁtting of the data. The third and fourth convolution layers have
16 and 8 ﬁlters, respectively, which are also followed by a max pooling layer. The ﬁnal layer is a fully
connected layer that will reduce the vector of height 8 to an output vector of one, given that there are
two classes to be predicted (Positive, Negative).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 29 
 making use of feature selection methods. However, in deep learning models, features are learned and 
extracted automatically, achieving better accuracy and performance. In general, the hyper parameters  
of classifier models are also measured automatically . Figure 1  shows the differences in sentiment 
polarity classification between the two approaches: traditional machine learning ( Support Vector 
Machine ( SVM), Bayesian network s, or decision tree s) and deep learning. Artificial neural networks 
and deep learning currently provide the best solutions to many problems in the fields of image and 
speech recognition , as well as in natural language processing. Several types of deep learning  
techniques  are discussed in this section.  
 
Figure 1.  Differences between two classification approaches of sentiment polarity, machine learning 
(top), and deep learning (bottom).  Part of Speech (POS); Named Entity Recognition (NER);  Term 
Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency  (TF-IDF). 
2.1.1. Deep Neural Networks (DNN)  
A deep neural network [21] is a neural network with more than two layers, some of which are  
hidden layers ( Figure 2). Deep neural networks use sophisticated mathematical modeling to process 
data in many different ways. A neural network is an adjustable model of outputs as functions of 
inputs, which consists of several layers: an input layer , including input data; hidden layers, including 
processing nodes called neurons; and an output layer , including one or several neurons, whose 
outputs are the network outputs.  
 
Figure 2.  Deep neural network (DNN). 
Figure 2. Deep neural network (DNN).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 29 
 2.1.2. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)  
A convolutional neural network is a special type of feed -forward neural network originally 
employed in areas such as computer vision, recommender systems, and natural language processing. 
It is a deep neural network architecture [22], typically compos ed of convolutional and pool ing or 
subsampling layers to provide inputs to  a fully-connected classification layer. Convolution layers 
filter their inputs to extract features; the outputs of multiple filters can be combined. Pooling  or 
subsampling layers reduce the resolution of featu res, which can increase the CNN’s robustness to 
noise and distortion. Fully connected layers perform classification tasks. An example of a CNN 
architecture can be seen in Figure 3. The input data was preprocessed to reshape it for the embedding 
matrix. The  figure shows an input embedding matrix processed by four convolution layers and two 
max pooling layers. The first two convolution layers have 64 and 32 filters, which are used to train 
different features; these are followed by a max pooling layer, which i s used to reduce the complexity 
of the output and to prevent the overfitting of the data. The third and fourth convolution layers have 
16 and 8 filters , respectively, which are also followed by a max pooling layer. The final layer is a fully 
connected laye r that will reduce the vector of height 8 to an output vector of one , given that  there are 
two classes to be predicted (Positive, Negative).  
 
Figure 3.  A convolutional neural network . 
2.1.3. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)  
Recurrent neural networks [23] are a class of neural networks whose connections between 
neurons form a directed cycle, which creates feedback loops within the RNN. The main function of 
RNN is the processing of sequential information on the basis of  the internal memory captured by the 
directed cycles. Unlike traditional neural networks, RNN can remember the previous computation  
of information  and can reuse it  by applying it to the next element in the sequence of inputs. A special 
type of RNN is long short-term memory (LSTM), which is capable of using long memory as the input 
of activation functions in the hidden layer. This was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 
(1997) [24]. Figure 4 illustrates an example of the LSTM architecture. The input data is preprocessed 
to reshape data for the embedding matrix ( the process is similar to the one described for  the CNN). 
The next layer is the LSTM , which includes 200 cells. The final layer is a fully connected layer , which 
includes 128 cells for text classification. The last layer  uses the sigm oid activation function to reduce 
the vector of height 128 to an output vector of one , given that t here are two classes to be predicted 
(positive, negative).  
Figure 3. A convolutional neural network.
2.1.3. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
Recurrent neural networks [ 23] are a class of neural networks whose connections between neurons
form a directed cycle, which creates feedback loops within the RNN. The main function of RNN is the
processing of sequential information on the basis of the internal memory captured by the directed cycles.
Unlike traditional neural networks, RNN can remember the previous computation of information and
can reuse it by applying it to the next element in the sequence of inputs. A special type of RNN is
long short-term memory (LSTM), which is capable of using long memory as the input of activation
functions in the hidden layer. This was introduced by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) [ 24]. Figure 4
illustrates an example of the LSTM architecture. The input data is preprocessed to reshape data for
the embedding matrix (the process is similar to the one described for the CNN). The next layer is the
LSTM, which includes 200 cells. The ﬁnal layer is a fully connected layer, which includes 128 cells for
text classiﬁcation. The last layer uses the sigmoid activation function to reduce the vector of height 128
to an output vector of one, given that there are two classes to be predicted (positive, negative).

==== Page 5 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 5 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 29 
  
Figure 4.  A long short -term memory network . LSTM, long short -term memory.  
2.1.4. Other Neural Networks  
One type of deep neural network is called a deep belief network (DBN)  [25]. It comprises 
multiple layers of a graphical model , having both directed and undirected edges. Each network is 
composed of multiple layers of hidden units and each layer is  connected to the next one , but the units 
within a layer are not connected. A DBN is learned by using a greedy layer -wise learning algorithm.  
A recursive neural network (RecNN)  [26] is a type of neural network that can be viewed as a 
generalization of RNN.  Recursive neural networks are usually used to learn a directed acyclic graph 
structure from data. The hidden state vectors of the left and right child nodes in the graph can be 
used to compute for the hidden state vector of the current node.  
Another categ ory is hybrid deep learning  [27], which combines two or more deep learning 
techniques together, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN) and long short-term memory 
(LSTM) [28], or probabilistic neural networks (PNN) and a two -layered restricted Boltzmann machine 
(RBM) [29]. 
2.2. Sentiment Analysis  
Sentiment analysis is a process of extracting information about an entity and automatically 
identifying any of the subjectivities of that entity . The objective is to determine whether text gen erated 
by users conveys their positive, negative , or neutral opinions. Sentiment classification can be carried 
out on three levels of extraction: the aspect or feature level , the sentence level , and the document 
level. Currently, there are three approaches  to address the problem of sentiment analysis  [30]: (1) 
lexicon-based techniques , (2) machine -learning-based technique s, and (3) hybrid approaches.  
Lexicon-based techniques were the first to be used  for sentiment analysis. They are  divided into 
two approa ches: dictionary -based and corpus -based [31]. In the former type , sentiment classification 
is performed by using a dictionary of terms , such as those found in SentiWordNet and WordNet. 
Nevertheless, c orpus-based sentiment analysis does not rely on a predef ined dictionary but on 
statistical analysis of the contents of a collection of documents, using  techniques based on k -nearest 
neighbors (k -NN) [32], conditional random field (CRF) [33], and hidden Markov models (HMM) [34], 
among others . 
Machine -learning-based techniques [35] proposed for sentiment analysis problems can be 
divided into two groups: (1) traditional models and (2) deep learning models. Traditional models 
refer to classical machine learning techniques , such as the naïve Bayes classifie r [36], maximum 
entropy classifier [37,38], or support vector machines (SVM) [39]. The input to those algorithms 
includes lexical features, sentiment lexicon -based features, parts of speech , or adjectives and adverbs. 
The accuracy of these systems depends on which features are chosen. Deep learning models can 
provide better results than traditional models. Different kinds of deep learning models can be used 
for sentiment analysis, including CNN, DNN, and RNN. Such approaches address classification 
Figure 4. A long short-term memory network. LSTM, long short-term memory.
2.1.4. Other Neural Networks
One type of deep neural network is called a deep belief network (DBN) [ 25]. It comprises multiple
layers of a graphical model, having both directed and undirected edges. Each network is composed of
multiple layers of hidden units and each layer is connected to the next one, but the units within a layer
are not connected. A DBN is learned by using a greedy layer-wise learning algorithm.
A recursive neural network (RecNN) [ 26] is a type of neural network that can be viewed as a
generalization of RNN. Recursive neural networks are usually used to learn a directed acyclic graph
structure from data. The hidden state vectors of the left and right child nodes in the graph can be used
to compute for the hidden state vector of the current node.
Another category is hybrid deep learning [ 27], which combines two or more deep learning
techniques together, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN) and long short-term memory
(LSTM) [ 28], or probabilistic neural networks (PNN) and a two-layered restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM) [29].
2.2. Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis is a process of extracting information about an entity and automatically
identifying any of the subjectivities of that entity. The objective is to determine whether text generated
by users conveys their positive, negative, or neutral opinions. Sentiment classiﬁcation can be carried
out on three levels of extraction: the aspect or feature level, the sentence level, and the document level.
Currently, there are three approaches to address the problem of sentiment analysis [ 30]: (1) lexicon-based
techniques, (2) machine-learning-based techniques, and (3) hybrid approaches.
Lexicon-based techniques were the ﬁrst to be used for sentiment analysis. They are divided into
two approaches: dictionary-based and corpus-based [ 31]. In the former type, sentiment classiﬁcation
is performed by using a dictionary of terms, such as those found in SentiWordNet and WordNet.
Nevertheless, corpus-based sentiment analysis does not rely on a predeﬁned dictionary but on
statistical analysis of the contents of a collection of documents, using techniques based on k-nearest
neighbors (k-NN) [ 32], conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) [ 33], and hidden Markov models (HMM) [ 34],
among others.
Machine-learning-based techniques [ 35] proposed for sentiment analysis problems can be divided
into two groups: (1) traditional models and (2) deep learning models. Traditional models refer to
classical machine learning techniques, such as the naïve Bayes classiﬁer [ 36], maximum entropy
classiﬁer [ 37,38], or support vector machines (SVM) [ 39]. The input to those algorithms includes lexical
features, sentiment lexicon-based features, parts of speech, or adjectives and adverbs. The accuracy
of these systems depends on which features are chosen. Deep learning models can provide better

==== Page 6 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 6 of 29
results than traditional models. Di erent kinds of deep learning models can be used for sentiment
analysis, including CNN, DNN, and RNN. Such approaches address classiﬁcation problems at the
document level, sentence level, or aspect level. These deep learning methods will be discussed in the
following section.
Thehybrid approaches [40] combine lexicon- and machine-learning-based approaches. Sentiment
lexicons commonly play a key role within a majority of these strategies. Figure 5 illustrates a taxonomy
of deep-learning-based methods for sentiment analysis.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 29 
 problems at the document  level, sentence  level, or aspect level. These deep learning methods will be 
discussed in the following section.  
The hybrid approaches  [40] combine lexicon - and machine -learning-based approaches. 
Sentiment lexicons commonly play a key role within a majority of these strategies. Figure 5 illustrates 
a taxonomy of deep -learning-based methods for sentiment analysis.  
 
Figure 5.  Taxonomy of sentiment analysis techniques. Source:  [30,41]. 
Sentiment analysis, whether performed by  means of  deep learning or traditional machine 
learning, requires that text training data be cleaned before being used to induce the classification 
model. Tweets usually contain white spaces, punctuation marks, n on-characters,  Retweet ( RT), “@ 
links”, and stop words. These characters could be removed using libraries such as BeautifulSoup 
because they do not contain  any information  that would be  useful for sentiment analysis. After 
cleaning, tweets can be split int o individual words , which are transformed into their base form by 
lemmatization, then converted into numerical vectors by using methods  such as word embedding or 
term frequency -inverse document frequency  (TF-IDF).   
Word embedding  [42] is a technique for language modeling and feature learning, where each 
word is mapped to a vector of real values in such a way that words with similar meanings  have a 
similar representation. Value learning can be done using neural networks. A commonly used  word 
embedding system is Word2 vec (GloVe, or Gensim), which contains models such as skip-gram and 
continuous bag -of-words (CBOW). Both models are based on the probability of words occurring in 
proximity to each other. Skip -gram makes it possible  to start with a word and predict the word s that 
are likely to surround it. Continuous bag -of-words reverses that by predicting a word that is likely 
to occur on the basis of specific  context words.  
TF-IDF is a statistical measure reflecting how important a word is to a document in a collection 
or corpus. This metric considers the frequency of the word in the target document , as well as the 
frequency in the other documents of the corpus. The higher the frequency of a word in a target 
document and the lower its freque ncy in other documents, the greater its importance. The vectorizer 
class in the scikit-learn library is usually used to compute TF-IDF.  
Figure 5. Taxonomy of sentiment analysis techniques. Source: [30,41].
Sentiment analysis, whether performed by means of deep learning or traditional machine learning,
requires that text training data be cleaned before being used to induce the classiﬁcation model.
Tweets usually contain white spaces, punctuation marks, non-characters, Retweet (RT), “@ links”,
and stop words. These characters could be removed using libraries such as BeautifulSoup because they
do not contain any information that would be useful for sentiment analysis. After cleaning, tweets can
be split into individual words, which are transformed into their base form by lemmatization, then
converted into numerical vectors by using methods such as word embedding or term frequency-inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF).
Word embedding [ 42] is a technique for language modeling and feature learning, where each
word is mapped to a vector of real values in such a way that words with similar meanings have a
similar representation. Value learning can be done using neural networks. A commonly used word
embedding system is Word2vec (GloVe, or Gensim), which contains models such as skip-gram and
continuous bag-of-words (CBOW). Both models are based on the probability of words occurring in
proximity to each other. Skip-gram makes it possible to start with a word and predict the words that
are likely to surround it. Continuous bag-of-words reverses that by predicting a word that is likely to
occur on the basis of speciﬁc context words.
TF-IDF is a statistical measure reﬂecting how important a word is to a document in a collection
or corpus. This metric considers the frequency of the word in the target document, as well as the

==== Page 7 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 7 of 29
frequency in the other documents of the corpus. The higher the frequency of a word in a target
document and the lower its frequency in other documents, the greater its importance. The vectorizer
class in the scikit-learn library is usually used to compute TF-IDF.
Both word embedding and TF-IDF are used as input features of deep learning algorithms in NLP .
Sentiment analysis tasks transform collections of raw data into vectors of continuous real numbers.
There are di erent kinds of tasks, such as objective or subjective classiﬁcation, polarity sentiment
detection, and feature- or aspect-based sentiment analysis. The subjectivity of words and phrases may
depend on their context and an objective document may contain subjective sentences. Aspect-based
sentiment analysis refers to sentiments expressed towards speciﬁc aspects of entities (e.g., value, room,
location, cleanliness, or service). Polarity and intensity are two components used to score sentiment
analysis. Polarity indicates whether the sentiment is negative, neutral, or positive. Intensity indicates
the relative strength of the sentiment.
2.3. Application of Sentiment Analysis
It is widely accepted that sentiment analysis is very useful in a wide range of application domains,
such as business, government, and biomedicine.
In the ﬁelds of business intelligence and e-commerce, companies can study customers’ feedback to
provide better customer support, build better products, or improve their marketing strategies to attract
new customers. Sentiment analysis can be used to infer the users’ opinions on events or products.
The results of SA help to gain greater insight into the customers’ interests or opinions on industrial
trends. In this context, Jain and Dandannavar [ 43] proposed a fast, ﬂexible, and scalable SA framework
for sentiment analysis of Twitter data that involves the use of some machine learning methods and
Apache spark.
As pointed out in the introduction, the area of recommender systems has also beneﬁted from
sentiment analysis. A sample of this can be found in the work of Preethi et al. [ 12], where recursive
neural networks were applied to analyze sentiments in reviews. The output was used to improve
and validate the restaurant and movie recommendations of a cloud-based recommender system.
Along with behavioral analysis, sentiment analysis is also an e cient tool for commodity markets [ 7].
The medical domain is another ﬁeld of potential interest. The applications of opinion mining in
health-related texts on social media and blogs were explored in [ 8]. In addition to traditional machine
learning and text processing techniques, the author o ers new approaches and proposes a medical
lexicon to support experts and patients in the varied methodology that is used to describe symptoms
and diseases. In the ﬁeld of mental health, sentiment analysis is performed on texts written by patients’
posts on social media as a means of supplementing or replacing the questionnaires they usually ﬁll
in [9].
3. Related Work
The purpose of this study is to review di erent approaches and methods in sentiment analysis that
can be taken as a reference in future empirical studies. We have focused on key aspects of research, such
as technical challenges, datasets, the methods proposed in each study, and their application domains.
Recently, deep learning models (including DNN, CNN, and RNN) have been used to increase the
eciency of sentiment analysis tasks. In this section, state-of-the-art sentiment analysis approaches
based on deep learning are reviewed.
Beginning in 2015, many authors have since evaluated this trend. Tang et al. [ 44] introduced
techniques based on deep learning approaches for several sentiment analyses, such as learning word
embedding, sentiment classiﬁcation, and opinion extraction. Zhang and Zheng [ 35] discussed machine
learning for sentiment analysis. Both research groups used part of speech (POS) as a text feature
and used TF-IDF to calculate the weight of words for the analysis. Sharef et al. [ 45] discussed
the opportunities of sentiment analysis approaches for big data. In papers [ 13,18,46], the latest

==== Page 8 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 8 of 29
deep-learning-based techniques (namely CNN, RNN, and LSTM) were reviewed and compared with
each other in the context of sentiment analysis problems.
Some other studies applied deep-learning-based sentiment analysis in di erent domains, including
ﬁnance [ 5,6], weather-related tweets [ 10], trip advisors [ 11], recommender systems for cloud services [ 12],
and movie reviews [ 13–18]. In [ 10], where text features were automatically extracted from di erent
data sources, user information and weather knowledge were transferred into word embedding using
the Word2vec tool. The same techniques have been used in several works [ 5,47]. Jeong et al. [ 48]
identiﬁed product development opportunities by combining topic modeling and the results of a
sentiment analysis that had been performed on customer-generated social media data. It has been used
as a real-time monitoring tool for analysis of changing customer needs in rapidly evolving product
environments. Pham et al. used multiple layers of knowledge representation to analyze travel reviews
and determine sentiments for ﬁve aspects, including value, room, location, cleanliness, and service [ 11].
Another approach [ 49] combines sentiment and semantic features in an LSTM model based on emotion
detection. Preethi et al. [ 12] applied deep learning to sentiment analysis for a recommender system in
the cloud using the food dataset from Amazon. For the health domain, Salas-Z árate et al. [ 31] applied
an ontology-based, aspect-level sentiment analysis method to tweets about diabetes.
Polarity-based sentiment deep learning applied to tweets was found in [ 19,20,28,36,40,50].
The authors described how they used deep learning models to increase the accuracy of their
respective sentiment analysis. Most of the models are used for content written in English, but there
are a few that manage tweets in other languages, including Spanish [ 51], Thai [ 28], and Persian [ 47].
Previous researchers have analyzed tweets by applying di erent models of polarity-based sentiment
deep learning. Those models include DNN [50], CNN [20], and hybrid approaches [40].
Other works using neural network models are focused not only on the sentiment polarity of
textual content, but also on aspect sentiment analysis [ 6,11,31,52–54]. Salas-Z árate et al. [ 31] used
semantic annotation (diabetes ontology) to identify aspects from which they performed aspect-based
sentiment analysis using SentiWordNet. Pham et al. [ 11] included the determination of sentiment
ratings and importance degrees of product aspects. A novel, multilayer architecture was proposed to
represent customer reviews aiming at extracting more e ective sentiment features.
From among 32 of the analyzed studies, we identiﬁed three popular models for sentiment
polarity analysis using deep learning: DNN [ 50], CNN [ 20], and hybrid [ 40]. In [ 13,18,46], three deep
learning techniques, namely CNN, RNN, and LSTM, were individually tested on di erent datasets.
However, there was a lack of a comparative analysis of these three techniques.
Many studies use the same process for sentiment analysis. First, text features are automatically
extracted from di erent data sources, then they are transferred into word embedding using the
Word2vec tool [5,10,47].
Sentiment analysis has also been the target of extensive research in the application domain of
recommender systems. Most methods in this area are based on information ﬁltering, and they can
be classiﬁed into four categories: content-based, collaborative ﬁltering (CF), demographic-based,
and hybrid. Social media data can be used with these techniques in di erent ways. Content-based
methods make use of characteristics of items and user’s proﬁles, CF methods require implicit or
explicit user preferences, demographic methods exploit user demographic information (age, gender,
nationality, etc.), and hybrid approaches take advantage of any kind of item and user information that
can be extracted or inferred from social media (actions, preferences, behavior, etc.).
Besides, when dealing with both explicit data (which are provided directly by users) and implicit
data (which are inferred from the behavior and actions of users), hybrid methods and lifelong learning
algorithms are considered as in-depth approaches for recommendation systems.
Shoham [ 55] proposed one of the ﬁrst hybrid recommendation systems, which takes advantage
of both content and collaborative ﬁltering recommendation methods. The content-based part of the
proposal involves the identiﬁcation of user proﬁles based on their interest in topics extracted from
web pages, while the collaborative ﬁltering part of the system is based on the feedback of other users.

==== Page 9 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 9 of 29
Although sentiment analysis is not performed in this work, it can be considered the precursor of
other studies combining both approaches in which sentiment analysis is used to obtain implicit user
feedback. A recent study from Wang et al. [ 56] presents a hybrid approach in which sentiment analysis
of reviews about movies is used in order to improve a preliminary recommendation list obtained from
the combination of collaborative ﬁltering and content-based methods. In the same application domain,
Singh et al. propose the use of a sentiment classiﬁer induced from movie reviews as a second ﬁlter
after collaborative ﬁltering [57].
In addition, one advanced machine learning paradigm is the so-called holistic models or lifelong
learning algorithms, which are argued to signiﬁcantly improve sentiment analysis accuracy [ 58].
While other methods learn a model by using only data for a particular application, this method attains
a continually updating knowledge base of attributes, such as sentiment polarity or sentiment aspects.
Stai et al. [ 59] introduced a social recommendation framework, whose main objective is the creation of
enriched multimedia content adapted to users. This is achieved through a holistic approach, where
the explicit and implicit relevance feedback from users is derived from their interactions with both
the video and its enrichment. Although this method represents a signiﬁcant improvement over other
approaches, it requires personal user information.
Table 1 summarizes 32 important papers related to our research. It includes the year of publication,
authors’ names, research work, methods, datasets, and the study target.
4. Comparative Study
In this section, we begin by introducing di erent topics pertaining to datasets, and then we o er
details about the sentiment classiﬁcation process.
We used eight datasets in our experiments on sentiment polarity analysis. Three of them contain
tweets; the largest has 1.6 million tweets, with each one labeled as either positive or negative sentiment,
while the other two datasets contain 14,640 and 17,750 tweets, respectively, labeled as positive, negative,
or neutral. The remaining ﬁve datasets include a total of 125,000 comments from user reviews of
movies, books, and music labeled as either positive or negative sentiments.
Two approaches for preparing inputs to the classiﬁcation algorithms are compared in our
experiments: word embedding and TF-IDF. For word embedding, we applied Word2vec, which contains
models such as skip-gram and continuous bag-of-words (CBOW). Skip-gram makes it possible to start
with a word and predict the words that are likely to surround it. Continuous bag-of-words reverses
that and enables the prediction of a word that is likely to occur in the context of words. For TF-IDF,
we used the vectorizer class in the scikit-learn library.
We conducted an experimental study where three models (DNN, CNN, and RNN) were trained
and evaluated on di erent datasets, which had been preprocessed with both word embedding and
TF-IDF. The objective was to compare the performance of all these techniques and improve the
state-of-the-art of sentiment analysis tasks.

==== Page 10 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 10 of 29
Table 1. Summary of deep-learning-based sentiment analysis.
No. Year Study Research Work Method Dataset Target
1 2019 Alharbi el al. [19] Twitter sentiment analysis CNN SemEval 2016 workshopFeature extraction from user
behavior information
2 2019 Kraus et al. [16]Sentiment analysis based on
rhetorical structure theoryTree-LSTM and
Discourse-LSTMMovie
Database (IMD), food
reviews (Amazon)Aim to improve accuracy
3 2019 Do et al. [53]Comparative review of sentiment
analysis based on deep learningCNN, LSTM, GRU, and
hybrid approachesSemEval workshop and
social network sitesAspect extraction and
sentiment classiﬁcation
4 2019 Abid et al. [20]Sentiment analysis through
recent recurrent variantsCNN,
RNNTwitterDomain-speciﬁc
word embedding
5 2019 Yang et al. [52] Aspect-based sentiment analysisCoattention-LSTM,
Coattention-MemNet,
Coattention-LSTM +
locationTwitter,
SemEval 2014Target-level and context-level
feature extraction
6 2019 Wu et al. [60]Sentiment analysis with
variational autoencoderLSTM, Bi-LSTMFacebook,
Chinese VA,
EmobankEncoding, sentiment prediction,
and decoding
7 2018 Pham et al. [11] Aspect-based sentiment analysisLRNN-ASR,
FULL-LRNN-ASRTripadvisorEnriching knowledge of the
input through layers
8 2018 Sohangir et al. [5]Deep learning for ﬁnancial
sentiment analysisLSTM, doc2vec, and CNN StockTwitsImproving the performance of
sentiment analysis for StockTwits
9 2018 Li et al. [17]How textual quality of online
reviews a ect
classiﬁcation performanceSRN, LSTM, and CNNMovie reviews from
imdb.comImpact of two inﬂuential textual
features, namely the word count
and review readability
10 2018 Zhang et al. [61]Textual sentiment analysis via
three di erent attention
convolutional neural networks
and cross-modality
consistent regressionCNNSemEval 2016,
Sentiment Tree BankLSTM attention and attentive
pooling is integrated with CNN
model to extract sentence
features based on sentiment
embedding, lexicon embedding,
and semantic embedding

==== Page 11 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 11 of 29
Table 1. Cont.
No. Year Study Research Work Method Dataset Target
11 2018 Schmitt et al. [54]Joint aspect and polarity
classiﬁcation for aspect-based
sentiment analysisCNN,
LSTMSemEval 2017Approach based on aspect
sentiment analysis to solve two
classiﬁcation problems (aspect
categories +aspect polarity)
12 2018 Qian et al. [10]Sentiment analysis model on
weather-related tweetsDNN, CNNTwitter,
social network sitesFeature extraction
13 2018 Tang et al. [62]Improving the state-of-the-art in
many deep learning sentiment
analysis tasksCNN, DNN, RNN Social network sitesSentiment classiﬁcation, opinion
extraction, ﬁne-grained
sentiment analysis
14 2018 Zhang et al. [22]Survey of deep learning for
sentiment analysisCNN, DNN, RNN, LSTM Social network sitesSentiment analysis with word
embedding, sarcasm analysis,
emotion analysis, multimodal
data for sentiment analysis
15 2017 Choudhary et al. [30]Comparative study of
deep-learning-based sentimental
analysis with existing techniquesCNN, DNN, RNN, lexicon,
hybridSocial network sitesDomain dependency, sentiment
polarity, negation, feature
extraction, spam and fake review,
huge lexicon, bi-polar words
16 2018 Jangid et al. [6] Financial sentiment analysis CNN, LSTM, RNN Financial tweets Aspect-based sentiment analysis
17 2017 Araque et al. [63]Enhancing deep learning
sentiment analysis with
ensemble techniques in
social applicationsDeep-learning-based
sentiment classiﬁer using a
word embedding model
and a linear machine
learning algorithmSemEval 2013 /2014, Vader,
STS-Gold, IMDB, PL04,
and Sentiment140Improving the performance of
deep learning techniques and
integrating them with traditional
surface approaches based on
manually extracted features
18 2017 Jeong et al. [48]A product opportunity mining
approach based on topic
modeling and sentiment analysisLDA-based topic modeling,
sentiment analysis, and
opportunity algorithmTwitter, Facebook,
Instagram, and RedditIdentiﬁcation of product
development opportunities from
customer-generated social
media data
19 2017 Gupta et al. [49]Sentiment- /semantic-based
approaches for emotion detectionLSTM-based deep learning TwitterCombining sentiment and
semantic features

==== Page 12 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 12 of 29
Table 1. Cont.
No. Year Study Research Work Method Dataset Target
20 2017 Preethi et al. [12]Sentiment analysis for
recommender system in
the cloudRNN,
naïve Bayes classiﬁerAmazonRecommending the places that
are near to the user’s current
location by analyzing the
dierent reviews and
consequently computing the
score grounded on it
21 2017 Ramadhani et al. [50] Twitter sentiment analysis DNN TwitterHandling a huge amount of
unstructured data
22 2017 Ain et al. [13]A review of sentiment analysis
using deep learning techniquesCNN, RNN, DNN, DBN Social network sitesAnalyzing and structuring
hidden information extracted
from social media in the form of
unstructured data
23 2017 Roshanfekr et al. [47]Sentiment analysis using deep
learning on Persian textsNBSVM-Bi,
Bidirectional-LSTM,
CNNCustomer
reviews from
www.digikala.comEvaluating deep learning
methods using the
Persian language
24 2017 Paredes-Valverde et al. [ 51]Sentiment analysis for
improvement of products
and servicesCNN +Word2vec Twitter in SpanishDetecting customer satisfaction
and identifying opportunities for
improvement of products
and services
25 2017 Jingzhou Liu et al. [64]Extreme multilabel
text classiﬁcationXML-CNNRCV1, EUR-Lex,
Amazon, and WikiCapturing richer information
from di erent regions of
the document
26 2017 Hassan et al. [15] Sentiment analysis of short textsCNN, LSTM, on top of
pretrained word vectorsStanford Large Movie
Review, IMDB, Stanford
Sentiment Treebank, SSTbAchieving comparable
performances with fewer
parameters on sentiment
analysis tasks

==== Page 13 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 13 of 29
Table 1. Cont.
No. Year Study Research Work Method Dataset Target
27 2017 Chen et al. [65]Multimodal sentiment analysis
with word-level fusion and
reinforcement learningGated multimodal
embedding LSTM with
temporal attentionCMU-MOSIDeveloping a novel deep
architecture for multimodal
sentiment analysis that performs
modality fusion at the word level
28 2017 Al-Sallab et al. [66]Opinion mining in Arabic as a
low-resource languageRecursive deep learningOnline comments from
QALB, Twitter, and
Newswire articles written
in MSAProviding more complete and
comprehensive input features for
the autoencoder and performing
semantic composition
29 2016 Vateekul et al. [28]A study of sentiment analysis
in ThaiLSTM,
DCNNTwitterFinding the best parameters of
LSTM and DCNN
30 2016 Singhal, et al. [18]A survey of sentiment analysis
and deep learningCNN, RNTN, RNN, LSTMSentiment Treebank
dataset, movie reviews,
MPQA, and
customer reviewsComparison of classiﬁcation
performance of di erent models
on di erent datasets
31 2016 Gao et al. [14]Sentiment analysis using
AdaBoost combinationCNN Movie reviews and IMDBStudying the possibility of
leveraging the contribution of
dierent ﬁlter lengths and
grasping their potential in the
ﬁnal polarity of the sentence
32 2016 Rojas-Barahona et al. [ 46]Overview of deep learning for
sentiment analysisCNN,
LSTMMovie reviews, Sentiment
Treebank, and TwitterTo extract the polarity from
the data
Gated Recurrent Units (GRU); Bi-directional Long-Short-Term-Memory (Bi-LSTM); Latent Rating Neural Network-Aspect Semantic Representation (LRNN-ASR); Simple Recurrent
Networks (SRN); Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA); Naive Bayes and Support Vector Machine Bidirectional (NBSVM-bi); Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN); Recursive Neural
Tensor Network (RNTN); Multi-Perspective Question Answering (MPQA); Multimodal Opinion Sentiment Intensity (CMU-MOSI); Qatar Arabic Language Bank (QALB)

==== Page 14 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 14 of 29
4.1. Datasets
Studies that perform sentiment analyses either generate their own data or use available datasets.
Generating a new dataset makes it possible to use data that ﬁts the problem the analysis is targeted at;
moreover, the use of personal data ensures that no privacy laws are violated [ 67]. However, the main
drawback is having to label the dataset, which is a challenging task. Moreover, it is not always easy to
generate a large volume of data. Our approach to selecting datasets was based on their availability
and accessibility. Respecting personal privacy was another factor that was considered, given that it
appears in the regulations of most journals as a requirement for article publication.
Thus, we carefully chose datasets that are widely accepted by the research community.
In addition, one of our main concerns was the extensibility of the results obtained in the study.
Therefore, the datasets were obtained from di erent sources and they cover di erent topics in order
to perform a wide range of experiments. In this way, the results have made it possible to make a
comprehensive comparison of the performance of deep learning models in sentiment analysis. We also
considered the size of the datasets; the larger they are, the more possibilities they o er, even though
this also increases their complexity. We worked with labeled datasets from which personal information
was removed, since this information was not needed to test the performance of sentiment analysis
models. These datasets are described below:
 Sentiment140 was obtained from Stanford University [ 68]. It contains 1.6 million tweets about
products or brands. The tweets were already labeled with the polarity of the sentiment conveyed
by the person writing them (0 =negative, 4 =positive).
 Tweets Airline [ 69] is a tweet dataset containing user opinions about U.S. airlines. It was crawled in
February 2015. It has 14,640 samples, and it was divided into negative, neutral, and positive classes.
 Tweets SemEval [ 70] is a tweet dataset that includes a range of named geopolitical entities.
This dataset has 17,750 samples, and it was divided into positive, neutral, and negative classes.
 IMDB Movie Reviews [ 71] is a dataset of comments from audiences about the stories in ﬁlms.
It has 25,000 samples divided into positive and negative.
 IMDB Movie Reviews was obtained from Stanford University [ 72]. This dataset contains comments
from audiences about the story of ﬁlms. It has 50,000 samples, which are divided into positive
and negative.
 Cornell Movie Reviews [ 73] contains comments from audiences about the stories in ﬁlms.
This dataset includes 10,662 samples for training and testing, which are labeled negative or positive.
 Book Reviews and Music Reviews is a dataset obtained from the Multidomain Sentiment of the
Department of Computer Science of Johns Hopkins University. Biographies, Bollywood, Boom
Boxes, and Blenders: Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classiﬁcation [ 74] contains user comments
about books and music. Each has 2,000 samples with two classes—negative and positive.
Figure 6 shows an original sample of tweets in one of the datasets. It contains information on
each of the following ﬁelds:
 “target” is the polarity of the tweet;
 “id” is the unique ID of each tweet;
 “date” is the date of the tweet;
 “query_string” indicates whether the tweet has been collected with any particular query keyword
(for this column, 100% of the entries labeled are with the value “NO_QUERY”);
 “user” is the Twitter handle name of the user who tweeted;
 “text” is the verbatim text of the tweet.
We used the “text” and “target” ﬁelds to perform the experiment.

==== Page 15 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 15 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 29 
 Boom Boxes, and Blenders: Domain Adaptation for Sentiment Classification [74] contains 
user comments about books and music. Each has 2,000 samples with two classes —negative 
and positive.  
Figure 6 shows an original sample of tweets in one of the datasets. It contains information on 
each of the following fields:  
 “target” is the polarity of the tweet;  
 "id" is the uni que ID of each tweet;  
 "date" is the date of the tweet;  
 "query_string" indicates whether the tweet has been collected with any particular query 
keyword (for this column, 100% of the entries labeled are with the value "NO_QUERY");  
 "user" is the Twitter handle name of the user who tweeted;  
 “text” is the verbatim text of the tweet.  
We used the “text” and “target” fields to perform the experiment.  
 
Figure 6.  Examples of the Sentiment140 dataset.  
4.2. Methodological Approach 
After reviewing the proposed sentiment analysis methods in Section 3,  we identified three 
popular approaches that have been used frequently in recent studies , namely DNN, CNN , and RNN. 
These models have been employed in the majority of the 32 reviewed pape rs, have been widely 
tested, and provide highly accurate results when working with different t ypes of dataset s [75]. 
However,  no comparative study involving those algorithms has been conducted.  
The focus of this research was the deep learning approach ; therefore , we performed a 
comparative study of the performance of the  three most popular  deep learning models (DNN, CNN , 
and RNN) on eight datasets. Moreover, two text processing techniques  (word embedding  and TF-
IDF) were employed in data preprocessing. The objective of the experiment s is to compare the 
performance of these techniques , contributing in this way to the  state-of-the-art literature on 
sentiment analysis tasks.  These algorithms were applied to predict the sentiment polarity of the text 
and classify it according to that polarity.  The performance of those methods was evaluated by means 
of the most suitable metrics used for classification problems : overall accuracy, recall, F-score, and 
Area Under Curve ( AUC). We used k -fold cross validation with k = 10 in the application of th e 
metrics. More details about the application of DNN, CNN , and RNN algorithms with word 
embedding and TF -IDF are given  in Section 2. 
4.3. Sentiment Classification  
The process of sentiment analysis is discussed below. Data cle aning and feature extraction were 
performed in the preprocessing stages. In the training stage, several deep learning models were used . 
Detailed results are presented in the next section.  
The main objective of our study is to evaluate the deep learning mod els. We used k -fold cross 
validation with k  = 10 to determine the performance of the algorithms. All of them were tested with 
word embedding and TF -IDF. 
Text cleaning is a preprocessing step that removes words or other components that do not 
contain releva nt information , and thus may reduce the effectiveness of sentiment analysis. Text or 
Figure 6. Examples of the Sentiment140 dataset.
4.2. Methodological Approach
After reviewing the proposed sentiment analysis methods in Section 3, we identiﬁed three
popular approaches that have been used frequently in recent studies, namely DNN, CNN, and RNN.
These models have been employed in the majority of the 32 reviewed papers, have been widely
tested, and provide highly accurate results when working with di erent types of datasets [ 75].
However, no comparative study involving those algorithms has been conducted.
The focus of this research was the deep learning approach; therefore, we performed a comparative
study of the performance of the three most popular deep learning models (DNN, CNN, and RNN)
on eight datasets. Moreover, two text processing techniques (word embedding and TF-IDF) were
employed in data preprocessing. The objective of the experiments is to compare the performance of
these techniques, contributing in this way to the state-of-the-art literature on sentiment analysis tasks.
These algorithms were applied to predict the sentiment polarity of the text and classify it according
to that polarity. The performance of those methods was evaluated by means of the most suitable
metrics used for classiﬁcation problems: overall accuracy, recall, F-score, and Area Under Curve (AUC).
We used k-fold cross validation with k =10 in the application of the metrics. More details about
the application of DNN, CNN, and RNN algorithms with word embedding and TF-IDF are given in
Section 2.
4.3. Sentiment Classiﬁcation
The process of sentiment analysis is discussed below. Data cleaning and feature extraction were
performed in the preprocessing stages. In the training stage, several deep learning models were used.
Detailed results are presented in the next section.
The main objective of our study is to evaluate the deep learning models. We used k-fold cross
validation with k =10 to determine the performance of the algorithms. All of them were tested with
word embedding and TF-IDF.
Text cleaning is a preprocessing step that removes words or other components that do not contain
relevant information, and thus may reduce the e ectiveness of sentiment analysis. Text or sentence
data include white space, punctuation, and stop words. Text cleaning has several steps for sentence
normalization. All datasets were cleaned using the following steps:
 Cleaning the Twitter RTs, @, #, and the links from the sentences;
 Stemming or lemmatization;
 Converting the text to lower case;
 Cleaning all the non-letter characters, including numbers;
 Removing English stop words and punctuation;
 Eliminating extra white spaces;
 Decoding HTML to general text.
A certain processing method was then performed depending on the dataset to facilitate model
formation. For example, for the Sentiment140 dataset, we dropped the columns that are not useful

==== Page 16 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 16 of 29
for sentiment analysis purposes: {“id”, “date”, “query_string”, “user”} and converted class label
values {4, 0} to {1, 0} (1 =positive, 0 =negative). For the Tweets Airline and Tweets SemEval datasets,
we removed all samples labeled “neutral”, leaving only two classes for the experiment—positive
and negative.
After the datasets were cleaned, sentences were split into individual words, which were returned
to their base form by lemmatization. At this point, sentences were converted into vectors of continuous
real numbers (also known as feature vectors) by using two methods: word embedding and TF-IDF.
Both kinds of feature vectors were the inputs for the deep learning algorithms evaluated in the study.
Those algorithms were CNN, DNN, and RNN. Thus, two models were induced per algorithm, one for
each type of vector.
4.4. Sentiment Model
Most traditional models use well-known features, such as bag-of words, n-grams, and TF-IDF.
Such features do not consider the semantic similarity between words. Currently, many deep learning
models in NLP require word embedding results as input features. Figure 7 shows the semantic
similarity of the words that are the closest to “iPhone”, “Obama”, and “university”. The words
nearest to “Obama” are “president”, “leader”, and “election”. The words nearest to “university” are
“students”, “education”, and “master”. Since neural networks can be deployed to solve sentiment
classiﬁcation using word embedding, we use Word2vec to train initial word vectors from the datasets
that were described above.
Figure 8 shows word clouds produced from some of the topics of the datasets described in
Section 4.1. These datasets were cleaned before being transformed into vectors. The ﬁgure demonstrates
how topics can be easily identiﬁed. The book topic is shown in the top left corner, the movie topic is
shown in the top right corner, the left bottom corner shows the music topic, and ﬁnally the airplane
topic is shown in the bottom right corner.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 29 
 sentence data include white space, punctuation, and stop words. Text cleaning has several steps for 
sentence normalization. All datasets were cleaned using the following s teps: 
 Cleaning the Twitter RT s, @, #, and the links from the sentences;  
 Stemming or lemmatization;  
 Converting the text to lower case;  
 Cleaning all the non -letter characters , including numbers;  
 Removing English stop words and punctuation;  
 Eliminating extra white spaces;  
 Decoding HTML to general text.  
A certain processing method was then performed depending on the dataset to facilitate model 
formation. For example,  for the Sentiment140 dataset, we dropped the columns that are not useful 
for sentiment analysis  purposes: {"id", "date","query_string", "user"}  and converted class label values 
{4, 0} to {1, 0} (1  = positive, 0 = negative). For the Tweets Airline and Tweets Sem Eval datasets, we 
removed all samples labeled “neutral,” leaving only two classes  for the experiment —positive and 
negative . 
After the datasets were cleaned, sentences were split into individual words, which were 
returned to their base form by lemmatization. At this point, sentences were converted into vectors o f 
continuous real numbers  (also known as feature vectors ) by using two methods: word embedding 
and TF-IDF. Both kinds of feature vectors were the input s for the deep learning algorithms evaluated 
in the study. Those algorithms were CNN, DNN , and RNN. Thus, two models were induced per 
algorithm, one for each type of vector.  
4.4. Sentiment Model  
Most traditional models use well -known features, such as bag -of words, n -grams, and TF-IDF. 
Such features do not consider the semantic similarity between words. Currently, many deep learning 
models in NLP require word embedding results as input features. Figure 7  shows the semantic 
similarity of the words that are the closest to “iPhone,”, “O bama,” and “university.” The words 
nearest to “ Obama” are “president,” “leader,” and “election.” The wo rds nearest to “univers ity” are 
“students,” “education,” and “master”. Since neural networks can be deployed to solve sentiment 
classification using word embedding, we use Word2 vec to train initial word vectors from the datasets 
that were described above.  
 
Figure 7.  Word embedding after training the da taset with a minimum count of 5 000. 
Figure 7. Word embedding after training the dataset with a minimum count of 5000.

==== Page 17 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 17 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 29 
 Figure 8  shows word clouds produced from some of the topic s of the datasets described in 
Section 4.1. These datasets were cleaned before being transformed into vectors. The  figure 
demonstrates how topics can be easily identified. The book topic is shown in the top left corner , the 
movie topic is shown in the top right corner , the left bottom corner shows the music topic , and finally 
the airplane topic is shown in the bottom right corner.  
 
Figure 8.  Word cloud view  of the topics of the datasets . 
As stated before, we use d k-fold cross validation to determine the effectiveness of different 
embedding with k  = 10. The detail s are shown in the experimental results section. Figure 9 shows the 
details of the CNN model, which are explained below.  
 
Figure 9.  The details of the CNN model , which was set up for the experiment . 
The function embedding is the embedding layer that is initialized with random weights and 
which will learn the embedding for all words in the training datasets. In our case, the size of the 
Figure 8. Word cloud view of the topics of the datasets.
As stated before, we used k-fold cross validation to determine the e ectiveness of di erent
embedding with k =10. The details are shown in the experimental results section. Figure 9 shows the
details of the CNN model, which are explained below.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 29 
 Figure 8  shows word clouds produced from some of the topic s of the datasets described in 
Section 4.1. These datasets were cleaned before being transformed into vectors. The  figure 
demonstrates how topics can be easily identified. The book topic is shown in the top left corner , the 
movie topic is shown in the top right corner , the left bottom corner shows the music topic , and finally 
the airplane topic is shown in the bottom right corner.  
 
Figure 8.  Word cloud view  of the topics of the datasets . 
As stated before, we use d k-fold cross validation to determine the effectiveness of different 
embedding with k  = 10. The detail s are shown in the experimental results section. Figure 9 shows the 
details of the CNN model, which are explained below.  
 
Figure 9.  The details of the CNN model , which was set up for the experiment . 
The function embedding is the embedding layer that is initialized with random weights and 
which will learn the embedding for all words in the training datasets. In our case, the size of the 
Figure 9. The details of the CNN model, which was set up for the experiment.
The function embedding is the embedding layer that is initialized with random weights and which
will learn the embedding for all words in the training datasets. In our case, the size of the vocabulary
is 15,000, the output dim is 300, and the maximum length is 40. The results are in a 40 300 matrix.
The ﬁrst 1D CNN layer deﬁnes a ﬁlter of kernel size 3. For this, we will deﬁne 64 ﬁlters. This allows
us to train 64 di erent features on the ﬁrst layer of the network. Thus, the output of the ﬁrst neural
network layer is a 40 64 neuron matrix, and the result from the ﬁrst CNN will be fed into the second

==== Page 18 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 18 of 29
CNN layer. We will again deﬁne 32 di erent ﬁlters to be trained on this level. Following the same
logic as the ﬁrst layer, the output matrix will measure 40 32.
The maximum pooling layer is often used after a CNN layer in order to reduce the complexity of
the output and prevent overﬁtting of the data. In our case, we choose a size of three. This means that
the size of the output matrix of this layer is 13 32.
The third and fourth 1D CNN layers are in charge of learning higher level features. The outputs
of those two layers are a 13 16 matrix and a 13 8 matrix.
The average pooling layer is a pooling layer used to further avoid overﬁtting. We will use the
average value instead of the maximum value because it will give better results in this case. The output
matrix has a size of 1 8 neurons.
The fully connected layer with sigmoid activation is the ﬁnal layer that will reduce the vector of
height 8 to 1 for prediction (“positive”, “negative”).
5. Experimental Results
To conduct the tests, we used a GeForce GTX2070 GPU card, and the Keras (https: //keras.io) and
Tensorﬂow (https: //www.tensorﬂow.org /) libraries. DNN, CNN, and RNN models were applied to
perform experiments with the di erent datasets described above, in order to analyze the performance
of those algorithms using both word embedding and TF-IDF feature extraction.
In all the experiments, we conﬁgure the parameter for our code, such as echoes =5, batch size =4096,
and k-fold =10.
Accuracy, AUC, and F-score were the metrics used to evaluate the performance of the models
through all experiments. Since F-score is derived from recall and precision, we also show these two
measures for reference purposes.
Sentiment140 was the ﬁrst dataset to be processed. Its contents were labeled as positive or negative.
Since this dataset contains a much larger number of tweets than the other datasets, we ﬁrst analyzed
the performance of the models induced from di erent subsets formed with di erent percentages
of the initial data, ranging from 10% to 100%. As shown in Figures 10–15, the combinations of
feature extractors and deep learning techniques applied to those subsets produced di erent results for
Sentiment140 data.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 29 
 vocabulary is 15,000, the output dim is 300 , and the maximum length is 40. The results are in a 40  × 
300 matrix.  
The first 1D CNN layer defines a filter of kernel size 3. For this, we will define 64 filters. This 
allows us to train 64 different features on the first layer of the network. Thus, the output of the first 
neural network layer is a 40 × 64 neuron matrix, and the result from the first CNN will be fed into the 
second CNN  layer. We will again define 32 different filters to be trained on this level. Following the 
same logic as the first layer, the output matrix will measure  40 × 32. 
The maximum pooling layer is often used after a CNN layer in order to reduce the complexity 
of the output and prevent overfitting of the data. In our case , we choose a size of three. This means 
that the size of the output matrix of this layer is 13  × 32. 
The third and fourth 1D CNN layers are in charge of learning higher  level features. The outpu ts 
of those two layers are a 13 × 16 matrix and a 13  × 8 matrix.  
The average pooling layer is a pooling layer  used to further avoid overfitting. We will use the 
average value instead of the maximum value because it will give better results in this case. Th e output 
matrix has a size of 1 x 8 neurons.  
The fully connected layer with sigmoid activation is the final layer that will reduce the vector of 
height 8 to 1 for prediction (“positive”, “negative”).  
5. Experimental  results  
To conduct the tests, we used a  GeForce GTX2070 GPU card, and the Keras  (https://keras.io)  and 
Tensorflow  (https://www.tensorflow.org/)  libraries. DNN, CNN , and RNN models were applied to 
perform experiments with the different datasets described above, in order to analyze the performanc e 
of those algorithms using both word embedding and TF -IDF feature extraction.  
In all the experiments, we configure the parameter for our code , such as echoes = 5, batch size = 
4096, and k-fold = 10. 
Accuracy, AUC , and F-score were the metrics used to evaluate the performance of the models 
through all experiments. Since F -score is derived from recall and precision, we also show these two 
measures for reference purpose s.  
Sentiment140 was the first dataset to be proc essed. Its contents were labeled as positive or 
negative. Since this dataset contains a much larger number of tweets than the other datasets, we fir st 
analyzed the performance of the models induced from different subsets formed with different 
percentages o f the initial data, ranging from 10% to 100%. As shown in Figure 10  to Figure 15 , the 
combinations of feature extractors and deep learning techniques applied to those subsets produced 
different results for Sentiment140 data.  
 
Figure 10.  Accuracy values o f deep-learning models with TF-IDF and word embedding for different 
numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
Figure 10. Accuracy values of deep-learning models with TF-IDF and word embedding for di erent
numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset).

==== Page 19 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 19 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 29 
  
Figure 11.  Recall values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 12.  Precision values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 13.  F-score values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 14.  AUC values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
Figure 11. Recall values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 29 
  
Figure 11.  Recall values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 12.  Precision values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 13.  F-score values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 14.  AUC values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
Figure 12. Precision values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 29 
  
Figure 11.  Recall values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 12.  Precision values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 13.  F-score values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 14.  AUC values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
Figure 13. F-score values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset).
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 29 
  
Figure 11.  Recall values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 12.  Precision values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 13.  F-score values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different number s of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
 
Figure 14.  AUC values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset) . 
Figure 14. AUC values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent numbers of tweets (percentage of the dataset).

==== Page 20 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 20 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 29 
  
Figure 15.  Comparison of all  measures for RNN with TF -IDF (left) and word embedding (right) . 
An observation that is clearly seen in Figure 10  to Figure 15  is the best behavior of the models 
when using word embedding against TF -IDF regarding all metrics analyzed. This improvement is 
especially significant for RNN, which is the method providing the best results when used in 
conjunction with word embedding. On the contrary, RNN is the worst of the three analyzed methods 
when used with TF -IDF. Figure 14 shows the metric values yielded by the RNN models.  
We can also see in the graphs above that there are no significant difference s in the values of the 
evaluation measures between the three deep learning techniques in the case of word embedding, 
while in the case of TF -IDF the differences in the results of the three methods are important.  
Regarding the dataset size, its influence on the results is minimal for word embedding, being 
slightly greater and uneven for the TF -IDF method.  
Therefore, from the analysis of the results obtained with the Sentiment140 dataset, we can 
deduce that word embedding is a more robust technique than TF -IDF. In addition, its use would 
allow us to work with a subset of data containing 50% or 60% of the total sample at a lower 
computational cost and with hardly any di fference in the results.  
After this preliminary study, we conducted additional experiments , in which the methods were 
tested on other datasets. Some of them contain tweets, while others contain different types of reviews , 
as noted in Section 4.1. These dat asets contain significantly fewer examples than Sentiment140’s , 
which has  1.6 million entries, so there was no problem working with the complete datasets.  
Table 2 to Table 6 show the results of the datasets; Figure 16  to Figure 20  illustrate these results.  
These tables include the results of the complete Sentiment140 dataset, although as we found in the 
preliminary study, we could have used a subset of it and obtained similar results.  
The results obtained with the new datasets do nothing more than confirm t he conclusions 
obtained after the analysis of the results of the Sentiment140 dataset. In general, the best behavior is 
shown by the combination of RNN and word embedding, although there are some exceptions. These 
are produced in the “ book reviews” and “ music review” datasets , where the values of all the metrics 
are slightly higher for DNN + TF -IDF than for RNN + word embedding. For “book reviews”, the 
highest values for accuracy, recall, F -score, and AUC were given by CNN + word embedding. In 
addition, the Tweets Airline dataset is one of the datasets that shows the highest value s for all metrics 
in all case s. We can also highlight that the recall metric shows an uneven behavior, especially for the 
model that combines RNN and TF -IDF. The same behavior was s een in the preliminary study with 
the Sentiment140 dataset ( Figure 11 ). Likewise, as in the preliminary study, we can affirm that word 
embedding is a more appropriate technique than TF -IDF for performing sentiment analysis, despite 
the slight improvements obtained with TF -IDF for some data sets.  
Table 2. Accuracy comparison for datasets with two classes (positive and negative ). 
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Sentiment140  0.7649740
7 0.7668854
4 0.5695793
9 0.7881676
1 0.8006084
9 0.82819948  
Tweets Airline  0.8593694
4 0.8545145
7 0.8280922
6 0.8979309  0.9037343
9 0.90451624  
Figure 15. Comparison of all measures for RNN with TF-IDF (left) and word embedding (right).
An observation that is clearly seen in Figures 10–15 is the best behavior of the models when
using word embedding against TF-IDF regarding all metrics analyzed. This improvement is especially
signiﬁcant for RNN, which is the method providing the best results when used in conjunction with
word embedding. On the contrary, RNN is the worst of the three analyzed methods when used with
TF-IDF. Figure 14 shows the metric values yielded by the RNN models.
We can also see in the graphs above that there are no signiﬁcant di erences in the values of the
evaluation measures between the three deep learning techniques in the case of word embedding,
while in the case of TF-IDF the di erences in the results of the three methods are important.
Regarding the dataset size, its inﬂuence on the results is minimal for word embedding, being slightly
greater and uneven for the TF-IDF method.
Therefore, from the analysis of the results obtained with the Sentiment140 dataset, we can deduce
that word embedding is a more robust technique than TF-IDF. In addition, its use would allow us to
work with a subset of data containing 50% or 60% of the total sample at a lower computational cost
and with hardly any di erence in the results.
After this preliminary study, we conducted additional experiments, in which the methods were
tested on other datasets. Some of them contain tweets, while others contain di erent types of reviews,
as noted in Section 4.1. These datasets contain signiﬁcantly fewer examples than Sentiment140’s,
which has 1.6 million entries, so there was no problem working with the complete datasets.
Tables 2–6 show the results of the datasets; Figures 16–20 illustrate these results. These tables
include the results of the complete Sentiment140 dataset, although as we found in the preliminary
study, we could have used a subset of it and obtained similar results.
Table 2. Accuracy comparison for datasets with two classes (positive and negative).
DatasetsTF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
Sentiment140 0.76497407 0.76688544 0.56957939 0.78816761 0.80060849 0.82819948
Tweets Airline 0.85936944 0.85451457 0.82809226 0.8979309 0.90373439 0.90451624
Tweets SemEval 0.83674669 0.81377485 0.54857318 0.83674748 0.84313431 0.85172402
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.85232000 0.82300000 0.56392000 0.84572000 0.86072000 0.87052000
IMDB Movie Reviews (2) 0.85512000 0.80628002 0.58724000 0.80252000 0.82624000 0.86688000
Cornell Movie Reviews 0.70437264 0.67867751 0.50787764 0.70221434 0.71365671 0.76693790
Book Reviews 0.75876443 0.72741509 0.5169437 0.74560455 0.76630924 0.73347052
Music Reviews 0.76850000 0.69200000 0.5170000 0.70800000 0.74450000 0.73100000

==== Page 21 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 21 of 29
Table 3. The recall comparison for di erent datasets.
DatasetsTF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
Sentiment140 0.75775700 0.74076035 0.77731305 0.79096262 0.80080020 0.83692316
Tweets Airline 0.95565582 0.97003680 0.97417837 0.9577253 0.95924821 0.95086398
Tweets SemEval 0.80817204 0.7744086 0.09462366 0.80860215 0.81827957 0.83139785
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.84072000 0.80080000 0.46880000 0.84360000 0.84960000 0.86808000
IMDB Movie Reviews (2) 0.87112000 0.75744000 0.56088000 0.78304000 0.83248000 0.88832000
Cornell Movie Reviews 0.71468474 0.67811554 0.84203575 0.70455552 0.72050860 0.80943813
Book Reviews 0.74221810 0.73009689 0.63040610 0.73912595 0.81599670 0.74824778
Music Reviews 0.76500000 0.69700000 0.74200000 0.68600000 0.72900000 0.73600000
Table 4. The precision comparison for di erent datasets.
DatasetsTF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
Sentiment140 0.75775700 0.74076035 0.77731305 0.79096262 0.80080020 0.83692316
Tweets Airline 0.88451273 0.86396543 0.83664149 0.91759076 0.92284682 0.93061436
Tweets SemEval 0.83504669 0.81594219 0.58839133 0.83492767 0.84024502 0.84745555
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.85057402 0.83996428 0.61862397 0.84727512 0.8689903 0.87328478
IMDB Movie Reviews (2) 0.84410853 0.83943612 0.59209526 0.81478398 0.82221871 0.85179503
Cornell Movie Reviews 0.70070694 0.67920909 0.45431496 0.70142346 0.71117779 0.74808808
Book Reviews 0.77071809 0.72645030 0.56145983 0.74877856 0.74335207 0.73283058
Music Reviews 0.77097163 0.69126657 0.46068591 0.71900797 0.75328872 0.73186536
Table 5. The F-score comparison for di erent datasets.
DatasetsTF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
Sentiment140 0.76383225 0.75932297 0.64044056 0.78876610 0.80063705 0.82967613
Tweets Airline 0.91863362 0.91385701 0.90011208 0.93720980 0.94064543 0.94059646
Tweets SemEval 0.82114704 0.79433397 0.13751971 0.82130776 0.82884635 0.83874720
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.85057402 0.81871110 0.46834558 0.84540045 0.85908973 0.87020187
IMDB Movie Reviews (2) 0.85740157 0.79633290 0.57606508 0.79859666 0.82731754 0.86967419
Cornell Movie Reviews 0.70731859 0.67852670 0.59007189 0.70290291 0.71560412 0.77594109
Book Reviews 0.75501388 0.72758940 0.51163296 0.74364502 0.77728796 0.73395298
Music Reviews 0.76770393 0.69126657 0.56736672 0.70080624 0.74026385 0.73207829
Table 6. The AUC comparison for di erent datasets.
DatasetsTF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
Sentiment140 0.76499683 0.76535951 0.56950939 0.78816189 0.80062146 0.82818031
Tweets Airline 0.73510103 0.68790047 0.61740993 0.81170789 0.82367939 0.83767632
Tweets SemEval 0.83484059 0.81115021 0.51834041 0.83487221 0.84147827 0.85037175
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.85232000 0.82300000 0.56392000 0.84572000 0.86072000 0.87052000
IMDB Movie Reviews (2) 0.85512000 0.80628000 0.58724000 0.80252000 0.82624000 0.86688000
Cornell Movie Reviews 0.70437264 0.67867751 0.50787764 0.70221434 0.71365671 0.76693790
Book Reviews 0.75875593 0.72740157 0.51676458 0.74558854 0.76630592 0.73348794
Music Reviews 0.76850000 0.69200000 0.51700000 0.70800000 0.74450000 0.73207829

==== Page 22 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 22 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  20 of 29 
 Tweets Sem Eval 0.8367466
9 0.8137748
5 0.5485731
8 0.8367474
8 0.8431343
1 0.85172402  
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.8523200
0 0.8230000
0 0.5639200
0 0.8457200
0 0.8607200
0 0.87052000  
IMDB Movie Reviews (2)  0.8551200
0 0.8062800
2 0.5872400
0 0.8025200
0 0.8262400
0 0.86688000  
Cornell Movie Reviews  0.7043726
4 0.6786775
1 0.5078776
4 0.7022143
4 0.7136567
1 0.76693790  
Book Reviews  0.7587644
3 0.7274150
9 0.5169437  0.7456045
5 0.7663092
4 0.73347052  
Music Reviews  0.7685000
0 0.6920000
0 0.5170000  0.7080000
0 0.7445000
0 0.73100000  
 
Figure 16.  Accuracy values of deep -learning models with TF-IDF and word embedding for different 
datasets. 
Table 3. The recall comparison for different datasets. 
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Sentiment140  0.7577570
0 0.7407603
5 0.7773130
5 0.7909626
2 0.8008002
0 0.83692316  
Tweets Airline  0.9556558
2 0.9700368
0 0.9741783
7 0.9577253  0.9592482
1 0.95086398  
Tweets Sem Eval 0.8081720
4 0.7744086  0.0946236
6 0.8086021
5 0.8182795
7 0.83139785  
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.8407200
0 0.8008000
0 0.4688000
0 0.8436000
0 0.8496000
0 0.86808000  
IMDB Movie Reviews (2)  0.8711200
0 0.7574400
0 0.5608800
0 0.7830400
0 0.8324800
0 0.88832000  
Cornell Movie Reviews  0.7146847
4 0.6781155
4 0.8420357
5 0.7045555
2 0.7205086
0 0.80943813  
Book Reviews  0.7422181
0 0.7300968
9 0.6304061
0 0.7391259
5 0.8159967
0 0.74824778  
Music Reviews  0.7650000
0 0.6970000
0 0.7420000
0 0.6860000
0 0.7290000
0 0.73600000  
Figure 16. Accuracy values of deep-learning models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent datasets.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  21 of 29 
  
Figure 17.  Recall values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different datasets . 
Table 4. The precision comparison for different datasets.  
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Sentiment140  0.7577570
0 0.7407603
5 0.7773130
5 0.7909626
2 0.8008002
0 0.83692316  
Tweets Airline  0.8845127
3 0.8639654
3 0.8366414
9 0.9175907
6 0.9228468
2 0.93061436  
Tweets Sem Eval 0.8350466
9 0.8159421
9 0.5883913
3 0.8349276
7 0.8402450
2 0.84745555  
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.8505740
2 0.8399642
8 0.6186239
7 0.8472751
2 0.8689903  0.87328478  
IMDB Movie Reviews (2)  0.8441085
3 0.8394361
2 0.5920952
6 0.8147839
8 0.8222187
1 0.85179503  
Cornell Movie Reviews  0.7007069
4 0.6792090
9 0.4543149
6 0.7014234
6 0.7111777
9 0.74808808  
Book Reviews  0.7707180
9 0.7264503
0 0.5614598
3 0.7487785
6 0.7433520
7 0.73283058  
Music Reviews  0.7709716
3 0.6912665
7 0.4606859
1 0.7190079
7 0.7532887
2 0.73186536  
 
Figure 18.  Precision values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different datasets . 
Table 5. The F-score comparison for different datasets.  
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
Figure 17. Recall values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent datasets.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  21 of 29 
  
Figure 17.  Recall values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different datasets . 
Table 4. The precision comparison for different datasets.  
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Sentiment140  0.7577570
0 0.7407603
5 0.7773130
5 0.7909626
2 0.8008002
0 0.83692316  
Tweets Airline  0.8845127
3 0.8639654
3 0.8366414
9 0.9175907
6 0.9228468
2 0.93061436  
Tweets Sem Eval 0.8350466
9 0.8159421
9 0.5883913
3 0.8349276
7 0.8402450
2 0.84745555  
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.8505740
2 0.8399642
8 0.6186239
7 0.8472751
2 0.8689903  0.87328478  
IMDB Movie Reviews (2)  0.8441085
3 0.8394361
2 0.5920952
6 0.8147839
8 0.8222187
1 0.85179503  
Cornell Movie Reviews  0.7007069
4 0.6792090
9 0.4543149
6 0.7014234
6 0.7111777
9 0.74808808  
Book Reviews  0.7707180
9 0.7264503
0 0.5614598
3 0.7487785
6 0.7433520
7 0.73283058  
Music Reviews  0.7709716
3 0.6912665
7 0.4606859
1 0.7190079
7 0.7532887
2 0.73186536  
 
Figure 18.  Precision values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different datasets . 
Table 5. The F-score comparison for different datasets.  
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
Figure 18. Precision values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent datasets.

==== Page 23 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 23 of 29
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  22 of 29 
 DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Sentiment140  0.7638322
5 0.7593229
7 0.6404405
6 0.7887661
0 0.8006370
5 0.82967613  
Tweets Airline  0.9186336
2 0.9138570
1 0.9001120
8 0.9372098
0 0.9406454
3 0.94059646  
Tweets Sem Eval 0.8211470
4 0.7943339
7 0.1375197
1 0.8213077
6 0.8288463
5 0.83874720  
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.8505740
2 0.8187111
0 0.4683455
8 0.8454004
5 0.8590897
3 0.87020187  
IMDB Movie Reviews (2)  0.8574015
7 0.7963329
0 0.5760650
8 0.7985966
6 0.8273175
4 0.86967419  
Cornell Movie Reviews  0.7073185
9 0.6785267
0 0.5900718
9 0.7029029
1 0.7156041
2 0.77594109  
Book Reviews  0.7550138
8 0.7275894
0 0.5116329
6 0.7436450
2 0.7772879
6 0.73395298  
Music Reviews  0.7677039
3 0.6912665
7 0.5673667
2 0.7008062
4 0.7402638
5 0.73207829  
 
Figure 19.  F-score values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different datasets . 
Table 6. The AUC comparison for different d atasets. 
Datasets  TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Sentiment140  0.7649968
3 0.7653595
1 0.5695093
9 0.7881618
9 0.8006214
6 0.82818031  
Tweets Airline  0.7351010
3 0.6879004
7 0.6174099
3 0.8117078
9 0.8236793
9 0.83767632  
Tweets Sem Eval 0.8348405
9 0.8111502
1 0.5183404
1 0.8348722
1 0.8414782
7 0.85037175  
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 0.8523200
0 0.8230000
0 0.5639200
0 0.8457200
0 0.8607200
0 0.87052000  
IMDB Movie Reviews (2)  0.8551200
0 0.8062800
0 0.5872400
0 0.8025200
0 0.8262400
0 0.86688000  
Cornell Movie Reviews  0.7043726
4 0.6786775
1 0.5078776
4 0.7022143
4 0.7136567
1 0.76693790  
Book Reviews  0.7587559
3 0.7274015
7 0.5167645
8 0.7455885
4 0.7663059
2 0.73348794  
Music Reviews  0.7685000
0 0.6920000
0 0.5170000
0 0.7080000
0 0.7445000
0 0.73207829  
Figure 19. F-score values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent datasets.
Electronics 2020, 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW  23 of 29 
  
Figure 20.  AUC values of DNN, CNN , and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for 
different datasets . 
After analyzing the results concerning the quality of the predictions, it is necessary to obtain 
information on the computational cost associated with the induction of the models , since the 
differences between th e results or some of them are not very significant. The aim is to know the extent 
to which the best reliability values are obtained at the expense of a higher or lower computational 
cost.  
The CPU times are shown in  Table 7 and Table 8. Table 7 shows the p rocessing time required to 
induce the models from the Sentiment140 dataset and its subsets. Table 8 contains the CPU time 
required for all datasets involved in the experiments.  
The tables show that the use of TF -IDF, which produces less reliable models, r equires longer 
computational time than the use of word embedding. This is one more reason to consider this last 
technique as the most recommendable. However, RNN is the most time -consuming algorithm, both 
with TF-IDF and with word embedding. Given that the  improvements of RNN with respect to DNN 
and CNN are not very significant  in the latter case , the use of these two methods could be considered 
more appropriate when the computational cost needs to be reduced.  
Regarding the large Sentiment140 dataset shown in Table 8, if the sample size is reduced by 50% , 
the evaluation measures are not significantly affected, but the processing time is reduced by 50%.  
Moving to a comparison between the DNN and CNN models, CNN has slightly longer 
processing times, but it als o has much better evaluation measures than DNN.  
Table 7. CPU times of experiments with number s of tweets with a GPU.  
Dataset 
(%) TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
10 1 min 37 s 1 min 14 s 11 min 18 s 25.8 s 39.6 s 4 min 58 s 
20 2 min 32 s 2 min 25 s 22 min 14 s 41.3 s 1 min 18 s 11 min 59 s 
30 3 min 26 s 3 min 34 s 32 min 56 s 1 min 1 min 53 s 18 min 57 s 
40 4 min 19 s 4 min 53 s 44 min 1 s 1 min 21 s 2 min 32 s 25 min 9 s 
50 5 min 12 s 6 min 9 s 54 min 32 s 1 min 44 s 3 min 10 s 31 min 29 s 
60 6 min 33 s 7 min 23 s 1h 5 min 26 s 2 min 10 s 3 min 52 s 37 min 35 s 
70 7 min 47 s 10 min 20 s 1 h15 min5 s 2 min 45 s 4 min 38 s 44 min 16 s 
80 9 min 4 s 18 min 32 s 1 h27 min22 s 3 min 19 s 5 min 31 s 50 min 47 s 
90 10 min 14 s 29 min 49 s 1 h37 min59 s 3 min 47 s 6 min 12 s 57 min 3 s 
100 11 min 55 s 38 min 17 s 1 h48 min52 s 4 min 18 s 7 min 3 s 1 h 4 min 16 s 
Table 8. CPU times of experiments with number s of dataset s with a GPU. 
Dataset TF-IDF Word Embedding  
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN 
Figure 20. AUC values of DNN, CNN, and RNN models with TF-IDF and word embedding for
dierent datasets.
The results obtained with the new datasets do nothing more than conﬁrm the conclusions obtained
after the analysis of the results of the Sentiment140 dataset. In general, the best behavior is shown
by the combination of RNN and word embedding, although there are some exceptions. These are
produced in the “book reviews” and “music review” datasets, where the values of all the metrics are
slightly higher for DNN +TF-IDF than for RNN +word embedding. For “book reviews”, the highest
values for accuracy, recall, F-score, and AUC were given by CNN +word embedding. In addition,
the Tweets Airline dataset is one of the datasets that shows the highest values for all metrics in all
cases. We can also highlight that the recall metric shows an uneven behavior, especially for the model
that combines RNN and TF-IDF. The same behavior was seen in the preliminary study with the
Sentiment140 dataset (Figure 11). Likewise, as in the preliminary study, we can a rm that word
embedding is a more appropriate technique than TF-IDF for performing sentiment analysis, despite
the slight improvements obtained with TF-IDF for some data sets.
After analyzing the results concerning the quality of the predictions, it is necessary to obtain
information on the computational cost associated with the induction of the models, since the di erences
between the results or some of them are not very signiﬁcant. The aim is to know the extent to which
the best reliability values are obtained at the expense of a higher or lower computational cost.
The CPU times are shown in Tables 7 and 8. Table 7 shows the processing time required to induce
the models from the Sentiment140 dataset and its subsets. Table 8 contains the CPU time required for
all datasets involved in the experiments.

==== Page 24 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 24 of 29
Table 7. CPU times of experiments with numbers of tweets with a GPU.
Dataset
(%)TF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
10 1 min 37 s 1 min 14 s 11 min 18 s 25.8 s 39.6 s 4 min 58 s
20 2 min 32 s 2 min 25 s 22 min 14 s 41.3 s 1 min 18 s 11 min 59 s
30 3 min 26 s 3 min 34 s 32 min 56 s 1 min 1 min 53 s 18 min 57 s
40 4 min 19 s 4 min 53 s 44 min 1 s 1 min 21 s 2 min 32 s 25 min 9 s
50 5 min 12 s 6 min 9 s 54 min 32 s 1 min 44 s 3 min 10 s 31 min 29 s
60 6 min 33 s 7 min 23 s 1h 5 min 26 s 2 min 10 s 3 min 52 s 37 min 35 s
70 7 min 47 s 10 min 20 s 1 h15 min5 s 2 min 45 s 4 min 38 s 44 min 16 s
80 9 min 4 s 18 min 32 s 1 h27 min22 s 3 min 19 s 5 min 31 s 50 min 47 s
90 10 min 14 s 29 min 49 s 1 h37 min59 s 3 min 47 s 6 min 12 s 57 min 3 s
100 11 min 55 s 38 min 17 s 1 h48 min52 s 4 min 18 s 7 min 3 s 1 h 4 min 16 s
Table 8. CPU times of experiments with numbers of datasets with a GPU.
DatasetTF-IDF Word Embedding
DNN CNN RNN DNN CNN RNN
Sentiment140 11 min 55 s 3 8min 17 s 1h48 min 52 s 4 min 18 s 7 min 3 s 1 h 4 min 16 s
Tweets Airline 1 min 34.41 s 1 h 54 s 30.66 s 1 min 22 s 2 min 41 s
Tweets SemEval 20.53 s 24.5 s 23 min 52 s 26.75 s 1 min 11 s 2 min 43 s
IMDB Movie Reviews (1) 1 min 11 s 1 min 7 s 1 h25 min 48 s 21.13 s 32.66 s 7 min 42 s
IMDB Movie Reviews (2) 17.78 s 22.05 s 30 min 21 s 31.32 s 36.81 s 8 min 23 s
Cornell Movie Reviews 23.2 s 16.83 s 31 min 55 s 12.9 s 21.26 s 4 min 40 s
Book Reviews 11.93 s 10.12 s 21 min 9 s 16.21 s 20.6 s 2 min17 s
Music Reviews 26.48 s 17.35 s 29 min 50 s 13.94 s 16.89 s 4 min 42 s
The tables show that the use of TF-IDF, which produces less reliable models, requires longer
computational time than the use of word embedding. This is one more reason to consider this
last technique as the most recommendable. However, RNN is the most time-consuming algorithm,
both with TF-IDF and with word embedding. Given that the improvements of RNN with respect
to DNN and CNN are not very signiﬁcant in the latter case, the use of these two methods could be
considered more appropriate when the computational cost needs to be reduced.
Regarding the large Sentiment140 dataset shown in Table 8, if the sample size is reduced by 50%,
the evaluation measures are not signiﬁcantly a ected, but the processing time is reduced by 50%.
Moving to a comparison between the DNN and CNN models, CNN has slightly longer processing
times, but it also has much better evaluation measures than DNN.
From the analysis of overall accuracy, recall, precision, F-scores, AUC values, and CPU times,
we highlight some patterns for high and low performance of the sentiment analysis methods. We are
aware that di erent types of datasets inﬂuence the results of a sentiment analysis di erently [76].
 The DNN model is simple to implement and provides results within a short period of
time—around 1 min for the majority of datasets, except dataset Sentiment140, for which the model
took 12 min to obtain the results. Although the model is quick to train, the overall accuracy of the
model is average (around 75% to 80%) in all of the tested datasets, including tweets and reviews.
 The CNN model is also fast to train and test, although possibly a bit slower than DNN. The model
oers higher accuracy (over 80%) on both tweet and review datasets.
 The RNN model has the highest reliability when word embedding is applied, however its
computational time is also the highest. When using RNN with TF-IDF, it takes a longer time than
other models and results in lower accuracy (around 50%) in the sentiment analysis of tweet and
review datasets.
In comparative studies presented in [ 5,17,19,20], which were performed by using tweets or reviews
datasets, the evaluation of results was made only in terms of accuracy, however the processing time

==== Page 25 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 25 of 29
was not considered. Regarding the continuously expanding size and complexity of big data in the
future, it is crucial to consider both reliability and time, especially in critical systems requiring a fast
response [ 77]. In this work, two techniques (TF-IDF and word embedding) are examined on three deep
learning algorithms, which give an extended overview of performances of sentiment analysis using
deep learning techniques.
Finally, general summaries of the results archived in the experiments referenced earlier are
explained below:
 Three deep learning models (DNN, CNN, and RNN) were used to perform sentiment analysis
experiments. The CNN model was found to o er the best tradeo between the processing time
and the accuracy of results. Although the RNN model had the highest degree of accuracy when
used with word embedding, its processing time was 10 times longer than that of the CNN model.
The RNN model is not e ective when used with the TF-IDF technique, and its far higher processing
time leads to results that are not signiﬁcantly better. DNN is a simple deep learning model that has
average processing times and yields average results. Future research on deep learning models can
focus on ways of improving the tradeo between the accuracy of results and the processing times.
 Related techniques (TF-IDF and word embedding) are used to transfer text data (tweets, reviews)
into a numeric vector before feeding them into a deep learning model. The results when TF-IDF
is used are poorer than when word embedding is used. Moreover, the TF-IDF technique used
with the RNN model takes has a longer processing time and yields less reliable results. However,
when RNN is used with word embedding, the results are much better. Future work can explore
how to improve these and other techniques to achieve even better results.
 The results from the datasets containing tweets and IMDB movie review datasets are better than
the results from the other datasets containing reviews. Regarding tweets data, the models induced
from the Tweets Airline dataset, focused on a speciﬁc topic, show better performance than those
built from datasets about generic topics.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we described the core of deep learning models and related techniques that have
been applied to sentiment analysis for social network data. We used word embedding and TF-IDF
to transform input data before feeding that data into deep learning models. The architectures of
DNN, CNN, and RNN were analyzed and combined with word embedding and TF-IDF to perform
sentiment analysis. We conducted some experiments to evaluate DNN, CNN, and RNN models on
datasets of di erent topics, including tweets and reviews. We also discussed related research in the
ﬁeld. This information, combined with the results of our experiments, gives us a broad perspective on
applying deep learning models for sentiment analysis, as well as combining these models with text
preprocessing techniques.
After the analysis of 32 papers, DNN, CNN, and hybrid approaches were identiﬁed as the
most widely used models for sentiment polarity analysis. Another conclusion extracted from the
analysis was the fact that common techniques, such as CNN, RNN, and LSTM, are individually tested
in these studies on di erent datasets, however there is a lack of a comparative analysis for them.
In addition, the results presented in most papers are given in terms of reliability, without considering
computational time.
The experiments conducted in this work were designed to help ﬁll the gaps mentioned above.
We studied the impacts of di erent types of datasets, feature extraction techniques, and deep learning
models, with a special focus on the problem of sentiment polarity analysis. The results show that it is
better to combine deep learning techniques with word embedding than with TF-IDF when performing
a sentiment analysis. The experiments also revealed that CNN outperforms other models, presenting a
good balance between accuracy and CPU runtime. RNN reliability is slightly higher than CNN
reliability with most datasets but its computational time is much longer. One last conclusion derived
from the study is the observation that the e ectiveness of the algorithms depends largely on the

==== Page 26 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 26 of 29
characteristics of the datasets, hence the convenience of testing deep learning methods with more
datasets in order to cover a greater diversity of characteristics.
In future work, we will focus on exploring hybrid approaches, where multiple models and
techniques are combined in order to enhance the sentiment classiﬁcation accuracy achieved by the
individual models or techniques, as well as to reduce the computational cost. The aim is to extend
the comparative study to include both new methods and new types of data. Therefore, the reliability
and processing time of hybrid models will be evaluated with several types of data, such as status,
comments, and news on social media. We will also intend to address the problem of aspect sentiment
analysis in order to gain deeper insight into user sentiments by associating them with speciﬁc features
or topics. This has great relevance for many companies, since it allows them to obtain detailed feedback
from users, and thus know which aspects of their products or services should be improved.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.C.D. and M.N.M.-G.; methodology, M.N.M.-G.; software, N.C.D.;
validation, M.N.M.-G., and F.D.l.P .; formal analysis, N.C.D., and M.N.M.-G.; investigation, N.C.D.; data curation,
N.C.D.; writing—original draft preparation, N.C.D.; writing—review and editing, M.N.M.-G. and F.D.l.P .;
visualization, N.C.D.; supervision, M.N.M.-G. and F.D.l.P .; project administration, F.D.l.P .; funding acquisition,
F.D.l.P . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the Spanish government and European (Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo
Regional) FEDER funds, project InEDGEMobility: Movilidad inteligente y sostenible soportada por Sistemas
Multi-agentes y Edge Computing (RTI2018-095390-B-C32).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. Pouli, V .; Kafetzoglou, S.; Tsiropoulou, E.E.; Dimitriou, A.; Papavassiliou, S. Personalized multimedia content
retrieval through relevance feedback techniques for enhanced user experience. In Proceedings of the 2015
13th International Conference on Telecommunications (ConTEL), Graz, Austria, 13–15 July 2015; pp. 1–8.
2. Thai, M.T.; Wu, W.; Xiong, H. Big Data in Complex and Social Networks ; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2016.
3. Cambria, E.; Das, D.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Feraco, A. A Practical Guide to Sentiment Analysis ; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2017.
4. Hussein, D.M.E.-D.M. A survey on sentiment analysis challenges. J. King Saud Univ. Eng. Sci. 2018 ,30,
330–338. [CrossRef]
5. Sohangir, S.; Wang, D.; Pomeranets, A.; Khoshgoftaar, T.M. Big Data: Deep Learning for ﬁnancial sentiment
analysis. J. Big Data 2018 ,5, 3. [CrossRef]
6. Jangid, H.; Singhal, S.; Shah, R.R.; Zimmermann, R. Aspect-Based Financial Sentiment Analysis using Deep
Learning. In Proceedings of the Companion of the The Web Conference 2018 on The Web Conference, Lyon,
France, 23–27 April 2018; pp. 1961–1966.
7. Keenan, M.J.S. Advanced Positioning, Flow, and Sentiment Analysis in Commodity Markets ; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ,
USA, 2018.
8. Satapathy, R.; Cambria, E.; Hussain, A. Sentiment Analysis in the Bio-Medical Domain ; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2017.
9. Rajput, A. Natural Language Processing, Sentiment Analysis, and Clinical Analytics. In Innovation in Health
Informatics ; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 79–97.
10. Qian, J.; Niu, Z.; Shi, C. Sentiment Analysis Model on Weather Related Tweets with Deep Neural Network.
In Proceedings of the 2018 10th International Conference on Machine Learning and Computing, Macau,
China, 26–28 February 2018; pp. 31–35.
11. Pham, D.-H.; Le, A.-C. Learning multiple layers of knowledge representation for aspect based sentiment
analysis. Data Knowl. Eng. 2018 ,114, 26–39. [CrossRef]
12. Preethi, G.; Krishna, P .V .; Obaidat, M.S.; Saritha, V .; Yenduri, S. Application of deep learning to sentiment
analysis for recommender system on cloud. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Computer,
Information and Telecommunication Systems (CITS), Dalian, China, 21–23 July 2017; pp. 93–97.

==== Page 27 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 27 of 29
13. Ain, Q.T.; Ali, M.; Riaz, A.; Noureen, A.; Kamran, M.; Hayat, B.; Rehman, A. Sentiment analysis using deep
learning techniques: A review. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2017 ,8, 424.
14. Gao, Y.; Rong, W.; Shen, Y.; Xiong, Z. Convolutional neural network based sentiment analysis using Adaboost
combination. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 24–29 July 2016; pp. 1333–1338.
15. Hassan, A.; Mahmood, A. Deep learning approach for sentiment analysis of short texts. In Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on Control, Automation and Robotics (ICCAR), Nagoya, Japan,
24–26 April 2017; pp. 705–710.
16. Kraus, M.; Feuerriegel, S. Sentiment analysis based on rhetorical structure theory: Learning deep neural
networks from discourse trees. Expert Syst. Appl. 2019 ,118, 65–79. [CrossRef]
17. Li, L.; Goh, T.-T.; Jin, D. How textual quality of online reviews a ect classiﬁcation performance: A case of
deep learning sentiment analysis. Neural Comput. Appl. 2018 , 1–29. [CrossRef]
18. Singhal, P .; Bhattacharyya, P . Sentiment Analysis and Deep Learning: A Survey ; Center for Indian Language
Technology, Indian Institute of Technology: Bombay, Indian, 2016.
19. Alharbi, A.S.M.; de Doncker, E. Twitter sentiment analysis with a deep neural network: An enhanced
approach using user behavioral information. Cogn. Syst. Res. 2019 ,54, 50–61. [CrossRef]
20. Abid, F.; Alam, M.; Yasir, M.; Li, C.J. Sentiment analysis through recurrent variants latterly on convolutional
neural network of Twitter. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2019 ,95, 292–308. [CrossRef]
21. Aggarwal, C.C. Neural Networks and Deep Learning ; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2018.
22. Zhang, L.; Wang, S.; Liu, B. Deep learning for sentiment analysis: A survey. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov.
2018 ,8, e1253. [CrossRef]
23. Britz, D. Recurrent Neural Networks Tutorial, Part 1–Introduction to Rnns. Available online:
http://www.wildml.com /2015/09/recurrent-neural-networkstutorial-part-1-introduction-to-rnns /(accessed
on 12 March 2020).
24. Hochreiter, S.; Schmidhuber, J. LSTM can solve hard long time lag problems. In Proceedings of the Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, Denver, CO, USA, 2–5 December 1996; pp. 473–479.
25. Ruangkanokmas, P .; Achalakul, T.; Akkarajitsakul, K. Deep Belief Networks with Feature Selection for
Sentiment Classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2016 7th International Conference on Intelligent Systems,
Modelling and Simulation (ISMS), Bangkok, Thailand, 25–27 January 2016; pp. 9–14.
26. Socher, R.; Lin, C.C.; Manning, C.; Ng, A.Y. Parsing natural scenes and natural language with recursive
neural networks. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-11),
Bellevue, WA, USA, 28 June–2 July 2011; pp. 129–136.
27. Long, H.; Liao, B.; Xu, X.; Yang, J. A hybrid deep learning model for predicting protein hydroxylation sites.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018 ,19, 2817. [CrossRef]
28. Vateekul, P .; Koomsubha, T. A study of sentiment analysis using deep learning techniques on Thai Twitter
data. In Proceedings of the 2016 13th International Joint Conference on Computer Science and Software
Engineering (JCSSE), Khon Kaen, Thailand, 13–15 July 2016; pp. 1–6.
29. Ghosh, R.; Ravi, K.; Ravi, V . A novel deep learning architecture for sentiment classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the 2016 3rd International Conference on Recent Advances in Information Technology (RAIT), Dhanbad,
India, 3–5 March 2016; pp. 511–516.
30. Bhavitha, B.; Rodrigues, A.P .; Chiplunkar, N.N. Comparative study of machine learning techniques in
sentimental analysis. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Inventive Communication and
Computational Technologies (ICICCT), Coimbatore, India, 10–11 March 2017; pp. 216–221.
31. Salas-Z árate, M.P .; Medina-Moreira, J.; Lagos-Ortiz, K.; Luna-Aveiga, H.; Rodriguez-Garcia, M.A.;
Valencia-Garc ía, R.J.C. Sentiment analysis on tweets about diabetes: An aspect-level approach. Comput. Math.
Methods Med. 2017 ,2017 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Huq, M.R.; Ali, A.; Rahman, A. Sentiment analysis on Twitter data using KNN and SVM. IJACSA Int. J. Adv.
Comput. Sci. Appl. 2017 ,8, 19–25.
33. Pinto, D.; McCallum, A.; Wei, X.; Croft, W.B. Table extraction using conditional random ﬁelds. In Proceedings
of the 26th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Informaion
Retrieval, Toronto, ON, Canada, 28 July–1 August 2003; pp. 235–242.

==== Page 28 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 28 of 29
34. Soni, S.; Shara , A. Sentiment analysis of customer reviews based on hidden markov model. In Proceedings
of the 2015 International Conference on Advanced Research in Computer Science Engineering & Technology
(ICARCSET 2015), Unnao, India, 6 March 2015; pp. 1–5.
35. Zhang, X.; Zheng, X. Comparison of Text Sentiment Analysis Based on Machine Learning. In Proceedings of
the 2016 15th International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Computing (ISPDC), Fuzhou, China,
8–10 July 2016; pp. 230–233.
36. Malik, V .; Kumar, A. Communication. Sentiment Analysis of Twitter Data Using Naive Bayes Algorithm.
Int. J. Recent Innov. Trends Comput. Commun. 2018 ,6, 120–125.
37. Mehra, N.; Khandelwal, S.; Patel, P . Sentiment Identiﬁcation Using Maximum Entropy Analysis of Movie Reviews ;
Stanford University: Stanford, CA, USA, 2002.
38. Wu, H.; Li, J.; Xie, J. Maximum entropy-based sentiment analysis of online product reviews in Chinese.
InAutomotive, Mechanical and Electrical Engineering ; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2017; pp. 559–562.
39. Firmino Alves, A.L.; Baptista, C.d.S.; Firmino, A.A.; Oliveira, M.G.d.; Paiva, A.C.D. A Comparison of
SVM versus naive-bayes techniques for sentiment analysis in tweets: A case study with the 2013 FIFA
confederations cup. In Proceedings of the 20th Brazilian Symposium on Multimedia and the Web, Jo ão Pessoa,
Brazil, 18–21 November 2014; pp. 123–130.
40. Pandey, A.C.; Rajpoot, D.S.; Saraswat, M. Twitter sentiment analysis using hybrid cuckoo search method.
Inf. Process. Manag. 2017 ,53, 764–779. [CrossRef]
41. Medhat, W.; Hassan, A.; Korashy, H. Sentiment analysis algorithms and applications: A survey. Ain Shams
Eng. J. 2014 ,5, 1093–1113. [CrossRef]
42. Mikolov, T.; Sutskever, I.; Chen, K.; Corrado, G.S.; Dean, J. Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality. In Proceedings of the Advances in neural Information Processing Systems,
Lake Tahoe, NV , USA, 5–10 December 2013; pp. 3111–3119.
43. Jain, A.P .; Dandannavar, P . Application of machine learning techniques to sentiment analysis. In Proceedings
of the 2016 2nd International Conference on Applied and Theoretical Computing and Communication
Technology (iCATccT), Karnataka, India, 21–23 July 2016; pp. 628–632.
44. Tang, D.; Qin, B.; Liu, T. Deep learning for sentiment analysis: Successful approaches and future challenges.
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2015 ,5, 292–303. [CrossRef]
45. Sharef, N.M.; Zin, H.M.; Nadali, S. Overview and Future Opportunities of Sentiment Analysis Approaches
for Big Data. JCS2016 ,12, 153–168. [CrossRef]
46. Rojas-Barahona, L.M. Deep learning for sentiment analysis. Lang. Linguist. Compass 2016 ,10, 701–719.
[CrossRef]
47. Roshanfekr, B.; Khadivi, S.; Rahmati, M. Sentiment analysis using deep learning on Persian texts.
In Proceedings of the 2017 Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE), Tehran, Iran, 2–4 May 2017;
pp. 1503–1508.
48. Jeong, B.; Yoon, J.; Lee, J.-M. Social media mining for product planning: A product opportunity mining
approach based on topic modeling and sentiment analysis. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2019 ,48, 280–290. [CrossRef]
49. Gupta, U.; Chatterjee, A.; Srikanth, R.; Agrawal, P . A sentiment-and-semantics-based approach for emotion
detection in textual conversations. arXiv 2017 , arXiv:1707.06996.
50. Ramadhani, A.M.; Goo, H.S. Twitter sentiment analysis using deep learning methods. In Proceedings of
the 2017 7th International Annual Engineering Seminar (InAES), Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 1–2 August 2017;
pp. 1–4.
51. Paredes-Valverde, M.A.; Colomo-Palacios, R.; Salas-Z árate, M.D.P .; Valencia-Garc ía, R. Sentiment analysis in
Spanish for improvement of products and services: A deep learning approach. Sci. Program. 2017 ,2017 .
[CrossRef]
52. Yang, C.; Zhang, H.; Jiang, B.; Li, K.J. Aspect-based sentiment analysis with alternating coattention networks.
Inf. Process. Manag. 2019 ,56, 463–478. [CrossRef]
53. Do, H.H.; Prasad, P .; Maag, A.; Alsadoon, A.J. Deep Learning for Aspect-Based Sentiment Analysis:
A Comparative Review. Expert Syst. Appl. 2019 ,118, 272–299. [CrossRef]
54. Schmitt, M.; Steinheber, S.; Schreiber, K.; Roth, B. Joint Aspect and Polarity Classiﬁcation for Aspect-based
Sentiment Analysis with End-to-End Neural Networks. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1808.09238.
55. Balabanovic, M.; Shoham, Y. Combining content-based and collaborative recommendation. Commun. ACM
1997 ,40, 66–72. [CrossRef]

==== Page 29 ====
Electronics 2020 ,9, 483 29 of 29
56. Wang, Y.; Wang, M.; Xu, W. A sentiment-enhanced hybrid recommender system for movie recommendation:
A big data analytics framework. Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. 2018 ,2018 . [CrossRef]
57. Singh, V .K.; Mukherjee, M.; Mehta, G.K. Combining collaborative ﬁltering and sentiment classiﬁcation for
improved movie recommendations. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Multi-disciplinary
Trends in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Hyderabad, India, 7–9 December 2011; pp. 38–50.
58. Chen, Z.; Liu, B. Lifelong machine learning. Synth. Lect. Artif. Intell. Mach. Learn. 2018 ,12, 1–207. [CrossRef]
59. Stai, E.; Kafetzoglou, S.; Tsiropoulou, E.E.; Papavassiliou, S.J. A holistic approach for personalization,
relevance feedback & recommendation in enriched multimedia content. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2018 ,77,
283–326.
60. Wu, C.; Wu, F.; Wu, S.; Yuan, Z.; Liu, J.; Huang, Y. Semi-supervised dimensional sentiment analysis with
variational autoencoder. Knowl. Based Syst. 2019 ,165, 30–39. [CrossRef]
61. Zhang, Z.; Zou, Y.; Gan, C. Textual sentiment analysis via three di erent attention convolutional neural
networks and cross-modality consistent regression. Neurocomputing 2018 ,275, 1407–1415. [CrossRef]
62. Tang, D.; Zhang, M. Deep Learning in Sentiment Analysis. In Deep Learning in Natural Language Processing ;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2018; pp. 219–253.
63. Araque, O.; Corcuera-Platas, I.; Sanchez-Rada, J.F.; Iglesias, C.A. Enhancing deep learning sentiment analysis
with ensemble techniques in social applications. Expert Syst. Appl. 2017 ,77, 236–246. [CrossRef]
64. Liu, J.; Chang, W.-C.; Wu, Y.; Yang, Y. Deep learning for extreme multi-label text classiﬁcation. In Proceedings
of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
Tokyo, Japan, 7–11 August 2017; pp. 115–124.
65. Chen, M.; Wang, S.; Liang, P .P .; Baltrušaitis, T.; Zadeh, A.; Morency, L.-P . Multimodal sentiment analysis with
word-level fusion and reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction, Glasgow, UK, 13–17 November 2017; pp. 163–171.
66. Al-Sallab, A.; Baly, R.; Hajj, H.; Shaban, K.B.; El-Hajj, W.; Badaro, G. Aroma: A recursive deep learning
model for opinion mining in arabic as a low resource language. ACM Trans. Asian Low-Resour. Lang. Inf.
Process. TALLIP 2017 ,16, 1–20. [CrossRef]
67. Kumar, S.; Gahalawat, M.; Roy, P .P .; Dogra, D.P .; Kim, B.-G.J.E. Exploring Impact of Age and Gender on
Sentiment Analysis Using Machine Learning. Electronics 2020 ,9, 374. [CrossRef]
68. Available online: http: //help.sentiment140.com /site-functionality (accessed on 12 March 2020).
69. Available online: https: //www.kaggle.com /crowdflower /twitter-airline-sentiment (accessed on 12 March 2020).
70. Available online: http: //alt.qcri.org /semeval2017 /(accessed on 12 March 2020).
71. Available online: https: //www.kaggle.com /c/word2vec-nlp-tutorial /data (accessed on 12 March 2020).
72. Maas, A.L.; Daly, R.E.; Pham, P .T.; Huang, D.; Ng, A.Y.; Potts, C. Learning word vectors for sentiment
analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies-Volume 1, Portland, OR, USA, 19–24 June 2011; pp. 142–150.
73. Available online: http: //www.cs.cornell.edu /people /pabo /movie-review-data /(accessed on 12 March 2020).
74. Blitzer, J.; Dredze, M.; Pereira, F. Biographies, bollywood, boom-boxes and blenders: Domain adaptation for
sentiment classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, Prague, Czech Republic, 23–30 June 2007; pp. 440–447.
75. Kim, Y.; Sidney, J.; Buus, S.; Sette, A.; Nielsen, M.; Peters, B. Dataset size and composition impact the reliability
of performance benchmarks for peptide-MHC binding predictions. BMC Bioinform. 2014 ,15, 241. [CrossRef]
76. Choi, Y.; Lee, H.J. Data properties and the performance of sentiment classiﬁcation for electronic commerce
applications. Inf. Syst. Front. 2017 ,19, 993–1012. [CrossRef]
77. Neppalli, V .K.; Caragea, C.; Squicciarini, A.; Tapia, A.; Stehle, S.J. Sentiment analysis during Hurricane Sandy
in emergency response. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 2017 ,21, 213–222. [CrossRef]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

