==== Page 1 ====
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Shadows of quantum machine learning
Soﬁene Jerbi1,2, Casper Gyurik3, Simon C. Marshall3, Riccardo Molteni3&
Vedran Dunjko3
Quantum machine learning is often high lighted as one of the most promising
practical applications fo r which quantum compute rs could provide a com-
putational advantage. However, a maj or obstacle to the widespread use of
quantum machine learning models in practice is that these models, even oncetrained, still require access to a quantu m computer in order to be evaluated on
new data. To solve this issue, we intro duce a class of quantum models where
quantum resources are only required during training, while the deployment ofthe trained model is classical. Speci ﬁcally, the training phase of our models
ends with the generation of a ‘shadow model ’from which the classical
deployment becomes possible. We prov e that: (i) this class of models is uni-
versal for classically-deployed quantum machine learning; (ii) it does haverestricted learning capacities compared to ‘fully quantum ’models, but none-
theless (iii) it achieves a provable learning advantage over fully classical lear-ners, contingent on widely believed assu mptions in complexity theory. These
results provide compelling eviden ce that quantum machine learning can
confer learning advantages across a subs tantially broader range of scenarios,
where quantum computers are exclusively employed during the trainingphase. By enabling classi cal deployment, our appro ach facilitates the imple-
mentation of quantum machine learning m odels in various practical contexts.
Quantum machine learning is a rapidly growing ﬁeld1–3driven by its
potential to achieve quantum advantages in practical applications. Aparticularly interesting approach to make quantum machine learningapplicable in the near term is to develop learning models based on
parametrized quantum circuits
4–6. Indeed, such quantum models have
already been shown to achieve good learning performance in bench-marking tasks, both in numerical simulations
7–11and on actual quantum
hardware12–15. Moreover, based on widely believed cryptography
assumptions, these models also hold the promise to solve certainlearning tasks that are intractable for classical algorithms
16,17, including
predicting ground state properties of highly-interacting quantumsystems
18.
Despite these advances, quantum machine learning is facing a
major obstacle for its use in practice. A typical work ﬂow of a machine
learning model involved, e.g., in driving autonomous vehicles, is divi-ded into: (i) a training phase, where the model is trained, typically using
training data or by reinforcement; followed by (ii) a deployment phase,where the trained model is evaluated on new input data. For quantum
machine learning models, both of these phases require access to aquantum computer. But given that in many practical machine learningapplications, the trained model is meant for a widespread deployment,
the current scarcity of quantum computing access dramatically redu-
ces the applicability of quantum machine learning. One way ofaddressing this problem is by generating shadow models out ofquantum machine learning models. That is, we propose inserting ashadowing phase between the training and deployment, where aquantum computer is used to collect information on the quantummodel. Then a classical computer can use this information to evaluatethe model on new data during the deployment phase.
The conceptual idea of generating shadows of quantum models
was already proposed by Schreiber et al.
19, albeit under the terminol-
ogy of classical surrogates. In that work, as well as in that of Landmanet al.
20, the authors make use of the general expression of quantum
models as trigonometric polynomials21to learn the FourierReceived: 9 May 2024
Accepted: 21 June 2024
Check for updates
1Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.2Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems, Freie Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.3applied Quantum algorithms (aQa), Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. e-mail: soﬁene.jerbi@fu-berlin.de
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 11234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

==== Page 2 ====
representation of trained models and evaluate them classically on new
data. However, these works also suggest that a classical model couldpotentially be trained directly on the training data and achieve thesame performance as the shadow model, thus circumventing the needfor a quantum model in the ﬁrst place. This raises the concern that all
quantum models that are compatible with a classical deploymentwould also lose all quantum advantage, hence severely limiting theprospects for a widespread use of quantum machine learning.
Therefore, two natural open questions are raised:
1. Can shadow models achieve a quantum advantage over entirely
classical (classically trained and classically evaluated) models?
2. Do there exist quantum models that do not admit ef ﬁciently
evaluatable shadow models?
In this work, we resolve both of these key open questions. We
propose a general de ﬁnition for shadow models, rooted in the fun-
damental idea that quantum machine learning models can be uni-versally expressed as linear models
22. This formulation of shadow
models allows us to leverage various results and techniques from
quantum information theory for the analysis of this model class. From
a practical perspective, employing shadow tomographytechniques
23–26allows to easily construct diverse shadow models that
will resonate with the practitioners of quantum machine learning.Furthermore, in our exploration of the computational capabilities ofshadow models, we ﬁnd them to capture a distinct computational
class. Speci ﬁcally, we demonstrate that, under widely believed cryp-
tography assumptions, there exist learning tasks where shadow mod-els exhibit a provable quantum advantage over fully classical models.However, contrary to this advantage, we also establish that there existquantum models that are strictly more powerful than the class of
shadow models, based on common assumptions in complexity theory.
For ease of exposition, we will ﬁrst adhere to a working de ﬁnition
of a shadow model as a model that is trained on a quantum computer,but can be evaluated classically on new input data with the help ofinformation generated by a quantum computer (i.e., quantum-generated advice) that is independent of the new data. We will(informally) call a model “shadow ﬁable" if there exists a method of
turning it into a shadow model. In the Section “General shadow mod-
els”,w ew i l lm a k eo u rd e ﬁnitions more precise.
Results
Theﬂipped model
The construction of our shadow models starts from a simple yet key
observation: all standard quantum machine learning models forsupervised learning can be expressed as linear models
22.T od e l v ei n t o
this claim, we ﬁrst draw upon early works that utilized parametrized
quantum circuits in machine learning7,12. These works proposedquantum models that are naturally expressed as linear functions of the
form
fθðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOðθÞ/C138 ð 1Þ
where ρ(x) are quantum states that encode classical data x2Xand
O(θ) are parametrized observables whose inner product with ρ(x)
deﬁnesfθ(x) (see Fig. 1). In a regression task, one would use such a
model to assign a real-valued label to an input x, while in classi ﬁcation
tasks, one would additionally apply, e.g., a sign function, to discretize
its output into a class. From a circuit picture, such models can beevaluated on a quantum computer by: (i) preparing an initial state ρ
0,
e.g., ∣0i0h∣/C10n, (ii) evolving it under a data-dependent circuit U(x),
(iii) followed by a variational circuit V(θ), (iv) before ﬁnally measuring
the expectation value of a Hermitian observable O.T o g e t h e r ,s t e p s( i )
and (ii) de ﬁne
ρðxÞ=UðxÞρ0UyðxÞ, ð2Þ
while steps (iii) and (iv) de ﬁne
OðθÞ=VyðθÞOVðθÞ: ð3Þ
Since the early works, it is known that quantum linear models also
capture quantum kernel models as a special case27, simply by making
O(θ) directly dependent on the training data of the learning task.
Perhaps more surprisingly, quantum linear models can also encom-pass more general data re-uploading models, composed of severallayers of data encoding and variational processing U
1(x)V1(θ)U2(x)…
Indeed, data re-uploading models can be mapped to linear modelsthrough circuit transformations (e.g., gate teleportation) that relocateall data-encoding gates to the ﬁrst layer of the circuit
22.
Flipped model de ﬁnition
The de ﬁnition of a quantum linear model in Eq. ( 1) can in general
accommodate any pair of Hermitian operators in place of ρ(x),O(θ).
However, due to how these models are evaluated on a quantumcomputer, one commonly works under the constraint that ρ(x)d eﬁnes
a quantum state (i.e., a positive semi-de ﬁnite operator with unit trace).
Indeed, from an operational perspective, ρ(x) must be physically pre-
pared on a quantum device before being measured with respect to theobservable O(θ) (which only needs to be Hermitian in order to be a
valid observable).
For reasons that will become clearer from the shadowing per-
spective, we de ﬁne a so-called ﬂipped model, where we ﬂi pt h er o l eo f
Fig. 1 | Quantum and shadow models. (left) Conventional quantum models can be
expressed as inner products between a data-encoding quantum state ρ(x)a n da
parametrized observable O(θ). The resulting linear model fθðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOðθÞ/C138
naturally corresponds to a quantum computation, depicted here. (middle) Wedeﬁneﬂipped models f
θðxÞ=T r½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138as quantum linear models where the role
of the quantum state ρ(θ) and the observable O(x)i sﬂipped compared to con-
ventional models. (right) Flipped models are associated to natural shadow models:one can use techniques from shadow tomography to construct a classical repre-sentation ^ρðθÞof the parametrized state ρ(θ) (during the shadowing phase), suchthat, for encoding observables O(x) that are classically representable (e.g., linear
combinations of Pauli observables), ^ρðθÞcan be used by a classical algorithm to
evaluate the model f
θ(x) on new input data (during the evaluation phase). More
generally, a shadow model is de ﬁned by (i) a shadowing phase where a (bit-string)
advice ω(θ) is generated by the evaluation of multiple quantum circuits
W1(θ),…,WM(θ), and (ii) an evaluation phase where this advice is used by a classical
algorithm A,a l o n gw i t hn e wi n p u td a t a xto evaluate their labelsefθðxÞ. In the Sec-
tion “General shadow models ”, we show that under this general de ﬁnition, all
shadow models are shadows of ﬂipped models.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 2

==== Page 3 ====
ρ(x)a n d O(θ). That is, we consider
fθðxÞ=T r½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138 ð 4Þ
where ρ(θ) is a parametrized quantum state and O(x) is an observable
that encodes the data and can take more general forms than Eq. ( 3)a s
we will see next. This model also corresponds to a straightforward
quantum computation as ρ(θ) can be physically prepared before being
measured with respect to O(x).
As i m p l ee x a m p l eo f ﬂipped model is for instance de ﬁned by:
ρðθÞ=VðθÞρ0VyðθÞ&OðxÞ=Xm
j=1wjðxÞPj ð5Þ
for an initial state ρ0, a variational circuit V(θ), and a collection of Pauli
observables fPjgm
j=1weighted by data-dependent weights wjðxÞ2R.
One can evaluate this model by repeatedly preparing ρ(θ)o na
quantum computer, measuring it in a Pauli basis speci ﬁed by a Pj,a n d
weighting the outcome by wj(x). For other examples of ﬂipped models,
see Supplementary Section 1.
As opposed to conventional quantum linear models, ﬂipped mod-
els are well-suited to construct shadow models. Since the variationaloperators ρ(θ) are quantum states, one can st raightforwardly use tech-
niques from shadow tomography
23to construct classical shadows ^ρðθÞ
of these states. What we call classical shadows ^ρðθÞhere are collections
of measurement outcomes obtained from copies of ρ(θ)t h a tc a nb e
used to classically approximate expectation values of certain obser-vables O(for a certain restricted family). If we take these observables to
be our data- dependent O(x), then we end up with a classical modelef
θðxÞ
that approximates our ﬂipped model. Note here that one has total
freedom on the classical shadow techniques they may use to de ﬁne their
shadow models, and a plethora of protocols have already been pro-posed in the literature
23–26. But it is important to keep in mind that each
of these protocols comes with its limitations, as it may restrict the classof states ρ(θ) or the class of observables O(x)f o rw h i c ha ne f ﬁcient and
faithful shadow model can be constructed. By “efﬁcient ”we refer here to
the number of measurements performed on ρ(θ)a n dt h et i m ec o m -
plexity of estimating the expectation values of observables O(x)f r o m
these measurements. And by “faithful ”we refer to the approximation
error between the shadow modelef
θðxÞresulting from the shadow
protocol and the original ﬂipped model fθ(x). For instance, in the
example of Eq. ( 5), we know that if all Pauli operators fPjgm
j=1arek-local,
theneOð3kB2ε/C02Þmeasurements of ρ(θ), where B=m a xxPm
j=1jwiðxÞj,
are suf ﬁcient to guarantee maxx∣efθðxÞ/C0fθðxÞ∣≤εwith high probability.
But for non-local Pauli operators (i.e., large k), this protocol becomes
highly inef ﬁcient if we want to guarantee a low error ε.
Importantly, shadow ﬁedﬂipped models are not limited to con-
structions based on classical shadow protocols. Given that the statesρ(θ) are not given to us a black-box (as is generally assumed in shadow
tomography), one can use prior knowledge on these states to con-
struct ef ﬁcient shadowing procedure. For instance, if ρ(θ)i sk n o w nt o
be a superposition of a tractable number of computational basis states,or well-approximated by a matrix product state (MPS) with low bonddimension, then ef ﬁcient tomography protocols may be used
28.
Properties of ﬂipped models
Flipped models are a stepping stone toward the claims of quantum
advantage and “shadow ﬁability ”that are the focus of this paper.
Nonetheless, they constitute a new ly introduced model, which is why it
is useful to understand ﬁrst how they relate to previous quantum
models and what learning guarantees they can have.
Since conventional linear models of the form of Eq. ( 1)p l a ya
central role in quantum machine learning, we start by asking thequestion: when can these models be represented by (ef ﬁciently eva-
luatable) ﬂipped models? That is, given a conventional model
fθðxÞ=T r ½ρðxÞOðθÞ/C138,c a nw ec o n s t r u c ta ﬂipped model
efθðxÞ=T r ½ρ0ðθÞO0ðxÞ/C138such thatefθðxÞ≈fθðxÞ,8x,θ,a n defθðxÞis as ef ﬁ-
cient to evaluate as fθ(x). Clearly, a conventional model fθ(x)f o rw h i c h
the parametrized operator O(θ) is also a quantum state (i.e., a positive
semi-de ﬁnite trace-1 operator) is by de ﬁnition also a ﬂipped model.
Therefore, a natural strategy to ﬂip a conventional model is to trans-
form its observable O(θ) into a quantum state ρ0ðθÞ. This transforma-
tion involves dealing with the negative eigenvalues of O(θ), which can
be taken into account using an auxiliary qubit, without overheads inthe ef ﬁciency of evaluation (see Supplementary Section 2 for more
details). More importantly, the transformation involves normalizing
these eigenvalues, which affects the ef ﬁciency of evaluating the
resulting ﬂipped model. Indeed, the normalization factor αthat results
from normalizing O(θ) corresponds to its trace norm kOk
1=T rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
O2phi
and needs to be absorbed into the observable O0ðxÞ=αρðxÞof the
ﬂipped modelefθðxÞto guaranteeefθðxÞ=fθðxÞ. This directly impacts
the spectral norm kO0k1=m a x∣ψihO0iψ=αof the ﬂipped model, and
therefore the ef ﬁciency of its evaluation, as OðkO0k2
1=ε2Þmeasure-
ments of ρ0ðθÞare needed in order to estimateefθðxÞto additive error ε
(see Supplementary Section 2 for a derivation). Therefore, we end up
showing that, for a conventional model fθ(x) acting on nqubits and
with a bounded observable trace norm ∥O∥1≤α, we can construct a
ﬂipped model acting on m=n+ 1 qubits and with observable spectral
norm kO0k1=α.
Interestingly, in the relevant regime where the number of
qubits n,mused by the linear models involved in this ﬂipping is
logarithmic in ∥O∥1(e.g., where Ois a Pauli observable and hence
∥O∥1=2n), we ﬁnd that this requirement on the spectral norm kO0k1
of the resulting ﬂipped model is unavoidable in the worst case, up to
a logarithmic factor in ∥O∥1. We refer to Appendix Supplementary
Section 2 for proofs of these statements and a more in-depthdiscussion.
Another property of interest in machine learning is the general-
ization performance of a learning model. That is, we want to bound the
gap between the performance of the model on its training set (so-called training error) and its performance on the rest of the data space(or expected error). Such bounds have for instance been derived interms of the number of encodi ng gates in the quantum model
29,o rt h e
rank of its observable30.I nt h ec a s eo f ﬂipped model, we ﬁnd instead a
bound in terms of the number of qubits nand the spectral norm ∥O∥∞
of the observable. Since these quantities are operationally meaningful,
this gives us a natural way of controlling the generalization perfor-mance of our ﬂipped models. Stated informally, we ﬁnd that if a ﬂipped
model achieves a small error ∣f
θ(x)−f(x)∣≤ηfor all xin a training set of
sizeM, then we only need Mto scale as eΩnkOk2
1
εη2/C16/C17
in order to guarantee
a small expected error ∣fθ(x)−f(x)∣≤2ηwith probability 1 −εover the
entire data distribution.
Note that the dependence on nand ∥O∥∞is linear and quadratic,
respectively, which means that we can afford a large number of qubitsand a large spectral norm and still guarantee a good generalizationperformance. This is particularly relevant as the spectral norm is acontrollable quantity, meaning we can easily ﬁne-tune our models to
perform well in training and generalize well. E.g., in the case of themodel in Eq. ( 5), this spectral norm is bounded by max
xPm
j=1jwiðxÞj,
which scales favourably with the number of qubits nifm2Oðpoly ðnÞÞ
or if the vector w(x)i ss p a r s e .
Quantum advantage of a shadow model
We recall that we (informally) de ﬁne shadow models as models that
are trained on a quantum computer, but, after a shadowingArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 3

==== Page 4 ====
procedure that collects information on the trained model, are eval-
uated classically on new input data. In this section, we consider thequestion of achieving a quantum advantage using such shadowmodels. It may seem at ﬁrst sight that this question has a straight-
forward answer, which is “no": if the function learned by a model is
classically computable, then there should be no room for a quantumadvantage. However, as demonstrated in refs. 17,31, one can also
achieve a quantum advantage based on so-called trap-door func-tions. These are functions that are believed to be hard to computeclassically, unless given a key (or advice) that allows for an ef ﬁcient
classical computation. Notably, there exist trap-door functionswhere this key can be ef ﬁciently computed using a quantum com-
puter, but not classically. This allows us to construct shadow modelsthat make use of this quantum-generated key to compute an other-wise classically untractable function.
Similarly to related results showing a quantum advantage in
machine learning with classical data
16,32, we consider a learning task
where the target function (i.e., the function generating the trainingdata) is derived from cryptographic functions that are widely believedto be hard to compute classically. More precisely, we introduce avariant of the discrete cube root learning task
17, which is hard to solve
classically under a hardness assumption related to that of the RSAcryptosystem
33. In this task, we consider target functions de ﬁned on
ZN=f0,...,N/C01gas
gsðxÞ=1, ifﬃﬃﬃx3pmod N2½s,s+N/C01
2/C138,
0, otherwise(
ð6Þ
where N=pqis an n-bit integer, product of two primes p,qof the
form 3 k+2 ,3 k0+ 2, such that the discrete cube root is properly
deﬁned as the inverse of the function y3mod N. These target func-
tions are particularly appealing because of a number of interestingproperties:
i. It is believed that given only xand Nas input, computing
gðxÞ=ﬃﬃﬃx
3pmod Nwith high probability of success over
random draws of xand Nis classically intractable. This
assumption is known as the discrete cube root (DCR)assumption.
ii. On the other hand, computing x
amod Nis classically ef ﬁcient for
anya2ZN.F o r a=3 ,t h i si m p l i e st h a t g−1(y)=y3mod Nis a one-
way function, under the DCR assumption.
iii. The function gðxÞ=ﬃﬃﬃx3pmod Nhas a “trap-door ”,i nt h a tt h e r e
exists another way of computing it ef ﬁciently. For every N(as
speci ﬁed above), there exists a key d2ZNsuch that g(x)=xdmod
N.F i n d i n g dis efﬁcient quantumly by using Shor ’s factoring
algorithm34, but hard classically under the DCR assumption.
Observations (i) and (ii) can be leveraged to show that learning the
functions gsfrom examples is also intractable. Indeed, Alexi et al.35
showed that a classical algorithm that could faithfully capture a single
bitgs(x) of the discrete cube root of x, for even a 1/2 + 1/poly( n) fraction
of all x2ZN, could also be used to reconstruct gðxÞ,8x2ZN,w i t h
high probability of success. Since, from observation (ii), the trainingdata for the learning algorithm can also be generated ef ﬁciently clas-
sically from N, a classical learner that learns g
s(x) correctly for a 1/2 + 1/
poly( n)f r a c t i o no fa l l x2ZNwould then contradict the DCR
assumption.
Observation (iii) allows us to de ﬁne the following ﬂipped model:
fθðxÞ=T r½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138
ρðθÞ=∣d0,s0/C11
d0,s0/C10
∣&OðxÞ=X
d0,s0bgd0,s0ðxÞ∣d0,s0/C11
d0,s0/C10
∣:ð7ÞThat is, ρ(θ)( f o rθ=ðN,s0Þ)s p e c i ﬁes candidates for the key d0and the
parameter s0of interest, while O(x) uses that information to compute
bgd0,s0ðxÞ=1, if xd0mod N2½s0,s0+N/C01
2/C138,
0, otherwise.(
ð8Þ
The state ρðθÞ=∣d,s0/C11
d,s0/C10
∣for the right key dcan be prepared ef ﬁ-
ciently using Shor ’s algorithm applied on N(provided with the training
data). As for O(x), it simply processes classically a bit-string to compute
bgd0,s0ðxÞefﬁciently, which corresponds to gs(x)w h e n ðd0,s0Þ=ðd,sÞ.
Finding an s0close to sis an easy task given training data and d0=d.
Since ρ(θ) is a computational basis state, this ﬂipped model admits a
trivial shadow model where a single computational basis measurementofρ(θ) allows to evaluate f
θ(x) classically for all x. Therefore, we end up
showing the following theorem:
Theorem 1 .(Quantum advantage (informal)) . There exists a learning
task where a shadow model ﬁrst trained using a quantum computer
then evaluated classically on new input data, can achieve an arbitrarilygood learning performance, while any fully classical model cannot dosigniﬁcantly better than random guessing, under the hardness of
classically computing the discrete cube root.
In Supplementary Section 3, we formalize the statement of this
result using the PAC framework and provide more details on the set-ting and the proofs.
General shadow models
As mentioned at the start of this paper, shadow models are notlimited to shadow ﬁedﬂipped models, and the main alternative pro-
posals are based on the Fourier representation of quantummodels
19,20. It is clear that Fourier models are de ﬁned very differently
from ﬂipped models, but one may wonder whether they nonetheless
include shadow ﬁedﬂipped models as a special case, or the other way
around.
In this section, we ﬁrst start by showing that there exist quantum
models that admit shadow models (i.e., are shadow ﬁable) but cannot
be shadow ﬁed ef ﬁciently using a Fourier approach. This then moti-
vates our proposal for a general de ﬁnition of shadow models, and we
show that, under this de ﬁnition, all shadow models can be expressed as
shadow ﬁedﬂipped models. Finally, we show the existence of quantum
models that are not shadow ﬁable at all under likely complexity theory
assumptions.
Shadow models beyond Fourier
An interesting approach to construct shadows of quantum models isbased on their natural Fourier representation. It has been shown
21,36
that quantum models can be expressed as generalized Fourier series of
the form
fθðxÞ=X
ω2ΩcωðθÞe/C0iω/C1x
ð9Þ
where the accessible frequencies Ωonly depend on properties of the
encoding gates used by the model (notably the number of encodinggates and their eigenvalues). Since these frequencies can easily be readout from the circuit, one can proceed to form a shadow model byestimating their associated coef ﬁcients c
ω(θ) using queries of the
quantum model fθ(x) at different values xand, e.g., a Fourier
transform19. Given a good approximation of these coef ﬁcients, one can
then compute estimates of fθ(x) for arbitrary new inputs x. We will
refer to such a shadowing approach that considers the quantum model
as a black-box, aside from the knowledge of its Fourier spectrum, asthe Fourier shadowing approach.Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 4

==== Page 5 ====
Although we will be explicit about this in the next subsection, we
will consider a shadowing procedure to be successful, if, with highprobability, the resulting shadow model agrees with the original modelon all inputs, i.e.,
max
x2X∣fθðxÞ/C0efθðxÞ∣≤ε, ð10Þ
for a speci ﬁedε≥0. We want the shadowing procedure to be suc-
cessful independently of the data distribution under which the modelshould be trained, which justi ﬁes this de ﬁnition. We discuss this point
further in Supplementary Section 4.
We show that the Fourier shadowing approach can suffer from an
exponential sample complexity in the dimension of the input data x,
making it intractable for high-dimensional input spaces. To see this,consider the linear model:
f
yðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOðyÞ/C138
ρðxÞ=On
i=1RYðxiÞ∣0i0h∣Ry
YðxiÞ&OðyÞ=∣y/C11
y/C10
∣:ð11Þ
forx2Rnandy∈{0, 1}⊗n.L e tu s ﬁrst restrict our attention to the
domain x∈{0,π}n. It is quite clear that on this domain, fy(x)=δx/π,y
plays the role of a database search oracle, where the database has 2n
elements and a unique marked element y. From lower bounds on
database search, we know that Ω(2n) calls to this oracle are needed to
ﬁndy37. This implies that a Fourier shadowing approach would require
Ω(2n) calls to fy(x)=δx/π,yin order to guarantee maxx2X∣efθðxÞ/C0
fθðxÞ∣≤1=4. In Supplementary Section 4, we explain how this result can
be generalized to the full domain x2Rn, and we relate this bound on
the sample complexity to the Fourier decomposition of the model.
On the other hand, note that the ﬂipped model associated to fy(x)
allows for a straightforward shadowing procedure. Indeed, by pre-paring O(y) and measuring it in the computational basis, one
straightforwardly obtains yand can therefore classically compute the
expectation value of any tensor product observable ρ(x)a ss p e c i ﬁed
by Eq. ( 11). Therefore, we have shown that there exist shadow ﬁable
models that are not ef ﬁciently Fourier-shadow ﬁable, i.e., for which a
shadowing procedure based solely on the knowledge of their Fourierspectrum and on black-box queries has query complexity that isexponential in the input dimension.
All shadow models are shadows of ﬂipped models
We give a general de ﬁnition of shadow models that can encompass all
methods that have been proposed to generate them. In contrast to thedeﬁnition of classical surrogates proposed by Schreiber et al.
19, we give
explicit de ﬁnitions for the shadowing and evaluation phases of shadow
models which makes explicit the need for a quantum computer in theshadowing phase. Indeed, as mentioned in the introduction, the term“classical surrogate ”has been used to describe both a classically eva-
luatable model obtained from a quantum shadowing procedure and afully classical model trained directly on the data. We want to avoid thisconfusion in the de ﬁnition of shadow models. We view a general sha-
dowing phase as the generation of advice that can be used to classically
evaluate a quantum model. This advice is generated by the executionof quantum circuits that may or may not depend on the (trained)quantum circuit from the training phase. For instance, when we sha-dowfy a ﬂipped model, we simply prepare the parametrized states ρ(θ)
and use (randomized) measurements to generate an operationallymeaningful classical description. In the case of Fourier shadowing, thisadvice is instead generated by evaluations of the quantum model f
θ(x)
for different inputs x2Rdthat are rich enough to learn the Fourier
coefﬁcients of this model. We propose the following de ﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 2 .(General shadow model) .L e t W1(θ) ,..., WM(θ)b ea
sequence of Oðpoly ðmÞÞ-time quantum circuits applied on all-zerostates ∣0i/C10m, and that can potentially be chosen adaptively. Call
ω(θ)=(ω1(θ),…,ωM(θ)) the outcomes of measuring the output states
of these circuits in the computational basis. A general shadow model isdeﬁned as:
f
θðxÞ=Aðx,ωðθÞÞ ð 12Þ
where Ais a classical Oðpoly ðM,m,dÞÞtime algorithm that processes
the outcomes ω(θ) along with an input x2Rdto return the (real-
valued) label fθ(x).
From this de ﬁnition, a shadow model is a classically evaluatable
model that uses quantum-generated advice. Crucially, this advice mustbe independent of the data points xwe wish to evaluate the model on
in the future. We distinguish the notion of a shadow model from that ofas h a d o w ﬁable quantum model, that is a quantum model that admits a
shadow model:
Deﬁnition 3 .(Shadow ﬁable model) .Am o d e l f
θacting on nqubits is
said to be shadow ﬁable if, for ε,δ> 0, there exists a shadow modelefθ
such that, with probability 1 −δover the quantum generation of the
advice ω(θ) (i.e., the shadowing phase), the shadow model satis ﬁes?
maxx2XjfθðxÞj /C0efθðxÞ≤ε, ð13Þ
and uses m,M2Oðpoly ðn,1=ε,1=δÞÞqubits and circuits to generate its
advice ω(θ).
While we have seen that there exist shadow ﬁable models that
cannot be shadow ﬁed ef ﬁciently using a Fourier approach, we show
that all shadow ﬁable models as de ﬁned above can be approximated by
shadow ﬁableﬂipped models.
Lemma 4 .(Flipped models are shadow-universal) . All shadow ﬁable
models as de ﬁned in Defs. 2 and 3 can be approximated by ﬂipped
models fθðxÞ=T r ½ρðθÞOðxÞ/C138with the guarantee that computational
b a s i sm e a s u r e m e n t so f ρ(θ)a n de f ﬁcient classical post-processing can
be used to evaluate fθ(x)t og o o dp r e c i s i o nw i t hh i g hp r o b a b i l i t y .
This result is essentially based on the observation that the eva-
luation of a general shadow model as de ﬁn e di nD e f .2c a nb ed o n e
entirely coherently. Instead of classically running the algorithm A
using the random advice ω(θ), one can quantumly simulate this algo-
rithm (using a reversible execution) and execute it on the coherent
advice ρðθÞ=∣ωðθÞ/C11
ωðθÞ/C10
∣generated by { W1(θ) ,..., WM(θ)} before the
computational basis measurements. We refer to Supplementary Sec-tion 4 for a more detailed statement and proof.
Not all quantum models are shadow ﬁable
From the discrete cube root learning task, we already understand that
a learning separation can be established between classical and sha-dowﬁable models. We would also like to understand whether a learn-
ing separation exists between shadow ﬁable models and general
quantum models, or equivalently, whether all quantum models areshadow ﬁable. We show that this also is not the case, under widely
believed assumptions (see Fig. 2).
Theorem 5 .(Not all shadow ﬁable) . Under the assumption that
BQP⊄P/poly, there exist quantum models, i.e., models in BQP, that are
not shadow ﬁable, i.e., that are not in BPP/qgenpoly.
We start by noting that shadow models can be characterized by a
complexity class we de ﬁne as BPP/qgenpoly, which stands for “Boun-
ded-error Probabilistic Polynomial-time with quantumly generated(polynomial-time) advice of polynomial size ”. This class contains all
functions that can be computed ef ﬁciently classically with the help of
polynomially-sized advice generated ef ﬁciently by a quantum com-
puter. This class is trivially contained in the standard class BPP/poly,
which doesn ’t have any constraint on how the advice is generated andArticle https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 5

==== Page 6 ====
can be derandomized to P/poly (i.e., BPP/poly = P/poly38). Note how-
ever that BPP/qgenpoly constitutes a physically relevant class, since itonly contains problems that can be solved ef ﬁciently by classical and
quantum computers, as opposed to P/poly, which contains undecid-able problems, such as a version of the halting problem. We refer toSupplementary Section 1 for formal de ﬁnitions of these complexity
classes, and an in-depth discussion.
On the other hand, it is easy to show that quantum models (more
precisely quantum linear models) can also represent any function inBQP, i.e., all functions that are ef ﬁciently computable on a quantum
computer. For this, one simply takes a simple encoding of an n-bit
input x:
ρðxÞ=O
n
i=1Xxi
i∣0i0h∣Xxi
ið14Þ
along with an observable
On=Uy
nZ1Un ð15Þ
speci ﬁed by an arbitrary n-qubit circuit Unin BQP and the Pauli- Z
operator applied on it ﬁrst qubit. The resulting model
fnðxÞ=T r½ρðxÞOn/C138can then be used to decide any language in BQP.
Combining these two observations, we get that the proposition
“all quantum models are shadow ﬁable ”would imply that BQP ⊆BPP/
qgenpoly ⊆P/poly, which violates the widely believed conjecture39
that BQP ⊈P/poly (see Supplementary Section 4 for a formal proof).
To give an example of candidates of non-shadow ﬁable quantum
models, the discrete logarithm loggxmod p(or even one bit of it) is
provably in BQP but is not believed to be in P/poly. Therefore, a modelthat could be used to compute the discrete logarithm (e.g., thequantum model of Liu et al.
16) is likely not shadow ﬁable.
Discussion
In this work, we examined the class of quantumly trainable, classically
evaluatable models we refer to as shadow models. Our analysis hasshown that these models can be universally captured by a restrictedfamily of quantum linear models, wherein data-encoding and varia-tional operations are ﬂipped compared to conventional quantum
models. Furthermore, we demonstrated that shadow models belong toan intriguing complexity class, coined BPP/qgenpoly, exhibitingsuperiority over classical models (in BPP) but inferiority to fullyquantum models (in BQP), based on prevalent complexity theory
assumptions.
By presenting shadows models as ﬂipped linear models, we
illustrated how shadow tomography protocols could be appliedstraightforwardly to construct shadow models in practice. Yet, it is
important to note a crucial distinction between a shadow tomo-graphy scenario and a shadow model: in the latter, one has controlover the quantum state intended for shadowing. This distinction
introduces new possibilities for devising ‘state-aware ’shadow
tomography protocols aimed at constructing shadow models. Thiscould potentially alleviate some of the limitations of current classicalshadow protocols.
Considering our ﬁndings on learning separations, we identi ﬁed a
noteworthy characteristic of shadow models: their ability to quan-tumly compute useful advice for a classical evaluation algorithm,enabling them to tackle otherwise classically intractable tasks. Theexample we presented, based on trap-door functions, readily allowsfor such constructions, but it remains somewhat contrived. Exploringsimilar constructions for physically relevant problems, such as pre-
dicting ground state properties of complex quantum systems, would
be an intriguing avenue for future research.
Data availability
Data sharing is not applicable to this paper as no datasets were gen-erated or analyzed during the current study.
References
1. Biamonte, J. et al. Quantum machine learning. Nature 549,
195 (2017).
2. Dunjko, V. & Briegel, H. J. Machine learning & arti ﬁcial intelligence in
the quantum domain: a review of recent progress. Rep. Prog. Phys.
81,0 7 4 0 0 1( 2 0 1 8 ) .
3. Schuld, M. & Petruccione, F. Supervised Learning With Quantum
Computers 1st edn, Vol. 287 (Springer, 2018).
4. Benedetti, M., Lloyd, E., Sack, S. & Fiorentini, M. Parameterized
quantum circuits as machine learning models. Quant. Sci. Technol.
4,0 4 3 0 0 1( 2 0 1 9 ) .
5. Cerezo, M. et al. Variational quantum algorithms. Nat. Rev. Phys. 3,
625 (2021).
6. Bharti, K. et al. Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 94, 015004 (2022).
7. Schuld, M. & Killoran, N. Quantum machine learning in feature hil-
bert spaces. Physical review letters 122,0 4 0 5 0 4( 2 0 1 9 ) .
8. Schuld, M., Bocharov, A., Svore, K. M. & Wiebe, N. Circuit-centric
quantum classi ﬁers.Phys. Rev. A 101, 032308 (2020).
9. Liu, J.-G. & Wang, L. Differentiable learning of quantum circuit born
machines. Phys. Rev. A 98,0 6 2 3 2 4( 2 0 1 8 ) .
10. Jerbi, S., Gyurik, C., Marshall, S., Briegel, H. & Dunjko, V. Para-
metrized quantum policies for reinforcement learning. Adv. Neural
Inf. Processing Syst .https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.05577
(2021).
11. Skolik, A., Jerbi, S. & Dunjko, V. Quantum agents in the gym: a
variational quantum algorithm for deep q-learning. Quantum 6,
720 (2022).
12. Havlí ček, V. et al. Supervised learning with quantum-enhanced
feature spaces. Nature 567,2 0 9( 2 0 1 9 ) .
13. Zhu, D. et al. Training of quantum circuits on a hybrid quantum
computer. Sci. Adv. 5, eaaw9918 (2019).
14. Peters, E. et al. Machine learning of high dimensional data on a noisy
quantum processor. npj Quant. Inform. 7,1 6 1( 2 0 2 1 ) .
15. Haug, T., Self, C. N. & Kim, M. Quantum machine learning of large
datasets using randomized measurements. Mach. Learn Sci.-
Technol. 4, 015005 (2023).
16. Liu, Y., Arunachalam, S. & Temme, K. A rigorous and robust quan-
tum speed-up in supervi sed machine learning. Nat. Phys .17,
1013 –1017 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-021-01287-z (2021).
17. Gyurik, C. & Dunjko, V. On estab lishing learning separations
between classical and quantum machine learning with classicaldata. arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.06339
(2022).
Fig. 2 | Separations between classical, shadow, and quantum models. Under the
assumption that the discrete cube root (DCR) cannot be computed classically inpolynomial time, we have a separation between shadow models (captured by the
class BPP/qgenpoly) and classical models (in BPP). Under the assumption that there
exist functions that can be computed in quantum polynomial time but not inclassical polynomial time with the help of advice (i.e., BQP ⊄P/poly), we have a
separation between quantum models (universal for BQP) and shadow models (BPP/
qgenpoly). A candidate function for this separation is the discrete logarithm (DLP).Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 6

==== Page 7 ====
18. Gyurik, C. & Dunjko, V. Exponential separations between classical and
quantum learners. arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.16028 (2023).
1 9 . S c h r e i b e r ,F .J . ,E i s e r t ,J .&M e yer, J. J. Classical surrogates for
quantum learning models. Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 100803 (2023).
20. Landman, J., Thabet, S., Dalyac, C., Mhiri, H. & Kashe ﬁ,E .C l a s s i c a l l y
approximating variational quantum machine learning with randomfourier features. arXiv https://arXiv:2210.13200 (2022).
21. Schuld, M., Sweke, R. & Meyer, J. J. Effect of data encoding on the
expressive power of variational quantum-machine-learning mod-els.Phys. Rev. A 103,0 3 2 4 3 0( 2 0 2 1 ) .
22. Jerbi, S. et al. Quantum machine learning beyond kernel methods.
Nat. Commun. 14,5 1 7( 2 0 2 3 ) .
23. Huang, H.-Y., Kueng, R. & Preskill, J. Predicting many properties of a
q u a n t u ms y s t e mf r o mv e r yf e wm e a s u r e m e n t s . Nat. Phys. 16,
1050 (2020).
24. Bertoni, C. et al. Shallow shadows: Expectation estimation using
low-depth random clifford circuits. P h y s .R e v .L e t t . https://journals.
aps.org/prl/accepted/f9079Y0cPf41d490530c11a3d770886929e5b63ec (2024).
2 5 . W a n ,K . ,H u g g i n s ,W .J . ,L e e ,J .&B a b b u s h ,R .M a t c h g a t es h a d o w s
for fermionic quantum simulation. Commun. Math. Phys .404,
629 –700 https://doi.org/10.100 7/s00220-023-04844-0 (2023).
26. Hu, H.-Y., Choi, S. & You, Y.-Z. Classical shadow tomography with
locally scrambled quantum dynamics. Phys. Rev. Res. 5,
023027 (2023).
27. Schuld, M. Supervised quantum machine learning models are
kernel methods. arXiv https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.11020 (2021).
28. Cramer, M. et al. Ef ﬁcient quantum state tomography. Nat. Com-
mun. 1, 149 (2010).
2 9 . C a r o ,M .C . ,G i l - F u s t e r ,E . ,M e y e r ,J .J . ,E i s e r t ,J .&S w e k e ,R .
Encoding-dependent generalization bounds for parametrizedquantum circuits. Quantum 5, 582 (2021).
30. Gyurik, C. et al. Structural risk minimization for quantum linear
classi ﬁers.Quantum 7, 893 (2023).
31. Servedio, R. A. & Gortler, S. J. Equivalences and separations
between quantum and classical learnability. SIAM J. Comput. 33,
1067 (2004).
32. Sweke, R., Seifert, J.-P., Hangleiter, D. & Eisert, J. On the quantum
versus classical learnability of discrete distributions. Quantum 5,
417 (2021).
3 3 . K e a r n s ,M .J .&V a z i r a n i ,U . An Introduction to Computational
Learning Theory , 222 (MIT Press, 1994).
34. Shor, P. W. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and
discrete logarithms on a quantum computer. SIAM Rev. 41,
303 (1999).
35. Alexi, W., Chor, B., Goldreich, O. & Schnorr, C. P. Rsa and rabin
functions: certain parts are as hard as the whole. SIAM J. Comput.
17, 194 (1988).
36. Casas, B. & Cervera-Lierta, A. Mul tidimensional fourier series with
quantum circuits. P h y s .R e v .A 107, 062612 (2023).
37. Grover, L. K. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database
search. In Proc. 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Com-
puting 212 –219 (ACM, 1996).
38. Adleman, L. Two theorems on random polynomial time. In 19th
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science(SFCS 1978) 75–83https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1978.37 (IEEE, 1978).
39. Aaronson, S. & Arkhipov, A. The computational complexity of linear
optics. In Proc. 43rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Com-
puting 333 –342 (ACM, 2011).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Johannes Jakob Meyer, Franz
Schreiber, and Richard Kueng for insightful discussions at differentphases of this project. S.J. acknowle dges support from the Austrian Sci-
ence Fund (FWF) through the projects DK-ALM:W1259-N27 and SFBBeyondC F7102. S.J. also acknowle dges the Austrian Academy of Sci-
ences as a recipient of the DOC Fellowship. S.J. thanks the BMWK
(EniQma) and the Einstein Foundatio n (Einstein Research Unit on Quan-
tum Devices) for their support. V.D. a nd C.G. acknowledge the support of
the Dutch Research Council (NWO/ O CW), as part of the Quantum Soft-
ware Consortium programme (project number 024.003.037). V.D. andR.M. acknowledge the support of the NWO through the NWO/NWA pro-ject Divide and Quantum. V.D. and S.C.M. acknowledge the support bythe project NEASQC funded from the European Union ’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (g rant agreement No 951821). V.D.
and S.C.M. also acknowledge partial f unding by an unrestricted gift from
G o o g l eQ u a n t u mA I .T h i sw o r kw a sa l s oi np a r ts u p p o r t e db yt h eD u t c hNational Growth Fund (NGF), as part of the Quantum Delta NL
programme.
Author contributions
The project was conceived by S.J., S.C.M., and V.D. The theoretical
aspects of this work were developed by S.J., C.G., R.M., and V.D. Allauthors (S.J., C.G., S.C.M., R.M., and V.D.) contributed to technical dis-cussions and writing of the manuscript.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available athttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8 .
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Soﬁene Jerbi.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Apeer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, aslong as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate ifchanges were made. The images or other third party material in thisarticle are included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is notincluded in the article ’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory re gulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyrightholder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2024Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49877-8
Nature Communications |         (2024) 15:5676 7

