==== Page 1 ====
Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2020) , pages 6018–6024
Marseille, 11–16 May 2020
cEuropean Language Resources Association (ELRA), licensed under CC-BY-NC
6018Sign Language Recognition with Transformer Networks
Mathieu De Coster1, Mieke Van Herreweghe2, Joni Dambre1
1IDLab-AIRO – Ghent University - imec,2Ghent University
1Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 126, Ghent, Belgium,2Blandijnberg 2, Ghent, Belgium
fmathieu.decoster, mieke.vanherreweghe, joni.dambre g@ugent.be
Abstract
Sign languages are complex languages. Research into them is ongoing, supported by large video corpora of which only small parts are
annotated. Sign language recognition can be used to speed up the annotation process of these corpora, in order to aid research into sign
languages and sign language recognition. Previous research has approached sign language recognition in various ways, using feature
extraction techniques or end-to-end deep learning. In this work, we apply a combination of feature extraction using OpenPose for human
keypoint estimation and end-to-end feature learning with Convolutional Neural Networks. The proven multi-head attention mechanism
used in transformers is applied to recognize isolated signs in the Flemish Sign Language corpus. Our proposed method signiﬁcantly
outperforms the previous state of the art of sign language recognition on the Flemish Sign Language corpus: we obtain an accuracy of
74.7% on a vocabulary of 100 classes. Our results will be implemented as a suggestion system for sign language corpus annotation.
Keywords: sign language recognition, deep learning, corpus annotation
1. Introduction
Sign language recognition (SLR) is a complex problem.
Sign languages are, after all, complex visual languages.
Generally, one can say that sign languages have ﬁve
parameters. A sign is distinguished by hand shape,
hand orientation, movement, location, and non-manual
components such as mouth shape and eyebrow shape.
However, these parameters do not necessarily fully identify
signs: two signs can have the same execution but different
meaning. Furthermore, identical signs are often executed
differently based on several factors, such as age, gender, the
dominant hand, and dialects. Additionally, there is a high
degree of co-articulation in sign languages: both hands can
produce different signs at the same time.
SLR is typically tackled using machine learning
approaches. Deep learning in particular has proven
to be very powerful for tasks such as image classiﬁcation
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and neural translation (Vaswani et
al., 2017). Deep learning algorithms require large datasets
in order to learn meaningful representations that generalize
well to unseen data, especially for complex problems such
as SLR. While large video corpora are available for several
sign languages, they consist mostly of unlabeled data.
Labeling the sign language corpora is a time-consuming
process that requires the annotator to know sign language
and its speciﬁc phonetic and phonological properties. As a
consequence, the portion of a video corpus that is labeled
grows only slowly.
Larger datasets exist (Chai et al., 2014; Huang et al.,
2018; Vaezi Joze and Koller, 2019), but several consist
of recordings of persons performing signs in repetition
(Ronchetti et al., 2016; Ko et al., 2018). These datasets
are often not representative of real world sign language, as
they contain artiﬁcial repetitions of isolated signs (Bragg
et al., 2019). Because the accuracy - the measure that is
most commonly used to assess the performance of sign
classiﬁcation systems - is saturated on such datasets when
using deep learning methods (Konstantinidis et al., 2018;Ko et al., 2018), it is more challenging and interesting to
perform SLR on real sign language data. This also paves
the way for sign language translation in the future.
The question can be posed if a deep learning system
can be used to speed up the annotation process of sign
language corpora, in order to obtain more labeled data.
This could for example be done by creating a suggestion
system for corpus annotators, that provides a list of likely
glosses given a selected video fragment of a sign. In
this work, we use a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
network as a baseline. We then present and compare three
methods based on the transformer network architecture,
that consistently outperform this baseline. The methods
will be applied in the creation of the proposed suggestion
system.
2. Related Work
Three sub-domains can be distinguished within SLR:
isolated SLR, also known as sign classiﬁcation, continuous
SLR, and sign language translation. In isolated SLR, each
sample corresponds to a single sign. In continuous SLR,
samples contain one or more signs, and the task is to
locate and recognize the signs. Sign language translation is
translation from sequences of signs to sentences in a written
language, such as English. In this work, we focus on
isolated SLR speciﬁcally, but give an overview of methods
used for SLR in general, because methods can be applied
to several sub-domains.
The success of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) in
automatic speech recognition motivated their use by
SLR researchers (V ogler and Metaxas, 1997; Starner et
al., 1998; Bauer and Kraiss, 2001). In recent years,
however, the domain has largely moved towards deep
learning, because of its performance in related domains (in
particular computer vision and again, speech recognition).
Spatio-temporal models such as 3D Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have been used for continuous SLR
(Pigou et al., 2017; Jing et al., 2019). Hybrid architectures
which combine spatial models (2D CNNs) with temporal

==== Page 2 ====
6019models (LSTMs or HMMs) also yield good results for
continuous SLR (Koller et al., 2016b; Koller et al., 2017; Ye
et al., 2018) and sign language translation (Cihan Camgoz
et al., 2018).
Previous work has attempted to classify isolated signs
in sign language corpora using learned features and 2D
CNNs (Pigou et al., 2014; Pigou et al., 2016). However,
sign language corpus datasets are small for the problem
complexity, and cross-domain learning is required to obtain
adequate accuracy values. Even then, there is room for
improvement. Recently, OpenPose was introduced as an
open-source human pose estimation system (Cao et al.,
2017). OpenPose extracts relevant information for sign
language (i.e., position of important body parts) and can
be used as a feature extractor (Konstantinidis et al., 2018;
Ko et al., 2018). This is quite similar to the approach
taken by researchers before such generic pose estimation
systems were available (Ong and Bowden, 2004; Charles et
al., 2014). Currently, OpenPose is the only full-body pose
estimation technique and is therefore an obvious choice for
SLR, which relies not only on hand shape, location and
orientation, but also on non-manual components such as
mouth shape. Other pose estimation techniques exist, but
only recognize, for example, body keypoints (Fang et al.,
2017) or hand keypoints (Mueller et al., 2018).
3. Deep Learning Background
SLR is a spatio-temporal problem. Methods from computer
vision and natural language processing are typically applied
to tackle it.
3.1. Convolutional Neural Networks
The most popular computer vision algorithm in deep
learning is the CNN. Krizhevsky et al. (2012) showed
that CNNs can outperform engineered feature extractors.
Since then, they have been ubiquitous in image and video
recognition tasks.
3.2. Attention and Transformers
Transformer networks, introduced by Vaswani et al.
(2017), obtain state of the art performance for many natural
language processing tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et
al., 2019). These networks consist of repeated multi-head
attention blocks and point-wise feed-forward layers.
A query, key and value matrix are constructed from the
input features through trainable linear transformations:
Q=XWQ;
K=XWK;
V=XWV;
whereWQ,WKandWVare trainable weight matrices.
Then, scaled dot-product attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
is applied. For this, the query and key matrices are used
to calculate an attention weight matrix, which is multiplied
with the value matrix to obtain the attended output O. This
is computed as
O=softmaxQK>
pde
V: (1)The denominator, with dethe dimensionality of the input
features, is used to scale the dot products such that the
softmax is not saturated for large embeddings (Vaswani et
al., 2017).
Multi-head attention applies attention several times in
parallel on sub-regions of the input space. Every attention
calculation is performed in a so-called attention head. Each
of thenhheads looks at a subset of the original input: for
X2RTN(T: sequence length, N: number of features),
Qh,KhandVhare elements of RTdein headh, with
de=N=nh.
The outputs of all heads in a layer are concatenated,
normalized using layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016), and
processed by a residual point-wise feed-forward network as
input for the next layer. Transformers typically consist of
several of these layers. An illustrated example of a multi-
head attention layer is shown in ﬁgure 1.
3.3. Video Transformer Networks
Recently, CNNs and transformers have been combined
to perform action recognition on videos (Kozlov et al.,
2019). Speciﬁcally, they use a 2D CNN which learns
vector representations in latent space from input frames
as a feature extractor. The extracted features are used as
input to a network consisting of 4 stacked 8-head attention
layers. The trainable weight matrices are initialized using
the Glorot normal distribution (Glorot and Bengio, 2010).
The network outputs predictions per frame. These are
averaged across time to obtain the ﬁnal clip prediction.
Kozlov et al. (2019) call their network architecture the
Video Transformer Network (VTN). They note that VTNs
do not lead to optimal performance in action recognition,
which is currently obtained using 3D CNNs (e.g., the
network by Tran et al. (2018) for the Sports-1M dataset
(Karpathy et al., 2014)). However, because of the lower
number of parameters, VTNs require less computation time
and are less prone to overﬁtting than 3D CNNs. The latter
is particularly important for sign language datasets which
are typically smaller than action recognition datasets.
4. Experiments
4.1. Data
As the goal of this work is to present an annotation tool for
sign language corpora, we use such a corpus as dataset to
train and evaluate our models. In particular, we evaluate
our method on the Flemish sign language (VGT) corpus
(Van Herreweghe et al., 2015).
The Corpus VGT consists of 140 hours of video data. Each
video has a spatial resolution of 960 by 540 pixels and
a temporal resolution of 50 frames per second (FPS). We
consider 100 classes, corresponding to 104 glosses. Some
classes correspond to two glosses rather than one because
they are visually indistinguishable. If two data classes are
visually very similar but have distinct labels, the neural
network will be confused. For an annotation suggestion
tool, both glosses are valid suggestions: they can simply
both be shown at the same time. In total, we obtain 18730
samples from 67 native signers.

==== Page 3 ====
6020
Figure 1: A multi-head attention layer with 2 heads.
Figure 2: The network architectures of the different
methods. The classiﬁers (on the right) obtain their input
features from one or more feature extractors (on the left).
“P” represents OpenPose and “I” represents a 2D CNN.
4.2. Methodology
We explore four methods for isolated SLR. Each method is
based on a combination of one or more feature extractors
and a classiﬁer. The feature extractor is either OpenPose
(Cao et al., 2017) or a 2D CNN pre-trained on ImageNet
(Deng et al., 2009) that is ﬁne-tuned on sign language data
during the classiﬁcation task. The classiﬁer architecture is
either an LSTM, or a deep multi-head attention network
like the one shown in ﬁgure 1. An overview of the four
methods is shown in ﬁgure 2. We train and evaluate the
methods on the same dataset, but tune hyperparameters
individually in order to obtain optimal performance for
each of the methods. We apply each method to the problem
of isolated sign language recognition and compare how
they perform. They are described in detail in the next
sections.
We split the data into a train, validation and test set.
The training set consists of 70% of the original dataset,
the validation set of 10% and the test set of 20%. This
yields 13077 training samples, 3743 test samples, and 1910
Figure 3: An example of the output of the pre-processing
and data augmentation pipeline used for OpenPose
keypoints. On the left: the original keypoints. On the right:
the transformed keypoints.
validation samples. The neural networks are trained on the
training set, tuned on the validation set, and evaluated on
the test set.
We use random temporal cropping to select 16 frames as a
form of temporal data augmentation for all four methods.
If a sample is longer than 16 frames, a random start index
is chosen, and 16 consecutive frames are used as input to
the network. If a sample is shorter than 16 frames, it is
padded by looping the sample. Finally, if the sample length
is exactly 16 frames, the sample is used in its entirety as
input to the network. We ﬁnd that this performs similarly
to using zero-padded variable length sequences and the
shorter sequence length reduces computation time during
training. At inference time, the entire clip is evaluated using
a sliding window approach: non-overlapping sequences are
chosen from each sample, and the accuracy is averaged
across these windows of all samples.
All neural networks are trained and evaluated using
PyTorch 1.3 (Paszke et al., 2017) on two Nvidia GeForce
GTX 1080 Ti GPUs.
4.2.1. PoseLSTM
As a ﬁrst experiment, we consider using LSTM networks
with OpenPose features as a baseline to be able to evaluate
the impact of multi-head attention on the accuracy of the
neural network.
We use OpenPose as a ﬁxed feature extractor. For every
frame, OpenPose extracts 137 keypoints. 25 keypoints
represent the body pose, 70 are facial keypoints, and there
are 21 keypoints per hand representing the hand pose.

==== Page 4 ====
6021Every keypoint is a triplet (x;y;c ), wherexandyare
rational numbers representing the 2D coordinates of the
keypoint, and cis the conﬁdence of OpenPose in the
correctness of this keypoint. We use entire triplets as
input features. The lower body is not in frame and is
not relevant for sign language, so we decide to drop those
keypoints. The facial keypoints from the body model are
also removed, because that information is present in the
keypoints of the face model. We keep 8 keypoints for the
body and 120 in total per frame. As spatial pre-processing,
we rotate the pose such that the shoulders are horizontal
to account for seating position, and we standardize the
body pose such that the length of the neck is 1. For data
augmentation, we perform the following transformations.
First, we introduce Gaussian noise on the keypoints, i.e.,
translating every keypoint by ( x,y), wherexandyare
sampled fromN(0;0:005) . Secondly, we randomly rotate
both hands separately up to 20 degrees using the wrist
keypoints as pivot points. These values were empirically
found. An example result of this pre-processing and data
augmentation pipeline is shown in ﬁgure 3.
These features are used as input to an LSTM with 512
hidden units with a positive forget gate bias initialization
(Jozefowicz et al., 2015). We use the Adam optimizer
(Kingma and Ba, 2015) with initial learning rate = 1e 3,
1= 0:9,2= 0:999,= 1e 8and weight decay with
a penalty of 1e 4. Learning rate decay is used to reduce
the learning rate by a factor 10 whenever the validation
accuracy does not improve by at least 0:01for 10 epochs.
The mini-batch size is set to 64. The network is trained for
100 epochs with early stopping.
4.2.2. Pose Transformer Network
The Pose Transformer Network (PTN) uses the keypoints
extracted by OpenPose as input for a multi-head attention
classiﬁer with embedding size equal to the number of input
features, which is 360.
We use the same settings as for the PoseLSTM with regards
to the optimizer and learning rate decay.
4.2.3. Video Transformer Network
The third method uses the architecture proposed by Kozlov
et al. (2019). The feature extractor is a framewise 2D CNN
(in our case ResNet-34 (He et al., 2016)) that transforms
each frame into a 512-dimensional vector. The classiﬁer is
a multi-head attention network with embedding size 512.
We use the standard pre-processing and data augmentation
techniques from action recognition. Multi-scale cropping
(Wang et al., 2015) is applied to obtain RGB images of
224 by 224 pixels. The images are then normalized by
subtracting the mean of the ImageNet dataset on which
the network is pre-trained and dividing by the standard
deviation, with= (0:485;0:456;0:406) and=
(0:229;0:224;0:225) . As in the other methods, temporal
random cropping is used as temporal data augmentation to
obtain 16 frames per sample.
We also use the Adam optimizer with the hyperparameters
as described for the PoseLSTM. The initial learning rate
differs: it is = 1e 4. The mini-batch size is set to 16.Method Top-1 Top-3 Top-5 Top-10
PoseLSTM 54.55% 66.61% 72.75% 79.81%
PTN 61.73% 75.77% 81.12% 87.63%
VTN 73.39% 85.25% 89.19% 92.62%
MTN 74.70% 86.11% 89.81% 93.37%
Table 1: Top- naccuracy values for different models on the
unseen test set.
4.2.4. Multimodal Transformer Network
The fourth and ﬁnal method combines the OpenPose
keypoints and the learned features as input for the classiﬁer.
In order to reduce the dimensionality of the feature space,
which would otherwise be equal to 512 + 360 = 872 , we
apply spatial scaled dot-product attention to learn which
features are relevant for a given frame. We assume that
there is quite some redundancy within the keypoints of
a single frame, as well as between keypoints and RGB
data. This dimensionality reduction technique allows the
network to learn how to remove redundancy on a frame
by frame basis. We modify the attention calculation in
equation 1 in order to attend to spatial rather than temporal
information:
Q=PWQ;
K=FWK;
V=XWV;
O=VsoftmaxQKp
872
;
wherePis the keypoint feature matrix, Fis the image
feature matrix and Xthe matrix of all input features. We
obtain 512 features per frame, which is the same as for
the VTN method. Each of these 512 features is a linear
transformation of the original 872 input features, with the
factors given by the attention weights.
The pre-processing and data augmentation approach is
identical to the approach taken for the previous methods
(= 1e 4). The hyperparameters are initialized
identically to the VTN method.
4.3. Evaluation
In a suggestion tool for corpus annotation, the number
of suggestions could depend on the preferences of the
annotator and is not ﬁxed. Therefore, we look at top-3, top-
5 and top-10 suggestions, as done by Pigou et al. (2016).
We report on the top- naccuracy, with n2f1;3;5;10g.
This is deﬁned as the frequency with which the ground truth
label is in the top nof network predictions.
5. Results
5.1. Comparison of the Architectures
The top-1, top-3, top-5 and top-10 accuracy measures
per model are shown in table 1. The difference
between PTN and PoseLSTM indicates that transformers
outperform LSTM networks when used with OpenPose
features. This suggests that transformers are also capable
of outperforming LSTM networks on tasks other than
machine translation, for which they were designed.

==== Page 5 ====
6022
Figure 4: An example of a case where OpenPose fails. The
keypoints of the left hand (green) are noisy and at incorrect
locations. Meanwhile, the RGB frame is of reasonable
quality and shows the hand in the correct position.
We notice a large difference in accuracy values between the
PoseLSTM and PTN on the one hand and the other methods
on the other hand. This indicates that OpenPose features
on their own are not signiﬁcantly powerful, as it is possible
to learn better features directly from the data. We suspect
that there is too much motion blur in the available data for
OpenPose to detect keypoints with sufﬁcient accuracy, and
that information is therefore lost that is still present in the
RGB data (e.g., keypoints are completely missed while the
RGB data still gives a hint of what could be the correct
hand shape). We present a failure case in ﬁgure 4, which
clearly shows how OpenPose extraction may reduce the
quality of the input features. A possible remedy for this
problem would be to ﬁne-tune OpenPose while training the
network for the SLR task, rather than using it as a ﬁxed
feature extractor. This is beyond the scope of this work and
left for future research.
We notice a smaller difference between the VTN and MTN
than between the PTN and VTN. We suspect that the
2D CNN in the networks is already capable of extracting
most of the relevant information by itself. However the
increase in accuracy suggests that the OpenPose keypoints
add information which can be useful for discriminating
between classes.
5.2. Error Analysis
We now look at the confusion matrix of the MTN network
(ﬁgure 5), more speciﬁcally at two pairs of signs. The
largest confusion (38% misclassiﬁed) occurs between the
signs for “BRIEF” (letter) and “ENVELOPPE” (envelope).
This is a minimal pair in VGT: the signs differ only in
a single parameter, in this case mouthing. A possible
improvement for future work is to add side-channels to
the neural network that predict the sign parameters. This
is similar to the works of Cooper et al. (2012) and
Koller et al. (2016a). The second largest confusion (36%
misclassiﬁed) is between two variants of the sign “V AN”
(of). The ﬁrst variant is the general use of the preposition,
while the second variant more speciﬁcally refers to the
ﬁrst person (“my”). These are similar in the signing of
the dominant hand, but distinct in the non-dominant hand
(which is why they are not grouped in a single class).
Distinguishing between these two variants may be possible
Figure 5: Normalized confusion matrix for the MTN. The
two largest confusions have been indicated in red and green.
with context, which is absent in the domain of isolated
SLR. A continuous SLR model might be able to reduce the
confusion.
5.3. Impact of Dataset Size
Pigou et al. (2016) use an older version of the Corpus
VGT with only 12599 labeled samples and obtains top-
1, top-3 and top-5 accuracy values of 39.3%, 60.3% and
69.9% respectively. The top-10 accuracy is not explicitly
reported. In this work, we use an updated version with
18730 labeled samples. In order to compare both works,
we investigate the impact of this dataset update. To do
this, we measure the absolute increase in top- naccuracy
for each of the methods. The average absolute increases in
top-1, top-3, top-5 and top-10 accuracy are 9.31%, 8.33%,
7.83% and 6.89% respectively. It is clear from these results
that increasing the dataset size has a large impact on the
accuracy on unseen data.
We now show that further increases in dataset size will
likely lead to further improvements in accuracy. Figure
6 shows a learning curve for the MTN. The validation
accuracy curve has not yet converged, which indicates that
more data, or more data augmentation, would lead to better
performance. In fact, the curve suggests that the vocabulary
size will be able to be increased, as isolated SLR will be a
solved problem for vocabularies of 100 glosses with double
the amount of labeled data. This illustrates the importance
of speeding up corpus annotation for SLR.
6. Conclusion
This work presents four network architectures for SLR:
three based on transformer networks and one based on
LSTMs. Pigou et al. (2016) used end-to-end deep
learning to extract features from video data and classify
signs based on these features. Initial results in this work

==== Page 6 ====
6023
Figure 6: Learning curve for the MTN.
indicate that a network trained using features extracted
by the pose estimation technique OpenPose is able to
signiﬁcantly outperform this previous work. However, by
using state of the art techniques for computer vision (pre-
trained CNNs) and sequence learning (transformers), end-
to-end deep learning is able to extract features that are more
salient than OpenPose keypoints. Future work on SLR
in sign language corpora must focus on extracting salient
features from the available data.
By using attention to combine both feature sets (learned
features and OpenPose keypoints), the network accuracy
can further be improved beyond what is possible when
considering either feature set in isolation. Our best method,
which we name the “Multimodal Transformer Network”,
obtains 74.7% accuracy on the unseen test set for a
vocabulary of 100 classes.
Finally, we show that increasing the dataset size leads to
increased performance. The proposed methods can be used
in a suggestion tool for sign language corpus annotation.
Such a tool has the potential to speed up the annotation
process, which will lead to the availability of larger datasets
for SLR.
In future work, we will investigate continuous SLR and
focus on creating models that are capable of understanding
sign language.
7. Bibliographical References
Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. (2016). Layer
normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 .
Bauer, B. and Kraiss, K.-F. (2001). Towards an automatic
sign language recognition system using subunits. In
International Gesture Workshop , pages 64–75. Springer.
Bragg, D., Koller, O., Bellard, M., Berke, L., Boudrealt, P.,
Braffort, A., Caselli, N., Huenerfauth, M., Kacorri, H.,
Verhoef, T., V ogler, C., and Morris, M. R. (2019). Sign
language recognition, generation, and translation: An
interdisciplinary perspective. In ASSETS 2019 . ACM,
October. Best Paper Award.
Cao, Z., Simon, T., Wei, S.-E., and Sheikh, Y . (2017).
Realtime multi-person 2d pose estimation using part
afﬁnity ﬁelds. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference onComputer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 7291–
7299.
Chai, X., Wang, H., and Chen, X. (2014). The devisign
large vocabulary of chinese sign language database
and baseline evaluations. Technical report VIPL-TR-14-
SLR-001. Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing
of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of
Computing Technology, CAS .
Charles, J., Pﬁster, T., Everingham, M., and Zisserman, A.
(2014). Automatic and efﬁcient human pose estimation
for sign language videos. International Journal of
Computer Vision , 110(1):70–90.
Cihan Camgoz, N., Hadﬁeld, S., Koller, O., Ney, H., and
Bowden, R. (2018). Neural sign language translation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 7784–7793.
Cooper, H., Ong, E.-J., Pugeault, N., and Bowden, R.
(2012). Sign language recognition using sub-units.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13(Jul):2205–
2231.
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-
Fei, L. (2009). Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 248–255. Ieee.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K.
(2019). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Fang, H.-S., Xie, S., Tai, Y .-W., and Lu, C. (2017). Rmpe:
Regional multi-person pose estimation. In ICCV .
Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y . (2010). Understanding the
difﬁculty of training deep feedforward neural networks.
InProceedings of the thirteenth international conference
on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics , pages 249–256.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 770–778.
Huang, J., Zhou, W., Zhang, Q., Li, H., and Li, W. (2018).
Video-based sign language recognition without temporal
segmentation. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence .
Jing, L., Vahdani, E., Huenerfauth, M., and Tian, Y . (2019).
Recognizing american sign language manual signs from
rgb-d videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02851 .
Jozefowicz, R., Zaremba, W., and Sutskever, I. (2015). An
empirical exploration of recurrent network architectures.
InInternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages
2342–2350.
Karpathy, A., Toderici, G., Shetty, S., Leung, T.,
Sukthankar, R., and Fei-Fei, L. (2014). Large-scale
video classiﬁcation with convolutional neural networks.
InProceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1725–1732.

==== Page 7 ====
6024Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A method
for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio et al.,
editors, 3rd International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May
7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings .
Ko, S.-K., Son, J. G., and Jung, H. (2018). Sign
language recognition with recurrent neural network
using human keypoint detection. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Research in Adaptive and
Convergent Systems , pages 326–328. ACM.
Koller, O., Bowden, R., and Ney, H. (2016a). Automatic
alignment of hamnosys subunits for continuous sign
language recognition. LREC 2016 Proceedings , pages
121–128.
Koller, O., Zargaran, O., Ney, H., and Bowden, R.
(2016b). Deep sign: Hybrid cnn-hmm for continuous
sign language recognition. In Proceedings of the British
Machine Vision Conference 2016 .
Koller, O., Zargaran, S., and Ney, H. (2017). Re-
sign: Re-aligned end-to-end sequence modelling with
deep recurrent cnn-hmms. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 4297–4305.
Konstantinidis, D., Dimitropoulos, K., and Daras, P.
(2018). A deep learning approach for analyzing video
and skeletal features in sign language recognition.
In2018 IEEE International Conference on Imaging
Systems and Techniques (IST) , pages 1–6. IEEE.
Kozlov, A., Andronov, V ., and Gritsenko, Y . (2019).
Lightweight network architecture for real-time action
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08711 .
Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012).
Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural
networks. In Advances in neural information processing
systems , pages 1097–1105.
Mueller, F., Bernard, F., Sotnychenko, O., Mehta, D.,
Sridhar, S., Casas, D., and Theobalt, C. (2018).
Ganerated hands for real-time 3d hand tracking from
monocular rgb. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 49–
59.
Ong, E.-J. and Bowden, R. (2004). A boosted
classiﬁer tree for hand shape detection. In Sixth
IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and
Gesture Recognition, 2004. Proceedings. , pages 889–
894. IEEE.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E.,
DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., and
Lerer, A. (2017). Automatic differentiation in PyTorch.
InNIPS Autodiff Workshop .
Pigou, L., Dieleman, S., Kindermans, P.-J., and
Schrauwen, B. (2014). Sign language recognition using
convolutional neural networks. In European Conference
on Computer Vision , pages 572–578. Springer.
Pigou, L., Van Herreweghe, M., and Dambre, J. (2016).
Sign classiﬁcation in sign language corpora with
deep neural networks. In International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Workshop ,
pages 175–178.Pigou, L., Van Herreweghe, M., and Dambre, J.
(2017). Gesture and sign language recognition with
temporal residual networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision , pages
3086–3093.
Ronchetti, F., Quiroga, F., Estrebou, C., Lanzarini, L., and
Rosete, A. (2016). Lsa64: A dataset of argentinian sign
language. In XX II Congreso Argentino de Ciencias de
la Computaci ´on (CACIC) .
Starner, T., Weaver, J., and Pentland, A. (1998). Real-
time american sign language recognition using desk and
wearable computer based video. IEEE Transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 20(12):1371–
1375.
Tran, D., Wang, H., Torresani, L., Ray, J., LeCun, Y .,
and Paluri, M. (2018). A closer look at spatiotemporal
convolutions for action recognition. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 6450–6459.
Vaezi Joze, H. and Koller, O. (2019). Ms-asl: A large-scale
data set and benchmark for understanding american sign
language. In The British Machine Vision Conference
(BMVC) , September.
Van Herreweghe, M., Vermeerbergen, M., Demey, E.,
De Durpel, H., and Verstraete, S. (2015). Het Corpus
VGT. Een digitaal open access corpus van videos
and annotaties van Vlaamse Gebarentaal, ontwikkeld
aan de Universiteit Gent i.s.m. KU Leuven. www.
corpusvgt.be .
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L. u., and Polosukhin, I.
(2017). Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, et al.,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30 , pages 5998–6008. Curran Associates, Inc.
V ogler, C. and Metaxas, D. (1997). Adapting hidden
markov models for asl recognition by using three-
dimensional computer vision methods. In 1997
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics. Computational Cybernetics and
Simulation , volume 1, pages 156–161. IEEE.
Wang, L., Xiong, Y ., Wang, Z., and Qiao, Y . (2015).
Towards good practices for very deep two-stream
convnets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.02159 .
Ye, Y ., Tian, Y ., Huenerfauth, M., and Liu, J. (2018).
Recognizing american sign language gestures from
within continuous videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops , pages 2064–2073.

