==== Page 1 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
93 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  Smart Sustainable Agriculture (SSA) Solution 
Underpinned by Internet of Things (IoT) a nd 
Artificial Intelligence (AI)  
Eissa Alreshidi1 
Assistant Professor at College of Computer Science  & Engineering , University of Hail, Ha il, P.O. Box 2440, Saudi Arabia  
 
 
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) have been employed in agriculture over a long 
period of time, alongside other advanced computing technologies. 
However, increased attention is currently being paid to the use of 
such sm art technologies. Agriculture has provided an important 
source of food for human beings over many thousands of years, 
including the development of appropriate farming methods for 
different types of crops. The emergence of new advance d IoT 
technologies has the potential to monitor the agricultural 
environment to ensure high -quality products. However, there 
remains a lack of research and development in relation to Smart 
Sustainable Agriculture (SSA), accompanied by complex 
obstacles arising from the fragmenta tion of agricultural 
processes, i.e. the control and operation of IoT/AI machines; data 
sharing and management; interoperability; and large amounts of 
data analysis and storage. This study  firstly, explores existing 
IoT/AI technologies adopted for SSA and secondly, identifies  
IoT/AI technical architecture capable of  underpinning  the 
development of SSA platforms. As well as contributing to the 
current body of knowledge, this research reviews research and 
development within SSA and provides an IoT/AI architec ture to 
establish a Smart, Sustainable Agriculture platform  as a solution . 
Keywords —Smart Agriculture ; Internet of Things ; IoT; 
Artificial Intelligence ; AI; Fragmentation ; Smart Sustainable 
Agriculture solutions  
I. INTRODUCTION  
Agriculture forms a critical activity vital to the survival of 
humanity for approximately many  thousand s of years [1].This 
relationship has resulted in the advancement of agricultural 
activities, initially through the time -consuming methods of 
traditional agriculture [2]. The current recent rapid increase in 
in the global population (predicted to rise to 8.9 billion by 
2050) has now led to an urgent need to balance demand and 
supply through the use of new technologies [3] to increase food 
production [4, 5] . This development places pressure on natural 
resources, with agriculture  now consuming 70% of the world‟s 
fresh water supply for the purposes of irrigation. Limited 
resources and the impact of climate change will therefore lead 
to considerable challenges in producing sufficient high quality 
food to support the population [6]. Smart Agricultural is a 
global initiative to preserve resources and maintain  sustainable 
agriculture [7]. Recently, researchers have adopted the In ternet 
of Things (IoT) [8, 9] , with a number of studies emphasizing 
the adoption and implementation of IoT in agriculture, 
farming, and i rrigation [10]. Around the globe, many pri vate 
companies and organizations are now focusing  on investigating new technologies to create a smarter agriculture environment. 
These include mechanical and economic aspects, engineering, 
food retailers and computing. However, agricultural processes 
are fragmented, resulting in a number of issues, i.e. difficulties 
in operating and managing smart machines, data sharing and 
management, data analysis and storage [11, 12] . It is therefore 
important to facilitate cooperation when developing standards 
for smart agriculture, while also enhancing interoperability 
among different stakeholders, systems and technologies [13]. 
The use of IoT and AI technologies has the potential to 
result in a positive transformation of traditional agriculture [3], 
including: (a) improved use of data collected from smar t 
agriculture sensors; (b) managing and governing the internal 
processes within the smart agriculture environment (including 
the management of the harvesting and storage of crops); (c) 
waste reduction and cost saving; (d) increasing business 
efficiency by means of automating traditional processes; and 
(e) improving the quality and volume of products [14]. A major 
challenge is to provide farmers with the required information in 
a rapid manner [15]. AI therefore has significant  potential to 
address the urgent challenges faced by traditional agriculture. 
There has, over previous decades, been considerable research 
and application of AI, including in: (a) smart agriculture; (b) 
robotics; (c) agricultural optimization management; ( d) 
automation; (e) agricultural expert systems; (f) agricultural 
knowledge -based systems; and (g) decision support systems 
[16]. 
There remains a lack of research and development in 
relation to Smart Sustainable Agriculture (SSA), a ccompanied 
by complex obstacles arising from the fragmentation of 
agricultural processes, i.e. the control and operation of IoT/AI 
machines; data sharing and management; interoperability; and 
large amounts of generated data analysis and storage.  
Therefore,  this study firstly, explores existing IoT/AI 
technologies adopted for SSA and secondly, establishes an 
IoT/AI technical architecture to underpin SSA platforms, in 
order to tackle fragmentation in traditional agriculture 
processes and enrich the research a nd development of future 
smart agriculture worldwide  via establish ment of  a Smart, 
Sustainable Agriculture platform  as a solution . 
There now follows an outline of the methodology 
underpinning this research, supported by related work 
highlighting the histor y of smart agriculture, smart and 
advanced computing technologies and examples of IoT/AI 
technologies in current agricultural practices. This is supported 

==== Page 2 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
94 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  by an in -depth discussion of Smart Agriculture  and IoT/AI 
SSA technical architecture, along with  the most significant 
outcomes from this study. The paper finishes with concluding 
remarks and plans for future work.  
II. BACKGROUND  
Due to the lack of literature concerning the development of 
IoT frameworks for SSA, this study focuses on: (a) the history 
of smart agriculture, its potential and challenges; (b) smart and 
advanced computing technologies; and (c) existing smart, 
sustainable agricultural frameworks.  
A. Smart  Sustainable Agriculture  
There has recently been considerable research into SSA, 
employing vari ous different terms, including Precision 
Farming, Smart Irrigation and Smart Greenhouse. This paper 
commences with an examination of these concepts to 
determine the definition of SSA used in this study.  
Precision Farming refers to a method of managing farm s 
and conserving resources through the use of IoT and 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT). It 
obtains real -time data concerning the condition of farm 
elements, (i.e. crops, soil and air) to protect the environment 
while ensuring profits and su stainability [15]. Smart Irrigation 
is a method of improving the efficiency of irrigation processes 
and reducing water losses, while conserving existing water 
resources using IoT -based smart irrigation systems [16]. 
Drones are employed in many agricultural  applications, 
including monitoring field crops and livestock, and scanning 
large areas, while sensors on the ground collect a huge range of 
information [13]. Smart greenhouses promote the cultivation of 
crops with the least degree of human intervention po ssible, 
through use of continuously monitored climatic conditions (i.e. 
humidity, temperature, luminosity and soil moisture), 
triggering automated actions based on the evaluated changes 
and implementing corrective action to maintain the most 
benefic ial con ditions for growth [17].  
Farm Management Systems (FMS) can assist farmers with 
a variety of collected information, by managing and controlling 
various tracking devices and sensors. The collected 
information is analysed for the undertaking of complex 
decisi on-making tasks before being placed in a storage 
medium. This enables the use of the most effective agricultural 
data analysis practices [18]. Soil Monitoring Systems help to 
track and improve the quality of soil through the monitoring of 
its physical, che mical, and biological properties. Livestock 
monitoring systems provide real -time assessment of the 
productivity, health and welfare of livestock, to promote the 
health of animals [19]. The IoT/AI SSA platform Cloud offers 
real-time information to farmers t o facilitate decision -making 
and reduce operational costs, while at the same time enhancing 
productivity. Following a review of a considerable amount of 
research, we define SSA as the utilization process of IoT/AI 
technologies to establish, monitor, manage , process and 
analyse data generated from various agricultural resources, 
such as field, crops, livestock and others  to ensure the 
sustainability and quality of agricultural products and further 
enrich decision -making taken by stakeholders.  B. Smart and Advan ced Computing Technologies  
This section provides an overview of appropriate 
technologies underpinning the development of smart, 
sustainable agriculture platforms, including: IoT; Big Data 
Analytics (BDA); Cloud Computing (CC); Mobile Computing 
(MC); and Ar tificial Intelligence (AI):  
1) Internet of Things (IoT) : IoT is a technology aimed at 
connecting all intelligent objects within a single network, i.e. 
the Internet. It involves all kinds of computer technologies, 
both (a) hardware (i.e. intelligent boards and  sensors) and 
(b) software (i.e. advanced operating systems and AI 
algorithms). Its primary target is the establishment of 
applications for devices, in order to enable the monitoring and 
control of a specific domain. It has been widely adopted in 
many area s, i.e. industrial business processes; home machines; 
health applications; and smart homes and cities. IoT 
connectivity encompasses people, machines, tools and 
locations, aiming to achieve different intelligent functions from 
data sharing and information e xchange [17]. However, it is 
primarily used in agriculture for management of agricultural 
products within gathered real -time data, alongside: 
(1) searching ; (2) tracking; (3) monitoring; (4) control; (5) 
managing; (6) evaluating; and (7) operations within a supply 
chain [1, 9] . 
2) Big Data Analytics (BDA) : BDA refers to the large 
volume of data gathered from different datasets sources over a 
long period of time, i.e. sensor, Internet and business data. The 
datasets used in this technology surpass the comput ational and 
analytical capabilities of typical software applications and 
standard database infrastructure. Its primary task is to capture, 
store, analyze  and search for data, as well as seeking to identify 
concealed patterns in the gathered data. Thus, BDA  involved 
the utilization  of: (a) tools, (i.e. classification and clustering); 
(b) techniques, (i.e. data mining, machine learning and 
statistical analysis); and (c) technologies (i.e. Hadoop and 
spark). These go beyond traditional data analytical approach es, 
being employed to extract beneficial knowledge from a 
considerable amount of data, in order to facilitate timely and 
accurate decision –making [17]. How ever, the use of BDA in 
agriculture focusses on management of the supply chain of 
agricultural products, in order to enhance decision -making and 
minimize the cost of production cost. It is also employed for 
the analysis of the properties of different types  of soil for 
classification and further enhancement. Furthermore, it is 
useful for the improved prediction and production of crops.  
3) Cloud Computing (CC) : CC has is a recent and rapidly 
growing phenomenon within IT [18]. The Cloud is not 
restricted to a particular busine ss domain, but has been 
implemented to underpin and support various software 
applications and platforms [19]. It offers easy access to the 
Cloud provider‟s high -performance and storage infrastructure 
over the Internet, with one of its main benefits being to conceal 
from users the complexity of IT infrastructure management 
[20] [21]. NIST [22] defined CC as “a model for enabling 
convenient, on -demand network access to a shared pool of 

==== Page 3 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
95 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  configurable computing resources (e.g. networks, servers, 
storage, applications and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction”. The Cloud can be seen as high 
virtualization method for datacenter  infrastructure distributed 
over a wide geographical area , linked by means of high 
bandwidth network cables providing a variety of virtualized 
services . These inc lude entire infrastructures, as well as small 
software applications and different types of services, i.e. high -
performance computing and large scalable storage services 
based on a pay -per-use model. CC can be divided into four 
main layers: (1) hardware; (2 ) infrastructure; (3) platform; and 
(4) application [23]. The delivery of Cloud services can 
generally be divided into three different models: (1) 
Infrastructure -as-a-Service (IaaS); (2) Platform -as-a-Service 
(PaaS); and (3) Software -as-a-Service (SaaS) [24, 25] . CC is 
considered the most effective method of storing agricultural 
data, along with IoT [1]. 
4) Mobile Computing (MC) : MC refers to infrastructure in 
which data processing and data storage take place externally to 
the mobile device [26]. MC applications transfer computing 
power, processing and data storage from mobile devices in the 
Cloud [27, 28] . MC has had a considerable impact on modern 
daily life, due to the availability and low cost of purchasing and 
communication. It is now widely used in every field, including 
the agricultural sector [29], in which MC systems collect and 
send daily data to farmers, informing them of both the 
production status and weather conditions [29]. It is crucial to 
use automatic Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) efficient 
traceability systems to store and access data on electronic data 
chips in a more rapid and accurate manner. It has been 
primarily applied to the logistics of industrial products, for the 
purposes of identification and to check delivery processes [30]. 
5) Artificial Intelligence (AI) : AI has been employed in 
smart systems over a long period of time [31], being the science 
of creating intelligent machines to facilitate everyday life [32]. 
AI covers many areas, including computer vision, data mining, 
deep learning, image processing and neural networks [16, 33] . 
AI technologies are now emerging to assist and improve 
efficiency and tackle many of the challenges facing the 
agricultural industry, incl uding soil health, crop yield and 
herbicide -resistance. According to Sennaar [34] , agricultural 
AI Cloud applications fall into three main catego ries, as 
discussed below.  
a) Robots:  these are developed and programmed to 
handle fundamental agricultural tasks (i.e. harvesting crops) 
more rapidly and with a higher capacity than human workers. 
Examples of robotic applications include: (a) See and Spray 
(i.e. a weed control robot) and (b) Harvest CROO (i.e. a crop 
harvesting robot). Agricultural robots have the potential to 
become valuable AI app lications, i.e. milking robots.  
b) Monitoring Crop and Soil:  this employs computer 
vision and deep -learning algorith ms for processing captured 
data by sensors monitoring crop and soil health, i.e. the PEAT 
machine for diagnosing pests and soil defects, based on deep learning application known as Plantix that identifies potential 
defects and nutrient deficiencies in the soil. A further example 
is Trace Genomics, a machine learning based service for 
diagnosing soil defects and providing soil analysis services to 
farmers. This uses machine learning to provide farmers with a 
sense of both the strengths and weaknesses of thei r soil, with 
the emphasis being on the prevention of poor crops and 
optimizing the potential for healthy crop production. A 
SkySquirrel technology is  an example of the use of drones and 
computer vision for crop analysis.  
c) Predictive Analytics:  This analysis  captured data, 
based on machine learning models capable of tracking and 
predicting various environmental impacts on crop harvest, i.e. 
changes in weather. Examples of such AI technologies include 
(a) aWhere (i.e. prediction of weather and crop sustainabil ity) 
and (b) Farmshots (i.e. monitoring of crop health and 
sustainability). Crop and soil monitoring technologies are 
important applications for addressing issues related to climate 
change. IoT/AI technologies (such as drone and satellite) that 
generate a large amount of data on a daily basis have the 
potential to enable agricultural production to forecast changes 
and detect opportunities. It is predicted that, over the coming 
years, IoT and AI applications will attract a considerable 
degree of interest fro m large industrial agricultural enterprises 
[34]. 
The benefits and advantages of the agricultural use of IoT 
are as follows: (a) efficiency of input; (b) cost reduction ; 
(c) profitability; (d) sustainability; (e) food safety and 
environmental protection [35]. However, Ferrández -Pastor, et 
al. [36]  considered SSA to contain a number of barriers 
potentially hindering its adoption: (a) initial expectations and 
advanta ges remaining unfulfilled; (b) complexity of technology 
and incompatibility of components; (c) a lack of products; and 
(d) the high cost involved in the establishment and 
maintenance of such facilities. To ensure the adoption and 
improvement of smart techn ologies in the agriculture sector, it 
is vital for farmers to be trained and given up -to-date 
knowledge of IoT/AI technologies. Furthermore, it is crucial to 
test and validate IoT/AI applications, due to the high risk 
involved in the adoption of these tech nologies in a critical 
sector, along with the influence of environmental factors.  
C. Examples of IoT/AI Technologies in Current Agriculture 
Practices  
There are many types of IoT and AI sensors and 
applications in current agricultural st udies and development. 
Table 1 provides an overview of the most commonly employed 
IoT/AI platforms/technologies found in smart agriculture . 
D. Examples of an Existing AI/IoT Research in Smart 
Agriculture  
There are a number of specific challenges that need to be 
considered before in vesting in smart agriculture, primarily 
those falling into the following categories: (1) hardware; 
(2) data analysis; (3) maintenance; (4) mobility; and 
(5) infrastructure [56]. Nonetheless, there are many research 
efforts in the field of IoT/AI to support the creation and 
establishment of SSA, as shown in Table 2 . 

==== Page 4 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
96 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  TABLE I.  EXAMPLE OF IOT/AI APPLICATION S IN SMART AGRICULTURE  
Category  Tool/Company  Description  
Climate 
conditions 
Monitoring  allMETEO [37] A po rtal to manage IoT micro weather stations, to gather real -time data access and create a weather map. It also 
provides an API for easy real -time data transfer into developed or existing infrastructure.  
Smart Elements 
[38] A collection of products that improve efficiency by eliminating manual checking. They work by deploying a wide 
range of sensors generating a report back to an online dashboa rd, allowing rapid and informed decisions based on real -
time conditions.  
Pycno [39] A software and sensor allowing continuous data collection and flow from the f arm to smartphone. It also contains a 
dashboard to apply the latest phenological and disease models to monitor trends and assess risk to agricultural products.  
Greenhou
se automation  Farmapp [40] A process of monitoring pests and diseases, generating reports for mobile applications. It records the data quickly 
and more efficiently than traditional methods (i.e. paper), allowing a smooth implementation. The sto red data is 
synchronized with the server, enabling the following metrics to be immediately observed: (1) a satellite map with 
recorded points; (2) the current sanitary status of the farm; (3) comparative heatmaps to easily compare previous 
measures with th e current situation; and (4) charts and reports concerning pests and diseases.  
Growlink [41] A platform that tightly integrates hardware and software p roducts, enabling smarter working, including providing 
wireless automation and control, data collection, optimization, and monitoring and visualization.  
GreenIQ [42] A system to control irrigation and lighting from all locations and to connect IoT devices to automation platforms.  
Crop 
management  Arable [43] A device that combines weather and plant measurements, sending data to the Cloud for instant retrieval from all 
locations. It offers continuous indicators of stress, pests and disease.  
Semios [44] A platform focused  on yield improvement. It enables farmers to assess and respond to insects, disease and the health 
of crops using real -time data, forming on -site sensing, big data and predictive analytics solutions for sustained 
agricultural products.  
livestock 
monitoring 
and 
management  SCR/Allflex [45] An advanced animal monitoring system, aimed at the collection and analysis of critical data, includin g for individual 
animals. It delivers, when needed, the heat, health and nutrition insights required by farmers for effective decision 
making.  
Cowlar [46] A smart  neck collar for monitoring dairy animals to gather information on temperature, rumination, activity and 
other behavior . The intelligence algorithm in the system allows for the detection of health disorders before the 
appearance of visual symptoms. It can monitor body movement patterns and gait to provide accurate oestrus detection 
alerts. It uses a solar power base unit, along with a waterproof and non -invasive monitoring system, both comfortable for 
the animal and requiring minimum maintenance.  
End-to-
end farm 
management 
systems  FarmLogs [47] This system monitors field conditions, facilitating the planning and managing of crop production. It also m arkets 
agricultural products.  
Cropio [48] A decision -making t ool used to optimize fertilization and irrigation to control the amount of fertilizer and reduce the 
use of water. It combines weather information and satellite data to monitor crops and field forecasts.  
Predictive 
Analytics  Farmshots [49] A system analyzing  satellite and drone images of farms fields to map potential sign of diseases, pests and poor 
nutrition. It turns images into a prescription map t o optimize farm production and view analytics on farm performance. 
Generated data in the Cloud can be exportable into nearly all agricultural software for prescription creation.  
aWhere [50] A platform employed for weather prediction and information on crop sustainability. Its goal is to deliver complete 
information and insight for real -time agricultural decisions on a daily basis and at a global level.  
Crop and  
Soil Health 
Monitoring  Plantix [51] A machine learning based tool to control and manage the agriculture process, disease control, and the cultivation of 
high-quality crops.  
Trace Genomics 
[52] A soil monitoring system performing complex test s (i.e. DNA) on soil samples. It uses a machine learning process 
known as „genome sequencing‟ that generates a health report for a soil sample by reading its DNA and comparing it to a 
large soil DNA database.  
Agricultu
re machines  
/drones  SkySquirrel [53] A drone system aimed at helping users to improve their crop yield and reduce costs. Users pre -program a drone‟s 
route, and, o nce deployed, the device will leverage computer vision to record images to be used for analysis. Once the 
drone completes its route, users can transfer the data to a computer and upload it to a Cloud drive. It uses algorithms to 
integrate and analyze  the c aptured images and data to provide a detailed report on the health and condition of crops.  
See & Spray [54] A robot  designed to control weeds and protect crops. It leverages computer vision to monitor and precisely spray 
weeds and infected plants.  
CROO [55] A robot that  assists in the picking and packing of crops. The manufacturer claimed  that this robot can harvest eight 
acres in a single day and replace the work of thirty human laborers . 

==== Page 5 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
97 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  TABLE II.  IOT/AI  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN SMART SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE  
Researcher/s  Year  Summary  
Ray [57]  2017  The researchers undertook a review of various potentia l IoT applications, including the specific issues and challenges associated 
with IoT deployment to improve farming. They comprehensively analyzed  the specific requirements the devices and wireless 
communication technologies associated with agricultural IoT  applications. They presented different case studies to explore existing 
IoT based solutions operated by various organizations and individuals, followed by categorizing them based on their deploymen t 
parameters. Furthermore, they identified a number of fac tors for the improvement and future road map of work using IoT.  
Mekala and 
Viswanathan [58]  2017  The researchers surveyed a number of conventional applications of Agricultural Io T Sensor Monitoring Network technologies 
utilizing  CC. Their study aimed at understanding the diverse technologies to build smart, sustainable agriculture. They addressed a 
simple IoT agriculture model with a wireless network.  
Kamilaris, et al. 
[59] 2017  The researchers reviewed work in agriculture employing the practice of big data analysis to solve var ious different problems. 
Their review emphasized the opportunities provided by big data analysis for the development of smarter agriculture, the avail ability of 
hardware and software, as well as the techniques and methods for big data analysis.  
Rajeswari, et al. 
[29] 2017  The researchers investigated a number of different features, i.e. humidity, temperature sensing, server -based remote monitoring 
system detection and soil moisture sensing. They used sensor networks to measure temperature, moisture and humidity in place of 
manual checking. They deployed several sensors in different locations within farms, using a single controller. Their major ob jectiv e 
was to collect real -time data of the agriculture production environment to establish an easy access agricultural advice, in order to 
identify weather or crops patterns.  
Antonacci, et al. 
[5] 2018  The researchers attempted to provide nanotechnology -based (bio) sensors to support farmers in delivering an analysis that is 
accurate, fast, cost -effective, and useful in the field to identify water and soil nutrients/pesticides, soil humidity, and plant pathogens.  
Cadavid, et al. 
[60] 2018  The researchers proposed an extension to a popular open -source IoT platform, known as „Thingsb oard‟. This formed the core of a 
Cloud -based Smart Farming platform and deliberate sensors, a decision support system, and a configuration of remotely autonomous 
and controlled machines (e.g. water dispensers, rovers or drones).  
Soto-Romero, et 
al. [61]  2019  The researchers designed an easily insertable cylindrical sensor with internal electron ics to offer a low power electronic 
architecture to measure and communicate wirelessly with a LoRa, Sigfox network or mobile phones.  
Nóbrega, et al. 
[62] 2019  The researchers reviewed the proposed stack and details of the recent developments within smart agriculture, focusing on 
IoT/Machin e-2-Machine interaction. They described the design and deployment of a gateway addressing the requirements of the 
SheepIT service, evaluating this gateway using real scenarios in terms of performance, thus demonstrating its feasibility and  
scalability.  
III. METHODOLOGY  
As well as undertaking the literature review, the current 
researcher enhanced this study by informally interviewing 
experienced farmers. The study aims to establish an IoT /AI 
SSA architecture, as well as exploring the potential of the use 
of IoT and AI as a backbone to establish an SSA platform. A 
review was employed to identify, analyze  and study key books, 
journals, reports, and white papers, in order to achieve the 
above -noted aim. The lack of existing studies in this area 
ensures that this current research also contributes to the body of 
knowledge by establishing an IoT/AI framework for the 
adoption of smart technologies, in order to establish smart 
sustainable agricultu ral practices. Fig . 1 shows the 
methodology adopted for this study.  
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
Based on the research aim outlined in the Methodology, 
this section is divided into ( A) Domains of Smart Sustainable 
agricultural model ; (B) B. Proposed IOT/AI SSA p latform as a 
solution ; and ( C) Proposed IoT/AI technical architecture for 
SSA platform . A. Domains of Smart Sustainable Agricultural Model 
The results from the literature review revealed that several 
domains need to be considered when adopting the smart 
agric ultural model. Fig . 2 demonstrates the interrelation and 
complexity of data flow between different Smart, Sustainable 
Agriculture domains.  
 
Fig. 1.  IoT/SSA Research  Methodology . 


==== Page 6 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
98 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org   
Fig. 2.  Chaotic Data Flow and Interrelation of SSA Domains . 
These domains are discussed individually, as follows:  
 Human resources:  This refers to people, policies and 
practices within the agricultural environment, which are 
as important as in any other domain, as are weather and 
technology. Human resources receive careful attention, 
due to th eir significant impact on production, as well as 
financial and marketing  decisions. Whatever its size, an 
agricultural concern requires effective human resources 
management and planning, including hiring and 
keeping employees who are engaged, high -performi ng 
and effective communicators. Providing up -to-date 
knowledge potentially opens the means to adopt smart 
technologies in an agricultural environment.  
 Crops : This refers to a plant that can be grown and 
harvested extensively for subsistence or profit: (1) food 
crops (i.e. for human consumption); (2) feed crops (i.e. 
for livestock consumption); (3) fibre crops (i.e. for 
cordage and textiles); and (4) oil crops (i.e. for 
consumption or industrial uses).  
 Weather:  This plays a major role in determining the 
success of agricultural processes. Most field crops and 
livestock are solely dependent on climactic conditions 
to provide life -sustaining water and energy. Adverse 
weather can cause losses in agricultural products, 
particularly during critical stages of growth . The 
elements of weather (solar radiation, temperature, 
precipitation, humidity and wind) influence the 
physiology and production of agricultural plants and 
animals. Severe weather (i.e. tornadoes, drought, 
flooding, hail and wind storms) can cause consid erable 
damage and destruction to fields and livestock.  
 Soil:  This forms a critical aspect of successful 
agriculture, being the source of nutrients used to grow 
crops, which are subsequently passed into plants and 
then to humans and animals. Healthy soils p roduce 
healthy and rich food supplies;  however the health of 
soil tends to decline over time, forcing farmers to move 
to new fields. Soil health depends on regional conditions and climates, with soil nutrients more likely 
to deteriorate in dry climates, pa rticularly if irrigated, 
which, if not managed carefully, can result in 
salinization, i.e. a build -up in the level of salts and 
chemicals contained in water. Healthy and rich soil can 
be achieved through the use of IoT sensors to monitor 
its chemical statu s, using specific sensors (e.g. moisture 
sensors), whose data readings are transferred to the data 
management and analysis layer for analysis, assisting 
decisions concerning the need for fertilizer.  
 Pests:  These consist of any living creature that is 
invas ive, or damaging to crops, livestock or human 
structures. Pests often occur in high quantities, to the 
detriment of agricultural products. It is vital to control 
and monitor these creatures by means of IoT/AI 
technologies, to avoid serious diseases, includ ing 
plague and malaria, as well as plant and livestock 
diseases.  
 Fertilization:  Soils naturally contain many nutrients, 
i.e. nitrogen, phosphorous, calcium and potassium. 
Crops are unable to function effectively and produce 
high quality food when their nut rient level is low. The 
natural levels of nutrients in the soil need to be 
enhanced by the addition of nutrients once crops have 
been harvested. Fertilizers have been used since the 
beginning of agriculture, but it is now recognized that 
their extensive us e can, if not correctly controlled, harm 
the environment. Therefore, farmers use IoT sensors to 
read and test soil samples for baseline testing to enable 
them to add fertilizers using correct and appropriate 
measurements. Fertilization is an important meth od of 
maintaining  sustainable agricultural production 
systems.  
 Agricultural Products:  These are derived from 
cultivating crops or livestock to sustain or enhance 
human life. Human beings also use a wide collection of 
agricultural products on a daily basis,  i.e. food and 
clothing. Agricultural products fall into the following 
groups: (a) grains; (b) foods; (c) fuels; (d) fibres; 
(e) livestock; and (f) raw materials. Food is the most 
extensively produced agricultural product.  
 Irrigation/Water:  Water demand in  agriculture is now 
rising globally and particularly in Mediterranean 
countries, increasing the pressure to preserve available 
freshwater resources. Smart, sustainable agriculture 
processes should therefore focus on new and efficient 
techniques to improve agricultural productivity, which 
promote considerable savings in terms of food 
consumption and wasted water.  
 Livestock:  These are animals raised in a domesticated 
agricultural environment, for the purposes of labour and 
to produce commodities such as eggs,  meat, milk, fur, 
wool and leather. Animal husbandry is a component of 
current agriculture and refers to the breeding, 
maintenance and slaughter of livestock.  
 Machines:  Agricultural equipment is any kind of 
machinery used to assist with farming. Such machi nes 


==== Page 7 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
99 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  can be light or heavy, i.e. tractors. Modern farm 
machinery is seen as the important driver for increased 
agricultural sustainability, efficiency and 
competitiveness. Smart technologies can reduce the 
impact of farming practices within global agricultu re. 
The current development of agricultural machinery 
addresses environmental challenges, while increasing 
productivity and bringing economic benefits. These 
smart agricultural machines should be: (a) fast, 
accurate, versatile and intelligent; (b) produce less CO2 
emissions and (c) make use of bioenergy.  
 Field s: This refers to an area of land used for 
agricultural purposes, i.e. crops, cultivation or for 
livestock. Many fields have borders composed of a strip 
of bushes used to provide both food and cover, i n order 
to ensure the survival of wildlife. Monitoring field 
activities using IoT devices can have a significantly 
positive impact on controlling objects within the field.  
B. Proposed IOT/AI SSA Platform as a Solution  
This platform would prove a valuable medi um to facilitate 
data flow and sharing among SSA domains. Many researchers 
have developed IoT architectures, but their efforts have tended 
to target specific areas of IoT/AI, i.e. sensors or weather 
monitoring systems [58, 60, 61] . This current paper is 
proposing a holistic IoT/AI platform to cover all areas within a 
SSA environment, performing the following tasks: (a) manage 
and govern data flow between SSA domains; (b) facilitate the 
integration of the d ifferent components of SSA architecture; 
(c) tackle interoperability issues caused by the utilization of 
different tools and software; (d) provide easy -to-use interfaces 
for interaction; (e) provide an ability to generate reports based 
on real -time data an d keep it updated; (f) store generated data 
in sustainable storage place (i.e. the Cloud), to enable it to 
permanently recorded for future reuse; (g) isolate different 
layers to improve the development process in the future; and 
(h) the platform should con sist of several nodes, so that, in the 
case of any failure, other nodes can keep the system up and 
running. Fig . 3 shows how the SSA -IoT/AI platform would be 
used at the center  of the SSA domain to facilitate business 
process and data flow and to share wit hin a smart, sustainable 
agricultural environment.  
 
Fig. 3.  Proposed SSA -IoT/AI Platform . C. Proposed IoT/AI Technical Architecture for SSA Platform  
Fig. 4 shows the overall AI/IoT technical architectu re for 
SSA. It consists of two main components: (a) the first 
component: SSA Layers and AI/IoT technologies; and (b) the 
second component: data lifecycle within SSA architecture and 
data process location. In order to provide additional detail 
concerning th e framework, the following description gives 
further details about each component:  
1) The First component: Smart Sustainable Agriculture 
(SSA) layers and (SSA) AI/IoT technologies  
The first component of smart, sustainable agriculture 
(SSA), AI/IOT framework, consists of the following layers: 
(a) Physical Hardware and Storage layer; (b) AI and Data 
Management layer, and Governance layer; (c) Network layer; 
(d) Security layer; (e) Application layer; (f) IoT and sensing 
layer; and (g) SSA domain layer. Fig . 4 demonstrates the 
following description of each layer, highlighting its primary 
role: 
 Physical hardware and Storage layer : This layer 
consists of powerful hardware to host virtualized 
machines, as well as dedicated traditional storage 
medium, cloud storage solutions or hybrid storage 
solutions. It contains the supporting hardware for IoT 
devices that exist in Internet of Thi ns and Sensing layer.  
 Artificial Intelligence and Data Management Layer : 
This layer is responsible for managing processes and 
controlling the business logic, focussing on three main 
activities: (i) data analysis and processing, using data 
mining and intell igence statistical analysis on generated 
data; (ii) data classification and transformation, using 
ontologies, and machine learning to classify and 
transform analysed data; and (iii) data interpretation, 
representing the transformed data into knowledge to 
make machines smarter.  
 Network Layer:  This layer contains all the different 
types of network connections exist, with this cloud 
consisting of wired or wireless network 
connections/devices. It is important that this layer uses 
the latest networking technolog ies to keep up with the 
most recent developments in other sectors. Its main job 
is to facilitate the transaction of all data to and from 
different layers within the architecture. The 
technologies of IoT in this layer include Internet, WIFI 
and GSM/CMDA. It  is responsible for data accessibility 
and availability throughout other layers. Further, it 
manages data and its flow within between all layers.  
 Security Layer:  This layer is responsible for data 
security transferred among different layers and should 
be the means of addressing any security concerns and 
vulnerabilities within all other IoT/SSA layers, i.e. 
malware, spyware and viruses. It should employ up -to-
date security solutions and AI algorithms to block and 
quarantine any threat to the platform.  
 Applic ations Layers:  This layer gathers different 
applications related to smart sustainable agriculture. It 
is built based on AI and data management layers. Many 
Fig. 4 Overall AI/IoT platform technical architecture for SSA  

==== Page 8 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
100 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  smart, sustainable agricultural applications could be 
developed and integrated into this layer, i.e.  crop 
monitoring applications and drone -controlled 
applications. This layer focuses on the supervision 
aspect of the data flow and migration between all layers  
and can provide an authorized institution with full or 
partial governance on data migration, tra nsactions and 
access.  
 Internet of Things (IoT) and Sensing Layer:  This 
forms the first interaction layer with SSA domains. It 
uses and hosts various types of IoT devices (e.g. 
sensors), capable of collecting data from real -world 
objects, sharing it to prov ide real -time data. Many 
sensors in the Cloud are hosted and integrated within 
this layer, i.e. humidity sensors, moisture sensors and 
weather monitoring systems. Furthermore, this layer is 
responsible for operating robotic and drone actuators to 
assist in  the mobility of intelligent machines within the 
agricultural area. It thus allows intelligent machines to 
move between locations, in order to cover a wide area.  
 SSA Domain Layer:  This layer hosts various different 
Smart Sustainable Architectural domains a nd forms the 
main source for data generated from various 
agricultural domains, including: fields; machines; 
human resources; and crops. It forms the basis for 
IOT/AI SSA platforms, as it contains various raw data 
formats without interference.  2) The Second co mponent: data lifecycle within SSA 
Architecture and its process location:  
Fig. 5 demonstrates that data lifecycle remains in line with 
SSA Architecture layers. This commences with the original 
data source, i.e. SSA domain layers. The acquisition and 
captur ing of data is undertaken at the layer containing sensors 
and actuators. These captured data are then passed to the 
application layer for business logic and control, following 
which, the data must be checked for security issues before 
moving to data analys is and processing. This is followed by 
data classification and transformation of the analyzed  and 
processed data before it moves to data interpretation and the 
resulting building decisions. The final stage is to store the data 
for future retrieval.  
There a re two locations for sharing and processing of 
generated data. Firstly, on -site. Here, the generated data is 
more likely to be shared and processed within the location of 
the agricultural field, covering the four architecture layers: 
(1) SSA; (2) the domai n layer; (3) the IoT layer; and (4) the 
application layer. Secondly, off -site: here the sharing and 
processing of the generated data must be outsourced to the 
physical location „data centre‟, in which data is processed and 
analyzed away from the field. It can cover the four architecture 
layers: (1) network; (2) AI and data management; (3) physical; 
and (4) storage. It is also important to highlight that the 
Security layer forms a common layer between on -site and off -
site processing locations.  
 
Fig. 4.  Overall AI/IoT Platform Technical Architecture for SSA . 
 
Fig. 5.  IoT/AI Data Lifecycle . 


==== Page 9 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
101 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  V. CONCLUSION  
This paper has established the importance of employing 
recent and advanced computing technologies in the agricult ural 
sector, in particularly AI and IoT. Agriculture is considered 
central to the survival of human beings. Supporting the current 
practices of traditional agriculture with recent IoT/AI 
technologies can improve the performance, quality and volume 
of produ ction. This study has reviewed the existing IoT/AI 
technologies discussed within the main research journals in the 
area of agricultural. Furthermore, it categorized the main 
domains of smart, sustainable agriculture, i.e. human resources; 
crops; weather; soil; pests; fertilization; farming products; 
irrigation/water; livestock; machines; and fields. The major 
contribution of this paper concerns  the AI/IoT technical 
architecture for SSA, leading to an emphasis on the research 
and development of a unified AI/IoT platform for SSA, to 
positively resolve issues resulting from the frag mentary nature 
of the agricultural process. Future work will include 
investigati on of  the process of implementing AI/IoT 
technologies for SSA by applying the proposed AI/IoT 
technical architecture in the form of the prototype of a unified 
platform on real test cases . This will  identify the relevant 
strengthens and weaknesses for further improvement and 
enhancement.  
REFERENCES  
[1] H. Channe, S. Kothari, and D. Kadam, "Multidisciplinary model for 
smart agriculture using  internet -of-things (IoT), sensors, cloud -
computing, mobile -computing & big -data analysis," Int. J. Computer 
Technology & Applications, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 374 -382, 2015.  
[2] L. Taiz, "Agriculture, plant physiology, and human population growth: 
past, present, a nd future," Theoretical and Experimental Plant 
Physiology, vol. 25, pp. 167 -181, 2013.  
[3] C. Smita and G. Shivani, "Smart Irrigation Techniques for Water 
Resource Management," in Smart Farming Technologies for Sustainable 
Agricultural Development, C. P. Rames h, G. Xiao -Zhi, R. Linesh, S. 
Sugam, and V. Sonali, Eds. Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2019, pp. 
196-219. 
[4] V. Scognamiglio, Antonacci, A. , Lambreva, M. D., Arduini, F. , 
Palleschi, G. , Litescu, S. C., Johanningmeier, U. and Rea, G. , 
"Application of Biose nsors for Food Analysis," in Food Safety, 2016.  
[5] A. Antonacci, F. Arduini, D. Moscone, G. Palleschi, and V. 
Scognamiglio, "Nanostructured (Bio) sensors for smart agriculture," 
TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, vol. 98, pp. 95 -103, 2018.  
[6] P. S. Kumar and G . J. Joshiba, "Water Footprint of Agricultural 
Products," in Environmental Water Footprints: Springer, 2019, pp. 1 -19. 
[7] E. Bennett et al., "Toward a more resilient agriculture," Solutions, vol. 5, 
no. 5, pp. 65 -75, 2014.  
[8] O. Elijah, T. A. Rahman, I. Orikumhi , C. Y. Leow, and M. N. Hindia, 
"An Overview of Internet of Things (IoT) and Data Analytics in 
Agriculture: Benefits and Challenges," IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 3758 -3773, 2018.  
[9] S. de Wilde, "The future of technology in agriculture ," 2016.  
[10] P. Jayashankar, S. Nilakanta, W. J. Johnston, P. Gill, and R. Burres, 
"IoT adoption in agriculture: the role of trust, perceived value and risk," 
Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 804 -821, 
2018.  
[11] J. Leventon et al., "C ollaboration or fragmentation? Biodiversity 
management through the common agricultural policy," Land Use Policy, 
vol. 64, pp. 1 -12, 2017.  
[12] E. Timofti, D. Popa, and B. Kielbasa, "Comparative analysis of the land 
fragmentation and its impact on the farm manag ement in some EU 
countries and Moldova," Scientific Papers: Management, Economic 
Engineering in Agriculture & Rural Development, vol. 15, no. 4, 2015.  [13] P. R. Crosson, "Sustainable agriculture," in Global Development and the 
Environment: Routledge, 2016, pp.  61-68. 
[14] M. Aleksandrova. (2019) Technologies and IoT have the potential to 
transform agriculture in many aspects. Namely, there are 5 ways IoT can 
improve agriculture. Eastern Peak.  
[15] I. Mohanraj, K. Ashokumar, and J. Naren, "Field monitoring and 
automation using IOT in agriculture domain," Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 93, pp. 931 -939, 2016.  
[16] D. I. Patrício and R. Rieder, "Computer vision and artificial intelligence 
in precision agriculture for grain crops: A systematic review," 
Computers and Electronics in  Agriculture, vol. 153, pp. 69 -81, 
2018/10/01/ 2018.  
[17] S. E. Bibri, "The IoT for smart sustainable cities of the future: An 
analytical framework for sensor -based big data applications for 
environmental sustainability," Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 38 , 
pp. 230 -253, 2018.  
[18] A. Kumar, L. Byung Gook, L. HoonJae, and A. Kumari, "Secure storage 
and access of data in cloud computing," in ICT Convergence (ICTC), 
2012 International Conference on, 2012, pp. 336 -339, New Jersey, USA: 
Institute of Electrical and El ectronics Engineers (IEEE).  
[19] M. Armbrust et al., "A view of cloud computing," Communications of 
the ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 50 -58, 2010.  
[20] W. Jiyi, P. Lingdi, G. Xiaoping, W. Ya, and F. Jianqing, "Cloud Storage 
as the Infrastructure of Cloud Computing," in I ntelligent Computing and 
Cognitive Informatics (ICICCI), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2010, pp. 
380-383, New Jersey, USA: Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), 2010.  
[21] J. Repschlaeger, S. Wind, R. Zarnekow, and K. Turowski, "A Reference 
Guide to Cloud Computing Dimensions: Infrastructure as a Service 
Classification Framework," in System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th 
Hawaii International Conference on, 2012, pp. 2178 -2188, Washington, 
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2012.  
[22] P. Mell and T. Grance, "The NI ST definition of cloud computing," 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1 -3, 
2009.  
[23] Q. Zhang, L. Cheng, and R. Boutaba, "Cloud computing: state -of-the-art 
and research challenges," Journal of Internet Services and Applications , 
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 7 -18, 2010.  
[24] D. Chornyi, J. Riediger, and T. Wolfenstetter, "Into The Cloud," 2010.  
[25] A. Marinos and G. Briscoe, "Community cloud computing," in Cloud 
Computing: Springer, 2009, pp. 472 -484. 
[26] K. Gai, M. Qiu, H. Zhao, L. Tao, and Z. Zong, " Dynamic energy -aware 
cloudlet -based mobile cloud computing model for green computing," 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 59, pp. 46 -54, 
2016.  
[27] C. V. Raja, K. Chitra, and M. Jonafark, "A Survey on Mobile Cloud 
Computing," International Journ al of Scientific Research in Computer 
Science, Engineering and Information Technology, vol. 3, no. 3, 2018.  
[28] A. u. R. Khan, M. Othman, F. Xia, and A. N. Khan, "Context -Aware 
Mobile Cloud Computing and Its Challenges," IEEE Cloud Computing, 
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 42 -49, 2015.  
[29] S. Rajeswari, K. Suthendran, and K. Rajakumar, "A smart agricultural 
model by integrating IoT, mobile and cloud -based big data analytics," in 
2017 International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control 
(I2C2), 2017, pp. 1 -5: IEEE.  
[30] K. Sugahara, "Traceability system for agricultural productsbased on 
RFID and mobile technology," in International conference on computer 
and computing technologies in agriculture, 2008, pp. 2293 -2301: 
Springer.  
[31] J. V. Abellan -Nebot and F. R. Subirón, "A revi ew of machining 
monitoring systems based on artificial intelligence process models," The 
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 47, 
no. 1 -4, pp. 237 -257, 2010.  
[32] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artificial intelligence: a modern approac h. 
Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited, 2016.  
[33] S. S. Kale and P. S. Patil, "Data Mining Technology with Fuzzy Logic, 
Neural Networks and Machine Learning for Agriculture," in Data 
Management, Analytics and Innovation: Springer, 2019, pp. 79 -87. 

==== Page 10 ====
(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 10, No.  5, 201 9 
102 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org  [34] K. Sennaar. (2019, April). AI in Agriculture – Present Applications and 
Impact. Available: https://emerj.com/ai -sector -overviews/ai -agriculture -
present -applications -impact/  
[35] K. Lakhwani, H. Gianey, N. Agarwal, and S. Gupta, "Development of 
IoT for Smart Agriculture a R eview: Proceedings of ICETEAS 2018," 
2019, pp. 425 -432. 
[36] F. Ferrández -Pastor, J. García -Chamizo, M. Nieto -Hidalgo, J. Mora -
Pascual, and J. Mora -Martínez, "Developing ubiquitous sensor network 
platform using internet of things: Application in precision agric ulture," 
Sensors, vol. 16, no. 7, p. 1141, 2016.  
[37] allMETEO. (2019, April). allMETEO. Available: 
https://www.allmeteo.com/  
[38] S. Elements. (2019, April). Smart Elements. Available: 
https://smartelements.io/  
[39] Pycno. (2019, April). Pycno. Available: https://www.py cno.co/  
[40] Farmapp. (2019, April). Farmapp. Available: https://farmappweb.com/  
[41] Growlink. (2019, April). Growlink. Available: http://growlink.com/  
[42] GreenIQ. (2019, April). GreenIQ. Available: 
https://easternpeak.com/works/iot/  
[43] Arable. (2019, April). Arable. Ava ilable: https://arable.com/  
[44] Semios. (2019, April). Semios. Available: http://semios.com/  
[45] SCR/Allflex. (2019, April). SCR/Allflex. Available: 
http://www.scrdairy.com/  
[46] Cowlar. (2019, April). Cowlar. Available: https://cowlar.com/  
[47] FarmLogs. (2019, April). Far mLogs. Available: https://farmlogs.com/  
[48] Cropio. (2019, April). Cropio. Available: https://about.cropio.com/#agro  
[49] Farmshots. (2019, April). Farmshots. Available: http://farmshots.com  
[50] aWhere. (2019, April). aWhere. Available: https://www.awhere.com  
[51] Plantix.  (2019, April). Plantix. Available: https://plantix.net/en  [52] T. Genomics. (2019, April). Trace Genomics. Available: 
https://www.tracegenomics.com/#/  
[53] SkySquirrel. (2019, April). SkySquirrel. Available: 
https://www.skysquirrel.ca/#productnav  
[54] S. Spray. (2019, A pril). See & Spray. Available: 
http://smartmachines.bluerivertechnology.com  
[55] CROO. (2019, April). CROO. Available: https://harvestcroo.com  
[56] S. Chen, H. Xu, D. Liu, B. Hu, and H. Wang, "A vision of IoT: 
Applications, challenges, and opportunities with china p erspective," 
IEEE Internet of Things journal, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 349 -359, 2014.  
[57] P. P. Ray, "Internet of things for smart agriculture: Technologies, 
practices and future direction," Journal of Ambient Intelligence and 
Smart Environments, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 395-420, 2017.  
[58] M. S. Mekala and P. Viswanathan, "A Survey: Smart agriculture IoT 
with cloud computing," in 2017 International conference on 
Microelectronic Devices, Circuits and Systems (ICMDCS), 2017, pp. 1 -
7: IEEE.  
[59] A. Kamilaris, A. Kartakoullis, and F. X . Prenafeta -Boldú, "A review on 
the practice of big data analysis in agriculture," Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 143, pp. 23 -37, 2017.  
[60] H. Cadavid, W. Garzon, A. Pérez Ruiz, G. López, C. Mendivelso, and 
C. Ramírez, "Towards a Smart Farming Platform: From IoT -Based Crop 
Sensing to Data Analytics: 13th Colombian Conference, CCC 2018, 
Cartagena, Colombia, September 26 –28, 2018, Proceedings," 2018, pp. 
237-251. 
[61] G. Soto -Romero, J. Roux, C. Escriba, J. -Y. Fourniols, and G. Soto -
Romero, "A new bi -frequency soil smart sensing moisture and salinity 
for connected sustainable agriculture," Journal of Sensor Technology, 
2019.  
[62] L. Nóbrega, P. Gonçalves, P. Pedreiras, and J. Pereira, "An IoT -Based 
Solution for Intelligent Farming," Sensors, vol. 19, no. 3, p. 603, 2019.  
 
 

