==== Page 1 ====
 
Manas Jain, Shruthi Narayan, Pratibha Balaji, Bharath K P, Abhijit Bhowmick,  Karthik R,  
Rajesh Kumar Muthu  
School of Electronics Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore.  
jainmanas13@gmail.com ,shruthi.narayan98@gmail.com , balajipratibha@gmail.com ,bharathkp25@gmail.com ,  
abhijit.bhowmick@vit.ac.in ,tkgravikarthik@gmail.com , mrajeshkumar@vit.ac.in . 
 
 
Abstract— In this project, we  aim to classify the speech taken as 
one of the four emotions namely, sadness, anger, fear and 
happiness. The samples that have been taken to complete this 
project are taken from Linguistic Data Consortium ( LDC) and 
UGA database. The  important characterist ics determined from 
the samples are energ y, pitch, MFCC coefficients, LPCC 
coefficients  and speaker rate. The classifier used to classify these 
emotional states is Support Vector Machine ( SVM) and this is 
done using two classification strategies: One again st All ( OAA) 
and Gender Dependent Classification. Furthermore, a 
comparative  analysis has been conducted between the two  and 
LPCC and MFCC algorithms as well.  
 
Keywords — Emotio n; datasets; SVM; MFCC ; framing; 
autocorrelation  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
 
Human computer intelligence is an upcoming field of research 
which aims to make computers learn from experiences and 
decide how to respond to a particular situation. This has 
resulted in improved interaction between users and the 
computer. With the help of  certain algorithms and procedures, 
the computer can be made fit to detect the various 
characteristics present in the voice sample and deduce the 
emotion underlying  [2]. This emotion detection can be done in 
two methods, one being speech and the other bein g image. 
Since speech is a very important part of communication, it is 
essential to be able to detect the emotion from it. There are 
various methods and classifications that are available like  K-
Nearest Neighbor, Artificial Neural Networks , Hidden 
Markov M odel, Support Vector Machines , and others that 
have been developed to classify human emotions based on 
training datasets  [2-5]. 
 
Feature extraction is the first step that needs to be carried out 
while detecting emotions. In this project, we have used MFCC and LPC to extract features and then used SVM to train the 
data sets to identify the emotion or sentiment  [5].  
SVM is a supervised machine learning technique that is used 
for classification as well as regression. It attempts to 
categorize data by finding suitable  hyperplanes that can 
separate data by the highest margin. Based on the training sets, 
the new values are segregated and analyzed.  
In the paper written by Feng Yu etal, they have used support 
vector machines method to classify basic four types of 
emotions sadness, happiness, anger and neutral using 721 
utterances [ 2]. In the paper written by Sapra etal , they have 
used K -nearest Neighbors  to classify emotions and used only 
one technique of MFCC to extract features [4]. In the paper by 
Utane etal, the y have used MFCC to extract features in the 
speech signal and made a comparative analysis of various 
other classifiers like M arkov model, Gaussian model and 
support vector machines [5]. El Ayadi etal in his paper has 
conducted a surv ey on three important a spects present in 
speech  emotion rec ognition namely how to design emotional 
speech corpora, what are the impacts of speech features on 
performance  and classification systems that are present  in 
speech emotion  recognition  [6]. Kim Samuel etal in their 
paper has built an application for  emotion detection system 
which operates in real time and  uses multi -modal fusion of 
various  features of the speech. [7]. Farouk etal , in his paper 
have conducted the emotion detection using w avelet analysis 
and have concluded that wavelet analysis has helped 
improving the basic features of speech signal as well [8]. 
Schuller etal, in  their paper have used techniques of Hidden  
markov model to classify emotions. While doing so they have 
incorpor ated two varieties in it one that takes global statistics 
and is classified using Gaussian model and the other where 
temporal complexity was introduced using several low level 
instantaneous  features [9].Kwon etal, in their paper have used 
MFCC for feature extraction and have used quadratic 
discriminant analysis to carry out the speech recognition 
resulting in decently good results [10].Schuller etal ,in their 
paper have presented a model firstly by making use of Speech Emotion Recognition using Support 
Vector Machin e

==== Page 2 ====
acoustic features after which characteristics  like pitch, energy  
and others are used with respective classifiers to classify 
human emotions[12].  
 
II. METHODOL OGY 
Speech Emotion Detection aims to  identify the emotions of a 
person based on the input voice sample. This is done by 
analyzing the input voice signal and carrying out an in depth 
procedure. First, the speech signal is procured after which 
features are extracting using MFCC, LPC C which contain the 
emotional information, voice pattern and coefficients which 
will be further given as the input to the  classification system 
for further analysis. Our project contains four modules: input 
speech signal, Feature extraction using MFCC and LPC, 
Classification based on SVM and the output  [3].  
  
Figure  1. Proposed Model  
 
On extracting features, the following information is 
collected and they are:  
 i. Pitch:  
The pitch signal is one of the most  important featur es in speech 
emotion recognition [ 6]. Pitch frequency is defined as t he 
vibration rate of  a vocal. It has  all the information about the 
emotion  present be cause what type of emotion depends on the 
stress  present in the vocal folds an d the amount of sub glottal 
air pressure. Therefore  the mean value of pitch  present in the samples , variation range s in the samples  and the contour s are  
different i n various basi c emotional states .  
 
ii. MFCC:  
This method of feature extraction has been used widely in 
feature extraction process.  Its calculation s are  based on the 
characteristics of  human ear , which has a nonlinea r freq uency 
unit to make it  similar to  that of  human a uditory system. The 
process of cal culating MFCC is shown in Fig ure 1[9]. 
 
 
Figure  2. Block diagram of MFCC  
iii. LPC C: 
It is used for representing an e nvelope of the input sp eech 
signal in compressed form. It uses  information from a linear 
productive model . It analyses the input  signal by estimating the 
forma nts or enhanced frequency bands. It removes  their effect s 
from the signal and estimates  the intensity and  frequency of the 
remaining signal . Also this technique is very sensitive to 
transmission errors.  
 
Figure 3 . Block diagram of LP CC 
 
iv. Energy:  
 Energy  calculation  is one of the most  important feature s of 
speech  analysis  [12]. To obtain the  complete  statistics of all 
energy feature s, we use a few short -term function s to extract 
the value of energy in every speech frame. Using the above 
information  we can ob tain the  overall  statistics of energy for  
the entire  speech sample by calculating the energy  such as 
mean value, max imum  value, and variation range  present in the 
voice sample.  
v. Speech Rate:  
Speech rate shows  how fast a human  speak s. It has strong 
correlations  with any emotion  like happy, sad, fear and angry. 


==== Page 3 ====
We studied the waveform of the speech signal in time domain;  
and the speech is calculated using MATLAB function .  
 
III. SVM  ALGORITHM  
SVM is a very simple and efficient classifying algorithm 
which is used for  classification and pattern recognition. 
Support Vector Machines algorithm was  introduced by 
Vladimir Vapnik in 1995.The main aim of this algorithm is to 
obtain a function that constructs hyper planes or boundaries. 
These hyper planes are us ed to separate different categories  of 
input  data points.  SVM uses binary classification  [2]. 
SVM are systems that use  hyper planes in feature space of 
high dimensions  to differentiate values based on a particular 
specification . Hyper  planes are trained with  specific 
algorithms to use statistical learning.  SVM m ethod of 
classification is similar to  supervised learning that involves the  
feature extraction and generates  desirable  outputs. The  
advantage of SVM is that it is very easy to train. It can scale 
high dimensional data  better  than neural networks  [3]. There 
are typically two types  of SVM classifiers , Linear and Non -
linear.  
Also SVM has kernel f unctions that can be  used in supervising 
environment. In training phase we are using  radial basis kern el 
function because it limits  the training data sets to lie within the 
specified boundaries .  LIBSVM tool is used  for SVM 
class ification. During training of signal , feature va lues of 
speech signals that are extracted from speech signals are send 
to LIBSV M with their clas s labels as Happy, Angry, Sad, and 
Fear. SVM model is obtained  for each emotional state  by 
using their feature values which are extracted.  
Once the t raining model has been prepared with , it is easy to 
predict t he emotional states with testing datasets. F eatures are 
extracted from speech signals and with the help of SVM  
model  values generated by training models , the emotio ns are 
classified automatically as Happy, Angry, Sad or Fear.  
IV. DATASETS  
In this project we have used two datasets, LDC and UGA. The 
UGA datasets contains the speech samples spoken by students 
of Universit y of Georgia. It contains 100 samples. We have 
used 70 samples to train the system and 3 0 samples for testing. 
In LDC dataset each  speech sample  is recorded for one to two 
seconds with 60ms small segments. The total numbers of 
voice samples are  100 (70 for training and 30 for testing) . For 
each emotional class there are about 25 utterances  spoken by 
speakers.  
Some LDC speech samples are:  
 
 cc_001(m)_hotAnger_4.wav  
 
 
 
cl_001(m)_happy_active_positive_4.wav  
 
 
gg_001(f)_sadness_passive_negative_13a.wav  
 
 
 
cc_001(m)_hotAnger_4.wav  
 
V. SIMULATION OUTPUTS AN D RESULTS  
 
Waveform and speaking rate of an utterance is shown in  Fig. 1 
and the features Energy, Pitch  and MFCC coefficients  and 
LPCC co efficient are shown in Fig. 3,4,5,6 and 7  respectively.  
 
Figure 4. Speaking rate and Waveform  
 
 


==== Page 4 ====
 
Figure 5. Energy  
 
 
Figure 6. Pitch  
 
Figure  7. MFCC coefficients  
 
  
Figure 8. LPCC coefficients  
 
The proposed GUI  prototype is shown in Fig. 8 and the final 
emotion classification result and output for an an gry emotion 
is shown in Fig. 9. 
Accuracy of both classifiers (OAA and gender dependent) is 
shown in table 1 for different emotions whereas table 2 shows 
the accuracy of both the datasets (LDC and UGA).  The overall 
accuracy  using MFCC and LPCC algorithm  is also computed 
and is shown in the table 3.  
LDC datasets shows overall accuracy of 90.08% mu ch higher 
than the accuracy of UGA dataset (65.95 %) as LDC datasets 
are performed by trained actors and in noiseless environment 
whereas UGA datasets are performed by students in noisy 
environment.  
The overall accuracy of Gender dependent classifier was 
found out to be 84.42% higher than the OAA (One against all) 
SVM classifier (72.785). Graph 1 shows the comparison of 
accuracies of two classifiers and through that we can conclude 
that gender dependent classifier shows better accuracy than 
OAA classifier a lgorithm.  Graph 2  shows the comparison of 
accuracies of MFCC and LPCC algorithms and it clearly 
shows MFCC shows better results than LPCC.  
The overall accuracy of the s ystem was found out to be 85.085 
%. 
 
Figure 9. Proposed GUI model  
 


==== Page 5 ====
 
Figure  10. Emotion Classification  
 
 
TABLE I: ACCURACY OF BOTH CLASSIFIERS USING MFCC  
Emotions  OAA  (%) Gender dependent 
(%) 
Happy  94.62  98.53  
Sad 72.72  76.1 
Angry  66.66  91.66  
Fear  57.14  71.42  
 
TABLE II: ACCURACY FOR BOTH DATASETS USING MFCC  
Emotio
ns LDC(%)  UGA(%)  
OAA(
%) Gender 
dependent(
%) OAA(
%) Gender 
dependent(
%) 
Happy  98.52  99.64  42.85  60 
Sad 63.63  83.33  54.54  66.66  
Angry  71.42  91.66  66.66  80 
Fear  83.33  57.14  37.50  57.14  
 
TABLE III: OVERALL ACCURACY COMPARISON WITH MFCC AND 
LPCC ALGORITHMS  
Emotions  Overall accuracy (%)  
MFCC  LPCC  
Happy  99.64  70.94  
Sad 83.33  71.32  
Angry  91.66  85.65  
Fear  65.71  64.59  
 
     
 
Graph 1: OAA vs Gender dependent classifier  
 
  
Graph 2.  MFCC vs LPCC accuracy comparison  
 
VI. CONCLUSION  AND FUTURE WORKS  
Today, the Speech Emotion Recognition has become one of 
the most important research areas. The type and the number of 
emotional classes, feature selection, classification algorithm 
are the import ant factors of this system. In this project we 
have used SVM for gaining  higher classification accuracy.  
Two classification strategies (OAA and gender dependent 
classifier) has been performed and compared.  MFCC and 
LPCC feature values are extracted from speech utterances and 
emotional states are classifi ed using both the class ifiers . On 
completing the analyses and recording the outputs, we can see 
that the features extraction using MFCC has garnered a higher 
degree of accuracy compared to that of LPCC.  For training set 
with acted speakers we obtained recognition rate by 90.08 % 
with LDC datasets and of 65.97 % with UGA datasets. Since 
the LDC datasets are recorde d in noise less environment  and 
by professional actors, the accuracy of this dataset is very 
high.  The overall accuracy of Gender dependent classifier was 
found out to be 84.42% higher than the OAA (One against all) 
SVM classifier (72.785%). We can conclude that gender 
dependent classifier shows better accuracy than OAA 
classifier algorithm.  The accuracy using LPCC algorithm was 
found out to be 73.125 % which is less than t he overall 
accuracy using MFCC algorithm which is 85.085  %. 
 
In our future works, we tend to work on modifying the system 
by combining another feature values with MFCC and MEDC 
so as to create the accuracy of system higher. This emotion 
recognition system is enforced in voice mail application that 
queues up the calls supported emotions.  
REFERENCES  
 
[1] Rao, K. Sreenivasa, et al. "Emotion recognition from 
speech."  International Journal of Computer Science and 
Information Technologies  3.2 (2012): 3603 -3607. 
[2] Yu, F eng, et al. "Emotion detection from speech to enrich 
multimedia content."  Pacific -Rim Conference on 
Multimedia . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001 .. 
[3] Pfister, Tomas. "Emotion Detection from 
Speech."  2010 (2010).  
[4] Sapra, Ankur, Nikhil Panwar, and Sohan Panwar.  
"Emotion recognition from speech."  International journal 
of emerging technology and advanced engineering  3 
(2013): 341 -345. 


==== Page 6 ====
[5] Utane, Akshay S., and S. L. Nalbalwar. "Emotion 
recognition through Speech."  International Journal of 
Applied Information Syatems ( IJAIS)  (2013): 5 -8. 
[6] El Ayadi, Moataz, Mohamed S. Kamel, and Fakhri 
Karray. "Survey on speech emotion recognition: Features, 
classification schemes, and databases."  Pattern 
Recognition 44.3 (2011): 572 -587. 
[7]  Kim, Samuel, et al. "Real -time emotion detection s ystem 
using speech: Multi -modal fusion of different timescale 
features."  Multimedia Signal Processing, 2007. MMSP 
2007. IEEE 9th Workshop on . IEEE, 2007.  
[8] Farouk, Mohamed Hesham. "Emotion Recognition from 
Speech."  Application of Wavelets in Speech Processin g. 
Springer, Cham, 2018. 51 -55.  
[9] Schuller, Björn, Gerhard Rigoll, and Manfred Lang. 
"Hidden Markov model -based speech emotion 
recognition."  Multimedia and Expo, 2003. ICME'03. 
Proceedings. 2003 International Conference on . Vol. 1. 
IEEE, 2003 . 
[10] Kwon, Oh -Wook , et al. "Emotion recognition by speech 
signals."  Eighth European Conference on Speech 
Communication and Technology . 2003.  
[11] Wendemuth, Andreas, et al. "Emotion Recognition from 
Speech."  Companion Technology . Springer, Cham, 2017. 
409-428.  
[12] Schuller, Björn, Gerhard Rigoll, and Manfred Lang. 
"Speech emotion recognition combining acoustic features 
and linguistic information in a hybrid support vector 
machine -belief network architecture."  Acoustics, Speech, 
and Signal Processing, 2004. Proceedings.(ICASSP'04). 
IEEE International Conference on . Vol. 1. IEEE, 2004 . 
[13] Nwe, Tin Lay, Say Wei Foo, and Liyanage C. De Silva. 
"Speech emotion recognition using hidden Markov 
models."  Speech communication  41.4 (2003): 603 -623. 
[14] Busso, Carlos, et al. "Iterative feature normalization 
scheme for automatic emotion detection from 
speech."  IEEE transactions on affective computing  4.4 
(2013): 386 -397.  
[15] Sethu, Vidhyasaharan, Eliathamby Ambikairajah, and 
Julien Epps. "Speaker normalisation for speech -based 
emotion detection."  Digital Signal Processing, 2007 15th 
International Conference on . IEEE, 2007 .  

