==== Page 1 ====
SPEECH EMOTION RECOGNITION USING CAPSULE NETWORKS
Xixin Wu1, Songxiang Liu1, Yuewen Cao1, Xu Li1, Jianwei Yu1, Dongyang Dai2, Xi Ma2,
Shoukang Hu1, Zhiyong Wu1;2, Xunying Liu1, Helen Meng1;2
1Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
2Tsinghua-CUHK Joint Research Center for Media Sciences, Technologies and Systems,
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
fwuxx, sxliu, ywcao, xuli, jwyu, skhu, zywu, xyliu, hmmeng g@se.cuhk.edu.hk,
fddy17,max15 g@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Speech emotion recognition (SER) is a fundamental step towards
ﬂuent human-machine interaction. One challenging problem in SER
is obtaining utterance-level feature representation for classiﬁcation.
Recent works on SER have made signiﬁcant progress by using spec-
trogram features and introducing neural network methods, e.g., con-
volutional neural networks (CNNs). However the fundamental prob-
lem of CNNs is that the spatial information in spectrograms is not
captured, which are basically position and relationship information
of low-level features like pitch and formant frequencies. This paper
presents a novel architecture based on the capsule networks (Cap-
sNets) for SER. The proposed system can take into account the spa-
tial relationship of speech features in spectrograms, and provide an
effective pooling method for obtaining utterance global features. We
also introduce a recurrent connection to CapsNets to improve the
model’s time sensitivity. We compare the proposed model to pre-
vious published results based on combined CNN-long short-term
memory (CNN-LSTM) models on the benchmark corpus IEMOCAP
over four emotions, i.e., neutral, angry, happy and sad. Experimental
results show that our model achieves better results than the baseline
system on weighted accuracy (WA) (72.73% vs. 68.8%) and un-
weighted accuracy (UA) (59.71% vs. 59.4%), which demonstrates
the effectiveness of CapsNets for SER.
Index Terms —Speech Emotion Recognition, Capsule Net-
works, Spatial Relationship Information, Recurrent Connection,
Utterance-level Features
1. INTRODUCTION
One important step towards intelligent human-machine interaction
is speech emotion recognition (SER), since human emotion contains
important information for machine response generation. Two of
the most challenging problems in SER is the extraction of frame-
based high-level feature representations and the construction of
utterance-level features [1, 2]. Speech signals are considered to be
approximately stationary in small frames. Some acoustic features
extracted from short frames, e.g., pitch, are believed to be inﬂuenced
by emotions and can provide detailed emotionally relevant local
information. These frame-based features are often referred to as
low-level features [3]. Based on the frame-based low-level features,
neural networks are utilized to extract neural representations frame
*Corresponding authorby frame, which are referred to as frame-based high-level feature
representations [4]. However, the emotion recognition at utter-
ance level requires a global feature representation, which contains
both detailed local information and global characteristics related to
emotion.
There have been many studies in this area. [4, 5] propose to
apply neural network on low-level features, e.g., pitch, energy, to
learn high-level features, i.e., the neural network outputs. Recently,
SER has made great progress by introducing neural networks to ex-
tract high-level neural hidden representations directly from spec-
trogram features [6]. Directly applying neural networks to spec-
trograms overcomes the open question of how to choose effective
low-level features as input [7], since the spectrograms contain rich
information for emotion recognition and neural networks can learn
the high-level feature representations oriented for the recognition
task [6]. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are conventionally
utilized to extract the high-level neural features [8, 10]. However,
with the kernel-based convolution process, CNN is not sensitive to
spatial relationship or orientation information of input features.
Based on the frame-based high-level features learned, various
methods are used to construct the utterance-level features. [5] pro-
poses to use extreme learning machine (ELM) upon utterance-level
statistical features. The utterance-level features are statistics of
segment-level deep neural networks (DNNs) output probabilities,
where each segment is a stack of neighboring frames [4]. [6, 11]
propose to introduce recurrent networks to increase model’s ability
to capture temporal information. However, only the ﬁnal states
of the recurrent layers are used for classiﬁcation, which may lead
to loss of detailed information for emotion classiﬁcation, since all
information is stored in the ﬁxed-size ﬁnal states. [10] explores
pooling utterance-level features from high-level features output by
CNNs with attention weights, because not all regions in the spec-
trogram contain information useful for emotion recognition. By
pooling, it also avoids to squeeze all the information in one ﬁxed-
size vector [12]. However, pooling loses the spatial information,
e.g., the position information of pitch in time and frequency axes,
which is informative for emotion recognition.
Recently, capsule networks (CapsNets) are proposed to over-
come the disadvantage of CNNs in capturing spatial informa-
tion [13]. A capsule contains a group of neurons maintaining
activity vectors. The length of the vector represents the existence
probability of the activity represented by the capsule, and the orien-
tation captures the detailed instantiation parameters of the activity,6695 978-1-5386-4658-8/18/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE ICASSP 2019

==== Page 2 ====
e.g., translation and rotation information. Based on the activity
vectors output by the lower layer of capsules, a routing algorithm is
used to couple the similar activity vectors to activate corresponding
capsules in the upper layer. The CapsNet has been applied to several
tasks and demonstrated its effectiveness [14, 15, 16]. However, the
CapsNets used in previous work does not consider the temporal
information, which is important in emotion recognition.
In this paper, we propose a sequential capsule structure, ﬁrst
slicing the input into windows and applying a CapsNet to the win-
dows iteratively, then aggregating the CapsNet outputs and applying
another CapsNet to the outputs to obtain utterance-level features.
In this way, we adapt the CapsNet to incorporate temporal infor-
mation. To further enhance this capability, we introduce recurrent
connections between capsules at neighboring timesteps to the cap-
sule structure. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
capsule-based structure can signiﬁcantly improve the overall accu-
racy of SER system.
This paper is organized as follows: the capsule-based structures
are introduced in Section 2; the system architecture is illustrated in
Section 3; Section 4 describes the setup and results of experiments;
Section 5 draws the conclusion.
2. CAPSULE NETWORKS
2.1. Basic Capsule Structure
The idea of the capsule is to maintain a group of neurons, instead
of a unique neuron, to capture both the existence probability and the
spatial information. For the connection between capsule layers, the
routing-by-agreement algorithm is applied to learn the hierarchical
relationship between the learned spatial information in neighboring
layers [13]. Compared to previous neural networks, e.g., CNNs, the
CapsNets replace the scalar neuron with vector neuron, and the max-
pooling method with dynamic routing method.
Referring to Fig. 1, assume that the capsules in layer landl+ 1,
e.g., window capsules layer and window emo-capsules layer, are u
andvrespectively. The j-th capsule vjin layerl+ 1 is obtained
by compressing the total input sjas Eq. (1). This non-linear com-
pressing function normalizes the input vector to have norm between
0 and 1, while keeping the orientation of the vector. The vector norm
represents the existence probability of the activity represented by the
orientation.
vj=jjsjjj2
1 +jjsjjj2sj
jjsjjj(1)
The input sjis calculated by summing up all prediction vectors ^ujji
with weights cij, where the prediction vector ^ujjiis produced by
multiplying ui, output of the i-th capsule in layer l, with a weight
matrix Wijas Eq. (3).
sj=X
icij^ujji (2)
^ujji=Wijui+bij (3)
The weightcijis determined by a softmax upon the logits dij, which
represents the log probability of whether uishould be routed to vj.
cij=exp(dij)P
kexp(dik)(4)
When the outputs of lower capsule layer are different, the coupling
coefﬁcients are determined dynamically by the dynamic routing al-
gorithm. Initially, dij= 0, which means the output in layer lis
routed to all possible capsules in upper layer l+ 1equally. In each
8x8
Window
Input MatrixWindow
Emo-CapsulesRouting
5x5Orientations
Lengths  
Routing
8648Window
CapsulesWindow
Emo-V ectorsUtterance
Capsules16
4
8x8
8Fig. 1 . Structure of SeqCaps: the input is ﬁrst sliced into windows,
and then CapsNets are applied to the windows. Finally the win-
dow outputs are aggregated and sent to another CapsNets to obtain
utterance-level features.
iteration,cij;sjandvjare updated according to Eq. (1)-(3), and the
logit values are updated according to dij dij+^ujjivj, where
represents dot production. Finally, when the predeﬁned iteration
number is reached, the vjat the ﬁnal iteration is returned as output
of thej-th capsule in layer l+ 1.
2.2. Sequential Capsules (SeqCaps)
In the task of SER, the input data is a sequence of feature frames
with variable length. It is impractical to feed the whole sequence to
capsule layers. In order to optimize the model upon the whole se-
quence, we propose the structure of SeqCaps. As shown in Fig. 1,
we ﬁrst slice the input sequence into overlapped windows and ap-
ply capsule layers to each window, with the capsule layer weights
shared across time steps. In each window, several separated convo-
lutional layers are used on the input to obtain the capsules, denoted
as window capsules. The output of the window capsules are routed
to activate the window emo-capsules. The window emo-capsule out-
puts are converted to window emo-vectors. The window emo-vector
ocontains the orientations and lengths of all the Nemo-capsules in
one window:
o= [vT
1;:::;vT
N;jjv1jj;:::;jjvNjj]: (5)6696

==== Page 3 ====
Concat  
Max pooling@2x1  Conv1a@2x8x1x8
Conv1b@8x2x1x8Conv2@5x5x16x16  
Max pooling@2x2  Conv3@5x5x16x16  
Max pooling@2x2  
Max pooling@4x1  
BiGRU(fw64, bw64)CapsuleFC 
Dropout   
FC 
Softmax
FC 
Dropout   
FC 
SoftmaxFig. 2 . Architecture of proposed system CNN GRU-SeqCap.
All window emo-vectors are then routed to activate the utterance
capsules.
2.3. Recurrent Capsules (RecCaps)
The temporal information of speech contains important cues for
emotion recognition. In order to improve the model’s ability of
capturing temporal information, we introduce recurrent connections
to the routing algorithm. We denote the output of j-th capsule in
layerl+ 1in windowt 1asvt 1;jand output of i-th capsule in
layerlin windowtasut;i. The prediction vector ^ut;jjiin window
tis produced as Eq. (6):
^ut;jji=Wu
ijut;i+Wo
ijot 1+bij; (6)
where ot 1is the window-level emo-vector containing both the
length and orientation information of all the Ncapsules in layer
l+ 1in windowt 1:
ot 1= [vT
t 1;1;:::;vT
t 1;N;jjvt 1;1jj;:::;jjvt 1;Njj]:(7)
Via this connection, the spatial information in the previous window
can assist in determining the coupling coefﬁcients and activating the
activity which is salient in terms of time steps.
3. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
As demonstrated in previous work [4, 6], using spectrograms as in-
put to CNNs can signiﬁcantly improve the system accuracy. Hence,
we also directly apply CNN layers to spectrograms. To capture the
relationship information across frequencies and timesteps, we apply
two separated CNN layers with kernel of 2 8 and 82. The outputs
of these two separated CNN layers are concatenated together and
passed through two convolutional layers and three max pooling lay-
ers as shown in Fig. 2, where the convolution ﬁlters are denoted by
heightwidthinput channelsoutput channels. These CNN layers
are used to extract a representation with appropriate size which can
be handled by the CapsNets.
We ﬁrst explore using gated recurrent unit (GRU) architecture
upon the CNN layers mentioned above in the system of CNN GRU.
The GRU layer is bidirectional with 64 cells per direction. The ﬁnal
state of forward GRU and the ﬁrst state of backward GRU are con-
catenated and fed to a dense layer with 64 units activated by ReLU
and dropped out with rate of 0.5. The dense layer output is then fed
to a linear dense output layer with 4 units. A softmax function isapplied to the ﬁnal output to obtain the emotion probabilities. To
compare with CNN GRU, we build another system CNN SeqCap,
which adds SeqCaps upon the above mentioned CNN layers. The
output of SeqCaps, containing four 16-dimension classes, is ﬁrst re-
shaped into emo-vector, which contains both the class vector and the
vector length, as in Eq. (7). The emo-vectors are then fed to two
dense layers and softmax function with the same conﬁguration as in
CNN GRU. The window used to slice the input matrix is set to size
of 40 input steps with shift of 20 steps. The conﬁguration of Seq-
Caps is shown in Fig. 1, where the connection weights between the
input matrix and the window capsules are shared across input steps.
The iteration number of the routing algorithm is set to 3.
We also explore the addition of RecCaps upon the above men-
tioned CNN layers, denoted as CNN RecCap, to verify whether re-
current connection can help improve the performance. The archi-
tecture of CNN RecCap is the same as CNN SeqCap except that in
CNN RecCap the capsule components have recurrent connection in
the routing from the window capsules to the window emo-capsules.
To further improve the system’s long-context view, we add another
branch of GRU layer upon the CNN layers, parallel to the capsule
branch. This system is denoted as CNN GRU-SeqCap, as shown
in Fig. 2. The outputs of the GRU layers are fed to a separated set
of dense layers with the same conﬁguration as in the capsule branch.
The total loss of CNN GRU-SeqCap is the unweighted sum of losses
of the two branches. At the testing stage, the output probabilities
of the capsule branch and the GRU branch are combined with the
weights ofand1 respectively.
4. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
4.1. Experimental Setup
We evaluate our proposed system on the corpus of interactive emo-
tional dyadic motion capture (IEMOCAP) database [17], which is
a common evaluation dataset. The corpus consists of ﬁve sessions,
with two speakers in each session. We evaluate our systems on four
emotions in the corpus, i.e., Neutral ,Angry ,Happy andSad. Since
the speech from scripted data may contain undesired relationship
between linguistic information and the emotion labels, we only use
the improvised data. Five-fold cross validation is adopted as [6]: 8
speakers from four sessions in the corpus are used as training data.
One speaker from the remaining session is used as validation data,
and the other one as test data.
We calculate spectrograms from the speech signal in IEMOCAP6697

==== Page 4 ====
Table 1 . WA and UA of proposed and baseline systems
Model WA(%) UA(%)
CNN LSTM[6] 68.80 59.40
CNN GRU 67.02 51.84
CNN SeqCap 69.86 56.71
CNN RecCap 70.62 58.17
CNN GRU-SeqCap 72.73 59.71
and split those spectrograms into 2-s segments. Segments split from
one sentence share the same emotion label. The training is con-
ducted based on the 2-s segments. It is only during the testing stage
that the whole original spectrogram is used for evaluation. The spec-
trograms are extracted with 40-ms Hanning window, 10-ms shift and
DFT of length 1600 (for 10Hz grid resolution). The frequency range
of 0-5.12KHz is used, ignoring the rest. Following aggregation of
the short-time spectra, the spectrogram is ﬁnally represented by a
NMmatrix, where N200corresponds to the segment length
andM= 512 according to the selected frequency grid resolution.
We normalize the whole dataset to have zero mean and unit variance.
To evaluate the systems’ performance, we use two common eval-
uation metrics:
Weighted Accuracy (WA) – the accuracy of all samples in
the test data.
Unweighted Accuracy (UA) – the average of class accura-
cies in the test set.
Weight initialization is important to the convergence of Cap-
sNets [15]. We use Xavier initializer for both CNN and capsule
layers. We use a batch size of 16. Cross-entropy criterion is used as
the training objective function. The Adam algorithm is adopted for
optimization with parameters of 1= 0:9,2= 0:999and=1e-
8 [18]. The learning rate in the ﬁrst 3 epochs is set to 0.001. After
that, the learning rate is decayed dynamically determined by the av-
erage of training losses of the last 100 training steps. The learning
rate is reduced to 0.0005, 0.0002 and 0.0001 gradually, when the av-
erage training loss is reduced by a factor of 10. The models are all
trained for 20 epochs and then optimized on the validation set with
respect to the weighted accuracy.
4.2. Experimental Results
As shown in Table 1, both the CNN SeqCap and the CNN RecCap
systems outperform the baseline system CNN GRU. The CNN GRU-
SeqCap system achieves the best performance. In our experiments,
we ﬁnd that the CapsNets have better performance in emotions of
Neutral ,Angry andSad, while have worse results in the category of
Happy , as shown in Table 2. It is already reported in previous works
that the category of Happy is difﬁcult to be recognized because of
limited training data and its special emotion characteristics, i.e., the
Happy emotion relies on context contrastive information more than
the other categories. In order to improve the CapsNets in captur-
ing context information, in the system CNN RecCap, we introduce
recurrent connection to the routing process upon the window cap-
sules. From the results shown in Table 3, it can been found that
theHappy category is improved signiﬁcantly from 1.69% to 11.9%.
The system performance improves from 69.86% to 70.62%, and
56.70% to 58.17% on WA and UA respectively, which demonstrates
the effectiveness of the recurrent connection.Table 2 . Confusion matrix of CNN SeqCap
ActualPredictNeutral Angry Happy Sad
Neutral 84.22% 5.26% 0.58% 9.94%
Angry 29.03% 68.39% 0% 2.58%
Happy 73.75% 18.64% 1.69% 5.92%
Sad 26.90% 0.29% 0.29% 72.52%
Table 3 . Confusion matrix of CNN RecCap
ActualPredictNeutral Angry Happy Sad
Neutral 83.85% 2.92% 3.11% 10.12%
Angry 34.06% 59.42% 2.17% 4.35%
Happy 76.19% 5.56% 11.90% 6.35%
Sad 19.29% 1.93% 1.29% 77.49%
CapsNets are good at capturing detailed spatial information for
distinguishing emotions. However, the coupling process in the rout-
ing algorithm will tend to cluster to the emotion categories that are
distributed evenly across time- and frequency-axis. In the sentences
with Happy emotion, there may be many frames without obvious
happy characteristics, thus CapsNets can not recognize the category
ofHappy as well as the other three categories. As suggested in [6,
11], RNN has strong ability to capture long context characteristics.
In the system CNN GRU-SeqCap, we combine the strengths of Cap-
sNets and RNN by setting = 0:6. CNN GRU-SeqCap achieves
better performance than CNN SeqCap and CNN RecCap and the
baseline system CNN LSTM, as shown in Table 1. This demon-
strates that CapsNet is effective, and the two kind of network, RNN
and CapsNet, can be merged complementarily.
5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel architecture for speech emotion
recognition (SER) based on capsule networks (CapsNets). The
CapsNets can take into account the spatial relationship of activities
in speech features, e.g., pitch and formant frequencies, which are
important for emotion recognition, and provide an effective pooling
method for constructing utterance-level feature representation for
emotion recognition. To enable the CapsNets to consider temporal
information, we propose to introduce recurrent connection to the
routing algorithm between capsule layers. Experimental results
demonstrate that the recurrent connection can signiﬁcantly improve
the CapsNets’ performance. Our proposed system CNN GRU-
SeqCap outperforms the baseline system on both weighted accuracy
and unweighted accuracy, which also demonstrates the effectiveness
of CapsNets in SER. In the future, we plan to investigate exten-
sion of the CapsNet’s ability to capture the emotions of which the
characteristics are variable across time.
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is partially supported by National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China-Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (NSFC-
RGC) joint fund (61531166002, N CUHK404/15).6698

==== Page 5 ====
7. REFERENCES
[1] B. Schuller, A. Batliner, S. Steidl, and D. Seppi, “Recognis-
ing realistic emotions and affect in speech: State of the art and
lessons learnt from the ﬁrst challenge,” Speech Communica-
tion, vol. 53, no. 9-10, pp. 1062–1087, 2011.
[2] M. El Ayadi, M. Kamel, and F. Karray, “Survey on speech
emotion recognition: Features, classiﬁcation schemes, and
databases,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 572–587,
2011.
[3] S. Mirsamadi, E. Barsoum, and C. Zhang, “Automatic speech
emotion recognition using recurrent neural networks with local
attention,” in Proc. ICASSP . IEEE, 2017, pp. 2227–2231.
[4] J. Lee and I. Tashev, “High-level feature representation using
recurrent neural network for speech emotion recognition,” in
Proc. INTERSPEECH , 2015.
[5] K. Han, D. Yu, and I. Tashev, “Speech emotion recognition
using deep neural network and extreme learning machine,” in
Fifteenth annual conference of the international speech com-
munication association , 2014.
[6] A. Satt, S. Rozenberg, and R. Hoory, “Efﬁcient emotion recog-
nition from speech using deep learning on spectrograms,” in
Proc. INTERSPEECH , 2017, pp. 1089–1093.
[7] M. Tahon and L. Devillers, “Towards a small set of ro-
bust acoustic features for emotion recognition: challenges,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Pro-
cessing (TASLP) , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 16–28, 2016.
[8] W. Zheng, J. Yu, and Y . Zou, “An experimental study of
speech emotion recognition based on deep convolutional neu-
ral networks,” in Affective Computing and Intelligent Inter-
action (ACII), 2015 International Conference on . IEEE, 2015,
pp. 827–831.
[9] Y . Zhang, J. Du, Z. Wang, and J. Zhang, “Attention based fully
convolutional network for speech emotion recognition,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.01506 , 2018.
[10] P. Li, Y . Song, I. McLoughlin, W. Guo, and L. Dai, “An atten-
tion pooling based representation learning method for speech
emotion recognition,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH , 2018, pp.
3087–3091.
[11] X. Ma, Z. Wu, J. Jia, M. Xu, H. Meng, and L. Cai, “Emotion
recognition from variable-length speech segments using deep
learning on spectrograms,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH , 2018,
pp. 3683–3687.
[12] J. Cho, R. Pappagari, P. Kulkarni, J. Villalba, Y . Carmiel, and
N. Dehak, “Deep neural networks for emotion recognition
combining audio and transcripts,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH ,
2018, pp. 247–251.
[13] S. Sabour, N. Frosst, and G. Hinton, “Dynamic routing be-
tween capsules,” in Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems , 2017, pp. 3856–3866.
[14] W. Zhao, J. Ye, M. Yang, Z. Lei, S. Zhang, and Z. Zhao, “Inves-
tigating capsule networks with dynamic routing for text classi-
ﬁcation,” in Proc. EMNLP , 2018.
[15] J. Bae and D. Kim, “End-to-end speech command recognition
with capsule network,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH , 2018, pp.
776–780.[16] M. Turan and E. Erzin, “Monitoring infant’s emotional cry
in domestic environments using the capsule network architec-
ture,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH , 2018, pp. 132–136.
[17] C. Busso, M. Bulut, C.-C. Lee, A. Kazemzadeh, E. Mower,
S. Kim, J. N. Chang, S. Lee, and S. S. Narayanan, “Iemocap:
Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database,” Lan-
guage resources and evaluation , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 335, 2008.
[18] D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba, “Adam: a method for stochastic
optimization,” in Proc. ICLR , 2015.6699

