==== Page 1 ====
SPEECH-LANGUAGE PRE-TRAINING FOR END-TO-END SPOKEN LANGUAGE
UNDERSTANDING
Yao Qian1, Ximo Bian2, Yu Shi1, Naoyuki Kanda1, Leo Shen1, Zhen Xiao1and Michael Zeng1
1Microsoft Cognitive Services Research Group, USA,2Beijing Institute of Technology, China
ABSTRACT
End-to-end (E2E) spoken language understanding (SLU) can in-
fer semantics directly from speech signal without cascading an
automatic speech recognizer (ASR) with a natural language under-
standing (NLU) module. However, paired utterance recordings and
corresponding semantics may not always be available or sufﬁcient
to train an E2E SLU model in a real production environment. In
this paper, we propose to unify a well-optimized E2E ASR encoder
(speech) and a pre-trained language model encoder (language) into
a transformer decoder. The uniﬁed speech-language pre-trained
model (SLP) is continually enhanced on limited labeled data from
a target domain by using a conditional masked language model
(MLM) objective, and thus can effectively generate a sequence of
intent, slot type, and slot value for given input speech in the infer-
ence. The experimental results on two public corpora show that
our approach to E2E SLU is superior to the conventional cascaded
method. It also outperforms the present state-of-the-art approaches
to E2E SLU with much less paired data.
Index Terms —spoken language understanding, end-to-end ap-
proach, pre-training, transfer learning, self-supervised learning
1. INTRODUCTION
The conventional SLU generally contains two components: the au-
tomatic speech recognizer (ASR) to decode the input speech into
recognized text and the natural language understanding (NLU) mod-
ule to transform the ASR hypothesis into a concept or semantic la-
bel that can drive subsequent responses in a task-oriented spoken
dialog system (SDS). These two components are optimized with dif-
ferent criteria. Nowadays, the performance of ASR has been sig-
niﬁcantly improved by using a huge amount of training data with a
deep learning architecture. Transfer learning based on transformer-
based LMs like BERT [1] or GPT [2] has also largely boosted the
accuracy of NLU. This cascaded process is beneﬁcial in reusing the
well-optimized modules to accelerate the development of the SLU
system. However, the cascaded process could propagate errors that
occurred in the current module to the following modules and results
in generating inappropriate responses or even causing the task fail-
ure.
In recent few years, an end-to-end (E2E) modeling approach has
been widely applied to speech recognition, language recognition,
etc. It enables us to utilize as little a prior knowledge as possible
and train a single model for the whole target system, skipping the in-
termediate modules in conventional pipeline designs. ASR-free E2E
SLU has also been exploited in [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], where either the raw
waveforms or the acoustic features (e.g., ﬁlterbank features) are di-
rectly used as the inputs of SLU to infer semantic meanings. In [5],
Work done while the second author was an intern at Microsoft.multiple E2E SLU approaches, i.e., direct model, joint model, multi-
task model, and multi-stage model, have been proposed to jointly
optimize the ASR and NLU components in a manner of sequence-
to-sequence mapping. On the other hand, the performance of the
end-to-end approach is always suffering from a dearth of data, i.e.,
it is difﬁcult to obtain large amounts of paired speech utterances and
corresponding semantic labels from real production environments
when we are developing new SDS applications from scratch.
Substantial work has shown that transfer learning with a pre-
trained model requires much less task-speciﬁc data than conven-
tional methods. It is also extended to cross-modal learning, e.g.,
VLP [9] and SpeechBERT [10] proposed to build two-modality joint
embeddings for image captioning, spoken question answering, etc.
There are many studies to use either speech model or language model
as a pre-trained model to address the issue of insufﬁcient data for
SLU but few tries to leverage both and jointly optimize them on
the paired data. BERT or GPT is leveraged as the pre-trained lan-
guage model [11, 12]. The speech model is pre-trained by using
ASR task [6, 8, 13], i.e., to predict phonemes, sub-words or words, or
by self-supervised learning on the unlabeled speech data [14]. Lan-
guage embeddings were assumed to have better representation for
lexical semantics than speech embeddings, so a loss function, e.g.,
mean squared error (MSE), L1 norm, or triplet loss, is employed
to make speech embeddings closer to language embeddings in the
stage of jointly training semantic representations across these two
modalities [13, 14]. This kind of alignment for speech and language
embeddings could be applied at the sentence level or token level.
Sentence-level alignment is more feasible than that of token-level
since obtaining accurate boundaries of sub-word for speech embed-
ding sequence is nontrivial. Consequently, most of the studies focus
on sentence-level SLU, i.e., domain/intent classiﬁcation, or using a
ﬁxed dimension vector of logits corresponding to the different se-
mantic labels.
In this paper, we exploit leveraging transfer learning based on
well-trained encoders from both speech and language for sentence-
level and word-level SLU, i.e., intent classiﬁcation and slot ﬁlling.
The proposed approach can compensate for insufﬁcient paired train-
ing data in the SLU tasks and avoid train a model from scratch so
that the resultant model has a better generalization capability. The
major contribution of this paper is two-fold:
1. We unify two encoders from speech and language separately
into a decoder, continually pre-train it by using a conditional
masked language model (MLM) objective, and ﬁnetune it to
generate a sequence of intent, slot type, and slot value.
2. Slot ﬁlling, conventionally regarded as a classiﬁcation or tag-
ging problem on the word/token level, is formulated as a con-
ditional sequence to sequence generation problem, given the
contextual embeddings of input speech. The effectiveness of
this approach is demonstrated by a comparison with the con-arXiv:2102.06283v1  [cs.CL]  11 Feb 2021

==== Page 2 ====
ventional method on public datasets.
2. RELATED WORK
Inspired by the transfer Learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former (T5) [15] where the input and output are always text strings
for NLP tasks, ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained causal LM (e.g., GPT), for
NLP tasks like natural language understanding, natural language
generation, or end-to-end task completion have been explored for
dialog systems [16, 17, 18, 19]. However, most of them aim at pro-
cessing the user’s written responses or the human transcriptions of
spoken responses. Speech to semantics mapping was also deﬁned
as a sequence-to-sequence problem in [5, 20], but it lacks a mecha-
nism to leverage pre-trained models from either speech or language
to further improve the performance of E2E SLU. Speech synthesis is
thus explored to generate large training data from multiple artiﬁcial
speakers to cover the shortage of paired data in E2E SLU [13, 20].
The most similar work to ours has been presented in [13, 21],
where it initializes the speech-to-intent (S2I) model with an ASR
model and improves it by leveraging BERT and text-to-speech aug-
mented S2I data. The signiﬁcant difference between ours and theirs
is that they employ sentence-level embedding from both speech and
language to jointly classify intent, while we use an attention-based
autoregressive generation model jointly trained by using frame-level
speech embedding and token level text embedding to generate mul-
tiple intents and slots/values given an utterance input. It is difﬁcult
to use their approach to handle more complicated SLU tasks, e.g.,
slot ﬁlling in the ATIS dataset, since a classiﬁcation layer with a
ﬁxed-length output is impossible to cover various slots/values across
utterances.
3. SPEECH-LANGUAGE PRE-TRAINING FOR SLU
Our proposed model architecture for speech-language pre-training
is depicted in Figure 1. The model inputs include speech embed-
ding sequence, X, masked text token sequence, Y, and three spe-
cial tokens. Speech embeddings are extracted from the encoder of
an attention-based encoder-decoder ASR model. We tokenize the
texts into subword units by WordPiece [22], and add the correspond-
ing token embeddings with position embeddings. Three special to-
kens: [BOS], [SEP], and [EOS] indicate the start of speech input,
the boundary between the speech input and the text input, and the
end of text input, separately. These three delimiter tokens only give
the model weak information about which segment (i.e., speech in-
put or text input) each embedding belongs to. We add the segment
embeddings to both speech embeddings and text embeddings.
3.1. Pre-training
We initialize the parameters of the model with pre-trained BERT
and continually pre-train it with the speech and the corresponding
transcriptions from the target dataset. The parameters of the model
are updated by using a cloze task with a conditional masked language
modeling (C-MLM) objective. It aims to predict the masked token
ym
ninY= (y1;::;yN), conditioned on a sequence of input X. It
is usually trained by Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), or
equivalently, minimizing the cross-entropy loss as follows:
L() = X
mlogP(ym
tjy1:t 1;X) (1)
where the conditional probability is calculated by using an attention
mechanism in transformer-based network architecture.
Fig. 1 . A schematic diagram of our approach to speech-language
pre-training for E2E SLU.
We randomly select some tokens in the input and replace each of
them with a special token [Mask] or a random token or the original
token, and then predict the masked tokens by feeding the output vec-
tors from the transformer network into a softmax classiﬁer. We mask
one token or a bigram/trigram at random. For the prediction, the to-
kens in the speech part can attend to each other, while the tokens in
the text part can only attend to the left-side context (including all the
tokens in the speech part) and itself. It is different from what BERT
uses, i.e., all tokens are allowed to be attended in the prediction.
A self-attention mask matrix, as deﬁned in [23],
Mij=
0; allow to attend
 1; prevent from attending(2)
is applied to control which contextual tokens can be attended to. The
l-th self-attention output, Al, is computed as:
Al=softmax (QK>
pdk+M)V (3)
where we use a single attention head in the self-attention module to
simplify the description. V,QandKare the intermediate variables
as deﬁned in [24] for representing values, queries, and keys, respec-
tively.dkis the dimension of the keys.
Our continual pre-training approach can be regarded as turn-
ing the BERT initialized encoder, which has learned better text rep-
resentations by encoding contextual information from both direc-
tions, into an autoregressive decoder that satisﬁes the property of
sequence-to-sequence generation in the inference stage.
3.2. Fine-tuning for SLU
We ﬁne-tune the pre-trained speech-language model by using the
same objective as that of pre-training but with the speech and the an-
notated semantic labels from the target dataset. Unlike the conven-
tional slot IOB labels (i.e., tagging inside, outside, beginning words
in a slot type ) assigned to every word in the utterance, sequence
representation, such as [intent] & [slot1 type] [slot1 value] & [slot2
type] [slot2 value] & ..., is employed to represent the intents and the
slots/values for the whole utterance.
3.3. Inference
In the inference stage, we ﬁrst encode the speech embeddings along
with the special [BOS] and [SEP] tokens and then use a greedy sam-
pling approach or a beam search to generate text token-by-token.

==== Page 3 ====
Table 1 . Number of audio ﬁles in training, validation and test sets,
and the number of intents and slots
# Training Validation Testing Intents Slots
FSC 23,132 3,118 3,793 31
ATIS 4,439 500 893 21 79
The generation starts with appending a [MASK] token to the input
sequence, replaces it with a sampled token, and repeats the process
till the [EOS] token is chosen. Given speech embeddings, the pre-
trained speech-language model can directly generate the correspond-
ing transcription and the ﬁne-tuned model can produce the matching
semantic label sequence. The model can also generate ASR tran-
scription and SLU semantic labels sequentially if the input text token
in Figure 1 is the concatenation of transcription and semantic labels
during the training.
4. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
4.1. Datasets
We evaluate our approach of speech-language pre-training to E2E
SLU on two public SLU datasets: Fluent Speech Commands (FSC)
[6] and Air Travel Information System (ATIS) [25].
FSC dataset was recorded by 77 speakers for a smart home or
virtual assistant. There are 248 distinct sentences. Each sentence,
e.g.,fturn on the lights in the kitchen g, was spoken by multiple
speakers in both training set and validation/test sets. Each audio ﬁle
is labeled with three slots, e.g., faction: “active”, object: “lights”,
location: “kitchen” g. We follow the usage suggested in [6], i.e.,
combining slot values as the intent of utterance and using 31 distinct
intents in total.
ATIS pilot corpus is the most commonly used dataset for SLU
research. It comprises the acoustic speech data for a query, the
transcriptions of that query, and the corresponding semantic frames,
i.e., an intent and slots ﬁlled with phrases. For example, Query:
fWhat ﬂights are available from Pittsburgh to Baltimore on Thurs-
day morningg; Intent:fﬂight infog; Slots:ffrom city : “Pitts-
burgh”, tocity : “Baltimore”, depart date : “Thursday”,
depart time : “morning”g
The statistics of these two datasets are shown in Table 1, where
lists the number of audio ﬁles in training, validation and test sets,
and the number of intents and slots. We use the same data division
as [6] and [26, 16] for FSC and ATIS datasets, respectively. Some
utterances have multiple intents in ATIS corpus, so we employed 21
intents rather than 18 intents in some papers, where only one intent
was forcedly assigned to an utterance. Slot labels in the IOB format
(120 labels in total) and human transcriptions have been widely used
in the studies (e.g., [16]) for ATIS corpus. We ﬁnd 39 utterances
have the transcriptions, but the audio ﬁles are missing. We use total
of 4,439 training utterances and the corresponding 79 original slot
types in this study.
4.2. Experimental setup
The experiments are conﬁgured as follows:
E2E with speech-language pre-training (E2E SLP) This is our
approach described in Section 3. We construct mode with the ar-
chitecture shown in Figure 1. The model parameters are initializedby using the English uncased BERT-Base model, which is a multi-
layer bidirectional transformer encoder consisting of 12 layers, 768
hidden states, and 12 heads, and is trained on BooksCorpus (800M
words) and English Wikipedia (2,500M words).
The input to the model is a concatenation of text embeddings,
speech embeddings, and three special tokens: [BOS], [SEP], and
[EOS]. Text embeddings are the sums of WordPiece embeddings
with a 30,000 token vocabulary, positional embeddings, and segment
embeddings. Speech embeddings are extracted from the outputs
of the encoder of an attention-based encoder-decoder (AED) ASR
model, which comprises of 6 layers of 1,024-dim bidirectional long
short-term memory (BLSTM) for the encoder, 2 layers of 1,024-dim
unidirectional LSTM for the decoder, and a conventional location-
aware content-based attention [27] with a single head in between the
encoder and the decoder. Layer normalization [28] was applied after
every BLSTM in the encoder but not after every LSTM in the de-
coder. The input feature is a sequence of 80-dim log Mel ﬁlter bank
with a stride of 10 milliseconds (ms). Three of them are stacked
together to form a 240-dim super-frame. We feed into the encoder
on top of the stacked features. 4,000 WordPiece tokens are used as
the output targets. This model was trained on 75 thousand hours of
Microsoft anonymized training data. A linear layer is applied to the
speech embeddings for converting 1,024-dim to 768-dim in order to
keep the same dimension as those of text embeddings.
Adam optimizer, 64 batch size, and 1e-4 learning rate are used
for both pre-training and ﬁne-tuning. We trim long utterance and pad
short utterances to 30 words for the text embeddings and 500 frames
for the speech embeddings. During the training, 15% of input text
tokens are masked and replaced with the special token [Mask], the
random token, or the original token with the probabilities of 80%,
10%, and 10%, separately. One or two/three successive tokens are
masked at random with the chances of 80% and 20%, respectively.
A beam search with beam size 4 is used in the inference stage.
E2E Joint Modeling Similar to the AED-based ASR model, the
approach of E2E joint modeling to SLU also employs an encoder-
attention-decoder architecture and trains the model in an end-to-end
manner. We use the same architecture and input acoustic features
as those of the above AED-based ASR model to train E2E SLU.
The output of this model is the concatenation of transcription and
its corresponding semantics rather than just the transcription, i.e.,
the decoder produces the transcription followed by intent, slot types,
and slot values. We test this approach by using only the FSC corpus.
The training data in ATIS is too insufﬁcient to deliver a decent E2E
model.
Cascaded ASR+NLU It is a conventional approach to SLU. We
ﬁrst use ASR described in the above section to recognize the spoken
input into text and then ﬁne-tune the pre-trained BERT model with
the ASR transcriptions of training utterances. The objective of the
ﬁne-tuning is to jointly optimize model parameters for intent clas-
siﬁcation and slot ﬁlling [16]. This approach can leverage BERT
to improve the generalization capability of NLU models and achieve
the state-of-the-art performance on the human transcriptions of ATIS
corpus. The same English uncased BERT-Base model as that em-
ployed in our approach is used for ﬁne-tuning. The hyperparameters
are also set as those in [16].
4.3. Results and discussion
Word error rate (WER) is used to evaluate the performance of ASR.
The performance metrics for semantic labeling are intent accuracy
(Intent-Acc), slot precision (Slot-Pre), slot recall (Slot-Rec), and slot
F1 (Slot-F1). Table 2 shows the performance of different systems.

==== Page 4 ====
Table 2 . Performance(%) of different systems
Systems FSC ATIS
Approaches Conﬁgurations WER Intent-Acc WER Intent-Acc Slot-Pre Slot-Rec Slot-F1
E2E Joint ASR[SLU 0.86 99.13
E2E SLP one-step ( SLU ) 98.58 94.96 89.21 85.58 87.36
E2E SLP one-step ( ASR[SLU ) 0.42 99.71 14.47 95.30 86.71 82.20 84.40
E2E SLP two-step ( ASR;SLU ) 0.42 99.71 8.68 96.30 91.13 90.76 90.95
Cascaded Ref !BERT 100.0 97.65 95.89 96.30 96.10
Cascaded ASR !BERT 2.82 96.84 14.82 95.18 86.53 81.86 84.13
Cascaded SLP ASR !BERT 0.42 99.47 8.68 95.52 90.46 89.78 90.12
The slots/values of each utterance are combined as the intent of the
utterance in the FSC corpus, so there are no results related to the
slots in Table 2. Meanwhile, the results of E2E joint modeling for
ATIS corpus are also blank due to the inadequate training data for
building an E2E SLU model.
The E2E joint modeling approach to SLU achieves the intent
accuracy of 99.13% on the FSC testing set. This is the best perfor-
mance we have seen by building a model from scratch, i.e., using
only training data of FSC without any helps from the pre-trained
models.
We apply two strategies in building E2E SLP modes. Two-step
means that we ﬁrstly pre-train SLP with paired speech and the corre-
sponding transcriptions, and then ﬁne-tune the resultant model with
paired speech and the semantic labels. One-step indicates that we
just ﬁne-tune the SLP model. The output targets can be semantic la-
bels, i.e., one-step ( SLU ), or the concatenation of transcriptions and
semantic labels, i.e., one-step ( ASR[SLU ). The experimental re-
sults in Table 2 show that the performance of one-step ( ASR[SLU )
is equivalent to that of two-step ( ASR;SLU ) for the FSC corpus but
two-step signiﬁcantly outperforms one-step for the ATIS corpus. We
think 1) the size of training data in FSC is much larger than that in
ATIS so that both strategies can converge to the same performance;
2) the concatenations of transcriptions and semantic labels in ATIS
corpus are much longer than those in FSC corpus. It may cause per-
formance degradation for sequence generation.
Three kinds of transcription: 1) The ground-truth transcription
(Ref!BERT) as a upper-bound reference; 2) ASR transcription
(ASR!BERT) by using the AED-based ASR system mentioned
in Section 4.2; 3) ASR transcription from pre-trained SLP model
(SLP ASR!BERT), are fed into the BERT model to build cascaded
SLU system. The pre-trained SLP model can reduce ASR WER
from 2.82%, 14.82% to 0.42%, 8.68% for FSC and ATIS, respec-
tively. The reﬁned ASR hypotheses are critical for improving the
performance of intent prediction and slot ﬁling, e.g., the slot-F1
for ATIS is signiﬁcantly improved from 84.13% to 90.12%. In the
pre-training stage, we continually train the SLP model with the
speech embeddings from the encoder of the AED-based ASR model
and the tokenized transcription by using FSC or ATIS dataset. This
procedure can be thought of as domain adaptation for the acoustic
model (AM) and language model (LM) in the point of view of ASR
customization. LM represented by the decoder in the AED-based
ASR model is replaced by BERT based LM and further adapted
with the training transcriptions of FSC or ATIS. It brings most of the
WER reductions for the generated hypotheses.By comparing the performance of different systems shown in
Table 2, we ﬁnd that our proposed approach achieves the best per-
formance in terms of all evaluation metrics for both corpora. In the
previous studies, E2E SLU is difﬁcult to beat the cascaded SLU,
which can leverage large module-speciﬁc data to optimize individ-
ual modules. Our approach can unify well-optimized modules into a
single model and further optimize the model with a uniﬁed objective
of SLU.
Fig. 2 . The number of training samples from FSC corpus vs. the
intent accuracy by using the approach of E2E SLP one-step ( ASR[
SLU )
The size of training data in the FSC corpus is relatively larger
than other commonly used SLU corpora. We investigate whether
we can reduce the number of utterances for transfer learning with
the pre-trained SLP. The Figure 2 illustrates the intent accuracy
along with the number of training samples by using our proposed
approach, i.e., E2E SLP one-step ( ASR[SLU ). It shows that us-
ing only 3,000 samples by a random selection from the training set
can reach a similar performance to that of using all 23,132 training
samples.
5. CONCLUSIONS
The cascaded SLU can leverage ASR and NLU modules optimized
with a large amount of module-speciﬁc training data and deliver a
decent performance. It is a challenge for E2E SLU to beat it due to a
lack of labeled data. We propose to leverage the pre-trained speech
embeddings from ASR and the semantic representations from BERT
and jointly optimize them for E2E SLU. We have demonstrated the
effectiveness of our approach on FSC and ATIS datasets in this study.
In the future, we will extend our method to multi-domain and multi-
lingual SLU corpora and evaluate its generalization capability.

==== Page 5 ====
6. REFERENCES
[1] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova, “BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1810.04805, 2018.
[2] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario
Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever, “Language models are unsuper-
vised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog , vol. 1, no. 8, pp. 9,
2019.
[3] Yao Qian, Rutuja Ubale, Vikram Ramanaryanan, Patrick
Lange, David Suendermann-Oeft, Keelan Evanini, and Eugene
Tsuprun, “Exploring ASR-free end-to-end modeling to im-
prove spoken language understanding in a cloud-based dialog
system,” in ASRU , 2017, pp. 569–576.
[4] Yuan-Ping Chen, Ryan Price, and Srinivas Bangalore, “Spo-
ken language understanding without speech recognition,” in
ICASSP , 2018, pp. 6189–6193.
[5] Parisa Haghani, Arun Narayanan, Michiel Bacchiani, Galen
Chuang, Neeraj Gaur, Pedro Moreno, Rohit Prabhavalkar,
Zhongdi Qu, and Austin Waters, “From audio to semantics:
Approaches to end-to-end spoken language understanding,” in
SLT, 2018, pp. 720–726.
[6] Loren Lugosch, Mirco Ravanelli, Patrick Ignoto, Vikrant Singh
Tomar, and Yoshua Bengio, “Speech model pre-training for
end-to-end spoken language understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.03670 , 2019.
[7] Dmitriy Serdyuk, Yongqiang Wang, Christian Fuegen, Anuj
Kumar, Baiyang Liu, and Yoshua Bengio, “Towards end-to-
end spoken language understanding,” in ICASSP , 2018, pp.
5754–5758.
[8] P. Wang, L. Wei, Y . Cao, J. Xie, and Z. Nie, “Large-scale
unsupervised pre-training for end-to-end spoken language un-
derstanding,” in ICASSP , 2020, pp. 7999–8003.
[9] Luowei Zhou, Hamid Palangi, Lei Zhang, Houdong Hu, Ja-
son J. Corso, and Jianfeng Gao, “Uniﬁed vision-language
pre-training for image captioning and VQA,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.11059 , 2019.
[10] Yung-Sung Chuang, Chi-Liang Liu, Hung-Yi Lee, and Lin
shan Lee, “Speechbert: An audio-and-text jointly learned lan-
guage model for end-to-end spoken question answering,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.11559 , 2020.
[11] Chao-Wei Huang and Yun-Nung Chen, “Learning spoken lan-
guage representations with neural lattice language modeling,”
inProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 2020, pp. 3764–3769.
[12] Yao Qian, Yu Shi, and Michael Zeng, “Discriminative trans-
fer learning for optimizing ASR and semantic labeling in task-
oriented spoken dialog,” in To be appeared in Interspeech ,
2020.
[13] Y . Huang, H. Kuo, S. Thomas, Z. Kons, K. Audhkhasi,
B. Kingsbury, R. Hoory, and M. Picheny, “Leveraging un-
paired text data for training end-to-end speech-to-intent sys-
tems,” in ICASSP , 2020, pp. 7984–7988.
[14] Yu-An Chung, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng, “Semi-
supervised speech-language joint pre-training for spoken lan-
guage understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02295 , 2020.[15] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J Liu, “Exploring the limits of transfer learning
with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.10683 , 2019.
[16] Qian Chen, Zhu Zhuo, and Wen Wang, “BERT for joint in-
tent classiﬁcation and slot ﬁlling,” CoRR , vol. abs/1902.10909,
2019.
[17] Baolin Peng, Chenguang Zhu, Chunyuan Li, Xiujun Li, Jin-
chao Li, Michael Zeng, and Jianfeng Gao, “Few-shot natural
language generation for task-oriented dialog,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.12328 , 2020.
[18] Chien-Sheng Wu, Andrea Madotto, Ehsan Hosseini-Asl,
Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Pascale Fung, “Trans-
ferable multi-domain state generator for task-oriented dialogue
systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08743 , 2019.
[19] Paweł Budzianowski and Ivan Vuli ´c, “Hello, it’s gpt-2–
how can i help you? towards the use of pretrained language
models for task-oriented dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.05774 , 2019.
[20] L. Lugosch, B. H. Meyer, D. Nowrouzezahrai, and M. Ra-
vanelli, “Using speech synthesis to train end-to-end spoken
language understanding models,” in ICASSP , 2020, pp. 8499–
8503.
[21] Pavel Denisov and Ngoc Thang Vu, “Pretrained semantic
speech embeddings for end-to-end spoken language under-
standing via cross-modal teacher-student learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2007.01836 , 2020.
[22] Yonghui Wu and et al., “Google’s neural machine translation
system: Bridging the gap between human and machine trans-
lation,” CoRR , vol. abs/1609.08144, 2016.
[23] Li Dong, Nan Yang, Wenhui Wang, Furu Wei, Xiaodong Liu,
Yu Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Ming Zhou, and Hsiao-Wuen Hon,
“Uniﬁed language model pre-training for natural language un-
derstanding and generation,” in Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 32 , pp. 13063–13075. 2019.
[24] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30 , pp. 5998–6008. 2017.
[25] C. HEMPHILL, “The ATIS spoken language systems pilot cor-
pus,” DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop , 1990.
[26] Chih-Wen Goo, Guang Gao, Yun-Kai Hsu, Chih-Li Huo,
Tsung-Chieh Chen, Keng-Wei Hsu, and Yun-Nung Chen,
“Slot-gated modeling for joint slot ﬁlling and intent predic-
tion,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Pa-
pers) , 2018, pp. 753–757.
[27] Jan K Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Dmitriy Serdyuk,
Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio, “Attention-based mod-
els for speech recognition,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 28 , pp. 577–585. 2015.
[28] Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E. Hin-
ton, “Layer normalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 ,
2016.

