==== Page 1 ====
Stabilizing Dynamical Systems via Policy Gradient
Methods
Juan C. Perdomo
University of California, BerkeleyJack Umenberger
MITMax Simchowitz
MIT
Abstract
Stabilizing an unknown control system is one of the most fundamental problems
in control systems engineering. In this paper, we provide a simple, model-free
algorithm for stabilizing fully observed dynamical systems. While model-free
methods have become increasingly popular in practice due to their simplicity and
ﬂexibility, stabilization via direct policy search has received surprisingly little at-
tention. Our algorithm proceeds by solving a series of discounted LQR problems,
where the discount factor is gradually increased. We prove that this method efﬁ-
ciently recovers a stabilizing controller for linear systems, and for smooth, nonlin-
ear systems within a neighborhood of their equilibria. Our approach overcomes
a signiﬁcant limitation of prior work, namely the need for a pre-given stabiliz-
ing control policy. We empirically evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on
common control benchmarks.
1 Introduction
Stabilizing an unknown control system is one of the most fundamental problems in control systems
engineering. A wide variety of tasks - from maintaining a dynamical system around a desired equi-
librium point, to tracking a reference signal (e.g a pilot’s input to a plane) - can be recast in terms
of stability. More generally, synthesizing an initial stabilizing controller is often a necessary ﬁrst
step towards solving more complex tasks, such as adaptive or robust control design [Sontag, 1999,
2009].
In this work, we consider the problem of ﬁnding a stabilizing controller for an unknown dynamical
system via direct policy search methods. We introduce a simple procedure based off policy gradients
which provably stabilizes a dynamical system around an equilibrium point. Our algorithm only
requires access to a simulator which can return rollouts of the system under different control policies,
and can efﬁciently stabilize both linear and smooth, nonlinear systems.
Relative to model-based approaches, model-free procedures, such as policy gradients, have two key
advantages: they are conceptually simple to implement, and they are easily adaptable; that is, the
same method can be applied in a wide variety of domains without much regard to the intricacies of
the underlying dynamics. Due to their simplicity and ﬂexibility, direct policy search methods have
become increasingly popular amongst practitioners, especially in settings with complex, nonlinear
dynamics which may be challenging to model. In particular, they have served as the main workhorse
for recent breakthroughs in reinforcement learning and control [Silver et al., 2016, Mnih et al., 2015,
Andrychowicz et al., 2020].
Despite their popularity amongst practitioners, model-free approaches for continuous control have
only recently started to receive attention from the theory community [Fazel et al., 2018, Kakade
et al., 2020, Tu and Recht, 2019]. While these analyses have begun to map out the computational
and statistical tradeoffs that emerge in choosing between model-based and model-free approaches,
Correspondence to jcperdomo@berkeley.edu
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

==== Page 2 ====
they all share a common assumption: that the unknown dynamical system in question is stable, or
that an initial stabilizing controller is known. As such, they do not address the perhaps more basic
question, how do we arrive at a stabilizing controller in the ﬁrst place?
1.1 Contributions
We establish a reduction from stabilizing an unknown dynamical system to solving a series of dis-
counted, inﬁnite-horizon LQR problems via policy gradients, for which no knowledge of an initial
stable controller is needed. Our approach, which we call discount annealing , gradually increases the
discount factor and yields a control policy which is near optimal for the undiscounted LQR objec-
tive. To the best of our knowledge, our algorithm is the ﬁrst model-free procedure shown to provably
stabilize unknown dynamical systems, thereby solving an open problem from Fazel et al. [2018].
We begin by studying linear, time-invariant dynamical systems with full state observation and as-
sume access to inexact cost and gradient evaluations of the discounted, inﬁnite-horizon LQR cost of
a state-feedback controller K. Previous analyses (e.g., [Fazel et al., 2018]) establish how such eval-
uations can be implemented with access to (ﬁnitely many, ﬁnite horizon) trajectories sampled from
a simulator. We show that our method recovers the controller K?which is the optimal solution of
theundiscounted LQR problem in a bounded number of iterations, up to optimization and simulator
error. The stability of the resulting K?is guaranteed by known stability margin results for LQR. In
short, we prove the following guarantee:
Theorem 1 (informal). For linear systems, discount annealing returns a stabilizing state-feedback
controller which is also near-optimal for the LQR problem. It uses at most polynomially many,
"-inexact gradient and cost evaluations, where the tolerance "also depends polynomially on the
relevant problem parameters.
Since both the number of queries and error tolerance are polynomial, discount annealing can be
efﬁciently implemented using at most polynomially many samples from a simulator.
Furthermore, our results extend to smooth, nonlinear dynamical systems. Given access to a sim-
ulator that can return damped system rollouts, we show that our algorithm ﬁnds a controller that
attains near-optimal LQR cost for the Jacobian linearization of the nonlinear dynamics at the equi-
librium. We then show that this controller stabilizes the nonlinear system within a neighborhood of
its equilibrium.
Theorem 2 (informal). Discount annealing returns a state-feedback controller which is exponen-
tially stabilizing for smooth, nonlinear systems within a neighborhood of their equilibrium, using
again only polynomially many samples drawn from a simulator.
In each case, the algorithm returns a near optimal solution Kto the relevant LQR problem (or local
approximation thereof). Hence, the stability properties of Kare, in theory, no better than those of
the optimal LQR controller K?. Importantly, the latter may have worse stability guarantees than
the optimal solution of a corresponding robust control objective (e.g. H1synthesis). Nevertheless,
we focus on the LQR subroutine in the interest of simplicity, clarity, and in order to leverage prior
analyses of model-free methods for LQR. Extending our procedure to robust-control objectives is
an exciting direction for future work.
Lastly, while our theoretical analysis only guarantees that the resulting controller will be stabilizing
within a small neighborhood of the equilibrium, our simulations on nonlinear systems, such as the
nonlinear cartpole, illustrate that discount annealing produces controllers that are competitive with
established robust control procedures, such as H1synthesis, without requiring any knowledge of
the underlying dynamics.
1.2 Related work
Given its central importance to the ﬁeld, stabilization of unknown and uncertain dynamical systems
has received extensive attention within the controls literature. We review some of the relevant litera-
ture and point the reader towards classical texts for a more comprehensive treatment [Sontag, 2009,
Sastry and Bodson, 2011, Zhou et al., 1996, Callier and Desoer, 2012, Zhou and Doyle, 1998].
Model-based approaches. Model-based methods construct approximate system models in order to
synthesize stabilizing control policies. Traditional analyses consider stabilization of both linear and
2

==== Page 3 ====
nonlinear dynamical systems in the asymptotic limit of sufﬁcient data [Sastry and Bodson, 2011,
Sastry, 2013]. More recent, non-asymptotic studies have focused almost entirely on linear systems,
where the controller is generated using data from multiple independent trajectories [Fiechter, 1997,
Dean et al., 2019, Faradonbeh et al., 2018a, 2019]. Assuming the model is known, stabilizing
policies may also be synthesized via convex optimization [Prajna et al., 2004] by combining a ‘dual
Lyapunov theorem’ [Rantzer, 2001] with sum-of-squares programming [Parrilo, 2003]. Relative to
these analysis our focus is on strengthening the theoretical foundations of model-free procedures and
establishing rigorous guarantees that policy gradient methods can also be used to generate stabilizing
controllers.
Online control. Online control studies the problem of adaptively ﬁne-tuning the performance of an
already-stabilizing control policy on a single trajectory [Dean et al., 2018, Faradonbeh et al., 2018b,
Cohen et al., 2019, Mania et al., 2019, Simchowitz and Foster, 2020, Hazan et al., 2020, Simchowitz
et al., 2020, Kakade et al., 2020]. Though early papers in this direction consider systems without
pre-given stabilizing controllers [Abbasi-Yadkori and Szepesvári, 2011], their guarantees degrade
exponentially in the system dimension (a penalty ultimately shown to be unavoidable by Chen and
Hazan [2021]). Rather than ﬁne-tuning an already stabilizing controller, we focus on the more basic
problem of ﬁnding a controller which is stabilizing in the ﬁrst place, and allow for the use of multiple
independent trajectories.
Model-free approaches. Model-free approaches eschew trying to approximate the underlying dy-
namics and instead directly search over the space of control policies. The landmark paper of Fazel
et al. [2018] proves that, despite the non-convexity of the problem, direct policy search on the
inﬁnite-horizon LQR objective efﬁciently converges to the globally optimal policy, assuming the
search is initialized at an already stabilizing controller. Fazel et al. [2018] pose the synthesis of this
initial stabilizing controller via policy gradients as an open problem; one that we solve in this work.
Following this result, there have been a large number of works studying policy gradients procedures
in continuous control, see for example Feng and Lavaei [2020], Malik et al. [2019], Mohammadi
et al. [2020, 2021], Zhang et al. [2021] just to name a few. Relative to our analysis, these papers
consider questions of policy ﬁnite-tuning, derivative-free methods, and robust (or distributed) con-
trol which are important, yet somewhat orthogonal to the stabilization question considered herein.
The recent analysis by Lamperski [2020] is perhaps the most closely related piece of prior work.
It proposes a model-free, off-policy algorithm for computing a stabilizing controller for determin-
istic LQR systems. Much like discount annealing, the algorithm also works by alternating between
policy optimization (in their case by a closed-form policy improvement step based on the Riccati
update) and increasing a damping factor. However, whereas we provide precise ﬁnite-time conver-
gence guarantees to a stabilizing controller for both linear and nonlinear systems, the guarantees
in Lamperski [2020] are entirely asymptotic and restricted to linear systems. Furthermore, we pay
special attention to quantifying the various error tolerances in the gradient and cost queries to ensure
that the algorithm can be efﬁciently implemented in ﬁnite samples.
1.3 Background on stability of dynamical systems
Before introducing our results, we ﬁrst review some of the basic concepts and deﬁnitions regarding
stability of dynamical systems. In this paper, we study discrete-time, noiseless, time-invariant dy-
namical systems with states xt2Rdxand control inputs ut2Rdu. In particular, given an initial
state x0, the dynamics evolves according to xt+1=G(xt;ut)whereG:RdxRdu!Rdxis
a state transition map. An equilibrium point of a dynamical system is a state x?2Rdxsuch that
G(x?;0) = x?. As per convention, we assume that the origin x?= 0 is the desired equilibrium
point around which we wish to stabilize the system.
This paper restricts its attention to static state-feedback policies of the form ut=Kxtfor a ﬁxed
matrixK2Rdudx. Abusing notation slightly, we conﬂate the matrix Kwith its induced policy.
Our aim is to ﬁnd a policy Kwhich is exponentially stabilizing around the equilbrium point.
Time-invariant, linear systems, where G(x;u) =Ax+Buare stabilizable if and only if there exists
aKsuch thatA+BK is a stable matrix [Callier and Desoer, 2012]. That is if (A+BK)<1, where
(X)denotes the spectral radius, or the largest eigenvalue magnitude, of a matrix X. For general
nonlinear systems, our goal is to ﬁnd controllers which satisfy the following general, quantitative
3

==== Page 4 ====
deﬁnition of exponential stability (e.g Chapter 5.2 in Sastry [2013]). Throughout, kk denotes the
Euclidean norm.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A controller Kis(m;)-exponentially stable for dynamics Gif there exist constants
m; > 0such that if inputs are chosen according to ut=Kxt, the sequence of states xt+1=
G(xt;ut)satisfy
kxtkmexp( t)kx0k: (1.1)
Likewise,Kis(m;)-exponentially stable on radius r > 0if (1.1) holds for all x0such that
kx0kr.
For linear systems, a controller Kis stabilizing if and only if it is stable over the entire state space,
however, the restriction to stabilization over a particular radius is in general needed for nonlinear
systems. Our approach for stabilizing nonlinear systems relies on analyzing their Jacobian lin-
earization about the origin equilibrium. Given a continuously differentiable transition operator G,
the local dynamics can be approximated by the Jacobian linearization (Ajac;Bjac)ofGabout the
zero equilibrium; that is
Ajac:=rxG(x;u)
(x;u)=(0;0); B jac:=ruG(x;u)
(x;u)=(0;0): (1.2)
In particular, for xandusufﬁciently small, G(x;u) =Ajacx+Bjacu+fnl(x;u), wherefnl(x;u)
is a nonlinear remainder from the Taylor expansion of G. To ensure stabilization via state-feedback
is feasible, we assume throughout our presentation that the linearized dynamics (Ajac;Bjac)are
stabilizable.
2 Stabilizing Linear Dynamical Systems
We now present our main results establishing how our algorithm, discount annealing, provably sta-
bilizes linear dynamical systems via a reduction to direct policy search methods. We begin with the
following preliminaries on the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR).
Deﬁnition 2.1 (LQR Objective) .For a given starting state x, we deﬁne the LQR problem Jlinwith
discount factor 2(0;1], dynamic matrices (A;B), and state feedback controller Kas,
Jlin(Kjx;;A;B ) :=1X
t=0t 
x>
tQxt+u>
tRut
s.t.ut=Kxt;xt+1=Axt+But;x0=x:
Here, xt2Rdx,ut2Rdu, andQ;R are positive deﬁnite matrices. Slightly overloading notation,
we deﬁne
Jlin(Kj;A;B ) := E
x0pdxSdx 1[Jlin(Kjx;;A;B )];
to be the same as the problem above, but where the initial state is now drawn from the uniform
distribution over the sphere in Rdxof radiuspdx.2
To simplify our presentation, we adopt the shorthand Jlin(Kj) :=Jlin(Kj;A;B )in
cases where the system dynamics (A;B)are understood from context. Furthermore, we as-
sume that (A;B)is stabilizable and that min(Q);min(R)1. It is a well-known fact that
K?;:= arg minKJlin(Kj;A;B )achieves the minimum LQR cost over all possible control
laws. We begin our analysis with the observation that the discounted LQR problem is equivalent to
the undiscounted LQR problem with damped dynamics matrices.3
Lemma 2.1. For all controllers Ksuch thatJlin(Kj;A;B )<1,
Jlin(Kj;A;B ) =Jlin(Kj1;pA;pB):
From this equivalence, it follows from basic facts about LQR that a controller KsatisﬁesJlin(0j
;A;B )<1if and only ifp(A+BK)is stable. Consequently, for  <  (A) 2, the zero
2This scaling is chosen so that the initial state distribution has identity covariance, and yields cost equivalent
tox0N (0; I).
3This lemma is folklore within the controls community, see e.g. Lamperski [2020].
4

==== Page 5 ====
Discount Annealing
Initialize: ObjectiveJ(j),02(0;(A) 2),K0 0, andQ I,R I
Fort= 0;1;:::
1. Ift= 1, run policy gradients once more as in Step 2, break, and return the resulting
K0.
2. Using policy gradients (see Eq. (2.1)) initialized at Kt, ﬁndK0such that:
Jlin(K0jt) min
KJlin(Kjt)dx: (2.2)
3. Update initial controller Kt+1 K0.
4. Using binary or random search, ﬁnd a discount factor 02[t;1]such that
2:5J(Kt+1jt)J(Kt+1j0)8J(Kt+1jt): (2.3)
5. Update the discount factor t+1 0.
Figure 1: Discount annealing algorithm. The procedure is identical for both linear and nonlinear
systems. For linear, we initialize J=Jlin(j0)and for nonlinear J=Jnl(j0;r?)where
r?is chosen as in Theorem 2. See Theorem 1, Theorem 2, and Appendix C for details regarding
policy gradients and binary (or random) search. The constants above are chosen for convenience,
any constants c1;c2such that 1<c1<c2sufﬁce.
controller is stabilizing and one can solve the discounted LQR problem via direct policy search
initialized at K= 0 [Fazel et al., 2018]. At this point, one may wonder whether the solution to this
highly discounted problem yields a controller which stabilizes the undiscounted system. If this were
true, running policy gradients (deﬁned in Eq. (2.1)) to convergence, on a single discounted LQR
problem, would sufﬁce to ﬁnd a stabilizing controller.
Kt+1=Kt rKJlin(Ktj); K 0= 0; > 0 (2.1)
Unfortunately, the following proposition shows that this is not the case.
Proposition 2.2 (Impossibility of Reward Shaping) .FixA= diag(0;2). For any positive deﬁnite
cost matrices Q;R and discount factor such thatpAis stable, there exists a matrix Bsuch that
(A;B)is controllable (and thus stabilizable), yet the optimal controller K?;:= arg minKJ(Kj
;A;B )on the discounted problem is such that A+BK?;is unstable.
We now describe the discount annealing procedure for linear systems (Figure 1), which provably re-
covers a stabilizing controller K. For simplicity, we present the algorithm assuming access to noisy,
bounded cost and gradient evaluations which satisfy the following deﬁnition. Employing standard
arguments from [Fazel et al., 2018, Flaxman et al., 2005], we illustrate how these evaluations can be
efﬁciently implemented using polynomially many samples drawn from a simulator in Appendix C.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Gradient and Cost Queries) .Given an error parameter " > 0and a function J:
Rd!R,"-Grad (J;z)returns a vector ersuch thatker rJ(z)kF". Similarly,"-Eval (J;z;c)
returns a scalar vsuch thatjv minfJ(z);cgj ".
The procedure leverages the equivalence (Lemma 2.1) between discounted costs and damped dy-
namics for LQR, and the consequence that the zero controller is stabilizing if we choose 0sufﬁ-
ciently small. Hence, for this discount factor, we may apply policy gradients initialized at the zero
controller in order to recover a controller K1which is near-optimal for the 0discounted objective.
Our key insight is that, due to known stability margins for LQR controllers, K1is stabilizing for the
1discounted dynamics for some discount factor 1>(1 +c)0, wherecis a small constant that
has a uniform lower bound. Therefore, K1has ﬁnite cost on the 1discounted problem, so that we
may again use policy gradients initialized at K1to compute a near-optimal controller K2for this
larger discount factor. By iterating, we have that t(1 +c)t0and can increase the discount
factor up to 1, yielding a near-optimal stabilizing controller for the undiscounted LQR objective.
5

==== Page 6 ====
The rate at which we can increase the discount factors tdepends on certain properties of the (un-
known) dynamical system. Therefore, we opt for binary search to compute the desired in the
absence of system knowledge. This yields the following guarantee, which we state in terms of
properties of the matrix P?, the optimal value function for the undiscounted LQR problem, which
satisﬁes minKJlin(Kj1) = tr [P?](see Appendix A for further details).
Theorem 1 (Linear Systems) .LetMlin:= maxf16tr [P?];Jlin(K0j0)g. The following state-
ments are true regarding the discount annealing algorithm when run on linear dynamical systems:
a) Discount annealing returns a controller bKwhich is (p
2tr[P?];(4tr [P?]) 1)-
exponentially stable.
b) If0<1, the algorithm is guaranteed to halt whenever tis greater than
64tr [P?]4log(1=0).
Furthermore, at each iteration t:
c) Policy gradients as deﬁned in Eq. (2.1) achieves the guarantee in Eq. (2.2) using only
poly(Mlin;kAkop;kBkop)many queries to "-Grad (;Jlin(j))as long as"is less than
poly(M 1
lin;kAk 1
op;kBk 1
op).
c) The noisy binary search algorithm (see Figure 2) returns a discount factor 0satisfying
Eq.(2.3) using at mostd4 log(tr [P?])e+ 10 many queries to "-Eval (;Jlin(j))for
"=:1dx.
We remark that since "need only be polynomially small in the relevant problem parameters, each call
to"-Grad and"-Eval can be carried out using only polynomially many samples from a simulator
which returns ﬁnite horizon system trajectories under various control policies. We make this claim
formal in Appendix C.
Proof. We prove part b)of the theorem and defer the proofs of the remaining parts of to Appendix A.
DeﬁnePK;to be the solution to the discrete-time Lyapunov equation. That is forp(A+BK)
stable,PK;solves:
PK;:=Q+K>RK+(A+BK)>PK;(A+BK): (2.4)
Using this notation, P?=PK?;1is the solution to the above Lyapunov equation with = 1. The
key step of the proof is Proposition A.4, which uses Lyapunov theory to verify the following: given
the current discount factor t, an idealized discount factor 0
t+1deﬁned by
0
t+1:=1
8kPKt+1;tk4op+ 12
t;
satisﬁesJlin(Kt+1j0
t+1) = tr[PKt+1;0
t+1]2tr
PKt+1;t
= 2Jlin(Kt+1jt). Since the
control cost is non-decreasing in , the binary search update in Step 4 ensures that the actual t+1
also satisﬁes
t+11
8kPKt+1;tk4op+ 12
t 
1
128tr [P?]4+ 1!2
t;
The following calculation (which uses dxtr [P?]formin(Q)1) justiﬁes the second inequality
above:
kPKt+1;tk4
optr
PKt+1;t4=Jlin(Kt+1jt)4(min
KJlin(Kjt) +dx)416tr [P?]4:
Therefore,t(1=(128tr [P?]4) + 1)2t0. The precise bound follows from taking logs of both
sides and using the numerical inequality log(1 +x)xto simplify the denominator.
6

==== Page 7 ====
3 Stabilizing Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
We now extend the guarantees of the discount annealing algorithm to smooth, nonlinear systems.
Whereas our study of linear systems explicitly leveraged the equivalence of discounted costs and
damped dynamics, our analysis for nonlinear systems requires access to system rollouts under
damped dynamics, since the previous equivalence between discounting and damping breaks down
in nonlinear settings.
More speciﬁcally, in this section, we assume access to a simulator which given a controller K,
returns trajectories generated according to xt+1=pGnl(xt;Kxt)for any damping factor 2
(0;1], whereGnlis the transition operator for the nonlinear system. While such trajectories may
be infeasible to generate on a physical system, we believe these are reasonable to consider when
dynamics are represented using software simulators, as is often the case in practice [Lewis et al.,
2003, Peng et al., 2018].
The discount annealing algorithm for nonlinear systems is almost identical to the algorithm for linear
systems. It again works by repeatedly solving a series of quadratic cost objectives on the nonlinear
dynamics as deﬁned below, and progressively increasing the damping factor .
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Nonlinear Objective) .For a state feedback controller K:Rdx!Rdu, damping
factor2(0;1], and an initial state x, we deﬁne:
Jnl(Kjx;) :=1X
t=0x>
tQxt+u>
tRut (3.1)
s.tut=Kxt;xt+1=pGnl(xt;ut);x0=x: (3.2)
Overloading notation as before, we let Jnl(Kj;r) :=ExrSdx 1[Jnl(Kj;x)]dx
r2.
The normalization by dx=r2above is chosen so that the nonlinear objective coincides with the LQR
objective when Gnlis in fact linear. Relative to the linear case, the only algorithmic difference for
nonlinear systems is that we introduce an extra parameter rwhich determines the radius for the
initial state distribution. As established in Theorem 2, this parameter must be chosen small enough
to ensure that discount annealing succeeds. Our analysis pertains to dynamics which satisfy the
following smoothness deﬁnition.
Assumption 1 (Local Smoothness) .The transition map Gnlis continuously differentiable. Further-
more, there exist rnl;nl>0such that for all (x;u)2Rdx+duwithkxk+kukrnl,
krx;uGnl(x;u) rx;uGnl(0;0)kopnl(kxk+kuk):
For simplicity, we assume nl1andrnl1. Using Assumption 1, we can apply Taylor’s
theorem to rewrite Gnlas its Jacobian linearization around the equilibrium point, plus a nonlinear
remainder term.
Lemma 3.1. IfGnlsatisﬁes Assumption 1, then all x;ufor whichkxk+kuk rnl,
Gnl(x;u) =Ajacx+Bjacu+fnl(x;u); (3.3)
wherekfnl(x;u)knl(kxk2+kuk2),krfnl(x;u)knl(kxk+kuk), and where (Ajac;Bjac)
are the system’s Jacobian linearization matrices deﬁned in Eq. (1.2) .
Rather than trying to directly understand the behavior of stabilization procedures on the nonlinear
system, the key insight of our nonlinear analysis is that we can reason about the performance of
a state-feedback controller on the nonlinear system via its behavior on the system’s Jacobian lin-
earization. In particular, the following lemma establishes how any controller which achieves ﬁnite
discounted LQR cost for the Jacobian linearization is guaranteed to be exponentially stabilizing on
the damped nonlinear system for initial states that are small enough. Throughout the remainder of
this section, we deﬁne Jlin(j) :=Jlin(j;A jac;Bjac)as the LQR objective from Deﬁnition 2.1
where (A;B) = (Ajac;Bjac).
Lemma 3.2 (Restatement of Lemma B.2) .Suppose thatCJ=Jlin(Kj)<1, thenKis
(C1=2
J;(4CJ) 1)exponentially stable on the damped systempGnlover radiusr=rnl=(nlC3=2
J).
7

==== Page 8 ====
The second main building block of our nonlinear analysis is the observation that if the dynamics
are locally smooth around the equilibrium point, then by Lemma 3.1, decreasing the radius rof the
initial state distribution x0rSdx 1reduces the magnitude of the nonlinear remainder term fnl.
Hence, the nonlinear system smoothly approximates its Jacobian linearization. More precisely, we
establish that the difference in gradients and costs between Jnl(Kj;r)andJlin(Kj)decrease
linearly with the radius r.
Proposition 3.3. AssumeJlin(Kj)<1. Then, forPK;deﬁned as in Eq. (2.4) :
a) Ifrrnl
2nlkPK;k2op, thenJnl(Kj;r) Jlin(Kj)8dxnlkPK;k4
opr:
b) Ifr1
12nlkPK;k5=2
op, then,krKJnl(Kj;r) rKJlin(Kj)kF48dxnl(1 +
kBkop)kPK;k7
opr
Lastly, because policy gradients on linear dynamical systems is robust to inexact gradient queries,
we show that for rsufﬁciently small, running policy gradients on Jnlconverges to a controller
which has performance close to the optimal controller for the LQR problem with dynamic matrices
(Ajac;Bjac). As noted previously, we can then use Lemma 3.2 to translate the performance of the
optimal LQR controller for the Jacobian linearization to an exponential stability guarantee for the
nonlinear dynamics. Using these insights, we establish the following theorem regarding discount
annealing for nonlinear dynamics.
Theorem 2 (Nonlinear Systems) .LetMnl:= maxf21tr [P?];Jlin(K0j0)g. The following state-
ments are true regarding the discount annealing algorithm for nonlinear dynamical systems when
r?is less than a ﬁxed quantity that is poly(1=Mnl;1=kAkop;1=kBkop;rnl=nl)
a) Discount annealing returns a controller bKwhich is (p
2tr[P?];(8tr [P?]) 1)-
exponentially stable over a radius r=rnl=(8nltr [P?]2)
b) If0<1, the algorithm is guaranteed to halt whenever tis greater than
64tr [P?]4log(1=0).
Furthermore, at each iteration t:
c) Policy gradients achieves the guarantee in Eq. (2.2) using only poly(Mnl;kAkop;kBkop)
many queries to "-Grad (;Jnl( j))as long as"is less than some ﬁxed polynomial
poly(M 1
nl;kAk 1
op;kBk 1
op).
c) Letc0denote a universal constant. With probability 1 , the noisy random search
algorithm (see Figure 2) returns a discount factor 0satisfying Eq. (2.3) using at most
c0tr [P?]4log(1=)queries to"-Eval (;Jnl(j;r?))for"=:01dx.
We note that while our theorem only guarantees that the controller is stabilizing around a polyno-
mially small neighborhood of the equilibrium, in experiments, we ﬁnd that the resulting controller
successfully stabilizes the dynamics for a wide range of initial conditions. Relative to the case of
linear systems where we leveraged the monotonicity of the LQR cost to search for discount factors
using binary search, this monotonicity breaks down in the case of nonlinear systems and we instead
analyze a random search algorithm to simplify the analysis.
4 Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the ability of the discount annealing algorithm to stabilize a simulated
nonlinear system. Speciﬁcally, we consider the familiar cart-pole, with dx= 4 (positions and
velocities of the cart and pole), and du= 1 (horizontal force applied to the cart). The goal is to
stabilize the system with the pole in the unstable ‘upright’ equilibrium position. For further details,
including the precise dynamics, see Appendix D.1. The system was simulated in discrete-time with
a simple forward Euler discretization, i.e., xt+1=xt+Ts_xt, where _xtis given by the continuous
time dynamics, and Ts= 0:05(20Hz). Simulations were carried out in PyTorch [Paszke et al.,
2019] and run on a single GPU.
8

==== Page 9 ====
Table 1: Final region of attraction radius rroaas a function of the initial state radius rused during
training (discount annealing). We report the [ min,max] values ofrroaover 5 independent trials. The
optimal LQR policy for the linearized system achieved rroa= 0:703when applied to the nonlinear
system. We also synthesized an H1optimal controller for the linearized dynamics, which achieved
rroa= 0:506.
r 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7
rroa [0.702, 0.704] [0.711, 0.713] [0.727, 0.734] [0.731, 0.744] [0.769, 0.777]
Setup . The discounted annealing algorithm of Figure 1 was implemented as follows. In place of the
true inﬁnite horizon discounted cost Jnl(Kj;r)in Eq. (C.4) we use a ﬁnite horizon, ﬁnite sample
Monte Carlo approximation as described in Appendix C,
Jnl(Kj)1
NXN
i=1J(H)
nl(Kj;x(i));x(i)rSdx 1:
Here,J(H)
nl(Kj;x) =PH 1
j=0x>
tQxt+u>
tRut, is the length H, ﬁnite horizon cost of a controller
Kin which the states evolve according to thepdamped dynamics from Eq. (C.5) and ut=Kxt.
We usedN= 5000 andH= 1000 in our experiments. For the cost function, we used Q=TsI
andR=Ts. We compute unbiased approximations of the gradients using automatic differentiation
on the ﬁnite horizon objective J(H)
nl.
Instead of using SGD updates for policy gradients, we use Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] with a
learning rate of = 0:01=r. Furthermore, we replace the policy gradient termination criteria in
Step 2 (Eq. (2.2)) by instead halting after a ﬁxed number (M= 200) of gradient descent steps. We
wish to emphasize that the hyperparameters (N;H;;M )were not optimized for performance. In
particular, for r= 0:1, we found that as few as M= 40 iterations of policy gradient and horizons
as short asH= 400 were sufﬁcient. Finally, we used an initial discount factor 0= 0:9kAjack 2
2,
whereAjacdenotes the linearization of the (discrete-time) cart-pole about the vertical equilibrium.
Results . We now proceed to discuss the performance of the algorithm, focusing on three main
properties of interest: i) the number of iterations of discount annealing required to ﬁnd a stabilizing
controller (that is, increase tto 1), ii) the maximum radius rof the ball of initial conditions x0
rSdx 1for which discount annealing succeeds at stabilizing the system, and iii) the radius rroaof
the largest ball contained within the region of attraction (ROA) for the policy returned by discount
annealing. Although the true ROA (the set of all initial conditions such that the closed-loop system
converges asymptotically to the equilibrium point) is not necessarily shaped like a ball (as the system
is more sensitive to perturbations in the position and velocity of the pole than the cart), we use the
term region of attraction radius to refer to the radius of the largest ball contained in the ROA.
Concerning (i), discount annealing reliably returned a stabilizing policy in less than 9 iterations.
Speciﬁcally, over 5 independent trials for each initial radius r2 f0:1;0:3;0:5;0:7g(giving 20
independent trials, in total) the algorithm never required more than 9 iterations to return a stabilizing
policy.
Concerning (ii), discount annealing reliably stabilized the system for r0:7. Forr0:75, we
observed trials in which the state of the damped system (  < 1) diverged to inﬁnity. For such a
rollout, the gradient of the cost is not well-deﬁned, and policy gradient is unable to improve the
policy, which prevents discount annealing from ﬁnding a stabilizing policy.
Concerning (iii), in Table 1 we report the ﬁnal radius rroafor the region of attraction of the ﬁnal con-
troller returned by discount annealing as a function of the training radius r. We make the following
observations. Foremost, the policy returned by discount annealing extends the radius of the ROA
beyond the radius used during training, i.e. rroa> r. Moreover, for each r > : 1, therroaachieved
by discount annealing is greater than the rroa= 0:703achieved by the exact optimal LQR controller
andtherroa= 0:506achieved by the exact optimal H1controller for the system’s Jacobian lin-
earization (see Table 1). (The H1optimal controller mitigates the effect of worst-case additive state
disturbances on the cost; cf. Appendix D.2 for details).
One may hypothesize that this is due to the fact that discount annealing directly operates on the true
nonlinear dynamics whereas the other baselines (LQR and H1control), ﬁnd the optimal controller
9

==== Page 10 ====
for an idealized linearization of the dynamics. Indeed, there is evidence to support this hypothe-
sis. In Figure 3 presented in Appendix D, we plot the error kK?
pg(t) K?
lin(t)kFbetween the
policyK?
pg(t)returned by policy gradients, and the optimal LQR policy K?
lin(t)for the (damped)
linearized system, as a function of the discount factor tused in each iteration of the discount an-
nealing algorithm. For small training radius, such as r= 0:05,K?
pg(t)K?
lin(t)for allt.
However, for larger radii (i.e r= 0:7), we see thatkK?
pg(t) K?
lin(t)kFsteadily increases as t
increases.
That is, as discount annealing increases the discount factor and the closed-loop trajectories explore
regions of the state space where the dynamics are increasingly nonlinear, K?
pgbegins to diverge
fromK?
lin. Moreover, at the conclusion of discount annealing K?
pg(1)achieves a lower cost, namely
[15.2, 15.4] vs [16.5, 16.8] (here [a;b]denotes [ min,max] over 5 trials) and larger rroa, namely
[0.769, 0.777] vs [0.702, 0.703], than K?
lin(1), suggesting that the method has indeed adapted to
the nonlinearity of the system. Similar observations as to the behavior of controllers ﬁne tuned via
policy gradient methods are predicted by the theoretical results from Qu et al. [2020].
5 Discussion
This works illustrates how one can provably stabilize a broad class of dynamical systems via a
simple model-free procedure based off policy gradients. In line with the simplicity and ﬂexibility
that have made model-free methods so popular in practice, our algorithm works under relatively
weak assumptions and with little knowledge of the underlying dynamics. Furthermore, we solve an
open problem from previous work [Fazel et al., 2018] and take a step towards placing model-free
methods on more solid theoretical footing. We believe that our results raise a number of interesting
questions and directions for future work.
In particular, our theoretical analysis states that discount annealing returns a controller whose sta-
bility properties are similar to those of the optimal LQR controller for the system’s Jacobian lin-
earization. We were therefore quite surprised when in experiments, the resulting controller had a
signiﬁcantly better radius of attraction than the exact optimal LQR and H1controllers for the lin-
earization of the dynamics. It is an interesting and important direction for future work to gain a
better understanding of exactly when and how model-free procedures are adaptive to the nonlinear-
ities of the system and improve upon these model-based baselines. Furthermore, for our analysis of
nonlinear systems, we require access to damped system trajectories. It would be valuable to under-
stand whether this is indeed necessary or whether our analysis could be extended to work without
access to damped trajectories.
As a ﬁnal note, in this work we reduce the problem of stabilizing dynamical systems to running
policy gradients on a discounted LQR objective. This choice of reducing to LQR was in part made
for simplicity to leverage previous analyses. However, it is possible that overall performance could
be improved if rather than reducing to LQR, we instead attempted to run a model-free method that
directly tries to optimize a robust control objective (which explicitly deals with uncertainty in the
system dynamics). We believe that understanding these tradeoffs in objectives and their relevant
sample complexities is an interesting avenue for future inquiry.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Peter Bartlett for many helpful conversations and comments throughout
the course of this project, and Russ Tedrake for support with the numerical experiments. JCP is
supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. MS is supported by an Open Philanthropy
Fellowship grant. JU is supported by the National Science Foundation, Award No. EFMA-1830901,
and the Department of the Navy, Ofﬁce of Naval Research, Award No. N00014-18-1-2210.
10

==== Page 11 ====
References
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori and Csaba Szepesvári. Regret bounds for the adaptive control of linear
quadratic systems. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference on Learning Theory , pages
1–26, 2011.
OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew,
Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning
dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 39(1):3–20,
2020.
Frank M Callier and Charles A Desoer. Linear system theory . Springer Science & Business Media,
2012.
Xinyi Chen and Elad Hazan. Black-box control for linear dynamical systems. In Conference on
Learning Theory , pages 1114–1143. PMLR, 2021.
Alon Cohen, Tomer Koren, and Yishay Mansour. Learning linear-quadratic regulators efﬁciently
with only sqrt(t) regret. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1300–1309.
PMLR, 2019.
Sarah Dean, Horia Mania, Nikolai Matni, Benjamin Recht, and Stephen Tu. Regret bounds for robust
adaptive control of the linear quadratic regulator. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pages 4188–4197, 2018.
Sarah Dean, Horia Mania, Nikolai Matni, Benjamin Recht, and Stephen Tu. On the sample com-
plexity of the linear quadratic regulator. Foundations of Computational Mathematics , pages 1–47,
2019.
Mohamad Kazem Shirani Faradonbeh, Ambuj Tewari, and George Michailidis. Finite-time adap-
tive stabilization of linear systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 64(8):3498–3505,
2018a.
Mohamad Kazem Shirani Faradonbeh, Ambuj Tewari, and George Michailidis. On optimality of
adaptive linear-quadratic regulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10749 , 2018b.
Mohamad Kazem Shirani Faradonbeh, Ambuj Tewari, and George Michailidis. Randomized al-
gorithms for data-driven stabilization of stochastic linear systems. In 2019 IEEE Data Science
Workshop (DSW) , pages 170–174. IEEE, 2019.
Maryam Fazel, Rong Ge, Sham Kakade, and Mehran Mesbahi. Global convergence of policy gradi-
ent methods for the linear quadratic regulator. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pages 1467–1476. PMLR, 2018.
Han Feng and Javad Lavaei. Escaping locally optimal decentralized control polices via damping. In
2020 American Control Conference (ACC) , pages 50–57. IEEE, 2020.
Claude-Nicolas Fiechter. Pac adaptive control of linear systems. In Proceedings of the tenth annual
conference on Computational learning theory , pages 72–80, 1997.
Abraham D. Flaxman, Adam Tauman Kalai, and H. Brendan McMahan. Online convex optimization
in the bandit setting: gradient descent without a gradient. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , SODA ’05, page 385–394, USA, 2005. Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Elad Hazan, Sham Kakade, and Karan Singh. The nonstochastic control problem. In Algorithmic
Learning Theory , pages 408–421. PMLR, 2020.
Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Kendall Lowrey, Motoya Ohnishi, and Wen Sun. Infor-
mation theoretic regret bounds for online nonlinear control. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 15312–15325, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
11

==== Page 12 ====
Andrew Lamperski. Computing stabilizing linear controllers via policy iteration. In 2020 59th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 1902–1907. IEEE, 2020.
Beatrice Laurent and Pascal Massart. Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional by model selec-
tion. Annals of Statistics , pages 1302–1338, 2000.
Frank L Lewis, Darren M Dawson, and Chaouki T Abdallah. Robot manipulator control: theory
and practice . CRC Press, 2003.
Dhruv Malik, Ashwin Pananjady, Kush Bhatia, Koulik Khamaru, Peter Bartlett, and Martin Wain-
wright. Derivative-free methods for policy optimization: Guarantees for linear quadratic systems.
InThe 22nd International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 2916–2925.
PMLR, 2019.
Horia Mania, Stephen Tu, and Benjamin Recht. Certainty equivalence is efﬁcient for linear quadratic
control. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 10154–10164, 2019.
V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Hesameddin Mohammadi, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Mihailo R Jovanovi ´c. On the linear conver-
gence of random search for discrete-time lqr. IEEE Control Systems Letters , 5(3):989–994, 2020.
Hesameddin Mohammadi, Armin Zare, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Mihailo R Jovanovic. Conver-
gence and sample complexity of gradient methods for the model-free linear quadratic regulator
problem. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 2021.
Pablo A Parrilo. Semideﬁnite programming relaxations for semialgebraic problems. Mathematical
programming , 96(2):293–320, 2003.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01703 , 2019.
Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer
of robotic control with dynamics randomization. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 3803–3810, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460528.
Juan C. Perdomo, Max Simchowitz, Alekh Agarwal, and Peter L. Bartlett. Towards a dimension-
free understanding of adaptive linear control. In Conference on Learning Theory , volume 134 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3681–3770. PMLR, 2021.
Stephen Prajna, Pablo A Parrilo, and Anders Rantzer. Nonlinear control synthesis by convex opti-
mization. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 49(2):310–314, 2004.
Guannan Qu, Chenkai Yu, Steven Low, and Adam Wierman. Combining model-based and model-
free methods for nonlinear control: A provably convergent policy gradient approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.07476 , 2020.
Anders Rantzer. A dual to lyapunov’s stability theorem. Systems & Control Letters , 42(3):161–168,
2001.
Shankar Sastry. Nonlinear systems: analysis, stability, and control , volume 10. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2013.
Shankar Sastry and Marc Bodson. Adaptive control: stability, convergence and robustness . Courier
Corporation, 2011.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature , 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Max Simchowitz and Dylan Foster. Naive exploration is optimal for online lqr. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8937–8948. PMLR, 2020.
12

==== Page 13 ====
Max Simchowitz, Karan Singh, and Elad Hazan. Improper learning for non-stochastic control. In
Conference on Learning Theory , pages 3320–3436. PMLR, 2020.
Eduardo D Sontag. Nonlinear feedback stabilization revisited. In Dynamical Systems, Control,
Coding, Computer Vision , pages 223–262. Springer, 1999.
Eduardo D. Sontag. Stability and feedback stabilization . Springer New York, New York, NY , 2009.
ISBN 978-0-387-30440-3. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-30440-3_515.
Stephen Tu and Benjamin Recht. The gap between model-based and model-free methods on the
linear quadratic regulator: An asymptotic viewpoint. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages
3036–3083. PMLR, 2019.
Kaiqing Zhang, Xiangyuan Zhang, Bin Hu, and Tamer Ba¸ sar. Derivative-free policy optimization
for risk-sensitive and robust control design: implicit regularization and sample complexity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.01041 , 2021.
Kemin Zhou and John Comstock Doyle. Essentials of robust control , volume 104. Prentice Hall,
1998.
Kemin Zhou, John Comstock Doyle, Keith Glover, et al. Robust and optimal control , volume 40.
Prentice hall New Jersey, 1996.
13

