==== Page 1 ====
Supply Chain Risk Management and Articial Intelligence:
State of the Art and Future Research Directions
George Baryannisa, Sahar Validib, Samir Daniband Grigoris Antonioua
aDepartment of Computer Science, School of Computing & Engineering, University of
Hudderseld, Hudderseld, UK;bDepartment of Logistics, Operations, Hospitality and
Marketing, Hudderseld Business School, University of Hudderseld, Hudderseld, UK
ABSTRACT
Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) encompasses a wide variety of strategies
aiming to identify, assess, mitigate and monitor unexpected events or conditions
which might have an impact, mostly adverse, on any part of a supply chain. SCRM
strategies often depend on rapid and adaptive decision making based on potentially
large, multidimensional data sources. These characteristics make SCRM a suitable
application area for Articial Intelligence (AI) techniques. The aim of this paper is
to provide a comprehensive review of supply chain literature that addresses prob-
lems relevant to SCRM using approaches that fall within the AI spectrum. To that
end, an investigation is conducted on the various denitions and classications of
supply chain risk and related notions such as uncertainty. Then, a mapping study is
performed to categorise existing literature according to the AI methodology used,
ranging from mathematical programming to Machine Learning and Big Data An-
alytics, and the specic SCRM task they address (identication, assessment or re-
sponse). Finally, a comprehensive analysis of each category is provided to identify
missing aspects and unexplored areas and propose directions for future research at
the conuence of SCRM and AI.
KEYWORDS
supply chain risk management; articial intelligence; decision making; SCRM
strategy; supply chain disruption
1. Introduction
Supply chains, especially global ones, have always been aected by predictable or
unforeseen events that threaten their protability and continuity. Practitioners and
researchers have, thus, been interested in investigating the causes of these events in
an attempt to mitigate the eects of the associated risks. This interest has increased
signicantly over the past two decades for three main reasons. First, the adoption of
lean management and just-in-time philosophy in production and logistics may have
increased eciency but have left supply chains vulnerable to adverse events since they
leave little room for error and change (Snyder et al. 2016). Second, rms are increas-
ingly global and less vertically integrated, increasing the complexity of supply chains
and exposing them to much more risks (Behzadi et al. 2018). Third, numerous events
have been witnessed to disrupt global supply chains and have attracted worldwide
attention. These range from natural disasters, such as the 2011 Thailand oods which
caused a global shortage of hard disk drives (Chopra and Sodhi 2014), to man-made
Corresponding author. Email: g.bargiannis@hud.ac.uk

==== Page 2 ====
disasters such as the 9/11 terrorist attacks. They also include events that cause nan-
cial or political instability, such as the 2008 global nancial crisis (World Economic
Forum 2012) and the subsequent Great Recession or the decision in 2016 of the UK
to withdraw from the European Union (Brexit) (Matthews 2017).
Research in supply chain risk management (SCRM) has included many dierent
methodologies, from qualitative ones such as empirical studies and conceptual the-
ories to quantitative approaches such as mathematical optimisation, statistics and
simulation (Ghadge, Dani, and Kalawsky 2012). In terms of implemented strategies,
SCRM can follow either a reactive or a proactive strategy: the former is applied after
a risk materialises, while the latter allows to identify and assess risks before they oc-
cur, in order to prepare suitable mitigation and contingency plans. Experience drawn
from cases such as the Philips/Ericsson one in 2000 (Norrman and Jansson 2004) led
researchers to place more focus on proactive strategies since delayed risk responses
have proven to be signicantly damaging. Recent events such as the KFC chicken
supply crisis in early 2018 (Green 2018) strengthen the view that weighing risks and
preparing contingency plans ahead of a major switch in a supply chain can potentially
prevent signicant losses. To achieve this, proactive strategies rely on the ability to
accurately predict the likelihood of occurrence and the potential impact of risks. This
necessary predictive capability can be achieved using techniques that fall within the
broad spectrum of Articial Intelligence (AI).
AI research has had a long history since the creation of the Turing Test in 1950 and
the naming of the eld at the 1956 Dartmouth workshop (Solomono 1985). Interest
in the eld has seen wide variations, from periods of relatively low interest (known as
AI winters) to periods of resurgence and rapid progress. Starting in the early 2000s,
increasing computing power and advances in Big Data and Machine Learning research
have led to renewed interest in AI, going as far as being termed \the AI frenzy" in the
media (Lohr 2016), spearheaded by recent successes of systems such as IBM Watson1
and DeepMind's AlphaGo2. This resurgence has also led to AI being considered in
research areas and applications where it has not played an important role in the past
(such as human resources and recruitment (Zhao et al. 2015)), or in areas where classic
AI techniques have been applied but more recent advances have not been explored.
This survey aims to contribute to the latter case.
Methodologies and techniques that fall under the umbrella of AI are numerous. For
the purposes of this survey, a classication into ve broad categories is adopted: (1)
techniques that rely on some form of mathematical optimisation; (2) network-based
approaches that represent problems as sets of possible states and transitions among
them; (3) methodologies that adopt agent-based modelling and multi-agent system
interactions; (4) approaches that involve some form of automated reasoning based
on existing knowledge; and (5) machine learning and big data analytics techniques.
Exploiting these techniques can lead to several interesting applications in the eld of
SCRM, including, but not limited to, risk-aware automated supplier selection, risk
propagation modelling in a supply network, identication and prediction of deceptive
supply chain practices, data-driven explanation of disaster resilience, and end-to-end
decision support to facilitate collaborative disruption management.
The main purpose of this paper is to conduct a comprehensive review of SCRM-
related studies that involve AI methodologies to achieve their goals, essentially an-
swering the following research question: to what extent has research in the eld of
1https://www.ibm.com/watson/
2https://deepmind.com/research/alphago/
2

==== Page 3 ====
SCRM exploited AI capabilities such as decision making, prediction, learning and abil-
ity to deal with complex and uncertain environments? In order to eectively answer
this question, a critical comparison and assessment of relevant literature is conducted
through answering the following sub-questions for each reviewed study:
(1) Is any decision-making capability provided and has it been applied to inuence
SCRM-related decisions?
(2) Is any predictive capability provided, with regard to future situations that aect
the supply chain in terms of risk?
(3) Is any learning capability provided, adapting decisions according to updated
knowledge?
(4) How many risk-related (or uncertain) parameters are considered?
(5) Are large datasets exploited?
(6) Which SCRM-related tasks (e.g. identication, assessment, response) are re-
alised?
Several literature reviews on topics relevant to SCRM have been published in re-
cent years3. However, to the best of the authors' knowledge, there has not been any
attempt to view SCRM literature under the prism of AI and assess how eectively
SCRM research has exploited the potential of AI techniques. In this context, the main
contributions of this survey are:
A comprehensive analysis of SCRM literature, in terms of AI-related capabilities,
namely decision making, prediction and learning
An investigation on the extent to which large datasets are exploited by existing
SCRM approaches
A correlation between AI-related methodologies and the SCRM tasks on which
they are applied
A detailed identication of research gaps and relevant future directions aiming
to harness the untapped potential of current advancements in AI research for
the benet of SCRM
As succinctly presented in Olhager (2013), production research and especially plan-
ning and control, has witnessed several paradigm shifts since the 1960s, moving from
a shop oor level to enterprise resource planning and eventually supply chain-wide de-
cision making. It can be argued that AI has gradually brought about a new paradigm
shift, leading to automated systems that can harness knowledge and data to improve
decision making within supply chains. This survey contributes to understanding the
progression of this shift so far, in what concerns SCRM, and mapping the way forward.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 oers a concise anal-
ysis of risk, uncertainty and related notions and provides the denitions of SCRM
and AI based on which this survey is constructed. Section 3 presents the methodology
followed for the review, also providing a comparison to related survey papers in liter-
ature. Section 4 contains a classication analysis of the reviewed studies, according to
publication year and venue, case studies and types of risk and uncertainty. Section 5
is the main part of the survey, answering the aforementioned research questions by
evaluating the reviewed studies in terms of their AI capabilities and the SCRM tasks
they realise. Finally, Section 6 discusses a set of research gaps that result from this
survey and proposes several interesting directions for future research.
3For a detailed analysis of relevant literature, please refer to Section 3.3
3

==== Page 4 ====
2. Background of Study
This section is devoted to analysing the background knowledge relevant to this litera-
ture review. It begins with a series of denitions on supply chain risk, uncertainty and
related notions, as well as SCRM, based on a meta-review conducted on previously
published survey and research agenda articles on supply chain risk. Then, a denition
of AI is provided that is relevant for the purposes of this survey.
2.1. Risk and Uncertainty
While there have been several attempts to dene supply chain risk, there is no uni-
versally accepted denition. Early attempts to dene risk in SCRM literature re-
lied on existing denitions in nance and enterprise risk management. For instance,
J uttner (2005) assumes March and Shapira's denition of risk as \the variation in the
distribution of possible outcomes, their likelihoods, and their subjective value" (March
and Shapira 1987). Risk denitions tend to be vague and ambiguous, involving a wide
array of core characteristics (Heckmann, Comes, and Nickel 2015). Among the various
proposals, there has been consensus on some characteristics of risks. Specically, there
is an agreement that risk involves exposure to an event (Holton 2004), which occurs
with varying likelihood and possible outcomes (Manuj and Mentzer 2008a).
On the other hand, there has been extensive debate on whether risk is a subjective
or objective phenomenon, whether it involves both negative and positive outcomes,
and the relation of risk and uncertainty (Khan and Burnes 2007). Those in favour of a
subjective view argue that a risk is determined by the viewpoints (social, political or
otherwise) of the stakeholders involved, while others maintain that risk is objectively
dened based on quantiable and measurable dimensions (Lupton 2013). In terms
of outcomes, risk is more commonly associated with the negative consequences (i.e.
losses) that follow an event occurrence, with relatively fewer researchers stressing the
positive eects (i.e. gains) that may be possible in a risky situation.
On the connection between risk and uncertainty, Manuj and Mentzer (2008b) view
risk as the expected outcome of an uncertain event, while Rao and Goldsby (2009)
link a risk to an event and the uncertainty of possible outcomes. Vilko, Ritala, and
Edelmann (2014) model a complete spectrum of the knowledge that decision makers
hold about the supply chain, ranging from complete certainty to radical uncertainty.
In between, there are four distinct stages of increasing levels of uncertainty; the closest
one to complete certainty is the one that the authors view as a basis for typical SCRM:
the situation where the supply chain structure is fully known and the likelihood and
impact of future events is known in terms of objective probabilities. This is in contrast
to the next more uncertain level where these probabilities are not known and SCRM
can only rely on subjective beliefs.
In the context of managing supply chain risks, the aforementioned debates can be
resolved in order to obtain a more specic risk denition. First, SCRM can certainly
benet from an objective rather than a subjective view, provided that the focus is
on wider applicability instead of individualised approaches. Second, the concept of
managing risks carries the connotation of adverse eects, in the sense of containing
or avoiding altogether the negative consequences accompanying risk. Finally, SCRM
is only eective when at least the supply chain structure is fully known. A recent risk
denition that captures these characteristics is provided by Ho et al. (2015), where
supply chain risk is dened as \the likelihood and impact of unexpected macro and/or
4

==== Page 5 ====
micro-level events or conditions that adversely inuence any part of a supply chain,
leading to operational, tactical or strategic level failures or irregularities".
2.2. Related notions
While risk and uncertainty are the most common terms used in association with SCRM
in literature, there are several related notions that usually stress either negative con-
sequences of risk or positive outcomes of managing risk. A summary of denitions
for some of these notions follows, based on relevant discussions that have appeared in
SCRM literature.
Vulnerability and disturbance are frequently used by researchers and practitioners
to describe a supply chain aected by risk. Both J uttner (2005) and Martin and
Peck (2004) dene vulnerability as an exposure to disturbances due to supply chain
risks, aecting the ability to satisfy the end customer market needs. Disruption is
a synonym of disturbance, albeit one with graver consequences: while disturbance
may simply interrupt a normal situation, disruption causes a violent dissolution of
continuity (Pfohl, K ohler, and Thomas 2010). As further analysed in Section 2.4,
disruption has been widely used to denote risks caused by natural and man-made
disasters. Other terms with negative connotations that have been used in relation to
risk are threat, crisis, disaster, catastrophe, peril, hazard and emergency.
Other negative terms associated with risk are threat , which is either viewed as a
synonym for risk, or as a lower probability event than risk (Schlegel and Trent 2014)
andcrisis , dened as "the interruption of one or more supply chain activities, resulting
in a major disruption of the normal ow of goods or services" (Natarajarathinam,
Capar, and Narayanan 2009).
In terms of positive outcomes, risk is often associated with robustness andresilience ,
which are usually viewed as means of decreasing supply chain vulnerability (Behzadi
et al. 2018). Robustness is dened by Colicchia and Strozzi (2012) as \the extent to
which the supply chain is able to carry its functions for a variety of possible future
scenarios". Resilience puts more emphasis on the proactive ability to adapt in prepa-
ration for unexpected events so that it is possible to quickly recover from them and
reinstate continuity of operations in the supply chain (Ponomarov and Holcomb 2009).
Other terms with positive connotations that have appeared in literature relevant to
risk are security, safety, sustainability, opportunity, exibility and agility.
It should be noted that the aforementioned notions are all qualitative in nature. Risk
is often quantied through a product of its probability and its impact, provided that
these can be represented numerically. Alternatively, SCRM researchers have proposed
the use of several measures, most of which are borrowed from research in nancial
risk management. Among them, the most commonly used are deviation-based, aim-
ing to quantify risk in terms of how much it aects a situation compared to normal
circumstances. Examples include variance, standard, absolute or expected deviation,
or central semideviation. Another commonly used category includes the downside-risk
measures of value-at-risk (VaR) and conditional-value-at-risk (CVaR). VaR expresses
a loss threshold given a specic probability, while CVaR expresses the average loss be-
yond that threshold. For a more detailed analysis of risk measures, please refer to Heck-
mann, Comes, and Nickel (2015) and Govindan, Fattahi, and Keyvanshokooh (2017).
5

==== Page 6 ====
2.3. Supply Chain Risk Management
As is the case with risk, there is no universally accepted denition of SCRM. However,
in contrast to risk, there seems to be more agreement than debate. Nearly all propos-
als dene SCRM in terms of a set of actions that lead to an intended result, while
also stressing out the prerequisite of coordination and collaboration among supply
chain partners. SCRM-related actions are either collectively termed as management
(e.g. (J uttner 2005; Tang 2006)), or are individually specied. In the latter case, SCRM
is dened to include identication (J uttner 2005; Manuj and Mentzer 2008b), evalua-
tion (Manuj and Mentzer 2008b; Ho et al. 2015), mitigation and monitoring (Ho et al.
2015) of risks.
In terms of intended results of SCRM, researchers either stress the mitigation of
negative eects of risks or the strengthening of positive characteristics of the sup-
ply chain. Examples of the former case include reducing vulnerability (J uttner 2005;
Martin and Peck 2004), losses, probability or exposure to risks (Manuj and Mentzer
2008b). On the other hand, positive eects of SCRM that are included in denitions
involve ensuring protability and continuity (Tang 2006; Manuj and Mentzer 2008b).
For the purposes of this survey paper, an inclusive synthesis of the aforementioned
elements is proposed, which results in the following generalised denition: SCRM en-
compasses the collaborative and coordinated eorts of all parties involved in a supply
chain to identify, assess, mitigate and monitor risks with the aim to reduce vulnera-
bility and increase robustness and resilience of the supply chain, ensuring protability
and continuity.
2.4. Risk classication
According to
SC Network
LevelExternal to network1
(Environmental2,3)Environmental1
(SC Scope4,
Macro5)
Internal to network-
External to rm1
(Network2,
Industry3)Supply1
(Source4)
Demand1
(Deliver4)
Internal to rm1
(Organisational2,3)Process1
(Make4,
Manufacturing5)
Control1
(Infrastructural5)Problem-specic3
Decision-maker
specic3According to
SC Process
1Martin and Peck (2004),2J uttner (2005),3Rao and Goldsby (2009),4Tang and Nurmaya Musa (2011),5Ho
et al. (2015)
Figure 1.: Common supply chain risk classications.
Risks have been classied in many dierent ways in SCRM literature, depending
on the scope and goals of each research article (Rangel, de Oliveira, and Leite 2015;
6

==== Page 7 ====
Hudnurkar et al. 2017). The two most common supply chain risk classications in
literature are shown in Fig. 1. The rst, shown on the left side, classies risks ac-
cording to the level within the supply chain network that they aect or are sourced
from (Martin and Peck 2004; J uttner 2005; Rao and Goldsby 2009). Three main lev-
els are usually recognised. The rst involves risks that are external to the network,
alternatively termed environmental . The second level groups risks that are internal to
the network but external to the focal rm, also named as network orindustry risks.
The third level includes all risks that are internal to the rm, called organisational .
Rao and Goldsby (2009) recognise two additional levels related to the specic decision
problem at hand and characteristics of individual decision makers.
An alternative risk classication approach is based on the specic subset of the
supply chain that the risk aects or is sourced from (Martin and Peck 2004; Manuj
and Mentzer 2008b; Peidro et al. 2009; Tang and Nurmaya Musa 2011; Ho et al. 2015),
shown on the right side of Fig. 1. Five separate classes are identied. The rst involves
risks that are related to the supply chain as a whole and not to any specic part of
it; this category directly corresponds to the aforementioned rst level (external to the
network) and risks within are referred to as environmental (Martin and Peck 2004),
macro (Ho et al. 2015) or SC scope (Tang and Nurmaya Musa 2011). The second class
groups risks that are related to the supply side of the chain (or source, according to
the SCOR model). On the other hand, the third class contains all demand side risks
(deliver, according to SCOR). The fourth class involves risks that aect the supply
chain processes , alternatively termed manufacturing (Ho et al. 2015) or make (Tang
and Nurmaya Musa 2011) risks. The fth and nal class groups risks that relate
tocontrol over supply chain processes (equivalent to the infrastructural risks in Ho et
al. (2015)).
2.5. Articial Intelligence
Ever since its introduction in the 1950s, the eld of AI has witnessed alternating peri-
ods of intense growth and signicant decline. In recent years, factors such as increasing
computational power and availability of Big Data, among others, have led to renewed
interest in the eld. Due to this constant evolution in AI research, the denition of
what is considered AI is also continually evolving.
Legg and Hutter (2007) have attempted a thorough analysis of well known de-
nitions of intelligence in order to come up with a formalised denition and measure
of Machine Intelligence. In their analysis, they identify two fundamental prerequisite
features for considering a human or machine intelligent: (1) the ability to carefully
choose their actions in a way that leads to success or prot, in terms of some kind
of objective or goal; (2) the ability to deal not with a fully known environment, but
with a range of possibilities which cannot be wholly anticipated, through learning and
adaptation.
For the purposes of this survey, an SCRM approach is considered as articially
intelligent if it satises both of the aforementioned characteristics: it should be able
toautonomously decide on a course of action that leads to success in SCRM-related
objectives and do so under a partially unknown supply chain environment. The partic-
ular AI techniques that are exploited can range from traditional symbolic AI, relying
on mathematical, or knowledge-based problem representations, to sub-symbolic AI,
including, for instance, fuzzy systems and evolutionary computation, to statistical AI,
encompassing Machine Learning approaches.
7

==== Page 8 ====
3. Review methodology
3.1. Search strategy
The literature review conducted for the purposes of this paper relies primarily on
automated search. Following recently published reviews (Fahimnia et al. 2015; Prakash,
Soni, and Rathore 2017), two levels of keywords are used, conjunctively combined
with AND. The rst level denes the search context and includes the term \supply
chain". The second level includes the following disjunction of terms related to risk and
uncertainty, as detailed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2: \risk OR uncertainty OR vulnerability
OR threat OR disruption OR disturbance OR crisis OR disaster OR catastrophe OR
peril OR hazard OR emergency OR opportunity OR resilience OR robustness OR
security OR safety OR exibility OR agility OR sustainability".
Bibliometric research (Mongeon and Paul-Hus 2016) suggests that the largest in-
dexing services currently are Elsevier's Scopus (with a bias towards researchers in
Europe) and Clarivate's Web of Science (with a bias towards researchers in the US).
While neither is a strict subset of the other, Scopus seems to have a slightly larger
coverage (22,800+ journals4as opposed to Web of Science's 20,300+5). Based on this,
Scopus was chosen as the primary resource for automated search.
To decide on a time period for the search, this survey relies on previously published
supply chain risk literature reviews, where the earliest reviewed study is published in
1978. Hence, it is reasonable to set the time period from 1978 up to and including
June 2018.
To assess and ensure completeness, three ancillary search procedures are included:
(1) backwards snowballing (i.e. checking reference lists) on select primary studies; (2)
title and abstract search on recent volumes of the most prominent journals in relevant
elds and (3) comparison against the articles explored by previous literature reviews
on supply chain risk (more details in Section 3.3).
3.2. Search scope
A series of inclusion and exclusion criteria frames the scope of this survey. First,
studies must be peer-reviewed and written in English. Second, each study must include
at least one practice, technique or methodology that has a proactive rather than a
reactive approach to a risk-related issue in supply chains. Note that studies do not
have to explicitly mention risk; instead, they may refer to uncertainty and/or any of
the related notions in Section 2.2. Third, the aforementioned practice, technique or
methodology must be articially intelligent, according to the denition included in
Section 2.5.
Additional criteria focus on excluding studies that are not specically related to
supply chain, risk management and AI. Specically, supply chain management publi-
cations with no concrete link to risk-related issues are excluded. Moreover, enterprise
risk management publications with no clear connection to supply chain are also ex-
cluded. Studies are also excluded if the proposed approaches do not satisfy the AI
denition in Section 2.5, e.g. if they rely exclusively on AHP, TOPSIS or FMEA
methods. Finally, due to the Scopus limit of 2000 results per year, studies that have
not been referenced at least once have also been excluded (this applies only to years
2013-2016).
4http://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus/content
5https://clarivate.libguides.com/webofscienceplatform/coverage
8

==== Page 9 ====
Table 1.: Comparison with related surveys.
Survey Time period Reviewed Shared Focus
studies studies
(Behzadi et al. 2018) 1993-2017 42 5 Agribusiness SCRM
(Ivanov et al. 2017) 2001-2017 38 7 SC disruption recovery
(Govindan, Fattahi, and Keyvanshokooh 2017) 2000-2015 170 137 Supply chain network
design under uncertainty
(Ho et al. 2015) 2003-2013 224 20 SCRM in general
(Ghadge, Dani, and Kalawsky 2012) 2000-2010 120 1 SCRM from a holistic
systems thinking perspective
(Colicchia and Strozzi 2012) 1994-2010 55 6 SCRM in general
(Peidro et al. 2009) 1988-2007 103 27 Supply chain planning
under uncertainty
(Vanany, Zailani, and Pujawan 2009) 2000-2007 82 2 SCRM in general
A Scopus search as detailed in Section 3.1 yields more than 28,000 results. By care-
fully and thoroughly applying all aforementioned criteria and ancillary search strate-
gies, 276 studies remain and are analysed in the rest of this paper6.
3.3. Related surveys
Despite the relatively short history of SCRM as a distinct research eld, several articles
have been published with the aim of reviewing related literature. In Table 1, survey
papers published in the past 10 years are summarised. Only surveys that present a
detailed account of the search process and reference all reviewed studies are included,
since their results can be replicated and compared. It should be noted that the only
SCRM survey that uses the term AI to refer to a subset of applied methodologies is
Peidro et al. (2009); however, it adopts a rather narrow view of AI, containing only
multi-agent systems, reinforcement learning, evolutionary and genetic algorithms and
fuzzy mathematical programming.
With the exception of Govindan, Fattahi, and Keyvanshokooh (2017), the number
of shared studies with other surveys is low. This is either due to surveys being less
recent (Vanany et al. (2009) and Peidro et al. (2009)), or due to adopting a more
restricted focus: Ghadge, Dani, and Kalawsky (2012) and Colicchia and Strozzi (2012)
focus mostly on strategic approaches to SCRM, Behzadi et al. (2018) include only
agribusiness-related studies, and Ho et al. (2015) include only results that match both
\supply chain" and risk.
Roughly 80% of the studies reviewed by Govindan, Fattahi, and Keyvan-
shokooh (2017) are also reviewed in this survey. This is due to the fact that quan-
titative approaches to supply chain network design under uncertainty most often in-
volve some form of mathematical programming, which falls under the denition of
AI in Section 2.5, since it is capable of autonomously making decisions (based on a
mathematical optimisation model) under partially known (uncertain) environments.
However, this survey includes a further 135 studies which have either been published
after Govindan, Fattahi, and Keyvanshokooh (2017) or are not related to supply chain
network design under uncertainty but are directly relevant to SCRM. Also, while their
goal is to study the selected studies in terms of mathematical modelling, solution meth-
ods and optimisation techniques, the goal in this survey is to evaluate their AI-related
capabilities, as well as their relevance to the typical phases in SCRM.
6The survey dataset can be provided in various formats (e.g. SciVal, EndNote, or .BIB/.RIS les) upon request
to the corresponding author.
9

==== Page 10 ====
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
1-6/201805101520253035
Publication YearNumber of studies
Figure 2.: Distribution of studies by publication year.
4. Classication of reviewed studies
In this section, the reviewed studies are classied according to the following charac-
teristics: (1) year of publication, (2) venue (journal or conference) where the study is
published and (6) the approach used to achieve SCRM-related goals.
4.1. Year of publication
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the trend of publishing AI-related research in SCRM conrms
the results of previous surveys (e.g. (Fahimnia et al. 2015)), with a roughly geometric
growth, from less than 5 studies before 2002, to more than 30 studies in 2014, fuelled
by worldwide phenomena that have a direct or indirect eect on supply chains such as
the post-2001 increase in terrorism, the 2008 global nancial crisis and the post-2009
European debt crisis. There is a noticeable sharp drop in 2016 and a slight uptick in
2017. This can be attributed to a general decrease in the publication of SCRM studies
and possibly a saturation in terms of the most popular quantitative approaches to
SCRM which involve some form of stochastic or fuzzy programming. However, the
trend seems to have completely reversed during 2018: we have identied 26 studies
only during the rst half of the year, which strongly suggests that the total for the
whole year may surpass the 2014 peak. This renewed interest in AI-focused SCRM
(and possibly SCRM in general) is likely linked to the recent AI resurgence and the
uncertainty in global economy that is fuelled by the ongoing European debt crisis and
global trade wars Hornby (2018).
10

==== Page 11 ====
024681012141618202224262830Int. J. Production Research
Int. J. Production Economics
Transportation Research Part E
Eur. J. Operational Research
Computers and Chemical Eng.
Computers and Industrial Eng.
Int. J. of Adv. Manuf. Technology
Expert Systems With Apps
Applied Math. Modelling
AIChE Journal
Computers and Ops Research
Industrial and Eng. Chem. Research29
27
21
18
14
13
11
9
7
7
7
7
Number of studies
Figure 3.: Journals with the highest contribution in the conducted survey.
4.2. Venue of publication
Fig. 3 shows the top 10 journals ranked based on their contribution in the studies
selected in this survey (note that there are 12 entries due to a three-way tie in tenth
place). As should be expected, the most contributions come from production, logis-
tics and operational research journals. Also, the list includes journals that involve
computers, expert systems and engineering, due to this survey's focus on AI.
4.3. Approach
In terms of the approach adopted to tackle SCRM-related issues, the reviewed studies
are classied in ve categories, as shown in Fig. 4. The rst category groups ap-
proaches that involve some form of mathematical programming and is divided into
six subcategories. The most common case, representing 50% of the reviewed studies,
is the use of stochastic programming to handle uncertainties, analysed in Section 5.1.
Other mathematical programming techniques include robust optimisation (Mulvey,
Vanderbei, and Zenios 1995) and fuzzy programming (11% and 19% of the reviewed
studies, respectively) and are discussed in Sections 5.2 and 5.3. A few studies propose
hybrid solutions that combine various forms of mathematical programming; these are
examined in Section 5.4.
The remaining four categories (representing 14% of the reviewed studies) exploit
various solutions proposed in AI research to achieve SCRM-related goals. These include
network-based models such as Petri Nets and Bayesian networks (Section 5.5), multi-
agent systems (Section 5.6), automated reasoning (Section 5.7) and Machine Learning
and Big Data Analytics (Section 5.8).
11

==== Page 12 ====
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90Stochastic Programming - Scenario-basedStochastic Programming - Continuous
Stochastic Programming - Other
Fuzzy Programming
Robust Optimisation
Hybrid Mathematical Programming
Machine Learning and Big Data
Network-based
Agent-based
Reasoning9039
10
53
30
15
14
10
8
7
Number of studies
Figure 4.: Distribution of reviewed studies according to the adopted approach.
5. AI-focused analysis of reviewed studies
In this section, the selected studies are evaluated in terms of their AI-related capa-
bilities: the number of risk/uncertain parameters considered, the exploitation of large
datasets and their decision-making, predictive and learning capabilities. Results are
presented in comparison tables, where a Yes/ s/No value indicates full, limited or
no support of the corresponding capability. Also, the SCRM tasks realised by each
approach are determined, choosing among identication, assessment and response.
It should be noted that mathematical programming approaches (based on stochas-
tic, fuzzy and robust optimisation models) fall under the umbrella of AI based on
the denition in Section 2.5, due to their ability to assist in making decisions under
partially unknown environments. However, such approaches exhibit limited decision-
making capabilities, while their nature precludes any form of prediction or learning.
As a compromise, this survey includes such studies, but they are only briey discussed,
though detailed comparison tables can be found in Appendix B.
5.1. Stochastic Programming
The most common approach to SCRM is to use stochastic parameters to model any
aspect that is subject to risk or uncertainty and then optimise the resulting model with
regard to one or more objective functions, often cost-related. The heart of any stochas-
tic programming approach is the mathematical model which encodes the knowledge
and expertise of the practitioners and researchers that propose it.
5.1.1. Continuous parameters
Some models rely on the assumption that continuous distributions for all uncertain
parameters are known (or can be estimated) beforehand and all decisions are made
based on these distributions. In most cases, a single uncertain parameter (most often
demand) is included and evaluation is based on small-to-medium datasets, with the
exception of You and Grossmann (2008), which presents a slightly larger case study
12

==== Page 13 ====
of a US supply chain. All of the reviewed studies relate to risk response in the form
of risk-aware or uncertainty-focused supply chain planning or design, while some of
them (Dal-Mas et al. 2011; Azad and Davoudpour 2013; Azad et al. 2014) also provide
risk evaluation by relying on risk measures such as CVaR.
In terms of decision making, research is mostly geared towards dening, solving and
evaluating the proposed stochastic model, with less focus on how it may be integrated
into an SCRM decision-making process. Some of the works (e.g. (Ryu, Dua, and Pis-
tikopoulos 2004) or (Marufuzzaman et al. 2014)) do oer some managerial insights
with regard to the obtained results without, however, incorporating these insights into
a decision support system. Table B1 in Appendix B details all reviewed studies that
incorporate stochastic programming with continuous parameters.
5.1.2. Scenario-based
Assuming a continuous distribution for uncertain parameters often leads to excep-
tionally complex problems that are hard to solve. Instead, parameter values can be
assumed to be discrete (and nite), leading to a nite number of possible realisations,
called scenarios, each one with an attached probability. This is usually combined with
a two-stage setting, where some decisions are made beforehand, leading to a set of pos-
sible realisations; then, corrective actions (known as recourse) may need to be taken,
in order to meet goals.
The scenario-based stochastic approach is by far the most popular modelling choice
for SCRM. Its characterisation with regard to AI is similar to that of the previous sub-
category; this should be expected as the approaches dier mainly in how values are
attributed to uncertain parameters. The number of uncertain parameters is slightly
increased in some studies (e.g. (You, Wassick, and Grossmann 2009; Sch utz, Tomas-
gard, and Ahmed 2009; Ghavamifar, Makui, and Taleizadeh 2018)), though it should
be noted that the more parameters a model incorporates, the less scenarios can be
supported before the problem becomes exceedingly computationally complex. Tsiakis,
Shah, and Pantelides (2001) is notable for using a Europe-wide supply chain network
to evaluate the proposed model, while Koutsoukis et al. (2000) is one of the very few
stochastic programming approaches that implements a prototype decision support sys-
tem to assist the decision maker in addressing uncertain demand. All reviewed studies
in this category are provided in Table B2 in Appendix B.
5.1.3. Other
Other SCRM-related approaches that involve stochastic optimisation primarily rely
on chance-constrained (probabilistic) programming7(Gupta, Maranas, and McDonald
2000; Mitra et al. 2008; Guill en-Gos albez and Grossmann 2010; Scott et al. 2015)) or
dynamic programming (Huchzermeier and Cohen 1996; Fang et al. 2013). The former
is used when there are \soft" constraints which need only be satised with a pre-
specied probability (or reliability level), while the latter applies a divide-and-conquer
approach, by iteratively solving smaller sub-problems and reusing such solutions when
possible.
Almost all studies in this category propose models that include a single uncertain pa-
rameter (related to demand or product quality) in order to design supply chains that
are risk-aware, with the notable exception of Pasandideh, Niaki, and Asadi (2015),
7Note that probabilistic constraints are included in other studies as well, but as part of a hybrid approach,
hence they are discussed in Section 5.4.
13

==== Page 14 ====
which includes 11 uncertain parameters and relies on genetic algorithms to nd opti-
mal solutions. None of the reviewed studies in this category support large datasets. In
terms of decision-making capabilities, the work of Scott et al. (2015) stands out since
it proposes a decision support system for order portfolio recommendation that com-
bines chance-constrained optimisation with supplier selection using analytic hierarchy
process. Table B3 in Appendix B oers a detailed comparison of the studies belonging
to this category.
5.2. Robust Optimisation
If distributions for uncertain parameters are unavailable, robust optimisation tech-
niques are a suitable alternative. In such techniques, uncertain parameters are assumed
to have a nite set of possible realisations. Model solutions are evaluated in terms of
solution-robustness and model-robustness. Solution-robustness determines how \close"
to optimal a given solution is, measured using a cost function. Model-robustness eval-
uates how \feasible" the solution is, by examining which constraints are violated.
Robust optimisation approaches tend to focus on a limited number of parameters,
usually 1 to 3, mostly focusing on supply or demand uncertainties. In terms of ex-
ploiting large datasets, only two approaches consider this in a limited manner, in that
they conduct evaluations with larger-than-average test sets: Pishvaee, Rabbani, and
Torabi (2011) consider problems of size up to roughly 14 million elements while Dubey,
Gunasekaran, and Childe (2015) include a scenario where the problem size rises up to
165109.
Regarding decision-making capabilities, the only study that explicitly integrates the
proposed robust optimisation model into a decision-making framework is that of Hahn
and Kuhn (2012), although the decision-making process is still purely manual. Finally,
all robust optimisation studies focus only on the risk response phase of SCRM. For
a comparison of all studies based on robust optimisation, please refer to Table B4 in
Appendix B.
5.3. Fuzzy Programming
In handling the inherent uncertainty of SCRM, it is sometimes useful to incorporate
a level of exibility in the assumed values of parameters or in the satisfaction of
goals. This is realised through the use of fuzzy programming methods, where uncertain
parameters are treated as fuzzy numbers and constraints as fuzzy sets. Note that, since
the focus of this survey is on the risk aspects of supply chain, studies that rely solely
on exible programming have been excluded, since they assume uncertainty only on
goals and not parameters.
While earlier approaches seem to support only a small number of fuzzy parameters,
more recent studies have proposed models with more than 50 of them, as is the case of
Pishvaee, Razmi, and Torabi (2014) and Babazadeh et al. (2017), with both reducing
computational complexity by relying on techniques such as Benders decomposition or
the -constraint method. As should be expected, no approach directly supports large
datasets, since model validation is almost always based on a limited case study.
In terms of decision making, there are three notable cases that propose decision
support frameworks exploiting the dened fuzzy models. The latter three are analysed
in more detail. Selim and Ozkarahan (2008) employ a simple feedback loop to modify
coecient values until an acceptable solution is reached. Tang, Lau, and Ho (2008)
14

==== Page 15 ====
propose a two-phase knowledge framework for risk assessment, with experts formulat-
ing the initial input to genetic algorithms. Micheli, Mogre, and Perego (2014) propose
a decision support system that involves the decision maker throughout the SCRM
process, from the identication of risks and corresponding mitigation measures and
budget to the denition of risk proles in terms of likelihood and impact. It should also
be noted that the work of Tang, Lau, and Ho (2008) is the only fuzzy programming
study that focuses on risk assessment, rather than risk mitigation, as is the case for
all others. Table B5 in Appendix B includes all reviewed studies that fall under the
fuzzy programming category.
5.4. Hybrid Approaches within Mathematical Programming
A small subset of the SCRM approaches that exploit mathematical programming
techniques do not belong strictly to one of the previous categories, either because they
compare dierent techniques or because they attempt to combine two or more of them
in a hybrid framework. Most cases involve employing fuzzy sets in relation to stochastic
programming or robust optimisation. Two studies put dierent approaches head-to-
head for the problem of supplier selection under risk but do not propose a full-edged
hybrid: Wu and Olson (2008) compare chance-constrained programming, data envel-
opment analysis and multi-objective programming, while Li and Zabinsky (2011) com-
pare two-stage stochastic programming with chance-constrained programming models,
noting that the latter requires less computational eort but does so at the penalty of
discretising the relationships between parameters.
A hybrid approach combining chance-constrained and fuzzy models has been pro-
posed by Pishvaee, Torabi, and Razmi (2012) for the design of a green supply chain
under uncertainty. The proposed model includes constraints on fuzzy events (e.g. re-
lated to fuzzy demands) which do not need to always hold but which need to exceed a
specic credibility threshold. Similar constraints are also used by Bai and Liu (2016)
but within a robust optimisation setting. Vahdani et al. (2013) approach the design of a
closed loop supply chain under uncertainty with a similar fuzzy chance-constrained hy-
brid, incorporating, however, interval programming as well. This allows their model to
deal with uncertain parameters presented as intervals without knowing their distribu-
tion. Another fuzzy chance-constrained hybrid is proposed by Zhalechian et al. (2016)
to simultaneously address the facility location and vehicle routing problems under un-
certainty. Due to its complexity, a hybrid metaheuristic combining the self-adaptive
genetic algorithm and variable-neighbourhood search is applied to solve it.
Instead of chance-constrained models, other proposals for supply chain network de-
sign under uncertainty combine fuzzy features with standard stochastic programming,
such as the work of Felfel, Ayadi, and Masmoudi (2016), which uses a typical two-stage
three-objective stochastic formulation; however, to select the preferred solution among
Pareto-optimal alternatives, they maximise a fuzzy membership function that corre-
sponds to a compromise among the three objectives. Vahdani et al. (2012) propose a
similar hybrid for supply chain design under uncertain capacity and costs, but also
calculate the robust counterpart of the model before solving it. Keyvanshokooh, Ryan,
and Kabir (2016) propose a hybrid robust-stochastic programming approach due to
their model incorporating stochastic uncertainty for transportation costs and polyhe-
dral uncertainty sets for demand and return. Haddadsisakht and Ryan (2018) propose
a similar robust-stochastic hybrid for closed-loop supply chain network design, but
use stochastic uncertainty for demand and polyhedral uncertainty sets for carbon tax.
15

==== Page 16 ====
Finally, Zahiri and Pishvaee (2017) propose a robust possibilistic model for supply
chain network design with uncertain parameters following trapezoidal distributions
and determining robustness based on the credibility measure.
Pavlov et al. (2018) address the problem of assessing the resilience of a supply
chain using a hybrid methodology that combines fuzziness and the genome method.
Supply chain reliability is modelled through possibility of failure, while the genome
method is used to determine the most ecient structure for the supply chain network
that achieves a certain (or maximum) reliability level. Jabbarzadeh, Fahimnia and
Sabouhi (2018) use fuzzy c-means clustering to score supplier sustainability based on
several criteria. These scores are then used as input parameters to a stochastic model
that aims to minimise total cost and maximise sustainability performance, when the
percentage of a supplier's capacity that is disrupted is uncertain.
Less common hybrids are centred around simulation techniques. Tong, Feng, and
Rong (2012) present a two-stage scenario-based stochastic programming model for
supply chain planning under uctuating demand and yield and solve it using a
simulation-based heuristic that can handle large scenario numbers. Claypool, Norman,
and Needy (2014) model supply, demand and exposure risk within a mixed-integer pro-
gramming model, whose solutions are used as inputs in a simulation that analyses the
results of implementing them.
Regardless of the combination examined, the aforementioned studies exhibit a sim-
ilar prole with regard to their AI-related features. Table B6 in Appendix B oers
a comparison of hybrid mathematical programming approaches to SCRM. Most of
them deal with a low number of uncertain parameters, with the exception of Vahdani
et al. (2012) and Zhalechian et al. (2016), while none of them exploit large datasets.
Almost all of them oer managerial insights on how the proposed models can assist in
decision making but none propose a full-edged decision support system. Finally, with
the exception of Pavlov et al. (2018) which focuses on risk assessment, the rest focus
on risk mitigation by addressing various issues in relation to supply chain network
design under uncertainty.
5.5. Network-based
The complex and dynamic nature of SCRM decision making, especially under uncer-
tainty, has led several researchers to adopt a network-based model to represent the
various possible states, their outcomes and the possible transitions between them.
Four studies have been identied that use some form of Petri Nets and ve that use
Bayesian Belief Networks8. In addition, a Generalised Semi-Markov Process is used in
a single study (Deleris, Elkins, and Pat e-Cornell 2004) along with Monte Carlo sim-
ulation in order to estimate the probability distribution of supply chain losses caused
by disruptions.
Reasoning Petri Nets are employed by Asar et al. (2006) to model supply chains
as a discrete event system. The networks include rules that concern frequency and
cause-eect relationships of events, as well as probability of threats. Using the net-
works, the authors are able to determine how threats propagate and what preventive
actions are necessary. Supply chains have also been modelled using attributed Petri
Nets (Rossi and Pero 2012), in order to be able to embed logistic parameters within
the network. The authors compute the coverability graph of the network to identify
8Bayesian networks are only used in these studies only for inference. Studies that use such models for learning
as well are classied within the Machine Learning and Big Data category, discussed in Section 5.8
16

==== Page 17 ====
events that carry risk and assess that risk using simulation. Other variants include P-
Trans-Nets (Blackhurst, Wu, and O'Grady 2004), which employ probabilities and are
used to simulate the performance of a supply chain, and Colored Petri Nets, used by
Zegordi and Davarzani (2012) to model change propagation and calculate the impact
of supply chain disruptions.
Bayesian networks have also been used for risk identication and assessment in
literature. Badurdeen et al. (2014) use them to create a risk network map that captures
the interrelations among risks and various driving factors; by inputting probabilities
for these factors, the network is able to calculate probabilities for specic risks. The
SCOR metrics model has also been mapped to a Bayesian network (Abolghasemi,
Khodakarami, and Tehranifard 2015), in order to assess supply chain performance
and evaluate potential aecting risks. Nepal and Yadav (2015) combine FMEA with
Bayesian networks and decision trees for the particular case of supplier selection,
computing probability and impact for sourcing risks, then calculating the total incurred
cost per supplier in order to rank them.
Qazi et al. (2017) propose a holistic SCRM approach that uses FMEA to identify
risks and risk sources, then employs Bayesian networks to build a risk dependency
network and use it to determine risk propagation, rank risks based on appropriate
measures and determine a fair allocation of budget to mitigation strategies. In a follow-
up work (Qazi et al. 2018), the authors use fault tree analysis instead of FMEA
and extend their approach to employ expected utility theory to capture dierent risk
strategies and to include dierent decision criteria apart from cost.
Table 2.: Network-based approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Prediction
Learning
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Blackhurst, Wu, and O'Grady 2004) 7 No No No NoXX
(Deleris, Elkins, and Pat e-Cornell 2004) N/A No No No No X
(Asar et al. 2006) N/A No No No NoXX
(Rossi and Pero 2012) N/A No No No NoXX
(Zegordi and Davarzani 2012) N/A No No No NoXX
(Badurdeen et al. 2014) N/A No s No NoXX
(Abolghasemi, Khodakarami, and Tehranifard 2015) N/A No No No NoXX
(Nepal and Yadav 2015) N/A No s No NoXX
(Qazi et al. 2017) N/A No s No NoXXX
(Qazi et al. 2018) N/A No s No NoXXX
In contrast to the approaches discussed so far, network-based approaches rarely fo-
cus on a specic set of uncertain parameters or risks. Instead, they provide a generalised
model that can be applied to model dynamic characteristics caused by uncertainty or
risk. Hence, in most cases, the number of parameters is not relevant so it is marked
as not applicable (N/A) in Table 2. No approaches utilise large datasets or support
learning, while some of them oer limited decision-making support, by discussing how
the proposed networks can be used by supply chain practitioners. Finally, all of the
studies in this category provide for risk identication and risk assessment, instead of
risk response which was the focus of almost all of the studies presented so far.
17

==== Page 18 ====
5.6. Agent-based
SCRM is, by nature, a problem that involves several dierent entities interacting
with each other, each with dierent and possibly conicting requirements. Hence, it
lends itself to agent-based formalisations, where entities within the supply chain are
modelled as agents and SCRM-related issues are addressed by relying on multi-agent
system research.
The earliest use of agents in the context of SCRM is the work of Kiekintveld et
al. (2004), where an agent handles interactions with suppliers, customers, manufactur-
ing and shipping operations, under circumstances of uctuating supply and demand.
The agent observes supply and demand conditions based on continuous market anal-
ysis and attempts to nd a balance between them, which then has to be maintained
by controlling all sales and procurements actions. Bansal et al.(2005) propose a simi-
lar agent-based approach that monitors key performance indicators (KPIs) to identify
disruptions, then evaluates corrective actions and nds the optimal one. Note that
these works are the rst approaches in this survey so far to oer a holistic approach.
Multi-agent systems have also been used as simulation tools for inventory man-
agement to reduce costs and improve ll rate (Chan and Chan 2006), to resolve col-
laboration issues among supply chain entities that arise due to uncertain supply and
demand (Kwon, Im, and Lee 2007) and to reduce costs and the bullwhip eect in a
multi-stage supply chain (Zarandi, Pourakbar, and Turksen 2008). In all the afore-
mentioned approaches, agent technology is preferred over mathematical optimisation
due to its inherent capability to capture negotiation and coordination among dier-
ent parties and the relatively less computational eort required. In contrast, Mele et
al. (2007) propose a hybrid approach for retrotting a production/distribution supply
chain design to address uncertain demand, transport and processing times. A genetic
algorithm is employed to solve a multi-stage stochastic model of the problem, but the
tness of each iteration's individuals is calculated using agent-based simulation.
The work of Giannakis and Louis (2011) is notable as it goes beyond simulation
to explore the learning capabilities of multi-agent systems in the context of SCRM.
The proposed framework addresses all SCRM phases and starts similarly to others by
monitoring KPIs to identify deviations, which are then assessed in order to pinpoint
the root cause. Through case-based learning, successful past decisions are leveraged
when similarities with the current situation are identied (e.g. with regard to root
causes). The optimal decision is selected and its results simulated and quantied, with
all the information stored in order to be considered in similar situations in the future.
Recent work by Blos, da Silva and Wee (2018) proposes a holistic disruption man-
agement framework that combines multi-agent systems with variants of Petri Nets
called Production Flow Systems and Place-Transition Petri Nets. The latter are used
to model complex supply chain networks in several disruption scenarios. An agent-
based system is used to generate more scenarios based on the existing ones, choose the
most appropriate mitigation actions and evaluate the resulting eect in performance.
Then, based on a risk event database, the supply chain is monitored in order to detect
disruptions and immediately propose mitigation plans.
As shown in Table 3, the aforementioned agent-based approaches usually focus on
very few parameters (up to 4), since it is dicult and computationally complex to
simultaneously support a large number of policies that formalise agent behaviour.
Similarly to previous categories, large datasets and predictive or learning capabili-
ties are not supported, with the exceptions of the learning capability of Giannakis
and Louis (2011) and the predictive capability of Blos, da Silva and Wee (2018). In
18

==== Page 19 ====
Table 3.: Agent-based approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Prediction
Learning
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Kiekintveld et al. 2004) 2 No Yes No NoXXX
(Bansal et al. 2005) 1 No Yes No NoXXX
(Chan and Chan 2006) 2 No s No No X
(Kwon, Im, and Lee 2007) 4 No Yes No No X
(Mele et al. 2007) 4 No Yes No No X
(Zarandi, Pourakbar, and Turksen 2008) 2 No Yes No No X
(Giannakis and Louis 2011) N/A No Yes No Yes XXX
(Blos, da Silva, and Wee 2018) N/A No Yes Yes NoXXX
stark contrast to previous categories, all but one of the agent-based approaches use
multi-agent systems as a bona-de decision support system for SCRM. This is prob-
ably because the very purpose of a multi-agent system is to solve problems through
automated decision making.
5.7. Reasoning
Some researchers have addressed SCRM issues by exploiting automated reasoning
techniques which rely on encoding expert knowledge in the form of rules or cases,
making decisions based on these and the available data. These studies are summarised
in Table 4.
Table 4.: Reasoning-based approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Prediction
Learning
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Kumar and Viswanadham 2007) N/A No Yes No NoXXX
(Behret, Oztayi, and Kahraman 2011) 4 No s No NoXX
(Hofman 2011) N/A Yes s No NoXX
(Emmenegger, Laurenzi, and Th onssen 2012) N/A Yes Yes No NoXX
(Kayis and Karningsih 2012) N/A No No No NoX
(Solanki and Brewster 2013) N/A Yes No No NoXX
(Paul 2015) 18 No Yes No No X
Kumar and Viswanadham (Kumar and Viswanadham 2007) propose a decision
support system for construction supply chains that relies on case-based reasoning. By
using fault-tree analysis, important features of past projects that induce risk events
are identied, categorised and stored. Then, for any future risk event, similar cases
are retrieved and the corresponding solutions are adapted for the current case, which,
in turn, gets stored to be reused in the future.
Behret, Oztayi, and Kahraman (2011) propose a fuzzy inference system that uses
if-then rules to identify and assess potential risks, given risk indicator values. Trian-
gular fuzzy numbers are used for all values, expressing low, medium or high levels of
risk indicators and risks themselves. Paul (2015) proposes a similar approach for the
particular case of supplier selection under risk, with rules associating selection factors
with supplier rankings. Note that these are the only studies in this category that in-
19

==== Page 20 ====
clude a specic number of parameters; in the rest, the reasoning process is assumed
to apply to any type of risk.
Standard (i.e. not fuzzy) rules are employed in the works of Kayis and Karn-
ingsih (2012) and Emmenegger, Laurenzi, and Th onssen (2012). The former study
encodes SCRM knowledge in the form of rule chains and uses them to identify risks as
follows: specic characteristics of a supply network derive the occurrence of risk sub
factors, sub factors derive risk factors, risk factors derive risk events and nally, the
occurrence of a risk event leads to the system communicating this to the user. The
latter study is notable as one of the few that aims to exploit large datasets collecting
information from sources both within and beyond the supply chain in order to realise
automatic identication, validation and quantication of risks.
Large datasets are also included in the studies of Hofman (2011) and Solanki and
Brewster (2013) with the aim of increasing visibility in global supply chains. The
authors argue that administrative burden can be decreased if supply chain participants
share information such as product traceability as Linked Open Data, with appropriate
privacy, security and access control mechanisms. By minimising the amount of data
that is not visible, missing or uninterpretable, supply chain risk analysis may yield
improved results.
5.8. Machine Learning and Big Data
Within the broad eld of AI research, a rapid growth has been witnessed in recent
years in relation to research that involves Machine Learning. This includes techniques
that allow a computer program to learn by analysing input data, with or without
being given information about the corresponding output (supervised and unsupervised
forms). At the same time, the closely associated research strand of Big Data Analytics
focuses on processing and extracting knowledge from datasets that are characterised
by high volume, velocity and variety. As shown in Table 5, only a few SCRM studies
have followed these recent AI developments.
Table 5.: Machine Learning and Big Data Analytics for SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Prediction
Learning
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Bruzzone and Orsoni 2003) 2 No s Yes Yes X
(Jiang and Sheng 2009) 1 No Yes No Yes X
(Chen, Xia, and Wang 2010) 1 No s Yes Yes X
(Zhao and Yu 2011) 7 No Yes No Yes X
(Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh 2013) N/A Yes Yes Yes Yes X
(Fan, Heilig, and Voss 2015) N/A Yes Yes No Yes XXX
(Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt 2015) N/A No s No Yes X
(He et al. 2015) N/A Yes Yes Yes Yes XXX
(Ye, Xiao, and Zhu 2015) N/A Yes No Yes NoX
(Li and Wang 2017) 2 Yes s Yes No X
(Mani et al. 2017) N/A Yes s No NoX
(Papadopoulos et al. 2017) N/A Yes s No No X
(Shang, Dunson, and Song 2017) 1 Yes Yes Yes No X
(Ojha et al. 2018) N/A No s No Yes X
The earliest SCRM study that involves some form of Machine Learning is Bruzzone
and Orsoni (2003), which employs Articial Neural Networks (ANNs) for risk assess-
ment with regard to production losses. The ANNs are supplied with specic scenarios
20

==== Page 21 ====
with production times, quantities and capacities (input), along with corresponding
cost estimates (output). Based on these training data, the ANNs learn how to corre-
late input and output, gaining the capability of calculating cost estimates for dierent
scenarios.
ANNs are also exploited in Zhao and Yu (2011) to solve the problem of supplier
selection, while Jiang and Sheng (2009) propose a reinforcement learning algorithm to
improve the supplier selection process. Chen, Xia, and Wang (2010) employ Bayesian
learning to evaluate dierent responses to the problem of unreliable suppliers. Finally,
Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt (2015) use Bayesian networks to model risk depen-
dency graphs which have the ability to adapt when new knowledge is acquired, thus
making sure that risk propagation is modelled accurately.
The most recent studies in this category use Big Data Analytics for various SCRM
tasks. Generic SCRM frameworks based on Big Data are proposed in Fan, Heilig, and
Voss (2015) and He et al. (2015), based on monitoring data both within and external
to the supply chain. The case of eet management is explored in Mani et al. (2017)
with vehicle tracking systems employed to identify social and environmental risks (e.g.
theft of vehicles and goods). On the other hand, Big Data are used in Papadopoulos
et al. (2017) to determine how best to achieve supply chain resilience in the face of
disaster. While the latter three studies do not use data sources for any predictive or
learning purposes, there is a handful of recent studies that do and are briey described
next.
Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh (2013) analyse large amounts of Web data using semi-
supervised learning to determine the trustworthiness of vendors, thus allowing identi-
cation of deceivers. Risk identication is also explored by Ye, Xiao and Zhu (2015),
focusing, however, on nancial risk. Publicly available economic performance data
for Chinese rms are collected are used to train multi-class Support Vector Machine
(SVM) classiers. These models are able to determine whether a rm is prone to sup-
ply, demand, product or external disruptions. Bayesian prediction is used in Shang,
Dunson, and Song (2017) to assess transport time risks in air cargo supply chains.
Li and Wang (2017) use big data collected by sensors in a food supply chain to dy-
namically predict the product time-temperature prole and adjust prices accordingly.
Finally, Ojha et al. (2018) perform analysis of risk propagation using Bayes networks,
automatically learning the interconnections between several risk factors for dierent
supply chain stakeholders and using this knowledge to determine probability of occur-
rence and cost for risks.
6. Discussion and Conclusions
Based on the analysis in the previous section, answers to the research questions stated
at the beginning of this survey are provided and a set of research gaps are identied
with regard to applying AI technologies in SCRM. Then, for each one of the identied
gaps, recommendations for future research are oered.
6.1. Gaps
While most of the reviewed studies focus on designing and evaluating a mathematical
model that takes a number of uncertainties and risks into account, there is less focus
on establishing and analysing the applicability of the proposed models. Indeed, as
shown in Fig. 5a, 53% of the reviewed studies do not provide any decision-making
21

==== Page 22 ====
Yes
8%Limited
39%
No53%
(a) Decision makingYes
5%
No95%
(b) Prediction and learning
Figure 5.: Decision-making, prediction and learning capabilities of reviewed studies.
capability whatsoever, while 39% oer some form of managerial insights to assist in
decision making. Only 8% provide some form of decision support system, mainly in the
agent-based, reasoning, Machine Learning and Big Data categories. Hence, the vast
majority of studies exhibit a limited ability to act as a basis for a decision-making
framework that can eectively support practitioners in managing supply chain risks.
This hinders the potential benets of the proposed models as it is dicult to answer
\whether" and \how" they can be applied to relevant SCRM problems. Also, relatively
little attention has been given to using the intelligence and knowledge gained from the
proposed models to automate, at least partially, the decision-making process.
In terms of AI in the form of predictive and learning capabilities, SCRM research is
still in its infancy, as illustrated in Fig. 5b. It is clear that, by denition, mathemati-
cal programming techniques do not have these capabilities. Although agent-based and
network-based approaches are capable of prediction and learning, there is only one
reported study (Giannakis and Louis 2011) that proposes a multi-agent system for
SCRM that is capable of learning. On the other hand, Machine Learning approaches
are, by denition, geared towards creating systems that can predict and learn based on
provided input. However, initial studies (Bruzzone and Orsoni 2003; Jiang and Sheng
2009; Chen, Xia, and Wang 2010; Zhao and Yu 2011) have only explored few Machine
Learning techniques, such as ANNs or Bayesian models. Newer techniques and recent
advances in more established ones have yet to be exploited in the context of SCRM.
The more recent studies of He et al. (2015) and Fan, Heilig, and Voss (2015) have pro-
vided conceptual SCRM frameworks that rely on Machine Learning techniques and
Big Data but have not proceeded to implementing, applying and evaluating the frame-
works. To the best of the authors' knowledge, the only recent studies that implement
learning algorithms in the context of SCRM are Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh (2013),
Garvey, Carnovale, and Yeniyurt (2015) and Ojha et al. (2018).
While the so-called Big Data and associated analysis techniques have made a con-
siderable impact in various research elds and applications, this has not yet been
made evident in the eld of supply chain research, despite the potentially transforma-
tive capabilities of data science (Waller and Fawcett 2013; Choi, Wallace, and Wang
22

==== Page 23 ====
Limited
3%Yes
4%
No93%
(a) Large datasetsFour
8%Three
11%Five or more
20%
Two
23%
One
38%
(b) Number of parameters
Figure 6.: Complexity of reviewed studies in terms of datasets and parameters.
2018). The results of this survey, illustrated in Fig. 6a, show that very few SCRM
approaches exploit large datasets: 4% use Big Data aiming to improve supply chain
visibility (Solanki and Brewster 2013), security (Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh 2013) and
sustainability (Mani et al. 2017) and a further 3% employ larger than average case
studies, although in a Big Data scale. Much like the case of Machine Learning, SCRM
research has yet to exploit the full potential of Big Data Analytics.
The complexity of the studies examined, with regard to the number of risk (or
uncertainty) aspects taken into consideration, varies considerably from one category
to another and even within categories. As shown in Fig. 6b, 38% of those that ex-
plicitly state the employed models focus on a single uncertain parameter, 23% focus
on two, 11% on three, 8% on four and the rest, 20% include models with 5 or more
uncertain parameters. On average, it seems that using fuzzy programming techniques
allows for the inclusion of a comparatively larger number of uncertain parameters.
This is in line with the observation in literature that fuzzy models are, in general,
easier to solve than stochastic ones and, hence, may accommodate more parameters
in comparison(Inuiguchi and Ram k 2000).
Fig. 7 examines the reviewed studies with regard to the specic SCRM tasks they
realise. The vast majority (84%) focuses on risk response, most prominently supply
chain models that avoid or mitigate risk and uncertainty eects. An additional 4% ac-
companies response with some form of risk assessment, while another 4% combines as-
sessment with risk identication. Identication and assessment are tackled individually
by very few studies (2% and 3%, respectively). Finally, only 9 out of the 276 reviewed
studies (3%) oer holistic approaches, encompassing all three major phases of SCRM
(identication, assessment and response). This imbalance parallels the dierence in
popularity among the employed techniques. Mathematical programming techniques
have been applied by the majority of the examined studies and such techniques are
suitable for risk response, sometimes augmented with assessment capabilities through
the use of a variety of risk measures. Such techniques are not capable of identify-
ing risks. This can only be achieved within the minority of studies that apply other
solutions, from agents and network-based models, to automated reasoning, Machine
Learning and Big Data Analytics.
23

==== Page 24 ====
2%3%
84%
4%4%3%Identication
Assessment
Response
Identication+Assessment
Assessment+Response
Holistic (I+A+R)
Figure 7.: SCRM tasks realised by the reviewed studies.
6.2. Managerial insights
The results of the survey indicate that supply chain and production researchers, in
general, are more inclined to investigate tried and proven mathematical program-
ming solutions rather than explore the potential of other AI techniques. This can be
attributed to the relatively less exposure techniques such as machine learning, au-
tomated reasoning and multi-agent systems have had within production and supply
chain research, despite the fact that they have been fruitful in other research areas.
Additionally, researchers are considerably less familiar with such techniques than they
are with stochastic or fuzzy programming, for instance.
A direct result of this imbalance is that decision makers in the industry are still
widely unaware of the potential of AI, especially in terms of managing risks and
uncertainty. However, this survey has uncovered the fact that relatively unexplored AI
techniques are more capable of providing automated decision making, predictive and
learning capabilities. Hence, decision makers should embrace these newer technologies
and collaborate with researchers to determine ways in which SCRM decision-making
can be improved. Note that this does not mean using AI as the sole decision maker,
but rather relying on AI to uncover new knowledge that decision makers can then
combine with their own expertise to arrive at the optimal decisions within the SCRM
process.
A related aspect is the observed gradual shift from analytical models to data-driven
ones, as evidenced in the work of Kuo and Kusiak (2018) for production research,
in general. This, however, is directly dependent on the availability of large amounts
of multi-dimensional data that should be as accurate as possible, since data-driven
techniques can often result in trivial or even incorrect decisions if the available data
is scarce or invalid. Thus, industry decision makers and stakeholders must strive to
enhance and safeguard data collection processes and also be ready to provide any
available data to SCRM researchers.
Availability of relevant data is often hindered by justiable concerns related to data
safety, security and transparency. Especially in the context of a supply chain, stake-
holders may be unwilling to provide detailed data even to their supply chain partners.
Fortunately, research in data security has led to several advances that guarantee pro-
24

==== Page 25 ====
tected collection, storage and sharing of data. Blockchains are just one example of
a promising technology that has the potential to increase trust among supply chain
partners and increase adoption of techniques that rely on access to data (Mendling
et al. 2018). Therefore, the concerns of supply chain decision makers and stakeholders
should gradually be alleviated, removing data-related barriers to progress in terms of
the adoption of AI technologies in SCRM.
6.3. Future research directions
The potential of modern AI techniques in realising proactive and predictive SCRM
has only been explored by a minority of supply chain researchers. Hence, there are
plenty of opportunities for research on the conuence of AI and SCRM that addresses
the identied gaps. Some of these are outlined in the rest of this section.
6.3.1. Decision making and applicability
In terms of automating the decision-making process in relation to SCRM, there are
several dierent alternatives that can be explored. Multi-agent systems, coupled with
semantic reasoning on large datasets, can be used as a basis for a decision support sys-
tem for SCRM, as explored in Giannakis and Louis (2016) for the purpose of increasing
supply chain agility. To the extent that SCRM-related knowledge can be encoded in
the form of rules, automated rule-based reasoning can be exploited, similarly to its
use by Paul (2015) for supplier selection. The advantage, in this case, is that such a
system can assist in various dierent SCRM tasks: rules can help in identifying risks,
assessing their probability and impact and choosing a response strategy.
6.3.2. Prediction and learning
Machine learning techniques can also be employed to not only automate SCRM de-
cisions but also transform traditional SCRM practices of of modelling supply chains
statically to a dynamic representation of the supply chain adapted through learning
and prediction. There are several dierent tasks within Machine Learning that can be
exploited for SCRM. Indicatively, unsupervised learning algorithms can be employed
to mine patterns in supply chain data that may be related to specic risks, assisting in
risk identication. Alternatively, the algorithm can be trained to identify risk patterns
based on example patterns that have been identied by practitioners. Learning-based
classication and prediction can also facilitate the risk estimation, assessment and mit-
igation processes, as applied in other elds such as economics (Galindo and Tamayo
2000).
6.3.3. Big Data
In close correlation to Machine Learning, Big Data Analytics can also prove benecial
to SCRM, even if adoption is still relatively low. It is notable that, while research
in other elds very often combines Machine Learning techniques with Big Data, the
presented analysis only yielded a single SCRM study that features both of these char-
acteristics, that of Zage, Glass, and Colbaugh (2013). This low adoption rate may be
due to reasons such as lack of understanding and skills, inability to identify suitable
data and low acceptance by SC partners (Nguyen et al. 2017).
As discussed by Waller and Fawcett (2013), data relevant to the supply chain can
25

==== Page 26 ====
come from disparate sources, such as sales, consumer behaviour, product inventory,
transportation and distribution. All of these sources, especially in the case of global
supply chains, are characterised by large volumes, frequent updates and wide vari-
ability due to dierent materials, products and consumers. Several applications can
be envisioned, from reducing demand uncertainty based on consumer behaviour, to
using sensor data in distribution centres to mitigate transportation-related risks, to
increasing visibility and trust among suppliers.
The untapped potential of Big Data Analytics and AI with regard to SCRM has also
been identied by Ivanov and Dolgui (2018), who present a digitalisation framework
that envisions a cyber supply chain sitting on top of traditional supply chain analytics.
This cyber supply chain relies on and harnesses the power of big data, Internet of
Things, cloud and blockchain technologies. The authors highlight the need for research
that examines the relationships between these technologies and SCRM, a need that
has also been made evident throughout this survey.
6.3.4. Hybridisation
Something evident throughout this survey is the fact that dierent AI techniques have
a varying degree of applicability to the various phases of SCRM, due to possessing a
dierent set of capabilities. For instance, mathematical programming approaches are
successful in risk avoidance and mitigation but are incapable of automated decision
making and learning or handling large amounts of data. These are achievable through
automated reasoning, agents and Machine Learning techniques, which, however, are
not so eective in modelling highly complex systems such as supply chains. Hence, it
makes sense to investigate some form of hybridisation, which has previously only been
attempted among dierent mathematical programming techniques. Research geared
towards a hybrid framework that successfully combines powerful mathematical mod-
elling and optimisation along with some other AI technique that is capable of auto-
mated decision making based on prediction and learning has the potential to achieve
eective proactive and predictive management of risks in supply chains.
References
Abolghasemi, M., V. Khodakarami, and H. Tehranifard. 2015. \A new approach for supply
chain risk management: Mapping SCOR into Bayesian network." Journal of Industrial En-
gineering and Management 8 (1): 280{302.
Asar, A., M.C. Zhou, R.J. Caudill, and S. Asar. 2006. \Modelling risks in supply chains using
Petri net approach." International Journal of Services Operations and Informatics 1 (3):
273{285.
Azad, N., and H. Davoudpour. 2013. \Designing a stochastic distribution network model under
risk." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 64 (1-4): 23{40.
Azad, N., H. Davoudpour, G.K.D. Saharidis, and M. Shiripour. 2014. \A new model to mitigat-
ing random disruption risks of facility and transportation in supply chain network design."
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 70 (9-12): 1757{1774.
Babazadeh, R., J. Razmi, M.S. Pishvaee, and M. Rabbani. 2017. \A sustainable second-
generation biodiesel supply chain network design problem under risk." Omega 66: 258{277.
Badurdeen, F., M. Shuaib, K. Wijekoon, A. Brown, W. Faulkner, J. Amundson, I.S. Jawahir,
T.J. Goldsby, D. Iyengar, and B. Boden. 2014. \Quantitative modeling and analysis of supply
chain risks using Bayesian theory." Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management 25
(5): 631{654.
26

==== Page 27 ====
Bai, X., and Y. Liu. 2016. \Robust optimization of supply chain network design in fuzzy
decision system." Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 27 (6): 1131{1149.
Bansal, M., A. Adhitya, R. Srinivasan, and I.A. Karimi. 2005. \An online decision support
framework for managing abnormal supply chain events." Computer Aided Chemical Engi-
neering 20 (C): 985{990.
Behret, H., B. Oztayi, and C. Kahraman. 2011. \A fuzzy inference system for supply chain
risk management." Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing 124: 429{438.
Behzadi, G., M.J. O'Sullivan, T.L. Olsen, and A. Zhang. 2018. \Agribusiness supply chain risk
management: A review of quantitative decision models." Omega 79: 21{42.
Blackhurst, J., T. Wu, and P. O'Grady. 2004. \Network-based approach to modelling uncer-
tainty in a supply chain." International Journal of Production Research 42 (8): 1639{1658.
Blos, Maur cio Fontoura, Robson Marinho da Silva, and Hui-Ming Wee. 2018. \A framework
for designing supply chain disruptions management considering productive systems and
carrier viewpoints." International Journal of Production Research 0 (0): 1{17.
Bruzzone, A., and A. Orsoni. 2003. \AI and simulation-based techniques for the assessment
of supply chain logistic performance." In Proceedings - Simulation Symposium , Vol. 2003-
January, 154{164.
Chan, F.T.S., and H.K. Chan. 2006. \A simulation study with quantity exibility in a supply
chain subjected to uncertainties." International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufac-
turing 19 (2): 148{160.
Chen, M., Y. Xia, and X. Wang. 2010. \Managing supply uncertainties through Bayesian
information update." IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 7 (1):
24{36.
Choi, T.-M., S. W. Wallace, and Y. Wang. 2018. \Big Data Analytics in Operations Manage-
ment." Production and Operations Management .
Chopra, S., and M. S. Sodhi. 2014. \Reducing the Risk of Supply Chain Disruptions." MIT
Sloan Management Review Spring (3): 73{80.
Claypool, E., B.A. Norman, and K.L. Needy. 2014. \Modeling risk in a Design for Supply
Chain problem." Computers and Industrial Engineering 78: 44{54.
Colicchia, C., and F. Strozzi. 2012. \Supply chain risk management: A new methodology for
a systematic literature review." Supply Chain Management 17 (4): 403{418.
Dal-Mas, M., S. Giarola, A. Zamboni, and F. Bezzo. 2011. \Strategic design and investment
capacity planning of the ethanol supply chain under price uncertainty." Biomass and Bioen-
ergy 35 (5): 2059{2071.
Deleris, L.A., D. Elkins, and M.E. Pat e-Cornell. 2004. \Analyzing losses from hazard exposure:
A conservative probabilistic estimate using supply chain risk simulation." In Proceedings -
Winter Simulation Conference , Vol. 2, 1384{1391.
Dubey, R., A. Gunasekaran, and S.J. Childe. 2015. \The design of a responsive sustainable
supply chain network under uncertainty." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology 80 (1-4): 427{445.
Emmenegger, S., E. Laurenzi, and B. Th onssen. 2012. \Improving supply-chain-management
based on semantically enriched risk descriptions." In KMIS 2012 - Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Knowledge Management and Information Sharing , 70{80.
Fahimnia, B., C.S. Tang, H. Davarzani, and J. Sarkis. 2015. \Quantitative models for managing
supply chain risks: A review." European Journal of Operational Research 247 (1): 1{15.
Fan, Y., L. Heilig, and S. Voss. 2015. \Supply chain risk management in the era of big data."
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 9186: 283{294.
Fang, J., L. Zhao, J.C. Fransoo, and T. Van Woensel. 2013. \Sourcing strategies in supply risk
management: An approximate dynamic programming approach." Computers and Operations
Research 40 (5): 1371{1382.
Felfel, H., O. Ayadi, and F. Masmoudi. 2016. \Multi-objective stochastic multi-site supply
chain planning under demand uncertainty considering downside risk." Computers and In-
dustrial Engineering 102: 268{279.
Galindo, J., and P. Tamayo. 2000. \Credit Risk Assessment Using Statistical and Machine
27

==== Page 28 ====
Learning: Basic Methodology and Risk Modeling Applications." Computational Economics
15 (1): 107{143.
Garvey, M.D., S. Carnovale, and S. Yeniyurt. 2015. \An analytical framework for supply
network risk propagation: A Bayesian network approach." European Journal of Operational
Research 243 (2): 618{627.
Ghadge, A., S. Dani, and R. Kalawsky. 2012. \Supply chain risk management: Present and
future scope." The International Journal of Logistics Management 23 (3): 313{339.
Ghavamifar, Ali, Ahmad Makui, and Ata Allah Taleizadeh. 2018. \Designing a resilient com-
petitive supply chain network under disruption risks: A real-world application." Transporta-
tion Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 115: 87 { 109.
Giannakis, M., and M. Louis. 2011. \A multi-agent based framework for supply chain risk
management." Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management 17 (1): 23{31.
Giannakis, M., and M. Louis. 2016. \A multi-agent based system with big data processing
for enhanced supply chain agility." Journal of Enterprise Information Management 29 (5):
706{727.
Govindan, K., M. Fattahi, and E. Keyvanshokooh. 2017. \Supply chain network design under
uncertainty: A comprehensive review and future research directions." European Journal of
Operational Research 263 (1): 108{141.
Green, W. 2018. \Five lessons from the KFC chicken crisis." CIPS Supply Management .
Guill en-Gos albez, G., and I. Grossmann. 2010. \A global optimization strategy for the envi-
ronmentally conscious design of chemical supply chains under uncertainty in the damage
assessment model." Computers and Chemical Engineering 34 (1): 42{58.
Gupta, A., C.D. Maranas, and C.M. McDonald. 2000. \Mid-term supply chain planning under
demand uncertainty: Customer demand satisfaction and inventory management." Comput-
ers and Chemical Engineering 24 (12): 2613{2621.
Haddadsisakht, Ali, and Sarah M. Ryan. 2018. \Closed-loop supply chain network design
with multiple transportation modes under stochastic demand and uncertain carbon tax."
International Journal of Production Economics 195: 118 { 131.
Hahn, G.J., and H. Kuhn. 2012. \Value-based performance and risk management in supply
chains: A robust optimization approach." International Journal of Production Economics
139 (1): 135{144.
He, M., H. Ji, Q. Wang, C. Ren, and R. Lougee. 2015. \Big data fueled process management
of supply risks: Sensing, prediction, evaluation and mitigation." In Proceedings - Winter
Simulation Conference , Vol. 2015-January, 1005{1013.
Heckmann, I., T. Comes, and S. Nickel. 2015. \A critical review on supply chain risk - Deni-
tion, measure and modeling." Omega 52: 119{132.
Ho, W., T. Zheng, H. Yildiz, and S. Talluri. 2015. \Supply chain risk management: A literature
review." International Journal of Production Research 53 (16): 5031{5069.
Hofman, W. 2011. \Supply chain visibility with linked open data for supply chain risk analysis."
InWITNESS 2011 - Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on IT Innovations Enabling Seamless
and Secure Supply Chains , Vol. 769, 20{31.
Holton, G. 2004. \Dening Risk." Financial Analysts Journal 60 (6): 19{25.
Hornby, L. 2018. \US-China taris in charts: global supply chains at risk." Financial Times
https://www.ft.com/content/bd99c39c-8024-11e8-bc55-50daf11b720d .
Huchzermeier, A., and M.A. Cohen. 1996. \Valuing operational exibility under exchange rate
risk." Operations Research 44 (1): 100{113.
Hudnurkar, Manoj, Sujeet Deshpande, Urvashi Rathod, and Suresh K. Jakhar. 2017. \Supply
Chain Risk Classication Schemes: A Literature Review." Operations and Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal 10 (4).
Inuiguchi, M., and J. Ram k. 2000. \Possibilistic linear programming: a brief review of fuzzy
mathematical programming and a comparison with stochastic programming in portfolio
selection problem." Fuzzy Sets and Systems 111 (1): 3{28.
Ivanov, Dmitry, Alexandre Dolgui, and Boris Sokolov. 2018. \The impact of digital technology
and Industry 4.0 on the ripple eect and supply chain risk analytics." International Journal
28

==== Page 29 ====
of Production Research 0 (0): 1{18.
Ivanov, Dmitry, Alexandre Dolgui, Boris Sokolov, and Marina Ivanova. 2017. \Literature re-
view on disruption recovery in the supply chain." International Journal of Production Re-
search 55 (20): 6158{6174.
Jabbarzadeh, Armin, Behnam Fahimnia, and Fatemeh Sabouhi. 2018. \Resilient and sus-
tainable supply chain design: sustainability analysis under disruption risks." International
Journal of Production Research 0 (0): 1{24.
Jiang, C., and Z. Sheng. 2009. \Case-based reinforcement learning for dynamic inventory
control in a multi-agent supply-chain system." Expert Systems with Applications 36 (3 PART
2): 6520{6526.
J uttner, U. 2005. \Supply chain risk management: Understanding the business requirements
from a practitioner perspective." The International Journal of Logistics Management 16
(1): 120{141.
Kayis, B., and P. D. Karningsih. 2012. \SCRIS: A knowledge-based system tool for assisting
manufacturing organizations in identifying supply chain risks." Journal of Manufacturing
Technology Management 23 (7): 834{852.
Keyvanshokooh, E., S.M. Ryan, and E. Kabir. 2016. \Hybrid robust and stochastic optimiza-
tion for closed-loop supply chain network design using accelerated Benders decomposition."
European Journal of Operational Research 249 (1): 76{92.
Khan, O., and B. Burnes. 2007. \Risk and supply chain management: Creating a research
agenda." The International Journal of Logistics Management 18 (2): 197{216.
Kiekintveld, C., M.P. Wellman, S. Singh, J. Estelle, Y. Vorobeychik, V. Soni, and M. Rudary.
2004. \Distributed feedback control for decision making on Supply Chains." In ICAPS 2004
- Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling ,
384{392.
Koutsoukis, N.-S., B. Dominguez-Ballesteros, C.A. Lucas, and G. Mitra. 2000. \A prototype
decision support system for strategic planning under uncertainty." International Journal of
Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 30 (7): 640{660.
Kumar, V., and N. Viswanadham. 2007. \A CBR-based decision support system framework
for construction supply chain risk management." In CASE 2007 - Proceedings of the 3rd
IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering , 980{985.
Kuo, Yong-Hong, and Andrew Kusiak. 2018. \From data to big data in production research:
the past and future trends." International Journal of Production Research 0 (0): 1{26.
Kwon, O., G.P. Im, and K.C. Lee. 2007. \MACE-SCM: A multi-agent and case-based rea-
soning collaboration mechanism for supply chain management under supply and demand
uncertainties." Expert Systems with Applications 33 (3): 690{705.
Legg, S., and M. Hutter. 2007. \Universal Intelligence: A Denition of Machine Intelligence."
Minds and Machines 17 (4): 391{444.
Li, Dong, and Xiaojun Wang. 2017. \Dynamic supply chain decisions based on networked sen-
sor data: an application in the chilled food retail chain." International Journal of Production
Research 55 (17): 5127{5141.
Li, L., and Z.B. Zabinsky. 2011. \Incorporating uncertainty into a supplier selection problem."
International Journal of Production Economics 134 (2): 344{356.
Lohr, S. 2016. \IBM Is Counting on Its Bet on Watson, and Paying Big Money
for It." The New York Times https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/17/technology/
ibm-is-counting-on-its-bet-on-watson-and-paying-big-money-for-it.html .
Lupton, D. 2013. Risk, 2nd ed., Chap. 2. Routledge.
Mani, V., C. Delgado, B.T. Hazen, and P. Patel. 2017. \Mitigating supply chain risk via
sustainability using big data analytics: Evidence from the manufacturing supply chain."
Sustainability 9 (4).
Manuj, I., and J.T. Mentzer. 2008a. \Global supply chain risk management." Journal of Busi-
ness Logistics 29 (1): 133{155.
Manuj, I., and J.T. Mentzer. 2008b. \Global supply chain risk management strategies." Inter-
national Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 38 (3): 192{223.
29

==== Page 30 ====
March, J. G., and Z. Shapira. 1987. \Managerial Perspectives on Risk and Risk Taking."
Management Science 33 (11): 1404{1418.
Martin, C., and H. Peck. 2004. \Building the Resilient Supply Chain." The International
Journal of Logistics Management 15 (2): 1{14.
Marufuzzaman, M., S.D. Eksioglu, X. Li, and J. Wang. 2014. \Analyzing the impact of
intermodal-related risk to the design and management of biofuel supply chain." Trans-
portation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 69: 122{145.
Matthews, A. 2017. \Brexit Impacts on Irish Agri-food Exports to the UK." EuroChoices 16
(2): 26{32.
Mele, F.D., G. Guill en, A. Espu~ na, and L. Puigjaner. 2007. \An agent-based approach for
supply chain retrotting under uncertainty." Computers and Chemical Engineering 31 (5-
6): 722{735.
Mendling, J., I. Weber, W. M. P. van der Aalst, J. vom Brocke, C. Cabanillas, F. Daniel,
S. Debois, et al. 2018. \Blockchains for Business Process Management - Challenges and
Opportunities." ACM Trans. Management Inf. Syst. 9 (1): 4:1{4:16.
Micheli, G.J.L., R. Mogre, and A. Perego. 2014. \How to choose mitigation measures for supply
chain risks." International Journal of Production Research 52 (1): 117{129.
Mitra, K., R.D. Gudi, S.C. Patwardhan, and G. Sardar. 2008. \Midterm supply chain planning
under uncertainty: A multiobjective chance constrained programming framework." Indus-
trial and Engineering Chemistry Research 47 (15): 5501{5511.
Mongeon, P., and A. Paul-Hus. 2016. \The journal coverage of Web of Science and Scopus: a
comparative analysis." Scientometrics 106 (1): 213{228.
Mulvey, J. M., R. J. Vanderbei, and S. A. Zenios. 1995. \Robust Optimization of Large-Scale
Systems." Operations Research 43 (2): 264{281.
Natarajarathinam, M., I. Capar, and A. Narayanan. 2009. \Managing supply chains in times
of crisis: A review of literature and insights." International Journal of Physical Distribution
and Logistics Management 39 (7): 535{573.
Nepal, B., and O.P. Yadav. 2015. \Bayesian belief network-based framework for sourcing risk
analysis during supplier selection." International Journal of Production Research 53 (20):
6114{6135.
Nguyen, T., L. Zhou, V. Spiegler, P. Ieromonachou, and Y. Lin. 2017. \Big data analytics in
supply chain management: A state-of-the-art literature review." Computers and Operations
Research .
Norrman, A., and U. Jansson. 2004. \Ericsson's proactive supply chain risk management ap-
proach after a serious subsupplier accident." International Journal of Physical Distribution
& Logistics Management 34 (5): 434{456.
Ojha, Ritesh, Abhijeet Ghadge, Manoj Kumar Tiwari, and Umit S. Bititci. 2018. \Bayesian
network modelling for supply chain risk propagation." International Journal of Production
Research 0 (0): 1{25.
Olhager, Jan. 2013. \Evolution of operations planning and control: from production to supply
chains." International Journal of Production Research 51 (23-24): 6836{6843.
Papadopoulos, T., A. Gunasekaran, R. Dubey, N. Altay, S. J. Childe, and S. Fosso-Wamba.
2017. \The role of Big Data in explaining disaster resilience in supply chains for sustain-
ability." Journal of Cleaner Production 142: 1108 { 1118.
Pasandideh, S.H.R., S.T.A. Niaki, and K. Asadi. 2015. \Bi-objective optimization of a multi-
product multi-period three-echelon supply chain problem under uncertain environments:
NSGA-II and NRGA." Information Sciences 292: 57{74.
Paul, S.K. 2015. \Supplier selection for managing supply risks in supply chain: a fuzzy ap-
proach." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 79 (1-4): 657{664.
Pavlov, A., D. Ivanov, A. Dolgui, and B. Sokolov. 2018. \Hybrid fuzzy-probabilistic approach
to supply chain resilience assessment." IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 65
(2): 303{315.
Peidro, D., J. Mula, R. Poler, and F.-C. Lario. 2009. \Quantitative models for supply chain
planning under uncertainty." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology
30

==== Page 31 ====
43 (3-4): 400{420.
Pfohl, H.-C., H. K ohler, and D. Thomas. 2010. \State of the art in supply chain risk manage-
ment research: Empirical and conceptual ndings and a roadmap for the implementation in
practice." Logistics Research 2 (1): 33{44.
Pishvaee, M.S., M. Rabbani, and S.A. Torabi. 2011. \A robust optimization approach to closed-
loop supply chain network design under uncertainty." Applied Mathematical Modelling 35
(2): 637{649.
Pishvaee, M.S., J. Razmi, and S.A. Torabi. 2014. \An accelerated Benders decomposition
algorithm for sustainable supply chain network design under uncertainty: A case study of
medical needle and syringe supply chain." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review 67: 14{38.
Pishvaee, M.S., S.A. Torabi, and J. Razmi. 2012. \Credibility-based fuzzy mathematical pro-
gramming model for green logistics design under uncertainty." Computers and Industrial
Engineering 62 (2): 624{632.
Ponomarov, S. Y., and M. Holcomb. 2009. \Understaind the concept of supply chain resilience."
The International Journal of Logistics Management 20 (1): 124{143.
Prakash, S., G. Soni, and A. P. S. Rathore. 2017. \A critical analysis of supply chain risk
management content: a structured literature review." Journal of Advances in Management
Research 14 (1): 69{90.
Qazi, A., J. Quigley, and A. Dickson. 2015. \Supply Chain Risk Management: Systematic lit-
erature review and a conceptual framework for capturing interdependencies between risks."
InIEOM 2015 - Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Industrial Engineering
and Operations Management , 1{13.
Qazi, Abroon, Alex Dickson, John Quigley, and Barbara Gaudenzi. 2018. \Supply chain risk
network management: A Bayesian belief network and expected utility based approach for
managing supply chain risks." International Journal of Production Economics 196: 24 { 42.
Qazi, Abroon, John Quigley, Alex Dickson, and ule nsel Ekici. 2017. \Exploring dependency
based probabilistic supply chain risk measures for prioritising interdependent risks and
strategies." European Journal of Operational Research 259 (1): 189 { 204.
Rangel, Djalma Ara'ujo, Taiane Kamel de Oliveira, and Maria Silene Alexandre Leite. 2015.
\Supply chain risk classication: discussion and proposal." International Journal of Pro-
duction Research 53 (22): 6868{6887.
Rao, S., and T.J. Goldsby. 2009. \Supply chain risks: A review and typology." The Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management 20 (1): 97{123.
Rossi, T., and M. Pero. 2012. \A formal method for analysing and assessing operational risk
in supply chains." International Journal of Operational Research 13 (1): 90{109.
Ryu, J.-H., V. Dua, and E.N. Pistikopoulos. 2004. \A bilevel programming framework for
enterprise-wide process networks under uncertainty." Computers and Chemical Engineering
28 (6-7): 1121{1129.
Schlegel, G. L., and R. J. Trent. 2014. Supply Chain Risk Management: An Emerging Disci-
pline , Chap. 1. CRC Press.
Sch utz, P., A. Tomasgard, and S. Ahmed. 2009. \Supply chain design under uncertainty using
sample average approximation and dual decomposition." European Journal of Operational
Research 199 (2): 409{419.
Scott, J., W. Ho, P.K. Dey, and S. Talluri. 2015. \A decision support system for supplier selec-
tion and order allocation in stochastic, multi-stakeholder and multi-criteria environments."
International Journal of Production Economics 166: 226{237.
Selim, H., and I. Ozkarahan. 2008. \A supply chain distribution network design model: An
interactive fuzzy goal programming-based solution approach." International Journal of Ad-
vanced Manufacturing Technology 36 (3-4): 401{418.
Shang, Y., D. Dunson, and J.-S. Song. 2017. \Exploiting Big Data in Logistics Risk Assessment
via Bayesian Nonparametrics." Operations Research 65 (6): 1574{1588.
Snyder, L.V., Z. Atan, P. Peng, Y. Rong, A.J. Schmitt, and B. Sinsoysal. 2016. \OR/MS
models for supply chain disruptions: A review." IIE Transactions (Institute of Industrial
31

==== Page 32 ====
Engineers) 48 (2): 89{109. Cited By 41.
Solanki, M., and C. Brewster. 2013. \Consuming linked data in supply chains: Enabling data
visibility via linked pedigrees." In COLD 2013 - Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Consuming Linked Data , Vol. 1034, 74{86.
Solomono, R. J. 1985. \The time scale of articial intelligence: Reections on social eects."
Human Systems Management 5 (2): 149{153.
Tang, C.S. 2006. \Perspectives in supply chain risk management." International Journal of
Production Economics 103 (2): 451{488.
Tang, C.X.H., H.C.W. Lau, and G.T.S. Ho. 2008. \A conceptual fuzzy-genetic algorithm frame-
work for assessing the potential risks in supply chain management." International Journal
of Risk Assessment and Management 10 (3): 263{271.
Tang, O., and S. Nurmaya Musa. 2011. \Identifying risk issues and research advancements in
supply chain risk management." International Journal of Production Economics 133 (1):
25{34.
Tong, K., Y. Feng, and G. Rong. 2012. \Planning under demand and yield uncertainties in an
oil supply chain." Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 51 (2): 814{834.
Tsiakis, P., N. Shah, and C.C. Pantelides. 2001. \Design of multi-echelon supply chain networks
under demand uncertainty." Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 40 (16): 3585{
3604.
Vahdani, B., R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, F. Jolai, and A. Baboli. 2013. \Reliable design of a
closed loop supply chain network under uncertainty: An interval fuzzy possibilistic chance-
constrained model." Engineering Optimization 45 (6): 745{765.
Vahdani, B., R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, M. Modarres, and A. Baboli. 2012. \Reliable design
of a forward/reverse logistics network under uncertainty: A robust-M/M/c queuing model."
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 48 (6): 1152{1168.
Vanany, I., S. Zailani, and N. Pujawan. 2009. \Supply chain risk management: Literature
review and future research." International Journal of Information Systems and Supply Chain
Management 2 (1): 16{33.
Vilko, J., P. Ritala, and J. Edelmann. 2014. \On uncertainty in supply chain risk management."
International Journal of Logistics Management 25 (1): 3{19.
Waller, M. A., and S. E. Fawcett. 2013. \Data Science, Predictive Analytics, and Big Data:
A Revolution That Will Transform Supply Chain Design and Management." Journal of
Business Logistics 34 (2): 77{84.
World Economic Forum. 2012. New Models for Addressing Supply Chain and Transport Risk .
Industry agenda. World Economic Forum.
Wu, D., and D.L. Olson. 2008. \Supply chain risk, simulation, and vendor selection." Interna-
tional Journal of Production Economics 114 (2): 646{655.
Ye, ShiJie, Zhi Xiao, and Guangfu Zhu. 2015. \Identication of supply chain disruptions with
economic performance of rms using multi-category support vector machines." International
Journal of Production Research 53 (10): 3086{3103.
You, F., and I.E. Grossmann. 2008. \Design of responsive supply chains under demand uncer-
tainty." Computers and Chemical Engineering 32 (12): 3090{3111.
You, F., J.M. Wassick, and I.E. Grossmann. 2009. \Risk management for a global supply chain
planning under uncertainty: Models and algorithms." AIChE Journal 55 (4): 931{946.
Zage, D., K. Glass, and R. Colbaugh. 2013. \Improving supply chain security using big data."
2013 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics: Big Data,
Emergent Threats, and Decision-Making in Security Informatics 254{259.
Zahiri, Behzad, and Mir Saman Pishvaee. 2017. \Blood supply chain network design consid-
ering blood group compatibility under uncertainty." International Journal of Production
Research 55 (7): 2013{2033.
Zarandi, M.H.F., M. Pourakbar, and I.B. Turksen. 2008. \A Fuzzy agent-based model for
reduction of bullwhip eect in supply chain systems." Expert Systems with Applications 34
(3): 1680{1691.
Zegordi, S.H., and H. Davarzani. 2012. \Developing a supply chain disruption analysis model:
32

==== Page 33 ====
Application of colored Petri-nets." Expert Systems with Applications 39 (2): 2102{2111.
Zhalechian, M., R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, B. Zahiri, and M. Mohammadi. 2016. \Sustainable
design of a closed-loop location-routing-inventory supply chain network under mixed uncer-
tainty." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 89: 182{214.
Zhao, K., and X. Yu. 2011. \A case based reasoning approach on supplier selection in petroleum
enterprises." Expert Systems with Applications 38 (6): 6839{6847.
Zhao, M., F. Javed, F. Jacob, and M. McNair. 2015. \SKILL: A system for skill identica-
tion and normalization." In IAAI 2015 - Proceedings of the 27th Conference on Innovative
Applications of Articial Intelligence , Vol. 5, 4012{4017.
33

==== Page 34 ====
0 2 4 6 810 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28Other Manufacturing
Fuel
Automotive & Aerospace
Food
Medical
Chemical
Wood & Paper
Humanitarian
Waste27
22
11
11
8
7
3
2
2
Number of studies
Figure A1.: Distribution of reviewed studies according to industrial case study pre-
sented.
Appendix A. Additional classication metrics
This appendix extends the classication presented in Section 4, to include three more
metrics: (1) industry used as case study, (2) country used within case study and (3)
risk or uncertainty types modelled.
A.1. Case studies
Fig. A1 shows the dierent industries that have been used as case studies in the
reviewed literature. Note that only real-world case studies have been considered and
not hypothetical supply chains or articially generated numerical examples. The most
common cases involve supply chains that manufacture and distribute various products,
as well as supply chains that deal with fuel (from oil to biomass). The majority (66%)
of the reviewed studies does not include such a case study, a higher percentage than
what has been reported in other surveys (e.g. Qazi, Quigley, and Dickson (2015) report
38%). This is probably due to the quantitative nature of AI-related techniques: it is
more likely to resort to randomly or otherwise generated test sets for such techniques,
as opposed to qualitative and strategic approaches, which may also be informed by
specic industries.
The countries related to the aforementioned case studies (if stated) are shown in
Fig. A2. As should be expected, countries of case studies closely mirror the countries
of the authors' aliations.
A.2. Risk and uncertainty types
Most of the reviewed studies mention explicitly a set of parameters which they consider
risky or uncertain and which they address through the proposed approach. The ratio
of explicitly referencing uncertainty and risk is roughly 3:1, with 176 studies describing
their research in relation to uncertainty and 66 studies relating it to risk. As mentioned
34

==== Page 35 ====
Iran USA
TurkeyChinaEU
India SpainUKItaly
Singapore
New ZealandNorwayPakistanTunisia0510152021 21
6
5
4 4 4 4
3
2
1 1 1 1Number of studies
Figure A2.: Distribution of reviewed studies according to country of case study.
in Section 2.1, risk is most closely associated to disruptions or nancial parameters,
with other supply chain aspects more often linked to uncertainty.
DemandCost
Supply Return
CapacityPrice
Process
Lead TimeOther Yield020406080100120140160180168
68
56
29
191510 96 4Number of studies
Figure A3.: Distribution of reviewed studies according to risk/uncertainty type.
35

==== Page 36 ====
Fig. A3 shows the distribution of parameters associated with risk or uncertainty in
the reviewed studies. The most common case, by far, is uncertain demand (or demand
risk), followed by parameters related to cost and nancial exposure. Supply risk (or
uncertain supply) is also quite commonly tackled. Parameters such as return and
capacity are primarily included in the case of reverse or closed-loop supply chains.
Appendix B. Additional comparison tables
In this appendix, detailed comparison tables are provided for the reviewed studies
that involve some form of mathematical programming, which are briey summarised
in Sections 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4.
Table B1.: Stochastic programming approaches to SCRM with continuous parameters.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Gupta and Maranas 2000) 1 No No X
(Guill en et al. 2003) 1 No No X
(Lin and Chen 2003) 1 No No X
(Miranda and Garrido 2004) 1 No No X
(Ryu, Dua, and Pistikopoulos 2004) 4 No s X
(Han and Damrongwongsiri 2005) 1 No No X
(Tapiero and Grando 2006) 2 No No X
(Gaonkar and Viswanadham 2007) 1 No No X
(Lieckens and Vandaele 2007) 3 No No X
(Qi and Shen 2007) 2 No No X
(Miranda and Garrido 2008) 1 No No X
(You and Grossmann 2008) 1s No X
(You and Grossmann 2008) 1 No No X
(Guill en-Gos albez and Grossmann 2009) 2 No No X
(You and Grossmann 2009) 1 No No X
(Cui, Ouyang, and Shen 2010) 1 No No X
(Hnaien, Delorme, and Dolgui 2010) 1 No No X
(Park, Lee, and Sung 2010) 1 No No X
(Qi, Shen, and Snyder 2010) 4 No No X
(You and Grossmann 2010) 1 No No X
(Dal-Mas et al. 2011) 2 No No XX
(Taleizadeh, Niaki, and Barzinpour 2011) 1 No No X
(You and Grossmann 2011) 1 No No X
(Liu, Shah, and Papageorgiou 2012) 1 No No X
(Azad and Davoudpour 2013) 1 No s XX
(Benyoucef, Xie, and Tanonkou 2013) 1 No No X
(Kumar and Tiwari 2013) 1 No No X
(Meena and Sarmah 2013) 1 No No X
(Azad et al. 2014) 3 No No XX
(Jeong, Hong, and Xie 2014) 2 No s X
(Mari, Lee, and Memon 2014) 1 No s X
(Marufuzzaman et al. 2014) 1 No No X
(Nasiri, Zolfaghari, and Davoudpour 2014) 1 No No X
(Hnaien, Dolgui, and Wu 2016) 2 No No X
(Yongheng et al. 2014) 1 No No X
(Nooraie and Parast 2015) 1 No No X
(Sharifzadeh, Garcia, and Shah 2015) 2 No No X
(PrasannaVenkatesan and Goh 2016) 1 No No X
(Rayat, Musavi, and Bozorgi-Amiri 2017) 1 No No X
36

==== Page 37 ====
Table B2.: Scenario-based stochastic programming approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Koutsoukis et al. 2000) 1 No Yes X
(Chan, Carter, and Burnes 2001) 1 No No X
(Lucas et al. 2001) 1 No No X
(Tsiakis, Shah, and Pantelides 2001) 1s No X
(Alonso-Ayuso et al. 2003) 3 No No X
(Lababidi et al. 2004) 2 No No X
(Levis and Papageorgiou 2004) 1 No No X
(Guill en et al. 2005) 1 No No X
(Santoso et al. 2005) 4 No No X
(Guill en, Espu~ na, and Puigjaner 2006) 1 No No X
(Guill en et al. 2006) 1 No No X
(Goh, Lim, and Meng 2007) 2s No X
(Lee et al. 2007) 3 No No X
(Salema, Barbosa-Povoa, and Novais 2007) 2 No No X
(Azaron et al. 2008) 6 No No X
(Bonll, Espu~ na, and Puigjaner 2008) 3 No No X
(Poojari, Lucas, and Mitra 2008) 1 No No XX
(Lee and Dong 2009) 2 No No X
(Sch utz, Tomasgard, and Ahmed 2009) 11 No No X
(Sodhi and Tang 2009) 1 No No X
(You, Wassick, and Grossmann 2009) 22 No No X
(Franca et al. 2010) 1 No s X
(Kara and Onut 2010) 2 No s X
(Kumar, Tiwari, and Babiceanu 2010) 3 No s X
(Lee, Dong, and Bian 2010) 2 No No X
(Sabio et al. 2010) 2 No No X
(Shu, Ma, and Li 2010) 7 No No X
(Cardona-Vald es, Alvarez, and Ozdemir 2011) 1 No No X
(Georgiadis et al. 2011) 1 No No X
(Kim, Real, and Lee 2011) 5 No No X
(Longinidis and Georgiadis 2011) 1 No No X
(Bidhandi and Yusu 2011) 3 No No X
(Rajgopal et al. 2011) 8 No No X
(Sawik 2011) 1 No No XX
(Shimizu, Fushimi, and Wada 2011) 7 No No X
(Shukla, Lalit, and Venkatasubramanian 2011) 1 No No X
(Almansoori and Shah 2012) 1 No No X
(Chen and Fan 2012) 1 No No X
(Gebreslassie, Yao, and You 2012) 2 No No X
(Giarola, Shah, and Bezzo 2012) 2 No s X
(Kiya and Davoudpour 2012) 2 No No X
(Klibi and Martel 2012) 2 No No X
(Mak and Shen 2012) 2 No s X
(Nickel, Saldanha-da Gama, and Ziegler 2012) 2 No No X
(Noyan 2012) 4 No No X
(PrasannaVenkatesan and Kumanan 2012) 4 No No X
(Ahmadi-Javid and Seddighi 2013) 2 No No X
(Amin and Zhang 2013) 2 No No X
(Awudu and Zhang 2013) 2 No No X
(Cardoso, Barbosa-Pvoa, and Relvas 2013) 1 No No X
(Kazemzadeh and Hu 2013) 2 No No X
(Longinidis and Georgiadis 2013) 7 No No X
(Oliveira et al. 2013) 1 No No X
(Pimentel, Mateus, and Almeida 2013) 1 No No X
(Qin, Liu, and Tang 2013) 1 No s X
(Ramezani, Bashiri, and Tavakkoli-Moghaddam 2013a) 7 No No X
(Ruiz-Femenia et al. 2013) 1 No No X
(Sawik 2013) 1 No No XX
(Singh, Jain, and Mishra 2013) 1 No No X
(Cardona-Vald es, Alvarez, and Pacheco 2014) 1 No No X
(Dayhim, Jafari, and Mazurek 2014) 1 No No X
(Li and Hu 2014) 3 No s X
(Liu and Guo 2014) 6 No No X
(Madadi et al. 2014a) 2 No No X
(Madadi et al. 2014b) 2s s XX
(Sawik 2014) 1 No s XX
(Soleimani and Govindan 2014) 4 No No XX
(Soleimani, Seyyed-Esfahani, and Kannan 2014) 5 No No XX
(Zeballos et al. 2014) 2 No s X
Continued on next page
37

==== Page 38 ====
Table B2.: (continued)
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Ayvaz, Bolat, and Aydin 2015) 2 No No X
(Fattahi et al. 2015) 1 No No X
(Govindan, Jafarian, and Nourbakhsh 2015) 1 No No X
(Khatami, Mahootchi, and Farahani 2015) 2 No No X
(Kilic and Tuzkaya 2015) 3 No No X
(Sawik 2015) 1 No No X
(Sawik 2016) 1 No s X
(Behzadi et al. 2017) 1 No s X
(Chatzikontidou et al. 2017) 1 No No X
(Kamalahmadi and Parast 2017) 1 No s X
(Ghavamifar, Makui, and Taleizadeh 2018) 9 No s X
(Jalali, Seifbarghy, and Niaki 2018) 2 No s X
(Jerbia et al. 2018) 6 No No X
(Namdar et al. 2018) 4 No s X
(Pariazar and Sir 2018) 3 No s X
(Rahimi and Ghezavati 2018) 3 No s X
(Sawik 2018) 2 No s X
(Song, Chen, and Lei 2018) 2 No s X
(Weskamp et al. 2018) 1 No s X
(Xie and Huang 2018) 1 No s X
(Zahiri et al. 2018) 2 No s X
Table B3.: Other stochastic programming approaches to SCRM
Ref
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Huchzermeier and Cohen 1996) 1 No No XX
(Gupta, Maranas, and McDonald 2000) 1 No No X
(Mitra et al. 2008) 1 No No X
(Guill en-Gos albez and Grossmann 2010) 1 No No X
(Fang et al. 2013) 1 No No X
(Pasandideh, Niaki, and Asadi 2015) 11 No No X
(Scott et al. 2015) 1 No Yes X
(Chibani et al. 2018) 1 No No X
(Liu et al. 2018) 2 No No X
(Quddus et al. 2018) 1 No s X
Table B5.: Fuzzy programming approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Petrovic, Roy, and Petrovic 1998) 2 No s X
(Petrovic, Roy, and Petrovic 1999) 2 No s X
(Petrovic 2001) 3 No s X
(Giannoccaro, Pontrandolfo, and Scozzi 2003) 2 No s X
(Chen and Lee 2004) 2 No No X
(Wang and Shu 2005) 4 No s X
(Amid, Ghodsypour, and O'Brien 2006) 3s No X
(Kumar, Vrat, and Shankar 2006) 4 No s X
(Xie, Petrovic, and Burnham 2006) 1 No s X
(Peidro, Mula, and Poler 2007) 11 No s X
(Selim and Ozkarahan 2008) 1 No Yes X
Continued on next page
38

==== Page 39 ====
Table B5.: (continued)
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Tang, Lau, and Ho 2008) 1 No Yes X
(Xu, Liu, and Wang 2008) 2 No s X
(Amid, Ghodsypour, and O'Brien 2009) 4 No s X
(Mitra et al. 2009) 2 No s X
(Peidro et al. 2009) 11 No s X
(Xu, He, and Gen 2009) 3 No s X
(Bilgen 2010) 1 No s X
(Mula, Peidro, and Poler 2010) 1 No No X
(Peidro, Mula, and Poler 2010) 11 No s X
(Peidro et al. 2010) 11 No s X
(Pishvaee and Torabi 2010) 28 No s X
(Qin and Ji 2010) 3 No No X
(Wu et al. 2010) 11 No s X
(Haleh and Hamidi 2011) 9 No s X
(Kabak and lengin 2011) 4 No s X
(Pishvaee and Razmi 2012) 19 No s X
(Bouzembrak et al. 2013) 10 No s X
(Fazlollahtabar, Mahdavi, and Mohajeri 2013) 5 No No X
(Jouzdani, Sadjadi, and Fathian 2013) 8 No s X
(Tabrizi and Razmi 2013) 11 No s X
(Wu et al. 2013) 8 No s X
(Jindal and Sangwan 2014) 20s No X
(Khalili-Damghani, Tavana, and Amirkhan 2014) 24 No s X
(Micheli, Mogre, and Perego 2014) 4 No Yes X
(Mirakhorli 2014) 2 No s X
(Ozceylan and Paksoy 2014) 17 No No X
(Pishvaee, Razmi, and Torabi 2014) 54 No No X
(Ramezani et al. 2014) 37 No s X
(Tong et al. 2014) 4 No s X
(Vahdani et al. 2014) 32 No s X
(Yilmaz Balaman and Selim 2014) 1 No s X
(Hate et al. 2015a) 17 No No X
(Hate et al. 2015b) 17 No No X
(Moghaddam 2015) 3 No s X
(Mousazadeh, Torabi, and Zahiri 2015) 7 No No X
(Salehi Sadghiani, Torabi, and Sahebjamnia 2015) 4 No s X
(Subulan et al. 2015) 15 No s X
(Torabi, Baghersad, and Mansouri 2015) 7 No s X
(Yang, Liu, and Yang 2015) 4 No s X
(Yang and Liu 2015) 4 No s X
(Babazadeh et al. 2017) 51 No s X
(Tsao et al. 2018) 5 No No X
Table B6.: Hybrid mathematical programming approaches to SCRM.
Reference
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Wu and Olson 2008) 3 No s X
(Li and Zabinsky 2011) 2 No s X
(Pishvaee, Torabi, and Razmi 2012) 6 No s X
(Tong, Feng, and Rong 2012) 2 No No X
(Vahdani et al. 2012) 14 No s X
(Vahdani et al. 2013) 7 No s X
(Claypool, Norman, and Needy 2014) 3 No s X
(Bai and Liu 2016) 4 No s X
(Felfel, Ayadi, and Masmoudi 2016) 1 No s X
(Keyvanshokooh, Ryan, and Kabir 2016) 3 No s X
(Zhalechian et al. 2016) 29 No s X
(Zahiri and Pishvaee 2017) 15 No No X
(Haddadsisakht and Ryan 2018) 3 No No X
(Jabbarzadeh, Fahimnia, and Sabouhi 2018) 1 No s X
(Pavlov et al. 2018) N/A No s X
39

==== Page 40 ====
Table B4.: Robust Optimisation approaches to SCRM
Ref
# parameters
Large datasets
Decision-making
Identication
Assessment
Response
(Aghezzaf 2005) 1 No s X
(Soner Kara and Onut 2010) 2 No s X
(Pan and Nagi 2010) 2 No s X
(Ben-Tal et al. 2011) 1 No No X
(Mirzapour Al-E-Hashem, Malekly, and Aryanezhad 2011) 6 No s X
(Peng et al. 2011) 1 No s X
(Pishvaee, Rabbani, and Torabi 2011) 3s No X
(Babazadeh and Razmi 2012) 3 No No X
(Hahn and Kuhn 2012) 1 No Yes X
(Hasani, Zegordi, and Nikbakhsh 2012) 2 No s X
(Baghalian, Rezapour, and Farahani 2013) 2 No No X
(De Rosa et al. 2013) 2 No s X
(Ramezani, Bashiri, and Tavakkoli-Moghaddam 2013b) 2 No No X
(Hate and Jolai 2014) 3 No No X
(Huang and Goetschalckx 2014) 5 No No X
(Jin et al. 2014) 2 No No X
(Kaya, Bagci, and Turkay 2014) 2 No No X
(Akbari and Karimi 2015) 1 No No X
(Dubey, Gunasekaran, and Childe 2015) 1s No X
(Hasani, Zegordi, and Nikbakhsh 2015) 3 No s X
(Hasani and Khosrojerdi 2016) 2 No s X
(Govindan and Fattahi 2017) 1 No No X
(Zhang and Jiang 2017) 1 No No X
(Zokaee et al. 2017) 8 No s X
(Buhayenko and den Hertog 2017) 1 No s X
(Behzadi et al. 2018) 5 No s X
(Jabbarzadeh, Haughton, and Khosrojerdi 2018) 3 No s X
(Kim et al. 2018) 3 No s X
(Prakash et al. 2018) 2 No s X
(Rahmani 2018) 4 No s X
Additional References
Aghezzaf, E. 2005. \Capacity planning and warehouse location in supply chains with uncertain
demands." Journal of the Operational Research Society 56 (4): 453{462.
Ahmadi-Javid, A., and A.H. Seddighi. 2013. \A location-routing problem with disruption risk."
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 53 (1): 63{82.
Akbari, A.A., and B. Karimi. 2015. \A new robust optimization approach for integrated
multi-echelon, multi-product, multi-period supply chain network design under process un-
certainty." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 79 (1-4): 229{244.
Almansoori, A., and N. Shah. 2012. \Design and operation of a stochastic hydrogen supply
chain network under demand uncertainty." International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 37
(5): 3965{3977.
Alonso-Ayuso, A., L.F. Escudero, A. Garn, M.T. Ortu~ no, and G. P erez. 2003. \An approach
for strategic supply chain planning under uncertainty based on stochastic 0-1 programming."
Journal of Global Optimization 26 (1): 97{124.
Amid, A., S.H. Ghodsypour, and C. O'Brien. 2006. \Fuzzy multiobjective linear model for
supplier selection in a supply chain." International Journal of Production Economics 104
(2): 394{407.
Amid, A., S.H. Ghodsypour, and C. O'Brien. 2009. \A weighted additive fuzzy multiobjective
model for the supplier selection problem under price breaks in a supply Chain." International
Journal of Production Economics 121 (2): 323{332.
Amin, S.H., and G. Zhang. 2013. \A multi-objective facility location model for closed-loop
supply chain network under uncertain demand and return." Applied Mathematical Modelling
37 (6): 4165{4176.
40

==== Page 41 ====
Awudu, I., and J. Zhang. 2013. \Stochastic production planning for a biofuel supply chain
under demand and price uncertainties." Applied Energy 103: 189{196.
Ayvaz, B., B. Bolat, and N. Aydin. 2015. \Stochastic reverse logistics network design for
waste of electrical and electronic equipment." Resources, Conservation and Recycling 104:
391{404.
Azaron, A., K.N. Brown, S.A. Tarim, and M. Modarres. 2008. \A multi-objective stochastic
programming approach for supply chain design considering risk." International Journal of
Production Economics 116 (1): 129{138.
Babazadeh, R., and J. Razmi. 2012. \A robust stochastic programming approach for agile
and responsive logistics under operational and disruption risks." International Journal of
Logistics Systems and Management 13 (4): 458{482.
Baghalian, A., S. Rezapour, and R.Z. Farahani. 2013. \Robust supply chain network design
with service level against disruptions and demand uncertainties: A real-life case." European
Journal of Operational Research 227 (1): 199{215.
Behzadi, G., M.J. O'Sullivan, T.L. Olsen, F. Scrimgeour, and A. Zhang. 2017. \Robust and
resilient strategies for managing supply disruptions in an agribusiness supply chain." Inter-
national Journal of Production Economics 191: 207{220.
Behzadi, G., M.J. OSullivan, T.L. Olsen, and A. Zhang. 2018. \Allocation exibility for
agribusiness supply chains under market demand disruption." International Journal of Pro-
duction Research 56 (10): 3524{3546.
Ben-Tal, A., B.D. Chung, S.R. Mandala, and T. Yao. 2011. \Robust optimization for emergency
logistics planning: Risk mitigation in humanitarian relief supply chains." Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological 45 (8): 1177{1189.
Benyoucef, L., X. Xie, and G.A. Tanonkou. 2013. \Supply chain network design with unreliable
suppliers: A Lagrangian relaxation-based approach." International Journal of Production
Research 51 (21): 6435{6454.
Bidhandi, H. M., and R. M. Yusu. 2011. \Integrated supply chain planning under uncertainty
using an improved stochastic approach." Applied Mathematical Modelling 35 (6): 2618{2630.
Bilgen, B. 2010. \Application of fuzzy mathematical programming approach to the production
allocation and distribution supply chain network problem." Expert Systems with Applica-
tions 37 (6): 4488{4495.
Bonll, A., A. Espu~ na, and L. Puigjaner. 2008. \Proactive approach to address the uncertainty
in short-term scheduling." Computers and Chemical Engineering 32 (8): 1689{1706.
Bouzembrak, Y., H. Allaoui, G. Goncalves, H. Bouchriha, and M. Baklouti. 2013. \A possi-
bilistic linear programming model for supply chain network design under uncertainty." IMA
Journal of Management Mathematics 24 (2): 209{229.
Buhayenko, Viktoryia, and Dick den Hertog. 2017. \Adjustable Robust Optimisation approach
to optimise discounts for multi-period supply chain coordination under demand uncertainty."
International Journal of Production Research 55 (22): 6801{6823.
Cardona-Vald es, Y., A. Alvarez, and D. Ozdemir. 2011. \A bi-objective supply chain design
problem with uncertainty." Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 19 (5):
821{832.
Cardona-Vald es, Y., A. Alvarez, and J. Pacheco. 2014. \Metaheuristic procedure for a bi-
objective supply chain design problem with uncertainty." Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological 60: 66{84.
Cardoso, S.R., A.P.F.D. Barbosa-Pvoa, and S. Relvas. 2013. \Design and planning of supply
chains with integration of reverse logistics activities under demand uncertainty." European
Journal of Operational Research 226 (3): 436{451.
Chan, Y., W.B. Carter, and M.D. Burnes. 2001. \A multiple-depot, multiple-vehicle, location-
routing problem with stochastically processed demands." Computers and Operations Re-
search 28 (8): 803{826.
Chatzikontidou, A., P. Longinidis, P. Tsiakis, and M.C. Georgiadis. 2017. \Flexible supply
chain network design under uncertainty." Chemical Engineering Research and Design 128:
290 { 305.
41

==== Page 42 ====
Chen, C.-L., and W.-C. Lee. 2004. \Multi-objective optimization of multi-echelon supply chain
networks with uncertain product demands and prices." Computers and Chemical Engineer-
ing28 (6-7): 1131{1144.
Chen, C.-W., and Y. Fan. 2012. \Bioethanol supply chain system planning under supply
and demand uncertainties." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review 48 (1): 150{164.
Chibani, Akram, Xavier Delorme, Alexandre Dolgui, and Henri Pierreval. 2018. \Dynamic
optimisation for highly agile supply chains in e-procurement context." International Journal
of Production Research 0 (0): 1{26.
Cui, T., Y. Ouyang, and Z.-J.M. Shen. 2010. \Reliable facility location design under the risk
of disruptions." Operations Research 58 (4 PART 1): 998{1011.
Dayhim, M., M.A. Jafari, and M. Mazurek. 2014. \Planning sustainable hydrogen supply chain
infrastructure with uncertain demand." International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 39 (13):
6789{6801.
De Rosa, V., M. Gebhard, E. Hartmann, and J. Wollenweber. 2013. \Robust sustainable bi-
directional logistics network design under uncertainty." International Journal of Production
Economics 145 (1): 184{198.
Fattahi, M., M. Mahootchi, S.M. Moattar Husseini, E. Keyvanshokooh, and F. Alborzi. 2015.
\Investigating replenishment policies for centralised and decentralised supply chains using
stochastic programming approach." International Journal of Production Research 53 (1):
41{69.
Fazlollahtabar, H., I. Mahdavi, and A. Mohajeri. 2013. \Applying fuzzy mathematical pro-
gramming approach to optimize a multiple supply network in uncertain condition with
comparative analysis." Applied Soft Computing Journal 13 (1): 550{562.
Franca, R.B., E.C. Jones, C.N. Richards, and J.P. Carlson. 2010. \Multi-objective stochas-
tic supply chain modeling to evaluate tradeos between prot and quality." International
Journal of Production Economics 127 (2): 292{299.
Gaonkar, R.S., and N. Viswanadham. 2007. \Analytical framework for the management of
risk in supply chains." IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 4 (2):
265{273.
Gebreslassie, B.H., Y. Yao, and F. You. 2012. \Design under uncertainty of hydrocarbon
biorenery supply chains: Multiobjective stochastic programming models, decomposition
algorithm, and a Comparison between CVaR and downside risk." AIChE Journal 58 (7):
2155{2179.
Georgiadis, M.C., P. Tsiakis, P. Longinidis, and M.K. Sooglou. 2011. \Optimal design of
supply chain networks under uncertain transient demand variations." Omega 39 (3): 254{
272.
Giannoccaro, I., P. Pontrandolfo, and B. Scozzi. 2003. \A fuzzy echelon approach for inventory
management in supply chains." European Journal of Operational Research 149 (1): 185{196.
Giarola, S., N. Shah, and F. Bezzo. 2012. \A comprehensive approach to the design of ethanol
supply chains including carbon trading eects." Bioresource Technology 107: 175{185.
Goh, M., J.Y.S. Lim, and F. Meng. 2007. \A stochastic model for risk management in global
supply chain networks." European Journal of Operational Research 182 (1): 164{173.
Govindan, K., and M. Fattahi. 2017. \Investigating risk and robustness measures for sup-
ply chain network design under demand uncertainty: A case study of glass supply chain."
International Journal of Production Economics 183: 680{699.
Govindan, K., A. Jafarian, and V. Nourbakhsh. 2015. \Bi-objective integrating sustainable
order allocation and sustainable supply chain network strategic design with stochastic de-
mand using a novel robust hybrid multi-objective metaheuristic." Computers and Operations
Research 62: 112{130.
Guill en, G., A. Espu~ na, and L. Puigjaner. 2006. \Addressing the scheduling of chemical supply
chains under demand uncertainty." AIChE Journal 52 (11): 3864{3881.
Guill en, G., F.D. Mele, M. Bagajewicz, A. Espu~ na, and L. Puigjaner. 2003. \Management of
nancial and consumer satisfaction risks in supply chain design." Computer Aided Chemical
42

==== Page 43 ====
Engineering 14 (C): 419{424.
Guill en, G., F.D. Mele, M.J. Bagajewicz, A. Espu~ na, and L. Puigjaner. 2005. \Multiobjective
supply chain design under uncertainty." Chemical Engineering Science 60 (6): 1535{1553.
Guill en, G., F.D. Mele, A. Espu~ na, and L. Puigjaner. 2006. \Addressing the design of chemical
supply chains under demand uncertainty." Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research
45 (22): 7566{7581.
Guill en-Gos albez, G., and I.E. Grossmann. 2009. \Optimal design and planning of sustainable
chemical supply chains under uncertainty." AIChE Journal 55 (1): 99{121.
Gupta, A., and C.D. Maranas. 2000. \A two-stage modeling and solution framework for mul-
tisite midterm planning under demand uncertainty." Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research 39 (10): 3799{3813.
Haleh, H., and A. Hamidi. 2011. \A fuzzy MCDM model for allocating orders to suppliers in
a supply chain under uncertainty over a multi-period time horizon." Expert Systems with
Applications 38 (8): 9076{9083.
Han, C., and M. Damrongwongsiri. 2005. \Stochastic modeling of a two-echelon multiple sourc-
ing supply chain system with genetic algorithm." Journal of Manufacturing Technology
Management 16 (1): 87{108.
Hasani, A., and A. Khosrojerdi. 2016. \Robust global supply chain network design under
disruption and uncertainty considering resilience strategies: A parallel memetic algorithm
for a real-life case study." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review 87: 20{52.
Hasani, A., S.H. Zegordi, and E. Nikbakhsh. 2012. \Robust closed-loop supply chain network
design for perishable goods in agile manufacturing under uncertainty." International Journal
of Production Research 50 (16): 4649{4669.
Hasani, A., S.H. Zegordi, and E. Nikbakhsh. 2015. \Robust closed-loop global supply chain
network design under uncertainty: The case of the medical device industry." International
Journal of Production Research 53 (5): 1596{1624.
Hate, S.M., and F. Jolai. 2014. \Robust and reliable forward-reverse logistics network design
under demand uncertainty and facility disruptions." Applied Mathematical Modelling 38
(9-10): 2630{2647.
Hate, S.M., F. Jolai, S.A. Torabi, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam. 2015a. \A credibility-
constrained programming for reliable forward-reverse logistics network design under un-
certainty and facility disruptions." International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufac-
turing 28 (6): 664{678.
Hate, S.M., F. Jolai, S.A. Torabi, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam. 2015b. \Reliable design of
an integrated forward-revere logistics network under uncertainty and facility disruptions: A
fuzzy possibilistic programing model." KSCE Journal of Civil Engineering 19 (4): 1117{
1128.
Hnaien, F., X. Delorme, and A. Dolgui. 2010. \Multi-objective optimization for inventory
control in two-level assembly systems under uncertainty of lead times." Computers and
Operations Research 37 (11): 1835{1843.
Hnaien, Faicel, Alexandre Dolgui, and Desheng Dash Wu. 2016. \Single-period inventory model
for one-level assembly system with stochastic lead times and demand." International Journal
of Production Research 54 (1): 186{203.
Huang, E., and M. Goetschalckx. 2014. \Strategic robust supply chain design based on the
Pareto-optimal tradeo between eciency and risk." European Journal of Operational Re-
search 237 (2): 508{518.
Jabbarzadeh, Armin, Michael Haughton, and Amir Khosrojerdi. 2018. \Closed-loop supply
chain network design under disruption risks: A robust approach with real world application."
Computers and Industrial Engineering 116: 178 { 191.
Jalali, Sajjad, Mehdi Seifbarghy, and Seyed Taghi Akhavan Niaki. 2018. \A risk-averse
location-protection problem under intentional facility disruptions: A modied hybrid decom-
position algorithm." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review
114: 196 { 219.
43

==== Page 44 ====
Jeong, K.-Y., J.-D. Hong, and Y. Xie. 2014. \Design of emergency logistics networks, taking ef-
ciency, risk and robustness into consideration." International Journal of Logistics Research
and Applications 17 (1): 1{22.
Jerbia, Rim, Mouna Kchaou Boujelben, Mohamed Amine Sehli, and Zied Jemai. 2018. \A
stochastic closed-loop supply chain network design problem with multiple recovery options."
Computers and Industrial Engineering 118: 23 { 32.
Jin, M., R. Ma, L. Yao, and P. Ren. 2014. \An eective heuristic algorithm for robust supply
chain network design under uncertainty." Applied Mathematics and Information Sciences 8
(2): 819{826.
Jindal, A., and K.S. Sangwan. 2014. \Closed loop supply chain network design and optimisation
using fuzzy mixed integer linear programming model." International Journal of Production
Research 52 (14): 4156{4173.
Jouzdani, J., S.J. Sadjadi, and M. Fathian. 2013. \Dynamic dairy facility location and supply
chain planning under trac congestion and demand uncertainty: A case study of Tehran."
Applied Mathematical Modelling 37 (18-19): 8467{8483.
Kabak, O., and F. lengin. 2011. \Possibilistic linear-programming approach for supply chain
networking decisions." European Journal of Operational Research 209 (3): 253{264.
Kamalahmadi, M., and M.M. Parast. 2017. \An assessment of supply chain disruption miti-
gation strategies." International Journal of Production Economics 184: 210{230.
Kara, S.S., and S. Onut. 2010. \A two-stage stochastic and robust programming approach to
strategic planning of a reverse supply network: The case of paper recycling." Expert Systems
with Applications 37 (9): 6129{6137.
Kaya, O., F. Bagci, and M. Turkay. 2014. \Planning of capacity, production and inventory de-
cisions in a generic reverse supply chain under uncertain demand and returns." International
Journal of Production Research 52 (1): 270{282.
Kazemzadeh, N., and G. Hu. 2013. \Optimization models for biorenery supply chain network
design under uncertainty." Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 5 (5).
Khalili-Damghani, K., M. Tavana, and M. Amirkhan. 2014. \A fuzzy bi-objective mixed-integer
programming method for solving supply chain network design problems under ambiguous
and vague conditions." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 73
(9-12): 1567{1595.
Khatami, M., M. Mahootchi, and R.Z. Farahani. 2015. \Benders' decomposition for concur-
rent redesign of forward and closed-loop supply chain network with demand and return
uncertainties." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 79:
1{21.
Kilic, Y.E., and U.R. Tuzkaya. 2015. \A two-stage stochastic mixed-integer programming
approach to physical distribution network design." International Journal of Production Re-
search 53 (4): 1291{1306.
Kim, J., M.J. Real, and J.H. Lee. 2011. \Optimal design and global sensitivity analysis of
biomass supply chain networks for biofuels under uncertainty." Computers and Chemical
Engineering 35 (9): 1738{1751.
Kim, Joonrak, Byung Do Chung, Yuncheol Kang, and Bongju Jeong. 2018. \Robust optimiza-
tion model for closed-loop supply chain planning under reverse logistics ow and demand
uncertainty." Journal of Cleaner Production 196: 1314 { 1328.
Kiya, F., and H. Davoudpour. 2012. \Stochastic programming approach to re-designing a ware-
house network under uncertainty." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Trans-
portation Review 48 (5): 919{936.
Klibi, W., and A. Martel. 2012. \Modeling approaches for the design of resilient supply net-
works under disruptions." International Journal of Production Economics 135 (2): 882{898.
Kumar, M., P. Vrat, and R. Shankar. 2006. \A fuzzy programming approach for vendor selec-
tion problem in a supply chain." International Journal of Production Economics 101 (2):
273{285.
Kumar, S.K., and M.K. Tiwari. 2013. \Supply chain system design integrated with risk pool-
ing." Computers and Industrial Engineering 64 (2): 580{588.
44

==== Page 45 ====
Kumar, S.K., M.K. Tiwari, and R.F. Babiceanu. 2010. \Minimisation of supply chain cost
with embedded risk using computational intelligence approaches." International Journal of
Production Research 48 (13): 3717{3739.
Lababidi, H.M.S., M.A. Ahmed, I.M. Alatiqi, and A.F. Al-Enzi. 2004. \Optimizing the Supply
Chain of a Petrochemical Company under Uncertain Operating and Economic Conditions."
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 43 (1): 63{73.
Lee, D.-H., and M. Dong. 2009. \Dynamic network design for reverse logistics operations under
uncertainty." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 45 (1):
61{71.
Lee, D.-H., M. Dong, and W. Bian. 2010. \The design of sustainable logistics network under
uncertainty." International Journal of Production Economics 128 (1): 159{166.
Lee, D.-H., M. Dong, W. Bian, and Y.-J. Tseng. 2007. \Design of product recovery networks
under uncertainty." Transportation Research Record (2008): 19{25.
Levis, A.A., and L.G. Papageorgiou. 2004. \A hierarchical solution approach for multi-site ca-
pacity planning under uncertainty in the pharmaceutical industry." Computers and Chem-
ical Engineering 28 (5): 707{725.
Li, Q., and G. Hu. 2014. \Supply chain design under uncertainty for advanced biofuel produc-
tion based on bio-oil gasication." Energy 74 (C): 576{584.
Lieckens, K., and N. Vandaele. 2007. \Reverse logistics network design with stochastic lead
times." Computers and Operations Research 34 (2): 395{416.
Lin, C.-W.R., and H.-Y.S. Chen. 2003. \Dynamic allocation of uncertain supply for the per-
ishable commodity supply chain." International Journal of Production Research 41 (13):
3119{3138.
Liu, Ming, Rongfan Liu, Zhanguo Zhu, Chengbin Chu, and Xiaoyi Man. 2018. \A Bi-
Objective Green Closed Loop Supply Chain Design Problem with Uncertain Demand."
Sustainabilauthor = "Abroon Qazi and Alex Dickson and John Quigley and Barbara Gau-
denzi",you2009ity 10 (4).
Liu, S., N. Shah, and L.G. Papageorgiou. 2012. \Multiechelon supply chain planning with
sequence-dependent changeovers and price elasticity of demand under uncertainty." AIChE
Journal 58 (11): 3390{3403.
Liu, Y., and B. Guo. 2014. \A lexicographic approach to postdisaster relief logistics planning
considering ll rates and costs under uncertainty." Mathematical Problems in Engineering
2014.
Longinidis, P., and M.C. Georgiadis. 2011. \Integration of nancial statement analysis in the
optimal design of supply chain networks under demand uncertainty." International Journal
of Production Economics 129 (2): 262{276.
Longinidis, P., and M.C. Georgiadis. 2013. \Managing the trade-os between nancial perfor-
mance and credit solvency in the optimal design of supply chain networks under economic
uncertainty." Computers and Chemical Engineering 48: 264{279.
Lucas, C., S.A. Mirhassani, G. Mitra, and C.A. Poojari. 2001. \An application of Lagrangian
relaxation to a capacity planning problem under uncertainty." Journal of the Operational
Research Society 52 (11): 1256{1266.
Madadi, A., M.E. Kurz, S.J. Mason, and K.M. Taae. 2014a. \Supply chain design under qual-
ity disruptions and tainted materials delivery." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review 67: 105{123.
Madadi, A., M.E. Kurz, K.M. Taae, J.L. Sharp, and S.J. Mason. 2014b. \Supply network
design: Risk-averse or risk-neutral?" Computers and Industrial Engineering 78: 55{65.
Mak, H.-Y., and Z.-J. Shen. 2012. \Risk diversication and risk pooling in supply chain design."
IIE Transactions 44 (8): 603{621.
Mari, S.I., Y.H. Lee, and M.S. Memon. 2014. \Sustainable and resilient supply chain network
design under disruption risks." Sustainability 6 (10): 6666{6686.
Meena, P.L., and S.P. Sarmah. 2013. \Multiple sourcing under supplier failure risk and quantity
discount: A genetic algorithm approach." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review 50 (1): 84{97.
45

==== Page 46 ====
Mirakhorli, A. 2014. \Fuzzy multi-objective optimization for closed loop logistics network
design in bread-producing industries." International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology 70 (1-4): 349{362.
Miranda, P.A., and R.A. Garrido. 2004. \Incorporating inventory control decisions into a
strategic distribution network design model with stochastic demand." Transportation Re-
search Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 40 (3): 183{207.
Miranda, P.A., and R.A. Garrido. 2008. \Valid inequalities for Lagrangian relaxation in an
inventory location problem with stochastic capacity." Transportation Research Part E: Lo-
gistics and Transportation Review 44 (1): 47{65.
Mirzapour Al-E-Hashem, S.M.J., H. Malekly, and M.B. Aryanezhad. 2011. \A multi-objective
robust optimization model for multi-product multi-site aggregate production planning in a
supply chain under uncertainty." International Journal of Production Economics 134 (1):
28{42.
Mitra, K., R.D. Gudi, S.C. Patwardhan, and G. Sardar. 2009. \Towards resilient supply chains:
Uncertainty analysis using fuzzy mathematical programming." Chemical Engineering Re-
search and Design 87 (7): 967{981.
Moghaddam, K.S. 2015. \Fuzzy multi-objective model for supplier selection and order allo-
cation in reverse logistics systems under supply and demand uncertainty." Expert Systems
with Applications 42 (15-16): 6237{6254.
Mousazadeh, M., S.A. Torabi, and B. Zahiri. 2015. \A robust possibilistic programming ap-
proach for pharmaceutical supply chain network design." Computers and Chemical Engi-
neering 82: 115{128.
Mula, J., D. Peidro, and R. Poler. 2010. \The eectiveness of a fuzzy mathematical program-
ming approach for supply chain production planning with fuzzy demand." International
Journal of Production Economics 128 (1): 136{143.
Namdar, Jafar, Xueping Li, Rupy Sawhney, and Ninad Pradhan. 2018. \Supply chain resilience
for single and multiple sourcing in the presence of disruption risks." International Journal
of Production Research 56 (6): 2339{2360.
Nasiri, G.R., R. Zolfaghari, and H. Davoudpour. 2014. \An integrated supply chain production-
distribution planning with stochastic demands." Computers and Industrial Engineering 77:
35{45.
Nickel, S., F. Saldanha-da Gama, and H.-P. Ziegler. 2012. \A multi-stage stochastic supply
network design problem with nancial decisions and risk management." Omega 40 (5): 511{
524.
Nooraie, S.V., and M. M. Parast. 2015. \A multi-objective approach to supply chain risk
management: Integrating visibility with supply and demand risk." International Journal of
Production Economics 161: 192{200.
Noyan, N. 2012. \Risk-averse two-stage stochastic programming with an application to disaster
management." Computers and Operations Research 39 (3): 541{559.
Oliveira, F., V. Gupta, S. Hamacher, and I.E. Grossmann. 2013. \A Lagrangean decomposition
approach for oil supply chain investment planning under uncertainty with risk considera-
tions." Computers and Chemical Engineering 50: 184{195.
Ozceylan, E., and T. Paksoy. 2014. \Interactive fuzzy programming approaches to the strategic
and tactical planning of a closed-loop supply chain under uncertainty." International Journal
of Production Research 52 (8): 2363{2387.
Pan, F., and R. Nagi. 2010. \Robust supply chain design under uncertain demand in agile
manufacturing." Computers and Operations Research 37 (4): 668{683.
Pariazar, Mahmood, and Mustafa Y. Sir. 2018. \A multi-objective approach for supply chain
design considering disruptions impacting supply availability and quality." Computers and
Industrial Engineering 121: 113 { 130.
Park, S., T.-E. Lee, and C.S. Sung. 2010. \A three-level supply chain network design model with
risk-pooling and lead times." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review 46 (5): 563{581.
Peidro, D., J. Mula, M. Jim enez, and M. del Mar Botella. 2010. \A fuzzy linear programming
46

==== Page 47 ====
based approach for tactical supply chain planning in an uncertainty environment." European
Journal of Operational Research 205 (1): 65{80.
Peidro, D., J. Mula, and R. Poler. 2007. \Supply chain planning under uncertainty: A fuzzy
linear programming approach." In IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems , 1{6.
Peidro, D., J. Mula, and R. Poler. 2010. \Fuzzy linear programming for supply chain planning
under uncertainty." International Journal of Information Technology and Decision Making
9 (3): 373{392.
Peidro, D., J. Mula, R. Poler, and J.-L. Verdegay. 2009. \Fuzzy optimization for supply chain
planning under supply, demand and process uncertainties." Fuzzy Sets and Systems 160
(18): 2640{2657.
Peng, P., L.V. Snyder, A. Lim, and Z. Liu. 2011. \Reliable logistics networks design with
facility disruptions." Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 45 (8): 1190{1211.
Petrovic, D. 2001. \Simulation of supply chain behaviour and performance in an uncertain
environment." International Journal of Production Economics 71 (1-3): 429{438.
Petrovic, D., R. Roy, and R. Petrovic. 1998. \Modelling and simulation of a supply chain in
an uncertain environment." European Journal of Operational Research 109 (2): 299{309.
Petrovic, D., R. Roy, and R. Petrovic. 1999. \Supply chain modelling using fuzzy sets." Inter-
national Journal of Production Economics 59 (1): 443{453.
Pimentel, B.S., G.R. Mateus, and F.A. Almeida. 2013. \Stochastic capacity planning and
dynamic network design." International Journal of Production Economics 145 (1): 139{
149.
Pishvaee, M.S., and J. Razmi. 2012. \Environmental supply chain network design using multi-
objective fuzzy mathematical programming." Applied Mathematical Modelling 36 (8): 3433{
3446.
Pishvaee, M.S., and S.A. Torabi. 2010. \A possibilistic programming approach for closed-loop
supply chain network design under uncertainty." Fuzzy Sets and Systems 161 (20): 2668{
2683.
Poojari, C.A., C. Lucas, and G. Mitra. 2008. \Robust solutions and risk measures for a supply
chain planning problem under uncertainty." Journal of the Operational Research Society 59
(1): 2{12.
Prakash, Surya, Sameer Kumar, Gunjan Soni, Vipul Jain, and Ajay Pal Singh Rathore. 2018.
\Closed-loop supply chain network design and modelling under risks and demand uncer-
tainty: an integrated robust optimization approach." Annals of Operations Research .
PrasannaVenkatesan, S., and M. Goh. 2016. \Multi-objective supplier selection and order allo-
cation under disruption risk." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation
Review 95: 124{142.
PrasannaVenkatesan, S., and S. Kumanan. 2012. \Multi-objective supply chain sourcing strat-
egy design under risk using PSO and simulation." International Journal of Advanced Man-
ufacturing Technology 61 (1-4): 325{337.
Qi, L., and Z.-J.M. Shen. 2007. \A supply chain design model with unreliable supply." Naval
Research Logistics 54 (8): 829{844.
Qi, L., Z.-J.M. Shen, and L.V. Snyder. 2010. \The eect of supply disruptions on supply chain
design decisions." Transportation Science 44 (2): 274{289.
Qin, X., X. Liu, and L. Tang. 2013. \A two-stage stochastic mixed-integer program for the
capacitated logistics fortication planning under accidental disruptions." Computers and
Industrial Engineering 65 (4): 614{623.
Qin, Z., and X. Ji. 2010. \Logistics network design for product recovery in fuzzy environment."
European Journal of Operational Research 202 (2): 479{490.
Quddus, Md Abdul, Sudipta Chowdhury, Mohammad Marufuzzaman, Fei Yu, and Linkan
Bian. 2018. \A two-stage chance-constrained stochastic programming model for a bio-fuel
supply chain network." International Journal of Production Economics 195: 27 { 44.
Rahimi, Mohsen, and Vahidreza Ghezavati. 2018. \Sustainable multi-period reverse logistics
network design and planning under uncertainty utilizing conditional value at risk (CVaR)
for recycling construction and demolition waste." Journal of Cleaner Production 172: 1567
47

==== Page 48 ====
{ 1581.
Rahmani, Donya. 2018. \Designing a robust and dynamic network for the emergency blood
supply chain with the risk of disruptions." Annals of Operations Research .
Rajgopal, J., Z. Wang, A.J. Schaefer, and O.A. Prokopyev. 2011. \Integrated design and
operation of remnant inventory supply chains under uncertainty." European Journal of Op-
erational Research 214 (2): 358{364.
Ramezani, M., M. Bashiri, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam. 2013a. \A new multi-objective
stochastic model for a forward/reverse logistic network design with responsiveness and qual-
ity level." Applied Mathematical Modelling 37 (1-2): 328{344.
Ramezani, M., M. Bashiri, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam. 2013b. \A robust design for a closed-
loop supply chain network under an uncertain environment." International Journal of Ad-
vanced Manufacturing Technology 66 (5-8): 825{843.
Ramezani, M., A.M. Kimiagari, B. Karimi, and T.H. Hejazi. 2014. \Closed-loop supply chain
network design under a fuzzy environment." Knowledge-Based Systems 59: 108{120.
Rayat, F., M. Musavi, and A. Bozorgi-Amiri. 2017. \Bi-objective reliable location-inventory-
routing problem with partial backordering under disruption risks: A modied AMOSA ap-
proach." Applied Soft Computing Journal 59: 622{643. Cited By 0.
Ruiz-Femenia, R., G. Guill en-Gos albez, L. Jim enez, and J.A. Caballero. 2013. \Multi-objective
optimization of environmentally conscious chemical supply chains under demand uncer-
tainty." Chemical Engineering Science 95: 1{11.
Sabio, N., M. Gadalla, G. Guill en-Gos albez, and L. Jim enez. 2010. \Strategic planning with
risk control of hydrogen supply chains for vehicle use under uncertainty in operating costs:
A case study of Spain." International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 35 (13): 6836{6852.
Salehi Sadghiani, N., S.A. Torabi, and N. Sahebjamnia. 2015. \Retail supply chain network
design under operational and disruption risks." Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review 75: 95{114.
Salema, M.I.G., A.P. Barbosa-Povoa, and A.Q. Novais. 2007. \An optimization model for the
design of a capacitated multi-product reverse logistics network with uncertainty." European
Journal of Operational Research 179 (3): 1063{1077.
Santoso, T., S. Ahmed, M. Goetschalckx, and A. Shapiro. 2005. \A stochastic programming
approach for supply chain network design under uncertainty." European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 167 (1): 96{115.
Sawik, T. 2011. \Selection of supply portfolio under disruption risks." Omega 39 (2): 194{208.
Sawik, T. 2013. \Selection of resilient supply portfolio under disruption risks." Omega 41 (2):
259{269.
Sawik, T. 2014. \On the robust decision-making in a supply chain under disruption risks."
International Journal of Production Research 52 (22): 6760{6781.
Sawik, T. 2015. \On the fair optimization of cost and customer service level in a supply chain
under disruption risks." Omega 53: 58{66.
Sawik, Tadeusz. 2016. \On the risk-averse optimization of service level in a supply chain under
disruption risks." International Journal of Production Research 54 (1): 98{113.
Sawik, Tadeusz. 2018. \Selection of a dynamic supply portfolio under delay and disruption
risks." International Journal of Production Research 56 (1-2): 760{782.
Sharifzadeh, M., M.C. Garcia, and N. Shah. 2015. \Supply chain network design and operation:
Systematic decision-making for centralized, distributed, and mobile biofuel production using
mixed integer linear programming (MILP) under uncertainty." Biomass and Bioenergy 81:
401{414.
Shimizu, Y., H. Fushimi, and T. Wada. 2011. \Robust logistics network modeling and design
against uncertainties." Journal of Advanced Mechanical Design, Systems and Manufacturing
5 (2): 103{114.
Shu, J., Q. Ma, and S. Li. 2010. \Integrated location and two-echelon inventory network design
under uncertainty." Annals of Operations Research 181 (1): 233{247.
Shukla, A., V.A. Lalit, and V. Venkatasubramanian. 2011. \Optimizing eciency-robustness
trade-os in supply chain design under uncertainty due to disruptions." International Jour-
48

==== Page 49 ====
nal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management 41 (6): 623{646.
Singh, A.R., R. Jain, and P.K. Mishra. 2013. \Capacities-based supply chain network design
considering demand uncertainty using two-stage stochastic programming." International
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 69 (1-4): 555{562.
Sodhi, M.S., and C.S. Tang. 2009. \Modeling supply-chain planning under demand uncer-
tainty using stochastic programming: A survey motivated by asset-liability management."
International Journal of Production Economics 121 (2): 728{738.
Soleimani, H., and K. Govindan. 2014. \Reverse logistics network design and planning utilizing
conditional value at risk." European Journal of Operational Research 237 (2): 487{497.
Soleimani, H., M. Seyyed-Esfahani, and G. Kannan. 2014. \Incorporating risk measures in
closed-loop supply chain network design." International Journal of Production Research 52
(6): 1843{1867.
Soner Kara, S., and S. Onut. 2010. \A stochastic optimization approach for paper recycling
reverse logistics network design under uncertainty." International Journal of Environmental
Science and Technology 7 (4): 717{730.
Song, Ju Myung, Weiwei Chen, and Lei Lei. 2018. \Supply chain exibility and operations
optimisation under demand uncertainty: a case in disaster relief." International Journal of
Production Research 56 (10): 3699{3713.
Subulan, K., A. Baykasolu, F.B. Ozsoydan, A.S. Taan, and H. Selim. 2015. \A case-oriented
approach to a lead/acid battery closed-loop supply chain network design under risk and
uncertainty." Journal of Manufacturing Systems 37: 340{361.
Tabrizi, B.H., and J. Razmi. 2013. \Introducing a mixed-integer non-linear fuzzy model for
risk management in designing supply chain networks." Journal of Manufacturing Systems
32 (2): 295{307.
Taleizadeh, A.A., S.T.A. Niaki, and F. Barzinpour. 2011. \Multiple-buyer multiple-vendor
multi-product multi-constraint supply chain problem with stochastic demand and variable
lead-time: A harmony search algorithm." Applied Mathematics and Computation 217 (22):
9234{9253.
Tapiero, C.S., and A. Grando. 2006. \Supply risk and inventory outsourcing." Production
Planning and Control 17 (5): 534{539.
Tong, K., M.J. Gleeson, G. Rong, and F. You. 2014. \Optimal design of advanced drop-
in hydrocarbon biofuel supply chain integrating with existing petroleum reneries under
uncertainty." Biomass and Bioenergy 60: 108{120.
Torabi, S.A., M. Baghersad, and S.A. Mansouri. 2015. \Resilient supplier selection and or-
der allocation under operational and disruption risks." Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review 79: 22{48.
Tsao, Yu-Chung, Vo-Van Thanh, Jye-Chyi Lu, and Vincent Yu. 2018. \Designing sustainable
supply chain networks under uncertain environments: Fuzzy multi-objective programming."
Journal of Cleaner Production 174: 1550 { 1565.
Vahdani, B., S. Dehbari, M. Naderi-Beni, and E. Zeinali Kh. 2014. \An articial intelligence
approach for fuzzy possibilistic-stochastic multi-objective logistics network design." Neural
Computing and Applications 25 (7-8): 1887{1902.
Wang, J., and Y.-F. Shu. 2005. \Fuzzy decision modeling for supply chain management." Fuzzy
Sets and Systems 150 (1): 107{127.
Weskamp, Christoph, Achim Koberstein, Frank Schwartz, Leena Suhl, and Stefan Voss. 2018.
\A two-stage stochastic programming approach for identifying optimal postponement strate-
gies in supply chains with uncertain demand." Omega .
Wu, D.D., Y. Zhang, D. Wu, and D.L. Olson. 2010. \Fuzzy multi-objective programming for
supplier selection and risk modeling: A possibility approach." European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 200 (3): 774{787.
Wu, Dexiang, Desheng Dash Wu, Yidong Zhang, and David L. Olson. 2013. \Supply chain
outsourcing risk using an integrated stochastic-fuzzy optimization approach." Inf. Sci. 235:
242{258.
Xie, Fei, and Yongxi Huang. 2018. \A multistage stochastic programming model for a multi-
49

==== Page 50 ====
period strategic expansion of biofuel supply chain under evolving uncertainties." Transporta-
tion Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 111: 130 { 148.
Xie, Y., D. Petrovic, and K. Burnham. 2006. \A heuristic procedure for the two-level control
of serial supply chains under fuzzy customer demand." International Journal of Production
Economics 102 (1): 37{50.
Xu, J., Y. He, and M. Gen. 2009. \A class of random fuzzy programming and its application
to supply chain design." Computers and Industrial Engineering 56 (3): 937{950.
Xu, J., Q. Liu, and R. Wang. 2008. \A class of multi-objective supply chain networks optimal
model under random fuzzy environment and its application to the industry of Chinese
liquor." Information Sciences 178 (8): 2022{2043.
Yang, G.-Q., and Y.-K. Liu. 2015. \Designing fuzzy supply chain network problem by mean-
risk optimization method." Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing 26 (3): 447{458.
Yang, G.-Q., Y.-K. Liu, and K. Yang. 2015. \Multi-objective biogeography-based optimization
for supply chain network design under uncertainty." Computers and Industrial Engineering
85: 145{156.
Yilmaz Balaman, S ., and H. Selim. 2014. \A fuzzy multiobjective linear programming model
for design and management of anaerobic digestion based bioenergy supply chains." Energy
74 (C): 928{940.
Yongheng, J., M.A. Rodriguez, I. Harjunkoski, and I.E. Grossmann. 2014. \Optimal supply
chain design and management over a multi-period horizon under demand uncertainty. Part
II: A Lagrangean decomposition algorithm." Computers and Chemical Engineering 62: 211{
224.
You, F., and I.E. Grossmann. 2008. \Mixed-integer nonlinear programming models and algo-
rithms for large-scale supply chain design with stochastic inventory management." Industrial
and Engineering Chemistry Research 47 (20): 7802{7817.
You, F., and I.E. Grossmann. 2009. \Optimal Design of Large-Scale Supply Chain with Multi-
Echelon Inventory and Risk Pooling under Demand Uncertainty." Computer Aided Chemical
Engineering 26: 991{996.
You, F., and I.E. Grossmann. 2010. \Integrated multi-echelon supply chain design with in-
ventories under uncertainty: MINLP models, computational strategies." AIChE Journal 56
(2): 419{440.
You, F., and I.E. Grossmann. 2011. \Balancing responsiveness and economics in process supply
chain design with multi-echelon stochastic inventory." AIChE Journal 57 (1): 178{192.
Zahiri, B., S. Ali Torabi, M. Mohammadi, and M. Aghabegloo. 2018. \A multi-stage stochastic
programming approach for blood supply chain planning." Computers and Industrial Engi-
neering 122: 1 { 14.
Zeballos, L.J., C.A. M endez, A.P. Barbosa-Povoa, and A.Q. Novais. 2014. \Multi-period design
and planning of closed-loop supply chains with uncertain supply and demand." Computers
and Chemical Engineering 66: 151{164.
Zhang, Yong, and Yunjian Jiang. 2017. \Robust optimization on sustainable biodiesel supply
chain produced from waste cooking oil under price uncertainty." Waste Management 60:
329 { 339. Special Thematic Issue: Urban Mining and Circular Economy.
Zokaee, S., A. Jabbarzadeh, B. Fahimnia, and S.J. Sadjadi. 2017. \Robust supply chain network
design: an optimization model with real world application." Annals of Operations Research
257 (1-2): 15{44.
50

