==== Page 1 ====
1
Surrogate-Assisted Evolutionary Deep Learning
Using an End-to-End Random Forest-based
Performance Predictor
Yanan Sun, Member, IEEE, Handing Wang, Member, IEEE, Bing Xue, Member, IEEE,
Yaochu Jin, Fellow, IEEE, Gary G. Yen, Fellow, IEEE, and Mengjie Zhang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown
remarkable performance in various real-world applications. Un-
fortunately, the promising performance of CNNs can be achieved
only when their architectures are optimally constructed. The
architectures of state-of-the-art CNNs are typically hand-crafted
with extensive expertise in both CNNs and the investigated data,
which consequently hampers the widespread adoption of CNNs
for less experienced users. Evolutionary deep learning (EDL) is
able to automatically design the best CNN architectures without
much expertise. However, existing EDL algorithms generally
evaluate the ﬁtness of a new architecture by training from
scratch, resulting in the prohibitive computational cost even
operated on high-performance computers. In this paper, an end-
to-end ofﬂine performance predictor based on the random forest
is proposed to accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation in EDL. The
proposed performance predictor shows promising performance
in term of the classiﬁcation accuracy and the consumed compu-
tational resources when compared with 18 state-of-the-art peer
competitors by integrating it into an existing EDL algorithm as a
case study. The proposed performance predictor is also compared
with the other two representatives of existing performance predic-
tors. The experimental results show the proposed performance
predictor not only signiﬁcantly speeds up the ﬁtness evaluations,
but also achieves the best prediction among the peer performance
predictors.
Index Terms —evolutionary deep learning, performance pre-
dictor, surrogate model, random forest, convolutional neural
network.
I. I NTRODUCTION
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61803277, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds
for the Central Universities, in part by the National Natural Science Fund
of China for Distinguished Young Scholar under Grant 61625204, and in
part by the Marsden Fund of New Zealand Government under Contracts
VUW1209, VUW1509 and VUW1615, Huawei Industry Fund E2880/3663, and
the University Research Fund at Victoria University of Wellington 209862/3580,
and 213150/3662.
Y . Sun is with the College of Computer Science, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610065, China, and also with the School of Engineering and Computer
Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
(e-mail: ysun@scu.edu.cn).
B. Xue, and M. Zhang are with the School of Engineering and
Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600,
Wellington 6140, New Zealand (e-mails: bing.xue@ecs.vuw.ac.nz; and
mengjie.zhang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz).
H. Wang is with School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an
710071, China. (e-mail: hdwang@xidian.edu.cn).
Y . Jin is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Surrey,
Guildford GU2 7XH, U.K. (e-mail: yaochu.jin@surrey.ac.uk).
G. Yen is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Oklahoma
State University, Stillwater, OK 74078 USA (e-mail:gyen@okstate.edu).
H. Wang and B. Xue are the corresponding authors.CONVOLUTIONAL Neural Networks (CNNs) [1], [2], as
the most dominant deep learning approaches [3], have
been demonstrating their promising performance in addressing
various real-world applications, such as image classiﬁcation [4],
speech understanding [5], and natural language processing [6],
to name a few. It is well known that the performance of CNNs
highly relies upon their architectures, and a new architecture
must be redesigned if the addressed data has been changed.
Unfortunately, designing architecture with the best performance
for the investigated data requires extensive expertise in both the
CNNs and the data domain [7], which is not necessarily held
by the interested users. Designing the best CNN architecture
for the given data can be seen as an optimization problem,
which can be mathematically formulated by (1):
arg max
AL(A;Dtrain;Dtest)s:t: 2 (1)
whererefers to the parameters related to the architectures
of CNNs, such as the number of convolutional layers and the
conﬁgurations of pooling layers; refers to the parameter
space,Adenotes the CNN algorithm Aadopting the architec-
ture parameters , andLmeans the performance measure of A
on the test data Dtestafter it has been trained on the training
dataDtrain . Generally, is with discrete values, e.g., the
conﬁgurations of both convolutional and pooling layers must be
integers, which results in the architecture optimization not being
well-addressed by the exact optimization algorithms. To address
this challenge, researchers have developed algorithms (e.g., [8]–
[14]) to design the best CNN architecture by effectively solving
the problems represented in (1). Among these algorithms,
the evolutionary algorithm-based ones, which are called the
evolutionary deep learning algorithms (EDLs), are much
preferred because EDLs generally consume less computational
resource than other CNN architecture design algorithms [11]–
[14], while still can achieve the promising results. For example,
on the CIFAR10 dataset [15], the evolutionary algorithm-based
Automatic Evolving CNN (AE-CNN) algorithm ﬁnds the best
CNN architectures by consuming 22 days using three Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs), and achieves the classiﬁcation error
rate of 4:7%. However, the reinforcement learning-based neural
architecture search method [9] consumes 28 days using 800
GPUs, while achieves the classiﬁcation error rate of 6:01%
which is a worse result than AE-CNN.

==== Page 2 ====
2
Evolutionary algorithm is a type of population-based heuris-
tic computational paradigms [16]–[18], and has been widely
used in addressing various complex optimization problems [19]–
[21], mainly because of its gradient-free and insensitiveness
to local minimum [22]–[24]. In EDLs, each individual is
transformed to a CNN with the corresponding architecture
through the mapping from genotype to phenotype, and then
the weights of the CNN are initialized and iteratively trained
based onDtrain commonly with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) [25], [26] given a number of epochs. During each epoch,
the CNN also needs to be trained with multiple iterations
in which the number is determined by the adopted batch
size and the size of Dtrain . Such a single ﬁtness evaluation
typically takes several hours to days. As a result, the potential
promising architecture may not be found through EDLs within a
limited computational budget due to the time-consuming ﬁtness
evaluation. This will become even more severe in the case of
a large population and with a large number of generations,
which is a more widely used conﬁguration of evolutionary
algorithms targeting at ﬁnding the better solutions [16], [18],
[27]. Therefore, speeding up the ﬁtness evaluation of CNN is
essential in the design of EDL.
A common way to accelerate the ﬁtness evaluation of CNN
is to use a performance predictor [28]. In 2014, Swersky et al.
proposed the Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimization algorithm [29]
by using a Gaussian process regression [16], which built the
model based on the training performance in the ﬁrst tepochs
to predict performance at the T(T >t ) epoch. Followed by
the same routine, the learning curve extrapolation methods
in [30], [31] employed a set of functions from exponential
families and the Bayesian neural network, respectively, to
build the model based on the training performance in the
ﬁrsttepochs. Unfortunately, these mentioned performance
predictors are typically based on expensive Markov chain
Monte Carlo sampling procedures and manually designed curve
functions, which are with high computational complexity. In
2017, Deng et al. proposed the Peephole algorithm [32] that
predicted the performance of a CNN based on its architecture
information, where a large number of different CNNs were
trained, and the performance of all sampled networks in each
epoch was collected as the training data, and then a long-short
term memory neural network [33] is used to train the model. In
addition, the train-less accuracy predictor (TAP) [34] and the
accelerating neural network architecture search (ANNAS) [35]
algorithms also employed similar methods to predict the
performance of the given CNNs.
In fact, the optimization problem in EDLs is a type of
computationally expensive problems, which is usually solved by
surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithms (SAEAs) [36], using
cheap approximated regression and classiﬁcation models (like
Gaussian process model [37], radial basis function network [38],
etc.) to replace the expensive ﬁtness evaluation [39]. SAEAs
have shown effectiveness and efﬁciency in various real-world
optimization applications [40]. Generally, the models are
trained from a small number of expensive ﬁtness evaluations
(i.e., the samples with evaluated objective values), and then
the trained models are used as the ﬁtness predictors in the
evolutionary search to accelerate the optimization process [41].According to [42], SAEAs can be divided into online and
ofﬂine algorithms, which depend on whether expensive ﬁtness
evaluations are used to enrich the training data during the
optimization process. Although new training data in online
algorithms can signiﬁcantly improve the quality of the model
and optimization performance, ofﬂine algorithms are more
practical than online algorithms due to the hardness and
high cost in obtaining new data [40]. Without sampling new
training data, ofﬂine algorithms can be very fast, and its data
collection and optimization search are completely separated. So
far, the base algorithms commonly applied in ofﬂine SAEAs
are data pre-processing [43], data mining [42], and ensemble
learning [44], since they can effectively and robustly address
the problems having limited training data.
Our goal in this paper is to present an effective and
efﬁcient end-to-end performance predictor (in short named
E2EPP) based on random forest [45]. The adoption of random
forest lies in its effectiveness to a limited number of training
samples, applicability to discrete variables, and robustness to
its parameter settings [46], [47]. The proposed E2EPP is able
to directly know the performance of a CNN once it looks at
the new CNN architectures, which is naturally able to speed
up the evolutionary process of EDLs. The contributions of this
paper are summarized below:
1)The training data of the random forest are a set of data
pairs, and each pair is composed of the CNN architecture
and its performance. However, the architecture is modelled
by describing languages, e.g., a paragraph of words, which
cannot be directly used as the input to the random forest.
Therefore, we propose an effective encoding method that
is capable of extracting the features of CNN architectures
as the numerical values, which are further used as the
samples for training the random forest. As a case study,
AE-CNN [48], as the representative of the state-of-the-art
EDLs, is adopted to investigate the details of encoding.
2)The trained random forest is based on a set of samples
of CNN architectures (and their performance) which do
not necessarily cover all the architecture space. If the
performance prediction is adopted from the tree giving
the best performance, the obtained result may be biased.
To this end, we employ a selective ensemble strategy to
choose diverse trees for combination in the local area of
every generation.
3)Considering the two goals in term of using the per-
formance predictor: the efﬁciency in speeding up the
evolutionary process and the effectiveness in ﬁnding the
best CNN architecture, we perform extensive experiments
to verify these aspects.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
background and related work are introduced in Section II.
This is followed by the algorithm details of the proposed
random forest-based performance predictor in Section III. In
order to validate the effectiveness and the efﬁciency of the
proposed performance predictor, the experiment designs and
the experimental results are presented in Sections IV and V,
respectively. Finally, the conclusion and future works are
described in Section VI.

==== Page 3 ====
3
II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, the EDL, AE-CNN and random forest are ﬁrst
introduced as the base algorithms in Subsection II-A, which
is helpful to know the details of the proposed performance
predictor. Then, the related work to performance predictors
is presented in Subsection II-B, for better justifying the
effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed work.
A. Background
1) EDL: A general framework of EDLs [11]–[14] is com-
posed of the steps shown below:
Step 1: Randomly initialize a population with the predeﬁned
size based on the corresponding genotype-to-phenotype
mapping strategy.
Step 2: Map each genotyped individual to the corresponding
CNN, and train each CNN to obtain the classiﬁcation
accuracy on the validation dataset as its ﬁtness value.
Step 3: Use tournament selection to select the parent individ-
uals based on the ﬁtness, and then generate the new
offspring achieving the same predeﬁned size through
the crossover and mutation operators.
Step 4: Perform the environmental selection on the combined
population to select a new population surviving into
the next generation.
Step 5: Go to step 3 if the termination condition is not satisﬁed.
Otherwise, choose the individual with the best ﬁtness
and terminate the evolutionary process.
Indeed, the whole process of an EDL follows the procedure
of an evolutionary algorithm, i.e., population initialization
(Step 1), ﬁtness evaluation (Step 2), offspring generation
(Step 3) and environmental selection (Step 4). Generally, an
evolutionary algorithm involves four parameters: the maximal
generation number for the whole evolutionary process, the
population size for the population initialization and the en-
vironmental selection, and the crossover rate as well as the
mutation rate for the offspring generation. One major factor of
the promising performance of evolutionary algorithms is the
environmental selection to keep individuals with better ﬁtness
in the new population than the previous population. However,
as described in Step 2, the ﬁtness of each individual in EDL is
evaluated through the training of the corresponding CNN. For
a better understanding of the ﬁtness evaluation, the framework
of training a CNN is provided in Algorithm 1.
Generally, the training of a CNN is achieved by using
SGD on a given training dataset through hundreds of epochs
(Steps 5-11). The objective of the training is to maximize the
classiﬁcation accuracy by adjusting millions of the weights
(Step 8) in CNN. For a moderate CNN on a commonly used
benchmark dataset, e.g., CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 [15], the
training process would take from several hours to days perform-
ing even on the high-performance GPUs. Since evolutionary
algorithms belong to a class of population-based algorithms,
their required numbers of evaluations are larger than that
of SGD, which make the computational cost of EDL even
higher. For example, on the CIFAR10 dataset, the large-scale
evolutionary algorithm [12] consumed 11 days on 250 GPUs,
and the hierarchical evolutionary algorithm [13] spent 1.5 daysAlgorithm 1: Fitness Evaluation of A CNN in EDL
Input: The individual p, training datasetDtrain ,
validation datasetDvalid, training epochs T,
batch sizeb, learning rate , objective function
L.
Output: The ﬁtness.
1net Decodepinto the corresponding CNN
architecture;
2Add the classiﬁcation layer to the end of net;
3Randomly initialize the weights winnet;
4t 0;
5whilet<T do
6 foreach batch data in Dtrain do
7rw Compute the gradient by @L=@w;
8w w rw;
9 end
10t t+ 1;
11end
12Calculate the classiﬁcation accuracy of netonDvalid;
13Return the ﬁtness.
on 200 GPUs. Such a large number of GPUs may not be
available to many researchers. To address such a challenge,
it is of great importance to reduce the computational cost
for EDLs by developing performance predictors, which could
replace most of those expensive ﬁtness evaluations, to speed
up EDLs relying on limited computational resources.
2) AE-CNN: As the performance predictor is part of EDL
in this research, an EDL method should be provided before
the performance predictor is detailed. In this work, the AE-
CNN algorithm developed by the authors is selected as the
representative EDL, which is mainly based on the reasons that:
1) it shows promising performance among existing EDLs [48],
and 2) the source code of AE-CNN is available to the public.
Noting that the proposed performance predictor is applicable
to any existing EDLs [8]–[14].
The AE-CNN algorithm [48] is an automatic EDL algo-
rithm based on the building blocks of the state-of-the-art
ResNet [49] and DenseNet [50], which has shown the promising
performance on the CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets [15]
compared to state-of-the-art CNNs manually designed and
other semi-automatic and automatic EDL algorithms [48]. The
AE-CNN algorithm used in this work is to prepare samples for
training the random forest, and then the trained random forest
is used as the performance predictor in AE-CNN to verify
the effectiveness and efﬁciency. In this subsection, we mainly
introduce the genotype-to-phenotype mapping of AE-CNN
for the completeness of the presentation, which enables the
ability of evolutionary algorithms to model CNN architectures.
These CNN architectures are the input to the random forest
(the details of how to feed the architecture information to the
random forest will be discussed in Section III).
The CNN architectures generated by AE-CNN are composed
of the DenseNet Blocks (DBs), ResNet Blocks (RBs) and
Pooling Blocks (PBs). Each DB or RB is composed of multiple
DenseNet Units (DUs) and ResNet Units (RUs), respectively,

==== Page 4 ====
4
while a PB consists of only one pooling layer. Each DU, RU,
or PB differs in terms of the parameter settings. The parameters
of a DU are the sizes of input and output (denoted by inand
out, respectively), while those of an RU are the same as those
of a DU, in addition to an increasing factor (denoted by k). The
parameter of a PB is only the pooling type (i.e., the maximal
ormean pooling type) because its other parameters are all set
to ﬁxed values. Because a DB/RB is composed of multiple
DUs/RUs, the parameters of a DB/RB are the corresponding
parameters of a DU/RU and the amount (denoted by amount )
of DUs/RUs in a DB/RB. In addition, as the DBs, RBs and PBs
compose a CNN with an order, an extra parameter (denoted by
id) is also used to represent the corresponding position in the
CNN. Obviously, a CNN generated by AE-CNN is composed
of sequential blocks which may be the DUs, RUs or PBs. When
the block is an RB, the parameters are the id,amount ,inand
out; when the block is a DB, the parameters are id,amount ,
k,inandout; when the block is a PB, the parameter is the
pooling type denoted by type. Noting that the inof the current
RB/DB should be equal to the outof its previous RB/DB for
the reason of constructing a valid CNN.
3) Random Forest: Compared with other learning algorithms,
such as neural networks, the random forest has the advantages
of directly accepting the discrete data as input, almost having
no extra parameters to tune and not relying on a large amount
of training data [50]. These advantages are the exact reason for
employing the random forest in this work. Random forest [45]
is an ensemble learning method by operating a set of decision
trees for classiﬁcation and regression tasks [46]. During the
training of random forest, each decision tree randomly selects
a part of the whole feature set and then learns the mapping
from the selected features to the corresponding target. During
the predicting process, each decision tree selects the same
features as it selects in the training phase, and then output
the corresponding prediction. The random forest uses the
average output of the selected decision trees as its ﬁnal output.
Randomly selecting a part of the whole feature set is also the
famous random subspace method [47], which has been shown
to be simple yet effective.
B. Related Work
The existing performance predictors can be classiﬁed into
two different categories: performance predictors based on the
learning curve and end-to-end performance predictors, both
of which are based on the training-predicting computational
paradigm. The representatives of these two types are the Freeze-
thaw Bayesian Optimization (FBO) algorithm [29] and the
Peephole algorithm [32].
The FBO algorithm uses a regression model based on
Bayesian Optimization to predict the performance of a CNN.
The regression model is built based on the data sampled from
the learning curve regarding the ﬁrst tepochs, i.e., a series of
data pairs in different training epochs and the corresponding
performance at these epochs. After the regression model that
has been optimized by the Bayesian Optimization method, it is
used to predict the performance of the same CNN at the T-th
epoch where T >t . The Peephole algorithm uses a number ofCNN architectures and their corresponding performances that
have been achieved by training the CNNs with Tepochs, as
the training samples to train a long-short time memory neural
network [33]. The trained neural network directly predicts the
performance of a new CNN based its architecture, which is
called the end-to-end mechanism because the end in the input
is the raw data while the end in the output is the classiﬁcation
accuracy. Because the architecture cannot be directly used as
the input data of the neural network, the Peephole algorithm
employs the word vector technique to map the CNN architecture
to a numerical value.
The major advantage of the FBO algorithm remains in the
trained-CNN-free nature, i.e., it does not need any trained
CNNs in advance. Because training a CNN is time-consuming,
varying from several days to weeks, the FBO algorithm is
efﬁcient. However, it will not be effective when the learning
curve is not smooth because the curve ﬁtting works under the
assumption that the curve is smooth. In recent deep learning
applications, the learning curve is usually not smooth because
a schedule of learning rates is usually used. Once the learning
rate is changed, the learning curve will have a non-smooth
segment. Another limitation of the FBO algorithm is the non-
end-to-end nature (i.e., in predicting the performance of each
CNN, a part of the training data regarding this CNN must be
collected for training the predictor), which requires much more
labour work when it is used. Owing to the end-to-end nature,
the Peephole algorithm is more convenient for use. However,
the major drawback of Peephole remains in the requirement
of a large number of training samples, which results in added
computational complexity of collecting train samples exceeding
the EDL without using performance predictors. For example,
Peephole used over 8;000fully trained CNN architectures as
the training data. However, EDLs generally achieve promising
performance by evaluating only hundreds of individuals. If we
have enough computational resources to evaluate the 8;000
CNN architectures, we will not need to develop the performance
predictor. Such a limitation is largely caused by its adopted
regression mode, i.e., the neural network-based algorithm,
which typically highly relies on a large amount of labelled
training data.
The proposed performance predictor has the advantages of
the end-to-end manner and relying upon only limited training
data, which address both limitations of the existing performance
predictors discussed above.
III. P ROPOSED ALGORITHM
As mentioned, the main challenge of EDL is the high
computational cost of evaluating a single CNN architecture.
Inspired by ofﬂine SAEAs, we use random forest [46] as the
ﬁtness predictor to replace the expensive ﬁtness evaluation.
For a better understanding, Fig. 1 shows the framework of the
proposed performance predictor as well as the associated EDL.
The random forest-based performance predictor is learned from
a number of different CNN architectures that have been trained
for a classiﬁcation task with their accuracy. Compared with
the CNN training process, the random forest construction and
prediction is computationally cheaper and can be repeatedly

==== Page 5 ====
5
Data collection
E2EPP
EDLData 1
Data 2
Data NClassifier 
accuracy 1
Classifier 
accuracy 2
Classifier 
accuracy NCART 1 CART 2 CART kRandom 
feature 
selectionRandom 
feature 
selectionRandom 
feature 
selection
InitializationArchitecture 
discoveringFitness 
predictionSelectionPredictor 
selectionPredictor 
combinationEncodingEncoding
Encoding
Encoding
Decision variables: CNN 
architectures Training Objective Predictor pool
Stop?Output 
optimum
Fig. 1. Main frame of the proposed algorithm.
used throughout the evolutionary optimization. Thus, the high
computational cost in EDL can be relieved.
As shown in Fig. 1 that is composed of three blocks,
i.e., the data collection, E2EPP and EDL. The proposed
E2EPP performance predictor is part of EDL. Firstly, a set of
training data is collected for training the random forest-based
predictor, where the collection is achieved by performing the
corresponding EDL without using E2EPP. Each data sample
is composed of the CNN architecture and the corresponding
classiﬁcation accuracy that is obtained by training the CNN
from scratch. Secondly, those architectures are encoded into
discrete code (shown in Subsection III-A ) for building the
random forest-based predictor pool with a large number (say
K) regression trees (denoted as CARTs) [51] (shown in
Subsection III-B ). During each generation of the EDL, the
newly generated CNN architecture is encoded as the input to
the random forest, and then its performance is predicted by
using the adaptive combination of CARTs from the predictor
pool (shown in Subsection III-C ). When the EDL terminates,
the CNN architecture that has the best prediction performance
is output. Noting that there is no further CNN training during
the optimization process.
Since the CNN architecture is presented as discrete variables,
random forest [52], which is suited for discrete regression
tasks and also relies on only limited labelled data [53], is
adopted as the ﬁtness predictor in the proposed algorithm.
Also, as a selective ensemble of CARTs considering both
global and local landscape, the random forest-based predictor
is adaptively updated over the generations of the evolutionary
search, where the population is distributed in different local
regions and a ﬁxed random forest cannot guarantee accuracyin those local regions. In the following subsections, we will
ﬁrst introduce the details of encoding of the CNN architectures
to the proper format for the random forest, training of the
random forest, and ﬁtness prediction using the trained random
forest in Subsections III-A ,III-B andIII-C , respectively. Then,
the strength and the weakness of the proposed performance
predictor are summarized in Subsection III-D.
A. Encoding
The encoding operates on the trained CNNs whose architec-
tures are randomly initialized. To collect this data, we use AE-
CNN to randomly generate a set of valid CNN architectures.
A valid CNN architecture means that this architecture can
be trained with a predeﬁned training routine without any
exceptions such as the out-of-memory errors causing a zero
classiﬁcation accuracy. Based on the description shown in
Subsection II-A2, the collected training data are summarized
as below:
1)RBs and DBs: Each generated CNN architecture is
composed of four RBs and four DBs at most, the number
of output channels of each block varies between [32;512]
that is set based on the conventions of state-of-the-art
CNNs [50], [54].
2)PBs: Each generated CNN architecture contains four
pooling layers at most. There are two types of PBs: MAX
and MEAN.
Generally, we encode a CNN architecture into a chromosome
with3Nb+ 2Npdiscrete variables, when the maximal number
of RBs and DBs is Nband the maximal number of PBs is
Np. For the ﬁrst 3Nbvariables, each RB or DB is encoded

==== Page 6 ====
6
Algorithm 2: Encoding A CNN Architecture
Input: The CNN architecture A, the maximal number
Bnof DBs and RBs, the maximal number Np
of PBs.
Output: The encoded architecture information.
1blist ;;
2plist ;;
3l Calculate the number of blocks in A;
4forfori 1toldo
5block Get thei-th block ofA;
6 ifblock is a RB then
7 Put1intoblist;
8 Put the values of the outandamount ofblock
intoblist;
9 else if block is a DB then
10 Put the values of the k,outandamount of
block intoblist;
11 else
12 ifblock is a maximal pooling layer then
13 Put1toplist;
14 else
15 Put0toplist;
16 end
17 Putitoplist;
18 end
19end
20Put zero toblistuntiljblistj= 3Nb;
21Put zero toplistuntiljplistj= 2Np;
22Returnblist[plist.
into a triplet as [ type,out,amount ], where the block type
for RBs is set to 1, and that for DBs are set to 12,20and40
whenkis equal to 12,20and40, respectively. Noting that
the parameter of infor each RB/DB is not encoded because it
can be calculated by the outof its previous RB/DB, and the
smaller number of decision variables could result in a better
performance for regression model when the training data is
limited [46]. For the following 2Npvariables, each pooling
layer is encoded into a pair as [pooling type, layer position],
themaximal andmean pooling types are presented by 1 and
0, respectively. If a CNN architecture has bRBs and DBs,
andpPBs, then its 3b+ 1-th to 3Nb-th variables are set to
zeros, and its 3Nb+ 2p+ 1-th to 3Nb+ 2Np-th variables are
set to zeros as well. Therefore, the performance predictor by
using random forest is based on the input data with 3Nb+2Np
discrete decision variables, and the output is a continuous value
within the range of [0;1]. Algorithm 2 shows the details of
encoding a CNN architecture into the data that can be directly
used by the random forest, and jjis a countable operator.
B. Training of the Random Forest
A large number of CARTs are generated in the predictor
pool. Each CART is trained by the whole training data with a
random subset of features (i.e. discrete variables), where each
discrete variable is assigned a probability of 0.5 in order to
maximize the diversity of the predictor pool [55]. Each nodeof a CART presents a rectangle region in the decision space.
The mean squared error of the output of those samples in that
region (node) determines whether this node needs splitting or
not (i.e., whether the mean squared error decrease is smaller
than a set threshold Ts[51], and if so, this node is a leaf node).
WhenKCARTs are obtained, the predictor pool is ready for
the optimizer. The details of training the CARTs are shown in
Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: Performance Predictor Training
Input: TheKCARTs, the encoded training data
Dtrain , the feature number m.
Output: TheKtrained CARTs and their selected
feature ids.
1I ;;
2fori 1toKdo
3CART Select thei-th CART from CARTs;
4v2Rm Randomly generated a vector from
[0;1];
5Ii Collect the position of the elements whose
values are greater than 0.5 in v;
6 TrainCART on the features whose ids are in Ii;
7I I[Ii;
8end
Output: TheKtrained CARTs and the corresponding
selected feature ids I.
C. Performance Prediction
Since the computational cost of training a single CNN is
very high, it is impractical to obtain any new training data
for the predictor pool during the optimization process. Thus,
those predictors cannot be updated or validated, which is
the main challenge of ofﬂine SAEAs [40]. To deal with the
lack of training data, a large number of surrogate models are
employed as ensemble members in a recent ofﬂine SAEA
[44]. The results indicate that a selective ensemble surrogate
can effectively improve the robustness of the obtained solution
when the new training data is unavailable. Also, those ensemble
members are adaptively combined in each generation to provide
local information on the current population. Motivated by
the combination strategy that was originally proposed in our
previous work [44] for addressing decision variables having
continuous values, we employ it to update the random forest-
based predictor in every generation in the proposed algorithm,
i.e., we choose QCARTs from the predictor pool and then
use their average prediction as the ﬁtness value. Although the
decision variables of the proposed algorithm are discrete, it is
experimentally found that the combination strategy still works
well.
In each generation, all of the Ktrained CARTs re-estimated
the performance on the CNN Abthat has the best-predicted
ﬁtness value; and then Qout of theKCARTs are uniformly
selected from the Kordered CARTs based on their prediction
values onAb. TheQCARTs are combined as the ensemble
performance predictor to evaluate both parent and offspring
population. Such selection is based on the performance diversity

==== Page 7 ====
7
of CARTs around the current best CNN architecture Ab. After
that, the generated CNN architectures Aare evaluated by
using the ensemble predictor of QCARTs. Thus, the adaptive
predictor can balance the global tendency and local information
in the ﬁtness landscape, where the combination of KCARTs
predicts the global average landscape and that of Qdiverse
CARTs in a small area reﬁnes the local landscape. The details of
the prediction process in a generation are shown in Algorithm 4.
D. Strength and Weakness of E2EPP
As have been introduced in Subsection II-B, the limitations
of the existing performance predictors are the non-end-to-end
nature, the strict assumption on the smoothness of the learning
curve, and the availability of the large training samples. The
proposed method has been carefully designed to address these
limitations.
The proposed algorithm is end-to-end and does not rely on
the learning curve no matter whether it is smooth or not. Firstly,
the end-to-end nature is more convenient in practice because
we do not need to prepare the training data in predicting the
performance of each CNN. Secondly, because the proposed
algorithm does not need to ﬁt the learning curve, the predicted
performance is better than the existing approaches based on
the learning curve. This is theoretically evidenced by the
universal approximation theorem [56] that the learning curve-
based approaches can achieve promising performance only
when the learning curve is smooth. However, in practice, the
learning curve is not always smooth.
On the other hand, the proposed algorithm does not require
a large number of training samples. Most existing approaches
employing deep learning techniques succeed subject to the
availability of a large amount of training data. In the CNN
performance prediction, such training data is collected by
training a lot of CNNs from scratch. However, the training is
time-consuming even if performing on GPUs, while the main
goal of designing performance predictors is to save the time
of training CNNs. If we put enough time to collect a sufﬁcient
amount of training data, the performance predictor design will
lose its original purpose. In the proposed method, we use
the random forest as the base operator to learn the mapping
between the CNN architecture and its performance. The reason
is that random forest can achieve a promising performance on
limited amount of training data, which has been theoretically
proven and practically investigated [45], [46].
Unfortunately, the weakness of the proposed algorithm is
the unknown of the minimal number of training samples for
achieving promising performance, while the minimal number
is case by case for different tasks. In practice, we need to use
an incremental strategy to sample training samples until the
desired performance is achieved.
IV. E XPERIMENT DESIGN
In order to verify the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the
proposed performance predictor, a series of experiments are
carefully designed and performed. Although the proposed
performance predictor aims at speeding up the ﬁtness evaluation
of EDL, the ultimate goal of the performance predictor isAlgorithm 4: Performance Predicting
Input: TheKtrained CARTs, the selected features ids
Iof each CART, the current best CNN Ab, the
number of most diverse prediction Q, the
generated architectures Ato be evaluated.
Output: The ﬁtness values of A.
1Y ;;
2Ab
encoded EncodeAbbased on the details shown in
Subsection III-A;
3fori 1toKdo
4CART Select thei-th CART from CARTs;
5x FromAb
encoded select the elements whose ids
are inIi;
6y UseCART predict the classiﬁcation accuracy
onx;
7Y Y[x;
8end
9Y Order the elements in Y;
10ICART
selected Uniformly select QCARTs based on Y;
11fori 1tojAjdo
12Fi the mean prediction of Qselected CARTs
(ICART
selected ) onjAij;
13end
14ReturnF.
to ﬁnd the best CNN architecture that achieves a promising
classiﬁcation performance on the image data at hand. Therefore,
two experiments are performed in this paper: 1) investigating
the classiﬁcation performance of the proposed performance
predictor with AE-CNN, and 2) inspecting the efﬁciency
of the proposed performance predictor. In this section, the
selected peer competitors and benchmark datasets, as well as
the parameter settings for these two types of experiments, are
detailed.
A. Peer Competitors
In comparing the classiﬁcation performance, the chosen
peer competitors are divided into three different categories:
the state-of-the-art CNNs whose architectures are manually
designed, the state-of-the-art CNN architecture designs based
on non-evolutionary algorithms (mainly based on reinforcement
learning), and the state-of-the-art EDL algorithms. The ﬁrst
category covers DenseNet [50], ResNet [54], Maxout [57],
VGG [58], Network in Network [59], Highway Network [60],
All-CNN [61], FractaNet [62]. Considering the promising
performance of ResNet, we use its two different versions:
ResNet with the depths of 101 and 1;202, respectively.
For the convenience of the discussion, they are denoted as
ResNet (depth=101) and ResNet (depth=1,202), respectively.
The second category consists of NAS [9], MetaQNN [8],
EAS [9], and Block-QNN-S [10]. The third category includes
Genetic CNN [11], Large-scale Evolution [12], Hierarchical
Evolution [13], and CGP-CNN [14]. Considering the proposed
performance predictor is introduced in a case study of AE-CNN,
AE-CNN combined with E2EPP (denoted as AE-CNN+E2EPP)
is chosen to perform this experiment.

==== Page 8 ====
8
bird
cat
horse
(a) CIFAR10
baby
dolphin
snail (b) CIFAR100
Fig. 2. Examples of CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 shown in Figs. 2a and 2b, respectively. Each row represents two samples from the same category and the words
in the left refer to the corresponding category name.
For the second experiment, the selected peer competitors
are the existing performance predictors [30], [32] discussed in
Subsection II-B.
B. Benchmark Datasets
Benchmark datasets are only required by the ﬁrst experiment.
The CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets are selected as the
benchmark datasets. Both benchmark datasets are selected
mainly because of their wide adoption by the state-of-the-art
CNNs and CNN architecture design algorithms.
CIFAR10 is a 10-category natural object classiﬁcation
dataset, consisting of a training dataset with 50;000images
and a test dataset with 10;000images, and each image has the
dimension of 3232. In the training dataset, each category
has roughly the equal number of samples, while in the test
dataset, each category has the exact same number of samples.
CIFAR100 is just like CIFAR10, except that it is 100-
category. Because CIFAR100 has the same number of images
in the training images and test images as those of CIFAR10,
each category in CIFAR100 only has one-tenth of images
as that in CIFAR10. Due to the smaller number of training
data in each category and a larger number of classiﬁcation
categories than CIFAR10, CIFAR100 is a more complex dataset
for classiﬁcation than CIFAR10.
For each image of both benchmark datasets, the object to be
classiﬁed commonly occupies a small area of the entire image,
and also the size, the area, and the position of each object differ
to each other in other images, even when they are from the
same category. An example of these two benchmark datasets
are shown in Fig. 2 for a glance, where each row denotes the
objects from the same category, and the label leading in each
row denotes the ground-truth of the corresponding object.
C. Parameter Settings
In this subsection, the parameter settings for generating the
training data from AE-CNN are detailed at ﬁrst, and then
those of the proposed performance predictor are introduced
next. Noting that these parameter settings are applied to both
experiments.
Based on the conventions of the deep learning community,
the SGD algorithm is used to train the CNN architectures
whose weights are initialized with the commonly used Xavier
method [63]; the batch size is set to 128; the weight decay
is set to 510 4; each CNN is trained 350 epochs, and
the learning rate is set to 0:01for the ﬁrst epoch and the151-th to the 249-th epoch, 0:1for the second to the 150-th
epoch, and 0:001for the remaining epochs. The classiﬁcation
accuracy is evaluated on the “validation dataset1”. Because
the used benchmark datasets do not have the corresponding
validation dataset, 20% images are randomly selected from the
corresponding training dataset as the validation dataset based
on the conventions. All the CNNs are trained on three GPUs
with the same model of NVIDIA 1080TI. In addition, we set
both maximal numbers of RB and DB to 4because of the
limited GPU memory. Because each pooling operation halves
the input size one time, and the input sizes of CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 are both 3232, the maximal number of pooling
layers is set to 4. Furthermore, based on the conventions of
DenseNet,kis selected fromf12;20;40g, and the maximal
numbers of DUs in a DB are 10whenk= 12 andk= 20 , and
5whenk= 40 . The maximal number of RUs in an RB is set
to10. Based on our conﬁguration for generating the training
data,NbandNpare set equal to 8and4, respectively, and the
decision variable length of each training data for the random
forest is 32(83 + 42). To build the performance predictor
pool, we generate 1000 CARTs. The threshold of stopping
node splitting is set as 1e 42(2is the variance of the
training data) when growing each CART. In each generation,
100CARTs are selected to combine the random forest-based
predictor. All the parameter settings are summarized in Table I.
In performing the CNN architecture design by using AE-
CNN and the proposed E2EPP method, we set both the
maximal generation number and the population size to 20,
the probabilities for the crossover and mutation are set to 0.9
and 0.1, respectively, as suggested in AE-CNN. Noting that
before E2EPP is used for each generated CNN architecture,
the CNN architecture is evaluated in the GPUs for one epoch
so that the generated CNN can be normally evaluated by
E2EPP, i.e., the employed GPUs can carry the CNN architecture
and will not lead to an out-of-memory error. This is also for
keeping a similar data distribution between the training data
and the test data for E2EPP. After the evolutionary process, the
individual with the best classiﬁcation accuracy is chosen and
then fully trained with the same training routine as collecting
1We are aware of different deﬁnitions on the validation (data)set from
literature. Based on the convention of the machine learning community, the
validation set is used only for controlling overﬁtting and model selection, and
the selected model cannot be updated and improved via the validation set. In
evolutionary deep learning, after the individuals (models) are selected based
on their performance of the “validation set”, they are updated and possibly
improved by genetic operators during evolution. So we use the quotation marks
to highlight its different meaning here from its traditional meaning.

==== Page 9 ====
9
the training data for ﬁve independent runs, and the best result is
reported, which is followed the conventions from deep learning
community.
TABLE I
ASUMMARY OF THE PARAMETER SETTINGS .
Parameter name Parameter value
batch size 128
weight decay 510 4
training epochs 350
learning rate 0:01for1, and 151–249 epochs;
0:1for2–150 epochs; 0:001 for
251–350 epochs
kof the DB f12,20,40g
maximal number of DUs in a DB 10whenk= 12 andk= 20 ;5
whenk= 40
maximal number of RUs in a RB 10
maximal number of DBs ( Np) 4
maximal number of RBs ( Nb) 8
generation number 20
population size 20
crossover probability 0:9
mutation probability 0:1
number of CARTs 1000
threshold of stopping node splitting 1e 42(2is the variance of
the training data)
number of selected CARTs 100
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The results of the designed experiments are presented
and analyzed in this section. Speciﬁcally, the classiﬁcation
performance of AE-CNN+E2EPP, in terms of the classiﬁcation
accuracy and the consumed GPU days, are elaborated in
Subsection V-A. In order to extensively investigate the proposed
E2EPP performance predictor, its efﬁciency and effectiveness
are individually tested, and the corresponding experimental
results are shown in Subsections V-B andV-C, respectively. In
addition, the comparision to Radial Basis Network (RBN) has
also been done to show the promising performnace of random
forest employed in the proposed E2EPP performance predictor.
A. Overall Results
Table II presents the experimental results in terms of the
classiﬁcation accuracy and consumed GPU days of the com-
pared algorithms. Speciﬁcally, Table II is divided into ﬁve rows:
the second to fourth rows denote the state-of-the-art CNNs
manually designed, the state-of-the-art CNN architecture design
algorithms based on non-evolutionary algorithms, and the
state-of-the-art CNN architecture design algorithms based on
evolutionary algorithms (i.e., the EDL algorithms), respectively;
the last row shows the result of the proposed performance
predictor used in AE-CNN (i.e., AE-CNN+E2EPP). In addition,
the ﬁrst column shows the names of the compared algorithms;
the second and the third columns show the classiﬁcation
accuracy on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, and the fourth column
shows the consumed GPU days for achieving the corresponding
classiﬁcation accuracy by the corresponding architecture design
algorithms. These architecture design algorithms generally
report their consumed numbers of GPUs and days. For the
convenience of the comparison, we unify them by using “GPUdays” as an indicator expressing the utilized computational
resource. For example, one GPU day means a GPU is fully
consumed in one day to achieve the classiﬁcation accuracy. All
the results of the peer competitors in this table are extracted
from their seminal papers, in addition to the GPU days that we
convert it by multiplying the number of GPUs with the number
of days taken. The symbol “–” means the corresponding paper
does not provide the corresponding result publicly available.
Noting that the GPU days of AE-CNN+E2EPP is mainly caused
by collecting the training data but not performing E2EPP.
For the classiﬁcation accuracy obtained by the state-of-the-art
CNN manually designed, on the CIFAR10 benchmark dataset,
AE-CNN+E2EPP achieves, on the average, the classiﬁcation
accuracy of 1:5%higher than ResNet (depth= 101), VGG
and All-CNN, 2:04% higher than ResNet (depth= 1;202) and
Highway Network, and even 3:78% higher than Maxout and
Network in Network, respectively, while slightly lower than
DesnNet ( 0:04%) and FractalNet ( 0:06%). On the CIFAR100
benchmark dataset, AE-CNN+E2EPP, whose classiﬁcation
accuracy is 77:98%, outperforms all other peer competitors that
achieve the classiﬁcation accuracy varying from 77:70% (by
FractalNet) to 61:40% (by Maxout). AE-CNN+E2EPP demon-
strates the promising performance among peer competitors in
this category.
Compared with non-evolutionary algorithms, AE-
CNN+E2EPP achieves the better classiﬁcation accuracy
than NAS and MetaQQ, but a little worse than EAS and
Block-QNN-S on CIFAR10; on CIFAR100, the classiﬁcation
accuracy of AE-CNN+E2EPP is signiﬁcantly better than that
of MetaQQ while slightly worse than that of Block-QNN-S.
In addition, NAS, MetaQNN and Block-QNN-S achieve
their classiﬁcation accuracies by consuming 22;400,100and
90GPU days, respectively, while AE-CNN+E2EPP only
consumes 8:5GPU days. In addition, AE-CNN+E2EPP also
consumes fewer GPU days than that of EAS.
Compared with other EDLs, AE-CNN+E2EPP shows lower
classiﬁcation accuracy than that of Hierarchical Evolution,
while higher than those of Genetic CNN, Large-scale Evolution
and CGP-CNN on CIFAR10. On CIFAR100, AE-CNN+E2EPP
shows the highest classiﬁcation accuracy than others. Further-
more, AE-CNN+E2EPP also consumes the fewest GPU days
than other peer competitors in this category.
In fact, EAS, Block-QNN-S, Hierarchical Evolution and
CGP-CNN are all semi-automatic CNN architecture design al-
gorithms, i.e., they design the CNN architectures based on both
the expertise of manually designed CNNs and the automatic
ways of EDLs. To this end, it is reasonable that CNN+E2EPP
is inferior to them in terms of the classiﬁcation accuracy.
In summary, AE-CNN+E2EPP wins 26 times out of the 30
classiﬁcation accuracy comparisons, and also consumes the
least GPU days among all architecture design peer competitors.
B. Efﬁciency of E2EPP
The experimental results presented in Table II have indicated
that AE-CNN can achieve promising classiﬁcation accuracy
when the proposed E2EPP is used, which is the ultimate goal
of designing the performance predictor. In this subsection,

==== Page 10 ====
10
TABLE II
THE COMPARISON OF AE-CNN+E2EPP AND THE PEER COMPETITORS IN TERMS OF THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) AND THE CONSUMED GPU
DAYS ON THE CIFAR10 AND CIFAR100 BENCHMARK DATASETS .
Peer Competitors CIFAR10 CIFAR100 GPU Days
state-of-the-art CNNs
manually designedDenseNet [50] 94.76 75.58 –
ResNet (depth=101) [54] 93.57 74.84 –
ResNet (depth=1,202) [54] 92.07 72.18 –
Maxout [57] 90.70 61.40 –
VGG [58] 93.34 7.95 –
Network in Network [59] 91.19 64.32 –
Highway Network [60] 92.28 67.61 –
All-CNN [61] 92.75 66.29 –
FractalNet [62] 94.78 77.70 –
CNN architecture design algorithms
based on non-evolutionary methodsNAS [9] 93.91 – 22,400
MetaQNN [8] 93.08 27.14 100
EAS [9] 95.77 – 10
Block-QNN-S [10] 95.62 79.35 90
CNN architecture design algorithms
based on evolutionary methodsGenetic CNN [11] 92.90 70.95 17
Large-scale Evolution [12] 94.60 77.00 2,750
Hierarchical Evolution [13] 96.37 – 300
CGP-CNN [14] 94.02 – 27
AE-CNN + E2EPP 94.70 77.98 8.5
we will speciﬁcally investigate the efﬁciency of E2EPP by
disabling and enabling it in AE-CNN. To do a fair comparison,
AE-CNN is performed with the same parameter settings as
those of AE-CNN+E2EPP on both CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.
We record the consumed GPU days of AE-CNN when it has a
new generated CNN architecture whose ﬁtness value satisﬁes
the condition formulated by (2)
f1 f2
f20:01 (2)
wheref1denotes the ﬁtness of the new CNN architecture
generated by AE-CNN, and f2denotes the ﬁtness of AE-
CNN+E2EPP shown in Table II.
CIFAR10 CIFAR10005101520253035GPU days
722
1033AE-CNN+E2EPP
AE-CNN
Fig. 3. The consumed GPU days of AE-CNN and AE-CNN+E2EPP when
achieving the same classiﬁcation accuracy on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.
Fig. 3 shows the comparisons of the consumed GPU days
when AE-CNN satisﬁes the condition of (2) on CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100. The numbers above each bar display the consumed
GPU days by the corresponding algorithm. The bars ﬁlled with
the symbol of “” denote the results of AE-CNN+E2EPP, while
the bars ﬁlled with the symbol of “ ” denote that of AE-CNN.
Clearly, it can be seen from Fig. 3 that E2EPP has signiﬁcantlyimproved the efﬁciency of AE-CNN for ﬁnding the best CNN
architectures. Particularly, E2EPP saves 214% and230% fewer
GPU days on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, respectively, when it
is used in AE-CNN. Therefore, the goal of designing such a
proposed performance predictor, in terms of speeding up the
ﬁtness evaluation, has been achieved.
C. Effectiveness of E2EPP
In order to check the effectiveness of E2EPP, the FBO [30]
and Peephole [32] algorithms, which are the representatives of
existing performance predictors as detailed in Subsection II-B,
are selected to do the quantitative and qualitative comparisons
against E2EPP. For the quantitative comparison, we choose
the Mean Square Error (MSE), Kendall’s Tau (KTau) [64] and
the Coefﬁcient of Determination (CoD) [65] as the indicators
suggested in [32]. Speciﬁcally, KTau measures the correlation
between the ranks of the prediction and their true ranks. A
higher KTau value implies the higher correlation and the KTau
value varies between [ 1;1]. The CoD measures the closeness
degree of the prediction to its true value, and its value ranges
from 1 to1where a larger value means the closer degree.
For the qualitative comparison, we scatter the true values with
the corresponding prediction on a 2-dimension space where
the horizontal axis denotes the true values while the vertical
axis denotes the prediction. The parameter settings of FBO and
Peephole are set based on the suggestions in [32]. In addition,
the experiment on each benchmark dataset is performed 10
times.
TABLE III
THEMEAN SQUARE ERROR (MSE), K ENDALL ’STAU(KT AU),
COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION (COD)AND THE USED TIME OF FBO,
PEEPHOLE ,AND E2EPP ALGORITHMS ON THE CIFAR10 DATASET .
MSE KTau CoD Time (seconds)
FBO 0.0077 0.2170 -4.346 3.702
Peephole 0.0019 0.5324 0.3765 359.296
E2EPP 0.0006 0.6604 0.5184 3.813

==== Page 11 ====
11
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.000.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
(a) FBO
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.000.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
 (b) Peephole
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.000.700.750.800.850.900.951.00
 (c) E2EPP
Fig. 4. The prediction and the true values of EBO, Peephole and E2EPP on the CIFAR10 dataset. In each subﬁgure, the horizon axis denotes the true values,
while the vertical axis denotes the corresponding prediction.
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.800.500.550.600.650.700.750.80
(a) FBO
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.800.500.550.600.650.700.750.80
 (b) Peephole
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.800.500.550.600.650.700.750.80
 (c) E2EPP
Fig. 5. The prediction and the true values of EBO, Peephole and E2EPP on the CIFAR100 dataset. In each subﬁgure, the horizon axis denotes the true values,
while the vertical axis denotes the corresponding prediction.
TABLE IV
THEMEAN SQUARE ERROR (MSE), K ENDALL ’STAU(KT AU),
COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION (COD)AND THE USED TIME OF FBO,
PEEPHOLE ,AND E2EPP ALGORITHMS ON THE CIFAR100 DATASET .
MSE KTau CoD Time (seconds)
FBO 0.0078 0.1923 -2.631 3.725
Peephole 0.0024 0.5412 0.3238 458.652
E2EPP 0.0015 0.6501 0.3872 3.514
The quantitative comparison results on CIFAR10 and CI-
FAR100 are shown in Tables III and IV, respectively. In
addition, we also add the consumed time (seconds) measuring
how long E2EPP, FBO and Peephole take to ﬁnish the
experiment. Clearly as can be seen from Table III, FBO and
Peephole obtain the MSE of 0.0077, and 0.0019, respectively,
while E2EPP obtains the MSE of 0.0006 that is an order
of magnitude less than FBO and Peephole can. This means
that E2EPP could achieve a better prediction than FBO and
Peephole. For the KTau indicator, FBO, Peephole and E2EPP
achieve the values of 0.2170, 0.5324 and 0.6604, respectively,
which imply that the performance predicted by E2EPP has
the best correlation. For the CoD indicator, E2EPP again wins
the highest value of 0.5184 (-4.346 for FBO and 0.3765 for
Peephole). Based on the deﬁnition of CoD, the predicted value
of E2EPP is the closest one to the ground truth value among
the comparisons. In addition, E2EPP uses 3.813 seconds for
the prediction, which is a little worse than FBO that uses 3.702
seconds. However, it is still much better than Peephole thatuses 359.296 seconds. The similar comparison results can also
be investigated from Table IV. Speciﬁcally, E2EPP obtains the
MSE of 0.0015 that is about half of that from Peephole and 1/5
of that from FBO, i.e., E2EPP has the minimal prediction error
than the others. Furthermore, FBO obtains the KTau indicator
value of 0.1923, while Peephole and E2EPP obtain the values
of 0.5412 and 0.6501, respectively. For the CoD indicator,
E2EPP achieves the best one, i.e., 0.3872, while FBO and
Peephole acquire -2.631 and 0.3238, respectively. This shows
the best prediction performance of E2EPP on the CIFAR100
dataset. In addition, E2EPP consumes 3.514 seconds to ﬁnish
the prediction, which is the best among FBO (3.725 seconds)
and Peephole (458.652 seconds).
The qualitative comparisons on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100
are scattered in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively, where the xaxis of
each point (denoted as (x;y)) represents the true value and y
axis denotes the corresponding prediction. For the convenience
of the comparison, we also plot the line y=xin each ﬁgure.
The points standing above y=xmean the predictions are
higher than the true values, while the points standing below
y=xmeans the predictions are lower than the true values.
The more points closer to y=x, the better prediction of the
corresponding performance predictor. As can be clearly seen
from Figs. 4a and 4b, FBO has only half of the total points
that are close to the line of y=x, and Peephole achieves
better results by having more points close to the line of y=x.
However, it is clearly observed from Fig. 4c showing the results
of E2EPP, almost all of the points are close to the line y=x.

==== Page 12 ====
12
This means that the predicted values of E2EPP have minimal
prediction errors, which is consistent with the quantitative
analysis shown in Table III. From Figs. 5a, 5b and 5c that
show the results performed on CIFAR100 by FBO, Peephole
and E2EPP, respectively, it can be seen that FBO and Peephole
achieve the similar results that have a wide spread of points
around the line of y=x, while the results of E2EPP have the
closer distance to the line y=x. This also shows the same
conclusion from the quantitative analysis observed in Table IV.
D. Comparison to Radial Basis Network (RBN)
In order to demonstrate the promising performance of the
random forest employed by the proposed E2EPP performance
predictor, the comparison to RBN is performed, and the results
are shown and analyzed in this subsection.
Speciﬁcally, an RBN is a three-layer neural network, except
that the activation function of each unit in the hidden layer is
a Gaussian function, and the output layer is a linear weight
summation of the output of the hidden layer. The RBN is
often used for regression tasks, which is similar to the function
of random forest used in the proposed E2EPP performance
predictor. Another reason for choosing RBN here for the
comparison is that RBN is the base of our previous work [44]
that motivates the design of E2EPP in this paper. For a fair
comparison, we only replace the random forest by an RBN,
while the other parts are kept the same as that used for the
experiment shown in Subsection V-A. For the convenience of
the discussions, we denote the RBN used by the AE-CNN
algorithm as AE-CNN+RBN.
In the comparison, we only show the classiﬁcation accuracies
on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, but not showing the consumed
GPU days since the performance of both AE-CNN+E2EPP
and AE-CNN+RBN does not rely on GPUs. The number of
GPU days shown in Table II of AE-CNN+E2EPP is used for
measuring the validity of the generated CNN architectures
during the evolutionary process. In addition, the number of
hidden units of the RBN is set to the same as the input size
based on the conventions of practice [44]. The comparison
results are shown in Table V.
TABLE V
THE COMPARISON OF AE-CNN+E2EPP AND AE-CNN+RBN IN TERMS OF
THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%) ON THE CIFAR10 AND CIFAR100
BENCHMARK DATASETS .
CIFAR10 CIFAR100
AE-CNN + E2EPP 94.70 77.98
AE-CNN + RBN 82.33 70.20
It can be seen from Table V that AE-CNN+E2EPP achieves
the classiﬁcation accuracies of 94.70% and 77.98% on CI-
FAR10 and CIFAR100, respectively, while AE-CNN+RBN
achieves those of 82.33% and 70.20%, respectively. This
implies that the random forest employed in the proposed
E2EPP performance predictor is better than RBN. In fact,
it is easy to ﬁnd the proof of this conclusion, when the RBN
is used, the mean and standard deviations of the Gaussian
functions are calculated based on the training data. However,
the training data in E2EPP is encoded with some numericalnumbers that do not refer to the real meaning. In addition, the
RBN has been well-known to be suitable for continuous data,
while the training data in E2EPP is discrete. In summary, AE-
CNN+E2EPP outperforms AE-CNN+RBN on the CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 benchmark datasets.
As can be seen above, we have performed four groups of
experiments that are carefully designed to verify the promising
performance of the proposed E2EPP performance predictor.
Particularly, the ﬁrst is for investigating whether E2EPP
could enable EDL to achieve the competitive performance in
designing the CNN architectures. The second validates whether
E2EPP could accelerate EDL or not. The third quantitatively
and qualitatively investigates whether E2EPP could outperform
the existing approaches regarding the performance prediction,
and the fourth investigates whether the random forest employed
in E2EPP could perform better than the RBN that is another
commonly used regression model. In addition to the third
one, all the others are performed in the case of AE-CNN.
All the experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of the proposed E2EPP performance predictor.
From these experimental results, we can recognize that the
performance predictor is indeed able to speed up EDL, and the
end-to-end nature is convenient to use in practice by avoiding
manual interventions during the performing of EDL. In addition,
the random forest, as an ensemble approach, achieves the
promising performance but relying on only limited training
samples, which is a good characteristic especially in EDL where
sufﬁcient training data is not easy to obtain. Furthermore, the
random forest could directly use the discrete number as its
input, which is also another good characteristic in predicting
the performance of CNNs when the architecture information is
used as the input data. This implies that the ensemble methods
depend on discrete input data may be a proper choice in
designing the performance predictors, which is not only suitable
to EDL but also other deep learning model selection methods.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of this paper was to develop an effective and
efﬁcient end-to-end performance predictor, named E2EPP, to
speed up evolutionary deep learning algorithms in designing
the best CNN architectures for given tasks. This goal has
been achieved by proposing a random forest-based ofﬂine
surrogate model. In order to enable the random forest to accept
the CNN architectures as its input data, we also develop an
encoding schema that is able to uniquely map the description
of a CNN architecture into a numerical decision variable. In
addition, we took the advantage of random forest in terms
of the ensemble characteristic that each tree in the random
forest randomly selects a subspace of the whole features as its
training data. Furthermore, in order to improve the diversity
of used off-line model, only a part of the decision trees
in the random forest is selected based on their prediction
on the best individual to do the prediction, which in turn
enhances the accuracy of the predicted values. The proposed
performance predictor is ﬁrstly examined by integrating it
into an existing evolutionary deep learning algorithm, which is
called AE-CNN+E2EPP, on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100. Through

==== Page 13 ====
13
the comparisons with eight CNNs whose architecture are
manually crafted, and another eight CNN architecture designs,
AE-CNN+E2EPP shows the very promising results on both
classiﬁcation accuracy and consumed GPU days. In addition,
the efﬁciency of the E2EPP is also examined on AE-CNN
by enabling and disabling it. The results show that E2EPP
could save 2/3 of computational time when achieving the same
classiﬁcation accuracy. Further, the E2EPP is compared with
the other two state-of-the-art performance predictors, namely
FBO and Peephole, on three measurements. E2EPP shows the
best results on these three measurements. Especially, E2EPP
uses only 1=100computational time of that Peephole uses. It
also shows that E2EPP achieves the best prediction through
the qualitative comparison among these three performance
predictors on both CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets.
The proposed performance predictor is based on the ﬁrst-
train-then-to-predict paradigm, which requires a set of trained
samples in advance. Theoretically, the more trained samples,
the better prediction results. However, collecting more trained
samples implies consuming more computational resource,
which leads to long processing time. Achieving a better
performance prediction results conﬂicts to the goal of designing
the performance predictors. Therefore, ﬁnding a good balance
between these two objectives may be an efﬁcient way to
use the performance predictor, which is left for future work.
In addition, we will also integrate E2EPP into other CNN
architecture design algorithms to solve some speciﬁc tasks,
such as recognizing breast cancer on the BreakHis dataset [66].
REFERENCES
[1]A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 25 , Lake Tahoe, Nevada, USA., 2012,
pp. 1097–1105.
[2]Y . Leung, Y . Gao, and Z.-B. Xu, “Degree of population diversity-a
perspective on premature convergence in genetic algorithms and its
markov chain analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , vol. 8,
no. 5, pp. 1165–1176, 1997.
[3]Y . LeCun, Y . Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature , vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[4]T. N. Sainath, A.-r. Mohamed, B. Kingsbury, and B. Ramabhadran, “Deep
convolutional neural networks for LVCSR,” in Proceeding of 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing .
Vancouver, Canada: IEEE, 2013, pp. 8614–8618.
[5]O. Abdel-Hamid, A.-r. Mohamed, H. Jiang, L. Deng, G. Penn, and D. Yu,
“Convolutional neural networks for speech recognition,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol. 22, no. 10,
pp. 1533–1545, 2014.
[6]I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V . Le, “Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 2014 , Montreal, Canada, 2014, pp. 3104–3112.
[7]Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “Evolving unsupervised deep neural
networks for learning meaningful representations,” IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 89–103, 2019.
[8]B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, “Designing neural network
architectures using reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 2017
International Conference on Learning Representations , Toulon, France,
2017.
[9]B. Zoph and Q. V . Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning,” in Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on
Learning Representations , Toulon, France, 2017.
[10] Z. Zhong, J. Yan, and C.-L. Liu, “Practical network blocks design with
q-learning,” in Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , Louisiana, USA, 2018.
[11] L. Xie and A. Yuille, “Genetic CNN,” in Proceedings of 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision , Venice, Italy, 2017, pp.
1388–1397.[12] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y . L. Suematsu, J. Tan, Q. Le, and
A. Kurakin, “Large-scale evolution of image classiﬁers,” in Proceedings
of 2017 Machine Learning Research , Sydney, Australia, 2017, pp. 2902–
2911.
[13] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals, C. Fernando, and K. Kavukcuoglu,
“Hierarchical representations for efﬁcient architecture search,” in Proceed-
ings of 2018 Machine Learning Research , Stockholm, Sweden, 2018.
[14] M. Suganuma, S. Shirakawa, and T. Nagao, “A genetic programming
approach to designing convolutional neural network architectures,”
inProceedings of the 2017 Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference . Berlin, Germany: ACM, 2017, pp. 497–504.
[15] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features from
tiny images,” online: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/kriz/cifar.html , 2009.
[16] T. Back, Evolutionary Algorithms in Theory and Practice: Evolution
Strategies, Evolutionary Programming, Genetic Algorithms . England,
UK: Oxford university press, 1996.
[17] W. Banzhaf, P. Nordin, R. E. Keller, and F. D. Francone, Genetic
Programming: An Introduction . Morgan Kaufmann San Francisco,
1998.
[18] L. M. Schmitt, “Theory of genetic algorithms,” Theoretical Computer
Science , vol. 259, no. 1-2, pp. 1–61, 2001.
[19] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “Improved regularity model-based EDA
for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation , vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 662–678, 2019.
[20] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002.
[21] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “Reference line-based estimation of
distribution algorithm for many-objective optimization,” Knowledge-
Based Systems , vol. 132, pp. 129–143, 2017.
[22] H. Wang, L. Jiao, and X. Yao, “Two arch2: an improved two-archive
algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 524–541, 2015.
[23] Y . Sun, G. G. Yen, and Z. Yi, “IGD indicator-based evolutionary
algorithm for many-objective optimization problems,” IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 173–187, 2019.
[24] Y . Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, and G. G. Yen, “A new two-stage evolutionary
algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, DOI:10.1109/TEVC.2018.2882166. , 2019.
[25] L. Bottou, “Stochastic gradient descent tricks,” in Neural Networks:
Tricks of the Trade . Springer, 2012, pp. 421–436.
[26] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 86,
no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[27] M. Mitchell, An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms . Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA: MIT press, 1998.
[28] Y . Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, and G. G. Yen, “Evolving deep convolu-
tional neural networks for image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , 2019,DOI: 10.1109/TEVC.2019.2916183.
[29] K. Swersky, J. Snoek, and R. P. Adams, “Freeze-thaw bayesian
optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.3896 , 2014.
[30] T. Domhan, J. T. Springenberg, and F. Hutter, “Speeding up automatic
hyperparameter optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation
of learning curves.” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , vol. 15, 2015, pp. 3460–8.
[31] A. Klein, S. Falkner, J. T. Springenberg, and F. Hutter, “Learning
curve prediction with Bayesian neural networks,” Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Learning Representations , 2016.
[32] B. Deng, J. Yan, and D. Lin, “Peephole: Predicting network performance
before training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.03351 , 2017.
[33] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[34] R. Istrate, F. Scheidegger, G. Mariani, D. Nikolopoulos, C. Bekas, and
A. C. I. Malossi, “TAPAS: train-less accuracy predictor for architecture
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00250 , 2018.
[35] B. Baker, O. Gupta, R. Raskar, and N. Naik, “Accelerating neural
architecture search using performance prediction,” 2018 International
Conference on Learning Representations Workshop , 2017.
[36] Y . Jin, “Surrogate-assisted evolutionary computation: recent advances
and future challenges,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 61–70, 2011.
[37] S. Jeong, M. Murayama, and K. Yamamoto, “Efﬁcient optimization
design method using kriging model,” Journal of Aircraft , vol. 42, no. 2,
pp. 413–420, 2005.
[38] D. S. Broomhead and D. Lowe, “Radial basis functions, multi-variable
functional interpolation and adaptive networks,” Royal Signals and Radar
Establishment Malvern (United Kingdom), Tech. Rep., 1988.

==== Page 14 ====
14
[39] H. Wang, Y . Jin, and J. Doherty, “Committee-based active learning for
surrogate-assisted particle swarm optimization of expensive problems,”
IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2664–2677, 2017.
[40] Y . Jin, H. Wang, T. Chugh, D. Guo, and K. Miettinen, “Data-driven evo-
lutionary optimization: an overview and case studies,” IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation , 2018, DOI: 10.1109/TEVC.2018.2869001.
[41] Z. Zhou, Y . S. Ong, P. B. Nair, A. J. Keane, and K. Y . Lum,
“Combining global and local surrogate models to accelerate evolutionary
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C: Applications and Reviews , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 66–76, 2007.
[42] H. Wang, Y . Jin, and J. O. Janson, “Data-driven surrogate-assisted
multi-objective evolutionary optimization of a trauma system,” IEEE
Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 939–952,
2016.
[43] T. Chugh, N. Chakraborti, K. Sindhya, and Y . Jin., “A data-driven
surrogate-assisted evolutionary algorithm applied to a many-objective
blast furnace optimization problem,” Materials and Manufacturing
Processes , vol. 32, pp. 1172–1178, 2017.
[44] H. Wang, Y . Jin, C. Sun, and J. Doherty, “Ofﬂine data-driven evolutionary
optimization using selective surrogate ensembles,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , 2018, DOI: 10.1109/TEVC.2018.2834881.
[45] T. K. Ho, “Random decision forests,” in Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition , vol. 1.
IEEE, 1995, pp. 278–282.
[46] A. Liaw, M. Wiener et al. , “Classiﬁcation and regression by random
forest,” R news , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 18–22, 2002.
[47] I. Barandiaran, “The random subspace method for constructing decision
forests,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,
vol. 20, no. 8, 1998.
[48] Y . Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, and G. G. Yen, “Automatically designing CNN
architectures using genetic algorithm for image classiﬁcation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1808.03818 , 2018.
[49] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Identity mappings in deep residual
networks,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: Springer, 2016, pp. 630–645.
[50] G. Huang, Z. Liu, K. Q. Weinberger, and L. van der Maaten, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of 2017 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , Honolulu,
HI, USA, 2017, pp. 2261–2269.
[51] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, C. J. Stone, and R. A. Olshen, Classiﬁcation
and Regression Trees . CRC press, 1984.
[52] H. Wang and Y . Jin, “A random forest-assisted evolutionary algorithm
for data-driven constrained multiobjective combinatorial optimization of
trauma systems,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , 2018.
[53] T. Bartz-Beielstein and M. Zaefferer, “Model-based methods for contin-
uous and discrete global optimization,” Applied Soft Computing , vol. 55,
pp. 154–167, 2017.
[54] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , Las Vegas, NV , USA, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[55] G. Mart ´ınez-Mu ˜noz and A. Su ´arez, “Out-of-bag estimation of the optimal
sample size in bagging,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 143–152,
2010.
[56] J. Park and I. W. Sandberg, “Universal approximation using radial-basis-
function networks,” Neural computation , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 246–257,
1991.
[57] I. J. Goodfellow, D. Warde-Farley, M. Mirza, A. Courville, and Y . Bengio,
“Maxout networks,” in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
on Machine Learning , Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Jun 2013, pp. 1319–1327.
[58] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks
for large-scale image recognition,” in 32nd International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML 2015) , Lille, France, 2015.
[59] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” in Proceedings of
the 2014 International Conference on Learning Representations , Banff,
Canada, 2014.
[60] R. K. Srivastava, K. Greff, and J. Schmidhuber, “Highway networks,”
inProceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Learning
Representations Workshop , San Diego, CA, 2015.
[61] J. T. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. Riedmiller, “Striving
for simplicity: the all convolutional net,” in Proceedings of the 2015
International Conference on Learning Representations , San Diego, CA,
2015.
[62] G. Larsson, M. Maire, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Fractalnet: ultra-
deep neural networks without residuals,” The 5th International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1VaB4cex[63] X. Glorot and Y . Bengio, “Understanding the difﬁculty of training
deep feedforward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , 2010,
pp. 249–256.
[64] P. K. Sen, “Estimates of the regression coefﬁcient based on kendall’s
tau,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 63, no. 324,
pp. 1379–1389, 1968.
[65] D. J. Ozer, “Correlation and the coefﬁcient of determination.” Psycho-
logical Bulletin , vol. 97, no. 2, p. 307, 1985.
[66] F. A. Spanhol, L. S. Oliveira, C. Petitjean, and L. Heutte, “A dataset for
breast cancer histopathological image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering , vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 1455–1462, 2016.
Yanan Sun (S’15-M’18) received a Ph.D. degree in
engineering from the Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China, in 2017. He is currently a Professor (research)
in the College of Computer Science, Sichuan Univer-
sity, China. Prior to that, He was a Research Fellow
in the School of Engineering and Computer Science,
Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New
Zealand.
Dr. Sun’s research topics are evolutionary algo-
rithms, deep learning, and evolutionary deep learning.
He is the leading organizer of the First Workshop on
Evolutionary Deep Learning, the leading organizer of the Special Session on
Evolutionary Deep Learning and Applications in CEC19, and the founding chair
of the IEEE CIS Task Force on Evolutionary Deep Learning and Applications.
Handing Wang (S’10-M’16) received the B.Eng.
and Ph.D. degrees from Xidian University, Xi’an,
China, in 2010 and 2015, respectively.
She is currently a professor with School of Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
Dr. Wang is an Associate Editor of IEEE Com-
putational Intelligence Magazine and Complex &
Intelligent Systems, chair of the Task Force on
Intelligence Systems for Health within the Intelligent
Systems Applications Technical Committee of IEEE
Computational Intelligence Society. Her research
interests include nature-inspired computation, multiobjective optimization,
multiple criteria decision making, surrogate-assisted evolutionary optimization,
and real-world problems.
Bing Xue (M’10) received the B.Sc. degree from the
Henan University of Economics and Law, Zhengzhou,
China, in 2007, the M.Sc. degree in management
from Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China, in 2010,
and the PhD degree in computer science in 2014
at Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand.
She is currently an Associate Professor in School of
Engineering and Computer Science at Victoria Uni-
versity of Wellington. Her research focuses mainly on
evolutionary computation, feature selection, feature
construction, multi-objective optimization, image
analysis, transfer learning, data mining, and machine learning. She has over
100 papers published in fully refereed international journals and conferences
and most of them are on evolutionary feature selection and construction.
Dr Xue is currently the Chair of the IEEE Task Force on Evolutionary
Feature Selection and Construction, IEEE Computational Intelligence Society
(CIS), Vice-Chair of the IEEE CIS Data Mining and Big Data Analytics
Technical Committee, and Vice-Chair of IEEE CIS Task Force on Transfer
Learning & Transfer Optimization. She is also an Associate Editor/member
of Editorial Board for ﬁve international journals and a reviewer of over 50
international journals. Dr Xue is the Finance Chair of IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC) 2019.

==== Page 15 ====
15
Yaochu Jin (M’98-SM’02-F’16) received the B.Sc.,
M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China, in 1988, 1991, and 1996 respec-
tively, and the Dr.-Ing. degree from Ruhr University
Bochum, Germany, in 2001.
He is currently a Professor in Computational Intel-
ligence, Department of Computer Science, University
of Surrey, Guildford, U.K., where he heads the Nature
Inspired Computing and Engineering Group. He is
also a Finland Distinguished Professor funded by
the Finnish Agency for Innovation (Tekes) and a
Changjiang Distinguished Visiting Professor appointed by the Ministry of
Education, China. His research interests include computational intelligence,
computational neuroscience, and computational systems biology. He is
particularly interested in nature-inspired, real-world driven problem-solving.
He has (co)authored over 200 peer-reviewed journal and conference papers
and been granted eight patents on evolutionary optimization.
Dr Jin is the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COG-
NITIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL SYSTEMS and Complex & Intelligent
Systems. He is an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer (2017-2019) and was the Vice
President for Technical Activities of the IEEE Computational Intelligence
Society (2014-2015). He is the recipient of the 2014 and 2016 IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine Outstanding Paper Award, and the 2017
IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation Outstanding Paper Award.
He is a Fellow of IEEE.
Gary G. Yen (S’87-M’88-SM’97-F’09) received a
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Notre Dame in 1992. Currently
he is a Regents Professor in the School of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, Oklahoma State Univer-
sity (OSU). Before joined OSU in 1997, he was
with the Structure Control Division, U.S. Air Force
Research Laboratory in Albuquerque. His research
interest includes intelligent control, computational
intelligence, conditional health monitoring, signal
processing and their industrial/defense applications.
Dr. Yen was an associate editor of the IEEE Control Systems Magazine,
IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology ,Automatica ,Mechantronics ,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Parts A and B and
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks . He is currently serving as an associate
editor for the IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation and the IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics . He served as the General Chair for the 2003
IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Control held in Houston, TX and
2006 IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence held in Vancouver,
Canada. Dr. Yen served as Vice President for the Technical Activities in 2005-
2006 and then President in 2010-2011 of the IEEE Computational intelligence
Society. He was the founding editor-in-chief of the IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine , 2006-2009. In 2011, he received Andrew P Sage Best
Transactions Paper award from IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics Society
and in 2014, he received Meritorious Service award from IEEE Computational
Intelligence Society .
Mengjie Zhang (M’04-SM’10-F’18) received the
B.E. and M.E. degrees from Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research Center, Agricultural University of Hebei,
Hebei, China, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC,
Australia, in 1989, 1992, and 2000, respectively.
He is currently Professor of Computer Science,
Head of the Evolutionary Computation Research
Group, and the Associate Dean (Research and Inno-
vation) in the Faculty of Engineering. His current
research interests include evolutionary computation,
particularly genetic programming, particle swarm optimization, and learning
classiﬁer systems with application areas of image analysis, multi-objective
optimization, feature selection and reduction, job shop scheduling, and transfer
learning. He has published over 350 research papers in refereed international
journals and conferences. Prof. Zhang is a Fellow of Royal Society of
New Zealand and have been a Panel member of the Marsden Fund (New
Zealand Government Funding). He is also a senior member of IEEE and
a member of ACM. He is currently chairing the IEEE CIS Intelligent
Systems and Applications Technical Committee, and the immediate Past
Chair for the IEEE CIS Emergent Technologies Technical Committee and the
Evolutionary Computation Technical Committee, and a member of the IEEE
CIS Award Committee. He is a vice-chair of the IEEE CIS Task Force on
Evolutionary Feature Selection and Construction, a vice-chair of the Task Force
on Evolutionary Computer Vision and Image Processing, and the founding
chair of the IEEE Computational Intelligence Chapter in New Zealand. He is
also a committee member of the IEEE NZ Central Section.

