==== Page 1 ====
The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation
and Analysis of Deep Neural Networks
Guy Katz1(B), Derek A. Huang2, Duligur Ibeling2,
Kyle Julian2, Christopher Lazarus2, Rachel Lim2,
Parth Shah2, Shantanu Thakoor2, Haoze Wu2,
Aleksandar Zelji´ c2, David L. Dill2,
Mykel J. Kochenderfer2, and Clark Barrett2
1The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Israel
guykatz@cs.huji.ac.il
2Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{huangda,duligur,kjulian3,clazarus,parth95,thakoor,
haozewu,zeljic,dill,mykel,clarkbarrett }@stanford.edu,
rachelim@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract. Deep neural networks are revolutionizing the way complex
systems are designed. Consequently, there is a pressing need for tools and
techniques for network analysis and certiﬁcation. To help in addressing
that need, we present Marabou , a framework for verifying deep neural
networks. Marabou is an SMT-based tool that can answer queries about
a network’s properties by transforming these queries into constraint sat-
isfaction problems. It can accommodate networks with diﬀerent activa-
tion functions and topologies, and it performs high-level reasoning on the
network that can curtail the search space and improve performance. Italso supports parallel execution to further enhance scalability. Marabou
accepts multiple input formats, including protocol buﬀer ﬁles generated
by the popular TensorFlow framework for neural networks. We describethe system architecture and main components, evaluate the technique
and discuss ongoing work.
1 Introduction
Recent years have brought about a major change in the way complex systems are
being developed. Instead of spending long hours hand-crafting complex software,
many engineers now opt to use deep neural networks (DNNs )[6,19]. DNNs are
machine learning models, created by training algorithms that generalize from aﬁnite set of examples to previously unseen inputs. Their performance can often
surpass that of manually created software as demonstrated in ﬁelds such as image
classiﬁcation [ 16], speech recognition [ 8], and game playing [ 21].
Despite their overall success, the opacity of DNNs is a cause for concern,
and there is an urgent need for certiﬁcation procedures that can provide rig-
orous guarantees about network behavior. The formal methods community has
c/circlecopyrtThe Author(s) 2019
I. Dillig and S. Tasiran (Eds.): CA V 2019, LNCS 11561, pp. 443–452, 2019.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-25540-4
_26

==== Page 2 ====
444 G. Katz et al.
taken initial steps in this direction, by developing algorithms and tools for neural
network veriﬁcation [ 5,9,10,12,18,20,23,24]. A DNN veriﬁcation query consists
of two parts: (i) a neural network, and (ii) a property to be checked; and its
result is either a formal guarantee that the network satisﬁes the property, or a
concrete input for which the property is violated (a counter-example). A veriﬁca-tion query can encode the fact, e.g., that a network is robust to small adversarial
perturbations in its input [ 22].
A neural network is comprised of neurons , organized in layers. The network
is evaluated by assigning values to the neurons in the input layer, and then using
these values to iteratively compute the assignments of neurons in each succeeding
layer. Finally, the values of neurons in the last layer are computed, and this is thenetwork’s output. A neuron’s assignment is determined by computing a weighted
sum of the assignments of neurons from the preceding layer, and then applying
to the result a non-linear activation function, such as the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) function, ReLU( x) = max (0 ,x). Thus, a network can be regarded as a
set of linear constraints (the weighted sums), and a set of non-linear constraints
(the activation functions). In addition to a neural network, a veriﬁcation query
includes a property to be checked, which is given in the form of linear or non-
linear constraints on the network’s inputs and outputs. The veriﬁcation problemthus reduces to ﬁnding an assignment of neuron values that satisﬁes all the
constraints simultaneously, or determining that no such assignment exists.
This paper presents a new tool for DNN veriﬁcation and analysis, called
Marabou . The Marabou project builds upon our previous work on the Reluplex
project [ 2,7,12,13,15,17], which focused on applying SMT-based techniques to
the veriﬁcation of DNNs. Marabou follows the Reluplex spirit in that it applies anSMT-based, lazy search technique: it iteratively searches for an assignment that
satisﬁes all given constraints, but treats the non-linear constraints lazily in the
hope that many of them will prove irrelevant to the property under consideration,and will not need to be addressed at all. In addition to search, Marabou performs
deduction aimed at learning new facts about the non-linear constraints in order
to simplify them.
The Marabou framework is a signiﬁcant improvement over its predecessor,
Reluplex. Speciﬁcally, it includes the following enhancements and modiﬁcations:
– Native support for fully connected and convolutional DNNs with arbitrary
piecewise-linear activation functions. This extends the Reluplex algorithm,which was originally designed to support only ReLU activation functions.
– Built-in support for a divide-and-conquer solving mode, in which the solver is
run with an initial (small) timeout. If the timeout is reached, the solver par-
titions its input query into simpler sub-queries, increases the timeout value,
and repeats the process on each sub-query. This mode naturally lends itselfto parallel execution by running sub-queries on separate nodes; however, it
can yield signiﬁcant speed-ups even when used with a single node.
– A complete simplex-based linear programming core that replaces the exter-
nal solver (GLPK) that was previously used in Reluplex. The new simplex

==== Page 3 ====
The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation and Analysis of DNNs 445
core was tailored for a smooth integration with the Marabou framework and
eliminates much of the overhead in Reluplex due to the use of GLPK.
– Multiple interfaces for feeding queries into the solver. A query’s neural net-
work can be provided in a textual format or as a protocol buﬀer ( protobuf )
ﬁle containing a TensorFlow model; and the property can be either compiledinto the solver, provided in Python, or stored in a textual format. We expect
these interfaces will simplify usage of the tool for many users.
– Support for network-level reasoning and deduction. The earlier Reluplex tool
performed deductions at the level of single constraints, ignoring the input
network’s topology. In Marabou, we retain this functionality but also include
support for reasoning based on the network topology, such as symbolic boundtightening [ 23]. This allows for eﬃcient curtailment of the search space.
Marabou is available online [ 14] under the permissive modiﬁed BSD license.
EngineMarabou
SAT
UNSATSearch:
Simplex Core
Piecewise-Linear Constraints
Deduction:
Constraint-Level Reasoning
Network-Level ReasoningInput
Interfaces
Divide and
ConquerQuery
Fig. 1. The main components of Marabou.
2 Design of Marabou
Marabou regards each neuron in the network as a variable and searches for a
variable assignment that simultaneously satisﬁes the query’s linear constraintsand non-linear constraints. At any given point, Marabou maintains the current
variable assignment, lower and upper bounds for every variable, and the set of
current constraints. In each iteration, it then changes the variable assignmentin order to (1) correct a violated linear constraint, or (2) correct a violated
non-linear constraint.
The Marabou veriﬁcation procedure is sound and complete, i.e. the afore-
mentioned loop eventually terminates. This can be shown via a straightforward
extension of the soundness and completeness proof for Reluplex [ 12]. However,
in order to guarantee termination, Marabou only supports activation functions
that are piecewise-linear. The tool already has built-in support for the ReLU
function and the Max function max ( x
1,...,x n), and it is modular in the sense
that additional piecewise-linear functions can be added easily.

==== Page 4 ====
446 G. Katz et al.
Another important aspect of Marabou’s veriﬁcation strategy is deduction—
speciﬁcally, the derivation of tighter lower and upper variable bounds. The moti-vation is that such bounds may transform piecewise-linear constraints into lin-
ear constraints, by restricting them to one of their linear segments. To achieve
this, Marabou repeatedly examines linear and non-linear constraints, and alsoperforms network-level reasoning, with the goal of discovering tighter variable
bounds.
Next, we describe Marabou’s main components (see also Fig. 1).
2.1 Simplex Core ( Tableau and BasisFactorization Classes)
The simplex core is the part of the system responsible for making the variable
assignment satisfy the linear constraints. It does so by implementing a variant
of the simplex algorithm [3]. In each iteration, it changes the assignment of some
variable x, and consequently the assignment of any variable ythat is connected
toxby a linear equation. Selecting xand determining its new assignment is
performed using standard algorithms—speciﬁcally, the revised simplex method
in which the various linear constraints are kept in implicit matrix form, and thesteepest-edge and Harris’ ratio test strategies for variable selection.
Creating an eﬃcient simplex solver is complicated. In Reluplex, we delegated
the linear constraints to an external solver, GLPK. Our motivation for imple-menting a new custom solver in Marabou was twofold: ﬁrst, we observed in
Reluplex that the repeated translation of queries into GLPK and extraction of
results from GLPK was a limiting factor on performance; and second, a blackbox simplex solver did not aﬀord the ﬂexibility we needed in the context of DNN
veriﬁcation. For example, in a standard simplex solver, variable assignments are
typically pressed against their upper or lower bounds, whereas in the context ofa DNN, other assignments might be needed to satisfy the non-linear constraints.
Another example is the deduction capability, which is crucial for eﬃciently ver-
ifying a DNN and whose eﬀectiveness might depend on the internal state of the
simplex solver.
2.2 Piecewise-Linear Constraints ( PiecewiseLinearConstraint
Class)
Throughout its execution, Marabou maintains a set of piecewise-linear con-
straints that represent the DNN’s non-linear functions. In iterations devoted tosatisfying these constraints, Marabou looks for any constraints that are not sat-
isﬁed by the current assignment. If such a constraint is found, Marabou changes
the assignment in a way that makes that constraint satisﬁed. Alternatively, inorder to guarantee eventual termination, if Marabou detects that a certain con-
straint is repeatedly not satisﬁed, it may perform a case-split on that constraint:
a process in which the piecewise-linear constraint ϕis replaced by an equivalent
disjunction of linear constraints c
1∨...∨cn. Marabou considers these disjuncts
one at a time and checks for satisﬁability. If the problem is satisﬁable when ϕis

==== Page 5 ====
The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation and Analysis of DNNs 447
replaced by some ci, then the original problem is also satisﬁable; otherwise, the
original problem is unsatisﬁable.
In our implementation, piecewise-linear constraints are represented by
objects of classes that inherit from the PiecewiseLinearConstraint abstract class.
Currently the two supported instances are ReLU and Max, but the design is mod-ular in the sense that new constraint types can easily be added. PiecewiseLin-
earConstraint deﬁnes the interface methods that each supported piecewise-linear
constraint needs to implement. Some of the key interface methods are:
–satisﬁed() : the constraint object needs to answer whether or not it is satisﬁed
given the current assignment. For example, for a constraint y=R e L U ( x)a n d
assignment x=y=3 , satisﬁed() would return true; whereas for assignment
x=−5,y= 3, it would return false.
–getPossibleFixes() : if the constraint is not satisﬁed by the current assignment,
this method returns possible changes to the assignment that would correct theviolation. For example, for x=−5,y= 3, the ReLU constraint from before
might propose two possible changes to the assignment, x←3o ry←0, as
either would satisfy y=R e L U ( x).
–getCaseSplits() : this method asks the piecewise-linear constraint ϕto return
a list of linear constraints c
1,...,c n, such that ϕis equivalent to c1∨...∨cn.
For example, when invoked for a constraint y= max ( x1,x2),getCaseSplits()
would return the linear constraints c1:(y=x1∧x1≥x2)a n d c2:(y=
x2∧x2≥x1). These constraints satisfy the requirement that the original
constraint is equivalent to c1∨c2.
–getEntailedTightenings() : as part of Marabou’s deduction of tighter variable
bounds, piecewise-linear constraints are repeatedly informed of changes to the
lower and upper bounds of variables they aﬀect. Invoking getEntailedTight-
enings() queries the constraint for tighter variable bounds, based on current
information. For example, suppose a constraint y=R e L U ( x) is informed of
the upper bounds x≤5a n d y≤7; in this case, getEntailedTightenings()
would return the tighter bound y≤5.
2.3 Constraint- and Network-Level Reasoning
(RowBoundTightener ,ConstraintBoundTightener
and SymbolicBoundTightener Classes)
Eﬀective deduction of tighter variable bounds is crucial for Marabou’s perfor-
mance. Deduction is performed at the constraint level, by repeatedly examin-ing linear and piecewise-linear constraints to see if they imply tighter variable
bounds; and also at the DNN-level, by leveraging the network’s topology.
Constraint-level bound tightening is performed by querying the piecewise-
linear constraints for tighter bounds using the getEntailedTightenings() method.
Similarly, linear equations can also be used to deduce tighter bounds. For exam-
ple, the equation x=y+zand lower bounds x≥0,y≥1a n d z≥1
together imply the tighter bound x≥2. As part of the simplex-based search,
Marabou repeatedly encounters many linear equations and uses them for bound
tightening.

==== Page 6 ====
448 G. Katz et al.
Several recent papers have proposed veriﬁcation schemes that rely on DNN-
level reasoning [ 5,23]. Marabou supports this kind of reasoning as well, by stor-
ing the initial network topology and performing deduction steps that use this
information as part of its iterative search. DNN-level reasoning is seamlessly
integrated into the search procedure by (1) initializing the DNN-level reasonerswith the most up-to-date information discovered during the search, such as vari-
able bounds and the state of piecewise-linear constraints; and (2) feeding any
new information that is discovered back into the search procedure. PresentlyMarabou implements a symbolic bound tightening procedure [ 23]: based on net-
work topology, upper and lower bounds for each hidden neuron are expressed
as a linear combination of the input neurons. Then, if the bounds on the inputneurons are suﬃciently tight (e.g., as a result of past deductions), these expres-
sions for upper and lower bounds may imply that some of the hidden neurons’
piecewise-linear activation functions are now restricted to one of their linear
segments. Implementing additional DNN-level reasoning operations is work in
progress.
2.4 The Engine ( Engine and SmtCore Classes)
The main class of Marabou, in which the main loop resides, is called the Engine .
The engine stores and coordinates the various solution components, includingthe simplex core and the piecewise-linear constraints. The main loop consists,
roughly, of the following steps (the ﬁrst rule that applies is used):
1. If a piecewise-linear constraint had to be ﬁxed more than a certain number
of times, perform a case split on that constraint.
2. If the problem has become unsatisﬁable, e.g. because for some variable a
lower bound has been deduced that is greater than its upper bound, undo a
previous case split (or return UNSAT if no such case split exists).
3. If there is a violated linear constraint, perform a simplex step.
4. If there is a violated piecewise-linear constraint, attempt to ﬁx it.
5. Return SAT(all constraints are satisﬁed).
The engine also triggers deduction steps, both at the neuron level and at the
network level, according to various heuristics.
2.5 The Divide-and-Conquer Mode and Concurrency ( DnC.py )
Marabou supports a divide-and-conquer (D&C) solving mode, in which the
input region speciﬁed in the original query is partitioned into sub-regions. The
desired property is checked on these sub-regions independently. The D&C modenaturally lends itself to parallel execution, by having each sub-query checked
on a separate node. Moreover, the D&C mode can improve Marabou’s overall
performance even when running sequentially: the total time of solving the sub-queries is often less than the time of solving the original query, as the smaller
input regions allow for more eﬀective deduction steps.

==== Page 7 ====
The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation and Analysis of DNNs 449
Given a query φ, the solver maintains a queue Qof/angbracketleftquery, timeout /angbracketrightpairs. Qis
initialized with one element /angbracketleftφ,T/angbracketright, where T, the initial timeout, is a conﬁgurable
parameter. To solve φ, the solver loops through the following steps:
1. Pop a pair /angbracketleftφ/prime,t/prime/angbracketrightfromQand attempt to solve φ/primewith a timeout of t/prime.
2. If the problem is UNSAT andQis empty, return UNSAT .
3. If the problem is UNSAT andQis not empty, return to step 1.
4. If the problem is SAT, return SAT.
5. If a timeout occurred, split φ/primeintoksub-queries φ/prime
1,...,φ/prime
kby partitioning
its input region. For each sub-query φ/prime
i, push /angbracketleftφ/prime
i,m·t/prime/angbracketrightintoQ.
The timeout factor mand the splitting factor kare conﬁgurable parameters.
Splitting the query’s input region is performed heuristically.
2.6 Input Interfaces ( AcasParser class, maraboupy Folder)
Marabou supports veriﬁcation queries provided through the following interfaces:
– Native Marabou format: a user prepares a query using the Marabou C++
interface, compiles the query into the tool, and runs it. This format is usefulfor integrating Marabou into a larger framework.
– Marabou executable: a user runs a Marabou executable, and passes to it
command-line parameters indicating the network and property ﬁles to be
checked. Currently, network ﬁles are encoded using the NNet format [ 11],
and the properties are given in a simple textual format.
– Python/TensorFlow interface: the query is passed to Marabou through
Python constructs. The python interface can also handle DNNs stored as
TensorFlow protobuf ﬁles.
3 Evaluation
For our evaluation we used the ACAS Xu [ 12], CollisionDetection [ 4]a n d
TwinStream [ 1] families of benchmarks. Tool-wise, we considered the Reluplex
tool which is the most closely related to Marabou, and also ReluVal [ 23]a n d
Planet [ 4]. The version of Marabou used for the evaluation is available online [ 14].
The top left plot in Fig. 3compares the execution times of Marabou and Relu-
plex on 180 ACAS Xu benchmarks with a 1 hour timeout. We used Marabou in
D&C mode with 4 cores and with T=5 ,k=4 ,a n d m=1.5. The remaining
three plots depict an execution time comparison between Marabou D&C (con-
ﬁguration as above), ReluVal and Planet, using 4 cores and a 1 hour timeout.
Marabou and Reluval are evaluated over 180 ACAS Xu benchmarks (top rightplot), and Marabou and Planet are evaluated on those 180 benchmarks (bottom
left plot) and also on 500 CollisionDetection and 81 TwinStream benchmarks
(bottom right plot). Due to technical diﬃculties, ReluVal was not run on theCollisionDetection and TwinStream benchmarks. The results show that in a
4 cores setting Marabou generally outperforms Planet, but generally does not
outperform ReluVal (though it does better on some benchmarks). These resultshighlight the need for additional DNN-level reasoning in Marabou, which is a
key ingredient in ReluVal’s veriﬁcation procedure.

==== Page 8 ====
450 G. Katz et al.
Fig. 2. A scalability comparison of
M a r a b o ua n dR e l u V a lo nA C A S
Xu.Figure 2shows the average runtime of
Marabou and ReluVal on the ACAS Xu prop-erties, as a function of the number of avail-
able cores. We see that as the number of cores
increases, Marabou (solid) is able to closethe gap, and sometimes outperform, ReluVal
(dotted). With 64 cores, Marabou outper-
forms ReluVal on average, and both solverswere able to solve all ACAS Xu benchmarks
within 2 hours (except for a few segfaults by
ReluVal).
Fig. 3. A comparison of Marabou with Reluplex, ReluVal and Planet.
4 Conclusion
DNN analysis is an emerging ﬁeld, and Marabou is a step towards a more mature,
stable veriﬁcation platform. Moving forward, we plan to improve Marabou in sev-
eral dimensions. Part of our motivation in implementing a custom simplex solver
was to obtain the needed ﬂexibility for fusing together the solving process for lin-ear and non-linear constraints. Currently, this ﬂexibility has not been leveraged
much, as these pieces are solved relatively separately. We expect that by tackling

==== Page 9 ====
The Marabou Framework for Veriﬁcation and Analysis of DNNs 451
both kinds of constraints simultaneously, we will be able to improve performance
signiﬁcantly. Other enhancements we wish to add include: additional network-level reasoning techniques based on abstract interpretation; better heuristics for
both the linear and non-linear constraint solving engines; and additional engi-
neering improvements, speciﬁcally within the simplex engine.
Acknowledgements. We thank Elazar Cohen, Justin Gottschlich, and Lindsey
Kuper for their contributions to this project. The project was partially supported
by grants from the Binational Science Foundation (2017662), the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (FA8750-18-C-0099), the Federal Aviation Administration,Ford Motor Company, Intel Corporation, the Israel Science Foundation (683/18), the
National Science Foundation (1814369, DGE-1656518), Siemens Corporation, and the
Stanford CURIS program.
References
1. Bunel, R., Turkaslan, I., Torr, P., Kohli, P., Kumar, M.: Piecewise lin-
ear neural network veriﬁcation: a comparative study. Technical report (2017).arXiv:1711.00455v1
2. Carlini, N., Katz, G., Barrett, C., Dill, D.: Provably minimally-distorted adversarial
examples. Technical report (2017). arXiv:1709.10207
3. Chv´ atal, V.: Linear Programming. W. H. Freeman and Company, New York (1983)
4. Ehlers, R.: Formal veriﬁcation of piece-wise linear feed-forward neural networks.
In: D’Souza, D., Narayan Kumar, K. (eds.) ATVA 2017. LNCS, vol. 10482, pp.
269–286. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68167-2
19
5. Gehr, T., Mirman, M., Drachsler-Cohen, D., Tsankov, E., Chaudhuri, S., Vechev,
M.: AI2: safety and robustness certiﬁcation of neural networks with abstract inter-
pretation. In: Proceedings of 39th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P)(2018)
6. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., Courville, A.: Deep Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
(2016)
7. Gopinath, D., Katz, G., Pˇ asˇareanu, C., Barrett, C.: DeepSafe: a data-driven app-
roach for checking adversarial robustness in neural networks. In: Proceedings of
16th International Symposium on on Automated Technology for Veriﬁcation and
Analysis (ATVA), pp. 3–19 (2018)
8. Hinton, G., et al.: Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recogni-
tion: the shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 29(6),
82–97 (2012)
9. Huang, X., Kwiatkowska, M., Wang, S., Wu, M.: Safety veriﬁcation of deep neural
networks. In: Proceedings of 29th International Conference on Computer Aided
Veriﬁcation (CAV), pp. 3–29 (2017)
10. Hull, J., Ward, D., Zakrzewski, R.: Veriﬁcation and validation of neural networks
for safety-critical applications. In: Proceedings of 21st American Control Confer-ence (ACC) (2002)
11. Julian, K.: NNet Format (2018). https://github.com/sisl/NNet
12. Katz, G., Barrett, C., Dill, D.L., Julian, K., Kochenderfer, M.J.: Reluplex: an
eﬃcient SMT solver for verifying deep neural networks. In: Majumdar, R., Kunˇ cak,
V. (eds.) CAV 2017. LNCS, vol. 10426, pp. 97–117. Springer, Cham (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-63387-9
5

==== Page 10 ====
452 G. Katz et al.
13. Katz, G., Barrett, C., Dill, D., Julian, K., Kochenderfer, M.: Towards proving the
adversarial robustness of deep neural networks. In: Proceedings of 1st Workshop
on Formal Veriﬁcation of Autonomous Vehicles (FVAV), pp. 19–26 (2017)
14. Katz, G., et al.: Marabou (2019). https://github.com/guykatzz/Marabou/tree/
cavartifact
15. Kazak, Y., Barrett, C., Katz, G., Schapira, M.: Verifying deep-RL-driven systems.
In: Proceedings of 1st ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Network Meets AI & ML
(NetAI) (2019)
16. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G.: ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 1097–1105 (2012)
17. Kuper, L., Katz, G., Gottschlich, J., Julian, K., Barrett, C., Kochenderfer, M.:
Toward scalable veriﬁcation for safety-critical deep networks. Technical report
(2018). arXiv:1801.05950
18. Pulina, L., Tacchella, A.: An abstraction-reﬁnement approach to veriﬁcation of
artiﬁcial neural networks. In: Touili, T., Cook, B., Jackson, P. (eds.) CAV 2010.
LNCS, vol. 6174, pp. 243–257. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-14295-6 24
19. Riesenhuber, M., Tomaso, P.: Hierarchical models of object recognition in cortex.
Nat. Neurosci. 2(11), 1019–1025 (1999)
20. Ruan, W., Huang, X., Kwiatkowska, M.: Reachability analysis of deep neural net-
works with provable guarantees. In: Proceedings of 27th International Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) (2018)
21. Silver, D., et al.: Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree
search. Nature 529(7587), 484–489 (2016)
22. Szegedy, C., et al.: Intriguing properties of neural networks. Technical report
(2013). arXiv:1312.6199
23. Wang, S., Pei, K., Whitehouse, J., Yang, J., Jana, S.: Formal security anal-
ysis of neural networks using symbolic intervals. Technical report (2018).arXiv:1804.10829
24. Xiang, W., Tran, H., Johnson, T.: Output reachable set estimation and veriﬁcation
for multi-layer neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. (TNNLS)99, 1–7 (2018)
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and thesource, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitteduse, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

