==== Page 1 ====
Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November  2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
28 The Importance of Text Mining for Services 
Management  
Shaily Malik  1, Dr. Shashi Kant Gupta  2 
1 Maharaja Surajmal institute of Technology , India . 
2 Ph.D. & Researcher, CSE, Integral  University, Luck now, UP , India . 
*Corresponding  Author  Email:  1 shaily.singh@msit.in   
 
Abstract  
The present investigative study is a systematic as well as scientific endeavor to understand the beneficial effect of the tex t mining approach 
for the service management of the organization. This stud uses secondary qualitative data for gaining accurate in sight into the present 
research study. Thematic analysis is done on the collected data set for gaining accurate insight into the present study. Inte rpretive research 
philosophy is chosen for this study along with the inductive research approach. This study  also uses an explanatory research design for 
effective insight into the beneficial effect of the text mining process for the service management of the organization.  The study focuses on the 
process of text mining which is used for analysing the client forums, call logs, tickets of customer service, and platforms  of social me dia, 
news feeds, tweets and many  others. It also focuses on the business that have better insights  based on client expectations and it requires the 
areas that focus on overall improvements. The study integrates the customer communications and reviews that can identify the new features 
for strengthening the product offerings. It focuses on the latest technologies that provide  several opportunities  for improving the customer 
experience those results  in increased profits and revenue.   
Keywords  
Customer , management , Text mining . 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Text mining  is an effective transforming method that deals 
with the modification of unstructured text documents into 
systemic structural text. The data text mining technique is 
essential for the identification of a meaningful pattern of the 
information. The natural l anguage processing technique is 
used for the automatic procession of unstructured text into the 
structural format. Transformation of data into meaningful 
information is essential for service management within the 
organizational setup. Service management  is essential for 
providing a valuable customer relationship approach. It 
provides a systematic framework for the effective 
management of the potential customer of the organization.  
Objectives  
The major objectives of the present investigative research 
study  are  
● To understand the concept of text mining within the 
business organization  
● To evaluate the effect of service management within the 
organization  
● To identify the benefits of the text mining approach for 
effective service management within the organizat ion.  
● To detect the importance of text mining for the effective 
customer retention of an organization  
The major purpose of the present study is to analyze the 
beneficial effect of the text mining approach for effective 
service management within the organi zational setup. Text 
mining is an essential gateway for managing the customer 
relationship with the organization. Service strategy and 
offerings of an organization became easier by implementing a text -mining approach within the organizational setup. 
Servic e management is believed to be a set of specialized 
activities that deals with effective customer service 
management within the organizational setup.  
Natural language processing  (NLP) techniques are 
majorly used for the transformation of the data into 
meaningful text based on the machine learning algorithm. 
Text mining helps to analyze a large amount of information 
quickly as well as efficiently within the organizational setup. 
Apart from that, the text -mining approach helps in decoding 
the expectation of the customer towards a particular 
organization. It also improves the overall quality of the 
business organization by utilizing the comment of the 
customer towards the organiza tion. 
MATE RIAL AND METHODS  
The research study is based on the beneficial ef fect of the 
text mining approach within the organizational setup for 
effective service management. Service management is 
essential for the customer need -based growth of the business 
organization. The entire research focused on the 
philosophical assumption of Interpretive for enhancing the 
knowledge regarding the benefits of the text -mining 
approach for the growth of the organization. Identification of 
research philosophy is an essential criterion for controlling 
the data collection as well as the data analy sis process of the 
study. Interpretive  research philosophy is a renowned 
philosophy that is mainly used in social science research. It 
directly focused on situational analysis by using the 
qualitative data set rather than the quantitative data [1]. This 
research philosophy believed in situatio nal truth rather than 
the universal truth. This research deals with the explanatory 

==== Page 2 ====
Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
29 research design  for scientifically exploring the effect of text 
mining on the service management of an organization. 
Explanatory research design is used within the  research  realm 
when the available information is significantly scanty in the 
amount [2]. This research design wanted to explore the 
causes of a particular phenomenon for gaining in -depth 
insight into the beneficial effect of the text -mining approach 
within the org anizational setup.   
The inductive approach is chosen for identifying the 
benefits of text mining within the business organization. The 
inductive research approach deals with the understanding of 
the phenomenon of specific scenarios to the general conclusi on of a fact [3]. It relies on the collection of a large 
amount of data from the different situations of a particular 
problem for delivering an effective conclusion from it. Apart 
from that the present investigative study uses secondary 
qualitative data fo r continuing the entire study in a systematic 
manner. Secondary data are collected from different 
scholarly articles as well as high -impact journals for 
evaluating the background of the aforementioned topic [4]. 
As the present study deals with the collecti on of secondary 
qualitative data, no sample size is denoted for the data set. 
Rather a set of inclusion and exclusion criteria are set for the 
effective collection of the data set.  
Table 1:  Inclusion and Exclusion criteria  
Inclusion criteria  Exclusion criteria  
● Data after the year 2019  
● Peer-reviewed journals  
● Scholarly articles  
● Journal which only used the English language  
● Keyword -specific search of the information  ● Data before the year 2019  
● Journal with another unknown language  
● Journal with restricted  access  
 
Above table denoted the inclusion and exclusion criteria 
for the collection of secondary qualitative data which are 
particularly set for the identification of the resourceful 
journals for the collection of information. The present study 
used the  Google scholar platform for collecting secondary 
qualitative data for gaining effective insight into the benefits 
of the text -mining approach within the organizational setup 
[5]. 
Using secondary qualitative data is cost -effective as well 
as less time -consuming for the entire study. The collected 
secondary data set are analyzed by using thematic analysis of 
the data seat. Thematic analysis is one of the essential 
qualitative data an alysis methods that helps in the effective 
identification of codes based on the repetition of the 
keywords within the previous research work. It is a 
cost-effective method for the authentic analysis of the 
benefits of text mining within an organizational s etup. On the 
other hand, the thematic analysis needs more time for the 
accurate analysis of the collected data set [6]. In the case of 
the present study, a total of 6 months is allocated for the 
effective completion of the research study based on the 
benef its of the text mining approach for effective service 
management within the organization.  
RESULTS  
Text mining is used for improving the provision regarding 
service to the potential and existing customers of business.  
The text mining is used for the overall improvement 
regarding provision of service for potential and existing 
customer’s  communications. Furthermore, it also includes 
the reviews that can identify the new features for 
strengthening the product offerings. A part from that, the 
technology also provides the main opportunity for improving 
the customer experience that will result in increasing the profits and revenue [7]. The text mining is considered to be 
the act of taking vast volumes based on raw text data an d it 
also performs the analysis for producing the structured 
results. On the other hand, the process  of text mining is often 
delegated for AI -powered mining tools which are  due to all 
the benefits regarding  machine learning and automation 
regarding  the min ing process. Within the business processes, 
the data mining process  is used for discovering the 
relationship and several patterns within the data which help in 
making better business decisions. Moreover, the data mining 
process  can help in spotting the sal es trends, help in 
predicting the customer loyalty and help in developing 
smarter campaigns of marketing.   
 
Figure  1: Components of Text data mining  
The above figure illustrates about the main components of 
Text data mining includes incorporating results, applications, 
processes, numerating  the texts, areas, pros and cons and 
other approaches. Apart from that, the process of text mining 
is analysed thr ough the automatic process with the help of 
advanced technology and it is the reason for which larger 
amount of information within e -commerce [8]. It also 


==== Page 3 ====
Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
30 includes digging out the potential models, helping the makers 
of business decisions, predicting total  customer behaviour, 
making right decisions and reducing overall risks. Text 
mining is also known to be the process of data mining and it 
is the actual process that demonstrates the transforming of 
unstructured texts into a structure format. It is used for  
identifying the meaningful patterns and other new insights 
and one of the main popular decisions includes the 
appropriate applications of text mining which is Information 
Retrieval.  
The main benefits of using the process of data mining 
includes that it helps the companies that gather reliable 
information. Furthermore, it is also considered to be the 
efficient and cost -effective solution that is  compared with 
other data applications. Apart from that, it also helps  the 
business more profitable production an d other operational 
adjustments. The data mining processes also uses both the 
legacy and new systems and also help the overall business in 
making the informed decisions.     
Text mining is considered to be the critical way of 
processing and analysing the u nstructured data . The process 
of text mining includes in analysing and exploring larger 
amounts regarding  unstructured text data that are aided by 
particular  software which can identify several concepts, 
keywords and topics. On the other hand, it also focuses on 
text analytics and some people also draw  the distinctions 
between two terms. The main technique that is  used within 
text mining includes in identifyin g the intrinsic structures 
within the textual information and it organise into the 
relevant subgroups for the further analysis [9]. The text 
analytics also refers to the applications that includes in using 
the techniques of text mining for the sort out thr ough all the 
data sets. On the other hand, the process  of text mining is 
much more practical for all the data scientists and it also 
includes other users according to the development of big data 
platforms and it also uses the deep learning algorithm which 
can help to analyse several sets of unstructured data.  
 
Figure 2: Venn diagram  of test mining  Analysing the data mining process  help several 
organisations in finding valuable business insights within the 
corporate documents, call centre logs, posts of social network 
and several other resources based on text data. The 
capabilities of the process of data mining are  corporate  into 
virtual agents and AI chat bots  where a company can easily 
deploy in providing the automated responses. It is for all the 
customers as the main part of marketing, operations of 
customer services and sales. The overall process of text 
mining also includes the  conventional process which focuses 
on gathering the unstructured information from several 
sources that are accessible within the document organisation . 
It also focuses on data cleansing and pre -processing tasks that 
are performed for eliminating and disti nguishing the 
inconsistency from all the data variables.  
The data mining process is totally focused on the process 
of document clustering and document classification. It also 
focuses on other process such as machine learning and AI, 
computational linguist ics, library and information science, 
several databases and others [10]. Power BI is also 
considered  to be the powered self -service  BI tool which can 
be performed the unstructured data analytics and it is 
well-suited for both the business audiences and ana lysts as 
per the initiative dashboard features and other visualisation 
features. Therefore, text analytics is considered to be the 
concept which  includes the information retrieval and process 
of information extraction process with web mining and data 
minin g process.              
Importance of Text mining includes in huge collection 
regarding  collection of documents . The main importance of 
text mining includes in using the processing of natural 
language and also for processing AI for uncovering the 
relationships and patterns within unstructured texts. On the 
other hand, it also enables the business for automatically 
identifying the useful information within emails, tickets for 
customer service, Chabot , posts within social media and 
several other texts. The larger collection of the text data 
within  the text analytics process that includes in the 
extraction process of int eresting patterns and information’s  
from several data within larger database [11]. It is the process 
that helps  to extract several useful information and the 
nontrivial patterns form  the larger amount of text database. 
The IR systems also make  the use of d ifferent algorithm for 
monitoring and tracking the user behaviour and it also 
discover the relevant data. The main features of this process 
include text clustering process, text categorisation process, 
sentiment analysis, entity -relation modelling and docu ment 
summarisation.      


==== Page 4 ====
Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
31  
Figure 3: Steps of text analytics  
The process of text analytics includes transforming the 
unstructured  text data within the machine -process able  
structured form that form in discovering the hidden patterns. 
On the other hand, it also deals with machine learning that are 
focused on the supported analysis regarding text data [12]. 
The main process of text mining includes pre -processing 
operations, a nalysing the patterns through management 
information systems, information extraction, categorisation, 
clustering and summarisation . It also includes in identifying 
the file systems for collecting data and also for retrieval of 
data. Therefore, within the o verall file systems, the stored 
information cannot be isolated in individual files and it can be 
much more difficult to retrieve and identify. The main factors 
that are linked with the process of text analytics includes text 
features, text content, text or ganisation and several other 
processes.  
The process includes in transforming overall information 
based on the data variables. Furthermore, the machines can 
easily understand and the process of text analytics also 
automates the overall process that classif ies the texts by 
intent, topic and sentiments. Data cleansing is also 
considered to be the important step as it holds the total 
importance of dirty data if they are used within the mining 
process directly and it can also causes much confusion within  
severa l procedures and it also produces the inaccurate results. 
Therefore, the importance  regarding  file information and 
document information help to be much more organised, 
transparent, efficient and systematic. Hence , it also helps  
several people that can be c apable to access overall 
information which can be much easier for implementing the 
process.       
The process of Text mining can assist in interpretation and 
tracking the texts created by blogs, news and emails . The 
process of text mining includes in assis ting the interpretation 
and tracking process regarding  the texts that are created by 
blogs, news and emails. The organisation  might use the 
technologies that are based on the process of data mining and 
it is used for assessing the visibility of the brands,  likes, followers and posts. It also provides the organisation  with the 
clear picture of customers that react to several contents and 
brands. It is considered as the main act that takes vast 
volumes regarding  raw data texts and analyse in producing 
structu red results [13]. In addition, i t also delegates the 
mining tools that are AI -powered which benefits the 
automation process of mining. The first step within  the 
process of text mining is information retrieval and it help 
retrieve several information based on data variables. 
Furthermore, it might require  by using the search engine for 
identifying the coups  regarding texts which are digitised and 
may necessitat e digitisation of the physical texts within 
publications.  
 
Figure 4: Important phases of text mining process  
The above figures about the phases of test mining process 
and it focuses on text transformation, text pre -processing, 
data mining, evaluation, feature selection and applications. 
On the other hand, information extraction is one of the main 
techniques of text mining and information exchange also 
refers to the process. It also extracts  some meaningful 
information which is having vast chunks of the textual data 
[14]. The process of data mining includes in handling the 
structured data that have highly formatted data within the 
database and with ERP systems. Apart from that, i t deals with 
the unstructured textual data that are not pre -defined and it 
integrates the text mining and data mining approaches based 
on the analytics. Therefore, it also focuses on the mining 
techniques such as process discovery, process enhancements 
and conformance checking.  
DISCUSSION  
Present an investigative study that deals with the 
understanding of the beneficial effect of the text mining 
approach for effective service management within the 
organizational setup. Thematic analysis is done on the 
collected secondary qualitative data fo r gaining effective 
insight into the positive effect of the text -mining approach 


==== Page 5 ====
Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
32 within the organizational setup. It is evident from the result of 
the thematic analysis that text mining deals with a large 
number of data set that effectively enable the anal ytical 
processing of the data set in an accurate manner. The text 
mining process is also utilized in the service management 
approach of an organization [15]. In the case of social media 
analysis, text mining is believed to be one of the essential 
processes  that quickly transform the unstructured data of the 
social media handles into a systematic as well as a structured 
manner for gaining effective insight from the social media 
users. Apart from that, the feedback response of the 
customers is also analyzed b y using a text -mining process for 
improving the customer -based approach of the organization.  
It is also stated that the text mining process is effectively 
used in social media analysis for the strategic improvement of 
the organization. Social media analys is is believed to be one 
of the essential methods for analyzing the target market of the 
organization [16]. Text mining is an approach that enhances 
data transformation in a quick as well as accurate manner. On 
the other hand, the capacity of handling larg e amounts of data 
set is essential for the effective growth as well as the 
profitability of the organization. It is stated that utilization of 
the text mining approach enhances the customer relationship 
with the organization [17]. Text mining is a benefici al tool for 
effective communication of the organization with potential 
customer. Maintenance of appropriate customer relationship 
management is essential for the effective growth and 
development of the organization.  
It is evident from the present analysis  that text mining 
enhances the report generation process of the organization in 
an effective manner that impacted the service management 
approach of the organization. In the era of globalization, 
people are more interested to go in intellectual investment.  In 
the case of business organizations, intellectual investment is 
to invest a large amount towards the repairing as well as 
maintenance of a good relationship with potential customers. 
It is evident from the analysis that the text -mining approach 
enhances  the provision of organizational service for the 
effective retention of customers [18]. Natural language 
processing techniques are used in the text mining approach 
for the growth and development of the organization. Coding 
of the structured data set along with the sentimental analysis 
has been done in the text mining approach for gaining 
effective insight into the customer’s perspective regarding 
the quality of a particular organization.  
The present study suggested that the incorporation of 
automatic techn iques enhances the profitability as well as 
productivity of the organization. Incorporation of a text 
mining approach within the organizational process leads 
towards automation and increased productivity of the 
organization. The automatic data translating process 
enhances the systematic processing of the structured data for 
quick understanding and effective decision -making processes 
within the organization. Incorporation of a text mining 
approach enhances the chances of establishing new market 
opportunities  along with the innovative marketing approach for a particular product . The study indicated that the 
incorporation of text mining enhances the effective 
relationship of the company with its effective stakeholders. 
On the other hand, it emphasizes the effec tive 
decision -making process of the organization that in turn helps 
in the customer -centric growth of the organization in an 
effective manner [19]. Depending on the need of the specific 
business firm the form of text mining is applied for the 
betterment of  the organization. Testing the social media 
handles of the target group of customers is essential for the 
incorporation of customer -specific policies of the 
organization.  
It is evident from this study that social media analysis deals 
with a large number of potential customers which is analyzed 
for tracking the current perspective of the customer towards 
purchasing a particular product. Apart from that, sentiment 
analysis, m easuring the satisfaction rate of the customer, 
customer voice analysis, and more are effectively handled by 
the text mining approach within the organization [20]. 
Sometimes analyzing the feedback response is another 
important criterion that is used for th e implication 
customer -centric approach within the organization. 
Open -ended survey questions are also analyzed by the 
implication of the text -mining approach within the 
organization. Text mining enhances the overall service 
management approach within the o rganizational setup.   
CONCLUSION  
The present investigative study is an endeavor to 
understand the beneficial effect of the text mining approach 
for the effective service management of the organization. The 
present study uses secondary qualitative data  for gaining 
effective insight into the aforementioned problem. 
Interpretive research philosophy is used in the research study 
along with an inductive research approach for gaining 
accurate insight into the benefits of the text -mining approach 
within the o rganizational setup. Secondary quantitative data 
is used for quick as well as efficient analysis of the 
above -mentioned concepts. Particular inclusion and 
exclusion criteria are set for the effective collection of the 
data set. It is clear from the result of the thematic analysis that 
text mining benefited the business organization for the 
effective service management of the organization. It helps to 
enhance the customer relationship approach of the 
organization which in turn positively affected the 
profita bility of the organization. The entire duration of the 
entire investigative study is 6 months for gaining effective 
insight into the research problem.  
Text mining is used for improving the provision of the 
service to both existing as well as potential cus tomers of the 
organization. Apart from that, the text mining act as a critical 
analytical process for transforming unstructured data into 
structured information of a particular data set. It helps to 
analyze a large amount of data in a quick as well as effi cient 
manner. One of the major benefits of the text mining 
approach is the handling capacity of a large number of 

==== Page 6 ====
Technoarete Transactions on Intelligent Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery  
Vol-2, Issue -4, November 2022 
e-ISSN: 2583 -195X  
 
  
33 datasets in an accurate manner. Apart from that, the result of 
the thematic analysis suggested that the appropriate 
interpretation of the data  of social media handles is also done 
by the text mining process for gaining effective insight into 
the current perspective of the customers regarding a 
particular product. Effective tracking of the data of online 
platforms is also done by the text mining approach of the 
particular business organization.  
REFERENCES  
[1]  Sezgen, Eren, Keith J. Mason, and Robert Mayer. "Voice of 
airline passenger: A text mining approach to understand 
customer satisfaction."  Journal of Air Transport 
Management  77 (2019): 65-74. 
[2]  de Brito, Mariana Madruga, Christian Kuhlicke, and Andreas 
Marx. "Near -real-time drought impact assessment: a text 
mining approach on the 2018/19 drought in 
Germany."  Environmental Research Letters  15.10 (2020): 
1040a9.  
[3]  Kutela, Boniphace, et  al. "Analysis of residents’ stated 
preferences of shared micro -mobility devices using 
regression -text mining approach."  Transportation Planning 
and Technology  45.2 (2022): 159 -178. 
[4]  Nishimura, Kiyohiko G., Seisho Sato, and Akihiko Takahashi. 
"Term stru cture models during the global financial crisis: A 
parsimonious text mining approach."  Asia-Pacific Financial 
Markets  26.3 (2019): 297 -337. 
[5]  Pejic -Bach, Mirjana, et al. "Text mining of industry 4.0 job 
advertisements."  International journal of informati on 
management  50 (2020): 416 -431. 
[6]  Loureiro, Sandra Maria Correia, et al. "Understanding the use 
of Virtual Reality in Marketing: A text mining -based 
review."  Journal of Business Research  100 (2019): 514 -530. 
[7]  Kumar, Sunil, Arpan Kumar Kar, and P. Vigneswara 
Ilavarasan. "Applications of text mining in services 
management: A systematic literature review." International 
Journal of Information Management Data Insights  1.1 (2021): 
100008.  
[8]  Saura, Jose Ramon, and Dag R. Bennett. "A three -stage 
method for data text mining: Using UGC in business 
intelligence analysis." Symmetry  11.4 (2019): 519.  [9]  Antons, David, et al. "The application of text mining methods 
in innovation research: current state, evolution patterns, and 
development priorities." R&D Man agement  50.3 (2020): 
329-351. 
[10]  Pejić Bach, Mirjana, et al. "Text mining for big data analysis 
in financial sector: A literature review." Sustainability  11.5 
(2019): 1277.   
[11]  Pejic -Bach, Mirjana, et al. "Text mining of industry 4.0 job 
advertisements ." International journal of information 
management  50 (2020): 416 -431. 
[12]  Zhang, Fan, et al. "Construction site accident analysis using 
text mining and natural language processing techniques." 
Automation in Construction  99 (2019): 238 -248.  
[13]  Gröndahl , Tommi, and N. Asokan. "Text analysis in 
adversarial settings: Does deception leave a stylistic trace?." 
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)  52.3 (2019): 1 -36. 
[14]  Albalawi, Rania, Tet Hin Yeap, and Morad Benyoucef. 
"Using topic modeling methods for short -text data: A 
comparative analysis." Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence  3 
(2020): 42.  
[15]  Zhang, Fan, et al. "Construction site accident analysis using 
text mining and natural language processing 
techniques."  Automation in Construction  99 (2019): 238 -248. 
[16]  McColl -Kennedy, Janet R., et al. "Gaining customer 
experience insights that matter."  Journal of service 
research  22.1 (2019): 8 -26. 
[17]  Antons, David, et al. "The application of text mining methods 
in innovation research: current state, evolution pat terns, and 
development priorities."  R&D Management  50.3 (2020): 
329-351. 
[18]  Guerreiro, João, and Paulo Rita. "How to predict explicit 
recommendations in online reviews using text mining and 
sentiment analysis."  Journal of Hospitality and Tourism 
Manageme nt 43 (2020): 269 -272. 
[19]  Jung, Yeonjae, and Yongmoo Suh. "Mining the voice of 
employees: A text mining approach to identifying and 
analyzing job satisfaction factors from online employee 
reviews."  Decision Support Systems  123 (2019): 113074.  
[20] Onan, Aytuğ. "Sentiment analysis on massive open 
online course evaluations: a text mining and deep learning 
approach."  Computer Applications in Engineering 
Education  29.3 (2021): 572 -589. 

