==== Page 1 ====
09 February 2025
 
Alma Mater Studiorum Università di Bologna
Archivio istituzionale della ricerca
Vlačić, B., Corbo, L., Costa e Silva, S., Dabić, M. (2021). The evolving role of artificial intelligence in
marketing: A review and research agenda. JOURNAL OF BUSINESS RESEARCH, 128, 187-203
[10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.01.055].Published Version:The evolving role of artificial intelligence in marketing: A review and research agenda
Published:
DOI: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.01.055
Terms of use:
(Article begins on next page)Some rights reserved. The terms and conditions for the reuse of this version of the manuscript are
specified in the publishing policy. For all terms of use and more information see the publisher's website.Availability:
This version is available at: https://hdl.handle.net/11585/834100 since: 2022-02-25This is the final peer-reviewed author’s accepted manuscript (postprint) of the following publication:
This item was downloaded from IRIS Università di Bologna (https://cris.unibo.it/).
When citing, please refer to the published version.

==== Page 2 ====
This item was downloaded from IRIS Università di Bologna ( https://cris.unibo.it/ ) 
When citing, please refer to the published version.  
 
 
 
This is the final peer-reviewed accepted manuscript of:  
Vlačić, B., Corbo, L., e Silva, S. C., & Dabić, M. (2021). The evolving role of 
artificial intelligence in marketing: A review and research agenda. Journal of 
Business Research, 128, 187-203. 
The final published version is available online at: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.01.055 
 
Rights / License: 
The terms and conditions for the reuse of this version of the manuscript are specified in the 
publishing policy. For all terms of use and more information see the publisher's website.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 3 ====
2 
 THE EVOLVING ROLE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MARKETING: A 
REVIEW AND RESEARCH AGENDA 
 
 
Abstract 
An increasing amount of research on Intelligent Systems/Artificial Intelligence (AI) in marketing 
has shown that AI is capable of mimicking humans and performing activities in an ‘intelligent’ 
manner. Considering the growing interest in AI among marketing researchers and practitioners, 
this review seeks to provide an overview of the trajectory of marketing and AI research fields. 
Building upon the review of 164 articles published in Web of Science and Scopus indexed journals, 
this article develops a context-specific research agenda. Our study of selected articles by means of 
Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) procedure outlines several research avenues related to 
the adoption, use, and acceptance of AI technology in marketing, the role of data protection and 
ethics, the role of institutional support for marketing AI, as well as the revolution of the labor 
market and marketers’ competencies. 
 
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence, Intelligent System, Marketing, Systematic Literature Review, 
Multiple Correspondence Analysis, HOMALS. 
  

==== Page 4 ====
3 
  
THE EVOLVING ROLE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN MARKETING: A 
REVIEW AND RESEARCH AGENDA 
 
1. Introduction 
Research on digital and technological evolution in marketing has been considerably fast-
paced (Crittenden et al., 2019), with researchers seeking to explore the ways in which 
technological advancements influence the knowledge potential of organizations when it comes to 
managing customer needs and delivering offerings (Kumar et al., 2019). The existing body of 
research on marketing is rich with studies assessing the effects and the application of several 
technologies on marketing performance. However, only in recent years has research positioned at 
the intersection of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and marketing been given more attention, with recent 
calls for research encouraging further exploration of AI-related topics and their roles in marketing 
(Davenport et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2019). With this in mind, and for the purpose of this review, 
we adopt an understanding of AI as “computational agents that act intelligently” (Poole & 
Mackworth, 2010, p. 3). This notion departs from earlier views that have considered AI to be 
limited only to machines that can display human-like intelligence. In this regard, we embrace the 
definition of Marketing AI as “the development of artificial agents that, given the information they 
have about consumers, competitors, and the focal company, suggest and/or take marketing actions 
to achieve the best marketing outcome” (Overgoor et al., 2019, p. 2). 
From a strategic perspective, AI is becoming increasingly important in marketing. 
Companies such as Google, Rare Carat, Spotify, and Under Armor are among the expanding list 
of firms enhancing their performance through the adoption of AI-based platforms (such as 
Microsoft Cognitive Services, Amazon Lex, Google Assistant, or IBM Watson). This approach 
increases their customer interaction across marketing channels and improves market forecasting 

==== Page 5 ====
4 
 and automation. Consequently, AI has been recognized as the most influential technology for 
business, with expected growth from $10.1 billion in 2018 to $126 billion by 2025 (Tractica, 
2020). A recent survey among business leaders revealed that a priority area for the application of 
AI is in sales and marketing, with 24% of US companies already using AI and 60% expected to 
use it by 2022 (MIT Technology Review Insights, 2020). Additionally, AI is considered the 
number one workplace trend in the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology’s 
workplace list (SIOP, 2020). 
The success of AI in marketing practices is also reflected in research, with several 
significant contributions appearing in recent times, particularly from 2017 onwards. The academic 
attention given to AI can be traced back to the 1980s, with studies focusing on expert systems and 
robotics (e.g., Chablo, 1994; Davenport, 2018; Gill, 1995). After a quiet period of almost two 
decades, its recent popularity among researchers and practitioners within marketing can be 
ascribed to three major factors: the development of Big Data; the availability of computational 
power; and the progression of AI techniques and technological enablers (Bock et al., 2020; 
Overgoor et al., 2019).  
Recent expert-based surveys on this topic (Davenport et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; 
Kumar et al., 2020a) have outlined the importance of the application of AI in marketing. However, 
these studies are not based on a sound quantitative approach and arguably suffer from interpretative 
or subjectivity biases (Furrer et al., 2020). With this in mind, this study aims to complement 
contemporary findings by further elucidating the historical intersection of the two research fields 
and subsequently proposing avenues for future research. A multiple correspondence analysis 
(MCA) method was used in order to reveal the foundations of the research field and allow for the 
representation of the field’s intellectual structure. This approach has been recognized as a reliable 

==== Page 6 ====
5 
 method of content analysis, enabling the mapping of the structure of various research fields, such 
as international strategic alliances (López-Duarte et al., 2016), service marketing (Furrer et al., 
2020), and immigrant entrepreneurship (Dabić et al., 2020), among others. 
This paper offers multiple contributions to the field of AI and marketing. Firstly, while the 
majority of previous works conducting reviews on AI and marketing can be considered structured 
expert-based reviews, which, although valuable, can suffer from interpretative or subjectivity 
biases (Furrer et al., 2020), our work relies on content analysis combined with quantitative MCA 
procedures. In so doing, our paper complements expert-based reviews, offering a more objective 
account of the development of AI and marketing. The methodology used for this study – which is, 
to our knowledge, the first of its kind to be applied to AI and marketing studies – allows us to 
delineate a research agenda related to theory, context, characteristics, and methods. While several 
previous studies have focused on the interaction between AI and a specific marketing area, our 
paper instead offers a comprehensive overview of more than 30 years’ worth of development in 
this research field by not imposing any limitations with regards to time or topics. 
The remainder of the article is structured as follows. In the following section, we outline 
the typology of previous systematic literature reviews and present the methodological approach 
adopted in our study. In Section 3, we provide an illustration of the marketing and AI research 
field, outlining theoretical underpinnings and major research themes. Section 4 presents the results 
obtained and proposes future research directions. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper by 
summarizing its key contributions as well as discussing its limitations and opportunities for further 
review studies. 
  

==== Page 7 ====
6 
 2. Methodology  
2.1. Typology of extant systematic literature reviews and methods  
A literature review represents a specific piece of scientific inquiry, a method by which 
previous research is collected and synthesized (Snyder, 2019) in order to advance a subject’s 
understanding and outline an agenda for future research (Kumar et al., 2020c). Littell and 
colleagues (2008, p. 1-2) define systematic literature reviews as “ research that bears on a 
particular question, using organized, transparent, and replicable procedures at each step in the 
process”. Paul and Rialp-Criado (2020, p. 2) expand upon this definition, providing an overview 
of several types of systematic literature reviews, namely structured reviews  focusing on widely 
used methods, theories, and constructs (e.g., Ngai et al., 2015;  Mishra et al., 2020; Casprini et al., 
2020); hybrid-narratives with a framework for setting future research agendas  (e.g., Dabić et al., 
2020); theory-based reviews  (e.g., Ozturk, 2020); meta-analysis  (e.g., Fetscherin & Heinrich, 
2015); bibliometric reviews  (e.g., Randhawa et al., 2016); and reviews seeking model/framework 
development  (e.g., Paul & Mas, 2019).  
Further screening of up-to-date literature reviews by Furrer and colleagues (2020) outlined 
three prevalent methodologies: expert-based surveys  (see Davenport et al., 2020), which provide 
reflections and offer future research agendas but may suffer from author subjectivity bias; citation 
studies, which overcome the weakness of subjectivity as they adopt a quantitative approach which, 
in turn, lacks the richness of expert surveys (see Kumar et al., 2020b); and content analysis  (see 
Dabić et al., 2020), which provides systematic and rich data but incorporates a certain degree of 
author subjectivity during the coding process.  
Prior reviews of AI and marketing have predominantly followed expert-based and citation-
based approaches (see Table 1). For example, scholars have previously focused on AI and new 

==== Page 8 ====
7 
 technologies (Kumar et al., 2020a), the role of AI within the general business domain (Loureiro et 
al., 2020), or sub-domains of marketing, such as sales (Syam & Sharma, 2018) and business-to-
business (B2B) marketing (Kumar et al., 2020b).  
-----Insert Table 1 about here--- 
In order to expand the research domain of AI and marketing, this study adopts a content 
analysis based hybrid-narrative systematic review approach, offering a framework for setting 
future research agendas . The adoption of this approach enables the integration of “the tenets of 
both bibliometric and structured reviews” (Paul & Rialp-Criado, 2020, p. 2), simultaneously 
minimizing the authors’ subjectivity biases and offering a more objective account of the research 
domain (Furrer et al., 2020).  
The chosen systematic literature review type and the methodological approach selected are 
operationalized as follows. First, we specified the search criteria and collected the articles. Second, 
we performed an in-depth analysis of the selected articles and generated the content-based 
codebook. Third, we performed the MCA analysis and illustrated the AI and marketing research 
domains’ intersection. The findings of the analysis are presented in Section 3. In Figure 1, we 
present the methodological protocol performed.  
---Insert Figure 1 about here--- 
2.2. The sample of articles and data collection 
The data collection began by searching for articles that contained (in their title, abstract, or 
the authors’ keywords) terms such as “marketing” AND “artificial intelligence OR intelligent 
system(s)”, as recommended by Martínez-López and Casillas (2013). The search was performed 
among Thomson Reuters Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), Science Citation Index Expanded 

==== Page 9 ====
8 
 (SSCI) list of journals1, or those indexed in the Elsevier Scopus database2 (Paul & Rialp-Criado, 
2020). To ensure the validity of the review, we limited our analysis to academic journals that had 
a peer-review process (Podsakoff et al., 2005) and were written in English. We excluded book 
chapters, book reviews, conference proceedings, and editorial notes (López-Duarte et al., 2016). 
Finally, in order to graphically depict the evolution of this research topic, we did not impose any 
time constraints. This enabled us to map the trajectory of the intersection of marketing and AI. The 
search criteria at the date of extraction (8th May, 2020) resulted in 164 articles, which, following 
the recommendations of Graneheim and Lundman (2004), were reviewed by an international team 
of four members.  
The final list includes 164 articles published in academic journals between 1987 and 2020. 
Increased attention among scholars, as demonstrated by a notable increase in recent published 
academic articles (see Figure 2), is a testament to the need to map the intellectual structure of the 
field and facilitate the understanding of this research theme’s foundations (Patriotta, 2020; 
Tranfield et al., 2003).  
-----Insert Figure 2 about here--- 
The advancement of academic interest in this area relies on the journals most frequently 
publishing articles positioned at the intersection of marketing and AI, such as the Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, Industrial Marketing Management, the European Journal of 
Marketing, and the Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing , among others (see Table 2). 
Additionally, Table 2 reveals notable studies published in those journals and outlines that 78.0% 
                                                 
 
 
 
1 http://mjl.clarivate.com/publist ssci.pdf   
2 https://www.scopus.com/sources.uri  

==== Page 10 ====
9 
 of publications reviewed in our study were published in journals with an Impact Factor of above 
1.0 (2020 impact factor). This is in line with the research of Paul and Rosado-Serrano (2019) and 
Chatterjee and Sahasranamam (2018), who define influential articles as those published in SSCI 
indexed journals with an impact factor above 1.0, a necessary condition required in order to shape 
research fields and provide a baseline for further developments. 
-----Insert Table 2 about here--- 
2.3. The building of the codebook 
The protocol for building the codebook (see Figure 1) consisted of identifying the main 
descriptors within the research field and carrying out the MCA (Dabić et al., 2020; Furrer et al., 
2008, 2020). Following the methodological procedure outlined in López-Duarte and colleagues 
(2016, p. 512), using QDA Miner v.5 and Wordstat v.8 software, this stepwise process consists of 
“(I) extracting the key content from the articles’ titles, abstracts, and keywords; (II) classifying it 
in order to build a reduced list of the core descriptors; (III) revising the codebook by merging the 
similar categories in order to obtain a meaningful list of descriptors in terms of content and 
frequency”. The genesis of the initial codebook was based on previous literature reviews 
conducted within the two respective research fields (Baesens et al., 2009; Davenport et al., 2020; 
Martínez-López & Casillas, 2013; Kumar et al., 2019) (see Table 1). Building upon the initial 
classification and categorization, the authors extracted the key content and generated the final 
codebook, which consisted of 887 terms classified into 21 descriptors. The descriptors were further 
clustered into six broad themes according to their characteristics: theoretical 
approaches/frameworks, marketing and AI major research themes and topics, methodologies used, 
geographical scope, industrial sectors, and levels of research. The entire list of keywords and 
descriptors is available in the supplementary material. 

==== Page 11 ====
10 
 2.4. The Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) 
To map the intersection of the research fields of marketing and AI, we used MCA 
procedures (Greenacre & Blasius, 2006; Hoffman & Franke, 1986; Hoffman & De Leeuw, 1992). 
MCA is a quantitative technique characterized by its ability to identify the relationships between 
dichotomous variables (the occurrence of the defined key content in this study) (Gifi, 1990). A 
value of “1” was entered if the term appeared and “0” if the term was absent. In line with the goals 
of this study, the homogeneity analysis by means of alternating least squares (HOMALS) analysis 
was performed using SPSS (v. 26) software, enabling the illustration of the research field’s 
intellectual structure on a low-dimensional proximity map. Descriptors were positioned along the 
two axes (see Figure 3). Accordingly, the proximity of the descriptors corresponded with the 
common constituent. In the event of a large proportion of the articles involving similar descriptors, 
descriptors were positioned close to each other and vice-versa (Bendixen, 1995). Furthermore, the 
closer the position of the descriptor was to the center of the map, the larger the number of articles 
researching the topic within the field. 
 
3. Findings 
The general focus of research on marketing has gradually progressed towards an increasing 
intersection with research expert systems (Gill, 1995; Steinberg & Plank, 1990) and, more recently, 
AI (Davenport et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020a; Rust, 2020). Accordingly, the findings of our 
study reveal numerous facets and angles that, through this development, have been somewhat 
concealed (see Figure 3). The review performed specifically uncovers the outline of a nascent 
theoretical context, a very large diversity of research themes, and information on the contexts and 
particular challenges faced in different strands of research within the ﬁeld. 

==== Page 12 ====
11 
 -----Insert Figure 3 about here--- 
To illustrate the link between marketing and AI and reveal research opportunities, the 
initial phase of this study required an understanding of the research domain portrayed in Figure 3, 
along with its dimension poles (see Table 3) (Hoffman & De Leeuw, 1992). The proportion of 
variance explained by each pole accounts for 22.21% of the variance. However, this indicator tends 
to mislead, as the map combines the information of the k variables (21 descriptors) in only two 
dimensions (Dabić et al., 2020; Furrer et al., 2008; López-Duarte et al., 2016). In agreement with 
Hair and colleagues (1998), Furrer and colleagues (2008; 2020) noted that variance could have a 
deceptive effect on the MCA approach and that the overall mean of keywords per article - which 
should be larger than 1 - is more profound. In our case, it was 1.23. 
-----Insert Table 3 about here--- 
As a result, our analysis identified the dimension of behavioral profiling on the far-left 
horizontal line. The publications within this category focus on behavioral approaches to 
segmentation, targeting, and positioning (Belanche et al., 2019; Casabayó et al., 2004; Miralles-
Pechuán, 2018; Pitt et al., 2018) while considering ethical concerns that may arise through the 
implementation of AI (Belk, 2020; Martin & Murphy, 2017). The far-right end of the horizontal 
dimension demonstrates a specific focus on technological and marketing strategies (Bonnin & 
Rodriguez, 2019; Gardé, 2018; Li, 2000, 2004; Paschen et al., 2019; Yazici et al., 1994). The upper 
part of the vertical axis identifies a dimension focused on customer relationships and customer-
centricity, while taking into consideration marketing channels and the overall impact of AI on 
performance (Daskou & Mangina, 2003; Moriuchi, 2019; Payne et al., 2018; Steinhoff et al., 
2019), whereas the lower part focuses on technology-oriented approaches, including technological 

==== Page 13 ====
12 
 theoretical foundations and macro-level elements of marketing research (e.g., firms, institutions, 
environment) (Tam et al., 1994; Weber & Schütte, 2019 Wirtz et al., 2018; Zenobia et al., 2009). 
In addition to labeling the map’s poles, it is also important to acknowledge that the greater 
the distance between the descriptors in the map, the lesser their association, thus indicating 
potential research gaps and future research opportunities (López-Duarte et al., 2016). In this way, 
we outline the theoretical foundations revealed by our content analysis. We present the findings 
pertaining to the predominant research themes concerning AI and marketing in the following sub-
sections. In line with the identified descriptors and their positions within the domains illustrated in 
Figure 3, these findings serve to establish a foundation for future research directions, as presented 
in Section 4.3  
3.1. Theoretical foundations 
3.1.1. Behavioral Theories  
A primary goal of marketing science is to describe, model, and predict the behavior of 
consumers towards products. As a result of the emergence of a new type of customer (i.e., an 
individual that is more informed, demanding, sophisticated, and whose needs are rapidly changing) 
(Klaus & Zaichkowsky, 2020), and in light of the ‘new normal’ reality caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic, marketers face additional issues when it comes to understanding customer behavior 
(Sheth, 2020). The importance of the insights unveiled by user data shared on the internet has been 
of particular interest to marketers in recent years. In particular, further comprehension of 
                                                 
 
 
 
3 The entire sample of 164 papers was considered when developing insights based on theoretical groundwork, research 
themes, methodologies (Aguinis et al., 2009), and geographical contexts. However, due to space limitations, we have 
adopted a parsimonious approach, and we highly encourage readers to further explore the entire list of articles 
available in the supplementary material. 

==== Page 14 ====
13 
 consumers’ digital footprints and their widespread use of web facilities can, along with the use of 
AI, assist in the design of commercially successful products and services (Kühl et al., 2019). 
Several studies have acknowledged AI’s ability to analyze complex data and identify behavioral 
patterns and insights, ultimately assisting marketers in making strategic decisions and decreasing 
the churn rate (Casabayó et al., 2004). In this vein, Liker and Sindi (1997) found that a user 
acceptance model for expert systems was affected by attitude, perceived usefulness, perceived 
impact on career, and perceived impact on job security. Similarly, but with regards to consumers 
rather than marketers, Moriuchi (2019) measured the influence of the perceived ease of use and 
perceived usefulness over consumers’ engagement and loyalty when AI technological enablers, 
such as voice assistants (VA), were used. Furthermore, Yang and Lee (2019) noted that VA 
adoption is determined by perceptions of utilitarian and hedonic values and that these are 
composed of perceived usefulness, perceived enjoyment, portability, automation, content quality, 
and visual attractiveness. Additionally, Nguyen and Sidorova (2018), building upon self-
determination theory, furthered our understanding of human-AI interaction, positioning perceived 
autonomy, competence, and cognitive effort as antecedents of AI user satisfaction. Therefore, it 
seems that, in order to adopt an AI-powered device and enhance its usage, potential customers 
must also perceive a higher hedonic value in addition to the device’s practical utility (Belanche et 
al., 2019). 
In recent years, scholars have considered the impact of the “psychology of automation” on 
AI (Klaus & Zaichkowsky, 2020) in order to reveal the ways in which AI provokes an 
overconfidence effect among users, caused by biased perceptions and misguidance or discomfort. 
This suggests that, even though advanced quantitative approaches have been developed, human 
judgment is still relevant (Coldewey, 2018). In firms, for instance, it is important to guarantee that 

==== Page 15 ====
14 
 AI can be regarded as an ethical problem-solver that requires the commitment of all hierarchical 
levels within a firm (Amen et al., 2020a; Belk, 2016; 2020). Otherwise, intentions to use AI run 
the risk of being jeopardized. To embrace AI, all levels within the firm are expected to have an 
aligned vision when it comes to its utilization. As such, the employment of AI-powered marketing 
tools should be aligned with the ways in which consumers perceive them, guaranteeing that the 
development of managerial decision-making is in accordance with the process of understanding 
customers (Longoni et al., 2019). 
3.1.2. Foundations of Customer Relationship Management (CRM) 
Customer relationship management (CRM) encompasses the processes and enabling systems 
supporting a strategy that attempts to create profitable long-term relationships with specific 
customers. CRM has grown in importance in line with our increasing awareness that customer 
acquisition is costlier than maintaining existing customers (Ling & Yen, 2001). With this in mind, 
several outcomes of AI can contribute towards leveraging the enhancement of relationships. 
Building upon AI’s ability to predict which customers are most likely to respond to marketing 
campaigns using traditional RFM (recency, frequency, and monetary value) methods with 
demographic and psychographic variables (Cui et al., 2012), the focus of CRM has been on the 
use of new technologies and methods (Chatterjee et al., 2019). Thus, recent advancements in 
technology amplify CRM’s potential through the effective use of collected data and prominent 
interactivity in a way that fosters customer relationships (Bock et al., 2020; Kaplan & Haenlein, 
2019) and ultimately enables customer-centricity (Latinovic & Chatterjee, 2019), co-creation, and 
co-production (Ranjan & Read, 2016). 
In line with the evolution of AI and marketers’ growing aspirations towards customer-
centricity (Sheth et al., 2000; Wang et al., 2020), CRM has been viewed as a way by which to 

==== Page 16 ====
15 
 implement a customer-facing approach across the entire organization. Therefore, AI plays a crucial 
role in transforming data into marketing insights (Shah et al., 2006). For example, AI includes text 
and voice-driven conversational agents (De Keyser et al., 2019) that exhibit aspects of human 
intelligence (Huang & Rust, 2018; Rust, 2020). This state-of-the-art technology includes 
perception, reasoning, and actuation, combined in the form of algorithms, which lead to improved 
customer service and performance (Belanche et al., 2020). Accordingly, in order to better explain 
the value of AI within the CRM range of actuation, it is important to acknowledge two spectrums: 
service encounter characteristics and customer features that must be considered permanent 
adjusters of conversational agents (Bock et al., 2020).  
When considering service encounters, the notion of the customer journey has particular 
relevance. This, according to D’Arco and colleagues (2019), is useful when trying to understand 
the ways in which AI can assist in different areas (ranging from customer profiling to the 
management of CRM initiatives), ultimately contributing to the improvement of the customer 
journey across all touchpoints. Consequently, Ngai and colleagues (2009) and, recently, Paschen 
and colleagues (2020) acknowledged that advanced marketing intelligent systems could equally 
benefit different sales funnel stages, seemingly increasing customer lifetime value through the 
promotion of loyalty programs and one-to-one marketing initiatives.  
When it comes to the customer features that must be considered when managing 
relationships with clients and considering the bots’ permanent adaptation, particular attention is 
given to constant updating of the data collected. According to Heaven (2020), during the COVID-
19 pandemic, an AI-powered credit card fraud detection system was not able to cope with what 
seemed to be erratic consumer behavior. During the initial period of the recent global pandemic, 
some consumers were demonstrating unusual consumption activities towards certain products and 

==== Page 17 ====
16 
 services (e.g., hand sanitizer, personal protective equipment) that did not align with their expected 
behavior, according to extant algorithms (Pantano et al., 2020). Consequently, as customer 
behavior changes, AI-powered marketing systems need to change and adapt, learning from new 
events and circumstances (Rust, 2020).  
3.1.3. Knowledge-Based View 
Building on the resource-based view, which conceptualizes firms as a collection of 
resources (Penrose, 1959), the knowledge-based view (KBV) treats knowledge as a distinctively 
unique resource (Kogut & Zander, 1992), which can be either explicit (i.e., can be written down 
and transferred easily through systematic language) or tacit (i.e., more difficult to decode and 
describe) (Polanyi, 1958). Within the KBV, the concept of knowledge integration has attracted 
significant attention, with several authors seeking to distinguish between knowledge integration 
processes and knowledge integration outcomes (Kearns & Shabherwal, 2006). The former refers 
to actions through which individuals apply or share specific knowledge or combine it to develop 
new knowledge, while the latter refers to the outcomes of that knowledge being shared, applied, 
or combined with other forms of knowledge in order to create new knowledge (Grant, 1996). As 
a result, researchers have developed an approach to handle the knowledge that enabled the creation 
of the “means” to solve problems. This advancement gave rise to ‘knowledge-intensive computer 
programs’ (i.e., expert systems) (Harmon & King, 1985). Technologically, knowledge 
management systems (KMS) have attracted scholarly attention as they have evolved from concepts 
such as executive information systems, decision support systems, and expert support systems 
(Nevo & Chan, 2007).  
From a marketing perspective, considering KMS as a building block of AI offers 
opportunities that facilitate knowledge integration (Paschen et al., 2019). By imitating humans in 

==== Page 18 ====
17 
 terms of the ways they think and act through various technologies, AI can ‘learn’ and improve 
itself progressively by updating its knowledge base and capabilities (Coldewey, 2018). The 
applications of AI are generally deemed more suitable for the acquisition of explicit knowledge - 
knowledge that can be specified verbally or in writing, such as computer programs, patents, 
drawings, concepts, or formulas (Hau & Evangelista, 2007). On the other hand, tacit knowledge is 
obtained through experiential learning, insight, intuition, senses, or implicit rules of thumb 
(Leonard & Sensiper, 1998; Nonaka & von Krogh, 2009). These attributes constitute a major 
difference in the learning processes of the two forms of knowledge. While explicit knowledge can 
be transferred in various ways and can migrate or move around the world in seconds, the transfer 
of tacit or embedded knowledge is very slow (Badaracco, 1991) and requires extended social 
contact (Nonaka et al., 2000). For this reason, it has been argued that the intrinsic characteristics 
of tacit knowledge might represent a significant obstacle when it comes to its implementation 
within the context of AI technology (Fowler, 2000).  
The value of AI applications, however, has been demonstrated through the acquisition of 
customer knowledge, enabling firms to map customer’s journeys and create meaningful content 
for such journeys through marketing automation in both B2B and business to customer (B2C) 
environments (Mero et al., 2020; Syam & Sharma, 2018). Through predictive models, AI can also 
cultivate marketing efficiency by evaluating prospective customers on their propensity to buy and 
identifying high-quality leads (Jӓrvinen & Taiminen, 2016). Additional applications in the 
marketing domain include knowledge-based technologies, such as sentic computing, which relies 
on the accumulated application of common-sense computing and the psychology of emotions in 
order to infer the conceptual and affective information associated with natural language (Poria et 
al., 2014), or the gender classification of text based on natural language processing (Mukherjee & 

==== Page 19 ====
18 
 Bala, 2016). In short, the use of the KBV in the context of marketing and AI highlights the 
important role of automation in the creation, codification, transfer, and application of knowledge, 
enabling a more holistic understanding of consumer needs and behaviors across devices, platforms, 
and products (Kumar et al., 2019).  
3.1.4. Network Theory  
Research on networks has become central to several disciplines, including marketing, due 
to its ability to explain a variety of social phenomena and its intrinsic cross-disciplinary nature. 
Networks are built upon relational data and can be defined as a set of actors (e.g., individuals or 
groups) with some pattern between them in terms of relationships or interactions (Oliveira & 
Gama, 2012). Borgatti and colleagues (2009) noted that one of the central tenets of network theory 
is that a node’s position in a network determines the opportunities and constraints that it 
encounters, playing an important role in its outcomes. One of the most studied characteristics of 
networks is centrality, which helps to identify the structural importance or prominence of a node 
in a network through several indicators, such as degree, betweenness, closeness, and eigenvector 
centrality (Freeman, 1977).  
In marketing, networks have been studied in terms of the ways in which customer networks 
affect word-of-mouth effectiveness (Zhang et al., 2020), service purchase decisions (Bansal & 
Voyer, 2000), customer equity (Chae & Ko, 2016), and the diffusion of products and services 
across borders (Elo et al., 2020). Of particular interest has been the identification within such 
networks of influencers, i.e., individuals that are well-connected and have a substantial influence 
on others (Keller & Berry, 2003). As central individuals often play an important role in spreading 
information (Jalili & Perk, 2017), centrality measures have emerged as powerful predictors of a 
person's influence in a network and have been shown to be useful in a variety of decision support 

==== Page 20 ====
19 
 system applications. The PageRank algorithm, for example, which is the fundamental search 
engine mechanism of Google, uses the topology of the web as an indicator of the value attached 
to any page (Brin & Page, 1998). Using a number of computational experiments on artificial and 
real networks in call data from a telecom company, Kiss and Bichler (2008) observed a significant 
increase in message diffusion when using influencers. Several studies have measured social 
influence by counting how much information related to a topic can be diffused in a network. 
Focusing on viral marketing, researchers have used social media platforms, such as Twitter, to 
measure a user’s influence (see Riquelme & González-Cantergiani, 2016). An interesting 
extension of this stream of research is represented by the notion that individuals who want to 
emerge as influencers compete in order to do so, a concept known as competitive influence 
maximization. Using the Competitive Influence Improvement (CI2) algorithm, for example, it is 
possible to identify the minimum number of influential nodes within an influencer’s networks 
(Bozorgi et al., 2017). In short, the use of networks in marketing and AI highlights the increasing 
role of AI applications, such as algorithms, in identifying patterns of influence that affect both 
consumer choices and firms’ product offerings. 
3.2. Major research themes and topics  
While the twentieth century observed a lack of application of intelligent systems in 
marketing (Gill, 1995), recent years have been characterized by rapid advancements in information 
technology (Naudé, 2020). Currently, AI is being applied in various contexts, from automated fact-
checking in journalism to powering chatbots that interact with customers on e-commerce websites. 
To identify the reference points of AI and marketing, we utilized systematic search methods using 
multiple sources as an initial foundation. Building upon the results of content analysis, combined 
with the HOMALS technique (shown in Figure 3), we present the four major research themes 

==== Page 21 ====
20 
 identified in line with the technological advancement and application of AI in marketing while 
taking into consideration potential threats to privacy and the increased vulnerability of users 
(Letheren et al., 2020).  
Theme 1: Marketing Channels 
Marketing channels are meant to bridge the gap between producers and consumers, 
representing a crucial link in the buyer-seller exchange. Given that the purpose of marketing 
channels is to ensure efficiency, a large body of literature on marketing channels acknowledges 
the endless opportunities for improvement in this area through AI technologies and applications 
(e.g., robots, voice assistance devices, etc.) (Bock et al., 2020; Wirtz et al., 2018). Essentially, AI’s 
unparalleled ability to gather and interpret existing data in a correct way, learn from it, and use it 
in an intelligent manner (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2019) is dependent upon AI technological enablers 
(e.g., machine learning, deep learning, and neural networks, among others)4. Recent technological 
developments have influenced marketing channels and have attracted the attention of both scholars 
and practitioners (Moriuchi, 2019; Poria et al., 2014). Retailers such as North Face, Amazon, 1-
800-Flowers.com, and many others are already incorporating the most recently updated 
innovations based on AI from social media to retailing analytics (i.e., Pepper Robot, Conversica 
Sales Agent, IBM Watson Cognitive Computing) (Angus & Westbrook, 2019; Sjödin et al., 2018). 
The reasoning behind these investments lies in the firms’ assurance that the recognition of 
customer demographics and psychographics will assist marketers in customer profiling and allow 
                                                 
 
 
 
4 The authors recommend readers to see Bock and colleagues (2020) as well as SAS (2019) for more information 
regarding AI technological enablers. 

==== Page 22 ====
21 
 them to better predict consumers’ choices, either in terms of prospection and comparison, but 
mainly in terms of purchase and the physical distribution of goods.  
The COVID-19 pandemic has increased demand for marketing channel enhancements, as 
customers are currently confined to their homes and are less able to access physical stores (Pantano 
et al., 2020). Given this new reality, as well as the ongoing changes in consumers’ preferences 
with regards to searching and analyzing through multiple channels (Silva et al., 2018; 2020), rather 
than interacting with conventional sales assistants (Grewal et al., 2020), AI solutions are being 
recognized as additional and, to some extent, alternative marketing assistants when it comes to 
understanding customers (De Cicco et al., 2020; Wirth, 2018). Casabayó and colleagues (2004) 
acknowledged that AI’s capabilities, in terms of language processing, image recognition, and the 
overall leverage of powerful tools and algorithms, can access data from both internal and external 
sources. These characteristics provide no-cost on-premise technology and represent the basis for 
better dynamic attribution and online targeting (Gardé, 2018). Hence, AI, in using semantic 
recognition, generates databases from which marketers can extract information and learn about 
customers (Adi et al., 2020). This approach offers resourceful insights (Paschen et al., 2020; Wirtz 
et al., 2018) in the ‘new normal’ landscape triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, as demonstrated 
by unusual customer behavior and business actions. 
Theme 2: Marketing Strategy  
Intelligent systems for marketing strategies are ultimately changing the way businesses are 
conceived (Pantano et al., 2020). In this sense, AI has assisted in establishing new paradoxes in 
strategy, such as recognizing the advantages of massification alongside those of customization (Du 
et al., 2003), the association of the pros of luxury/premium brands with those of the mass market 

==== Page 23 ====
22 
 (Kumar et al., 2020c; Paul, 2019), as well as the combination of niche markets with the benefits 
of the large market through e-commerce (Meiseberg, 2016).  
The continuous evolution of AI technology affects the future of marketing strategies (Rust, 
2020). For example, some of the most relevant problems, such as the alignment of strategic 
orientation with market potential (Griffith et al., 2012), are solved nowadays using AI solutions. 
In this way, implementers of AI-based marketing solutions have noted improvements in business 
model decisions (Valter et al., 2018), new product development (Chan & Ip, 2011), 
communication (Paschen, 2019), pricing (Calvano et al., 2019), sales management (Flaherty et al., 
2018), advertising (Kietzmann et al., 2018), and personalized mobile marketing strategies (Tong 
et al., 2020). Additionally, in service industries, different types of AI (i.e., mechanical, analytical, 
and intuitive) are being recognized as sources of innovation and enablers of higher productivity, 
causing a redefinition of the workplace and task allocation (Huang & Rust, 2018). Hence, for 
service tasks that are based on routines and simple transactions involving more standardization 
(e.g., shipping, delivery, and payment), a cost leadership advantage should be pursued through a 
more mechanical type of AI. For service tasks that rely on learning with data (e.g., the 
identification of new markets or services, personalization), a quality leadership advantage should 
be pursued through a more analytical type of AI. For tasks that rely on experiential learning (e.g., 
engagement with customers), a relationship advantage should be pursued through a more intuitive 
type of AI. Altogether, the different types of AI can gradually enhance service task performance 
depending on the offering, strategy, and processes (Huang & Rust, 2018; 2020). 
Considering the changes made to business models, sales processes, customer service 
options, and marketing information systems (Donthu & Gustafsson, 2020), it is important to 
acknowledge ethical problems and data protection issues (Etzioni & Etzioni, 2017; Ameen et al., 

==== Page 24 ====
23 
 2020a). Accordingly, data collection through speech recognition, in which the clients’ tone of 
voice when communicating with voice bots, along with other data used to improve marketing 
strategies, requires alignment with the General Data Protection Regulation and approval of the 
client (Butterworth, 2018). Hence, in order to reduce consumers’ skepticism and avoid speciesism 
toward AI (Schmitt, 2020), practitioners are reminded of ethical codes (Stone et al., 2020) and the 
importance of data protection (Kolbjørnsrud et al., 2017).  
Theme 3: Performance 
Scholarly literature on AI and marketing examines performance under two separate lenses. 
The first lens focuses on how AI tools and techniques score in terms of performance with respect 
to more conventional tools and methods. Such a comparison, in terms of performance, is 
particularly valuable in solving the higher accuracy versus higher cost trade-off typically 
associated with these methods. AI, through its technological enablers (Bock et al., 2020), which 
are considered a prerequisite for its development, performs better in its ability to make predictions 
as it can accommodate highly nonlinear and complex relationships between inputs and outputs 
(Russell & Norvig, 2016; Syam & Sharma, 2018).  
The second lens treats performance as an outcome variable. It focuses on how and if AI 
can contribute to performance in terms of competitive advantage efficiency, sales prevision, sales 
performance, and value creation for customers, among others. Companies can benefit from AI by 
translating big data into information and knowledge, allowing them to develop more effective 
marketing and sales strategies, which often translate into a sustainable competitive advantage 
(Paschen et al., 2020). By using decision support systems, marketers enhance the efficiency of 
marketing programs by fully utilizing all available databases (Kim & Street, 2004) and estimating 
the net customer lifetime value from customers’ purchasing behaviors (Chan & Ip, 2011). In 

==== Page 25 ====
24 
 addition, AI applications have been used to support customer value creation in many instances, for 
example, in the insurance industry (Riikkinen et al., 2018). In the hospitality industry, a study on 
how the Hyatt Hotels Group used AI to improve cross- and up-selling to customers found that 
room revenues increased up to 60% through these techniques (Diaz, 2017). By using AI-powered 
marketing tools, companies can also predict what customers may want to buy, thus improving their 
sales funnel. More recently, Syam and Sharma (2018), as well as Davenport and colleagues (2020), 
noted that AI affects companies’ sales processes and, consequently, their sales performance. 
Besides current sales performance, firms expect to benefit from AI regarding anticipation of trends 
and changes in demand (Pantano et al., 2020). The calculation and prediction of future trends, 
accomplished through forecasting, can be facilitated by AI through the development of accurate 
tools, such as the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System and the Modular Genetic-Fuzzy 
Forecasting System (Hadavandi et al., 2011; Shahrabi et al., 2013). Other examples of AI 
techniques in the field of sales forecasting include Support Vector Machines and Neural Networks 
(e.g., Carbonneau et al., 2008). 
Theme 4: Segmentation, Targeting, and Positioning (STP) 
Recent developments in segmentation, targeting, and positioning (STP) research have 
primarily addressed problems related to dealing with the customer base of a firm through variables 
such as demographics (Belanche et al., 2019), psychographics (Poria et al., 2014), geographic 
considerations (Wu et al., 2015), and behavioral segmentation (Belk, 2016), which seem to be the 
fields in which AI provides vital assistance. Accordingly, dealing with client acquisition (Quijano-
Sanchez & Liberatore, 2017), customers’ preferences and consequent clustering (Pitt et al., 2018; 
Shahrabi et al., 2013), and obtaining sales efficiency in their targeting (Flaherty et al., 2018; 

==== Page 26 ====
25 
 Cherviakova & Cherviakova, 2018) are issues which have received significant attention among 
marketing scholars and practitioners (Rust et al., 2020).  
The advances in this field allow different segments and generational cohorts to be better 
served (Lei & Moon, 2015), enabling the anticipation of customer profile shifts as well as post-
demographic consumption (Pitt et al., 2018). Arising from the eager attempt to implement the 
“shipping-then-shopping” model (Davenport et al., 2020), positioning the right proposal in the 
right segment has been a concern of some researchers (Wu et al., 2015; Lei & Moon, 2015). 
Research conducted by Chica and colleagues (2016) enhanced brand positioning with the 
assistance of mechanisms involving complex choices that permitted the modeling and evaluation 
of brand decisions in an intelligent way. One of the best examples of the power of AI can be seen 
in the correct recommendations that Google’s algorithms can produce, based on millions of 
unconsciously made incorrect entries (Makridakis, 2017). 
Within this research stream, a large body of literature has focused on neural networks and 
artificial neural networks (ANN). ANN represent a type of AI computing based on a nonlinear, 
nonparametric regression model that mimics the structure and function of the brain (Ha et al., 
2005). The main advantage of neural networks is that they can estimate very complex relationships 
(D’Haen & Van den Poel, 2013). Hence, neural networks have been seen to be more accurate in 
classifying potential customers into groups for market segmentation in comparison to discriminant 
analysis and logistic regression (Fish et al., 1995) and can outperform multinomial logit in terms 
of brand share estimation (Fish et al., 2004). The predictive power of neural networks has been 
used, for instance, to predict customer churn in the mobile telecommunications industry, using 
subscriber contractual information and call pattern changes (Wei & Chiu, 2002). Additional 
examples of studies using neural networks include Li (2000), who developed an ANN to analyze 

==== Page 27 ====
26 
 and forecast market growth, and D’Haen and Van den Poel (2013), who created an analytical 
model with three phases using diverse methods, among which decision trees and neural networks 
were used to facilitate customer acquisition in B2B environments.  
 
4. Discussion and directions for future research 
Academic focus on AI in the field of marketing can be traced back to the 1980s, with 
studies considering AI’s applications and tools as decision support systems in forecasting (Collins 
et al., 1987) and sales (Steinberg & Plank, 1987), among others. Our review of 164 papers 
advances scholars’ and practitioners’ understanding of this promising domain by demonstrating 
the ways in which AI assists marketers in predicting customer behavior, customer value creation, 
business process automation, and productivity, among other factors (Davenport et al., 2020; Chan 
& Ip, 2011; Kumar et al., 2020a). Hence, building upon the findings presented and our review of 
extant studies positioned at the intersection of AI and marketing, we outline future research 
avenues and provide potential implications for practitioners. 
4.1. Future research avenues regarding theory  
The evolution of AI’s applicability, from Simon’s (1985) expert systems to the notion of 
Society 5.0 (Salgues, 2018), shows that the future lies in the unique features of AI and intelligent 
systems’ enrichment of marketing and its development of advanced empirical and theoretical 
models. Despite the benefits of AI and the technological progress made, limited acceptance of AI 
from a user perspective has been a core challenge over the past few decades. With this in mind, 
recent studies predict that the acceptance process will prove to be further complicated as AI 
applications expand into domains of higher intelligence (Chi et al., 2020) and ethical concerns 
arise (Dignum; 2018; Jobin et al., 2019). To better understand how and why certain technologies, 
such as AI, are accepted or rejected, future studies could explore the acceptance of AI technology  

==== Page 28 ====
27 
 through the lens of theories grounded in psychology. Among them, a core theoretical framework 
is the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) (Davis, 1989), along with its subsequent extensions, 
including the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) and the Value-
based Adoption Model (VAM) (Kim et al., 2007; Venkatesh et al., 2003). 
When it comes to AI user adoption (Seranmadevi & Kumar, 2019), technology acceptance 
theories offer interesting avenues for further theoretical and empirical development. Given the 
slow and limited acceptance of AI by users (Chi et al., 2020), a natural avenue for future research 
is the adoption and usage of AI technology and applications , with a particular focus on the 
individual- or user-level characteristics that could affect the acceptance, use, and adoption of AI 
technology, in line with ethical concerns regarding privacy and safety. Cognitive and emotional 
aspects could, for instance, predict perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use of AI or 
moderate the relationship between the intention to use AI and the actual use of AI, in line with the 
importance of data protection and ethics (see Table 4 for an overview of the proposed research 
questions).  
The cognitive aspects required when interacting with a specific type of technology, such 
as the level of attention, i.e., the general distribution of mental activity to the tasks being performed 
by the individual (Moates & Schumacher, 1980), could potentially affect a user’s attitude towards 
a specific technology (Luna et al., 2002). However, less is known about the ways in which degrees 
of attention might affect actual usage or adoption intentions in the context of AI technology when 
it comes to threats to privacy and data protection. Future research could incorporate more reason-
based and emotional factors in order to determine the role of user acceptance for AI. For instance, 
hedonic motivations have been considered major determinants of AI service usage (Lin et al., 
2019) as customers interact with these services for fun and out of curiosity (Kuo et al., 2017) rather 

==== Page 29 ====
28 
 than for their usefulness. A similar conclusion was also reached by Sohn and Kwon (2020), who 
stated that customers may value enjoyment over practical use because the diffusion of AI-based 
products is moving towards the early adoption stage, in which individuals are generally curious 
about new technology.  
The demographic profile of users in relation to their tendency to adopt or use AI is an 
additional research stream in itself, deserving further exploration. Previous studies have focused 
on two demographics, namely, age and gender (De Cicco et al., 2020). With respect to age, several 
studies have reached the conclusion that younger users have more positive attitudes towards AI 
when compared to older people, particularly in the context of robotic services (Onorato, 2018). 
For gender, previous studies tend to agree that men seem to express fewer negative perceptions 
than women when it comes to AI technology in contexts such as children’s education (Zawacki-
Richter et al., 2019) or hotel services (Ivanov & Webster, 2018). Similar conclusions have also 
been reached by Davenport and colleagues (2020), who suggest that women are less likely than 
men to adopt AI. The relationship between AI and gender has also been explored in terms of the 
gender profiling of online content. Capturing gender differences by using AI-based applications 
has been deemed relevant to companies as it allows for the improvement of several commercial 
domains, including product development and target advertisement (Mukherjee & Bala, 2017). 
After exploring the ways in which demographic characteristics can impact the adoption and use of 
AI, it would be interesting to examine whether gender traits (e.g., voice, appearance, etc.) of AI-
based applications and technology are more or less likely to influence adoption based on 
similarities or dissimilarities between the user’s gender and the gender traits attributed to AI.  
An additional area that deserves further exploration is the relationship between culture and 
AI. While previous studies have argued for the importance of incorporating cultural differences in 

==== Page 30 ====
29 
 models dealing with the acceptance of technology in general (Marangunic & Granic, 2015) and of 
AI more specifically (Belanche et al., 2020), there is a limited amount of research on the ways in 
which culture influences the adoption and use of AI. Such studies could be conducted at a national 
level or across cultural dimensions, exploring individualism and uncertainty avoidance (Belanche 
et al., 2020) across nations and examining whether they lead to positive or negative attitudes 
towards AI technology. 
Another interesting pathway for future development, incorporating some of the 
considerations mentioned above, is represented by the simultaneous focus on three elements 
affecting customers’ acceptance of AI technology, namely factional, relational, and socio-
emotional elements (Wirtz et al., 2018). While factional elements (e.g., perceived ease of use and 
perceived usefulness) are well-represented in technology acceptance theories, more attention could 
be paid to relational elements, such as trust, and socio-emotional elements, such as perceived 
humanness. Practice-oriented research suggests that when consumers express their feelings 
towards AI, they often express concern, skepticism, and suspicion, demonstrating consumers’ 
reluctance  to trust the technology ( Davenport, 2018 ). It would be interesting to examine the 
correlation between trust (a relational element) and perceived humanness (a socio-emotional 
element) with respect to AI-powered devices. Results from research on anthropomorphic AI 
devices and consumers’ attitudes towards them have yielded mixed results (e.g., Lin et al., 2019; 
van Pinxteren et al., 2019). Future studies might explore how the relationship between perceived 
humanness and the acceptance of AI technology is mediated or moderated by trust. All in all, 
technology acceptance theories serve as valuable theoretical frameworks for future studies in this 
field, offering exciting possibilities for building a stronger theoretical foundation for future 
empirical research in this domain. 

==== Page 31 ====
30 
 4.2. Future research avenues regarding Marketing AI characteristics  
The spectrum of benefits enabled by the intersection of AI and marketing is developing 
intensely and rapidly. In light of the ‘new normal’ landscape caused by the COVID-19 pandemic 
and the necessity to self-isolate and depend on technology more than usual (Donthu & Gustafsson, 
2020), AI-powered marketing tools are expected to play a central role in our future understanding 
of consumer’s attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. In fact, even before the pandemic, AI had 
demonstrated its ability to assist in shopping processes and enhance customer experience (Ameen 
et al., 2020b; Gacanic & Wagner, 2019). Accordingly, AI-powered marketing tools facilitate easy 
access to information, assistance in the comparison process, accelerated checkout, and the ultimate 
growth of overall marketing performance (Martínez-López & Casillas, 2013). Despite these 
benefits, concerns over ethical issues (e.g., transparency, justice, fairness, and privacy), data 
protection, and employment opportunities (Makarius et al., 2020) remain some of the major 
drawbacks of AI technologies. As such, the promising nature of AI may depend on understanding 
its challenges and its opportunities. One of the major challenges lies in managerial abilities when 
it comes to comprehending the benefits of new technology and its subsequent contributions to 
product and service improvements. For businesses, the adoption of AI substantially changes the 
ways that both marketing strategies and customer behaviors are regarded (Davenport et al., 2020).  
In this line, as AI has shifted the paradigm from a rule-based expert systems’ approach to 
a data-driven approach, the implementation of AI within organizations seems to undermine 
inherited methods of skill development and training (Huang & Rust, 2020). Hence, further 
investigation regarding the revolution of the labor market and marketers’ competences  is needed, 
particularly when it comes to soft and hard skills. Building upon the suggestion of Davenport and 
colleagues (2020) and Huang and Rust (2020) that, depending on the nature of the task, AI is either 

==== Page 32 ====
31 
 replacing or augmenting marketers’ activities, further investigation is needed into the adoption of 
a holistic approach that pushes firms to have a different conception of resources and workplace.  
Additionally, the path towards the concretization of digital transformation (Rogers, 2016) 
and the paradigm of Industry 4.0 seem to be dependent on institutional support. Therefore, research 
on the role of institutions  at local, national, and international levels could be considered a fruitful 
avenue for future research through the exploration, for example, of the extent to which public 
policies and initiatives that promote AI without harming consumers’ interests are effective in 
encouraging the adoption of AI, both by organizations and by individuals.  
AI’s application in marketing enables the evolution of STP by enhancing the understanding 
of consumers’ needs and wants. Accordingly, tech-savvy companies trace and use digital 
footprints (i.e., Amazon’s “anticipatory” shipping) and comprehend consumers more than ever 
before. These developments, as anticipated by Kotler and colleagues (2016), have affected the 
transfer from “what is shopped is shipped” to another possibility, in which shipping is an 
antecedent of shopping. Additionally, mechanisms such as emotion-sensing technology and 
emotionally intelligent machines, materialized in devices (i.e., Walmart’s emotion-sensing 
internet-connected shopping cart), truly favor the customer experience. However, all of these 
advancements come with ethical concerns. Therefore, promoting a win-win-win situation for all 
involved - individuals, firms, and all other stakeholders - remains questionable due to ethical 
concerns and represents an opportunity for future research.  
A firm’s ability to adopt AI marketing advantages in content creation and communication 
will ultimately exponentiate inbound marketing (Lusch & Vargo, 2009). The opportunity to 
understand whether or not overwhelming messages could be avoided by targeting the right people 
with the most efficient media and message types would be another fruitful avenue for future 

==== Page 33 ====
32 
 research. Finally, the possibility promoted by AI applications in terms of co-creating (Buhalis & 
Sinarta, 2019), customizing and personalizing solutions, developing simultaneously massified and 
customized proposals with several online possibilities of configuration, gives rise to the idea that 
on-demand solutions are the future, that consumers are unique, and that their needs should be 
inspirational. This technological alteration has enabled the ‘everyone’s an expert’ era, in which 
consumers want everything, anywhere, at a good quality, at a fair price, in a differentiated way, 
and right now. Understanding how managers might cope with such an array of strains represents 
the next challenge for researchers.  
4.3. Future research avenues regarding context and methodology  
This study found that the vast majority of research at the intersection of marketing and AI 
has focused on market contexts such as Europe (Baesens et al., 2004; Casabayó et al., 2004; Kühl 
et al., 2019), North America (Belanche et al., 2019; Moriuchi, 2019), and Asia (Chopra, 2019; 
Seranmadevi & Kumar, 2019; Wang et al., 2020). Given the nascent nature of the research field 
under study, future research could examine the development of AI technology in countries located 
in the southern hemisphere, taking into consideration the research avenues proposed in Table 4. 
Moreover, a multi-country approach could present a promising research avenue, particularly 
considering international differences in ethical standards and institutional and technical 
developments . Furthermore, from a customer perspective, further insights into multi-country and 
multi-cultural contexts would prove useful, as shown in a study conducted by Belanche and 
colleagues (2019), who compared Portugal, the UK, and the US. Their study indicated that the 
influence of subjective norms on the use of AI-powered devices transcends national borders and 
is much stronger in the UK and the US compared to Portugal, where perceived usefulness was 
considered much lower.  

==== Page 34 ====
33 
 Overall, the findings of this review indicate that the marketing and AI research field is still 
in a nascent stage in which many areas remain unexplored. In this regard, the adoption of a multi-
level methodological exploratory approach (Jones et al., 2016) promises to further increase our 
understanding of the role of AI in marketing. Additionally, the vast majority of studies are 
conceptual studies, demonstrating a need for more direct and indirect observations of AI in 
marketing that could, for example, test conceptual findings in underexplored sets of individuals, 
such as digital natives and digital immigrants. 
4.4. Future research avenues regarding marketing AI and the COVID-19 pandemic 
  The impact of AI on marketing cannot yet be quantified in the ‘new normal’ reality caused 
by the COVID-19 pandemic (Naudé, 2020) as it is characterized by erratic customer behavior 
(giving rise to noisy and outlying data) and discrepant institutional data privacy regulations 
(Ameen et al., 2020a). Given that this situation is unlikely to change in the short term, AI-powered 
marketing tools will depend more on rigorous human-AI interaction (Coldewey, 2018). Thus, 
given marketers’ need to innovate and adapt to the new reality (Wang et al., 2020), future research 
is needed on the ways in which marketers can understand and anticipate customers’ behavior and 
businesses’ actions through AI. As AI is dependent on data, the following questions should be 
tackled by future researchers: 1) To what extent are marketers willing to gather and share data - 
both existing and new - in order to inform new AI marketing models? 2) Has the COVID-19 
pandemic changed marketers’ approaches to data protection? And if so, how? 3) In light of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, what role will AI-powered marketing tools play in understanding 
consumers’ attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors? 
Bearing in mind that pandemics and other catastrophes have a tendency to repeatedly affect 
society (Donthu & Gustafsson, 2020), learning from the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic 

==== Page 35 ====
34 
 could be of crucial value to the long-term reduction of the effects of disasters. As our society is 
still in the middle of the pandemic and long-term effects are still unknown, marketing researchers 
and practitioners have the opportunity to evaluate current effects and maximize preparedness for 
the upcoming period. Under these circumstances, delivering customer convenience and building 
trust are both significant challenges. At the same time, a number of online businesses in retail and 
education, among others, were able to adapt quickly and develop new offerings based on AI-
powered applications. The COVID-19 outbreak accelerated the implementation of AI’s application 
in marketing (e.g., chatbots, virtual assistants), gradually replacing human-to-human contact. The 
future of marketing thus truly depends on digital savviness (Sheth, 2020) and state-of-the-art 
technologies (Rust, 2020), with AI acting as a cornerstone of marketing development. 
---Insert Table 4 about here--- 
4.5. Implications for practice  
With the upheaval of information technology, marketers’ skills, such as creativity and 
content creation, and competencies, such as data analysis and reporting skills, have experienced 
significant changes (Davenport & Ronanki, 2018). With the assistance of AI, marketers are tapping 
into the profound knowledge of clients’ needs, enabling them to perform effective data analysis 
and organize their activities towards customer-centricity. As such, the adoption of AI in marketing 
has revolutionized the job requirements of marketers and their overall labor market in terms of 
skills (Huang & Rust, 2020). However, it seems to free up offices and workstations, allowing work 
to be conducted remotely (Makarius et al., 2020).  
Building upon the labor market revolution, marketers’ competencies are expected to evolve 
in order to remain competitive as they cope with the unprecedented crisis evoked by the COVID-
19 pandemic. Intelligent marketing systems are also likely to require constant updates given the 

==== Page 36 ====
35 
 unprecedented changes in the environment and due to the massive amounts of new data made 
available, for instance, through geo-referencing systems used in mobile phones (Ameen et al., 
2020a) or complaints verbalized in voice assistance interactions. Different sources of information 
should include social media, reports by data brokers, digital key performance indicators, and track 
records of sales, among others, in order to provide personalized recommendations. Sales processes 
are also likely to change, as AI agents can better monitor conversations in real-time, interpret a 
client’s tone of voice, and scrutinize unsolved situations that may require immediate intervention. 
This may require different levels of intervention in terms of the information provided, the degree 
of involvement proposed, the products and services offered, projected levels of compensation, and 
planned alternatives. Therefore, marketers must be aware that business models will experience 
disruption and that these changes should be considered with a forward-thinking approach. For 
instance, driverless cars can produce dramatic changes when it comes to insurance, carmakers, 
other equipment manufacturers, and even real estate businesses (Davenport et al., 2020) due to 
their specificities and the consequent time-saving convenience promoted. Therefore, managers are 
advised to think ahead and, above all, promote knowledge acquisition in their teams.  
Overall, marketing strategies, such as advertising and communication, require closer 
attention from managers in order to remain aligned with changes in consumer decision-making 
processes, perceptions of time, and confidence triggered by AI (Lemon & Verhoef, 2016). While 
this new paradigm might appear to be far from being put into practice, global spending on smart 
home related hardware, services, and installation fees is expected to reach $143 billion per year by 
2023, by which point 274 million homes worldwide are expected to have at least one type of smart 
system installed (Ablondi, 2018). Similarly, a study of Cap Gemini, based on a survey of 5000 
consumers, found that the majority would rather follow the advice of an AI-based technology than 

==== Page 37 ====
36 
 spend time on a website (Sengupta, 2018). This challenges the very concept of conventional online 
convenience (Duarte et al., 2018), demonstrating that consumers are more and more inclined to 
believe that AI-based technology will make the “best decision” for them, as they can filter content 
according to a user’s profile, based on their track record of purchases and preferences. On these 
grounds, marketers should consider AI mechanisms as a hub facilitating the capturing, coding, 
retrieval, and sharing of knowledge. Health issues caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have 
accelerated the adoption of e-commerce by five years (Haller et al., 2020), with an expected decline 
in department stores of around 60% and a projected increase of 20% in e-commerce, which is in 
line with recent research on the phenomenon conducted by Stewart (2020). Thus, given that AI-
powered marketing tools can improve the customer experience, driving online sales and, 
ultimately, creating value for all those involved (Barnes, 2020), they represent one of the fields 
that may benefit from the pandemic. 
 
5. Conclusion 
Research positioned at the intersection of AI and marketing has flourished in recent times. 
Our review of the academic contributions on this subject across more than 30 years indicates a 
spike in the number of papers published from 2017 onwards. This academic interest has been 
accompanied by an equal increase in the attention paid to AI applications by companies such as 
Google, Spotify, and Under Armor, to name a few. Hence, the knowledge accumulated on AI and 
marketing offers the opportunity for the systematization and assessment of existing contributions. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine research on AI and marketing in order to 
provide an extensive and holistic review of the existing literature on this topic. Using content 
analysis, combined with HOMALS statistical procedure, we reviewed relevant literature published 
between 1987 and 2020. Based on the analysis of these works, this study offers the following 

==== Page 38 ====
37 
 contributions. 
Firstly, the literature review provides an introduction to the existing literature on AI and 
marketing that might appeal to researchers, particularly those working in the domain of AI wishing 
to further explore its application to marketing and vice-versa, introducing them to major 
publication resources. Secondly, the content analysis reveals five major theoretical dimensions 
employed by studies in AI and marketing. These dimensions, also presented in the proposed visual 
map, are related to behavioral theories, CRM, KBV, network theory, and technology-related 
theoretical foundations. Additionally, our analysis identifies several research themes, namely, the 
application of AI in marketing, technological advancement, ethics, marketing channels, marketing 
strategy, performance, and STP. This categorization provides a more granular view of scholarly 
work on AI and marketing. Thirdly, unlike previous research on AI and marketing, which can 
usually be classified as structured reviews adopting either expert-based or citation-based 
methodological approaches, our work adopts a hybrid-narrative approach with a framework for 
setting a future research agenda by implementing content analysis combined with HOMALS 
techniques. To our knowledge, this is the first study to adopt this approach when studying the 
relationship between AI and marketing. Therefore, our paper complements previous expert-based 
reviews – by offering a more objective account of the development of AI and marketing – and 
citation analyses – by offering a deeper discussion of the underlying themes and theoretical 
approaches to the study of AI and marketing. Finally, building upon the literature review 
performed, we propose research themes that could represent fruitful avenues for further research 
linked to the adoption and use of AI technology and its applications, the acceptance of AI 
technology, the revolution of the labor market and marketers competences, the role of institutional 
support, the importance of data protection and ethics, and the recent COVID-19 outbreak, which 

==== Page 39 ====
38 
 will pose additional technological and behavioral challenges. A set of 21 descriptors, along with 
keywords, are provided in the supplementary material, enabling the replicability of this study.  
As with most studies, this research has its limitations. While we see value in the approach 
undertaken in this study, as it does not impose specific time or subject constraints, limitations can 
be seen, firstly, in our methodology. The methodological approach employed in this study is 
subject to a certain degree of author subjectivity by virtue of the process of developing the 
codebook (Furrer et al., 2020). Secondly, the search  query performed using an ‘umbrella 
approach’, while having the merit of providing an in-depth overview of studies at the intersection 
between marketing and AI, it does not focus on any specific sub-field of marketing and AI (e.g., 
AI and neuromarketing), offering the opportunity for researchers interested in specific sub-fields 
to perform additional review studies depending on their topics of interest in AI. Therefore, future 
studies could build upon the work of this review by conducting a more focused analysis of specific 
areas and sub-fields of marketing (e.g., retail marketing, direct marketing, and social media 
marketing, among others) and AI. Third, while the inclusion of research from peer-reviewed 
journals is common practice in literature reviews, relevant research published in books or 
conference proceedings is not reviewed, potentially introducing publication bias (Kepes et al., 
2012). Finally, while this review paper offers an initial discussion of the implications of the 
ongoing crisis triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic for marketing and AI, we believe that the real 
impact of this disruption is not yet fully understood. Hence, more research will be necessary to 
obtain a complete account of how pandemics and other unforeseen events impact marketing and 
AI. Despite such limitations, our study suggests several directions that we hope will inspire future 
studies and attract further attention to this timely topic from both scientific and societal 
standpoints.  

==== Page 40 ====
39 
 References 
Ablondi, W. (2018). Global Smart Home Forecast, Strategy Analytics . Available at 
https://www.strategyanalytics.com/access-services/devices/connected-home/smart-
home/market-data/report-detail/2018-global-smart-home-forecast#.WwWtm-4vyUk, accessed 
on 21/05/2020. 
Adi, E., Anwar, A., Baig, Z., & Zeadally, S. (2020). Machine learning and data analytics for the 
IoT. Neural Computing and Applications , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-020-04874-y. 
Aguinis, H., Pierce, C. A., Bosco, F. A., & Muslin, I. S. (2009). First Decade of Organizational 
Research Methods: Trends in Design, Measurement, and Data-Analysis Topics. Organizational 
Research Methods , 12(1), 69–112. 
Ameen, N., Tarhini, A., Shah, M. H., Madichie, N., Paul, J., & Choudrie, J. (2020a). Keeping 
customers' data secure: A cross-cultural study of cybersecurity compliance among the Gen-
Mobile workforce. Computers in Human Behavior , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2020.106531. 
Ameen, N., Tarhini, A., Reppel, A., & Anand, A. (2020b). Customer experiences in the age of 
artificial intelligence. Computers in Human Behavior , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2020.106548. 
Angus, A. & Westbrook, G. (2019). Top 10 Global Consumer Trends . London, UK: Euromonitor 
International.  
Badaracco, J. L. (1991). Alliances speed knowledge transfer. Planning Review , 19(2), 10-16. 
Baesens, B., Verstraeten, G., Van Den Poel, D., Egmont-Petersen, M., Van Kenhove, P. & 
Vanthienen, J. (2004). Bayesian Network Classifiers for Identifying the Slope of the Customer 
Lifecycle of Long-Life Customers. European Journal of Operational Research , 156(2), 508-523. 
Baesens, B., Mues, C., Martens, D., & Vanthienen, J. (2009). 50 Years of Data Mining and OR: 
Upcoming Trends and Challenges. Journal of the Operational Research Society , 60(S1), 16-23. 
Bansal, H. S., & Voyer, P. A. (2000). Word-of-mouth processes within a services purchase 
decision context. Journal of Service Research , 3(2), 166-177. 
Barnes, S. J. (2020). Information management research and practice in the post-COVID-19 world. 
International Journal of Information Management , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102175. 
Belanche D., Casaló, L.V. & Flavián, C. (2019). Artificial Intelligence in Fintech: Understanding 
Robo-Advisors Adoption Among Customers. Industrial Management and Data Systems , 119(7), 
1411-1430. 
Belanche, D., Casaló, L. V., Flavián, C., & Schepers, J. (2020). Service robot implementation: a 
theoretical framework and research agenda. The Service Industries Journal , 40(3-4), 203-225. 
Belk, R. (2016). Understanding the robot: Comments on Goudey and Bonnin (2016). Recherche 
et Applications en Marketing  (English Edition), 31(4), 83-90. 
Belk, R. (2020). Ethical issues in service robotics and artificial intelligence. The Service Industries 
Journal, 40(3/4), 203-235. 

==== Page 41 ====
40 
 Bendixen, M. T. (1995). Compositional perceptual mapping using chi‐squared trees analysis and 
correspondence analysis. Journal of Marketing Management , 11(6), 571-581. 
Bock, D. E., Wolter, J. S., & Ferrell, O. C. (2020). Artificial intelligence: disrupting what we know 
about services. Journal of Services Marketing , 34(3), 317-334.  
Bonnin, G., & Rodriguez, M. A. (2019). The Narrative Strategies of B2B Technology Brands. 
Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing , 34(7), 1448-1458. 
Borgatti, S. P., Mehra, A., Brass, D. J., & Labianca, G. (2009). Network analysis in the social 
sciences. Science, 323(5916), 892-895. 
Bozorgi, A., Samet, S., Kwisthout, J., & Wareham, T. (2017). Community-based influence 
maximization in social networks under a competitive linear threshold model. Knowledge-Based 
Systems, 134, 149-158. 
Bradford, S. C. (1934). Sources of information on specific subjects. Engineering , 137, 85–86 
Reprinted in Collection Management  1, 95–103. 
Brin, S., & Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine. 
Computer Networks , 30, 107-117. 
Buhalis, D. & Sinarta, Y. (2019). Real-Time Co-Creation and Nowness Service: Lessons from 
Tourism and Hospitality. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing , 36(5), 563-582. 
Butterworth, M. (2018). The ICO and artificial intelligence: The role of fairness in the GDPR 
framework. Computer Law & Security Review , 34(2), 257-268. 
Calvano, E., Calzolari, G., Denicolò, V. & Pastorello, S. (2019). Algorithmic pricing what 
implications for competition policy?. Review of Industrial Organization , 55(1), 155-171. 
Carbonneau, R., Laframboise, K., & Vahidov, R. (2008). Application of machine learning 
techniques for supply chain demand forecasting. European Journal of Operational Research , 
184, 1140–1154. 
Casabayó, M., Agell, N., Aguado, J. C. (2004). Using AI Techniques in the Grocery Industry: 
Identifying The Customers Most Likely to Defect. International Review of Retail, Distribution 
and Consumer Research,  14(3), 295-308. 
Casprini, E., Dabic, M., Kotlar, J., & Pucci, T. (2020). A bibliometric analysis of family firm 
internationalization research: Current themes, theoretical roots, and ways forward. International 
Business Review , 29(5) 101715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2020.101715 
Chablo, A. (1994). Potential Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Telecommunications. 
Technovation , 14(7), 431-435. 
Chae, H., & Ko, E. (2016). Customer social participation in the social networking services and its 
impact upon the customer equity of global fashion brands. Journal of Business Research , 69(9), 
3804-3812. 
Chan, S. L., & Ip, W. H. (2011). A Dynamic Decision Support System to Predict the Value of 
Customer for New Product Development. Decision Support Systems , 52(1), 178-188. 
Chatterjee, D., & Sahasranamam, S. (2018). Technological innovation research in China and India: 
A bibliometric analysis for the period 1991-2015. Management and Organization Review , 14(1), 
179–221. 

==== Page 42 ====
41 
 Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, S. K., Chaudhuri, R., & Nguyen, B. (2019). Are CRM systems ready for AI 
integration?. The Bottom Line , 32(2), 144-157. 
Cherviakova, V., & Cherviakova, T. (2018). Value Opportunities for Automotive Manufacturers 
in Conditions of Digital Transformation of the Automotive Industry. Journal of Applied 
Economic Sciences , 13(8), 2351-2362. 
Chi, O. H., Denton, G., & Gursoy, D. (2020). Artificially intelligent device use in service delivery: 
a systematic review, synthesis, and research agenda. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & 
Management , available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1080/19368623.2020.1721394. 
Chica, M., Cordón, Ó., Damas, S., Iglesias, V., & Mingot, J. (2016). Identimod: Modeling and 
managing brand value using soft computing. Decision Support Systems , 89, 41-55. 
Chopra, K. (2019). Indian Shopper Motivation to use Artificial Intelligence: Generating Vroom's 
Expectancy Theory of Motivation using Grounded Theory Approach. International Journal of 
Retail & Distribution Management , 47(3), 331-347. 
Coldewey, D. (2018). This clever AI hid data from its creators to cheat at its appointed task”, 
available at: https://techcrunch.com/2018/12/31/this-clever-ai-hid-data-fromits-creators-to-
cheat-at-its-appointed-task/, accessed 20/09/2020. 
Collins, R. H., Mauritson, R. J. & Collins, R. H. (1987). Artificial Intelligence in Sales Forecasting 
Applications. Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management , 7(1), 77-80. 
Crittenden, W. F., Biel, I. K., & Lovely, W. A. (2019). Embracing digitalization: student learning 
and new technologies. Journal of Marketing Education , 41(1), 5-14. 
Cui, G., Wong, M., & Wan, X. (2012). Cost-Sensitive Learning Via Priority Sampling to Improve 
the Return on Marketing and CRM Investment. Journal of Management Information Systems , 
29(1), 341-374. 
D’Arco, M., Lo Presti., L., Marino, V., & Resciniti, R. (2019). Embracing AI and Big Data in 
customer journey mapping: from literature review to a theoretical framework. Innovative 
Marketing , 15(4), 102-115. 
D’Haen, J., & Van den Poel, D. (2013). Model-supported business-to-business prospect prediction 
based on an iterative customer acquisition framework. Industrial Marketing Management , 42(4), 
544-551. 
Dabić, M., Vlacic, B., Paul, J., Sahasranamam, S., Dana, L-P, & Glinka, B. (2020). Immigrant 
entrepreneurship: a review & agenda for future research, Journal of Business Research , 113, 25-
38. 
Daskou, S., & Mangina, E. E. (2003). Artificial intelligence in managing market relationships: the 
use of intelligence agents. Journal of Relationship Marketing , 2(1-2), 85-102. 
Davenport, T. (2018). The AI Advantage: How to put the artificial intelligence revolution to work . 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
Davenport, T. H., & Ronanki, R. (2018). Artificial intelligence for the real world. Harvard 
Business Review , 96(1), 108–116. 
Davenport, T., Guha, A., Grewal, D., & Bressgott, T. (2020). How artificial intelligence will 
change the future of marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 48(1), 24-42. 

==== Page 43 ====
42 
 Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use and User Acceptance of 
Information Technology. MIS Quarterly,  13(3), 319-339. 
De Cicco, R., Silva, S. & Alparone, F. (2020). Millennials’ attitude toward chatbots: An 
experimental study in a social relationship perspective. International Journal of Retail and 
Distribution Management, available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJRDM-12-
2019-0406. 
De Keyser, A., Köcher, S., Alkire, L., Verbeeck, C., & Kandampully, J. (2019). Frontline service 
technology infusion: conceptual archetypes and future research directions. Journal of Service 
Management , 30(1), 156-183. 
Diaz, J. (2017). How marketers are using machine learning to cross-sell and upsell. Principa, 
available at: https://insights.principa.co.za/you-want-fries-with-that-using-machine-learning-to-
cross-sell-and-up-sell, accessed on 01/6/2020. 
Dignum, V. (2018) Ethics in artificial intelligence: introduction to the special issue. Ethics and 
Information Technology , 20(1), 1-3. 
Donthu, N., & Gustafsson, A. (2020). Effects of COVID-19 on business and research. Journal of 
Business Research , 117, 284-289. 
Du, X., Jiao, J., & Tseng, M. M. (2003). Identifying customer need patterns for customization and 
personalization. Integrated Manufacturing Systems , 14(5), 387-396. 
Duarte, P., Silva, S. C., & Ferreira, M. (2018). How convenient is it? Delivering online shopping 
convenience to enhance customer satisfaction and encourage and-WOM. Journal of Retailing 
and Consumer Services , 44, 161-169.  
Elo, M., Minto-Coy, I., Silva, S. C. & Zhang, X. (2020). Customer networks governing 
international marketing-How ethnic products and services diffuse across borders? European 
Journal of International Management , 14(4), 693-729.  
Etzioni, A., & Etzioni, O. (2017). Incorporating ethics into artificial intelligence. The Journal of 
Ethics, 21(4), 403-418. 
Fetscherin, M., & Heinrich, D. (2015). Consumer brand relationships research: A bibliometric 
citation meta-analysis. Journal of Business Research , 68(2), 380-390  
Fish, K. E., Barnes, J. H., & Aiken, M. W. (1995). Artificial neural networks: a new methodology 
for industrial market segmentation. Industrial Marketing Management , 24(5), 431-438. 
Fish, K. E., Johnson, J. D., Dorsey, R. E., & Blodgett, J. G. (2004). Using an artificial neural 
network trained with a genetic algorithm to model brand share. Journal of Business Research , 
57(1), 79-85. 
Flaherty, K. E., Lassk, F., Lee, N., Marshall, G. W., Moncrief, W. C., Mulki, J. P., & Pullins, E. 
B. (2018). Sales scholarship: honoring the past and defining the future (Key takeaways from the 
2018 American Marketing Association Faculty Consortium: New Horizons in Selling and Sales 
Management). Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management , 38(4), 413-421. 
Fowler, A. (2000). The role of AI-based technology in support of the knowledge management 
value activity cycle. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems , 9(2-3), 107-128. 
Freeman, L. C. (1977). A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry , 35-41. 

==== Page 44 ====
43 
 Furrer, O., Thomas, H., & Goussevskaia, A. (2008). The structure and evolution of the strategic 
management field: A content analysis of 26 years of strategic management research. 
International Journal of Management Reviews , 10(1), 1-23. 
Furrer, O., Kerguignas, J. Y., Delcourt, C., & Gremler, D. D. (2020). Twenty-seven years of 
service research: a literature review and research agenda. Journal of Services Marketing , 
available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1108/JSM-02-2019-0078. 
Gacanic, H., & Wagner, M. (2019). Artificial intelligence paradigm for customer experience 
management in next-generation networks: Challenges and perspectives. IEEE Network , 33(2), 
188-194. 
Gardé, V. (2018). Digital Audience Management: Building and managing a robust data 
management platform for multi-channel targeting and personalisation throughout the customer 
journey. Applied Marketing Analytics , 4(2), 126-135. 
Garfield, E. (1990). How ISI selects journals for coverage: quantitative and qualitative 
considerations. Current Contents 5–13. Reprinted in Essays of an Information Scientist , 13(22), 
185–193. 
Gifi, A. (1990). Nonlinear Multivariate Analysis , Wiley, Chichester. 
Gill, T. G. (1995). Early Expert-Systems - Where Are They Now. MIS Quarterly , 19(1), 51-81. 
Graneheim, U. H., & Lundman, B. (2004), Qualitative content analysis in nursing research: 
concepts, procedures and measures to achieve trustworthiness. Nurse Education Today , 24(2), 
105-112. 
Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge‐based theory of the firm. Strategic Management 
Journal, 17(S2), 109-122. 
Greenacre, M., & Blasius, J. (2006). Multiple correspondence analysis and related methods . 
Chapman and Hall/CRC. 
Grewal, D., Hulland, J., Kopalle, P. K., & Karahanna, E. (2020). The future of technology and 
marketing: a multidisciplinary perspective. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 
available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-019-00711-4. 
Griffith, D., Kiessling, T. & Dabić, M. (2012). Aligning strategic orientation with local market 
conditions: Implications for subsidiary knowledge management. International Marketing 
Review, 29(4), 379-402. 
Ha, K., Cho, S., & MacLachlan, D. (2005). Response models based on bagging neural networks. 
Journal of Interactive Marketing , 19(1), 17-30. 
Hadavandi, E., Ghanbari, A., Shahanaghi, K., & Abbasian, S. (2011). Tourist arrival forecasting 
by evolutionary fuzzy systems. Tourism Management , 32(5), 1196-1203. 
Hair, J. H., Jr, Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1998). Multivariate Data Analysis  
(5th edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  
Haller, K., Lee, J., & Cheung, J (2020) Meet the 2020 Consumers driving change: Why brands 
must deliver on omnipresence, agility, and sustainability , available at: 
https://www.ibm.com/thoughtleadership/institute-business-value/report/consumer-2020#, 
accessed on 21/09/2020. 
Harmon, P., & King, D. (1985). Expert Systems . New York: John Willey and Sons, Inc. 

==== Page 45 ====
44 
 Hau, L. G., & Evangelista, F. (2007). Acquiring tacit and explicit marketing knowledge from 
foreign partners in IJVs. Journal of Business Research , 60(11), 1152-1165. 
Heaven, W. (2020). AI Could Help with the Next Pandemic - But Not with This One. MIT 
Technology  Review, March 12, available at: www.technologyreview.com/2020/03/12/905352/ai-
could-help-with-the-next-pandemicbut-not-with-this-one/, accessed on 20/6/2020. 
Hoffman, D. L., & Franke, G. R. (1986). Correspondence analysis: Graphical representation of 
categorical data in marketing research. Journal of Marketing Research , 23(3), 213-227. 
Hoffman, D. L., & De Leeuw, J. (1992). Interpreting multiple correspondence analysis as a 
multidimensional scaling method. Marketing Letters , 3(3), 259-272. 
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in service. Journal of Service Research , 
21(2), 155-172. 
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2020). Engaged to a Robot? The Role of AI in Service. Journal of 
Service Research , available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670520902266. 
Ivanov, S., Webster, C., & Garenko, A. (2018). Young Russian adults' attitudes towards the 
potential use of robots in hotels . Technology in Society , 55, 24-32. 
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (2019). Robots in tourism: A research agenda for tourism economics. 
Tourism Economics , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1354816619879583. 
Jalili, M., & Perc, M. (2017). Information cascades in complex networks. Journal of Complex 
Networks , 5(5), 665-693. 
Järvinen, J., & Taiminen, H. (2016). Harnessing marketing automation for B2B content marketing, 
Industrial Marketing Management , 54, 164-175. 
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nature 
Machine Intelligence , 1, 389–399. 
Jones, K., Johnston, R., & Manley, D. (2016). Uncovering interactions in multivariate contingency 
tables: a multi-level modelling exploratory approach. Methodological Innovations , 9, 1-17. 
Kaplan, A., & Haenlein, M. (2019). Siri, Siri, in my hand: Who’s the fairest in the land? On the 
interpretations, illustrations, and implications of artificial intelligence. Business Horizons , 62(1), 
15-25. 
Kearns, G. S., & Sabherwal, R. (2006). Strategic alignment between business and information 
technology: a knowledge-based view of behaviors, outcome, and consequences. Journal of 
Management Information Systems , 23(3), 129-162. 
Keller, E., & Berry, J. (2003). The influentials: One American in ten tells the other nine how to 
vote, where to eat, and what to buy . Simon and Schuster. 
Kepes, S., Banks, G. C., McDaniel, M., & Whetzel, D. L. (2012). Publication bias in the 
organizational sciences. Organizational Research Methods , 15(4), 624-662. 
Kietzmann, J., Paschen, J., & Treen, E. (2018). Artificial intelligence in advertising: How 
marketers can leverage artificial intelligence along the consumer journey. Journal of Advertising 
Research, 58(3), 263-267. 
Kim, Y., & Street, W. N. (2004). An Intelligent System for Customer Targeting: A Data Mining 
Approach. Decision Support Systems , 37(2), 215-228. 

==== Page 46 ====
45 
 Kim, H. W., Chan, H. C., & Gupta, S. (2007). Value-based adoption of mobile internet: an 
empirical investigation . Decision Support Systems , 43(1), 111-126. 
Kiss, C., & Bichler, M. (2008). Identification of Influencers - Measuring Influence in Customer 
Networks. Decision Support Systems , 46(1), 233-253. 
Klaus, P., & Zaichkowsky, J. (2020). AI voice bots: a services marketing research agenda. Journal 
of Services Marketing , available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1108/JSM-01-2019-
0043. 
Kogut, B., & Zander, U. (1992). Knowledge of the firm, combinative capabilities, and the 
replication of technology. Organization Science , 3(3), 383-397. 
Kolbjørnsrud, V., Amico, R., & Thomas, R. J. (2017). Partnering with AI: how organizations can 
win over skeptical managers. Strategy & Leadership , 45(1), 37-43. 
Kotler, P., Kartajaya, H., & Setiawan, I. (2016). Marketing 4.0: Moving from traditional to digital . 
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA. 
Kühl, N., Mühlthaler, M. & Goutier, M. (2019). Supporting Customer-Oriented Marketing with 
Artificial Intelligence: Automatically Quantifying Customer Needs From Social Media. 
Electronic Markets,  available online ahead of print, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12525-019-00351-
0. 
Kumar, V., Rajan, B., Venkatesan, R., & Lecinski, J. (2019). Understanding the role of artificial 
intelligence in personalized engagement marketing. California Management Review , 61(4), 135-
155. 
Kumar, V., Ramachandran, D. & Kumar, B. (2020a). Influence of new-age technologies on 
marketing: A research agenda. Journal of Business Research , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.01.007. 
Kumar, B., Sharma, A., Vatavwala, S., & Kumar, P. (2020b). Digital mediation in business-to-
business marketing: A bibliometric analysis . Industrial Marketing Management , 85, 126-140. 
Kumar, A., Paul, J., & Unnithan, A. B. (2020c). Masstige marketing: A review, synthesis and 
research agenda. Journal of Business Research , 113, 384–398.  
Kuo, C. M., Chen, L. C., & Tseng, C. Y. (2017). Investigating an innovative service with 
hospitality robots. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management . 29(5), 1305-
1321. 
Latinovic, Z., & Chatterjee, S. C. (2019). Customer Centricity in the Digital Age. MIT Sloan 
Management Review , 60(4), 1-2. 
Lei, N., & Moon, S. K. (2015). A Decision Support System for market-driven product positioning 
and design. Decision Support Systems , 69, 82-91. 
Lemon, K. N., & Verhoef, P. C. (2016). Understanding customer experience throughout the 
customer journey. Journal of Marketing , 80(6), 69-96. 
Leonard, D., & Sensiper, S. (1998). The role of tacit knowledge in group innovation. California 
Management Review,  40(3), 112-132. 
Letheren, K., Russell-Bennett, R., & Whittaker, L. (2020). Black, white or grey magic? Our future 
with artificial intelligence. Journal of Marketing Management , 36(3-4), 216-232. 

==== Page 47 ====
46 
 Li, S. (2000). The development of a hybrid intelligent system for developing marketing strategy. 
Decision Support Systems , 27(4), 395-409. 
Li, S. (2004). Webstra: A Web-Based Intelligent System for formulating marketing strategies and 
associated e-commerce strategies. Marketing Intelligence & Planning , 22(7), 751-760.  
Liker, J. K., & Sindi, A. A. (1997). User acceptance of expert systems: a test of the theory of 
reasoned action. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management , 14(2), 147-173. 
Lin, H., Chi, O. H., & Gursoy, D. (2019). Antecedents of customers’ acceptance of artificially 
intelligent robotic device use in hospitality services. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & 
Management, available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1080/19368623.2020.1685053. 
Ling, R. & Yen, D. C. (2001). Customer relationship management: an analysis framework and 
implementation strategies. Journal of Computer Information Systems , 41(3), 82-97. 
Littell, J., Corcoran, J., & Pillai, V. (2008). Systematic reviews and meta-analysis . New York: 
Oxford University Press.  
Longoni, C., Bonezzi, A., & Morewedge, C. K. (2019). Resistance to medical artificial 
intelligence. Journal of Consumer Research , 46(4), 629-650. 
López-Duarte, C., González-Loureiro, M., Vidal-Suárez, M. M., & González-Díaz, B. (2016). 
International strategic alliances and national culture: Mapping the field and developing a research 
agenda. Journal of World Business , 51(4), 511-524. 
Loureiro, S. M. C., Guerreiro, J., & Tussyadiah, I. (2020). Artificial intelligence in business: State 
of the art and future research agenda. Journal of Business Research , available online ahead of 
print at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.11.001. 
Luna, D., Peracchio, L. A., & de Juan, M. D. (2002). Cross-cultural and cognitive aspects of web 
site navigation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 30(4), 397-410. 
Lusch, R. F., & Vargo, S. L. (2009). Service-dominant logic—a guiding framework for inbound 
marketing. Marketing Review St. Gallen , 26(6), 6-10. 
Makarius, E. E., Mukherjee, D., Fox, J. D., & Fox, A. K. (2020). Rising with the machines: A 
sociotechnical framework for bringing artificial intelligence into the organization. Journal of 
Business Research , 120, 262-273. 
Makridakis, S. (2017). The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) revolution: Its impact on 
society and firms. Futures, 90, 46-60. 
Marangunic, N., & Granic, A. (2015). Technology acceptance model: a literature review from 
1986 to 2013. Universal Access in the Information Society , 14(1), 81-95. 
Martin, K. D., & Murphy, P. E. (2017). The role of data privacy in marketing. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science , 45(2),135–155.  
Martínez-López, F. J., & Casillas, J. (2013). Artificial Intelligence-Based Systems Applied in 
Industrial Marketing: An Historical Overview, Current and Future Insights. Industrial Marketing 
Management , 42(4), 489-495. 
Meiseberg, B. (2016). The effectiveness of e-tailers’ communication practices in stimulating sales 
of niche versus popular products. Journal of Retailing , 92(3), 319-332. 

==== Page 48 ====
47 
 Mero, J., Tarkiainen, A., & Tobon, J. (2020). Effectual and causal reasoning in the adoption of 
marketing automation. Industrial Marketing Management , 86, 212-222. 
Miralles-Pechuán, L., Ponce, H. & Martínez-Villaseñor, L. (2018). A Novel Methodology for 
Optimizing Display Advertising Campaigns Using Genetic Algorithms. Electronic Commerce 
Research and Applications , 27, 39-51. 
Mishra, R., Kr Singh, R., & Koles, B. (2020). Consumer decision‐making in Omnichannel 
retailing: Literature review and future research agenda. International Journal of Consumer 
Studies, available online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.12617  
MIT Technology Review Insights (2020). The global AI agenda: North America. MIT 
Technology Review, available at 
https://mittrinsights.s3.amazonaws.com/AIagenda2020/NAAIagenda.pdf, accessed on 
14/06/2020. 
Moates, D. R., & Schumacher, G. M. (1980). An introduction to cognitive psychology . Wadsworth 
Publishing Company. 
Moriuchi, E. (2019). Okay, Google! An Empirical Study on Voice Assistants on Consumer 
Engagement and Loyalty. Psychology & Marketing , 35(5), 489-501. 
Mukherjee, S., & Bala, P. K. (2017). Gender classification of microblog text based on authorial 
style. Information Systems and e-Business Management , 15(1), 117-138. 
Mustak, M., Salminen, J., Plé, L., & Wirtz, J. (2020). Artificial intelligence in marketing: Topic 
modeling, scientometric analysis, and research agenda. Journal of Business Research , available 
online ahead of print at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.10.044. 
Naudé, W. (2020). Artificial intelligence vs. COVID-19: limitations, constraints and pitfalls. AI & 
Society, 35, 367–379. 
Nevo, D., & Chan, Y. E. (2007). A Delphi study of knowledge management systems: Scope and 
requirements. Information & Management , 44(6), 583-597. 
Ngai, E. W., Xiu, L., & Chau, D. C. (2009). Application of data mining techniques in customer 
relationship management: A literature review and classification. Expert systems with 
applications , 36(2), 2592-2602.  
Ngai, E. W., Tao, S. S., & Moon, K. K. (2015). Social media research: Theories, constructs, and 
conceptual frameworks. International journal of information management , 35(1), 33-44. 
Nguyen, Q. N., & Sidorova, A. (2018). Understanding user interactions with a chatbot: A self-
determination theory approach. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems , New Orleans, LA, USA, 1–5 August 2018. 
Nonaka, I., Toyama, R., & Konno, N. (2000). SECI, Ba and leadership: a unified model of dynamic 
knowledge creation. Long Range Planning , 33(1), 5-34. 
Nonaka, I., & Von Krogh, G. (2009). Perspective—Tacit knowledge and knowledge conversion: 
Controversy and advancement in organizational knowledge creation theory. Organization 
Science, 20(3), 635-652. 
Oliveira, M., & Gama, J. (2012). An overview of social network analysis. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 2(2), 99-115. 

==== Page 49 ====
48 
 Onorato, D. A. (2018). Robots, unions, and aging: Determinants of robot adoption evidence from 
OECD countries. Atlantic Economic Journal , 46(4), 473-474. 
Overgoor, G., Chica, M., Rand, W. & Weishampel, A. (2019). Letting the Computers Take Over: 
Using AI to Solve Marketing Problems. California Management Review , 61(4), 156-185. 
Ozturk, O. (2020). Bibliometric review of resource dependence theory literature: an 
overview. Management Review Quarterly , https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-020-00192-8 
Pantano, E., Pizzi, G., Scarpi, D., & Dennis, C. (2020). Competing during a pandemic? Retailers’ 
ups and downs during the COVID-19 outbreak. Journal of Business Research,  116, 209–213. 
Paschen, J. (2019). Investigating the Emotional Appeal of Fake News Using Artificial Intelligence 
and Human Contributions. Journal of Product and Brand Management , available online ahead 
of print: https://doi.org/ 10.1108/JPBM-12-2018-2179. 
Paschen, U., Wilson, M., & Ferreira, J. J. (2020). Collaborative Intelligence: How human and 
artificial intelligence create value along the B2B sales funnel. Business Horizons , 63(3), 403-
414. 
Patriotta, G. (2020). Writing impactful review articles. Journal of Management Studies , available 
online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12608. 
Paul, J. (2019). Masstige model and measure for brand management. European Management 
Journal, 37(3), 299-312. 
Paul, J., & Mas, E. (2019). Toward a 7-P framework for international marketing. Journal of 
Strategic Marketing , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0965254X.2019.1569111. 
Paul, J., & Rialp-Criado, A. (2020). The Art of Writing Literature review: What do we know and 
What do we need to know?. International Business Review , available online ahead of print: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2020.101717. 
Payne, E. M., Peltier, J. W., & Barger, V. A. (2018). Mobile banking and AI-enabled mobile 
banking. Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing , 12(3), 328-346. 
Penrose, E. T. (1959). The Theory of the Growth of the Firm . New York: John Wiley. 
Pitt, C.S., Mulvey, M. & Kietzmann, J. (2018). Quantitative Insights from Online Qualitative Data: 
An Example from The Health Care Sector. Psychology & Marketing , 35(12), 1010-1017.  
Podsakoff, P., Mackenzie, S., Bachrach, D., & Podsakoff, N. (2005). The influence of management 
journals in the 1980s and 1990s. Strategic Management Journal , 26 (5), 473-488. 
Polanyi, M. (1958). Personal knowledge: Towards a post-critical philosophy . University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Poole, D. L. & Mackworth, A. K. (2010). Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational 
Agents, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Poria, S., Cambria, E., Winterstein, G., & Huang, G. B. (2014). Sentic Patterns: Dependency-
Based Rules for Concept-Level Sentiment Analysis. Knowledge-Based Systems , 69(1), 45-63. 
Quijano-Sanchez, L., & Liberatore, F. (2017). The BIG CHASE: A decision support system for 
client acquisition applied to financial networks. Decision Support Systems , 98, 49-58. 

==== Page 50 ====
49 
 Randhawa, K., Wilden, R., & Hohberger, J. (2016). A bibliometric review of open innovation: 
Setting a research agenda. Journal of Product Innovation Management,  33(6), 750-772 
Ranjan, K. R., & Read, S. (2016). Value co-creation: concept and measurement. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science , 44(3), 290-315. 
Riikkinen, M., Saarijärvi, H., Sarlin, P. & Lähteenmäki, I. (2018). Using artificial intelligence to 
create value in insurance. International Journal of Bank Marketing , 36(6), 1145-1168.  
Riquelme, F., & González-Cantergiani, P. (2016). Measuring user influence on Twitter: A survey. 
Information Processing & Management , 52(5), 949-975. 
Rogers, D. L. (2016). The digital transformation playbook: Rethink your business for the digital 
age. Columbia University Press, New York, USA. 
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2016). Artificial intelligence: A modern approach  (3rd ed.). Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education Limited. 
Rust, RT (2020). The Future of Marketing. International Journal of Research in Marketing , 37(1), 
15-26.  
Salgues, B. (2018). Society 5.0 and the Management of the Future, in Salgues, B. (Eds.) Society 
5.0: Industry of the Future, Technologies, Methods and Tools , Wiley, 91-119.  
SAS (2019). To the internet of things: a non-geeks A-to-Z guide”, available at: 
www.sas.com/content/dam/SAS/en_us/doc/whitepaper1/non-geek-a-to-z-guide-to-internet-
ofthings-108846.pdf/, accessed 25/09/2020. 
Schmitt, B. (2020). Speciesism: an obstacle to AI and robot adoption. Marketing Letters , 31(1), 
3-6. 
 Sengupta, A. (2018). Empathetic intelligence: how smart voice assistants are driving consumer 
convenience , Capgemini Research Institute, available at: www.capgemini.com/2018/09/voice-
assistants-driving-consumer-convenience/, accessed on 23/5/2020. 
Seranmadevi, R., & Kumar, A. (2019). Experiencing the AI emergence in Indian retail–Early 
adopters approach. Management Science Letters , 9(1), 33-42. 
Shah, D., Rust, R. T., Parasuraman, A., Staelin, R., & Day, G. S. (2006). The Path to Customer 
Centricity. Journal of Service Research , 9(2), 113–124. 
Shahrabi, J., Hadavandi, E., & Asadi, S. (2013). Developing a Hybrid Intelligent Model for 
Forecasting Problems: Case Study of Tourism Demand Time Series. Knowledge-Based Systems , 
43, 112-122. 
Sheth, J. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 on Consumer Behavior: Will the Old Habits Return or 
Die?. Journal of Business Research , 117, 280-283. 
Sheth, J. N., Sisodia, R. S., & Sharma, A. (2000). The Antecedents and Consequences of 
Customer-Centric Marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 28(1), 55–56.  
Silva, S. C., Martins, C. C., & de Sousa, M. J. (2018). Omnichannel approach: Factors affecting 
consumer acceptance. Journal of Marketing Channels , 25(1-2), 73-84. 
Silva, S. C., Duarte, P. & Sundetova, A. (2020), Multichannel versus Omnichannel: A price-
segmented comparison from the fashion industry. International Journal of Retail and 
Distribution Management . 48(4), 417-430. 

==== Page 51 ====
50 
 Simon, H. A. (1985). The corporation: will it be managed by machines? Management and the 
Corporations , 1960, 17-55. 
SIOP Administrative Office (2020). SIOP announces top 10 workplace trends for 2020. Society 
for Industrial and Organizational Psychology , available at: https://www.siop.org/Research-
Publications/Items-of-Interest/ArtMID/19366/ArticleID/3361/Top-10-Workplace-Trends-for-
2020?utm_source=SIOP&utm_medium=Website&utm_campaign=Top10page, accessed on 
18/09/2020. 
Sjödin, D. R., Parida, V., Leksell, M., & Petrovic, A. (2018). Smart Factory Implementation and 
Process Innovation. Research-Technology Management , 61(5), 22-31. 
Snyder, H. (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines. 
Journal of Business Research , 104, 333-339. 
Sohn, K., & Kwon, O. (2020). Technology acceptance theories and factors influencing artificial 
Intelligence-based intelligent products. Telematics and Informatics , 47, 101324. 
Steinberg, M., & Plank R. E. (1987). Expert Systems: The Integrative Sales Management Tool of 
the Future. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 15(2), 55-62. 
Steinberg, M., & Plank, R. E. (1990). Implementing Expert Systems into Business-To-Business 
Marketing Practice. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing , 5(2), 15-26. 
Steinhoff, L., Arli, D., Weaven, S., & Kozlenkova, I. V. (2019). Online relationship marketing. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 47(3), 369-393. 
Stewart, R. (2020). Stores may be reopening, but brands shouldn’t put e-commerce back on the 
simmer. The Drum , available online: https://www.thedrum.com/news/2020/06/11/ stores-may-
be-reopening-brands-shouldn-t-put-e-commerce-back-the-simmer, accessed on 02/09/2020. 
Stone, M., Aravopoulou, E., Ekinci, Y., Evans, G., Hobbs, M., Labib, A., Laughlin, P., 
Machtynger, J. & Machtynger, L. (2020). Artificial Intelligence (AI) In Strategic Marketing 
Decision-Making: A Research Agenda. Bottom Line , available online ahead of print:: 
10.1108/BL-03-2020-0022 
Syam, N., & Sharma, A. (2018). Waiting for a sales renaissance in the fourth industrial revolution: 
Machine learning and artificial intelligence in sales research and practice. Industrial Marketing 
Management , 69, 135-146. 
Tam, M. M., Chung, W. W., Yung, K. L., David, A. K., & Saxena, K. B. C. (1994). Managing 
organizational DSS development in small manufacturing enterprise. Information & management,  
26(1), 33-47. 
Tong, S., Luo, X., & Xu, B. (2020). Personalized mobile marketing strategies. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science , 48(1), 64-78. 
Tractica (2020). Artificial Intelligence Software Market to Reach $126.0 Billion in Annual 
Worldwide Revenue by 2025. Omdia-Tractica , available at: 
https://tractica.omdia.com/newsroom/press-releases/artificial-intelligence-software-market-to-
reach-126-0-billion-in-annual-worldwide-revenue-by-2025, accessed on 14/6/2020. 
Tranfield, D., Denyer, D., & Smart, P. (2003). Towards a methodology for developing evidence‐
informed management knowledge by means of systematic review. British Journal of 
Management , 14(3), 207-222. 

==== Page 52 ====
51 
 Valter, P., Lindgren, P., & Prasad, R. (2018). Advanced business model innovation supported by 
artificial intelligence and deep learning. Wireless Personal Communications , 100(1), 97-111. 
van Pinxteren, M. M., Wetzels, R. W., Rüger, J., Pluymaekers, M., & Wetzels, M. (2019). Trust 
in humanoid robots: implications for services marketing . Journal of Services Marketing , 33(4), 
507-518. 
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of information 
technology: Toward a unified view. MIS quarterly , 425-478. 
Wang, Y., Hong, A., Li, X., & Gao, J. (2020). Marketing innovations during a global crisis: A 
study of China firms’ response to COVID-19. Journal of Business Research , available online 
ahead of print: doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.05.029. 
Weber, F. D., & Schütte, R. (2019). State-of-the-art and adoption of artificial intelligence in 
retailing. Digital Policy, Regulation and Governance, 21(3), 264-279. 
Wei, C. P., & Chiu, I. T. (2002). Turning telecommunications call details to churn prediction: a 
data mining approach. Expert Systems with Applications , 23(2), 103-112. 
Wirth, N. (2018). Hello Marketing, What Can Artificial Intelligence Help You With? International 
Journal of Market Research , 60(5), 435-438. 
Wirtz, J., Patterson, P. G., Kunz, W. H., Gruber, T., Lu, V. N., Paluch. S, & Martins, A. (2018). 
Brave new world: service robots in the frontline, Journal of Service Management , 29(5), 907-
931. 
Wu, C. H., Ho, G. T. S., Lam, C. H. Y., & Ip, W. H. (2015). Franchising Decision Support System 
for Formulating a Center Positioning Strategy. Industrial Management and Data Systems , 
115(5), 853-882. 
Yang, H. & Lee, H. (2019). Understanding User Behavior of Virtual Personal Assistant Devices. 
Information Systems and E-Business Management , 17(1), 65-87. 
Yazici, H., Benjamin, C. & McGlaughlin, J (1994). AI-Based Generation of Production 
Engineering Labor Standards. IEEE- Transactions on Engineering Management , 41(3), 302-309.  
Zawacki-Richter, O., Marín, V. I., Bond, M., & Gouverneur, F. (2019). Systematic review of 
research on artificial intelligence applications in higher education-where are the educators?. 
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education , 1, 16-39. 
Zenobia, B., Weber, C., & Daim, T. (2009). Artificial markets: A review and assessment of a new 
venue for innovation research . Technovation , 29(5), 338-350. 
Zhang, H., Liang, X., & Qi, C. (2020). Investigating the impact of interpersonal closeness and 
social status on electronic word-of-mouth effectiveness. Journal of Business Research , available 
online ahead of print: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.01.020. 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 53 ====
52 
 Figure 1: Methodology protocol 
  
Source: own draft 
 
Figure 2: Publishing frequency over time 
 
 
Source: own draft Illustration of the 
marketing and AI  
research domain 
(Figure 3) – see 
Section 4.I. SPECIFYING THE SEARCH QUERY AND DATA COLLECTION  -see Subsection 2.2. 
Clarivate Analytics -Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI) 
& SCI Expanded (SCIE) & Scopus: 
a) Specify the search criteria:
Marketing and (Artificial Intelligence OR 
Intelligent System(s))
b) Run search
c) Narrow down by specifying subject areas
(social sciences; business, management and 
economics); 
d) Document type : Article;
e) Language : English; 
f) Time period : no constraint;
g) Import the results into Excel
h) Clean Excel file (delete unnecessary 
information) (n=164, see supplementary 
material for the full list of selected articles)II. BUILDING THE CODEBOOK -see Subsection 2.3.
Soft: QDA Miner & Wordstat Analysis
i )Import cleaned Excel file into QDA Miner
j) Analyze the content of each selected article 
(Title, Abstract, Keywords) using QDA Miner 
v5. and Wordstat v.8 soft.
k) Build the codebook (Descriptors & Keywords)
(n=21 descriptors consisted of n=877 
keywords) (see supplementary material for the 
full list of descriptors and keywords)III. MAP THE RESEARCH FIELD – see Subsection 2.4 
Soft: SPSS v.26
l) Import generated codebook from QDA Miner 
to SPSS
m) Perform technique for the graphical display 
of multivariate categorical data (HOMALS)
2133
12343
1232146
13
15
126
16
2101741
27
051015202530354045
1987 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2007 2008 2009 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

==== Page 54 ====
53 
 Figure 3: Map of the marketing and artificial intelligence research field. 
 
 
Source: own draft 


==== Page 55 ====
54 
 Table 1: Notable references for the development and construction of AI and Marketing framework5 
Author Title Type of review 
(according to 
Paul & Rialp-
Criado, 2020)  Methodology 
(according to 
Furrer et al., 
2020) Sample Time 
Span Database Source Overview and findings 
Martínez-
López & 
Casillas 
(2013) Artificial 
intelligence-
based systems 
applied in 
industrial 
marketing: 
a historical 
overview, 
current, and 
future insights Structured review  Qualitative –  
Expert-based 
survey 50 
articles 1972-
2011 Scopus Journals 
/conferences/ 
research/ book 
chapters Research on the intersection of AI and 
industrial marketing is still scarce and 
unexplored. The vast majority of 
research is concentrated in the last 
decade and relates to ad-hoc 
intelligent systems based on a diverse 
range of AI approaches, such as fuzzy 
logic, neural networks, dynamic 
programming, and optimization 
algorithms, among others. 
Syam & 
Sharma 
(2018) Waiting for a 
sales renaissance 
in the fourth 
industrial 
revolution: 
Machine 
learning and 
artificial 
intelligence in 
sales research 
and practice Structured review  Qualitative –  
Expert-based 
survey n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. AI facilitates marketing effectiveness 
at each stage of the business-to-
business sales funnel. Authors discuss 
the impact of machine learning and AI 
and propose future research avenues 
for sales processes regarding 
prospecting, pre-approach, approach, 
presentation, overcoming objections, 
close, and follow-up.  
                                                 
 
 
 
5 Considering Bradford (1934) and Garfield’s (1990) suggestions that papers published in the top journals of a field are more likely to push the boundaries of the 
research field, in this manuscript, we primarily use papers published in top journals. To identify the top journals, we referred to the Chartered Association of 
Business Schools (CABS) journal ratings of 2018 and considered those that were ranked at Level 3 or above (Dabić et al., 2020). Other articles are 
acknowledged throughout the manuscript but, due to word limits, are not presented in Table 1 within the reviewed manuscript. 

==== Page 56 ====
55 
 Author Title Type of review 
(according to 
Paul & Rialp-
Criado, 2020)  Methodology 
(according to 
Furrer et al., 
2020) Sample Time 
Span Database Source Overview and findings 
Davenport 
et al. 
(2020) How artificial 
intelligence will 
change the future 
of marketing Structured review  Expert-based 
survey n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Building on insights from marketing, 
social sciences, and computer 
science/robotics, the authors propose 
a framework to help customers and 
firms anticipate how AI is likely to 
evolve. The authors outline three AI-
related dimensions: levels of 
intelligence, task type, and whether or 
not the AI is embedded in a robot, 
highlighting the potential effects of AI 
implementation through cost 
reduction and enhanced customer 
service. 
Kumar et 
al. (2020a) Influence of 
new-age 
technologies on 
marketing: A 
research agenda Structured review  Expert-based 
survey 9 n.a. n.a. Journals Focusing on the respective roles of 
IoT, AI, ML, and Blockchain in 
marketing, the authors outline the 
importance of the implementation of 
technology with regards to marketing 
outcomes, the necessity for financial 
and human resources, and the 
subsequent impact on customer 
relationships. 
Kumar et 
al. (2020b) Digital 
mediation in 
business-to-
business 
marketing: A 
bibliometric 
analysis Bibliometric 
review  Citation study 119 1999-
2019 Scopus/ Google 
Scholar/Business  
Source 
Premier/ISI Web 
of Science- 
Social Science 
Citation Index Journals and 
Conference 
Proceedings Synthesizing two decades of literature 
on digital mediation in business-to-
business marketing, the authors 
outline the major changes to the 
research field affected by the 
emergence of Internet research and 
business-to-business technology, the 
evolution of e-commerce, and the new 
focus on social media. The authors 
recommend further research on the 
intersection of social media and tools, 
channels, models, and metrics. 

==== Page 57 ====
56 
 Author Title Type of review 
(according to 
Paul & Rialp-
Criado, 2020)  Methodology 
(according to 
Furrer et al., 
2020) Sample Time 
Span Database Source Overview and findings 
Loureiro et 
al. (2020) Artificial 
intelligence in 
business: State 
of the art and 
future 
research agenda Structured review  Citation study 404 1977-
2020 Scopus / 
ISI Web of 
Science Journals 
indexed in 
business-
related 
categories 
 This review summarizes the role of AI 
within the general business field. The 
findings of this study reveal 18 
different topics that have attracted 
scholarly attention regarding AI’s 
applicability, ranging from learning to 
marketing and manufacturing. 
Accordingly, the authors reveal that 
marketing is among the topics in 
which AI has attracted the most 
attention from researchers and 
practitioners. Finally, the authors 
propose future trends related to AI’s 
effects on internal stakeholders, 
external stakeholders, and 
governmental policymaking. 
Mustak et 
al. (2020) Artificial 
intelligence in 
marketing: Topic 
modeling, 
scientometric 
analysis, 
and research 
agenda Bibliometric 
review Citation study 214 1960-
2019 ISI Web of 
Science Journals 
indexed in 
marketing-
related 
categories 
according to 
CABS list and 
non-marketing 
related 
according to 
Harzing 
Journal 
Quality List.  Building on insights from 214 articles 
indexed in the Web of Science 
Database, using CiteSpace and 
VOSviever, the authors outline the 
countries, universities, and authors 
that have contributed to the 
development of AI in Marketing, 
presenting the predominant research 
topics. Furthermore, the findings of 
the study highlight future research 
opportunities related to two 
interrelated relevant streams of 
research: (1) increased depth and (2) 
increased breadth of AI within the 
marketing domain. 

==== Page 58 ====
57 
 Author Title Type of review 
(according to 
Paul & Rialp-
Criado, 2020)  Methodology 
(according to 
Furrer et al., 
2020) Sample Time 
Span Database Source Overview and findings 
Rust 
(2020) The Future of 
Marketing Structured review  Expert-based 
survey n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. The future of marketing is influenced 
by changes in three major forces: 1) 
technological trends, 2) 
socioeconomic trends, and 3) 
geopolitical trends. The development 
of AI algorithms unveils the potential 
of all aspects of marketing research, 
education, and practice. 
Abbreviations: n.a. = information not available 
  

==== Page 59 ====
58 
 Table 2: Overview of the most frequent journal sources by the number of articles and reference studies published in these journals 
No. Publications Frequency of articles Reference studies 
1 Decision Support Systems 12 Chan & Ip (2011);  
Chica et al. (2016) 
2 Applied Marketing Analytics 10 Abbas et al. (2020); 
Gardé (2018);  
3 Industrial Marketing Management 7 Kumar et al. (2020);  
Martínez-López & Casillas (2013)  
4 European Journal of Marketing 6 Lee et al. (2020); 
Pitt et al. (2020);  
5 European Journal of Operational Research 5 Baesens (2004); 
Montgomery et al. (1997) 
6 Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing 5 Paschen et al. (2019);  
Wilson & Bettis-Outland (2019 
7 Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 4 Davenport et al. (2020);  
Steinberg & Plank (1987) 
8 Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 3 Tian et al. (2018); 
Miralles-Pechuán et al. (2018) 
9 Industrial Management and Data Systems 3 Belanche et al. (2019);  
Choi et al., (2017) 
10 Marketing Intelligence and Planning 3 Li (2000a); 
Li et al. (1999); 
78.0 % of articles with IF>1.0 (JCR 2020)  

==== Page 60 ====
59 
 Table 3: Descriptors that represent the poles of the axes. 
Axes Descriptor Origin of the axes descriptor Notable studies 
Axis X Left Behavioral Profiling Behavioral Theories; Segmentation, Targeting & 
Positioning; Ethics Belanche et al., 2019; Belk et al., 2020; 
Casabayó et al., 2004; Miralles-Pechuán, 2018; 
Pitt et al., 2018. 
Axis X Right Strategic Intelligence 
Systems Marketing Strategy; AI Technological 
Advancement; Knowledge-Based View Bonnin & Rodriguez, 2019; Gardé, 2018; 
Paschen et al., 2020; Yazici et al., 1994. 
Axis Y Upper Client Orientated 
Relationship Customer Relationship Foundations; Marketing 
Channels; Micro-marketing Daskou & Mangina, 2003; Kumar et al., 2019; 
Moriuchi, 2019; Payne et al., 2018; Paschen et 
al., 2020; Steinhoff et al., 2019. 
Axis Y Lower Technology Orientated 
Approaches Technological Theoretical Foundations; Macro-
marketing, Services Tam et al., 1994; Weber & Schütte, 2019; Wirtz 
et al., 2018; Zenobia et al., 2009. 
  

==== Page 61 ====
60 
 Table 4: AI and Marketing: future research trends and research questions 
Future Research Trends Research Questions 
Acceptance of AI technology  To what extent do users’ cognitive structures (e.g., levels of attention) affect the relationship 
between behavioral intentions to use AI technology and actual AI use? 
How do relational elements, such as trust and rapport, affect customers’ acceptance of AI 
technology? 
Do relational and socio-emotional elements act as substitutes or complements to factional 
elements in endorsing customers’ acceptance of AI technology? 
Adoption and use of AI technology 
and applications  What role do emotion-related aspects, such as fun and curiosity, play in the adoption and use of 
AI-based applications? 
How do the demographic characteristics of users (e.g., digital natives, digital immigrants, 
gender) affect their likelihood of adopting or using AI technology? 
How do cultural differences within and across nations affect users’ attitudes with regards to AI? 
How is the relationship between perceived humanness and the adoption and use of AI 
moderated or mediated by trust? 
Can the adoption of AI improve targeting by means of a more efficient and effective 
communication strategy? 
Revolution of the labor market 
and marketers’ competences  To what extent does AI augment organizational performance in terms of employer 
attractiveness and employee satisfaction?  
Does AI affect the balance and transfer of soft and hard skills across organizational levels 
(horizontally and vertically)? 
How are marketers coping with digital and data analytics upskilling and reskilling? 

==== Page 62 ====
61 
 Future Research Trends Research Questions 
Role of institutional support  To what extent do public policies affect the adoption of AI technology?  
What is the role of institutional initiatives, at a national and/or international level, in promoting 
the effective adoption of AI?  
How can AI improve relationships between institutions and clients? 
Importance of data protection and 
ethics Which marketing strategies enabled by AI developments are more likely to change under the 
General Data Protection Regulation? 
How does the General Data Protection Regulation affect the AI revolution in marketing?  
To what extent do ethical principles (e.g., transparency, justice and fairness, non-maleficence, 
responsibility, and privacy) affect the adoption and use of AI in marketing?  
Do differences in ethical standards affect AI in marketing in terms of creating a win-win-win 
situation for all involved (individuals, firms, and all other stakeholders)? 
Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on 
AI in Marketing  To what extent are marketers willing to gather and share data - both existing and new - in order 
to inform new AI marketing models?  
Has the COVID-19 pandemic changed marketers’ approaches to data protection? If so, how? 
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, what role do AI-powered marketing tools play in 
understanding consumers’ attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors? 
 
 
 

