==== Page 1 ====
The Role and Limits of Principles in AI Ethics:
Towards a Focus on Tensions
Jess Whittlestone∗
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
jlw84@cam.ac.ukRune Nyrup
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
rn330@cam.ac.uk
Anna Alexandrova
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
Department of History and Philosophy of Science
University of Cambridge
aa686@cam.ac.ukStephen Cave
Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence
University of Cambridge
sjc53@cam.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
The last few years have seen a proliferation of principles for AI
ethics. There is substantial overlap between different sets of prin-
ciples, with widespread agreement that AI should  be used for the 
common good, should not be used to harm people or undermine 
their rights, and should respect widely held values such as fair-
ness, privacy, and autonomy. While articulating and agreeing on 
principles is important, it is only a starting point. Drawing on
comparisons with the field of bioethics, we highlight some of the 
limitations of principles: in particular, they are often too broad and
high-level to guide ethics in practice. We suggest that an impor-
tant next step for the field of AI ethics is to focus on exploring the
tensions that inevitably arise as we try to implement principles 
in practice. By explicitly recognising these tensions we can begin
to make decisions about how they should be resolved in specific 
cases, and develop frameworks and guidelines for AI ethics that 
are rigorous and practically relevant. We discuss some different
specific ways that tensions arise in AI ethics, and what processes
might be needed to resolve them.
KEYWORDS
Artificial intelligence, ethics, principles
ACM Reference Format:
Jess Whittlestone, Rune Nyrup, Anna Alexandrova, and Stephen Cave. 2019. 
The Role and Limits of Principles in AI Ethics: Towards a Focus on Tensions. 
In AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (AIES ’19), January 
27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314289
1 INTRODUCTION
AI systems promise widespread benefits to society, while also pos-
ing substantial risks across almost all sectors. In the last few years,
∗Corresponding author
AIES ’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6324-2/19/01.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3306618.3314289a number of different groups and initiatives have attempted to artic-
ulate and agree principles to guide the application of AI in society.
In this paper we discuss the role and limitations of these principles,
and argue that an important next step for AI ethics is to focus more
on the tensions that arise as we try to implement them in practice.
By ‘AI ethics’ we specifically mean the emerging field of practical
AI ethics, which focuses on developing frameworks and guidelines
to ensure the ethical use of AI in society (analogous to the field of
biomedical ethics, which provides practical frameworks for ethical
practice in medicine.) AI ethics therefore covers several different
sectors and types of institutions, including the following:
•Technology companies aiming to develop their own ethi-
cal guidelines (e.g. Google’s ‘AI Ethics principles’);
•Professional bodies whose codes of ethics are aimed at
guiding practitioners;
•Standards-setting bodies that aim to set general standards
for fields of research of industries (e.g. the IEEE or British
Standards Institution);
•Government bodies and legislators that aim to develop
policy and regulation (e.g. the UK’s new Centre for Data
Ethics and Innovation);
•Researchers across disciplines whose work aims to in-
form these ways that AI ethics is put into practice: exploring
the technical, philosophical, or legal aspects of using algo-
rithms in ethical ways [ 20] or synthesising and translating
such research into practice [27].
Agreeing on principles is valuable for the aims of all of these
groups: for example, principles can provide a useful starting point
from which to develop more formal standards and regulation, and
can help to identify priority issues on which both research and pol-
icy should focus. However, we argue that current lists of principles
for AI ethics are too high-level to be immediately useful for these
groups’ aims. When we look at specific cases, it becomes clear that
principles will come into conflict with each other. This means their
practical value is limited: without acknowledging these conflicts
standards may be set unrealistically high, or regulation intended to
protect one value might inadvertently compromise other important
goals. In order to be practically useful, we suggest that the field
of AI ethics should focus more on identifying and attempting to
resolve the tensions that arise when we apply them to specific cases.
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
195
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 4.0 License.


==== Page 2 ====
We begin by reviewing how principles have evolved in AI ethics
over the last two years. Drawing on comparisons with bioethics - a
field with a robust and well-developed tradition in using principles
to govern medical practice - we discuss some of the limitations of
principles. We make the case that all areas of AI ethics would benefit
from a more rigorous exploration of the tensions that arise when
we try to apply principles to concrete cases. We outline some key
tensions that already arise from the use of AI in society, and discuss
what work might be needed to resolve them. To our knowledge,
this is the first paper to explicitly examine the role and limits of
principles in AI ethics, and the importance of focusing more on
tensions as a next step.
2 THE EMERGENCE OF PRINCIPLES IN AI
ETHICS
Though the field is in its infancy, there is widespread agreement
on some of the core issues (such as bias) and values (such as fair-
ness) that AI ethics should focus on. Over the last two years, these
have begun to be codified in sets of ‘principles’ or ‘tenets’. The
Asilomar AI principles, developed in 2017 in conjunction with the
Asilomar conference for Beneficial AI, outline guidelines on how
research should be conducted, ethics and values that use of AI must
respect, and important considerations for thinking about long-term
issues [ 12]. The principles were signed by several thousand AI re-
searchers and others, including many academic ethicists and social
scientists. Around the same time, the US Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) issued a statement and set of seven principles
for Algorithmic Transparency and Accountability, addressing a
narrower but closely related set of issues [1].
Over the course of 2017, several other initiatives and organisa-
tions published additional sets of principles: including the Japanese
Society for Artificial Intelligence’s Ethical Guidelines in February
2017 [ 16]; a set of draft principles from the Montreal Declaration
on Responsible AI in November [ 25]; and the IEEE’s General Prin-
ciples of Ethical Autonomous and Intelligent Systems in December
[14]. This proliferation of principles has continued into 2018: with
the Partnership on AI publishing a set of ‘tenets’ which its mem-
bers agree to uphold [ 18]; the UK House of Lords suggesting five
principles for a cross-sector AI code which could be adopted inter-
nationally [ 23], and Google publishing their ‘AI ethics principles’
in June [19].
These different sets of principles have considerable overlap.
There is widespread agreement that AI-based technologies should
be used for the common good, should not be used to harm people or
undermine their rights, and should respect widely-held values such
as fairness, privacy, and autonomy. [ 9] suggest that many of the
different existing sets can be synthesised into five key principles:
the four that are already used in bioethics - autonomy, beneficence,
non-maleficence, and justice [ 4] - plus the additional principle of
explicability, which captures the challenges of intelligibility and
accountability unique to AI systems. While this convergence is
encouraging, it is unclear at this point whether this reflects a deep
consensus about what is important, arrived at independently by
numerous different actors, or merely a shallow consensus due to
the fact that different groups have read similar papers and built on
the work of one another.Principles can be a valuable part of applied ethics; agreeing on
high-level principles is therefore an important step for ensuring
that AI is developed and used for the benefit of society. Principles
help condense complex ethical issues into a few central elements
which can be clearly understood and agreed upon by people from
diverse fields and sectors. They encourage widespread commitment
to a shared set of values, and can give them a more prominent role in
institutional decision-making processes. Principles can form a basis
for more formal commitments in professional ethics, internationally
agreed standards, and regulation. They can also help address public
concerns, by clarifying the ethical commitments of researchers and
industry.
However, while principles are important, they are not in them-
selves enough to ensure society can reap the benefits and mitigate
the risks of new technologies. In order to be useful in practice,
principles need to be able to guide action - to help people navigate
the competing demands and considerations of concrete situations.
As we articulate in the next section, there are several obstacles to
this.
3 THE LIMITS OF PRINCIPLES
The four principles of beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy, and
justice have played a prominent role in bioethics [ 4], a field with
decades of experience in managing the challenges posed by new
technologies. These principles aim to articulate general values on
which everyone can agree, and to function as practical guidelines.
But they have spurred substantial debate: some argue that we should
put no weight on principles and focus entirely on the elements of
specific cases [ 10], while others have advocated a more moderate
view, whereby principles should be considered in close conjunction
with analysis of ‘paradigm’ cases [17].
However, even the strongest advocates of principlism in bioethics
acknowledge that principles alone are not enough. [ 4] suggest
that principles should be taken as guidelines, which need to be
made specific for use in policy and clinical decision-making. They
elaborate that in order to be action-guiding, principles need to be
accompanied by an account of how they apply in specific situations,
and how to balance them when they conflict. In this section, we
review some of the main limitations of principles that have been
highlighted in the bioethics literature and illustrate why these also
apply to the principles proposed for AI ethics.
3.1 Different Groups May Interpret Principles
Differently
The central terms used in principles are often ambiguous, mask-
ing conceptual complexity and differences in interpretation across
populations. As [ 8] point out, the principle of ‘justice’ in bioethics
does not say anything about what is just or unjust, leaving this to
the agent to decide for themselves. Clouser and Gert argue that
principles often mask important moral disagreements rather than
presenting a well-developed unified theory as they propose to, and
that it would be better if these disagreements were articulated and
understood more explicitly.
In particular, lists of broadly agreed-upon principles cannot
recognise that important and legitimate differences in values ex-
ist across people and populations. While everyone might agree
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
196

==== Page 3 ====
in principle that ‘fairness’ is important, there exist deep political
disagreements about what exactly constitutes fairness [ 5]. Groups
may also vary in how much weight they put on one value relative to
others in situations of conflict: more individualist cultures may put
more weight on personal privacy than more collectivist cultures,
for example. An important step in making principles more practical
is to formalize them into standards and regulation [ 27]. But this
process is not a straightforward unpacking of the relevant princi-
ples, as different principles will come into conflict when applied
to concrete cases. In the next section, we make the case that in
order for principles to inform more practical aspects of AI ethics,
including professional ethics, standards, and regulation, we need
to begin by exploring in detail the different kinds of tensions that
arise when principles are applied.
3.2 Principles Are Highly General
Relatedly, principles are by their nature highly general: their value
is that they indicate important moral themes that apply across a
wide range of scenarios. This means that they can be useful as a
kind of checklist: as a set of important considerations that need to
be taken into account in specific scenarios. However, the generality
of most principles also limits their ability to guide practical action
[3]). Many of the principles proposed in AI ethics are too broad to
be action-guiding. For example, ensuring that AI is used for ‘social
good’ or ‘the benefit of humanity’ is a common thread among all
sets of principles. These are phrases on which a great majority
can agree exactly because they carry with them few if any real
commitments. A very wide range of differing ideological, political
and philosophical standpoints could claim to be for the good, or
for the benefit of humanity. Only principles that are narrower and
more specific are likely to be useful in practice. Recent industry
commitments to not develop technology for autonomous weapons
are an example of a principle that is specific, action-guiding and
can be used to hold people to account. But at the same time, exactly
that specificity means its relevance is limited to one sector, and it
has many dissenters.
3.3 Principles Come into Conflict in Practice
The gap between principles and practical judgement grows larger
still when we consider that principles will inevitably conflict with
each other. For example, the UK House of Lords AI Committee
report states that, “it is not acceptable to deploy any artificial in-
telligence system which could have a substantial impact on an
individual’s life, unless it can generate a full and satisfactory ex-
planation for the decisions it will take.” The intentions behind this
principle are important, but it masks a crucial tension between us-
ing algorithms for social benefit (‘beneficence’) and ensuring those
algorithms are fully intelligible to humans (‘explicability’). For ex-
ample, algorithms exist today that can diagnose medical conditions
more accurately than doctors, potentially saving lives [ 24], but for
which a full and satisfactory explanation cannot necessarily be
provided (depending on how this is defined). In some situations, the
benefit of using an algorithm may be high enough, and its accuracy
reliable enough, that all users agree it is worth using even if a fully
comprehensive explanation of its decisions cannot be given. There
are complex and important trade-offs involved here [ 15,22], and aprinciple that simply states that it is not acceptable to deploy AI
systems without full explainability fails to recognise this.
In conclusion, there is a risk that high-level principles give the
impression of being the outcome of meaningful debate about how
AI should be developed, but in reality they are simply postponing
it.
4 WHY THE FIELD SHOULD FOCUS ON
TENSIONS
We use the term ‘tension’ to refer to any conflict, whether ap-
parent, contingent or fundamental, between important values or
goals, where it appears necessary to give up one in order to realise
the other. For example, the use of socially beneficial data-driven
technologies might make it impossible for us to fully guarantee
otherwise desirable levels of data privacy. If the potential gains of
these technologies are significant enough - new and highly effec-
tive cancer treatments, say - we might decide that a higher risk of
privacy breaches is a price worth paying.
In some cases, a tension may reflect a strict moral tradeoff: a
situation where two values or goals conflict and it is not possible
to get more of one without sacrificing another. However, many
tensions in AI are more contingent, and arise as a result of current
technological or societal constraints. Using machine learning for
social benefit may not be fundamentally in tension with privacy,
transparency, or fairness, but many current methods employed for
the former goal do conflict with these ideals. We do not yet know
how far new technological or governance solutions could go to
dissolve these tensions.
Others have acknowledged the importance of recognising con-
flicts between values in AI ethics, but to our knowledge none have
explored in detail why this would be beneficial or what it would
look like in practice. For example, [ 9] say that, “Ensuring socially
preferable outcomes of AI relies on resolving the tension between
incorporating the benefits and mitigating the potential harms of
AI, in short, simultaneously avoiding the misuse and underuse of
these technologies”, but do not discuss specific tensions in detail or
how to resolve them.
In this section, we discuss some of the benefits of focusing on
tensions. We outline four reasons this is an important next step
for AI ethics: (1) bridging the gap between principles and prac-
tice, (2) acknowledging differences in values, (3) highlighting areas
where new solutions are needed and (4) identifying ambiguities
and knowledge gaps.
4.1 Bridging the Gap between Principles and
Practice
In general, we see focussing on tensions as an important way of
bridging the gap between abstract ethical principles and specific
cases, and therefore an important first step towards an ethics of AI
that is practical and action-guiding.
To identify tensions, we need to consider how different values
and goals might come into practice in concrete cases. For example,
when Google DeepMind collaborated with the Royal Free Hospi-
tal, they encountered a conflict between protecting the privacy of
patient data, and their goal of using AI to improve early diagnosis
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
197

==== Page 4 ====
of acute kidney injury [20]. Since similar tensions will likely arise
across a range of different cases, focusing on tensions means we are
neither driven entirely by the specifics of an individual case, nor
are we relying on abstract high-level values. If we can articulate
important tensions by looking at a range of cases, and find ways
to resolve them in specific scenarios, what we learn from this can
then be used to develop standards and regulation that are more
sensitive to how principles apply differently across scenarios.
4.2 Acknowledging Differences in Values
Focusing on tensions forces us to consider how different values
might be interpreted and endorsed differently across groups. While
some important tensions are due to conflicts between principles
in practice, others arise because there are conflicting meanings
or values within a single principle: broad terms like ‘fairness’ or
‘justice’ for example are subject to substantial moral and political
disagreement [5, 8].
It may never be possible to totally resolve all of these disagree-
ments. But clearly articulating them is a crucial starting point for
ensuring that all aspects of AI ethics are as inclusive as possible: for
example, to ensure that international standards take full account of
and accommodate cultural differences, and that agreement on such
standards is meaningful.
4.3 Highlighting Areas Where New Solutions
Are Needed
Noting a tension between two values does not necessarily mean
we are forced to choose between them: often, we may be able to
find some way to get more of both things we value. Recognising
these tensions can therefore highlight high priority areas for both re-
searchers and policymakers. For example, acknowledging that there
is currently a tradeoff between performance and interpretability in
state-of-the-art machine learning systems has motivated technical
research that attempts to reduce or eliminate this trade-off [2].
Acknowledging tensions will also help direct the development
of AI in beneficial directions more generally. It is currently far
from clear whether advances in AI will augment or degrade human
capabilities and agency, but making this tension explicit focuses
attention on the important question of which trajectories of devel-
opment are most likely to lead to the former.
4.4 Identifying Ambiguities and Knowledge
Gaps
Finally, a tension-focused approach helps to clearly highlight am-
biguities and gaps in our understanding of how uses of AI are
impacting society. Again, this can help identify new and important
research directions.
To think clearly about all tensions, we need to recognise and
clarify ambiguities in terms: what do we really mean by things
like ‘fairness’, ‘justice’, and ‘autonomy’, and how might these be
interpreted differently across groups and contexts? To understand
the nature of many tensions we need to understand what is cur-
rently technically possible: what are the best current methods for
ensuring data privacy in machine learning, for example, and what
are the costs of these methods? To understand how tensions arise
in practice, we need better evidence on how AI is actually beingapplied in society today: what effect is automation already having
on individual lives across different sectors? And to articulate and
resolve conflicts between the interests of different groups, we need
to really understand the needs and values of affected communities:
how do the trade-offs people are willing to make differ based on
demographic factors, for example? Focussing on tensions should
help to drive this important work.
5 WHICH TENSIONS?
There are several different ways that applications of AI can intro-
duce tensions between important goals and values.
Some tensions arise due to the very nature of AI and machine
learning: these techniques allow us to use and draw inferences
from very large amounts of (often personal) data, and so challenge
important notions of privacy. The most useful models also often
quickly become very complex, introducing new issues around hu-
man interpretability [ 11,26]. This means we face tensions between
using these technologies for socially beneficial goals: improving
healthcare, justice, or security, for example, and other goals such
as respecting privacy and maintaining trust and understanding in
automated systems.
Another possibility is that AI systems exacerbate already ex-
isting ethical or societal tensions: between different conflicting
notions of fairness, for example. Often this is due to the fact that
machine learning models are trained on historical data, and so in-
herit the biases or mistakes they contain [ 13]. Here, applications
of AI in society do not necessarily introduce new tensions, but in-
crease the importance of already-existing ones such as how to make
decision-making more accurate and efficient without inadvertently
discriminating against minority groups.
Other tensions arise because the harms and benefits of AI sys-
tems are unequally distributed in various ways. For example, the
impacts of automation may be unequally distributed across pop-
ulations and cultures: enhancing the agency of some groups by
automating mundane tasks while wiping out the livelihood of oth-
ers, thus threatening their basic needs. The risks and benefits of
AI systems could also be unequally distributed over time, and uses
of AI that present opportunities in the near term may compromise
important long-term values. Increasing personalisation of messages
and services may make our lives more convenient and enjoyable in
the short run, but begin to undermine important aspects of auton-
omy, equality and solidarity over time [21].
Finally, AI may have the potential to both enhance and threaten
a given value. For example, depending on the precise direction in
which technology develops, it could be used to either greatly en-
hance human capabilities - if we can develop sophisticated methods
of intelligence augmentation [ 7] - or to degrade them: if our own
capabilities atrophy as we outsource more and more tasks [ 6]. As
mentioned above, automation might enhance the agency of some
groups while threatening the autonomy of others: whether we see
AI as enhancing or degrading human agency could depend on how
narrow or global a view we take of its impacts.
6 FOUR KEY TENSIONS
Given the wide range of tensions that may arise from applications
of AI, now or in the future, there is unlikely to be an exhaustive list
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
198

==== Page 5 ====
of all possible tensions. However, we believe that the following four
tensions will be particularly central to thinking about the ethical
issues arising from the applications of AI systems in society today.
These capture a range of issues which are already salient or likely
to grow in importance moving forward.
Tension 1 : Using data to improve the quality and efficiency
of services vs. respecting privacy and autonomy of individuals.
Machine learning and big data are already being used to improve
various public services (including healthcare, education, and social
care). These improvements could be hugely beneficial to citizens,
but require large amounts of personal data, raising concerns about
how to best protect privacy and ensure meaningful consent.
Tension 2 : Using algorithms to make decisions and predictions
more accurate vs ensuring fair and equal treatment. This tension
arises when public or private bodies base decisions on predictions
about future behaviour of individuals (e.g. when probation offi-
cers estimate risk of reoffending) and when they employ machine
learning algorithms to improve their predictions. These algorithms
may improve accuracy overall, but discriminate against specific
subgroups for whom representative data is not available.
Tension 3 : Reaping the benefits of increased personalisation in
the digital sphere vs enhancing solidarity and citizenship. Compa-
nies and governments can use personal data to tailor the messages,
offers, and services people see. This personalisation can make it
easier for people to find the right products and services for them,
but differentiating between people in such fine-grained ways may
threaten societal ideals of citizenship and solidarity.
Tension 4 : Using automation to make people’s lives more con-
venient and empowered vs promoting selfactualisation and dignity.
Automated solutions may genuinely improve people’s lives by sav-
ing them time on mundane tasks that could be better spent on
more rewarding activities. But they also risk disrupting some of the
practices that are an important part of what makes us human. With
automation we may see the gifts of arts, languages and science
become more accessible to those who were excluded in the past -
but we may also see widespread deskilling, atrophy, ossification of
practices, homogenisation and cultural diversity.
7 IDENTIFYING FURTHER TENSIONS
The above tensions are important and represent areas where ex-
ploring tensions is likely to be fruitful for AI ethics. Going forward,
further such areas can and should be identified. In order to do so, it
is helpful to ask a range of questions, including:
•Where AI is being used to serve a particular goal or value,
or for ‘social benefit’ in general, what risks to other values
are introduced?
•Where might uses of AI that benefit one group, or the pop-
ulation as a whole, have negative consequences for a spe-
cific subgroup? How do we balance the interests of different
groups?
•Where might applications of AI that are beneficial in the
near-term introduce risks in the long-term? How do we
trade-off short and long-term impacts of society?
•Where might future developments in AI either enhance or
threaten important values, depending on the direction they
take?8 RESOLVING TENSIONS
The best approach to resolving a tension will depend on the nature
of the tension in question.
Where a strict trade-off between two values exists, a choice must
be made to prioritise one set of values over another. For example,
this may mean judging what risks to privacy it is acceptable to incur
for the sake of better public health, or where to reject innovative
automation technologies because the threats they pose to human
skills and autonomy are too great.
Making these trade-off judgements will be a complex political
process. Weighing the costs and benefits of different solutions can
be an important part of the process but alone is not enough, since
it fails to recognise that values are vague and unquantifiable, and
that numbers often hide complex value judgements. In addition,
resolving trade-offs will require extensive public engagement, to
give voice to a wide range of stakeholders and articulate their
interests with rigour and respect.
On the other hand, where tensions are more practical in nature,
strict trade-offs may not be inevitable. It may be that we simply
lack the knowledge or tools to advance conflicting values, and
investing in further research could identify solutions that better
serve all relevant values or goals. For example, it might be possible
to use automation to improve people’s lives without sacrificing
self-actualisation and devaluing human skills, if a clear line can
be drawn between the contexts where we do and do not want to
pursue automation.
In these situations we face a choice. Even if a tension between
two goals is not a fundamentally irresolvable one, if we want to
apply current technology in society, we will still need to make the
kinds of trade-offs described above. On the other hand, if we can
hold-off from implementing technologies that introduce tensions -
certain kinds of automation, say - then we could instead invest in
more research on how technological or governance solutions might
reduce the need to navigate potentially difficult value trade-offs. Of
course, this is not a binary choice: we can choose to strike a balance
by making the trade-offs necessary to implement technology where
doing so is relatively unproblematic, while still investing in research
to explore how these tensions might be resolvable in future. This
choice can be thought of as involving its own tension, between
short- and long-term interests: to what extent should we postpone
the benefits of new technologies in order to invest the time and
resources necessary to resolve the tensions they introduce?
9 CONCLUSION
Over the last two years, many different sets of principles for the
ethical use of AI have been developed. We argue that these high-
level principles, rather than representing the outcome of meaningful
debate on how AI should be developed, risk simply postponing it. In
order to make AI ethics practical, the field needs to now focus more
on the tensions that arise when principles are applied to concrete
cases.
Though most of these tensions cannot be resolved straightfor-
wardly, we believe articulating them more clearly and explicitly
has several benefits. To be useful in practice, principles need to
be formalized in standards, codes and ultimately regulation. To be
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
199

==== Page 6 ====
effective, these in turn must acknowledge that there are tensions be-
tween the different high-level goals of AI ethics, and provide some
guidance on how they should be resolved in different scenarios.
They also need to acknowledge and accommodate different per-
spectives and values as far as possible, if they are to reflect genuine
agreement.
A focus on tensions can also help to direct research priorities
in AI ethics. Articulating tensions can help to highlight important
ambiguities and gaps in our understanding of how AI is currently
being applied in society which need further research. More gen-
erally, much current research in AI ethics appears to be driven by
questions of how we ensure that uses of AI respect important values,
such as privacy, transparency, or fairness. Reframing research ques-
tions to be more focused on understanding and resolving tensions
is an important step towards solving practical problems arising
from the use of AI in society, since it directs attention to where
new technological or governance solutions might help push the
development of AI in robustly beneficial directions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the Nuffield Foundation and by a Lever-
hulme Trust Research Centre Grant.
REFERENCES
[1]ACM US Public Policy Council 2017. Statement on Algorithmic Transparency
and Accountability. https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/assets/publicpolicy/
2017_usacm_statement_algorithms.pdf
[2]Tameem Adel, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Adrian Weller. 2018. Discovering inter-
pretable representations for both deep generative and discriminative models. In
International Conference on Machine Learning. 50–59.
[3]Tom L. Beauchamp. 1995. Principlism and its alleged competitors. Kennedy
Institute of Ethics Journal 5, 3 (1995), 181–198.
[4]Tom L. Beauchamp and James F. Childress. 2001. Principles of biomedical ethics.
Oxford University Press, USA.
[5]Reuben Binns. 2017. Fairness in machine learning: Lessons from political philos-
ophy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.03586 (2017).
[6]Adam J. Carter. 2018. Autonomy, cognitive offloading and education. Educational
Theory (2018).[7]Shan Carter and Michael Nielsen. 2017. Using artificial intelligence to augment
human intelligence. Distill 2, 12 (2017), e9.
[8]Danner K. Clouser and Bernard Gert. 1990. A critique of principlism. The Journal
of medicine and philosophy 15, 2 (1990), 219–236.
[9]Josh Cowls and Luciano Floridi. 2018. Prolegomena to a White Paper on an
Ethical Framework for a Good AI Society. (2018).
[10] Jonathan Dancy. 2004. Ethics without principles. Oxford University Press on
Demand.
[11] Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. 2017. Towards a rigorous science of inter-
pretable machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08608 (2017).
[12] Future of Life Institute 2017. Asilomar AI Principles. https://futureoflife.org/
ai-principles/
[13] Sara Hajian, Francesco Bonchi, and Carlos Catillo. 2016. Algorithmic bias: From
discrimination discovery to fairness-aware data mining. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining.
ACM, 2125–2126.
[14] IEEE 2017. Ethically Aligned Design, Version 2. https://ethicsinaction.ieee.org/
[15] W. Nicholson Price II. 2017. Regulating black-box medicine. Mich. L. Rev. 116
(2017), 421.
[16] Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence 2017. The Japanese Society for Artifi-
cial Intelligence Ethical Guidelines. http://ai-elsi.org/archives/514
[17] Albert R. Jonsen and Stephen E. Toulmin. 1988. The abuse of casuistry: A history
of moral reasoning. Univ of California Press.
[18] Partnership on AI 2018. Tenets. https://www.partnershiponai.org/tenets/
[19] Sundar Pichai. 2018. AI at Google: Our Principles. https://www.blog.google/
technology/ai/ai-principles/.
[20] Julia Powles and Hal Hodson. 2017. Google DeepMind and healthcare in an age
of algorithms. Health and technology 7, 4 (2017), 351–367.
[21] Barbara Prainsack and Alena Buyx. 2017. Solidarity in biomedicine and beyond.
Vol. 33. Cambridge University Press.
[22] Andrew D. Selbst and Solon Barocas. 2018. The intuitive appeal of explainable
machines. Fordham L. Rev. 87 (2018), 1085.
[23] Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence 2018. AI in the UK: Ready, Willing, and
Able? https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201719/ldselect/ldai/100/100.pdf
[24] Ming Song, Yi Yang, Jianghong He, Zhengyi Yang, Shan Yu, Qiuyou Xie, Xiaoyu
Xia, Yuanyuan Dang, Qiang Zhang, Xinhuai Wu, Yue Cui, Bing Hou, Ronghao
Yu, Ruxiang Xu, and Tianzi Jiang. 2018. Prognostication of chronic disorders of
consciousness using brain functional networks and clinical characteristics. eLife
7 (2018), e36173.
[25] University of Montreal 2017. Montreal Declaration on Responsible AI. https:
//www.montrealdeclaration-responsibleai.com/the-declaration
[26] Adrian Weller. 2017. Challenges for transparency. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01870
(2017).
[27] Alan F. Winfield and Marina Jirotka. 2018. Ethical governance is essential to
building trust in robotics and artificial intelligence systems. Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
376, 2133 (2018), 20180085.
Session 5: Rights and Principles
AIES’19, January 27–28, 2019, Honolulu, HI, USA
200

