==== Page 1 ====
The power of ensemble learning in sentiment analysis
Jacqueline Kazmaier1, Jan H van Vuuren
Stellenbosch Unit for Operations Research in Engineering, Department of Industrial Engineering, Stellenbosch University,
Private Bag XI, Matieland, 7602, South Africa
Abstract
An ensemble of models is a set of learning models whose individual predictions are combined in such a
way that component models compensate for each other's weaknesses. Although there has been a growing
interest in ensemble learning techniques in the general machine learning community, the use of ensembles
in sentiment classication is still limited. Moreover, much of the research activity on ensemble learning
is centred around homogeneous ensembles, although heterogeneous ensembles may prove very useful when
combining pre-trained models, which are often readily available.
In this paper, several techniques for constructing heterogeneous ensembles are applied and comparatively
evaluated in respect of benchmark sentiment classication data sets across four dierent domains. Median
performance improvements of up to 5.53% over the best individual model are observed for several ensemble
congurations in respect of all four validation data sets, and clear trends are identied that may prove useful
to other researchers in the eld. Furthermore, a novel ensemble selection approach is proposed that avoids
the storage of individual predictions, as well as the costly retraining of all candidate models for an ensemble,
that are often required by other such approaches.
Keywords: Ensemble learning, Sentiment analysis, Machine learning, Natural language processing
1. Introduction
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subeld of articial intelligence that enables computers to read,
interpret and derive meaning from human language. Tasks performed by NLP systems include machine
translation, automatic summarisation and sentiment analysis. The latter is often formulated as a classica-
tion problem of a given text into various sentiment categories ( e.g.positive, negative and neutral) and solved 5
by means of lexicon-based or machine learning approaches.
It was shown in [1] that lexicon-based models may be highly accurate in one domain, but typically
do not generalise well to other domains. Furthermore, whilst machine learning models trained in respect
of similar data often outperform lexicon-based models, this is only possible if a comprehensive process is
1Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jqkazmaier@gmail.com (J Kazmaier), vuuren@sun.ac.za (JH van Vuuren)
Preprint submitted to Decision Support Systems January 6, 2021

==== Page 2 ====
followed to select a suitable combination of text features2, algorithm and (hyper)parameters [1]. Improving 10
the robustness of sentiment classication models, therefore, remains an open challenge.
Anensemble of models is a set of learning models whose individual predictions are combined in some
way [3] in order to attain a more generalisable result [4]. The intuition underlying this approach is that
dierent models exhibit dierent inductive biases. If the errors caused by these biases are uncorrelated, the
models in the ensemble are expected to compensate for each other's errors, resulting in a decrease in the 15
overall error when the model results are aggregated. It has been shown that ensemble methods can eectively
leverage this property in order to reduce variance error without increasing bias error [5].
There has been a growing interest in ensemble learning techniques aimed at producing more generalisable
models. Compared to other research areas, however, the use of ensembles in sentiment classication is still
limited [6]. Moreover, much of the research activity on ensemble learning is centred around homogeneous en- 20
sembles (combining similar models). Especially since pre-trained models are commonly encountered in NLP
tasks, however, there is also a need to investigate the understudied problem of constructing heterogeneous
ensembles (combining dissimilar models).
In this paper, several techniques for constructing heterogeneous ensembles are applied and comparatively
evaluated in respect of benchmark sentiment classication data sets across four dierent domains. In the 25
process, the advantages of ensemble learning are illustrated, and clear trends are identied that may prove
useful to other researchers in the eld. Furthermore, a novel ensemble selection approach is proposed that
avoids the storage of individual predictions, as well as the costly retraining of all candidate models for an
ensemble, that are often required by other such approaches.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. An overview of the literature on ensemble learning, 30
in general, is given in Section 2, and this is followed by a review of ensemble learning for sentiment analysis,
in particular. The methodology followed to implement and compare selected ensemble learning techniques
is described in Section 3. Subsequently, the relative performances of ensemble methods in respect of the
benchmark data sets are presented in Section 4. Finally, the paper closes with a short discussion on its
contents and some proposals for future work in Section 5. 35
2. The literature on ensemble learning
The notion that the combination of several `weak' classiers3can be combined to form a `strong' classier
has been studied in various contexts. French mathematician Nicolas de Condorcet, for instance, established
what is now known as Condorcet's Jury Theorem [8]. Consider a group of njurors who wish to reach a binary
2In order to apply machine learning algorithms, text must rst be converted into machine-readable vectors by means of bag-
of-words or word embeddings representations, for example (see [2] for a detailed review of document representation methods
for sentiment analysis).
3A classier that performs only marginally better than random guessing is referred to as a weak classier [5, 7]. A strong
classier , on the other hand, can be arbitrarily accurate [5].
2

==== Page 3 ====
decision ( e.g.to nd a defendant guilty ornot guilty ) by majority vote, where each juror has a probability 40
pof making the correct decision and where the probability that the correct verdict is reached by majority
vote isP. The theorem states that if p > 0:5, thenP > p . Furthermore, the theorem also states that
P!1 asn!1 for allp>0:5. The theorem has two limiting assumptions, namely that the votes should
be independent of one another and that there should only be two possible outcomes. Nevertheless, if these
conditions hold true, a jury whose members' judgements are only slightly better than a random vote can 45
come to the correct conclusion provided it is suciently large [5, 9].
Analogously, English statistician and polymath Sir Francis Galton discovered the phenomenon of the
wisdom of crowds whilst attending a livestock fair. As part of a contest, several visitors of the fair submitted
guesses estimating the weight of an ox. Galton observed that, although no single visitor succeeded in guessing
the true weight of the ox (1 198 pounds), the average of all the guesses (1 197 pounds) came remarkably close 50
to this value. As in the the situation described in Condorcet's Jury Theorem, the aggregation of numerous
simplistic predictions resulted in an accurate prediction [5]. As before, however, this is not unconditionally
true. According to Surowiekie [10], the following four conditions must hold in order for a crowd to be
considered wise:
IDiversity of opinon : Each person should have some information that is private . This may take several 55
forms, including a unique or unconventional interpretation of the facts.
IIIndependence : The opinion of an individual should not be inuenced by the opinions of others.
IIIDecentralisation : People should each have access to a local source of knowledge or specialisation.
IVAggregation : There should be some means by which individual judgements may be combined to form a
collective decision. 60
The same basic principles that hold true for a wise crowd or jury may be applied to form an eective
ensemble of mathematical or statistical models. In the remainder of this section, ensemble methods are
discussed in the context of classication. Important considerations when constructing an ensemble classier
are rst outlined, and this is followed by descriptions of three popular ensemble methods, namely bagging ,
boosting and stacking . 65
2.1. Constructing an ensemble classier
A typical ensemble architecture comprises several base learners , which take as input an instance of the
feature vector x, and some means of combining or aggregating their results to yield a single prediction y,
as shown in Figure 1. Base learners are typically trained in respect of a set of training data by means of a
base learning algorithm , which can be a decision tree, a support vector machine (SVM) or any other suitable
algorithm [7]. Mathematically, an ensemble learning model may be described as a mapping
'(xi) =G(f1(xi);f2(xi);:::;f k(xi)) = ^yi;
whereGis an aggregation function and f1;f2;:::;f kare the base learners [9]. Often, base learners are
generated by applying the same base learning algorithm, resulting in homogeneous ensembles. Heterogeneous
3

==== Page 4 ====
ensembles are, however, also possible, in which dierent learning algorithms are employed to generate dierent
types of base learners [7]. The latter type of ensemble is typically also referred to as a multiple classier 70
system in the literature [5].
Base learner 1
xBase learner 2
Base learner kCombination y
. . .
Figure 1: A typical ensemble architecture (adapted from [7]).
Two pioneering papers on ensemble learning from the year 1990 provided initial evidence that this type
of model conguration may result in improved performance. Schapire [11] proved theoretically that a strong
classier can be generated by combining several weak classiers. Hansen and Salamon [12], on the other
hand, showed empirically that the prediction error made by an ensemble of several classiers can be smaller 75
than that of the best single classier.
Necessary and sucient conditions for the ensemble to outperform its individual members are that the
base learners are both accurate (in the sense that they perform better than random guessing) and diverse (in
the sense that they make dierent errors on new data points) [3, 12]. Dietterich [3] provided three primary
reasons why such an ensemble results in a lower generalisation error. These are illustrated schematically in 80
Figure 2.
h1
h3h2 f
(a) Statistical
h1
h3h2 f (b) Computational
h1
h3h2f (c) Representational
Figure 2: Schematic illustrations of the three primary reasons why ensembles may outperform single classiers (adapted from [3]).
The rst reason is statistical . Consider an hypothesis space Hof possible hypotheses describing a set of
data. A learning algorithm may be viewed as searching through this space in order to nd the most suitable
4

==== Page 5 ====
hypothesish. If there are too few data points available, the algorithm may nd several hypotheses that yield
the same accuracy in respect of the training data. By constructing an ensemble of several such accurate 85
classiers, their hypotheses are eectively averaged, reducing the risk of choosing an incorrect hypothesis
and thereby more closely resembling the true hypothesis f, as shown in Figure 2(a).
The second reason is computational . Many learning algorithms search through the hypothesis space by
means of local search algorithms, such as gradient descent, which may become stuck in local optima, even
when sucient training data are available. By repeatedly deploying such a search algorithm from dierent 90
starting points and aggregating the results, a better approximation may be achieved, as shown in Figure 2(b).
Finally, ensemble methods may overcome representational problems. Often, the true function fis not
contained within the hypothesis space Hprovided to the algorithm. The aggregation of several dierent
hypotheses inHmay, however, allow for an expansion of the space of representable functions, as shown in
Figure 2(c). 95
2.1.1. Diversity
Various dierent approaches exist for ensuring diversity between base learners. The three most common
approaches may be described as follows [3, 9]:
(i)Input manipulation : According to this approach, the training algorithm is executed several times, each
time employing a dierent subset of the training data. These subsets can be generated by random 100
sampling, or by partitioning the data set to either include dierent training examples with all features
in each subset ( horizontal partitioning ) or to include all training examples with dierent groups of
features in each subset ( vertical partitioning ).
(ii)Learning algorithm manipulation : Diversity may also be induced by altering the manner in which the
learning algorithm traverses the hypothesis space by selecting dierent hyperparameters for each base 105
learner or by introducing randomness into one of the steps of the algorithm. Forming a heterogeneous
ensemble comprising dierent learning algorithms may also be considered a form of learning algorithm
manipulation.
(iii) Output manipulation : According to this approach, the target variable provided to each learning al-
gorithm is altered. A multi-class ensemble classier may, for example, be constructed by combining 110
several binary classiers.
Naturally, it is also possible to combine several of the above approaches when constructing an ensemble.
Sagi and Rakoch [9] refer to such a combination as an ensemble hybridisation approach .
2.1.2. Dependency
Ensemble methods may also be distinguished by their dependency between base models [9]. Ensembles 115
generated within a dependent paradigm are constructed sequentially, allowing the knowledge generated
during the training of a previous base learner to inuence the construction of the next base learner. In
5

==== Page 6 ====
anindependent paradigm, however, each base learner is built independently of the others. Consequently,
this operation may be parallelised. These groups of ensembles are therefore also referred to as sequential
ensemble methods and parallel ensemble methods , respectively [7]. 120
2.1.3. Output aggregation
There are numerous methods for aggregating the output of individual base learners in an ensemble. Most
commonly, these may be classied as either weighting approaches or meta-learning approaches [7, 9].
Weighting approaches include averaging andvoting . The former may be applied to combine quantitative
outputs returned by regression algorithms. In simple averaging , the arithmetic mean of the predictions of 125
all base learners is returned by the ensemble. This approach is recommended when the performances of the
base learners are comparable. In weighted averaging , on the other hand, each base learner's prediction is
assigned a weight signifying its importance. This weight is often chosen to be proportional to the individual
model's strengths and may, for example, represent its relative performance in respect of the validation data
set compared to those of the other models in the ensemble. This method is typically recommended when 130
base learners dier signicantly in terms of classication accuracy. In general, however, empirical research
has not shown weighted averaging to outperform simple averaging [7].
Voting is a method similar to averaging applied to qualitative outputs returned by classication algo-
rithms. The most popular such method is majority voting , whereby the ensemble returns the class label
predicted by more than half of the base classiers. In the case where a consensus is not reached by the 135
majority, no prediction is made by the ensemble. In plurality voting , on the other hand, the class which
receives the largest number of votes is returned by the ensemble regardless of the overall proportion of votes.
The idea behind weighted voting methods is to assign a contribution to each classier that reects its
overall performance, typically as measured in respect of the validation data set, such that the votes of more
accurate models are, eectively, counted several times. These weights may be assigned in a myriad dierent
ways. By adopting a Bayesian approach, it can be shown that the optimal weight wiof a base learner
in an ensemble is proportional to log( i=(1 i)), whereirepresents the model's accuracy in respect of
the validation set. This relationship only holds under the assumption that the outputs of the base learners
are independent. Since the base learners are trained in respect of the same problem, however, they are
usually \highly" correlated [7]. Opitz and Shavlik [13] therefore suggested setting the weight of base learner
i2f1;2;:::;Kgproportional to its validation accuracy as
wi=iPK
j=1j;
whilst more complex methods employ the Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence or the notion of entropy to
assign model weights [5]. In practice, nding good weights for the ensemble is a computationally hard
6

==== Page 7 ====
problem4[7]. 140
In all the voting methods discussed thus far, discrete class labels were assumed. If the ensemble is formed
by probabilistic or scoring classiers, soft voting can be employed instead. According to this approach, the
probability or score for each class label is averaged across the base learners in the ensemble. A weight may
be applied for each classier, or for each classier per class, accommodating cases where specic classiers
routinely misclassify instances of certain classes. Soft voting is typically only employed in homogeneous 145
ensembles, since the scores or probabilities returned by models of dierent types often cannot be compared
directly without careful calibration [7].
Meta-learning refers to the process of `learning from learners' [9]. More specically, a two-level training
procedure is employed, by which the base learners (or rst-level learners ) are rst trained in respect of
the training data, and another learning algorithm is employed to train a second-level learner in respect of 150
the outputs generated by the rst-level learners [7]. This approach works well when dierent base learners
perform better in respect of dierent subsets of the data [9]. Essentially, the meta-learning approach corre-
sponds to the weighted voting or averaging approach, with the exception that the weights are learnt by the
second-level learning algorithm rather than being predetermined by some other means.
A popular variant of meta-learning is the mixture of experts [5, 9]. According to this approach, the 155
problem space is partitioned into various sub-problems ( e.g.certain regions of the feature space). A dierent
model is then trained in respect of each of these sub-problems, and is subsequently referred to as the expert
for that sub-problem. Each time the ensemble is deployed, one of the experts is consulted based on the type
of problem at hand.
According to the denitions above, simply weighting the outputs of several dierent models can be 160
considered an ensemble, since the conditions of a diverse set of base learners and some means of combining
their results are satised. In the remainder of this section, three other popular ensemble methods, namely
bagging ,boosting and stacking , are described in more detail with reference to the considerations described
above. Subsequently, the concept of ensemble pruning is nally reviewed.
2.2. Bagging 165
Bagging, or bootstrap aggregating , is an ensemble learning method rst developed by Breiman [14], which
underlies the popular machine learning algorithm random forests . In this context, the technique entails
generating an ensemble (group or forest ) of decision trees, each trained in respect of a dierent set of training
data. These data sets are generated by means of bootstrap sampling , which involves sampling uniformly and
with replacement from the original data set. A bootstrapped data set is expected to have a fraction of 170
1 1
e(63:2%) unique samples, with the remainder comprising duplicate entries [14]. A prediction is made
based on this ensemble by averaging the results of all decision trees (for regression) or by means of voting (for
4A problem is considered computationally hard if the asymptotic upper bound of its time complexity is not a polynomial
function of the input size.
7

==== Page 8 ====
classication). Aggregating the results of several models may reduce the variance in the predicted results,
resulting in a superior model accuracy [15].
According to this method, diversity is achieved by training each base learner in respect of a dierent subset 175
of the training data (diversity by input manipulation5). Bagging is typically implemented by employing base
learners of the same type, and is therefore considered an homogeneous ensemble. Furthermore, each model
is constructed independently.
In order to provide a large enough data subset to each of the base learners, bootstrap sampling is
employed, which entails uniformly sampling with replacement from the original data set until a new data 180
set of the same size as the original data set has been constructed, which contains some repeated data points.
The outputs of each base learner are then aggregated by means of a simple average or plurality vote.
This process is illustrated schematically in Figure 3 in the case of three base learners, where cylindrical
shapes represent data stores, the symbols contained within these data stores represent dierent training
examples and where the white circle represents the aggregation of model outputs by means of weighting. 185
As is evident from the gure, the bootstrap samples each contain one or two repeated elements from the
original data set and represent dierent distributions of the same data. In the conguration in the gure,
Base learner 3 will likely more accurately dierentiate between stars and squares, whilst Base learners 1 and
2 will likely be better at identifying triangles and circles, respectively. The models are combined with the
aim of harnessing the models' complementary strengths in order to predict the output vector ^yaccurately. 190
Base learner 3Base learner 1
Base learner 2 y^
Figure 3: A schematic illustration of the bagging ensemble method with three base learners.
2.3. Boosting
Boosting is a procedure by which weak learners may be converted to strong learners, as rst outlined
by Schapire [11]. As in bagging, diversity is ensured by input manipulation, whereby each base learner is
trained in respect of a dierently distributed data set. Unlike bagging, however, boosting is a sequential and
dependent process. More specically, the data set for each new base learner is generated to target the errors 195
5The random forests technique additionally ensures diversity by learning algorithm manipulation, since it randomly selects
a subset of features that may be considered for the split at each level of the decision tree. Random forests therefore represents
an ensemble hybridisation approach.
8

==== Page 9 ====
made by previous base learners. The general boosting procedure is illustrated in Figure 4 by means of an
example with three base learners.
Base learner 1+2+3 Base learner 1 Base learner 1+2 y^
y1   y^ y12   y^
Figure 4: A schematic illustration of the boosting ensemble method with three base learners.
Base learner 1 is trained in respect of the original training data. Subsequently, its error, denoted by the
dierence between the predicted outcome ^yiand the true label y, is observed. In the case of the example,
the model was found to misclassify instances of the star and circle classes. The data distribution is then 200
adjusted to give more weight to those classes that were misclassied, as indicated by the larger shapes in the
second data distribution. A second base learner is then trained in respect of the new distribution, and its
predictions are weighted with those of Base learner 1 to form an initial two-model ensemble. The results of
this ensemble are then employed to guide the next data distribution, and the process is repeated a specied
number of times. By iteratively adding new models targeted to address the weaknesses of the previous 205
models, weak learners are boosted to form a single strong learner.
The boosting procedure has been adapted by several algorithms, including the award-winning Ad-
aBoost [16] algorithm and XGBoost [17], which was employed in seventeen of the twenty nine winning
solutions to competitions hosted on the popular platform Kaggle [5, 9].
2.4. Stacking 210
Stacking [18] is an ensemble learning method in which a meta-learner is trained to combine several
independent base learners. This type of ensemble is typically heterogeneous, with diversity stemming from
the dierent learning algorithms employed. This is illustrated in Figure 5, where the same data set is
employed to train base learners of dierent types (denoted by dierent shades of grey). As is true for
the base learners in an ensemble, any learning algorithm can be employed as the meta-learning algorithm. 215
Typically, however, some form of linear or logistic regression is applied [18, 19].
As indicated in the gure, the meta-learning algorithm is trained in respect of a new data set formed by
the predicted outputs ^yiof each of the base learners i2f1;2;:::;Kgin order to return a collated prediction
^y. If the predictions which form the training data for the meta-learning algorithm were made in respect of
the same data employed to train the base learners, there would be a high risk of overtting [7]. A k-fold 220
cross-validation approach is therefore typically applied, whereby the base learners are trained in respect of
9

==== Page 10 ====
Base learner 3Base learner 1
Meta-learner Base learner 2y1
y2
y3y^^
^
^Figure 5: A schematic illustration of the stacking ensemble method with three base learners.
k 1 folds and the predictions in respect of the kthfold are included in the training data set for the meta-
learner. This process is repeated ktimes, yielding a new training set of the same size as the original data
set. The base learners are subsequently re-trained in respect of the entire training data set for use during
the deployment phase. 225
Ting and Witten [20] recommended using the predicted class probabilities of each base learner as input
to the meta-learner for classication problems instead of discrete class labels. In this approach, the number
of input features is increased from KtoKC, whereCis the number of classes in the data set. They,
furthermore, proposed formulating the problem as a multi-response regression problem by employing a one-
versus-all approach, whereby Cclassiers are formed to predict the probability with which a data point 230
belongs to class i2f1;2;:::;Cgand not to any of the other classes. Seewald [21] later suggested that only
the class probabilities associated with the target class should be employed as input features for each of these
one-versus-all classiers. This variation of the stacking algorithm is referred to as StackingC [7].
2.5. Ensemble pruning
As shown in Figure 1, a typical ensemble comprises two phases: The generation of base learners and their 235
combination. An ensemble comprising a large number of models may, however, be associated with a high
computational expense and a large memory requirement. Furthermore, retaining base learners with poor
performance may compromise the ensemble's ability to achieve superior results compared to its component
learners. Several researchers have, therefore, added an additional intermediate phase with the purpose of
reducing the size of the ensemble prior to combination. This phase, commonly referred to as ensemble pruning 240
orensemble selection , seeks to improve both the ensemble's eciency and its predictive performance [22, 23].
The selection of an appropriate set of base learners is a complex task. In the case of three base learn-
ersL1;L2andL3, seven subsets can be generated. These include the set of all three base learners, the
combinationsfL1;L2g,fL1;L3gandfL2;L3g, as well as the three singleton sets each containing one of
the base learners. The number of possible subsets that can be formed with Nbase learners, given by 245
PN
i=1 N
i
=eN 1, increases to 31 for N= 5, to 1 023 for N= 10 and to 1 048 575 for N= 20. It therefore
quickly becomes practically infeasible to select the best ensemble conguration by brute force.
Tsoumakas et al. [22] categorised ensemble pruning approaches into four categories. The rst refers to
search-based methods , which employ heuristics to search through the space of possible base learner combina-
10

==== Page 11 ====
tions in order to maximise some evaluation criterion. These methods may further be classied as greedy or 250
stochastic .
Whalen and Pandey [23], for example, employed a simple greedy approach in which the Ktop performing
classiers are added to the ensemble. They compared this approach with a variation by Caruana et al. [24,
25], in which an ensemble is iteratively generated by randomly selecting a small subset of candidate base
learners during each iteration and then including the candidate whose addition to the ensemble results in 255
the maximum performance of the ensemble. A notable drawback of such approaches is the requirement that
the ensemble size Kshould be selected beforehand. Furthermore, only the accuracy of the individual base
learners is considered in the rst approach, without regard for the eect of the base learners' inclusion on the
ensemble performance. Several other researchers have employed evolutionary algorithms, such as the genetic
algorithm [26, 27], ant colony optimisation [28], the articial bee colony algorithm [29] and particle swarm 260
optimisation [30] to select base learners. The objective functions of these algorithms are typically related
to the performance of the entire ensemble. If simple voting is employed as the output aggregation method,
this value is easily computed. If, however, a meta-learning algorithm is employed, the approach comes at a
signicant computational cost, since training and prediction steps must be performed during each iteration.
Other researchers have, therefore, computed evaluation measures reecting the diversity and accuracy 265
of a selected subset of base learners, based on the notion that choosing accurate and diverse base learners
should result in an accurate ensemble [31, 22]. This approach, however, introduces a dierent problem,
since there is neither a formal denition of model diversity nor a generally accepted means of quantifying its
magnitude [31, 32, 22]. Kadkhodaei and Moghadam [33] quantied diversity based on a measure of entropy
related to the classication of individual observations by the base learners. More specically, entropy (or 270
diversity) as dened in their paper is maximised when half the base learners vote for the positive class
and the other half vote for the negative class in a binary classication problem. A genetic algorithm was
employed to maximise entropy by selectively including certain base learners in the ensemble. Gu et al. [31]
presented a survey of multi-objective ensemble selection techniques, where ensemble selection is performed
in the context of a trade-o between accuracy and diversity. Several additional measures of diversity may be 275
found in the survey [31], many of which consider classiers that make dierent errors in respect of training
or validation data as diverse. By this denition, an increase in ensemble accuracy results in a decrease in
ensemble diversity, since the overall frequency of errors is reduced. Accuracy and diversity are therefore
often viewed as conicting objectives, and Pareto optimal6solutions to the ensemble selection problem are
typically sought. 280
Approaches within the second category in the taxonomy by Tsoumakas et al. [22], namely clustering-
based methods , typically employ a two-stage process. First, unsupervised learning algorithms are employed to
6In this context, a solution is Pareto optimal if any other solution that results in a higher accuracy (diversity) is also
associated with a lower diversity (accuracy).
11

==== Page 12 ====
partition base learners into clusters of models that make similar predictions. Each cluster is then separately
pruned in order to increase the overall diversity of the ensemble. Giacinto et al. [34], for instance, employed
hierarchical agglomerative clustering to partition classiers into groups of learners that made similar errors 285
in respect of a validation set. The base learner in a cluster whose predictions are most dissimilar to those of
learners from other clusters is then chosen to represent each cluster, whilst majority voting is employed to
aggregate predictions from all clusters. The number of clusters is chosen to maximise the validation accuracy
of the pruned ensemble.
The third category comprises ranking-based methods , which sort candidate base learners according to 290
some evaluation metric and then select a predened number of base learners according to this sorting order.
Inorientation ordering , for example, a signature vector is computed for each base learner. The signature
vector is a binary vector with one entry for each training observation, taking the value one if the observation
is correctly classied, or zero otherwise. The ensemble signature vector is the average of all base learner
signature vectors and represents the voting ensemble's predictive accuracy. Furthermore, the reference vector 295
is chosen as a vector orthogonal to the ensemble signature vector. The base learners are, nally, ordered
according to the angle between their signature vector and the reference vector. Only those base learners with
angles less than =2 radians are included in the ensemble. In essence, this method gives preference to base
learners that correctly classify instances misclassied by the full ensemble. Rooney et al. [35], on the other
hand, dened a composite metric, accuracy i+(diversity i), for each candidate base learner i. This metric is 300
composed of the base learner's validation accuracy (relative to that of the most accurate base learner) and the
base learner's contribution to overall ensemble diversity, weighted by a user-specied parameter 2[0;1].
Two dierent measures of diversity were compared in the paper. The rst represents the proportion of
models in the ensemble to which the base learner's prediction error is not highly correlated7. The second
represents the normalised variance of the base learner's predictions relative to the average predictions of all 305
candidate base learners. The Kbase learners achieving the highest composite metrics were then included in
the ensemble.
Finally, Tsoumakas et al. [22] dened a fourth category to accommodate all other approaches to ensemble
pruning. This includes, for example, a statistical approach by which only classiers whose performances are
signicantly8better than those of the other base learners are retained in the ensemble. 310
Onan [30] compared the relative performances of various homogeneous and heterogeneous ensemble mod-
els, as well as several evolutionary approaches towards ensemble selection in combination with stacking, in
respect of text classication problems. He found that heterogeneous ensembles ( i.e.stacking) outperformed
homogeneous ensembles ( e.g.AdaBoost, Bagging and Random Forest), whilst stacking congurations op-
timised by means of evolutionary algorithms performed better than regular stacking methods. Whalen 315
7Rooney et al. [35] considered errors with a Pearson correlation coecient [36] of 0.6 or greater as highly correlated.
8A dierence between two values is considered statistically signicant if it is unlikely that a dierence of such magnitude
would be observed due to sampling error alone.
12

==== Page 13 ====
and Pandey [23] found that a voting ensemble with base learners selected according to a greedy approach
matched or outperformed a stacking classier using all base learners in respect of four dierent data sets. The
stochastic iterative ensemble selection method of Caruana et al. [24, 25] consistently outperformed the greedy
approach, whilst a combination of cluster-based ensemble selection and stacking performed comparably with
or marginally worse than the greedy approach. The best results were, however, consistently achieved by rst 320
aggregating the results of base learners with the same learning algorithm and then stacking the aggregated
results. This may indicate that selecting base learners based on the diversity of their underlying learning
algorithms presents a promising approach.
3. The literature on ensemble learning in sentiment analysis
As mentioned in Section 1, the use of ensembles in sentiment classication is limited compared to other 325
research areas [6]. Nevertheless, several researchers have shown that ensembles and hybrid models perform
better than their individual components in respect of sentiment classication.
Wilson et al. [37], for instance, observed a 23% to 96% increase in classication accuracy when using
boosting compared to individual classiers. Prabowo and Thelwall [38] similarly found that a hybrid ap-
proach combining several lexicon-based and rule-based approaches with an SVM classier outperformed all 330
individual classiers in three of four tested cases.
Typical ensemble learning approaches towards sentiment analysis include stacking and weighting of dif-
ferent types of classiers. Comparatively, meta-learning approaches appear to outperform simple weighting
approaches towards sentiment classication. Omar et al. [39] compared the performance of a simple voting
ensemble with stacking ensembles employing na ve Bayes, logistic regression and SVM as meta-learners, 335
respectively, for classifying sentiment in Arabic customer reviews. They found that all ensemble techniques
outperformed their individual component models, and that stacking with logistic regression produced the
best results in terms of the well-known F-measure for both subjectivity and sentiment classication. Tsut-
sumi et al. [40] compared the performance of an SVM, ME and a lexicon-based approach with ensembles of
these classiers employing simple voting, weighted voting and meta-learning by means of an SVM, respec- 340
tively. Once again, all ensemble classiers were found to outperform the individual base learners, whilst the
best performance was achieved by stacking an SVM as the meta-learner.
Wang et al. [6], however, noted diculties associated with selecting base learners in a stacking approach
and actively turned away from such methods. Instead, they compared bagging, boosting and random subspace
or vertical partitioning approaches towards ensemble learning with na ve Bayes, maximum entropy, a decision 345
tree,knearest neighbours and an SVM as base learners, respectively. The results showed that the random
subspace approach with an SVM as the base learner performed best in six out of ten cases, and comparably
with the best results in the other four cases.
Other researchers have achieved good results by combining stacking with input data manipulation in
respect of the feature dimension. Xia et al. [41], for example, compared the eectiveness of various ensemble 350
13

==== Page 14 ====
congurations. More specically, they employed two dierent feature sets (parts-of-speech-related features
and features capturing word relations) and three dierent base learners (maximum entropy, na ve Bayes
and SVM) in conjunction with three dierent ensemble methods (simple voting, simple averaging of output
probabilities and stacking). The stacking approach was implemented in several dierent congurations
using linear regression, logistic regression, a neural network and SVM as meta-learners, respectively, and 355
in the form of the StackingC approach with linear regression as a meta-learner. In general, Xia et al. [41]
found that constructing an ensemble based on the dierent feature sets outperformed the use of a joint
feature set, and that ensembles of dierent classiers outperformed individual classiers, with meta-learning
approaches faring better than simple voting or averaging. Furthermore, ensembles of both dierent feature
sets and dierent classication algorithms outperformed the associated individual approaches. Araque et 360
al.[42] similarly found that an ensemble of classiers trained in respect of dierent types of features (surface
features, generic word embeddings and word embeddings trained for sentiment analysis) performed best and
that the meta-learning approach outperformed simple majority voting.
More complex approaches involved the use of additional model selection layers. Hassan et al. [43], for
example, developed a two-stage ensemble framework for sentiment analysis of Twitter data. During the 365
rst stage, dierent data sets, feature sets and classication algorithms are combined to form an array of
dierent models. A subset of the possible models is then selected by means of an iterative search algorithm
seeking to maximise validation performance of the ensemble. This approach was shown to better identify
extremities in the sentiment expressed in Tweets over time. On a similar note, Khan et al. [44] proposed
a semi-supervised framework in which SentiWordNet scores were revised by means of point-wise mutual 370
information, and where feature weights for these scores were learnt by an SVM-based multi-objective model
selection algorithm, resulting in superior performance in respect of benchmark data sets over existing lexicon-
based and machine learning approaches.
Finally, Lam and Kai [45] proposed a meta-learning ensemble model whose input features represent meta-
data on the data set or task at hand rather than the outputs of base learners. The model then recommends 375
a specic algorithm to make the prediction based on the given situation. This approach therefore represents
a mixture of expert models. Their results showed an improvement in classication accuracy for the ensemble
over individual base learners.
In summary, there is only limited volume of work in the literature on ensemble learning in sentiment
analysis that addresses the dicult, and often expensive, task of choosing suitable base learners from a pool 380
of candidates. Furthermore, no papers could be found that comparatively evaluate dierent combinations
of output type, combination method and ensemble selection approach simultaneously in respect of various
data sets. Both of these shortcomings are addressed in the remainder of this paper.
14

==== Page 15 ====
4. Methodology
The starting point for the experiments performed in this paper were individual sentiment classication 385
models trained and evaluated in respect of four benchmark data sets in [1]. More specically, four pre-
trained lexicon-based models from the literature ( Vader ,Pattern ,Sentiwordnet and the Hu and Liu opinion
lexicon ) and six machine learning algorithms ( na ve Bayes , Support Vector Machines, logistic regression , a
feedforward neural network , aconvolutional neural network (CNN) and a long short-term memory network
(LSTM)) were employed. Moreover, the former three machine learning models were implemented using nine 390
dierent variants of the bag-of-words representation as input9, whereas for the CNN and LSTM models, word
embeddings were trained end-to-end. The resulting pool of candidate base learners therefore comprised forty
two models (4 + (9 4) + 2), trained and evaluated in respect of ten dierent train-test splits, where testing
data comprised 20% of the available data for each experimental run.
As described in the previous sections, an ensemble model is dened by the type of base learner output 395
employed, the method used to combine these outputs, and the manner in which component base learners
are selected from the pool of candidates. In the remainder of this section, the congurations evaluated for
each of these dimensions are outlined.
4.1. Selecting base learners from the candidate pool
As mentioned in x2.5, the task of selecting suitable base learners for an ensemble is non-trivial. In this 400
particular case, in which there are forty two dierent models that may be included,P42
K=1 42
K
= 242 14
trillion options exist to form a set of base learners. Based on the literature review on ensemble pruning
inx2.5, we employ two approaches. The rst is a simple greedy approach, in which the Kbase learners
with the largest mean test accuracy across all ten experimental runs are selected. Here, the value of Kis
arbitrarily set to ve. 405
The second approach entails selecting a set of base learners for which an original composite measure is
maximised which represents the favourability Fof a set of base learners. In this context, a favourable com-
position of base learners is as accurate and as diverse as possible, as per the relevant literature. Furthermore,
there should be a bias towards including a larger number of base learners, in line with Condorcet's Jury
Theorem. Ensemble favourability is therefore expressed as
F=1A+2D+ (1 1 2)K
N;
whereAis the average accuracy of the base learners included, Dis a measure of diversity of the ensemble,
K=N is the proportion of available models selected as base learners, and 12[0;1],22[0;1] and 1 1 2
are weights representing the relative importance of base learner accuracy, ensemble diversity and ensemble
size, respectively.
9Each possible combination of the three document representations term presence ,term frequency and TF-IDF , as well as
the three n-gram ranges unigrams ,bigrams and unigrams with bigrams .
15

==== Page 16 ====
Motivated by the ndings of Whalen and Pandey [23], namely that employing only one base learner per 410
learning algorithm achieved consistently good results, as well as the generally observed trend that employing
dierent feature sets to train dierent base learners leads to superior results, we quantify ensemble diversity
as the degree of dierentiation between base learners in respect of the learning algorithm and feature set
employed. More specically, each candidate base learner iis assigned a vector Xi=h
Xi1Xi2Xi3Xi4i
;
whereXi1represents the approach to sentiment classication employed ( i.e.lexicon-based or machine learn- 415
ing),Xi2represents the specic algorithm employed ( e.g.SVM or SentiWordNet), and Xi3andXi4are the
rst and second feature dimension, respectively. The rst feature dimension constitutes the document rep-
resentation for base learners employing the bag of words model as input ( i.e.term presence, term frequency
or the TF-IDF weighting) and the types of features employed by the remaining algorithms ( i.e.word embed-
dings for the CNN and LSTM models, and aect words for the lexicon-based methods). The second feature 420
dimension denotes the n-gram range for bag of words models, the type of word embedding employed ( i.e.
pre-trained or end-to-end) or the specic sentiment lexicon employed ( e.g.the Hu and Liu opinion lexicon
or SentiWordNet). The diversity of a set of base learners can then be quantied by determining the degree
of diversity between each pair of base learners in the set across all four dimensions, normalising the sum of
these values for all pairs in the ensemble. 425
In contrast to comparing the prediction errors of dierent base learners in respect of dierent classes,
our approach to quantifying diversity may be viewed as a prediction of diversity in classication. The
selection of meta-features in respect of which to dene diversity is therefore critical in ensuring that this
measure of diversity is helpful to the ensemble model. The computational expense of this approach is,
however, comparatively low, since individual predictions of candidate base learners do not need to be stored 430
or compared directly. In fact, this measure of diversity can be computed prior to deploying candidate models.
If some measure of accuracy is already available for candidate base learners, such as historical performance
in respect of similar tasks, this ensemble selection approach avoids the costly retraining of candidate models
that are not ultimately selected.
Mathematically, ensemble diversity may be expressed as
D=PN
a=1PN
i=a+1PZ
j=1I(Xij=Xaj)`a K
2
Z; (1)
whereNis the number of candidate base learners, Zis the number of dimensions across which diversity is
measured,`ais a binary indicator variable indicating whether or not candidate base learner ais included
in the ensemble, K=PN
a=1`ais the number of base learners chosen and Iis an indicator function which
equates to one if the statement in its argument is true, or zero otherwise. If every pair of base learners
included in the ensemble is diverse in respect of all dimensions considered, then D= 1. Moreover, if all pairs
of ensembles are equal across all dimensions considered, then D= 0. The accuracy term may be expressed
in terms of the variable `aasPN
a=1a`a
K:
16

==== Page 17 ====
435
The most favourable set of base learners is then selected from the available candidates by solving the
optimisation problem
maxF=1PN
a=1a`a
K+2PN
a=1PN
i=a+1PZ
j=1I(Xij=Xaj)`a K
2
Z+ (1 1 2)K
N(2)
subject toK=NX
a=1`a: (3)
The parameters 1and2are congured by considering a small test problem with three candidate base
learners and tuned such that the desired outcome is achieved in a number of cases. More specically, if
all models are equal across all four dimensions ( D= 0), the single model with the highest accuracy should
be selected if the dierence between accuracies is large. If the dierence between individual accuracies is 440
relatively small, however, larger numbers of base learners should be preferred. If the accuracies achieved by
the three candidate models are 0.6, 0.6 and 0.9, for instance, the model with the highest accuracy should
be selected. If, on the other hand, the candidate models were to achieve accuracies of 0.8, 0.8, and 0.9,
respectively, all three candidates should be included in the ensemble. Accordingly, if all candidate base
learners are perfectly diverse and have the same accuracy ( D= 1 and the values of Aare equal for all 445
possible subsets), all candidate base learners should be selected in order to maximise the ensemble size.
Finally, if one model is entirely diverse from both other candidates, then that model should be selected along
with the other candidate with the highest accuracy in order to maximise diversity. The selected parameter
values that suciently satisfy these conditions were found to be 1=2= 0:45.
The resulting optimisation model was implemented in an MS Excel spreadsheet and solved using a 450
genetic algorithm with default hyperparameters, namely a population size of 100, a mutation rate of 0.75
and a convergence tolerance of 0.001.
Since the lexicon-based models had previously been found to perform signicantly worse than the ma-
chine learning models in all four data sets (see [1]), the optimisation model was also applied to a candidate
pool comprising only the machine learning models. By comparing the performance of the ensembles formed 455
by applying model-based selection to both sets of candidate base learners, the eectiveness of the ensemble
favourability model could be evaluated both in the case of large discrepancies in individual candidate ac-
curacies with high potential diversity, and lower dierences in accuracies with more similar models (lower
diversity). We refer to these variants of the model-based ensemble pruning approach as the model and the
model ML approach, respectively. 460
4.2. Forming ensembles from the selected base learners
Two dierent output types are employed, namely discrete outputs and, where available, scoring (or prob-
abilistic) outputs. Furthermore, these outputs are combined by means of simple plurality voting, weighted
17

==== Page 18 ====
voting or a meta-learning approach. In the weighted voting approach, the weight wiof each base learner
i2f1;:::;Kgis taken as
wi=iPK
j=1j
as per Opitz and Shavlik [13], where iis the cross-validated score achieved during the grid search for machine
learning models, and the accuracy in respect of the training data for lexicon-based models. In the meta-
learning approach, the most popular meta-learning algorithm, namely logistic regression, is implemented.
The simple and weighted voting ensembles are implemented viatheVotingClassifier class of the 465
Scikit-learn library [19], whilst the meta-learning approach is facilitated by means of the StackingClassifier
class of the same library. In the stacked ensemble, the training data for the meta-learner are generated by
means of ve-fold cross-validation in respect of the training data according to the process described in Sec-
tion 2. For the classication of new data points, the base learners are then retrained in respect of the entire
training data set. If scoring outputs are employed as input to the meta-learning algorithm, the scores or 470
probabilities for all classes are employed (unlike in the StackingC approach reviewed in Section 2). In the
case of binary classication, however, only one class is considered, since the probabilities of Class 0 and
Class 1 are perfect predictors of one another by means of the relationship p1= 1 p0. Finally, for the sake
of simplicity, default hyperparameters are employed in the meta-learning algorithm. More specically, the
LBFGS optimisation algorithm is employed to determine model parameters within a limit of 100 iterations, 475
and the inverse regularisation strength Cis taken as 1 :0.
One experiment is performed for each possible combination of the output type employed in the ensemble
(discrete or scoring outputs) and the method of output combination (simple voting, weighted voting and
meta-learning), resulting in six (2 3) experiments for each of the ensembles formed by means of the three
previously described ensemble selection strategies. 480
5. Results and discussion
The data sets employed in this paper were selected from four vastly dierent domains, as summarised in
Table 1 [1]10.Three of these are well-known data sets from the sentiment analysis literature: The PL04 data
set11comprises 1 000 positive and 1 000 negative processed movie reviews, the Yelp data set12contains data
related to business reviews from the popular review site Yelp and the Twitter data set13, published along with 485
the popular lexicon-based sentiment analysis model, Vader [48], which comprises 4 200 randomly selected
microblogs from the social media site Twitter . The nal data set, the SMS data set, contains customer
10In the table, binary problems refer to documents labelled as either positive ornegative in sentiment, whilst ternary problems
also include a third sentiment class, neutral .
11Available at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/pabo/movie-review-data/ as \polarity data set v2.0."
12Available at https://www.yelp.com/dataset.
13Available at https://github.com/cjhutto/vaderSentiment.
18

==== Page 19 ====
feedback data on the services of a South African retail bank14in the form of over 2 500 text messages.
Data set Domain Problem type Supplementary data
PL04 Movie Reviews Binary |
Yelp Business Reviews Binary Business & user data
Twitter Social Media Ternary |
SMS Banking Survey Ternary Branch & customer data
Table 1: A summary of the case study data sets [1].
As is evident from the metadata presented on the data sets in Table 2, the data are not only diverse
in domain, but also in class distribution, document length and vocabulary size jVj(the number of unique 490
tokens present in the original corpus) [1].
Data set # DocumentsClass distribution Document length
jVj
Positive Negative Neutral Mean Min Max
PL04 2 000 50% 50% | 747.96 18 2 680 46 462
Yelp 3 801 57% 43% | 90.53 1 1008 15 879
Twitter 4 200 67% 27% 5% 14.07 1 78 11 468
SMS 2 500 11% 73% 16% 13.74 1 32 12 448
Table 2: Metadata on the selected data sets [1].
For the PL04, Yelp and Twitter data sets, the number of selected base learners obtained by maximising
the optimisation problem in (2){(3) by means of a genetic algorithm was two, both when considering only
machine learning models and when considering the entire pool of candidate base learners. For the SMS data
set, on the other hand, three base learners were selected, which may also be described as the set of the best- 495
performing models in each of the following categories: Machine learning models employing the bag-of-words
representation as input, deep learning models trained end-to-end with a word embedding matrix, and lexicon-
based models. A summary of the selected ensemble congurations for all four data sets in the validation suite
is presented in Table 3 along with their associated diversity, accuracy and favourability metrics. Details about
individual base learners can be found along with the results of each ensemble conguration in the appendix. 500
To account for variability in training and testing data, each of the eighteen experiments (six experiments
for each of the three base learner sets) was repeated ten times, in respect of the same random splits employed
for the individual model experiments in [1]. All reported results reect performance in respect of the test
data. The accuracies achieved by each of the examined ensemble congurations in respect of each of the
validation data sets during the ten experimental runs are illustrated in the form of box plots in Figure 6. The 505
median performance achieved by the best base learner is denoted by the black dotted line. In general, median
14The raw data are protected by a non-disclosure agreement.
19

==== Page 20 ====
Data set Selection approach K Diversity Accuracy Favourability
Greedy 5 0.3500 0.8721 0.5683
Model 2 1.0000 0.8100 0.8192PL04
Model ML 2 0.7500 0.8677 0.7332
Greedy 5 0.4000 0.9265 0.6088
Model 2 1.0000 0.8985 0.8591Yelp
Model ML 2 0.7500 0.9257 0.7593
Greedy 5 0.6000 0.8264 0.6538
Model 2 1.0000 0.8401 0.8328TwitterModel ML 2 0.7500 0.8157 0.7098
Greedy 5 0.3500 0.8529 0.5532
Model 3 0.9167 0.7199 0.7436SMS
Model ML 3 0.7500 0.8409 0.7238
Table 3: The results of the ensemble selection approaches applied to each of the validation data sets.
performance improvements over the best individual model were observed for several ensemble congurations
in respect of all four validation data sets. The most signicant improvement of 5.53% was achieved in respect
of the Twitter data set, whilst only a marginal improvement of 0.43% was achieved in respect of the Yelp
data set, as is summarised in Table 4. 510
Best ensemble Best relative
Data set BBL Greedy Model Model ML improvement
PL04 87.90 89.50 88.50 88.90 1.82%
Yelp 93.10 93.25 93.20 93.50 0.43%
Twitter 85.90 90.65 90.55 82.25 5.53%
SMS 84.00 84.39 84.90 85.40 1.68%
Table 4: The median test accuracies (in percentages) achieved by the best base learners15and best ensemble congurations
for each ensemble selection approach in respect of each of the validation data sets. The performance of the best ensemble is
highlighted in boldface.
The model selection approach, which is associated with the largest ensemble diversity for all four data sets,
resulted in the widest range of performance results across the six ensemble congurations | some achieving
signicantly lower accuracy scores than the best base learner, and others signicantly outperforming this
benchmark. The combination of scoring outputs by means of meta-learning, however, consistently resulted
15In this case, the best base learner refers to the best individual model across all three sets of base learners, irrespective of
whether the model appeared in all three sets. The indicated improvement was measured relative to this value.
20

==== Page 21 ====
(a) PL04
 (b) Yelp
(c) Twitter
 (d) SMS
Figure 6: Box plots of the accuracy achieved by ensembles in respect of the adopted ensemble pruning approach, output type
and combination method employed during ten experimental runs. The median accuracy achieved over ten experimental runs
of the best base learner is denoted by the dashed black line.
21

==== Page 22 ====
in superior results for this selection approach compared with the performance of the best individual model. 515
Even with an average base learner accuracy 14% lower than that of the best individual model, as was the
case for the SMS data set, this ensemble conguration resulted in a 1% increase in median accuracy16. These
results suggest that there is potential for selecting base learners according to the proposed metric of ensemble
diversity in combination with a meta-learning approach.
There does not, however, appear to be a direct correlation between the ensemble favourability scores in 520
Table 3 and the scores achieved by the associated ensemble models summarised in Table 4. Whilst the most
favourable set of base learners was always generated according to the model selection approach, this set did
not result in the best ensemble performance in any of the four cases (although the results were typically
very close to those of the best ensemble). The individual metrics of ensemble size, diversity and accuracy,
when considered separately, were equally inadequate predictors of ensemble performance. Notwithstanding 525
this, the largest improvement over the best base learner (observed in respect of the Twitter data set) was
achieved by the most diverse ensemble of those generated according to the greedy approach, which generally
produced the largest ensembles with high accuracy scores. A dierent weighting of ensemble size, diversity
and accuracy in the proposed favourability metric may therefore be more eective in predicting ensemble
performance. 530
It is also worth noting that the Twitter data set presented the only case in which a lexicon-based model
was not signicantly outperformed by all of the machine learning models. It was therefore also the only case
in which a high ensemble diversity could be achieved without a signicant trade-o in ensemble accuracy.
On the other hand, whilst the model ML selection approach eectively applied a minimum threshold on base
learner accuracy for the other data sets in the validation suite, excluding the Vader model from the ensemble 535
corresponded to setting a maximum threshold on base learner accuracy in respect of the Twitter data set.
It is, therefore, unsurprising that the ensemble selected by the model approach achieved better results than
those of the ensemble selected viathe model ML approach only in respect of this data set. The inclusion
of a constraint on the minimum base learner accuracy in the optimisation problem (2){(3) may present an
additional avenue for improvement of the proposed ensemble selection approach. 540
With respect to the eectiveness of the output types and combination methods employed in the ensemble
models, a clear trend was observed across all four data sets, as shown in Figure 7. According to this trend,
the combination of scoring or probabilistic outputs by means of meta-learning matched or outperformed the
remaining ve ensemble congurations in respect of all the data sets in the validation suite. The relative
performance among the other ensemble congurations varied across data sets. In nine out of twelve cases, 545
however, ensembles employing scoring outputs outperformed those utilising discrete outputs.
In summary, the complementary selection of models resulted in a median performance improvement
over competitive selection across all four data sets. Furthermore, it was shown that ensembles formed by
16In both cases, scores are reported relative to the median accuracy of the best base learner.
22

==== Page 23 ====
Simple Weighted Meta
combinationMethod0.7250.7500.7750.8000.8250.8500.8750.900accuracy
outputType
Discrete
Score(a) PL04
Simple Weighted Meta
combinationMethod0.860.880.900.920.94accuracy
outputType
Discrete
Score (b) Yelp
Simple Weighted Meta
combinationMethod0.800.820.840.860.880.900.92accuracyDiscrete
Score
(c) Twitter
Simple Weighted Meta
combinationMethod0.780.800.820.840.86accuracyDiscrete
Score (d) SMS
Figure 7: Box plots of the accuracy achieved by ensembles in respect of the adopted ensemble pruning approach, output type
and combination method employed during ten experimental runs.
combining pre-trained models with those trained specically in respect of the available data can perform
better than their best component model, and signicantly better than the average performance of their 550
constituent models when a meta-learning approach is adopted.
23

==== Page 24 ====
6. Conclusions
In this paper, the eectiveness of various ensemble congurations was compared in the context of senti-
ment classication. After presenting a review of the literature on ensemble techniques in general and within
the context of sentiment analysis, in particular, a methodology was presented whereby various methods for 555
constructing homogeneous ensembles could be comparatively evaluated in a comparative fashion. Six dif-
ferent ensemble congurations (the combination of discrete and scoring model outputs by means of simple
voting, weighted voting and meta-learning, respectively) were implemented in conjunction with three dif-
ferent ensemble selection methods (a greedy approach and two variants of a newly proposed favourability
model) in respect of four data sets from various domains. 560
Median performance improvements of up to 5.53% over the best individual model were observed for
several ensemble congurations in respect of all four validation data sets. Furthermore, clear trends were
identied that may prove useful to other researchers in the eld. In particular, the combination of scoring
or probabilistic outputs by means of meta-learning matched or outperformed the remaining ve ensemble
congurations in respect of all the data sets in the validation suite. Moreover, in nine out of twelve cases 565
ensembles employing scoring outputs outperformed those utilising discrete outputs.
6.1. Research contributions
In spite of a growing interest in ensemble learning techniques in the machine learning community, the
application of ensemble models to sentiment classication is still limited. The application and comparative
evaluation of several dierent ensemble learning techniques to benchmark data sets from the sentiment 570
analysis literature may therefore be viewed as a useful contribution of this paper, which may form the basis
for future experimentation, as well as the promotion of complementary over competitive model selection.
Furthermore, as discussed in x2.5, the problem of selecting suitable base learners for an ensemble model
from a pool of candidates is under-explored in the literature. Many existing techniques involve comparing
individual prediction errors of candidate models in respect of training or validation data in order to select 575
a diverse and accurate set of base learners. As the number of candidate models increases, however, these
approaches become expensive in terms of storage and computing power, since all candidate models must
be trained in respect of the same data and their individual predictions stored. In this paper, a dierent
approach was proposed, in which a set of base learners is selected by maximising a novel favourability metric
| a weighted sum of measures of ensemble diversity, accuracy and size. The proposed diversity measure is 580
based on meta-features of the models, rather than their individual predictions. Ensemble diversity was, for
instance, quantied as the degree of dierentiation between base learners in respect of the learning algorithm
and feature set employed. This measure of diversity can be computed prior to deploying candidate models
and does not require individual predictions to be stored. If some measure of accuracy is already available
for candidate base learners, such as historical performance in respect of similar tasks, the proposed ensemble 585
24

==== Page 25 ====
selection approach, furthermore, avoids the costly retraining of candidate models that are not ultimately
selected.
We applied our ensembling approach in the context of sentiment classication across four dierent do-
mains. Overall, promising results were observed. The ensembles slightly outperformed those associated with
a greedy selection approach in two out of the four cases evaluated. More interestingly, an ensemble of the 590
base learners selected by means of the favourability model achieved a 1% improvement in median accuracy
over the best individual model in respect of the SMS data set, in spite of the average base learner accuracy
being 14% lower than that of the individual model. The selection of a diverse set of base learners according
to our diversity metric therefore appears to provide some advantage. There is, however, considerable room
for improvement of this approach, as is discussed in the following section. 595
6.2. Limitations and future work
For the meta-learning approach towards combining base learner outputs, we only employed logistic re-
gression. This approach served as a proof of concept, as well as an indicator of the value of ensemble
learning in sentiment analysis. In order to evaluate the true limits of this approach, however, it would be
valuable to investigate the use of more complex combination algorithms, such as random forests or neural 600
networks. Furthermore, including a hyperparameter tuning step for this model could signicantly improve
on the observed results.
Finally, with respect to the proposed favourability model, several avenues for improvement can be pursued
based on our observations made during numerical experimentations. Although ensembles of base learners
selected according to our proposed model were shown to leverage internal diversity successfully and thereby 605
signicantly improve on average base learner accuracy, computed ensemble favourability values did not
correlate particularly well with relative ensemble performance. A dierent weighting of the composite metrics
of diversity, accuracy and ensemble size may produce a more eective measure of ensemble favourability.
Furthermore, it was observed that imposing a minimum threshold on base learner accuracy was capable of
improving the performance of the resulting ensemble models. Another promising avenue of future work could 610
be employing a Pareto approach instead of assigning weights to the individual component metrics.
7. References
[1] J. Kazmaier, J. H. van Vuuren, A generic framework for sentiment analysis: Leveraging opinion-bearing data to
inform decision making, decision Support Systems, 135, Manuscript 113304 (no page numbers) (2020).
[2] J. Kazmaier, J. H. van Vuuren, Sentiment analysis of unstructured customer feedback for a retail bank, ORiON 615
36 (1) (2020) 35{71.
[3] T. G. Dietterich, Ensemble methods in machine learning, in: International Workshop on Multiple Classier
Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000, pp. 1{15.
25

==== Page 26 ====
[4] Zhou Z-H, Ensemble learning, Springer US, Boston (MA), 2015, pp. 411{416.
[5] L. Rokach, Pattern Classication using Ensemble Methods, 1st Edition, World Scientic Publishing Company, 620
Singapore, 2010.
[6] G. Wang, J. Sun, J. Ma, K. Xu, J. Gu, Sentiment classication: The contribution of ensemble learning, Decision
Support Systems 57 (1) (2014) 77{93.
[7] Zhou Z-H, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms, 1st Edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC, Baca Raton
(FL), 2012. 625
[8] N. De Condorcet, Essai sur l'application de l'analyse  a la probabilit e des d ecisions rendues  a la pluralit e des
voix, de l'Imprerie Royale, Paris, 1785.
[9] O. Sagi, L. Rokach, Ensemble learning: A survey, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery 8 (4) (2018) 1{18.
[10] J. Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds: Why the Many Are Smarter than the Few and How Collective Wisdom 630
Shapes Business, Economies, Societies, and Nations, Doubleday & Co, New York (NY), 2004.
[11] R. E. Schapire, The strength of weak learnability, Machine Language 5 (2) (1990) 197{227. doi:10.1023/A:
1022648800760 .
[12] L. K. Hansen, P. Salamon, Neural network ensembles, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 12 (1990) 993{1001. 635
[13] D. W. Opitz, J. W. Shavlik, Actively searching for an eective neural network ensemble, Connection Science
8 (3{4) (1996) 337{354.
[14] L. Breiman, Bagging predictors, Machine Learning 24 (2) (1996) 123{140.
[15] G. James, D. Witten, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, An Introduction to Statistical Learning, 6th Edition, Springer,
New York (NY), 2013. 640
[16] Y. Freund, R. E. Schapire, A desicion-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting,
in: European Conference on Computational Learning Theory, Springer, 1995, pp. 23{37.
[17] T. Chen, C. Guestrin, Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system, in: International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, 2016, pp. 785{794.
[18] D. H. Wolpert, Stacked generalization, Neural Networks 5 (2) (1992) 241{259. 645
[19] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer,
R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, E. Duchesnay, Scikit-
learn: Machine learning in Python, Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011) 2825{2830.
[20] K. M. Ting, I. H. Witten, Issues in stacked generalization, Journal of Articial Intelligence Research 10 (1999)
271{289. 650
26

==== Page 27 ====
[21] A. Seewald, How to make stacking better and faster while also taking care of an unknown weakness, in: Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, no. 19, 2002, pp. 554{561.
[22] G. Tsoumakas, I. Partalas, I. Vlahavas, A taxonomy and short review of ensemble selection, in: European
Conference on Articial Intelligence, Vol. 18, 2008, pp. 41|-46. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03999-7 .
URL http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-70350244321{&}partnerID=tZOtx3y1 655
[23] S. Whalen, G. Pandey, A comparative analysis of ensemble classiers: Case studies in genomics, in: IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining, Dallas (TX), 2013, pp. 807{816. arXiv:1309.5047 ,doi:10.1109/
ICDM.2013.21 .
[24] R. Caruana, A. Munson, A. Niculescu-Mizil, Getting the most out of ensemble selection, in: International
Conference on Data Mining, IEEE, 2006, pp. 828{833. 660
[25] R. Caruana, A. Niculescu-Mizil, G. Crew, A. Ksikes, Ensemble selection from libraries of models, in: International
conference on Machine learning, 2004, pp. 18{26.
[26] A. Ledezma, R. Aler, A. Sanchis, D. Borrajo, Ga-stacking: Evolutionary stacked generalization, Intelligent Data
Analysis 14 (1) (2010) 89{119.
[27] F. J. Ord o~ nez, A. Ledezma, A. Sanchis, Genetic approach for optimizing ensembles of classiers, in: International 665
Florida Articial Intelligence Research Society Conference, 2008, pp. 89{94.
[28] Y. Chen, Wong M-L, H. Li, Applying ant colony optimization to conguring stacking ensembles for data mining,
Expert Systems with Applications 41 (6) (2014) 2688 { 2702. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.
10.063 .
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417413008956 670
[29] P. Shunmugapriya, S. Kanmani, Optimization of stacking ensemble congurations through articial bee colony
algorithm, Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 12 (2013) 24 { 32. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.
2013.04.004 .
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210650213000199
[30] A. Onan, Particle swarm optimization based stacking method with an application to text classication, Academic 675
Platform Journal of Engineering and Science 6 (2) (2018) 134{141. doi:10.21541/apjes.329940 .
[31] S. Gu, R. Cheng, Y. Jin, Multi-objective ensemble generation, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery 5 (5) (2015) 234{245. doi:10.1002/widm.1158 .
[32] M. P. Sesmero, A. I. Ledezma, A. Sanchis, Generating ensembles of heterogeneous classiers using stacked
generalization, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 5 (1) (2015) 21{34. 680
doi:10.1002/widm.1143 .
[33] H. Kadkhodaei, A. M. E. Moghadam, An entropy based approach to nd the best combination of the base
classiers in ensemble classiers based on stack generalization, in: International Conference on Control, Instru-
mentation, and Automation, Qazvin, 2016, pp. 425{429. doi:10.1109/ICCIAutom.2016.7483200 .
27

==== Page 28 ====
[34] G. Giacinto, F. Roli, G. Fumera, Design of eective multiple classier systems by clustering of classiers, in: 685
International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Vol. 15, IEEE, 2000, pp. 160{163.
[35] N. Rooney, D. Patterson, C. Nugent, Reduced ensemble size stacking, in: International Conference on Tools
with Articial Intelligence, Boca Raton (FL), 2004, pp. 266{271.
[36] Anonymous, Pearson's correlation coecient, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 2008, pp. 1090{1091.
[37] T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, R. Hwa, Recognizing strong and weak opinon clauses, Computational Intelligence 22 (2) 690
(2006) 73{99. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8640.2006.00275.x .
[38] R. Prabowo, M. Thelwall, Sentiment analysis: A combined approach, Journal of Informetrics 3 (2) (2009)
143{157. doi:10.1016/j.joi.2009.01.003 .
[39] N. Omar, M. Albared, A. Q. Al-Shabi, T. Al-Moslmi, Ensemble of classication algorithms for subjectivity and
sentiment analysis of Arabic customer reviews, International Journal of Advancements in Computing Technology 695
5 (12) (2013) 77{85. doi:10.1128/AAC.03728-14 .
[40] K. Tsutsumi, K. Shimada, T. Endo, Movie review classication based on a multiple classier, in: Pacic Asia
Conference on Language, Information and Computation, 2007, pp. 481{488.
[41] R. Xia, C. Zong, S. Li, Ensemble of feature sets and classication algorithms for sentiment classication, Infor-
mation Sciences 181 (6) (2011) 1138{1152. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2010.11.023 . 700
[42] O. Araque, I. Corcuera-Platas, J. F. S anchez-Rada, C. A. Iglesias, Enhancing deep learning sentiment analysis
with ensemble techniques in social applications, Expert Systems with Applications 77 (2017) 236{246. doi:
10.1016/j.eswa.2017.02.002 .
[43] A. Hassan, A. Abbasi, D. Zeng, Twitter sentiment analysis: A bootstrap ensemble framework, in: International
Conference on Social Computing, IEEE, 2013, pp. 357{364. 705
[44] F. H. Khan, U. Qamar, S. Bashir, Multi-Objective Model Selection (MOMS)-based semi-supervised framework
for sentiment analysis, Cognitive Computation 8 (4) (2016) 614{628. doi:10.1007/s12559-016-9386-8 .
[45] W. Lam, K. Y. Lai, A meta-learning approach for text categorization, in: ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval, no. 24, 2001, pp. 303{309. doi:10.1145/383952.384011 .
[46] B. Pang, L. Lee, A sentimental education: Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on mini- 710
mum cuts, in: 42ndAnnual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2004, pp. 271{278.
[47] A. Salinca, Business reviews classication using sentiment analysis, in: International Symposium on Symbolic
and Numeric Algorithms for Scientic Computing (SYNASC), 2015, pp. 247{250.
[48] C. J. Hutto, E. Gilbert, Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model for sentiment analysis of social media text, in:
8thInternational AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2014, pp. 216{225. 715
28

==== Page 29 ====
8. Appendix
Tables 5, 7, 9 and 11 contain details about the base learners selected for the PL04, Yelp, Twitter and
SMS data sets, respectively. Tables 6, 8, 10 and 12 contain the aggregate results achieved by the eighteen
congurations (2 output types 3 combination methods 3 selection approaches) of ensembles formed
using subsets of these base learners in respect of the same data sets. 720
29

==== Page 30 ====
Document n-gram Accuracy AUC
Base learner Algorithm representation range Min Median Max Min Median Max
0 LogReg presence (1, 1) 0.848 0.871 0.895 0.929 0.9435 0.955
1 ANN presence (1, 1) 0.828 0.876 0.892 0.937 0.945 0.951
2 SVM presence (1, 2) 0.852 0.867 0.878 0.935 0.939 0.953
3 LogReg presence (1, 2) 0.848 0.879 0.895 0.939 0.9475 0.958
4 ANN presence (1, 2) 0.83 0.863 0.895 0.935 0.9445 0.959
5 SVM tf-idf (1, 1) 0.762 0.837 0.875 0.829 0.924 0.942
6 Pattern 0.718 0.742 0.762 0.718 0.742 0.762
Table 5: Details about the base learners for the PL04 data set.
Output Combination Selection Accuracy AUC
Base learners type method approach Min Median Max Min Median Max
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 Discrete Simple Greedy 0.86 0.889 0.9 0.86 0.889 0.9
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 Discrete Weighted Greedy 0.86 0.888 0.9 0.86 0.888 0.9
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 Discrete Meta Greedy 0.868 0.894 0.912 0.92 0.9295 0.948
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 Score Simple Greedy 0.865 0.893 0.912 0.946 0.958 0.966
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 Score Weighted Greedy 0.865 0.893 0.91 0.944 0.956 0.967
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 Score Meta Greedy 0.87 0.895 0.91 0.944 0.956 0.967
3, 6 Discrete Simple Model 0.778 0.795 0.82 0.777 0.795 0.82
3, 6 Discrete Weighted Model 0.85 0.879 0.895 0.85 0.879 0.895
3, 6 Discrete Meta Model 0.858 0.878 0.892 0.888 0.911 0.925
3, 6 Score Simple Model 0.718 0.742 0.762 0.889 0.911 0.921
3, 6 Score Weighted Model 0.795 0.836 0.87 0.908 0.926 0.936
3, 6 Score Meta Model 0.868 0.885 0.898 0.939 0.951 0.959
3, 5 Discrete Simple Model ML 0.835 0.86 0.89 0.835 0.86 0.89
3, 5 Discrete Weighted Model ML 0.852 0.876 0.898 0.852 0.876 0.898
3, 5 Discrete Meta Model ML 0.85 0.88 0.895 0.889 0.91 0.935
3, 5 Score Simple Model ML 0.855 0.878 0.905 0.93 0.952 0.962
3, 5 Score Weighted Model ML 0.852 0.88 0.905 0.93 0.9525 0.962
3, 5 Score Meta Model ML 0.855 0.889 0.902 0.936 0.954 0.964
Table 6: Aggregate results of the ensemble learners for the PL04 data set over ten experimental runs. Base learners are referred
to in terms of the indices from Table 5.
30

==== Page 31 ====
Document n-gram Accuracy AUC
Base learner Algorithm representation range Min Median Max Min Median Max
0 LogReg presence (1, 1) 0.911 0.925 0.94 0.97 0.975 0.983
1 LogReg presence (1, 2) 0.909 0.931 0.94 0.973 0.978 0.987
2 SVM tf-idf (1, 1) 0.911 0.93 0.941 0.971 0.981 0.985
3 LogReg tf-idf (1, 1) 0.903 0.93 0.937 0.971 0.98 0.985
4 SVM tf-idf (1, 2) 0.603 0.922 0.942 0.945 0.98 0.987
5 LogReg tf-idf (1, 2) 0.917 0.93 0.938 0.974 0.982 0.987
6 Sentiwordnet 0.853 0.864 0.88 0.845 0.86 0.873
Table 7: Details about the base learners for the Yelp data set.
Output Combination Selection Accuracy AUC
Base learners type method approach Min Median Max Min Median Max
0, 1, 3, 4, 5 Discrete Simple Greedy 0.919 0.931 0.94 0.917 0.928 0.938
0, 1, 3, 4, 5 Discrete Weighted Greedy 0.919 0.932 0.94 0.917 0.93 0.938
0, 1, 3, 4, 5 Discrete Meta Greedy 0.919 0.932 0.937 0.939 0.955 0.966
0, 1, 3, 4, 5 Score Simple Greedy 0.917 0.932 0.945 0.976 0.982 0.989
0, 1, 3, 4, 5 Score Weighted Greedy 0.917 0.932 0.943 0.976 0.982 0.989
0, 1, 3, 4, 5 Score Meta Greedy 0.924 0.931 0.95 0.976 0.983 0.988
1, 6 Discrete Simple Model 0.891 0.906 0.919 0.897 0.912 0.924
1, 6 Discrete Weighted Model 0.909 0.931 0.938 0.908 0.929 0.937
1, 6 Discrete Meta Model 0.909 0.932 0.94 0.942 0.956 0.966
1, 6 Score Simple Model 0.853 0.864 0.88 0.964 0.972 0.977
1, 6 Score Weighted Model 0.899 0.908 0.926 0.968 0.976 0.98
1, 6 Score Meta Model 0.92 0.931 0.947 0.974 0.981 0.987
1, 2 Discrete Simple Model ML 0.913 0.928 0.942 0.917 0.929 0.944
1, 2 Discrete Weighted Model ML 0.911 0.93 0.941 0.908 0.93 0.938
1, 2 Discrete Meta Model ML 0.909 0.928 0.941 0.933 0.943 0.96
1, 2 Score Simple Model ML 0.922 0.934 0.947 0.974 0.982 0.988
1, 2 Score Weighted Model ML 0.924 0.935 0.946 0.974 0.982 0.988
1, 2 Score Meta Model ML 0.921 0.934 0.946 0.974 0.982 0.988
Table 8: Aggregate results of the ensemble learners for the Yelp data set over ten experimental runs. Base learners are referred
to in terms of the indices from Table 7.
31

==== Page 32 ====
Document n-gram Accuracy AUC
Base learner Algorithm representation range Min Median Max Min Median Max
0 ANN frequency (1, 2) 0.801 0.808 0.826 0.874 0.889 0.904
1 LogReg tf-idf (1, 1) 0.788 0.802 0.814 0.887 0.904 0.915
2 ANN tf-idf (1, 1) 0.807 0.815 0.829 0.874 0.893 0.902
3 LogReg tf-idf (1, 2) 0.787 0.811 0.829 0.884 0.9 0.905
4 ANN tf-idf (1, 2) 0.806 0.812 0.824 0.876 0.889 0.899
5 Vader 0.85 0.859 0.865 0.885 0.891 0.896
Table 9: Details about the base learners for the Twitter data set.
Output Combination Selection Accuracy AUC
Base learners type method approach Min Median Max Min Median Max
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Discrete Simple Greedy 0.817 0.827 0.84 0.755 0.774 0.786
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Discrete Weighted Greedy 0.819 0.826 0.842 0.757 0.766 0.79
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Discrete Meta Greedy 0.898 0.906 0.915 0.932 0.94 0.947
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Score Simple Greedy 0.843 0.854 0.863 0.933 0.938 0.945
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Score Weighted Greedy 0.843 0.851 0.861 0.931 0.938 0.944
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Score Meta Greedy 0.899 0.906 0.913 0.949 0.956 0.965
1, 5 Discrete Simple Model 0.84 0.853 0.858 0.884 0.891 0.896
1, 5 Discrete Weighted Model 0.788 0.802 0.814 0.705 0.721 0.742
1, 5 Discrete Meta Model 0.9 0.906 0.914 0.928 0.936 0.943
1, 5 Score Simple Model 0.85 0.859 0.865 0.942 0.948 0.954
1, 5 Score Weighted Model 0.85 0.861 0.868 0.942 0.948 0.954
1, 5 Score Meta Model 0.9 0.905 0.913 0.95 0.955 0.965
0, 1 Discrete Simple Model ML 0.8 0.816 0.83 0.759 0.778 0.802
0, 1 Discrete Weighted Model ML 0.788 0.802 0.814 0.705 0.721 0.742
0, 1 Discrete Meta Model ML 0.801 0.817 0.833 0.764 0.794 0.813
0, 1 Score Simple Model ML 0.801 0.815 0.829 0.889 0.899 0.911
0, 1 Score Weighted Model ML 0.8 0.822 0.833 0.886 0.9 0.914
0, 1 Score Meta Model ML 0.806 0.822 0.839 0.888 0.905 0.915
Table 10: Aggregate results of the ensemble learners for the Twitter data set over ten experimental runs. Base learners are
referred to in terms of the indices from Table 9.
32

==== Page 33 ====
Document n-gram Accuracy AUC
Base learner Algorithm representation range Min Median Max Min Median Max
0 LogReg presence (1, 1) 0.814 0.84 0.854 0.887 0.9 0.926
1 LogReg presence (1, 2) 0.816 0.836 0.859 0.886 0.899 0.92
2 LogReg frequency (1, 1) 0.799 0.839 0.859 0.879 0.9 0.923
3 ANN frequency (1, 1) 0.795 0.822 0.848 0.866 0.89 0.912
4 LogReg frequency (1, 2) 0.812 0.831 0.857 0.887 0.895 0.924
5 LogReg tf-idf (1, 1) 0.818 0.828 0.85 0.88 0.893 0.925
6 CNN Embeddings 0.789 0.826 0.852 0.867 0.882 0.907
7 Sentiwordnet 0.436 0.47 0.496 0.557 0.592 0.619
Table 11: Details about the base learners for the SMS data set.
Output Combination Selection Accuracy AUC
Base learners type method approach Min Median Max Min Median Max
0, 1, 2, 4, 5 Discrete Simple Greedy 0.818 0.843 0.861 0.774 0.798 0.814
0, 1, 2, 4, 5 Discrete Weighted Greedy 0.818 0.843 0.861 0.774 0.798 0.814
0, 1, 2, 4, 5 Discrete Meta Greedy 0.801 0.827 0.85 0.794 0.819 0.843
0, 1, 2, 4, 5 Score Simple Greedy 0.816 0.836 0.865 0.892 0.902 0.927
0, 1, 2, 4, 5 Score Weighted Greedy 0.816 0.837 0.865 0.892 0.902 0.927
0, 1, 2, 4, 5 Score Meta Greedy 0.83 0.844 0.865 0.89 0.898 0.924
1, 6, 7 Discrete Simple Model 0.818 0.841 0.859 0.77 0.79 0.835
1, 6, 7 Discrete Weighted Model 0.811 0.832 0.852 0.769 0.796 0.823
1, 6, 7 Discrete Meta Model 0.809 0.825 0.85 0.827 0.853 0.886
1, 6, 7 Score Simple Model 0.779 0.803 0.822 0.86 0.874 0.885
1, 6, 7 Score Weighted Model 0.816 0.837 0.855 0.878 0.894 0.912
1, 6, 7 Score Meta Model 0.82 0.849 0.865 0.894 0.904 0.927
1, 3, 6 Discrete Simple Model ML 0.82 0.846 0.867 0.761 0.792 0.813
1, 3, 6 Discrete Weighted Model ML 0.814 0.84 0.867 0.753 0.794 0.816
1, 3, 6 Discrete Meta Model ML 0.818 0.834 0.859 0.804 0.839 0.868
1, 3, 6 Score Simple Model ML 0.812 0.854 0.863 0.887 0.903 0.926
1, 3, 6 Score Weighted Model ML 0.818 0.849 0.873 0.894 0.902 0.922
1, 3, 6 Score Meta Model ML 0.814 0.844 0.863 0.891 0.903 0.922
Table 12: Aggregate results of the ensemble learners for the SMS data set over ten experimental runs. Base learners are given
in terms of the indices from Table 11.
33

