==== Page 1 ====
The Future of Human-AI Collaboration: A Taxonomy of Design Knowledge
for Hybrid Intelligence Systems
Dominik Dellermann
vencortex
dominik.dellermann@vencortex.comAdrian Calma
vencortex
adrian.calma@vencortex.comNikolaus Lipusch
Kassel University
lipusch@uni-kassel.de
Thorsten Weber
Kassel University
weber@uni-kassel.deSascha Weigel
Kassel University
weigel@uni-kassel.dePhilipp Ebel
University of St. Gallen
ebel@unisg.ch
Abstract
Recent technological advances, especially in
the ﬁeld of machine learning, provide astonishing
progress on the road towards artiﬁcial general
intelligence. However, tasks in current real-world
business applications cannot yet be solved by machines
alone. We, therefore, identify the need for developing
socio-technological ensembles of humans and machines.
Such systems possess the ability to accomplish complex
goals by combining human and artiﬁcial intelligence to
collectively achieve superior results and continuously
improve by learning from each other. Thus, the need for
structured design knowledge for those systems arises.
Following a taxonomy development method, this article
provides three main contributions: First, we present
a structured overview of interdisciplinary research on
the role of humans in the machine learning pipeline.
Second, we envision hybrid intelligence systems and
conceptualize the relevant dimensions for system design
for the ﬁrst time. Finally, we offer useful guidance for
system developers during the implementation of such
applications.
1. Introduction
Recent technological advances especially in the ﬁeld
of deep learning provide astonishing progress on the
road towards artiﬁcial general intelligence (AGI) [1, 2].
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) are progressively achieving
(super-) human level performance in various tasks
such as autonomous driving [3], cancer detection [4],
or playing complex games [5, 6]. Therefore, more
and more business applications that are based on AI
technologies arise. Both research and practice are
wondering when AI will be able to solve complex tasks
in real-world business applications apart from laboratory
settings in research. However, those advances providea rather one-sided picture on AI, denying the fact that
although AI is capable to solve certain tasks with quite
impressive performance, AGI is far away from being
achieved. There are lots of problems that machines
can not yet solve alone [7], such as applying expertise
to decision making, planning, or creative tasks just to
name a few. In particular, machine learning systems
in the wild have major difﬁculties with being adaptive
to dynamic environments and self adjusting [8], lack
of what humans call common sense. This makes
them highly vulnerable for adversarial examples [9].
Moreover, AGI needs massive amounts of training data
compared to humans, who can learn from only few
examples [10], and fails to work with certain data types
(e.g. soft data). Nevertheless, a lack of control of the
learning process might lead to unintended consequences
(e.g. racism biases) and limit interpretability, which
is crucial for critical domains such as medicine [11].
Therefore, humans are still required at various positions
in the loop of the machine learning process. While
lot of work has been done in creating training sets
with human labelers, more recent research point towards
end user involvement [12] and teaching of such
machines [5], thus, combining humans and machines
inhybrid intelligence systems. The main idea of
hybrid intelligence systems is, thus, that socio-technical
ensembles and its human and AI parts can co-evolve
to improve over time. Therefore, the following
central questions are arise: Which and how should
certain design decisions be made for implementing such
systems? The purpose of this paper is to point towards
such hybrid intelligence systems. Thereby, we aim at
conceptualizing the idea of hybrid intelligence systems
and provide an initial taxonomy of design knowledge
for developing such socio-technical ensembles. By
following a taxonomy development method [13], we
reviewed various literature in interdisciplinary ﬁelds
and combine those ﬁndings with empirical examination
of practical business applications in the context of

==== Page 2 ====
hybrid intelligence . The contribution of this paper
is threefold. First, we provide a structured overview
of interdisciplinary research on the role of humans in
the machine learning pipeline. Second, we offer an
initial conceptualization of the term hybrid intelligence
systems and relevant dimensions for system design.
Third, we intend to provide useful guidance for
system developers during the implementation of hybrid
intelligence systems in real-world applications. Towards
this end, we propose an initial taxonomy of hybrid
intelligence systems.
2. Related Work
2.1. Machine Learning and AI
The subﬁeld of intelligence that relates to machines
is called artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). By this term
we mean systems that perform ”[] activities that
we associate with human thinking, activities such as
decision-making, problem solving, learning []” [14].
Although, various deﬁnitions exist for AI, this term
generally covers the idea of creating machines that can
accomplish complex goals. This includes facets such as
natural language processing, perceiving objects, storing
of knowledge and applying it for solving problems, and
machine learning to adapt to new circumstances and act
in its environment [15].
Figure 1. Machine learning and AI.
A subset of techniques that is required to achieve AI
ismachine learning (ML) . Mitchell [16] deﬁnes this as:
“A computer program is said to learn from experience
E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance
measure P , if its performance at tasks in T, as measured
by P , improves with experience E. ”
A popular approach that drives current progress in
both paradigms is deep learning [9]. Deep-learning
constitutes a representation-learning method that
includes multiple levels of representation, obtained
by combining simpler but non-linear models. Each
of those models transforms the representation of one
level (starting with the input data) into a representation
at more abstract level [17]. Deep learning is a special
machine learning technique.
Finally, human-in-the-loop learning describes
machine learning approaches (both deep and other)that use the human in some part of the pipeline.
Such approaches are in contrast to research on most
knowledge-base systems in IS that use rather static
knowledge repositories. We will focus on this in the
following chapter.
2.2. The Role of Humans-in-the-Loop of
Machine Learning
Although, the terms of AI and machine learning
give the impression that humans become to some extent
obsolete, the machine learning pipeline still requires lot
of human interaction such as for feature engineering,
parameter tuning, or training. While deep learning
has decreased the effort for manual feature engineering
and some automation approaches (e.g. AutoML [18])
support human experts in tuning models, the human
is still heavily in the loop for sense-making and
training. For instance, unsupervised learning requires
humans to make sense of clusters that are identiﬁed
as patterns in data to create knowledge [19]. More
obviously, human input is required to train models
in supervised machine learning approaches, especially
for creating training data, debug models, or train
algorithms such as in reinforcement learning [5]. This
is especially relevant when divergences of real-life and
machine learning problem formulations emerge. This
is for instance the case when static (ofﬂine) training
datasets are not perfectly representative of realist and
dynamic environments [20]. Moreover, human input
is crucial when models need to learn from human
preferences (e.g. recommender systems) and adapt to
users or when security concerns require both control and
interpretability of the learning process and the output
[11]. Therefore, more recent research has focused on
interactive forms of learning (e.g. [21, 12] and machine
teaching (e.g. [22]). Those approaches make active
use of human input (e.g. active learning [23]) and thus
learn from human intelligence. This allows machines to
learn tasks that they can not yet achieve alone [7], adapt
to environmental dynamics, and deal with unknown
situations [24].
2.3. Hybrid Intelligence
Rather then using the human just in certain parts
and time during the process of creating machine
learning models, applications that are able to deal
with real-world problems require a continuously
collaborating socio-technological ensemble integrating
humans and machines, which is contrast to previous
research on decision support and expert systems [21,
25].
Therefore, we argue that the most likely paradigm

==== Page 3 ====
for the division of labor between humans and
machines in the next years, or probably decades, is
hybrid intelligence . This concept aims at using the
complementary strengths of human intelligence and
AI to behave more intelligently than each of the two
could be in separation (e.g. [7]). The basic rational
is to try to combine the complementary strengths of
heterogeneous intelligences (i.e., human and artiﬁcial
agents) into a socio-technological ensemble. We
envision hybrid intelligence systems, which are deﬁned
as systems that have the ability to accomplish complex
goals by combining human and artiﬁcial intelligence to
collectively achieve superior results than each of the
could have done in separation and continuously improve
by learning from each other.
Collectively: means that tasks are performed
collectively. This means that the activities conducted by
each part are dependent, however, are not necessarily
always aligned to achieve a common goal (e.g. teaching
an AI adversarial tasks such as playing games).
Superior results: deﬁnes that the system achieves a
performance that none of the involved actors could have
achieved in a certain task without the other. The goal is,
therefore, to make the outcome (e.g. a prediction) both
more efﬁcient and effective on the level of the whole
socio-technical system by achieving goals that could not
have been achieved before.
Continuous learning: describes that over time
this socio-technological system improves both as a
whole and each single component (i.e. humans and
machines) learn through experience from each other,
thus improving performance in a certain task. The
performance of such systems can be thus not only
measured by the superior outcome of the whole system
but also by the learning of the human and machine
agents that are parts of the socio-technical system.
The idea of hybrid intelligence systems is thus
that socio-technical ensembles and its human and AI
parts can co-evolve to improve over time. The central
questions are, therefore, which and how certain design
decisions should be made for implementing such hybrid
systems rather than focusing.
3. Methodology
3.1. Taxonomy Development Method
For developing our proposed taxonomy, we followed
the methodological procedures of Nickerson et al. [13].
In general, a taxonomy is deﬁned as a “fundamental
mechanism for organizing knowledge” and the term
is considered as a synonym to “classiﬁcation”
and “typology” [13]. The method follows aniterative process consisting of the following steps: 1)
deﬁning a meta-characteristic; 2) determining stopping
conditions; 3) selecting an empirical-to-conceptual or
conceptual-to-empirical approach; and 4) iteratively
following this approach, until the stopping conditions
are met (see Figure 3).
Figure 2. Taxonomy development method [13].
The process of the taxonomy development starts
with deﬁning a set of meta-characteristic. This step
limits the odds of naive empiricism where a large
number of characteristics are deﬁned in search for
random pattern, and reﬂects the expected application
of the taxonomy [13]. For this purpose, we deﬁne
those meta-characteristic as generic design dimensions
that are required for developing hybrid intelligence
systems. Based on our classiﬁcation from literature, we
choose four dimensions: task characteristics, learning
paradigm, human-AI interaction, and AI-human
interaction. In the second step, we selected both
objective and subjective conditions to conclude the
iterative process. The following conditions, adapted
from Nickerson et al. [13], were selected:
We applied the following objective conditions : 1)
All papers from the sample of the literature review and
empirical cases are examined. 2) Then, at least one
object is classiﬁed under every characteristic of every
dimension. 3) While performing the last iteration, no
new dimension or characteristics are added. 4) We
treated every dimension as unique. 5) Lastly, every
characteristic is unique within its dimension.
The following subjective conditions
were considered: conciseness, robustness,
comprehensiveness, extensibility, explanatory, and
information availability. We included no unnecessary
dimension or characteristic (conciseness), whereas
there are enough dimensions and characteristics
to differentiate (robustness). At this point, all
design decisions can be classiﬁed in the taxonomy
(comprehensiveness), while still allowing for new

==== Page 4 ====
Table 1. Empirical evidence from business applications of hybrid intelligence systems.
Application Domain Reference
Teachable Machine Image Recognition [26]
Cindicator Asset Management [27]
vencortex Startup Financing [28]
Cobi Conference Sheduling [29]
Stitch Fix Fashion [30]
Alpha Go Games [31]
Custom Decision Service General [32]
TOTAL 7
dimensions and characteristics to be subsequently
added (extensible). Furthermore, the information is
valuable for guiding hybrid intelligence systems design
decisions (explanatory) and is typically available or
easily interpretable (information availability).
We conducted a total of three iterations so far. The
ﬁrst iteration used a conceptual-to-empirical approach,
where we used extant theoretical knowledge from
literature in various ﬁelds such as computer science,
HCI, information systems, and neuro science to
guide the initial dimensions and characteristics of
the taxonomy. Based on the identiﬁed dimensions
ofhybrid intelligence systems, we sampled seven
real-world applications that make use of human
and AI combinations. The second iteration used
the empirical-to conceptual approach focuses on
creating characteristics and dimensions based on the
identiﬁcation of common characteristics from a sample
of AI applications in practice. The third iteration then
used the conceptual-to-empirical approach, based on
an extended literature review including newly identiﬁed
search termini.
3.2. Data Sources and Sample
Literature review: For conducting our literature
review, we followed the methodological procedures
of [33, 34]. The literature search was conducted
from April to June 2018. A prior informal literature
search revealed keywords for the database searches
resulting in the search string (”hybrid intelligence” OR
”human-in-the-loop” OR ”interactive machine learning”
OR ”machine teaching” OR ”machine learning AND
crowdsourcing” OR ”human supervision” OR ”human
understandable machine learning” OR ”human concept
learning”). During this initial phase we decided
to exclude research on knowledge-base systems such
as expert systems or decision support systems in IS
[35, 25], as the studies either do not focus on the
continuous learning of the knowledge repository or do
not use machine learning techniques at all. Moreover,the purpose of this study is to identify and classify
relevant (socio-) technical design knowledge for hybrid
intelligence systems, which is also not included in
those studies. The database search was constrained to
title, abstract, keywords and not limited to a certain
publication. Databases include AISeL, IEEE Xplore,
ACM DL, AAAI DL, and arXiv to identify relevant
interdisciplinary literature from the ﬁelds of IS, HCI,
bio-informatics, and computer science. The search
resulted in a total of 2505 hits. Titles, abstracts
and keywords were screened for potential ﬁt to the
purpose of our study. Screening was conducted by three
researchers independently and resulted in 85 articles that
were reviewed in detail so far. A backward and forward
search ensured the extensiveness of our results. Table 1
lists the number of search results after the review phases.
Empirical cases: To extend our ﬁndings
from literature and provide empirical evidence
(cf. Table 1) from recent (business) applications of
hybrid intelligence systems, we include an initial set
of seven empirical applications that was analyzed for
enhancing our taxonomy.
4. Taxonomy of Design Knowledge on
hybrid intelligence Systems
Our taxonomy of hybrid intelligence systems
is organized along the four meta-dimensions task
characteristics, learning paradigm, human-AI
interaction , and AI-human interaction . Moreover,
we identiﬁed 16 sub-dimensions and a total of 50
categories for the proposed taxonomy. For organizing
the dimensions of the taxonomy we followed a
hierarchical approach following the sequence of the
design decisions that are necessary to develop such
systems.
4.1. Task Characteristics
The goal of hybrid intelligence is to create
superior results through a collaboration between humans

==== Page 5 ====
and machines. The central component that drives
design decisions for hybrid intelligence systems is the
task, that humans and machines solve collaboratively.
Task characteristics focus on how the task itself is
carried out [36]. In context of hybrid intelligence
systems, we identify the following four important tasks
characteristics.
Type of Task: The task to be solved is the ﬁrst
dimension that has to be deﬁned for developing hybrid
intelligence systems. In this context, we identiﬁed
four generic categories of tasks: recognition, prediction,
reasoning andaction. First, recognition deﬁnes tasks
that recognize for instance objects [17], images [37],
or natural language [38]. On an application level such
tasks are used for autonomous driving (e.g. [3]) or
smart assistants such as Alexa, Siri or Duplex. Second,
prediction tasks aim at predicting future events based on
previous data such as stock prices or market dynamics
[39]. The third type of task, reasoning , focuses on
understanding data by for instance inductively building
(mental) models of a certain phenomenon and therefore
make it possible to solve complex problems with
small amount of data [10]. Finally, action tasks are
characterized as such that require an agent (human or
machine) to conduct a certain kind of action [40].
Goals: The two involved agents, the human and
the AI, may have a common ”goal” like solving a
problem through the combination of the knowledge and
abilities of both. An example for such common goals
are recommender systems (e.g. Netﬂix [41]), which
learn a user’s decision model to offer suggestions. In
other contexts, the agents goals also be adversarial . For
instance, in settings where AIs tzry to beat human in
games such as IBMs Watson in the game of Jeopardy!
[42]. In many other cases the goal of the human and the
AI may also be independent for example when humans
train image classiﬁers without being involved in the end
solution.
Shared Data Representation: The shared data
representation is what is the data that is shown to
both the human and the machine before executing
their tasks. The data can be represented in different
levels of granularity and abstraction to create a shared
understanding between humans and machines [22, 43].
Features describe phenomenas in different kinds of
dimensions like height and weight of a human being.
Instances are examples of a phenomena which are
speciﬁed by features. Concepts on the other hand are
multiple instances that belong to one common theme,
e.g. pictures of different humans. Schemas ﬁnally
illustrate relations between different concepts [44].
Timing in Machine Learning Pipeline: The last
sub-dimension describes the timing in the machine
Figure 3. Taxonomy of hybrid intelligence design.
learning pipeline that focuses on hybrid intelligence.
For this dimension we identiﬁed three characteristics:
feature engineering ,parameter tuning , and training .
First, feature engineering allows the integration of
domain knowledge in machine learning models. While
more recent advances make it possible to fully
automatically (i.e. machine only) learn features through
deep learning, human input can be combined for
creating and enlarging features such in the case of
artist identiﬁcation on images and quality classiﬁcation
of Wikipedia articles (e.g. [45]). Second, parameter
tuning is applied to optimize models. Here machine
learning experts typically use their deep understanding
of statistical models to tune hyper-parameters or select
models. Such human only parameter tuning can be
augmented with approaches such as AutoML [18] or
neural architecture search [46, 47] automate the design
of machine learning models,thus, making it much more
accessible for non-experts. Finally, human input is
crucial for training machine learning models in many

==== Page 6 ====
domains. For instance large dataset such as ImageNet
or the lung cancer dataset LUNA16 rely on human
annotations. Moreover, recommender systems heavily
rely on input of human usage behavior to adapt to
speciﬁc preferences (e.g. [12]) and robotic applications
are trained by human examples [40].
4.2. Learning Paradigm
Augmentation: In general, hybrid intelligence
systems allow three different forms of augmentation:
human ,machine , and hybrid augmentation. The
augmentation of human intelligence is focused on
typically applications that enable humans to solve tasks
through the predictions of an algorithm such as in
ﬁnancial forecasting or solving complex problems [48].
Contrary, most research in the ﬁeld of machine learning
focuses on leveraging human input for training to
augment machines for solving tasks that they cannot yet
solve alone [7]. Finally, more recent work identiﬁed
the great potential for simultaneously augmenting both
at the same time through hybrid augmentation [49, 50]
or the example of Alpha Go that started by learning
from human game moves (i.e. machine augmentation)
and ﬁnally offered hybrid augmentation by inventing
creative moves that taught even mature players novel
strategies [6, 51].
Machine Learning Paradigm: The machine
learning paradigm that is applied in hybrid intelligence
systems can be categorized into four relevant subﬁelds:
supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised , and
reinforcement learning [52]. In supervised learning , the
goal is to learn a function that maps the input data x to a
certain output data y, given a labeled set of input-output
pairs. In unsupervised learning , such output y does
not exist and the learner tries to identify pattern in
the input data x [16]. Further forms of learning
such as reinforcement learning or semi-supervised
learning can be subsumed under those two paradigms.
Semi-supervised learning describes a combination of
both paradigms, which uses both a small set of labeled
and a large set of unlabeled data to solve a certain
task [53]. Finally, reinforcement learning . An agent
interacts with an environment thereby learning to solve
a problem through receiving rewards and punishment
for a certain action [5, 6].
Human Learning Paradigm: Humans have a
mental model of their environment, which gets updated
through events. This update is done by ﬁnding an
explanation for the event [50, 49, 10]. Human learning
can therefore can be achieved from experience and
comparison with previous experiences [54, 44] and from
description and explanations [55].4.3. Human-AI Interaction
Machine Teaching: deﬁnes how humans provide
input. First, humans can demonstrate actions that
the machine learns to imitate [40]. Second, humans
can annotate data for training a model for instance
through crowdsourcing [56, 57]. We designate that as
alabeling . Third, human intelligence can be used to
actively identify a misspeciﬁcation of the learner and
debug the model, which we deﬁne as troubleshooting
[58, 24]. Moreover, human teaching can take the form of
veriﬁcation whereby humans verify or falsify machine
output [59].
Teaching Interaction: The input provided through
human teaching, can be both explicit and implicit .
While explicit teaching leverages active input of the
user such as for instance labeling tasks such as image
or text annotation [60], implicit teaching learns from
observing the actions of the user and thus adapts to their
demands. For instance, Microsoft uses contextual bandit
algorithms to suggest users certain content, using the
actions of the user as implicit teaching interaction.
Expertise Requirements: Hybrid intelligence
systems can have certain requirements for the expertise
of humans that provides input for systems. While
by now both most research and practical applications
focus on human input from an ML expert [61, 62,
63, 24], thus, requiring deep expertise in the ﬁeld of
AI. Moreover, end users can provide the system with
input for product recommendations and e-commerce or
input from human non-experts accessed through crowd
work platforms [64, 58, 65]. More recent endeavors,
however, focus on the integration of domain experts
in hybrid intelligence architectures that leverage the
profound understanding of the semantics of a problem
domain to teach a machine, while not requiring any ML
expertise [22, 66, 67].
Amount of Human Input: The amount of human
input can vary between those of individual humans
and aggregated input from several humans. Individual
human input is for instance applied in recommender
systems for individualization or due to cost efﬁciency
reasons [60]. On the other hand, collective human
input combines the input of several individual humans
by leveraging mechanisms of human computation (e.g.
[68, 66, 67]). This approach allows to reduce errors
and biases of individual humans and the aggregation of
heterogeneous knowledge [45, 69, 65].
Aggregation: When human input is aggregated
from a collective of individual humans, different
aggregation mechanisms can be leveraged to maximize
the quality of teaching. First, unweighted methods
can be used that use averaging or majority voting to

==== Page 7 ====
aggregate results (e.g. [60]). Additionally, aggregation
can be achieved by modeling the context of teaching
through algorithmic approach such as expectation
maximization, graphical models, entropy minimization,
or discriminative training. Therefore, the aggregation
can be human dependent focusing on the characteristics
of a the individual human [70, 71, 72], or human-task
dependent adjusting to the teaching task [73, 72, 74].
Incentives: Humans need to be incentivized to
provide input in hybrid intelligence systems. Incentives
can be monetary rewards such in the case of crowd work
on platforms (e.g. Amazon Mechanical Turk), intrinsic
rewards such as intellectual exchange in citizen science
[75], fun in games with a purpose [76] learning [77].
Another incentive for human input is customization ,
which allows to increase individualized service quality
for users that provide a higher amount of input to the
learner [12, 78].
4.4. AI-Human Interaction
This sub-dimension describes the machine part of
the Interaction, the AI-human interaction. At ﬁrst,
which query strategy the algorithm used to learn.
Second, we describe the feedback of the machine to
humans. Third, we carry out a short explanation
of interpretability to show the inﬂuence for hybrid
intelligence.
Query Strategy: Ofﬂine query strategies require the
human to ﬁnish her task completely before her actions
are applied as input to the AI (e.g. [79, 80]). Handling
a typical labeling task the human would ﬁrst need to go
through all the data and label each instance. Afterwards
the labeled Data is fed to an machine learning algorithm
to train a model. In contrast, online query strategies
let the human complete subtasks whose are directly fed
to an algorithm, so that teaching and learning can be
executed almost simultaneously [64, 58, 72]. Another
possibility is the use of active learning query strategies
[81, 23]. In this case, the human is queried by the
machine when more input to give an accurate prediction
is required.
Machine Feedback: Those four categories describe
the feedback that humans receive from the machine.
First, humans can get direct suggestions from the
machine, which makes explicit recommendations to the
user on how to act. For instance recommender systems
such as Netﬂix or Spotify provide such suggestions
for users. Furthermore, systems can make suggestions
for describing images [58]. Predictions as machine
feedback can support humans e.g. to detect lies
[45], predict worker behaviors [72], or classify images.
Thereby, this form of feedback provides a probabilisticvalue of a certain outcome (e.g. probability of
some data x belonging to a certain class y). The
third form of machine feedback is clustering data.
Thereby, machines compare data points and put them
in an order for instance to prioritize items [82], or
organize data among identiﬁed pattern. Furthermore,
another possibility of machine feedback is optimization .
Machines enhance humans for instance in making more
consistent decisions by optimizing their strategy [83].
Interpretability : For AI-Human interaction in
hybrid intelligence systems interpretability is crucial
to prevent biases (e.g. racism), achieve reliability and
robustness, ensure causality of the learning, debugging
the learner if necessary and for creating trust especially
in the context of AI safety [11]. Interpretability in
hybrid intelligence systems can be achieved through
algorithm transparency , that allows to open the black
box of an algorithm itself, global model interpretability
that focuses on the general interpretability of a machine
learning model, and local prediction interpretability that
tries to make more complex models interpretable for a
single prediction [84, 11].
5. Discussion
Our proposed taxonomy for hybrid intelligence
systems extracts interdisciplinary knowledge on
human-in-the-loop mechanisms in ML and proposes
initial descriptive design knowledge for the development
of such systems that might guide developers. Our
ﬁndings reveal the manifold applications, mechanisms,
and beneﬁts of hybrid systems that might probably
become of increasing interest in real-world applications
in the future. In particular, our taxonomy of design
knowledge offers insights on how to leverage the
advantages of combining human and machine
intelligence. For instance, this allows to integrate
deep domain insights into machine learning algorithms,
continuously adapt a learner to dynamic problems,
and enhance trust through interpretability and human
control. Vice versa, this approach offers the advantage
of improving humans in solving problems by offering
feedback on how the task was conducted or the
performance of a human during that task and machine
feedback to augment human intelligence. Moreover,
we assume that the design of such systems might allow
to move beyond sole efﬁciency of solving tasks to
combined socio-technical ensembles that can achieve
superior results that could no man or machine have
achieved so far. Promising ﬁelds for such systems are in
the ﬁeld of medicine, science, innovation and creativity.

==== Page 8 ====
6. Conclusion
Within this paper we propose a taxonomy for design
knowledge for hybrid intelligence systems, which
presents descriptive knowledge structured along the
four meta-dimensions task characteristics, learning
paradigm, human-AI interaction , and AI-human
interaction . Moreover, we identiﬁed 16 sub-dimensions
and a total of 50 categories for the proposed taxonomy.
By following a taxonomy development methodology
[13], we extracted interdisciplinary knowledge on
human-in-the-loop approaches in machine learning and
the interaction between human and AI. We extended
those ﬁndings with an examination of seven empirical
applications of hybrid intelligence systems.
Therefore, our contribution is threefold. First,
the proposed taxonomy provides a structured
overview of interdisciplinary research on the role
of humans in the machine learning pipeline by
reviewing interdisciplinary research and extract
relevant knowledge for system design. Second, we
offer an initial conceptualization of the term hybrid
intelligence systems and relevant dimensions for
developing applications. Third, we intend to provide
useful guidance for system developers during the
implementation of hybrid intelligence systems in
real-world applications.
Obviously this paper is not without limitations
and provides a ﬁrst step towards a comprehensive
taxonomy of design knowledge on hybrid intelligence
systems. First, further research should extend the
scope of this research to more practical applications
in various domains. By now our empirical case
selection is slightly biased on decision problem
contexts.Second, as we proceed our research we
will further condensate the identiﬁed characteristics
by aggregating potentially overlapping dimensions in
subsequent iterations. Third, our results are overly
descriptive so far. As we proceed our research we will
therefore focus on providing prescriptive knowledge on
what characteristics to choose in a certain situation and
thereby propose more speciﬁc guidance for developers
ofhybrid intelligence systems that combine human
and machine intelligence to achieve superior goals and
driving the future progress of AI. For this purpose,
we will identify interdependencies between dimensions
and sub-dimensions and evaluate the usefulness of our
artifact for designing real-world applications. Finally,
further research might focus on integrating the overly
design oriented knowledge of this study with research
on knowledge-base systems in IS to discuss the ﬁndings
in the context of those class of systems.References
[1]B. Goertzel and C. Pennachin, Artiﬁcial general
intelligence , vol. 2. Springer, 2007.
[2]R. Kurzweil, The singularity is near . Gerald Duckworth
& Co, 2010.
[3]L. Fridman, B. Reimer, B. Mehler, and W. T. Freeman,
“Cognitive Load Estimation in the Wild,” in Proceedings
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - CHI ’18 , (New York, USA),
pp. 1–9, 2018.
[4]A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R. A. Novoa, J. Ko, S. M.
Swetter, H. M. Blau, and S. Thrun, “Dermatologist-level
classiﬁcation of skin cancer with deep neural networks,”
Nature , vol. 542, no. 7639, pp. 115–118, 2017.
[5]V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu,
J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller,
A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie,
A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran,
D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and D. Hassabis, “Human-level
control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature ,
vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[6]D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou,
A. Huang, A. Guez, T. Hubert, L. Baker, M. Lai,
A. Bolton, Y. Chen, T. Lillicrap, F. Hui, L. Sifre, G. Van
Den Driessche, T. Graepel, and D. Hassabis, “Mastering
the game of Go without human knowledge,” nature ,
vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, 2016.
[7]E. Kamar, “Directions in hybrid intelligence:
Complementing AI systems with human intelligence,”
inIJCAI International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , 2016.
[8]C. M ¨uller-Schloer and S. Tomforde, Organic Computing
Technical Systems for Survival in the Real World .
Autonomic Systems, Cham: Springer International
Publishing, 2017.
[9]A. Kurakin, I. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial
examples in the physical world,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.02533 , 2016.
[10] B. M. Lake, T. D. Ullman, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. J.
Gershman, “Building machines that learn and think like
people,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences , vol. 40, 2017.
[11] F. Doshi-Velez and B. Kim, “Towards a rigorous science
of interpretable machine learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.08608 , 2017.
[12] S. Amershi, M. Cakmak, W. B. Knox, and T. Kulesza,
“Power to the people: The role of humans in interactive
machine learning,” AI Magazine , vol. 35, no. 4,
pp. 105–120, 2014.
[13] R. C. Nickerson, U. Varshney, and J. Muntermann, “A
method for taxonomy development and its application in
information systems,” European Journal of Information
Systems , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 336–359, 2013.
[14] R. Bellman, An introduction to artiﬁcial intelligence :
can computers think? Boyd & Fraser Pub. Co, 1978.
[15] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, “Artiﬁcial intelligence: a
modern approach,” 2016.
[16] T. M. Mitchell et al. , “Machine learning. 1997,” Burr
Ridge, IL: McGraw Hill , vol. 45, no. 37, pp. 870–877,
1997.
[17] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,”
nature , vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.

==== Page 9 ====
[18] M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg,
M. Blum, and F. Hutter, “Efﬁcient and robust automated
machine learning,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 2962–2970, 2015.
[19] R. G. Gomes, P. Welinder, A. Krause, and P. Perona,
“Crowdclustering,” Advances in neural information
processing systems , pp. 558–566, 2011.
[20] J. Kleinberg, H. Lakkaraju, J. Leskovec, J. Ludwig,
and S. Mullainathan, “Human decisions and machine
predictions,” The quarterly journal of economics ,
vol. 133, no. 1, pp. 237–293, 2017.
[21] A. Holzinger, “Interactive machine learning for health
informatics: when do we need the human-in-the-loop?,”
Brain Informatics , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 119–131, 2016.
[22] P. Y. Simard, S. Amershi, D. M. Chickering, A. E. Pelton,
S. Ghorashi, C. Meek, G. Ramos, J. Suh, J. Verwey,
M. Wang, et al. , “Machine teaching: A new paradigm
for building machine learning systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06742 , 2017.
[23] B. Settles, “Active Learning Literature Survey,” Machine
Learning , 2010.
[24] J. Attenberg, P. Ipeirotis, and F. Provost, “Beat the
Machine,” Journal of Data and Information Quality ,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2015.
[25] S. Gregor, “Explanations from knowledge-based systems
and cooperative problem solving: an empirical study,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies ,
vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 81–105, 2001.
[26] “Teachable Machine.” https://
teachablemachine.withgoogle.com last
access: 2018-06-14.
[27] “Cindicator-Hybrid Intelligence for Effective Asset
Management — Cindicator — Cindicator.” https:
//cindicator.com last access: 2018-06-14.
[28] “vencortex.” https://www.vencortex.com last
access: 2018-06-14.
[29] “Cobi Communitysourcing Large-Scale Conference
Scheduling.” http://projectcobi.com last
access: 2018-06-14.
[30] “Your Online Personal Stylist — Stitch Fix.” https:
//www.stitchfix.com last access: 2018-06-14.
[31] “AlphaGo DeepMind.” https://deepmind.com/
research/alphago last access: 2018-06-14.
[32] “Microsoft Custom Decision Service.” https:
//portal.ds.microsoft.com last access:
2018-06-14.
[33] J. Webster and R. T. Watson, “Analyzing the past to
prepare for the future: Writing a literature review,” MIS
Quarterly , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 8–23, 2002.
[34] J. vom Brocke, A. Simons, B. Niehaves, K. Riemer,
R. Plattfaut, A. Cleven, J. V. Brocke, and K. Reimer,
“Reconstructing the Giant: On the Importance of Rigour
in Documenting the Literature Search Process,” 17th
European Conference on Information Systems , 2009.
[35] U. Kayande, A. De Bruyn, G. L. Lilien, A. Rangaswamy,
and G. H. Van Bruggen, “How incorporating feedback
mechanisms in a dss affects dss evaluations,”
Information Systems Research , vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 527–546, 2009.
[36] W. M. Reynolds, G. E. Miller, and I. B. Weiner,
Handbook of psychology . Wiley, 2013.[37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual
learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pp. 770–778, 2016.
[38] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-r. Mohamed,
N. Jaitly, A. Senior, V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T. N.
Sainath, et al. , “Deep neural networks for acoustic
modeling in speech recognition: The shared views
of four research groups,” IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine , vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82–97, 2012.
[39] P. Choudhary, A. Jain, and R. Baijal, “Unravelling
airbnb predicting price for new listing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1805.12101 , 2018.
[40] R. Mao, J. S. Baras, Y. Yang, and C. Fermuller,
“Co-active Learning to Adapt Humanoid Movement for
Manipulation,” sep 2016.
[41] C. A. Gomez-Uribe and N. Hunt, “The netﬂix
recommender system: Algorithms, business value,
and innovation,” ACM Transactions on Management
Information Systems (TMIS) , vol. 6, no. 4, p. 13, 2016.
[42] D. Ferrucci, E. Brown, J. Chu-Carroll, J. Fan,
D. Gondek, A. A. Kalyanpur, A. Lally, J. W. Murdock,
E. Nyberg, J. Prager, N. Schlaefer, and C. Welty,
“Building Watson: An Overview of the DeepQA
Project,” AI Magazine , vol. 31, p. 59, jul 2010.
[43] S. Feldman, “Enforcing social conformity: A theory of
authoritarianism,” 2003.
[44] D. Gentner and L. Smith, “Analogical Reasoning,” in
Encyclopedia of Human Behavior , 2012.
[45] J. Cheng, J. Teevan, S. T. Iqbal, and M. S. Bernstein,
“Break It Down: A Comparison of Macro- and
Microtasks,” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems -
CHI ’15 , pp. 4061–4064, 2015.
[46] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y. L. Suematsu,
J. Tan, Q. Le, and A. Kurakin, “Large-scale evolution
of image classiﬁers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01041 ,
2017.
[47] E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y. Huang, and Q. V. Le,
“Regularized evolution for image classiﬁer architecture
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.01548 , 2018.
[48] S. Doroudi, E. Kamar, E. Brunskill, and E. Horvitz,
“Toward a Learning Science for Complex
Crowdsourcing Tasks,” in Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems - CHI ’16 , (New York, USA), pp. 2623–2634,
ACM Press, 2016.
[49] S. Milli, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch, “Interpretable
and pedagogical examples,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.00694 , 2017.
[50] S. Carter and M. Nielsen, “Using Artiﬁcial Intelligence
to Augment Human Intelligence,” Distill , vol. 2, no. 12,
2017.
[51] L. Baker and F. Hui, “Innovations of
AlphaGo.” https://deepmind.com/blog/
innovations-alphago/ last access: 2018-06-14.
[52] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic
Perspective . MIT Press, 2012.
[53] X. Zhu, “Semi-supervised learning literature survey,”
Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison ,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 4–44, 2006.

==== Page 10 ====
[54] B. Kim, C. Rudin, and J. A. Shah, “The bayesian case
model: A generative approach for case-based reasoning
and prototype classiﬁcation,” 2014.
[55] R. M. Hogarth, “On the learning of intuition,” Intuition
in judgment and decision making , pp. 111–126, 2011.
[56] R. Snow, B. O’Connor, D. Jurafsky, and A. Y. Ng,
“Cheap and fast—but is it good?: evaluating non-expert
annotations for natural language tasks,” Proceedings of
the conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing , pp. 254–263, 2008.
[57] V. C. Raykar, S. Yu, L. H. Zhao, G. Hermosillo Valadez,
C. Florin, L. Bogoni, L. Moy, and L. M. Org, “Learning
From Crowds,” Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
vol. 11, pp. 1297–1322, 2010.
[58] B. Nushi, E. Kamar, E. Horvitz, and D. Kossmann, “On
human intellect and machine failures: Troubleshooting
integrative machine learning systems.,” AAAI ,
pp. 1017–1025, 2017.
[59] K. Pei, Y. Cao, J. Yang, and S. Jana, “Towards practical
veriﬁcation of machine learning: The case of computer
vision systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01785 , 2017.
[60] G. Li, Y. Zheng, J. Fan, J. Wang, and R. Cheng,
“Crowdsourced data management: Overview and
challenges,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
International Conference on Management of Data ,
pp. 1711–1716, ACM, 2017.
[61] A. Chakarov, A. Nori, S. Rajamani, S. Sen, and
D. Vijaykeerthy, “Debugging machine learning tasks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.07292 , 2016.
[62] T. Kulesza, S. Stumpf, M. Burnett, W.-K. Wong,
Y. Riche, T. Moore, I. Oberst, A. Shinsel, and
K. McIntosh, “Explanatory Debugging: Supporting
End-User Debugging of Machine-Learned Programs,”
in2010 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and
Human-Centric Computing , pp. 41–48, IEEE, sep 2010.
[63] K. Patel, N. Bancroft, S. M. Drucker, J. Fogarty,
A. J. Ko, and J. Landay, “Gestalt: integrated support
for implementation and analysis in machine learning,”
Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM symposium on
User interface software and technology - UIST ’10 ,
pp. 37–46, 2010.
[64] J. C. Chang, S. Amershi, and E. Kamar, “Revolt,” in
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 , 2017.
[65] J. C. Chang, A. Kittur, and N. Hahn, “Alloy: Clustering
with Crowds and Computation,” Proceedings of the
2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems - CHI ’16 , 2016.
[66] D. Dellermann, N. Lipusch, and P. Ebel, “Developing
Design Principles for a Crowd-Based Business Model
Validation System,” in International Conference on
Design Science Research in Information Systems ,
pp. 163–178, 2017.
[67] D. Dellermann, N. Lipusch, P. Ebel, K. M. Popp, and
J. M. Leimeister, “Finding the Unicorn : Predicting Early
Stage Startup Success through a Hybrid Intelligence
Method,” ICIS 2017 Proceedings , pp. 1–12, 2017.
[68] A. J. Quinn and B. B. Bederson, “Human computation:
a survey and taxonomy of a growing ﬁeld,”
pp. 1403–1412, ACM, 2011.
[69] J. Y. Zou, K. Chaudhuri, and A. T. Kalai,
“Crowdsourcing feature discovery via adaptively
chosen comparisons,” 2015.[70] A. P. Dawid and A. M. Skene, “Maximum likelihood
estimation of observer error-rates using the em
algorithm,” Applied statistics , vol. 28, pp. 20–28,
1979.
[71] H.-C. Kim and Z. Ghahramani, “Bayesian Classiﬁer
Combination,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Artiﬁcal Intelligence and Statistics
(AISTATS) , 2012.
[72] K. A. M. Kamar, Z. A. Hamid, and N. Dzulkalnine,
“Industrialised Building System (IBS) construction:
Measuring the perception of contractors in Malaysia,”
inBEIAC 2012 - 2012 IEEE Business, Engineering and
Industrial Applications Colloquium , 2012.
[73] M. Kosinski, Y. Bachrach, P. Kohli, D. Stillwell,
and T. Graepel, “Manifestations of user personality in
website choice and behaviour on online social networks,”
Machine learning , vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 357–380, 2014.
[74] J. Whitehill, T.-f. Wu, J. Bergsma, J. R. Movellan,
and P. L. Ruvolo, “Whose vote should count more:
Optimal integration of labels from labelers of unknown
expertise,” 2009.
[75] A. Segal, K. sGal, E. Kamar, E. Horvitz, and G. Miller,
“Optimizing interventions via ofﬂine policy evaluation:
Studies in citizen science,” AAAI 2018 , 2018.
[76] L. Von Ahn and L. Dabbish, “Designing games with a
purpose,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 51, no. 8,
pp. 58–67, 2008.
[77] J. W. Vaughan, “Making better use of the crowd: How
crowdsourcing can advance machine learning research,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 18, no. 193,
pp. 1–46, 2018.
[78] A. Bernardo, A. Cervero, M. Esteban, E. Tuero, J. R.
Casanova, and L. S. Almeida, “Freshmen Program
Withdrawal: Types and Recommendations.,” Frontiers in
psychology , vol. 8, p. 1544, 2017.
[79] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona,
D. Ramanan, P. Doll ´ar, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft
coco: Common objects in context,” in European
conference on computer vision , pp. 740–755, 2014.
[80] V. S. Sheng, F. Provost, and P. G. Ipeirotis, “Get
another label? improving data quality and data mining
using multiple, noisy labelers,” Proceedings of the 14th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining , pp. 614–622, 2008.
[81] L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and G. Sukthankar, “An
active learning approach for jointly estimating
worker performance and annotation reliability with
crowdsourced data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.3836 ,
2014.
[82] G. Kou, Y. Peng, and G. Wang, “Evaluation of clustering
algorithms for ﬁnancial risk analysis using mcdm
methods,” Information Sciences , vol. 275, pp. 1–12,
2014.
[83] A. M. Chirkin and R. K ¨onig, “Concept of Interactive
Machine Learning in Urban Design Problems,” in
Proceedings of the SEACHI 2016 on Smart Cities for
Better Living with HCI and UX - SEACHI 2016 , 2016.
[84] Z. C. Lipton, “The mythos of model interpretability,”
Queue , vol. 16, no. 3, p. 30, 2018.

