==== Page 1 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning
Neil Thompson
MIT Computer Science and A.I. Lab, MIT Initiative on the
Digital Economy
Cambridge, MA, USA
neil_t@mit.eduKristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
Keeheon Lee
Underwood International College, Yonsei University
Seoul, KoreaGabriel F. Manso
MIT Computer Science and A.I. Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
ABSTRACT
Deep learning’s recent history has been one of achievement: from
triumphing over humans in the game of Go to world-leading per-
formance in image classification, voice recognition, translation, and
other tasks. But this progress has come with a voracious appetite
for computing power. This article catalogs the extent of this depen-
dency, showing that progress across a wide variety of applications
is strongly reliant on increases in computing power. Extrapolat-
ing forward this reliance reveals that progress along current lines
is rapidly becoming economically, technically, and environmen-
tally unsustainable. Thus, continued progress in these applications
will require dramatically more computationally-efficient methods,
which will either have to come from changes to deep learning or
from moving to other machine learning methods.
KEYWORDS
Deep Learning, Computing Power, Computational Burden, Scaling,
Machine Learning
ACM Reference Format:
Neil Thompson, Kristjan Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F. Manso.
2021. The Computational Limits of Deep Learning. In LIMITS ’21: Workshop
on Computing within Limits, June 14–15, 2021. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages.
1 INTRODUCTION
In this article, we present a comprehensive meta-analysis of how
deep learning progress depends on growing computational power
and use this to understand not just how particular models scale, but
how the field as a whole does. Our analysis differs from previous
ones in that we are (i) more precise in the models we compare than
are many high-level historical analyses, which allows us to better
understand how performance changes as computing scales up, and
(ii) better able to account for innovation in the field than estimates
where researchers have tested scaling by varying the compute used
in training their own models.
To understand scaling in deep learning, we analyze 1,527re-
search papers found in the arXiv pre-print repository, as well as
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
©2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).other sources, in the domains of image classification, object de-
tection, question answering, named entity recognition, machine
translation, speech recognition, face detection, image generation,
and pose estimation. We find that computational requirements have
escalated dramatically and that increases in computing power have
been central to performance improvements.
This finding has important public policy implications: if cur-
rent trends continue, the growing “computational burden” of deep
learning will rapidly become technically and economically prohib-
itive. Such a rapid escalation in computing needed also implies
alarming growth in deep learning’s environmental cost[ 26]. Faced
with these challenges, the machine learning community will be
pushed to either dramatically increase the efficiency of deep learn-
ing1or to move to more computationally-efficient machine learning
techniques.
To understand why deep learning is so computationally expen-
sive, we analyze its statistical and computational scaling in theory.
We show that deep learning is not computationally expensive by
accident, but by design. The same flexibility that makes it excellent
at modeling diverse phenomena and outperforming expert models
also makes it dramatically more computationally expensive. De-
spite this, we find that the actual computational burden of deep
learning models is scaling more rapidly than (known) lower bounds
from theory, suggesting that substantial improvements might be
possible.
It would not be a historical anomaly for deep learning to become
computationally constrained. Even at the creation of the first neural
networks by Frank Rosenblatt, performance was limited by the
available computation. In the past decade, these computational
constraints have been relaxed due to speed-ups from moving to
specialized hardware and a willingness to invest more resources to
improve performance. But, as we show, the computational needs
of deep learning scale so rapidly that they will quickly become
constraining again.
2 DEEP LEARNING’S COMPUTATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS IN THEORY
In deep learning, the relationship between performance, model
complexity, and computational requirements is still not well un-
derstood theoretically. Nevertheless, there are important reasons
1There are already significant efforts underway to increase efficiency[ 87], as we will
discuss in section 5

==== Page 2 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
to believe that deep learning is intrinsically highly reliant on com-
puting power. This arises from the role of overparameterization
and how this scales as additional training data are used to improve
performance.
It has been proven that there are significant benefits to having a
neural network containing more model parameters than data points
available for training, that is, by overparameterizing it [108]. Clas-
sically this would lead to overfitting, but stochastic gradient-based
optimization methods provide a regularizing effect due to early
stopping [ 9,92]2, moving the neural networks into an interpola-
tion regime, where the training data is fit almost exactly while
still maintaining reasonable predictions on intermediate points
[10,11]. An example of large-scale overparameterization is the cur-
rent state-of-the-art image classification system, CoCa, which has
2.1B parameters for ImageNet’s 1.2M data points [128].
The challenge of overparameterization is that the number of
deep learning parameters must grow as the number of data points
grows. Since the cost of training a deep learning model scales with
theproduct of the number of parameters with the number of data
points, this implies that computational requirements grow as at least
thesquare of the number of data points in the overparameterized
setting. This quadratic scaling, however, is an underestimate of how
fast deep learning networks must grow to improve performance ,
because a linear improvement in performance generally requires a
faster-than-linear increase in the amount of training data.
For instance, statistical learning theory tells us that, in general,
root mean squared prediction error can at most drop as 1/√n(where
nis the number of data points) [ 72]. These rates indicate that at
least a quadratic increase in data points would be needed to im-
prove performance. So, combining the computational overhead
from overparameterization and the data requirements for statistical
learning yields a back-of-the envelope estimate that the computa-
tion required to train an overparameterized model should grow at
least as a fourth-order polynomial with respect to performance,3
i.e.Computation =Ω(Per f ormance4). This is, of course, just a
lower bound. Due to the complexity of deep learning, performance
could be considerably worse, perhaps even requiring exponential
increases in computing power as has been seen in other tasks like
weather prediction [113].
While the bound above was derived for root mean squared error,
the result is more general, applying to the large class of perfor-
mance metrics that converge as 1/√n. For example, this includes
any smooth loss function (or error metric) that is computed by av-
eraging over data points, as [ 42] showed.4In particular, this result
applies to most popular neural network training losses, including
the cross entropy loss.
The relationship between model parameters, data, and computa-
tional requirements in deep learning can be illustrated by analogy
in the setting of linear regression, where the statistical learning
theory is better developed (and, which is equivalent to a 1-layer
neural network with linear activations). Under the usual conditions,
2This is often called implicit regularization, since there is no explicit regularization
term in the model.
3Here, performance is 1/(RMSE).
4See [42] for precise assumptions.the root mean squared prediction error from the ordinary least-
squares (OLS) estimator scales as Oq
d
n
, where dis the number
of model parameters and nthe number of observations. Under
these conditions, and assuming stochastic gradient descent is used
for estimation, learning a model with 1,000×as many parameters
would take 1,000,000×longer (due to the necessary increase in n
to preserve the same RMSE). Regularization (either explicit regu-
larization or the implicit regularization created by state of the art
training of neural networks) can help. For instance, the lasso estima-
tor [117], which performs an explicit regularization, improves root
mean squared error scaling to Oq
slogd
n
where sis the number
of nonzero coefficients in the true model [ 82]. We make an analogy
between the role of regularized lasso estimation in linear regression
to the role of deep learning in nonlinear problems, since neural
networks have been shown to be implicitly regularized [9, 92].
Even with regularization, however, theory tells us that the com-
puting power needed for improved performance still grows incredi-
bly rapidly. For example, the computational power needed to run a
highly flexible (flexibility is sometimes also called “effective model
complexity” [ 84]) lasso model with d=1,000sparameters, is about
1,000×that for running a lasso model with just the true number
of parameters, d=s. Figure 1 (a) generalizes this, showing the
increase in computation needed as the effective model complexity
(d/s) increases [84].
Figure 1: a) Computational burden of running regularized
models (lasso) as the effective model complexity [84], d/s, is
increased (where dis the number of parameters in the esti-
mated model and sis the number in the true model. b) Im-
plications of flexibility for machine learning model perfor-
mance.

==== Page 3 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
As Figure 1 (a) shows, there is an enormous computational price
that has to be paid for building models with many parameters,
even when regularization is used. But while the price of including
so many parameters may be high, it also offers flexibility for the
model. In contrast, smaller models may be more efficient, but if they
do not include the parameters that matter for the answer (in the
example above, some of the scoefficients), this would imply lower
RMSE values being unachievable for any amount of computation.
In other words, the performance of that model will eventually
plateau at a low level as available computation/number of samples
increase, since it lacks important predictive features. In contrast,
the model with many parameters will eventually achieve a high
level of performance, but at the cost of more data and computation.
Thus, we arrive at the central tradeoff between traditional ma-
chine learning methods (like regression) that use small numbers of
parameters and deep learning methods that use enormous numbers
of parameters. The more parameters that one adds to a model the
greater the flexibility and hence potential for better performance.
Indeed, it has been shown that sufficiently large neural networks
areuniversal function approximators [55], hence in theory, any de-
sired performance level can be achieved by making the model large
enough and including enough training data. But these additional
parameters also make the model more expensive to train (even
before any needed increase in amount of training data) and can
make it do less well when the amount of data (or computation) is
not large enough. Figure 1 (b), our adaptation of a graph attributed
to Andrew Ng [67], summarizes this.
3 DEEP LEARNING’S COMPUTATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS IN PRACTICE
3.1 Past
Even in their early days, it was clear that computational require-
ments limited what neural networks could achieve. In 1960, when
Frank Rosenblatt wrote about a 3-layer neural network, there were
hopes that it had “gone a long way toward demonstrating the fea-
sibility of a perceptron as a pattern-recognizing device.” But, as
Rosenblatt already recognized “as the number of connections in the
network increases, however, the burden on a conventional digital
computer soon becomes excessive” [ 101]. Later that decade, in 1969,
Minsky and Papert explained the limits of 3-layer networks, includ-
ing the inability to learn the simple XOR function. At the same
time, however, they noted a potential solution: “the experimenters
discovered an interesting way to get around this difficulty by in-
troducing longer chains of intermediate units” (that is, by building
deeper neural networks) [ 83]. Despite this potential workaround,
much of the academic work in this area was abandoned because
there simply wasn’t enough computing power available at the time.
As Léon Bottou later wrote “the most obvious application of the
perceptron, computer vision, demands computing capabilities that
far exceed what could be achieved with the technology of the 1960s”
[83].
In the decades that followed, improvements in computer hard-
ware provided, by one measure, an approximately 50,000×improve-
ment in performance [ 48] and the largest neural networks being
used grew their computational requirements proportionally, as
shown in Figure 2(a). Since the growth in computing power perdollar closely mimicked the growth in computing power per chip
[116], this meant that the economic cost of running such models
was largely stable over time. Despite this large increase, deep learn-
ing models in 2009 remained “too slow for large-scale applications,
forcing researchers to focus on smaller-scale models or to use fewer
training examples.”[ 96] The turning point seems to have been when
deep learning was ported to GPUs, initially yielding a 5−15×speed-
up [96] which by 2012 had grown to more than 35×[85], and which
led to the important victory of Alexnet at the 2012 ImageNet com-
petition [ 66].5But image classification was just the first of these
benchmarks to fall. Shortly thereafter, deep learning systems also
won at object detection [ 36,105,124], named-entity recognition
[70], machine translation [ 60,76,129], question answering[ 56], and
speech recognition [3, 45].
Figure 2: Computing power used in: (a) the largest deep
learning models in different year (across all applications)
[4] as compared with the growth in hardware performance
from improving processors[25], as analyzed by [48] and
[69],6(b) image classification models tested on the Ima-
geNet benchmark with computation normalized to the 2012
AlexNet model [66].
The introduction of GPU-based (and later ASIC-based) deep
learning led to widespread adoption of these systems. But the
amount of computing power used in the largest cutting-edge sys-
tems grew even faster, at approximately 10×per year from 2012 to
2019 [4]. This rapid increase in computing burden far outpaced
5The ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) released a large
visual database to evaluate algorithms for classifying and detecting objects and scenes
every year since 2010 [29, 103].
6The range of hardware performance values indicates the difference between SPECInt
values for the lowest core counts and SPECIntRate values for the highest core counts.

==== Page 4 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
the≈35×total improvement from moving to GPUs, the mea-
ger improvements from the last vestiges of Moore’s Law [ 116],
or the improvements in neural network training efficiency [ 49].
Instead, much of the increase came from a much-less-economically-
attractive source: running models for more time on more machines.
For example, in 2012 AlexNet trained using 2 GPUs for 5-6 days[ 66],
in2017 ResNeXt-101 [ 126] was trained with 8 GPUs for over 10
days, and in 2020 Meta Pseudo Labels (EfficientNet-L2) was trained
with 2048 TPU cores for 11 days[ 91]. Another extreme example
is the machine translation system, “Evolved Transformer”, which
used more than 2million GPU hours and cost millions of dollars
to run[ 107,125].7Scaling deep learning computation by scaling up
hardware hours or number of chips is problematic in the longer-
term because it implies that costs scale at roughly the same rate as
increases in computing power [ 4], which (as we show) will quickly
make it unsustainable.
3.2 Present
To examine deep learning’s dependence on computation, we con-
ducted an extensive review of allthe research papers we could find
that covered the domains of image classification (ImageNet , CIFAR-
10, CIFAR-100), object detection (MS COCO), question answering
(SQuAD 1.1), named-entity recognition (COLLN 2003), machine
translation (WMT 2014), speech recognition (ASR SWB Hub500),
face detection (WIDER Face Hard), image generation (CIFAR-10),
and pose estimation (MPII Human Pose)8. We limit our analysis to
benchmarks with exact right and wrong answers, so that error rates
can be precise. For this reason, our analysis excludes generative
models in language and audio. Using established benchmarks to
measure progress in these areas is important because it ensures
a common baseline for comparison (which is a significant prob-
lem in parts of the deep learning literature[ 23]). We source these
deep learning papers from the arXiv repository as well as other
benchmark sources.
In total, we gathered 1,527deep learning papers, for which we
did a detailed manual review for their performance and computa-
tion burden data. Unfortunately, as is well known in deep learning,
few papers report the details of the amount of computation they
used [ 31,35], reflecting the field’s historical focus on accuracy at
the expense of other measures of progress [ 79]. Most papers do not
report anydetails of the computational requirements for their mod-
els, and in many others only limited computational information is
provided. Table 1 summarizes our data. Because there is insufficient
computational data for other benchmarks, we limit our analysis to
ImageNet, MC COCO, SQuAD 1.1, COLLN 2003, and WMT 2014
(EN-FR) and WMT 2014 (EN-DE).
7Some have argued that neural architecture search costs should not be included in
training costs because they help reduce inference costs [ 28]. While we agree with the
latter point, it doesn’t change that this search is part of the initial training cost and
thus we include it in our calculations.
8ImageNet, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 are datasets of labeled images that have been
widely used to train and evaluate image classification models. MS COCO is a large-
scale dataset for object detection, segmentation, and captioning tasks. SQuAD 1.1 is
a dataset designed for question-answering tasks. CoNLL-2003 is a dataset designed
for named entity recognition tasks. WMT 2014 consists of parallel texts in different
languages and is commonly used for training and evaluating machine translation
models. ASR SWB Hub500 is a dataset used for training and evaluating automatic
speech recognition models. WIDER Face Hard is a dataset used for face detection and
recognition tasks. MPII Human Pose is a dataset used for human pose estimation tasks.Reflecting the computational information available in these pa-
pers, we do separate analyses for two measures of the computational
burden: (1) Network Operations[ 4,104], the number of floating
point operations computed in the network10, and (2) Hardware
burden, the computational capacity of the hardware used to train
the model.
Õ
i∈{pre−traininд,
traininд,
f ine−tuninд}Epochs i·FlopsPerNetworkPass i
·NetworkPassesPerEpoch i(1)
Õ
i∈{pre−traininд,
traininд,
f ine−tuninд}Processors i·ComputationRate i·Time i(2)
We illustrate our analysis first in the area with the most data and
longest history: image classification. The relevant performance met-
ric here is the error rate for classification. As discussed in the previ-
ous section, we should expect computation to scale at least as a high
order (e.g. 4th order) polynomial versus performance, which we
estimate via the equation: log(1/error)=α+β·log(computation).
Figure 2 (b) shows the fall in the image classification error rate
for the ImageNet dataset and its correlation to the computation
used in these models. Each data point reflects a particular deep
learning model from the literature. Because this is plotted on a log-
log scale, a straight line indicates a polynomial growth in computing
per unit of performance – that is, a power law. In particular, a
polynomial relationship between computation and performance
of the form Computation =Per f ormanceαyields a slope of−1
αin
our plots. Thus, our estimated slope coefficient of −0.084(p-value
<0.01) indicates that computation used for ImageNet scales as
O(Per f ormance12.0). Concretely, this means that every halving of
the remaining error on this problem requires ≈212.0>4,000×as
much computation.
Taking into account the standard error on this estimate yields a
95% confidence interval for scaling between O(Per f ormance10.4)
andO(Per f ormance13.9), i.e. between≈1,350×and≈15,290×as
much computation to halve the error. Not only is computational
power a highly statistically significant predictor of performance,
but it also has substantial explanatory power, explaining 72% of the
variance in ImageNet performance. Table 2a, specification 1, reports
9Top 1 score refers to the accuracy of a classification model, indicating the percentage
of correct predictions where the model’s top-ranked prediction matches the true label.
BOX AP measures the precision and recall of a model by evaluating how well it
localizes and classifies objects within bounding boxes. Percentage correct represents
the accuracy of a model or classifier, indicating the percentage of correct predictions
out of the total number of predictions made. AP is a metric used to evaluate the
performance of models in information retrieval or object detection tasks. PCKh-0.5
stands for Percentage of Correct Keypoints and is often used to evaluate human
pose estimation models. The F1 score is a measure of a model’s accuracy, combining
precision and recall. BLEU is a metric commonly used to evaluate the quality of
machine translation. Percentage error: This general term refers to the percentage
difference between an observed or predicted value and the true value.
10Note that, one multiply−add operation is composed of two arithmetic operations
(the product of two numbers and the addition of this product to an accumulator).
Therefore, for cases where authors report the number of forward-pass operations in
multiply−add operations, we use a conversion factor equals to 2to convert this
value to f lops [4]

==== Page 5 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
Table 1: Deep learning benchmark data
# Models Including
Domain Task BenchmarkEvaluation
Criteria9 State-of-the-Art# Papers
Found# Models
Hardware
BurdenNetwork
OperationsHardware Burden &
Network Operations
Image Classification ImageNet Top-1 scoreCoCa
(Top 1: 91.00)309 208 36 77 11
Object Detection MS COCO BOX APDINO Swin-L
(BOX AP: 63.3)277 116 13 7 0
Image Classification CIFAR-10 Percentage CorrectViT-H/14
(Percentage Correct: 99.5)78 94 1 0 0
Image Classification CIFAR-100 Percentage CorrectEffNet-L2 SAM
(Percentage Correct: 96.08)70 71 0 0 0
Face Detection WIDER Face (Hard) APTinaFace
(AP: 0.924)21 21 0 0 0
Image Generation CIFAR-10 FIDLSGM
(FID: 2.1)35 35 4 0 0Computer Vision
Pose Estimation MPII Human Pose PCKh-0.5Soft-gated Skip Connections
(PCKh-0.5: 94.1)30 30 3 4 0
Question Answering SQuAD 1.1 EMANNA
(EM: 90.6)147 41 12 0 0
Named Entity Recognition CoNLL 2003 F1-scoreACE + document-context
(F1-score: 94.6)247 54 12 0 0
Machine Translation WMT 2014 (EN-FR) BLEUTransformer + BT ADMIN init
(BLEU: 46.4)96 42 14 0 0Natural Language Processing
Machine Translation WMT 2014 (EN-DE) BLEUTransformer Cycle Rev
(BLEU: 35.14)127 55 12 0 0
Speech Speech Recognition Switchboard + Hub 500 Percentage ErrorIBM LSTM + Conformer encoder-decoder
(Percentage Error: 4.3)90 18 7 0 0
Total 1527 785 114 88 11
this regression result, alongside a series of alternate specifications
that test the robustness of our finding.
It is known that there have been substantial improvements in
the efficiency of deep learning training [ 49]. In specification ( 2)
we introduce a time trend to proxy for these algorithmic changes
and find that it increases the explanatory power of the model by
11.1%. As in previous work, we find clear evidence of efficiency
gains: 3years of algorithm improvement is equivalent to an in-
crease in computing power of 10×. But, even after accounting for
algorithm improvement, we continue to observe a power law be-
tween computing power that performance. This implies that every
year deep learning system designers are both taking advantage
of year-over-year algorithm improvement and also scaling their
models according to the performance trade-offs that we have iden-
tified. And thus, while it is encouraging that algorithmic efficiency
has improved, it does not alleviate the inflation in computational
burden that we observe.11
In specification ( 3) we test a functional form where computation
scales exponentially with performance, rather than polynomially.
That form also results in a highly statistically significant reliance
on computing power, but has less explanatory power, so we retain
specification 1as our preferred form.
In specification ( 4) we analyze whether focusing on the best-
performing models would yield a different result that looking at
all models. Using a quantile regression, we estimate the scaling
at the threshold of the 10%most efficient models. This estimation
11In 5 we revisit this issue of efficiency improvement as part of a larger discussion about
the economic and environmental implications of this rapid rise in the computation
needed.shows a similar dependence of performance on computation for
these cutting-edge models: O(Per f ormance11.9).
Thus, in ImageNet, where we have the most data, our baseline
analysis and robustness checks paint a strongly coherent picture:
deep learning performance improvement is strongly dependent on
rapid scale-up of computing power, whether or not algorithmic
improvement is accounted for and whether or not one looks at all
models or only cutting-edge ones.
Despite the efforts of machine learning conferences to encour-
age more thorough reporting of experimental details (e.g. the re-
producibility checklists of ICML [ 59] and NeurIPS[ 93,106]), few
papers in the other benchmark areas provide sufficient information
to analyze the computational burden via network operations. More
widely reported, however, are the components needed to calcu-
late an alternative metric: hardware burden. This also estimates
the computation needed, but is less precise since it depends on
hardware implementation efficiency.
Table 2b and Figure 3 shows progress in the areas of image
classification, object detection, question answering, and named
entity recognition. We find highly-statistically significant slopes
and strong explanatory power ( R2between 42%and87%) for all
benchmarks. Interpreting the coefficients for the five remaining
benchmarks shows a slightly lower polynomial dependence for
ImageNet when calculated using this method ( ≈11.0), and a depen-
dence of 10.5and16.4for question answering and object detection
respectively. Named-entity recognition shows large increases in
hardware burden with relatively small improvements in outcomes,
implying dependencies of around 37.2, although this model ex-
plains only 42%of the variance so this result should be interpreted
as preliminary. In machine translation we also observe a correlation

==== Page 6 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
Table 2: Regression Analysis of how Deep Learning Performance depends on Computing Power Growth
(1) (2) (3) (4)
log10(Top 1 error) log10(Top 1 error) Top 1 error log10(Top 1 error)
(a) Network Operations
Image Classification Image Classification Image Classification Image Classification
(Imagenet) (Imagenet) (Imagenet) (Imagenet)
OLS Regression OLS Regression OLS Regression Quantile Regression
loд10(NetworkOperations ) -0.084∗∗∗-0.064∗∗∗-0.034∗∗∗-0.084∗∗∗
(0.006) (0.006) (0.003) (0.005)
Year -0.025∗∗∗
(0.004)
Intercept -0.629∗∗∗-0.453∗∗∗0.231∗∗∗-0.676∗∗∗
(0.011) (0.027) (0.005) (0.010)
Observations 77 77 77 77
R2/pseudo R20.720 0.831 0.628 0.579
Adjusted R20.717 0.826 0.623 −
Residual Std. Error 0.050 (df =75) 0.039 (df = 74) 0.025 (df = 75) −
F Statistic 193.224∗∗∗(df = 1; 75) 181.400∗∗∗(df = 2; 74) 126.667∗∗∗(df = 1; 75) −
Implied Polynomial Scaling Factor 12.0 15.7 − 11.9
95% Confidence Interval 10.4 −13.9 13.3 −18.9 − 10.6−13.3
(5) (6) (7) (8)
(b) Hardware Burden log10(TOP 1) log10(BOX AP) log10(EM) log10(F1 score)
Image Classification Object Detection Question Answering Named Entity Recognition
(ImageNet) (MS COCO) (SQuAD 1.1) (CoNLL 2003)
loд10(HardwareBurden) 0.091∗∗∗0.061∗∗∗0.096∗∗∗0.027∗∗
(0.006) (0.007) (0.012) (0.010)
Intercept -1.067∗∗∗-0.935∗∗∗-1.123 0.633∗∗∗
(0.120) (0.134) (0.226) (0.186)
Observations 102 20 12 12
R20.694 0.814 0.872 0.417
Adjusted R20.690 0.804 0.859 0.359
Residual Std. Error 0.063 (df = 100) 0.030 (df = 18) 0.080 (df = 10) 0.058 (df = 10)
F Statistic 226.324∗∗∗(df = 1; 100) 78.916∗∗∗(df = 1; 18) 68.022∗∗∗(df = 1; 10) 7.148∗∗(df = 1; 10)
Implied Polynomial Scaling Factor 11.0 16.4 10.5 37.2
95% Confidence Interval 9.7 −12.7 13.3 −21.3 8.3 −14.3 20.4 −250
∗p<0.1;∗∗p<0.05;∗∗∗p<0.01
Note: Network Operations is normalized relative to the 2012 AlexNet model.
between compute and performance, but there has not been enough
variation in computing power for us to reliably estimate the slope.
In the online supplementary materials, we also test other func-
tional forms for estimating hardware burden [ 115]. As with the
network operations analysis, we find that polynomial models best
explain the data, but that exponential models are also plausible.
Collectively, our results make it clear that, across many areas
of deep learning, progress in training better models has depended
on large increases in the amount of computing power being used.
A dependence on computing power for improved performance is
not unique to deep learning, but has also been seen in other areas
such as weather prediction, computer chess, computer Go, and oilexploration [ 113]. In those areas there has been enormous growth in
the cost of systems, with many cutting-edge models now requiring
some of the largest computer systems in the world [ 41]. This could
well be deep learning’s fate if current trends continue.
3.3 Future
In this section, we extrapolate the estimates from each domain
to understand the projected computational power needed to train
models to hit various benchmark performance levels. To make these

==== Page 7 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
Figure 3: Performance improvement in various deep learning applications as a function of the hardware burden of training
that model (in flops).
targets tangible, we present them not only in terms of the com-
putational power required, but also in terms of the economic and
environmental cost of training such models on current hardware.12
12Economic and environmental costs are measured using the methodology provided
by [110] for V100 GPU training. We confirm pricing as of 2022 based on [ 1] and use
updated carbon emissions estimates from [ 32] (for which we take the geometric mean).
These carbon estimates are similar to those provided by [86, 88].These projections reinforce the growing concern that deep learn-
ing’s current trajectory will have important negative effects [ 40,79].
In this analysis, we focus on the training costs of these models but
in section 5 we also discuss the deployment cost of these models.
Because the polynomial and exponential functional forms explored

==== Page 8 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
in previous section have roughly equivalent statistical fits — but
quite different extrapolations — we report both in table 3.
We do not anticipate that the computational requirements
implied by the targets in Figure 3 will be hit. The hardware,
environmental, and monetary costs would be prohibitive and enor-
mous effort is going into finding ways to improving scaling perfor-
mance to avoid these outcomes (as we discuss in the next section).
Nevertheless, these projections do provide a scale for the efficiency
improvements that would be needed to hit these performance tar-
gets. For example, even in the more-optimistic model, an additional
650×more computing would be needed to get to an error rate of
5%for ImageNet. Hitting this in an economical way will require
more efficient hardware, more efficient algorithms, or other im-
provements such that the net impact is at least this large. Figure 4
(a) shows the large effects that improving the polynomial scaling
performance would have on projections and how well these agree
with current data.
The rapid escalation in computing needs in Table 3 also makes a
stronger statement: without substantial efficiency improvements,
it will not be possible for deep learning to hit these benchmarks.
The environmental impacts are also troubling. To put these into
perspective, they imply that training an ImageNet model to an
accuracy of 5% would produce almost as much carbon as the city
of Boulder (CO) in a month, while an accuracy of 3% would require
as much carbon as New York City emits in a month.
To avoid these outcomes, fundamental rearchitecting is needed
to lower the computational intensity so that the scaling of these
problems becomes less onerous - which we discuss this in detail
in section 5. Efforts will also be needed to minimize these carbon
emissions, as we describe in section 6, but first we consider how
our findings differ from other scaling studies that have been done
on deep learning.
4 COMPARISON TO OTHER SCALING
STUDIES
The key question for the future of deep learning is how performance
scales up, that is, how much performance for the field improves
as computing power increases . This article addresses this question
differently from the growing body of work on deep learning scaling.
In studying the performance of the whole field, rather than just a
class of models, we are tracking not just mathematical scaling of
models but also the pace of innovation as researchers find better
ways to harness computing power, which Rich Sutton has argued
is “the only thing that matters in the long run.” [ 111]. By measur-
ing the average progress of the field (or in Table 2 specification 4,
just the state-of-the-art) we capture cross-researcher, cross-model
differences that other scaling papers miss. Not surprisingly, this
results in different estimates for scaling performance.
Table 4 summarizes how our analysis compares to other papers
in this field. Like most of the papers in this field, we focus on the
training costs needed. Of these, other papers generally fall into
two groups: within-model experiments and across-model histori-
cal analyses. Within-model experiments have a specific reference
point, the benchmark being analyzed. As a result, they provide an
excellent view of how deep learning performance scales as more
computation is used. But this analysis has a limited scope — onlythe model used by the researchers — and thus these analyses cannot
make any claims about innovation happening across the field. In
contrast, most across-model historical analyses can capture inno-
vation, but lack the specificity of benchmark comparisons and thus
cannot articulate the performance benefits of additional computa-
tion. Our analyses sits between these, capturing both the specificity
of individual benchmarks (and thus the performance vs compute
trade-off), but also the breadth of looking across models that allows
us to capture innovation in the field. More specifically, our approach
provides the following benefits:
First, our analysis has more specificity in its comparison set
because we examine performance within particular deep learning
benchmarks rather than across domains. This contrasts, for exam-
ple, with [ 4,73,104] that aggregate analysis across different deep
learning benchmarks and domains, and therefore do not distinguish
between increases in computational burden within particular tasks
(e.g. image classification on ImageNet) and the application of deep
learning to more computationally-intensive sub-fields (e.g. play-
ing Go). In contrast with those papers, we are able to measure the
growth in computational burden that has been needed to get better
performance on particular benchmarks.
Second, our analysis tracks the evolution of performance in each
field differently than within model studies where authors examine
trade-offs by implementing many different model configurations
[14,19,46,64,112,130]. The weakness of these experimental studies
is that the ‘space’ of potential models they explore is limited to what
the authors implement themselves — for example [ 14] only consid-
ers particular network architectures and [ 64] only studies language
models that use the Adam optimizer. Therefore these experimental
approaches necessarily miss innovations that those authors did
not consider or that take deep learning in new directions. These
exclusions hinder the ability of those scaling studies to capture
progress over time, whereas our across models approach is able
to capture the innovations that are missed by these experimental
studies.
Third, as we discuss in more detail below, our analysis is more
reliable for estimating future progress, i.e., how things scale up , be-
cause analyses that estimate scaling by looking at how performance
deteriorates with less computing power, i.e., by scaling down , can
yield artificially rosy estimates.
In general, one would expect that our analysis would show faster
performance gains from increased computing power than other
studies because while both capture the improvements from scaling
within models, our also accounts for innovation over time that
could further improve on this performance. In practice, however,
this is not what we see. While some studies do show slower model
scaling than we show for the field, others show faster scaling. We
hypothesize that this inconsistency arises because of differences
in measurement approaches, depending on whether scaling is de-
termined by how performance scales with additional computation
versus how it scales with less. These approaches sound like they
might be symmetric, but they are not.
Put simply, the ‘scaling up’ approach measures improvements to
the state of the art, whereas the ‘scaling down’ approach measures
performance deterioration. To see this, we consider each in turn.
The scaling up approach measures how performance changes as
computing power increases . As shown in Figure 4 (a), scaling up

==== Page 9 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
Table 3: Implications of achieving performance benchmarks on the computation (in flops), carbon emissions (lbs), and eco-
nomic costs ($USD) from deep learning based on projections from polynomial and exponential models.
Polynomial Exponential
Benchmark Error Rate
Computation
Required (flops)Environmental
Cost (CO 2)Economic
Cost ($)Computation
Required (flops)Environmental
Cost (CO 2)Economic
Cost ($)
Today: 9.00% 10231051061024106107
Target 1: 5% 1026108109103110131014ImageNet
Target 2: 1% 103310161016109310751076
Today: 38.7% 10221041051022104105
Target 1: 30% 10231061071025107108MS COCO
Target 2: 10% 103110141014104910321032
Today: 9.4% 10221041051022105105
Target 1: 2% 102910111012105110341034SQuAD 1.1
Target 2: 1% 103210151015108810701071
Today: 5.4% 10231061061024106107
Target 1: 2% 103910221022106110431044CoNLL 2003
Target 2: 1% 105010331033101191010210102
Table 4: Comparison of articles analyzing deep learning scaling.
Calculation Specificity of Comparison Scaling Trends
Paper
Training InferenceAcross
DomainsSingle Domain
(e.g. NLP)Single Benchmark
(e.g. ImageNet)Within
ModelAcross
ModelsPerformance ComputePerformance
vs. Compute
Ours (2020 - updated in 2022) ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
AI and Compute (2018) [4] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Compute Trends Across Three Eras of Machine Learning (2022) [104] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
“AI and Compute” Trend isn’t Predictive of What is Happening (2021) [77] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
AI and Compute: How Much Longer Can Computing Power Drive
Artificial Intelligence Progress? (2021) [73]✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models (2020) [64] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition (2015) [46] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Dual Path Networks (2017) [19] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
What is the State of Neural Network Pruning? (2020) [14] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural Networks (2019) [112] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Learning Transferable Architectures for Scalable Image Recognition (2017) [130] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Scaling Laws for Deep Learning (2021) [102] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Deep Learning Scaling is Predictable, Empirically (2017) [52] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
Compute and Energy Consumption Trends in Deep Learning Inference (2021) [30] ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘
clearly measures the progression in the field in an intuitive way:
good scaling means that as more computation is used fewer errors
are being made and the state of the art is improving. A scaling up
approach naturally emerges from observational analyses, like ours,where both performance and computational power are increasing
over time.
Observing this same estimate (i.e. slope) has a less clear impli-
cation when scaling down a state-of-the-art model to see how it
performs with less computation. In this latter case, a steep slope

==== Page 10 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
(“good scaling”) simply means that smaller models are farther from
the frontier of what is possible. A simple example illustrates how
misleading this can be: imagine a state-of-the-art model that, if it
used one flop less for training, became useless (i.e. would have an
error rate = 100%). Such a hypothetical system would have an enor-
mous change in performance from a small change in computing, so
it would seem to scale enormously well. But, in reality, the system
simply breaks when it uses less computation. A less extreme ex-
ample of this seems to be the case with ResNet scaling[ 46], which
nominally shows dramatically better scaling than the field as a
whole (i.e., to get a performance improvement requires compute
to only grows to the power of 5.6, whereas for the field it grows
by12.2). In practice, however, these models are not competitive
for state-of-the-art performance (as shown in Figure 4) and the
rapid scaling just seems to indicate that their relative performance
deteriorates more quickly as less computation is used.
The example of NasNets provides an alternative way to under-
stand why we hypothesize that models will not scale up. The class
of NasNet models reports to have vastly better scaling than the field
as a whole. If one projects this reported scaling, it would indicate
that a (hypothetical) NasNet using the same amount of computation
as one of the largest vision models (XCiT-L24) should achieve an
error rate of 6.85%, handily beating the actual state of the art by
more than 2%. That we do not see NasNets easily beating state-of-
the-art models is strongly suggestive that they do not in fact scale
upthis well.
The problem of misinterpreting rapidly deteriorating perfor-
mance as an indication of good scaling is not limited to deep learn-
ing. Similar issues arise in studies of parallelism and lead to perverse
conclusions including a parallel algorithm that ‘scales well’ being
run on 128 cores and being outperformed by a serial algorithm run-
ning on a single core [ 81]. To avoid having deep learning studies
fall prey to this same defect, it is important to analyze how models
scale up and to compare such performance across models so that
deteriorating performance is not misinterpreted as a virtue.
With this conceptual framework, we can consider how our re-
sults compare to other scaling studies. Our results notionally agree
with the power law growths found by the experimental studies of
[64] and [ 51], and the rapid growth (appearing to be approximately
exponential) indicated by the plots in [ 14]. But we can also be more
quantitative, comparing our ImageNet scaling results to those found
by others [ 19,46,112,130]. Figure 4 (b) plots these studies, and
ours, on the same graph.13
As already mentioned, two sets of analyses show faster scaling
for individual models that we observe for the field: ResNet and NAS-
Net. NASNet in particular achieves cutting-edge performance and
shows an impressive scaling of O(Per f ormance5.3). Based on the
argument above, however, we would expect that observing scaling
faster than the whole field is just an indication that performance
deteriorates rapidly for smaller models.
Of the other scaling studies that we consider, perhaps the most
interesting is EfficientNet [ 112]. For most levels of computation,
EfficientNets are at, or close to, the frontier of performance. So
they do not seem to fall prey to the ‘rapid deterioration equals
13Because the comparison papers do not report all the necessary information to
calculate network operations, we instead measure computing by the operations per
network pass for this analysis.
Figure 4: Scaling laws for Deep Learning. (a) schematic repre-
sentation of scaling up versus scaling down where the slope
is the same but the implications are quite different. (b) Com-
parison of ImageNet scaling estimates between this paper,
ResNet [46], DPN [19], NASNet [130], and EfficientNet [112].
good scaling’ trap. Moreover, while EfficientNet scales less well
than the field as a whole, it is very close ( p12.3versus p12.2) and
remains near the state-of-the-art for each level of computing. All
of which suggest that it may be harnessing many of the important
innovations used across the field.
Thus, because our analysis accounts for innovation and because
it is not misled by overly-optimistic scaling down studies, we believe
it provides a better long-term view of the evolution of computing
power as higher model performance is sought.
While not the focus of our work, it is also important to consider
the research being done on scaling laws for generative AI, for
example as summarized by [ 34]. Here, as well, scaling laws are
emerging. Also, as we would expect given our discussion above,
we see disagreements when different within-model scaling results
are reported and conflict (significantly) in their recommendations
[54,118]. This suggests that across-model comparisons like ours
will also be useful in such circumstances - although they will also
be quite challenging because the generality of these models means
there is not a single measure for comparison.
An important distinction between generative language models
and our analysis of computer vision is data. Currently the largest
language models are already running into challenges finding new
data sources[ 34], which might either limit their ability to scale up

==== Page 11 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
further, or push them to grow performance using less efficient ratios
of compute and data.
5 LESSENING THE COMPUTATIONAL
BURDEN
The economic and environmental burden of hitting the performance
benchmarks in Section 3.3 suggest that Deep Learning is facing
an important challenge: either find a way to increase performance
without increasing computing power, or have performance stagnate
as computational requirements become a constraint. In this section,
we briefly survey approaches that are being used to address this
challenge. As with the rest of the paper, we focus on just the training
cost of these models, rather than including the deployment cost
since the latter depends on usage and diffusion patterns for which
data is not available. Since total costs must necessarily be higher
than just training costs, our analysis provides a lower bound on the
total computation needed for any given level of performance.
Increasing computing power: Hardware accelerators. For
much of the 2010 s, moving to more-efficient hardware platforms
(and more of them) was a key source of increased computing power
[116]. For deep learning, these included mostly GPU and TPU im-
plementations, although it has increasingly also included FPGA
and other ASICs. Fundamentally, all of these approaches sacrifice
generality of the computing platform for the efficiency of increased
specialization.
In recent years, hardware specialization has provided gains in
both compute per dollar and compute per watt, for example TPUs
improved by approximately 1.5×in compute per dollar from 2017
to 2019[ 62,63] and 4.9×in compute per watt from 2017 to 2020
[62, 63, 98–100].
Even with significant gains from specialization so far, it is un-
clear that specialization will be able to continue to provide such
gains in the future since it faces diminishing returns [ 69]. Other
hardware frameworks are being explored as alternatives, including
analog hardware with in-memory computation [ 2,65], neuromor-
phic computing [ 27], optical computing [ 71], and quantum com-
puting based approaches [ 121], as well as hybrid approaches [ 94].
Thus far, however, such attempts have yet to disrupt the GPU/TPU
and FPGA/ASIC architectures. Of these, quantum computing is the
approach with perhaps the most long-term upside, since it might
offer a potential for sustained exponential increases in computing
power [21, 39].
Reducing computational complexity: Network Compres-
sion and Acceleration. This body of work primarily focuses on
taking a trained neural network and sparsifying or otherwise com-
pressing the connections in the network, so that it requires less
computation to use it in prediction tasks [ 20]. This is typically
done by using optimization or heuristics such as “pruning" weights
[14,33], quantizing the network [ 57], or using low-rank compres-
sion [ 122], yielding a network that retains the performance of the
original network but requires fewer floating point operations to
evaluate. Not all results that have claimed success in this field have
really achieved it [ 58], but those that have achieved gains have
not been large enough to mitigate the overall orders-of-magnitude
increases of computation in the field (e.g. the work [ 18] reduces
computation by a factor of 2, and [ 125] reduces it by a factor of8 on a specific NLP architecture, both without reducing perfor-
mance significantly).14Furthermore, many of these works focus
on improving the computational cost of evaluating the deployed
network,15which is useful, but does not mitigate the training cost,
which can itself be prohibitive.
Finding high-performing small deep learning architectures:
Neural Architecture Search and Meta Learning. It has become
popular to use optimization to find network architectures that are
computationally efficient to train while retaining good performance
on some class of learning problems, e.g. [ 90], [15] and [ 37]. Design-
ers exploit the fact that many datasets are similar and therefore
information from previously trained models can be used (meta
learning [ 90] and transfer learning [ 74]). While often quite suc-
cessful, the downside is that the current overhead of doing meta
learning or neural architecture search is itself computationally in-
tense (since it requires training many models on a wide variety of
datasets) [ 90]. Promisingly, however, the size of this extra overhead
cost has been falling [13, 15, 16].
An important limitation to meta learning is the scope of the data
that the original model was trained on. For example, for ImageNet,
[7] showed that image classification performance depends heavily
on image biases (e.g. an object is often photographed at a particular
angle with a particular pose), and that without these biases transfer
learning performance drops 45%. Even with novel data sets purposely
built to mimic their training data, [ 97] finds that performance drops
11−14%. Hence, while there seems to be a number of promising
research directions for making deep learning computation grow
at a more attractive rate, they have yet to achieve the orders-of-
magnitude improvements needed to allow deep learning progress
to continue scaling.
Improved curation of data may also be a way to decrease the
computational burden of deep learning models. In particular, models
could be trained with better data, rather than more of it, to reduce
the computation needed [ 12]. That said, since data curation can be
expensive (e.g. in increased human annotator costs), while higher
quality data would preferentially improve computational costs, it
could still have an ambiguous effect on total costs.
Another possible approach to evade the rising computational
burden of deep learning would be to move to other, perhaps as
yet undiscovered or underappreciated types of machine learning.
”Expert” models can be much more computationally-efficient, but
their performance plateaus if those experts cannot see all the con-
tributing factors that a flexible model might explore. One example
where such techniques are already outperforming deep learning
models are those where engineering and physics knowledge can
be more-directly applied: the recognition of known objects (e.g.
vehicles) [ 47,119], and those using biologically-inspired methods,
e.g. for learning neural controller architectures [ 68]. The recent
development of symbolic approaches to machine learning take
this a step further, using symbolic methods to efficiently learn and
apply “expert knowledge" in some sense, e.g. [ 120] which learns
physics laws from data, or approaches [ 5,78,127] which apply
neuro-symbolic reasoning to scene understanding, reinforcement
14Some works, e.g. [ 44] focus more on the reduction in the memory footprint of the
model. [44] achieved 50x compression.
15An exception is [38], which shows pruning during training.

==== Page 12 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
learning, and natural language processing tasks, building a high-
level symbolic representation of the system in order to be able to
understand and explore it more effectively with less data.
A recent study which compared neural to non-neural models
of text classification found, unsurprisingly, that non-neural ap-
proaches outperformed when data was limited, but that neural ap-
proaches won out when data was copious (echoing our discussion
in the theory section). For those researchers, moving to non-neural
approaches produced a more than 23×speedup with a 5% drop in
performance [22].
Finally, exploring combinations of the above approaches to achieve
even larger compounded gains may be fruitful in reducing com-
putation [ 24], or reducing environmental damage [ 87]. Based on
the reported gains of the individual approaches so far, however, we
don’t believe compounding them would yet be sufficient to dra-
matically bring down the very severe scaling we have seen in this
work.
6 LESSENING THE ENVIRONMENTAL
IMPACT
As first highlighted by Strubell et al in 2019, the environmental
impact of deep learning models is an important concern. For exam-
ple, they noted that training a single language model could emit as
much carbon dioxide equivalent as the lifetime emissions from five
cars [ 110]. Our analysis heightens this concern, because environ-
mental damage grows with computing power use, and our analysis
predicts enormous increases in computing power are needed for
future performance improvements (See Table 3). To put the scale
of this challenge into perspective, our estimations suggest that if
current technology was used to train ImageNet performance to 3%
then the carbon emissions produced would be 1010pounds of CO2
- more than the monthly emissions of New York City in 2011 [ 114].
One encouraging aspect of our analysis for the environment is
that financial costs rise roughly proportionally to environmental
costs. This means that there are strong financial incentives to reduce
carbon emissions. Even so, faced with such sizable environmental
damages, it is important to ask which approaches could mitigate
these damages. To understand this, we disaggregate the carbon
emissions into three pieces: the compute done (C), the energy (E)
required per unit of computation, and the carbon emissions per
joule of energy used. This relationship is summarized in equation
3:
Carbon =#Compute·Enerдy
Compute·Carbon
Enerдy. (3)
In the analysis that follows, we consider each of these terms
separately and ask what strategies are being used (or could be) to
mitigate the environmental damage16through this pathway.
6.1 REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF
COMPUTATION
In many ways, reducing the amount of computation needed to train
or use deep learning models is the best solution to this problem. In
16In the analysis that follows, we focus on the carbon pollution from computation. But
it is important to note that there are also other environmental costs, e.g. water usage,
electronic waste, rare earth usage, that could also be considered.the same way that "Negawatts" [ 75] are beneficial to the energy
sector because they represent joules not used, these "NegaFlops"
would be the computations never needed and thus which don’t
produce any carbon emissions.
In section 5 we discussed these approaches in detail. But the
broad approach is to recognize that some of the model details and
data representations may be more complex than are needed to solve
the problem. Efforts to simplify these take many forms, including
pruning weights, quantizing the network, or using low-rank com-
pression techniques. Early stopping and model distillation can also
help by reducing training iterations and computations [17, 53].
Efforts to decrease the amount of computation have shown con-
siderable promise, doubling in efficiency every year or so [ 50].
While an impressive achievement, it is important to recall that this
algorithmic improvement is already accounted for in our analy-
sis and thus it does not mitigate the escalation of environmental
damage we discussed if scale-up continues at the same pace.
6.2 REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY
PER COMPUTATION
Historically, the most promising way of reducing the energy per
computation was the miniaturization of processor components that
underpinned Moore’s Law. According to ”Dennard scaling,” for
about thirty-two years, the number of computations per joule dou-
bled every 18 months [ 123]. More recently, hardware designers
have instead turned to specialization, building chips suited to par-
ticular calculations (at the cost of not being able to do others well)
[116]. Google estimates that from one Tensor Processing Unit (TPU)
generation to another, they obtained a 2.1x increase in performance
and improved performance/Watt by 2.7x [61].
As discussed above, most algorithmic improvements have tackled
environmental concerns indirectly, optimizing for fewer calcula-
tions rather than energy usage per se. But recently, researchers
have also shown interest in explicitly designing algorithms to mini-
mize energy usage [ 89,95]. Other work in this area has looked at
how to efficiently update models and retrain them without unneces-
sary energy overhead, and how to do better model versioning and
retirement practices to further reduce energy consumption [ 6,109].
Another method of reducing the environmental impact of each
computation is to site those computations in efficient data centers.
Such data centers can be efficient for a variety of reasons: they may
be situated in areas with natural cooling, or just better designed
to make the needed cooling more efficient. Server management
can also make data centers more efficient, for example via tech-
niques such as server consolidation, dynamic voltage scaling, and
intelligent workload distribution [8, 80].
6.3 REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF CARBON
PER ENERGY
An additional determinant of the carbon produced by deep learning
models is the energy source used to power data centers. For ex-
ample, in its 2021 environmental report, Google claimed that they
purchased enough renewable energy to cover 100% of the electric-
ity needed by their data centers and offices [ 43]. This means that
hosting in some areas can yield greatly less carbon [ 87] than others
[32].

==== Page 13 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
7 CONCLUSION
The explosion in computing power used for deep learning models
has ended the longstanding pessimism about AI (the “AI winter”)
and set new benchmarks for computer performance on a wide range
of tasks. However, deep learning’s prodigious appetite for comput-
ing power limits how far it can improve performance in its current
form, particularly in an era when improvements in hardware per-
formance are slowing. This article shows that the growing computa-
tional burden of deep learning will soon be constraining for a range
of applications, making the achievement of important benchmark
milestones impossible if current trajectories hold. Finally, we have
discussed the likely impact of these computational limits: forcing
Deep Learning towards less computationally-intensive methods of
improvement, and pushing machine learning towards techniques
that are more computationally-efficient than current deep learning
approaches.
8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge funding from the MIT Ini-
tiative on the Digital Economy and the Korean Government. This
research was partially supported by Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded
by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2017R1C1B1010094),
and by the National Science Foundation (#2041897). This research
was sponsored in part by the United States Air Force Research
Laboratory and was accomplished under Cooperative Agreement
Number FA8750-19-2-1000. The views and conclusions contained
in this document are those of the authors and should not be in-
terpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or
implied, of the United States Air Force or the U.S. Government. The
U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints
for Government purposes, notwithstanding any copyright notation
herein.
REFERENCES
[1]2017. GPU pricing; Compute Engine: Virtual Machines (VMS). https://cloud.
google.com/compute/gpus-pricing. (2017).
[2]Stefano Ambrogio, Pritish Narayanan, Hsinyu Tsai, Robert M Shelby, Irem Boy-
bat, Carmelo di Nolfo, Severin Sidler, Massimo Giordano, Martina Bodini, and
Nathan CP Farinha. 2018. Equivalent-accuracy accelerated neural-network train-
ing using analogue memory. Nature 558, 7708 (2018), 60–67.
[3]Dario Amodei, Sundaram Ananthanarayanan, Rishita Anubhai, Jingliang Bai,
Eric Battenberg, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Qiang Cheng, and
Guoliang Chen. 2016. Deep speech 2: End-to-end speech recognition in english
and mandarin. In International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 173–182.
[4]Dario Amodei and Danny Hernandez. 2018. AI and Compute. Open AI Blog
Article (2018). https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/
[5]Masataro Asai and Christian Muise. 2020. Learning Neural-Symbolic Descriptive
Planning Models via Cube-Space Priors: The Voyage Home (to STRIPS). arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.12850 (2020).
[6]Soheil Bahrampour, Naveen Ramakrishnan, Lukas Schott, and Mohak Shah. 2015.
Comparative Study of Caffe, Neon, Theano, and Torch for Deep Learning. CoRR
abs/1511.06435 (2015). http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06435
[7]Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan
Gutfreund, Josh Tenenbaum, and Boris Katz. 2019. ObjectNet: A large-scale
bias-controlled dataset for pushing the limits of object recognition models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
A. Beygelzimer, F. Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Eds.). Curran Associates,
Inc., 9453–9463.
[8]Luiz André Barroso, Urs Hölzle, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. 2019. The
Datacenter as a Computer . Springer International Publishing. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-01761-2[9] Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. 2019. Reconciling
modern machine-learning practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 32 (2019), 15849–15854. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1903070116
[10] Mikhail Belkin, Daniel J Hsu, and Partha Mitra. 2018. Overfitting or perfect
fitting? risk bounds for classification and regression rules that interpolate. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 2300–2311.
[11] Mikhail Belkin, Alexander Rakhlin, and Alexandre B Tsybakov. 2019. Does
data interpolation contradict statistical optimality?. In The 22nd International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . 1611–1619.
[12] Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret
Shmitchell. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be
Too Big?. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency (FAccT ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 610âĂŞ623. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922
[13] Gabriel Bender, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc
Le. 2018. Understanding and Simplifying One-Shot Architecture Search. In
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research) , Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (Eds.), Vol. 80.
PMLR, 550–559. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/bender18a.html
[14] Davis Blalock, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Jonathan Frankle, and John Guttag.
2020. What is the State of Neural Network Pruning?. In Proceedings of Machine
Learning and Systems , I. Dhillon, D. Papailiopoulos, and V. Sze (Eds.), Vol. 2.
129–146.
[15] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. 2020. Once
for All: Train One Network and Specialize it for Efficient Deployment. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
[16] Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. 2019. ProxylessNAS: Direct Neural Ar-
chitecture Search on Target Task and Hardware. In International Conference on
Learning Representations .
[17] Rich Caruana, Steve Lawrence, and Lee Giles. 2001. Overfitting in neural nets:
Backpropagation, conjugate gradient, and early stopping. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 13 - Proceedings of the 2000 Conference, NIPS
2000. Neural information processing systems foundation. 14th Annual Neural
Information Processing Systems Conference, NIPS 2000 ; Conference date: 27-11-
2000 Through 02-12-2000.
[18] Chun-Fu Chen, Quanfu Fan, Neil Mallinar, Tom Sercu, and Rogerio Feris. 2018.
Big-little net: An efficient multi-scale feature representation for visual and speech
recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03848 (2018).
[19] Yunpeng Chen, Jianan Li, Huaxin Xiao, Xiaojie Jin, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi
Feng. 2017. Dual Path Networks. CoRR abs/1707.01629 (2017). http://arxiv.org/
abs/1707.01629
[20] Yu Cheng, Duo Wang, Pan Zhou, and Tao Zhang. 2017. A survey of model
compression and acceleration for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.09282 (2017).
[21] Andrew W Cross, Lev S Bishop, Sarah Sheldon, Paul D Nation, and Jay M Gam-
betta. 2019. Validating quantum computers using randomized model circuits.
Physical Review A 100, 3 (2019), 032328.
[22] Washington Cunha, VÃŋtor Mangaravite, Christian Gomes, SÃľrgio Canuto,
Elaine Resende, Cecilia Nascimento, Felipe Viegas, Celso FranÃğa, Welling-
ton Santos Martins, Jussara M. Almeida, Thierson Rosa, Leonardo Rocha, and
Marcos AndrÃľ GonÃğalves. 2021. On the cost-effectiveness of neural and non-
neural approaches and representations for text classification: A comprehensive
comparative study. Information Processing & Management 58, 3 (2021), 102481.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2020.102481
[23] Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, Paolo Cremonesi, and Dietmar Jannach. 2019. Are We
Really Making Much Progress? A Worrying Analysis of Recent Neural Recommen-
dation Approaches. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems (RecSys ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
101âĂŞ109. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3298689.3347058
[24] William J. Dally, Yatish Turakhia, and Song Han. 2020. Domain-Specific Hardware
Accelerators. Commun. ACM 63, 7 (June 2020), 48âĂŞ57. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/3361682
[25] Andrew Danowitz, Kyle Kelley, James Mao, John P. Stevenson, and Mark Horowitz.
2012. CPU DB: Recording Microprocessor History. Queue 10, 4 (2012), 10:10–
10:27.
[26] Peter Dauvergne. 2020. The globalization of artificial intelligence: consequences
for the politics of environmentalism. Globalizations 18, 2 (June 2020), 285–299.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14747731.2020.1785670
[27] Mike Davies. 2019. Progress in Neuromorphic Computing: Drawing Inspiration
from Nature for Gains in AI and Computing. In 2019 International Symposium on
VLSI Technology, Systems and Application (VLSI-TSA) . IEEE, 1–1.
[28] Jeff Dean. Sustainable Computation and Machine Learning Platforms at Google.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4VLj_GdV-BY. (????).
[29] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet: A
Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition .

==== Page 14 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
[30] Radosvet Desislavov, Fernando Martínez-Plumed, and José Hernández-Orallo.
2021. Compute and Energy Consumption Trends in Deep Learning Inference.
CoRR abs/2109.05472 (2021). https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.05472
[31] Jesse Dodge, Suchin Gururangan, Dallas Card, Roy Schwartz, and Noah A Smith.
2019. Show Your Work: Improved Reporting of Experimental Results. In Proceed-
ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP) . 2185–2194.
[32] Jesse Dodge, Taylor Prewitt, Remi Tachet Des Combes, Erika Odmark, Roy
Schwartz, Emma Strubell, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Noah A. Smith, Nicole
DeCario, and Will Buchanan. 2022. Measuring the Carbon Intensity of AI in
Cloud Instances. (2022). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2206.05229
[33] Xuanyi Dong, Junshi Huang, Yi Yang, and Shuicheng Yan. 2017. More is less: A
more complicated network with less inference complexity. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 5840–5848.
[34] Dynomight. 2023. First-principles on AI scaling. (2023). https://dynomight.net/
scaling/
[35] Kawin Ethayarajh and Dan Jurafsky. 2021. Utility is in the Eye of the User: A
Critique of NLP Leaderboards. (2021).
[36] Pedro Felzenszwalb, Ross Girshick, David McAllester, and Deva Ramanan. 2008.
Discriminatively trained mixtures of deformable part models. PASCAL VOC
Challenge (2008).
[37] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017. Model-agnostic meta-
learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 . JMLR, 1126–1135.
[38] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. 2018. The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis: Find-
ing Sparse, Trainable Neural Networks. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
[39] J Gambetta and S Sheldon. 2019. Cramming more power into a quantum device.
IBM Research Blog (2019).
[40] Eva GarcÃŋa-MartÃŋn, Crefeda Faviola Rodrigues, Graham Riley, and HÃěkan
Grahn. 2019. Estimation of energy consumption in machine learning. J. Parallel
and Distrib. Comput. 134 (2019), 75–88. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jpdc.2019.07.007
[41] Cody Godwin. 2021. Met Office and Microsoft to build climate supercomputer.
BBC News (2021). https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-56840169
[42] Noah Golowich, Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad Shamir. 2017. Size-Independent
Sample Complexity of Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06541 (2017).
[43] Google. 2022. Google Environmental Report 2022 - gstatic.com. (2022).
https://www.gstatic.com/gumdrop/sustainability/google-2022-environmental-
report.pdf
[44] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. 2015. Deep compression: Compressing
deep neural networks with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149 (2015).
[45] Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich
Elsen, Ryan Prenger, Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, and Adam Coates.
2014. Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.5567 (2014).
[46] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2015. Deep Residual
Learning for Image Recognition. CoRR abs/1512.03385 (2015). http://arxiv.org/
abs/1512.03385
[47] Tong He and Stefano Soatto. 2019. Mono3D+: Monocular 3D Vehicle De-
tection with Two-Scale 3D Hypotheses and Task Priors. Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 33 (July 2019), 8409–8416. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33018409
[48] John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. 2019. Computer Architecture: A Quan-
titative Approach (sixth ed.). Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
[49] Danny Hernandez and Tom Brown. 2020. AI and Efficiency. Open AI Blog Article
(2020). https://openai.com/blog/ai-and-efficiency/
[50] Danny Hernandez and Tom B. Brown. 2020. Measuring the Algorithmic Efficiency
of Neural Networks. CoRR abs/2005.04305 (2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04305
[51] Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. 2021.
Scaling Laws for Transfer. (2021).
[52] Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory F. Diamos, Heewoo
Jun, Hassan Kianinejad, Md. Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou.
2017. Deep Learning Scaling is Predictable, Empirically. CoRR abs/1712.00409
(2017). http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.00409
[53] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. 2015. Distilling the Knowledge in
a Neural Network. (2015).
[54] Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya,
Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes
Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den
Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich
Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. 2022. Training Compute-
Optimal Large Language Models. (2022).
[55] Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. 1989. Multilayer feed-
forward networks are universal approximators. Neural networks 2, 5 (1989),359–366.
[56] Zhen Huang, Shiyi Xu, Minghao Hu, Xinyi Wang, Jinyan Qiu, Yongquan Fu,
Yuncai Zhao, Yuxing Peng, and Changjian Wang. 2020. Recent trends in deep
learning based open-domain textual question answering systems. IEEE Access 8
(2020), 94341–94356.
[57] Itay Hubara, Matthieu Courbariaux, Daniel Soudry, Ran El-Yaniv, and Yoshua
Bengio. 2016. Binarized neural networks. In Advances in neural information
processing systems . 4107–4115.
[58] Matthew Hutson. 2020. Eye-catching advances in some AI fields are not real.
Science News (2020). https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/05/eye-catching-
advances-some-ai-fields-are-not-real
[59] ICML. 2020. ICML 2020 Style & Author Instructions. ICML Website (2020).
https://icml.cc/Conferences/2020/StyleAuthorInstructions
[60] Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014.
On using very large target vocabulary for neural machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.2007 (2014).
[61] Norman P. Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng
Nai, Nishant Patil, Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, Cliff Young,
Xiang Zhou, Zongwei Zhou, and David Patterson. 2023. TPU v4: An Optically
Reconfigurable Supercomputer for Machine Learning with Hardware Support
for Embeddings. (2023).
[62] Norman P Jouppi, Doe Hyun Yoon, Matthew Ashcraft, Mark Gottscho, Thomas B
Jablin, George Kurian, James Laudon, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, and Xiaoyu Ma. 2021.
Ten lessons from three generations shaped googleâĂŹs tpuv4i: Industrial product.
In2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA) . IEEE, 1–14.
[63] Norman P Jouppi, Doe Hyun Yoon, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Nishant Patil, James
Laudon, Cliff Young, and David Patterson. 2020. A domain-specific supercomputer
for training deep neural networks. Commun. ACM 63, 7 (2020), 67–78.
[64] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess,
Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. (2020).
[65] W Kim, RL Bruce, T Masuda, GW Fraczak, N Gong, P Adusumilli, S Ambrogio, H
Tsai, J Bruley, and J-P Han. 2019. Confined PCM-based analog synaptic devices
offering low resistance-drift and 1000 programmable states for deep learning. In
Symposium on VLSI Technology . IEEE, T66–T67.
[66] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. 2012. Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems . 1097–1105.
[67] Karin Kruup. 2018. Clearing the buzzwords in machine learning.
https://medium.com/datamob/clearing-the-buzzwords-in-machine-learning-
e395ad73178b. (May 2018).
[68] Mathias Lechner, Ramin Hasani, Alexander Amini, Thomas A. Henzinger, Daniela
Rus, and Radu Grosu. 2020. Neural circuit policies enabling auditable autonomy.
Nature Machine Intelligence 2, 10 (2020), 642–652.
[69] Charles E. Leiserson, Neil C. Thompson, Joel Emer, Bradley C. Kuszmaul, Butler W.
Lampson, Daniel Sanchez, and Tao B. Schardl. 2020. ThereâĂŹs Plenty of Room
at the Top: What will drive growth in computer performance after MooreâĂŹs
Law ends? Science (2020).
[70] Jing Li, Aixin Sun, Jianglei Han, and Chenliang Li. 2020. A survey on deep
learning for named entity recognition. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering (2020).
[71] Xing Lin, Yair Rivenson, Nezih T Yardimci, Muhammed Veli, Yi Luo, Mona Jarrahi,
and Aydogan Ozcan. 2018. All-optical machine learning using diffractive deep
neural networks. Science 361, 6406 (2018), 1004–1008.
[72] Po-Ling Loh. 2017. On lower bounds for statistical learning theory. Entropy 19,
11 (2017), 617.
[73] Andrew Lohn and Micah Musser. 2022. AI and Compute: How Much Longer
Can Computing Power Drive Artificial Intelligence Progress? Technical Report.
Center for Security and Emerging Technology. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.51593/
2021ca009
[74] Mingsheng Long, Han Zhu, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. 2017. Deep
transfer learning with joint adaptation networks. In Proceedings of the 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 . JMLR. org, 2208–2217.
[75] A B Lovins. 1985. Saving gigabucks with negawatts. Public Util. Fortn.; (United
States) 115 (3 1985). https://www.osti.gov/biblio/5787710
[76] Minh-Thang Luong, Ilya Sutskever, Quoc V Le, Oriol Vinyals, and Wojciech
Zaremba. 2014. Addressing the rare word problem in neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8206 (2014).
[77] Alex Lyzhov. 2021. "AI and compute" trend isn’t predictive of what is happen-
ing. https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/wfpdejMWog4vEDLDg/ai-and-compute-
trend-isn-t-predictive-of-what-is-happening". (2021).
[78] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun
Wu. 2019. The neuro-symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and
sentences from natural supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12584 (2019).
[79] Fernando MartÃŋnez-Plumed, Shahar Avin, Miles Brundage, Allan Dafoe,
Sean ÃŞ hÃĽigeartaigh, and JosÃľ HernÃąndez-Orallo. 2018. Accounting for the

==== Page 15 ====
The Computational Limits of Deep Learning LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021,
Neglected Dimensions of AI Progress. (2018).
[80] Eric Masanet, Arman Shehabi, Nuoa Lei, Sarah Smith, and Jonathan Koomey.
2020. Recalibrating global data center energy-use estimates. Science 367, 6481
(Feb. 2020), 984–986. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aba3758
[81] Frank McSherry, Michael Isard, and Derek G. Murray. 2015. Scalability! But at
what COST?. In 15th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS XV) .
USENIX Association, Kartause Ittingen, Switzerland. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/hotos15/workshop-program/presentation/mcsherry
[82] Nicolai Meinshausen and Bin Yu. 2009. Lasso-type recovery of sparse represen-
tations for high-dimensional data. The Annals of Statistics 37, 1 (2009), 246–270.
[83] Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert. 1969. Perceptrons: An Introduction to Com-
putational Geometry . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
[84] Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Deep Double Descent: Where Bigger Models and More Data
Hurt. CoRR abs/1912.02292 (2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02292
[85] NVIDIA Corporation. 2017. Tesla P100 Performance Guide - HPC and Deep Learning
Applications . Technical Report. NVIDIA Corporation.
[86] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Urs HÃűlzle, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-
Miquel Munguia, Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean. 2022.
The Carbon Footprint of Machine Learning Training Will Plateau, Then Shrink.
(2022). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2204.05149
[87] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel Munguia,
Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean. 2021. Carbon Emissions
and Large Neural Network Training. arXiv:2104.10350. (2021).
[88] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel Munguia,
Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean. 2021. Carbon Emissions
and Large Neural Network Training. (2021). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/
ARXIV.2104.10350
[89] Songwen Pei, Jie Luo, Sheng Liang, Haonan Ding, Xiaochun Ye, and Mingsong
Chen. 2023. Carbon Emissions Reduction of Neural Network by Discrete Rank
Pruning. CCF Transactions on High Performance Computing (May 2023). DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s42514-023-00144-0
[90] Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. 2018. Efficient
Neural Architecture Search via Parameters Sharing. In International Conference
on Machine Learning . 4095–4104.
[91] Hieu Pham, Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, and Quoc V. Le. 2020. Meta Pseudo Labels.
CoRR abs/2003.10580 (2020). https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.10580
[92] Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Alessandro Rudi, and Francis Bach. 2018. Statistical
optimality of stochastic gradient descent on hard learning problems through
multiple passes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 8125–8135.
[93] Joelle Pineau, Philippe Vincent-Lamarre, Koustuv Sinha, Vincent Larivière, Alina
Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché Buc, Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. 2020. Im-
proving reproducibility in machine learning research (a report from the neurips
2019 reproducibility program). arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12206 (2020).
[94] Thomas E Potok, Catherine Schuman, Steven Young, Robert Patton, Federico
Spedalieri, Jeremy Liu, Ke-Thia Yao, Garrett Rose, and Gangotree Chakma. 2018.
A study of complex deep learning networks on high-performance, neuromorphic,
and quantum computers. ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing
Systems (JETC) 14, 2 (2018), 1–21.
[95] Kazi Rafat, Sadia Islam, Abdullah Al Mahfug, Md Ismail Hossain, Fuad Rahman,
Sifat Momen, Shafin Rahman, and Nabeel Mohammed. 2023. Mitigating carbon
footprint for knowledge distillation based deep learning model compression. Plos
one18, 5 (2023), e0285668.
[96] Rajat Raina, Anand Madhavan, and Andrew Ng. 2009. Large-scale Deep Unsuper-
vised Learning using Graphics Processors. Proceedings of the 26th International
Conference on Machine Learning (2009).
[97] Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. 2019.
Do ImageNet Classifiers Generalize to ImageNet? (2019).
[98] Albert Reuther, Peter Michaleas, Michael Jones, Vijay Gadepally, Siddharth Samsi,
and Jeremy Kepner. 2019. Survey and benchmarking of machine learning acceler-
ators. In 2019 IEEE high performance extreme computing conference (HPEC) . IEEE,
1–9.
[99] Albert Reuther, Peter Michaleas, Michael Jones, Vijay Gadepally, Siddharth Samsi,
and Jeremy Kepner. 2020. Survey of machine learning accelerators. In 2020 IEEE
high performance extreme computing conference (HPEC) . IEEE, 1–12.
[100] Albert Reuther, Peter Michaleas, Michael Jones, Vijay Gadepally, Siddharth
Samsi, and Jeremy Kepner. 2021. AI Accelerator Survey and Trends. In 2021 IEEE
High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC) . IEEE, 1–9.
[101] Frank Rosenblatt. 1960. Perceptron Simulation Experiments. Proceedings of
the IRE 48, 3 (March 1960), 301–309. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/jrproc.1960.
287598
[102] Jonathan S. Rosenfeld. 2021. Scaling Laws for Deep Learning. CoRR
abs/2108.07686 (2021). https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07686
[103] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean
Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexan-
der Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. 2015. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge.
International Journal of Computer Vision 115, 3 (2015), 211–252.[104] Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius Hobbhahn,
and Pablo Villalobos. 2022. Compute Trends Across Three Eras of Machine
Learning. (2022). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2202.05924
[105] Vipul Sharma and Roohie Naaz Mir. 2020. A comprehensive and systematic look
up into deep learning based object detection techniques: A review. Computer
Science Review 38 (2020), 100301.
[106] Koustuv Sinha, Joelle Pineau, Jessica Forde, Rosemary Nan Ke, and Hugo
Larochelle. 2020. NeurIPS 2019 Reproducibility Challenge. ReScience C 6, 2
(2020), 11.
[107] David R. So, Chen Liang, and Quoc V. Le. 2019. The Evolved Transformer. CoRR
abs/1901.11117 (2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.11117
[108] Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, Adel Javanmard, and Jason D Lee. 2019. Theoretical
insights into the optimization landscape of over-parameterized shallow neural
networks. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 65, 2 (2019), 742–769.
[109] Nikko Strom. 2015. Scalable distributed DNN training using commodity GPU
cloud computing. In Proc. Interspeech 2015 . 1488–1492. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
21437/Interspeech.2015-354
[110] Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. 2019. Energy and
policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02243
(2019).
[111] Rich Sutton. 2019. The Bitter Lesson. http://www.incompleteideas.net/IncIdeas/
BitterLesson.html. (2019).
[112] Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. 2019. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for
Convolutional Neural Networks. CoRR abs/1905.11946 (2019). http://arxiv.org/
abs/1905.11946
[113] Neil Thompson, Shuning Ge, and Gabriel Manso. 2020. The Importance of
(Exponentially More) Computing Power. Mimeo (2020).
[114] Neil C. Thompson, Kristjan Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F. Manso.
2021. Deep Learning’s Diminishing Returns: The Cost of Improvement is Becom-
ing Unsustainable. IEEE Spectrum 58, 10 (2021), 50–55. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/MSPEC.2021.9563954
[115] Neil C. Thompson, Kristjan H. Greenewald, Keeheon Lee, and Gabriel F. Manso.
2020. The Computational Limits of Deep Learning. CoRR abs/2007.05558 (2020).
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.05558
[116] Neil C. Thompson and Svenja Spanuth. 2021. The Decline of Computers as a
General Purpose Technology. Commun. ACM 64, 3 (Feb. 2021), 64âĂŞ72. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3430936
[117] Robert Tibshirani. 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 58, 1 (1996), 267–288.
[118] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, TimothÃľe Lacroix, Baptiste RoziÃĺre, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro,
Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume
Lample. 2023. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language Models. (2023).
[119] Vasileios Tzoumas, Pasquale Antonante, and Luca Carlone. 2019. Outlier-robust
spatial perception: Hardness, general-purpose algorithms, and guarantees. In
2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) .
IEEE, 5383–5390.
[120] Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. 2020. AI Feynman: A physics-inspired
method for symbolic regression. Science Advances 6, 16 (2020), eaay2631.
[121] J Welser, JW Pitera, and C Goldberg. 2018. Future computing hardware for AI.
In2018 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) . IEEE, 1–3.
[122] Wei Wen, Cong Xu, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang, Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. 2017.
Coordinating filters for faster deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision . 658–666.
[123] Wikipedia. 2023. Dennard scaling — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
(2023). https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dennard_scaling&oldid=
1134445777 [Online; accessed 25-May-2023].
[124] Xiongwei Wu, Doyen Sahoo, and Steven CH Hoi. 2020. Recent advances in deep
learning for object detection. Neurocomputing 396 (2020), 39–64.
[125] Zhanghao Wu, Zhijian Liu, Ji Lin, Yujun Lin, and Song Han. 2020. Lite Trans-
former with Long-Short Range Attention. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR) .
[126] Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He. 2017.
Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition . 1492–1500.
[127] Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Josh
Tenenbaum. 2018. Neural-symbolic vqa: Disentangling reasoning from vision and
language understanding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
1031–1042.
[128] Jiahui Yu, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan, Legg Yeung, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini,
and Yonghui Wu. 2022. CoCa: Contrastive Captioners are Image-Text Foundation
Models. arXiv:2205.01917. (2022). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2205.
01917
[129] Jiajun Zhang and Chengqing Zong. 2015. Deep Neural Networks in Machine
Translation: An Overview. IEEE Intell. Syst. 30, 5 (2015), 16–25.
[130] Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. 2017. Learning
Transferable Architectures for Scalable Image Recognition. CoRR abs/1707.07012

==== Page 16 ====
LIMITS ’21, June 14–15, 2021, Thompson et al.
(2017). http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.07012

