==== Page 1 ====
JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     33
VviewpointsIMAGE BY ANDRIJ BORYS ASSOCIATES, USING SHUTTERSTOCKadopted by the research community to 
the point that previous approaches tend 
to be regarded as obsolete. Researchers 
and practitioners have extended the use 
of DP beyond the interactive setting it 
was designed for. Extended uses include: 
data release, where privacy of respon -
dents versus data analysts is the goal, 
and collection of personal information, 
where privacy of respondents versus the 
data collector is claimed. Google, Apple, 
and Facebook have seen the chance to 
collect or release microdata (individual 
respondent data) from their users under 
the privacy pledge “don’t worry, whatever 
you tell us will be DP-protected.”
However, applying DP to record-
level data release or collection (which THE TRADITIONAL APPROACH  
to statistical disclosure con -
trol (SDC) for privacy protec -
tion is utility-first. Since the 
1970s, national statistical 
institutes have been using anonymiza -
tion methods with heuristic parameter 
choice and suitable utility preservation 
properties to protect data before re -
lease. Their goal is to publish analyti -
cally useful data that cannot be linked 
to specific respondents or leak confi -
dential information on them.
In the late 1990s, the computer sci -
ence community took another angle 
and proposed privacy-first data protec -
tion. In this approach a privacy model 
specifying an ex ante privacy condition is 
enforced using one or several SDC meth -
ods, such as noise addition, generaliza -
tion, or microaggregation. The param -
eters of the SDC methods depend on the 
privacy model parameters, and too strict 
a choice of the latter may result in poor 
utility. The first widely accepted privacy 
model was k-anonymity, whereas differ -
ential privacy (DP) is the model that cur -
rently attracts the most attention.
DP was originally proposed for inter -
active statistical queries to a database.5 
A randomized query function κ (that 
returns the query answer plus some 
noise) satisfies -DP if for all datasets D1 
and D2 that differ in one record and all S 
⊂ Range  (κ), it holds that Pr( κ(D1) ∈ S) ≤ 
exp( ) × Pr( κ(D2) ∈ S). In other words, the 
presence or absence of any single record must not be noticeable from the query 
answers, up to an exponential factor of . 
The smaller , the higher the protection. 
The noise to be added to the answer to 
enforce a certain  depends on the global 
sensitivity of the query to the presence or 
absence of any single record. Mild noise 
may suffice for statistical queries such 
as the mean, while a very large noise is 
needed for identity queries returning 
the contents of a specific record.
DP offers a very neat privacy guar -
antee and, unlike privacy models in 
the k-anonymity family, does not make 
assumptions on the intruder’s back -
ground knowledge (although it assumes 
all records in the database are indepen -
dent.3,10 For this reason, DP was rapidly Viewpoint  
The Limits of Differential Privacy 
(and Its Misuse in Data Release 
and Machine Learning) 
Differential privacy is not a silver bullet for all privacy problems. DOI:10.1145/3433638  Josep Domingo-Ferrer, David Sánchez, and Alberto Blanco-Justicia


==== Page 2 ====
34    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM   |  JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7viewpoints
introduced previously, publishing use -
ful record-level microdata under DP is 
exceedingly difficult. This is only logi -
cal: releasing DP-microdata, that is, 
individual-level data derived from real 
people, contradicts the core idea of DP, 
namely that the presence or absence 
of any individual should not be notice -
able from the DP output.
A further shortcoming arises when 
trying to use DP to protect continuous 
data collection like Apple and Google 
do. DP is subject to sequential compo -
sition: if a dataset collected at time t1 is 
DP-protected with 1 and a dataset col -
lected at time t2 on a non-disjoint group 
of respondents is DP-protected with 2, 
the dataset obtained by composing the 
two collected datasets is DP-protected 
only with 1 + 2. Therefore, to enforce a 
certain  after n data collections on the 
same set of individuals, each collection 
should be DP-protected with /n, there -
by very substantially reducing the utility 
of the collected data. Strictly speaking, 
it is impossible to collect DP-protected 
data from a community of respondents 
an indefinite number of times with 
a meaningful privacy guarantee. As a 
remedy, Apple made the simplifica -
tion that sequential composition only 
applies to the data collected on an in -
dividual during the same day but not 
in different days.9 Google took a differ -
ent way out: they use sequential com -
position only for values that have not 
changed from the previous collection.4 
Both fixes are severely flawed: the data 
of an individual collected across con -
secutive days or that may have changed 
still refer to the same individual, rather 
than to disjoint individuals. Ignoring 
this and conducting a systematic data 
collection for long periods increases 
the effective  and thus reduces the ef -
fective level of protection by several or -
ders of magnitude. This issue is signifi -
cantly more privacy-harming than the 
previously mentioned large values of  
declared by Apple and Google.
Machine learning (ML) has also seen 
applications of DP. In Abadi et al.,1 DP 
is used to ensure deep learning models 
do not expose private information con -
tained in the datasets they have been 
trained on. Such a privacy guarantee is 
interesting to facilitate crowdsourcing of 
representative training data from indi -
vidual respondents. The paper describes 
the impact of sequential composition is equivalent to answering identity 
queries) requires employing a large 
amount of noise to enforce a safe 
enough . As a result, if  ≤ 1 is used, 
as recommended in Dwork and Roth5 
to obtain a meaningful privacy guaran -
tee, the analytical utility of DP outputs 
is likely to be very poor.2,7 This problem 
arose as soon as DP was moved outside 
the interactive setting. A straightfor -
ward way to mitigate the utility prob -
lem is to use unreasonably large .
Let us look at data collection. Apple 
reportedly uses  = 6 in MacOS and  = 14 
in iOS 10 (with some beta versions using 
even  = 43).9 In their RAPPOR technol -
ogy, Google uses  up to 9. According to 
Frank McSherry, one of the co-inventors 
of DP, using  values as high as 14 is 
pointless in terms of privacy.9 Indeed, 
the privacy guarantee of DP completely 
fades away for such large values of .5
As to data release, Facebook has re -
cently released DP-protected datasets for 
social science research, but it is unclear 
which  value they have used. As pointed 
out in Mervis,12 this makes it difficult 
both to understand the privacy guaran -
tees being offered and to assess the trust -
worthiness of the results obtained on the 
data. The first released version of this DP 
dataset had all demographic informa -
tion about respondents and most of the 
time and location information removed, 
and event counts had been added noise 
with σ = 200.6 The second version looks 
better, but is still analytically poorer than 
the initial version released in 2018 un -
der utility-first anonymization based on 
removal of identifiers and data aggrega -
tion. In fact, Facebook researchers have 
acknowledged the difficulties of imple -
menting (and verifying) DP in real-world 
applications.11
The U.S. Census Bureau has also an -
nounced the use of DP to disseminate 
Census 2020 results.8 A forecast of the 
negative impact of DP on the utility of 
the current Census is given in Santos-
Lazoda et al.14 Additionally, Ruggles et 
al.13 have remarked that DP “is a radi -
cal departure from established Cen -
sus Bureau confidentiality laws and 
precedents”: the Census must take 
care of preventing respondent re-iden -
tification, but masking respondent 
characteristics—as DP does—is not 
required. A more fundamental objec -
tion in Ruggles et al.13 is against the 
very idea of DP-protected microdata. As speakers.acm.orgStudents and faculty 
can take advantage of 
ACM’s Distinguished 
Speakers Program 
to invite renowned 
thought leaders in 
academia, industry 
and government to 
deliver compelling and 
insightful talks on the 
most important topics 
in computing and IT 
today. ACM covers the 
cost of transportation 
for the speaker to 
travel to your event.
A great speaker 
can make the 
difference between 
a good event and 
a WOW event!Distinguished 
Speakers 
Program

==== Page 3 ====
JULY 2021  |  VOL. 64  |  NO. 7  |  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM     35viewpoints
are driven by the insistence to twist 
DP in ways that contradict its own core 
idea: to make the data of any single in -
dividual unnoticeable. 
References
1. Abadi, M. et al. Deep learning with differential privacy. 
In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGSAC Conference 
on Computer and Communications Security-CCS’16  
(2016), 308–318.
2. Bambauer, J., Muralidhar, K., Sarathy, R. Fool’s gold: 
An illustrated critique of differential privacy. Vanderbilt 
Journal of Entertainment & Technology Law 16 (, 4 
(2014), 701–755.
3. Clifton, C., Tassa, T. On syntactic anonymity and 
differential privacy. Transactions on Data Privacy 6 , 2 
(2013), 161–183.
4. Cyphers, B. Differential privacy, part 3: Extraordinary 
claims require extraordinary scrutiny. Accessnow 
(Nov. 30, 2017); https://bit.ly/3oqOTku
5. Dwork, C., Roth, A. The Algorithmic Foundations 
of Differential Privacy. Foundations and Trends in 
Theoretical Computer Science 9 , 3–4, (2014).
6. Francis, P. Dear differential privacy, put up or shut up. 
Technical Report MPI-SWS-2020-005 (Jan. 2020); 
https://bit.ly/3whnpkc
7. Fredrikson, M. et al. Privacy in pharmacogenetics: 
an end-to-end case study of personalized warfarin 
dosing. In Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security 
Symposium (2014), 17–32.
8. Garfinkel, S., Abowd, J.M., Martindale, C. 
Understanding database reconstruction attacks on 
public data. Commun. ACM 62 , 3 (Mar. 2019), 46–53.
9. Greenberg, A. How one of Apple’s key privacy 
safeguards falls short. Wired  (Sept. 15, 2017); https://
bit.ly/2RsaLjr
10. Kifer, D.and Machanavajjhala, A. No free lunch in data 
privacy. In Proceedings of the SIGMOD Conference 
2011  (2011), 193–-204.
11. Kifer, D. et al. Guidelines for implementing and 
auditing differentially private systems. (Feb. 10, 2020); 
https://bit.ly/2RwMHvH
12. Mervis, J. Researchers finally get access to data on 
Facebook’s role in political discourse. Science  (Feb. 13, 
2020); https://bit.ly/3ynS7Kj
13. Ruggles, S. et al. Differential privacy and Census data: 
implications for social and economic research. AEA 
Papers and Proceedings, 109  (2019), 403–408.
14. Santos-Lozada, A.R., Howard, J.T. and Verdery, A.M. 
How differential privacy will affect our understanding 
of health disparities in the United States. In 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 , 
24) (2020), 13405–13412.
15. Triastcyn, A. and Faltings, B. Federated learning with 
Bayesian differential privacy. In Proceedings of 2019 
IEEE Intl. Conf. on Big Data (2019), 2587–2596.
16. Wei, K. et al. Federated learning with differential 
privacy: algorithms and performance analysis. IEEE 
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 
15 (2020), 3454–3469.
Josep Domingo-Ferrer  (josep.domingo@urv.cat) is a 
Distinguished Professor of Computer Science and an 
ICREAAcadèmia Researcher at Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 
Tarragona, Catalonia, where he holds the UNESCO Chair in 
Data Privacy and leads CYBERCAT.
David Sánchez (david.sanchez@urv.cat ) is an associate 
professor and an ICREA-Acadèmia Researcher at 
Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Catalonia.
Alberto Blanco-Justicia (alberto.blanco@urv.cat) is a 
senior postdoc at Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, 
Catalonia.
The authors received support from the European 
Commission (projects H2020-871042 “SoBigData++” and 
H2020-101006879 “MobiDataLab”), the Government of 
Catalonia (ICREA Acadèmia Prizes to J. Domingo-Ferrer 
and D. Sánchez, and grant 2017 SGR 705), the Spanish 
Government (projects RTI2018-095094-B-C21 “Consent” 
and TIN2016-80250-R “Sec-MCloud”) and the Norwegian 
Research Council (project no. 308904 “CLEANUP”). The 
authors are associated with the UNESCO Chair in Data 
Privacy, but the views in this Viewpoint are the authors’ 
own and not necessarily shared by UNESCO.
Copyright held by authors.over ML training epochs (which can be 
viewed as continuous data collection) 
on the effective : after 350 epochs, a very 
large  = 20 is attained. To obtain usable 
results without rising to such a large , 
the authors use the ( ,δ) relaxation of DP 
that keeps  between 2 and 8. Employing 
relaxations of DP to avoid the “bad press” 
of large  while keeping data usable is a 
common workaround in recent litera -
ture.1,15 However, DP relaxations are not 
a free lunch: relaxed DP is not DP any -
more. For example, with ( ,δ )-DP, “ δ val-
ues on the order of 1/| D| (where | D| is the 
size of the dataset) are very dangerous: 
they permit preserving privacy by pub -
lishing the complete records of a small 
number of database participants.”5 The 
value of δ employed in Abadi et al.1 and 
Triastcyn and Faltings15 is in fact on the 
order of 1/| D|, thereby incurring severe 
risk of disclosure. Nonetheless, despite 
the use of relaxations and large  and δ, 
the impact of DP on data utility remains 
significant: in Abadi et al.1 the deep 
learning algorithm without privacy pro -
tection achieves 86% accuracy on the CI -
FAR-10 dataset, but it falls down to 73% 
for  = 8 and to 67% for  = 2.
Very recently, DP has also been pro -
posed for a decentralized form of ML 
called federated learning. Federated 
learning allows a model manager to 
learn a ML model based on data that 
are privately stored by a set of clients: in 
each epoch, the model manager sends 
the current model to the clients, who 
return to the manager a model update 
based on their respective private data -sets. This does not require the clients 
to surrender their private data to the 
model manager and saves computation 
to the latter. However, model updates 
might leak information on the clients’ 
private data unless properly protected. 
To prevent such a leakage, DP is ap -
plied to model updates.15,16 However, in 
addition to distorting model updates, 
using DP raises the following issues:
 ˲ Since model updates are protected 
in each epoch, and in successive epochs 
they are computed on the same (or, at 
least, not completely disjoint) client 
data, sequential composition applies. 
This means that the effective  grows 
with the number of epochs, and the 
effective protection decreases expo -
nentially. Therefore, reasonably useful 
models can only be obtained for mean -
inglessly large  (such as 50–10016).
 ˲In the original definition of DP, a 
dataset where each record contains 
the answer of a different respondent 
is assumed. Then DP ensures the re -
cord contributed by any single respon -
dent is unnoticeable from the released 
DP-protected output. This protects 
the privacy of any single respondent. 
However, when DP is used to protect 
the model update submitted by a cli -
ent, all records in the client’s dataset 
belong to the client. Making any single 
record unnoticeable is not sufficient 
to protect the client’s privacy when all 
records in the client’s private dataset 
are about the client, as it happens for 
example, if the client’s private data 
contain her health-related or fitness 
measurements. Thus, the DP guaran -
tee loses its significance in this case.
Conclusion
Differential privacy is a neat privacy 
definition that can co-exist with cer -
tain well-defined data uses in the con -
text of interactive queries. However, DP 
is neither a silver bullet for all privacy 
problems nor a replacement for all pre -
vious privacy models.3 In fact, extreme 
care should be exercised when trying to 
extend its use beyond the setting it was 
designed for. As we have highlighted, 
fundamental misunderstandings and 
blatantly flawed implementations 
pervade the application of DP to data 
releases, data collection, and machine 
learning. These misconceptions have 
serious consequences in terms of 
poor privacy or poor utility and they Fundamental 
misunderstandings 
and flawed 
implementations 
pervade the 
application of 
differential privacy 
to data releases, 
data collection, and 
machine learning.

