==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-022-00557-9
1 3
RESEARCH ARTICLE
The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique
Jan‑Christoph Heilinger1 
Received: 13 January 2022 / Accepted: 18 June 2022 / 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
The paper presents an ethical analysis and constructive critique of the current prac -
tice of AI ethics. It identifies conceptual substantive and procedural challenges and 
it outlines strategies to address them. The strategies include countering the hype and 
understanding AI as ubiquitous infrastructure including neglected issues of ethics 
and justice such as structural background injustices into the scope of AI ethics and 
making the procedures and fora of AI ethics more inclusive and better informed with 
regard to philosophical ethics. These measures integrate the perspective of AI jus -
tice into AI ethics, strengthening its capacity to provide comprehensive normative 
orientation and guidance for the development and use of AI that actually improves 
human lives and living together.
Keywords  Artificial intellig ence · Ethics · Structural injustice · Trust · AI justice
People around the globe increasingly encounter, use and benefit from AI in their 
daily lives in one form or another. AI-based applications range from web-based maps 
and navigation services to digital behavioural technologies such as mobile health 
apps, from recommender algorithms in online stores to parking aids, and AI-based 
services in policing, the legal system, etc. Also, less exciting but tedious tasks—
such as analysing immense amounts of data in different domains, or determining 
the next date for a maintenance check of a machine—can, fortunately, increasingly 
be done by AI-based systems, relieving humans from burdensome work. Once they 
are well set up, such AI-based systems work quickly and effectively through vast 
amounts of data that cannot be handled by humans. And they do so more reliably 
than humans because machines—unlike humans—are not distracted by fatigue, hun -
ger or the like.
AI figures among the most advanced tools humanity has developed to date, yet 
its potential for future development remains vast. That is why the High-Level Expert 
 * Jan-Chr istoph Heilinger 
 jc.heiling er@rwth-aachen.de
1 RWTH Aachen University, Applied Ethics, Theaterplatz 14, 52062 Aachen, GermanyPublished online: 7 July 2022Philosophy & Technology (2022) 35: 61

==== Page 2 ====
1 3Group on Artificial Intelligence— an influential advisory body to the European Com -
mission on AI and AI ethics—declared almost euphorically that AI is.
a promising means to increase human flourishing, thereby enhancing individ -
ual and societal well-being and the common good, as well as bringing progress 
and innovation. In particular, AI systems can help to facilitate the achievement 
of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, such as promoting gender bal -
ance and tackling climate change, rationalising our use of natural resources, 
enhancing our health, mobility and production processes […]. (HLEG 2019 )
Such all-encompassing praise indicates the enormous hopes and ambitions, 
including hope for progress in morally and socially relevant dimensions, that inspire 
and justify the development of AI-based applications: AI promises to contribute to 
the good, to just and sustainable human lives and living together on our planet.
The aim of the present paper is to subject such claims and the practice of AI 
ethics itself, which seeks to provide normative orientation and guidance for the 
development and use of AI, to a critical analysis. To this end, I proceed as follows. 
Section  1 will briefly introduce the dominating normative and methodological 
assumptions, and outline the main topics currently discussed in current ethics of AI. 
Section 2 will develop critical thoughts about the current state of AI ethics, high -
lighting conceptual, substantive and procedural challenges that affect the practice of 
AI ethics. Based on this critical analysis, Sect. 3 will draw constructive conclusions 
and propose several concrete strategies by which AI ethics could and should develop 
further.
The normative reflections and proposals made in this paper are based on the 
ideal of relational equality . Relational egalitarians take the equal moral value of 
all human beings as the normative bedrock for ethical practice in all dimensions of 
human life and seek to secure conditions under which all can relate to and interact 
with one another on a footing of equality. Equality, in this relational understanding, 
is a feature of interactions between people and groups of people that can be influ -
enced by different factors (e.g. economic, political, technological). Relational equal -
ity is particularly sensitive to asymmetrical relations of unjustifiably unequal influ -
ence and domination that often lead to unequal and unjust distributions of benefits 
and burdens. Relational egalitarianism aspires to realise more egalitarian distribu -
tions where possible, conducive to securing sufficiency for all and the common good 
(Anderson, 1999 ; Heilinger, 2020 ; Lippert-Rasmussen, 2018 ; Wolff, 1998 ). Bring -
ing a relational egalitarian account of justice to the normative assessment of AI is 
meant to expand the focus of AI ethics to pay more attention to the social, economic, 
political and environmental background structures within which AI is developed and 
used (cf. D’Ignazio and Klein, 2020 ). Furthermore, looking at the development and 
use of AI from this perspective helps also to make pre-existing ethical and social 
issues visible in a new way.1 The ultimate goal of the critical analysis offered in the 
1 Cf. A bebe et al. ( 2020 ) who argue that computing can act ‘as a synecdoche – a part that stands in for 
the larger whole in discourse and critique. Computing can offer us a tractable focus through which to 
notice anew, and bring renewed attention to, old problems’.J.-C. Heilinger Page2of20 61

==== Page 3 ====
1 3paper thus is to constructively support ongoing efforts to complement and improve 
the current practice of AI ethics from the mentioned normative perspectives, so that 
AI’s inevitably massive impact on how humans live and live together will be as good 
as possible.
1  T he Practice of AI Ethics
By now, a number of central ethical issues and problems have been identified and 
established as ‘core questions’ arising in the context of AI2:
• How can we understand, explain and control—if ever—the internal workings 
within a complex AI system (cf. e.g. Kempt et al., 2022 ; Mittelstadt et al., 2019 )?
• Who bears responsibility in the event of harm resulting from the use of an AI 
system (cf. e.g. Santoni de Sio & Mecacci, 2021 ; Sparrow, 2007 )?
• How can AI systems be prevented from reflecting existing discrimination, biases 
and social injustices based on their training data, thereby exacerbating them (cf. 
e.g. Bender et al., 2021 ; Benjamin, 2019 ; Friedman & Nissenbaum, 1996 )?
• How can the privacy of people be protected, given that personal data can be col -
lected and analysed so easily by many (cf. e.g. Véliz, 2020 ; Zuboff, 2015 , 2019 )?
• How can autonomous human decision-making be protected against undue influ -
ence and deskilling resulting from the use of AI (cf. e.g. Lara & Deckers, 2020 ; 
Lu, 2016 ; Mills, 2020 ; Reiner & Nagel, 2017 )?
• How can it be prevented that an uncontrollable, potentially malicious, super-
intelligence will, one day, put its own goals above those of humans (cf. e.g. Bos -
trom, 2014 )?
Given the significant economic potential, the far-reaching (geo-) political impli -
cations and the social and ethical salience of AI-based technologies, it is not aston -
ishing that next to scholars in the fields of applied ethics and computer sciences, 
corporations and political institutions have also become involved in the ethical 
debates. The ethical discourse is thus shaped by contributions from the perspective 
of the economy, politics and academia.3 Consequently, the numerous documents 
that are potentially relevant to the ethical debate about AI are quite heterogeneous 
and include reports and position papers from policy advisory bodies; guidelines and 
white papers as self-commitments from companies and research institutions; check -
lists or questionnaires as handouts for designers; and scholarly publications from all 
disciplines involved, especially computer science and engineering, management and 
business studies, sociology and STS and philosophy/(applied) ethics.
2 F or an overview cf. Coeckelbergh ( 2020 ), Fjeld et al. ( 2020 )
3 This is not to deny that others also contribute to the ethical debates, in particular individual users and 
engaged citizens, civil society initiatives and non-profit organisations, journalism and fictional storytell -
ing in film and literature.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page3of2061

==== Page 4 ====
1 3Ethical reflections and arguments in scholarly publications as well as in policy 
documents and tech industry guidelines4 often proceed as a discussion of (a) risks 
and opportunities, or of (b) rules and principles, or of (c) visions and ideals of AI, 
mirroring the three different normative theories that shape the tradition of Western 
moral philosophy: consequentialism, deontology and virtue ethics.
The aforementioned ethical questions can thus first be raised and discussed by 
weighing the hopes and promises against potential risks or problematic, harmful 
consequences  resulting from designing and using AI-based technologies (cf. e.g. 
Coeckelbergh, 2020 ). Second, as already firmly established in other fields of applied 
ethics such as bioethics and medical ethics, the ethical discussion can work along 
the lines of formulating principles  that are expected to provide orientation regarding 
what, morally, ought to be done—similar to a catalogue of duties (cf. Jobin et al., 
2019 ). Third, the ethical evaluation can proceed with the formulation of ideals  and a 
positive vision to establish goals either for a good, ‘virtuous’ use of AI or even a vir -
tuous AI itself  (cf. Vallor, 2016 ). And, of course, the three strategies are not mutually 
exclusive and, in the different contributions to the ethical debate, can often be found 
to be employed in parallel. To illustrate this claim with the first substantive ques -
tion in mind—the one addressing issues of understanding, explaining and control -
ling AI—the consequentialist discussion focusses on weighing potential risks of an 
AI that can or cannot be controlled, explained or understood; the deontic discussion 
would established a principled demand that AI must be explainable and implement 
measures to secure it as much as possible; and the aretic discussion could either call 
for virtues in those who develop and use AI or stress the ideal or vision of explain -
able AI and directly demand that AI-based applications be virtuous, e.g. ‘trustwor -
thy’, themselves (more on this below, in Sect. 2).
AI ethics thus presents itself as a many-voiced debate involving different perspec -
tives that centres, in quite heterogeneous contributions, around a set of canonical 
questions and deploys a set of normative tools for ethical analysis and decision-
making. Yet, from a normative meta-perspective that scrutinises the current stand -
ards and the dominating practices in AI ethics, several critical questions arise. These 
questions range from conceptual issues about determining the exact topic of the 
debate, over some basic normative assumptions that underlie it, to the procedures of 
actual ethical decision-making. In the following, I will identify and briefly discuss—
with no claim to completeness—several such normatively relevant meta-questions 
about AI ethics. The idea is to offer an ethical reflection of the ethics of AI, or, in 
other words, to work towards an ethics of the ethics of AI .
2  AI E thics: an Ethical Critique
When scrutinising AI ethics in its currently dominating form, three dimensions 
deserve particular attention because of their theoretical and practical impact on the 
normative discussions and assessments made: the conceptual  dimension that defines 
4 F or an overview cf. Hagendorff ( 2020 )J.-C. Heilinger Page4of20 61

==== Page 5 ====
1 3the key concepts employed to define the topic of the debate; the substantive  dimen -
sion of determining which ethical question can legitimately be raised within AI eth -
ics; and the procedural  dimension regarding the methods and practices employed to 
generate ethical assessments.
2.1  The Conceptual Dimension
The notions deployed to define the topic of AI ethics, on the one hand, shape the 
normative intuitions with which people approach AI. On the other, they also deter -
mine what is considered part of AI ethics—and what not. That is why a conceptual 
critique provides the grounds for and is an integral element of the normative critique 
of the practice of AI ethics.
2.1.1   Intelligent? Artificial?
The critical appreciation of the merits and flaws of the current ethical debate about 
AI starts with a closer look at the concept of AI itself. ‘Artificial intelligence’ is first 
of all a rather broad technical umbrella term for a number of complex computer 
technologies that—based on huge amounts of data—are very powerful in pattern 
recognition, classification, decision-making and prediction and thus can perform 
tasks in different fields that normally require human intelligence. Among computer 
scientists, however, the term AI is used less frequently than in public and ethical 
discourse. Instead, computer scientists usually name more precisely the particu -
lar AI method they use, such as machine learning, neural networks or deep learn -
ing, each of which constitutes a particular subset of the former (Russel & Norvig, 
2021 ). One of the reasons AI is rather rarely mentioned by computer scientists may 
be their awareness of the fact that AI—at least in its current forms—is, to pick up 
Kate Crawford’s provocative formulation, neither intelligent, nor artificial  (Craw -
ford, 2021 , 7).
Certainly, AI can process immense amounts of data and perform highly special -
ised tasks, but this has little to do with a general creative and cross-sectoral intel -
ligence of humans. A chess computer cannot control drones, a skin cancer detection 
algorithm can neither translate between different languages nor help me exercise 
regularly, etc. And at the current state of research, it is not yet foreseeable how—and 
if ever—a general , i.e. non-specialised, form of machine ‘intelligence’ can be devel -
oped.5 Furthermore, far from being merely artificial, AI systems are at the same 
time highly natural: they rely on numerous natural resources, on raw materials and 
energy resources extracted from the earth, on countless hours of human labour to 
5 This claim can be tr ue even if talk of  artificial general  intelligence can be, on occasion, found among 
developers and computer scientists, cf. https://  openai.  com/  about/ : ‘Our mission is to ensure that artificial 
general intelligence benefits all of humanity’.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page5of2061

==== Page 6 ====
1 3build machines and infrastructure, to develop the programs, to collect and clean data 
and to train algorithms (cf. Crawford, 2021 , chs. 1–2).6
Thus, a first basic and conceptual criticism with implications for any appreciation 
of AI ethics is that the term AI itself can give rise to misleading intuitions , which 
may subsequently also influence AI ethics itself by creating an idea of the technol -
ogy under consideration that does not match with its reality.
2.1.2   AI as Infrastructure
Next to this terminological issue, an additional conceptual question about the scope 
of AI ethics deserves attention. AI-based applications can be used in a wide variety 
of areas, ranging from health and mobility, over communication and consumption, 
to research, warfare and entertainment. That is why Andrew Ng has proposed to 
compare AI with electricity.7 As electricity too, AI is increasingly becoming per -
vasive and ambient in modern societies—its tasks ranging from ‘the general (learn -
ing, reasoning, perception, and so on) to the specific, such as playing chess, proving 
mathematical theorems, writing poetry, driving a car, or diagnosing diseases’ (Rus -
sel & Norvig, 2021 , 19). Thus, AI is becoming a ubiquitous part of infrastructure. 
Given that AI ‘is relevant to any intellectual task; it is truly a universal field’ (ibid.), 
one may even wonder about the need for and benefits of identifying AI as a distinct 
ethical topic.
Unlike other subfields in applied ethics—such as medical ethics, animal ethics, 
environmental ethics or the ethics of nuclear technology—the ethics of AI seems to 
lack a clearly limited and specific subject area , insofar as AI is using advanced algo -
rithms, mathematics and statistics and modern computer technologies to address a 
large range of heterogeneous problems. On this understanding, AI no longer consti -
tutes a narrower subject area, in a similar way as electricity -supported strategies to 
solve problems do not constitute a worthwhile subfield of the ethics of electricity.
This, of course, is a quite provocative claim challenging many contributions to a 
presumably distinctive AI ethics. But the provocation helps to appreciate the need to 
assess AI-based technologies as an increasingly important element of contemporary 
societies, and to embed this assessment in broader debates about ethics and justice. 
Modern societies, however, are shaped by electricity, etc. and importantly also by 
AI. Yet, limiting  the ethical assessment narrowly on the AI-based components itself 
seems problematic for the reasons just provided: Labelling a field in a misleading 
way comes with the danger of triggering false expectations, fears and hopes, that 
risk to lastingly distort an entire debate. And narrowing attention to a ubiquitous 
tool that is becoming part of everyday infrastructure in modern societies comes with 
the risk of getting the focus of ethical attention wrong. The ethical questions arising 
in modern societies are certainly inevitably influenced  (e.g. mirrored, consolidated, 
6 This claim, ho wever, does not conflict with the claim that AI technologies are also ‘artificial’, but 
Crawford wants to direct more attention to the ‘natural’ underpinnings and enabling conditions of the 
technology.
7 https://  www.  wipo.  int/ wipo_  magaz  ine/ en/ 2019/  03/ artic le_ 0001.  htmlJ.-C. Heilinger Page6of20 61

==== Page 7 ====
1 3developed, aggravated, etc.) by AI-based technologies. But focusing narrowly on 
the AI technologies themselves is insufficient to capture what is morally at stake. 
Instead, the larger social context, the political, economic, cultural dynamics on both 
a domestic and the global level need to be seen and scrutinised as the field within 
which ubiquitous AI exercises its influence. As the following section will further 
illustrate, the conceptual critique prepares for a substantive expansion of the scope 
of AI ethics.
2.2  The Substantive Dimension
Two substantive criticisms deserve particular attention and call for complementing 
and extending the dominating set of questions and debates in AI ethics listed above. 
The first substantive criticism acknowledges the important fact that AI technologies 
are infrastructure also in the sense that they require massive amounts of material 
resources, of human labour, and thus give rise—not only through their computa -
tional power but also through their material existence—to numerous ethical issues 
that are connected to the use of AI. The second criticism challenges from an ethi -
cal perspective the tendency to rely on AI-based technologies in the first place to 
address all kinds of problems.
2.2.1   From the Cloud into the Mines
Kate Crawford and Vladan Joler have undertaken a detailed analysis of what they 
call the ‘Anatomy of an AI System’ (Crawford & Joler, 2019 ). The ‘anatomical 
map’ they sketch shows the massive amounts of human labour, data and planetary 
resources that are required to develop, build, run and ultimately discard AI-based 
technologies. Their discussion focuses exemplarily on the life cycle of Amazon’s 
‘Echo’-device, the company’s smart speaker running the integrated, voice-controlled 
intelligent personal assistant service called ‘Alexa’. A visually appealing map of the 
‘anatomy’ of this AI system debunks the myth of AI as a solely cloud-based, bodi -
less and thus clean form of intelligence and instead brings to light how the small 
and elegant Echo-device, offering impressive and convenient cloud-based services, 
actually presupposes and hides a massive and very down-to-earth background of 
resource extraction, energy consumption, waste production, exploitative labour, 
power imbalances and benefit accumulation among some.
The exemplary analysis of one device has shown the ethically weighty fact that 
AI-based technologies are demanding large amounts of different resources, a fact 
largely neglected in the AI-ethical literature. Awareness for the environmental and 
human costs of these systems is increasingly receiving attention in the AI-ethical 
literature, e.g. with regard to the energy needed for training neural networks (Bender 
et al., 2021 ; Strubell et al., 2019 ); when showing that AI-based technologies cannot 
only be used to develop strategies for sustainable cities, farming etc. but are in them -
selves challenges for sustainability (Brevini, 2020 ; van Wynsberghe, 2021 ); or when 
providing a full ‘Atlas of AI’ that exposes the power-relationships, political and eco -
nomic and planetary dynamics and costs of AI systems generally (Crawford, 2021 ).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page7of2061

==== Page 8 ====
1 3To provide two more details: First, the financial gains made from AI-based sys -
tems are distributed in an extremely unequal way as comparing the annual financial 
gains of, say, Amazon’s CEO on the one extreme end and the underpaid labour -
ers working under dangerous and exploitative conditions in the Cobalt mines on the 
other extreme end, clearly shows.8 And second, the lasting harm for humans and the 
environment that results from toxic waste that remains once the devises are not in 
use any more.9 Both details are issues of distributive injustice that, from the perspec -
tive of relational egalitarianism, is a consequence of existing asymmetries in power 
and influence that allow some to dominate others.
Some may object that these issues are nothing but the normal background  which 
may be regrettable or not, but not directly relevant for a discussion of the ethics of 
AI technologies. Similarly in medical ethics, the objection could continue, where 
concern for the environmental costs of running hospitals or the unequal income dis -
tribution between the different groups that contribute to the functioning of a health 
system also does not figure in our engagement with topics of medical ethics. Thus, 
focussing on the distinctive  issues that arise through the very use of AI-based appli -
cations should be at the centre of AI ethics and nothing else.
A reply to this objection can be twofold. First, medical ethics has in recent years 
started to direct more attention to the connections between providing health ser -
vices to patients, e.g. in hospitals, on the one hand, and its environmental impact, 
e.g. on the climate and on population health, on the other. Attention to context and 
background is thus emerging in other fields, as well. And second, it is a longstand -
ing mistake to assume that an ethical assessment could limit itself to what is done 
by some (developers, users, etc.) while ignoring the influence of presumably nor -
mal and thus acceptable background conditions, that, at closer reflection, may turn 
out to be morally unjustifiable and indicative of structural injustice (Young, 2006 , 
120–121; McKeown, 2021a , 2021b ). An adequate understanding of the ethical 
issues thus requires assessing the social structures within which action takes place, 
because such social structures can make the positive moral valence of apparently 
innocent, well-intended and unproblematic actions shift.10 Only by expanding the 
focus of moral attention—which will lead to embedding but not to replacing the 
established questions of AI ethics mentioned above—can an adequate ethical assess -
ment be provided.
10 Insof ar as AI ethics integrates these issues, it can very well be called ‘critical theory’, as suggested by 
Waelen ( 2022 ).8 The countless full y unpaid  users who, through interacting with the Echo-device, provide important 
training opportunities that help develop and improve the product further, matter too. The massive differ -
ences in financial gains achieved by the different contributors to the entire infrastructure necessary for 
the device to function are not only an instance of distributive injustice (where adequate compensation 
would be required for all those who contribute to the entire cooperative system), but indicative of a more 
basic relational injustice that can be captured in terms of domination and intentional clustering of advan -
tages for some and of disadvantages for others (Rawls 1999 ; Young 1990 ; Young 2011 ).
9 Her e again, harm caused to the environment is not a regrettable and unintended effect of the business 
practice; instead, externalising costs are an essential element of accumulating benefits in growth- and 
profit-oriented corporations (Hickel 2020 ).J.-C. Heilinger Page8of20 61

==== Page 9 ====
1 3A global infrastructure lies in the background of devices running AI-based appli -
cations, an infrastructure marked by massive, structural injustice: Persistently and 
systemically, the advantages and disadvantages are unequally distributed between 
different groups of actors, as analysis of the production and supply chain, data 
extraction, disposal and the unequal distribution of power, influence and profits 
makes abundantly clear. Thus, the consequences and risks of developing and using 
AI go far beyond the issues discussed in the dominating debates that thus need to be 
expanded through an inclusion of the voices of all who are, in one way or another, 
affected by the development, use and disposal of such technologies.
2.2.2   Technosolutionism
A second substantive challenge for the ethics of AI arises from a very fundamen -
tal question: Prior to securing the ethical use of AI to address a problem, it needs 
to be asked and re-considered whether AI is indeed a suitable means to address a 
problem in the first place (cf. Riley, 2008 , ch. 2; Morozov, 2013 ). The grounds for 
this challenge lie in the fact that in some cases AI-based technologies are deployed 
to address problems that could be better addressed by non AI-based interventions. 
A general preference for prioritising technological over non-technological solutions 
may lead to choosing an ultimately unsuitable strategy. The worldview—some may 
say: the ideology—to address diverse human problems primarily  with the help of 
technology and engineering, including problems in the fields of politics and soci -
ety, education, public health and law, can be called ‘technological solutionism’ 
(Morozov, 2013 ).
Technosolutionism is a wide-spread phenomenon, in no way limited to the 
deployment of AI-based technologies. Examples thus go beyond apps to fix social 
problems (e.g. an app to secure consent before engaging in sexual activity) and 
include the medicalisation of social problems (e.g. administering drugs to pupils 
with ADHD), or geo-engineering such as solar radiation management to reduce the 
Earth’s albedo in order to reduce global warming that results from environmental 
pollution, etc.11
Two related dynamics strengthen the inclination to rely on technological solutions 
to all kinds of problems. First is a dynamic resulting from the sheer existence of a 
powerful tool that makes humans want to use it. Holding a hammer in one’s hands 
makes one approach the world in a specific way: the tool itself creates an invitation 
to use it. The same holds true for advanced medical, technological or other tools for 
which novel uses are thought up simply as the result of their availability. In such 
cases, the availability of certain technologies can lead to an incentive to ‘reverse 
engineer’ applications for which the technologies would serve as solutions. And 
11 The pr oblem of technosolutionism can be discussed in terms of relational injustice: Examples abound 
that can show how a dominating group and perspective deploys its preferred (technological) tools to 
address a problem that, from the perspective of those most affected, could or should be tackled by differ -
ent means. The fear that sexual self-determination and evolving, ongoing consent or dissent, for example, 
will not be respected cannot be appeased by an app that, instead, will strengthen the position of a poten -
tial perpetrator who can claim that consent was given.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page9of2061

==== Page 10 ====
1 3second, modern societies are characterised by a wide-ranging general openness for 
addressing problems of different kinds through engineering and digital approaches. 
Digital technologies are often perceived as progressive, effective, modern, fascinat -
ing and, because of their technological nature, as politically neutral12—and thus are 
frequently perceived as preferable over alternative, old-fashioned, ideological inter -
ventions to address problems. Yet, the preference for technological solutions tends 
to create a dynamic to narrow down the perception and the analytical understanding 
of problems to their technological dimension.
The substantive point of criticising technosolutionism, however, is not to deny 
that digital solutions can be effective and desirable. It stands beyond doubt that AI-
based and other advanced technologies do contribute in meaningful ways to address -
ing many problems and that using them can provide better outcomes, relieve humans 
from tiresome work and can also help address social, environment, medical and 
other challenges. Some problems indeed have technological solutions and others can 
be addressed at least partly with the help of technologies. The substantive point of 
the criticism is rather that the ethics of AI in particular (as the ethics of technol -
ogy in general) has to broaden its focus and must not only inquire whether the use 
of a particular technology is ethical or how it can be made more ethical. Instead, 
an ethical  AI ethics will have to also have to settle whether a particular problem 
ought, morally, to be conceived of as a technological problem and consequently be 
addressed with the help of (AI-based) technology in the first place. This is because 
problems of a non-technological nature may call for solutions that lie (at least pri -
marily) outside of the realm of technology: a social or political problem will be bet -
ter addressed through low-tech or even no-tech solutions, even when an AI-based 
high-tech strategy could also contribute to addressing some of their aspects.
An ethical AI ethics will thus carefully seek a comprehensive understanding of 
perceived problems that does not, from the outset, self-limit its attention to the prob -
lems’ technological side. Avoiding the technosolutionist mindset means to remain 
open for a problem’s social, political, economic and other dimensions and looking 
for solutions in these domains, as well.
Importantly, the need to avoid a technosolutionist mindset applies also to many 
problems that become obvious or aggravated through the use of technology. Think, 
for example, of ‘algorithmic bias’ when a computer programme generates unfair 
outcomes that systematically advantage or disadvantage specific social groups (e.g. 
Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018 ). An appropriate solution to this problem must not limit 
itself to a technological solution, because algorithmic bias is not so much a problem 
of technology but primarily a symptom and thus indicative of a fundamental social 
problem.13 Even if algorithmic  bias will be reduced or eliminated through improved 
programming and better data input, the problem of actual  bias, discrimination and 
12 But cf. W inner’s seminal paper on the politics of artifacts (Winner 1980 ).
13 This holds tr ue also for the outcomes of recommender algorithms, e.g. in social media presenting 
increasingly radical and extreme content to its users in order to generate attention. Here again, this is 
no automatism of the algorithm, but reflective of the interest of the service providers to keep people 
engaged. The providers prioritise their own commercial interests over the social interest.J.-C. Heilinger Page10of20 61

==== Page 11 ====
1 3unfairness in our societies would persist. Actual solutions will only be found on the 
social level, while technological solutions will even in the best case provide nothing 
but cosmetic improvements at the symptom level, leaving the origins, structures and 
underlying social dynamics and structural injustices untouched.
That is why an additional, important risk connected to the pursuit of technologi -
cal solutions to social problems lies in the potentially very high opportunity costs. If 
scarce resources (finances, attention, human ingenuity, etc.) are primarily directed 
towards technological solutions, these very resources cannot be deployed for other 
strategies to address the respective problems. Thus each decision to ‘techno-solve’ 
any problem bears a burden of proof to show that technology does indeed provide 
the most promising strategy to address the problem.
2.3  The Procedural Dimension
The ethics of AI deserves scrutiny also with regard to its own (institutionalised) 
practice, its standards and its methods. The main criticism to be raised here is that 
many committees or fora to deliberate and determine ethical standards for AI-based 
technology frequently fail, for systemic reasons, to meet the standards of independ -
ent, ethically informed, critical deliberation and decision-making and consequently 
only provide distorted ethical assessments. In the following, I discuss this issue with 
a particular focus on the European AI landscape, but related arguments about the 
influence of particular, strategic interests can also be made for other world areas.
2.3.1   Identifying Experts
It is hardly astonishing that large multi-national corporations, standing in harsh 
competition with one another regarding market shares, growth and profits, have only 
a limited and rather specific interest in an independent, critical ethical assessment of 
their practices. Corporate ethics units, in varying degrees, serve different purposes 
than providing actual ethics assessments, among them: reducing the likelihood of 
legal and ethical scandals that would create reputational damage; increasing aware -
ness for and compliance with existing moral and legal standards and regulations 
among the company’s employees; showcasing ethical awareness to meet societal 
expectations or for reputational gains; and reducing the need for further external, 
political interventions and regulations because of ethical self-commitment and self-
control. To this end, many companies have established corporate ethics boards, offer 
ethics trainings to their employees or fund ethics research relevant to the company’s 
interests inside or outside of the company.14 Corporate interest in ethics recently 
even seems to have started to cool down, now that it is increasingly becoming clear 
how independent ethics raises issues that might conflict with, even run directly 
14 A r ecent example from Germany is the Facebook-funded chair for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence at 
the Technical University Munich.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page11of2061

==== Page 12 ====
1 3contrary to the primarily financial interests of corporations.15 Corporate ethics thus 
has to walk the thin line of providing, as much as possible, independent and critical 
ethics assessments, while being and remaining on the payroll of the corporation.
Whether or not such dependency makes independent assessment principally 
impossible cannot be discussed here. Instead, I want to scrutinise another type of 
ethics committee, namely an ethics expert advisory group to support political 
decision-making.
Above, I have already quoted the enthusiastic endorsement of AI from the ‘Ethics 
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI’, a document published in April 2019 by the High-
Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (preceding the publication of ‘Policy 
and Investment Recommendations for Trustworthy AI’ in June 2019). This group 
was established by the European Commission to provide independent ethical advice 
on the development and use of AI-based technologies and provide a case in point.
In international comparison, the policy document is exemplary. It identifies, at 
the behest of a political body, numerous ethics issues arising in the context of AI 
and calls for a systemic approach to address them by assigning responsibility to 
‘all actors and processes that are part of the [AI-] system’s socio-technical context 
throughout its entire life cycle’ (HLEG 2019 , 5). With this, the European demand 
for the development and implementation of ‘trustworthy AI’ needs to be compared 
and contrasted at the global level in particular to the US-American digital ambitions 
to develop AI as a driver of ‘disruptive innovation’ (cf. e.g. Girasa, 2020 ) and the 
Chinese development and use of AI as controlled by and in the interest of the state 
(cf. e.g. Roberts et al., 2021 ). But looking at the genesis and content of the European 
strategy from an ethics perspective exposes both an institutional-procedural problem 
and a resulting normative-conceptual problem.
The Independent High-Level Expert Group comprised of more than fifty mem -
bers, mostly from industry with a tiny fraction of ethics experts, only some of which 
were philosophers.16 As important as the involvement of the industry in regula -
tory processes from the very beginning may be, in order to secure acceptance and 
compliance in the future, such an unbalanced composition of the group—largely 
excluding also representatives of users and civil society—clearly conflicts with the 
ambition to provide independent and comprehensive ethical expertise. Yet, the com -
position of the expert group does not seem coincidental but fully in line with the 
political preferences of the European Commission and its interest to advance the 
standing and business opportunities of European corporations on the global mar -
ket. Given this ambition, however, the primary interest in ethics will hardly have 
to establish sound ethical standards and regulations for the development and use of 
AI-based technologies. For this, a larger share of trained ethicists, sociologists and 
civil and human rights advocates would have been an obvious imperative. Instead, 
the interest in ethics was, so it seems, motivated by a perceived need to unburden 
AI-based technologies from its partly uncanny and unethical appearance. In other 
15 Cf. t he debate about the role of Timnit Gebru at Google and the circumstances of the termination of 
her contract, cf. Tiku ( 2020 ), Ghaffary ( 2021 ).
16 See lis t on https://  www.  aepd.  es/ sites/  defau  lt/ files/  2019-  12/ ai- defin  ition.  pdf.J.-C. Heilinger Page12of20 61

==== Page 13 ====
1 3words, the purpose of this political advisory group might have been to provide ‘eth -
ics washing’ (Metzinger, 2019 ).
‘Ethics washing’—or ‘ethics theatre’—is to engage in ethical discussions and 
the formulation of ethical self-commitments with the intention to prevent or at least 
delay effective legal regulations. This interest can primarily be found in the industry, 
for which regulations are often costly. To this end, AI-developing companies are 
establishing internal ethics units or funding research activities in AI ethics in public 
universities. In the present case, the industry’s interest was advanced and supported 
even with the help of the European Commission.
Given the dominance of industry and industry-friendly politics in the field of AI 
ethics, many resulting ethical guidelines for AI tend to insufficiently include inde -
pendent (academic) ethics expertise. Even if the European guideline rightly directs 
ethical attention towards numerous ethics issues, provides important ethical orienta -
tion and may be more advanced and concerned with the common good than exist -
ing policy documents from other countries or world regions,17 the described lopsid -
edness in the group’s composition contributes to severe conceptual distortions that 
turn out to be, from a normative perspective, highly problematic. I will illustrate this 
claim with regard to the guideline’s core concept, ‘trustworthy’ AI.
2.3.2   Neglec ting Expertise and Trusting AI
The document’s guiding ethical idea is the ideal of ‘trustworthy AI’. Trustworthi -
ness of an AI system is defined as comprising three components: AI ‘should be law-
ful, complying with all applicable laws and regulations; it should be ethical , ensur -
ing adherence to ethical principles and values; and it should be robust , both from a 
technical and social perspective, since, even with good intentions, AI systems can 
cause unintentional harm’ (HLEG 2019 , 6). For the authors, the entity worthy of 
trust thus is primarily the AI system itself and its ‘inherent properties’, even though 
it is admitted that also ‘the humans behind’ AI systems and ‘the qualities of the 
socio-technical systems involving AI systems’ are supposed to be worthy of trust—
in analogy to human trust in aviation, nuclear power or food safety. But it makes all 
of a difference to trust in something or to trust in the people and institutions behind 
something.
The ethics guidelines gloss over this difference and label something, an AI sys -
tem, as trustworthy that for principled (conceptual) reasons to be explained below 
cannot and should not be considered worthy of trust (Bryson, 2018 ). ng so amounts 
to, as Metzinger, one of the few ethics expert members of the group, critically 
remarked, a brilliant marketing coup lulling appropriate ethical concern and neces -
sary critical analysis with the help of a euphonic epithet (Metzinger, 2019 ).
Here is, briefly, the conceptual argument against the possibility of trustworthy 
AI that deploys the fundamental distinction between trust and reliance also in 
the realm of AI. Practical reliance is a ‘common core’ of trust (Hawley, 2019 , 2), 
and the informed rational expectation that people will do certain things is part of 
17 F or an overview cf. Jobin et al. ( 2019 ).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page13of2061

==== Page 14 ====
1 3trusting them. But while trust involves  reliance, following Baier’s seminal contri -
butions, there is wide agreement in philosophy that trust exceeds  mere reliance 
(Baier, 1986 ).
What now is the distinctive feature missing in cases of mere reliance and present 
in cases of trust? It is that it goes beyond the informed and rational expectation that 
someone will act in certain ways and includes a normative  and an affective  com -
ponent (Ryan, 2020 ). The normative component in an interpersonal relationship of 
trust is that the trusting person assumes the trusted person will have certain norma -
tive reasons, i.e. should  act as expected (Simpson, 2012 ). Yet, regrettably, even the 
best normative reasons do not always lead to corresponding action. Trust includes 
the expectation that the trusted person will indeed act upon them, but leaves open 
the possibility that she might also betray the trusting person. Correspondingly, a 
particular affective dimension exists in the relationship of trust that is absent when 
merely relying on something or someone: If the trusted person fails to act upon 
the normative reasons, the reactive attitude on the side of the trusting person goes 
beyond mere disappointment (which would also be appropriate in case a computer 
malfunctions, or the bad weather spoils my plans for the week-end). Beyond disap -
pointment, the betraying person, because of her agential features that allow her to 
act upon reasons, will become an appropriate target for moral criticism or blame.
AI cannot act by following reasons, it cannot explain the outcomes of its decisions 
by giving reasons, and it is not an appropriate target for moral critique or blame. AI 
is a sophisticated tool, not a moral agent (Véliz, 2021 ), on which we may rely, but 
which we must—for conceptual reasons—not trust. Talking about trustworthy AI 
seems to elevate AI systems to the status of moral agents, which is not only factually 
wrong, but also morally dubious, because it hides or reduces the moral responsibil -
ity of the appropriate potential targets of trust: those who develop and implement 
AI. These persons and institutions, however, have—for prudential reasons—to earn 
trust before it becomes rational for anyone to trust them.
Talk of trustworthy AI anthropomorphises technology, obscures agency and 
reduces the perceived urgency of the need to track responsibility and set boundaries 
for the development and implementation of AI systems. This misconception of AI 
as potential bearer of trust—uncritically taken up in countless documents about AI 
ethics—can be explained in at least two different ways: as a result of an intentional 
strategy to label something ‘problematic with a positive attribute; or as the regret -
table outcome of the confusion of considering AI as actually ‘intelligent’ in a sense 
comparable to human intelligence and free will. Honi soit qui mal y pense?  Given 
the perfect alignment of this conceptual confusion with the commercial interests of 
the AI-developing and AI-using corporation to delay and avoid regulation, suspi -
cion may be in order and support the diagnosis of intentional ethics washing through 
the European Commission’s High-Level Expert Group. For Metzinger the debate is 
set. The entire ‘Trustworthy AI narrative is, in reality, about developing future mar -
kets and using ethics debates as elegant public decorations for a large-scale invest -
ment strategy’ (Metzinger, 2019 ). In any case, even a more moderate reading vin -
dicates a morally highly problematic conclusion: AI ethics is strongly influenced 
by various political and economic interests that put ethics under the risk of being 
instrumentalised.J.-C. Heilinger Page14of20 61

==== Page 15 ====
1 33  S teps Towards a More Ethical AI Ethics
The preceding pages have, from a normative perspective, identified six challenges 
for AI ethics: misleading intuitions resulting from the notion ‘artificial intelligence’; 
a misconception of the topic of AI ethics by failing to recognise that AI is ubiquitous 
and part of modern societies’ infrastructure; an insufficient consideration of non-
AI issues lurking in the background of using AI-based technologies; the persistence 
of a technosolutionist mindset inclined to address all sorts of problems (tech and 
non-tech) with the help of AI and other high-tech solutions; a strong and distortive 
influence of particular (e.g. commercial, political) interests on the overall AI-ethics 
debate; and the insufficient integration of independent and critical philosophical and 
ethical expertise.
These issues—labelled as two conceptual, two substantive and two procedural 
issues—are ethical  issues, insofar as they point out ethically relevant shortcom -
ings in the existing debate. Making AI ethics more ethical thus requires to address 
these issues. In the following section, I will take up the preceding critique to outline 
potential directions and steps towards an improved, ethical AI ethics. Insofar as my 
proposal broadens the scope of AI ethics and invites increased consideration of the 
social, economic, political and environmental background structures within which 
novel AI systems are being developed and used, it can be understood as an argument 
for embedding AI ethics into AI justice.18
3.1  Conceptual Steps
In or der to make AI ethics more sure-footed and avoid distortions that result from 
conceptual unclarity, an explicit conceptual specification of the subject of AI ethics 
will be necessary. Of course, those working in the field are aware of the challenges 
mentioned above, but the ethical discourse that involves different types of players 
and is accompanied by significant public and lay interest can only gain through such 
clarifications. Being outspoken about the actual capacities and limitations of the dif -
ferent technologies and being realistic in the assessment of future developments—
that include also the increasing likelihood of the next, upcoming AI winter (Floridi, 
2020 )—will provide a much needed factual basis for addressing the pressing ethical 
issues at hand. In this context, it is also important not to limit the ethical attention to 
the specifics of AI-based technologies, but acknowledge that AI is becoming part of 
the ambient infrastructure in modern societies. Such a refocussing will thus include 
a dual movement of conceptual narrowing (leading e.g. to reduced interest in a pre -
sumed singularity or to decreased fear of an evil super-intelligence) and conceptual 
broadening (leading to analysing AI even more in its social context ).
Taking such conceptual clarifications seriously would impact in particular on the 
quality of the ethical discussions. It will contribute to a much needed toning down 
18 In par ticular, the substantive and procedural steps are committed the ideal of relational equality (see 
above).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page15of2061

==== Page 16 ====
1 3in a partly overexcited debate about a ‘hyped’ topic.19 A more composed attitude 
in parts of the debate would be desirable, also in order to support more appropriate 
decisions in different fields, such as funding decisions for AI research and AI-ethics 
research. The amount of (public and private) funding made available for AI ethics 
seems out of proportion, given that other ethical challenges—the climate, the pan -
demic, but also different questions from the field of (global) social justice, medical 
ethics, animal ethics, etc.—urgently call for ethical attention, too.
3.2  Substantive Steps
The mentioned challenges also come with substantive implications affecting the 
type of questions that should be discussed within the field of AI ethics. First, AI eth-
ics should, as a matter of justice, expand its focus beyond the development and use 
of AI-based applications to include the structural background conditions required 
for such development and use. Losing sight of the social, cultural, economic and 
political environment when focussing narrowly on the moral quality of specific acts 
is a mistake (that, however, can also occur in moral and political philosophy and 
other fields of applied ethics). In this case, one simply assumes—but unjustifiably 
so—that the background would constitute something like the normal, and morally 
uncontroversial baseline that can be excluded from the ethical analysis that concen -
trates on what some agent is ng here and now. Instead, the unequal and asymmetric 
relations of privilege, power and influence deserve full attention when it comes to 
providing normative guidance about the practical development and use of specific 
technologies.
If more attention is being directed towards the structural context of a respective 
specific act or decision, the entire supply chain for, the ongoing (natural and human) 
resource use of and the distribution of different types of costs and benefits arising 
throughout the entire life cycle of a technology will become part of the moral sit -
uation under consideration. Attention will also be directed towards those who are 
affected by the development and use of novel technologies in an indirect way, e.g. 
by being excluded from its use and the connected benefits. As a starting point for 
addressing the structural dimension of the respective technologies could be to ask: 
Who benefits from the novel development? How? At which costs that are born by 
whom?20
While, of course, not every discussion always has to include the full structural 
background, increasing awareness for the conditions under which the development, 
production and use of AI-based technologies occurs would be an important exten -
sion and correction of a debate that too often excludes it.
The second substantive implication of the challenges discussed above is to 
avoid narrowing down, even within the field of AI ethics, the search for solu -
tions to technological  strategies. In every case where an advanced technology 
19 Cf. e.g. the Better Images of AI  initiative collecting illustrations of AI that avoid clichéd and mislead -
ing visualisations ( https://  bette  rimag  esofai. org/).
20 F or a longer list of ethically relevant ‘who’-questions, cf. D’Ignazio and Klein ( 2020 ), in particular p. 27.J.-C. Heilinger Page16of20 61

==== Page 17 ====
1 3could provide a solution to a problem that is seen as worthy of attention, one has 
to ask whether a low-tech or even a no-tech solution would might be available 
and maybe even preferable. When taking into consideration all costs incurred 
by AI-based technologies (including negative externalities that may only further 
increase structurally unjust background conditions), low- or no-tech solutions 
may turn out to be, from a normative perspective, the preferable option.
3.3  Procedural Steps
The challenges discussed above also carry procedural implications for how AI 
ethics should be practiced. Here again, two demands follow. First, as a matter of 
justice, it is essential to include in ethical debates worthy of this name the voices 
of all affected. Limiting participation in and contributions to the debate to the 
already influential economic or political agents in the field is a severe ethical 
flaw. From the exploration and development of novel ideas over the discussion 
of regulatory frameworks to the assessment of the actual, practical outcome of 
technological changes in societies and communities, the voices of all affected 
need to be heard. Community-oriented ‘design ethics’ and ‘design justice’ pro -
vide already important experience and guidance for future improvements in this 
direction (Costanza-Chock, 2020 ): Political bodies should rely more on citizen 
advisory groups, and also corporations should be more inclusive in consider -
ing the social impact of their products. Any ethical and responsible develop -
ment of novel, AI-based technologies and applications cannot occur in corpora -
tions alone. Ultimately, the willingness to make genuine efforts to build socially 
beneficial technologies (instead of building profitable products advancing the 
financial interests and growth of the company) requires a cultural and attitudinal 
development and change in much of the established corporate practice, and thus 
has to be considered as a long term project. However, if AI is really to advance 
the common good, the pursuit of this project is worthwhile and contributing to it 
will be an integral element of AI ethics.
A second procedural implication of the mentioned challenges consists in a 
call to include the best available ethical experiences and knowledge into the AI 
ethics debates that are, so far, very rarely dominated by trained ethicists. The 
border between technical and ethical issues cannot be drawn in a way that would 
allow a functional separation; ethics and technical issues have to be considered 
jointly from the outset. Also the conceptual tools to discuss ethical challenges 
and ideals must not be used uncritically lest they generate more confusion than 
provide orientation. Two parallel strategies can be recommended here: one con -
sists in seeing to it that trained philosophical ethicists learn to (better) communi -
cate with practitioners and policy makers in the field and will be included more 
and heard better in the relevant debates; the other consists in training and edu -
cating not only ethicists but also provide more substantive training about ethics 
and justice to all those working in the computer sciences, engineering and in 
politics (cf. Riley, 2008 ).The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page17of2061

==== Page 18 ====
1 34  C onclusion: the Ethics of AI Ethics
AI is quickly evolving and will continue to impact human lives and living together in the 
future, calling for normative reflection and guidance. This paper has identified conceptual, 
substantive and procedural challenges for the current practice of AI ethics: a misconcep -
tion of the topic of AI ethics that fails to recognise AI as ubiquitous and part of modern 
societies’ infrastructure; an insufficient consideration of non-AI issues lurking in the back -
ground of AI-based technologies; the persistence of a technosolutionist mindset inclined to 
address all sorts of problems (tech and non-tech) with the help of AI and other high-tech 
solutions; a strong and distortive influence of particular (e.g. commercial, political) inter -
ests on the overall AI-ethics debate; and the insufficient integration of independent and 
critical philosophical and ethical expertise. Reflecting, from a normative perspective, upon 
the practice of AI ethics, the paper outlined recommendations for an ethical AI ethics to 
address the identified challenges through terminological reform; through a broadening of 
scope to better include the dimensions of relational ethics and social justice in the context 
of AI; and through more inclusive deliberative procedures that better represent all affected 
and better integrate available philosophical and ethical knowledge.
While further work is necessary to substantiate and detail the proposals, the main con -
clusion of the argument is the following: In order to use AI and AI-based technologies for 
the common good and to actually improve human lives and the living together of humans 
generally—and not only for some, at the expense of others—more ethical reflection and 
specific concern for issues of structural (in-) justice is imperative. A failure to advance in 
the directions outlined above will condemn AI ethics to provide only an impoverished ethi -
cal analysis, which perpetuates or even aggravates existing injustices. Given the expected 
impact of AI on our lives, it is of prime concern to deploy the best possible, ethical AI eth -
ics to steer the use of AI-based technologies towards the common good.
Funding  Open A ccess funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. The research was supported by 
the German Federal Ministry of Health (Bundesministerium für Gesundheit, BMG) within the project 
KIPeriOP (grant number 2520DAT10G).
Declarations  
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate  Not applicable (philosophical desk research).
Consent for Publication  Not applicable.
Competing Interests  The aut hor declares no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com -
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/ licen  
ses/ by/4.  0/.J.-C. Heilinger Page18of20 61

==== Page 19 ====
1 3References
Abebe, R., Barocas, S., Kleinberg, J., Levy, K., Raghavan, M., and Robinson, D. G. (2020). Roles for 
computing in social change. In, Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, 
and Transparency.  Association for Computing Machinery, Barcelona, Spain , 252–60. https://  doi. 
org/ 10. 1145/  33510  95. 33728  71
Anderson, E. (1999). What Is the Point of Equality? Ethics,  109(2), 287–337.
Baier, A. C. (1986). Trust and Antitrust. Ethics,  96, 231–260.
Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., and Shmitchell, S. (2021). ‘On the dangers of stochas -
tic parrots: Can language models be too big?’. FAccT ’21: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Confer -
ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency  610–23. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1145/  34421  88. 
34459  22
Benjamin, R. (2019). Race after technology: Abolitionist tools for the new jim code . Polity.
Bostrom, N. (2014). Superintelligence. Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford/New York: Oxford Univer -
sity Press.
Brevini, B. (2020). Black boxes, not green: Mythologizing artificial intelligence and omitting the 
environment. Big Data & Society,  7(2), 1–5.
Bryson, J. (2018). AI & Global Governance: No One Should Trust AI . United Nations University.
Buolamwini, J., and Gebru, T. (2018). ’Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in com -
mercial gender classification’. Proceedings of the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and 
Transparency  81.
Coeckelbergh, M. (2020). AI Ethics . MIT Press.
Costanza-Chock, S. (2020). Design justice: Community-led practices to build the worlds we need . 
MIT Press.
Crawford, K., and Joler, V. (2019). ’ Anatomy of an AI system’. https://  anato  myof.  ai.
Crawford, K. (2021). Atlas of AI. Power, politics, and the planetary costs of artificial intelligence. 
New Haven/London: Yale University Press.
D’Ignazio, C., & Klein, L. F. (2020). Data Feminism . MIT Press.
Fjeld, J., Achten, N., Hilligoss, H., Nagy, A. C., and Srikumar, M. (2020). ’Principled artificial intelli -
gence: Mapping consensus in ethical and rights-based approaches to principles for AI’. Berkman 
Klein Center Research Publication No. 2020-1 . https://  doi. org/ 10. 2139/  ssrn.  35184  82
Floridi, L. (2020). AI and its new winter: From myths to realities. Philosophy & Technology,  33(1), 
1–3. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s13347-  020-  00396-6
Friedman, B., & Nissenbaum, H. (1996). Bias in computer systems. ACM Transactions on Informa -
tion Systems,  14(3), 330–347.
Ghaffary, S. (2021). ’Google says it’s committed to ethical AI research. Its ethical AI team isn’t so 
sure’. Vox June 2.
Girasa, R. (2020). Artificial intelligence as a disruptive technology. Economic Transformation and 
Government Regulation . Palgrave.
Hagendorff, T. (2020). The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines. Minds and Machines,  
30(1), 99–120.
Hawley, K. (2019). How to be Trustworthy?  Oxford University Press.
Heilinger, J.-C. (2020). Cosmopolitan Responsibility. Global Injustice, Relational Equality, and Indi -
vidual Agency, https://  doi. org/ 10. 1515/  97831  10612  271. Berlin/Boston: de Gruyter.
Hickel, J. (2020). Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World . Penguin/Windmill.
HLEG (2019). High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy 
AI. Brussels: European Commission.
Jobin, A., Ienca, M., & Vayena, E. (2019). The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines. Nature 
Machine Intelligence,  1(9), 389–399. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1038/  s42256-  019-  0088-2
Kempt, H., Heilinger, J.-C., Nagel, S.K. (2022). “I’m afraid I can’t let you do that, Doctor” – Mean -
ingful Disagreements with AI in Medical Contexts’. AI & Society . https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s00146-  022-  01418-x
Lara, F., & Deckers, J. (2020). Artificial Intelligence as a Socratic Assistant for Moral Enhancement. 
Neuroethics,  13(3), 275–287. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s12152-  019-  09401-y
Lippert-Rasmussen, K. (2018). Relational Egalitarianism . Cambridge University Press.
Lu, J. (2016). Will Medical Technology Deskill Doctors? International Education Studies,  9(7), 
130–134.The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Critique   Page19of2061

==== Page 20 ====
1 3McK eown, M. (2021). Structural injustice. Philosophy Compass,  16(7), e12757. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1111/  phc3.  12757
McKeown, M. (2021). Geist aus der Flasche. Ist der Kampf um einen ethischen Einsatz Künstlicher Intel -
ligenz schon verloren? Forschung & Lehre,  7, 548–549.
Metzinger, T. (2019). ’Ethics washing made in Europe’. Der Tagesspiegel  8 April 2019 ( https://  www.  
tages spieg  el. de/ polit ik/ eu- guide  lines-  ethics-  washi  ng- made-  in- europe/  24195  496. html).
Mills, S. (2020). Personalized nudging. Behavioural Public Policy,  6(1), 150–159. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1017/  bpp. 2020.7
Mittelstadt, B., Russell, C., and Wachter, S. (2019). ’Explaining Explanations in AI’. FAT’19: Conference 
on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT’19), January 29–31, 2019, Atlanta, GA, USA 
(https://  doi. org/ 10. 1145/  32875  60. 32875  74).
Morozov, E. (2013). To save everything, click here. The folly of technological solutionism. New York: 
Perseus.
Rawls, J. (1999). A Theory of Justice  (Revised). Harvard University Press.
Reiner, P. B., and Nagel, S. K. (2017). ’Technologies of the extended mind: Defining the issues’. in Illes, 
J. (ed.), Neuroethics. Anticipating the future . Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press. 108–22.
Riley, D. (2008). Engineering and Social Justice . San Rafael, CA: Morgan & Claypool.
Roberts, H., Cowls, J., Morley, J., Taddeo, M., Wang, V., & Floridi, L. (2021). The Chinese approach to 
artificial intelligence: An analysis of policy, ethics, and regulation. AI & Society,  36(1), 59–77.
Russel, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence. A Modern Approach (Fourth Edition  (Global). 
Pearson.
Ryan, M. (2020). In AI We Trust: Ethics, Artificial Intelligence, and Reliability. Science and Engineering 
Ethics,  26(5), 2749–2767. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s11948-  020- 00228-y
Santoni de Sio, F., and Mecacci, G. (2021). ‘Four responsibility gaps with artificial intelligence: Why 
they matter and how to address them’. Philosophy & Technology 34 , 1057–1084 . https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1007/  s13347-  021- 00450-x
Simpson, T. W. (2012). What is trust? Pacific Philosophical Quarterly,  93(4), 550–569.
Sparrow, R. (2007). Killer Robots. Journal of Applied Philosophy,  24(1), 62–77. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1111/j.  1468-  5930.  2007.  00346.x
Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., and McCallum, A. (2019). ’Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learn -
ing in NLP’ . arXiv :1906.02243.
Tiku, N. (2020). ‘Google hired Timnit Gebru to be an outspoken critic of unethical AI. Then she was 
fired for it.’. The Washington Post  23 December. 
Vallor, S. (2016). Technology and the Virtues: A Philosophical Guide to a Future Worth Wanting . Oxford 
University Press.
Véliz, C. (2020). Privacy is Power. Why and How You Should Take Back Control of Your Data . Bantam.
Véliz, C. (2021). Moral zombies: Why algorithms are not moral agents. AI & Society,  36(2), 487–497.
Waelen, R. (2022). Why AI Ethics Is a Critical Theory. Philosophy & Technology,  35(1), 9.
Winner, L. (1980). Do Artifacts Have Politics? Daedalus,  109(1), 121–136.
Wolff, J. (1998). Fairness, Respect, and the Egalitarian Ethos. Philosophy & Public Affairs,  27(2), 
97–122. https://  doi. org/ 10. 2307/  26728  34
van Wynsberghe, A. (2021). ‘Sustainable AI: AI for sustainability and the sustainability of AI‘. AI and 
Ethics 1 , 213–218 . https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s43681-  021- 00043-  6,10.  1007/  s43681-  021- 00043-6
Young, I. M. (1990). Five Faces of Oppression. In I. M. Young (Ed.), Justice and the Politics of Differ -
ence (pp. 39–65). Princeton.
Young, I. M. (2006). Responsibility and Global Justice: A Social Connection Model. Social Philosophy 
and Policy,  23, 102–130.
Young, I. M. (2011). Responsibility for Justice . Oxford University Press.
Zuboff, S. (2015). Big other: Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information Civilization. 
Journal of Information Technology,  30(1), 75–89. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1057/  jit. 2015.5
Zuboff, S. (2019). The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Fron -
tier of Power . Public Affairs.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.J.-C. Heilinger Page20of20 61

