==== Page 1 ====
The Threat of Adversarial Attacks Against Machine Learning in
Network Security: A Survey
Olakunle Ibitoye, Rana Abou-Khamis, Mohamed el Shehaby, Ashraf Matrawy
and M. Omair Shaﬁq
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
Emails: Kunle.Ibitoye@carleton.ca, Rana.Aboukhamis@carleton.ca,
MohamedelShehaby@cmail.carleton.ca, Ashraf.Matrawy@carleton.ca,
Omair.Shafiq@carleton.ca
Abstract — Machine learning models have made many deci-
sion support systems to be faster, more accurate and more
efﬁcient. However, applications of machine learning in network
security face more disproportionate threat of active adversarial
attacks compared to other domains. This is because machine
learning applications in network security such as malware
detection, intrusion detection, and spam ﬁltering are by them-
selves adversarial in nature. In what could be considered
an arm’s race between attackers and defenders, adversaries
constantly probe machine learning systems with inputs which
are explicitly designed to bypass the system and induce a
wrong prediction. In this survey, we ﬁrst provide a taxonomy
of machine learning techniques, tasks, and depth. We then
introduce a classiﬁcation of machine learning in network secu-
rity applications. Next, we examine various adversarial attacks
against machine learning in network security and introduce
two classiﬁcation approaches for adversarial attacks in network
security. First, we classify adversarial attacks in network
security based on a taxonomy of network security applications.
Secondly, we categorize adversarial attacks in network security
into a problem space vs. feature space dimensional classiﬁcation
model. We then analyze the various defenses against adversarial
attacks on machine learning-based network security applica-
tions. We conclude by introducing an adversarial risk grid
map and evaluate several existing adversarial attacks against
machine learning in network security using the risk grid map.
We also identify where each attack classiﬁcation resides within
the adversarial risk grid map.
Keywords: Machine Learning, Adversarial samples, Net-
work security
I. I NTRODUCTION
There has been an ever-increasing application of machine
learning and deep learning techniques in network security.
One key advantage of machine learning is that it makes
optimal decisions more feasible.
It, however, introduces a new challenge since security and
robustness of these models is usually not a huge consid-
eration for machine learning algorithm designers who are
more focused on designing effective and efﬁcient models.
This creates room for various forms of attack models against
machine learning-based network security applications.
Researchers [1][2][3][4] have shown that the presence
of adversarial samples can easily fool machine learning
systems. Adversarial samples are specially crafted inputs that
cause a machine learning model to classify an input wrongly.
Machine learning systems typically take in input data intwo distinct phases. The training data which is fed into the
learning algorithm during the training phase, and the new
or test data which is fed into the learned model during the
prediction phase. If the attacker can manipulate the input data
in either phase, it is possible to induce a wrong prediction
from the machine learning model.
In this survey, we provide a brief introduction to machine
learning using a three-dimensional classiﬁcation method. We
classify the various machine learning approaches based on
the learning tasks, learning techniques and learning depth.
We further organize the various applications of machine
learning in network security based on a taxonomy of security
tasks. Contrary to the survey by Corona et al. [5], our
work focuses on adversarial attacks that are strictly machine
learning based. Next, we classify the various adversarial
attacks based on the applications in network security. We
identify ﬁve main categories of machine learning applications
in network security for our classiﬁcation method. Finally, we
classify adversarial attacks against machine learning based
on a taxonomy of network security applications.
Our contribution is threefold. First, we introduce a new
method for classifying adversarial attacks in network security
based on a taxonomy of network security applications. We
also introduce the concept of problem space and feature
space dimensional classiﬁcation of adversarial attacks in
network security.
Secondly, we introduce the concept of adversarial risk
in computer and network security. We provide a new risk
mapping for evaluating the risk of adversarial attacks in
network security based on the discriminative or directive
autonomy of the machine learning tasks and techniques
respectively.
Lastly, we evaluate several adversarial attacks against ma-
chine learning in network security applications as proposed
by various researchers and classify the attacks based on an
adversarial threat attack taxonomy shown in Table I.
As we outline in Section II, prior adversarial attacks
surveys [6][7][8] mainly covered them in the computer vi-
sion domain. Nevertheless, some surveys tackled adversarial
attacks on cybersecurity [9][10][11][12], but to the best of
our knowledge, there is currently no prior work that has
reviewed adversarial attacks in network security based on
a classiﬁcation of network security applications. No prior
work has also reviewed the concept of problem space vs.arXiv:1911.02621v3  [cs.CR]  21 Mar 2023

==== Page 2 ====
feature space dimensional classiﬁcation of adversarial attacks
in network security. Also, this is the ﬁrst work to propose
an adversarial machine learning risk grid map in the ﬁeld
of network security based on the directive or discriminative
autonomy of the machine learning algorithms.
Fig. 1. Structure of the Paper
As illustrated in Figure 1, We structure the remainder
of the paper as follows. In Section II, we survey some
related work. In section III, we discuss some applications of
machine learning in network security. In section IV , we begin
with a brief background about adversarial machine learning
followed by a description of our adversarial attack taxonomy.
We also review different adversarial attack methods and
algorithms. In section V , we introduce a classiﬁcation method
for adversarial attacks in network security based on the
network security CIA goals of conﬁdentiality, integrity and
availability. In section VI, we discuss and evaluate adver-
sarial risk in machine learning. In section VII, we review
various approaches for defending against adversarial attacks.
In section VIII, we provide some discussion and lessons
learnt. Finally, in section IX, we add a conclusion for our
survey with guidance for future work.
II. R ELATED WORK
Adversarial attacks have been widely studied in the ﬁeld
of computer vision [6][7][8] with several attack methods
and techniques developed mostly for image recognition
tasks. Researchers have discussed the public safety concern
of adversarial attacks such as in self-driving cars which
could be fooled into mis-classifying a stop sign resulting
in a potentially fatal outcome [13]. In network security, the
consequences of adversarial attacks are equally signiﬁcant[14] especially in areas such as intrusion detection [15]
and malware detection [16] where there have been rapid
progress in the adoption of machine learning for such tasks.
Even though adversarial machine learning has recently
been widely researched in network security, to the best of
our knowledge, there is currently no publication that has
surveyed the vast number of growing research work on
adversarial machine learning in this ﬁeld. Some existing
survey papers we reviewed include Akhtar et al. [17]
which reviewed adversarial attacks against deep learning
in computer vision. Qui et al [18] provided a generalized
survey on adversarial attacks in artiﬁcial intelligence, with
a brief discussion on cloud security, malware detection
and intrusion detection. Liu et al. [19] reviewed security
threats and corresponding defensive techniques of machine
learning focusing on the threats in the learning algorithms.
Rosenberg et al. [9] provided a general review on adversarial
attacks on cyber security domains like; Intrusion detection
systems, URL Detection systems, Biometric Systems, CPSs
(Cyber-Physical Systems), and Industrial Control Systems.
Unlike their work, our review only concentrates on network
security and uses different approaches to classify adversarial
attacks and defenses. Duddu el al. in [10] discussed
various research work on adversarial machine learning in
cyberwarfare, with some mention of adversarial attacks
against malware classiﬁers. Zhang et al. [11] discussed
adversarial attacks as a limitation of deep learning in
mobile and wireless networking but did not consider deep
learning in the context of network security applications.
Buczak et al. [20] in their survey on machine learning-based
cybersecurity intrusion detection focused on complexity
and challenges of machine learning in cybersecurity but
did not review adversarial attacks in their study. Biggio
and Roli [12] provided an historical timeline of adversarial
machine learning in the context of computer vision and
cybersecurity but their work did not provide a detailed
review in the context of network security. Gardiner et al.
[21] in their survey on the security of machine learning
in malware detection, focused on reviewing the Call and
Control (C & C) detection techniques. They also identiﬁed
the weaknesses and explained the limitations of secure
machine learning algorithms in malware detection systems.
Domain speciﬁc surveys on adversarial machine learning
has also been published including Hao et al. [22] in which
various adversarial attacks and defenses in images, graphs
and texts were reviewed. In the ﬁeld of natural language
processing, zhang et.al [23] reviewed various publications in
which deep adversarial attacks and defenses were proposed.
Sun et al. [24] published a survey on adversarial machine
learning in graph data. Akhtar et al. [17] computer vision,
Duddu et al. [10] cyber warfare.
Research Gap With growing interest in the use of ma-
chine learning for network security applications, the signif-
icance of adversarial attacks against such machine learning-
based application have become more prevalent. With con-
tinued increase in the amount of work in this ﬁeld, there
2

==== Page 3 ====
have been recent attempts to review these publications into
a survey work. In the ﬁeld of network security, We identiﬁed
nine survey papers which attempt to discuss adversarial
machine learning from the context of network security. None
of these previous survey papers have however explored the
vast amount of research work currently ongoing on the topic
of adversarial machine learning in network security in a
manner that categorizes them based on security applications,
problem and feature space dimensional classiﬁcation and
adversarial risk grid map.
Our survey more importantly seeks to distinguish between
adversarial attacks in general, and adversarial machine learn-
ing in context. We note that an adversary may seek to
compromise network security applications in various ways
and this may not be related to adversarial machine learning.
For example in [5] where adversarial attacks in Intrusion
detection systems was reviewed. In our context, adversar-
ial machine learning speciﬁcally addresses the optimization
problem in which a machine learning based network security
solution is being attacked. Many network security solutions
are strictly rules based or hard programming dependent and
do not implement machine learning techniques. Our survey
work does not refer to such adversarial attacks, since they do
not capture the real context of adversarial machine learning
in principle.
III. A PPLICATIONS OF MACHINE LEARNING IN
NETWORK SECURITY
Today’s network as well as next generation network archi-
tectures have become quite complex, and new innovations
of network security solutions are required to protect against
the growing landscape of cyber threats. Machine learning
techniques have been increasingly used to carry out a wide
range of tasks in network security [25] incorporating several
layers of defenses both within the network and at the edge
of the network. In this section, we review and highlight
some applications of machine learning in network security by
classifying them into ﬁve categories as illustrated in Figure
2.
A. Machine Learning for Network Protection
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are essential solutions
for monitoring events dynamically in a computer network
or system. Essentially there are two types of IDS (signature
based and anomaly based) [26]. Signature based IDS detects
attacks based on the repository of attacks signatures with no
false alarm [27]. However, zero-day attacks can easily by-
pass signature-based IDS. Anomaly IDS [27] uses machine
learning and can detect a new type of attacks and anomalies.
A typical disadvantage of anomaly IDS is the tendency to
generate a signiﬁcant number of false positive alarms.
Hybrid Approach for Alarm Veriﬁcation Sima et al. [28]
designed and built Hybrid Alarm Veriﬁcation System
that requires processing a signiﬁcant number of real-
time alarms, high accuracy in classifying false alarms,
perform historical data analysis. The proposed sys-
tem consists of three components: Machine Learning,Stream processing and Batch processing (Alarm His-
tory). Machine learning model trained ofﬂine and used
for veriﬁcation service that can immediately classify
true or false alarms. They used different machine learn-
ing algorithms in the experiments to show the effective-
ness of their system where the accuracy achieves more
than 90% in a stream of 30K alarms per second [28].
Learning Intrusion Detection Laskov et al. [29] worked
in developing a framework to compare the super-
vised learning (classiﬁcation) and unsupervised learn-
ing (clustering) techniques for detecting intrusions and
malicious. They used different methods in supervised
learning to evaluate the work include k-Nearest Neigh-
bor (kNN), decision trees, Support Vector Machines
(SVM) and Multi-Layer Perception (MLP). Also, k-
means clustering was utilized, with single linkage clus-
tering as unsupervised algorithms. The evaluation was
ran under two scenarios to evaluate how much the
IDS could generalize its knowledge to new malicious
activities. The supervised algorithms showed better
classiﬁcation with the known attacks. The best result
among the supervised algorithm was the decision tree
algorithm whiched achieved 95% true positive and 1%
false positive rate, followed by MLP, SVM and then
KNN. If there were new attacks not previously seen in
the training data, the accuracy decreases signiﬁcantly.
However, the unsupervised algorithms performed better
for unseen attacks and did not show signiﬁcant differ-
ence in accuracy for seen and unseen attacks [29].
B. Machine Learning for Endpoint Protection
Malware detection is a signiﬁcant part of endpoint security
including workstations, servers, cloud instances, and mobile
devices. Malware detection is used to detect and identify
malicious activities caused by malware. With the increase in
the variety of malware activities, the need for automatic de-
tection and classiﬁer ampliﬁes as well. The signature-based
malware detection system is commonly used for existing
malware that has a signature but it not suitable for unknown
malware or zero-day malware. Machine learning can cope
with this increase and discover underlying patterns in large-
scale datasets [30].
Automatic Analysis of Malware Behavior Rieck et al.
[31] successfully proposed a framework for analyzing
malware behavior automatically using various machine
learning techniques. The framework allows clustering
similar malware behaviors into classes and assigns new
malware to these discovered classes. They designed an
incremental approach for the behavior analysis that can
process various malware behaviors and reduce the run-
time defense against malware development comparing
to other analysis methods and provide accurate dis-
covery of novel malware. To implement this automatic
framework, they collected a large number of malware
samples and monitored their behaviors using a sandbox
environment and learn those behaviors using Clustering
and Classiﬁcation algorithms [31].
3

==== Page 4 ====
Fig. 2. Machine Learning Applications in Network Security
Automated Multi-level Malware Detection System
In [32], authors proposed Advanced Virtual Ma-
chine Monitor-based guest-assisted Automated Multi-
level Malware Detection System (AMMDS) that affect
both Virtual Machine Introspection (VMI) and Memory
Forensic Analysis (MFA) techniques to mitigate in real
time symptoms of stealthily hidden processes on guest
OS [32]. They use different machine learning techniques
such as Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Naive
Bayes, Random Tree, Sequential Minimal Optimization
(SMO), and J48 to evaluate the AMMDS and the results
achieve 100%.
Classiﬁcation of Malware System Call Sequences
Kolosnjaji et al. [30] focused on the utilization of neural
networks by stacking layers according to deep learning
to improve the classiﬁcation of newly retrieved malware
samples into a predeﬁned set of malware classes. They
constructed Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) layers for modeling
System Call Sequences. The sequences used by the
CNN layers was based on a set of n-grams. The
presence of the n-grams and their relation were counted
in a behavioral trace. The RNN on the other hand used
sequential information to train the model. A dependence
between the system call appearance and the system call
sequence was however maintained. If this model was
trained properly, it usually provided better accuracy on
subsequent data and most often captured more training
set information. This deep learning technique for cap-
turing the relation between the n-grams in the system
call sequences was deemed to be relatively efﬁcient as
it achieved 90% average accuracy, precision and recallfor most of the malware families [30].
A Hybrid Malicious Code Detection Method Li et
al. [33] proposed a hybrid malicious code detection
scheme based on AutoEncoder and Deep Belief Net-
works (DBN). They used the AutoEncoder to reduce the
dimensionality of data by extracting the main features.
Then they used the DBN that composed multilayer
Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) and a layer of
BP neural network to detect malicious code. The BP
neural network has an input vector from the last layer
of RBM based on unsupervised learning and then use
supervised learning in the BP neural network. They
achieved the Optimal hybrid model. The experiment
results that are veriﬁed by KDDCUP’99 dataset show
higher accuracy compared to a single DBN and reduce
the time complexity [33].
C. Machine Learning for Application Security
Various machine learning tasks used for application se-
curity including malicious web attack detection, phishing
detection and spam detection.
Detection of Phishing Attacks Basnet et al. [34] studied
and compared the effectiveness of using different ma-
chine learning algorithms for classiﬁcation of phishing
emails using many novel input features that helps in de-
tecting phishing attacks. The training dataset is labeled
with phishing or legitimate email. They used unsuper-
vised learning to extract features without prior training
directly and provides fast and reliable knowledge from
the dataset. They used 4000 emails in total, A total of
2000 emails used for testing. They used Support Vector
Machines (SVM), Leave One Model Out, Biased SVM,
4

==== Page 5 ====
Neural Networks, Self Organizing Maps (SOMs) and
K-Means on the dataset. Consistently, Support Vector
Machine achieved the best results. The Biased Support
Vector Machine (BSVM) and NN have an accuracy of
97.99% [34].
Adaptively Detecting Malicious Queries in Web Attacks
Don et al. [35] proposed a new system called AMODS
and learning strategy called SVM HYBRID for de-
tecting web attacks. AMODS is an adaptive system
that aims to periodically update the detection model to
detect the latest web attacks. The SVM HYBRID is
an adaptive learning strategy which was implemented
primarily for reducing manual work. The detection
model was trained using dataset which was obtained
from an academic institute’s web server logs. The
proposed detection model outperformed existing web
attack detection methods with an FP rate of 0.09% and
94.79% F-value. The SVM Hybrid system obtained a
total number of malicious queries equal to 2.78 times
by the popular SVM method. Also, the Web Application
Firewall (WAF) can use malicious queries to update the
signature library. The signiﬁcant queries were used for
updating the detection model which consisted of a meta-
classiﬁer as well as other three base classiﬁers [35].
URLNet -Learning a URL Representation with Deep
Learning for Malicious URL Detection Le et al. [36]
proposed an end-to-end deep learning framework which
did not require sophisticated feature. URLNet was in-
troduced to address several limitations which was found
with the other model approaches. This framework learns
from the URL directly how to perform a nonlinear
URL embedding which then enabled it to successfully
detect various Malicious URLs. Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) were applied to both the characters
and words of each URL to discover the URL embedding
method. They also proposed advanced word-embedding
techniques to deal with uncommon words, which was a
limitation being experienced by other malicious URL
detection systems. The framework then learns from
unknown works at testing phase [36].
D. Machine Learning for User Behavior Analytic
User behavior analytics is a cybersecurity process which
involves analyzing patterns in human behaviors and detecting
anomalies that give an indication of fraudulent activities
or insider threats. Machine learning algorithms are used to
detect such anomalies in user actions such as unusual login
tries and to infer useful knowledge from those patterns.
Authentication with Keystroke Dynamics Revett et al.
[37] proposed a system using Probabilistic Neural Net-
work (PNN) for keystroke dynamics that captures the
typing style of a user. A system comprising of 50 user
login credential keystrokes was evaluated. The authors
[37] used eight attributes to monitor the enrollment
and authentication attempts. An accuracy of 90% was
obtained in classifying legitimate users from imposters.
A comparison of the training time between the PNNsystem and a Multi-Layer Perception Neural Network
(MLPNN) showed that the PNN was four times faster.
Text-based CAPTCHA Strengths and Weaknesses
Bursztein et al. [38] in a study showed that several
well known websites still implemented technologies that
have been proven to be vulnerable to cyber attacks. In
the study, an automated Decaptcha tool was tested on
numerous websites including well known names such as
eBay, Google and Wikipedia. It was observed that 13
out of 15 widely used web technologies were vulnera-
ble to their automated attack. They had a signiﬁcant
success rate for most of the websites. Only Google
and Recaptacha were able to resist to the automated
attack. Their study revealed the need for more robust
CAPTCHA designs in most of the widely used schemes.
Authors recommended that the schemes should not
rely on segmentation alone because it did not provide
sufﬁcient defense against automated attacks.
Social Network Spam Detection K. Lee et al. [39]
proposed social network spam detection that gathers
legitimate and spam proﬁles and feeds them to Support
Vector Machine (SVM) model. The authors selected
two social networks: Twitter and MySpace to evaluate
the proposed machine learning system. They collected
data over months and feed them to the SVM classiﬁer.
The dataset contains 388 legitimate proﬁles and 627
spam proﬁles collected from MySpace, and 104 legiti-
mate proﬁles and 168 proﬁles between promoters and
spammers collected from Twitter. The system achieved
a low false positive rate and high precision up to 70%
for MySpace and 82% for Twitter.
E. Machine Learning for Process Behavior Analytic
Machine learning applications usually necessitate the need
to learn and have some domain knowledge about business
process behaviors in order to detect anomalous behaviors.
Machine learning could be used for determining fraudulent
transactions within banking systems. Also it has been suc-
cessfully used for identifying outliers, classifying types of
fraud and for clustering various business processes.
Anomaly detection in Industrial Control Systems
Kravch et al.[40] performed a successful study on
SecureWater Treatment Testeb (SWat) using Deep Con-
volutional Neural Networks CNN to detect most of
attacks on Industrial Control System (ICS) with a low
false positive. The anomaly detection method was based
on the statistical deviation measurement of the predicted
value. They performed the study using 36 different
attacks from SWat. The authors in [40] proofed that
using 1D convolutional networks in anomaly detection
in ICS outperformed the recurrent networks.
Detecting Credit Card Fraud Traditionally, the Fraud
Detection System uses old transactions data to predict a
new transaction. Fraud Detection System (FDS) should
encounter various potential challenges and difﬁculties
to achieve high accuracy and performance [41]. The
traditional detection method does not solve all problems
5

==== Page 6 ====
Fig. 3. Adversarial Machine Learning
and challenges including imbalanced data where there
is a small chance of transactions are fraudulent. Wrong
classiﬁcation and overlapping data and Fraud detection
cost are other major challenges [41]. Chen et al. [42]
proposed an approach to solving the listed challenges
and problems for Credit Card fraud. They introduced a
system to prevent fraud from the initial use of credit
cards by collecting user data from online questionnaire
based on consumer behavior surveys. They used var-
ious classiﬁers models: decision tree (C5.0, CandRT,
CHAID) and SVM ( linear and radial basis, Kernels
of polynomial, sigmoid). They use three datasets to de-
velop questionnaire-responded transaction (QRT) model
to predict new transaction.
Deep Learning Techniques for Side-Channel Analysis
Prouff et al. [43] deﬁned Side-Channel Analysis as a
type of attack that attempts to leak information from a
system by exploiting some parameters from the physical
environment [43]. This attack was utilizing the running-
time of some cryptographic computation, especially in
the block ciphers. The capability of a system to resist
side-channel attacks (SCA) requires an evaluation strat-
egy that focuses on deducing the relationship between
the device behavior and the sensitivity of the infor-
mation that is common in classical cryptography. The
authors in [43] focused on proposing an extensive study
of using deep learning algorithms in the Side-Channel
Analysis. Also, they focused on the hyper-parameters
selection to help in designing new deep learning classi-
ﬁer and models. They conﬁrmed that the Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) models are better in detecting
SCA. Their proposal system outperformed the other
tested models on highly desynchronized traces and had
the best performance as well on small desynchronized
trace [43].
IV. A DVERSARIAL MACHINE LEARNING
Adversarial attacks have been studied for more than a
decade now [12]. However, the ﬁrst notable discovery in
adversarial attacks for computer vision was by Szegedy et
al. [44] who reported that a small perturbation in the form
of a carefully crafted input could confuse a deep neural
network to misclassify an image object. Other researchers
have demonstrated the use of adversarial attacks beyond
image classiﬁcation [45][46][47][48].
In adversarial machine learning, an adversary seeks toconfuse a machine learning model into making a wrong
decision. The adversary achieves this by modifying the input
data that is fed to the machine learning model either during
the training phase (poisoning attack) [49] or during the
inference phase (evasion attack) [50].
The reason behind adversarial examples has been linked to
the fact that most machine learning models remain overtly
attached to the superﬁcial statistics of the input data [51]
[52] . This attachment to the input data makes the machine
learning highly sensitive to distribution shift, resulting in a
disparity between semantic changes and a decision change
[1].
We consider the security model for use of machine learn-
ing in network security as a combination of four components
namely the attack surface, threat model, adversarial frame-
work and adversarial risk. An alternative adversarial model
was proposed in [53] which modeled the adversary using a
threefold approach based on knowledge, goals and capabil-
ity. The attack surface identiﬁes the various attack vectors
along a typical machine learning data processing pipeline
in network security related applications. The threat model
provides a system abstraction for proﬁling the adversary’s
capabilities and the potential threats that are associated. The
adversarial framework details our approach for classifying
the various attacks and defenses within each network security
domain and lastly the adversarial risk provides an evaluation
of the likelihood and severity of adversarial attacks within a
network security system.
A major component of an adversarial attack is the ad-
versarial sample. As illustrated in Figure 3, an adversarial
sample consists of an input to a machine learning model
which has been perturbed. For a particular dataset with
features x and label y, a corresponding adversarial sample
is a speciﬁc data point x’ which causes a classiﬁer c to
predict a different label on x’ other than y, but x’ is
almost indistinguishable from x. The adversarial samples
are created using one of many optimization methods known
as adversarial attack methods. Crafting adversarial samples
involves solving an optimization problem to determine the
minimum perturbation which maximizes the loss for the
neural network
Considering an input x, and a classiﬁer f, the optimization
goal for the adversary is to compute such perturbation with a
s mall norm, measured w.r.t some distance metric, that would
modify the output of the classiﬁer such that
f(x+)6=f(x)
6

==== Page 7 ====
whereis the perturbation. If is applied to all of the input
data (all of the image’s pixels, for example), it is considered
adense adversarial attack . However, if just partial positions
are perturbed, it is called a sparse adversarial attack [54].
Adversarial machine learning in network security is typ-
ically an arms race between two agents. The ﬁrst agent is
an adversary whose objective is to intrude a network with a
malicious payload. The other agent is one whose role is to
protect the network from the consequences of the malicious
payload.
We start with a view of the different type of data that
traverses a network during any given time.
A. Adversarial Attack Taxonomy
We examine the Adversarial Attack Taxonomy in Table I
to consider the goals and capabilities of any adversary for
a machine learning system. We base our threat framework
from the original model in [8] [53] and adapt it within
the context of adversarial attacks in network security
domain. Within this context, adversarial attack threats in
network security may be considered based on the attacker’s
knowledge, attack space, attacker’s strategy, attacker’s goal
and attack target. As mentioned in section I, to the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst review to add the idea of the
space dimension in the classiﬁcation of adversarial attacks
in network security.
1) Knowledge: The knowledge component of the ad-
versarial threat model describes the extent to which the
adversary knows about the machine system as a whole. This
could be classiﬁed as White-box ,Gray-box orBlack-box
attacks.
In white-box attacks, it is assumed that the attacker has
complete knowledge of the training data, the learning
algorithm, the learned model as well as the parameters
which were used while training model. A white-box
attack represents an adversary who has the exact in-
formation that is held by the owner or creator of the
machine learning system which is being under attack.
In the majority of real world adversarial attack settings,
this is usually not feasible.
A Gray-box attacks assumes a more realistic approach,
and considers that there could be varying degrees infor-
mation accessible to the adversary [57]. For example, an
adversary may have partial information about the model
queries, or limited access to the training data. For a
gray-box attack, the adversary does not have the exact
knowledge which the creator of the model possesses, but
has sufﬁcient information to attack the machine learning
system to cause the machine learning system to fail.
A black-box attack assumes that the adversary is totally
unaware of the machine learning system. in this type
of attack, the adversary has no knowledge about either
the learning algorithm or the learned model. It may
be argued that a truly black-box attack is impossible.
this is because it is assumed that the adversary mustat least have some speciﬁc information, for example
the location of the model before it can attack the
model. The severity of blackbox attacks poses a greater
threat in practice. The model for real-world systems
may be more restrictive than a theoretical black-box
model where the adversary can understand the full
output of the neural network on inputs that have been
chosen arbitrarily. In [69], an analysis of three threat
models were proposed. These models, deﬁned as, the
query-limited setting, the partial information setting,
and the label-only setting, provide a more accurate
characterization of real-world classiﬁers. As such, a
representation of black box adversarial attacks was
proposed, such that, it would be possible to fool
classiﬁers under these more restrictive threat models,
whereas, it might have been impractical or ineffective.
2) Space: In the ﬁeld of adversarial machine learning, the
input space can be deﬁned as a dimensional representation of
all the possible conﬁgurations of the objects in determination
context. We categorize this as Feature Space andProblem
Space .
Feature space modeling of an adversarial sample is a
method in which an optimization algorithm is used to
ﬁnd the ideal value out of a ﬁnite number of arbitrary
changes made to the features. In a feature space adver-
sarial attack, the attacker’s objective is to remain benign
without generating a new instance. Conversely, a feature
space is deﬁned as the n dimensional space in which all
variables in the input dataset are represented. We take as
an example an intrusion detection dataset with 70 vari-
ables, this represents a 70-dimensional feature space. A
feature space adversarial attack in the context above will
seek to alter the feature space by making changes within
the 70-dimensional feature space. A feature space attack
modiﬁes the features in the instance directly. Using an
example of malware adversarial attacks, a feature space
adversarial malware attack will only modify the feature
vectors but no new malware is created.
The problem space refers to an input space in which
the objects e.g. image, ﬁle, etc. resides. A problem
space adversarial malware attack will modify the actual
instance from the source to produce a new instance
of the malware. Typically, a problem space adversarial
attack tends to generate new objects in domains such
as malware detection whereby there is no clear inverse
mapping to the feature space [58]. A typical difference
between a problem space adversarial attack, and a
feature space adversarial attack is that a feature space
attack does not generate a new sample but only creates a
new feature vector. A problem space adversarial attack
modiﬁes the actual instance itself to create an entirely
new object.
3) Strategy: Attacker’s strategy implies the phases of
operation in which the adversary launches the attack. Three
7

==== Page 8 ====
TABLE I
ADVERSARIAL ATTACK TAXONOMY
Types References
KnowledgeBlack Box [7] [55]
White Box [56] [1]
Gray Box [57]
SpaceFeature Space [15]
Problem Space [58]
StrategyEvasion [57] [59]
Poisoning [60] [61] [49]
Oracle [62] [60]
GoalAvailability [63] [64]
Integrity [63] [65]
Conﬁdentiality [63] [66]
TargetPhysical Domain [67] [68]
ML Model [1]
main strategies which an adversary may use in adversarial
attacks are Evasion ,Poisoning andOracle .
Evasion attacks, also known as exploratory attack or
attack at decision time, during the testing or inference
phase. The attacker aims to confuse the decision of the
machine learning model after it has been learned as
shown in Figure 4. Evasion attacks typically involve an
arithmetic computation of an optimization problem. The
objective of the optimization problem is to compute a
tiny perturbation sigma which would cause an increase
in the loss function. The change in loss function would
then be signiﬁcant enough to result in a wrong predic-
tion by the machine learning model. Evasion attacks
are classiﬁed as gradient-based attacks or gradient-free
attacks.
Gradient-based attacks are further classiﬁed based on
the frequency with which the adversarial samples are
updated or optimized. These are iterative orOne-
shot attacks. Iterative attacks provide tighter control of
the perturbation in order to generate more convincing
adversarial samples [60]. This however results in higher
computational costs. Alternative to iterative attacks are
one-shot attacks which adopt a single-step approach
without iterations. One-shot or one-time attacks are
attacks in which the adversarial samples are optimized
just once. Iterative attacks, however, involve updating
the adversarial samples multiple times. By updating
the adversarial samples multiple times, the samples
are better optimized and perform better compared to
one-shot attacks. However, iterative attacks cost more
computational time to generate.
Adversarial attacks against certain machine learning
techniques which are computationally intensive such asreinforcement learning usually demand one-shot attacks
as the only feasible approach [59].
Gradient-free attacks [57], unlike gradient-based attacks
do not require knowledge of the model. Gradient-free
attacks can generate potent attacks against a machine
learning model with knowledge of only the conﬁdence
values of the model.
Fig. 4. Evasion Attack
Poisoning attacks, also known as causative attack,
involves adversarial corruption of the training data or
model logic during the training phase to induce a wrong
prediction from the machine learning mode as shown
in Figure 5. Poisoning attacks may be carried out by
data injection, data manipulation or logic corruption
[60]. Data injection occurs when the adversary inserts
adversarial inputs to alter the data distribution while
preserving the original input features and data labels.
Data manipulation refers to a situation in which either
the input features or data labels of the original training
data are modiﬁed by the adversary. Logic corruption is
an attempt by the adversary to model structure.
Oracle attacks occur when an adversary leverages the
8

==== Page 9 ====
Fig. 5. Poisoning Attack
access to the Application Programming Interface of
a model, to create a substitute model with malicious
intent. The substitute model typically preserves a signif-
icant part of the functionality of the original model [62].
As a result, the substitute model can then be used for
other types of attacks such as evasion attacks [60]. Or-
acle attacks can be further subdivided into Extraction ,
Inversion and Inference attacks. The objective of an
extraction attack is to deduce model architectural details
such as parameters and weights from an observation of
the model’s output predictions and class probabilities
[70]. Inversion attacks occurs when adversary attempts
to reconstruct the training data. An inference attacks
allows the adversary to identify speciﬁc data points with
the distribution of the training dataset [71].
4) Goal: Traditionally in the ﬁeld of computer vision,
adversarial attacks are regarded in terms of targeted or
reliability attacks [17]. In targeted attacks, the attacker has
a speciﬁc goal with regard to the model decision. Most
commonly, the attacker would aim to induce a deﬁnite pre-
diction from the machine learning model. On the other hand,
a reliability attack occurs when the attacker only seeks to
maximize the prediction error of the machine learning model
without necessarily inducing a speciﬁc outcome. Yevgeny et
al. [14] have noted that the distinction between reliability
and targeted attacks becomes blurred in attacks on binary
classiﬁcation tasks such as malware binary classiﬁcation.
As such, these conventional paradigms of attacker goal
classiﬁcation is not optimal for consideration in network
security. We choose to adopt the CIA triad in this context
and ﬁnd that it is more suitable for adversarial classiﬁcation
of the adversary goals in network security domain.
Conﬁdentiality attack refers to the goal of the attacker to
intercept communication between two parties AandB,
to gain access to private information being exchanged.
This happens within the context of adversarial machine
learning, whereby machine learning techniques are be-
ing used to carry out network security tasks.
Integrity attack seeks to cause a misclassiﬁcation, dif-
ferent from the actual output class which the machine
learning model was trained to predict. Integrity attack
could result in a targeted misclassiﬁcation or a reliability
attack. A targeted misclassiﬁcation attempts to make the
machine learning model to produce a speciﬁc wrong
prediction. A reliability attack results in either a conﬁ-
dence reduction or a misclassiﬁcation to any arbritrary
class apart from the correct class.Availability Attack results in a denial of service situ-
ation for the machine learning model. as a result, the
machine earning model becomes either totally unavail-
able to the user, or the quality is signiﬁcantly degraded
to the extent that the machine learning system becomes
unusable to the end users.
5) Target: In our surveyed work, adversarial attacks are
targeted against a speciﬁc machine learning technique. Sev-
eral successful attempts have been made towards the trans-
ferability of adversarial attacks [72] [73]. However, attacks
that have been targeted towards a speciﬁc machine learning
technique for example unsupervised learning, have not been
successfully transfered towards a another technique for ex-
ample supervised learning. Regarding the physical domain,
it includes input sensors, cameras and output actions.
B. Adversarial Attack Methods and Algorithms
We recall that adversarial attacks could be deployed either
during decision time (evasion attacks) or during training time
(poisoning attacks). In each case, the training algorithm (for
poisoning attacks) or the learned model (for evasion attacks)
is being manipulated with some form of carefully crafted
input known as the adversarial samples. A common trend
among the attack methods below reveals that the robustness
of a machine learning model to a large extent depends on
the ability of an attacker to ﬁnd an adversarial sample that
is as close as possible to the original input. In this section,
we evaluate the primary methods for generating adversarial
samples. It should be noted that recent research has shown
the limitations of some earlier methods that are still listed
here for reference even though more effective methods have
been introduced.
In the previous section IV-A, we described our threat
model for adversarial attacks in network security. In this
section, we introduce a classiﬁcation method for the various
adversarial attack algorithms. As seen in Figure 6 our classi-
ﬁcation method is based on the adversary strategy described
in section IV-A.3.
1) Evasion Attacks: Evasion attacks attempt to mislead
the machine learning system during the testing or inference
phase. Below we highlight adversarial attack methods that
fall within this category of evasion attacks. The attacks
are further divided into Gradient-based andGradient-free
attacks.
Gradient-based attacks: Szegedy et al. [44] studied
how adversarial samples could be generated against
neural networks for image classiﬁcation. The L-BFGS
(Limited Broyden-Fletcher- Goldfarb-Shanno) method
was then introduced, which used an expensive linear
search method to ﬁnd the optimal values of the ad-
versarial samples. In a different approach proposed by
Goodfellow et al. [1] called the Fast Gradient Sign
Method (FGSM), adversarial samples are created by
ﬁnding the maximal direction of positive change in the
loss. This is a faster method than the L-BFGS method
since only a one-step gradient update is performed
along the direction of the sign gradient at each level.
9

==== Page 10 ====
Adversarial Attack Algorithms
Poisoning Evasion Oracle
Mi-Face[71]
Copycat CNN[74]
Attribute inference[71]
KnockOff Nets[75]
FEE[70]SVM Poisoning[76]
Backdoor Attack[77]
Feature Collision[61]
PGD[6] L-BFGS[44] FGM[1]
Feature Adversaries[78] BIM[79] JSM[4]
Decision Tree Attack[72] DeepFool[3] NewtonFool[80]
EAD[81] Carlini and Wagner[82] AutoAttack[83]
UAP[84] Shadow Attack[85] Adversarial Patch[86]
Square Attack[87] ZOO[81] DbBA[85]
Threshold Attack[86] Hop Skip Jump[81] SimBA[81]
DPatch[81] TUAP[81] Wasserstein[81]
Spatial Transformation[81] Elastic Net[81] IFS[81]
Fig. 6. Adversarial Attack Algorithms
A major limitation of the Fast Gradient Sign Method
and similar attack methods is that they work based on
the assumption that the adversarial samples can be fed
directly into the machine learning model. This is far
from being practical since most attackers would seek
to access the machine learning models through devices
such as sensors [88]. The Basic Iterative Method (BIM)
proposed in [79] overcomes this limitation by running
the gradient update in multiple iterations.
The Jacobian-based Saliency Map Attack (JSMA) was
introduced by Papernot et al. [4]. For the attack, the Ja-
cobian matrix of a given sample is computed to ﬁnd the
input features of that sample which most signiﬁcantly
impacts the output. Subsequently, a small perturbation
is created based on that input feature for generating the
adversarial attack. DeepFool was proposed by Moosavi
et al. [3] as a method for creating adversarial samples
by ﬁnding out the closest distance between original
input and the decision boundary for adversarial samples.
They were able to determine that by using a related
classiﬁer, the closest distance which would correspond
to the minimal perturbation for creating an adversarial
sample will be the distance to the hyperplane of therelated classiﬁer.
Jang et al. [80] presented the NewtonFool attack, an
algorithm that is based on gradient-descent to ﬁnd
adversarial samples. This attack is similar to Deepfool
[3] but more effective in producing good adversarial
samples and reduces the conﬁdence probability of the
correct class. They exploit the softmax layer and control
the step size and how small the perturbation could be.
Carlini et al. [82] developed Carlini and Wagner Attack,
a targeted attack speciﬁcally for existing adversarial
defense methods. It was discovered that defenses such
as defensive distillation [89] were ineffective towards
the Carlini and Wagner attack. Madry et al. [6] pro-
posed the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) adversarial
attacks that is more robust than FGSM. This form of
attack utilizes a multi-step approach with a negative
loss function. It overcomes the network overﬁt problem,
and shortly comes of FGSM adversarial samples. It
is more robust than FGSM, which utilizes the ﬁrst-
order network information, and it works well in large-
scale constraints. In `1-ball, PGD iterate to explore the
maximum loss.
Croce et al. [83] proposed Auto Attack, an attack that
10

==== Page 11 ====
overcomes and remedy the weaknesses of Projected
Gradient Descent (PGD) [6] that lead to model robust-
ness false outcomes. First PGD attack use ﬁxed step
size with cross-entropy as a loss function that causes
the failure as identity by [90]. In [83], they use a new
gradient-based scheme without step size selection with
different loss function. With these two changes, two
versions of PGD produced with free parameters in the
number of iteration. They also integrate the new PGD
versions with FAB-attack [91] and Square attack [87]
to produce a parameter-free attack called AutoAttack.
The authors also integrated two Auto Attack and were
tested on a large scale on 40 classiﬁers.
Sabour et al. [78] proposed a new adversarial image
attack that not only focus on the class label but in the
internal representations. The attack, known as Feature
Adversaries enables the possibility to deceive a trained
DNN to mystify any source image with other target
image by ﬁnding a small perturbation from the source
image that create similar internal representation to the
target image and not related to the source image. The
authors however take into consideration that such adver-
saries are not outliers. Universal Perturbation [84] was
proposed by Moosavi et al. as an algorithm to calculate
a universal small image perturbation to misclassify a
state-of-the-art deep neural network classiﬁer. The main
focus of this algorithm was to ﬁnd the perturbation
vector that deceives classiﬁer on all data point samples.
This ﬁx perturbation is existed to lead changes in image
label gradually to build the universal perturbation.
Gradient-free Attacks: Decision Tree Attack was pro-
posed by Papernot et al. [72] this type of black-box
attacks use transferability of adversarial samples be-
tween and within different classiﬁers, including Deep
neural network. Logistic regression, decision trees, sup-
port vector machines (SVM), ensembles, and nearest
neighbors. They demonstrated that black box attacks
are feasible to a machine learning algorithm that not
using deep neural networks and adversarial samples
works well between and across models using the same
and different machine learning techniques. Chen et al.
[81] proposed an adversarial attack algorithm to attack
DNN based on elastic-net regularization in feature L1
andL2called elastic-net attacks to DNNs (EAD).
EAD considers state-of-the-are L2andLinfinty Au-
thors demonstrated that EAD could break undefended
and defensively distilled DNNs. They also improve
the transferability of attacks and adversarial training.
Shadow Attack was proposed by Ghiasi et al. [85]
which is a new method for attacking systems that rely
on certiﬁcates and fool certiﬁed robust networks to
assign the wrong label to an image and produce a
spoofed secure robustness certiﬁcate for the adversarial
example. Adversarial Patch, proposed by Brown et al.
[86] present universal, robust, and targeted adversarial
patches for the real world that do not require any
knowledge about what image they are attacking. Thoseadversarial samples can be used to attack any classiﬁer,
and they work with many transformations that exist
defense methods may not be robust to such a massive
transformation. The adversarial patch leads the classiﬁer
to switch class labels to any target class. Chen et al. [92]
develop HopSkipJumpAttack based on a decision-based
attack that is a type pf black-box attack. This algorithm
generates iterative targeted and untargeted adversarial
samples with minimum distance. This attack demon-
strates superior efﬁciency over various state-of-the-art
decision-based attacks. The iteration in the algorithm
is based on gradient direction, step size, and boundary
search.
2) Poisoning Attacks: A poisoning attack also known as
causative attack, uses direct or indirect means to alter the data
or the model. Poisoning attacks occurs either by injecting
false data, manipulating the original data, or corrupting the
model logic.
Data Injection: Biggio et al. [76] proposed a gradient
ascent based attack based on SVM that attacks the input
data that lead to maximize the non-convex surface error
and increase classiﬁer classiﬁcation at the test time. Gu
et al. [77] proposed BadNets, which perform adversarial
attacks by discovering the backdoored neural network
or BadNet. The attack is based on a full or partial
outsourced training process where attacker provides the
user with a trained model with a backdoor that causes
a targeted misclassiﬁcation and degrade in the accuracy
in some cases called backdoor trigger. For example, in
autonomous driving, an attacker provides the user with
a street sign detector that is backdoored, which classify
stop sign well in most cases except when the stop signs
have a particular sticker in classifying it as speed limit
signs. This type of attack occurs under two scenarios
user outsource trained model or download a pre-trained
model.
Data Manipulation: Feature Collision Attack proposed
by Shafahi et al. [61] presents a watermarking poisoning
attack based on optimization-based to craft a clean
label attack to target the behavior of a neural network
classiﬁer on a speciﬁc instance. This attack uses en-
hanced preservation techniques to make it difﬁcult to
be detected.
3) Oracle Attacks: In an oracle type adversarial attack,
an adversary who has been given a oracle prediction access
to a model, steals a copy of a remotely deployed machine
learning model. This enables the adversary to duplicate the
functionality of the model, i.e "steal the model" [62]. This
attack has become increasingly common due to the increase
in Machine Learning as a Service "MLaaS" offerings where
several companies that offer cloud-based Machine Learning
services e.g. Google, Amazon, and BigML, provide easy-to-
use web APIs to manage client interaction.
Inversion Attacks: Fredrikson et al. [71] exposed the
privacy issues with providing access to machine learn-
ing API. Their study demonstrated how an adversary
11

==== Page 12 ====
could utilize the conﬁdence information of a model to
result in model inversion attacks. The attack, which
is implemented as a function called MI-Face attack,
enables an adversary to extract pictures of subjects from
a trained machine learning model.
Inference Attacks: Fredrikson et al. [71] proposed the
attribute inference attack which could be launched either
as a white-box or black-box attack.
Extraction Attacks: Correia-Silva et al. [74] demon-
strated how an adversary could create a substitute model
from a black-box convolutional neural network (CNN)
model by querying the black-box model with random
non-labeled data. A more intriguing aspect of this oracle
type of extraction attack is the fact that dataset used to
persuade the model was not related to original problem
domain. Orekondy et al. [75] proposed Knockoff Nets
which are capable of stealing the functionality of a fully
trained model using a two-step approach. The adversary
ﬁrst obtains predictions from the model by querying a
set of input data, then the data-prediction pairs are used
to create a substitute model known as a "knock-off"
model. Their approach uses a reinforcement learning
approach with demonstrated query efﬁciency and per-
formance gains, compared to other oracle type attacks.
Jagielski et al [70] proposed the Functionally Equivalent
Extraction (FEE) attacks which explore accuracy and
ﬁdelity objectives within the space of model extraction
by improving the query efﬁciency of learning attacks.
Their method is demonstrated to be practical for high
parameter models in the range of millions. In their
attack method, an adversarial model is produced whose
architecture and weights are identical to the oracle.
V. A DVERSARIAL ATTACK CLASSIFICATION
Multiple studies [93] [94] have sought to differentiate
the different domains of network security into multiple
fragmented domains. A common approach for example make
attempts at differentiating malware and spam detection from
intrusion detection [9]. We ﬁnd that this attempt of ﬁne
grained classiﬁcation results in redundancy, since the task of
malware or phishing detection in a network could be consid-
ered an intrusion detection task. As such, in this survey, we
consider cyber attacks against a network as an attempt by an
adversary to intrude the network with a malicious payload.
We identify malicious payload in a network to consist of
three broad types: malicious ﬁles (malware), malicious text
(spam) and malicious url links (phishing). We note that
attackers may use a combination of all three payloads in most
cyber attacks. For example, a spam email may also contain a
link to a malicious url or contain a malicious ﬁle attachment.
This payload approach becomes even more crucial in our
study on adversarial attacks within the network security
domain. We realise from our study that this distinction plays
an important role in providing an accurate classiﬁcation of
adversarial attacks within the network security domain, as
compared to other domains such as computer vision.In this section, we introduce a classiﬁcation method for
adversarial attacks in network security based on network
security task. Our classiﬁcation approach considers the data
object which is being manipulated by the adversary. The
feature scope of the adversarial attack corresponds to the
data object as shown in Figure 7.
For the scope of this study, we consider adversarial attacks
based on the actual payload which is being attacked in
context. When a message is being transmitted from a sender
to a receiver, the payload represents the portion of the
transmitted data that is actually the intended message. For
example, when an email is sent, the payload consist of the
message body, attachments, and URL links. Headers and
metadata which help to facilitate the delivery of the payload
are not considered as part of the payload, within the context
of our study. Hence, the protocol overhead is not considered
as part of the actual data.
Our approach for classifying adversarial attacks in network
security is based off this approach, as shown in Figure 7.
This is known as feature scope based classiﬁcation, which
refers to what features are being manipulated or perturbed
by the adversary in other to generate an adversarial sam-
ple. Adversarial attacks against malware detection, phishing
detection and spam detection applications try to perturb the
payload features such as a binary ﬁle, a URL, or an email
message. These attacks are categorized as adversarial attacks
against endpoint protection systems. Conversely, we also
have adversarial attacks against network anomaly detection
applications and these type of attacks will seek to perturb
protocol features such as the network metadata or protocol
headers. We categorize these attacks as adversarial attacks
against network protection systems.
Network security domain that utilize machine learning
techniques fall into four broad categories namely malware
detection, phishing detection, spam detection and network
anomaly detection. We illustrate this categorization in Figure
7. The ﬁrst three categories of network security tasks are
considered as endpoint based protection. Machine learning
applications within this endpoint based protection category
are typically initiated with payload features. Network protec-
tion primarily constitutes network anomaly detection and ma-
chine learning applications within this category are typically
initiated with protocol features. Our study only considers
active attacks against a network, and passive attacks such as
eavesdropping are not within the scope of this study. Ad-
versarial attacks hence seek to generate adversarial samples
using speciﬁc data objects.
In contrast to adversarial attacks in the ﬁeld of image
processing or computer vision, network security’s adversarial
learning is more challenging. This occurs because even very
slight modiﬁcations to URLs, spam, packets, or malware
bytes of the binary ﬁles can signiﬁcantly alter the function-
ality of the data. In computer vision, the addition of tiny
perturbations to an image sample does not alter the human
perception of the image and same as in speech processing.
Text processing and network security ﬁltering techniques are
similar in this regard since a very slight change in the input
12

==== Page 13 ====
Fig. 7. Adversarial attack classiﬁcation
such as a word or a byte will alter the meaning of the text
or the data functionality. Hence, approaches for generating
adversarial samples in the domain of machine learning-based
network security ﬁltering systems need to occur in such a
way that the malicious functionality is not distorted. Several
approaches for achieving these adversarial attacks have been
researched and are discussed in the sections below.
A. Adversarial attacks against Malware Detection
A major component of endpoint protection in network
security is malware detection. Yet, malware detection re-
mains a challenging problem in network security. Between
2009 and 2019, the number of new malware digital signa-
tures has increased by over 2000 percent [95]. Therefore,
traditional malware detection systems that rely solely on
digital signatures have become less effective. Signiﬁcant
effort has been made in the use of machine learning to
protect against malware attacks. Several researches have
shown the vulnerability of these machine learning models
to adversarial attacks. The most common approach is the
addition of selected sequence of bytes to the binary ﬁle.
Several approaches have been considered for synthesizing
this sequence of bytes as discussed below.
Malware detection may be based on static analysis, in
which the malware is detected without executing the code.
Alternatively, dynamic analysis for malware detection typi-
cally executes a suspicious malware sample in a sandbox in
an attempt to discover dynamic behavioural patterns such as
API call sequences.
1) Iagodroid: One of the earliest attacks against machine
learning based malware detection systems was the Iagodroid
attack [96]. Iagodroid uses a method to induce mislabelling
of malware families during the triaging process of malware
samples. Their evasion rate reached 97 percent.
2) Stingray: Suciu et al [97] proposed an adversarial
attack against malware using the ’FAIL’ model. Their study
focuses on constraints of obscurity and transferability in
order to realize a targeted poisoning attack. StingRay suc-
ceeded in half of the test cases.3) Texture Perturbation Attacks: Researchers have de-
ployed visualization techniques similar to computer vision
and adapted it for malware classiﬁcation [98]. This involves
conversion of malware binary code into image data. The
Adversarial Texture Malware Perturbation Attack (ATMPA)
achieved a 100 percent effectiveness in defeating visualiza-
tion based machine learning malware detection system and
also resulted in 88.7 percent transfer-ability rate [16]. The
attack model for ATMPA works by allowing the attacker
to distort the malware image data during the visualization
process.
4) Android malware attack in Problem space: [58] et al
formalized an approach for problem space adversarial eva-
sion attacks against machine learning based android malware
detection systems. Their study identiﬁed four main contraints
which are characteristic of any problem space attack. Their
study adopted a technique which automates the generation
thousands of realistic and inconspicuous adversarial malware
samples, further buttressing the notion of adversarial mal-
ware as a service as a real threat in network security. Their
attack led to a misclassiﬁcation rate of 100.0 percent on the
successfully generated samples.
5) EvadeDroid: Bostani et al. [99] presented EvadeDroid,
another problem space Android evasion attack. EvadeDroid
is a query-efﬁcient black-box attack, that can fool ML-based
Android malware detectors without altering the functionality
of the original malware samples. It uses an n-gram-based
similarity method to select candidate donors for gadget
extraction to change malware samples into benign ones
through an iterative and incremental manipulation technique.
Their experimental results demonstrated that EvadeDroid’s
evasion rates are 81, 73, 75, and 79 percent for DREBIN,
Sec-SVM, MaMaDroid, and ADE-MA, respectively.
6) EvnAttack: EvnAttack is an evasion attack model that
was proposed in [47] which manipulates an optimal portion
of the features of a malware executable ﬁle in a bi-directional
way such that the malware is able to evade detection from
a machine learning model based on the observation that
the API calls differently contribute to the classiﬁcation
of malware and benign ﬁles. The detection model’s false
negative ratio almost reached 1 (100 percent), which means
almost all malware samples are misclassiﬁed.
7) AdvAttack: AdvAttack was proposed in [45] as a novel
attack method to evade detection with the adversarial cost as
low as possible. This is achieved by manipulating the API
calls by injecting more of those features which are most
relevant to benign ﬁles and removing those features with
higher relevance scores to malware. AdvAttack increased the
classiﬁer’s false negative ratio to 71 percent while degrade
the accuracy of the classiﬁer to 58.5 percent.
8) MalGAN: To combat the limitations of traditional
gradient-based adversarial sample generation, the use of a
generative adversarial network (GAN) based algorithm for
generating adversarial samples has been proposed. Genera-
tive models have been mostly used for input reconstruction
by encoding an original image into a lower-dimensional
latent representation [2]. The latent representation of the
13

==== Page 14 ====
original input can be used to distort the initial input to
create an adversarial sample. MalGAN proposed by [100]
leverages on generative modeling techniques to evade black-
box malware detection systems with a detection rate close
to zero.
9) GAPGAN: Yuan et al. [101] introduced GAPGAN,
an adversarial attack framework that generates adversarial
examples against binaries-based malware detection through
GANs. Adversarial perturbations are appended to the original
malware binaries to maintain its malicious functionality.
They tested GAPGAN on deep learning and MalConv de-
tectors. GAPGAN’s success rate reached 100 percent attack
with appending payloads of 2.5 percent of the total length
of the original data.
10) Black-Box Attacks against RNN Based Malware De-
tection Algorithms: Hu et al. [55] implemented a generative
recurrent neural network (RNN) which generates sequential
adversarial samples. In their study, the Gumbel-Softmax
approach is used to approximate generated discrete API’s.
Before their attack, the victim’s RNN malware detection rates
ranged from 90.74 to 93.87 percent. After their adversarial
attack, the detection rates on adversarial examples ranged
from 0.44 to 3.03 percent.
11) Adversarial Deep Learning for Robust Detection of
Binary Encoded Malware: Al-Dujaili et al [102] proposed
a method of generating adversarial malware samples with a
focus on preserving the malicious functionality of the binary
encoded ﬁles. They also introduce a mitigation framework
known as SLEIPNIR which employs the saddle-point opti-
mization technique to learn malware detection models.
12) Deceiving End-to-End Deep Learning Malware De-
tectors using Adversarial Examples: The authors Kreuk et
al. [103] introduced a novel approach for creating adversarial
malware samples by injecting a small sequence of bytes
to the binary ﬁle. The approach was also found to be
transferable across different malware ﬁles and families. In
their study, they evaluated the effectiveness of adversarial
malware samples based on ﬁve metrics namely (1) File
transferability, (2) Spatial Invariance (3) payload size, (4)
entropy (5) Functionality preservation. Their study was based
on only white box attacks and was not evaluated as white box
scenarios. Their injection procedure resulted in an evasion
rate of 99.21 and 98.83 percent.
13) Adversarial Examples on Discrete Sequences for
Beating Whole-Binary Malware Detection: The authors
[104] focus on adversarial attacks against Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) based end to end malware detectors.
End to end malware detectors such as Malconv [105] func-
tion quite different from most deep learning based malware
detectors in the sense that they take the whole malware
binary ﬁle as an input. To achieve their aim, a loss function
was which functions as a surrogate loss function proposed
which enforces the modiﬁcations in the embedding space.
Thus, the authors were able to modify the embedding vector
in order to reconstruct the modiﬁed binary, which becomes
the adversarial malware sample. To preserve the functionality
of the malware binary, a unique section of payload bytesis perturbed and appended to the original malware binary
ﬁle instead of perturbing the original binary ﬁle. Thus by
adding perturbations in the embedding vector space and
reconstructing new binary ﬁles from the adversarial example.
This attack’s evasion rate reached 100 percent.
14) Adversarial-Example Attacks Toward Android Mal-
ware Detection System: . MalGAN [100] proposed a black-
box adversarial-example attacks toward Android malware
detection, in which adversarial examples are generated using
a generative adversarial network (GAN) without requiring
the knowledge about the target. Unfortunately, the effec-
tiveness of Malgan is affected, if a ﬁrewall is incorporated
into the malware detection system. Adversarial attacks were
also studied against cloud-based Android malware detection
systems. Li et al. proposed a bi-objective GAN type adversar-
ial attack against android malware detection systems. Their
technique has the novelty of implementing a GAN with two
discriminators in which one discriminator contends against
the ﬁrewall while the other discriminator contends against
the malware detector. This study was the ﬁrst study to target
a ﬁrewall-equipped Android malware detection system.
15) Adversarial malware sample generation method
based on the prototype of deep learning detector: Qiaoa
et al.[106] presented a method for generating adversarial
malware to fool the deep learning-based malware detection
systems. The post-hoc interpretability of deep learning is
used by the authors to direct the malware ﬁle’s updates.
Based on their experiments, the time to generate their ad-
versarial malware is less than other attacks. The fooling rate
of this attack reached 92 percent.
16) Slack Attacks: A byte-based convolutional neural
network (MalConv) was introduced by Raff et al. [107].
Unlike image perturbation attacks [44], where the ﬁdelity of
the image is of little concern, attacks that alter the binaries
of malware ﬁles must maintain the semantic ﬁdelity of
the original ﬁle because altering the bytes of the malware
arbitrarily could affect the malicious effect of the malware.
This problem could be solved by appending adversarial noise
to the end of the binary [48]. This prevents the added
noise from affecting the malware functionality. The Random
Append attack and Gradient Append attacks are two types of
append attacks which work by appending byte values from
a uniform distribution sample and gradually modifying the
appended byte values using the input gradient value. Two
additional variations of append attacks; the benign append
and the FGM Append were introduced by Suciu et al. [108]
which improves the long convergence time experienced in
previous attacks. When malware binaries have exceeded the
model’s maximum size, it is impossible to append additional
bytes to them. Hence a slack attack proposed by Suciu et
al. [108] exploits the existing bytes of the malware binaries.
The most common form of the slack attack is the Slack FGM
Attack which deﬁnes a set of slack bytes that can be freely
modiﬁed without breaking the malware functionality.
17) Attack and Defense of Dynamic Analysis-Based, Ad-
versarial Neural Malware Detection Models: Stokes et. al
[109] proposed adversarial attacks against dynamic analysis-
14

==== Page 15 ====
based malware detection systems. Their work focuses on
different strategies of crafting adversarial samples for deep
learning based dynamic analysis of malware samples. Their
study is motivated in the fact that static analysis based
deep learning malware classiﬁers only classify the content
of the unknown ﬁle without execution, and become less
effective when faced with packed or encrypted malware
ﬁles. In addition, they propose a defense mechanism known
as the weight defense mechanism. The compare their de-
fence technique to existing defenses such as distillation and
ensemble defenses. They however did not compare their
study to the more popular approach of adversarial training,
which is a proven method for reducing the vulnerability
deep learning classiﬁers to adversarial samples. Their study
also indicates that adding more hidden layers to the neural
network signiﬁcantly improves the robustness of the deep
learning based malware classiﬁer to adversarial samples.
B. Adversarial attacks on Spam Detection
Spam detection is a signiﬁcant endpoint protection com-
ponent, used to protect users from unsolicited digital com-
munications. Machine learning techniques are widely used
for current spam ﬁltering applications, most of which utilize
supervised learning methods [110]. Multiple adversarial at-
tacks on machine learning-based spam detection systems are
discussed below.
1) Adversarial classiﬁcation: Dalvi et al [111] were the
ﬁrst to introduce a formal framework with corresponding
algorithms to describe the problem of adversarial attacks
against machine learning based spam detectors. In their
study, they seek the minimum cost camouﬂage (MCC) of
a data sample xto generate an adversarial sample MCC(x)
with the minimum cost, for which the classiﬁer outputs
a negative sample. Similar studies [112] had considered
adversarial attacks against spam detectors albeit not machine
learning based.
2) Attacks on Statistical Spam ﬁlters: Several spam ﬁlters
such as SpamAssasin, SpamBayes, Bogoﬁlter are based on
the popular Naive Bayes Machine learning algorithm which
was ﬁrst applied to ﬁltering junk email in 1998 [113]. A
variety of good word attacks introduced by Lowd [112]
were successfully evading the machine learning models from
detecting spam or junk emails. Using these attacks, an
attacker can get 50 percent of currently blocked spam past
a typical spam ﬁlter.
3) Exploiting Machine Learning to Subvert Your Spam
Filter: Nelson et al. [114] showed in 2008 that an at-
tacker could effectively disable the SpamBayes spam ﬁlter
with small information and little control over training data.
Their introduced Usenet dictionary poisoning attack caused
misclassiﬁcation of 36 percent of ham messages with only
1 percent control over the training data. They have also
presented a new class of focused attacks that stop victims
from receiving speciﬁc email messages. With knowledge of
only 30 percent of the target’s tokens, their focused attack
altered the classiﬁcation of the target email 60 percent of the
time.4) Attacks against crowd-turﬁng detection systems: Ma-
chine learning techniques are used to identify misbehavior
includes fake users in social networks and detect users who
pays for sites to have fake accounts. Malicious crowdsourc-
ing or crowd-turﬁng systems are used to connect users who
are willing to pay, with workers who carry out malicious
activities such as generation and distribution of fake news,
or malicious political campaigns. Machine learning models
have been used to detect crowdturﬁng activity with up to
95 percent accuracy particularly in detecting the accounts
of crowdturﬁng workers [115]. However, malicious crowd-
sourcing detection systems are highly vulnerable to adver-
sarial evasion and poisoning attacks.
5) Attacks Against ML for Keystroke Dynamics: Negi et
al. [116] created adversarial keystroke samples that misled
an otherwise accurate classiﬁer into accepting the artiﬁcially
generated keystroke samples as belonging to an authentic
user. Almost 50 percent of the tested users were compro-
mised after their attack.
6) Attacks against ML for credit card fraud detection:
Zeager et al. [117] examined how a logistic regression clas-
siﬁer used as a fraud detection mechanism, could be adver-
sarially attacked to cause a number of fraudulent transactions
to go undetected. Previous studies have similar models which
are based on game theory to investigate adversarial attacks
against credit card fraud detection and email spam detectors.
However, the authors introduced a new framework which
successfully produced an improved AUC score on multiple
iterations of the validation sets compared to the performance
of the models which credit card companies had previously
used.
7) Crafting Adversarial Email Content against Machine
Learning Based Spam Email Detection: Wang et al. [118]
proposed two methods to create adversarial email content
to bypass spam detectors. The ﬁrst approach approximates
the Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency) TF-IDF
values in the resultant adversarial examples and the second
method recognizes and adds a group of signiﬁcant words
to fool the detectors. They tested their work on multiple
machine language models like; KNN, SVM, decision tree,
and logistic regression, in both white-box and black-box
attack scenarios. Their attacks’ success rates ranged from
2.2 to 98.9 percent, which is inconclusive. However, they
concluded that the second method is more effective.
8) Marginal Attacks of Generating Adversarial Exam-
ples for Spam Filtering: Zhaiquan et al. [119] created the
marginal attack, which generates adversarial samples that can
deceive naive bayesian spam ﬁlters by selecting sensitive
words from a sentence and then add them at the end of
the sentence. Their experiments showed that adding just one
word to the message could reduce the model’s accuracy from
93.6 to 55.8 percent. They also tested the transferability of
the generated adversarial samples against standard machine
learning ﬁlters like logic regression, decision tree, and linear
support vector. In some cases, the accuracy of these ﬁlters
could drop from 100 to 1.5 percent.
15

==== Page 16 ====
9) Universal Adversarial Perturbations and Image Spam
Classiﬁers: Phung et al.[120] evaluated numerous adversar-
ial attack methods against deep learning-based image spam
classiﬁers, and they found that the universal perturbation
method is the most harmful. So they used this approach to
create a novel transformation-based adversarial attack that
was capable of creating tailored “natural perturbations” in
image spam. In some cases, their suggested attack can lower
the model’s accuracy to reach 23.7 percent.
C. Adversarial attacks against Phishing Detection
Phishing detection is a critical endpoint protection element
aimed to save the users from serious fraudulent actions like;
money stealing and accessing private information. There
are multiple techniques for phishing detection like [121];
List-base approach, Visual similarity-base approach, and
Heuristics and machine learning-based approach, which is
the most popular method now. Several adversarial attacks
on machine learning-based phishing detection systems are
discussed below.
1) FIGA: Gressel et al.[122] proposed the Feature Im-
portance Guided Attack (FIGA) to fool phishing detection
models by perturbing the most effective features of the
input in the direction of the target class. It is a model-
agnostic gray-box attack that needs knowledge of the feature
representation of the victim model. FIGA was tested on eight
different phishing detection models, and it reduced the F1-
score of the models from 0.96 to 0.41 on average.
2) Bypassing Detection of URL-based Phishing Attacks
Using Generative Adversarial Deep Neural Networks: AlEr-
oud et al. [123] presented an evasion technique that attacks
URL phishing detection systems via Generative Adversar-
ial Networks (GAN). Their generated samples can deceive
Blackbox phishing detectors even when those detectors are
created using reﬁned methods like those relying on intra-
URL similarities. Their experiments revealed that some
classiﬁers were unable to identify any of the adversarial
examples leading to zero true positive rates. At the same
time, the false positive rates are increased, which indicates
the percentage of benign examples classiﬁed as phishing.
3) Generating Optimal Attack Paths in Generative Adver-
sarial Phishing: Al-Qurashi et al. [124] proposed a method
that creates adversarial phishing attacks by discovering op-
timal subsets of features that lead to a higher evasion rate.
To achieve this, multiple feature engineering techniques are
used, such as Recursive Feature Elimination, Lasso, and
Cancel Out. Their experiments revealed that their attack has
better evasion capability than Generative Adversarial Deep
Neural Network (GAN) which randomly perturbs features.
4) Advanced evasion attacks and mitigations on practical
ML-based phishing website classiﬁers: Song et al. [125]
introduced multiple mutation-based techniques, differing in
the knowledge of the target classiﬁer (white, gray, and black
boxes). They also proposed a sample-based collision attack
to acquire the knowledge of the target model, in the cases
of white- and gray-box scenarios. Their evasion attacks
fooled the classiﬁers without changing the functionalitiesand appearance of the samples. Their attack’s success rate
varied depending on the knowledge and the attacked model.
Attacks on Google’s phishing page ﬁlter achieved a 100
percent attack success rate. Their transferability attack on
BitDe-fender’s industrial phishing page classiﬁer, Trafﬁ-
cLight, achieved 81.25 and 50 percent transferability attack
rates in the black- and gray-box scenarios.
D. Adversarial attacks against Network Anomaly Detection
Network anomaly detection devices learn network activity
patterns and detect irregularities. They must continuously
scan the network, analyze encrypted data, and spot anomalies
in real-time. Machine learning ticks all these boxes, that’s
why it is used extensively in modern Network anomaly
detection tools, however, researches have found some ways
to attack them. Multiple of these adversarial attacks are
discussed below.
1) IDSGAN: IDSGAN was proposed by Lin et al. [126]
for generating adversarial attacks targeted towards intrusion
detection systems. IDSGAN is based on the Wasserstein
GAN [127] which uses a generator, discriminator and a
black-box. The discriminator is used to imitate the black-box
intrusion detection system and at the same time provide the
malicious trafﬁc samples. IDSGAN can lower the detection
rates of some IDS models to approximately zero percent.
2) TCP Obfuscation Techniques: Another method for
evading machine learning based intrusion detection systems
is the use of obfuscation techniques. Homolial et al. [128]
proposed the modiﬁcation of various properties of network
connections to obfuscate a TCP communication which suc-
cessfully evades a wide variety of intrusion detection classi-
ﬁers.
3) Deep Adversarial Learning in Intrusion Detection: A
Data Augmentation Enhanced Framework: Zhang el al.
[129] proposed a framework which incorporates deep ad-
versarial learning with statistical learning in a manner which
exploits learning-based data-augmentation. In the study, the
Poisson-Gamma joint probabilistic generative model is used
to synthesize adversarial samples.
4) Generative Adversarial Networks For Launching and
Thwarting Adversarial Attacks on Network Intrusion Detec-
tion Systems: A Generative adversarial network (GAN) -
based adversarial attack was proposed by Usama et al. [65].
Their method was the ﬁrst attempt to utilize GAN-based
adversarial attacks against a black box Intrusion detection
system (IDS) while still preserving the functional behavior
of the network trafﬁc. In some cases, their attack dropped the
accuracy of the detection model from 84.3 to 43.4 percent.
5) Adversarial deep learning for robust detection of bi-
nary encoded malware: Al et al. [102], developed four
adversarial attack methods to generate an adversarial exam-
ple of a binary malware ﬁle that preserves its functionality
(rFGSM, dFGSM, BCA, and BGA). They developed a
framework for training robust malware detection models by
utilizing the saddle-point formulation that consists of the
inner maximization and outer maximization problems. The
inner maximization approach is used to generate powerful
16

==== Page 17 ====
adversarial examples that maximize the loss, and then they
inject them in the training time. In some conditions, their
attack’s evasion rate exceeded 99 percent.
6) Investigating Adversarial Attacks against Network In-
trusion Detection Systems in SDNs: With the increasing
deployment of ML-based NIDSs which leverage the global
network visibility offered by SDNs, the threat of vulnera-
bility of the ML algorithms to adversarial attacks is also
considered. Their study considered a use-case example of a
SYN Flood DDoS attack, in which they demonstrated the
ability to reduce the NIDS detection accuracy from 100% to
0% on multiple classiﬁers using evasion attacks. This was
one of the most successful attempts of adversarial attacks
against Network Intrusion Detections Systems, proposed by
Aiken et al [130]. Their experimental platform was based
on ML based NIDS for Software deﬁned networks called
Neptune. In their study, they demonstrated that with the
perturbation of a few features, the detection accuracy of a
speciﬁc SYN ﬂood Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attack by Neptune decreases from 100% to 0% across a
number of classiﬁers. Furthermore, they proposed an ad-
versarial test suite named Hydra to evaluate the impact
of adversarial evasion classiﬁers against an anomaly-based
NIDS - Neptune. Their study considered several classiﬁers
and machine learning algorithms, proving that clustering al-
gorithms were more robust to adversarial samples compared
to other ML types. Speciﬁcally, KNN proved to be the most
robust classiﬁer against the adversarial attacks performed
within their research, with only one combination of feature
perturbations halving the detection accuracy from 100% to
50%. In contrast, Random forest, LR, and Support vector
machines were generally vulnerable to the same perturba-
tions resulting in similar detection accuracy reductions. The
concept of attack generalization was also studied in this
publication, using their Neptune NIDS framework as the
adversarial target and which was capable of implementing
multiple classiﬁers.
7) IoT Network Security from the Perspective of Adver-
sarial Deep Learning: . The effect of adversarial attacks
on wireless sensor networks was studied by Sagduyu et.
al. [131]. The study experimented with adversarial attacks
within the context of three types of over-the-air (OTA) wire-
less attacks, namely within the jamming, spectrum poisoning,
and priority violation attack. Their study demonstrated how
adversarial attacks can lead to signiﬁcant loss in throughput,
by fooling an IoT transmitter into making a wrong trans-
mit decision in the test phase. This was also an evasion
attack against the machine learning model. In their study,
they considered an IoT network where an IoT transmitter
predicts if a channel status is idle or busy, by using deep
learning algorithms. Their study showed that deep learning
was effective in performing this task. Then, adversarial
machine learning as applied in three contexts - jamming,
spectrum poisoning and priority violation attakcs. A defense
system based on stackelberg game showed to be an effective
mitigation against adversarial machine learning against ioT
networks. This defense technique is however considered nottransferable as it was not proven to be generalizable across
multiple adversarial attack scenarios.
Several uses of deep learning for anomaly detection
in wireless communication systems have been commonly
implemented including channel decoding, [132], wireless
resource allocation [133] [134] and radio signal (modulation)
classiﬁcation [135]. Uses of Machine Learning in IoT include
anomaly detection [136], device identiﬁcation [137] [138],
and signal authentication [139].
8) Adversarial Attacks on Deep-Learning Based Radio
Signal Classiﬁcation: The robustness of deep learning based
algorithms for the wireless physical layer was also stud-
ied within the context of radio radio signal (modulation)
classiﬁcation tasks. Sadeghi [140] investigated the use of
convolutional neural networks in which they developed both
white-box and blackbox adversarial attacks for a DL based
modulation classiﬁcation. In their study, a VT-CNN was
used as the classiﬁer. The outcome of their research showed
that Signiﬁcantly less transmit power is required by the
attacker in order to cause misclassiﬁcation in the case of
adversarial machine learning, as compared to the case of
conventional jamming (where the attacker transmits only
random noise). Hence, adversarial machine learning is an
alternative to signal jamming with random noise, with less
resource required in terms of transmit power. Their research
also created a a computational efﬁcient algorithm for crafting
universal adversarial perturbations (UAP), which can cause
a misclasiﬁcation of the deep learning model irrespective of
the input provided to the model. Furthermore, their study
revealed an interesting property known as the Shift invariant
Property of their attack method, which makes the attack
generalizable across various deep learning models, without
having any knowledge of the nature of the model, thus
implying a black-box attack. Their tests showed that after
applying these attacks, the targeted model accuracy could
drop from 75 to 0 percent in the cases of a high perturbation-
to-noise ratio (ratio of the perturbation power to the noise
power).
9) Addressing Adversarial Attacks Against Security Sys-
tems Based on Machine Learning: Apruzzese et al. [141]
proposed an attack and defense method against several
types machine learning algorithms in for network intrusion
detection systems. In their study, they evaluated both poison-
ing and evasive adversarial attacks against three supervised
machine learning algorithms. The three algorithms namely
Random forest, K-nearest neighbour and Artiﬁcial Neural
Network (multi-layer perceptron) MLP were used to develop
a network intrusion detection system. Their poisoning and
evasion attack severity averaged 70.1 and 66.4 percent,
respectively. They also demonstrated that adversarial training
was effective in improving the robustness of deep learning
based network intrusion detection systems.
10) Adversarial Deep Learning for Cognitive Radio Secu-
rity: Jamming Attack and Defense Strategies: Shi et al. [142]
proposed an adversarial machine learning approach to launch
jamming attacks on wireless communications and introduces
a defense strategy. The study bases on the premise that in
17

==== Page 18 ====
a cognitive radio network, a typical transmitter workﬂow
includes the task of sensing available channels, identifying
spectrum opportunities, and then transmitting data to the
receiver in idle channels. As machine learning techniques
have been progressively applied in this context, such as im-
plementing a deep learning classiﬁer for the classiﬁcation of
channels as either idle or busy, attackers seek to compromise
the machine learning classiﬁer. Even though the attacker
has no knowledge of the deep learning classiﬁer, i.e this
is a black box attack. Their experiments showed that their
adversarial deep learning attack reduced the transmission
success rate from 73.79 to 2.91 percent. The authors also
propose a defense technique for the deep learning classiﬁer
that works by allowing the transmitter to deliberately takes
wrong actions in predetermined time slots in order to mislead
the adversary.
11) Performance Evaluation of Physical Attacks against
E2E Autoencoder over Rayleigh Fading Channel: Albaseer
et. al [67] investigated the vulnerabilities of autoencoder
E2E with Rayleigh channel mode. Their study demonstrated
the vulnerability of auntoencoder deep learning models to
adversarial samples when used in end-to-end wireless com-
munication systems. Both white-box and black box attacks
were launched against and e2e model that was based on a
realistic channel model. Their results showed that adversarial
attacks had more signiﬁcant impacts compared to jamming
attack.
12) Physical adversarial attacks against end-to-end au-
toencoder communication systems: Sadeghi et al. [68] also
showed that end to end learning of wireless communica-
tion systems are vulnerable to physical adversarial attacks.
Similar to the work of Albaseer et al. [67], their study
demonstrates that adversarial attacks are more destructive
than jamming attacks.
13) Targeted Adversarial Examples Against RF Deep
Classiﬁers: Kokalj-Filipovic et al. [143] studied the effect
of adversarial samples on machine learning based classiﬁers
for radio frequency signals. The goal of their research was to
verify if adversarial samples against machine learning based
classiﬁcation in of radio frequency signals was as effects in
the physical world (i.e when launched over the air - OTA)
as it was in theoretical settings.
14) Deep Learning-Based Intrusion Detection With Ad-
versaries: Wang et al. [15] evaluated the vulnerabilities of
deep learning-based IDS among state-of-the-art adversarial
attack algorithms, including FGSM, JSMA, Deepfool, and
CW using NSL-KDD dataset. They recognize feature pat-
terns for the attack algorithms, and they demonstrated that
modifying a limited number of features is better for most
of the adversaries, such as JSMA attacks. JSMA attacks
distinguish adversaries in terms of applicability. They noticed
how feature selection to be perturbed by an adversary varies
depending on the degree of signiﬁcance.
15) Evaluating Deep Learning-Based Network Intrusion
Detection System in Adversarial Environment: Peng et al.
[144] evaluated the developed scalable ENIDS framework
robustness in the adversarial environment against variousattacks ( MI-FGSM, L-BFGS, PGD, and SPSA) using NSD-
KDD dataset. They compare different well-known models,
including SVM, RF, and LR, with the proposed framework
under adversarial attacks. They use different metrics to
compare the model robustness, including accuracy(ACC),
Precision Rate (PR), Recall Rate (RR), F-Sorce (FS), and
Success Rate (SR).
16) Analyzing adversarial attacks against deep learning
for intrusion detection in IoT networks: Ibitoye et al. [145]
studied the adversarial samples effectiveness against deep
learning-based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) within the
context of an IoT network. The authors provide a com-
prehensive comparison between two different deep learning
model, a Self-normalizing Neural Network (SNN) and a
Feed-forward Neural Network (FNN). They utilize and study
input features normalization in a deep learning-based IDS in
an adversarial environment. It increases the robustness of
the deep learning model against various adversarial attacks
(FGSM, BIM, and PGD).
17) Online anomaly detection under adversarial impact:
Kloft et al. [146] studied the effect of a poisoning attack
of training data on online centroid anomaly detection (IDS)
with a ﬁnite sliding window. They study the poising attack
with limited and full control of the training dataset using
real HTTP trafﬁc from a web server of Fraunhofer FIRST
institute. This study shows if the attacker has full control
of the data, is it easy to attack while when applying ad-
ditional constraints to have limited control of the training
data by assuming that attacker can inject a small fraction
of the training dataset, the attack fails. Therefore, adding
those constraints adds protection approaches against poising
attacks. Their results show that they cannot consider their
method secure if the attacker has full control of the dataset.
18) Security evaluation of pattern classiﬁers under attack:
Biggio et al. [147] proposed a framework for empirical
security evaluation that can be applied in different three
real-life applications, including Intrusion detection system,
spam ﬁltering, Biometric Authentication. They proposed an
algorithm to sample training and testing sets. They evaluate
their framework performance under causative adversarial
attack using SVM and LR algorithm. For IDS, they used a
public data set of a web-server with 205 malicious samples
collected in ﬁve days in 2006. Authors recommend the
designer of classiﬁers to follow to use their framework to
evaluate the security of the classiﬁer.
19) Evading Machine Learning Botnet Detection Models
via Deep Reinforcement Learning: Wu et al. [148] intro-
duced a generic black-box attack against botnet detection
machine learning models. The authors of this paper use
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to generate adversarial
trafﬁc ﬂows to deceive the detection models. A reinforcement
learning agent updates the adversarial samples to change the
temporal and spatial features of the trafﬁc ﬂows without
altering the original functionality and executability. Their
attack’s evasion rate ranged from 69.3 to 80.4 percent.
20) Attack-GAN: Cheng et al. [149] proposed Attack-
GAN to generate malicious adversarial raw packets that can
18

==== Page 19 ====
mislead current machine learning network intrusion detection
systems in the internet of things. Each byte in a packet is
represented with word embedding. Feedback from the victim
NIDS is needed by this black box attack to update the
parameters of the generator. The attack success rate depends
on multiple factors like the machine model and the modes
of byte embedding, but it reached 98.42 percent in the best
case.
21) Fooling intrusion detection systems using adversar-
ially autoencoder: Chen et al. [150] introduced AIDAE
(Anti-Intrusion Detection AutoEncoder) framework against
IDSs. AIDAE can produce features matching normal fea-
ture distribution, it also keeps the correlation between the
generated continuous and discrete features. They used Eva-
sion Increase Rate (EIR) to evaluate their attack. The EIR
reﬂects the evasion power by comparing the adversarial
detection rate with the original, i.e. 1-(adversarial detection
rate/original detection rate). EIR was higher than 0.9 in all
their experiments.
22) TANTRA: Sharon et al. [151] presented TANTRA
(Timing-Based Adversarial Network Trafﬁc Reshaping)
which deceives NIDSs by reshaping attack network trafﬁc
using the timestamp attribute. Based on the authors’ evalu-
ation, TANTRA had an extremely high success rate (99.99
percent). However, when TANTRA was tested after training
the NIDSs with both benign and reshaped trafﬁc, its success
rate decreased.
VI. E VALUATING ADVERSARIAL RISK
In discussing adversarial risk, we introduce the concept
of discriminative and directive autonomy of machine learn-
ing models. The two-fold goal of an adversarial risk grid
mapping is to evaluate the likelihood of success of an
adversarial attack against a machine learning model, and
the consequence of that attack if successful. Adversarial risk
often seek to measure the performance of a machine learning
model based on worst case inputs [152]. We present in this
paper, an adversarial risk grid map shown in Figure 8 based
on the level of autonomy of the machine learning model
with respect to the learning technique and task. The concept
of discriminative autonomy and directive autonomy of the
machine learning models represents a novel approach for
evaluating the relative adversarial risk of a machine learning
model.
A. Security by Obscurity in Adversarial Risk
The notion of security by obscurity in adversarial context,
in which defenses are proposed based on obscurity to an
adversary does not truly reﬂect the nature of adversarial
risk in machine learning-based network security applications.
The prevalence of black box adversarial attacks which fool
classiﬁers without having direct access to the model further
demonstrate the weakness in the obscurity approach to
adversarial risk.
As adversarial attacks continue to emerge into real world
production systems, the ability to computationally evaluate
and even optimize adversarial risk becomes invaluable. Whileboth adversarial risk and obscurity have been impossible
to compute directly [152], frameworks for adversarial risk
based on the concept of obscurity have been proposed [153].
B. Adversarial Risk Grid Map
A modiﬁed notion of adversarial risk was proposed in
[154] which suggested that certain classiﬁers inherently have
low adversarial risk. Other works [155] [156] have suggested
a trade-off between standard risks and adversarial risk. This
indicates that with increase in standard accuracy of the
classiﬁer, the adversarial risk of the classiﬁer increases.
Based on our review, a grid map based on the autonomy
of the machine learning model is proposed. We term this as
model autonomy adversarial risk approach since it is based
on the directive and discriminative autonomy of the machine
learning models. The map is shown in Figure 8.
Discriminative Autonomy: The discriminative autonomy
is directly related to the type of task being performed
by the machine learning model. Machine learning tasks
such as classiﬁcation are highly dependent on the input
data. As such, they have lower discriminative or condi-
tional autonomy compared to tasks such as generative
modeling which depend less on the input data when
predicting an outcome.
Directive autonomy: The directive autonomy of a ma-
chine learning model is a function of the machine learn-
ing technique. In supervised machine learning, there is
less directive autonomy since the model needs to be ﬁrst
learned with some form of labeled data. Machine learn-
ing techniques such as reinforcement learning depend
less on a model being learned with any form of training
data and posses much higher directive autonomy.
C. Cross Model vs Cross Dataset Attack
In discussing adversarial risk, the notion of transferability
becomes pertinent. Transferability refers to the fact in which
an adversarial example which is crafted for a speciﬁc deep
learning model, is found to be effective in causing a mis-
classiﬁcation in a different model. This is known as cross-
model adversarial samples. in a similar situation, when the
adversarial sample that was generated by altering a particular
dataset. If that sample is used to attack a deep learning
system that was trained using a different dataset, that is called
a Cross-dataset adversarial sample.
VII. D EFENDING AGAINST ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS
Numerous researchers have aimed to review and classify
defenses against adversarial attacks. Barreno et al. [8] ﬁrst
proposed three broad approaches for defending machine
learning algorithms against adversarial attacks. Regulariza-
tion, Randomization, and Information hiding. Yuan et al. [88]
classiﬁed the defenses into two broad strategies. Proactive
strategies and reactive strategies. Rosenberg et al. [9] orga-
nized the defenses based on the cyber security sub-domains
(malware detection, spam detection, biometric systems, etc.),
in our work, we classify the defenses based on generalized
ML approaches.
19

==== Page 20 ====
Fig. 8. Adversarial Risk Grid Map
Since adversarial examples represent a worst-case scenario
of a distribution shift, the task of generating an adversar-
ial sample is a non-convex optimization problem that can
only be approximately solved. Adversarial attack methods
are mostly optimization algorithms in search for a lower
boundary perturbation that corresponds to an adversarial
sample [157] . These optimization algorithms often result
in high frequency outputs [158]. This however makes the
defense methods against this adversarial samples vulnerable
to adversarial samples that are generated within a low-
frequency subspace.
In this section, we provide the most common defense
methods in use today and classify them based on the strategy
and approach. The reviewed defense methods are shown in
Figure 9 below.
1) Gradient Masking: Since most method of adversarial
attacks are based on the using of gradient, the gradient
masking method modiﬁes a machine learning model in an
attempt to obscure its gradient from an attacker. Nayebi
et al [159] demonstrated the effect of gradient masking by
saturating the sigmoid network which results in a vanishing
gradient effect in gradient-based attacks. Authors force the
neural networks to works in nonlinear saturating system.
By using Jacobian regularization for each network layer
including the output layer, the model becomes non sensi-
tive of perturbations that are generated using fast gradient
sign method (FGSM) and iterative adversarial attacks[159].
However, [160] indicate that gradient masking react as over-
ﬁtting in their experiments.
2) Defensive Distillation: Distillation technique was orig-
inally proposed by Hinton et al. [161] for transferring
knowledge from large neural networks to smaller ones. To
implement the distillation approach, Hinton et al. authors
built 10 DNN models with same architecture and training
method and use soft targets to avoid overﬁtting that occurwhen using hard targets. They proved in their experiments
that ensemble model is able to transfer knowledge to the
distilled model better than individual models. However, en-
semble requires large computation models that have large
networks and large datasets. Therefore, they use learning
specialist models that each use a subset of dataset classes
to reduce the amount of computation [161]. Also, it was
adapted by Papernot et al. [89] to defend against adversarial
crafting by using the output of the original neural network
to train a smaller network rather than using the distillation
as originally proposed by Hinton. Defensive distillation was
initially tested against adversarial attacks in computer vision,
but further research is required to determine its effectiveness
in other applications such as malware detection.
3) Adversarial Training: Adversarial training [6] is a
method that aims to increase the robustness of a machine
learning model to adversarial samples by minimizing the
lossLon data/label pairs fXi;yigwhile maximizing the
corresponding loss function. Szegedy et al. [44] originally
proposed a three-step method known as adversarial training
for defending against adversarial attacks. 1, Train the classi-
ﬁer on the original dataset 2, Generate adversarial samples
3, Iterate additional training epochs using the adversarial
samples. Generally, adversarial training is based on min-max
formulation that solves two problems: attacks as an inner
maximization problem and defenses as an outer minimization
problem to achieve optimization [6]. The inner maximization
intents to generate adversarial samples version that results
to maximize the model loss. Where the outer minimization
intents to minimize the loss by ﬁnding model parameters
that build a more robust model with less adversarial loss
[6]. Numerous researchers tested and evaluated the effect of
adversarial training in the network security domain [166],
[167]. They concluded that it improves the classiﬁcation
performance of the machine learning model and makes it
20

==== Page 21 ====
Adversarial Defense Methods
Gradient
Masking
[159]Defensive
Distillation
[161]Adversarial
Training
[6]Gradient
Regularization
[162]Detecting
Adversarial Samples
[139]Feature
Reduction
[163]Input
Randomization
[164]Ensemble
Defenses
[165]
Fig. 9. Adversarial Defense Methods
more resilient to adversarial crafting.
However, adversarial training has certain limitations par-
ticularly in the context of adversarial machine learning in net-
work security. First, the adversary may implement a different
attack method other than the one which was used in training
the network. Secondly, the adversary may design adversarial
perturbations for a deep learning model that already has been
trained with adversarial training, and craft new adversarial
perturbations which would make the previous adversarial
training ineffective. It has also been shown that adversarial
training can reduce the performance of the deep learning
models on clean inputs as discussed in [68].
4) Gradient Regularization: Gradient regularization is a
technique that penalizes large changes in the output of some
neural network layer, to adjust machine learning models,
minimize the loss function, increase model robustness and
prevent overﬁtting or underﬁtting. Many researchers tested
this approach as a defense against adversarial attacks, like
Ros et al. [162] who found that training DNNs with gra-
dient regularization improves the robustness to adversarial
perturbations as much or more than adversarial training. They
have also found that combining both approaches (gradient
regularization and adversarial training) achieves greater ro-
bustness. The main drawback of Gradient regularization is
that it doubles the training time per batch.
5) Detecting Adversarial Samples: Several approaches
are used to detect the presence of adversarial samples in the
training phase of a machine-learning model. One of such
approaches proposed by [139] works on the premise that
adversarial samples have a higher uncertainty than clean data
and uses a Bayesian neural network that is in dropout layers
of neural networks to estimate the extent of uncertainty in
the input data to detect the adversarial samples. Other ap-
proaches include the use of probability divergence proposed
by [168] as well as the use of an auxiliary network of the
original network introduced by Metzen et al. in [169]. Ren
et al. [170] also proposed adversarial attack detection and
adversarial sample recognition methods by using the causal
inference technique to establish a causal model to describe
the generation and performance of adversarial samples that
attack DNNs.
6) Feature Reduction: Other potential defenses for adver-
sarial attacks have been proposed. Simple feature reduction
was evaluated by Grosse et al. [163] but was found inade-
quate in defending against adversarial attacks.7) Input Randomization: Some researchers tried random-
ization operations on the input of the model as a defense
against adversarial attacks on machine learning, for example,
Xie et al. [164] tried random resizing and adding random
padding on inputs. Experiments demonstrated that their pro-
posed method is effective. Zhang et al. [56] also tried a
similar method by injecting random Gaussian noise. These
approaches have multiple advantages such as simplicity, low
computational complexity, and eliminating the need for addi-
tional training. The main disadvantage is using this defense
technique in the network security domain could change the
functionality of the inputs (Executables, Packets, etc.). In our
opinion, this method needs to be evaluated in the network
security domain.
8) Ensemble Defenses: Similar to the idea of ensem-
ble learning which combines one or more machine learn-
ing techniques, researchers have also proposed the use of
multiple defense strategies as a defense technique against
adversarial samples. PixelDefend was proposed by [165] to
combine adversarial detecting techniques with one or more
other methods for creating a more robust defense against
adversarial attacks.
VIII. D ISCUSSION AND LESSONS LEARNT
This section discusses several key lessons learnt through
our survey on adversarial attacks against ML in network
security.
A. Increased Adversarial Risk
We observed an increased risk of adversarial vulnerability
of machine learning models in network security with reduced
discriminative autonomy and directive autonomy. Similarly,
we observed a reduced risk of adversarial vulnerability with
increased discriminative autonomy and directive autonomy.
As illustrated in the adversarial risk grid map shown in
Figure 8, the discriminative autonomy directly relates to
the machine learning tasks while the directive autonomy
relates to the machine learning technique. The reason for
the adversarial sensitivity of the machine learning models
to the discriminative and directive autonomy based risk grid
map is still an area of open research.
Previous approaches on making machine learning in net-
work security more secure have advocated the development
of machine learning models that are resilient to adversarial
attacks. In this survey, we introduced the concept of an
element of reduced risk of adversarial attacks based on an
21

==== Page 22 ====
adversarial risk grid map. Our ﬁndings suggest that the
adversarial risk grid map provides a promising future for
the security of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning in
network security. Machine learning based network security
applications that are more resilient to adversarial attacks
can be designed by leveraging on the adversarial risk grid
map. We observed that the misclassiﬁcation achieved by an
adversarial attack is dependent signiﬁcantly on the design
of the adversarial attack algorithm with the context of each
speciﬁc attack . White-box, Evasion attacks against endpoint
protection systems (malware detection) are the most common
attacks. While there is limited research in adversarial attacks
against process behavior and user behavior analysis, use
cases of machine learning in network security, endpoint
protection, network protection and application security have
been well researched.
B. Transferability with regards to machine learning tech-
nique
Transferability of adversarial samples [72] [171] has been
shown to be more effective with targeted adversarial samples
[73]. This implies that non-targeted adversarial samples
(reliability attacks) which are solely aimed at causing a
misclassiﬁcation, are more likely to transfer from one model
to the other. In furtherance to this phenomenon, we observe
that adversarial attacks in network security are less likely
to transfer from one machine learning technique to another.
Transferability of adversarial defences in network security
in also impacted by to the heterogenous nature of the
perturbed features. While this is has a positive side with
regards to preventing transferable defenses, it also makes it
more difﬁcult in real world situations. From our observation,
adversarial attacks in problem space are more difﬁcult to
generate, more difﬁcult to defend against and less chances
of being transferable.
In our research, we observed that a signiﬁcant amount
of features are perturbed in the process of generating the
adversarial sample. This is a sub optimal approach. There
is currently no publication which has explored the challenge
of ﬁnding a way to identify the ideal features that need to
be perturbed for creating adversarial samples. In the ﬁeld of
computer vision, Guo et al. [158] restricted the search for
adversarial samples to the low frequency domain, thereby
reducing query complexity.
We reviewed defenses against adversarial attacks on ma-
chine learning applications in network security. We note that
there are two major limitations in the existing research on
adversarial defenses. Firstly, most defenses are designed to
protect against attacks on machine learning applications in
computer vision. Secondly, the defenses studied are usually
designed for a speciﬁc attack or a part of the attack. A
generalized defense model against adversarial attacks is
at best still theoretical as research on generalized defense
models is in early stages [172]. Furthermore, our ﬁndings
indicate that defenses against adversarial attacks are speciﬁc
to a particular type of attack and are not necessarily trans-
ferable. Recent research [72] have studied the transferabilityin malware machine learning models in machine learning
applications such as malware detection.
C. Malware Detection Approaches
In the majority of cases, Android malware detection is
posed as a binary classiﬁcation problem in which a classiﬁer
is used to determine whether an app is malicious or not.
Malware detection take three general approaches which are
dynamic, static, or hybrid. Signiﬁcant overhead is usually
required in order to extract dynamic features because it
requires monitoring the behavior of apps at run time. Several
of the studies we examined have focused on instances
in which static features were extracted, including required
permissions, actions, and application programming interface
(API) calls. In our literature review, we did not come across
any work in which adversarial attacks were successfully
carried out against machine learning based malware detection
systems in which dynamic features were extracted.
D. Quantitative evaluation of adversarial attacks
In network security, majority of the adversarial attacks
reported target the integrity aspect of the CIA triad, with the
intent of causing a misclassiﬁcation. A quantitative analysis
of the attacks’ efﬁciency for the four reviewed categories
(malware detection, phishing detection, spam detection, and
network anomaly detection) was observed. After calculating
the average attack success rate per class, we have found that
the most signiﬁcant adversarial effect was in the malware
detection and the network anomaly detection domains, in
which the adversarial attacks’ success rates averaged more
than 90 percent. It is worth mentioning that we think that
a number of these attacks are theoretical and need more
investigation to deploy them in practical settings, thus the
quantitative effect of some of the reviewed attacks could
be exaggerated. However, we ﬁnd these results as a good
indication of the malicious potential of adversarial attacks
on network security domains.
The challenge of quantifying the efﬁciency of adversarial
example generation, is an emerging ﬁeld and several ap-
proaches have been proposed in recent literature. In [173]
a new performance metric was proposed, called effective
generation rate (EGR) which is the ratio between n and
n, i.e., n /n. Where n represents the number of adversarial
examples generated by an attacker and n denotes the
number of adversarial examples that successfully evades both
malware and adversarial example detection.
E. Difference between adversarial attacks in network secu-
rity and computer vision
1) In image recognition, the primary feature used in
adversarial perturbation is the pixels of the image.
However, in network security, there is a great variation
in the types of features which may be used, and as
such, the perturbation scope for adversarial attacks
becomes largely increased.
2) Adversarial attacks in network security differs from
computer vision since data objects are considered
22

==== Page 23 ====
rather than images. As a result, the perturbed features
are more diverse and heterogeneous. The consequence
of this is that it becomes more difﬁcult to defend
against adversarial attacks in network security due to
the heterogeneity , hence, transferability and universal
defenses against . It should be noted that signiﬁcant
strides have been made in computer vision, with re-
gards to developing universal defences but this is still
an infant research area in network security. Also, the
feature varies greatly based on the network security
application. In most cases, the features used in the ma-
chine learning classiﬁcation are also the features that
are perturbed in generating the adversarial samples.
IX. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We present a ﬁrst of its kind survey on adversarial attacks
on machine learning in network security. The previous survey
[17] that we reviewed had only discussed adversarial attacks
against deep learning in computer vision. We introduced a
new classiﬁcation for adversarial attacks based on applica-
tions of machine learning in network security and developed
a matrix to correlate the various types of adversarial attacks
with a taxonomy-based classiﬁcation to determine their ef-
fectiveness in causing a misclassiﬁcation. We also presented
a novel idea of the concept of an adversarial risk grid map
for machine learning in network security.
In our review on defenses against adversarial attacks,
although there were numerous proposed defenses against
speciﬁc adversarial attacks, research on generalized defenses
against adversarial attacks is still not well established [172].
In our future work, we would study generalized defenses
against adversarial attacks to understand if a generalized
approach towards adversarial defenses will be effectively
attainable. In addition, we would examine the interpretability
of the adversarial risk to further understand why the reduced
adversarial vulnerability occurs, and its implications for other
applications of machine learning such as computer vision and
natural language processing.
Future Work Based on our research, adversarial attack
has mostly been carried out on data at rest, with very
few successful attempts of adversarial attacks on data in
transit, or streaming data such as [174] [175]. However, in
network security domains such as in the ﬁeld of intrusion
detection, realistic adversarial attacks will be carried out on
data in transit. Hence, more research is needed in this area to
understand the potential risks of adversarial attacks against
data in transit and the possible defense techniques.
Adversarial attack against federated learning [176] is still
an open area of research. Federated learning [177], which
is quite different from distributed computation, involves the
situation in which each client performs the machine learning
computation without sending the data to the cloud. As such,
the cloud provider does not have a complete view of the
machine learning model with signiﬁcant gains for privacy
and conﬁdentiality.
Adversarial attacks were demonstrated to affect only clas-
siﬁer and clustering tasks in network security. From thereviewed literature of over ﬁfty attacks against machine
learning in network security, there has been no attempt to
implement adversarial attacks against any other task in net-
work security except classiﬁcation and clustering tasks. This
is consistent with our adversarial risk grid map illustrated
in Figure 8 in which we posit that adversarial risk increases
based on the type of network security task which is being
performed. Our study notes that there are diverse adversaries
in network security compared to computer vision. as such,
there is even more relevant arms race situation in network
security than in computer vision
Several authors have shown that deep learning can be
performed on data that is encrypted[178] [179] [180]. But
in our study, we observe that encrypted data has not been
adversarial defeated. Even though, most data in network
security is encrypted, adversarial attacks or the ability to
generate adversarial samples against encrypted data is an area
of open research. As such, it is a promising idea, subject
to future research, to stipulate that performing encryption
before applying machine learning to the data, is a trusted
and proven defense against adversarial machine learning in
network security.
The use of deep learning as a technique for encryption
is quite restrictive [181]. This is mostly due to the com-
putational costs of deep learning. Research is also required
to understand the effects of adversarial attacks against deep
learning for encryption.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through
the NSERC Discovery Grant program.
REFERENCES
[1] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harness-
ing adversarial examples (2014),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 .
[2] J. Kos, I. Fischer, and D. Song, “Adversarial examples for generative
models,” in 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW) ,
pp. 36–42, IEEE, 2018.
[3] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “Deepfool:
a simple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pp. 2574–2582, 2016.
[4] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik, and
A. Swami, “The limitations of deep learning in adversarial settings,”
inSecurity and Privacy (EuroS&P), 2016 IEEE European Symposium
on, pp. 372–387, IEEE, 2016.
[5] I. Corona, G. Giacinto, and F. Roli, “Adversarial attacks against
intrusion detection systems: Taxonomy, solutions and open issues,”
Information Sciences , vol. 239, pp. 201–225, 2013.
[6] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu,
“Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.06083 , 2017.
[7] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, I. Goodfellow, S. Jha, Z. B. Celik, and
A. Swami, “Practical black-box attacks against machine learning,” in
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , pp. 506–519, ACM, 2017.
[8] M. Barreno, B. Nelson, R. Sears, A. D. Joseph, and J. D. Tygar,
“Can machine learning be secure?,” in Proceedings of the 2006 ACM
Symposium on Information, computer and communications security ,
pp. 16–25, ACM, 2006.
[9] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y . Elovici, and L. Rokach, “Adversarial
machine learning attacks and defense methods in the cyber security
domain,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36,
2021.
23

==== Page 24 ====
[10] V . Duddu, “A survey of adversarial machine learning in cyber
warfare,” Defence Science Journal , vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 356–366, 2018.
[11] C. Zhang, P. Patras, and H. Haddadi, “Deep learning in mobile and
wireless networking: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials , 2019.
[12] B. Biggio and F. Roli, “Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of
adversarial machine learning,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 84, pp. 317–
331, 2018.
[13] D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Christiano, J. Schulman,
and D. Mané, “Concrete problems in ai safety,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.06565 , 2016.
[14] Y . V orobeychik and M. Kantarcioglu, “Adversarial machine learning,”
Synthesis Lectures on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning ,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1–169, 2018.
[15] Z. Wang, “Deep learning-based intrusion detection with adversaries,”
IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 38367–38384, 2018.
[16] X. Liu, Y . Lin, H. Li, and J. Zhang, “Adversarial examples: Attacks
on machine learning-based malware visualization detection methods,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01546 , 2018.
[17] N. Akhtar and A. Mian, “Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learn-
ing in computer vision: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00553 ,
2018.
[18] S. Qiu, Q. Liu, S. Zhou, and C. Wu, “Review of artiﬁcial intelligence
adversarial attack and defense technologies,” Applied Sciences , vol. 9,
no. 5, p. 909, 2019.
[19] Q. Liu, P. Li, W. Zhao, W. Cai, S. Yu, and V . C. Leung, “A survey
on security threats and defensive techniques of machine learning: A
data driven view,” IEEE access , vol. 6, pp. 12103–12117, 2018.
[20] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and ma-
chine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176,
2015.
[21] J. Gardiner and S. Nagaraja, “On the security of machine learning in
malware c&c detection: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) ,
vol. 49, no. 3, p. 59, 2016.
[22] H. X. Y . M. Hao-Chen, L. D. Deb, H. L. J.-L. T. Anil, and K. Jain,
“Adversarial attacks and defenses in images, graphs and text: A
review,” International Journal of Automation and Computing , vol. 17,
no. 2, pp. 151–178, 2020.
[23] W. E. Zhang, Q. Z. Sheng, A. Alhazmi, and C. Li, “Adversarial
attacks on deep-learning models in natural language processing: A
survey,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology
(TIST) , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1–41, 2020.
[24] L. Sun, M. Tan, and Z. Zhou, “A survey of practical adversarial
example attacks,” Cybersecurity , vol. 1, no. 1, p. 9, 2018.
[25] V . Ford and A. Siraj, “Applications of machine learning in cyber
security,” in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Computer Applications in Industry and Engineering , 2014.
[26] J. Singh and M. J. Nene, “A survey on machine learning techniques
for intrusion detection systems,” International Journal of Advanced
Research in Computer and Communication Engineering , vol. 2,
no. 11, pp. 4349–4355, 2013.
[27] M. Almseidin, M. Alzubi, S. Kovacs, and M. Alkasassbeh, “Evalua-
tion of machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection system,”
inIntelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY), 2017 IEEE 15th
International Symposium on , pp. 000277–000282, IEEE, 2017.
[28] A.-C. Sima, K. Stockinger, K. Affolter, M. Braschler, P. Monte, and
L. Kaiser, “A hybrid approach for alarm veriﬁcation using stream
processing, machine learning and text analytics,” in International
Conference on Extending Database Technology (EDBT), March 26-
29, 2018 , ACM, 2018.
[29] P. Laskov, P. Düssel, C. Schäfer, and K. Rieck, “Learning intrusion
detection: supervised or unsupervised?,” in International Conference
on Image Analysis and Processing , pp. 50–57, Springer, 2005.
[30] B. Kolosnjaji, A. Zarras, G. Webster, and C. Eckert, “Deep learning
for classiﬁcation of malware system call sequences,” in Australasian
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp. 137–149, Springer,
2016.
[31] K. Rieck, P. Trinius, C. Willems, and T. Holz, “Automatic analysis
of malware behavior using machine learning,” Journal of Computer
Security , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 639–668, 2011.
[32] A. Kumara and C. Jaidhar, “Automated multi-level malware detection
system based on reconstructed semantic view of executables using
machine learning techniques at vmm,” Future Generation Computer
Systems , vol. 79, pp. 431–446, 2018.[33] Y . Li, R. Ma, and R. Jiao, “A hybrid malicious code detection method
based on deep learning,” methods , vol. 9, no. 5, 2015.
[34] R. Basnet, S. Mukkamala, and A. H. Sung, “Detection of phishing
attacks: A machine learning approach,” in Soft Computing Applica-
tions in Industry , pp. 373–383, Springer, 2008.
[35] Y . Dong, Y . Zhang, H. Ma, Q. Wu, Q. Liu, K. Wang, and W. Wang,
“An adaptive system for detecting malicious queries in web attacks,”
Science China Information Sciences , vol. 61, no. 3, p. 032114, 2018.
[36] H. Le, Q. Pham, D. Sahoo, and S. C. Hoi, “Urlnet: Learning a url
representation with deep learning for malicious url detection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.03162 , 2018.
[37] K. Revett, F. Gorunescu, M. Gorunescu, M. Ene, P. S. T. Magalhães,
and H. D. d. Santos, “A machine learning approach to keystroke
dynamics based user authentication,” 2007.
[38] E. Bursztein, M. Martin, and J. Mitchell, “Text-based captcha
strengths and weaknesses,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM confer-
ence on Computer and communications security , pp. 125–138, ACM,
2011.
[39] K. Lee, J. Caverlee, and S. Webb, “Uncovering social spammers:
social honeypots+ machine learning,” in Proceedings of the 33rd
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
in information retrieval , pp. 435–442, ACM, 2010.
[40] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Anomaly detection; industrial
control systems; convolutional neural networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.08110 , 2018.
[41] Y . Kou, C.-T. Lu, S. Sirwongwattana, and Y .-P. Huang, “Survey of
fraud detection techniques,” in Networking, sensing and control, 2004
IEEE international conference on , vol. 2, pp. 749–754, IEEE, 2004.
[42] Y . G. ¸ Sahin and E. Duman, “Detecting credit card fraud by decision
trees and support vector machines,” 2011.
[43] E. Prouff, R. Strullu, R. Benadjila, E. Cagli, and C. Dumas, “Study of
deep learning techniques for side-channel analysis and introduction to
ascad database.,” IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , vol. 2018, p. 53,
2018.
[44] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfel-
low, and R. Fergus, “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.6199 , 2013.
[45] L. Chen and Y . Ye, “Secmd: Make machine learning more secure
against adversarial malware attacks,” in Australasian Joint Confer-
ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pp. 76–89, Springer, 2017.
[46] L. Chen, S. Hou, Y . Ye, and S. Xu, “Droideye: Fortifying security of
learning-based classiﬁer against adversarial android malware attacks,”
in2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social
Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) , pp. 782–789, IEEE, 2018.
[47] L. Chen, Y . Ye, and T. Bourlai, “Adversarial machine learning in
malware detection: Arms race between evasion attack and defense,”
inIntelligence and Security Informatics Conference (EISIC), 2017
European , pp. 99–106, IEEE, 2017.
[48] B. Kolosnjaji, A. Demontis, B. Biggio, D. Maiorca, G. Giacinto,
C. Eckert, and F. Roli, “Adversarial malware binaries: Evading
deep learning for malware detection in executables,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.04173 , 2018.
[49] L. Muñoz-González, B. Biggio, A. Demontis, A. Paudice, V . Won-
grassamee, E. C. Lupu, and F. Roli, “Towards poisoning of deep
learning algorithms with back-gradient optimization,” in Proceedings
of the 10th ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Security ,
pp. 27–38, 2017.
[50] B. Biggio, I. Corona, D. Maiorca, B. Nelson, N. Šrndi ´c, P. Laskov,
G. Giacinto, and F. Roli, “Evasion attacks against machine learning
at test time,” in Joint European conference on machine learning and
knowledge discovery in databases , pp. 387–402, Springer, 2013.
[51] J. Jo and Y . Bengio, “Measuring the tendency of cnns to learn surface
statistical regularities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.11561 , 2017.
[52] D. Hendrycks and T. Dietterich, “Benchmarking neural network ro-
bustness to common corruptions and perturbations,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[53] L. Huang, A. D. Joseph, B. Nelson, B. I. Rubinstein, and J. Tygar,
“Adversarial machine learning,” in Proceedings of the 4th ACM
workshop on Security and artiﬁcial intelligence , pp. 43–58, ACM,
2011.
[54] Y . Fan, B. Wu, T. Li, Y . Zhang, M. Li, Z. Li, and Y . Yang, “Sparse
adversarial attack via perturbation factorization,” in European con-
ference on computer vision , pp. 35–50, Springer, 2020.
[55] W. Hu and Y . Tan, “Black-box attacks against rnn based malware
24

==== Page 25 ====
detection algorithms,” in Workshops at the Thirty-Second AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 2018.
[56] Y . Zhang and P. Liang, “Defending against whitebox adversarial
attacks via randomized discretization,” in The 22nd International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 684–693,
PMLR, 2019.
[57] N. Carlini, A. Athalye, N. Papernot, W. Brendel, J. Rauber,
D. Tsipras, I. Goodfellow, A. Madry, and A. Kurakin, “On evaluating
adversarial robustness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06705 , 2019.
[58] F. Pierazzi, F. Pendlebury, J. Cortellazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Intriguing
properties of adversarial ml attacks in the problem space,” in 2020
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) , pp. 1332–1349,
IEEE, 2020.
[59] A. Pattanaik, Z. Tang, S. Liu, G. Bommannan, and G. Chowdhary,
“Robust deep reinforcement learning with adversarial attacks,” in
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and MultiAgent Systems , pp. 2040–2042, International Foun-
dation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2018.
[60] E. Tabassi, K. J. Burns, M. Hadjimichael, A. D. Molina-Markham,
and J. T. Sexton, “A taxonomy and terminology of adversarial
machine learning,” 2019.
[61] A. Shafahi, W. R. Huang, M. Najibi, O. Suciu, C. Studer, T. Dumitras,
and T. Goldstein, “Poison frogs! targeted clean-label poisoning
attacks on neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , pp. 6103–6113, 2018.
[62] F. Tramèr, F. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart,
“Stealing machine learning models via prediction apis,” in 25th
fUSENIX gSecurity Symposium ( fUSENIX gSecurity 16) , pp. 601–
618, 2016.
[63] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, A. Sinha, and M. P. Wellman, “Sok:
Security and privacy in machine learning,” in 2018 IEEE European
Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) , pp. 399–414, IEEE,
2018.
[64] B. Kim, Y . E. Sagduyu, K. Davaslioglu, T. Erpek, and S. Ulukus,
“Over-the-air adversarial attacks on deep learning based modulation
classiﬁer over wireless channels,” in 2020 54th Annual Conference
on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS) , pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2020.
[65] M. Usama, M. Asim, S. Latif, J. Qadir, et al. , “Generative adversarial
networks for launching and thwarting adversarial attacks on net-
work intrusion detection systems,” in 2019 15th International Wire-
less Communications & Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC) ,
pp. 78–83, IEEE, 2019.
[66] M. Juuti, S. Szyller, S. Marchal, and N. Asokan, “Prada: protecting
against dnn model stealing attacks,” in 2019 IEEE European Sympo-
sium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) , pp. 512–527, IEEE, 2019.
[67] A. Albaseer, B. S. Ciftler, and M. M. Abdallah, “Performance evalu-
ation of physical attacks against e2e autoencoder over rayleigh fading
channel,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Informatics, IoT,
and Enabling Technologies (ICIoT) , pp. 177–182, IEEE, 2020.
[68] M. Sadeghi and E. G. Larsson, “Physical adversarial attacks against
end-to-end autoencoder communication systems,” IEEE Communica-
tions Letters , vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 847–850, 2019.
[69] A. Ilyas, L. Engstrom, A. Athalye, and J. Lin, “Black-box adver-
sarial attacks with limited queries and information,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.08598 , 2018.
[70] M. Jagielski, N. Carlini, D. Berthelot, A. Kurakin, and N. Papernot,
“High accuracy and high ﬁdelity extraction of neural networks,” in
29th fUSENIX gSecurity Symposium ( fUSENIX gSecurity 20) , 2020.
[71] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model inversion attacks
that exploit conﬁdence information and basic countermeasures,” in
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security , pp. 1322–1333, 2015.
[72] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, and I. Goodfellow, “Transferability in
machine learning: from phenomena to black-box attacks using ad-
versarial samples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07277 , 2016.
[73] Y . Liu, X. Chen, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Delving into transfer-
able adversarial examples and black-box attacks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.02770 , 2016.
[74] J. R. Correia-Silva, R. F. Berriel, C. Badue, A. F. de Souza, and
T. Oliveira-Santos, “Copycat cnn: Stealing knowledge by persuading
confession with random non-labeled data,” in 2018 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2018.
[75] T. Orekondy, B. Schiele, and M. Fritz, “Knockoff nets: Stealing
functionality of black-box models,” in Proceedings of the IEEEConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 4954–
4963, 2019.
[76] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against
support vector machines,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6389 , 2012.
[77] T. Gu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “Badnets: Identifying vulnera-
bilities in the machine learning model supply chain,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.06733 , 2017.
[78] S. Sabour, Y . Cao, F. Faghri, and D. J. Fleet, “Adversarial manip-
ulation of deep representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05122 ,
2015.
[79] A. Kurakin, I. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial examples in
the physical world,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533 , 2016.
[80] U. Jang, X. Wu, and S. Jha, “Objective metrics and gradient descent
algorithms for adversarial examples in machine learning,” in Proceed-
ings of the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications Conference ,
pp. 262–277, 2017.
[81] P.-Y . Chen, Y . Sharma, H. Zhang, J. Yi, and C.-J. Hsieh, “Ead: elastic-
net attacks to deep neural networks via adversarial examples,” in
Thirty-second AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence , 2018.
[82] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of
neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP), pp. 39–57, IEEE, 2017.
[83] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness
with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.01690 , 2020.
[84] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, O. Fawzi, and P. Frossard,
“Universal adversarial perturbations,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1765–
1773, 2017.
[85] A. Ghiasi, A. Shafahi, and T. Goldstein, “Breaking certiﬁed defenses:
Semantic adversarial examples with spoofed robustness certiﬁcates,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08937 , 2020.
[86] T. B. Brown, D. Mané, A. Roy, M. Abadi, and J. Gilmer, “Adversarial
patch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09665 , 2017.
[87] F. Croce, M. Andriushchenko, and M. Hein, “Provable robustness
of relu networks via maximization of linear regions,” in the 22nd
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics ,
pp. 2057–2066, 2019.
[88] X. Yuan, P. He, Q. Zhu, R. R. Bhat, and X. Li, “Adversarial
examples: Attacks and defenses for deep learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1712.07107 , 2017.
[89] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, and A. Swami, “Distil-
lation as a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural
networks,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) ,
pp. 582–597, IEEE, 2016.
[90] M. Mosbach, M. Andriushchenko, T. Trost, M. Hein, and D. Klakow,
“Logit pairing methods can fool gradient-based attacks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.12042 , 2018.
[91] F. Croce and M. Hein, “Minimally distorted adversarial ex-
amples with a fast adaptive boundary attack,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.02044 , 2019.
[92] J. Chen, M. I. Jordan, and M. J. Wainwright, “Hopskipjumpat-
tack: A query-efﬁcient decision-based attack,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.02144 , 2019.
[93] A. K. Das, S. Zeadally, and D. He, “Taxonomy and analysis of se-
curity protocols for internet of things,” Future Generation Computer
Systems , vol. 89, pp. 110–125, 2018.
[94] S. Hansman and R. Hunt, “A taxonomy of network and computer
attacks,” Computers & Security , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 31–43, 2005.
[95] “Total malware.”
[96] A. Calleja, A. Martín, H. D. Menéndez, J. Tapiador, and D. Clark,
“Picking on the family: Disrupting android malware triage by forc-
ing misclassiﬁcation,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 95,
pp. 113–126, 2018.
[97] O. Suciu, R. Marginean, Y . Kaya, H. Daume III, and T. Dumitras,
“When does machine learning fFAIL g? generalized transferability
for evasion and poisoning attacks,” in 27th fUSENIX gSecurity
Symposium ( fUSENIX gSecurity 18) , pp. 1299–1316, 2018.
[98] K. S. Han, J. H. Lim, B. Kang, and E. G. Im, “Malware analysis
using visualized images and entropy graphs,” International Journal
of Information Security , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2015.
[99] H. Bostani and V . Moonsamy, “Evadedroid: A practical evasion
attack on machine learning for black-box android malware detection,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03301 , 2021.
25

==== Page 26 ====
[100] W. Hu and Y . Tan, “Generating adversarial malware examples for
black-box attacks based on gan,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.05983 ,
2017.
[101] J. Yuan, S. Zhou, L. Lin, F. Wang, and J. Cui, “Black-box adversarial
attacks against deep learning based malware binaries detection with
gan,” in ECAI 2020 , pp. 2536–2542, IOS Press, 2020.
[102] A. Al-Dujaili et al. , “Adversarial deep learning for robust detection
of binary encoded malware,” in 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy
Workshops (SPW) , pp. 76–82, IEEE, 2018.
[103] F. Kreuk, A. Barak, S. Aviv-Reuven, M. Baruch, B. Pinkas, and
J. Keshet, “Deceiving end-to-end deep learning malware detectors
using adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04528 , 2018.
[104] F. Kreuk, A. Barak, S. Aviv-Reuven, M. Baruch, B. Pinkas, and
J. Keshet, “Adversarial examples on discrete sequences for beating
whole-binary malware detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04528 ,
pp. 490–510, 2018.
[105] E. Raff, J. Barker, J. Sylvester, R. Brandon, B. Catanzaro, and C. K.
Nicholas, “Malware detection by eating a whole exe,” in Workshops
at the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ,
2018.
[106] Y . Qiao, W. Zhang, Z. Tian, L. T. Yang, Y . Liu, and M. Alazab, “Ad-
versarial malware sample generation method based on the prototype
of deep learning detector,” Computers & Security , p. 102762, 2022.
[107] E. Raff, J. Barker, J. Sylvester, R. Brandon, B. Catanzaro, and
C. Nicholas, “Malware detection by eating a whole exe,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.09435 , 2017.
[108] O. Suciu, S. E. Coull, and J. Johns, “Exploring adversarial examples
in malware detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08280 , 2018.
[109] J. W. Stokes, D. Wang, M. Marinescu, M. Marino, and B. Bussone,
“Attack and defense of dynamic analysis-based, adversarial neural
malware detection models,” in MILCOM 2018-2018 IEEE Military
Communications Conference (MILCOM) , pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2018.
[110] M. Crawford, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, J. D. Prusa, A. N. Richter, and
H. Al Najada, “Survey of review spam detection using machine
learning techniques,” Journal of Big Data , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–24,
2015.
[111] N. Dalvi, P. Domingos, S. Sanghai, and D. Verma, “Adversarial clas-
siﬁcation,” in Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , pp. 99–108,
2004.
[112] D. Lowd and C. Meek, “Good word attacks on statistical spam
ﬁlters.,” in CEAS , vol. 2005, 2005.
[113] M. Sahami, S. Dumais, D. Heckerman, and E. Horvitz, “A bayesian
approach to ﬁltering junk e-mail,” in Learning for Text Categoriza-
tion: Papers from the 1998 workshop , vol. 62, pp. 98–105, Madison,
Wisconsin, 1998.
[114] B. Nelson, M. Barreno, F. J. Chi, A. D. Joseph, B. I. Rubinstein,
U. Saini, C. Sutton, J. D. Tygar, and K. Xia, “Exploiting machine
learning to subvert your spam ﬁlter.,” LEET , vol. 8, no. 1, p. 9, 2008.
[115] G. Wang, T. Wang, H. Zheng, and B. Y . Zhao, “Man vs. machine:
Practical adversarial detection of malicious crowdsourcing workers,”
in23rd fUSENIX gSecurity Symposium ( fUSENIX gSecurity 14) ,
pp. 239–254, 2014.
[116] P. Negi, A. Sharma, and C. Robustness, “Adversarial machine learn-
ing against keystroke dynamics,” 2017.
[117] M. F. Zeager, A. Sridhar, N. Fogal, S. Adams, D. E. Brown, and P. A.
Beling, “Adversarial learning in credit card fraud detection,” in 2017
Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium (SIEDS) ,
pp. 112–116, IEEE, 2017.
[118] C. Wang, D. Zhang, S. Huang, X. Li, and L. Ding, “Crafting
adversarial email content against machine learning based spam email
detection,” in Proceedings of the 2021 International Symposium on
Advanced Security on Software and Systems , pp. 23–28, 2021.
[119] G. Zhaoquan, X. Yushun, H. Weixiong, Y . Lihua, H. Yi, and
T. Zhihong, “Marginal attacks of generating adversarial examples
for spam ﬁltering,” Chinese Journal of Electronics , vol. 30, no. 4,
pp. 595–602, 2021.
[120] A. Phung and M. Stamp, “Universal adversarial perturbations and
image spam classiﬁers,” in Malware Analysis Using Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence and Deep Learning , pp. 633–651, Springer, 2021.
[121] V . Shahrivari, M. M. Darabi, and M. Izadi, “Phishing detection us-
ing machine learning techniques,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11116 ,
2020.
[122] G. Gressel, N. Hegde, A. Sreekumar, and M. Darling, “Featureimportance guided attack: A model agnostic adversarial attack,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.14815 , 2021.
[123] A. AlEroud and G. Karabatis, “Bypassing detection of url-based
phishing attacks using generative adversarial deep neural networks,”
inProceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Security and
Privacy Analytics , pp. 53–60, 2020.
[124] R. Al-Qurashi, A. AlEroud, A. A. Saifan, M. Alsmadi, and I. Als-
madi, “Generating optimal attack paths in generative adversarial
phishing,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence
and Security Informatics (ISI) , pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2021.
[125] F. Song, Y . Lei, S. Chen, L. Fan, and Y . Liu, “Advanced evasion
attacks and mitigations on practical ml-based phishing website clas-
siﬁers,” International Journal of Intelligent Systems , vol. 36, no. 9,
pp. 5210–5240, 2021.
[126] Z. Lin, Y . Shi, and Z. Xue, “Idsgan: Generative adversarial networks
for attack generation against intrusion detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.02077 , 2018.
[127] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein gan,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.07875 , 2017.
[128] I. Homoliak, M. Teknos, M. Ochoa, D. Breitenbacher, S. Hosseini,
and P. Hanacek, “Improving network intrusion detection classiﬁers by
non-payload-based exploit-independent obfuscations: An adversarial
approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02684 , 2018.
[129] H. Zhang, X. Yu, P. Ren, C. Luo, and G. Min, “Deep adversar-
ial learning in intrusion detection: A data augmentation enhanced
framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.07949 , 2019.
[130] J. Aiken and S. Scott-Hayward, “Investigating adversarial attacks
against network intrusion detection systems in sdns,” in 2019 IEEE
Conference on Network Function Virtualization and Software Deﬁned
Networks (NFV-SDN) , pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2019.
[131] Y . E. Sagduyu, Y . Shi, and T. Erpek, “Iot network security from
the perspective of adversarial deep learning,” in 2019 16th Annual
IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and
Networking (SECON) , pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2019.
[132] F. Liang, C. Shen, and F. Wu, “An iterative bp-cnn architecture
for channel decoding,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 144–159, 2018.
[133] H. Sun, X. Chen, Q. Shi, M. Hong, X. Fu, and N. D. Sidiropoulos,
“Learning to optimize: Training deep neural networks for wireless
resource management,” in 2017 IEEE 18th International Workshop on
Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC) ,
pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017.
[134] T. J. O’Shea, J. Corgan, and T. C. Clancy, “Convolutional radio
modulation recognition networks,” in International conference on
engineering applications of neural networks , pp. 213–226, Springer,
2016.
[135] T. J. O’Shea, T. Roy, and T. C. Clancy, “Over-the-air deep learning
based radio signal classiﬁcation,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 168–179, 2018.
[136] J. Canedo and A. Skjellum, “Using machine learning to secure iot
systems,” in 2016 14th annual conference on privacy, security and
trust (PST) , pp. 219–222, IEEE, 2016.
[137] Y . Meidan, M. Bohadana, A. Shabtai, J. D. Guarnizo, M. Ochoa,
N. O. Tippenhauer, and Y . Elovici, “Proﬁliot: a machine learning ap-
proach for iot device identiﬁcation based on network trafﬁc analysis,”
inProceedings of the symposium on applied computing , pp. 506–509,
2017.
[138] M. Miettinen, S. Marchal, I. Hafeez, N. Asokan, A.-R. Sadeghi,
and S. Tarkoma, “Iot sentinel: Automated device-type identiﬁcation
for security enforcement in iot,” in 2017 IEEE 37th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS) , pp. 2177–
2184, IEEE, 2017.
[139] R. Feinman, R. R. Curtin, S. Shintre, and A. B. Gardner, “Detecting
adversarial samples from artifacts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00410 ,
2017.
[140] M. Sadeghi and E. G. Larsson, “Adversarial attacks on deep-learning
based radio signal classiﬁcation,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters , vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 213–216, 2018.
[141] G. Apruzzese, M. Colajanni, L. Ferretti, and M. Marchetti, “Address-
ing adversarial attacks against security systems based on machine
learning,” in 2019 11th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict
(CyCon) , vol. 900, pp. 1–18, IEEE, 2019.
[142] Y . Shi, Y . E. Sagduyu, T. Erpek, K. Davaslioglu, Z. Lu, and J. H.
Li, “Adversarial deep learning for cognitive radio security: Jamming
attack and defense strategies,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference
26

==== Page 27 ====
on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops) , pp. 1–6, IEEE,
2018.
[143] S. Kokalj-Filipovic, R. Miller, and J. Morman, “Targeted adversarial
examples against rf deep classiﬁers,” in Proceedings of the ACM
Workshop on Wireless Security and Machine Learning , pp. 6–11,
2019.
[144] Y . Peng, J. Su, X. Shi, and B. Zhao, “Evaluating deep learning based
network intrusion detection system in adversarial environment,” in
2019 IEEE 9th International Conference on Electronics Information
and Emergency Communication (ICEIEC) , pp. 61–66, IEEE, 2019.
[145] O. Ibitoye, O. Shaﬁq, and A. Matrawy, “Analyzing adversarial attacks
against deep learning for intrusion detection in iot networks,” in 2019
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) , pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2019.
[146] M. Kloft and P. Laskov, “Online anomaly detection under adversarial
impact,” in Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics , pp. 405–412, 2010.
[147] B. Biggio, G. Fumera, and F. Roli, “Security evaluation of pattern
classiﬁers under attack,” IEEE transactions on knowledge and data
engineering , vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 984–996, 2013.
[148] D. Wu, B. Fang, J. Wang, Q. Liu, and X. Cui, “Evading machine
learning botnet detection models via deep reinforcement learning,” in
ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC) , pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019.
[149] Q. Cheng, S. Zhou, Y . Shen, D. Kong, and C. Wu, “Packet-
level adversarial network trafﬁc crafting using sequence generative
adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.04794 , 2021.
[150] J. Chen, D. Wu, Y . Zhao, N. Sharma, M. Blumenstein, and S. Yu,
“Fooling intrusion detection systems using adversarially autoen-
coder,” Digital Communications and Networks , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 453–
460, 2021.
[151] Y . Sharon, D. Berend, Y . Liu, A. Shabtai, and Y . Elovici, “Tantra:
timing-based adversarial network trafﬁc reshaping attack,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.06297 , 2021.
[152] J. Uesato, B. O’Donoghue, A. v. d. Oord, and P. Kohli, “Adversarial
risk and the dangers of evaluating against weak attacks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1802.05666 , 2018.
[153] F. Liao, M. Liang, Y . Dong, T. Pang, X. Hu, and J. Zhu, “Defense
against adversarial attacks using high-level representation guided
denoiser,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1778–1787, 2018.
[154] A. S. Suggala, A. Prasad, V . Nagarajan, and P. Ravikumar, “Re-
visiting adversarial risk,” in The 22nd International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 2331–2339, 2019.
[155] A. Fawzi, H. Fawzi, and O. Fawzi, “Adversarial vulnerability for any
classiﬁer,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
pp. 1178–1187, 2018.
[156] D. Tsipras, S. Santurkar, L. Engstrom, A. Turner, and A. Madry,
“There is no free lunch in adversarial robustness (but there are
unexpected beneﬁts),” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12152 , vol. 2, no. 3,
2018.
[157] W. Brendel, J. Rauber, and M. Bethge, “Decision-based adversarial
attacks: Reliable attacks against black-box machine learning models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.04248 , 2017.
[158] C. Guo, J. S. Frank, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Low frequency adver-
sarial perturbation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.08758 , 2018.
[159] A. Nayebi and S. Ganguli, “Biologically inspired protection of deep
networks from adversarial attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09202 ,
2017.
[160] Y . Yanagita and M. Yamamura, “Gradient masking is a type of over-
ﬁtting,” International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing ,
vol. 8, no. 3, 2018.
[161] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
[162] A. Ross and F. Doshi-Velez, “Improving the adversarial robustness
and interpretability of deep neural networks by regularizing their
input gradients,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence , vol. 32, 2018.
[163] K. Grosse, N. Papernot, P. Manoharan, M. Backes, and P. McDaniel,
“Adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks for malware
classiﬁcation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04435 , 2016.
[164] C. Xie, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, Z. Ren, and A. Yuille, “Miti-
gating adversarial effects through randomization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.01991 , 2017.[165] Y . Song, T. Kim, S. Nowozin, S. Ermon, and N. Kushman, “Pixelde-
fend: Leveraging generative models to understand and defend against
adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10766 , 2017.
[166] R. Abou Khamis et al. , “Investigating resistance of deep learning-
based ids against adversaries using min-max optimization,” IEEE ICC
20, 2019.
[167] R. Abou Khamis and A. Matrawy, “Evaluation of adversarial training
on different types of neural networks in deep learning-based idss,”
in2020 international symposium on networks, computers and com-
munications (ISNCC) , pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2020.
[168] D. Meng and H. Chen, “Magnet: a two-pronged defense against
adversarial examples,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pp. 135–
147, ACM, 2017.
[169] J. H. Metzen, T. Genewein, V . Fischer, and B. Bischoff, “On detecting
adversarial perturbations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.04267 , 2017.
[170] M. Ren, Y .-L. Wang, and Z.-F. He, “Towards interpretable defense
against adversarial attacks via causal inference,” Machine Intelligence
Research , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 209–226, 2022.
[171] F. Tramèr, N. Papernot, I. Goodfellow, D. Boneh, and P. McDaniel,
“The space of transferable adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.03453 , 2017.
[172] L. Schmidt, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, K. Talwar, and A. Madry,
“Adversarially robust generalization requires more data,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 5014–5026, 2018.
[173] H. Li, S. Zhou, W. Yuan, J. Li, and H. Leung, “Adversarial-example
attacks toward android malware detection system,” IEEE Systems
Journal , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 653–656, 2019.
[174] Y . Xie, C. Shi, Z. Li, J. Liu, Y . Chen, and B. Yuan, “Real-time,
universal, and robust adversarial attacks against speaker recognition
systems,” in ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pp. 1738–1742,
IEEE, 2020.
[175] Y . Gong, B. Li, C. Poellabauer, and Y . Shi, “Real-time adversarial
attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13399 , 2019.
[176] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y . Hua, D. Estrin, and V . Shmatikov,
“How to backdoor federated learning,” in International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 2938–2948, 2020.
[177] Q. Yang, Y . Liu, T. Chen, and Y . Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology (TIST) , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
[178] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile
encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning,” in 2018 Network
Trafﬁc Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA) , pp. 1–8, IEEE,
2018.
[179] E. Hesamifard, H. Takabi, and M. Ghasemi, “Cryptodl: Deep neural
networks over encrypted data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05189 ,
2017.
[180] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
“Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation
using deep learning,” Soft Computing , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
2020.
[181] E. Klein, R. Mislovaty, I. Kanter, A. Ruttor, and W. Kinzel, “Synchro-
nization of neural networks by mutual learning and its application
to cryptography,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , pp. 689–696, 2005.
27

