==== Page 1 ====
Abstract  
A ne glected dualism is occurring in AI for Social 
Good involving the lack of encompassing both the 
role of  artificial moral agency and artificial legal 
reasoning in advanced AI systems. Efforts  by AI 
researchers and AI developers have tended to f ocus 
on how to craft and embed artificial moral ag ents 
to guide moral decision making  when an AI system 
is operating in the field  but ha ve not also focuse d 
on and  coupled the use of artific ial legal reasoning 
capabilities, which is equally necessary for robust 
moral and legal  outcomes. This paper  addresses  
this problematic neglect and offers insights to 
overc ome a substantive  prevailing weakness and 
vulnerability.  
1 Introduc tion 
A key question  in AI for Social Good is how to ensure that 
AI systems operating  in the field are able to make  needed 
and appropriate mo ral choices . As society becomes inc reas-
ingly depe ndent on AI, there is a widening  concern that AI 
systems might at times  not conform to applicable moral 
norms . By crafting and embedding Artificial Mor al Agents,  
specialized  compo nents within an AI  system, it is anticipat-
ed that a real -time capacity will enable  the enactment and  
abidance  of moral conventions  [Cane, 201 2; Huang, 2019; 
Misselhorn, 2019] . 
 
Even if Artificial Moral Agents can be suitably dev ised, 
there is a missing and crucial  element that is currently being 
neglected, namely the  dual role of moralit y and law. As 
pointed out  by Shiell [1987] , since at least the days of Plato 
there has been a struggle over the relationship between mo-
rality and  law, and even still today debates about  the nature 
and extent of how  moral decision s intertwin e with the law 
are persistent  and contenti ous.  
 
Overall , morality and law  are generally viewed as  inextri-
cably bound to each other in some fashion and must be c on-
sidered in concert , tho ugh the ir mutual  interaction and de-
pendencies are still an open -ended matter  
 As such, additional  attention to Artificial Legal Reason ers 
(ALR)  is needed, providing the other  missing or under-
played  element for  achieving the requisi te morality a nd law 
dualism. The inclusion of artificial legal reasoning provides 
the possibility  of including a cooperating  specialized  ALR  
component  within an AI system that offer s a real -time capa-
bility for rendering legal -based decisi ons or awareness  about 
the law [Eliot, 2019; Genesereth, 2009; Surden, 2019] . 
 
By considering the simultaneous  use and deployment  of 
components for both Artificial Moral Agen t capabilities and 
Artificial Legal Reason er capabilities , working in a coordi-
nated and communicativ e manner, the moral agency of AI 
systems is likely to be  more well -rounded and  balanced by 
prevailing laws. This aspiration though is not as readily ful-
filled as might seem at fir st glance  since there are inherent 
tensions between  morality and law , which w ill be  further  
exempl ified and revealed  in a collaborative  effor t to have 
such automated agents  work in conjunction  with each other.  
 
The remainder of this paper describes the possibilities and 
problems that will be encount ered in seeking to achieve  the 
proffered  dualism. In addition, insights about way s to cope 
with the consequent  hurdles and difficulties are laid  out as a 
research agenda  for those purs uing the devel opment of AI 
for Social Good.  
2 Dualism Tensions  
As stated by Bickenbach [ 1989 ], “the relationship  be-
tween  morality and law is one of the more enduring prob-
lematic s of jurispr udence. ” Those legal scholars in the do-
main of  natural law argue that morality  is the source of laws 
and serves as  the binding power of laws . In contrast, schol-
ars consider ed in the legal positivism  domain are likely to 
contend that morality is categorically  separate and distinct 
from law.  
 
In a legal rea lism context, Kagan  [1998 ] points out that  
morals and laws ultimately exhibit tensions between each 
other, and emp hasizes that “the law may permit some par-
ticular act, even though that act is immoral ; and the law may  
forbid an act, even though that act is morally permissible, or 
even morally required. ” 
 The Neglected D ualism Of Artif icial Moral Agency  
And Artificial Legal Reaso ning In AI For Social Good  
 
 
Dr. Lance B. Eliot  
Chief AI  Scientist , Techbruim; Fellow, CodeX: Stanfo rd Center for Le gal Informatics  
Stanford, California, USA  
 

==== Page 2 ====
Morality is sometimes viewed as existing within the 
shadow of law  [Mnooki n and Kornhauser, 1979]. In that 
sense,  a moral facet would be considered outside of the law 
and yet within reach of  the law. Some view that morality is  
actually the halo of law , such as Regan [1987] indicating 
that law is imbued  with moral sust enance, eve n if at times 
there might not be a moral obligation to abide by the law.  
 
Consider a given body of moral tenets as represented by a 
designation M  and a body of laws as rep resented by the  use 
of a designation L. Envision these as circles  or ovals  for 
which there is a Venn dia gram depicting them as overlap-
ping, whereby  the de signator O represents the ir overlap: 
 
O  = M∩L             (1) 
 
Define M ’ and L ’ as follows:  
 
Mʹ = M – (M∩L)           (2) 
 
Lʹ =  L – (M∩L)           (3) 
 
If and only if M ʹ is fully outsi de of the legal realm and 
not subj ect to the law, it will be assumed that any instance 
of an Artificial Moral Agent renderin g such a moral choi ce 
within the scope of M ʹ could ergo proceed unabated without 
any needed consultation with an Artificial  Legal Re asoner.  
 
Likewise, if and only if L ʹ is fully outside of the moral  
realm and not subject to a moral underpinning, it will be 
assumed that any instance of an Artificial  Legal Reason er 
rendering such a legal indication could ergo proceed  una-
bated  without any  needed consultation with an Artificial 
Moral Agent.  
 
The O presents the key challenge  for the dualistic nature 
of the two.  
 
Divide O into those instances for which  there is an 
agreement between the given M and L, which will be desig-
nated as A, and thos e instances for which there is disagree-
ment  which is to  be designated as D.  
 
O =  A + D              (4) 
 
In the case of A, the presumption is that since the M and 
L are in concordance on such instances, the Artificial Moral 
Agent and the Artificial Legal Reas oner have no conflict 
and thus either one can prev ail in such a use case.  
 
We are then left with the class D of instances, providing 
the essence of conflict that needs to be  resolved or otherwise 
conveyed. Some form of automated confli ct resolu tion will  
be required to contend with  body D.  In the study of law, 
there are considered “hard” cases that are less amenable to 
everyda y legal reasoning  [Hage et al, 1993].  
 Class D can be characteri zed as being  composed of some 
combination of hard case instances , designated a s D* and 
those that are non -hard, depicted as D°  (do not conflate the 
notion of non -hard with  a meaning of being easy or simple, 
since the non -hard cases can also pose quite arduous and 
complicated challenges).  
 
For D then:  
 
D =  D* + D°               (5) 
 
Algorithm ically , an AI for Social Good system that 
makes use of a n Artificial Moral Agent should correspond-
ingly include  an Artificial Legal Reasoner , and for which  at 
any invoking  of either one, the other should also be invoked, 
and the AI then would make  a comparison  of the re sults so 
rendered by each respectively.  
 
For Mʹ, the AI proceeds with the result of the  Artificial 
Moral Agent, and for the L ʹ the AI proceeds with the res ult 
of the Artific ial Legal Reasoner.  
 
In the O, the AI can  choose  from either  one in the in-
stance of A, while for those that are D the AI would under-
take a conflict r esolution process (as discussed next ). It is 
likely that the D* will require a n elaborate  effort by the con-
flict resolution process, while the D° will be predominantly 
less protracted.  
3 Conflict  Resolution  
In th is effort of the  prescribed  dualism, an a  prior i approach 
will need to be established for resolving the potential con-
flicts between the  results tendered  by the Artificial Moral 
Agent and th ose of  the Artificial Le gal Reasoner . 
 
Undertaking a satisfactory conflict resolution  of this sort  
is not straightforward, a s this salient remark in The Law  by 
Frederic Bastiat [1 850] illuminates: “When law and moral i-
ty contradict each other, the citizen has the  cruel alternative  
of either losing his moral sense or losing his respect for the 
law.” 
 
An outline of the potential approaches to the morality and 
law conflicts in an AI for Social Good system is indicated 
next, numbering each approach as Cn , and for whic h the n is 
merely for reference purposes and not to suggest priority or 
sequence of which approach is valued over another.  
3.1 Approach C1: Morality Prevails Over Law  
In Hart [1961 ], morality is depicted as the ultimate  standard 
for assessing human behavio r and thus the law is considered 
second -best, namely that moral reasoning eclipses  any legal 
reasoning.  
 
As per Goparaju Ramachandra Rao [1 980] in I Learn: 
“Whenever legality clashes with morality, legality should be 
opposed,  and morality should be upheld .” 
 

==== Page 3 ====
In that case,  for a  conflict resolution approach  labeled as 
C1, for those instances in  the realm of class D , the M will  
always  prevail , regardless of being either  D° or D*.  
 
This doe s not obviate the need for the  use of an  Artific ial 
Legal Reasoner  since there is still the class of L ʹ to be deal t 
with.  It does though significantly  reduce the run -time effort 
since anything other than L ʹ is transferred  over to the Artifi-
cial Moral Agent to render a final decision.  
3.2 Approach C2: Law Prevails Over Morality  
In approach C2, the law is co nsidered to prevail over the 
side of morality, and th erefore any instances in class D are 
to be dec ided by the Artifi cial Legal Reasoner.  This might 
be liken ed as a variant of the  Rule of Law as exemplified  by 
Albert Dicey ’s [1885] quote: “With us no man i s above the 
law and every man, whatever be his rank or condition, is 
subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to the 
jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals. ” Thus, even if the Ar-
tificial Moral Agent has deemed that t he instance is not 
morall y aligned, nonetheless , the law shall  prevail.  
3.3 Approach  C3: Determining Which  Prevail s 
In approach C 3, it is presumed that both the Artifi cial Moral 
Agent and the Artificial Legal Reasoner have a bona fide 
basis for why their respective rendered decisio ns are in con-
flict with each other  and that the rules of C1 and C2 are not 
applicable.  
 
Therefore, if a choice is to be made between the two, 
there must be some means to make such a choice.  
 
Quite a number of algorithmic  avenues could be utilized.  
Some are  mentioned herein, each of which has tradeoffs and 
the particular class  of AI for Social Good s ystem will be a 
determiner in which such aven ue is warranted. Also, this is 
by no means an exh austive list and m erely indicative of rep-
resentative ways that conflicts might be resolved.   
 
For example, there could be a weighting scheme that pro-
vides weights associated with  rendered choices. This poten-
tially introduces the use of uncertainty and probabilities int o 
the Artificial  Moral Agent and the Arti ficial Legal Reason-
er, which is an advanced variant that some believe is needed  
in any case,  regardless of this  specific  use for conflict reso-
lution [Bench -Capon, 2020; Brand ao et al, 2020]. 
 
Another approach would be to utilize  an Arguing Ma-
chines methodology  [Eliot, 2018; Fridman, 2017] , consist-
ing of the two compo nents engaging in a dialogue or argu-
ment with each other, trying to convince the other that the ir 
choice ought to prevail on their own side of the matter.   
 
Whichever avenue  is used, t here are key considera tions to 
be attende d to. If the run -time execution of attempting to 
settle the open  conflict is onerous, the impact of the conflict 
resolution ca n undermine the overarching actions of the AI 
for Social Good system. A delay in respon siveness might be more t han sim ply aggravating  or inconvenient  since the AI 
system might be imm ersed in a rea l-time activity that entails 
life-or-death de cisions of a n extremely timely nature (such 
as in the case of autonomous  systems , including self -drivi ng 
cars [ Eliot, 201 6; Huang, 2019]).  
 
 A sense  of AI self -awareness  [Parasuraman et al, 2000]  is 
required as part of the conflict re solution process, namely 
that the AI must be keeping tabs on the conflict resolution 
and have some means of ascertaining that either the process 
is taking too long for  the matter at hand or that the process 
has potentially become ind eterminate  or intractable,  and 
needs to be interrupted  or halted  [Eliot, 2017]. . 
3.4 Approach C4: Neither Prevails  
In approach C 4, the question arises as to what the AI should 
do if the confl ict between the  Artificial Moral Agent and the 
Artificial Legal Reasoner cannot be otherwise resolved. 
Assume that C1 is not applicable, nor C2, and nor has C3 
reached a res olution . 
 
A final catchall that perh aps randomly pick s betwe en the 
two is conc eivable, though likely unsatis fying in many re-
spects , or apply a  method that  tries to assess whether the 
choice of one is somehow preferred over the other. Re-
search ers such as Bench -Capon [2020]  have id entified op-
tions such as  conse quentialism might be use d (the impa cts 
of the act ivities  chosen), or deontologi cally chosen (a worth 
associated with the act, irr espective of the consequences), or 
even a  means abiding by Maslow ’s [Maslow, 1943] hierar-
chy of needs ( a selection based on the option fulfilling  the 
highest basi c human need ). 
 
Another possibility is to seek a res olution from th e end -
user of the AI for Social Good system, including possibly 
offer ing an ex planation associated with the impasse  (using 
XAI, as described by  Waltl and  Vogl [2018]). Seeking su ch 
input from the end -user could be pro blematic in many ways, 
including allowing a selection prefer ence with unintend ed 
consequences or other untoward possibilities and should 
carefully be assessed as to its utility [Freed man et al, 2020].   
4 Discussion   
This paper prov ides insights into the neglected dualism of 
Artificial Moral Agents and Artificial Legal Reasoners  and 
provides  an indication as to the value of  the moral -and-law 
dualism , along with offering  ways to encompass th at dual-
ism. It is hoped that this study  will spur additio nal research 
into an  emer ging area that is only yet being explored  and 
will likely become increasingly crucial for the expanding  
and widespr ead adoption of AI for Social Good.  
About The Author  
Prior to his present position , Dr. E liot served as a  professor 
at the Univ ersity of Southern California (USC)  and headed  a 
pioneering AI lab, his AI textbooks  consistently rank in the 
Top 10 , his AI  and Law  writings  are globally recognized . 

==== Page 4 ====
References  
[Basitat, 1850] Frederic Basitat . The La w. Ludwig von Mis-
es Institute, Auburn, Alabama , 1850 . 
[Bench -Capon , 2020 ] T.J. M. Bench -Capon. Ethical ap-
proaches and autonomous systems. Artificial Intelli-
gence , 281(3): 1 -15, January 2020.  
[Bickenbach , 1989 ] Jerome Bickenbach. Law and morality. 
Law and Philosophy , 3(3): 291 -300, March 1989.  
[Brandao et al , 2020 ] Martim Brandao, Marina Jirotka, Hel-
ena Webb, and Paul Luff. Fair n avigation planning: A 
resource for characterizing and designing fairness in 
mobile robots. Artificial Intelligence , 282(1): 1 -20, 
March 2020.  
[Cane , 2012 ] Peter Cane. Morality, law and conflicting rea-
sons for action. The Ca mbridge Law Journal , 71(1): 59 -
85, March 20 12. 
[Dicey, 1 885] Albert Dicey . Intro ducti on to the Study of the 
Law of the Constitution . McMillan and Co., London , 
1885.  
[Eliot , 2016 ] Lance Eliot.  AI Guardian Angels For Deep AI 
Trust worthiness . LBE Press Publishing,  Los Angeles, 
California  2016. 
[Eliot, 2017] Lance Eliot. Self -Aware AI. AI Trends , 2(8): 
1-5, August 201 7. 
[Eliot, 2018] Lance Eliot. Probabilistic  reasoning and AI. AI 
Trends, 3(2): 1 4-17, February 2018.  
[Eliot , 2018 ] Lance Eliot. A I arguing machines . AI Trends , 
3(11): 1 -8, Novem ber 2018.  
[Eliot , 2019 ] Lance Eliot. AI and Legal R easoning Essen-
tials. LBE Press Publishing,  Los Angeles, California  
2019.  
[Freedman et al , 2020 ] Rachel Freedman, Jana Borg, Walter 
Sinnott -Armstrong, John Dickerson, and Vincent Co-
nitzer. Adapting a kidney exchange algorithm  to align 
with human values. Artificial Intelligence , 283(2): 1-14, 
March 2020.  
[Fridman , 2017 ]. Lex Fridman, Li Ding, B enedikt Jenik, 
and Bryan Reimer. Arguing machines . Cornell Universi-
ty AI a rXiv, 1710.04459, October 2017.  
[Genesereth , 2009 ] Michael Gen esereth. Computational 
law. Stanford Center for Le gal Informatics , May  2019.  
[Hage et al , 1993 ] Jaap Hage, Ronald Leenes, and Arno 
Lodder. Hard cases: A procedural approach. Artificial 
Intelligence and Law , 82(1): 52-67, February  1993.  
[Huang , 2019 ] Bert Huang. Law ’s halo and the moral m a-
chine. Columbia Law Review , 119(7): 1811 -1828, No-
vember 2019.  
[Kagan, 1998 ] Shelly Kagan. The Limits of Morality . Ox-
ford Scholarship Online, November 1998.  
[Maslow , 1943 ] Abraham Maslow. A theory of human mo-
tivation. Psych ological Review , 50(4): 370 -396, April 
1943.  [Misselhorn , 2019 ] Catrin Misselhorn. Artificial  systems 
with moral capacities. Artificial Intelligence , 278(1): 1-
11, October  2019.  
[Mnookin and Kornhauser , 1979 ] Robert Mnookin and 
Lewis Kornhauser . Bargaining in the shadow of law. The 
Yale Law Review,  88(5): 950 -997, April 1979.  
[Parasuraman et al, 2000]  Raja Parasuraman , Thoma s Sher-
idan, and Christopher Wickens . A model for types and 
levels of human interaction with automation. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cyberne tics, 30(3): 
286-297, May 2000.  
[Rao, 1980] Goparaju Ramachandra Rao . I Learn. Navjivan 
Trust , Ahmedabad, India , 1980.  
[Regan , 1987 ] Do nald Regan. Law ’s halo. Social Philoso-
phy and Policy , 4(1): 15 -30, April 198 7. 
[Shiell , 1987 ] Timothy Shiell. Mak ing sens e out of a neces-
sary connection between law and morality. Public Af-
fairs Qua rterly, 1(3): 77 -90, July 1987.  
[Surden , 2019 ] Artificial Intelligence and the law: An ove r-
view. Georgia State University Law Review , 8(2): 41 -57, 
August 2019.  
[Waltl and Vogl , 2018] Ber nhard Waltl and Roland Vogl. 
Increasing transparency in algorithmic  decision -making 
with explainable AI .  Datenschutz Datensich , 42(1): 
613-617, October 201 8. 
 
 

