==== Page 1 ====
Time Series Data Augmentation for Deep Learning: A Survey
Qingsong Wen1, Liang Sun1, Fan Yang2, Xiaomin Song1, Jingkun Gao3, Xue Wang1, Huan Xu2
1DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, USA
2Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3Twitter, Seattle, WA, USA
fqingsong.wen, liang.sun, fanyang.yf, xiaomin.song, xue.w, huan.xu g@alibaba-inc.com,
jingkung@twitter.com
Abstract
Deep learning performs remarkably well on many
time series analysis tasks recently. The superior
performance of deep neural networks relies heavily
on a large number of training data to avoid over-
ﬁtting. However, the labeled data of many real-
world time series applications may be limited such
as classiﬁcation in medical time series and anomaly
detection in AIOps. As an effective way to enhance
the size and quality of the training data, data aug-
mentation is crucial to the successful application
of deep learning models on time series data. In
this paper, we systematically review different data
augmentation methods for time series. We pro-
pose a taxonomy for the reviewed methods, and
then provide a structured review for these methods
by highlighting their strengths and limitations. We
also empirically compare different data augmenta-
tion methods for different tasks including time se-
ries classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, and forecast-
ing. Finally, we discuss and highlight ﬁve future
directions to provide useful research guidance.
1 Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in many
ﬁelds, including computer vision (CV), natural language pro-
cessing (NLP), and speech processing, etc. Recently, it is
increasingly embraced for solving time series related tasks,
including time series classiﬁcation [Fawaz et al. , 2019 ], time
series forecasting [Han et al. , 2019 ], and time series anomaly
detection [Gamboa, 2017 ]. The success of deep learning re-
lies heavily on a large number of training data to avoid over-
ﬁtting. Unfortunately, many time series tasks do not have
enough labeled data. As an effective tool to enhance the size
and quality of the training data, data augmentation is crucial
to the successful application of deep learning models. The ba-
sic idea of data augmentation is to generate synthetic dataset
covering unexplored input space while maintaining correct la-
bels. Data augmentation has shown its effectiveness in many
applications, such as AlexNet [Krizhevsky et al. , 2012 ]for
ImageNet classiﬁcation.
The work was done when Jingkun Gao was at Alibaba Group.However, less attention has been paid to ﬁnd better data
augmentation methods speciﬁcally for time series data. Here
we highlight some challenges arising from data augmentation
methods for time series data. Firstly, the intrinsic properties
of time series data are not fully utilized in current data aug-
mentation methods. One unique property of time series data
is the so-called temporal dependency. Unlike image data,
the time series data can be transformed into the frequency
and time-frequency domains and effective data augmentation
methods can be designed and implemented in the transformed
domain. This becomes more complicated when we model
multivariate time series where we need to consider the poten-
tially complex dynamics of these variables across time. Thus,
simply applying those data augmentation methods from im-
age and speech processing may not result in valid synthetic
data. Secondly, the data augmentation methods are also task
dependent. For example, the data augmentation methods ap-
plicable for time series classiﬁcation may not be valid for time
series anomaly detection. In addition, data augmentation be-
comes more crucial in many time series classiﬁcation prob-
lems where class imbalance is often observed. In this case,
how to effective generate a large number of synthetic data
with labels with less samples remains a challenge.
Unlike data augmentation for CV [Shorten and Khoshgof-
taar, 2019 ]or speech [Cuiet al. , 2015 ], data augmentation
for time series has not yet been comprehensively and system-
atically reviewed to the best of our knowledge. One work
closely related to ours is [Iwana and Uchida, 2020 ]which
presents a survey of existing data augmentation methods for
time series classiﬁcation. However, it does not review the
data augmentation methods for other common tasks like time
series forecasting [Bandara et al. , 2020; Hu et al. , 2020;
Lee and Kim, 2020 ]and anomaly detection [Lim et al. , 2018;
Zhou et al. , 2019; Gao et al. , 2020 ]. Furthermore, the poten-
tial avenues for future research opportunities of time series
data augmentations are also missing.
In this paper, we aim to ﬁll the aforementioned gaps by
summarizing existing time series data augmentation methods
in common tasks, including time series forecasting, anomaly
detection, classiﬁcation, as well as providing insightful fu-
ture directions. To this end, we propose a taxonomy of data
augmentation methods for time series, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Based on the taxonomy, we review these data augmentation
methods systematically. We start the discussion from the sim-arXiv:2002.12478v4  [cs.LG]  31 Mar 2022

==== Page 2 ====
Time SeriesData AugmentationBasic ApproachesAdvanced ApproachesTimeDomainFrequencyDomainTime-FreqDomainDecompositionMethodsStatistical Generative ModelsLearningMethodsCropping, Flipping, Jittering, …Embedding SpaceDeep Generative ModelsAutomated Data AugmentationFigure 1: A taxonomy of time series data augmentation techniques.
ple transformations in time domain ﬁrst. And then we dis-
cuss more transformations on time series in the transformed
frequency and time-frequency domains. Besides the transfor-
mations in different domains for time series, we also summa-
rize more advanced methods, including decomposition-based
methods, model-based methods, and learning-based methods.
For learning-based methods, we further divide them into em-
bedding space, deep generative models (DGMs), and auto-
mated data augmentation methods. To demonstrate effective-
ness of data augmentation, we conduct preliminary evaluation
of augmentation methods in three typical time series tasks,
including time series classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, and
forecasting. Finally, we discuss and highlight ﬁve future di-
rections: augmentation in time-frequency domain, augmenta-
tion for imbalanced class, augmentation selection and combi-
nation, augmentation with Gaussian processes, and augmen-
tation with deep generative models.
2 Basic Data Augmentation Methods
2.1 Time Domain
The transforms in the time domain are the most straightfor-
ward data augmentation methods for time series data. Most
of them manipulate the original input time series directly, like
injecting Gaussian noise or more complicated noise patterns
such as spike, step-like trend, and slope-like trend. Besides
this straightforward methods, we will also discuss a particular
data augmentation method for time series anomaly detection,
i.e., label expansion in the time domain.
Window cropping or slicing has been mentioned in [Le
Guennec et al. , 2016 ]. Introduced in [Cuiet al. , 2016 ], win-
dow cropping is similar to cropping in CV area. It is a sub-
sample method to randomly extract continuous slices from
the original time series. The length of the slice is a tunable pa-
rameter. For classiﬁcation problem, the labels of sliced sam-
ples are the same as the original time series. During test time,
each slice from a test time series is classiﬁed using majority
voting. For anomaly detection problem, the anomaly label
will be sliced along with value series.
Window warping is a unique augmentation method for time
series. Similar to dynamic time warping (DTW), this method
selects a random time range, then compresses (down sample)
or extends (up sample) it, while keeps other time range un-
changed. Window warping would change the total length of
the original time series, so it should be conducted along with
window cropping for deep learning models. This method
contains the normal down sampling which takes down samplethrough the whole length of the original time series.
Flipping is another method that generates the new se-
quencex0
1;;x0
Nby ﬂipping the sign of original time series
x1;;xN, wherex0
t= xt. The labels are still the same,
for both anomaly detection and classiﬁcation, assuming that
we have symmetry between up and down directions.
Another interesting perturbation and also ensemble based
method is introduced in [Fawaz et al. , 2018 ]. This method
generates new time series with DTW and then ensembles
them by a weighted version of the Barycentric Averaging
(DBA) algorithm. It shows improvement of classiﬁcation in
some of the UCR datasets.
Noise injection is a method by injecting small amount
of noise/outlier into time series without changing the cor-
responding labels. This includes injecting Gaussian noise,
spike, step-like trend, and slope-like trend, etc. For spike,
we can randomly pick index and direction, randomly assign
magnitude but bounded by multiples of standard deviation of
the original time series. For step-like trend, it is the cumula-
tive summation of the spikes from left index to right index.
The slope-like trend is adding a linear trend into the original
time series. These schemes are mostly mentioned in [Wen
and Keyes, 2019 ]
In time series anomaly detection, the anomalies generally
last long enough during a continuous span so that the start and
end points are sometimes “blurry”. As a result, a data point
close to a labeled anomaly in terms of both time distance and
value distance is very likely to be an anomaly. In this case,
the label expansion method is proposed to change those data
points and their labels as anomalies (by assign it an anomaly
score or switch its label), which brings performance improve-
ment for time series anomaly detection as shown in [Gao et
al., 2020 ].
2.2 Frequency Domain
While most of the existing data augmentation methods focus
on time domain, only a few studies investigate data augmen-
tation from frequency domain perspective for time series.
A recent work in [Gao et al. , 2020 ]proposes to utilize per-
turbations in both amplitude spectrum and phase spectrum
in frequency domain for data augmentation in time series
anomaly detection by convolutional neural network. Speciﬁ-
cally, for the input time series x1;;xN, its frequency spec-
trumF(!k)through Fourier transform is calculated as:
F(!k)=1
NN 1X
t=0xte j!kt=A(!k) exp[j(!k)] (1)
where!k=2k
Nis the angular frequency, A(!k)is the am-
plitude spectrum, and (!k)is the phase spectrum. For per-
turbations in amplitude spectrum A(!k), the amplitude val-
ues of randomly selected segments are replaced with Gaus-
sian noise by considering the original mean and variance in
the amplitude spectrum. While for perturbations in phase
spectrum(!k), the phase values of randomly selected seg-
ments are added by an extra zero-mean Gaussian noise in
the phase spectrum. The amplitude and phase perturbations
(APP) based data augmentation combined with aforemen-
tioned time-domain augmentation methods bring signiﬁcant

==== Page 3 ====
time series anomaly detection improvements as shown in the
experiments of [Gao et al. , 2020 ].
Another recent work in [Lee et al. , 2019 ]proposes to
utilize the surrogate data to improve the classiﬁcation per-
formance of rehabilitative time series in deep neural net-
work. Two conventional types of surrogate time series are
adopted in the work: the amplitude adjusted Fourier trans-
form (AAFT) and the iterated AAFT (IAAFT) [Schreiber and
Schmitz, 2000 ]. The main idea is to perform random phase
shufﬂe in phase spectrum after Fourier transform and then
perform rank-ordering of time series after inverse Fourier
transform. The generated time series from AAFT and IAAFT
can approximately preserve the temporal correlation, power
spectra, and the amplitude distribution of the original time
series. In the experiments of [Leeet al. , 2019 ], the authors
conducted two types of data augmentation by extending the
data by 10 then 100 times through AAFT and IAAFT meth-
ods, and demonstrated promising classiﬁcation accuracy im-
provements compared to the original time series without data
augmentation.
2.3 Time-Frequency Domain
Time-frequency analysis is a widely applied technique for
time series analysis, which can be utilized as an appropriate
input features in deep neural networks. However, similar to
data augmentation in frequency domain, only a few studies
considered data augmentation from time-frequency domain
for time series.
The authors in [Steven Eyobu and Han, 2018 ]adopt short
Fourier transform (STFT) to generate time-frequency features
for sensor time series, and conduct data augmentation on the
time-frequency features for human activity classiﬁcation by a
deep LSTM neural network. Speciﬁcally, two augmentation
techniques are proposed. One is the local averaging based on
a deﬁned criteria with the generated features appended at the
tail end of the feature set. Another is the shufﬂing of feature
vectors to create variation in the data. Similarly, in speech
time series, recently SpecAugment [Park et al. , 2019 ]is pro-
posed to make data augmentation in Mel-Frequency (a time-
frequency representation based on STFT for speech time se-
ries), where the augmentation scheme consists of warping the
features, masking blocks of frequency channels, and masking
blocks of time steps. They demonstrate that SpecAugment
can greatly improve the performance of speech recognition
neural networks and obtain state-of-the-art results.
For illustration, we summarize several typical time series
data augmentation methods in time, frequency, and time-
frequency domains in Fig. 2.
3 Advanced Data Augmentation Methods
3.1 Decomposition-based Methods
Decomposition-based time series augmentation has also been
adopted and shown success in many time series related tasks,
such as forecasting and anomaly detection. Common decom-
position method like STL [Cleveland et al. , 1990 ]or Robust-
STL [Wen et al. , 2019b ]decomposes time series xtas
xt=t+st+rt; t = 1;2;:::N (2)
0 50 100 150 200 25002
Original
0 50 100 150 200 250−20Flipping
0 20 40 60 80 100 12002
Down-sampling
0 50 100 150 200 250−4−20
Adding slope(a) time domain
0 50 100 150 200 25002
AAFT augmented
0 50 100 150 200 25002
IAAFT augmented
0 50 100 150 200 25002
APP augmented
0 50 100 150 200 25002
STFT augmented (b) (time-)frequency domain
Figure 2: Illustration of several typical time series data augmenta-
tions in time, frequency, and time-frequency domains.
wheretis the trend signal, stis the seasonal/periodic signal,
and thertdenotes the remainder signal.
In[Kegel et al. , 2018 ], authors discussed the decomposi-
tion method to generate new time series. After STL, it re-
combines new time series with a deterministic component
and a stochastic component. The deterministic part is recon-
structed by adjusting weights for base, trend, and seasonality.
The stochastic part is generated by building a composite sta-
tistical model based on residual, such as an auto-regressive
model. The summed generated time series is validated by ex-
amining whether a feature-based distance to its original sig-
nal is within certain range. Meanwhile, authors in [Bergmeir
et al. , 2016 ]proposed to apply bootstrapping on the STL de-
composed residuals to generate augmented signals, which are
then added back with trend and seasonality to assemble a new
time series. An ensemble of the forecasting models on the
augmented time series has outperformed the original fore-
casting model consistently, demonstrating the effectiveness of
decomposition-based time series augmentation approaches.
Recently, in [Gao et al. , 2020 ], authors showed that ap-
plying time-domain and frequency-domain augmentation on
the decomposed residual that is generated using robust de-
composition [Wen et al. , 2020; Wen et al. , 2019a ]can help
increase the performance of anomaly detection signiﬁcantly,
compared with the same method without augmentation.
3.2 Statistical Generative Models
Time series augmentation approaches based on statistical
generative models typically involve modelling the dynamics
of the time series with statistical models. In [Caoet al. , 2014 ],
authors proposed a parsimonious statistical model, known as
mixture of Gaussian trees, for modeling multi-modal minor-
ity class time series data to solve the problem of imbalanced
classiﬁcation, which shows advantages compared with exist-
ing oversampling approaches that do not exploit time series
correlations between neighboring points. Authors in [Smyl
and Kuber, 2016 ]use samples of parameters and forecast
paths calculated by a statistical algorithm called LGT (Local
and Global Trend). More recently, in [Kang et al. , 2020 ]re-
searchers use mixture autoregressive (MAR) models to simu-
late sets of time series and investigate the diversity and cover-

==== Page 4 ====
age of the generated time series in a time series feature space.
Essentially, these models describe the conditional distribu-
tion of time series by assuming the value at time tdepends
on previous points. Once the initial value is perturbed, a new
time series sequence could be generated following the condi-
tional distribution.
3.3 Learning-based Methods
Time series data augmentation methods should be capable of
not only generating diverse samples, but also mimicking the
characteristics of real data. In this section, we summarize
some recent learning based schemes that have such potentials.
Embedding Space
In[DeVries and Taylor, 2017 ], the data augmentation is pro-
posed to perform in the learned embedding space (aka., latent
space). It assumes that simple transforms applied to encoded
inputs rather than the raw inputs would produce more plau-
sible synthetic data due to the manifold unfolding in feature
space. Note that the selection of the representation model
in this framework is open and depends on the speciﬁc task
and data type. When the time series data is addressed, a
sequence autoencoder is selected in [DeVries and Taylor,
2017 ]. Speciﬁcally, the interpolation and extrapolation are
applied to generate new samples. The ﬁrst knearest labels
in the transformed space with the same label are identiﬁed.
Then for each pair of neighboring samples, a new sample is
generated which is the linear combination of them. The dif-
ference of interpolation and extrapolation lies in the weight
selection in sample generation. This technique is particular
useful for time series classiﬁcation as demonstrated in [De-
Vries and Taylor, 2017 ]. Recently, another data augmentation
method in the embedding space named MODALS (Modality-
agnostic Automated Data Augmentation in the Latent Space)
is proposed in [Cheung and Yeung, 2021 ]. Instead of training
an autoencoder to learn the latent space and generate addi-
tional synthetic data for training, the MODALS method train
a classiﬁcation model jointly with different compositions of
latent space augmentations, which demonstrates superior per-
formance for time series classiﬁcation problems.
Deep Generative Models
Deep generative models (DGMs) have recently been shown to
be able to generate near-realistic high-dimensional data ob-
jects such as images and sequences. DGMs developed for
sequential data, such as audio and text, often can be extended
to model time series data. Among DGMs, generative adver-
sarial networks (GANs) are popular methods to generate syn-
thetic samples and increase the training set effectively. Al-
though the GAN frameworks have received signiﬁcant atten-
tion in many ﬁelds, how to generate effective time series data
still remains a challenging problem. In this subsection, we
brieﬂy review several recent works on GANs for time series
data augmentation.
In[Esteban et al. , 2017 ], a Recurrent GAN (RGAN) and
Recurrent Conditional GAN (RCGAN) are proposed to pro-
duce realistic real-valued multi-dimensional time series data.
The RGAN adopts RNN in the generator and discriminator,
while the RCGAN adopts both RNNs conditioned on auxil-
iary information. Besides desirable performance of RGANand RCGAN for time series data augmentation, differential
privacy can be used in training the RCGAN for stricter pri-
vacy guarantees like medicine or other sensitive domains.
Recently, [Yoon et al. , 2019 ]proposed TimeGAN, a natural
framework for generating realistic time series data in various
domains. TimeGAN is a generative time series model, trained
adversarially and jointly via a learned embedding space with
both supervised and unsupervised losses. Speciﬁcally, a step-
wise supervised loss is introduced to learn the stepwise con-
ditional distributions in data. It also introduces an embedding
network to provide a reversible mapping between features
and latent representations to reduce the high-dimensionality
of the adversarial learning space. Note that the supervised
loss is minimized by jointly training both the embedding and
generator networks.
Automated Data Augmentation
The idea of automated data augmentation is to automatically
search for optimal data augmentation policies through re-
inforcement learning, meta learning, or evolutionary search
[Ratner et al. , 2017; Cubuk et al. , 2019; Zhang et al. , 2020;
Cheung and Yeung, 2021 ]. The TANDA (Transformation Ad-
versarial Networks for Data Augmentations) scheme in [Rat-
neret al. , 2017 ]is designed to train a generative sequence
model over speciﬁed transformation functions using rein-
forcement learning in a GAN-like framework to generate re-
alistic transformed data points, which yields strong gains over
common heuristic data augmentation methods for a range
of applications including image recognition and natural lan-
guage understanding tasks. [Cubuk et al. , 2019 ]proposes
a procedure called AutoAugment to automatically search
for improved data augmentation policies in a reinforcement
learning framework. It adopts a controller RNN network to
predicts an augmentation policy from the search space and
another network is trained to achieve convergence accuracy.
Then, the accuracy is used as reward to update the RNN con-
troller for better policies in the next iteration. The experi-
mental results show that AutoAugment improves the accu-
racy of modern image classiﬁers signiﬁcantly in a wide range
of datasets.
For time series data augmentation, the MODALS [Cheung
and Yeung, 2021 ]is designed to ﬁnd the optimal composi-
tion of latent space transformations for data augmentation us-
ing evolution search strategy based on population based aug-
mentation (PBA) [Hoet al. , 2019 ], which demonstrates supe-
rior performance on classiﬁcation problems in continuous and
discrete time series data. Another recent work on automated
data augmentation is proposed in [Fons et al. , 2021 ], where
two sample-adaptive automatic weighting schemes are de-
signed speciﬁcally for time series data: one learns to weight
the contribution of the augmented samples to the loss, and
the other selects a subset of transformations based on the
ranking of the predicted training loss. Both adaptive poli-
cies demonstrate improvement on classiﬁcation problems in
multiple time series datasets.
4 Preliminary Evaluation
In this section, we demonstrate preliminary evaluations in
three common time series tasks to show the effectiveness of
data augmentation for performance improvement.

==== Page 5 ====
4.1 Time Series Classiﬁcation
In this experiment, we compare the classiﬁcation perfor-
mance with and without data augmentation. Speciﬁcally, we
collect 5000 time series of one-week long and 5-min interval
samples with binary class labels (seasonal or non-seasonal)
from Alibaba Cloud monitoring system. The data is ran-
domly splitted into training and test sets where training con-
tains 80% of total samples. We train a fully convolutional
network [Wang et al. , 2017 ]to classify each time series in the
training set. In our experiment, we inject different types of
outliers, including spike, step, and slope, into the test set to
evaluate the robustness of the trained classiﬁer. The data aug-
mentations methods applied include cropping, warping, and
ﬂipping. Table 1 summarizes the accuracies with and with-
out data augmentation when different types of outliers are
injected into the test set. It can be observed that data aug-
mentation leads to 0:1%1:9%accuracy improvement.
Outlier injection w/o aug w/ aug Improvement
spike 96.26% 96.37% 0.11%
step 93.70% 95.62% 1.92%
slope 95.84% 96.16% 0.32%
Table 1: Accuracy improvement from data augmentation under out-
lier injection in time series classiﬁcation.
4.2 Time Series Anomaly Detection
Given the challenges of both data scarcity anddata imbal-
ance in time series anomaly detection, it is beneﬁcial by
adopting data augmentation to generate more labeled data.
We brieﬂy summarize the results in [Gao et al. , 2020 ], where
a U-Net based network is designed and evaluated on pub-
lic Yahoo! dataset [Laptev et al. , 2015 ]for time series
anomaly detection. The performance comparison under dif-
ferent settings are summarized in Table 2, including apply-
ing the model on the raw data (U-Net-Raw), on the decom-
posed residuals (U-Net-DeW), and on the residuals with data
augmentation (U-Net-DeWA). The applied data augmenta-
tion methods include ﬂipping, cropping, label expansion, and
APP based augmentation in frequency domain. It can be ob-
served that the decomposition helps the increase of the F1
score and the data augmentation further boosts the perfor-
mance.
Algorithm Precision Recall F1
U-Net-Raw 0.473 0.351 0.403
U-Net-DeW 0.793 0.569 0.662
U-Net-DeWA (w/ aug) 0.859 0.581 0.693
Table 2: Time series anomaly detection improvement from data aug-
mentation based on precision, recall, and F1 score.
4.3 Time Series Forecasting
In this subsection we demonstrate the practical effectiveness
of data augmentation in two popular deep models DeepAR
[Salinas et al. , 2019 ]and Transformer [Vaswani et al. , 2017 ].
In Table 3, we report the performance improvement on mean
absolute scaled error (MASE) on several public datasets:
electricity and trafﬁc from UCI Learning Repository1and
1http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.php3 datasets from the M4 competition2. We consider the ba-
sic augmentation methods including cropping, warping, ﬂip-
ping, and APP based augmentation in frequency domain. In
Table 3, we summarize average MASE without augmenta-
tion, with augmentation and average relative improvement
(ARI) which is computed as the mean of (MASE w/o aug 
MASE w aug)=MASE w aug. We observe that the data augmen-
tation methods bring promising results for all models in aver-
age sense. However, the negative results can still be observed
for speciﬁc data/model pairs. As a future work, it motivates
us to search for advanced automated data augmentation poli-
cies that stabilize the inﬂuence of data augmentation speciﬁ-
cally for time series forecasting.
DatasetDeepAR Transformer
w/o aug w/ aug ARI w/o aug w/ aug ARI
electricity 0:87 0:97 1:92% 1:04 1:11 2%
trafﬁc 0:66 0:80 12% 0:70 0:91 16%
m4-hourly 6:33 5:35 56% 7:77 7:87 38%
m4-daily 4:88 4:48 10% 7:85 7:38 37%
m4-weekly 12:00 9:34 76% 6:62 7:09 23%
Table 3: Time seires forecasting improvement from data augmenta-
tion based on MASE.
5 Discussion for Future Opportunities
5.1 Augmentation in Time-Frequency Domain
As discussed in Section 2.3, so far there are only limited stud-
ies of time series data augmentation methods based on STFT
in the time-frequency domain. Besides STFT, wavelet trans-
form and its variants including continuous wavelet transform
(CWT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT), are another
family of adaptive time–frequency domain analysis meth-
ods to characterize time-varying properties of time series.
Compared to STFT, they can handle non-stationary time se-
ries and non-Gaussian noises more effectively and robustly.
Among many wavelet transform variants, maximum over-
lap discrete wavelet transform (MODWT) is especially at-
tractive for time series analysis [Percival and Walden, 2000;
Wen et al. , 2021 ]due to the following advantages: 1) more
computationally efﬁciency compared to CWT; 2) ability to
handle any time series length; 3) increased resolution at
coarser scales compared with DWT. MODWT based sur-
rogate time series have been proposed in [Keylock, 2006 ],
where wavelet iterative amplitude adjusted Fourier transform
(WIAAFT) is designed by combining the iterative amplitude
adjusted Fourier transform (IAAFT) scheme to each level of
MODWT coefﬁcients. In contrast to IAAFT, WIAAFT does
not assume sationarity and can roughly maintain the shape of
the original data in terms of the temporal evolution. Besides
WIAAFT, we can also consider the perturbation of both am-
plitude spectrum and phase spectrum as [Gao et al. , 2020 ]
at each level of MODWT coefﬁcients as a data augmentation
scheme.
It would be an interesting future direction to investigate
how to exploit different wavelet transforms (CWT, DWT,
MODWT, etc.) for an effective time-frequency domain based
time series data augmentation in deep neural networks.
2https://github.com/Mcompetitions/M4-methods/tree/master/
Dataset

==== Page 6 ====
5.2 Augmentation for Imbalanced Class
In time series classiﬁcation, class imbalance occurs very
frequently. One classical approach addressing imbal-
anced classiﬁcation problem is to oversample the minor-
ity class as the synthetic minority oversampling technique
(SMOTE) [Fern ´andez et al. , 2018 ]to artiﬁcially mitigate the
imbalance. However, this oversampling strategy may change
the distribution of raw data and cause overﬁtting. Another ap-
proach is to design cost-sensitive model by using adjust loss
function [Geng and Luo, 2018 ]. Furthermore, [Gao et al. ,
2020 ]designed label-based weight and value-based weight in
the loss function in convolution neural networks, which con-
siders weight adjustment for class labels and the neighbor-
hood of each sample. Thus, both class imbalance and tempo-
ral dependency are explicitly considered.
Performing data augmentation and weighting for imbal-
anced class together would be an interesting and effective di-
rection. A recent study investigates this topic in the area of
CV and NLP [Huet al. , 2019 ], which signiﬁcantly improves
text and image classiﬁcation in low data regime and imbal-
anced class problems. In future, it is interesting to design
deep network by jointly considering data augmentation and
weighting for imbalanced class in time series data.
5.3 Augmentation Selection and Combination
Given different data augmentation methods summarized in
Fig. 1, one key strategy is how to select and combine vari-
ous augmentation methods together. The experiments in [Um
et al. , 2017 ]show that the combination of three basic time-
domain methods (permutation, rotation, and time warping)
is better than that of a single method and achieves the best
performance in time series classiﬁcation. Also, the results
in[Rashid and Louis, 2019 ]demonstrate substantial perfor-
mance improvement for a time series classiﬁcation task when
using a deep neural network by combining four data aug-
mentation methods (i.e, jittering, scaling, rotation and time-
warping). However, considering various data augmentation
methods, directly combining different augmentations may re-
sult in a huge amount of data, and may not be efﬁcient and
effective for performance improvement. Recently, RandAug-
ment [Cubuk et al. , 2020 ]is proposed as a practical way for
augmentation combination in image classiﬁcation and object
detection. For each random generated dataset, RandAugment
is based on only two interpretable hyperparameters N(num-
ber of augmentation methods to combine) and M(magni-
tude for all augmentation methods), where each augmenta-
tion is randomly selected from K=14 available augmentation
methods. Furthermore, this randomly combined augmenta-
tion with simple grid search can be used in the reinforcement
learning based data augmentation as [Cubuk et al. , 2019 ]for
efﬁcient space searching.
An interesting future direction is how to design effective
augmentation selection and/or combination strategies suitable
for time series data in deep learning. Customized reinforce-
ment learning and meta learning optimized for time series
could be potential approaches. Furthermore, algorithm efﬁ-
ciency is another important consideration in practice.5.4 Augmentation with Gaussian Processes
Gaussian Processes (GPs) [Rasmussen and Williams, 2005 ]
are well-known Bayesian non-parametric models suitable for
time series analysis [Roberts et al. , 2013 ]. From the function-
space view, GPs induce a distribution over functions, i.e., a
stochastic process. Time series can be viewed as functions
with time as input and observation as output, and thus can
be modeled with GPs. A GP f(t) GP (m(t);k(t;t0))
is characterized by a mean function m(t)and a covari-
ance kernel function k(t;t0). The choice of the kernel al-
lows to place assumptions on some general properties of the
modeled functions, such as smoothness, scale, periodicity
and noise level. Kernels can be composed through addi-
tion and multiplication, resulting in compositional function
properties, such as pseudo-periodicity, additive decompos-
ability, and change point. GPs are often applied to interpola-
tion and extrapolation tasks, which correspond to imputation
and forecasting in time series analysis. Furthermore, deep
Gaussian processes(DGPs) [Damianou and Lawrence, 2013;
Salimbeni and Deisenroth, 2017 ], which are richer models
with hierarchical composition of GPs and often exceed stan-
dard (single-layer) GPs signiﬁcantly in many cases, have not
been well studied for time series. We believe GPs and DGPs
are future directions as they allow to sample time series with
those properties mentioned above through the design of ker-
nels, and to generate new data instances from existing ones
by exploiting their interpolation/extrapolation abilities.
5.5 Augmentation with Deep Generative Models
Current DGMs adopted for time series data augmentation are
mainly GANs. However, other DGMs also have great poten-
tials for time series modeling. For example, deep autoregres-
sive networks (DARNs) exhibit a natural ﬁt for time series
because they generate data in a sequential manner, obeying
the causal direction of physical time series data generating
process. DARNs like Wavenet [Oord et al. , 2016 ]and Trans-
former [Vaswani et al. , 2017 ]have demonstrated promis-
ing performance in time series forecasting tasks [Alexan-
drov et al. , 2020 ]. Another example is normalizing ﬂows
(NFs) [Kobyzev et al. , 2020 ], which recently have shown
success in modeling time series stochastic processes with
excellent inter-/extrapolation performance given observed
data [Deng et al. , 2020 ]. Most recently, variational autoen-
coders (V AEs) based data augmentation [Fuet al. , 2020 ]are
investigated for human activity recognition.
In summary, besides the common GAN architectures, how
to leverage other deep generative models like DARNs, NFs,
and V AEs, which are less investigated for time series data
augmentation, remain exciting future opportunities.
6 Conclusion
As deep learning models are becoming more popular on time
series data, the limited labeled data calls for effective data
augmentation methods. In this paper, we give a comprehen-
sive survey on time series data augmentation methods in var-
ious tasks. We organize the reviewed methods in a taxonomy
consisting of basic and advanced approaches, summarize rep-
resentative methods in each category, compare them empiri-
cally in typical tasks, and highlight future research directions.

==== Page 7 ====
References
[Alexandrov et al. , 2020 ]Alexander Alexandrov, Konstantinos
Benidis, Michael Bohlke-Schneider, Valentin Flunkert, Jan
Gasthaus, Tim Januschowski, Danielle C Maddix, Syama
Rangapuram, David Salinas, Jasper Schulz, et al. Gluonts:
Probabilistic and neural time series modeling in python. Journal
of Machine Learning Research , 21(116):1–6, 2020.
[Bandara et al. , 2020 ]Kasun Bandara, Hansika Hewamalage,
Yuan-Hao Liu, Yanfei Kang, and Christoph Bergmeir. Improv-
ing the accuracy of global forecasting models using time series
data augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02663 , 2020.
[Bergmeir et al. , 2016 ]Christoph Bergmeir, Rob J. Hyndman, and
Jos´e M. Ben ´ıtez. Bagging exponential smoothing methods using
STL decomposition and Box–Cox transformation. International
Journal of Forecasting , 32(2):303–312, 2016.
[Caoet al. , 2014 ]Hong Cao, Vincent YF Tan, and John ZF Pang. A
parsimonious mixture of gaussian trees model for oversampling
in imbalanced and multimodal time-series classiﬁcation. IEEE
TNNLS , 25(12):2226–2239, 2014.
[Cheung and Yeung, 2021 ]Tsz-Him Cheung and Dit-Yan Yeung.
MODALS: Modality-agnostic automated data augmentation in
the latent space. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR) , 2021.
[Cleveland et al. , 1990 ]Robert B Cleveland, William S Cleveland,
Jean E McRae, and Irma Terpenning. STL: A seasonal-trend de-
composition procedure based on loess. Journal of Ofﬁcial Statis-
tics, 6(1):3–73, 1990.
[Cubuk et al. , 2019 ]Ekin D. Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Dandelion Mane,
Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V . Le. AutoAugment: Learning aug-
mentation strategies from data. In IEEE CVPR 2019 , pages 113–
123, June 2019.
[Cubuk et al. , 2020 ]Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens,
and Quoc V Le. RandAugment: Practical automated data aug-
mentation with a reduced search space. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops ,
pages 3008–3017, 2020.
[Cuiet al. , 2015 ]X Cui, V Goel, and B Kingsbury. Data augmen-
tation for deep neural network acoustic modeling. IEEE/ACM
TASLP , 23(9):1469–1477, 2015.
[Cuiet al. , 2016 ]Zhicheng Cui, Wenlin Chen, et al. Multi-scale
convolutional neural networks for time series classiﬁcation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1603.06995 , 2016.
[Damianou and Lawrence, 2013 ]Andreas Damianou and Neil D
Lawrence. Deep gaussian processes. In Artiﬁcial intelligence
and statistics , pages 207–215. PMLR, 2013.
[Deng et al. , 2020 ]Ruizhi Deng, Bo Chang, Marcus A Brubaker,
Greg Mori, and Andreas Lehrmann. Modeling continuous
stochastic processes with dynamic normalizing ﬂows. In NeurIPS
2020 , Dec 2020.
[DeVries and Taylor, 2017 ]Terrance DeVries and Graham W. Tay-
lor. Dataset augmentation in feature space. In ICLR 2017 , pages
1–12, Toulon, 2017.
[Esteban et al. , 2017 ]Crist ´obal Esteban, Stephanie L Hyland, and
Gunnar R ¨atsch. Real-valued (medical) time series gen-
eration with recurrent conditional gans. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1706.02633 , 2017.
[Fawaz et al. , 2018 ]Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier,
Jonathan Weber, Lhassane Idoumghar, and Pierre-Alain Muller.Data augmentation using synthetic data for time series classiﬁca-
tion with deep residual networks. In ECML/PKDD Workshop on
AALTD , 2018.
[Fawaz et al. , 2019 ]Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier,
Jonathan Weber, et al. Deep learning for time series classi-
ﬁcation: a review. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery ,
33(4):917–963, 2019.
[Fern ´andez et al. , 2018 ]Alberto Fern ´andez, Salvador Garcia, Fran-
cisco Herrera, and Nitesh V Chawla. SMOTE for learning from
imbalanced data: progress and challenges, marking the 15-year
anniversary. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 61:863–
905, 2018.
[Fons et al. , 2021 ]Elizabeth Fons, Paula Dawson, Xiao-jun Zeng,
John Keane, and Alexandros Iosiﬁdis. Adaptive weighting
scheme for automatic time-series data augmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102.08310 , 2021.
[Fuet al. , 2020 ]Biying Fu, Florian Kirchbuchner, and Arjan Kui-
jper. Data augmentation for time series: traditional vs generative
models on capacitive proximity time series. In ACM PETRA ,
pages 1–10, 2020.
[Gamboa, 2017 ]John Cristian Borges Gamboa. Deep learning for
time-series analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.01887 , 2017.
[Gao et al. , 2020 ]Jingkun Gao, Xiaomin Song, Qingsong Wen,
Pichao Wang, Liang Sun, and Huan Xu. Robusttad: Robust time
series anomaly detection via decomposition and convolutional
neural networks. MileTS’20: 6th KDD Workshop on Mining and
Learning from Time Series , pages 1–6, 2020.
[Geng and Luo, 2018 ]Yue Geng and Xinyu Luo. Cost-sensitive
convolution based neural networks for imbalanced time-series
classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.04396 , 2018.
[Han et al. , 2019 ]Z Han, J Zhao, H Leung, K F Ma, and W Wang.
A review of deep learning models for time series prediction.
IEEE Sensors Journal , page 1, 2019.
[Hoet al. , 2019 ]Daniel Ho, Eric Liang, Xi Chen, Ion Stoica, and
Pieter Abbeel. Population based augmentation: Efﬁcient learning
of augmentation policy schedules. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 2731–2741, 2019.
[Huet al. , 2019 ]Zhiting Hu, Bowen Tan, Russ R Salakhutdinov,
Tom M Mitchell, and Eric P Xing. Learning data manipulation
for augmentation and weighting. In NeurIPS 2019 , pages 15764–
15775, 2019.
[Huet al. , 2020 ]Hailin Hu, MingJian Tang, and Chengcheng Bai.
Datsing: Data augmented time series forecasting with adversar-
ial domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Information & Knowledge Management ,
pages 2061–2064, 2020.
[Iwana and Uchida, 2020 ]Brian Kenji Iwana and Seiichi Uchida.
An empirical survey of data augmentation for time series classi-
ﬁcation with neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.15951 ,
2020.
[Kang et al. , 2020 ]Yanfei Kang, Rob J Hyndman, and Feng Li.
GRATIS: Generating time series with diverse and controllable
characteristics. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA
Data Science Journal , 13(4):354–376, 2020.
[Kegel et al. , 2018 ]Lars Kegel, Martin Hahmann, and Wolfgang
Lehner. Feature-based comparison and generation of time series.
InSSDBM 2018 , 2018.
[Keylock, 2006 ]C J Keylock. Constrained surrogate time series
with preservation of the mean and variance structure. Phys. Rev.
E, 73(3):36707, Mar 2006.

==== Page 8 ====
[Kobyzev et al. , 2020 ]Ivan Kobyzev, Simon Prince, and Marcus
Brubaker. Normalizing ﬂows: An introduction and review of
current methods. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence , pages 1–17, 2020.
[Krizhevsky et al. , 2012 ]Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ge-
offrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional
neural networks. In NeurIPS 2012 , pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[Laptev et al. , 2015 ]Nikolay Laptev, Saeed Amizadeh, et al.
Generic and scalable framework for automated time-series
anomaly detection. KDD , pages 1939–1947, 2015.
[Le Guennec et al. , 2016 ]Arthur Le Guennec, Simon Malinowski,
and Romain Tavenard. Data augmentation for time series clas-
siﬁcation using convolutional neural networks. In ECML/PKDD
Workshop on AALTD , 2016.
[Lee and Kim, 2020 ]Si Woon Lee and Ha Young Kim. Stock mar-
ket forecasting with super-high dimensional time-series data us-
ing convlstm, trend sampling, and specialized data augmentation.
Expert Systems with Applications , 161:113704, 2020.
[Leeet al. , 2019 ]Tracey Kah-Mein Lee, YL Kuah, Kee-Hao Leo,
Saeid Sanei, Efﬁe Chew, and Ling Zhao. Surrogate rehabilitative
time series data for image-based deep learning. In EUSIPCO
2019 , pages 1–5, 2019.
[Lim et al. , 2018 ]Swee Kiat Lim, Yi Loo, Ngoc-Trung Tran, Ngai-
Man Cheung, Gemma Roig, and Yuval Elovici. DOPING: Gener-
ative data augmentation for unsupervised anomaly detection with
gan. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining
(ICDM) , pages 1122–1127. IEEE, 2018.
[Oord et al. , 2016 ]Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga
Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalch-
brenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A
generative model for raw audio. In International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2016.
[Park et al. , 2019 ]Daniel S Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-
Cheng Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D Cubuk, et al. SpecAugment:
A simple data augmentation method for automatic speech recog-
nition. In INTERSPEECH 2019 , pages 2613–2617, 2019.
[Percival and Walden, 2000 ]Donald B Percival and Andrew T
Walden. Wavelet methods for time series analysis , volume 4.
Cambridge university press, New York, 2000.
[Rashid and Louis, 2019 ]Khandakar M Rashid and Joseph Louis.
Times-series data augmentation and deep learning for construc-
tion equipment activity recognition. Advanced Engineering In-
formatics , 42:100944, 2019.
[Rasmussen and Williams, 2005 ]Carl Edward Rasmussen and
Christopher KI Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine
Learning . The MIT Press, 2005.
[Ratner et al. , 2017 ]Alexander J Ratner, Henry R Ehrenberg, Ze-
shan Hussain, Jared Dunnmon, and Christopher R ´e. Learning to
compose domain-speciﬁc transformations for data augmentation.
NeurIPS 2017 , 30:3239, 2017.
[Roberts et al. , 2013 ]Stephen Roberts, Michael Osborne, Mark
Ebden, Steven Reece, Neale Gibson, and Suzanne Aigrain. Gaus-
sian processes for time-series modelling. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-
neering Sciences , 371(1984):20110550, 2013.
[Salimbeni and Deisenroth, 2017 ]Hugh Salimbeni and Marc Peter
Deisenroth. Doubly stochastic variational inference for deep
gaussian processes. In NeurIPS 2017 , pages 4591–4602, 2017.[Salinas et al. , 2019 ]David Salinas, Valentin Flunkert, Jan
Gasthaus, and Tim Januschowski. DeepAR: Probabilistic fore-
casting with autoregressive recurrent networks. International
Journal of Forecasting , 2019.
[Schreiber and Schmitz, 2000 ]Thomas Schreiber and Andreas
Schmitz. Surrogate time series. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenom-
ena, 142(3):346–382, 2000.
[Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019 ]Connor Shorten and Taghi M
Khoshgoftaar. A survey on image data augmentation for deep
learning. Journal of Big Data , 6(1):60, 2019.
[Smyl and Kuber, 2016 ]Slawek Smyl and Karthik Kuber. Data
preprocessing and augmentation for multiple short time series
forecasting with recurrent neural networks. In 36th International
Symposium on Forecasting , June 2016.
[Steven Eyobu and Han, 2018 ]Odongo Steven Eyobu and
Dong Seog Han. Feature representation and data augmen-
tation for human activity classiﬁcation based on wearable IMU
sensor data using a deep LSTM neural network. Sensors ,
18(9):2892, 2018.
[Umet al. , 2017 ]Terry T Um, Franz M J Pﬁster, Daniel Pichler,
Satoshi Endo, Muriel Lang, Sandra Hirche, Urban Fietzek, and
Dana Kuli ´c. Data augmentation of wearable sensor data for
Parkinson’s disease monitoring using convolutional neural net-
works. In ACM ICMI 2017 , pages 216–220, 2017.
[Vaswani et al. , 2017 ]Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Par-
mar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, et al. Attention is all you
need. In NeurIPS 2017 , pages 5998–6008, 2017.
[Wang et al. , 2017 ]Zhiguang Wang, Weizhong Yan, and Tim
Oates. Time series classiﬁcation from scratch with deep neural
networks: A strong baseline. In IJCNN , pages 1578–1585, 2017.
[Wen and Keyes, 2019 ]Tailai Wen and Roy Keyes. Time se-
ries anomaly detection using convolutional neural networks and
transfer learning. In IJCAI Workshop on AI4IoT , 2019.
[Wen et al. , 2019a ]Qingsong Wen, Jingkun Gao, Xiaomin Song,
Liang Sun, and Jian Tan. RobustTrend: A Huber loss with a
combined ﬁrst and second order difference regularization for time
series trend ﬁltering. In IJCAI , pages 3856–3862, 2019.
[Wen et al. , 2019b ]Qingsong Wen, Jingkun Gao, Xiaomin Song,
Liang Sun, Huan Xu, and Shenghuo Zhu. RobustSTL: A robust
seasonal-trend decomposition algorithm for long time series. In
AAAI , volume 33, pages 5409–5416, 2019.
[Wen et al. , 2020 ]Qingsong Wen, Zhe Zhang, Yan Li, and Liang
Sun. Fast RobustSTL: Efﬁcient and robust seasonal-trend decom-
position for time series with complex patterns. In KDD , pages
2203–2213, 2020.
[Wen et al. , 2021 ]Qingsong Wen, Kai He, Liang Sun, Yingying
Zhang, Min Ke, and Huan Xu. RobustPeriod: Time-frequency
mining for robust multiple periodicities detection. In Interna-
tional Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD) , 2021.
[Yoon et al. , 2019 ]Jinsung Yoon, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela
van der Schaar. Time-series generative adversarial networks. In
NeurIPS 2019 , pages 5508–5518, 2019.
[Zhang et al. , 2020 ]Xinyu Zhang, Qiang Wang, Jian Zhang, and
Zhao Zhong. Adversarial autoaugment. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2020.
[Zhou et al. , 2019 ]Bin Zhou, Shenghua Liu, Bryan Hooi, Xueqi
Cheng, and Jing Ye. Beatgan: Anomalous rhythm detection using
adversarially generated time series. In IJCAI , pages 4433–4439,
2019.

