==== Page 1 ====
arXiv:1909.06576v1  [cs.LG]  14 Sep 2019Torchmeta: A Meta-Learning library for PyTorch
Tristan Deleu1Tobias Würﬂ2Mandana Samiei3
Joseph Paul Cohen1Yoshua Bengio1, 4, 5
Mila – Montreal, Canada
Abstract
The constant introduction of standardized benchmarks in th e literature has helped
accelerating the recent advances in meta-learning researc h. They offer a way
to get a fair comparison between different algorithms, and t he wide range of
datasets available allows full control over the complexity of this evaluation.
However, for a large majority of code available online, the d ata pipeline is of-
ten speciﬁc to one dataset, and testing on another dataset re quires signiﬁcant
rework. We introduce Torchmeta, a library built on top of PyT orch that en-
ables seamless and consistent evaluation of meta-learning algorithms on mul-
tiple datasets, by providing data-loaders for most of the st andard benchmarks
in few-shot classiﬁcation and regression, with a new meta-d ataset abstraction.
It also features some extensions for PyTorch to simplify the development of
models compatible with meta-learning algorithms. The code is available here:
https://github.com/tristandeleu/pytorch-meta .
1 Introduction
Like for any subﬁeld of machine learning, the existence of st andardized benchmarks has played a
crucial role in the progress we have observed over the past fe w years in meta-learning research. They
make the evaluation of existing methods easier and fair, whi ch in turn serves as a reference point for
the development of new meta-learning algorithms; this crea tes a virtuous circle, rooted into these
well-deﬁned suites of tasks. Unlike existing datasets in su pervised learning though, such as MNIST
(LeCun et al., 1998) or ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015), the benchmarks in meta-learning con-
sist in datasets of datasets. This adds a layer of complexity to the data pipeline, to the extent that a
majority of meta-learning projects implement their own spe ciﬁc data-loading component adapted to
their method. The lack of a standard at the input level create s variance in the mechanisms surround-
ing each meta-learning algorithm, which makes a fair compar ison more challenging.
Although the implementation might be different from one pro ject to another, the process by which
these datasets of datasets are created is generally the same across tasks. In this paper we intro-
duce Torchmeta, a meta-learning library built on top of the P yTorch deep learning framework
(Paszke et al., 2017), providing data-loaders for most of th e standard datasets for few-shot classi-
ﬁcation and regression. Torchmeta uses the same interface f or all the available benchmarks, making
the transition between different datasets as seamless as po ssible. Inspired by previous efforts to
design a uniﬁed interface between tasks, such as OpenAI Gym ( Brockman et al., 2016) in reinforce-
ment learning, the goal of Torchmeta is to create a framework around which researchers can build
their own meta-learning algorithms, rather than adapting t he data pipeline to their methods. This
new abstraction promotes code reuse, by decoupling meta-da tasets from the algorithm itself.
In addition to these data-loaders, Torchmeta also includes extensions of PyTorch to simplify the
creation of models compatible with classic meta-learning a lgorithms that sometimes require higher-
1Université de Montréal,2Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,3Concordia University,
4CIFAR Senior Fellow,5Canada CIFAR AI Chair. Correspondance: tristan.deleu@gmail.com .
Preprint. Under review.

==== Page 2 ====
order differentiation (Finn et al., 2017; Finn, 2018; Rusu e t al., 2018; Grant et al., 2018). This paper
gives an overall overview of the features currently availab le in Torchmeta, and is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 gives a general presentation of the data-loa ders available in the library; in Section 3,
we focus on an extension of PyTorch’s modules called “meta-m odules” designed speciﬁcally for
meta-learning, and we conclude by a discussion in Section 4.
2 Data-loaders for few-shot learning
The library provides a collection of datasets correspondin g to classic few-shot classiﬁcation and
regression problems from the meta-learning literature. Th e interface was created to support modu-
larity between datasets, for both classiﬁcation and regres sion, to simplify the process of evaluation
on a full suite of benchmarks; we will detail this interface i n the following sections. Moreover, the
data-loaders from Torchmeta are fully compatible with stan dard data components of PyTorch, such
asDataset andDataLoader . Before going into the details of the library, we ﬁrst brieﬂy recall the
problem setting.
To balance the lack of data inherent in few-shot learning, me ta-learning algorithms acquire some
prior knowledge from a collection of datasets Dmeta={D1,...,Dn}, called the meta-training set .
In the context of few-shot learning, each element Dicontains only a few inputs/output pairs (x,y),
whereydepends on the nature of the problem. For instance, these dat asets can contain examples of
different tasks performed in the past. Torchmeta offers a so lution to automate the creation of each
datasetDi, with a minimal amount of problem-speciﬁc components.
2.1 Few-shot regression
A majority of the few-shot regression problems in the litera ture are simple regression problems
between inputs and outputs through different functions, wh ere each function corresponds to a task.
These functions are parametrized to allow variability betw een tasks, while preserving a constant
“theme” across tasks. For example, these functions can be si ne waves of the form fi(x) =aisin(x+
bi), withaandbvarying in some range (Finn et al., 2017). In Torchmeta, the m eta-training set
inherits from an object called MetaDataset , and each dataset Di(i= 1,...,n , withndeﬁned
by the user) corresponds to a speciﬁc choice of parameters fo r the function, with all the parameters
sampled once at the creation of the meta-training set. Once t he parameters of the function are known,
we can create the dataset by sampling inputs in a given range, and feeding them to the function.
The library currently contains 3 toy problems: sine waves (F inn et al., 2017), harmonic function (i.e.
sum of two sine waves, Lacoste et al., 2018), and sinusoid and lines (Finn et al., 2018). Below is an
example of how to instantiate the meta-training set for the s ine waves problem:
torchmeta.toy.Sinusoid(num_samples_per_task= 10, num_tasks= 1_000_000 , noise_std= None)
2.2 Few-shot classiﬁcation
For few-shot classiﬁcation problems, the creation of the da tasetsDiusually follows two steps: ﬁrst
Nclasses are sampled from a large collection of candidates (c orresponding to Nin “N-way clas-
siﬁcation”), and then kexamples are chosen per class (corresponding to kin “k-shot learning”).
This two-step process is automated as part of an object calle dCombinationMetaDataset , inher-
ited from MetaDataset , provided that the user speciﬁes the large collection of cla ss candidates,
which is problem-speciﬁc. Moreover, to encourage reproduc ibility in meta-learning, every task is
associated to a unique identiﬁer (the N-tuple of class identiﬁers). Once the task has been chosen,
the object returns a dataset Diwith all the examples from the corresponding set of classes. In
Section 2.3, we will describe how Dican then be further split into training and test datasets, as is
common in meta-learning.
The library currently contains 5 few-shot classiﬁcation pr oblems: Omniglot (Lake et al.,
2015, 2019), Mini-ImageNet (Vinyals et al., 2016; Ravi and L arochelle, 2017), Tiered-ImageNet
(Ren et al., 2018), CIFAR-FS (Bertinetto et al., 2018), and F ewshot-CIFAR100 (Oreshkin et al.,
2018). Below is an example of how to instantiate the meta-tra ining set for 5-way Mini-ImageNet:
torchmeta.datasets.MiniImagenet( "data", num_classes_per_task= 5, meta_train= True,
download= True)
2

==== Page 3 ====
Torchmeta also includes helpful functions to augment the po ol of class candidates with variants,
such as rotated images (Santoro et al., 2016).
2.3 Training & test datasets split
In meta-learning, it is common to separate each dataset Diin two parts: a training set (or support
set) to adapt the model to the task at hand, and a test set (or qu ery set) for evaluation and meta-
optimization. It is important to ensure that these two parts do not overlap though: while the task
remains the same, no example can be in both the training and te st sets. To ensure that, Torchmeta
introduces a wrapper over the datasets called a Splitter that is responsible for creating the training
and test datasets, as well as optionally shufﬂing the data. H ere is an example of how to instantiate
the meta-training set of a 5-way 1-shot classiﬁcation probl em based on Mini-Imagenet:
dataset = torchmeta.datasets.MiniImagenet( "data", num_classes_per_task= 5,
meta_train= True, download= True)
dataset = torchmeta.transforms.ClassSplitter(dataset, num_train_per_class= 1,
num_test_per_class= 15, shuffle= True)
in addition to the meta-training set, most benchmarks also p rovide a meta-test set for the overall
evaluation of the meta-learning algorithm (and possible a m eta-validation set as well). These differ-
ent meta-datasets can be selected when the MetaDataset object is created, with meta_test=True
(ormeta_val=True ) instead of meta_train=True .
2.4 Meta Data-loaders
The objects presented in Sections 2.1 & 2.2 can be iterated ov er to generate datasets from the meta-
training set; these datasets are PyTorch Dataset objects, and as such can be included as part of any
standard data pipeline (combined with DataLoader ). Nonetheless, most meta-learning algorithms
operate better on batches of tasks. Similar to how examples a re batched together with DataLoader
in PyTorch, Torchmeta exposes a MetaDalaoader that can produce batches of tasks when iterated
over. In particular, such a meta data-loader is able to outpu t a large tensor containing all the examples
from the different tasks in the batch. For example:
# Helper function, equivalent to Section 2.3
dataset = torchmeta.datasets.helpers.miniimagenet( "data", shots= 1, ways=5,
meta_train= True, download= True)
dataloader = torchmeta.utils.data.BatchMetaDataLoader (dataset, batch_size= 16)
forbatchindataloader:
train_inputs, train_labels = batch[ "train"]# Size (16, 5, 3, 84, 84) & (16, 5)
3 Meta-learning modules
Models in PyTorch are created from basic components called modules . Each basic module, equiv-
alent to a layer in a neural network, contains both the comput ational graph of that layer, as well as
its parameters. The modules treat their parameters as an int egral part of their computational graph;
in standard supervised learning, this is sufﬁcient to train a model with backpropagation. However
some meta-learning algorithms require to backpropagate th rough an update of the parameters (like a
gradient update, Finn et al., 2017) for the meta-optimizati on (or the “outer-loop”), hence involving
higher-order differentiation. Although high-order diffe rentiation is available in PyTorch as part of
its automatic differentiation module (Paszke et al., 2017) , replacing one parameter of a basic module
with a full computational graph (i.e. the update of the param eter), without altering the way gradients
ﬂow, is not obvious.
Backpropagation through an update of the parameters is a key ingredient of gradient-based meta-
learning methods (Finn et al., 2017; Finn, 2018; Grant et al. , 2018; Lee et al., 2019), and various
hybrid methods (Rusu et al., 2018; Zintgraf et al., 2019). It is therefore critical to adapt the existing
modules in PyTorch so they can handle arbitrary computation al graphs as a substitute for these
parameters. The approach taken by Torchmeta is to extend the se modules, and leave an option to
provide new parameters as an additional input. These new obj ects are called MetaModule , and
their default behaviour (i.e. without any extra parameter s peciﬁed) is equivalent to their PyTorch
3

==== Page 4 ====
model = MetaLinear(in_features,
out_features, bias= True)×+
MetaLinearWb
˜ytrain= model( xtrain, params= None)×+
Wb
params: N/AMetaLinearLinner
˜ytrain
xtrain
W′=W−α∇WL&b′=b−α∇bL
˜ytest= model( xtest, params= {W′,b′})×+
×α∂L
∂W
−W b
×α
∂L
∂b−
b W
params: W′b′MetaLinearLouter
˜ytest
xtest
Figure 1: Illustration of the functionality of the MetaLinear meta-module, the extension of
theLinear module. Left: Instantiation of a MetaLinear meta-module. Middle: Default be-
haviour, equivalent to Linear . Right: Behaviour with extra parameters (a one-step gradie nt update,
Finn et al., 2017). Gradients are represented as dashed arro ws, in orange for ∂/∂W and green for
∂/∂b .
counterpart. Otherwise, if extra parameters (such as the re sult of one step of gradient descent) are
speciﬁed, then the MetaModule treats them as part of the computational graph, and backprop agation
works as expected.
Figure 1 shows how the extension of the Linear module called MetaLinear works, with and with-
out additional parameters, and the impact on the gradients. The ﬁgure on the left shows the instan-
tiation of the meta-module as a container for the parameters W&b, and the computational graph
with placeholders for the weight and bias parameters. The ﬁg ure in the middle shows the default
behaviour of the MetaLinear meta-module, where the placeholders are substituted with W&b:
this is equivalent to PyTorch’s Linear module. Finally, the ﬁgure on the right shows how these
placeholders can be ﬁlled with a complete computational gra ph, like one step of gradient descent
(Finn et al., 2017). In this latter case, the gradient of Louter with respect to W, necessary in the
outer-loop update, can correctly ﬂow all the way to the param eterW.
4 Discussion
Reproducibility of data pipelines is challenging. It is eve n more challenging that some early works,
even though they were evaluated on benchmarks that now becam e classic, did not disclose the set of
classes available for meta-training and meta-test (and pos sibly meta-validation) in few-shot classiﬁ-
cation. For example, while the Mini-ImageNet dataset was in troduced in (Vinyals et al., 2016), the
split used in (Ravi and Larochelle, 2017) is now widely accep ted in the community as the ofﬁcial
dataset. The advantage of a library like Torchmeta is to stan dardize these benchmarks to avoid any
confusion.
The other objective of Torchmeta is to make meta-learning ac cessible to a larger community. We
hope that similar to how OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016) he lped the progress in reinforcement
learning, with an access to multiple environments under a un iﬁed interface, Torchmeta can have an
equal impact on meta-learning research. The full compatibi lity of the library with both PyTorch and
Torchvision, PyTorch’s computer vision library, simpliﬁe s its integration to existing projects.
Even though Torchmeta already features a number of datasets for both few-shot regression and clas-
siﬁcation, and covers most of the standard benchmarks in the meta-learning literature, one notable
missing dataset in the current version of the library is Meta -Dataset (Triantaﬁllou et al., 2019). Meta-
Dataset is a unique and more complex few-shot classiﬁcation problem, with a varying number of
classes per task. And while it could ﬁt the proposed abstract ion, Meta-Dataset requires a long initial
processing phase, which would make the automatic download a nd processing feature of the library
impractical. Therefore its integration is left as future wo rk. In the meantime, we believe that Torch-
4

==== Page 5 ====
meta can provide a structure for the creation of better bench marks in the future, and is a crucial step
forward for reproducible research in meta-learning.
5 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the students at Mila who tested the libr ary, and provided valuable feedback
during development. Tristan Deleu is supported by the Antid ote scholarship from Druide Informa-
tique.
References
Bertinetto, L., Henriques, J. F., Torr, P. H., and Vedaldi, A . (2018). Meta-learning with differentiable
closed-form solvers. International Conference on Learning Representations .
Brockman, G., Cheung, V ., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Sc hulman, J., Tang, J., and Zaremba, W.
(2016). OpenAI Gym.
Finn, C. (2018). Learning to Learn with Gradients . PhD thesis, UC Berkeley.
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. (2017). Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for Fast Adaptation of
Deep Networks. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
Finn, C., Xu, K., and Levine, S. (2018). Probabilistic model -agnostic meta-learning. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Grant, E., Finn, C., Levine, S., Darrell, T., and Grifﬁths, T . L. (2018). Recasting Gradient-Based
Meta-Learning as Hierarchical Bayes. International Conference on Learning Representations .
Lacoste, A., Oreshkin, B., Chung, W., Boquet, T., Rostamzad eh, N., and Krueger, D. (2018). Uncer-
tainty in Multitask Transfer Learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2015). Human-level concept learning through
probabilistic program induction. Science .
Lake, B. M., Salakhutdinov, R., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2019). The Omniglot Challenge: A 3-Year
Progress Report.
LeCun, Y ., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y ., Haffner, P., et al. (1998) . Gradient-based learning applied to
document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86.
Lee, K., Maji, S., Ravichandran, A., and Soatto, S. (2019). M eta-Learning with Differentiable
Convex Optimization.
Oreshkin, B., López, P. R., and Lacoste, A. (2018). TADAM: Ta sk dependent adaptive metric for
improved few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., De Vito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga,
L., and Lerer, A. (2017). Automatic differentiation in PyTo rch. In NIPS Autodiff Workshop .
Ravi, S. and Larochelle, H. (2017). Optimization as a model f or few-shot learning. International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Ren, M., Triantaﬁllou, E., Ravi, S., Snell, J., Swersky, K., Tenenbaum, J. B., Larochelle, H., and
Zemel, R. S. (2018). Meta-learning for semi-supervised few -shot classiﬁcation. International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla,
A., Bernstein, M., et al. (2015). ImageNet Large Scale Visua l Recognition Challenge. Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Vision , 115.
Rusu, A. A., Rao, D., Sygnowski, J., Vinyals, O., Pascanu, R. , Osindero, S., and Hadsell, R. (2018).
Meta-learning with latent embedding optimization.
5

==== Page 6 ====
Santoro, A., Bartunov, S., Botvinick, M., Wierstra, D., and Lillicrap, T. (2016). Meta-Learning with
Memory-Augmented Neural Networks. International Conference on Machine Learning .
Triantaﬁllou, E., Zhu, T., Dumoulin, V ., Lamblin, P., Xu, K. , Goroshin, R., Gelada, C., Swersky, K.,
Manzagol, P.-A., and Larochelle, H. (2019). Meta-Dataset: A Dataset of Datasets for Learning to
Learn from Few Examples. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
Vinyals, O., Blundell, C., Lillicrap, T. P., Kavukcuoglu, K ., and Wierstra, D. (2016). Matching
Networks for One Shot Learning. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
Zintgraf, L. M., Shiarlis, K., Kurin, V ., Hofmann, K., and Wh iteson, S. (2019). Fast Context Adap-
tation via Meta-Learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .
6

