==== Page 1 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 1
Towards Personalized Federated Learning
Alysa Ziying Tan, Han Yu, Lizhen Cui, and Qiang Yang,Fellow, IEEE
Abstract —In parallel with the rapid adoption of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) empowered by advances in AI research, there
have been growing awareness and concerns of data privacy.
Recent signiﬁcant developments in the data regulation landscape
have prompted a seismic shift in interest towards privacy-
preserving AI. This has contributed to the popularity of Fed-
erated Learning (FL), the leading paradigm for the training of
machine learning models on data silos in a privacy-preserving
manner. In this survey, we explore the domain of Personalized
FL (PFL) to address the fundamental challenges of FL on
heterogeneous data, a universal characteristic inherent in all
real-world datasets. We analyze the key motivations for PFL
and present a unique taxonomy of PFL techniques categorized
according to the key challenges and personalization strategies in
PFL. We highlight their key ideas, challenges and opportunities
and envision promising future trajectories of research towards
new PFL architectural design, realistic PFL benchmarking, and
trustworthy PFL approaches.
Index Terms —federated learning, personalized federated learn-
ing, non-IID data, statistical heterogeneity, privacy preservation,
edge computing.
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE pervasiveness of edge devices in modern society,
such as mobile phones and wearable devices, has led to
the rapid growth of private data originating from distributed
sources. In this digital age, organizations are using big data
and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to optimize their processes and
performance. While the wealth of data offers tremendous
opportunities for AI applications, most of these data are
highly-sensitive in nature and they exist in the form of isolated
islands. This is especially relevant in the healthcare industry
where medical data are highly-sensitive and they are often
collected and reside across different healthcare institutions [1]–
[4]. Such circumstances pose huge challenges for AI adoption
as data privacy issues are not well addressed by conventional
AI approaches. With the recent introduction of data privacy
preservation laws such as the General Data Protection Regu-
lation (GDPR) [5], there is an increasing demand for privacy-
preserving AI [6] in order to meet regulatory compliance.
In view of these data privacy challenges, Federated Learning
(FL) [7], [8] has seen growing popularity in recent years. FL
Alysa Ziying Tan is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore; Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint
Research Institute, NTU, Singapore; and Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China.
Han Yu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.
Lizhen Cui is with the School of Software, Shandong University (SDU),
Jinan, China; and the Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research (C-FAIR), SDU, Jinan, China.
Qiang Yang is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong; and WeBank,
Shenzhen, China.
Corresponding authors: Han Yu (han.yu@ntu.edu.sg), Lizhen Cui
(clz@sdu.edu.cn) and Qiang Yang (qyang@cse.ust.hk)is a learning paradigm that enables collaborative training of
machine learning models involving multiple data silos in a
privacy-preserving manner. The prevailing FL setting assumes
a federation of data owners (a.k.a. clients), which may be
as small as individual mobile devices to as large as entire
organizations, that collaboratively train a model under the
orchestration of a central parameter server (a.k.a. the FL
server) [7], [8]. The training data are stored locally and are
not directly shared during the training process. Most of the
existing FL training approaches are derived from the Federated
Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm introduced in [9]. The goal is
to train a global model that performs well on most FL clients.
A. Categorization of Federated Learning
FL can be categorized into horizontal FL (HFL), vertical
FL (VFL) and federated transfer learning (FTL), according
to how data are distributed in terms of feature and sample
spaces among participating entities [7]. HFL refers to scenarios
whereby participants share the same feature space but have
different data samples. It is the most commonly adopted FL
setting popularized by Google, which applied HFL to train
language models in mobile devices [9]. In VFL, participants
have overlapping data samples, but differ in the feature space.
A typical application scenario would involve the collaboration
of multiple organizations from different industry sectors (e.g.,
a bank and an e-commerce company) which have different
data features but may have a large number of shared users.
FTL is applicable when participants have little overlap in
both the feature space and the sample space. For example,
organizations from different industry sectors serving markets
in different regions can leverage FTL to collaboratively build
models. Existing PFL works mainly focus on the HFL setting
which makes up the majority of the FL application scenarios
[8]. The HFL setting is the focus of this paper. For brevity,
we use the terms HFL and FL interchangeably in the rest of
this survey.
B. Motivations for Personalized Federated Learning
Fig. 1 illustrates the key concepts and motivations for
centralized machine learning (CML) [10], FL and PFL. We
consider a cloud-based CML setting where data are pooled
together in the cloud server to train an ML model. In this
setting, the CML model achieves good generalization from
the rich amount of data. However, CML faces bandwidth and
latency challenges due to the sheer amount of data transferred
to the cloud. It also does not preserve data privacy or not
personalize well.
The FL setting assumes a federation of distributed clients,
each with its own private local dataset. As these clients
face data scarcity that limit their capacities to train effectivearXiv:2103.00710v3  [cs.LG]  17 Mar 2022

==== Page 2 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 2
Fig. 1: Concept, Motivations & Proposed Taxonomy for Personalized Federated learning. a. Centralized machine learning
(CML) which pools data together to train a central ML model. b. Federated learning (FL) which trains a global model
under the orchestration of a central parameter server. Data resides in different data silos. c. Personalized federated learning
(PFL) which addresses the limitations of FL through global model personalization and personalized models learning. 1–4Four
categories of PFL approaches: 1) data-based, 2) model-based 3) architecture-based, 4) similarity-based.
local models, they are motivated to join the FL process to
obtain a better performing model. FL enables collaborative
model training on data silos in a privacy-preserving manner,
which sets it apart from the CML setting. Additionally, FL is
communication-efﬁcient as it only transfers model parameters
which are a fraction in size compared to transferring raw
data. By considering privacy and communication constraints,
FL is applicable to support a wide range of application
scenarios such as Internet of Things (IoT), that entails privacy,
connectivity, bandwidth and latency challenges in varying edge
computing environments [11].
However, the general FL approach faces several fundamen-
tal challenges: (i) poor convergence on highly heterogeneous
data, and (ii) lack of solution personalization. These issues
deteriorate the performance of the global FL model on in-
dividual clients in the presence of heterogeneous local data
distributions, and may even disincentivize affected clients from
joining the FL process. Compared to traditional FL, PFL
research seeks to address these two challenges.
1) Poor Convergence on Heterogeneous Data: When learn-
ing on non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
data, the accuracy of FedAvg is signiﬁcantly reduced. This
performance degradation is attributed to the phenomenon of
client drift [12], as a result of the rounds of local training and
synchronization on local data distributions that are non-IID.Fig. 2 illustrates the effect of client drift on IID and non-IID
data. In FedAvg, the server updates move toward the average
of client optima. When data are IID, the averaged model is
close to the global optimum was it is equidistant to both
local optima w
1andw
2. However, when data are non-IID,
the global optimum wis not equidistant to the local optima.
In this illustration, wis closer to w
2. The averaged model
wt+1will therefore be far from the global optimum w, and
the global model does not converge to its true global optimum.
As the FedAvg algorithm experiences convergence issues on
non-IID data, careful tuning of hyperparameters (e.g., learning
rate decay) is required to improve learning stability [13].
2) Lack of Solution Personalization: In the vanilla FL
setting, a single globally-shared model is trained to ﬁt the
“average client”. As a result, the global model will not
generalize well for a local distribution that is very different
from the global distribution. Having a single model is often
insufﬁcient for practical applications which often face non-IID
local datasets. Taking the example of applying FL to develop
language models for mobile keyboards, users from different
demographics are likely to have divergent usage patterns due
to diverse generational, linguistic and cultural nuances. Certain
words or emojis are likely be used predominantly by speciﬁc
groups of users. For such a scenario, a more tailored prediction
pattern is needed for each individual user in order for the word

==== Page 3 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 3
Fig. 2: Illustration of client drift in FedAvg for 2 clients with
2 local steps. aIID data setting. bNon-IID data setting.
suggestions to be meaningful.
C. Contributions
There are several surveys on the general concepts, methods
and applications of FL [7], [14]. Others review FL from the
perspectives of privacy [15] and robustness [16]. Our survey
focuses on PFL, which studies the problem of learning person-
alized models to handle statistical heterogeneity under the FL
setting. There is a shortage of a comprehensive survey on PFL
that provides a systematic perspective on this important topic
for new researchers. In this paper, we bridge this gap in the
current FL literature. Our main contributions are summarized
as follows:
We provide a succinct overview of FL and its categoriza-
tion. A detailed analysis of the key motivations for PFL
in the current FL settings is also included.
We identify personalization strategies to address key
FL challenges, and offer a unique data-based, model-
based, architecture-based and similarity-based perspective
for guiding the review of the PFL literature. Based on
this perspective, we propose a hierarchical taxonomy to
present existing works on PFL, highlighting the chal-
lenges they face, their main ideas and assumptions they
made which could introduce potential limitations.
We discuss commonly adopted public datasets and evalu-
ation metrics in the current literature for PFL benchmark-
ing, and offer suggestions on enhancing PFL experimen-
tal evaluation techniques.
We envision promising future trajectories of research
towards new architectural design, realistic benchmarking,
and trustworthy approaches towards building personalized
federated learning systems.
II. S TRATEGIES FOR PERSONALIZED FEDERATED
LEARNING
In this section, we provide an overview of the PFL strategies
which are the basis for our systematic and comprehensive
review of existing PFL approaches. We organize the literature
around the proposed taxonomy (Fig. 1c) that divides PFL
methods according to the key challenges and personalization
strategies involved.Strategy I: Global Model Personalization
The ﬁrst strategy addresses the performance issues in
training a globally-shared FL model on heterogeneous data.
When learning on non-IID data, the accuracy of FedAvg-
based approaches is signiﬁcantly reduced due to client drift.
Under global model personalization, the PFL setup closely
follows the general FL training procedure where a single
global FL model is trained. The trained global FL model is
then personalized for each FL client through a local adaptation
step that involves additional training on each local dataset.
This two-step “FL training + local adaptation” approach is
commonly regarded as an FL personalization strategy by the
FL community [8], [17]. As personalization performance di-
rectly depends on the generalization performance of the global
model, many PFL approaches aim to improve the performance
of the global model under data heterogeneity in order to
improve the performance of subsequent personalization on
local data. Personalization techniques for this category are
classiﬁed into data-based and model-based approaches. Data-
based approaches aim to mitigate the client drift problem
by reducing the statistical heterogeneity among the clients’
datasets, while model-based approaches aim to learn a strong
global model for future personalization on individual clients
or improve the adaptation performance of the local model.
Strategy II: Learning Personalized Models
The second strategy addresses the challenge of solution per-
sonalization. In contrast to the global model personalization
strategy which trains a single global model, approaches in
this category train individual personalized FL models. The
goal is to build personalized models by modifying the FL
model aggregation process. This is achieved through applying
different learning paradigms in the FL setting. Personalization
techniques are classiﬁed into architecture-based and similarity-
based approaches. Architecture-based approaches aim to pro-
vide a personalized model architecture tailored to each client,
while similarity-based approaches aim to leverage client rela-
tionships to improve personalized model performance where
similar personalized models are built for related clients.
In personalized FL model training, the optimization objec-
tive is formulated differently from the vanilla FL setting, as
an individual personalized model is learned for each client.
Here, we provide formulations of the optimization objectives
under the FL setting and the local learning setting in order to
highlight the positioning of PFL approaches. The standard FL
objective is given as
min
w2RdF(w) :=1
CCX
c=1fc(w); (1)
whereCis the number of participating clients, w2Rd
encodes the parameters of the global model and
fc(w) :=E(x;y)Dc[fc(w;x;y)] (2)
represents the expected loss over the data distribution Dc
of clientc. The prevailing FL formulation minimizes the
aggregation of local functions and entails a common output for

==== Page 4 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 4
all clients using the global model without any personalization.
In the presence of data heterogeneity (i.e., the underlying
data distributions across the clients are not identical), simply
minimizing the average local loss with no personalization will
result in poor performance.
At the opposite end of the spectrum, we consider a local
learning setting where each client ctrains its own model c
locally without any communication with other clients. The
objective is given as
min
1;:::;c2RdF() :=1
CCX
c=1fc(c); (3)
wherec2Rdencodes the parameters of the local model of
clientc. In this setting, the resulting models may not achieve
good generalization performance as the number of training
examples that the local models are exposed to are limited.
Stronger generalization guarantees can be obtained with more
collaboration amongst clients to exploit the pool of knowledge
for model training.
Comparing the formulations of the standard FL and local
learning settings, standard FL facilitates collaboration and
knowledge sharing amongst clients but does not entail per-
sonalized outputs as it relies on a shared global model for
client inference. On the other hand, local learning entails a
fully personalized model for each client, but fails to leverage
potential performance gains from inter-client collaboration.
Given the need to achieve a balance between generalization
and personalization performance, PFL approaches fall between
the standard FL setting and the local learning setting.
III. S TRATEGY I: G LOBAL MODEL PERSONALIZATION
In this section, we survey PFL approaches following the
global model personalization strategy. The main setup and
conﬁgurations for these approaches are illustrated in Fig. 3.
Based on our proposed taxonomy, they are divided into Data-
based Approaches andModel-based Approaches as follows.
A. Data-based Approaches
Motivated by the client drift problem arising from federated
training on heterogeneous data, data-based approaches aim to
reduce the statistical heterogeneity of client data distributions.
This helps to improve the generalization performance of the
global FL model.
Data Augmentation
As the IID property of training data is a fundamental as-
sumption in statistical learning theory, data augmentation
methods to enhance the statistical homogeneity of the data
have been extensively studied in the ﬁeld of machine learning.
Over-sampling techniques involving synthetic data generation
(e.g., SMOTE [18] and ADASYN [19]), and under-sampling
techniques (e.g., Tomek links [20]) have been proposed to
reduce data imbalance. These techniques, however, cannot be
directly applied under the FL setting, where data residing at
the clients in the federation are distributed and private.
Data augmentation in FL (Fig. 3a) is highly challenging
as it often requires some form of data sharing or relies onthe availability of a proxy dataset that is representative of the
overall data distribution. In [21], the authors proposed a data
sharing strategy that distributes a small amount of global data
balanced by classes to each client. Their experiments show that
there is potential for signiﬁcant accuracy gains ( 30%) with
the addition of a small amount of data. In [22], the authors pro-
posed FAug, a federated augmentation approach that involves
training a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) model in
the FL server. Some data samples of the minority classes are
uploaded to the server to train the GAN model. The trained
GAN model is then distributed to each client to generate
additional data to augment its local data to produce an IID
dataset. In [23], the authors proposed Astraea, a self-balancing
FL framework to handle class imbalance by using Z-score
based data augmentation and down-sampling of local data.
The FL server requires statistical information about clients’
local data distributions (e.g., class sizes, mean and standard
deviation values). In [24], the authors proposed the FedHome
algorithm that trains a Generative Convolutional Autoencoder
(GCAE) model using FL. At the end of the FL procedure, each
client performs further personalization on a locally augmented
class-balanced dataset. This dataset is generated by executing
the SMOTE algorithm on the low dimensional features of the
encoder network based on the local data.
Client Selection
Another line of work focuses on designing FL client selection
mechanisms to enable sampling from a more homogeneous
data distribution, with the aim of improving model general-
ization performance (Fig. 3b). In [25], the authors proposed
FA VOR which selects a subset of participating clients for each
training round in order to mitigate the bias introduced by non-
IID data. A deep Q-learning formulation for client selection
was designed with the objective of maximizing accuracy, while
minimizing the number of communication rounds. In a similar
approach, a client selection algorithm based on the Multi-
Armed Bandit formulation was proposed in [26] to select
the subset of clients with minimal class imbalance. The local
class distributions are estimated by comparing the similarity
between the local gradient updates submitted to the FL server
with the gradients inferred from a balanced proxy dataset
residing on the server.
Recently, there is an emerging line of work that focuses
on developing client selection strategies to tackle data and
resource heterogeneity challenges that are prevalent in edge
computing applications. For cross-device FL, there is often
signiﬁcant variability in hardware capabilities in terms of com-
putation and communication capacities. Heterogeneity also
exists in data, whereby the quantity and distribution of data
differ among clients. Such diversity exacerbates challenges
such as communication costs, stragglers and model accuracy.
In [27], the authors proposed a tier-based FL system (TiFL)
that groups clients into tiers based on training performance.
The algorithm adaptively selects participating clients from the
same tier for each training round by optimizing both accuracy
and training time. This helps alleviate the performance issues
caused by data and resource heterogeneity. In [28], the authors
proposed FedSAE, a self-adaptive FL system that adaptively

==== Page 5 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 5
Fig. 3: The setup & conﬁgurations of approaches that fall under Strategy I: Global Model Personalization .a–b Data-based
approaches: ( a) data augmentation, ( b) client selection. c–eModel-based approaches: ( c) regularized local loss; regularization
can be performed 1) between global and local models, 2) between historical local model snapshots, ( d) meta-learning, ( e)
transfer learning.
selects clients with larger local training loss in each training
round to accelerate the convergence of the global model. A
prediction mechanism of the affordable workload of each
client is also proposed to enable the dynamic adjustment of
the number of local training epochs for each client in order to
improve device reliability.
B. Model-based Approaches
Although data-based approaches improve the convergence
of the global FL model by mitigating the client drift problem,
they generally need to modify the local data distributions. This
may result in loss of valuable information associated with
the inherent diversity of client behaviors. Such information
can be useful for personalizing the global model for each
client. In this section, we cover model-based global model
personalization FL approaches. The objective is either to learn
a strong global FL model for future personalization on each
individual client, or to improve the adaptation performance of
the local model.
Regularized Local Loss
Model regularization is a common strategy for preventing
overﬁtting and improving convergence when training machine
learning models. In FL, regularization techniques can beapplied to limit the impact of local updates. This improves con-
vergence stability and the generalization of the global model,
which in turn, can be used to produce better personalized
models. Instead of just minimizing the local function fc(),
each clientcminimizes the following objective:
min
2Rdhc(;w) :=fc() +lreg(;w); (4)
wherelreg(;w)is the regularization loss, which is generally
formulated as a function of the global model wand the local
modelcof clientc. Regularization can be applied in the
following ways as illustrated in Fig. 3c:
1) Between Global and Local Models: Several works im-
plement regularization between the global and local models
to tackle the client drift problem that is prevalent in FL due
to statistical data heterogeneity. FedProx [29] introduced a
proximal term to the local sub-problem which considers the
dissimilarity between the global FL model and local models
to adjust the impact of local updates. Along with model dis-
similarity, FedCL [30] further considers parameter importance
in the regularized local loss function using Elastic Weight
Consolidation (EWC) [31] from the ﬁeld of continual learning.
The importance of the weights to the global model is estimated
on a proxy dataset in the FL server. They are then transferred to
the clients where penalization steps are carried out to prevent
important parameters of the global model from being changed

==== Page 6 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 6
when adapting the global model to clients’ local data. Doing
so alleviates the weight divergence between the local and
global models, while preserving the knowledge of the global
model to improve generalization. Recently, SCAFFOLD [12]
uses variance reduction to alleviate the effect of client drifting
that causes weight divergence between the local and global
models. The update directions of the global ( v) and local ( vc)
models are estimated. The difference, (v vc), is added as a
component of the local loss function to correct local updates.
2) Between Historical Local Model Snapshots: Recently,
a contrastive learning-based FL – MOON [32] has been pro-
posed. The goal of MOON is to reduce the distance between
the representations learned by the local models and the global
model (i.e., to alleviate weight divergence), and increase the
distance between the representations learned between a given
local model and its previous local model (i.e., to speed up
convergence). This emerging approach enables each client to
learn a representation close to the global model to minimize
local model divergence. It also speeds up learning by encour-
aging the local model to improve from its previous version.
Meta-learning
Commonly known as “learning to learn”, meta-learning aims
to improve the learning algorithm through exposure to a
variety of tasks (i.e., datasets) [33]. This enables the model
to learn a new task quickly and effectively. Optimization-
based meta-learning algorithms, like Model-Agnostic Meta-
Learning (MAML) [34] and Reptile [35], are known for their
good generalization and fast adaptation on new heterogeneous
tasks. They are also model-agnostic and can be applied to
any gradient descent-based approaches, enabling applications
in supervised learning and reinforcement learning.
In [36], the authors drew parallels between meta-learning
and FL. Meta-learning algorithms run in two phases: meta-
training and meta-testing. The authors mapped the meta-
training step in MAML to the FL global model training
process, and the meta-testing step to the FL personalization
process in which a few steps of gradient descent are performed
on local data during local adaptation. They also show that
FedAvg is analogous to the Reptile algorithm, and are in
fact equivalent when all clients possess equal amounts of
local data. Given the similarities in the formulations of meta-
learning and FL algorithms, meta-learning techniques can be
applied to improve the global FL model, while achieving fast
personalization on the clients (Fig. 3d).
Per-FedAvg [37], which is a variant of FedAvg built on top
of the MAML formulation, has also been proposed.
min
w2RdF(w) :=1
CCX
c=1fc(w rfc(w)); (5)
where > 0is the step size. The cost function can be
written as the average of meta-functions F1;;Fc, where
Fc(w) :=fc(w rfc(w))is the meta-function associated
with client c. In contrast to the optimization objective of
FedAvg in Eq. (1) which aims to learn a global model
that performs well on most participating clients, the newgoal is transformed to learn a good initial global model
that performs well on a new heterogeneous task after it is
updated with a few steps of gradient descent. This problem
formulation is suitable for learning an improved global model
initialization for stronger personalization on local data silos
with heterogeneous distributions. However, this approach is
computationally expensive due to the need to compute second-
order gradients. To reduce computational overhead, the authors
evaluated 2 forms of gradient approximations: (i) FO-MAML
[34], which replaces the gradient estimate with its ﬁrst-order
approximation where the Hessian term is ignored; and (ii)
HF-MAML [38], which replaces the Hessian-vector product
with gradient differences. It has been found that HF-MAML
achieves better gradient approximation.
The idea of Per-FedAvg has been extended in [39] to
propose a federated meta-learning formulation using Moreau
envelopes (pFedMe). It incorporates an l2-norm regularization
loss which can control the balance between personalization
and generalization performance. It has achieved improved
accuracy and convergence over FedAvg and Per-FedAvg.
The authors in [40] proposed the ARUBA framework. It
is based on online learning to achieve adaptive meta-learning
under FL settings. When combined with FedAvg, it improves
model generalization performance and eliminates the need for
hyperparameter optimization during personalization.
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning (TL) is commonly used for model person-
alization in non-federated settings [41]. It aims to transfer
knowledge from a source domain to a target domain, where
both domains are often different but related. TL is an efﬁcient
approach that leverages knowledge transfer from a pre-trained
model, thereby avoiding the need to build models from scratch.
TL-based PFL approaches have also emerged. FedMD [42] is
an FL framework based on TL and knowledge distillation for
clients to design independent models using their own private
data. Before the FL training and knowledge distillation phases,
TL is ﬁrst carried out using a model pre-trained on a public
dataset. Each client then ﬁne-tunes this model on its private
data.
Domain adaptation TL techniques are commonly adopted
to achieve PFL. These techniques aim to reduce the domain
discrepancy between the trained global FL model (i.e., the
source domain) and a given local model (i.e., the target do-
main) for improved personalization. There are several studies
in FL that uses TL in the healthcare domain for model person-
alization (e.g., FedHealth [43] and FedSteg [44]). The training
procedure generally involves three steps: (i) training a global
model via FL; (ii) training local models by adapting the global
model on local data; and (iii) training personalized models by
reﬁning the local model using the global model via transfer
learning. In order to enable domain adaptation, an alignment
layer, such as the correlation alignment (CORAL) layer [45],
is often added before the softmax layer for adaptation of the
second-order statistics of the source and target domains (Fig.
3e).
To reduce training overhead in deep neural networks, the
lower layers of the global model are often transferred and

==== Page 7 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 7
TABLE I: Summary of personalization techniques in Global Model Personalization .
Method Advantages Disadvantages
Data Augmentation
Easy to implement, can be built on the general FL
training procedurePossibility of privacy leakage
May require a representative proxy dataset
Client Selection
Only modiﬁes the client selection strategy of the
general FL training procedureIncreased computational overhead from client subset
optimization
May require a representative proxy dataset
Regularization
Easy to implement, slight modiﬁcation to the FedAvg
algorithmSingle global model setup
Meta-learning
Optimizes the global model for fast personalization Single global model setup
Computationally expensive to compute second-order
gradients
Transfer Learning
Improves personalization by reducing the domain dis-
crepancy between the global and local modelsSingle global model setup
reused directly in the local models as low level generic features
are learned. Other layers of the local model are ﬁne-tuned with
the local data to learn task-speciﬁc features for personalization.
Summary
In this section, we have discussed Data-based Approaches
andModel-based Approaches forGlobal Model Personaliza-
tion. We now summarize and compare the personalization
techniques in terms of their advantages and disadvantages (as
shown in Table I).
Data-based approaches aim to reduce the statistical hetero-
geneity of client data distributions to tackle the problem of
client drift. Data augmentation methods are easy to implement
in the general FL training procedure. However, the applicabil-
ity of these data augmentation methods is limited to some
extent as the possibility of privacy leakage from data sharing
has not been adequately addressed in existing designs. Data
samples [21], [22] or data statistics about the clients’ data
distributions [23] are often shared during the training process.
Client selection methods improve the model generalization
performance by optimizing the subset of participating clients
for each FL communication round. As this requires compu-
tationally intensive algorithms such as deep Q-learning [25]
and Multi-Armed Bandits [26], it incurs higher computational
overhead than FedAvg. Additionally, many of these data-based
approaches assume the availability of a proxy dataset that is
representative of the global data distribution [21], [22], [26].
In order to construct such a proxy dataset, it is necessary to
understand the global data distribution, which is challenging
under FL settings due to privacy-preservation concerns.
Model-based approaches closely follow the general FL
training procedure in which a single global model is trained.
Regularization methods such as FedProx [29] and MOON [32]
are easy to implement and they only require a slight mod-
iﬁcation to the FedAvg algorithm. Meta-learning optimizes
the global model for fast personalization. However, gradient
approximations are needed as it is expensive to compute
second-order gradients [34], [37]. Transfer learning improves
personalization by reducing the domain discrepancy betweenthe global and local models. As the above approaches assume a
single global model setup where a single global model is learnt
over heterogeneous data silos, they are not well-suited for
solution personalization when there are signiﬁcant differences
among the client data distributions. Additionally, model-based
approaches generally assume that all clients and the FL server
share a common model architecture. This assumption requires
all clients to have sufﬁcient computation and communication
resources. However, edge computing FL clients are often
resource-constrained [11], making such approaches unsuitable.
IV. S TRATEGY II: L EARNING PERSONALIZED MODELS
In this section, we survey PFL approaches following the
strategy of learning personalized models. The main setup
and conﬁgurations for these approaches are illustrated in
Fig. 4. Based on our proposed taxonomy, they are divided
into Architecture-based Approaches andSimilarity-based Ap-
proaches as follows.
A. Architecture-based Approaches
Architecture-based PFL approaches aim to achieve
personalization through a customized model design that
is tailored to each client. Parameter decoupling methods
implement personalization layers for each client, while
knowledge distillation methods support personalized model
architectures for each client.
Parameter Decoupling
Parameter decoupling aims to achieve PFL by decoupling the
local private model parameters from the global FL model pa-
rameters. Private parameters are trained locally on the clients,
and not shared with the FL server. This enables task speciﬁc
representations to be learned for enhanced personalization.
The division between private and federated model parame-
ters is an architectural design decision. There are generally
two conﬁgurations used in parameter decoupling for deep
feed-forward neural networks (Fig. 4a). The ﬁrst is a “base
layers + personalized layers” design proposed by [46]. In
this setting, personalized deep layers are kept private by the
clients for local training to learn personalized task-speciﬁc

==== Page 8 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 8
Fig. 4: The setup & conﬁgurations of approaches that fall under Strategy II: Learning Personalized Models .a–b Architecture-
based approaches: ( a) parameter decoupling; parameter privatization designs include 1) personalized layers, 2) personalized
feature representations, ( b) knowledge distillation; knowledge can be distilled 1) towards clients, 2) towards server, 3) towards
both clients & server, 4) amongst clients. c–eSimilarity-based approaches: ( c) multi-task learning, ( d) model interpolation, ( e)
clustering.
representations, while the base layers are shared with the FL
server to learn low-level generic features.
The second design considers personalized feature represen-
tations for each client. In [47], a document classiﬁcation model
using a Bidirectional LSTM architecture is trained via FL
by treating user embeddings as the private model parameters,
and character embeddings (i.e., LSTM and MLP layers) as
the FL model parameters. In [48], Local Global Federated
Averaging (LG-FedAvg) has been proposed to combine local
representation learning and global federated training. Learning
lower dimensional local representations improves communica-
tion and computational efﬁciency for federated global model
training. It also offers ﬂexibility as specialized encoders can
be designed based on the source data modality (e.g., images,
texts). The authors also demonstrated how fair and unbiased
representations that are invariant to protected attributes (e.g.,
race, gender) can be learned by incorporating adversarial
learning into FL model training.
As the idea of parameter decoupling has some similarities to
split learning (SL) [49], [50], a distributed and private machine
learning paradigm, we brieﬂy discuss their differences in this
section. In SL, the deep network is split layer-wise between
the server and the clients. Unlike parameter decoupling, theserver model in SL is not transferred to the client for model
training. Instead, only the weights of the split layer of the
client model are shared during forward propagation and the
gradients from the split layer are shared with the client during
backpropagation. SL therefore has a privacy advantage over
FL as the server and clients do not have full access to the
global and local models [51]. However, training is less efﬁcient
due to the sequential client training process. SL also performs
worse than FL on non-IID data and has higher communication
overheads [52].
Knowledge Distillation
In server-based horizontal federated learning (HFL) [53], the
same model architecture is adopted by both the FL server
and the FL clients. The underlying assumption is that there is
sufﬁcient communication bandwidth and computation capacity
at the clients. However for practical applications with a large
number of edge devices as FL clients, they are often resource-
constrained. Clients may also choose to have different model
architectures due to different training objectives. The key
motivation for knowledge distillation in FL is to enable a
greater degree of ﬂexibility to accommodate personalized
model architectures for the clients. At the same time, it

==== Page 9 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 9
also seeks to tackle communication and computation capacity
challenges by reducing resource requirement.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) for neural networks was intro-
duced by [54] as a paradigm for transferring the knowledge
from an ensemble of teacher models to a lightweight student
model. Knowledge is commonly represented as class scores or
logit outputs in existing FL distillation approaches. In general,
there are four main types for distillation-based FL architec-
tures: (i) distillation of knowledge to each FL client to learn
stronger personalized models, (ii) distillation of knowledge
to the FL server to learn stronger server models, (iii) bi-
directional distillation to both the FL clients and the FL server,
and (iv) distillation amongst clients (Fig. 4b).
In [42], the authors proposed FedMD, a distillation-based
FL framework which allows clients to design diverse models
using their own private data via KD. Learning occurs through a
consensus computed using the average class scores on a public
dataset. For every communication round, each client trains its
model using the public dataset based on the updated consen-
sus, and ﬁne-tunes its model on its private dataset thereafter.
This enables each client to obtain its own personalized model
while leveraging knowledge from other clients. In [55], the
authors proposed FedGen, a data-free distillation framework
that distills knowledge to the FL clients. A generative model
is trained in the FL server and broadcast to the clients.
Each client then generates augmented representations over the
feature space using the learned knowledge as the inductive
bias to regulate its local learning.
In [56], the authors proposed the FedDF algorithm. It
assumes a setting in which the edge clients require different
model architectures due to diverse computational capabilities.
The FL server constructs pdistinct prototype models, each
representing clients with identical model architectures (e.g.,
ResNet, MobileNet). For each communication round, FedAvg
is ﬁrst performed among clients from the same prototype group
to initialize a student model. Cross-architecture learning is
then performed via ensemble distillation, in which the client
(teacher) model parameters are evaluated on an unlabelled
public dataset to generate logit outputs that are used to train
each student model in the FL server.
Knowledge may also be distilled in a bi-directional man-
ner between the FL client and FL server within the same
FL training procedure. In [57], the authors proposed Group
Knowledge Transfer (FedGKT) to improve model personal-
ization performance for resource-constrained edge devices.
It uses alternating minimization to train small edge models
and a large server model through a bi-directional distillation
approach. The large server model takes extracted features
from the local models as inputs, and uses the KL-divergence
loss to minimize the difference between the ground truth
and soft labels predicted by the local models. By doing so,
the server model absorbs the knowledge transferred from the
local models. Similarly, each local model calculates the KL-
divergence loss using its private dataset and the predicted soft
labels transferred from the server. This facilitates knowledge
transfer from the server model to the local models. Using this
bi-directional distillation framework, computation burden is
shifted from the edge clients to the more powerful FL server.However, there is potential privacy risk as the ground truth
labels from each client are uploaded to the FL server.
KD-based PFL may also be carried out in distributed
settings where knowledge is transferred amongst neighboring
clients in a network. In [58], the authors proposed an archi-
tecture agnostic distributed algorithm for on-device learning –
D-Distillation. It assumes an IoT edge FL setting in which
every edge device is connected to only a few neighboring
devices. Only connected devices can communicate with each
other. The learning algorithm is semi-supervised, with local
training performed on private data and federated training on an
unlabeled public dataset. For each communication round, each
client broadcasts its soft decisions to its neighbors, while re-
ceiving their soft decision broadcasts. Each client then updates
its soft decisions based on its neighbors’ soft decisions via a
consensus algorithm. The updated soft decisions are then used
to update the client’s model weights by regularizing its local
loss. This procedure facilitates model learning via knowledge
transfer amongst neighboring FL clients in a network.
B. Similarity-based Approaches
Similarity-based approaches aim to achieve personalization
by modeling client relationships. A personalized model is
learned for each client, with related clients learning similar
models. Different types of client relationships have been
studied in PFL. Multi-task learning and model interpolation
consider pairwise client relationships, while clustering
considers group level client relationships.
Multi-task Learning (MTL)
The goal of multi-task learning (MTL) is to train a model
that jointly performs several related tasks. This improves gen-
eralization by leveraging domain-speciﬁc knowledge across
the learning tasks. By treating each FL client as a task in
MTL, there is potential to learn and capture relationships
among the clients exhibited by their heterogeneous local data
(Fig. 4c). The MOCHA algorithm [59] has been proposed to
extend distributed MTL into the FL settings. MOCHA uses a
primal-dual formulation to optimize the learned models. The
algorithm addresses communication and system challenges
prevalent in FL which are not considered in the ﬁeld of
MTL. Unlike the conventional FL design which learns a
single global model, MOCHA learns a personalized model
for each FL client. While MOCHA improves personalization,
it is not suitable for cross-device FL applications as all
clients are required to participate in every round of FL model
training. Another drawback of MOCHA is that it is only
applicable to convex models, and is thus unsuitable for deep
learning implementations. This motivated [60] to propose the
VIRTUAL federated MTL algorithm that performs variational
inference using a Bayesian approach. Although it can handle
non-convex models, it is computationally expensive for large-
scale FL networks.
In [61], the authors proposed FedAMP, an attention-based
mechanism that enforces stronger pair-wise collaboration
amongst FL clients with similar data distributions. In contrast
to the standard FL framework in which a single global model

==== Page 10 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 10
is maintained by the server, FedAMP maintains a personalized
cloud model ucfor each client in the server. The personalized
cloud model uc=c;11+:::+c;mmis the linear combina-
tion of the local client models m2C, whereP
m2Cc;m= 1.
In each communication round t, the personalized cloud model
ucis transferred to client cto perform local training on its
own dataset. The local weights are computed as:

c= arg min
2Rdfc() +
2k uck2(6)
whereis the step size of gradient descent.
FedCurv [62] uses EWC to prevent catastrophic forgetting
when moving across learning tasks. Parameter importance is
estimated using the Fisher information matrix and penalization
steps are carried out to preserve important parameters. At
the end of each communication round, each client sends
its updated local parameters and the diagonal of its Fisher
information matrix to the server. These parameters will be
shared among all clients to perform local training in the next
round.
Model Interpolation
In [63], a new formulation that learns personalized models
using a mixture of global and local models has been proposed
to balance generalization with personalization (Fig. 4d). Each
FL client learns an individual local model. A penalty parameter
is used to discourage the local models from being too
dissimilar from the mean model. Pure local model learning
occurs when is set to zero. This is equivalent to the fully
personalized FL setting in Eq. (3) where each client trains
its own model locally without any communication with other
clients. Asincreases, mixed model learning occurs and the
local models become increasingly similar to each other. The
setting approximates global model learning in which all local
models are forced to be identical when approaches inﬁnity.
In this way, the degree of personalization can be controlled.
Additionally, the authors proposed a communication-efﬁcient
variant of SGD known as the Loopless Local Gradient Descent
(L2GD). Through a probabilistic framework that determines
whether a local GD step or a model aggregation step is to be
performed, the number of communication rounds is reduced
signiﬁcantly.
In a related line of work, [64] proposed the APFL algo-
rithm with the goal of ﬁnding the optimal combination of
global and local models in a communication-efﬁcient manner.
They introduced a mixing parameter for each client which is
adaptively learned during the FL training process to control
the weights of the global and local models. This enables the
optimal degree of personalization for each client to be learned.
The weighting factor on a particular local model is expected
to be larger if the local and global data distributions are not
well-aligned, and vice versa. A similar formulation involving
the joint optimization of local and global models to determine
the optimal interpolation weight has been proposed in [17].
Recently, [65] proposed the HeteroFL framework which
trains local models with diverse computational complexities,
based on a single global model. By adaptively allocating
local models of different complexity levels according to thecomputation and communication capabilities of each client,
it achieves PFL to address system heterogeneity in edge
computing scenarios.
Clustering
For applications in which there are inherent partitions among
clients or data distributions that are signiﬁcantly different,
adopting a client-server FL architecture to train a shared global
model is not optimal. A multi-model approach in which an
FL model is trained for each homogeneous group of clients
is more suitable (Fig. 4e). Several recent works focus on
clustering for FL personalization. The underlying assumption
of clustering-based FL is the existence of a natural grouping
of clients based on their local data distributions.
In [66], hierarchical clustering has been incorporated into
FL as a post-processing step. An optimal bi-partitioning al-
gorithm based on cosine similarity of the gradient updates
from the clients is used divide the FL clients into clusters.
As multiple communication rounds are needed to separate
all incongruent clients, the recursive bi-partitioning clustering
framework incurs high computation and communication costs
that limit practical feasibility for large-scale settings. Another
hierarchical clustering framework for FL has been proposed
in [67]. It uses an agglomerative hierarchical clustering for-
mulation that reduces clustering to a single step to lower
computation and communication loads. The procedure begins
by ﬁrst training a global FL model for tcommunication
rounds. The global model is then ﬁne-tuned on the private
datasets of all clients to determine the difference wbetween
the global model parameters wand the local model parameters
c. The wvalues for all clients are used as inputs to the
agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm to generate
multiple client clusters. FL training is then performed inde-
pendently for each client cluster to produce multiple federated
models. This approach is designed for a wider range of
non-IID settings and allows training on a subset of clients
during each round of FL model training. However, computing
the pairwise distance between all clients in agglomerative
clustering can be computationally intensive when there are
a large number of clients.
Other clustering approaches require a ﬁxed number of
clusters to be set at the beginning of FL training. In [68], the
authors proposed the Iterative Federated Clustering Algorithm
(IFCA). Instead of a single global model, the server constructs
Kglobal models and broadcasts these models to all clients for
local loss computation. Each client is assigned to one of the
Kclusters the global model of which achieves the lowest loss
value on the client’s data. Cluster-based FL model aggregation
within the cluster partition is then performed by the server.
Compared to FedAvg, the communication overhead of IFCA
isKtimes higher as the server needs to broadcast Kcluster
models to all clients in every communication round.
In [69], the authors proposed community-based FL (CBFL)
to predict patient hospitalization time and mortality. They
trained a denoising autoencoder and performed K-means clus-
tering with a pre-determined number of clusters to cluster
patients based on the encoded features of their private data.
An FL model is then trained for each cluster.

==== Page 11 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 11
TABLE II: Summary of personalization techniques in Learning Personalized Models .
Method Advantages Disadvantages
Parameter Decoupling
Simple formulation
Layer-wise ﬂexibility in architecture design for each
clientDifﬁcult to determine the optimal privatization strat-
egy
Knowledge Distillation
High degree of architecture design personalization for
each client
Communication-efﬁcient
Supports resource heterogeneityDifﬁcult to determine the optimal architecture design
May require a representative proxy dataset
Multi-Task Learning
Leverages pairwise client relationships to learn similar
models for related clientsSensitive to poor data quality of clients
Model Interpolation
Simple formulation using a mixture of global and local
modelsUses a single global model as a basis for personaliza-
tion
Clustering
Good for applications where there are inherent parti-
tions among clientsHigh computation and communication costs
Additional system infrastructure for cluster manage-
ment and deployment
In [70], the authors proposed FedGroup, an FL clustering
framework that implements a static client clustering strat-
egy and a newcomer client cold start mechanism. FedGroup
performs clustering on the local client updates using the K-
means++ algorithm [71] based on the Euclidean distance of
the Decomposed Cosine similarity (EDC).
In [72], the authors proposed a multi-center formulation that
learns multiple global models. It introduces a new distance-
based multi-center loss function:
`=1
CKX
k=1CX
c=1r(k)
cDist(c;w(k)); (7)
wherer(k)
cmeans that client cis assigned to cluster k,
andw(k)is the model parameters of cluster k. Expecta-
tion Maximization is used to solve the distance-based ob-
jective clustering problem and derive the optimal matching
of clients to each cluster center. In the E-step, the cluster
assignment r(k)
cis updated by ﬁxing wc.r(k)
cis set to 1
ifk= arg minjDist(c;w(j)). Otherwise, it is set to 0.
In the M-step, the cluster centers w(k)are updated with
w(k)=1PC
c=1r(k)
cPC
c=1r(k)
cwc. Finally,w(k)is sent to all
clients in cluster kto perform ﬁne-tuning of the local model
parameterscon its private training data. The above steps are
repeated until convergence.
Summary
In this section, we have discussed Architecture-based Ap-
proaches andSimilarity-based Approaches forLearning Per-
sonalized Models . We now summarize and compare the
personalization techniques in terms of their advantages and
disadvantages (as shown in Table II).
Architecture-based Approaches aim to achieve personal-
ization through a customized model design that is tailored
to each client. As parameter decoupling methods have a
simple formulation that implement personalized layers for
each client [46], [47], it is limited in its ability to support
a high degree of model design personalization. In contrast,
KD-based PFL methods provide clients with a greater degree
of ﬂexibility to accommodate personalized model architecturesfor clients. They are also advantageous in communication and
computation constrained edge FL settings [56], [57]. However,
a representative proxy dataset is often required in the KD pro-
cess [42], [56]. For both methods, there are some challenges
in model building. In parameter decoupling, the classiﬁcation
of private and federated parameters is an architectural design
decision which controls the balance between generalization
and personalization performance [46]. Determining the op-
timal privatization strategy is a research challenge. In KD,
the effectiveness of knowledge transfer depends not only on
model parameters, but also on model architecture. As it may
be difﬁcult for the student model to learn well if there is a
huge capacity gap between the large teacher model and the
small student model [73], [74], it is imperative to determine
an optimal design for both the server and client models.
Similarity-based approaches aim to achieve personaliza-
tion by modeling client relationships. MTL methods such as
FedAMP [61] excel in capturing pairwise client relationships
to learn similar models for related clients. As a result, it may
be sensitive to poor data quality which result in the segregation
of clients based on their data quality. Model interpolation
methods have a simple formulation that learn personalized
models using a mixture of global and local models. However,
it is likely to experience a degradation in performance in
highly non-IID scenarios as it uses a single global model as
a basis for personalization [64], [65]. Clustering methods are
advantageous when there are inherent partitions among clients.
However, they incur high computation and communication
costs that limit practical feasibility for large-scale settings [66],
[67]. Additional architectural components for the management
and deployment of the clustering mechanism are also required
[67].
V. PFL B ENCHMARK & E VALUATION METRICS
Another important factor for the long-term advancement of
the PFL research ﬁeld is performance benchmarking. In this
section, we review and discuss the benchmarks and evaluation
metrics used by existing PFL literature.

==== Page 12 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 12
TABLE III: Types of non-IID data considered in PFL research.
Method Quantity Skew Feature Distribution Skew Label Distribution Skew Label Preference Skew
Data Augmentation [23] [24] [21]–[23] -
Client Selection [28] [27]–[28] [25]–[28] -
Regularization [29] [29] [12], [29]–[32] -
Meta-Learning [39] [36], [40] [37], [39] -
Transfer Learning - [42]–[44] [42] -
Parameter Decoupling - [46]–[47] [46], [48] -
Knowledge Distillation - [42], [55], [58] [42], [55]–[57] -
Multi-Task Learning - [59]–[61] [61]–[62] -
Model Interpolation - [17], [63] [63]–[65] -
Clustering [72] [66]–[70], [72] [67], [70] [66]–[67]
FL Benchmark Datasets
There are several FL benchmarking frameworks developed in
recent years, including FLBench [75], Edge AIBench [76],
OARF [77] and FedGraphNN [78]. LEAF [79] is one of the
earliest and most popular benchmarking frameworks proposed
for FL. At the time of writing, it provides six FL datasets
covering a range of machine learning tasks including image
classiﬁcation, language modeling and sentiment analysis under
both IID and non-IID settings. Examples datasets include the
Extended MNIST [80] dataset split according to the writers of
the character digits, the CelebA [81] dataset split according to
the celebrity, and the Shakespeare [9] dataset split according
to the characters in the play. A set of accuracy and com-
munication metrics, along with implementation references for
well-known approaches such as FedAvg, SGD and MOCHA
are also provided. As LEAF extends existing public datasets
from traditional machine learning settings, it does not fully
reﬂect the data heterogeneity in FL scenarios. Although there
are a few real-world federated datasets, such as a street image
dataset for object detection [82] and a species dataset for image
classiﬁcation [83], they are often limited in size.
PFL Experimental Evaluation Design
Despite the release of benchmark datasets for FL, they are not
widely adopted in PFL research. The vast majority of PFL
studies choose to simulate the non-IID setting by performing
their own partitioning on a public benchmark dataset used in
machine learning (e.g., MNIST [84], EMNIST [80], CIFAR-
100 [85]), or creating a synthetic dataset [17], [64], [68]. Here,
we survey the different types of non-IID settings simulated in
PFL literature and summarize them according to the person-
alization methods in Table III.
1) Quantity Skew: FL clients hold local datasets of different
sizes, with some clients having considerably larger amounts
of data than others. Data size heterogeneity is pervasive in
real-world environments due to diverse usage patterns across
FL clients. To simulate data size heterogeneity, data from an
imbalanced dataset are used directly without further sampling
[23], [72]. Alternatively, data can be distributed to FL clients
according to power law [28], [29], [39].
2) Feature Distribution Skew: The feature distribution
Pc(x)varies across clients, while the conditional distribution
P(yjx)is the same across clients. For example, in health
monitoring applications, the distributions of users’ activity
data vary considerably according to their habits and lifestyle
patterns [24], [43]. To model feature distribution skew, adataset that is partitioned by users is often used with each
user associated with a different client [24], [59]. It can also
be simulated by augmenting datasets via rotations [68].
3) Label Distribution Skew: The label distribution Pc(y)
varies across clients, while the conditional distribution P(xjy)
is the same across clients. For example, in software mobile
keyboards, label distribution skew is a likely problem for users
from different demographics as there are diverse linguistic
and cultural nuances that result in certain words or emojis
to be used predominantly by different users. To model label
distribution skew, the dataset is partitioned based on labels,
where each client draws samples from a ﬁxed number of
label classes k. A smaller kvalue would mean stronger data
heterogeneity [9], [27], [48], [64]. Different levels of label
distribution imbalance can be simulated by using a Dirichlet
distribution Dir(), wherecontrols the degree of data
heterogeneity. An of 100 is equivalent to the IID setting,
while a smaller value means that each client is more
likely to hold data from only one class resulting in high data
heterogeneity [55], [56], [86].
4) Label Preference Skew: The conditional distribution
Pc(xjy)varies across clients, while the label distribution P(y)
is the same across clients. Due to personal preferences, there
may be variations in the labels. To model label preference
skew, a proportion of labels are often swapped to increase
variance in the ground truth labels [66], [67].
From Table III, the evaluation of PFL algorithms is limited
to a single type of non-IID setting in most existing studies.
Feature distribution and label distribution skew are most
commonly considered to simulate the non-IID setting in PFL
studies. Label preference skew settings have only been adopted
by clustering-based PFL approaches. Other PFL approaches
have not been studied under this type of non-IID FL setting.
A collective effort by the FL research community is needed
to align and adopt benchmarks in order to standardization
experimental evaluation design in PFL research.
PFL Evaluation Metrics
We categorize the evaluation metrics adopted in PFL research
into: 1) model performance related, 2) system performance
related, and 3) trustworthy AI related (Table IV).
Model performance can be measured in terms of accuracy
and convergence. Most PFL works adopt the average test
accuracy of personalized models to measure model accuracy.
While using an aggregated accuracy metric may be adequate
to evaluate the performance of vanilla FL which trains a

==== Page 13 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 13
TABLE IV: Evaluation metrics adopted by PFL research.
MethodModel Performance System Performance Trustworthy AI
Accuracy Convergence Communication Efﬁciency Computational
EfﬁciencySystem
HeterogeneitySystem
ScalabilityFault
ToleranceRobustness Fairness
Data Augmentation [21]–[24] [23]–[24] [22]–[24] - - [23] - - -
Client Selection [25]–[28] [25]–[28] [25]–[28] [27] [27] - [28] - -
Regularization [12], [29]–[32] [12], [29]–[32] [12], [30]–[32] - - [29], [32] [29] - -
Meta-Learning [36]–[37], [39]–[40] [36]–[37], [39]–[40] [36], [39] - - - - - -
Transfer Learning [42]–[44] [42] [42] - - - - - -
Parameter Decoupling [46]–[48] [46]–[48] [46]–[48] - - - - [48] [48]
Knowledge Distillation [42], [55]–[58] [42], [55]–[56], [58] [42], [55]–[56], [58] [57] [56] - [55] - -
Multi-Task Learning [59]–[62] [59], [61]–[62] [61]–[62] - [59], [61] - [59], [61] - -
Model Interpolation [17], [64]–[65] [17], [63]–[65] [63]–[65] [65] [65] [65] - - -
Clustering [66]–[70], [72] [66]–[70], [72] [66]–[67], [69]–[70], [72] - - - - - -
single globally-shared model, such a metric cannot reﬂect the
performance of individual personalized models. As such, there
are PFL works that use distribution-based evaluation frame-
works such as histogram proﬁling [61], [87], variance metrics
[37], [55], [88] and metrics at the individual client level [24],
[43] to evaluate the performance of personalized models. As
each client experiences a different baseline accuracy due to
statistical data heterogeneity, measuring the changes in model
accuracy before and after personalization is a useful approach
to assess the beneﬁts of personalization [30], [87], [89]. Model
convergence is measured by training loss [28], [32], [64], [66],
[67], number of communication rounds [12], [32], number of
local training epochs [23], [32], [39], and formalization of
convergence bounds [12], [29], [37].
System performance metrics focus on communication efﬁ-
ciency, computational efﬁciency, system heterogeneity, system
scalability and fault tolerance. Communication efﬁciency is
evaluated by the number of communication rounds [12], [32],
the number of parameters [23], [57], [65] and message sizes
[58], [90]. Computational efﬁciency is evaluated in terms of
the number of FLOPs [57], [65] and training time [27], [57].
System heterogeneity is assessed by simulating variations in
hardware capabilities and network conditions. This can be
achieved by varying the number of local training epochs [59],
[61], CPU resources [27] and local model complexity [56],
[65]. System scalability is evaluated in terms of performance
on a large number of clients [32], total elapse time [23], [29]
and total memory consumption [29], [65]. Fault tolerance is
measured in terms of performance under different ratios of
dropped out clients [59], [61] and stragglers [29], [55].
Trustworthy AI metrics have not been extensively adopted
to evaluate PFL approaches. There are a few emerging works
that consider these metrics [89]. In [48], local model fairness
and robustness against adversary attacks have been used to
evaluate the performance of the proposed approach.
The current direction for the evaluation of personalization
performance in PFL research focuses primarily on accuracy
gains in terms of model performance. However, the costs
for achieving PFL should also be considered. While seeking
accurate models, there are often trade-offs in terms of system
scalability, as well as communication and computation over-
heads. The fulﬁllment of trustworthy AI attributes is also not
sufﬁciently considered. It is important to design an effective
PFL framework that jointly optimizes these cost-beneﬁt objec-
tives that are important in real-world FL applications. Given
that PFL faces unique challenges and application scenarios,it is imperative to strengthen the development of evaluation
metrics that are tailored to PFL.
VI. P ROMISING FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The ﬁeld of PFL is starting to gain traction as practical FL
applications begin to demand for models with better person-
alization performance. Based on our review of existing PFL
literature, we envision promising future trajectories of research
towards new PFL architectural design, realistic benchmarking,
and trustworthy PFL approaches.
A. Opportunities for PFL Architectural Design
Client Data Heterogeneity Analytics: The heterogene-
ity of data among FL clients is a key consideration when
assessing the type of PFL required. For example, a multi-
model approach such as clustering is preferred for applications
where there are inherent partitions or data distributions that are
signiﬁcantly different. In order to facilitate experimentation
on non-IID data, recent works in PFL have proposed metrics
like Total Variation, 1-Wasserstein [37] and Earth Mover’s
Distance (EMD) [21] to quantify the statistical heterogeneity
of data distributions. However, these metrics can only be
calculated with access to raw data. The problem of FL client
data heterogeneity analysis in a privacy-preserving manner
remains open.
Aggregation Procedure: In more complex PFL scenarios,
averaging-based model aggregation may not be an ideal ap-
proach in handling data heterogeneity. Model averaging is
adopted in most prevailing FL architectures, and its effec-
tiveness as an aggregation method has not been well-studied
for PFL from a theoretical perspective [91]. Recently, [92]
proposed a layer-wise matched averaging formulation for CNN
and LSTM architectures. Specialized aggregation procedures
for PFL are to be explored.
PFL Architecture Search: In the presence of statistical het-
erogeneity, federated neural architectures are highly sensitive
to hyperparameter choices and may therefore experience poor
learning performance if not tuned carefully [13]. The choice of
the FL model architecture also need to ﬁt the underlying non-
IID distribution well. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [93] is
a promising technique to help PFL reduce manual design effort
to optimize the model architecture based on given scenarios.
It will be particularly beneﬁcial for parameter decoupling and
knowledge distillation-based PFL methods.

==== Page 14 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 14
Spatial Adaptability: It refers to the ability of PFL systems
to handle variations across client datasets as a result of (i)
the addition of new clients, and/or (ii) dropouts and strag-
glers. These are practical issues prevalent in complex edge
computing-based FL environments, where there is signiﬁcant
variability in hardware capabilities in terms of computation,
memory, power and network connectivity [94].
(i) Existing PFL approaches commonly assume a ﬁxed
client pool at the start of an FL training cycle, and that new
clients cannot join the training process midway [22], [67].
Other approaches involve a pre-training step [42] that require
time for local computation. Besides meta-learning approaches
[37] that encourage fast learning on a new client, there is
limited work addressing the cold-start problem in PFL. Current
deep FL techniques are also prone to catastrophic forgetting
of previously learned knowledge when new clients join, due
to the stability-plasticity dilemma in neural networks [95].
As a result, existing clients may experience a degradation in
performance. A promising direction is to incorporate continual
learning [96] into FL to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
(ii) With the prevalence of dropouts and stragglers in
large-scale federated systems due to network, communication
and computation constraints, it is necessary to design for
robustness in FL systems. Developing communication-efﬁcient
algorithms to mitigate the problem of stragglers is an ongo-
ing research direction, where gradient compression [97] and
asynchronous model updates [98] are common strategies for
addressing FL communication bottlenecks. These issues re-
quire further study in PFL to formalize the trade-offs between
overhead and performance.
Temporal Adaptability: It refers to the ability of a PFL
system to learn from non-stationary data. In dynamic real-
world systems, we may expect changes in the underlying data
distributions over time. This phenomenon is known as concept
drift. Learning in the presence of concept drift often involve
three steps: (i) drift detection (whether drift has occurred); (ii)
drift understanding (when, how and where the drift occurs);
and (iii) drift adaptation (response to drift) [99]. Casado et
al. [100] is one of the few works that study the problem
of concept drift in FL. It extends FedAvg with the Change
Detection Technique (CDT) for drift detection. It remains
an open direction to leverage existing drift detection and
adaptation algorithms to improve learning on dynamic real-
world data in PFL systems.
B. Opportunities for PFL Benchmarking
Realistic datasets: Realistic datasets are important for the
development of a ﬁeld. To facilitate PFL research, datasets that
include more modalities like audio, video and sensor signals,
and involve a broader range of machine learning tasks from
real-world applications are required.
Realistic non-IID settings: In most existing studies, the
evaluation of PFL algorithms is limited to a single type of non-
IID setting. Experiments are performed by either leveraging
an existing pre-partitioned public dataset (e.g., LEAF) or
prepared by partitioning a public dataset to ﬁt the target non-
IID setting. For fairer comparison, it is imperative for theresearch community to develop a deeper understanding of the
different non-IID settings in real-world federated learning in
order to simulate realistic non-IID settings. Possible scenarios
include: (i) temporal skew (changes in the data distributions
over time) and (ii) the presence of adversarial attackers. Such
an effort requires wider collaboration among researchers and
industry practitioners, and will be beneﬁcial for building a
healthy PFL research ecosystem.
Holistic evaluation metrics: The establishment of system-
atic evaluation methodologies and metrics is important for PFL
research. Model performance, system performance and Trust-
worthy AI attributes are important aspects to consider when
evaluating the performance of an FL system. Methodologies
that can provide a holistic cost-beneﬁt analysis on a given
PFL approach are needed for potential adopters to gain deeper
insight into its real-world impact.
C. Opportunities for Trustworthy PFL
Open Collaboration: Besides algorithmic challenges, fu-
ture PFL research can explore promoting collaboration among
self-interested data owners. For instance, data owners with
personalized FL models may need to collaborate by sharing
their models with other suitable data owners in order to adapt
to changes in the learning task over time in dynamic real-
world applications [101]. Incentive mechanism design is a
promising research direction towards this vision. Game theory,
pricing and auction mechanisms [102] may be applied to build
suitable incentive schemes to support the emergence of open
collaborative PFL systems.
Fairness: As machine learning technologies become more
widely adopted by businesses to support decision-making,
there has been a growing interest in developing methods
to ensure fairness in order to avoid undesirable ethical and
social implications [103], [104]. Current approaches do not
adequately address the unique set of fairness related chal-
lenges presented in PFL. These include new sources of bias
introduced by the diversity of participating FL clients due
to unequal local data sizes, activity patterns, location, and
connection quality, etc. [8]. The study of fairness in PFL is
still in its infancy and the framing of fairness in PFL has
not yet been well-deﬁned. The study of fairness in FL is
mostly focused on the prevailing server-based FL paradigm
[105]–[107], although new work on fairness in alternative FL
paradigms is emerging [108]. As FL approaches maturity,
advances in improving fairness for PFL in particular will
become increasingly important in order for FL to be adopted
at scale.
Explainability: Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI)
[109] is an active research area that has attracted signiﬁcant
interest recently, driven by pressure from government agencies
and the general public for interpretable models [110]. It
is important for models in high stake applications such as
healthcare to be explainable, where there is a strong need to
justify decisions made [111]. Explainability has not yet been
systematically explored in the FL literature. There are complex
challenges unique to achieving explainability in PFL due to
the scale and heterogeneity of distributed datasets. Striving for

==== Page 15 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 15
FL model explainability may also be associated with potential
privacy risks from inadvertent data leakage, as demonstrated
in [112] where certain gradient-based explanation methods are
prone to privacy leakage. There is few work addressing both
explainability and privacy objectives simultaneously. Devel-
oping an FL framework that balances the trade-off between
explainability and privacy is an important future research
direction. One possible approach to achieve this trade-off is
to incorporate explainability into the global FL model but not
the personalization component of the FL model.
Robustness: Although FL offers better privacy protection
compared to traditional centralized model training approaches,
recent research has exposed vulnerabilities of FL that could
potentially compromise data privacy [16]. It is therefore of
paramount importance to study FL attack methods and develop
defensive strategies to counteract these attacks in order to
ensure robustness of the FL system. With more complex
protocols and architectures developed for PFL, more work is
needed to study related forms of attacks and defenses to enable
robust PFL approaches to emerge.
VII. C ONCLUSIONS
In this survey, we provide an overview of FL and discuss
the key motivations for PFL. We propose a unique taxonomy
of PFL techniques categorized according to the key chal-
lenges and personalization strategies in PFL, and highlight key
ideas, challenges and opportunities for these PFL approaches.
Finally, we discuss commonly adopted public datasets and
evaluation metrics in PFL literature, and outline open problems
and directions that would inspire further research in PFL.
We believe that the discussions in this survey based on our
proposed PFL taxonomy will serve as a useful roadmap for
aspiring researchers and practitioners to enter the ﬁeld of PFL
and contribute to its long-term development.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported, in part, by the National Re-
search Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore Pro-
gramme (AISG Award No: AISG2-RP-2020-019); Alibaba
Group through Alibaba Innovative Research (AIR) Program
and Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute (JRI)
(Alibaba-NTU-AIR2019B1), Nanyang Technological Univer-
sity, Singapore; the RIE 2020 Advanced Manufacturing and
Engineering (AME) Programmatic Fund (No. A20G8b0102),
Singapore; the Nanyang Assistant Professorship (NAP); the
Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research
(C-FAIR) (NSC-2019-011); the NSFC No.91846205; National
Key R&D Program of China No. 2021YFF0900800; SDNSFC
No. ZR2019LZH008; Shandong Provincial Key Research and
Development Program (Major Scientiﬁc and Technological
Innovation Project) (No. 2021CXGC010108); the National
Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2018AAA0101100; and Hong Kong RGC TRS T41-603/20-R.
Any opinions, ﬁndings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not
reﬂect the views of the funding agencies.REFERENCES
[1] G. A. Kaissis, M. R. Makowski, D. R ¨uckert, and R. F. Braren,
“Secure, privacy-preserving and federated machine learning in medical
imaging,” Nat. Mach. Intell. , vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 305–311, 2020.
[2] S. Warnat-Herresthal, H. Schultze, K. L. Shastry, S. Manamohan,
S. Mukherjee, V . Garg, R. Sarveswara, K. H ¨andler, P. Pickkers, N. A.
Aziz et al. , “Swarm learning for decentralized and conﬁdential clinical
machine learning,” Nature , vol. 594, no. 7862, pp. 265–270, 2021.
[3] M. J. Sheller, B. Edwards, G. A. Reina, J. Martin, S. Pati, A. Kotrotsou,
M. Milchenko, W. Xu, D. Marcus, R. R. Colen et al. , “Federated learn-
ing in medicine: facilitating multi-institutional collaborations without
sharing patient data,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[4] I. Dayan, H. R. Roth, A. Zhong, A. Harouni, A. Gentili, A. Z. Abidin,
A. Liu, A. B. Costa, B. J. Wood, C.-S. Tsai et al. , “Federated learning
for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19,” Nat. Med. ,
pp. 1–9, 2021.
[5] P. V oigt and A. von dem Bussche, The EU General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) . Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[6] Y . Cheng, Y . Liu, T. Chen, and Q. Yang, “Federated learning for
privacy-preserving ai,” Commun. ACM , vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 33–36,
2020.
[7] Q. Yang, Y . Liu, T. Chen, and Y . Tong, “Federated Machine Learning:
Concept and Applications,” ACM TIST , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
[8] P. Kairouz, H. B. McMahan, and B. Avent et al., “Advances and Open
Problems in Federated Learning,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn. , vol. 14,
no. 1-2, pp. 1–210, 2021.
[9] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A.
y Arcas, “Communication-Efﬁcient Learning of Deep Networks from
Decentralized Data,” in AISTATS , 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[10] G. Drainakis, K. V . Katsaros, P. Pantazopoulos, V . Sourlas, and
A. Amditis, “Federated vs. centralized machine learning under privacy-
elastic users: A comparative analysis,” in IEEE NCA , 2020, pp. 1–8.
[11] W. Y . B. Lim, N. C. Luong, D. T. Hoang, Y . Jiao, Y .-C. Liang, Q. Yang,
D. Niyato, and C. Miao, “Federated learning in mobile edge networks:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. , vol. 22, no. 3,
pp. 2031–2063, 2020.
[12] S. P. Karimireddy, S. Kale, M. Mohri, S. J. Reddi, S. U. Stich, and A. T.
Suresh, “SCAFFOLD: Stochastic Controlled Averaging for Federated
Learning,” in ICML , 2020, pp. 5132–5143.
[13] X. Li, K. Huang, W. Yang, S. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “On the Conver-
gence of FedAvg on Non-IID Data,” in ICLR , 2020.
[14] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith, “Federated Learning:
Challenges, Methods, and Future Directions,” IEEE Signal Process.
Mag. , vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50–60, 2020.
[15] V . Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y . Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated
learning,” FGCS , vol. 115, pp. 619–640, 2021.
[16] L. Lyu, H. Yu, X. Ma, L. Sun, J. Zhao, Q. Yang, and P. S. Yu,
“Privacy and robustness in federated learning: Attacks and defenses,”
arXiv:2012.06337 , 2021.
[17] Y . Mansour, M. Mohri, J. Ro, and A. T. Suresh, “Three Ap-
proaches for Personalization with Applications to Federated Learning,”
arXiv:2002.10619 , 2020.
[18] N. V . Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
“SMOTE: Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique,” JAIR ,
vol. 16, pp. 321–357, 2002.
[19] H. He, Y . Bai, E. A. Garcia, and S. Li, “ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic
sampling approach for imbalanced learning,” in IJCNN , 2008, pp.
1322–1328.
[20] M. Kubat and S. Matwin, “Addressing the Curse of Imbalanced
Training Sets: One-Sided Selection,” in ICML , 1997, pp. 179–186.
[21] Y . Zhao, M. Li, L. Lai, N. Suda, D. Civin, and V . Chandra, “Federated
Learning with Non-IID Data,” arXiv:1806.00582 , 2018.
[22] E. Jeong, S. Oh, H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S.-L.
Kim, “Communication-efﬁcient on-device machine learning: Fed-
erated distillation and augmentation under non-iid private data,”
arXiv:1811.11479 , 2018.
[23] M. Duan, D. Liu, X. Chen, R. Liu, Y . Tan, and L. Liang, “Self-
Balancing Federated Learning With Global Imbalanced Data in Mobile
Systems,” IEEE TPDS , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 59–71, 2021.
[24] Q. Wu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, and J. Zhang, “Fedhome: Cloud-edge based
personalized federated learning for in-home health monitoring,” IEEE
TMC , 2020.
[25] H. Wang, Z. Kaplan, D. Niu, and B. Li, “Optimizing Federated
Learning on Non-IID Data with Reinforcement Learning,” in IEEE
INFOCOM , 2020, pp. 1698–1707.

==== Page 16 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 16
[26] M. Yang, X. Wang, H. Zhu, H. Wang, and H. Qian, “Federated learning
with class imbalance reduction,” in IEEE EUSIPCO , 2021, pp. 2174–
2178.
[27] Z. Chai, A. Ali, S. Zawad, S. Truex, A. Anwar, N. Baracaldo, Y . Zhou,
H. Ludwig, F. Yan, and Y . Cheng, “Tiﬂ: A tier-based federated learning
system,” in ACM HPDC , 2020, pp. 125–136.
[28] L. Li, M. Duan, D. Liu, Y . Zhang, A. Ren, X. Chen, Y . Tan, and
C. Wang, “Fedsae: A novel self-adaptive federated learning framework
in heterogeneous systems,” in IJCNN , 2021.
[29] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, and et al., “Federated Optimization in
Heterogeneous Networks,” MLSys , vol. 2, pp. 429–450, 2020.
[30] X. Yao and L. Sun, “Continual Local Training for Better Initialization
of Federated Models,” in IEEE ICIP , 2020, pp. 1736–1740.
[31] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, and N. Rabinowitz et al., “Overcoming
catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” PNAS , vol. 114, no. 13,
pp. 3521–3526, 2017.
[32] Q. Li, B. He, and D. Song, “Model-contrastive federated learning,” in
CVPR , 2021, pp. 10 713–10 722.
[33] T. Hospedales, A. Antoniou, P. Micaelli, and A. Storkey, “Meta-
learning in neural networks: A survey,” IEEE TPAMI , no. 01, pp. 1–1,
2020.
[34] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for
fast adaptation of deep networks,” in ICML , 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
[35] A. Nichol, J. Achiam, and J. Schulman, “On First-Order Meta-Learning
Algorithms,” arXiv:1803.02999 , 2018.
[36] Y . Jiang, J. Kone ˇcn´y, K. Rush, and S. Kannan, “Improving Feder-
ated Learning Personalization via Model Agnostic Meta Learning,”
arXiv:1909.12488 , 2019.
[37] A. Fallah, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar, “Personalized federated
learning with theoretical guarantees: A model-agnostic meta-learning
approach,” in NeurIPS , vol. 33, 2020, pp. 3557–3568.
[38] ——, “On the convergence theory of gradient-based model-agnostic
meta-learning algorithms,” in AISTATS , 2020, pp. 1082–1092.
[39] C. T. Dinh, N. H. Tran, and T. D. Nguyen, “Personalized federated
learning with moreau envelopes,” in NeurIPS , vol. 33, 2020, pp.
21 394–21 405.
[40] M. Khodak, M.-F. Balcan, and A. Talwalkar, “Adaptive Gradient-Based
Meta-Learning Methods,” in NeurIPS , vol. 32, 2019, pp. 5917–5928.
[41] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE TKDE ,
vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, 2009.
[42] D. Li and J. Wang, “Fedmd: Heterogenous federated learning via model
distillation,” arXiv:1910.03581 , 2019.
[43] Y . Chen, X. Qin, J. Wang, C. Yu, and W. Gao, “Fedhealth: A federated
transfer learning framework for wearable healthcare,” IEEE Intell. Syst. ,
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 83–93, 2020.
[44] H. Yang, H. He, W. Zhang, and X. Cao, “FedSteg: A Federated Transfer
Learning Framework for Secure Image Steganalysis,” IEEE TNSE ,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1084–1094, 2020.
[45] B. Sun, J. Feng, and K. Saenko, “Return of frustratingly easy domain
adaptation,” in AAAI , 2016, pp. 2058–2065.
[46] M. G. Arivazhagan, V . Aggarwal, A. K. Singh, and S. Choudhary,
“Federated Learning with Personalization Layers,” arXiv:1912.00818 ,
2019.
[47] D. Bui, K. Malik, J. Goetz, H. Liu, S. Moon, A. Kumar, and K. G. Shin,
“Federated User Representation Learning,” arXiv:1909.12535 , 2019.
[48] P. P. Liang, T. Liu, and L. Ziyin et al., “Think locally, act
globally: Federated learning with local and global representations,”
arXiv:2001.01523 , 2019.
[49] O. Gupta and R. Raskar, “Distributed learning of deep neural network
over multiple agents,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl. , vol. 116, pp. 1–8, 2018.
[50] P. Vepakomma, O. Gupta, T. Swedish, and R. Raskar, “Split learning
for health: Distributed deep learning without sharing raw patient data,”
arXiv:1812.00564 , 2018.
[51] C. Thapa, M. A. P. Chamikara, S. Camtepe, and L. Sun, “Splitfed:
When federated learning meets split learning,” arXiv:2004.12088 ,
2020.
[52] Y . Gao, M. Kim, S. Abuadbba, Y . Kim, C. Thapa, K. Kim, S. A.
Camtep, H. Kim, and S. Nepal, “End-to-end evaluation of federated
learning and split learning for internet of things,” in IEEE SRDS , 2020,
pp. 91–100.
[53] Q. Yang, Y . Liu, T. Chen, and Y . Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM TIST , vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
[54] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
[55] Z. Zhu, J. Hong, and J. Zhou, “Data-free knowledge distillation for
heterogeneous federated learning,” in ICML , 2021.[56] T. Lin, L. Kong, S. U. Stich, and M. Jaggi, “Ensemble distillation for
robust model fusion in federated learning,” in NeurIPS , vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 2351–2363.
[57] C. He, M. Annavaram, and S. Avestimehr, “Group knowledge transfer:
Federated learning of large cnns at the edge,” in NeurIPS , vol. 33,
2020, pp. 14 068–14 080.
[58] I. Bistritz, A. Mann, and N. Bambos, “Distributed distillation for on-
device learning,” in NeurIPS , vol. 33, 2020, pp. 22 593–22 604.
[59] V . Smith, C.-K. Chiang, M. Sanjabi, and A. Talwalkar, “Federated
Multi-Task Learning,” in NeurIPS , vol. 30, 2017, pp. 4427–4437.
[60] L. Corinzia and J. M. Buhmann, “Variational Federated Multi-Task
Learning,” arXiv:1906.06268 , 2019.
[61] Y . Huang, L. Chu, Z. Zhou, L. Wang, J. Liu, J. Pei, and Y . Zhang,
“Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data,” in AAAI ,
vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 7865–7873.
[62] N. Shoham, T. Avidor, A. Keren, N. Israel, D. Benditkis, L. Mor-Yosef,
and I. Zeitak, “Overcoming forgetting in federated learning on non-iid
data,” arXiv:1910.07796 , 2019.
[63] F. Hanzely and P. Richt ´arik, “Federated Learning of a Mixture of
Global and Local Models,” arXiv:2002.05516 , 2020.
[64] Y . Deng, M. M. Kamani, and M. Mahdavi, “Adaptive Personalized
Federated Learning,” arXiv:2003.13461 , 2020.
[65] E. Diao, J. Ding, and V . Tarokh, “Heteroﬂ: Computation and communi-
cation efﬁcient federated learning for heterogeneous clients,” in ICLR ,
2021.
[66] F. Sattler, K.-R. M ¨uller, and W. Samek, “Clustered federated learn-
ing: Model-agnostic distributed multitask optimization under privacy
constraints,” IEEE TNNLS , vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 3710–3722, 2020.
[67] C. Briggs, Z. Fan, and P. Andras, “Federated learning with hierarchical
clustering of local updates to improve training on non-IID data,” in
IJCNN , 2020, pp. 1–9.
[68] A. Ghosh, J. Chung, D. Yin, and K. Ramchandran, “An efﬁcient
framework for clustered federated learning,” in NeurIPS , vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 19 586–19 597.
[69] L. Huang, A. L. Shea, H. Qian, A. Masurkar, H. Deng, and D. Liu,
“Patient clustering improves efﬁciency of federated machine learning
to predict mortality and hospital stay time using distributed electronic
medical records,” J. Biomed. Inform. , vol. 99, p. 103291, 2019.
[70] M. Duan, D. Liu, X. Ji, R. Liu, L. Liang, X. Chen, and Y . Tan,
“Fedgroup: Efﬁcient federated learning via decomposed similarity-
based clustering,” in IEEE ISPA , 2021, pp. 228–237.
[71] S. Vassilvitskii and D. Arthur, “k-means++: The advantages of careful
seeding,” in ACM-SIAM , 2006, pp. 1027–1035.
[72] M. Xie, G. Long, T. Shen, T. Zhou, X. Wang, and J. Jiang, “Multi-
Center Federated Learning,” arXiv:2005.01026 , 2020.
[73] Y . Liu, X. Jia, M. Tan, R. Vemulapalli, Y . Zhu, B. Green, and X. Wang,
“Search to distill: Pearls are everywhere but not the eyes,” in CVPR ,
2020, pp. 7539–7548.
[74] C. Li, J. Peng, L. Yuan, G. Wang, X. Liang, L. Lin, and X. Chang,
“Block-wisely supervised neural architecture search with knowledge
distillation,” in CVPR , 2020, pp. 1989–1998.
[75] Y . Liang, Y . Guo, Y . Gong, C. Luo, J. Zhan, and Y . Huang, “Flbench: A
benchmark suite for federated learning,” in FICC , 2020, pp. 166–176.
[76] T. Hao, Y . Huang, X. Wen, W. Gao, F. Zhang, C. Zheng, L. Wang,
H. Ye, K. Hwang, Z. Ren et al. , “Edge aibench: towards comprehensive
end-to-end edge computing benchmarking,” in Bench , 2018, pp. 23–30.
[77] S. Hu, Y . Li, X. Liu, Q. Li, Z. Wu, and B. He, “The oarf bench-
mark suite: Characterization and implications for federated learning
systems,” arXiv:2006.07856 , 2020.
[78] C. He, K. Balasubramanian, E. Ceyani, C. Yang, H. Xie, L. Sun, L. He,
L. Yang, P. S. Yu, Y . Rong et al. , “Fedgraphnn: A federated learning
system and benchmark for graph neural networks,” arXiv:2104.07145 ,
2021.
[79] S. Caldas, S. M. K. Duddu, P. Wu, T. Li, J. Kone ˇcn´y, H. B. McMahan,
V . Smith, and A. Talwalkar, “LEAF: A Benchmark for Federated
Settings,” arXiv:1812.01097 , 2019.
[80] G. Cohen, S. Afshar, J. Tapson, and A. Van Schaik, “Emnist: Extending
mnist to handwritten letters,” in IJCNN , 2017, pp. 2921–2926.
[81] Z. Liu, P. Luo, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “Deep learning face attributes
in the wild,” in ICCV , 2015, pp. 3730–3738.
[82] J. Luo, X. Wu, Y . Luo, A. Huang, Y . Huang, Y . Liu, and Q. Yang,
“Real-world image datasets for federated learning,” arXiv:1910.11089 ,
2019.
[83] T.-M. H. Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Federated visual classiﬁcation
with real-world data distribution,” in ECCV , 2020, pp. 76–92.

==== Page 17 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 17
[84] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE , vol. 86, no. 11,
pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[85] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
MIT and NYU, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[86] T.-M. H. Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Measuring the effects of
non-identical data distribution for federated visual classiﬁcation,”
arXiv:1909.06335 , 2019.
[87] K. Wang, R. Mathews, C. Kiddon, H. Eichner, F. Beaufays, and
D. Ramage, “Federated evaluation of on-device personalization,”
arXiv:1910.10252 , 2019.
[88] T. Li, S. Hu, A. Beirami, and V . Smith, “Ditto: Fair and robust federated
learning through personalization,” in ICML , 2021, pp. 6357–6368.
[89] S. Divi, Y .-S. Lin, H. Farrukh, and Z. B. Celik, “New metrics
to evaluate the performance and fairness of personalized federated
learning,” arXiv:2107.13173 , 2021.
[90] D. Sui, Y . Chen, J. Zhao, Y . Jia, Y . Xie, and W. Sun, “Feded: Federated
learning via ensemble distillation for medical relation extraction,” in
EMNLP , 2020, pp. 2118–2128.
[91] P. Xiao, S. Cheng, V . Stankovic, and D. Vukobratovic, “Averaging is
probably not the optimum way of aggregating parameters in federated
learning,” Entropy , vol. 22, no. 3, p. 314, 2020.
[92] H. Wang, M. Yurochkin, Y . Sun, D. Papailiopoulos, and Y . Khazaeni,
“Federated learning with matched averaging,” in ICLR , 2020.
[93] H. Zhu, H. Zhang, and Y . Jin, “From federated learning to federated
neural architecture search: a survey,” Complex Intell. Syst. , vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 639–657, 2021.
[94] Q. Wu, K. He, and X. Chen, “Personalized federated learning for
intelligent IoT applications: A cloud-edge based framework,” IEEE OJ-
CS, vol. 1, pp. 35–44, 2020.
[95] R. Kemker, M. McClure, A. Abitino, T. Hayes, and C. Kanan, “Mea-
suring catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” in AAAI , 2018, pp.
3390–3398.
[96] M. Delange, R. Aljundi, M. Masana, S. Parisot, X. Jia, A. Leonardis,
G. Slabaugh, and T. Tuytelaars, “A continual learning survey: Defying
forgetting in classiﬁcation tasks,” IEEE TPAMI , 2021.
[97] Y . Lin, S. Han, H. Mao, Y . Wang, and W. Dally, “Deep Gradient
Compression: Reducing the communication bandwidth for distributed
training,” in ICLR , 2018.
[98] Y . Chen, X. Sun, and Y . Jin, “Communication-efﬁcient federated deep
learning with layerwise asynchronous model update and temporally
weighted aggregation,” IEEE TNNLS , vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 4229–4238,
2019.
[99] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under
concept drift: A review,” IEEE TKDE , vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 2346–2363,
2018.
[100] F. E. Casado, D. Lema, R. Iglesias, C. V . Regueiro, and S. Barro,
“Concept drift detection and adaptation for robotics and mobile devices
in federated and continual settings,” in WAF , 2021, pp. 79–93.
[101] S. Zheng, Y . Cao, and M. Yoshikawa, “Incentive mechanism for
privacy-preserving federated learning,” arXiv:2106.04384 , 2021.
[102] Y . Zhan, J. Zhang, Z. Hong, L. Wu, P. Li, and S. Guo, “A survey
of incentive mechanism design for federated learning,” IEEE Trans.
Emerg. Topics Comput. , 2021.
[103] N. Mehrabi, F. Morstatter, N. Saxena, K. Lerman, and A. Galstyan, “A
survey on bias and fairness in machine learning,” ACM CSUR , vol. 54,
no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021.
[104] K. Holstein, J. W. Vaughan, H. Daum ´e III, M. Dud ´ık, and H. Wallach,
“Improving fairness in machine learning systems: What do industry
practitioners need?” in CHI, 2019, pp. 1–16.
[105] M. Mohri, G. Sivek, and A. T. Suresh, “Agnostic Federated Learning,”
inICML , 2019, pp. 4615–4625.
[106] T. Li, M. Sanjabi, A. Beirami, and V . Smith, “Fair resource allocation
in federated learning,” in ICLR , 2020.
[107] J. Zhang, C. Li, A. Robles-Kelly, and M. Kankanhalli, “Hierarchically
Fair Federated Learning,” arXiv:2004.10386 , 2020.
[108] L. Lyu, J. Yu, K. Nandakumar, Y . Li, X. Ma, J. Jin, H. Yu, and K. S. Ng,
“Towards fair and privacy-preserving federated deep models,” IEEE
TPDS , vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 2524–2541, 2020.
[109] A. Adadi and M. Berrada, “Peeking inside the black-box: A survey
on explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI),” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp.
52 138–52 160, 2018.
[110] A. B. Arrieta, N. D ´ıaz-Rodr ´ıguez, and J. Del Ser et al., “Explainable
artiﬁcial intelligence (xai): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and
challenges toward responsible ai,” Inf. Fusion , vol. 58, pp. 82–115,
2020.[111] S. Tonekaboni, S. Joshi, M. D. McCradden, and A. Goldenberg,
“What clinicians want: contextualizing explainable machine learning
for clinical end use,” in MLHC , 2019, pp. 359–380.
[112] R. Shokri, M. Strobel, and Y . Zick, “On the privacy risks of model
explanations,” in AIES , 2021, pp. 231–241.
Alysa Ziying Tan is a PhD scholar at the Alibaba-
NTU Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technolog-
ical University (NTU), Singapore. Her research in-
terests include federated learning, deep learning and
optimization. She obtained her Master’s degree in
Intelligent Systems from the National University of
Singapore (NUS), and received the inaugural IMDA
Singapore Digital Postgraduate Scholarship. Prior to
her graduate studies, she worked as a data scientist
and built deep learning and optimization solutions
across manufacturing, insurance and supply chain
domains.
Han Yu is a Nanyang Assistant Professor (NAP)
in the School of Computer Science and Engineering
(SCSE), Nanyang Technological University (NTU),
Singapore. He held the prestigious Lee Kuan Yew
Post-Doctoral Fellowship (LKY PDF) from 2015
to 2018. He obtained his PhD from the School
of Computer Science and Engineering, NTU. His
research focuses on federated learning and algorith-
mic fairness. He has published over 150 research
papers and book chapters in leading international
conferences and journals. He is a co-author of the
book Federated Learning - the ﬁrst monograph on the topic of federated
learning. His research works have won multiple awards from conferences and
journals.
Lizhen Cui is a Professor and the Vice Chair of
the School of Software Engineering, Shandong Uni-
versity. Between 2013 and 2014, he was a Visiting
Scholar to the Georgia Institute of Technology in the
United States. His main research interest includes
data science and engineering, intelligent data analy-
sis, service computing and collaborative computing.
Qiang Yang is the head of the AI Department
at WeBank (Chief AI Ofﬁcer) and Chair Professor
at the Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)
Department of the Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology (HKUST), where he was a former
head of CSE Department and founding director of
the Big Data Institute (2015-2018). His research
interests include AI, machine learning, and data
mining, especially in transfer learning, automated
planning, federated learning, and case-based reason-
ing. He is a fellow of several international societies,
including ACM, AAAI, IEEE, IAPR, and AAAS. He received his Ph.D. in
Computer Science in 1989 and his M.Sc. in Astrophysics in 1985, both
from the University of Maryland, College Park. He obtained his B.Sc. in
Astrophysics from Peking University in 1982. He had been a faculty member
at the University of Waterloo (1989-1995) and Simon Fraser University (1995-
2001). He was the founding Editor-in-Chief of the ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology (ACM TIST) and IEEE Transactions
on Big Data (IEEE TBD). He served as the President of International Joint
Conference on AI (IJCAI, 2017-2019) and an executive council member of
Association for the Advancement of AI (AAAI, 2016-2020). Qiang Yang
is a recipient of several awards, including the 2004/2005 ACM KDDCUP
Championship, the ACM SIGKDD Distinguished Service Award (2017), and
AAAI Innovative AI Applications Award (2016). He was the founding director
of Huawei’s Noah’s Ark Lab (2012-2014) and a co-founder of 4Paradigm
Corp, an AI platform company. He is an author of several books including
Intelligent Planning (Springer), Crafting Your Research Future (Morgan &
Claypool), and Constraint-based Design Recovery for Software Engineering
(Springer).

