==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-022-00150-y
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
Towards AI ethics’ institutionalization: knowledge bridges 
from business ethics to advance organizational AI ethics
Mario D. Schultz1  · Peter Seele1 
Received: 26 October 2021 / Accepted: 28 February 2022 / Published online: 21 March 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
This paper proposes to generate awareness for developing Artificial intelligence (AI) ethics by transferring knowledge from 
other fields of applied ethics, particularly from business ethics, stressing the role of organizations and processes of institu-
tionalization. With the rapid development of AI systems in recent years, a new and thriving discourse on AI ethics has (re-)
emerged, dealing primarily with ethical concepts, theories, and application contexts. We argue that business ethics insights 
may generate positive knowledge spillovers for AI ethics, given that debates on ethical and social responsibilities have been 
adopted as voluntary or mandatory regulations for organizations in both national and transnational contexts. Thus, business 
ethics may transfer knowledge from five core topics and concepts researched and institutionalized to AI ethics: (1) stake-
holder management, (2) standardized reporting, (3) corporate governance and regulation, (4) curriculum accreditation, and 
as a unified topic (5) AI ethics washing derived from greenwashing. In outlining each of these five knowledge bridges, we 
illustrate current challenges in AI ethics and potential insights from business ethics that may advance the current debate. At 
the same time, we hold that business ethics can learn from AI ethics in catching up with the digital transformation, allowing 
for cross-fertilization between the two fields. Future debates in both disciplines of applied ethics may benefit from dialog 
and cross-fertilization, meant to strengthen the ethical depth and prevent ethics washing or, even worse, ethics bashing.
Keywords AI ethics · Business ethics · AI ethics washing · Stakeholder management · Standardized reporting · Corporate 
governance and regulation · Curriculum accreditation
1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) ethics as a discipline is still in the 
making—given not only the novelty of pervasive and power -
ful AI as such but even more the societal and commercial 
use and implications, raising questions of moral reasoning, 
normative controversy, as well as governance and regulation 
[149, 154]. This article argues that some structural analo-
gies from other applied ethics fields may serve as knowledge 
transfer bridges for AI ethics and provide cross-fertilization. 
We thereby build on a long tradition of cross-fertilization and knowledge transfer between subfields of applied ethics 
[38, 74, 123, 124]. Recently, a proposal to adopt medical 
ethics insights to the broader field of AI ethics has been 
published with important spillovers [166]. In analogy, we 
propose to adopt insights from the field of business ethics to 
advance the institutionalization of organizational AI ethics, 
as ethical concern about environmental and societal issues 
have produced experience with institutionalization, regula-
tion, and proposing management procedures for tackling 
ethical issues in corporate environments [24, 133]. Thus, 
insights about the success and failures of institutionalizing 
ethics may help advance the discussion about AI ethics [32, 
69, 149]. In turn, business ethics can gain by catching up 
with the recent challenges arising with AI in organizational 
contexts.
Broadly defined, business ethics focuses on “the study of 
business situations, activities, and decisions where issues of 
right and wrong are addressed” [31]. In this sense, business 
ethics comprises the study of the collective or ‘legal entity’ 
that produces goods and services, as well as its individual  * Mario D. Schultz 
 mario.schultz@usi.ch
 Peter Seele 
 peter.seele@usi.ch
1 Corporate Social Responsibility and Business Ethics, Ethics 
and Communication Law Center (ECLC), USI Università 
della Svizzera italiana, Via Buffi 13, CH-6900 Lugano, 
Switzerland

==== Page 2 ====
100 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
members and external stakeholders related to the business. 
From this perspective, technology corporations can be seen 
as powerful and pioneering collectives that maintain close 
relationships with governments and regulators via public 
affairs, lobbying, and corporate political activity, sometimes 
also close collaborations regarding security and intelligence 
[6, 71].
Corporate misconduct and shady business practices have 
substantially contributed to the growth of business ethics 
as a discipline and, in a broader vein, the advancement of 
governance and regulation [132, 161]. Over the past dec-
ades, business ethics has built a profound literature body 
dealing with various corporate scandals and implementing 
positive organizational ethics [24, 122]. Some of these eth-
ics and (corporate) social responsibility discussions have 
been gradually formalized and led to voluntary (soft), and 
mandatory (hard) law, guiding business practices in both 
national and transnational realms [28, 133], thus, triggering 
an institutionalization of organizational ethics [83, 98, 146]. 
Nonetheless, corporate misconduct and challenges with 
implementing ethics in firms’ daily practices persist, indi-
cating limitations of institutionalizing ethics in businesses 
[7, 8, 95, 119, 126]. Consequently, AI ethics may gain from 
insights into both the success and failures of institutional-
izing business ethics in recent decades.
In the following, we suggest five well-researched and 
institutionalized topics and concepts established for dec-
ades in business ethics that may help to advance the current 
debate and institutionalization of AI ethics: (1) stakeholder 
management, (2) reporting on non-financial digital issues, 
(3) corporate governance and regulation, (4) AI/tech ethics 
in tertiary education, and, the overarching topic, (5) Green-
washing and digital ethics washing. Thus, we will outline 
the new and thriving discourse on AI ethics of recent years 
as a (sub-) discipline of the broader field of applied eth-
ics, conjointly with business ethics as a valuable source of 
knowledge about the success and failures of institutional-
izing organizational ethics [32, 51, 69, 142, 149]. We then 
depict each of the five core concepts by elaborating on the 
current AI ethics challenges while highlighting the knowl-
edge transfer bridge from business ethics. Ultimately, we 
point out where limitations and potential for cross-fertiliza-
tion between business and AI ethics arise, stressing the value 
of joining forces between applied ethics fields.
2  AI ethics as a (sub‑) discipline of applied 
ethics
In the following, we outline that AI ethics is recommended 
to be integrated into the canon of applied ethics as a dis-
tinct field. So far, applied ethics as a field of ethics deals 
with “all systematic efforts to understand and to resolve moral problems that arise in some domain of practical 
life, […] or with some general issue of social concern” 
[174]. Within the (traditional) field of applied ethics, as 
Winkler continues, three major subfields are salient: bio-
medical, environmental, and business ethics. Whereas 
bio(medical) ethics revolves around issues of ethical con-
cern in medicine and biomedical research, environmental 
ethics is more future-oriented, focusing on the sustainable 
preservation of the earth’s ecosystems and the biosphere 
[174]. Further, business ethics, which will be central to 
the arguments presented below, is concerned with ethical 
issues arising in professional contexts, and that goes along 
with corporations’ conduct. All three subfields have grown 
over several decades, building a substantial research body 
and transitioning beyond a philosophical sub-discipline of 
applied ethics. For example, business ethics is considered 
an established field in general management and academic 
discipline, with “chairs, societies, master’s programs, con-
ferences, and dedicated journals” [122, 139]. Similarly, 
bioethics is considered a well-established field in biomedi-
cal research and public health, substantially contributing 
to advancing the practice of medicine [ 165]. Beyond these 
salient subfields, several other important research areas 
of applied ethics exist [for a profound overview, see, e.g., 
[23].
A new and thriving discourse of applied ethics has 
gradually moved into the public and scholarly spotlight in 
the past seven years: AI ethics. AI ethics as “a part or an 
extension of computer ethics” is thereby closely related 
to or sometimes used as an equivalent for digital ethics, 
cyberethics, tech ethics, information ethics, data ethics, 
internet ethics, and machine and robot ethics [35, 73, 98, 
103, 128, 149, 154, 156]. AI has spread rapidly across 
many areas of everyday life, driven by advancements in 
several approaches of computer sciences and particularly 
machine learning techniques, such as decision trees, sup-
port vector machines, neural nets, and deep learning (see, 
e.g., [ 29, 164]). With the gradual commercialization and 
deployment of AI across multiple sectors, such as self-
driving cars, job applicant assessment, bank lending, and 
autonomous weapon systems, AI decision-making ques-
tions have become a major concern [17, 94, 98, 125].
Critique has been raised about AI’s predictive and clas-
sificatory potential, leading to systemic errors and adverse 
outcomes for individuals and society. Numerous recent 
examples have shown that even unintended errors in AI’s 
design and training process can trigger profound ethical 
challenges regarding discrimination, fairness, privacy, and 
accountability [10, 39]. As a consequence, the study of the 
ethics of AI has become a salient focal point of academic 
discourse and drawn the attention of practitioners, policy -
makers, and the general public [114]. Seen as a continu-
ation and extension of the computer ethics discourse, AI 

==== Page 3 ====
101 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
ethics is still in an early stage dealing with the institution-
alization of ethics to address ethical challenges raised in 
organizational environments [69, 98, 149]. As Powers and 
Ganascia [125] note: “[t]he ethics of AI may be a “work in 
progress,” but it is at least a call that has been answered.”
2.1  AI ethics building on the tradition of knowledge 
transfer and cross‑fertilization in applied ethics
This article strives to contribute to the progressing work 
in AI ethics, seeking to shed light on knowledge transfer 
bridges from the field of business ethics [98]. Thus, under -
lining how AI ethics may benefit from drawing on previous 
knowledge and cross-fertilizing with other applied ethics 
disciplines. In this regard, we build on a long tradition of 
reciprocal enrichment and knowledge sharing between sub-
fields of applied ethics [38, 74, 123, 124]. To illustrate this 
point, one may consider Eiser et al. [38] and Poitras [123] 
outlining the common ground between medical and busi-
ness ethics; Hoffman [74] exploring the interconnections 
between environmental and business ethics; and Potter [124] 
linking medical and environmental ethics. The most recent, 
hands-on approach of such a mutually enriching knowledge 
transfer has been published by Carissa Véliz [166]. Véliz 
[166] adopts insights from medical ethics to AI ethics. The 
analogy between the two “is quite close,” but as Véliz also 
writes, “the analogy between medical and digital ethics 
is not perfect, however. The digital context is much more 
political than the medical one, as well as more dominated 
by private forces, and it will have to develop its own ethi-
cal practices” [166]. In light of this accurate description, 
this article proposes to adopt insights in analogy to Vèliz 
from the well-established field of business ethics to AI eth-
ics. Therefore, this paper is not to present a ‘better’ analogy 
but to complement and empower Véliz's [166] work with a 
selection of well-researched and institutionalized topics and 
concepts established for decades in business ethics. Thereby 
hoping to advance AI ethics by a multilateral perspective, 
ideally joining forces from various established ethics fields 
(see also [ 32, 51]). Given the scale and frequency of busi -
ness scandals of the past decades, there is a lot to learn from 
business ethics on tackling ethical challenges concerning 
institutionalizing organizational ethics [83, 146]. As Ven-
kataramakrishnan notes [167]: “[t]he assumption that tech 
ethics is mutually exclusive with innovation is at best lazy; 
so is the view that ethical treatment is an “optional” extra 
for companies that can afford it. […] Other sectors, such as 
coal and oil, have faced a reckoning over the impact they 
have on society; there is no reason why technology should 
not do the same.” Over the past decades, many ethical and 
social responsibility debates have been translated into volun-
tary and mandatory regulation in national and transnational 
perspectives. Consequently, in the following, we portray five knowledge bridges to connect business and AI ethics, 
explaining today’s challenge in AI ethics followed by the 
respective business ethics concept we propose to adopt con-
cerning the institutionalization of organizational AI ethics 
(Fig.  1).
3  Five business ethics areas to advance AI 
ethics
3.1  Stakeholder management
The digital transformation driven by AI and algorithmic 
decision-making comes with new and often invisible or 
unclear societal impacts [3 ]. Related ethical issues often 
remain blurry (job loss, dehumanization, singularity) or 
technologically mediated (face recognition, privacy (by 
design)), and few influential non-governmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) address AI ethics.1 Initially, AI ethics boards 
and committees were created to engage with societal con-
cerns. However, some have mired in controversy, dissolved 
shortly after their launch [94], or have ethicists step down 
[4]. Thus, they are considered a public relations measure or 
ethical façade, which critics have labeled as ‘ethics washing’ 
or ‘machine washing’ [11, 108, 148].
Here, the stakeholder management approach may offer 
guidance on openly and systematically addressing ethical 
issues of AI to initiate dialog, participation, and delibera-
tion. In 1984 stakeholder theory and management were 
introduced to counter the dominance of shareholder or stock -
holder theory [52, 54]. Whereas shareholder theory claims 
that the social responsibility of corporations is to increase 
profits, stakeholder theory underlines that corporations have 
to actively manage relations with stakeholders, defined as 
everyone who affects or is affected by the company [14]. In 
the course of the past decades, stakeholder theory became a 
highly influential framework to analyze ethical problems that 
arise in corporate decision-making [53]. However, stake-
holder theory also attracted criticism, helpful to understand 
where its theoretical and practical limitations lie. Orts and 
Strudler [119] summarized the central weaknesses of stake-
holder theory in three points: (1) the issue of defining and 
identifying stakeholders (2) the semantic vagueness and con-
ceptual flexibility when it comes to approaching concrete 
stakeholder problems; and (3) the challenge of balancing 
conflicting stakeholder interests in corporate decision-mak -
ing without a common measure. Banerjee [7 ] also takes up 
1 Algorithm Watch and Opendatawatch are one of the few excep-
tions, but still not (yet) on the level as well-known social and envi-
ronmental NGOs, such as Greenpeace, Amnesty International or Lob-
byWatch.

==== Page 4 ====
102 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
this point, warning about “stakeholder colonialism” when 
stakeholder theory is utilized as a means to regulate stake-
holder behavior. As a consequence, the risk arises that cor -
porations focus unilaterally on stakeholders with a financial 
or competitive influence on the firm, while disregarding the 
interests of marginalized stakeholder groups [7 ].
First attempts to define and engage stakeholders in AI 
ethics exist [3 , 5, 97, 169]. Still, a similar rollout as has 
happened in business ethics 35 years ago is yet to come. 
In this regard, stakeholder theory as a concept for strategic 
organizational management provides a systematic approach 
to identifying, addressing, and balancing the competing 
demands of individuals and groups affected by technology 
companies [36, 53]. As stressed by Ayling and Chapman [5 ], 
stakeholders of technology firms are those “who either have 
direct roles in the production and deployment of AI tech-
nologies or who have legitimate interests in the usage and 
impact of such technologies.” In light of the critique above, 
the complexity and opposing nature of stakeholder interests 
make applying stakeholder theory in practice challenging 
[119]. However, the relative adaptability of the theory as 
a managerial instrument to respond to moral demands of 
internal and external stakeholders has been outlined in many 
types of organizations and sectors, including healthcare 
institutions, NGOs, and recently, on-demand labor platforms 
[100]. Proper stakeholder management in AI ethics means 
to go beyond an ethical façade and address the interests and demands of everyone who affects or is affected by products 
and services featuring AI, regardless of their saliency or 
relative power [5 , 53]. Consequently, engaging with stake-
holder theory can advance practice-driven approaches of AI 
ethics, while shedding new light on the theory of the firm 
when discussing narrow and broad definitions of stakehold -
ers in digital environments [70].
3.2  Reporting on non‑financial digital issues
A core challenge of AI ethics is the opacity and obfusca-
tion of algorithms and third-party data collection [ 22, 40]. 
Open source as a transparent alternative remains to a large 
extent, a niche segment. The reasons for that are manifold 
(patents, protecting business models, value chains). How -
ever, frequent scandals shed light on ethical issues, where 
AI and data are used for political surveillance, disinforma-
tion, or manipulation [ 58, 67, 131]. Often organizations 
and AI developer teams make profound claims about how 
effectively their developed algorithms perform. Yet, without 
giving insights into neither the training data nor the code 
underlying the algorithm. The opacity and obfuscation are 
most striking in the context of law enforcement technology 
involving AI. A recent scandal involving the corporation 
Clearview, offering a facial recognition app to law enforce-
ment agencies, made this evident [72]. Hill [72] outlines that 
the corporation built a large-scale database with millions 
4. AI/T ech E thics in  
Tertiary Education 3. Corpo rate  
Governance and 
Regulation 2. St andardiz ed  
Reporting 1. St akeholder 
Management Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Doubts about credibility and moral authority of AI ethics  
• Ethics washing: as a façade to avoid regulation and ethics bashing trivializing ethics and moral philosophy  
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Businesses perceived as actors that strive to dominate and shape both market and non-market spheres, via public affairs, lobby ing, corporate political activity  
• The greenwashing concept with its various typologies as means to study ethics washing regarding corporate AI communication and action  
Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Opacity and obfuscation of algorithms  
and third-party data collection 
• Training data and code of algorithms  
remain undisclosed without  
possibilities to review  
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Standardized CSR reporting provides 
comparative insights into corporate  
conduct related to social and 
environmental impacts (via e.g., the 
Global Reporting Intuitive guidelines) 
• Transparent and standardized 
disclosure on algorithms and data 
collection as one pathway for 
institutionalizing AI ethics Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Ethics boards and soft-law guidelines  
as voluntary measures to govern  
ethical AI  
• Both with little relevance for practice, 
as boards lack competencies and 
guidelines are based on high-level  
ethical principles  
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Industry self-regulation comes with  
conceptual and practical limits that  
may even turn it into a lobbying 
instrument  
• Business ethics insights on soft and 
hard-law, co- and self-regulation, and 
the institutionalization of industry 
standards can prove a helpful  
perspective on governing ethical 
challenges of AI  Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• Lack of (standardized) ethics curricula  
in higher education of AI developers, 
engineers, and practitioners  
 
• Curricula demanded that prepare 
students for ethical challenges in 
practice and provide ethical 
background understandings about AI’s  
deeper societal impacts 
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Business school accreditation requiring  
dedicated ethics courses and chairs 
exemplifying standardization process  
• AI/tech ethics can draw on rich and 
multifaceted (applied) ethics 
literature, creating mutual benefits  
across curricula 5. Gr eenw ashing and E thics W ashing  
Challenge faced by AI ethics  
• AI’s invisible and unclear impacts on  
society raising ethical concer n 
• Few NGOs and institutional  
mechanisms to represent stakeholder 
voices and civil society in general 
Business ethics knowledge bridge  
• Stakeholder management as 
systematic approach to address 
stakeholder concerns and initiate 
dialogue, participation, and 
deliberation about AI impacts (e.g., via 
stakeholder roundtables)  
• Stakeholders: everyone who affects or 
is affected by products and services  
featuring AI  
Five Knowledge Bridges to advance the in stitutionali zation of or ganizational AI E thics 
Fig. 1  Five knowledge bridges to advance the institutionalization of organizational AI ethics

==== Page 5 ====
103 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
of photos scrapped without permission from various social 
media sites and used to train their opaque AI system. Simi-
larly, the AI system outlined in an academic publication 
made headlines claiming that the “[w]ith 80 percent accu-
racy and with no racial bias, the software can predict if 
someone is a criminal based solely on a picture of their face. 
The software is intended to help law enforcement prevent 
crime" [48]. An open response letter to the publication outlet 
signed by over 1000 experts and researchers made clear that 
“there is no way to develop a system that can predict or iden -
tify “criminality” that is not racially biased—because the 
category of “criminality” itself is racially biased” [10, 27].
Major scandals (see, e.g., Enron) led to new standards 
in business ethics, with businesses disclosing information 
on ethically sensitive topics like integrity and societal or 
environmental impacts [132, 161]. Corporate Social Respon-
sibility (CSR) reporting or non-financial reporting has sub-
stantially evolved in recent years, providing an essential 
resource for standardizing and comparing corporate conduct 
for both strategic and ethical reasons [96, 141, 162]. The 
non-profit organization Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) 
and IIRC offer standardized key performance indicators for 
CSR reporting plus reporting guidance for the material dis-
closure of stakeholder dialog engagement [88, 102, 171]. 
The CSR reporting standards strive to support corporations 
in their efforts to transparently share economic, environmen-
tal, and social information with their stakeholders [88]. The 
main goal is to enhance the quality and comparability of the 
reported information, based on specified disclosure metrics 
[59]. Thus, allowing stakeholders to assess reliable and con-
sistent information about a firms societal and environmental 
impacts. CSR reporting can even match mandatory financial 
reporting standards via digital-data-based reporting taxono-
mies like XBRL as established by the U.S. securities and 
exchange commission for financial reporting [ 138]. Some 
technology companies such as the German Telekom already 
include ‘data protection and data security’ chapters in their 
CSR reporting [33]. And (local) governments are moving 
forward with legislation that requires reporting on auto-
mated decision systems, although remaining vague about 
what needs to be disclosed [30, 158]. These examples show 
that transparent and standardized disclosure on algorithms 
and data collection processes are undoubtedly part of the 
future of a more institutionalized AI ethics as corporate digi -
tal responsibility [70].
Whereas CSR reporting has come a long way from often 
incomparable ‘glossy’ public relations reports to established 
standards with clearly delineated disclosure metrics, AI 
ethics reporting can build on these insights to advance the 
recent discourse about ‘what and how ’ to report about AI 
systems [7 , 77, 163, 168]. The GRI and similar standards for 
CSR information disclosure can serve as a starting point to 
determine the type of information that can help stakeholders assess corporate conduct and increase the transparency of 
AI systems and the handling of personal data [86]. The 
challenge for AI ethics reporting lies in the timely provi-
sion reliable and comparable information on algorithmic 
systems based on disclosure metrics [59]. Recent research 
has already begun outlining types of information that may 
be relevant in this regard, such as fairness metrics, impact 
assessments, bias testing, system accuracy, and workflow 
verification [16, 92, 101, 145]. Analogue to the Environ -
ment, Social, and Governance (ESG) framework Herden 
et al. [70], outline a list of 20 items indicating highly rel-
evant information domains, such as energy and carbon foot-
print, socially compatible automation, and data responsibil-
ity and stewardship.
Recent proposals for the regulation of AI in the Euro-
pean Union foresee reporting obligations for providers of 
high-risk AI systems, which encompass the disclosure of AI-
related incidents and malfunctioning [ 44]. In addition, the 
EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) strives to 
establish transparent insights into algorithmic decision-mak -
ing aimed at individuals as well as third-party and regulatory 
oversight [85]. In contrast to CSR reporting, this regulatory 
approach goes beyond the provision of a single report to 
cover all stakeholders and includes an “individual right to 
explanation.” Thus, providing so-called data-subjects and 
experts distinct kinds of information [85]. In practice, this 
profound approach to transparency creates high costs for 
corporations and raises doubts about how “meaningful” 
the presented information is for individuals [34]. In light of 
these and other challenges, Edwards and Veale [37] suggest 
to focus on creating better algorithms a priori, via certifica-
tion systems and privacy by design requirements. Overall 
stimulating the discussion on the formalization of AI ethics 
information disclosure is an important topic for practitioners 
and academics.
3.3  Corporate governance and regulation
Next to ethics boards and committees, corporations and 
legislators have created soft-law guidelines to govern AI 
ethics. Soft-law guidelines represent voluntary measures 
to govern the ethical development and deployment of AI 
[110]. In essence, the guidelines build on high-level ethical 
principles and values to align AI systems with the common 
good [159]. Over 200 such soft-law guidelines have been 
issued by public and private actors within the past five years 
compiled and clustered in the repository of Standards Watch 
[117, 150]. A recent systematic review by Jobin et al. [79] 
has analyzed the ethical content of 84 of them, finding that 
the guidelines converge in terms of five major principles: (1) 
transparency, (2) justice and fairness, (3) non-maleficence, 
(4) responsibility, and (5) privacy. However, Jobin [80] cau-
tions, highlighting that “despite an apparent convergence 

==== Page 6 ====
104 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
on certain ethical principles on the surface level, there are 
substantive divergences on how these principles are inter -
preted, why they are deemed important, what issue, domain 
or actors they pertain to, and how they should be imple-
mented.” Thus, ethical guidelines have been criticized as 
not having the moral authority to represent the public good 
[159]. Their inherent vagueness is understood by critiques 
as instrumental communication to engage in self-regulation 
while preventing governmental regulation [11].
Thereby revealing a striking analogy to business ethics, 
where self-regulation was praised for closing regulatory gaps 
in global governance and as means for gaining ‘moral legiti-
macy’ (see, e.g., [51, 121, 137, 173]). Analogue to AI ethics, 
critics warned about the weaknesses of ascribing “mid-level 
principles” to individuals and ignoring the complexity of 
organizational contexts and lacking philosophical depth [8 , 
95]. As business ethics literature evolved over the years, sev -
eral authors have warned about industry self-regulation’s 
conceptual and practical limits [51, 107, 130]. Leading crit-
ics to condemn it as a lobbying strategy. In a public health 
study published in the Lancet, Moodie et al. [112] describe 
industry self-regulation as a means that lacks proof of effec-
tiveness and safety. In a press interview about the study, 
Rob Moodie vividly summarizes the core issue at hand: 
“[s]elf-regulation is like having burglars install your locks” 
[120]. Thus, business ethics literature indicates persistent 
challenges that go along with the implementation of eth-
ics in organizational contexts, particularly the gap between 
theoretical principles and practice [8 ].
Doubts about industry self-regulation are also character -
istic of the current AI ethics debate. Governing the ethical 
challenges of AI has become a high priority for legislators 
worldwide [51, 91, 113]. Particularly, the European Union 
has recently made headlines for its moves to go beyond the 
self-regulatory pledges of technology corporations [42, 43, 
101]. These steps have not remained unnoticed by private 
sector companies engaged in the development and deploy -
ment of AI [153]. In 2020, the budget of Big Tech compa-
nies to lobby, e.g., in the European Union, has reached an 
all-time high to fight upcoming legislation, as a leaked docu-
ment published by the NYT revealed [136]. Thus, although 
hard-law regulation for AI is on the way, at least in some 
jurisdictions, [45], AI ethics may still benefit from business 
ethics research. Especially as current AI regulations come 
with many omissions and gaps meant to be filled by soft-law 
instruments and combinations of co- and self-regulation [26, 
32, 101, 143]. Business ethics research, with its “concep-
tualization of CSR as a form of co-regulation that includes 
elements of both voluntary and mandatory regulation,” can 
be beneficial in this regard [57]. Consequently, past experi-
ences and learnings from CSR may illuminate the institu-
tionalization of AI ethics and industry standard-setting [147] 
to advance the AI ethics field [2 , 28, 151].Instead of waiting for a major AI scandal with fatal impli -
cations, it would make sense to anticipate such events [115]. 
Business ethics was substantially advanced after the Enron 
WorldCom scandal in the U.S. in 2001, which subsequently 
led to the Sarbanes–Oxley Act in 2002, enforcing account-
ability and demanding an ethics officer and a dedicated 
code of ethics putting values into practice [109, 132]. A 
recent publication by Mökander and Floridi [111] provides a 
glimpse into one possible pathway of transferring principles 
into practices via ethics-based auditing of AI. Besides, one 
of the crucial business ethics achievements and central to 
codes of ethics is whistleblowing and whistleblower protec-
tion, a mechanism that may have helped in the recent Google 
case of Timnit Gebru [78, 80]. Similarly, the trend for dis-
closure of ethical content is headed towards mandatory CSR 
reporting in the EU, and India just revised its Company Act 
geared towards mandatory social responsibilities [57]. Con-
sequently, AI ethics may benefit from these insights.
3.4  AI/Tech ethics in tertiary education
The more AI spreads beyond traditional boundaries, the 
more paramount becomes the question of how to embed 
ethics in the higher education of software developers, engi-
neers, and AI practitioners in general [60, 153]. Graduates 
will be working for organizations that are inventing the 
future, including upcoming scandals and potential disasters. 
Johnson [81], therefore, recently stressed, “[t]he question is 
not whether engineers make moral decisions (they do!), but 
whether and how ethical decision-making can be taught.” 
Higher education institutions are increasingly demanding to 
offer curricula that prepare students for the practical chal-
lenges arising with AI’s development and deployment and 
provide them with a comprehensive understanding of AI’s 
ethical and philosophical impacts on the broader society 
[20, 153]. Some institutions, such as Harvard, have already 
begun experimenting with pilot courses on ethical reason-
ing embedded in their computer science curricula conjointly 
organized with philosophy departments [66]. However, little 
is known about such ethics courses in AI/tech curricula on 
a global scale. A recent review of 115 tech ethics syllabi 
from university technology ethics courses by Fiesler et al. 
[50] found a lack of consistency in the course content taught 
and a lack of standards. Course content may cover topics as 
diverse as law, policy, privacy, and surveillance, as well as 
social and environmental impact, cybersecurity, and medi-
cal/health [50]. For Fiesler et al. [50], this broad topic range 
and inconsistency in teaching content across syllabi do not 
come as a surprise, given the current lack of standards ena-
bling educators with leeway to design courses according to 
their own discretion. As Garret et al. [56 ] note, “if AI educa-
tion is in the infancy stage of development, then AI ethics 
education is barely an embryo.”

==== Page 7 ====
105 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
Here, a glimpse at business ethics may give some indi-
cation about ways in which ethical reasoning may become 
institutionalized as an integral part of computer science edu-
cation. In the past, the way to teach business ethics varied 
widely, with business school courses ranging from compul-
sory to elective or to no business ethics courses at all [47, 
55]. In addition, the integration of business ethics into cur -
ricula was often facilitated by non-experts and characterized 
by a lack of monitoring over their integration process [87, 
134]. However, scandals such as Enron-WorldCom in 2001 
led to more formalized implementation processes and legal 
prescriptions such as the Sarbanes–Oxley Act in the US 
[132, 161]. In response to the outrage over ethical and finan-
cial misconduct, the Sarbanes–Oxley Act legislated ethical 
behavior for corporations listed on the stock market and their 
auditors [132]. This included that a code of ethics became 
a legal requirement for publicly traded companies. Due to 
the new legislation, business school accreditors began to 
ask for dedicated business ethics courses and professors that 
reflect the legal prescriptions [106, 161]. Suppose a busi-
ness department wants to achieve the so-called Triple Crown 
Accreditation (AASCSB (U.S.), AMBA (U.K.), and EQUIS 
(EU)), ethics courses and dedicated faculty are a must today 
to prepare students for ethical dilemmas they may face in 
their future careers [132, 161].
This institutionalization process can be a helpful analogy 
to advance AI ethics curricula and revitalize a debate that 
already started in computer ethics several years ago [13, 
25, 161]. Currently, the U.S. is one of the few examples 
where the integration of ethics into accredited computer sci-
ence programs moves in this direction. The Accreditation 
Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) requires 
students to have “[a]n understanding of professional, ethi-
cal, legal, security and social issues and responsibilities” 
[1, 135]. However, the precise implementation of ethics in 
the curricula is left to the institutions and professors [56]. 
In this regard, curricula design may draw on the rich and 
multifaceted literature already established in applied eth-
ics [3 , 69, 104, 105, 128, 139], to provide a diverse scope 
stretching across Western and Eastern ethics [41], and to 
include topical approaches, even informed by other scientific 
fields, such as cognitive (neuro) science [62, 63]. Further, 
AI ethics education can build on innovative approaches [20, 
21] and education technologies that have not been present 
two decades ago, opening new pathways for engaging with 
ethical reflection [127].
In addition, closer attention needs to be paid to the role of 
regulatory bodies making legal prescriptions about the eth-
ics content in AI education, analog to the Sarbanes–Oxley 
Act [49, 135]. The EU’s GDPR and more recent regula-
tory proposals of the EU are indicative for more concrete 
prescriptions to provide future employees with profound 
knowledge about sensitive ethical topics such as data privacy and security, bias avoidance, and equal treatment [44, 144]. 
Thus, even without explicit legal prescriptions, the need reg-
ulatory compliance will certainly increase the demand for 
more institutionalized AI ethics education. Another pathway 
may build on the 2009 decision “no ethics, no grant” from 
the U.S. National Science Foundation [116], which decided 
that institutions receiving funds have to teach ethics. A simi-
lar road could be taken for AI curricula: No AI/tech ethics, 
no degree—or no accreditation.
3.5  Greenwashing and ethics washing
As shown, AI ethics is both high in demand and on the rise. 
Yet, the previous points also indicate that some damage has 
already been caused regarding the credibility and moral 
authority of AI ethics [148]. Critics point to the possibility 
that “ethical AI” or “responsible AI” represents an invention 
by Big Tech to manipulate academia and to avoid regulation 
[32, 61, 118, 160]. Recently, the terms “ethics washing” and 
“machinewashing” have been coined [ 108, 170], referring to 
“a strategy that organizations adopt to engage in misleading 
behavior (communication and/or action) about ethical Arti-
ficial Intelligence” [142]. In light of this deceptive strategy, 
also “ethics bashing” entered the scene criticizing the “trivi -
alization of ethics and moral philosophy now understood as 
discrete tools or pre-formed social structures such as ethics 
boards, self-governance schemes or stakeholder groups” 
[11]. This abuse of ethics and the disregard of reflexive 
moral reasoning is particularly worrisome and stakeholders 
are certainly right to strongly object such corporate prac-
tices. However, as shown above, applied ethics as a disci-
pline of reflexive moral reasoning and inquiry goes much 
deeper and offers a range of analytic and practical tools that 
can help prevent unethical behavior in corporate contexts 
[123, 126]. As in every academic discipline, limitations 
exist, consider Tenbrunsel and Smith-Crowe [157 discuss-
ing weaknesses of normative theory and how biases impede 
rational moral decision-making] or Bartlett [8 highlighting 
the persistent gap between theory and practice]. Admitting 
and actively engaging with such limitations, is what charac-
terizes ethics as a discipline of critical inquiry about morals, 
and what helps to develop, and improve analytic and practi-
cal tools used by organizations [7 , 95, 119, 157]. In sum, “[e]
thics has powerful teeth, but these are barely being used in 
the ethics of AI today” creating the risk for ethics washing 
and ethics bashing [129].
The reputational damage going along with ethics wash -
ing proves the vicinity of AI ethics and business ethics, as 
private entities are crucial actors striving to dominate both 
market and non-market spheres [142]. On the one hand, eth-
ics washing may be seen as an instrumentalization of soci-
etal values to gain a larger market share, such as promot-
ing “AI for good” while vending surveillance technology 

==== Page 8 ====
106 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
[61, 82, 160]. On the other hand, ethics washing serves as a 
means to avoid external regulation, as in the case of corpo-
rate lobbying and self-regulatory approaches to prevent and 
influence regulation favorable for technology firms [ 61, 129, 
160]. Thus, as shown by business ethics research, persuasion 
and lobbying fulfill instrumental purposes as “non-market 
strategies” to not only succeed in market competition but to 
conquer and dominate markets through shaping legal frame-
works [75, 142].
In business ethics, greenwashing has been researched 
since the mid-1980s, when environmental ethics and the 
green movement gained traction [9 ]. NGOs like Greenpeace 
raised awareness by presenting specific criteria for identify -
ing corporate greenwashing, and governmental actors, such 
as the U.S. Federal Trade Commission, followed suit with 
regulatory guidelines to help practitioners avoid making 
unfair or deceptive environmental claims [46, 65]. Particu-
larly, this role of governing bodies for green corporate com -
munication is deemed suitable to inform ethics washing and 
anticipate challenges and advancements of AI ethics.
Over the years, a profound body of business ethics litera-
ture, has observed greenwashing practices through various 
theoretical lenses, ranging from the individual level (e.g., 
agency theory [15]), over the organizational level (e.g., 
organizational institutionalism [64]), up to the institutional 
level (e.g., legitimacy theory [152]). Thus, greenwashing 
literature provides a range of typologies to better understand 
misleading corporate claims and explore the thin red line 
between deceptive and non-deceptive communication and 
action [90, 93, 99, 142]. Consequently, there is no need to 
reinvent the wheel, but a rich body of greenwashing research 
that can inform the study of AI ethics washing and the 
accompanying deceptive practices of technology corpora-
tions [61].
4  Limitations and future research
Recognizing a new and prevalent AI ethics emerging in 
recent years, this article drew on five salient areas of busi-
ness ethics literature to elaborate potential for knowledge 
transfer and spillovers between these applied ethics fields 
concerning the institutionalization of organizational ethics. 
Against this background, future research is needed to study 
the five depicted insights in depth. One major limitation, 
however, is the scope of this knowledge spill-over: Just as 
business ethics over the past decades failed to make the busi-
ness world ethical, so it may not to be expected that AI ethics 
will make AI fully ethical. This, however, is by far no reason 
not to keep pushing the application of ethics to societal and 
technologically important fields such as AI and business and 
their overlaps. Thus, beyond the scope of the underlying 
paper, fruitful avenues for future research open up when it comes to: (1) defining, identifying, and engaging with AI 
stakeholders and, for instance, mapping their salience; (2) 
the type of information on algorithms specific stakehold -
ers may need, value, and can comprehend concerning AI; 
(3) building effective governance mechanism that helps to 
connect ethical codes to practice; (4) designing AI/Tech 
and ethics courses and generating teaching content, which 
provides ethical backgrounds while preparing students for 
ethical challenges they will face in their future careers; and 
(5) gaining more profound understandings of causes and out-
comes of ethics washing, particularly in light of different 
stakeholders. Overall, the five knowledge bridges represent 
a non-exhaustive list of concepts business ethics literature 
may offer. Thus, opening space for future research to extend 
this initial set and identify topic areas where spillover effects 
and cross-fertilization between AI ethics and business eth-
ics may occur. Such mutually beneficial knowledge creation 
may even emerge in areas where business and AI ethics cur -
rently differ, as will be discussed next.
From an AI ethics perspective, the depicted business 
ethics concepts may provide new insights that can help 
to develop the research agenda. However, it is essential to 
stress the potential limits of the structural analogy of the 
two applied ethics fields. Whereas corporations can be seen 
as artificial entities or legal persons [12], AI and automated 
decision-making systems (currently) lack such a status [19, 
84]. Thus, in the case of the violation of others’ rights, AI 
respectively, the algorithmic decision-maker that has caused 
an infringement cannot be held accountable like a corpora-
tion. Although in some jurisdictions (e.g., European Union, 
UK), legal framework adjustments are considered regarding 
the civil and criminal liability of AI, such legal overhauls 
are regarded as troublesome and unlikely [19, 76]. However, 
Jowitt [84] argues that legal personhood for AI should be 
granted if the threshold of “bare, noumenal agency in the 
Kantian sense” is reached. With constant progress made, 
AI may undoubtedly advance in the coming years, further 
fueling this complex debate. Nevertheless—at least from a 
short-term perspective —it remains intangible to treat AI as 
a legal person, and thus, potential stakeholder. Regarding 
business ethics literature, AI as a latent stakeholder is also an 
important topic for future research, showing where the two 
fields of applied ethics can produce cross-fertilizing insights.
A second area where business and AI ethics structural 
analogy diverges emerges from how AI is developed and dis-
tributed. The twentieth century business context was char -
acterized by scale economies, where corporations focused 
on standardized goods, produced, distributed, and marketed 
in mass [155]. However, the digital business environment 
of today substantially differs. AI as a product or service 
may be costly to develop in the first place but can be digi-
tally replicated at close to zero cost. On top of this comes 
unprecedented customization due to AI’s ability to adapt to 

==== Page 9 ====
107 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
an individual level based on fine-grained user data [175]. 
Thus, once developed, AI can be quickly reproduced and 
offered even at a personal level.
Consequently, small and less visible firms can success-
fully compete in the market, often out of sight of the public 
eye. This represents a substantial difference to the twentieth 
century MNE, whose business conduct could be easily and 
closely followed by the public and dedicated NGOs alike. In 
light of a more significant number of small and less exposed 
firms, the watchdogs of public concerns could become less 
effective, spotting irresponsible business practices. Further, 
whereas ethical issues related to goods and services pro-
duced, distributed, and marketed in mass were relatively 
salient and easy to spot, AI’s digital nature and individual 
adaptability render ethical challenges much more complex 
and challenging to uncloak. Ethical issues, such as biases 
and discrimination triggered by AI, can remain hidden, with 
the individual unaware [140]. Ultimately, from a business 
ethics perspective, the increasing adaptation of AI in busi-
ness products and processes make it necessary to critically 
revisit established concepts and theories in light of computer 
science knowledge that AI ethics can provide.
5  Conclusions
This manuscript strives to create awareness for further 
expanding the recent discourse of AI ethics by highlighting 
topics and concepts about the institutionalization of organi -
zational ethics discussed in other applied ethics fields. Par -
ticularly business ethics has a long history of dealing with 
the challenges of institutionalizing ethics in organizational 
contexts. By building on this established research body, our 
manuscript strived to highlight the common ground between 
business ethics and AI ethics, discussing topics and con-
cepts about the institutionalization of organizational ethics 
that can trigger a joint debate. Given the rapid deployment 
and use of AI across multiple areas of life, the new and 
thriving discourse on AI ethics as a discipline will undoubt -
edly become increasingly important for other applied ethics 
fields. For instance, the business ethics debate can benefit 
from the discussions on algorithmic biases that have recently 
expanded [ 10, 68, 89, 172]. Thus, both systematic and prac -
tical potential lies in joining forces between ethics of AI, 
medicine, business, and beyond. Here, ethics is understood 
as an academic discipline meant to prevent ethics washing 
(and not fuel it). Therefore, the contribution of ethics lies 
not in adding another box to be ticked in the sense of an 
offer in service as a supplier, but to reflect and contribute to 
the human discourse characterized by fuzziness, openness, 
and guided by theory and reason. This is the ‘tool’ that AI 
ethics may provide as an ‘early indication system,’ but not 
turning it into a measure for the quantitative toolbox, which is not what ethics (as a philosophical discipline) is about in 
the first place [18].
Funding Open access funding provided by Università della Svizzera 
italiana.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest The authors have no relevant financial or non-fi-
nancial interests to disclose.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
 1. Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). 
Criteria for Accrediting Computing Programs, pp. 1–21 (2017)
 2. Aguilera, R.V., Jackson, G.: Comparative and international cor -
porate governance. Acad. Manag. Ann. 4, 485–556 (2010)
 3. Aizenberg, E., van den Hoven, J.: Designing for human rights in 
AI. Big Data Soc. (2020). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 20539 51720  
949566
 4. AlgorithmWatch. AlgorithmWatch Study debunks Facebook’s 
GDPR Claims, Mackenzie Nelson (AlgorithmWatch). (2020)
 5. Ayling, J., Chapman, A.: Putting AI ethics to work: are the 
tools fit for purpose? AI Ethics (2021). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s43681- 021- 00084-x
 6. Baars, G., Spicer, A. (eds.): The corporation: a critical, multi-
disciplinary handbook. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(2017)
 7. Banerjee, S.B.: Corporate social responsibility: the good, the bad 
and the ugly. Crit. Sociol. 34, 51–79 (2008)
 8. Bartlett, D.: Management and business ethics: a critique and inte-
gration of ethical decision-making models. Br. J. Manag. 14, 
223–235 (2003)
 9. Becker-Olsen, K., Potucek, S.: Greenwashing. In: Encycl. Corp. 
Social Responsible, pp. 1318–1323. Springer, Berlin (2013)
 10. Benjamin, R.: Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the 
New Jim Code. Polity Press, Cambridge (2019)
 11. Bietti, E.: From ethics washing to ethics bashing: a view on tech 
ethics from within moral philosophy. In: Proc. ACM FAT* Conf. 
(FAT* 2020), ACM, New Yoork, pp. 210–219 (2020)
 12. Blair, M.M.: Of corporations, courts, personhood, and morality. 
Bus. Ethics Q. 25, 415–431 (2015)
 13. Borenstein, J., Howard, A.: Emerging challenges in AI and the 
need for AI ethics education. AI Ethics. 1, 61–65 (2021)
 14. Bose, U.: An ethical framework in information systems decision 
making using normative theories of business ethics. Ethics Inf. 
Technol. 14, 17–26 (2012)

==== Page 10 ====
108 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
 15. Bosse, D.A., Phillips, R.A.: Agency theory and bounded self-
interest. Acad. Manag. Rev. 41, 276–297 (2016)
 16. Brandon, J.: Using unethical data to build a more ethical world. 
AI Ethics. 1, 101–108 (2021)
 17. Broussard, M.: Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers Mis-
understand the World. MIT Press, Cambridge (2018)
 18. Brusseau, J.: What a philosopher learned at an AI ethics evalua-
tion. AI Ethics J. 1, 1–8 (2020)
 19. Bryson, J.J., Diamantis, M.E., Grant, T.D.: Of, for, and by the 
people: the legal lacuna of synthetic persons. Artif. Intell. Law. 
25, 273–291 (2017)
 20. Burton, E., Goldsmith, J., Koenig, S., Kuipers, B., Mattei, 
N., Walsh, T.: Ethical considerations in artificial intelligence 
courses. AI Mag. 38, 22–34 (2017)
 21. Burton, E., Goldsmith, J., Mattei, N.: How to teach computer 
ethics through science fiction. Commun. ACM. 61, 54–64 (2018)
 22. Castelvecchi, D.: Can we open the black box of AI? Nature 538, 
20–23 (2016)
 23. Chadwick, R.: Encyclopedia of Applied Ethics. Elsevier Inc., 
London (2012)
 24. Chakrabarty, S., Bass, A.E.: Institutionalizing ethics in institu-
tional voids: building positive ethical strength to serve women 
microfinance borrowers in negative contexts. J. Bus. Ethics. 119, 
529–542 (2014)
 25. Chaudhry, M.A., Kazim, E.: Artificial Intelligence in Education 
(AIEd): a high-level academic and industry note 2021. AI Ethics. 
(2021). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s43681- 021- 00074-z
 26. Clarke, R.: Regulatory alternatives for AI. Comput. Law Secur. 
Rev. 35, 398–409 (2019)
 27. Coalition for Critical Technology. Abolish the #TechToPrison-
Pipeline: Crime prediction technology reproduces injustices and 
causes real harm, Medium. (2020)
 28. Cominetti, M., Seele, P.: Hard soft law or soft hard law? A con-
tent analysis of CSR guidelines typologized along hybrid legal 
status. Uwf Umwelt Wirtschafts Forum 24, 127–140 (2016)
 29. Corea, F.: AI Knowledge Map: how to classify AI technologies, 
Medium. (2018)
 30. Council of Europe, Ad Hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence 
(CAHAI): Feasibility Study (2020)
 31. Crane, A., Matten, D.: Business Ethics: Managing Corporate Cit-
izenship and Sustainability in the Age of Globalization. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford (2016)
 32. Delacroix, S., Wagner, B.: Constructing a mutually supportive 
interface between ethics and regulation. Comput. Law Secur. 
Rev. 40, 1–24 (2021)
 33. Deutsche Telekom, A.G.: Data protection and data security, 
(2021)
 34. Dexe, J., Ledendal, J., Franke, U.: An empirical investigation 
of the right to explanation under GDPR in insurance. In: Lect. 
Notes Comput. Sci. (Including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. 
Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), Springer International Publishing, 
pp. 125–139 (2020)
 35. Dubber, M., Pasquale, F., Das, S. eds.: The Oxford Handbook 
of Ethics of AI, in: Oxford Handb. Ethics Artif. Intell., Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, (2020)
 36. Dunfee, T.W.: Stakeholder Theory. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (2009)
 37. Edwards, L., Veale, M.: Slave to the algorithm? Why a right to 
explanationn is probably not the remedy you are looking for, 
duke law. Technol. Rev. 16, 18–84 (2017)
 38. Eiser, A.R., Goold, S.D., Suchman, A.L.: The role of bioethics 
and business ethics. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 14, 58–62 (1999)
 39. Eitel-Porter, R.: Beyond the promise: implementing ethical AI. 
AI Ethics. 1, 73–80 (2021) 40. Englehardt, S., Narayanan, A.: Online tracking: a 1-million-site 
measurement and analysis. In: Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Com-
mun. Secur. 24–28-Octo 1388–1401 (2016)
 41. Ess, C.: Computer-mediated colonization, the renaissance, and 
educational imperatives for an intercultural global village. In: 
Ethics Inf. Technol., Routledge, pp. 11–22 (2002)
 42. European Commission.: High-Level Expert Group on Artificial 
Intelligence, pp. 2–36 (2019)
 43. European Commission.: White Paper On Artificial Intelli-
gence—A European approach to excellence and trust, (2020)
 44. European Commission.: Proposal for a Regulation of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council: Laying down harmonised 
rules on artificial intelligence (artificial intelligence act) and 
amending certain union legislative acts, 0106, pp. 1–108 
(2021)
 45. European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 
Regulation on a European Approach for Artificial Intelligence, 
AI Regul. Draft. 1–81 (2021)
 46. Federal Trade Commission (FTC).: Part 260 - Guides for the use 
of Environmental Marketing Claims, 77 FR 62124. (2012)
 47. Felton, E.L., Sims, R.R.: Teaching business ethics: targeted out-
puts. J. Bus. Ethics. 60, 377–391 (2005)
 48. Felton, J.: Over 1000 experts call out "Racially Biased" AI 
designed to predict crime based on your face, IFLScience. (2020)
 49. Fiesler, C., Garrett, N., Beard, N.: What dowe teach whenwe 
teach tech ethics? a syllabi analysis. Annu. Conf. Innov. Technol. 
Comput. Sci. Educ. ITiCSE, pp. 289–295 (2020)
 50. Fiesler, C., Garrett, N., Beard, N.: What do we teach when we 
teach tech ethics?. In: Proc. 51st ACM Tech. Symp. Comput. Sci. 
Educ., ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 289–295 (2020)
 51. Flyverbom, M., Deibert, R., Matten, D.: the governance of digital 
technology, big data, and the internet: new roles and responsibili-
ties for business. Bus. Soc. 58, 3–19 (2019)
 52. Freeman, R.E.: Strategic management: a stakeholder approach. 
Pitman Publishing Inc., Massachusetts (1984)
 53. Freeman, R.E., Harrison, J.S., Wicks, A.C., Parmar, B., de Colle, 
S.: Stakeholder Theory: The State Of The Art. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge (2010)
 54. Friedman, M.: The social responsibility of business is to increase 
its profits, N. Y. Times Mag. (1970) September 13.
 55. Gandz, J., Hayes, N.: Teaching business ethics. J. Bus. Ethics. 7 , 
657–669 (1988)
 56. Garrett, N., Beard, N., Fiesler, C.: More than “If Time Allows”. 
In: Proc. AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, Soc., ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 272–278 (2020)
 57. Gatti, L., Vishwanath, B., Seele, P., Cottier, B.: Are we moving 
beyond voluntary CSR? Exploring theoretical and managerial 
implications of mandatory CSR resulting from the New Indian 
Companies Act. J. Bus. Ethics. 160, 961–972 (2019)
 58. Gebru, T.: Race and Gender. In: Dubber, M.D., Pasquale, F., Das, 
S. (eds.) Oxford Handb, pp. 251–269. Oxford University Press, 
Ethics AI (2020)
 59. Global Reporting Initiative.: GRI 1: Foundation 2021, (2021)
 60. Goldsmith, J., Burton, E.: Why teaching ethics to AI practitioners 
is important. AAAI Work. - Tech. Rep. WS-17–01, pp. 110–114 
(2017)
 61. Gotterbarn, D., Kreps, D.: Being a data professional: give voice 
to value in a data driven society. AI Ethics. 1, 195–203 (2021)
 62. Greene, J.D.: Moral tribes: emotion, reason, and the gap between 
us and them. Penguin Books, New York (2014)
 63. Greene, J.D.: Beyond point-and-shoot morality: why cognitive 
(neuro)science matters for ethics. Law Ethics Hum. Rights. 9, 
141–172 (2015)
 64. Greenwood, R., Oliver, C., Lawrence, T.B., Meyer, R.E. (eds.): 
The SAGE handbook of organizational institutionalism. SAGE 
Publications Ltd, London (2018)

==== Page 11 ====
109 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
 65. Greer, J., Bruno, K.: Greenwash: The Reality Behind Corporate 
Environmentalism. Third World Network, Penang (1996)
 66. Grosz, B.J., Grant, D.G., Vredenburgh, K., Behrends, J., Hu, L., 
Simmons, A., Waldo, J.: Embedded EthiCS: Integrating Ethics 
Broadly Across Computer Science Education. Commun. ACM. 
62, 54–61 (2019)
 67. Hagendorff, T.: The ethics of AI ethics: an evaluation of guide-
lines. Minds Mach, pp. 1–22 (2020)
 68. Hassani, B.K.: Societal bias reinforcement through machine 
learning: a credit scoring perspective. AI Ethics. 1 , 239–247 
(2021)
 69. Häußermann, J.J., Lütge, C.: Community-in-the-loop: towards 
pluralistic value creation in AI, or—why AI needs business 
ethics. AI Ethics, pp. 1–22 (2021)
 70. Herden, C.J., Alliu, E., Cakici, A., Cormier, T., Deguelle, C., 
Gambhir, S., Griffiths, C., Gupta, S., Kamani, S.R., Máté, 
Y.K., Lange, G., Moles, L., Laura, D.M., Moreno, T., Alain, 
H., Nunez, B., Pilla, V., Raj, B., Roe, J., Skoda, M., Song, 
Y., Kumar, P., Edinger-schons, L.M., Edinger-schons, L.M.: 
Corporate digital responsibility. NachhaltigkeitsManagement-
Forum. (2021) 13–29.
 71. Hersh, M.A.: Professional ethics and social responsibility: 
military work and peacebuilding. AI Soc. (2021)
 72. Hill, K.: The Secretive Company That Might End Privacy as 
We Know It. New York Times, New York (2020)
 73. Himma, K.E.: The relationship between the uniqueness of com-
puter ethics and its independence as a discipline in applied 
ethics. Ethics Inf. Technol. 5, 225–237 (2003)
 74. Hoffman, W.M.: Business and environmental ethics. Bus. Eth-
ics Q. 1, 169–184 (1991)
 75. den Hond, F., Rehbein, K.A., de Bakker, F.G.A., Lankveld, 
H.K.: Playing on two chessboards: reputation effects between 
corporate social responsibility (CSR) and corporate political 
activity (CPA). J. Manag. Stud. 51, 790–813 (2014)
 76. van den Hoven van Genderen, R.: Do we need new legal per -
sonhood in the age of robots and AI?. In: Perspect. Law, Bus. 
Innov., pp. 15–55 (2018)
 77. Innerarity, D.: Making the black box society transparent. AI 
Soc. 36, 975–981 (2021)
 78. Jobin, A.: Why Dr. Timnit Gebru Is Important for All of Us, 
Mediu. (2020)
 79. Jobin, A., Ienca, M., Vayena, E.: The global landscape of AI 
ethics guidelines. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 389–399 (2019)
 80. Jobin, A., Man, K., Damasio, A., Kaissis, G., Braren, R., 
Stoyanovich, J., Van Bavel, J.J., West, T.V., Mittelstadt, B., 
Eshraghian, J., Costa-jussà, M.R., Tzachor, A., Jamjoom, 
A.A.B., Taddeo, M., Sinibaldi, E., Hu, Y., Luengo-Oroz, M.: 
AI reflections in 2020. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 2–8 (2021)
 81. Johnson, D.G.: Can engineering ethics be taught?. In: Bridg., 
pp. 59–64 (2017)
 82. Johnson, K.: How AI companies can avoid ethics washing, 
VentureBeat. (2019)
 83. Jose, A., Thibodeaux, M.S.: Institutionalization of ethics: the 
perspective of managers. J. Bus. Ethics. 22, 133–143 (1999)
 84. Jowitt, J.: Assessing contemporary legislative proposals for 
their compatibility with a natural law case for AI legal person-
hood. AI Soc. (2020)
 85. Kaminski, M.E.: The right to explanation, explained. Berkeley 
Technol. Law J. 34, 190–218 (2019)
 86. Khalil, S., Saffar, W., Trabelsi, S.: Disclosure standards, audit-
ing infrastructure, and bribery mitigation. J. Bus. Ethics. 132, 
379–399 (2015)
 87. Kretzschmar, L., Bentley, W.: Applied ethics and tertiary edu-
cation in South Africa: teaching business ethics at the Univer -
sity of South Africa. Verbum Eccles. 34, 1–9 (2013) 88. Kücükgül, E., Cerin, P., Liu, Y.: Enhancing the value of cor -
porate sustainability: an approach for aligning multiple SDGs 
guides on reporting. J. Clean. Prod. 333, 130005 (2022)
 89. Laakasuo, M., Herzon, V., Perander, S., Drosinou, M., Sund-
vall, J., Palomäki, J., Visala, A.: Socio-cognitive biases in folk 
AI ethics and risk discourse, AI Ethics. (2021)
 90. Laufer, W.S.: Social accountability and corporate greenwashing. 
J. Bus. Ethics. 43, 253–261 (2003)
 91. Lauwaert, L.: Artificial intelligence and responsibility. AI Soc. 
36, 1001–1009 (2021)
 92. Lee, M.S.A., Floridi, L., Singh, J.: Formalising trade-offs beyond 
algorithmic fairness: lessons from ethical philosophy and welfare 
economics, AI Ethics. (2021)
 93. Lekakos, G., Vlachos, P., Koritos, C.: Green is good but is usabil-
ity better? Consumer reactions to environmental initiatives in 
e-banking services. Ethics Inf. Technol. 16, 103–117 (2014)
 94. Liao, S.M. (ed.): Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, New York (2020)
 95. Lippke, R.L.: A critique of business ethics. Bus. Ethics Q. 1 , 
367–384 (1991)
 96. Lock, I., Seele, P.: Analyzing sector-specific CSR reporting: 
social and environmental disclosure to investors in the chemi-
cals and banking and insurance industry. Corp. Soc. Responsib. 
Environ. Manag. 22, 113–128 (2015)
 97. Lock, I., Seele, P.: Theorizing stakeholders of sustainability in 
the digital age. Sustain. Sci. 12, 235–245 (2017)
 98. Lütge, C.: There is not enough business ethics in the ethics of 
digitization. In: Ethical Bus. Leadersh. Troubl. Times, Edward 
Elgar Publishing, pp. 280–295 (2019)
 99. Lyon, T.P., Montgomery, A.W.: The means and end of green-
wash. Organ. Environ. 28, 223–249 (2015)
 100. Ma, N.F., Yuan, C.W., Ghafurian, M., Hanrahan, B.V.: Using 
stakeholder theory to examine drivers’ stake in uber. In: Proc. 
2018 CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst., ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 1–12 (2018)
 101. Maccarthy, M., Propp, K.: Machines learn that Brussels writes 
the rules: the EU’s new AI regulation, Brookings Inst. (2021)
 102. Machado, B.A.A., Dias, L.C.P., Fonseca, A.: Transparency of 
materiality analysis in GRI‐ based sustainability reports. In: Corp. 
Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag. Online Ver (2020) csr.2066.
 103. Mahieu, R., van Eck, N.J., van Putten, D., van Den Hoven, J.: 
From dignity to security protocols: a scientometric analysis of 
digital ethics. Ethics Inf. Technol. 20, 1–13 (2018)
 104. Marques, J.: Shaping morally responsible leaders: infusing civic 
engagement into business ethics courses. J. Bus. Ethics. 135, 
279–291 (2014)
 105. Maurushat, A.: The benevolent health worm: comparing West -
ern human rights-based ethics and Confucian duty-based moral 
philosophy. Ethics Inf. Technol. 10, 11–25 (2008)
 106. McCraw, H., Moffeit, K.S., O’Malley, J.R.: An analysis of the 
ethical codes of corporations and business schools. J. Bus. Eth-
ics. 87, 1–13 (2009)
 107. Mehrpouya, A., Willmott, H.: Making a Niche: the marketization 
of management research and the rise of ‘knowledge branding.’ J. 
Manag. Stud. 55, 728–734 (2018)
 108. Metzinger, T.: EU guidelines: ethics washing made in Europe, 
Der Tagesspiegel. (2019)
 109. Mingers, J., Walsham, G.: Toward ethical information systems: 
the contribution of discourse ethics. MIS Q. 34, 833–854 (2010)
 110. Mittelstadt, B.: Principles alone cannot guarantee ethical AI. Nat. 
Mach. Intell. 1, 501–507 (2019)
 111. Mökander, J., Floridi, L.: Ethics—based auditing to develop 
trustworthy AI. Minds Mach. (2021)
 112. Moodie, R., Stuckler, D., Monteiro, C., Sheron, N., Neal, B., 
Thamarangsi, T., Lincoln, P., Casswell, S.: Profits and pan-
demics: prevention of harmful effects of tobacco, alcohol, and 

==== Page 12 ====
110 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111
1 3
ultra-processed food and drink industries. Lancet 381, 670–679 
(2013)
 113. Mozur, P., Kang, C., Stariano, A., McCabe, D.: A global tipping 
point for reining in Tech Has Arrived, New York Times (2021)
 114. Muller, V.C.: Ethics of artificial intelligence and robotics (stan-
ford encyclopedia of philosophy), Stanford Encycl. Philos, pp. 
1–30 (2020)
 115. Nagler, J., van den Hoven, J., Helbing, D.: An Extension of 
Asimov’s Robotics Laws. In: Towar. Digit. Enlight., Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 41–46 (2019)
 116. Nature, No ethics, no grant, Nature. 461, 433–433 (2009)
 117. Nesta, AI Governance Database, (2020)
 118. Ochigame, R.: The invention of “Ethical AI”—How Big Tech 
Manipulates Academia to Avoid Regulation, Intercept. (2019)
 119. Orts, E.W., Strudler, A.: Putting a stake in stakeholder theory. 
J. Bus. Ethics. 88, 605–615 (2009)
 120. Oswald, K.: Industry involvement in public health ‘like having 
burglars fit your locks,’ News-Medical.Net - An AZoNetwork 
Site. (2013)
 121. Palazzo, G., Scherer, A.G.: Corporate legitimacy as delibera-
tion: a communicative framework. J. Bus. Ethics. 66, 71–88 
(2006)
 122. Poff, D.C., Michalos, A.C.: Citation Classics from the Journal of 
Business Ethics. Springer, Dordrecht (2013)
 123. Poitras, G.: Business ethics, medical ethics and economic medi-
calization. Int. J. Bus. Gov. Ethics. 4, 372–389 (2009)
 124. Potter, V.R.: Bridging the gap between medical ethics and envi-
ronmental ethics. Glob. Bioeth. 6, 161–164 (1993)
 125. Powers, T.M., Ganascia, J.-G.: The ethics of the ethics of AI. In: 
Dubber, M.D., Pasquale, F., Das, S. (eds.) Oxford Handb, pp. 
25–51. Oxford University Press, Ethics AI (2020)
 126. Prasad, A., Mills, A.J.: Critical management studies and business 
ethics: a synthesis and three research trajectories for the coming 
decade. J. Bus. Ethics. 94, 227–237 (2010)
 127. Regan, P.M., Jesse, J.: Ethical challenges of edtech, big data and 
personalized learning: twenty-first century student sorting and 
tracking. Ethics Inf. Technol. 21, 167–179 (2019)
 128. Rehg, W.: Discourse ethics for computer ethics: a heuristic for 
engaged dialogical reflection. Ethics Inf. Technol. 17, 27–39 
(2015)
 129. Rességuier, A., Rodrigues, R.: AI ethics should not remain tooth-
less! A call to bring back the teeth of ethics. Big Data Soc. 7 , 1–5 
(2020)
 130. Rhodes, C., Fleming, P.: Forget political corporate social respon-
sibility. Organization 27, 943–951 (2020)
 131. Richardson, R., Schultz, J.M., Crawford, K.: Dirty data, bad pre-
dictions: how civil rights violations impact police data, predic-
tive policing systems, and justice. New York Univ. Law Rev. 94, 
15–55 (2019)
 132. Rockness, H., Rockness, J.: Legislated ethics: from enron to 
sarbanes-oxley, the impact on corporate America. J. Bus. Eth -
ics. 57, 31–54 (2005)
 133. Rossouw, D., Van Vuuren, L.: Institutionalising ethics. In: Bus. 
Ethics, 5th editio, Oxford University Press, pp. 273–289 (2013)
 134. Rossouw, G.J.: Rossouw—business ethics in South Africa, pp. 
1539–1547 (1997)
 135. Saltz, J., Skirpan, M., Fiesler, C., Gorelick, M., Yeh, T., Heck -
man, R., Dewar, N., Beard, N.: Integrating ethics within machine 
learning courses. ACM Trans. Comput. Educ. 19, 1–26 (2019)
 136. Satariano, A., Stevis-Gridneff, M.: Big tech turns its lobbyists 
loose on Europe, Alarming Regulators, New York Times. (2020)
 137. Scherer, A.G., Palazzo, G., Baumann, D.: Global rules and pri-
vate actors: toward a new role of the transnational corporation in 
global governance. Bus. Ethics Q. 16, 505–532 (2006)
 138. Seele, P.: Digitally unified reporting: how XBRL-based real-
time transparency helps in combining integrated sustainability reporting and performance control. J. Clean. Prod. 136, 65–77 
(2016)
 139. Seele, P.: What makes a business ethicist? A reflection on the 
transition from applied philosophy to critical thinking. J. Bus. 
Ethics. 150, 647–656 (2018)
 140. Seele, P., Dierksmeier, C., Hofstetter, R., Schultz, M.D.: Mapping 
the ethicality of algorithmic pricing: a review of dynamic and 
personalized pricing. J. Bus. Ethics. 170, 697–719 (2021)
 141. Seele, P., Lock, I.: Instrumental and/or deliberative? A typol -
ogy of CSR communication tools. J. Bus. Ethics. 131, 401–414 
(2015)
 142. Seele, P., Schultz, M.D.: From greenwashing to machinewash-
ing: a model and future directions derived from reasoning 
by analogy. J. Bus. Ethics. (2022). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
s10551- 022- 05054-9
 143. Senden, L.A.J., Kica, E., Hiemstra, M., Klinger, K.: Mapping 
Self- and Co-regulation Approaches in the Eu Context: Explora-
tive Study for the European Commission, DG Connect. Utrecht 
University, Renforce (2015)
 144. Sharma, S.: Data Privacy and GDPR Handbook. John Wiley & 
Sons Inc, Hoboken (2020)
 145. Shneiderman, B.: Bridging the gap between ethics and practice: 
guidelines for reliable, safe, and trustworthy human-centered AI 
systems. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 10 (2020)
 146. Sims, R.R.: The institutionalization of organizational ethics. J. 
Bus. Ethics. 10, 493–506 (1991)
 147. Spiekermann, S.: What to expect from IEEE 7000: the first stand -
ard for building ethical systems. IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag. 40, 
99–100 (2021)
 148. Stahl, B.C.: Emerging technologies as the next pandemic? Possi-
ble consequences of the Covid crisis for thefuture of responsible 
research and innovation. Ethics and Inf. Technol. 23(S1), 135–37 
(2021).https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10676- 020- 09551-1
 149. Stahl, B.C.: From computer ethics and the ethics of AI towards 
an ethics of digital ecosystems. AI Ethics. (2021). https:// doi. org/  
10. 1007/ s43681- 021- 00080-1
 150. StandICT.eu, Standards Watch, StandICT.Eu. (2020)
 151. Steurer, R.: Disentangling governance: a synoptic view of regula-
tion by government, business and civil society. Policy Sci. 46, 
387–410 (2013)
 152. Suddaby, R., Bitektine, A., Haack, P.: Legitimacy. Acad. Manag. 
Ann. 11, 451–478 (2017)
 153. Taebi, B., van den Hoven, J., Bird, S.J.: The importance of eth-
ics in modern universities of technology. Sci. Eng. Ethics. 25, 
1625–1632 (2019)
 154. Tajalli, P.: AI ethics and the banality of evil. Ethics Inf. Technol. 
3, 97–108 (2021)
 155. Taneja, H., Maney, K.: The end of scale. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 
59, 67–72 (2018)
 156. Tavani, H.T.: The state of computer ethics as a philosophical field 
of inquiry: some contemporary perspectives, future projections, 
and current resources. Ethics Inf. Technol. 3, 97–108 (2001)
 157. Tenbrunsel, A.E., Smith-Crowe, K.: 13 Ethical decision making: 
where we’ve been and where we’re going. Acad. Manag. Ann. 2, 
545–607 (2008)
 158. The New York City Council.: Reporting on automated decision 
systems used by city agencies, (2019)
 159. Theodorou, A., Dignum, V.: Towards ethical and socio-legal 
governance in AI. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2, 10–12 (2020)
 160. Tigard, D.W.: Responsible AI and moral responsibility: a com-
mon appreciation. AI Ethics. 1, 113–117 (2021)
 161. Towell, E., Thompson, J.B., McFadden, K.L.: Introducing and 
developing Professional Standards in the information systems 
curriculum. Ethics Inf. Technol. 6, 291–299 (2004)

==== Page 13 ====
111 AI and Ethics (2023) 3:99–111 
1 3
 162. Tschopp, D., Huefner, R.J.: Comparing the evolution of CSR 
reporting to that of financial reporting. J. Bus. Ethics. 127, 565–
577 (2015)
 163. Uyar, A., Karaman, A.S., Kilic, M.: Is corporate social respon-
sibility reporting a tool of signaling or greenwashing? Evidence 
from the worldwide logistics sector. J. Clean. Prod. 253 , 119997 
(2020)
 164. Varian, H.R.: Big data: new tricks for econometrics. J. Econ. 
Perspect. 28, 3–28 (2014)
 165. Veatch, R.M., Guidry-Grimes, L.K.: The Basics of Bioethics, 4th 
edn. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, New York (2020)
 166. Véliz, C.: Three things digital ethics can learn from medical eth-
ics. Nat. Electron. 2, 316–318 (2019)
 167. Venkataramakrishnan, S.: Why business cannot afford to ignore 
tech ethics. Financ. Times. (2020)
 168. Vigneau, L., Humphreys, M., Moon, J.: How do firms comply 
with international sustainability standards? Processes and conse-
quences of adopting the global reporting initiative. J. Bus. Ethics. 
131, 469–486 (2014)
 169. Vogt, J.: Where is the human got to go? Artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, big data, digitalisation, and human–robot 
interaction in Industry 4.0 and 5.0. Ai Soc. 36, 1083–1087 (2021)
 170. Wagner, B.: Ethics as an escape from regulation: from ethics-
washing to ethics-shopping? In: Emre, B., Irina, B., Liisa, J., Mireille, H. (eds.) Being Profiled—Cogitas Ergo Sum, pp. 
84–89. Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam (2018)
 171. Wagner, R., Seele, P.: Uncommitted deliberation? Discussing 
regulatory gaps by comparing GRI 3.1 to GRI 4.0 in a political 
CSR perspective. J. Bus. Ethics. 146, 1–19 (2017)
 172. Wich, M., Eder, T., Al Kuwatly, H., Groh, G.: Bias and compari -
son framework for abusive language datasets. AI Ethics (2021). 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s43681- 021- 00081-0
 173. Willke, H., Willke, G.: Corporate moral legitimacy and the legiti -
macy of morals: a critique of palazzo/scherer’s communicative 
framework. J. Bus. Ethics. 81, 27–38 (2008)
 174. Winkler, E.R.: Applied ethics, overview. Encycl. Appl. Ethics 1 , 
174–178 (2012)
 175. Zuboff, S.: The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a 
Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. Profile Books Ltd, 
London (2019)
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

