==== Page 1 ====
SCIENCE CHINA
Information Sciences
February 2023, Vol. 66 121101:1–121101: 19
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11432-021-3449-x
c/circlecopyrtScience China Press 2023 info.scichina.com link.springer.com.REVIEW.
Toward the third generation artiﬁcial intelligence
Bo ZHANG*, Jun ZHU & Hang SU
Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Tsinghua Universit y, Beijing 100084, China
Received 9 September 2021/Revised 24 December 2021/Accept ed 9 February 2022/Published online 12 January 2023
Abstract There have been two competing paradigms in artiﬁcial intell igence (AI) development ever since
its birth in 1956, i.e., symbolism and connectionism (or sub -symbolism). While symbolism dominated AI
research by the end of 1980s, connectionism gained momentum in the 1990s and is gradually displacing
symbolism. This paper considers symbolism as the ﬁrst gener ation of AI and connectionism as the second
generation. However, each of these two paradigms simulates the human mind from only one perspective.
AI cannot achieve true human behaviors by relying on only one paradigm. In order to develop novel AI
technologies that are safe, reliable, and extensible, it is necessary to establish a new explainable and robust
AI theory. To this end, this paper looks toward developing a t hird generation artiﬁcial intelligence by
combining the current paradigms.
Keywords artiﬁcial intelligence, symbolism, connectionism, dual- space model, single-space model, triple-
space model
Citation Zhang B, Zhu J, Su H. Toward the third generation artiﬁcial in telligence. Sci China Inf Sci, 2023, 66(2):
121101, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11432-021-3449-x
1 First-generation artiﬁcial intelligence
How is intelligent human behavior formed? Newell and Simon et al. [ 1–4] proposed a symbolic model
to simulate such behavior based on the physical symbol system hyp othesis (PSS hypothesis). The hy-
pothesis suggests that intelligent human behaviors can be interpre ted as instances of physical symbol
systems, which include (1) an arbitrary set of symbols and rules tha t manipulate the symbols; (2) the
manipulators are purely syntactic, i.e., they are concerned only with syntax rather than semantics, and
the manipulations consist of the combination and reconstruction of symbols; (3) the syntax has a sys-
tematic semantic interpretation, i.e., the symbol is associated with s ome object and its attributes. In
1955, McCarthy et al. [ 5] outlined the basic idea of symbolic AI as follows—“It may be speculate d that
a large part of human thought consists of manipulating words accor ding to rules of reasoning and rules
of conjecture”—in the Proposal for the Dartmouth Summer Rese arch Project on Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
They proposed a reasoning model based on knowledge and experien ce for intelligent human behaviors.
Therefore, symbolic AI is also called a knowledge-driven method.
The founders of symbolic AI initially focused on universal methods of reasoning (or search), such as
mean-end analysis, divide-and-conquer, and trial-and-error. Th ey tried to solve a wide range of practical
problems with these methods. Nevertheless, the general method s are always weak, and can only solve
simple “toy world” problems, such as a robot laying out blocks, playing tic-tac-toe, or chess. Most of the
previous eﬀorts that aimed for artiﬁcial general intelligence (AGI) met with failure, which made symbolic
AI fall out of favor in the 1980s. Fortunately, Feigenbaum at Stan ford University and others [ 6] gave
up the pursuit of artiﬁcial general intelligence just in time. They belie ved that knowledge, especially
domain knowledge, is the key to intelligent behaviors and presented a set of strong AI methods such as
knowledgeengineeringandexpertsystems, whichbroughtnewhop eforsymbolicAI.Theyhavedeveloped
variousexpert systems, including DENDRAL (1965–1975)[ 6], MYCIN (1971–1977)[ 7], and XCON. Both
Feigenbaum and Raddy won the 1994 ACM Turing award as the pioneer s in designing and constructing
large-scale AI systems.
*Corresponding author (email: dcszb@mail.tsinghua.edu. cn)

==== Page 2 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:2
However, most of these early expert systems were too simple and f ar from practical. This remained
the case until May 1997, when IBM Deep Blue defeated the chess ch ampion Kasparov. This marked a
new stage of symbolic AI as being truly capable of solving problems with the development of a large-scale
system.
Symbolic AI can also be applied to machine learning such as inductive lear ning. Taking inductive
logic programming (ILP) [ 8] as an example, we will show the mechanism of symbolic AI-based mach ine
learning. InILP,machinelearningisconsideredasknowledge-based inductivelearning,i.e., searchingfora
hypothesis in the hypothesis space. The hypothesis should include a s many positive examples as possible,
exclude negative examples as much as possible, and be consistent wit h background knowledge. In ILP,
the positive and negative samples (instances), background knowle dge, and hypotheses are expressed in
the form of ﬁrst-order logic clauses (programs). Generally, the h ypothesis space is huge, which makes ILP
learning quite diﬃcult. In some cases, the background knowledge ca n eﬀectively restrict the hypothesis
space to make learning more feasible. Obviously, an agent can learn m ore eﬀectively and eﬃciently if
it has more background knowledge. Moreover, Riguzzi et al. [ 9] proposed probabilistic inductive logic
programming (PILP) to deal with uncertainty.
With background knowledge appropriately harnessed, knowledge- driven methods are robust, and are
more eﬀective when the data is insuﬃcient and can be easily transfer red to diﬀerent domains. Take
transfer learning [ 10] as an example. One can update or transfer the knowledge learned from one scenario
to another to achieve cross-domain or cross-task generalization . Speciﬁcally, we can ﬁrst identify the
general knowledge that can be transferred across domains or ta sks, along with the speciﬁc knowledge for
asingledomainortaskfromthetrainingenvironment(includingtrainin gdataandmethods). Inthiscase,
the general knowledge can be used to improve the performance of the target domain or task. The general
knowledge can be transferred to the target domain in the following w ays: (1) examples available in the
source domain, (2) features that can be shared between the sou rce and target domains, (3) available parts
of the source domain model, (4) speciﬁc rules shared between entit ies in the source domain. Therefore,
knowledge plays an essential role in transfer learning, which is the re ason that knowledge-based methods
can be easily generalized across diﬀerent domains and tasks.
Besides Feigenbaum and Reddy (1994), Minsky (1969), McCarthy ( 1971), Newell and Simon (1975)
havealsomade greatcontributionsto the creationofsymbolicAI, a nd wonTuringawardsuccessively(the
yearsareindicatedinbrackets). TaketheIBMDeep Blueprograma sanexample. Thesuccessoftheﬁrst-
generation AI stems from the following aspects. (1) Knowledge and experience. The evaluation function
was split into 8000 parts (parameters). The system determined th e optimal values for these parameters
by analyzing over 4000 positions and 700000 grandmaster games. I t also uses the endgame database
which includes a large number of six-piece endgames and ﬁve or fewer piece positions. Additionally,
the program’s chess knowledge was ﬁne-tuned by grandmaster Jo el Benjamin. (2) Algorithm. Deep
Blue executes the α-βsearch algorithm in parallel, which eﬀectively improved the search eﬃc iency.
(3) Computing power. Using IBM RS/6000 SP2 with 11.38 GFLOPS, Dee p Blue can examine 200
million moves per second or 50 million positions within three minutes.
Symbolic AI has a solid foundation in cognitive psychology. It gains str ength by taking the symbol
system as the model of human higher mental activity. Symbols are c haracterizedby compositionality, i.e.,
simple atomic symbols may combine and form complex symbol strings. S ince each symbol corresponds
to a semantic meaning, the compositionality of symbols objectively re ﬂects that of semantic objects, such
as how to combine simple components into a whole. Composability is the b asis for reasoning. Therefore,
symbolic AI is as interpretable as human rational behaviors, which ma kes it easy to understand. Yet,
symbolic AI also has obvious limitations. At present, the existing meth ods can only solve deterministic
problems with complete information in a structured environment. IB M’s Deep Blue chess program, which
embodies the achievementofsuch methods, beats humans in aperf ect information game-thesimplest case
of games. However, human cognitive behavior, such as decision-ma king, usually takes place in a complex
environment with imperfect information. Symbolic AI is far from solvin g such problems. For example, it
is diﬃcult for a computer to process the human knowledge represen ted in natural language (by discrete
symbols). Therefore, it is necessary to develop new technologies o f knowledge representation. Existing
knowledge representation methods, such as production rules or lo gic programs, are easy for computers
to handle. However, these methods are simple but limited in their expr ession, which makes it diﬃcult
to describe more complex and uncertain knowledge. Moreover, the current research is mainly limited to
logicalreasoningandotherdeterministicmethods. Morecomplexkn owledgerepresentationandreasoning
methods, such as knowledge graphs [ 11] and probabilistic reasoning [ 12], remain open problems.

==== Page 3 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:3
x1
x2
xjyω
Figure 1 Perceptron.
In general, mathematical tools for the processing of discrete sym bols are lacking. It is non-trivial to
apply mathematical tools other than mathematical logic, which is one of the main reasons that it is
diﬃcult to execute symbolic AI eﬃciently on computers. Knowledge-d riven strong AI can only solve
speciﬁc problems on a case-by-case basis. It is still a controversia l issue as to whether there is a general
weak approach that can be applied to a wide range of problems, name ly artiﬁcial general intelligence.
In addition, the acquisition of knowledge from original data (including text, images, speech, and video)
is mainly operated manually at present, and therefore is of low eﬃcien cy. Therefore, it is important to
explore eﬀective automatic methods of knowledge acquisition.
Moreover, the current intelligent systems cannot understand th e world and behave reasonably in an
unpredictable environment due to the absence of common sense, w hich is recognized as one of the most
signiﬁcant barriers between the current AI algorithms and a more g eneral AI system. How common sense
is acquired, expressed, and inferred remains a challenging problem. Admittedly, the construction of a
practical common-sense library is akin to the “Manhattan Project ” of AI since the amount of common
sense is huge and introducing it into AI will require tremendous amoun t of time and eﬀort.
2 Second-generation artiﬁcial intelligence
Howissensoryinformation(e.g., vision, audio, andtouch)storedinm emoryandhowdoesitaﬀect human
behaviors? There are two schools of thought. One is that this infor mation is represented in some coded
way in memory (in neural networks), with the representative samp le of research on the symbolic AI. The
other is that sensory stimuli are not stored in memory, but instead create stimulus-response connections
(channels) in neural networks that lead to intelligent behaviors. Th is is known as the connectionist
claim, which is the foundation for connectionist AI. In 1958, Rosenb latt [13,14] built a perceptron—the
prototype of an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)–based on the ide a of connectionism. The inspiration for
the perceptron comes from two sources. One is from the mathema tical model of neurons proposed by
McCulloch and Pitts [ 15] in 1943—the “threshold logic” circuits, which convert the input of n eurons into
discrete values, usually known as the M-P model. The other is from th e Hebb learning rule proposed by
Hebb [16] in 1949, which is that “simultaneously ﬁring neurons are connected together”. The perceptron
function is shown in Figure 1, which can be formulated as
y=

0,if/summationtext
jwjxj/lessorequalslantb,
1,if/summationtext
jwjxj> b,(1)
wherebis the threshold value and wis the weight.
The founders of AI were aware of the idea of connectionism from th e very beginning. For example,
McCarthy et al. [ 5] raised the question “How can a set of (hypothetical) neurons be a rranged so as
to form concepts?” and states “Considerable theoretical and ex perimental work has been done on this
problem. ...But the problem needs more theoretical work”. The perceptron h as only one hidden layer,
which is too simple. Minsky and Papert [ 17] pointed out that the perceptron can only solve linearly
separable problems; even if the number of hidden layers is increased , it is diﬃcult to use the perceptron
because there is no eﬀective learning algorithm.
This criticism of the perceptron was fatal, which resulted in the nasc ent connectionism AI falling to
a low point for more than a decade. During this diﬃcult period, with the continuous eﬀorts of many
researchers, great progress has been made in both neural netw ork models and learning algorithms over

==== Page 4 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:4
the past 30 years, gradually forming mature theories and technolo gies of deep learning. The important
advances in this period can be summarized as follows. The ﬁrst is grad ient descent, an algorithm that
was originally proposed by the French mathematician Cauchy [ 18] in 1847, and improved as an enhanced
and usable version by the Russian mathematician Nesterov [ 19] in 1983. The second is the BP (back
propagation) algorithm, which is customized for ANN. BP was ﬁrst pr oposed by Linnainmaa [ 20], a
Finnish student, in his master’s thesis in 1970; in 1986, Rumelhart et a l. [21] conducted a systematic
analysis. These two algorithms infuse new power into ANNs’ learning a nd training. Together with
threshold logic and the Hebb learning rule, they constitute the four pillars of ANNs. In addition to the
four pillars, there is a series of important studies, including better lo ss functions (e.g., the cross-entropy
cost function [ 22]), algorithm improvement (e.g., regularization to prevent overﬁttin g [23]), new forms
of networks (e.g., convolution neural networks (CNN) by Fukushim a (Japan) [ 24,25] in 1980, recurrent
neural networks [ 26], long short-term memory neural networks [ 27], and deep belief nets (DBN) [ 28]).
These methods together have opened a new era of second-gener ation AI based on deep learning [ 29].
Data-based learning has a solid mathematical foundation. To illustra te this foundation, let us take a
simple example of supervised learning, which can be formalized into the following regression problem.
We extract samples ( xi,yi)i.i.d.←−(X,Y) from database D. The purpose is to estimate the input-output
mapping function as f:X→Yin the samples. That is, the algorithm searches for and selects a fun ction
f∗from the function family (hypothesis space) F={fθ:X−→Y;θ∈A}such that it is close to the
truefon average. In deep learning, this alternative function family is expr essed as a deep neural network
described by
f∗= arg min
fθ∈FED[l(fθ(x),y)], (2)
wherelis the loss function.
In general, there are three basic assumptions in parametric learnin g. (1) Independence: the selection
of the loss function and function family F(or neural network structure) is data-independent. (2) Large
capacity: there is a huge number of samples, i.e., ( xi,yi)i= 1,...,n,n→ ∞. (3) Completeness:
the training samples are complete and noiseless. If all the assumptio ns are satisﬁed, f∗will eventually
convergetotheoptimalfunction faswehaveanincreasingnumberoftrainingsamples. Ifwehaveenou gh
data with a suﬃcient level of quality, f∗can approximate any function because of the universality of deep
neural network.
Therefore, using deep learning to ﬁnd the function behind the data has a solid theoretical basis. This
assertion has been borne out in many practical applications. For ex ample, in the standard image library
ImageNet (20000 categories, 14 million images), the error rate of im age recognition was as high as 50% in
2011. By 2015, Microsofthad reduced the errorrateto 3.57%by u sing deep learningmethods; this is even
lower than the typical human error rate of 5.1% [ 30]. The speech recognition rate with a background of
lownoise wasgenerallyabout 80%before 2001, but it reachedover9 5%in 2017, meeting the requirements
of commercialization. In March 2016, the Google AlphaGo program de feated world Go champion Lee
Sedol, which represented another pinnacle of the second-genera tion AI. Go is known as one of the most
challenging games for AI because of its complexity; before 2015, th e strongest Go computer program
could only play at the level of a human at the amateur 5 dan level. More impressively, these results
require no domain knowledge, but only the input of a Go board as an ima ge.
The success of AlphaGo can be attributed to the following factors. The ﬁrst is data. AlphaGo-Zero
has taught itself tens of millions of Go games through reinforcement learning. In comparison, human
Go masters have played only 30 million eﬀective games over 1000 years . The second is algorithms,
including Monte-Carlo tree search [ 30], deep learning, and reinforcement learning [ 31]. The third is
computingpower. AlphaGoranonadistributedcomputersystemco mposedof1920CPUsand280GPUs.
Therefore, the second generation of AI is also called data-driven m ethods. Among the scholars who have
made signiﬁcant contributions to the creation of second-generat ion AI, the following ﬁve have received
the Turing award. They are L. G. Valiant (2010), J. Pearl (2011), and Y. Bengio, G. G. Hinton, Y.
LeCun (2018). The year of the award is indicated in the brackets.
However, since 2014, many limitations of deep learning methods have been revealed, indicating that its
path to AI has encountered a bottleneck. Take an example, which o ur group discovered, that illustrates
the vulnerability of the deep learning method. In [ 32], we present the results of an attack on the Inception
V3deepnetworkusingthemomentumiterativefastgradientsignme thod(MI-FGSM).Anoiselessoriginal
image called Albis Mons was correctly classiﬁed by the deep network wit h 94.39% conﬁdence. We used
the MI-FGSM method to generate adversarial noise after 10 itera tions, and then added the noise to the

==== Page 5 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:5
original image, yielding an adversarial sample accordingly. Due to the small amount of noise added, the
resulting adversarial sample is almost indistinguishable from the origin al image from human observation.
However, the deep network identiﬁed the adversarial sample as a “ dog” with 99.99% conﬁdence.
Why is deep learning so vulnerable, unsafe, and easily deceived? The r eason can only be found in deep
learning itself. The success or failure of deep learning is closely relate d to the above three assumptions.
Due to the uncertainty of observed and measured data, the obta ined data inevitably is incomplete and
contains noise. In this case, the choice of neural network struct ure (function family) is signiﬁcant. If
the network structure is too simple, there is a risk of under-ﬁtting , but it will also be over-ﬁtting if
the network structure is too complex. Recent work on regularizat ion methods can reduce the risk of
over-ﬁtting to some extent. But if the data quality is poor, it will inev itably lead to a serious decline in
generalization ability.
In addition, the “black box” characteristic of deep learning is anoth er reason for its poor generalization
ability. Taking image recognition as an example, deep learning can only ﬁ nd recurring local fragments
(patterns), whereas ﬁnding semantically meaningful parts prove s to be diﬃcult. In [ 33], we investigated
the classiﬁcation of birds’ images using the deep network VGG-16. T he inputting of a bird’s image
neuron 147# in the pool layer 5 of the network showed a strong res ponse. The response corresponded
to a local feature of the bird’s head in the image. The network uses t his local feature as the main
basis for distinguishing birds and other objects. Obviously, it is not a n invariant semantic feature of
“birds”. Therefore, when inputting adversarial samples of comple tely diﬀerent semantics (e.g., ﬁgures,
beer bottles, horses, etc.) but with features similar to that of a bir d’s head, neuron 147# also produces
a strong response. The network then mistakenly identiﬁed the adv ersarial samples as “birds”.
3 Third-generation artiﬁcial intelligence
The ﬁrst generation of knowledge-driven AI uses three factors o f knowledge, algorithm and computing
power to construct an AI. The second generation of data-driven AI uses three diﬀerent factors of data,
algorithms, and computing power. Therefore, the ﬁrst- and seco nd- generations of AI simulate human
intelligent behaviors in only one aspect, and each generation has its o wn limitations. In order to build
an AI that can reﬂect intelligent human behaviors, we need to build ro bust and explainable AI theories,
and develop safe, reliable, and extensible AI technology, i.e., the thir d-generation of AI. The key idea
is to combine the knowledge-driven methods of the ﬁrst generation and the data-driven methods of the
second-generation, in order to construct a more powerful AI by simultaneously using the four elements of
knowledge, data, algorithms, and computing power. Currently, th ere is a dual-space model. At present,
there are two schemes of a dual-space model and a single-space mo del.
3.1 Dual space model
The dual-space model is shown in Figure 2. It is a brain-style model, in which a symbolic model (space)
simulates rational behaviors, and the sub-symbolic model (space) simulates perceptual behaviors. These
two models are seamlessly integrated into the human brain. If this int egration could be achieved in
computers, it would be possible for AI to achieve human-like intelligent behaviors. In order to achieve
this goal, the following three problems need to be solved.
3.1.1Knowledge and reasoning
Knowledge(including common sense)and reasoningarethe foundat ionsofrationalbehaviors. Knowledge
andreasoninghavewitnessedsigniﬁcantprogressintheﬁrst-gen erationAI,whichusessymbolicmodelsto
simulate such human behaviors. However, problems in knowledge rep resentation and reasoning methods
need to be further addressed. An example of recent progress is t he IBM DeepQA project [ 34]. It proved
to be such a winning formula that the Watson dialog system, based on DeepQA, won the American
TV quiz show “Jeopardy!” by overwhelming the champions Ken Jenning s and Brad Rutter in February
2011. It is worth reviewing the following experience of the Watson dia logue system with respect to
knowledge representation and reasoning methods. The system inc ludes (1) a method to automatically
generate structured knowledge representation from a large num ber of unstructured texts, (2) a method
of representing uncertain knowledge based on a knowledge quality s core, and (3) uncertainty reasoning
based on the integration of multiple reasoning models.

==== Page 6 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:6
Continuous
feature
vector
spaceDiscrete 
semantic 
symbolic 
space 
Speech, Image, 
…… Raising
Guiding
Knowledge: text 
automatic acquisition 
Figure 2 Dual-space mode.
Answer sourcesInternet Evidence sources 
Question Primary
searchCandidate
answer
generationSupporting 
evidence 
retrieval Deep 
evidence 
scoring 
Question
analysisQuery
decom-
positionHypothesis
generationSoft
filteringHypothesis & 
evidence 
scoring Synthesis Final 
merging & 
ranking 
Hypothesis
generationSoft
filteringHypothesis & 
evidence 
scoring Training 
model 
Answer & 
confidence 
Figure 3 IBM Watson system.
Watson regards each “Question-Answer”pair as a knowledge-bas ed inference from “Question” to “An-
swer”. To reach human-level intelligence, a computer needs to kno w as much as or even more than a
human champion. Watson uses a vast number of information source s, including encyclopedias, dictio-
naries, thesauri, newswire articles, and literary work, as well as th e large online databases of DBPedia,
WordNet, Yago, etc. In order to build Waston, the designers ensu red that it could access at least 200
million pages of structured and unstructured documents, which ar e automatically transformed into a
structured and manageable representation. The Watson system uses a representation called Extended
Corpusasfollows. First, the baselinecorpusisgivento identify the s eeddocuments; then, Watsoncollects
relevant ﬁles from the Internet according to the seed ﬁles, and min es “text nuggets” from them; ﬁnally,
it scores the text nuggets and integrates them into the ﬁnal “Ext ended Corpus” based on the score.
In addition to the automatically generated Extended Corpus, Wats on’s knowledge base also includes
existing corpora, such as DBpedia, WordNet, Yago, as well as many other reference materials. Watson
uses hundreds of reasoning mechanisms to turn “questions” into “ answers” (see Figure 3). Firstly, the
“question”isanalyzed,classiﬁed,anddecomposed. Accordingtot hedecomposedresults,Wastonsearches
for the hypotheses and candidate answers from the source (cor pus). After preliminary ﬁltering, it selects
about 100 candidate answers. Then Watson collects evidence from information sources and scores the
candidate answers. The evaluation process also considers the relia bility of data sources, and several
candidate answers are synthesized based on the score. The synt hesized answers are sorted according

==== Page 7 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:7
to the degree of conﬁdence, and then the system outputs the ﬁn al answers. Watson also learned to
understand “questions” through 155 live competitions with humans and 8000 experiments.
3.1.2Perception
Symbolism uses a symbol system as a model of the human mind in order to achieve reasoning similar
to that of humans. But, from the cognition perspective, they are fundamentally diﬀerent in terms of
the symbol grounding problem [ 35]. In the machine symbol system, the “objects” and “relations” of
the objective world are represented by symbols. But the symbol it self has no meaning. We have to
assign it artiﬁcial semantics, i.e., the externally imposed “parasitic se mantics”, which are not known to
the machine. This is completely diﬀerent from the “intrinsic semantics ” that exists in the human brain.
“Intrinsic semantics” is mainly acquired through senses (audio, visu al, etc.) and the interaction between
senses and movement, with very few exceptions (some atomic conc epts and common sense are innate).
They can translate iconic representations and categorical repre sentations into symbolic representations.
That is what deep learning is supposed to do. Unfortunately, curre nt deep learning models are not up to
the task. This is because deep learning deals with a low-level feature space, which is very diﬀerent from
semantic space. Only “local fragments” with no explicit semantics ca n be learned in this space. These
fragments are not combinational and therefore cannot be used a s “intrinsic semantic” representations of
“objects”. In other words, the current deep learning can achiev e only “sensation” but not perception
unless it can learn the invariant parts of an object. Taking the obje ct “dog” for example, it needs to
learn about the head, legs, tail, and other parts of a dog. The comb ination of these parts then forms the
“intrinsic semantics” of a dog. The basic idea is that, with knowledge a s the guide, sensory information
is raised from a feature vector space to a semantic symbol space, as shown in Figure 2. There has been
a lot of research in this area [ 36–39].
Thepreliminaryprogresscanbeillustratedbytheworkofourteam. In[40],wedescribehowtoimprove
the performance of image classiﬁcation by using a triple generative a dversarial network (Triple-GAN).
It consists of three components: (1) a classiﬁer Cthat (approximately) characterizes the conditional
distribution pc(y|x)≈p(y|x), where yis a label and xis data; (2) a class-conditional generator Gthat
(approximately) characterizes the conditional distribution pg(x|y)≈p(x|y); and (3) a discriminator D
that distinguishes whether a pair ( x,y) comes from the true distribution p(x,y). All the components
are parameterized as neural networks. The desired equilibrium is th at the joint distributions deﬁned by
the classiﬁer and the generator converge to the true data distrib ution. If the utility function is properly
designed, with Triple-GAN, the generator can learn the represent ation of an “object” in the sample (i.e.,
prior knowledge) in an unsupervised (or weakly supervised) manner . The prior knowledge is used to
improve the performance of the classiﬁer. This study shows that t he prior knowledge of “objects” can
be learned through ANN’s unsupervised learning, which is the “intrins ic semantics” of the “objects”.
Using this prior knowledge with “intrinsic semantics” to improve the re cognition rate of the classiﬁer will
fundamentally solve the contradiction between “where” and “what ” that exists in computer vision. This
will facilitate learning with small data and improve its robustness and g eneralization.
There is an alternative way to address the problem. Let us go back t o the artiﬁcial neural network used
for deep learning (Figure 4). In the case of vision, an ANN is rather simple compared to human vis ual
neural networks. It has neither feedback connections, horizon tal connections, and inhibitory connections
on the same layer, nor complex mechanisms such as sparse discharg e (coding), memory, and attention. If
we can introduce these mechanisms into ANN, it will gradually improve t he perceptual ability of an AI
system. Since we know very little about the working mechanism of the brain’s visual neural networks,
currently we can only explore it step-by-step along the path of “Br ian Inspired Computing”.
There is some exploratory work at present. Take one project in ou r group as an example. As described
in [41], the mechanism of sparse discharge (coding) is applied to the calcula tion of each layer of ANN.
There are six layers in the network, including Gabor ﬁltering and Max p ooling. In each layer, we intro-
duce sparse regularization in the optimization procedure, which enc ourages the ANN to select the more
representativefeatures. When we train the networkusing images such as“human”, “car”, “elephant”and
“bird”, with simple backgrounds, neurons on the output layer of th e neural network respond strongly
to the outline of “face”, “car”, “elephant”, and “bird”, which rep resent these “categories”. In other
words, the semantic information of “whole object” is extracted, y ielding the “symbolic representation”
accordingly.
Nevertheless, these methods can only extract semantic informat ion as a whole, but not the semantic

==== Page 8 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:8
Agent
EnvironmentAction ai
State siReward γi
State si+1 
Figure 4 Artiﬁcial neural network. Figure 5 Reinforcement learning.
information at diﬀerent levels, such as “whole”, “parts”, and “sub -parts”. Extensive research is needed
on how to extract complete semantic information, namely the intrins ic semantics, in the future.
3.1.3Reinforcement learning
As mentioned above, it is possible to learn some basic knowledge (conc epts) through sensory information,
but sensory information is far from enough to acquire common-sen se knowledge. An agent can acquire
such capability only through their interaction with the environment, which results in intelligent behaviors
arising from a generic objective to maximize the reward. The paradig m is recognized as reinforcement
learning (RL), which is the most basic human learning behavior, and an important path towards true AI.
Reinforcementlearningaimstosimulatesuchlearningbehaviorofhum anbeings. Itconstantlyinteracts
with the environment through the “trial-and-error”mechanism to learn eﬀective strategies, which largely
mirrors the operating mechanisms of the feedback system by which the human brain makes decisions (see
Figure5). RL has become a signiﬁcant approach that may lead to breakthro ughs in artiﬁcial intelligence.
A recent study in [ 42] proposed that an agent can learn through the experience of tria l-and-error by
maximizing the reward, which can drive an agent to exhibit general AI abilities.
Formally, reinforcement learning is usually recognized as a random co ntrol process, i.e., the interaction
process between an agent and the environment. In the learning pr ocess, the agent explores the envi-
ronments by performing actions following a speciﬁc policy, and perce iving the consequences accordingly.
The decision process can be modeled as a Markov decision process (M DP). The purpose is to search for
the best policy for a given MDP, i.e., the policy that can maximize the rew ard. Many achievements have
been made in video games [ 43,44], chess and card games [ 45,46], robot navigation and control [ 47,48],
human-computer interaction, and other ﬁelds. In these cases, t he AI systems approach or even surpass
human levels in some tasks [ 49,50], which demonstrates that powerful reinforcement learning could be a
possible solution to general artiﬁcial intelligence.
The success stories in reinforcement learning such as Go and video g ames are relatively simple. In
these tasks, the environment is fully observable and the feedback is deﬁnite; the state is mainly discrete,
with clear regulations; and a large amount of data can be obtained at a low cost. These all match the
requirements of the current artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms. Neve rtheless, for the tasks of high uncer-
tainty, incomplete information, and insuﬃcient data, the performa nce of current reinforcement learning
algorithms tends to degenerate signiﬁcantly. In this section, we en umerate only some of the typical
challenges for the current state of reinforcement learning, and e numerate our work in these directions.
(1) Reinforcement learning in partially observable Markov decision pr ocesses (POMDPs). In real-
world problems, the agent cannot reliably identify complete informat ion about the environment; i.e.,
the information is incomplete. Formally, it can be modeled as a more nat ural model of POMDP for
sequential decision-making under uncertainty. As for POMDP, the agent might need to consider all the
previous observations and actions, rather than just the curren t state of reinforcement learning in MDP.
Existing POMDP solutions optimize the policies by exploiting the inner str uctures in value functions
using a belief-state MDP by deﬁning beliefs over the unknown parame ters. However, the complexity
of the problem could increase exponentially, making the algorithms inf easible. Recently, we proposed a
novel algorithm by estimating the unobservable states via a probab ilistic inference [ 51]. Speciﬁcally, we

==== Page 9 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:9
Speech, Image Text 
Raising Embedding Continuous
feature
vector
spaceContinuous
quasi-semantic
vector
spaceDiscrete 
semantic 
symbol 
space 
Figure 6 Single-space model.
propose sequential variationalsoft Q-learning networks(SVQNs ) which formalizes the inference of hidden
states and maximum entropy reinforcement learning under a uniﬁed graphical model. Experimental
results demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our algorithms under th e partially observable MDPs. However,
it remains a challenging problem to reduce the computational complex ity and speed up the convergence.
(2) The integration of domain knowledge in reinforcement learning. S imilar to perceptual tasks, it is
criticaltointegratedomainknowledgewithreinforcementlearning. However,withoutproperlyharnessing
domain knowledge, reinforcement learning faces many problems, su ch as slow convergence, high sampling
complexity, and low generalization. These problems could be address ed by introducing human knowledge
intothelearningprocess,whichisalsoinlinewiththehumanmindingener aldecision-makingprocedures.
One possible solution is relational reinforcement learning, which endo ws the agent with both knowledge
representation in the form of the (probabilistic) ﬁrst-order logic a nd reinforcement learning in complex
and uncertain worlds. In [ 52], our group proposed to integrate human knowledge, which is repre sented as
computable symbolic expressions, with reinforcement learning as a p osterior regularization. Experiments
demonstrate that we greatly improved the performance of reinfo rcement learning, and our method won
the championship in the FPS competition in 2018 [ 53].
(3) The integration of game theory and reinforcement learning. At its early stage, reinforcement
learning was designed for single-agent tasks in stochastic stationa ry environments. However, there may
exist multiple agents for policy learningin numerous domains, due to eit her the complexity of tasks or the
decentralization inherent in video games, robotics, distributed con trols, etc. A basic learning framework
to describe multi-agent systems involves introducing game theory in to reinforcement learning. Game
theory characterizes the strategic interactions between the ag ents. The combination of game theory and
reinforcement learning provides a generic method to model the coo peration and competition between
multiple agents. Examples include zero-sum/non-zero-sum games a nd complete/incomplete information
decision-making in a multi-agent system; the latter proves to be of v alue, e.g., AlphaStar [ 44]. Our group
alsoconductedexploratoryresearchinthisareabymodelingtheex plorationofanRL-agentwithinagame
theory framework [ 54]. We present a posterior sampling algorithm with the technique of cou nterfactual
regret minimization (CFR), which is a novel design of interaction stra tegies for the RL agent with a
provably theoretical guarantee.
Moreover, reinforcement learning is challenged by the gap between the simulated and real worlds, the
dilemma of exploration-exploitation, better world modeling technique s for planning, etc. Compared with
the success of supervised learning, the development of reinforce ment learning is still at its early stage and
is confronted with numerous unsolved problems.
3.2 Single-space model
In a single space model, both symbolic and sub-symbolic processing is c onducted in a single vector space,
as shown in Figure 6. It can make better use of the computing power of a computer, th ereby increasing
the processing speed, which is why it is called a computer-style model. The problem is that there exist
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent mechanisms between deep learning and the hum an brain’s learning, which results
in major limitations in deep learning, such as interpretability and robus tness. We discuss a few key issues
below.
3.2.1The vectorization of symbols
Knowledge is usually expressed in the form of discrete symbols in natu ral language. In order to build a
single-space model, we must ﬁrst transform the symbolic words, ph rases, sentences, and chapters, as well
astheknowledgegraph,intovectorrepresentations. Thereexis tvariousmethodsforwordtransformation,

==== Page 10 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:10
Figure 7 Word embedding graph.
also called word embedding, such as Word2Vec [ 55] and GloVe [ 56]. In this subsection, we show the skip-
gram [57] strategy used in Word2Vec which can transform words from symb ols to vectors as
argmax
θ/productdisplay
(w,c)∈Dp(c|w;θ), (3)
wherewis a given target word, cis an optional word from its context, p(c|w;θ) is the probability of the
occurrence of the word cfor a given word w,Dis allw-cpairs extracted from the corpus, and θis the
model parameter.
After further parameterization of ( 3), we obtain p(c|w;θ) =evcvw/summationtext
c′∈Cevc′vw, wherevc,vw∈Rdare vector
representations of the words candw, respectively; and Cis all available text; θis the parameter with a
proper dimension. By optimizing ( 3), we can obtain the vector representation for each word of vw.
Thesewordvectorshavethe desirable propertythat “semantica llysimilar wordshaveverysimilar word
vectors” which can be guaranteed for the following assumption. Th e higher the co-occurrence frequency
of two words in the context, the more likely they are to be semantica lly similar or semantically related.
These characteristics of the embedded word vectors indicate tha t the word vectors carry some semantics,
which is so-called quasi-semantic space, as is illustrated in Figure 7. In general, Eq. ( 3) is intractable
to solve since it needs to enumerate all the possibilities which can be ap proximated using a deep neural
network. Similar embedding techniques can be used to transform “p hrases”, “sentences” and “texts” or
knowledge graphs into quasi-semantic vector spaces [ 58].
Knowledge representation in vector form has the useful propert y that it can be manipulated as data
with various mathematical tools. Therefore, it has been widely used in text processing with remarkable
results, such as neural machine translation [ 59,60].
The basic task of neural machine translation is that, with a given sou rce sentence (e.g., Chinese)
x=x1,x2,...,x I, it will search for the target sentence (e.g., English) y=y1,y2,...,y J, which can be
formulated as the likelihood of a sequence of words in the target sen tence as
p(y|x;θ) =J/productdisplay
j=1p(yj|x,y<j;θ), (4)
whereθis a set of model parameters, y<j=y1,...,y j−1is the partially translated target sentence. In
ordertoconstructthe neuraltranslationmodels, the trainingse tisacollectionof“source-targetsentence”
pairs{/an}bracketle{tx(n),y(n)/an}bracketri}ht}N
n=1, and the objective is to maximize the log likelihood as
ˆθMLE= argmax
θ/braceleftBiggN/summationdisplay
n=1logp/parenleftBig
y(n)|x(n);θ/parenrightBig/bracerightBigg
, (5)
whereθisa set ofmodel parameters. The targetsentence canbe obtaine d viaoptimizing the equation. In
general, neural machine translation can achievea lowererrorrate than the traditional methods. However,
it shares the common drawbacks of deep learning methods, such as not being explainable to humans,
unavoidable fatal errors, and poor robustness. It is expected t hat future research will overcome these
limitations by integrating prior knowledge, posterior regularization, etc.

==== Page 11 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:11
3.2.2The improvement of deep learning
Recently, much work has been done to overcome the limitations in the current deep learning techniques
in terms of explainability and robustness. In this subsection, we will e laborate on representative work by
our group.
Explainability. The black-box nature of the recent deep learning models challenges their use in
mission-critical scenarios such as healthcare and self-driving vehic les. Therefore, explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence (XAI) has attracted signiﬁcant attention from numero us researchers. XAI aims to generate
high-quality interpretable or human-understandable explanations of AI decisions. The key challenge
for XAI is to bridge the gap between the feature space and the sem antic space, with the latter being
interpretable for human beings [ 61]. The core idea of machine-learning technologies is to map the raw
data to a suitable internal representation or feature vector to r ealize purposes such as classiﬁcation or
regression, no matter whether they are working with early algorith ms based on hand-crafted features or
the current deep learning algorithms based on feature learning. Ho wever, feature vectors generally are
not interpretable to human beings. In contrast, a human generally makes decisions in semantic space
using their background knowledge, which has signiﬁcant diﬀerences with data in a feature space in terms
of the inherent structures. The purpose of explainable artiﬁcial in telligence is to bridge the gap between
the feature space and semantic space.
Atpresent, themotivation andtechniquesforexplainablemodelsar ediverseandsometimesdiscordant.
The previous work broadly falls into two categories. The ﬁrst categ ory comprises post-hoc interpretable
techniques which focus on explaining predictions without elucidating t he inner mechanisms. Common
approaches include natural language explanations, visualizations o f learned representations, and expla-
nations by using examples.
The second type, explainable artiﬁcial intelligence, attempts to dev elop transparent models with the
aim of investigating how the model works at diﬀerent levels, i.e., the en tire model, individual components
(e.g., parameters), and the training algorithm. The key challenge fo r the transparent models is to
investigate the processes of how humans make decisions and enhan ce the unconscious features to a
more structured symbolic concept representation. Both types o f methods are in the process of rapid
development, and play important roles in the study of interpretabilit y.
Visualization is a common approach to generating the post-hoc inter pretation for an artiﬁcial intelli-
gence algorithm. Now that deep learning is recognized as a kind of “bla ck-box” method, since the inner
mechanism is opaque and “unexplainable”, we can use the tool of visu alization to open the “black box”
such that everything will be clear. In order to provide users with a t ool to better understand, diagnose,
and reﬁne deep CNNs, Liu et al. [ 62] proposed to formulate a deep CNN as a directed acyclic graph
(DAG), and presented a novel hybrid visualization that integrates a DAG with rectangle packing, ma-
trix visualization, and a biclustering-based edge bundling method. We further have developed a visual
analytics system, named CNNVis, which is one of the ﬁrst tools for th e visual analysis of deep learning
models. CNNVis has attracted widespread attention from both indu stry and academia. More recently,
we also proposed to analyze training dynamics, which provide a tool t o understand the failure cases and
to assist in debugging in the training process, with an example of a DGM Tracker that can assist experts
in understanding the training dynamic of the deep generative models .
The parameter redundancy in deep neural networks poses the gr eatest hindrance to interpretability by
humans. Apopularwaytotackleparameterredundancy, and ther ebybetter explaina model, istoextract
the important sub-components by using machine learning technique s. In order to extract the structured
subnetworks, we borrow ideas from network pruning techniques, and obtain a partial structure of the
original full model with comparable predictive performance [ 63]. Speciﬁcally, the critical subnetworks
can be recognized as a group of important channels such that the p erformance would deteriorate severely
if the subnetworks were suppressed to zero. By formulating the p roblem under a knowledge distillation
framework[ 64], we associatea controlgatewith the layer’soutput channels, whic h reﬂectsthe importance
of each channel in the network. After solving the problem, we ﬁnd t he semantic concepts contained in the
criticalsubnetworkrepresentations; i.e., the subnetworksreﬂe ct consistentinput patterns in the intraclass
samples, which can help identify outlier examples in the dataset and in t he more accurate and reasonable
explanatory regions.
The aforementioned methods focus on the post-hoc interpretat ion of the models which seek an expla-
nation of the prediction but may be farfetched in general. It remain s a question whether the explanation
conforms to the internal mechanism of the neural networks. Due to the inherent diﬀerence between the

==== Page 12 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:12
latent feature space for deep learning and the human interpretab le semantic space, it is imperative to
bridge the two spaces in order to derive a more transparent AI mod el. To address this issue, our group
proposes to improve the interpretability of the DNNs by leveraging t he rich semantic information de-
scribed by human knowledge [ 65]. By extracting a set of semantically meaningful topics from the hum an
descriptions, we propose to integrate them into the model with an in terpretive regularization, yielding
a model with more interpretable feature vectors. The result show s that human-interpretable knowledge
can guide the learning procedure of a deep neural network, yielding an interpretable representation.
Robustness. The growing sophistication of AI techniques has dramatically empowe red AI systems,
but, as a byproduct, it also brings about potential new vulnerabilitie s. Adversarial attacks on an AI
system can generate imperceptible perturbations which can deceiv e an AI model and signiﬁcantly alter
itsresponse. Inthis case, itisessentialtoidentify thevulnerabilitie s, andfurtherimprovethedefensibility
of an AI system functionally and substantially [ 66].
To deal with the threat of adversarial examples, extensive resea rch has been conducted on building
robust models to defend against adversarial attacks. Such work can be roughly classiﬁed into three
categories.
(1) Input transformation. Several defenses adopt transform ation on the inputs before feeding them to
the classiﬁer [ 67], or project adversarial examples onto the data distribution [ 68]. Among these methods,
the denoiser-based method has attracted wide attention due to it s plug-and-play nature that does not
change the structures or properties of the models. However, a d enoiser with good performance on general
Gaussian noise may fail to remove adversarial perturbations. Also , the small residual perturbation
could be ampliﬁed to a large magnitude in the top layers, which is the so- called “error ampliﬁcation
eﬀect” and leads to mistakes in prediction. In order to solve this pro blem, our group proposed a novel
method for a high-level representation guided denoiser (HGD) [ 69], which tries to minimize the diﬀerence
between the outputs of the target model induced by the original a nd the adversarial examples at the
top levels. Experiments demonstrate that HGD consistently produ ces more robust feature representation
by suppressing the progressive ampliﬁcation of adversarial noise a cross the layers. In the NeurIPS2017
competition on adversarial machine learning, our HGD solution won ﬁr st place and outperformed the
alternative models by a large margin.
(2) Robust training. Robust training is a basic strategy for defend ing against adversarial attacks by
augmenting training data with a batch of adversarial examples. The problem can be formulated as a
min-max optimization problem, in which the goal of the inner maximizatio n is to ﬁnd the adversarial
examples while the outer minimization aims to train a robust classiﬁer [ 70]. However, most of the existing
AT methods solve the inner maximization problem based on a speciﬁc at tack algorithm, yielding poor
generalization for other unseen attacks. Recent work has demon strated that even methods with state-of-
the-art robustness against commonly used attacks can still be de feated by other attacks [ 71]. To address
this issue, we propose a novel framework of adversarial distribut ional training (ADT) which learns an
adversarial distribution to characterize the potential adversar ial examples around a natural example [ 72].
Throughtheoreticalanalysisandempirical evaluation, wedemonst ratedthat ourADT trainingalgorithm
can lead to a more robust AI model that can resist adversarial exa mples, especially the ones generated
by unseen attacks.
(3) Model enhancement. Another category of methods is to train a more robust deep learning model
by modifying the network structure, the activation function, or t he loss function of the models. Among
these, the model ensemble is an eﬀective defense strategy in prac tice [73,74]. However, the general
ensemble model may fail to defend against adversarial attacks be cause the adversarial examples have
strong transferability among diﬀerent models. To address this issu e, our group proposed to introduce an
adaptive diversity promoting(ADP) regularizationto boost the dive rsity amongthe diﬀerent models [ 75].
Inparticular,weintroducedalogarithmofensemblediversity(LED) termintotheADP,whichencourages
the non-maximal predictions of each member to be mutually orthogo nal, while at the same time preserves
the maximalprediction consistentwith the groundtruth. Extensiv eresults onvariousdatasetsverifythat
our method can improve adversarial robustness signiﬁcantly while m aintaining state-of-the-art accuracy
on normal examples.
However, most of these methods are heuristics that have been su bsequently shown to fail to defend
against the more powerful adversaries. One of the major reason s is that most of the current deep
learningusesfunction approximationalgorithms,whichingeneralar eunequipped tounderstandtheinner
mechanism of human-like intelligence [ 76]. Therefore, it is imperative to pursue a variety of techniques
that can explain their rationale, and characterize the strength an d weakness. An alternative path is to

==== Page 13 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:13
integrate data and knowledge that can help overcome the brittle na ture of current AI models, which may
fail when presented with cases not included in the training phase.
3.2.3Bayesian deep learning
As shown in Figure 6, visual and auditory signals are processed in the feature space, w here the features
are often insuﬃcient in capturing semantics. One promising way to inc rease the amount of semantics in
feature representation is to incorporate knowledge into deep lear ning. Below, we will take Bayesian deep
learning as an example to illustrate the idea.
As stated before, deep neural networks are insuﬃcient in charac terizing the uncertainty in observing
empirical data. Such uncertainty, as well as the unknown physical process underlying the data, makes
it diﬃcult to judge the correctness of the outputs of deep learning methods. Meanwhile, because the
available data is basically ﬁnite and often ﬁxed, the uncertainty of th e model increases as the model
size quickly grows (e.g., networks with billions or trillions of parameters ). Therefore, there exist many
models that perform well on training data, but much less satisfacto rily on testing data. Bayesianmachine
learning (or Bayesian learning in short) provides an elegant framewo rk to consider prior knowledge as
well as the uncertainty of both the data and the model. It can grad ually reﬁne the understanding of the
data (or task) when more evidence arrives, which is known as increm ental learning. Such a paradigm can
suﬃciently leverage knowledge during learning, and it can not only pro vide an estimate of the prediction
conﬁdence, but also improve the eﬃciency and accuracy of learning .
The formal deﬁnition of Bayesian learning is as follows. Let Ddenote all the data. Given the observed
data set d⊂D, it calculates the posterior probability distribution of each hypothe sis via Bayes’ rule in
(6) [12,77] as
p(hi|d) =αp(d|hi)p(hi), (6)
wherep(hi) is the prior distribution (before seeing the data), and p(d|hi) is the likelihood of dgiven the
hypothesis hi. With the posterior distribution, we can make a prediction on unknow n variable Xas
p(X|d) =/summationdisplay
ip(X|d;hi)p(hi|d) =/summationdisplay
ip(X|hi)p(hi|d), (7)
where the hypothesis space is assumed to be ﬁnite for simplicity; for continuous hypothesis spaces, the
summation will be integral.
OnechallengeofBayesianlearninginvolvescomputation; whenthehy pothesisspaceishuge,Eq.( 7)can
be infeasible, which hinders practical application. A common solution is to use approximation inference
algorithms, which fall into two main categories: variational inferenc e and Monte Carlo methods [ 78]. In
addition, there are some common approaches to simplifying the calcu lation: (1) instead of marginalizing
over all hypotheses when predicting X, use only a single hypothesis hithat maximizes p(hi|d), known as
maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate; (2) by assuming a uniform prio rp(hi), the MAP estimator can
be further simpliﬁed as ﬁnding a hypothesis that maximizes p(hi|d), known as the maximum likelihood
estimate (MLE); (3) if not all variables are observable, i.e., some var iables are hidden, it is typical to
adopt the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm to solve the MLE p roblem as in ( 8). The EM
algorithm alternates between two steps: the E-step uses the obs erved data Xand current estimate of
model parameters θ(i)to calculate the posterior of hidden variable p(Z=z|x;θ(i)), and the M-step
updates the model parameters θ(i+1)according to the inferred zandxas
θ(i+1)= argmax
θ/summationdisplay
zp(Z=z|x;θ(i))L(x,Z=z|θ). (8)
Bayes’ rule in ( 7) is a procedure that implies the posterior distribution from a given pr ior and data
likelihood. In order to incorporate knowledge more ﬂexibly, we propo se a framework of regularized
Bayesian inference (RegBayes) [ 79]. RegBayes is built on a variational formulation of Bayes’ rule [ 80],
and we introduce the notion of posterior regularization to directly c onstrain the property of the targeted
post-dataposteriordistribution. Underauniﬁedformulation, Reg Bayescanveryﬂexiblyconsiderdomain
knowledge (e.g., the knowledge in ﬁrst-order logic [ 81]) or the objective of the task (e.g., max-margin loss
for classiﬁcation [ 82]).
Bayesian deep learning integrates the fundamental principle of Bay esian inference and representa-
tion learning via deep neural networks as illustrated in Figure 8. There are two types of integration:

==== Page 14 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:14
Z
XfDNN 
Figure 8 A general framework of deep Bayesian models with DNN as funct ion approximator.
(1) perform Bayesian inference over deep neural networks (e.g., Bayesian neural networks and Gaussian
processes), with the main objectives of calculating uncertainty an d avoiding overﬁtting; and (2) use deep
neural networks as a nonlinear function approximator to improve t he capacity of Bayesian models; ex-
amples include generative adversarial networks (GANs), variation al auto-encoder (VAE), and invertible
network-based ﬂow models. The ﬁrst type of integration was pione ered by Hopﬁeld, Hintion, and their
students in 1990s [ 83,84]. Back then, due to the limitation on computing power and training dat a, net-
works of medium size typically had a high risk of overﬁtting. Therefor e, one major motivation was to
perform Bayesian inference to protect neural networks from ov erﬁtting and select proper models. In the
era of deep learning, as the network depth increases, Bayesian me thods have attracted further attention,
which led to major progress on eﬃcient algorithms for Bayesian deep networks. One major challenge
involvesthe over-parameterizationof neural networksin Bayesia ninference. To addressthis challenge, we
havedeveloped variousmethods, including implicit variationalinferen ce [85,86]and functional variational
inference [ 87].
As for the second type of integration, we know that a simple random variable zcan be transformed
into a more complex random variable y=f(z) through a function f. Whenfis a bijective function, the
distribution of ywill bep(x) =p(z)|dz
dy|. We have used this trick when drawing samples from Gaussian
and many other distributions, where the function foften has some simple analytical form. However,
when we deal with complex data, the function fis unknown and may be very complicated. Therefore,
we desire to directly learn ffrom empirical data. By leveraging the expressiveness of deep net works,
we can parameterize fas a deep network, and learn an optimal transforming function fθunder some
task-related objective. As illustrated in Figure 8, this idea has been shown eﬀective in practice, with
many representative examples such as VAE, GAN, and ﬂow-based m odels. Even when trained under a
fully unsupervised setting, such models can generate high-quality n atural images or faces.
Onekeydiﬀerenceamongthesemodelsisthetransformingfunction ofdeﬁning y. InVAE, y=fθ(z)+ǫ,
whereǫis a noise variable (e.g., white Gaussian noise), while in GAN and ﬂow-base d models, there is
no explicit noise variable. This diﬀerence leads to diﬀerent strategies to estimate parameters. VAE and
ﬂow-based models adopt MLE, while GAN formulates the learning as a m in-max game via adversarial
training. Similar to the ﬁrst-type of integration, though such meth ods are powerful, they also raise
various challenges on inference and learning. For instance, the tra ining of GAN is often unstable, facing
gradient vanishing or explosion issues. We investigated this issue and presented a stabilizing approach to
train GAN by drawing inspiration from control theory [ 88]. On the other hand, ﬂow-based models adopt
an invertible transforming function, which can lead to a “dimensionalit y bottleneck” [ 89]. One possible
solution is to augment the dimension by performing variational infere nce (e.g., [ 89]).
It is clear from the above illustration that Bayesian deep learning pro vides powerful modeling language
to conjoin the advantages of probabilistic inference and represen tation learning via deep networks, while
the key challenges are on inference and learning algorithms. Recent ly, much progress has been made on
algorithms (see above). Meanwhile, various probabilistic programmin g libraries have been designed to
support the development and deployment of Bayesian deep learning models. One early example is the

==== Page 15 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:15
CNN
Image
How many types of
layers are located
below the continent
crust?
TF-
IDFQuestion
Tectonic 
plates
motionKeywords:
crust,
continental,
layers,...
Text GraphSAGE
Text coding modular Merging two
word embedding Multi-modal inference modular Keyword attention Question self-attention Bilinear pooling Answer “2” 
Figure 9 (Color online) The architecture of image-text Question-An swer system.
“ZhuSuan”library[ 90]1). Finally,intermsofapplication,Bayesiandeeplearninghasbeenused forvarious
tasks with promising results, including time-series forecasting, sem i-supervised learning, unsupervised
learning, few-shot learning, and continual learning.
3.2.4Calculation in a single space
As shown in Figure 6, it is diﬃcult for us to calculate the embedded vector from text and t he feature
vector from visual (image) or/and auditory in a single vector space . This is because the words of the
text lose a lot of semantics when they are converted from symbols t o vectors after embedding, and the
features extracted from visual (or/and auditory) perception g enerally belong to low-level features with
no semantics.
We take an “essay-level image-text question answering” task fro m our team [ 91] as an example to
introduce a preliminary attempt in this ﬁeld. More work can be referr ed to in [ 92,93]. Both images and
text in an “essay-level image-text question answering” task must be processed in a single vector space.
As shown in Figure 9, the task is to answer the question “How many types of layers are lo cated below the
continental crust?” based on the given image. In addition to the te xtual representation of the question,
there is also an essay “Tectonic Plates Motion” related to the image.
First, we use the word embedding based on skip-gram to transform words represented by discrete
symbols in “the problem” and “essay” into vectors. After the image is processed by the ResNet, we
use the high-layer feature vector to represent the image [ 57]. Then, the word vectors in “question” and
“essay” are fused with the feature vectors of “image” to predict the “answer”. For better integration, the
“key words” in “problem” and “essay” are ﬁrst identiﬁed through t he attention mechanism since these
keywords can better reﬂect the theme (semantics) of the “prob lem”. Based on the keywords, the spatial
attention mechanism is used to ﬁnd the features of the key areas in the image, since these key areas are
moreconsistent with the theme expressed by the keywords. More over,we use multimodal bilinear pooling
as the integration method. The current performance of machine “ image-text QA” is not comparable to
that of human beings. In the case of multiple-choice questions, for example, the level achieved so far is
only slightly better than random guesses.
1)https://zhusuan.readthedocs.io/.

==== Page 16 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:16
Continuous
feature
vector
spaceDiscrete 
semantic 
symbolic 
space Continuous 
quasi-semantic 
vector 
space Top-down 
RaisingProjection
Abstraction Embedding 
Bottom-up 
Figure 10 Triple-space integration model.
4 Conclusion
Inordertorealizethird-generationAI, weproposeatriple-space modelwhichisanintegrationofthedual-
space and single space models. Speciﬁcally, the dual-space model us es a brain-like working mechanism.
If it can be realized, the machine will behave in an interpretable and ro bust manner that will be close
to that of the brain. For the dual-space model, the visual/auditory sensory signals (feature vectors) are
upgraded to concepts (discrete symbols). Then concepts (symb ols) are generated by perception. Symbols
havetheir grounding,and symbolsandsymbolicreasoninghavetheir intrinsic semantics. The problemsof
interpretabilityand robustnesscanbe solvedfundamentally. Neve rtheless, the symbolgroundingproblem
is a diﬃcult task that needs to be explored.
The dual-space model imitates the working mechanism of the brain, b ut, because we know very little
about the working mechanism of the brain, there are some uncerta inties in this path. One question is
whether the “intrinsic semantics” obtained via reinforcement learn ing is the same as that acquired by
human perception. Can machines also be conscious? Despite these d iﬃculties, we believe that, as long
as the machine takes a step in this direction, it will be closer to real AI .
In a single space model, both symbolic and sub-symbolic processing is c onducted in a single vector
space. In addition to the need to raise (visual, auditory, etc.) vect or representation from feature space
into semantic space, it is also necessary to ensure that the semant ics will not be lost when the word
(or sentence, chapter, etc.) is embedded. In general, a single-sp ace model is based on deep learning,
which can make full use of computing power, and in some aspects can demonstrate better performance
than humans. However, there still exist great uncertainties abou t the potential for improvements to deep
learning, due to the fundamental limitations in terms of its interpret ability and robustness. However, we
believe that every step of improvement in deep learning will promote t he development of AI.
Considering the above uncertainties, the best strategy is to proc eed along these two routes at the same
time, through the integration of the three spaces: continuous fe ature vector space, discrete semantic
symbolic space, and continuous quasi-semantic vector space as is illu strated in Figure 10. In this way,
we can maximize the use of brain-like working mechanisms, and make fu ll use of the computing power of
the computer, which is expected to result in a more powerful AI, i.e., the third-generation AI.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundat ion of China (Grant No. 61620106010).
References
1 Simon H A. Models of Man. New York: Wiley & Sons, 1957
2 Newell A, Simon H A. Computer science as empirical inquiry: symbols and search. Commun ACM , 1976, 19: 113–126
3 Newell A. Physical Symbol Systems. Cogn Sci , 1980, 4: 135–183
4 Fodor J A. Methodological solipsism considered as a resear ch strategy in cognitive psychology. Behav Brain Sci , 1980, 3:
63–73
5 McCarthy J, Minsky M L, Rochester N, et al. A proposal for the Dartmouth summer research project on artiﬁcial intelligen ce.
1955, 27: 4
6 Lindsay, Robert K, Bruce G. Applications of Artiﬁcial Inte lligence for Organic Chemistry: The Dendral Project. New Yo rk:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1980

==== Page 17 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:17
7 Buchanan B G, Shortliﬀe E H. Rule-Based Expert Systems: The MYCIN Experiments of the Stanford Heuristic Programming
Project. Boston: Addison Wesley, 1984
8 Muggleton S, de Raedt L. Inductive logic programming: theo ry and methods. J Logic Programm , 1994, 19-20: 629–679
9 Riguzzi F, Bellodi E, Zese R. A history of probabilistic ind uctive logic programming. Front Robot AI , 2014, 1: 6
10 Yang Q, Zhang Y, Dai W Y, et al. Transfer Learning. Cambridg e: Cambridge University Press, 2020
11 Ehrlinger L, Wolfram W. Towards a deﬁnition of knowledge g raphs. In: Joint Proceedings of the Posters and Demos Track o f
12th International Conference on Semantic Systems (SEMANT iCS2016) and 1st International Workshop on Semantic Change
& Evolving Semantics (SuCCESS16), Leipzig, 2016
12 Russel S J, Norvig P. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern App roach. 2nd ed. New York: Pearson Education Inc., 2003
13 Rosenblatt F. The perceptron: a probabilistic model for i nformation storage and organization in the brain. Psychol R ev,
1958, 65: 6
14 Rosenblatt F. Principles of Neurodynamics. Arch Gen Psyc hiatry, 1962 7: 218–219
15 McCulloch W S, Pitts W. A logical calculus of the ideas imma nent in nervous activity. Bull Math Biophys , 1943, 5: 115–133
16 Hebb D O. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychologi cal Theory. London: Psychology Press, 1949
17 Minsky M, Papert S A. Perceptrons: An Introduction to Comp utational Geometry. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1969
18 Cauchy A. Methode generale pour la resolution des systeme s d’equations simultanees. Comp Rend Acad Sci, Paris, 1847, 25:
536–538
19 Nesterov Y E. A method for solving the convex programming p roblem with convergence rate O(1/k2). Soviet Math Doklady,
1983, 27: 372–376
20 Linnainmaa S. The representation of the cumulative round ing error of an algorithm as a taylor expansion of the local ro unding
errors (in Finnish). Dissertation for Master’s Degree. Hel sinki: University of Helsinki, 1970
21 Rumelhart D E, Hinton G E, Williams R J. Learning represent ations by back-propagating errors. Nature, 1986, 323: 533–536
22 Janocha K, Czarnecki W M. On loss functions for deep neural networks in classiﬁcation. Schedae Inform, 2016, 25: 49–59
23 Wan L, Zeiler M, Zhang A X, et al. Regularization of neural n etworks using DropConnect. In: Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Atla nta, 2013
24 Fukushima K. Neocognitron: a self-organizing neural net work model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaﬀected by
shift in position. Biol Cybernetics , 1980, 36: 193–202
25 Derevyanko G, Grudinin S, Bengio Y, et al. Deep convolutio nal networks for quality assessment of protein folds. Bioinfor-
matics, 2018, 34: 4046–4053
26 Lipton J C, Berkowitz J. A critical review of recurrent neu ral networks for sequence learning. 2015. ArXiv: 1506.00019v4
27 Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 1997, 9: 1735–1780
28 Hinton G E, Osindero S, Teh Y W. A fast learning algorithm fo r deep belief nets. Neural Comput , 2006, 18: 1527–1554
29 LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep learning. Nature, 2015, 521: 436–444
30 Coulom R. Eﬃcient selectivity and backup operators in Mon te-Carlo tree search. In: Proceedings of International Con ference
on Computers and Games, Berlin, 2006
31 Sutton R S, Barto A G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc tion. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2015
32 Dong Y P, Liao F Z, Pang T Y, et al. Boosting adversarial atta cks with momentum. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Salt Lak e City, 2018
33 Dong Y, Su H, Zhu J, et al. Towards interpretable deep neura l networks by leveraging adversarial examples. In: Proceed ings
of IJCAI Workshop on AISC, Sydney, 2019
34 Ferrucci D, Brown E, Chu-Carroll J, et al. Building Watson : an overview of the DeepQA project. In: Proceedings of
Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), Atlanta, 2010
35 Harnad S. The symbol grounding problem. Phys D-Nonlin Phenom , 1990, 42: 335–346
36 Chen X, Duan Y, Houthooft R, et al. InfoGAN: interpretable representation learning by information maximizing genera tive
adversarial nets. In: Proceedings of Advances in Neural Inf ormation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Barcelona, 2016. 2 172–
2180
37 Liu Y, Wei F Y, Shao J, et al. Exploring disentangled featur e representation beyond face identiﬁcation. In: Proceedin gs of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognit ion(CVPR), Salt Lake City, 2018. 2080–2089
38 Higgins I, Matthey L, Pal A, et al. Beta-VAE: learning basi c visual concepts with a constrained variational framework .
In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Log ic Programming (ICLP), New York City, 2016
39 Siddharth N, Paige B, Desmaison A, et al. Inducing interpr etable representations with variational autoencoders. In : Proceed-
ings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ( NeurIPS), Barcelona, 2016
40 Li C, Xu K, Zhu J, et al. Triple generative adversarial nets . In: Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Process ing
Systems (NeurIPS), Long Beach, 2017
41 Hu X L, Zhang J W, Li J M, et al. Sparsity regularized HMAX for visual recognition. Plos One , 2014, 9: e81813
42 Silver D, Singh S, Precup D, et al. Reward is enough. Artif Intell , 2021, 299: 103535

==== Page 18 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:18
43 Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, et al. Human-level contro l through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2015, 518:
529–533
44 Vinyals O, Babuschkin I, Czarnecki W M, et al. Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement lear ning.
Nature, 2019, 575: 350–354
45 Silver D, Huang A, Maddison C J, et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 2016,
529: 484–489
46 Silver D, Schrittwieser J, Simonyan K, et al. Mastering th e game of Go without human knowledge. Nature, 2017, 550: 354–359
47 Duan Y, Chen X, Houthooft R, et al. Benchmarking deep reinf orcement learning for continuous control. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), New Y ork, 2016
48 Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, et al. Proximal policy op timization algorithms. 2017. ArXiv: 1707.06347
49 Sutton R S, Barto A G. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc tion. 2nd ed. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2015
50 Fran¸ cois-Lavet V, Henderson P, Islam R, et al. An introdu ction to deep reinforcement learning. FNT Machine Learn , 2018,
11: 219–354
51 Huang S Y, Su H, Zhu J, et al. SVQN: sequential variational s oft Q-learning networks. In: Proceedings of International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020
52 Huang S Y, Su H, Zhu J, et al. Combo-action: training agent f or FPS game with auxiliary tasks. In: Proceedings of the 33rd
AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), Honolul u, 2019
53 Song S H, Weng J Y, Su H, et al. Playing FPS games with environ ment-aware hierarchical reinforcement learning.
In: Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), Macau, 2019
54 Zhou Y C, Li J L, Zhu J. Posterior sampling for multi-agent r einforcement learning: solving extensive games with imper fect
information. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), Addis Ababa, 2020
55 Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G, et al. Eﬃcient estimation of w ord representations in vector space. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Learning Representations (IC LR), Scottsdale, 2013
56 Pennington J, Socher R, Manning C D. Global vectors for wor d representation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Doha, 2014
57 Mikolov T, Sutskever I, Chen K, et al. Distributed represe ntations of words and phrases and their compositionality.
In: Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processi ng Systems (NeurIPS), Lake Tahoe, 2013
58 Kusner M J, Sun Y, Kolkin N I, et al. From word embeddingsto d ocumentdistances. In: Proceedingsof the 32nd Internation al
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Lille, 2015
59 Zhang J, Liu Y, Luan H B, et al. Prior knowledge integration for neural machine translation using posterior regulariza tion.
In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Associatio n for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2017
60 Ding Y, Liu Y, Luan H B, et al, Visualizing and understandin g neural machine translation. In: Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lingui stics (ACL), 2017
61 Zhang B. Artiﬁcial intelligence in the post-deep learnin g era (in Chinese). CAAI Trans Intell Technol, 2017, 7: 3–5
62 Liu M, Shi J, Li Z, et al. Towards better analysis of deep con volutional neural networks. In: Proceedings of IEEE Confer ence
on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2016
63 Wang Y L, Su H, Hu X L. Interpret neural networks by identify ing critical data routing paths. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVP R), Salt Lake City, 2018
64 Hinton G, Vinyals O, Dean J. Distilling the knowledge in a n eural network. In: Proceedings of Advances in Neural Inform ation
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Montreal, 2014
65 Dong Y P, Su H, Zhu J, et al. Improving interpretability of d eep neural networks with semantic information. In: Proceed ings
of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogniti on (CVPR), Honolulu, 2017
66 Dong Y P, Fu Q-A, Yang X, et al. Benchmarking adversarial ro bustness on image classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVP R), Seattle, 2020
67 Dziugaite G K, Ghahramani Z, Roy D M. A study of the eﬀect of j pg compression on adversarial images. 2016.
ArXiv:1608.00853
68 Samangouei P, Kabkab M, Chellappa R. Defense-GAN: protec ting classiﬁers against adversarial attacks using generat ive
models. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Lea rning Representations (ICLR), 2018
69 Liao F Z, Liang M, Dong Y P, et al. Defense against adversari al attacks using high-level representation guided denoise r.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision an d Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Salt Lake City, 2018
70 Madry A, Makelov A, Schmidt L, et al. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In: Proceedings o f
International Conference on Learning Representations (IC LR), 2018
71 Tramer F, Carlini N, Brendel W, et al. On adaptive attacks t o adversarial example defenses. 2020. ArXiv: 2002.08347
72 Dong Y P, Deng Z J, Pang T Y, et al. Adversarial distribution al training for robust deep learning. In: Proceedings of
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIP S), 2020
73 Kurakin A, Goodfellow I, Bengio S, et al. Adversarial atta cks and defences competition. 2018. ArXiv: 1804.00097

==== Page 19 ====
Zhang B , et al. Sci China Inf Sci February 2023 Vol. 66 121101:19
74 Liu X Q, Cheng M H, Zhang H, et al. Towards robust neural netw orks via random selfensemble. In: Proceedings of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018
75 Pang T Y, Xu K, Du C, et al. Improving adversarial robustnes s via promoting ensemble diversity. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Long Beach, 2019
76 Castelvecchi D. Can we open the black box of AI? Nature, 2016, 538: 20–23
77 Ghahramani Z. Probabilistic machine learning and artiﬁc ial intelligence. Nature, 2015, 521: 452–459
78 Zhu J, Chen J, Hu W, et al. Big learning with Bayesian method s.Natl Sci Rev , 2017, 4: 627–651
79 Zhu J, Chen N, Xing E P. Bayesian inference with posterior r egularization and applications to inﬁnite latent SVMs. J Ma ch
Learn Res, 2014, 15: 1799–1847
80 Williams P M. Bayesian conditionalisation and the princi ple of minimum information. Br J Philosophy Sci , 1980, 31: 131–144
81 Mei S, Zhu J, Zhu X. Robust RegBayes: selectively incorpor ating ﬁrst-order logic domain knowledge into Bayesian mode ls.
In: Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Lea rning (ICML), Beijing, 2014
82 Zhu J, Ahmed A, Xing E P. MedLDA: maximum margin supervised topic models. J Mach Learn Res, 2012, 13: 2237–2278
83 MacKay D J C. Bayesian methods for adaptive models. Disser tation for Ph.D. Degree. Pasadena: California Institute of
Technology, 1992
84 Neal R M. Bayesian learning for neural networks. Disserta tion for Ph.D. Degree. Toronto: University of Toronto, 1995
85 Shi J, Sun S, Zhu J. A spectral approach to gradient estimat ion for implicit distributions. In: Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Stoc kholm, 2018
86 Zhou Y, Shi J, Zhu J. Nonparametric score estimators. In: P roceedings of International Conference on Machine Learnin g
(ICML), Vienna, 2020
87 Wang Z, Ren T, Zhu J, et al. Function space particle optimiz ation for Bayesian neural networks. In: Proceedings of
International Conference on Learning Representations (IC LR), New Orleans, 2019
88 Xu K, Li C, Zhu J, et al. Understanding and stabilizing GANs ’ training dynamics using control theory. In: Proceedings o f
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Vien na, 2020
89 Chen J, Lu C, Chenli B, et al. VFlow: more expressive genera tive ﬂows with variational data augmentation. In: Proceedi ngs
of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Vi enna, 2020
90 Shi J, Chen J, Zhu J, et al. ZhuSuan: a library for Bayesian d eep learning. 2017. ArXiv: 1709.05870
91 Li J Z, Su H, Zhu J, et al. Essay-anchor attentive multi-mod al bilinear pooling for textbook question answering. In: Pr oceed-
ings of IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Exp o (ICME), San Diego, 2018
92 Ren M, Kiros R, Zemel R S. Exploring models and data for imag e question answering. In: Proceedings of Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2015
93 Zhu Y, Groth O, Bernstein M S, et al. Visual7W: grounded que stion answering in images. In: Proceedings of IEEE Conferen ce
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vega s, 2016

