==== Page 1 ====
Toward an AI Physicist for Unsupervised Learning
Tailin Wu, Max Tegmark
Dept. of Physics & Center for Brains, Minds & Machines,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; tailin@mit.edu
(Dated: September 4, 2019)
We investigate opportunities and challenges for improving unsupervised machine learning using
four common strategies with a long history in physics: divide-and-conquer, Occam's razor, uni-
cation and lifelong learning. Instead of using one model to learn everything, we propose a novel
paradigm centered around the learning and manipulation of theories , which parsimoniously predict
both aspects of the future (from past observations) and the domain in which these predictions are
accurate. Specically, we propose a novel generalized-mean-loss to encourage each theory to spe-
cialize in its comparatively advantageous domain, and a dierentiable description length objective
to downweight bad data and \snap" learned theories into simple symbolic formulas. Theories are
stored in a \theory hub", which continuously unies learned theories and can propose theories when
encountering new environments. We test our implementation, the toy \AI Physicist" learning agent,
on a suite of increasingly complex physics environments. From unsupervised observation of trajecto-
ries through worlds involving random combinations of gravity, electromagnetism, harmonic motion
and elastic bounces, our agent typically learns faster and produces mean-squared prediction errors
about a billion times smaller than a standard feedforward neural net of comparable complexity, typ-
ically recovering integer and rational theory parameters exactly. Our agent successfully identies
domains with dierent laws of motion also for a nonlinear chaotic double pendulum in a piecewise
constant force eld.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
The ability to predict, analyze and parsimoniously model
observations is not only central to physics, but also a
goal of unsupervised machine learning, which is a key
frontier in articial intelligence (AI) research [1]. Despite
impressive recent progress with articial neural nets, they
still get frequently outmatched by human researchers at
such modeling, suering from two drawbacks:
1. Dierent parts of the data are often generated by
dierent mechanisms in dierent contexts. A big
model that tries to t all the data in one environ-
ment may therefore underperform in a new envi-
ronment where some mechanisms are replaced by
new ones, being inexible and inecient at combi-
natorial generalization [2].
2. Big models are generally hard to interpret, and may
not reveal succinct and universal knowledge such as
Newton's law of gravitation that explains only some
aspects of the data. The pursuit of \intelligible in-
telligence" in place of inscrutable black-box neural
nets is important and timely, given the growing in-
terest in AI interpretability from AI users and poli-
cymakers, especially for AI components involved in
decisions and infrastructure where trust is impor-
tant [3{6].
To address these challenges, we will borrow from physics
the core idea of a theory , which parsimoniously pre-Strategy Denition
Divide-and- Learn multiple theories each of which
conquer specializes to t partof the data very well
Occam's Avoid overtting by minimizing description
Razor length, which can include replacing tted con-
stants by simple integers or fractions.
Unication Try unifying learned theories by introducing
parameters
Lifelong Remember learned solutions and try them
Learning on future problems
TABLE I: AI Physicist strategies tested.
dicts both aspects of the future (from past observa-
tions) and also the domain in which these predictions
are accurate. This suggests an alternative to the stan-
dard machine-learning paradigm of tting a single big
model to all the data: instead, learning small theories
one by one, and gradually accumulating and organiz-
ing them. This paradigm suggests the four specic ap-
proaches summarized in Table I, which we combine into
a toy \AI Physicist" learning agent: To nd individual
theories from complex observations, we use the divide-
and-conquer strategy with multiple theories and a novel
generalized-mean loss that encourages each theory to spe-
cialize in its own domain by giving larger gradients for
better-performing theories. To nd simple theories that
avoid overtting and generalize well, we use the strat-
egy known as Occam's razor, favoring simple theories
that explain a lot, using a computationally ecient ap-
proximation of the minimum-description-length (MDL)
formalism. To unify similar theories found in dierent
environments, we use the description length for cluster-arXiv:1810.10525v4  [physics.comp-ph]  2 Sep 2019

==== Page 2 ====
2
ing and then learn a \master theory" for each class of
theories. To accelerate future learning, we use a lifelong
learning strategy where learned theories are stored in a
theory hub for future use.
B. Goals & relation to prior work
The goal of the AI Physicist learning agent presented in
this paper is quite limited, and does not even remotely
approach the ambition level of problem solving by hu-
man physicists. The latter is likely to be almost as chal-
lenging as articial general intelligence, which most AI
researchers guess remains decades away [7, 8]. Rather,
the goal of this paper is to take a very modest but use-
ful step in that direction, combining the four physics-
inspired strategies above.
Our approach complements other work on automatic
program learning, such as neural program synthe-
sis/induction [9{14] and symbolic program induction [15{
19] and builds on prior machine-learning work on divide-
and-conquer [20{22], network simplication [23{28] and
continuous learning [29{32]. It is often said that babies
are born scientists, and there is arguably evidence for use
of all of these four strategies during childhood develop-
ment as well [14].
There has been signicant recent progress on AI-
approaches specically linked to physics, including phys-
ical scene understanding [33], latent physical properties
[34{36], learning physics simulators [37], physical con-
cept discovery [38], an intuitive physics engine [39], and
the \Sir Isaac" automated adaptive inference agent [40].
Our AI Physicist is dierent and complementary in two
fundamental ways that loosely correspond to the two mo-
tivations on the rst page:
1. All of these papers learn one big model to t all
the data. In contrast, the AI Physicist learns many
small models applicable in dierent domains, using
the divide-and-conquer strategy.
2. Our primary focus is not on making approximate
predictions or discovering latent variables, but on
near-exact predictions and complete intelligibility.
From the former perspective, it is typically ir-
relevant if a model parameter changes by a tiny
amount, but from a physics perspective, one is
quite interested to learn that gravity weakens like
distance to the power 2 rather than 1 :99999314.
We share this focus on intelligibility with a long tra-
dition of research on computational scientic discovery
[41], including the Bacon system [42] and its successors
[43], which induced physical laws from observations and
which also used a divide-and-conquer strategy. Other
work has extended this paradigm to support discovery ofdierential equation models from multivariate time series
[44{47].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, we introduce the architecture of our AI Physicist
learning agent, and the algorithms implementing the four
strategies. We present the results of our numerical exper-
iments using a suite of physics environment benchmarks
in Section III, and discuss our conclusions in Section IV,
delegating supplementary technical details to a series of
appendices.
II. METHODS
Unsupervised learning of regularities in time series can
be viewed as a supervised learning problem of predicting
the future from the past. This paper focuses on the task
of predicting the next state vector yt2Rdin a sequence
from the concatenation xt= (yt T;:::;yt 1) of the last
Tvectors. However, our AI Physicist formalism applies
more generally to learning any function RM7!RNfrom
examples. In the following we rst dene theory , then in-
troduce a unied AI Physicist architecture implementing
the four aforementioned strategies.
A. Denition of Theory
A theoryTis a 2-tuple ( f;c), where fis a prediction
function that predicts ytwhen xtis within the theory's
domain, and cis a domain sub-classier which takes xt
as input and outputs a logit of whether xtis inside this
domain. When multiple theories are present, the sub-
classierc's outputs are concatenated and fed into a soft-
max function, producing probabilities for which theory is
applicable. Both fandccan be implemented by a neu-
ral net or symbolic formula, and can be set to learnable
during training and xed during prediction/validation.
This denition draws inspirations from physics theories
(conditional statements), such as \a ball not touching
anything ( condition ) with vertical velocity and height
(v0;h0) will a time tlater have y(v;h) = (v0 gt;h 0+
v0t gt2=2) (prediction function )". For our AI Physicist,
theories constitute its \atoms" of learning, as well as the
building blocks for higher-level manipulations.
B. AI Physicist Architecture Overview
Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of the AI Physicist
learning agent. At the center is a theory hub which stores
the learned and organized theories. When encounter-
ing a new environment, the agent rst inspects the hub
and proposes old theories that help account for parts of

==== Page 3 ====
3
Environments
Master theoriesSymbolic theoriesAI-physicistTheory HubTheoriesPropose new theoriesOccam’s RazorUnificationDivide and conquer  
FIG. 1: AI Physicist Architecture
the data as well as randomly initialized new theories for
the rest of the data. All these theories are trained via
our divide-and-conquer strategy, rst jointly with our
generalized-mean loss then separately to ne-tune each
theory in its domain (section II C). Successful theories
along with the corresponding data are added to the the-
ory hub.
The theory hub has two organizing strategies: (1) Apply-
ing Occam's razor, it snaps the learned theories, in the
form of neural nets, into simpler symbolic formulas (sec-
tion II D). (2) Applying unication, it clusters and uni-
es the symbolic theories into master theories (section
II E). The symbolic and master theories can be added
back into the theory hub, improving theory proposals for
new environments. The detailed AI Physicist algorithm
is presented in a series of appendices. It has polynomial
time complexity, as detailed in Appendix F.
C. Divide-and-Conquer
Conventionally, a function fmapping xt7!ytis learned
by parameterizing fby some parameter vector that is
adjusted to minimize a loss (empirical risk)
LX
t`[f(xt);yt]; (1)
where`is some non-negative distance function quantify-
ing how far each prediction is from the target, typically
satisfying`(y;y) = 0. In contrast, a physicist observing
an unfamiliar environment does typically nottry to pre-
dict everything with one model, instead starting with an
easier question: is there any part or aspect of the worldthat can be described? For example, when Galileo fa-
mously tried to model the motion of swinging lamps in
the Pisa cathedral, he completely ignored everything else,
and made no attempts to simultaneously predict the be-
havior of sound waves, light rays, weather, or subatomic
particles. In this spirit, we allow multiple competing the-
oriesT=fTig=f(fi;ci)g,i= 1;2;:::M , to specialize in
dierent domains, with a novel generalized-mean loss
LX
t 
1
MMX
i=1`[fi(xt);yt]!1=
(2)
When <0, the lossLwill be dominated by whichever
prediction function fits each data point best. This dom-
inance is controlled by , withL!mini`[fi(xt);yt] in
the limit where ! 1 . This means that the best way
to minimizeLis for each fito specialize by further im-
proving its accuracy for the data points where it already
outperforms the other theories. The following Theorem
1 formalizes the above intuition, stating that under mild
conditions for the loss function `(;), the generalized-
mean loss gives larger gradient w.r.t. the error j^yt ytjfor
theories that perform better, so that a gradient-descent
loss minimization encourages specialization.
Theorem 1 Let^y(i)
tfi(xt)denote the prediction of
the target ytby the function fi,i= 1;2;:::M . Suppose
that <0and`(^yt;yt) =`(j^yt ytj)for a monotonically
increasing function `(u)that vanishes on [0;u0]for some
u00, with`(u)dierentiable and strictly convex for
u>u 0.
Then if 0<`(^y(i)
t;yt)<`(^y(j)
t;yt), we have
@L
@u(i)
t>@L
@u(j)
t; (3)
whereu(i)
tj^y(i)
t ytj.
Appendix G gives the proof, and also shows that this
theorem applies to mean-squared-error (MSE) loss `(u) =
u2, mean-absolute-error loss `(u) =juj, Huber loss and
our description-length loss from the next section.
We nd empirically that the simple choice = 1 works
quite well, striking a good balance between encourag-
ing specialization for the best theory and also giving
some gradient for theories that currently perform slightly
worse. We term this choice L 1the \harmonic loss", be-
cause it corresponds to the harmonic mean of the losses
for the dierent theories. Based on the harmonic loss,
we propose an unsupervised dierentiable divide-and-
conquer (DDAC) algorithm (Alg. 2 in Appendix B) that
simultaneously learns prediction functions ffigand cor-
responding domain classiers fcigfrom observations.
Our DDAC method's combination of multiple prediction
modules into a single prediction is reminiscent of Ad-
aBoost [48]. While AdaBoost gradually upweights those

==== Page 4 ====
4
modules that best predict allthe data, DDAC instead
identies complementary modules that each predict some
part of the data best, and encourages these modules to
simplify and improve by specializing on these respective
parts.
D. Occam's Razor
The principle of Occam's razor, that simpler explana-
tions are better, is quite popular among physicists. This
preference for parsimony helped dispense with phlogis-
ton, aether and other superuous concepts.
Our method therefore incorporates the minimum-
description-length (MDL) formalism [23, 26], which pro-
vides an elegant mathematical implementation of Oc-
cam's razor. It is rooted in Solomono's theory of in-
ference [49] and is linked to Hutter's AIXI approach to
articial general intelligence [50]. The description length
(DL) of a dataset Dis dened as the number of bits
required to describe it. For example, if regularities are
discovered that enable data compression, then the cor-
responding description length is dened as the number
of bits of the program that produces Das its output
(including both the code bits and the compressed data
bits). In our context of predicting a time series, this
means that the description length is the number of bits
required to describe the theories used plus the number
of bits required to store all prediction errors. Finding
the optimal data compression and hence computing the
MDL is a famous hard problem that involves searching
an exponentially large space, but any discovery reduc-
ing the description length is a step in the right direction,
and provably avoids the overtting problem that plagues
many alternative machine-learning strategies [23, 26].
The end-goal of the AI Physicist is to discover theories
Tminimizing the total description length, given by
DL(T;D) = DL( T) +X
tDL(ut); (4)
where ut=^yt ytis the prediction error at time step
t. By discovering simple theories that can each account
for parts of the data very well, the AI Physicist strives
to make both DL( T) andP
tDL(ut) small.
Physics has enjoyed great success in its pursuit of sim-
pler theories using rather vague denitions of simplicity.
In the this spirit, we choose to compute the description
length DL not exactly, but using an approximate heuris-
tic that is numerically ecient, and signicantly simpler
than more precise versions such as [51], paying special
attention to rational numbers since they are appear in
many physics theories. We compute the DL of both the-
oriesTand prediction errors utas the sum of the DL of
all numbers that specify them, using the following con-
ventions for the DL of integers, rational numbers and real
FIG. 2: The description length DL is shown for real num-
berspwith= 2 14(rising curve) and for rational numbers
(dots). Occam's Razor favors lower DL, and our MDL ratio-
nal approximation of a real parameter pis the lowest point
after taking these \model bits" specifying the approximate pa-
rameter and adding the \data bits" Lrequired to specify the
prediction error made. The two symmetric curves illustrate
the simple example where L= log+ x x0

forx0= 1:4995,
= 2 14and 0:02, respectively.
numbers. Our MDL implementation diers from popular
machine-learning approaches whose goal is eciency and
generalizability [27, 52, 53] rather than intelligibility.
The number of binary digits required to specify a natural
numbern= 1;2;3;:::is approximately log2n, so we de-
ne DL(n)log2nfor natural numbers. For an integer
m, we dene
DL(m)log2(1 +jmj): (5)
For a rational number q=m=n, the description length
is the sum of that for its integer numerator and (natural
number) denominator, as illustrated in Figure 2:
DLm
n
= log2[(1 +jmj)n]: (6)
For a real number rand a numerical precision oor , we
dene
DL(r) = log+r

; (7)
where the function
log+(x)1
2log2 
1 +x2
(8)
is plotted in Figure 2. Since log+(x)log2xforx
1, DL(r) is approximately the description length of the
integer closest to r=. Since log+(x)/x2forx1,
DL(r) simplies to a quadratic (mean-squared-error) loss
function below the numerical precision, which will prove
useful below.1
1Natural alternative denitions of log+(x) include log2(1 +jxj),

==== Page 5 ====
5
Note that as long as all prediction absolute errors juij
for some dataset, minimizing the total description lengthP
iDL(ui) instead of the MSEP
iu2
icorresponds to min-
imizing the geometric mean instead of the arithmetic
mean of the squared errors, which encourages focusing
more on improving already well-t points.P
iDL(ui)
drops by 1 bit whenever one prediction error is halved,
which is can typically be achieved by ne-tuning the t
for many valid data points that are already well predicted
while increasing DL for bad or extraneous points at most
marginally.
For numerical eciency, our AI Physicist minimizes the
description length of equation (4) in two steps: 1) All
model parameters are set to trainable real numbers, and
the DDAC algorithm is applied to minimize the harmonic
lossL 1with`(u)P
iDL(ui) using equation (7) and
the annealing procedure for the precision oor described
in Appendix B. 2) Some model parameters are replaced
by rational numbers as described below, followed by re-
optimization of the other parameters. The idea behind
the second step is that if a physics experiment or neu-
ral net training produces a parameter p= 1:4999917, it
would be natural to interpret this as a hint, and to check
ifp= 3=2 gives an equally acceptable t to the data,
reducing total DL. We implement step 2 using contin-
ued fraction expansion as described in Appendix C and
illustrated in Figure 3.
E. Unication
Physicists aspire not only to nd simple theories that ex-
plain aspects of the world accurately, but also to discover
underlying similarities between theories and unify them.
For example, when James Clerk Maxwell corrected and
unied four key formulas describing electricity and mag-
netism into his eponymous equations (d F= 0, d?F=J
in dierential form notation), he revealed the nature of
light and enabled the era of wireless communication.
Here we make a humble attempt to automate part of this
process. The goal of the unication is to output a mas-
ter theory T=f(fp;)g, such that varying the parameter
vector p2Rncan generate a continuum of theories ( fp;)
including previously discovered ones. For example, New-
ton's law of gravitation can be viewed as a master theory
unifying the gravitational force formulas around dierent
planets by introducing a parameter pcorresponding to
planet mass. Einstein's special relativity can be viewed
as a master theory unifying the approximate formulas for
vcandvcmotion.
log2max(1;jxj), (ln 2) 1sinh 1jxjand (2 ln 2) 1sinh 1(x2).
Unless otherwise specied, we choose = 2 32in our experi-
ments.
0 20 30 40 5001020304050
10
Model bitsData bitsπ
21/2
53/17 + 0.00000000314159≈3
≈22/7
≈333/106
≈355/113
≈53/17≈25/8≈0FIG. 3: Illustration of our minimum-description-
length (MDL) analysis of the parameter vector
p=f;p
2;3:43180632382353g. We approximate each
real number ras a fraction ak=bkusing the rst kterms of its
continued fraction expansion, and for each integer k= 1;:::,
we plot the number of \data bits" required to encode the
prediction error r ak=bkto 14 decimal places versus the
number of \model bits" required to encode the rational
approximation ak=bk, as described in the text. We then
select the point with smallest bit sum (furthest down/left
from the diagonal) as our rst approximation candidate to
test. Generic irrational numbers are incompressible; the
total description length (model bits+data bits) is roughly
independent of kas is seen for andp
2, corresponding
to a line of slope  1 around which there are small random
uctuations. In contrast, the green/light grey curve (bottom)
is for a parameter that is anomalously close to a rational
number, and the curve reveals this by the approximation
53=17 reducing the total description length (model+data
bits) by about 16 bits.
We perform unication by rst computing the descrip-
tion length dl(i)of the prediction function fi(in sym-
bolic form) for each theory iand performing clustering
onfdl(i)g. Unication is then achieved by discovering
similarities and variations between the symbolic formu-
las in each cluster, retaining the similar patterns, and
introducing parameters in place of the parameters that
vary as detailed in Appendix D.
F. Lifelong Learning
Isaac Newton once said \If I have seen further it is by
standing on the shoulders of giants", emphasizing the

==== Page 6 ====
6
utility of building on past discoveries. At a more basic
level, our past experiences enable us humans to model
new environments much faster than if we had to re-
acquire all our knowledge from scratch. We therefore
embed a lifelong learning strategy into the architecture
of the AI Physicist. As shown in Fig. 1 and Alg. 1, the
theory hub stores successfully learned theories, organizes
them with our Occam's razor and unication algorithms
(reminiscent of what humans do while dreaming and re-
ecting), and when encountering new environments, uses
its accumulated knowledge to propose new theories that
can explain parts of the data. This both ensures that past
experiences are not forgotten and enables faster learn-
ing in novel environments. The detailed algorithms for
proposing and adding theories are in Appendix E.
III. RESULTS OF NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
A. Physics Environments
We test our algorithms on two suites of benchmarks, each
with increasing complexity. In all cases, the goal is to
predict the two-dimensional motion as accurately as pos-
sible. One suite involves chaotic and highly nonlinear
motion of a charged double pendulum in two adjacent
electric elds. The other suite involves balls aected
by gravity, electromagnetic elds, springs and bounce-
boundaries, as exemplied in Figure 4. Within each spa-
tial region, the force corresponds to a potential energy
functionV/(ax+by+c)nfor some constants a,b,
c, wheren= 0 (no force), n= 1 (uniform electric or
gravitational eld), n= 2 (spring obeying Hooke's law)
orn=1(ideal elastic bounce), and optionally involves
also a uniform magnetic eld. The environments are sum-
marized in Table IV.
B. Numerical Results
In the mystery world example of Figure 4, after the
DDAC algorithm 2 taking the sequence of coordinates as
the only input, we see that the AI Physicist has learned
to simultaneously predict the future position of the ball
from the previous two, and classify without external su-
pervision the observed inputs into four big physics do-
mains. The predictions are seen to be more accurate
deep inside the domains (tiny dots) than near bound-
aries (larger dots) where transitions and bounces create
small domains with laws of motion that are harder to
infer because of complexity and limited data. Because
these small domains can be automatically inferred and
eliminated once the large ones are known as described in
Appendix H, all accuracy benchmarks quoted below refer
to points in the large domains only.
FIG. 4: In this sample mystery world, a ball moves through a
harmonic potential (upper left quadrant), a gravitational eld
(lower left) and an electromagnetic eld (lower right quad-
rant) and bounces elastically from four walls. The only input
to the AI Physicist is the sequence of dots (ball positions);
the challenge is to learn all boundaries and laws of motion
(predicting each position from the previous two). The color
of each dot represents the domain into which it is classied
byc, and its area represents the description length of the er-
ror with which its position is predicted ( = 10 6) after the
DDAC (dierentiable divide-and-conquer) algorithm; the AI
Physicist tries to minimize the total area of all dots.
After DDAC, the AI Physicist performs Occam's-razor-
with-MDL (Alg. 3) on the learned theories. As an exam-
ple, it discovers that the motion deep inside the lower-left
quadrant obeys the dierence equation parameterized by
a learned 3-layer neural net, which after the rst collapse-
Layer transformation simplies to
^yt=
-0.99999994 0.00000006 1.99999990 -0.00000012
-0.00000004 -1.0000000 0.00000004 2.00000000
xt
+
0.01088213
-0.00776199
; (9)
with DL( f) = 212:7 andP
tDL(ut) = 2524:1. The snap-
ping stage thereafter simplies this to
^yt=
-1 0 2 0
0 -1 0 2
xt+
0.010882
-0.007762
: (10)
which has lower description length in both model bits
(DL(f) = 55:6) and data bits (P
tDL(ut) = 2519:6) and
gets transformed to the symbolic expressions
^xt+2= 2xt+1 xt+ 0:010882;
^yt+2= 2yt+1 yt 0:007762; (11)

==== Page 7 ====
7
where we have writen the 2D position vector y= (x;y)
for brevity. During unication (Alg. D), the AI Physicist
discovers multiple clusters of theories based on the DL of
each theory, where one cluster has DL ranging between
48.86 and 55.63, which it unies into a master theory fp
with
^xt+2= 2xt+1 xt+p1;
^yt+2= 2yt+1 yt+p2; (12)
eectively discovering a \gravity" master theory out of
the dierent types of environments it encounters. If so
desired, the dierence equations (12) can be automati-
cally generalized to the more familiar-looking dierential
equations
x=gx;
y=gy;
wheregipi(t)2, and both the Harmonic Oscillator
Equation and Lorentz Force Law of electromagnetism can
be analogously auto-inferred from other master theories
learned.
Many mystery domains in our test suite involve laws of
motion whose parameters include both rational and irra-
tional numbers. To count a domain as \solved" below,
we use the very stringent requirement that any rational
numbers (including integers) must be discovered exactly ,
while irrational numbers must be recovered with accu-
racy 10 4.
We apply our AI Physicist to 40 mystery worlds in se-
quence (Appendix I). After this training, we apply it to a
suite of 40 additional worlds to test how it learns dierent
numbers of examples. The results are shown in tables III
and IV, and Table II summarizes these results using the
median over worlds. For comparison, we also show results
for two simpler agents with similar parameter count: a
\baseline" agent consisting of a three-layer feedforward
MSE-minimizing leakyReLU network and a \newborn"
AI Physicist that has not seen any past examples and
therefore cannot benet from the lifelong learning strat-
egy.
We see that the newborn agent outperforms baseline on
all the tabulated measures, and that the AI Physicist
does still better. Using all data, the Newborn agent and
AI Physicist are able to predict with mean-squared pre-
diction error below 10 13, more than nine orders of mag-
nitude below baseline. Moreover, the Newborn and AI
Physicist agents are able to simultaneously learn the do-
main classiers with essentially perfect accuracy, without
external supervision. Both agents are able to solve above
90% of all the 40 mystery worlds according to our strin-
gent criteria.
The main advantage of the AI Physicist over the New-
born agent is seen to be its learning speed, attaining given
accuracy levels faster, especially during the early stage of
learning. Remarkably, for the subsequent 40 worlds, theBenchmark Baseline Newborn AI Physicist
log10mean-squared error -3.89 -13.95 -13.88
Classication accuracy 67.56% 100.00% 100.00%
Fraction of worlds solved 0.00% 90.00% 92.50%
Description length for f11,338.7 198.9 198.9
Epochs until 10 2MSE 95 83 15
Epochs until 10 4MSE 6925 330 45
Epochs until 10 6MSE1 5403 3895
Epochs until 10 8MSE1 6590 5100
log10MSE
using 100% of data -3.78 -13.89 -13.89
using 50% of data -3.84 -13.76 -13.81
using 10% of data -3.16 -7.38 -10.54
using 5% of data -3.06 -6.06 -6.20
using 1% of data -2.46 -3.69 -3.95
Epochs until 10 2MSE
using 100% of data 95 80 15
using 50% of data 190 152.5 30
using 10% of data 195 162.5 30
using 5% of data 205 165 30
using 1% of data 397.5 235 35
TABLE II: Summary of numerical results, taking the median
over 40 mystery environments from Table III (top part) and
on 40 novel environments with varying fraction of random
examples (bottom parts), where each world is run with 10
random initializations and taking the best performance. Ac-
curacies refer to big regions only.
AI Physicist reaches 0.01 MSE within 35 epochs using
as little as 1% of the data, performing almost as well
as with 50% of the data much better than the Newborn
agent. This illustrates that the lifelong learning strategy
enables the AI Physicist to learn much faster in novel
environments with less data. This is much like an expe-
rienced scientist can solve new problems way faster than
a beginner by building on prior knowledge about similar
problems.
Our double-pendulum mysteries (Appendix I 2) are more
challenging for all the agents, because the motion is more
nonlinear and indeed chaotic. Although none of our
double-pendulum mysteries get exactly solved according
to our very stringent above-mentioned criterion, Figure 5
illustrates that the Newborn agent does a good job: it
discovers the two domains and classies points into them
with an accuracy of 96.5%. Overall, the Newborn agent
has a median best accuracy of 91.0% compared with the
baseline of 76.9%. The MSE prediction error is compa-
rable to the baseline performance ( 410 4) in the
median, since both architectures have similar large ca-
pacity. We analyze this challenge and opportunities for
improvement below.

==== Page 8 ====
8
FIG. 5: In this mystery, a charged double pendulum moves
through two dierent electric elds E1andE2, with a do-
main boundary corresponding to cos 1+ cos2= 1:05 (the
black curve above left, where the lower charge crosses the E-
eld boundary). The color of each dot represents the domain
into which it is classied by a Newborn agent, and its area
represents the description length of the error with which its
position is predicted, for a precision oor 0:006. In this
world, the Newborn agent has a domain prediction accuracy
of 96.5%.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented a toy \AI Physicist" unsupervised
learning agent centered around the learning and manip-
ulation of theories, which in polynomial time learns to
parsimoniously predict both aspects of the future (from
past observations) and the domain in which these predic-
tions are accurate.
A. Key ndings
Testing it on a suite of mystery worlds involving random
combinations of gravity, electromagnetism, harmonic mo-
tion and elastic bounces, we found that its divide-and-
conquer and Occam's razor strategies eectively identi-
ed domains with dierent laws of motion and reduced
the mean-squared prediction error billionfold, typically
recovering integer and rational theory parameters ex-
actly. These two strategies both encouraged prediction
functions to specialize: the former on the domains they
handled best, and the latter on the data points within
their domain that they handled best. Adding the lifelong
learning strategy greatly accelerated learning in novel en-
vironments.B. What has been learned?
Returning to the broader context of unsupervised learn-
ing from Section I raises two important questions: what
is the diculty of the problems that our AI physicist
solved, and what is the generality of our paradigm?
In terms of diculty , our solved physics problems are
clearly on the easier part of the spectrum, so if we were
to have faced the supervised learning problem where the
dierent domains were pre-labeled, the domain learning
would have been a straightforward classication task and
the forecasting task could have been easily solved by a
standard feedforward neural network. Because the real
world is generally unlabeled, we instead tackled the more
dicult problem where boundaries of multiple domains
had to be learned concurrently with the dynamical evolu-
tion rules in a fully unsupervised fashion. The dramatic
performance improvement over a traditional neural net-
work seen in Table III reects the power of the divide-
and-conquer and Occam's razor strategies, and their ro-
bustness is indicated by the the fact that unsupervised
domain discovery worked well even for the two-eld non-
linear double-pendulum system whose dynamic is notori-
ously chaotic and whose domain boundary is the curved
rhomboid cos 1+ cos2= 1:05.
In terms of generality , our core contribution lies in the AI
physicist paradigm we propose (combining divide-and-
conquer, Occams razor, unication and lifelong learning),
not in the specic implementation details. Here we draw
inspiration from the history of the Turing Machine: Tur-
ing's initial implementation of a universal computer was
very inecient for all but toy problems, but his frame-
work laid out the essential architectural components that
subsequent researchers developed into today's powerful
computers. What has been learned is that our AI physi-
cist paradigm outperforms traditional deep learning on
a test suite of problems even though it is a fully gen-
eral paradigm that is was not designed specically for
these problems. For example, it is dened to work for
an arbitrary number of input spatial dimensions, spatial
domains, past time steps used, boundaries of arbitrary
shapes, and evolution laws of arbitrary complexity.
From the above-mentioned successes and failures of our
paradigm, we have also learned about promising oppor-
tunities for improvement of the implementation which we
will now discuss. First of all, the more modest success in
the double-pendulum experiments illustrated the value
of learned theories being simple : if they are highly com-
plex, they are less likely to unify or generalize to future
environments, and the correspondingly complex baseline
model will have less incentive to specialize because it has
enough expressive power to approximate the motion in all
domains at once. It will therefore be valuable to improve
techniques for simplifying complex learned neural nets.
The specic implementation details for the Occam's Ra-
zor toolkit would then change, but the principle and nu-

==== Page 9 ====
9
merical objective would remain the same: reducing their
total description length from equation (4). There are
many promising opportunities for this using techniques
from the Monte-Carlo-Markov-Chain-based and genetic
techniques [54], reinforcement learning [55, 56] and sym-
bolic regression [57, 58] literature to simplify and shrink
the model architecture. Also, it will be valuable and
straightforward to generalize our implementation to sim-
plify not only the prediction functions, but also the clas-
siers, for example to nd sharp domain boundaries com-
posed of hyperplanes or other simple surfaces.
Analogously, there are many ways in which the unica-
tion and life-long learning toolkits can be improved while
staying within our AI physicist paradigm. For exam-
ple, unication can undoubtedly be improved by using
more sophisticated clustering techniques for grouping the
learned theories with similar ones. Life-long learning can
probably be made more ecient by using better meth-
ods for determining which previous theories to try when
faced by new data, for example by training a separate
neural network to perform this prediction task.
C. Outlook
In summary, these and other improvements to the algo-
rithms that implement our AI Physicist paradigm could
enable future unsupervised learning agents to learn sim-
pler and more accurate models faster from fewer exam-
ples, and also to discover accurate symbolic expressions
for more complicated physical systems. More broadly, AI
has been used with great success to tackle problems in
diverse areas of physics, ranging from quantum state re-
construction [59] to phase transitions [60{62], planetary
dynamics [63] and particle physics [64]. We hope that
building on the ideas of this paper may one day enable
AI to help us discover entirely novel physical theories
from data.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the
The Casey and Family Foundation, the Ethics and Gov-
ernance of AI Fund, the Foundational Questions Institute
and the Rothberg Family Fund for Cognitive Science. We
thank Isaac Chuang, John Peurifoy and Marin Solja ci c
for helpful discussions and suggestions, and the Center
for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM) for hospital-
ity.
Appendix A: AI Physicist Algorithm
The detailed AI Physicist algorithm is presented in Al-
gorithm 1, with links to each of the individual sub-
algorithms. Like most numerical methods, the algorithm
contains a number of hyperparameters that can be tuned
to optimize performance; Table V lists them and their
settings for our numerical experiments.Algorithm 1 AI Physicist: Overall algorithm
Given observations D=f(xt;yt)gfrom new environment:
1:TM0 Hub .propose-theories( D;M 0) (Alg. 5)
2:T dierentiable-divide-and-conquer( D;TM0)(Alg. 2)
3:Hub .add-theories( T;D) (Alg. 6)
Organizing theory hub:
T Hub .Occam's-Razor-with-MDL( T;D) (Alg. 3)
T Hub .unify( T) (Alg. 4)
Appendix B: The Dierentiable Divide-and-Conquer
(DDAC) Algorithm
Here we elaborate on our dierentiable divide-and-
conquer (DDAC) algorithm with generalized-mean loss
L(Eq. (2)). This loss with  <0 works with a broad
range of distance functions `satisfying Theorem 1. Since
the goal of our AI Physicist is to minimize the overall
description length (DL) from equation (4), we choose `
to be the DL loss function of equation (7) together with
= 1 (harmonic loss), which works quite well in prac-
tice.
Algorithm 2 describes our dierentiable divide-and-
conquer implementation, which consists of two stages.
In the rst stage (steps 2-6), it applies the subroutine
IterativeTrain( T;D;` DL;;L 1) with harmonic loss L 1
to train the theories Ta few times with the precision
oorgradually lowered according to the following an-
nealing schedule. We set the initial precision oor to
be quite large so that `initially approximates an MSE
loss function. After each successive iteration, we reset 
to the median prediction error.
The DL loss function from equation (7) is theoretically
desirable but tricky to train, both because it is non-
convex and because it is quite at and uninformative far
from its minimum. Our annealing schedule helps over-
come both problems: initially when is large, it approx-
imates MSE-loss which is convex and guides the training
to a good approximate minimum, which further training
accurately pinpoints as is reduced.
The subroutine IterativeTrain forms the core of the al-
gorithm. In the rst stage (steps 2-6), it uses the har-
monic mean of the DL-loss of multiple prediction func-
tions f= (f1;:::;fM) (i.e., equation (2) with = 1
and`=DL) to simultaneously train these functions, en-
couraging them to each specialize in the domains where
they predict best (as proven by Theorem 1), and simul-
taneously trains the domain classier c= (c1;:::;cM)
using each example's best-performing prediction function
as target, with categorical cross-entropy loss. After sev-
eral rounds of IterativeTrain with successively lower pre-
cision oors, each prediction function typically becomes
good at predicting part of the dataset, and the domain
classier becomes good at predicting for each example

==== Page 10 ====
10
Algorithm 2 AI Physicist: Dierentiable
Divide-and-Conquer with Harmonic Loss
Require DatasetD=f(xt;yt)g
RequireM: number of initial total theories for training
Require TM0=f(fi;ci)g;i= 1;:::;M 0;0M0M:
theories proposed from theory hub
RequireK: number of gradient iterations
Requiref;c: learning rates
Require0: initial precision oor
1: Randomly initialize M M0theoriesTi;i=M0+ 1;
:::;M . Denote T= (T1;;:::;TM),f= (f1;:::;fM),
c= (c1;:::cM) with learnable parameters and.
//Harmonic training with DL loss:
2: 0
3:forkinf1;2;3;4;5gdo:
4: T IterativeTrain (T;D;` DL;;L 1), where
L 1P
t
1
MPM
i=1`[fi(xt);yt] 1 1
(Eq. 2)
5: setepsilon( T;D) // median prediction error
6:end for
//Fine-tune each theory and its domain:
7:forkinf1;2gdo:
8: T IterativeTrain (T;D;` DL;;Ldom), where
LdomP
t`[fit(xt);yt] withit= arg maxici(xt)
9: setepsilon( T;D) // median prediction error
10:end for
11:return T
subroutine IterativeTrain (T;D;`;L) :
s1:forkinf1;:::;Kgdo:
// Gradient descent on fwith lossL:
s2: gf r L[T;D;` ]
s3: Update using gradients gf(e.g. Adam [65] or SGD)
// Gradient descent on cwith the best performing
theory index as target:
s4:bt arg minif`[fi(xt);yt]g;8t
s5: gc r P
(xt;)2DCrossEntropy[softmax( c(xt));bt]
s6: Update using gradients gc(e.g. Adam [65] or
SGD)
s7:end for
s8:T AddTheories( T;D;`;L) //Optional
s9:T DeleteTheories( T;D;` ) //Optional
s10:return T
which prediction function will predict best.
AddTheories( T;D;`;L) inspects each theory Tidescrib-
ing at least a large fraction insp(we use 30%) of the
examples to see if a non-negligible proportion splitof
examples (we use a threshold of 5%) of the examples in-
side its domain have MSE larger than a certain limit add
(we use 210 6) and thus warrant splitting o into a
separate domain.
If so, it uses those examples to initialize a new the-
oryTM+1, and performs tentative training together with
other theories using IterativeTrain without steps s8 ands9 (it is also possible to allow steps s8 and s9 in this
recursive calling of IterativeTrain, which will enable a
recursive adding of theories for not-well-explained data,
and may enable a more powerful DDAC algorithm). If
the resulting loss Lis smaller than before adding the
new theory,TM+1is accepted and retained, otherwise
it is rejected and training reverts to the checkpoint be-
fore adding the theory. DeleteTheories( T;D;` ) deletes
theories whose domain or best-predicted examples cover
a negligible fraction of the examples (we use a delete
thresholddel= 0:5%).
In the second stage (steps 7-10), the IterativeTrain is
applied again, but the loss for each example ( xt;yt) is
using only the theory that the domain classier c=
(c1;c2;:::cM) predicts (having the largest logit). In this
way, we iteratively ne-tune the prediction functions ffig
w.r.t. each of its domain, and ne-tune the domain to the
best performing theory at each point. The reason that
we assign examples to domains using our domain classi-
er rather than prediction accuracy is that the trained
domains are likely to be simpler and more contiguous,
thus generalizing better to unseen examples than, e.g.,
the nearest neighbor algorithm.
We now specify the default hyperparameters used for Al-
gorithm 1 in our experiments (unless otherwise specied).
We set the initial total number of theories M= 4, from
whichM0= 2 theories are proposed from the theory
hub. The initial precision oor 0= 10 and the number
of gradient iterations K= 10000. We use the Adam [65]
optimizer with default parameters for the optimization
of both the prediction function and the domain classi-
er. We randomly split each dataset DintoDtrain and
Dtestwith 4:1 ratio. The Dtestis used only for evalua-
tion of performance. The batch size is set to min(2000,
jDtrainj). We set the initial learning rate f= 510 3
for the prediction functions fandc= 10 3for the do-
main classier c. We also use a learning rate scheduler
that monitors the validation loss every 10 epochs, and
divides the learning rate by 10 if the validation loss has
failed to decrease after 40 monitoring points and stops
training early if there is no decrease after 200 epochs |
or if the entire MSE loss for all the theories in their re-
spective domains drops below 10 12.
To the main harmonic loss L, we add two regularization
terms. One is L1loss whose strength increases quadrat-
ically from 0 to L1during the rst 5000 epochs and
remains constant thereafter. The second regularization
term is a very small MSE loss of strength MSE, to en-
courage the prediction functions to remain not too far
away from the target outside their domain.
Appendix C: Occam's Razor with MDL Algorithm
Pushing on after the DDAC algorithm with harmonic
loss that minimizes theP
tDL(ut) term in Eq. (4), the

==== Page 11 ====
11
Algorithm 3 AI Physicist: Occam's Razor with
MDL
Require DatasetD=f(xt;yt)g
Require T=f(fi;ci)g;i= 1;:::;M : theories trained after
Alg. 2
Require: Precision oor for `DL;
1:foriinf1;:::;Mgdo:
2:D(i) f(xt;yt)jarg maxjfcj(xt)g=ig
3: fi MinimizeDL (collapseLayers ;fi;D(i);)
4: fi MinimizeDL (localSnap;fi;D(i);)
5: fi MinimizeDL (integerSnap ;fi;D(i);)
6: fi MinimizeDL (rationalSnap ;fi;D(i);)
7: fi MinimizeDL (toSymbolic ;fi;D(i);)
8:end for
9:return T
subroutine MinimizeDL (transformation, fi,D(i),):
s1:while transformation.is applicable( fi)do:
s2: dl 0 DL(fi) +P
(xt;yt)2D(i)`DL;[fi(xt);yt]
s3:fclone fi//clone fiin case transformation fails
s4: fi transformation( fi)
s5: fi Minimize fiP
(xt;yt)2D(i)`DL;[fi(xt);yt]
s6: dl 1 DL(fi) +P
(xt;yt)2D(i)`DL;[fi(xt);yt]
s7: ifdl1>dl0returnfclone
s8:end while
s9:return fi
AI Physicist then strives to minimize the DL( T) term,
which can be decomposed as DL( T) = DL( f)+DL( c),
where f= (f1;:::fM) and c= (c1;:::cM). We focus on
minimizing DL( f), since in dierent environments the
prediction functions fican often be reused, while the do-
mains may dier. As mentioned, we dene DL( f) simply
as the sum of the description lengths of the numbers pa-
rameterizing f:
DL(f) =X
jDL(j): (C1)
This means that DL( f) can be signicantly reduced if
an irrational parameter is replaced by a simpler rational
number.
If a physics experiment or neural net training produces a
parameterp= 1:999942, it would be natural to interpret
this as a hint, and to check if p= 2 gives an equally ac-
ceptable t to the data. We formalize this by replacing
any real-valued parameter piin our theoryTby its near-
est integer if this reduces the total description length in
equation (4), as detailed below. We start this search for
integer candidates with the parameter that is closest to
an integer, retting for the other parameters after each
successful \integer snap".
What if we instead observe a parameter p= 1:5000017?
Whereas generic real numbers have a closest integer, they
lack a closest rational number. Moreover, as illustrated
in Figure 2, we care not only about closeness (to avoid in-
creasing the second term in equation (4)), but also about
simplicity (to reduce the rst term). To rapidly nd thebest \rational snap" candidates (dots in Figure 2 that
lie both near pand far down), we perform a continued
fraction expansion of pand use each series truncation as
a rational candidate. We repeat this for all parameters
in the theoryT, again accepting only those snaps that
reduce the total description length. We again wish to try
the most promising snap candidates rst; to rapidly iden-
tify promising candidates without having to recompute
the second term in equation (4), we evaluate all trunca-
tions of all parameters as in Figure 3, comparing the de-
scription length of the rational approximation q=m=n
with the description length of the approximation error
jp qj. The most promising candidate minimizes their
sum, i.e., lies furthest down to the left of the diagonal
in the gure. The gure illustrates how, given the pa-
rameter vector p=f;p
2;3:43180632382353g, the rst
snap to be attempted will replace the third parameter by
53=17.
We propose Algorithm 3 to implement the above mini-
mization of DL( f) without increasing DL( T;D) (Eq. 4).
For each theoryTi= (fi;ci), we rst extract the examples
D(i)inside its domain, then perform a series of tentative
transformations (simplications) of the prediction func-
tionfiusing the MinimizeDL subroutine. This subrou-
tine takes fi, the transformation, and D(i)as inputs and
repeatedly applies the transformation to fi. After each
such transformation, it ne-tunes the t of fitoD(i)us-
ing gradient descent. For determining whether to accept
the transformation, Algorithm 3 presents the simplest 0-
step patience implementation: if the description length
dl = DL( fi) +P
(xt;yt)2D(i)`DL;(fi(xt);yt) for theory i
decreases, then apply the transformation again if pos-
sible, otherwise exit the loop. In general, to allow for
temporary increase of DL during the transformations, a
non-zero patience can be adopted: at each step, save the
best performing model as the pivot model, and if DL does
not decrease during nconsecutive transformations inside
MinimizeDL, exit the loop. In our implementation, we
use a 4-step patience.
We now detail the ve transformations used in Algorithm
3. The collapseLayer transformation nds all successive
layers of a neural net where the lower layer has linear
activation, and combines them into one. The toSymbolic
transformation transforms fifrom the form of a neural
net into a symbolic expression (in our implementation,
from a PyTorch net to a SymPy symbolic lambda expres-
sion). These two transformations are one-time transfor-
mations (for example, once fihas been transformed to a
symbolic expression, toSymbolic cannot be applied to it
again.) The localSnap transformation successively sets
the incoming weights in the rst layer to 0, thus favor-
ing inputs that are closer to the current time step. The
integerSnap transformation nds the (non-snapped) pa-
rameters in fithat is closest to an integer, and snaps it to
that integer. The rationalSnap transformation nds the
(non-snapped) parameter in fithat has the lowest bit
sum when replaced by a rational number, as described

==== Page 12 ====
12
in section II D, and snaps it to that rational number.
The latter three transformations can be applied multiple
times to fi, until there are no more parameters to snap
infi, or the transformation followed by ne-tuning fails
to reduce the description length.
In the bigger picture, Algorithm 3 is an implementation
of minimizing the DL( f) without increasing the total
DL(T;D), if the description length of fis given by Eq.
(C1). There can be other ways to encode Twith a dier-
ent formula for DL( T), in which case the transformations
for decreasing DL( T) may be dierent. But the struc-
ture of the Algorithm 3 remains the same, with the goal
of minimizing DL( f) without increasing DL( T;D) w.r.t.
whatever DL formula it is based on.
In the still bigger picture, Algorithm 3 is a computation-
ally ecient approximate implementation of the MDL
formalism, involving the following two approximations:
1. The description lengths DL( x) for various types of
numbers are approximate, for convenience. For ex-
ample, the length of the shortest self-terminating
bit-string encoding an arbitrary natural number
ngrows slightly faster than our approximation
log2n, because self-termination requires storing not
only the binary digits of the integer, but also
the length of said bit string, recursively, requiring
log2n+ log2log2n+ log2log2n+:::, where only
the positive terms are included [51]. Slight addi-
tional overhead is required to upgrade the encod-
ings to actual programs in some suitable language,
including encoding of whether bits encode integers,
rational numbers, oating-point numbers, etc..
2. If the above-mentioned DL( x)-formulas were made
exact, they would be mere upper bounds on the true
minimum description length. For example, our al-
gorithm gives a gigabyte description length forp
2
with precision = 256 109, even though it can be
computed by a rather short program, and there is
no simple algorithm for determining which numbers
can be accurately approximated by algebraic num-
bers. Computing the true minimum description
length is a famous numerically intractable problem.
Appendix D: Unication Algorithm
The unication process takes as input the symbolic pre-
diction functions f(fi;)g, and outputs master theories
T=f(fp;)gsuch that by varying each pinfp, we can
generate a continuum of prediction functions fiwithin
a certain class of prediction functions. The symbolic
expression consists of 3 building blocks: operators (e.g.
+, ,,=), input variables (e.g. x1;x2), and coecients
that can be either a rational number or irrational num-
ber. The unication algorithm rst calculates the DLAlgorithm 4 AI Physicist: Theory Unication
Require Hub : theory hub
RequireC: initial number of clusters
1:for(fi;ci)in Hub .all-symbolic-theories do:
2: dl(i) DL(fi)
3:end for
4:fSkg ClusterffigintoCclusters based on dl(i)
5:forSkinfSkgdo:
6: ( gik;hik) Canonicalize (fik),8fik2Sk
7: h
k Mode offhikjfik2Skg.
8:Gk fgikjhik=h
kg
9: gpk Traverse all gik2Gkwith synchronized steps,
replacing the coecient by a pjkwhen not all
coecients at the same position are identical.
10: fpk toPlainForm( gpk)
11:end for
12:T f(fpk;)g,k= 1;2;:::C
13:T MergeSameForm( T)
14:return T
subroutine Canonicalize (fi):
s1:gi ToTreeForm( fi)
s2:hi Replace all non-input coecient by a symbol s
return (gi;hi)
dl(i)of each prediction function, then clusters them into
Kclusters using e.g. K-means clustering. Within each
clusterSk, it rst canonicalizes each fik2Skinto a 2-
tuple ( gik;hik), where gikis a tree-form expression of fik
where each internal node is an operator, and each leaf is
an input variable or a coecient. When multiple order-
ings are equivalent (e.g. x1+x2+x3vs.x1+x3+x2),
it always uses a predened partial ordering. hikis the
structure of gikwhere all coecients are replaced by an
ssymbol. Then the algorithm obtains a set of gikthat
has the same structure hikwith the largest cardinality
(steps 7-8). This will eliminate some expressions within
the cluster that might interfere with the following uni-
cation process. Step 9 is the core part, where it traverses
eachgik2Gkwith synchronized steps using e.g. depth-
rst search or breath-rst search. This is possible since
eachgik2Gkhas the same tree structure h
k. During
traversing, whenever encountering a coecient and not
all coecients across Gkat this position are the same,
replace the coecients by some symbol pjkthat has not
been used before. Essentially, we are turning all coe-
cients that varies across Gkinto a parameter, and the
coecients that do not vary stay as they are. In this
way, we obtain a master prediction function fpk. Finally,
at step 13, the algorithm merges the master prediction
functions in T=f(fpk;)gthat have the exact same
form, and return T. The domain classier is neglected
during the unication process, since at dierent environ-
ments, each prediction function can have vastly dier-
ent spacial domains. It is the prediction function (which
characterizes the equation of motion) that is important
for generalization.

==== Page 13 ====
13
Algorithm 5 AI Physicist: Theory Proposing
from Hub
Require Hub : theory hub
Require DatasetD=f(xt;yt)g
RequireM0: number of theories to propose from the hub
1:f(fi;ci)g Hub:retrieve-all-theories()
2:D(i)
best f(xt;yt)jargminj`DL;[fj(xt);yt] =ig,8i
3:TM0 
(fi;ci)D(i)
bestranks among M0largest sets infD(i)
bestg	
4:return TM0
Algorithm 6 AI Physicist: Adding Theories to
Hub
Require Hub : theory hub
Require T=f(fi;cig: Trained theories from Alg. 2
Require DatasetD=f(xt;yt)g
Require: DL threshold for adding theories to hub
1:D(i) f(xt;yt)jarg maxjfcj(xt)g=ig;8i
2: dl(i) 1
jD(i)jP
(xt;yt)2D(i)`DL;(fi(xt);yt);8i
3:foriinf1;2;:::jTjgdo:
4: ifdl(i)<do
5: Hub .addIndividualTheory(( fi;ci);D(i))
6: end if
7:end for
Appendix E: Adding and Proposing Theories
Here we detail the algorithms adding theories to the hub
and proposing them for use in new environments. Alg. 5
provides a simplest version of the theory proposing algo-
rithm. Given a new dataset D, the theory hub inspects
all theories i, and for each one, counts the number niof
data points where it outperforms all other theories. The
topM0theories with largest niare then proposed.
For theory adding after training with DDAC (Alg. 2),
each theory icalculates its description length dl(i)inside
its domain. If its dl(i)is smaller than a threshold ,
then the theory ( fi;ci) with its corresponding examples
D(i)are added to the theory hub. The reason why the
dataD(i)are also added to the hub is that D(i)gives a
reference for how the theory ( fi;ci) was trained, and is
also needed in the Occam's razor algorithm.
Appendix F: Time complexity
In this appendix, we list crude estimates of the time com-
plexity of our AI physicist algorithm, i.e., of how its run-
time scales with key parameters.
DDAC , the dierentiable divide-and-conquer algorithm,
algorithm (Alg. 2), is run once for each of the nmystdier-
ent mystery worlds, with a total runtime scaling roughly
as
O(nmystnparndatan2
dom);wherenparis the average number of neural-network pa-
rameter in a theory, ndatais the average number of data
points (time steps) per mystery and ndomis the number
of discovered domains (in our case 4). The power of
two forndomappears because the time to evaluate the
loss function scales as ndom, and we need to perform of
orderndomtraining cycles to add the right number of
theories. The nparscaling is due to that the forward
and backward propagation of neural net involves succes-
sive matrix multiplied by a vector, which scales as O(n2)
wheren'q
npar=Nf
layis the matrix dimension for each
layer andNf
layis the number of layers. Accumulating
all layers we have Nf
layn2=npar. We make no attempt
to model how the number of training epochs needed to
attain the desired accuracy depends on parameters.
OurLifelong learning algorithm is also run once per
mystery, with a time cost dominated by that for propos-
ing new theories (Alg. 5), which scales as
O(nmystndatantheo):
Herentheois the number of theories in theory hub.
In contrast, our Occam's Razor algorithm (Alg. 3) and
unication algorithm (Alg. 4) are run once per learned
theory, not once per mystery. For Occam's Razor, the to-
tal runtime is dominated by that for snapping to rational
numbers, which scales as
O(nparndatantheo):
For the unication, the total runtime scales as
O(nparntheo), which can be neglected relative to the cost
of Occam's razor.
We note that all these algorithms have merely polynomial
time complexity. The DDAC algorithm dominates the
time cost; our mystery worlds were typically solved in
about 1 hour each on a single CPU. If vast amounts of
data are available, it may suce to analyze a random
subset of much smaller size.
Appendix G: Proof of Theorem 1 and Corollary
Here we give the proof for Theorem 1, restated here for
convenience.
Theorem 1 Let^y(i)
tfi(xt)denote the prediction of the
target ytby the function fi,i= 1;2;:::M . Suppose that
 < 0and`(^yt;yt) =`(j^yt ytj)for a monotonically
increasing function `(u)that vanishes on [0;u0]for some
u00, with`(u)dierentiable and strictly convex for
u>u 0.
Then if 0<`(^y(i)
t;yt)<`(^y(j)
t;yt), we have
@L
@u(i)
t>@L
@u(j)
t; (G1)

==== Page 14 ====
14
whereu(i)
tj^y(i)
t ytj.
Proof . Sinceu(i)
tj^y(i)
t ytjand`(^yt;yt) =`(j^yt ytj),
the generalized mean loss Las dened in Eq. 3 can be
rewritten as
L=X
t 
1
MMX
k=1`(u(k)
t)!1

; (G2)
which implies that
@L
@u(i)
t=1
M 
1
MMX
k=1`(u(k)
t)!1
 1
d`(u(i)
t)
du(i)
t
=1
jjM 
1
MMX
k=1`(u(k)
t)!1
 1d`(u(i)
t)
du(i)
t:
Since only the last factor depends on i, proving equa-
tion (G1) is equivalent to proving that
d`(u(i)
t)
du(i)
t>d`(u(j)
t)
du(j)
t: (G3)
Let us henceforth consider only the case u > u 0, since
the conditions `(u(j)
t)> `(u(i)
t)>0 implyu(j)
t> u(i)
t>
u0. Since < 0,`(u)>0 and`0(u)0, we have
d`(u)
du=`(u) 1`0(u)0, so thatd`(u)
du= d`(u)
du.
Because`(u)is dierentiable and strictly convex, its
derivatived`(u)
duis monotonically increasing, implying
thatd`(u)
du= d`(u)
duis monotonically decreasing.
Thusd`(u1)
du1>d`(u2)
du2wheneveru1< u 2. Setting
u1=j^y(i)
t ytjandu2=j^y(j)
t ytjtherefore implies
equation (G3), which completes the proof.
The following corollary 1.1 demonstrates that the theo-
rem applies to several popular loss functions as well as
our two description-length loss functions.
Corollary 1.1 Deninguj^y yj, the following loss
functions which depend only on usatisfy the conditions
for Theorem 1:
1.`(u) =urfor anyr >0, which includes MSE loss
(r= 2) and mean-absolute-error loss ( r= 1).
2. Huber loss: `(u) =(
1
2u2; u2[0;]
(u 
2);otherwise;
where>0.
3. Description length loss
`DL;(u) =1
2log2
1 + u
2
.
4. Hard description length loss
`DLhard;(u) = log2max 
1;u

.Proof . We have u0= 0 for (1), (2), (3), and u0=for
(4). All four functions `are monotonically increasing,
satisfy`(0) = 0 and are dierentiable for u > u 0, so all
that remains to be shown is that `(u)is strictly convex
foru>u 0,i.e., thatd2`(u)
du2>0 whenu>u 0.
(1) For`(u) =urandu>0, we haved2`(u)
du2=r(r 
1)ur 2>0, since <0 andr >0 implies that r < 0
andr 1<0, so`(u)is strictly convex for u>0.
(2) The Huber loss `(u) is continuous with a continuous
derivative. It satisesd2`(u)
du2>0 both for 0 < u < 
and for <u according to the above proof of (1), since
`(u) is proportional to `rin these two intervals with
r= 2 andr= 1, respectively. At the transition point
u=, this second derivative is discontinuous, but takes
positive value approaching both from the left and from
the right, so `(u)is strictly convex. More generally,
any function `(u) built by smoothly connecting functions
`i(u) in dierent intervals will satisfy our theorem if the
functions`i(u) do.
(3) Proving strict convexity of `(u)when`is the descrip-
tion length loss `DL;(u) =1
2log2h
1 + u
2i
is equivalent
to proving it when `(u) =(u)ln(1 +u2), since con-
vexity is invariant under horizontal and vertical scaling.
We thus need to prove that
d2(u)
du2= 2[ln(1 +u2)] 2
(1 +u2)2[2u2(1 ) + (u2 1) ln(1 +u2)]
is positive when u > 0. The factor 2[ln(1+u2)] 2
(1+u2)2 is
always positive. The other factor
2u2(1 )+(u2 1)log(1+u2)>2u2+(u2 1)log(1+u2);
since <0. Now we only have to prove that the function
(u)2u2+ (u2 1)log(1 +u2)>0
whenu>0. We have (0) = 0 and
0(u) = 2u1 + 3u2
1 +u2+ log(1 +u2)
>0
whenu >0. Therefore (u) =(0) +Ru
00(u0)du0>0
whenu>0, which completes the proof that `DL;(u)is
strictly convex for u>0.
(4) For the hard description length loss `DLhard;(u) =
log2max 
1;ut

, we haveu0=. Whenu >  , we have
`0
DLhard;(u) =1
uln2>0 and
d2`
DLhard;(u)
du2=
ln 2
 1 + lnu
 
lnu
 2
u2:
Foru >  , the factor(lnu
) 2
u2 is always positive, as is
the factor( 1 + lnu
), since <0.`
DLhard;(u) is
therefore strictly convex for u> .

==== Page 15 ====
15
Appendix H: Eliminating Transition Domains
In this appendix, we show how the only hard problem
our AI Physicist need solve is to determine the laws of
motion far from domain boundaries, because once this is
done, the exact boundaries and transition regions can be
determined automatically.
Our AI Physicist tries to predict the next position vec-
toryt2Rdfrom the concatenation xt= (yt T;:::;yt 1)
of the last Tpositions vectors. Consider the example
shown in Figure 6, where motion is predicted from the
lastT= 3 positions in a space with d= 2 dimensions
containingn= 2 domains with dierent physics (an elec-
tromagnetic eld in the upper left quadrant and free mo-
tion elsewhere), as well as perfectly reective boundaries.
Although there are only two physics domains in the 2-
dimensional space, there are many more types of domains
in theTd= 6-dimensional space of xtfrom which the AI
Physicist makes its predictions of yt. When a trajectory
crosses the boundary between the two spatial regions,
there can be instances where xtcontains 3, 2, 1 or 0
points in the rst domain and correspondingly 0, 1, 2
or 3 points in the second domain. Similarly, when the
ball bounces, there can be instances where xtcontains 3,
2, 1 or 0 points before the bounce and correspondingly
0, 1, 2 or 3 points after. Each of these situations in-
volves a dierent function xt7!ytand a corresponding
6-dimensional domain of validity for the AI Physicist to
learn.
Our numerical experiments showed that the AI Physi-
cist typically solves the big domains (where all vectors
inxtlie in the same spatial region), but occasionally
fails to nd an accurate solution in some of the many
small transition domains involving boundary crossings or
bounces, where data is insucient. Fortunately, simple
post-processing can automatically eliminate these annoy-
ing transition domains with an algorithm that we will
now describe.
The rst step of the algorithm is illustrated in Figure 6.
For each big domain where our AI Physicist has discov-
ered the future-predicting function xt7!yt, we deter-
mine the corresponding function that predicts the past
(xt7!yt T 1) by tting to forward trajectories gener-
ated with random initial conditions. Now whenever a
trajectory passes from a big domain through a transition
region into another big domain, two dierent extrapola-
tions can be performed: forward in time from the rst big
domain or backward in time from the second big domain.
Using cubic spline interpolation, we t continuous func-
tionsyf(t) and yb(t) (smooth curves in Figure 6) to these
forward-extrapolated and backward-extrapolated trajec-
tories, and numerically nd the time
targ minjyf(t) yb(t)j (H1)
when the distance between the two predicted ball posi-
tions is minimized. If this minimum is numerically con-
sistent with zero, so that yf(t)yb(t), then we record
Observed
ExtrapolatedObservedExtrapolated
Observed
ExtrapolatedObservedInferred 
boundary
pointsFIG. 6: Points where forward and backward extrapolations
agree (large black dots) are boundary points. The tangent
vectors agree for region boundaries (upper example), but not
for bounce boundaries (lower example).
this as being a boundary point. If both extrapolations
have the same derivative there, i.e., ify0
f(t)y0
b(t),
then it is an interior boundary point between two dier-
ent regions (Figure 6, top), otherwise it is an external
boundary point where the ball bounces (Figure 6, bot-
tom).
Figure 7 show these two types of automatically computed
boundary points in green and black, respectively. These
can now be used to retrain the domain classiers to ex-
tend the big domains to their full extent, eliminating the
transition regions.
Occasionally the boundary point determinations ll fail
because of multiple transitions within Ttime steps, Fig-
ure 7 illustrates that these failures (red dots) forces us
to discard merely a tiny fraction of all cases, thus hav-
ing a negligible aect on the ability to t for the domain
boundaries.
Appendix I: Numerical Experiment Details
In this appendix, we provide supplementary details on
our benchmark problems.

==== Page 16 ====
16
FIG. 7: Example of automatically determined boundary
points, for region boundary points (green), bounce boundary
points (black) and failed cases (red).
1. Mystery Worlds
World generation Our mystery worlds consist of a ball
elastically bouncing against the square boundary of the
two-dimensional spatial region where jxj2 andjyj2
(see Figure 4). In each of the four quadrants, one of the
following laws of physics are selected, together with their
parameters sampled from distributions as follows:
1. Free motion.
2. A uniform gravitational eld g= (gx;gy;0) with
gx;gydrawn from a uniform distribution: gx;gy
U[ 5;5].
3. Harmonic motion with frequency !around a line
a distance afrom the origin, making an angle 
with thex-axis;!U[1;4],aU[0:2;0:5],
U[0;2].
4. A uniform electric eld E= (Ex;Ey;0) and mag-
netic eld B= (0;0;Bz);Ex,EyU[ 5;5],
BzU[0;10].
To control the diculty of the tasks and avoid near-
degenerate scenarios, we keep only mystery worlds sat-
isfying the following two criteria: (1) At least 0.01 sep-
aration between all equations of motion (EOM) in the
same world, dened as the Euclidean distance between
the vectors of coecients specifying the EOM dierenceequations, and (2) at least 0.0015 of any non-integer pa-
rameter from its nearest integer.
Trajectory simulation Within each world, we initial-
ize the ball with a random position ( x;y)U[ 1;1]2
and velocity ( v0cos0;v0sin0;0);v0U[0:1;0:5],0
U[0;2]. We then compute its position for N= 4;000
times steps t= 1;2;:::;N with time interval 0.05.
Although the above-mentioned laws of physics are lin-
ear, the mapping from past points ( yt T;:::;yt 1) to the
next points ytis generally non-linear because of region
boundaries where the ball either bounces or transitions
to a dierent physics region. An exception is when three
successive points lie within the same region (with the
same physics), which happens far from boundaries: in
this case, the mapping from ( yt 2;yt 1)7!ytis deter-
ministic and linear thanks to the dierential equations of
motion being second-order and linear.
Architecture For the Newborn and AI Physicist agents,
each prediction function fiis implemented as a Nf
lay-layer
neural network with linear activation, with Nf
neur-neuron
hidden layers (we use Nf
lay= 3,Nf
neur = 8 for our main
experiments; see Table V). Each domain sub-classier
ciis implemented as a Nc
lay-layer neural net, with two
hiddenNc
neur-neuron layers with leakyReLU activation
(x) = maxf0:3x;xg, and the output layer having linear
activation (we use Nc
lay= 3,Nc
neur= 8 for our main ex-
periments). The baseline model is implemented as a sin-
gleNf
lay-layer neural net with two hidden 16-neuron lay-
ers with leakyReLU activation followed by a linear out-
put layer. Note that for a fair comparison, the baseline
model has more hidden neurons, to roughly compensate
for the Newborn and AI Physicist agents typically hav-
ing multiple theories. The baseline network is nonlinear
to boost its expressive power for modeling the nonlinear
prediction function of each world as a whole. For the do-
main classier c= (c1;c2;:::cM), it is aNc
lay-layer neural
net where each hidden layer has Nc
neur = 8 neurons and
leakyReLU activation. The last layer has linear activa-
tion. See Table V for a list of hyperparameters.
Evaluation The unsupervised classication accuracy is
dened as the fraction of correctly classied points, us-
ing the permutation of the learned domain labels that
best matches the hidden ground truth domain labels. It
is \unsupervised" in the sense that there is no external
supervision signal as to which domain label each point
should be assigned to: the AI Physicist has to gure out
the number of domains and their boundaries and assign
each point to a domain, which is a dicult task.
We dene a domain as solved if the agent discovers the
its law of motion as dierence equation (prediction func-
tion) within the following stringent tolerance: all ra-
tional coecients in the dierence equation are exactly
matched, and all irrational coeents agree to an accu-
racy better than 10 4. Because of the nature of the
physics problems, some of these dierence equation co-
ecients take on the values 0,  1, or 2, so solving a

==== Page 17 ====
17
region requires successful integer snapping as described
in Section II D. To make the problem even harder, we
also ne-tune the magnetic eld in ve of the electro-
magnetic regions to make some of the coecients sim-
ple fractions such as 1 =3 and 1=4, thus making solv-
ing those regions contingent on successful rational snap-
ping as described in Section II D. Domain solving can
fail either by \undersnapping" (failing to approximate
a oating-point number by a rational number) or `over-
snapping" (mistakenly rounding to a rational number).
All our mystery worlds can be downloaded at http:
//space.mit.edu/home/tegmark/aiphysicist.html .
As shown in Appendix H, the only hard problem our AI
Physicist or other algorithms need to solve is to deter-
mine the laws of motion away from domain boundaries.
Therefore, we evaluate, tabulate and compare the per-
formance of the algorithms only on interior points, i.e.,
excluding data points ( xt;yt) straddling a boundary en-
counter.
2. Double Pendulum
Our double pendulum is implemented as two connected
pendulums with massless rods of length 1 and that each
have a point charge of 1 at their end. As illustrated
in Figure 5, the system state is fully determined by the
4-tuple y= (1;_1;2;_2) and immersed in a piecewise
constant electric eld E:E= (0; E1) in the upper half
planey 1:05, and E= (0;E2) in the lower half plane
y< 1:05, using coordinates where yincreases vertically
and the origin is at the pivot point of the upper rod.
We generate 7 environments by setting ( E1;E2) equal to
(E0;2E0), (E0;1:5E0), (E0;E0), (E0;0:5E0), (2E0;E0),
(1:5E0;E0), and (0:5E0;E0), whereE0= 9:8. We see
that there are two dierent EOMs for the double pen-
dulum system depending on which of the two elds the
lower charge is in (the upper charge is always in E1).
We use Runge-Kutta numerical integration to simulate
y= (1;_1;2;_2) for 10,000 time steps with interval
of 0.05, and the algorithms' task is to predict the future
(yt+1) based on the past ( xtyt; history length T= 1),
and simultaneously discover the two domains and their
dierent EOMs unsupervised.
In this experiment, we implement prediction function of
the Baseline and Newborn both as a Nf
lay-layer neural
net (we use Nf
lay= 6) during DDAC. For the Newborn,
each hidden layer has Nf
neur = 160 neurons with hy-
perbolic tangent (tanh) activation, and for the Baseline,
each hidden layer has Nf
neur = 320 neurons with tanh
activation for a fair comparison. For the Newborn, the
optional AddTheories( T;D) (step s8 in Alg. 2) is turned
o to prevent unlimited adding of theories. The initial
numberMof theories for Newborn is set to M= 2 andM= 3, each run with 10 instances with random initial-
ization. Its domain classier c= (c1;c2;:::cM) is aNc
lay-
layer neural net (we use Nc
lay= 3) where each hidden
layer hasNc
neur = 6 neurons and leakyReLU activation.
The last layer has linear activation.

==== Page 18 ====
18
log10MSE Classication accuracy Unsolved domains Description length
Regions Base- New- AI Base- New- AI Base- New- AI Base- New- AI
line born phys line born phys line born phys line born phys
Free + gravity -4.12 -14.07 -14.08 72.88% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11310.4 59.4 73.5
Free + gravity -4.21 -14.02 -14.04 88.59% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11271.5 60.3 60.3
Free + gravity -3.69 -14.03 -14.03 67.65% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11364.2 60.2 41.9
Free + gravity -4.18 -13.98 -13.98 80.98% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11341.7 60.6 57.6
Free + gravity -4.51 -14.06 -14.07 87.66% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11289.3 5.2 59.8
Free + harmonic -3.77 -13.99 -13.94 73.54% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11333.8 94.4 139.9
Free + harmonic -3.60 -14.05 -13.89 66.92% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11337.4 173.0 172.8
Free + harmonic -3.77 -14.04 -13.95 59.46% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11317.5 156.0 173.8
Free + harmonic -5.32 -10.48 -13.14 80.29% 100.00% 100.00% 2 1 0 11219.5 91.6 90.5
Free + harmonic -3.64 -14.00 -13.89 71.70% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11369.6 143.7 136.6
Free + EM -3.62 -13.95 -13.96 82.77% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11397.5 142.8 284.9
Free + EM -4.13 -13.82 -13.67 76.55% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11283.0 306.2 306.2
Free + EM -4.03 -13.45 -13.47 74.56% 99.97% 99.97% 2 0 0 11388.1 305.9 307.9
Free + EM -4.31 -13.77 -13.62 86.68% 99.91% 99.91% 2 0 0 11257.7 152.0 133.5
Free + EM -4.32 -14.00 -14.05 84.55% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11258.9 303.7 303.8
Free + EM rational -3.45 -13.96 -13.95 77.88% 99.96% 99.93% 2 0 0 11414.9 194.2 195.8
Free + EM rational -3.90 -13.96 -13.91 71.13% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11340.0 199.0 199.0
Free + EM rational -4.12 -13.97 -13.90 72.78% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11330.7 198.8 198.8
Free + EM rational -4.02 -14.07 -14.00 77.92% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11323.5 197.8 197.8
Free + EM rational -4.83 -13.87 -13.86 91.14% 100.00% 100.00% 2 0 0 11247.1 10.3 13.9
Free + gravity + harmonic -4.08 -14.03 -13.95 60.08% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11269.0 191.8 191.9
Free + gravity + harmonic -4.31 -14.02 -13.66 63.01% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11334.2 170.4 83.1
Free + gravity + harmonic -4.01 -14.01 -13.99 67.48% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11351.0 168.7 198.9
Free + gravity + harmonic -3.64 -13.97 -13.88 60.02% 99.97% 99.93% 3 0 0 11374.6 225.7 225.7
Free + gravity + harmonic -4.11 -7.42 -7.43 51.63% 100.00% 99.97% 3 1 1 11313.7 193.5 179.2
Free + gravity + EM -3.79 -13.93 -13.47 57.89% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11334.0 323.9 346.8
Free + gravity + EM -4.18 -14.00 -14.00 77.16% 100.00% 100.00% 3 1 1 11301.0 277.9 96.2
Free + gravity + EM -3.38 -13.58 -13.87 53.33% 100.00% 99.96% 3 0 0 11381.4 360.4 364.0
Free + gravity + EM -3.46 -13.87 -13.89 49.08% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11370.1 354.0 350.4
Free + gravity + EM -3.54 -13.69 -13.83 51.28% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11370.3 331.1 320.7
Free + harmonic + EM -3.87 -13.82 -13.55 67.27% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11404.0 267.1 275.4
Free + harmonic + EM -3.69 -13.87 -10.93 56.02% 99.97% 99.94% 3 0 0 11413.4 468.5 464.9
Free + harmonic + EM -4.06 -13.39 -13.56 70.87% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11340.0 452.3 452.3
Free + harmonic + EM -3.46 -13.94 -10.51 59.02% 99.97% 99.93% 3 0 0 11416.0 475.5 471.9
Free + harmonic + EM -3.70 -13.75 -13.82 61.67% 100.00% 100.00% 3 0 0 11354.9 466.8 466.8
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM -3.76 -13.82 -9.48 27.93% 100.00% 99.94% 4 0 0 11358.8 526.9 530.4
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM -3.74 -13.00 -13.18 40.80% 100.00% 99.97% 4 1 1 11284.8 418.5 389.1
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM -4.09 -13.97 -13.75 35.69% 100.00% 100.00% 4 0 0 11297.4 504.6 504.6
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM -3.63 -13.80 -9.99 31.61% 100.00% 99.97% 4 0 0 11407.4 526.3 526.2
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM -3.51 -6.37 -13.52 32.97% 100.00% 100.00% 4 0 0 11445.8 527.4 527.5
Median -3.89 -13.95 -13.88 67.56% 100.00% 100.00% 2.5 0.00 0.00 11338.7 198.9 198.9
Mean -3.94 -13.44 -13.29 65.51% 99.99% 99.99% 2.6 0.10 0.07 11337.9 253.7 252.9
TABLE III: Results for each of our rst 40 mystery world benchmarks, as described in the section I 1. Each number is the best
out of ten trials with random initializations (using seeds 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210, 240, 270), and refers to big domains
only. Based on the \Unsolved domain" column, we count out of 40 worlds what's the percentage Baseline, Newborn and AI
Physicist completely solve (has unsolved domain of 0), which goes to the \Fraction of worlds solved" row in Table II.

==== Page 19 ====
19
Epochs to 10 2Epochs to 10 4Epochs to 10 6Epochs to 10 8
Regions Base- New- AI- Base- New- AI Base- New- AI Base- New- AI
line born phys line born physi line born phys line born phys
Free+gravity 100 85 85 8440 120 120 14175 3625 16315 4890
Free+gravity 100 70 10 4680 190 35 12900 4650 12995 6500
Free+gravity 85 100 15 1 135 30 18205 3815 19620 6455
Free+gravity 95 75 20 7495 140 25 16735 1785 18040 2860
Free+gravity 110 75 0 1770 295 35 13740 3240 17030 3460
Free + harmonic 80 75 20 1 145 25 12725 4050 12830 6145
Free + harmonic 85 75 20 1 80 25 17965 1690 110000 3400
Free + harmonic 95 75 30 1 110 30 11805 3895 11855 3900
Free + harmonic 25 20 5 1285 460 10 15390 1060 17225 6385
Free + harmonic 80 95 5 1 110 20 14380 3300 14800 4035
Free + EM 90 85 20 11190 115 16305 3380 16590 3435
Free + EM 125 120 0 6240 885 70 17310 1865 17565 1865
Free + EM 115 115 15 15260 600 70 12430 1225 12845 4435
Free + EM 145 90 0 6650 140 0 13000 5205 14530 8735
Free + EM 80 80 10 965 200 25 14635 1970 14690 2870
Free + EM rational 80 75 0 1 580 70 15415 4150 15445 4175
Free + EM rational 100 100 10 1 460 45 12560 965 12575 5760
Free + EM rational 140 95 10 11050 455 65 11960 1150 16295 4005
Free + EM rational 120 100 5 13315 325 175 13970 1290 14335 3560
Free + EM rational 35 30 35 1155 335 35 13245 2130 15115 5610
Free + gravity + harmonic 150 75 25 9085 130 30 13870 6145 15555 6185
Free + gravity + harmonic 145 90 5 6915 140 25 14525 3720 110275 4430
Free + gravity + harmonic 105 100 15 6925 155 40 16665 6560 18915 6845
Free + gravity + harmonic 95 95 5 1 120 30 15790 10915 118450 13125
Free + gravity + harmonic 135 95 15 7970 190 45 113125 7045 1 1 1
Free + gravity + EM 130 100 20 1 575 40 13215 5095 13215 5100
Free + gravity + EM 125 110 15 5650 160 30 16085 4720 18025 4980
Free + gravity + EM 80 65 15 1 630 120 14100 6250 14100 6570
Free + gravity + EM 80 75 5 1 90 45 15910 5815 17295 6090
Free + gravity + EM 80 85 20 11380 465 12390 11425 17450 11510
Free + harmonic + EM 85 75 25 1 600 150 13775 4525 14675 5070
Free + harmonic + EM 85 90 25 11245 200 16225 2340 16390 3180
Free + harmonic + EM 115 85 15 16600 190 35 16035 1515 110065 2110
Free + harmonic + EM 80 70 35 1 720 195 16990 3895 16995 6115
Free + harmonic + EM 85 65 10 1 985 165 15660 1670 15820 1820
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM 90 75 0 1 540 255 18320 7390 19770 7590
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM 95 80 15 11265 635 16520 6365 18475 6475
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM 130 85 10 8620 575 105 16320 4035 19705 7685
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM 75 80 0 1 815 425 17575 8405 110440 8620
Free + gravity + harmonic + EM 80 65 20 1 735 280 16715 4555 112495 8495
Median 95 83 15 1 330 45 15403 3895 16590 5100
Mean 98 82 15 1 455 109 15217 4171 16892 5499
TABLE IV: Same as previous table, but showing number of training epochs required to reach various MSE prediction accuracies.
We record the metrics every 5 epochs, so all the epochs are multiples of 5. Note that the AI Physicist has superseded 10 2MSE
already by 0 epochs for some environments, showing that thanks to the lifelong learning strategy which proposes previously
learned theories in novel environments, reasonably good predictions can sometimes be achieved even without gradient descent
training.

==== Page 20 ====
20
Hyperparameter Environments Baseline Newborn AI Physicist
 Generalized-mean-loss exponent All -1 -1 -1
f Initial learning rate for f All 0.005 0.005 0.005
c Initial learning rate for c All 0.001 0.001 0.001
K Number of gradient iterations All 10000 10000 10000
c Hidden layer activation function in c All - leakyReLU leakyReLU
Nc
lay Number of layers in c All - 3 3
C Initial number of clusters in theory unication All 4 4 4
MSE MSE regularization strength All 10 710 710 7
L1FinalL1regularization strength Mystery worlds 10 810 810 8
Double Pendulum 10 710 710 7
Nf
lay Number of layers in f Mystery worlds 3 3 3
Double Pendulum 6 6 6
Nf
neur Number of neurons in f Mystery worlds 16 8 8
Double Pendulum 320 160 -
Nc
neur Number of neurons in c Mystery worlds - 8 8
Double Pendulum - 6 -
T Maximum time horizon for input Mystery worlds 2 2 2
Double Pendulum 1 1 1
f Hidden layer activation function in f Mystery worlds leakyReLU linear linear
Double Pendulum tanh tanh -
M0Initial number of theories Mystery worlds 1 2 2
Double Pendulum 1 2 & 3 -
M Maximum number of theories Mystery worlds 1 4 4
Double Pendulum 1 2 & 3 -
add MSE threshold for theory adding Mystery worlds - 210 6210 6
Double Pendulum -1 -
insp Inspection threshold for theory adding Mystery worlds - 30% 30%
Double Pendulum -1 -
split Splitting threshold for theory adding Mystery worlds - 5% 5%
Double Pendulum -1 -
del Fraction threshold for theory deletion Mystery worlds - 0.5% 0.5%
Double Pendulum - 100% -
TABLE V: Hyperparameter settings in the numerical experiments. For a fair comparison between Baseline and the other
agents that can have up to 4 theories, the number of neurons in each layer of Baseline is larger so that the total number of
parameters is roughly the same for all agents. The Baseline agent in Mystery worlds has leakyReLU activation to be able to
able to account for dierent domains.

==== Page 21 ====
21
[1] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, Nature 521, 436
(2015).
[2] P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-
Gonzalez, V. Zambaldi, M. Malinowski, A. Tacchetti,
D. Raposo, A. Santoro, R. Faulkner, et al., arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.01261 (2018).
[3] S. Russell, D. Dewey, and M. Tegmark, Ai Magazine 36,
105 (2015).
[4] D. Amodei, C. Olah, J. Steinhardt, P. Chris-
tiano, J. Schulman, and D. Man e, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.06565 (2016).
[5] M. Boden, J. Bryson, D. Caldwell, K. Dautenhahn,
L. Edwards, S. Kember, P. Newman, V. Parry, G. Peg-
man, T. Rodden, et al., Connection Science 29, 124
(2017).
[6] V. Krakovna and F. Doshi-Velez, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.05320 (2016).
[7] V. C. M uller and N. Bostrom, in Fundamental issues of
articial intelligence (Springer, 2016), pp. 555{572.
[8] K. Grace, J. Salvatier, A. Dafoe, B. Zhang, and O. Evans,
Journal of Articial Intelligence Research 62, 729 (2018).
[9] A. Graves, G. Wayne, and I. Danihelka, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1410.5401 (2014).
[10] S. Sukhbaatar, a. szlam, J. Weston, and R. Fergus,
inAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems
28, edited by C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee,
M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc.,
2015), pp. 2440{2448, URL http://papers.nips.cc/
paper/5846-end-to-end-memory-networks.pdf .
[11] S. Reed and N. De Freitas, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.06279 (2015).
[12] E. Parisotto, A.-r. Mohamed, R. Singh, L. Li, D. Zhou,
and P. Kohli, arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01855 (2016).
[13] J. Devlin, J. Uesato, S. Bhupatiraju, R. Singh, A.-r. Mo-
hamed, and P. Kohli, arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07469
(2017).
[14] N. Bramley, E. Schulz, F. Xu, and J. Tenenbaum (2018).
[15] S. Muggleton, New Generation Computing 8, 295
(1991), ISSN 1882-7055, URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF03037089 .
[16] N. Lavrac and S. Dzeroski, in WLP (Springer, 1994), pp.
146{160.
[17] P. Liang, M. I. Jordan, and D. Klein, in Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML-10) (2010), pp. 639{646.
[18] K. Ellis, A. Solar-Lezama, and J. Tenenbaum,
in Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 28 , edited by C. Cortes, N. D.
Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and
R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2015), pp.
973{981, URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
5785-unsupervised-learning-by-program-synthesis.
pdf.
[19] E. Dechter, J. Malmaud, R. P. Adams, and J. B. Tenen-
baum, in IJCAI (2013), pp. 1302{1309.
[20] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein,
Introduction to algorithms (MIT press, 2009).
[21] J. F urnkranz, Articial Intelligence Review 13, 3 (1999).
[22] D. Ghosh, A. Singh, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, and
S. Levine, arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09874 (2017).
[23] J. Rissanen, Automatica 14, 465 (1978), ISSN 0005-1098, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0005109878900055 .
[24] B. Hassibi and D. G. Stork, in Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 5 , edited by S. J. Hanson,
J. D. Cowan, and C. L. Giles (Morgan-Kaufmann, 1993),
pp. 164{171, URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
647-second-order-derivatives-for-network-pruning-optimal-brain-surgeon.
pdf.
[25] K. Suzuki, I. Horiba, and N. Sugie, Neural Processing
Letters 13, 43 (2001).
[26] P. D. Gr unwald, I. J. Myung, and M. A. Pitt, Advances
in minimum description length: Theory and applications
(MIT press, 2005).
[27] S. Han, H. Mao, and W. J. Dally, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1510.00149 (2015).
[28] S. Han, J. Pool, J. Tran, and W. Dally, in Advances in
neural information processing systems (2015), pp. 1135{
1143.
[29] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Ve-
ness, G. Desjardins, A. A. Rusu, K. Milan,
J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska,
et al., Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 114, 3521 (2017), ISSN 0027-8424,
https://www.pnas.org/content/114/13/3521.full.pdf,
URL https://www.pnas.org/content/114/13/3521 .
[30] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence 40, 2935 (2018), ISSN
0162-8828.
[31] D. Lopez-Paz and M. A. Ranzato, in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 ,
edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2017), pp.
6467{6476, URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
7225-gradient-episodic-memory-for-continual-learning.
pdf.
[32] C. V. Nguyen, Y. Li, T. D. Bui, and R. E. Turner, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1710.10628 (2017).
[33] I. Yildirim, K. A. Smith, M. Belledonne, J. Wu, and
J. B. Tenenbaum, in 2nd Conference on Cognitive Com-
putational Neuroscience (2018).
[34] D. Zheng, V. Luo, J. Wu, and J. B. Tenenbaum, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.09244 (2018).
[35] P. Battaglia, R. Pascanu, M. Lai, D. Jimenez Rezende,
and k. kavukcuoglu, in Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 29 , edited by D. D.
Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and
R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2016), pp.
4502{4510, URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
6418-interaction-networks-for-learning-about-objects-relations-and-physics.
pdf.
[36] M. B. Chang, T. Ullman, A. Torralba, and J. B. Tenen-
baum, arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.00341 (2016).
[37] N. Watters, D. Zoran, T. Weber, P. Battaglia,
R. Pascanu, and A. Tacchetti, in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 ,
edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2017), pp.
4539{4547, URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
7040-visual-interaction-networks-learning-a-physics-simulator-from-video.

==== Page 22 ====
22
pdf.
[38] R. Iten, T. Metger, H. Wilming, L. Del Rio, and R. Ren-
ner, arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.10300 (2018).
[39] B. M. Lake, T. D. Ullman, J. B. Tenenbaum, and
S. J. Gershman, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 40, e253
(2017).
[40] B. C. Daniels and I. Nemenman, Nature communications
6, 8133 (2015).
[41] S. D zeroski, P. Langley, and L. Todorovski, Compu-
tational Discovery of Scientic Knowledge (Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007), pp. 1{
14, ISBN 978-3-540-73920-3, URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-540-73920-3_1 .
[42] P. Langley, Cognitive Science 5, 31 (1981), ISSN 0364-
0213, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0364021381800250 .
[43] P. Langley and J. M. Zytkow, Articial Intelli-
gence 40, 283 (1989), ISSN 0004-3702, URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0004370289900519 .
[44] S. Dzeroski and L. Todorovski, Journal of Intelligent In-
formation Systems 4, 89 (1995), ISSN 1573-7675, URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00962824 .
[45] E. Bradley, M. Easley, and R. Stolle, Arti-
cial Intelligence 133, 139 (2001), ISSN 0004-
3702, URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0004370201001436 .
[46] P. Langley, D. George, S. Bay, and K. Saito, in Proceed-
ings of the Twentieth International Conference on Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (AAAI Press,
2003), pp. 432{439, ISBN 1-57735-189-4, URL http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3041838.3041893 .
[47] P. Langley and A. Arvay, in Proceedings of the Twenty-
Ninth AAAI Conference on Articial Intelligence (2015).
[48] Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire, Journal of computer andsystem sciences 55, 119 (1997).
[49] R. J. Solomono, Information and control 7, 1 (1964).
[50] M. Hutter, arXiv preprint cs/0004001 (2000).
[51] J. Rissanen, The Annals of statistics pp. 416{431 (1983).
[52] G. E. Hinton and D. van Camp, in Proceedings of the
Sixth Annual Conference on Computational Learning
Theory (ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1993), COLT '93,
pp. 5{13, ISBN 0-89791-611-5, URL http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/168304.168306 .
[53] L. Blier and Y. Ollivier (2018).
[54] E. Real, S. Moore, A. Selle, S. Saxena, Y. L. Sue-
matsu, J. Tan, Q. Le, and A. Kurakin, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.01041 (2017).
[55] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01578
(2016).
[56] B. Baker, O. Gupta, N. Naik, and R. Raskar, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1611.02167 (2016).
[57] M. Schmidt and H. Lipson, science 324, 81 (2009).
[58] S.-M. Udrescu and M. Tegmark, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1905.11481 (2019).
[59] J. Carrasquilla, G. Torlai, R. G. Melko, and L. Aolita,
Nature Machine Intelligence 1, 155 (2019).
[60] J. Carrasquilla and R. G. Melko, Nature Physics 13, 431
(2017).
[61] L. Wang, Physical Review B 94, 195105 (2016).
[62] E. P. Van Nieuwenburg, Y.-H. Liu, and S. D. Huber,
Nature Physics 13, 435 (2017).
[63] C. Lam and D. Kipping, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 476, 5692 (2018).
[64] P. Baldi, P. Sadowski, and D. Whiteson, Nature commu-
nications 5, 4308 (2014).
[65] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
(2014).

