==== Page 1 ====
4Tracking Anthropomorphizing Behaviorin
Human-Robot Interaction
KERSTINFISCHER, Universityof Southern Denmark, Sønderborg, Denmark
Existing methodologies to describe anthropomorphism in human-robot interaction often rely either on spe-
cificone-timeresponsestorobotbehavior,suchaskeepingtherobot’ssecret,oronposthocmeasures,suchas
questionnaires.Currently,thereisnomethodtodescribethedynamicsofpeople’sbehavioroverthecourseof
aninteractionandinresponsetorobotbehavior.Inthispaper,Iproposeamethodthatallowstheresearcher
to trace anthropomorphizing and non-anthropomorphizing responses to robots dynamically moment-by-
moment over the course of human-robot interactions. I illustrate this methodology in a case study and find
considerable variation between participants, but also considerable intrapersonal variation in the ways the
robot is anthropomorphized. That is, people may respond to the robot as if it was another human in one
moment and to its machine-like properties in the next. These findings may influence explanatory models of
anthropomorphism.
CCSConcepts:• Human-centered computing →HCI theory, concepts and models ;Empirical studies
in HCI;
AdditionalKeyWordsandPhrases:Anthropomorphism,interactionanalysis,methodology,mindlesstransfer,
computers-are-social-actors
ACM Reference format:
Kerstin Fischer. 2021. Tracking Anthropomorphizing Behavior in Human-Robot Interaction. ACM Trans.
Hum.-Robot Interact. 11, 1, Article 4(October 2021), 28 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442677
1 INTRODUCTION
Overthepastdecades,ithasbeenwidelydocumentedthatpeoplemayrespondtorobotslikethey
respond to other humans. This phenomenon has been discussed under the headings anthropo-
morphism, mindless transfer or media equation,or as the ‘computers are socialactors paradigm.’
Thephenomenoncanbeunderstoodfromatleastthreedifferentperspectives,andthusaninitial
terminologicalclarificationisin order:
The research presented here rests to a large extent on a fruitful collaboration with Herbert H. Clark, supported through
a research stay at Stanford University funded by the Carlsberg Foundation. I am also much indebted to Jaap Ham and
AndreasMatthiasformanyinterestingquestionsandcommentsonapreviousversionofthispaper,andtotheanonymous
reviewers of this paper,who made many very useful suggestions. Remainingerrors and inconsistencies are self-evidently
myown.
Authors’ addresses: K. Fischer, Department of Design and Communication, University of Southern Denmark, Alsion 2,
DK-6400Sonderborg, Denmark;email:kerstin@sdu.dk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2021Copyright held bytheowner/author(s). Publicationrights licensed toACM.
2573-9522/2021/10-ART4$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442677
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.


==== Page 2 ====
4:2 K. Fischer
(a) First,anthropomorphismisdiscussedasaparticular psychological phenomenon,inwhich
peopleattributehuman-liketraitstorobots[e.g.Nass&Moon 2000].Forinstance,Ruijten
[2015: 13] defines anthropomorphism as “an automatic cognitive process of attributing
humannatureorhumanuniquenesscharacteristicstononhumantechnological,spiritual
or natural objects and entities, causing a mixture of affective, behavioral and cognitive
responses”.NassandMoon[ 2000]distinguishbetweenthreetypesofeffects:1)over-use
ofhumansocialcategories,like,forinstance,attributingfemalecharacteristicstoarobot
withafemalevoice;2)over-learnedsocialbehaviors,forinstance,applyingpolitenessand
reciprocitymaximstointeractionswithrobots,and3)prematurecognitivecommitments,
for instance,whenrobotsaretrustedblindly iflabelled ‘specialists.’
(b) Second,anthropomorphismcanbeunderstoodasa property ofrobots,suchthattheymay
carryhuman-likedesignfeatures[e.g.Rosenthal-vonderPütten 2014].Thesepropertiesof
robotsmaybeunderstoodascertain‘triggers’,suchasvoice,face,emotion,interactivity,
engagement with and attention to the user, unpredictability and the filling of traditional
roles [see Nass 2004].
(c) Third, anthropomorphism can refer to the description of people’s behaviors towards
robotsassimilar to responsesto humanactors.
From a terminological perspective, I therefore distinguish between a) anthropomorphism ,t h e
socio-cognitive phenomenon to be explained, i.e. the psychological mechanisms that determine
people’s behavior towards robots; b) anthropomorphic design , which I use here to describe the
social cues and ‘triggers’ built in by robot designers [cf. Fink 2012]; and c) anthropomorphizing
behavior,i.e.theobservablebehaviorbymeansofwhichpeoplerespondtorobotsinwayssimilar
to waysin whichtheyrespondtohumans.
Differentmethodshavebeenusedtoshedlightondifferentaspectsofanthropomorphism,such
as on the relationship between anthropomorphic design and trait attribution; for instance, brain
imaging techniques show activations in similar brain regions for human and robotic partners de-
pending on the degree of anthropomorphic design [e.g. Krach et al. 2008]; reaction time studies
showthatanthropomorphicrobotsmaygiverisetosimilarinhibitionsasotherhumans[e.g.Sten-
zeletal.2012;Klapperetal. 2014];questionnairestudiesshowthathuman-likecharacteristicsare
attributedtorobots[Bartnecketal. 2009]andthatrobotsaresubjectedtohumanstereotypes[e.g.
Nass & Moon 2000] and to in-group versus out-group biases, for example [e.g. Eyssel & Kuchen-
brandt2012];and analyses of people’slinguistic behavior show that people describe robots using
the same linguistic expressions and intentionalist language as when they describe other people
[Fusselletal. 2008](more onthedifferent approachesbelow).
At the same time, however, people do not interact with robots exactly like with other people.
For instance, Kory Westlund et al. [ 2016], who tested the effects of framing a robot as machine
versusassocialactoronchild-robotinteractions,foundthatincomparisonwithinteractionswith
the experimenter, children asked fewer questions and made fewer comments and laughed less in
both robot conditions. There is also brain imaging research that reports different responses to
human and robotic actors [Chaminade et al. 2010; Kuz et al. 2015]. In addition, not all people an-
thropomorphize robots to the same extent [Fischer 2011]; for instance, lonely people have been
found to anthropomorphize robots more [Lee et al. 2006; Epley et al. 2007]. Ruijten et al. [ 2019]
havealsodevelopedaquestionnairethatallowsthemtoidentifydifferentdegreesortypesoftrait
attributions; in particular, they find that traits that are unique to humans are more difficult to
attribute than traits that also other beings may have. It is also possible that anthropomorphism
changesovertime;Lemaignanetal.[ 2014],forinstance,suggestedthatpeoplemayrespondwith
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 3 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:3
anthropomorphismtorobotsinfirstencountersbutcometotreatthemasmoremachine-likelater
[cf. however Turkle et al. 2006; Paetzel et al. 2020for suggestions of different time courses]. Fur-
thermore, besides anthropomorphism, behaviors not typical of human face-to-face interactions,
suchasflaming,challengingorswearing,canbeobservedinhuman-robotinteractions[e.g.Kopp
2006; Brščić et al. 2015]. Moreover, the amount of anthropomorphism observable has been found
to depend to some degree on the method of analysis and on the time participants have available
to reflect on their behavior [Fussell et al. 2008]. For instance, the amount of cognitive load a user
isexperiencinghasbeenproposedtoinfluenceanthropomorphism[e.g.Leeetal. 2010;Hametal.
2012].
Whilethereisrobustevidenceforcertainpsychologicalresponsestoanthropomorphicdesign,
and while anthropomorphizing behavior is observable across domains and using a plethora of
differentmethods,itisstillnotclearhowthedifferentfindingscanbebroughttogether.Onereason
couldbethatstilllittleisknownaboutwhathappensdynamicallyoverthecourseofaninteraction
(and beyond). So far, anthropomorphism has been studied mostly either post hoc or in highly
controlled studies that focus on one isolated behavioral measure; very few studies have looked
at the progression of the expression of anthropomorphism over time in interaction. However, if
we could describe and track anthropomorphizing behavior in human-robot interactions directly,
wemaybeabletoshedlightonhowtheanthropomorphizingbehaviorobservedandthefindings
on interpersonal variation, anti-social behaviors and effects of time courses come together. Such
a method would constitute a useful addition to the methods to study anthropomorphism that are
already available. In the remainder of the paper, I therefore present a method for the description
of the dynamics of anthropomorphizing behavior in interaction, and illustrate its use in a case
study. In the last section, I discuss how analyses of anthropomorphizing responses to robots in
interactionmay affectexplanatorymodels of anthropomorphism.
2 PREVIOUS WORK: METHODS FOR DESCRIBING ANTHROPOMORPHISM
Anthropomorphizingresponsestorobotshavebeendemonstratedusingabroadrangeofdifferent
methodstoanalyzetheeffectsofrobotappearance,robotbehaviorsandtheframingofrobots.The
methodologicalspectrumcomprises,mostimportantly,questionnaires,experimentalelicitationof
behavioralresponses,brainimaging techniquesand reactiontime studies.
2.1 Questionnaires
Questionnaireshavebeenusedubiquitouslyinthestudyofanthropomorphism,forinstance,toin-
vestigatetheeffectsofrobots’appearanceanddesign[e.g.Hegel 2012;Philippsetal. 2017;Reeves
& Hancock 2020]. Questionnaires allow the researcher to ask explicitly or implicitly about the
effects of certain design decisions regarding robots’ appearance or the implementation of so-
cial behaviors, such as gaze following, presence or absence of gestures, body postures and the
like [e.g. Ham et al. 2012]. The questions asked may concern anthropomorphism directly by ad-
dressingtopicsliketheattributionofmind,intentionandsocialcharacteristics;forinstance,Sims
etal.[2005]hadparticipantsrateimagesthatvariedaccordingtorobotcharacteristics(movement
method,bodyshape,presenceoflimbs,etc.)inaquestionnaireaddressingthedegreeofperceived
aggression, intelligence, and animacy. Another study using questionnaire data is Rosenthal-von
der Pütten & Kramer [ 2014], in which questionnaire responses to 40 robot pictures were elicited
andclustered.Theauthorsfoundsixclustersemerged,dependingonhowthreatening,submissive,
likable and unfamiliar the robots were perceived. More recently, Mieczkowski et al. [ 2019]a s k e d
peopletorate342imagesofrobotsconcerningwarmthandcompetence,andtheyelicitedbehav-
ioraltendencies,suchasparticipants’willingnesstohelporharmtherobot.Severalstandardized
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 4 ====
4:4 K. Fischer
questionnaires have been developed to investigate anthropomorphism; very common is the God-
speed questionnaire developed by Bartneck et al. [ 2009]. More recent proposals are the Robotic
Social Attributes Scale [Carpinella et al. 2017], Ruijten et al.’s [ 2019] survey that distinguishes
between different types of attributions, and Damgaard et al.’s [ 2020] questionnaire, which dis-
tinguishes between anthropomorphing and sociomorphing. Thus, the first use of questionnaires
is to understand what features people attribute to robots (and to what extent), based on design
propertiesoftherobotor basedonthewaysin whichitisintroducedorpresented.
Arelateduseofquestionnairesistotestforsocialcategorization.Forexample,Eyssel&Kuchen-
brandt[2012]presentedarobottoparticipantsaseitheranin-grouporanout-groupmemberand
askedthemtoratetherobotregardinganthropomorphism(mindattribution,warmth),psycholog-
icalcloseness,contactintentions,anddesign.Participantsratedthein-grouprobotmorefavorably
and anthropomorphizedit more strongly.
Questionnaires are also used to measure the effects of certain robot behaviors or properties of
behaviors.Forinstance,NassandBrave[ 2005]investigatedwhetherpeoplerespondtocharacter-
isticsof robotvoicesin similar waysasto humanvoices.
Anotheruseofquestionnairesistostudyeffectsofrobotframingontheextenttowhichpeople
anthropomorphizerobots;Paepke&Takayama[ 2009],forinstance,presentedparticipantswitha
Pleorobot,introducingiteitherashighlysophisticatedorasratherbasic.Theyfoundthatpeople’s
experienceoftheinteractionasmeasuredbyapost-experimentalquestionnairewasinfluencedby
the way the robot was framed. A slightly different use of questionnaires is not to ask people for
evaluations of the robot, but instead to have them assess the robot’s suspected knowledge. Lee
et al. [2005], for instance, presented participants with a robot that was introduced to them as ei-
ther built in China or in the US. Participants furthermore witnessed a brief interaction between
the experimenter and the robot in either Mandarin or English, before they had to rate the like-
lihood that the robot knew landmarks from China, the US and other regions of the world in a
questionnaire. The results showed that participants assumed the robot to know more landmarks
ofthecountryinwhichitwasbuilt,andthusthatparticipantsoverusedsocialcategories,likethe
assumptionof common ground [Clark 1996].
Besides asking about trait attributions, attributions of group membership and cultural knowl-
edgetorobotsbasedontheirdesign,descriptionorbehavior,questionnairesmayalsoelicitother
kindsofattributions,suchasmoralcapability.Forinstance,theymayaskabouttheextenttowhich
participants hold robots morally accountable for their actions and the consequences of these ac-
tions[e.g.Arnold&Scheutz 2017],whichthenprovidesindirectevidenceforanthropomorphism.
Ifquestionnairesareusedtostudyanthropomorphicdesign,theyoftenmakeuseofimagesorof
videos of robots [e.g. Philipps et al. 2017; Rosenthal-von der Pütten & Kramer 2014; Hegel2012].
If questionnaires are used in human-robot interactions, they are usually administered post hoc,
duetothefactthatfillingthemoutconstitutesanactivitybyitself.Sometimesquestionnairesare
administered between different phases of an experiment [e.g. Ham et al. 2012], yet they do not
capturepeople’sresponsesinthehereandnowoftheinteraction.
2.2 BehavioralMeasures
Another methodology for studying anthropomorphism is to elicit behavioral effects of robot de-
sign, robot behavior or robot framing. In comparison with questionnaires, studies targeting be-
havioraleffectshavetheadvantageofstudyinganthropomorphisminthemoment,i.e.duringthe
interactions in which they arise. A considerable body of work rests on previous findings on the
effects of social cues in human interaction, which can be replicated in human-robot interaction
suchthatwhenproducedbyarobot,socialcuesaresimilarlyrespondedtoaswhensuchcuesare
produced by humans. Nass [ 2010, page 12] describes the method he and his collaborators have
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 5 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:5
beenusing[e.g.Reeves&Nass 1996;Nass&Moon 2000;Nass&Brave 2005;amongmanyothers]
asfollows:
“Iwouldfindanyconclusionbyasocialscienceresearcherandchangethesentence
‘People will do X when interacting with other people’ to ‘People will do X when
interactingwithacomputer.’Iconstantlychallengedmyselftouncoverevermore
unlikely socialrulesthatappliedto technologyindefianceof allcommon sense.”
Examplesofobservablehumanbehaviorsthatmayserveasindicatorsfortherespectivedegree
ofanthropomorphismincludetheirpreferencesforspatialdistancetowardsarobot.Forinstance,
Ham et al. [ 2012] measured how closely participants approached the robot to read numbers on
a screen mounted on the robot depending on the ostensible approachability of the robot’s body
posture and depending on their cognitive load. Other studies investigate the effects of anthropo-
morphic design or behavior on people’s willingness to lie for the robot [Kahn et al. 2015], on the
persuasiveness of a robot [Andrist et al. 2013;2015], or on compliance with robot requests, such
asnot toturnit offwhentherobotisafraid oflosingits memory [Seoetal. 2015].
Behavioralstudiesaregenerallydesignedtoelicitonemeasurableresponse,suchasthedistance
totherobotchosen,secretskeptorrevealed,orwhethertherobotisturnedoffornot.Thissingle
behavior is then taken as an indicator of, for instance, mindless transfer [Nass & Moon 2000].
Sometimes,notonlythesinglebehavioritselfbutalsofactorsthatpossiblyinfluencetherespective
responsebehaviorareanalyzedinordertoidentifytheconditionsunderwhichanthropomorphism
occurs,forexample,byvaryingparticipants’cognitiveload[Hametal. 2012]orbyanalyzinguser
characteristics[e.g.Lee 2010].
An exception from the more narrow focus on one type of response are studies that analyze
participants’verbalbehaviorinresponsetosocialcluesfromtherobot.Onevariantofthismethod
istoletparticipantswitnesshuman-robotinteractionsandhavethemsummarizewhattheyhave
observed in theirown words. An example of this method is the study by Fussellet al. [ 2008,p a g e
145]whogaveparticipantsscriptsfromhealthcareinterviewsthatwereallegedlycarriedouteither
by human or by robot interviewers; the manipulation was supported by presenting participants
withimagesofeitherapersonorarobot.Resultsshowthatparticipantsusesimilarvocabularyto
describetheroboticandthehumaninterviewers’behavior,whichinturnistakenasanindicator
for anthropomorphism.
Anothervariantofthismethodistohavepeopleinteractwitharobotviaspeech,andtoanalyze
the degree to which their speech is anthropomorphizing [cf. Fischer et al. 2012]. For instance,
Fischer [2006;2011] finds people to differ in their initial responses to the robot’s greeting, such
that their behavior shows more or less anthropomorphism, which correlates with their behavior
later in the interactions. Using this approach, Lee et al. [ 2010] analyzed people’s verbal behavior
forindicatorsofanthropomorphismdependingontheirinitialgreeting,andtheyobservedspecific
behavioral patterns, for instance, concerning politeness, grounding, attention to relevancy and
negativebehaviors.Thismethodreliedonthefactthatwealwaysdesignourutterancesinsucha
waythatourintendedrecipientscanunderstandit;therefore,utterancesshowtracesofwhothey
havebeenintendedfor,i.e.theyallow‘reverserecipientdesign’[Fischeretal. 2012;Fischer2016].
Thus, the method also provides indicators for how people understand the robot and the extent to
whichthey anthropomorphizeit.
Bothtypesofstudiesofverbalbehaviorfocusonparticipants’overalluseofanthropomorphiz-
inglanguage;thatis,theyanalyzethequantitativedistributionoffeatureswithrespecttothetotal
number of words spoken. Consequently, while they rely on the investigation of a broad range of
linguistic behaviors, their focus is not on the dynamics of anthropomorphism over the course of
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 6 ====
4:6 K. Fischer
theinteraction,noronitsdevelopmentovertime,butonthepervasivenessofanthropomorphism
in participants’verbalbehavior.
Participants’ (mostly) verbal behaviors also form the basis of ethnographic analyses of anthro-
pomorphism [cf. Chun & Knight 2020]. Specifically, participants’ verbal behavior observed and
documented in field notes or elicited in interviews can be analyzed for traces of anthropomor-
phism; for instance, Forlizzi [ 2007] reports instances of social attributions to a Roomba robot.
Chun & Knight [ 2020] additionally asked the participants in their study, employees at a robot
manufacturing company, directly for reports or stories about “interesting interactions” with the
robots,aswellasabouttherobots’genderandpersonality,inadditiontoasurveyinwhichsocial
attributions were elicited in open and Likert-scale questions. These analyses target stakeholders’
“holisticunderstandingsofintegratedtechnologies”[Chun&Knight 2020,p.16:5],i.e.howpartic-
ularsocialgroupsofpeople,suchasfamiliesorthedifferentteamsinthemanufacturingcompany,
makesenseofrobotsdependingontheirculturalsituatedness,andthusaimatunderstandingthe
general concepts and practices of groups, rather than at the dynamic unfolding of anthropomor-
phizingbehaviorin interaction.
Another type of behavioral study measures how quickly people answer questions about so-
cial attributions to robots in comparison with attributions to people [e.g. Fussell et al. 2008]
or how quickly they respond when primed with images of either humans or robots (Złotowski
et al. [2018]). A variant of this type of investigations is to study the conditions that slow reaction
timesdown,inparticular,interferenceeffects,suchasthe‘SocialSimonEffect.’Thisphenomenon
describes the motor interference from observing another person carrying out a slightly different
behavior.Thatis,ifapersontriestodrawastraightlineorhitabuttonasquicklyaspossible,she
maybemoreinaccurateorslowerwhenwatchinganotherpersoncarryingoutaslightlydifferent
task[cf.Försteretal. 2020].Stenzeletal.[ 2012]investigatedtowhatextentrobotsareperceivedas
similarenoughtocausesuchaninterference.Intheseexperiments,participantswereseatednext
toaquitemechanicallylooking,humanoidrobot,wheretheyhadtohittheleftkeywhenasquare
appearedonthescreen,whereastherobothittherightkeywhenadiamondappeared.Participants
weretoldeitherthattherobotwasactiveandintelligentandrespondingautonomously,orthatit
was completely controlled by the computer, and thus mechanically executing motor commands.
Theresultsshowedthatonlywhenparticipantsbelievedthattherobotwasactiveandintentional,
their own behavior was influenced by the robot’s behavior. In contrast, if they believed the robot
to bean unintelligentmachine,no interferencewasobserved.
Similarly, Klapper et al. [ 2014] investigated the degree to which anthropomorphic design and
beliefs about the robot interferes with participants’ own finger movements. They found that hu-
man form and the belief to be observing a human hand together created inhibition effects, but
not if only one of them is present. The two reaction time studies thus suggested that while au-
tomatic responses to anthropomorphic design can be observed, these responses are mediated by
participants’mentalmodels.
To sum up, behavioral measures provide indirect evidence for the extent to which people an-
thropomorphize a robotic interaction partner. Usually the baseline is the human communication
partner; for instance, if people’s reaction times, degrees of interference, ways of speaking or re-
sponses to a particular cue (like the request to lie for the robot) are similar to those observable
in interactions with humans, then these behaviors are taken as evidence for anthropomorphism.
Thisapproachproducesinformationaboutanthropomorphisminthemoment,butstudiesusually
measure only a single behavior and only once. This approach thus cannot inform us about the
timecourseofanthropomorphismininteractiondynamicallybecausenotenoughdatapointsare
elicited.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 7 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:7
2.3 Brain Imaging
Brain imaging techniques have been used to investigate the extent to which people respond to
robotsliketootherpeople.Forinstance,Krachetal.[ 2008]hadpeopleplayacomputergameand
madethembelievethattheywereplayingagainstahumanpartner,ahumanoidrobot,afunctional
robot and a laptop computer. In fact, participants interacted with the same computer program in
all four cases. However, the participants not only rated their interaction partners as increasingly
morefun,intelligent,competitiveandsympatheticwithincreasingdegreesofhuman-likeness,but
theirbrainactivationsininteractionswiththeartificialinteractionpartnerswerealsoincreasingly
similar to those in interactions with the human partner the more human-like the communication
partner was expected to be. Kuz et al. [ 2015] compared people’s recognition of movements by
tworoboticagents,onemechanical,theotheranthropomorphic,andfoundthatwhiletheactions
by both agents were generally recognized, in contrast to Krach et al.’s [ 2008] results, they did
giverisetodifferentbrainpatterns.Inareviewpaperonpeople’sresponsestoembodiedartificial
agents in general, Wykowska et al. [ 2016] concluded that responses to such agents are so similar
toresponsestohumans thatthey caneven beusedastestbedsto studyhuman socialcognition.
To sum up, while previous work has demonstrated anthropomorphism in a large variety of
situationsandhasshedmuchlightonthefactorsconditioninganthropomorphizingbehaviorand
the attribution of human-like properties into robots, the methods used in previous work are not
designedtotraceanthropomorphismoverthecourseofaninteraction.Tohavesuchamethodto
complementthesetofmethodsalreadyavailablewould,however,beveryusefultoaddressinter-
and intrapersonal variation in response to robots designed as social actors, to reconcile findings
aboutanthropomorphismwithfindingsonanti-socialbehaviorstowardsrobots,andtounderstand
therelationshipbetweentheautomatic,mindlesscharacteristicsofanthropomorphismontheone
hand and its cognitive mediatedness on the other. In the following, I thus suggest a method to
describethedynamics of anthropomorphismin interaction.
3 A METHODFOR DESCRIBING ANTHROPOMORPHIZING BEHAVIOR
IN INTERACTION
Anthropomorphismconcernsthefactthatanartefactistreatedasifithadhuman-likecharacter-
isticseventhoughitdoesnotpossesstheseproperties.Inthissection,Isuggestamethodtotrack
anthropomorphizingbehaviorininteractionovertime.
3.1 Tracking AnthropomorphizingBehavior in Interaction
In order to describe how people anthropomorphize robots over the course of an interaction, we
need a model that can track whether and, if so, in which ways or to what extent, people respond
to a robot in a human-like way. Such a procedure would have to rely on people’s behavior, since
their beliefs and attitudes are not directly available, and stopping them to fill out a questionnaire
woulddisrupttheveryinteractiontheanalysisissettingouttoexplain.Similarly,wecannotrelyon
robots’anthropomorphicdesignorbehaviorsinceitistheresponsestothesedesignsandbehaviors
thatareatissue.Thus,anymethodthataimstoinvestigateanthropomorphismininteractionhas
torelyontheobservationofpeople’sbehaviors,andnotjustonsinglebehaviors,suchaswhether
or not a secret is kept [Kahn et al. 2015] or whether or not people agree to the robot’s memory
being erased [Seo et al. 2015], but potentially on all behaviors observable in interaction. That is,
sinceanthropomorphismmayexpressitselfinmimics,gesture,politeverbalbehaviorandinmany
otherways,wewouldwanttoaccountforanthropomorphicresponseswithrespecttoallofthese
modalities,notjustsingleactions.Amethodtotrackanthropomorphizingbehaviorininteraction
overtimethushastorelyonobservingandclassifyingabroadrangeofpeople’sbehaviorstowards
robotsininteraction.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 8 ====
4:8 K. Fischer
Now,aminimalisticclassificationwouldmeantoclassifypeople’sbehavioraseitheranthropo-
morphizingornot,whereasamaximalistversionofsuchaclassificationmightclassifythetypeor
extentofanthropomorphization.Onemight,forinstance,identify,basedoneachofaperson’sob-
servablebehaviors,whatkindoftraitisattributed,howuniquelyhumanitisandcorrespondingly,
how easy or difficult it is to attribute this trait to the artifact in question [cf. Ruijten et al. 2019].
This would however mean that specific attributions can be identified and intersubjectively clas-
sified, given that all we have is how people behave. The question is whether such a classification
is feasible and how the relevant judgements can be made based on what is observable; it seems
thereforesaferto(a)keepthenumberofdistinctionssmall,and(b)toallowaneasyidentification
ofthelevelorientedto.
The proposal made here is to use a model of depiction [Clark 2016] because it allows us to
describe people’s responses to robots without presupposing that we know what this behavior is
causedby.Forinstance,Nass&Moon[ 2000]suggestthatpeoplerespondtotechnologicalartifacts
likerobotsliketootherhumansoutofmindlessness;Nass[ 2004]arguesthatanthropomorphizing
behavior is basically a mistake, based on our human evolution in which we were only faced with
human social actors. In contrast, Ruijten et al. [ 2019], for instance, regard anthropomorphism to
be a predisposition instead, whereas social-constructivist approaches may take it as an instance
of social practice, so that anthropomorphizing behavior would just be ‘how things get done’ [cf.
Edwards 1994; Hutchby 2001]. In order to avoid circularity, a model that describes observable
behaviors should not presuppose the one or other explanation and should thus be largely theory
neutral.Therefore,Ianalyzetherobot’sbehaviorbasedonClark’sthreelevelsofdepiction[Clark
2016], and the person’s behavior in terms of orientation to these levels. From this perspective
(Clark & Fischer under revision), the robot’s design is viewed as an act of staging, in which the
robotis depictedas asocialactor.
Weunderstandbydepictionaverycommonstrategyofhumaninteractioninwhichoneperson
stages a behavior for another person to evoke a temporally and spatially removed situation. This
strategyismostobviousinplaysandotherkindsoffictionalstaging(inmovies,videogames,pre-
tendplayetc.),butalsooccursfrequentlyinconversationingeneralwhenpeoplereportonevents
involvingotherpeople,forinstance,apersontellingherfriendabouthertyrannicalboss.Clark’s
model involves (a) a base scene, which consists of the concrete means by which the depiction is
carriedout,e.g.gesture,mimics,loudvoiceetc.,i.e.therespective‘trigger’,(b)theproximalscene,
which comprises the scene depicted, e.g. an angry person with a loud voice and exaggerated ges-
tures, and (c) the distal scene, for instance, the speaker’s boss getting outraged about a mistake
someone made. Robots are special kinds of depictions since the scene evoked is not necessarily
spatially or temporally removed, but rather concerns a fictitious being (cf. Clark & Fischer under
revision formore details onthefull model).
Concerning human-robot interaction, the base scene is relatively straight-forward to define: it
concernsthemechanicalpropertiesofarobotasamachine.Lessstraight-forwardisthedefinition
oftheproximalscene,whichcanbeunderstoodastheencodedmeaningofarobot’sbehavior.That
is,therelationshipbetweenbaseandproximalscenecanbeunderstoodasoneofsignaling[Peirce
1998],suchthatthebasescene(e.g.arobotmovingitsactuators)mayevokeaparticularmeaning
(e.g.therobotwaving)bymeansofindexical,iconicorsymbolicrelationsbetweenthemovement
and the interpretation. An index is a sign in which the form consists of a pointer to a particular
referent;anexampleistheEnglishword“I,”whichindexesthespeaker,butitdoesnot‘mean’John,
Mary,HerborKerstinitself.Forinstance,directingtherobotheadtowardsaparticipant’sposition
indicatesattentiontowardshimorher.Aniconisasignwheretheformisconnectedtoitsmeaning
by means of similarity; for instance, the robot moving its gripper from left to right and back is
similar to a human waving gesture, i.e. it can be taken to iconically represent waving. Finally, a
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 9 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:9
symbolisasignwithanarbitrary,conventionalrelationshipbetweenformandinterpretation,the
prime example being language, where the sequence of the letters c-a-t are conventionally taken
tomean ‘cat’.Whena robotsays“hello,”it conventionally symbolizes agreeting.
In contrast, the distal scene goes beyond the encoded meaning and concerns the pragmatic
interpretationofanaction.Thedefinitionofthedistalsceneisthusalsorelativelyunproblematic
since it concerns the completely fictional, live-like character evoked by the robot, for instance,
as a companion, friend or collaborator.For example, the robot moving its hand encodesa waving
gesture, but the interpretation that it sees me, recognizes me, wants to attract my attention and
initiate an interaction by waving at me is an interpretation that goes beyond what is encoded.
Both the proximal and the distal scene thus involve anthropomorphizing behavior; however,
whilethedistalsceneevokestherobotasacharacter,i.e.asasocialactor,theproximalsceneonly
assumesthattherobot isengaged in meaningfulaction,i.e.thatitsbehavior means something .
The two levels of depictions assumed thus differ in the underlying processes: whereas the
proximal scene relies on semiotic processes, i.e. on the interpretation of signs, the distal scene
is essentially fictional and relies on imagination [e.g. Walton 1993] and thus involves a certain
degree of pretending on the side of the recipient [Clark 1999]. The distinction is useful for our
analysisbecauseithelpsdistinguishbetweenfeaturesthatareencodedinthe(behavior)designof
therobotandfeaturesthatgobeyondthis;forinstance,usingavoicewithfeaturescharacteristic
of a human female, for example, indexes a female speaker; that is, there is an objective, indexical
relationship between certain voice characteristics and human gender. In contrast, if people
associate gender stereotypes to a (human or robotic) speaker with these voice characteristics,
then these stereotypes are not encoded in, but associated with the voice [e.g. Tay et al. 2014;
Bryant et al. 2020; Law et al. 2020]. That is, by means of its speech characteristics, the robot is
depicted as female, but an expected higher competence in a certain occupation is not part of the
robot’s(behavior)design, butrather“in theeye ofthebeholder”,i.e.in thedistalsceneevoked.
Inourmodel(Clark&Fischerunderrevision),arobotisthussimilartoMickeyMouseinDisney
Land: The man in the costume constitutes the basis for the depiction; the mouse-shaped costume
evokesthedepictionproper,alargemousewitheyes,earsandamouth.Thedistalsceneisthenthat
MickeyMouse,acharacteroneisfamiliarwithfromnumerouscomics,ispresentinthehereand
now.RegardingMickeyMouse,kidscanorienttothemaninthecostume(e.g.“isithotinthere?”),
tothedepictionofthemouse(e.g.“youhavealargehead!”)ortothecharacter(e.g.“Mickey,where
isMinnie?”).Towhichof thethreescenestheyorientcanthusbeidentifiedfromtheirbehavior.
Similarly, the robot has a mechanical base that enables the robot’s functionality; the robot’s
design,functionalityandpresentationincontextsuggestthatitcanbeinteractedwithbytalking
to it. And finally, the staging of the robot evokes a distal scene in which the robot can be under-
stood as a human-like character. Like kids’ interactions with Mickey Mouse, people’s behavior in
responsetoa robot’sactionsis revealingregardingto whichof thethreescenestheyorient.
Table1illustrateshowthedepictionmodelappliestovariousdifferentkindsofdepictions[see
alsoClark 2016].
Thus, the depiction model assumes that depictions allow attention to three different perspec-
tivesorscenes,whichexistinparallel,andallthreecanbeinfocusatdifferentpointsintime.For
instance,concerning the conversationaldepiction of the angry boss, the listener can focus on the
basescenebysaying‘notsoloud’,ontheproximalscenebysaying‘yousoundmorecynicalthan
angry’,or on thedistalscenebysaying‘yourbossis reallynot a niceperson’.
Thus, what we are proposing is the anatomy of a ‘social cue’, where on the side of the robot,
weunderstandasocialcueasthestagingofadesignchoiceorbehaviorthatisintendedtosignal
a certain human-like behavior, which is meant to evoke a particular character or fictional being
(for the explanatory power of this model, see Clark & Fischer under revision). In a second step, I
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 10 ====
4:10 K. Fischer
Table 1. Examples of Depictions
base proximal distal
conversational depiction speaker’s voiceandbody someone withloud,
agitatedvoicethespeaker’s tyrannicalboss
puppetshow wooden puppet,speaker’s
voice andmovementpuppetmovingaboutand
talkingcharacter
Hamlet(on stage) Kenneth Branagh young maninconflict princein16thcentury Denmark
Mickey Mouse maninco s tume human-size mouse MickeyMouse character
human-robot interaction robot movesgripperleft
andrightrobot wavesits hand robotgreets participant
Table 2. Examples of Human-Robot Interactions as Depictions
base proximal distal
Nakataetal.[ 1998]the robot liftsits‘head’ when
sensing human touchrepellingtactile
reactionrebellious
Tielmannetal.[ 2014]robot speaks withloud, high pitched
voice withhigher speech ratearousal the robotis asexcitedabout
something asthe child
Huang &Mutlu [ 2013]robot produces recorded gesture robotmakes an
iconic handgesturerobot iscompetent
employqualitativemethodstoanalyzetowhichofthesethreelevelspeople’sbehaviorisoriented
(seeSection 3.3below).
3.2 Describing RobotBehavior
For the description of robots’ behavior, we can use the depiction model to account for the dis-
crepancy between their mechanical nature as artefacts, the behaviors designed and the intended
effects. In particular, the base scene corresponds to the fact that robots are artefacts that operate
mechanically or are preprogrammed or remotely controlled and describes the robot’s actions on
the mechanical level, such as moving its joints. Responses to the base scene are thus clearly non-
anthropomorphic.Theproximalscenecorrespondstotherecognitionofthissceneasapurposeful
actionbytherobot,suchasliftingitsarm.Responsestothissceneareanthropomorphicsincethey
relyontheattributionofcertainpropertiesthattherobotdoesnothave,butwhicharesignaledby
thedesignorbehavioroftherobot,suchashavingeyesorlookingatsomething.Thedistalscene
finallyaccountsforthepossiblefunctionoftherespectivebehaviorincontext,whichmayinthis
case be that the robot is trying to reach for something. It concerns a fictional scene in which the
robotis acharacter,for instance,a human-likebeing.
Letusconsidersomeexamplesfromhuman-robotinteraction(seeTable 2);forinstance,Nakata
et al. [1998] introduced subjects to a fish-shaped experimental robot which is sensitive to touch.
In one of the three behaviors implemented, the robot lifts its ‘head’ when sensing human touch.
Theauthorsdefinethisbehavioras“arepellingtactilereaction”andlabelit“rebellious.”Usingthe
depictionmodel,wecandistinguishbetweenthebasescene,inwhichtherobot’smotorspushup
the upper part of the robot when the input to the touch sensor exceeds a threshold; the proximal
scene, in which the robot ‘pushes back;’ and the distal scene, in which the robot’s behavior is
understoodas expressinga rebelliousintention.
As another example consider Tielmann et al.’s [ 2014] model of robot emotional expression in
child-robot interaction, in which the robot’s behavior differs concerning features like speechvol-
ume, pitch height, speech rate, head pose, eye color, arm and trunk pose. The robot is designed
tomatchthechild’smeasuredemotionalstate,whichisanalyzedintermsofarousal,valenceand
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 11 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:11
levelofextroversion.Theauthorsdescribetherelationshipasfollows:“Thevoiceoftherobotwill
beinfluencedbyitsarousal.Thehigherarousal,theloudertherobotwillspeak,thehigherpitched
itsvoicewillbeandthehigherthespeechrate.Speechvolumeisalsoinfluencedbyextroversion,
thehighertheextroversion,thelouderthevoice.”Thus,accordingtoourmodel,thebasesceneis
constituted by a machine producing speech in a loud and high-pitched voice, the proximal scene
istosignalarousal,andthedistalsceneistoindicatetothechildthattherobotisasexcitedabout
somethingas thechildis.
Asalastexample,considertheimplementationofdifferenttypesofgesturesinanarratingrobot
[Huang & Mutlu 2013]. The robot’s gestures were carefully modeled after human gestures previ-
ously elicited in human narrations and coordinated with particular lexical material in the robot’s
speechstream.Theauthorsfind,forinstance,thatthe“robot’suseoficonicgesturessignificantly
predictedmales’perceptionsoftherobot’scompetence”.Usingourmodel,wecandistinguishbe-
tween the robot producing a previously demonstrated and recorded posture of its ‘hand’ at the
same time as a particular word is used, which constitutes the base scene; the interpretation of
the hand posture as iconic gesture, which constitutes the proximal scene, and the impression of
a competent robot that can accompany its words with appropriate gestures that indicate that it
understandswhatit issaying, whichconstitutesthedistalscene.
By conceptualizing the robot’s behavior as an act of depiction, we can analyze in the next step
what level of the robot’s behavior users rely on while interacting with the robot, moment by
moment. We thus apply the depiction model for describing the robot’s behavior, and in a second
stepuseitto describethewaysin whichpeoplerespondtotherobot’sactions.
3.3 Describing Human Behavior in Interaction with Robots
For the analysis of participants’ responses to the robot in interaction, we take the micro-analytic
perspective on participants’ actions developed in the framework of ethnomethodological conver-
sation analysis [cf. Garfinkel 1972; Sacks1992]. In this methodological framework [cf. Sacks et
al.1974], like in other collaborative models of communication [such as Clark 1996; Bangerter &
Mayor2013],itisassumedthatinorderforinteractiontosucceed,participantsneedtodisplayto
eachothercontinuouslyhow theyunderstandeachothers’contributionsand whatthey consider
therelevantcontextofthecurrentactiontobe[cf.Clark&Schaefer 1989].Forinstance,ifspeaker
A says “sit down”, this utterance per seis highly ambiguous; it could be a suggestion, an invita-
tion, or a command, among many other things. However, once speaker B has responded to it, for
instancebysaying“thankyou”,theinterpretationofA’sutteranceisspecifiedasaninvitation.In
thenextturn,speakerAmayrejectthisinterpretation,forinstance,bysaying“thiswasanorder!”;
however, if she does not challenge speaker B’s interpretation, ‘invitation’ is the intersubjectively
established interpretation of A’s utterance [cf. Sacks et al. 1974]. Because speakers in interaction
need to display to each other the interpretations of each others’ utterances in order to arrive at
intersubjectively available common ground [cf. Clark & Schaefer 1989], their interpretations of
eachothers’behaviorsarealso availableto theobserver[seeSacks 1984].
Correspondingly,inthemethodproposed,welookatthewaysinwhichtheparticipantsdisplay
how they make sense of the robot’s behavior.1Our micro-analysis of the users’ responses to the
robot’sdepictionofhumansocialbehaviorcanindicatetowhichscenetheuserattendsinthesense
1Obviously, in most current human-robot interactions, robots are not designed to display their interpretation of a user’s
utterance,especiallynotifthedialogisscriptedorevendeterministic.Nevertheless,eventhenon-verbalcompliancewith
the request to move forward constitutes such a display of the interpretation of the user’s behavior – to the user. That is,
if the robot complies, the user will take her instruction to be understood and processed successfully, and she will move
on to the next instruction, which she will design based on what she assumes has previously been successful, i.e. what she
takes tobecommonground (for detailsandfurther discussion, pleaseseeFischer [ 2016]).
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 12 ====
4:12 K. Fischer
thatthehumanisdisplayinganorientationtoacertainaspectofthesituation;forinstance,inthe
exampleabove,bysaying“thankyou,”speakerBdisplaysherorientationtospeakerA’sutterance
as an invitation. While in this example, the display concerns the interpretation of the function of
theutterance,peoplealsodesigntheirbehaviorsspecificallyfortheircurrentinteractionpartners.
That is, each utterance is so designed that the particular recipient can understand it [Levinson
2006]; who the speaker takes the recipient of the utterance to be, for example, whether he or she
assumestobetalkingtoamachineortoalive-likecharacter,canthusalsobeidentifiedfromthe
way the utterance is designed [i.e. by means of ‘reverse recipient design’, cf. Fischer et al. 2012].
Using this approach, we can analyze participants’ behaviors towards robots by classifying them
according to (a) whether they display an orientation to the base scene by treating the robot as a
mechanical tool; (b) whether they display an orientation to the proximal scene by displaying an
understanding of the robot’s behavior as being intentional and meaningful; or (c) whether they
attendto thedistalsceneby displayingan understandingof therobot’sbehaviorashuman-like.
Inparticular,foreachresponsetoarobot’sactions,weidentifytowhichofthethreescenespro-
poseditisaresponseto.Forinstance,arobot’sgreeting“Hello,howareyou?”,canberesponded
to in several different ways [see Fischer 2011]: One possibility is to reciprocate the greeting by
replying “I’m fine, thanks, how are you?”. This is a response at the distal level, where two people
arehavingapoliteconversation.Asecondpossibilityistorespondtotherobot’sutteranceasthe
productionofcannedspeechbyamachineinordertoindicatethebeginningoftheinteraction.In
this case, people may say “drive forward”. This utterance signals an orientation towards the base
scene.Furthermore,peoplemayacknowledgethattherobotwasaskingaquestionandproducing
agreetingbyresponding“fine”or“hello”.Inthiscase,peopleorienttowardstheproximalscene,in
which the robot is taken to produce some type of social action. However, the human interlocutor
doesnotenterintothejointpretense[cf.Clark 1999]ofhavingapoliteconversation,butacknowl-
edgesthattherobot’sbehaviormayhaveasocialfunction,suchasopeningtheinteraction(‘hello’)
and askingaquestion(‘fine’).Theseresponseswould thereforebelocatedat theproximal level.
We can thus classify people’s behavior as being oriented to the base, proximal or distal scene,
where responses to the proximal and distal scene are anthropomorphizing since they involve
sense-makingbydrawingonthehumandomain.Whilethedistalsceneclearlyevokesafictional,
human-likebeing,theproximalscenealsoinvolveshuman-likecategories,suchastheattribution
of human functions (e.g. the robot “sees” something), and can be (and has been) considered as
anthropomorphism [e.g. Fussell et al. 2008], yet the mechanisms underlying these two scenes are
most likely quite different (that is, semiotic versus inferential processes, [cf. Fischer 2016]), and
thusweratherkeepthemdistinctinourclassification.
Given the multimodal nature of interaction, users’ displays of how they understand the
partner’s actions may potentially comprise a very broad range of signals. For instance, on the
one hand, we can look at what people say, on the other, also the timely response to the partner’s
behavior, i.e. attending to the response time typical of human interaction, about 300msecs, [see
Jefferson 2004], can indicate to the analyst that the person is orienting to the robot in similar
ways as to a human communication partner [cf. Hutchby 2001]. Similarly, people may or may
notgazetowardsrobotsattimeswhentheywouldalsogazetowardshumaninteractionpartners
[e.g. Andrist et al. 2014]. Anthropomorphizing responses may consequently become evident in
all kinds of communicativebehaviors.
The method proposed thus targets anthropomorphism in terms of anthropomorphizing
behavior, i.e. behavior that attributes human-like qualities to a robot. It is consequently in line
with work investigating behavioral responses, such as keeping a robot’s secret [e.g. Kahn et al.
2015],savingacomputer’sface[Nass 2004]ordescribingarobotinintentionalisticways[Fussell
et al.2008]. However, the method proposed does not make claims regarding people’s subjective
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 13 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:13
understandingsofrobots,i.e.thepsychologicalbasisfortheobservablebehavior.Forinstance,the
method proposed does not make assumptions about psychological mechanisms such as mindless
transfer [Nass & Moon 2000], automatic trait attribution [Roebroek 2014], or the real belief
that the robot under consideration has a set of human-like characteristics. That is, our study is
neutral with respect to possible explanations for the anthropomorphizing behavior observable.
Nevertheless, as we shall see (Section 6), the results of tracking people’s anthropomorphizing
behaviors in interaction over time will have considerable consequences for explanatory models
of anthropomorphism in human-robot interaction. Bridging the gap between people’s cognitive
processes and their observable behavior goes unfortunately far beyond the limits of this paper
(but see Clark & Fischer under revision). What the method proposed here however does allow us
to do is to describe people’s responses to robotic action and track anthropomorphizing behavior
dynamically over thecourseofan interaction.
4 CASESTUDY
Inthefollowing,Iillustratethemethodproposedinanexampleanalysisofhuman-robotinterac-
tionsbasedonClark’s[ 2016]modelofdepiction;thatis,Iillustratetheapplicationofthemethod-
ology on a case.
4.1 Data
The data re-used here are spontaneous interactions gathered in the lobby of Willow Garage for
another study [Fischer et al. 2014]. In these interactions, participants were left alone in the lobby
to fill out an initial questionnaire. While participants were busy filling out the form, a PR2 robot,
placeddirectlyoppositetheparticipantsacrossthecounteronwhichtheywerewriting,addressed
them eitherwith speechor with a beep,and performed a series of gestures intended to be under-
stoodasgesturingforhelp.
Thedatasetcomprises19interactions(ninemen,ninewomen,oneunreportedgender)ofpar-
ticipantsbetween19and63yearsoldandfromvariousoccupationsandeducationalbackgrounds.
Theyhadbeenrecruitedtoparticipateinhuman-robotinteractionexperimentsbutdidnotknow
at the time of the interaction that it was part of the experiment (but were debriefed later). They
were on average not very acquainted with robots (3.4 on a 7-item scale), and they scored M =82
out of 110 on other-oriented empathy (sd =7.3) and M =25.5 out of 40 (sd =4.3) for helpfulness
[ cf.Fischeretal. 2014]in astandardized questionnaireonprosocialpersonality[Penner 2002].
The robot’s behaviors were all prerecorded and were initiated by the experimenter remotely
fromanotherroomaccordingtoafixedscript.Robotbehaviorwasnotfullyautomatizedinorder
to ensure participants’ safety. The experimenter came back into the lobby when the participants
hadstoppedinteractingwiththerobotforat least30seconds.
4.2 Analysisof theRobot’sBehavior
In Table3, we analyze the robot’s behavior in the speech condition on the basis of our depic-
tion model; the robot behaviors were implemented by the engineer using the so-called ‘puppet-
interface’[cf.Pantofaruetal. 2013].Thisinterfaceallowstheresearchertoprogramdifferentrobot
movements and to store them in sequence. These actions constitute the base scene, which com-
prises the concrete means by which the depiction is carried out, such as gesture, head orienta-
tionorpresynthesized,cannedspeech.Thisbehaviorismeanttoevokeaproximalscene,suchas
the robot reaching for something or turning towards the participant. The third level is the distal
scene evoked, such as the robot intending to collect a plastic cup from the shelf or turning to the
participant for help. The distal scene evoked thus corresponds to the robot behavior designer’s
intentions (see Table 3). That is, from a social interaction perspective (i.e. from the perspective of
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 14 ====
4:14 K. Fischer
Table 3. Analysisof theRobot’s Behavior inTerms of Depiction
base proximal distal
turnsupper part60 degrees turnsheadtowards participant attends toparticipant
playscannedspeec h initiatescontact,produce shumanspeech g reetsparticipant,opensconversation
playscannedspeech politeutterance politewelcome
keeps upper partturned extends gaze continuedattention
plays beep series typicalrobotbehavior aims togetparticipant’sattention
turnsupper part moves head towards shelf attends ostensively to shelf
liftsand lowers arm reachesfor object ostensively attempts toreach forobjecton shelf
lowers upper part looksdown indicatessadness
moves upper part toprevious position lookstowards participant asks participant forhelp
thedistalsceneevoked),therobotfirstattemptstoattracttheparticipant’sattention,thengestures
towardsanobjectontheshelfthatisoutofitsreach,andfinallylooksbackandforthbetweenthe
objectand theparticipantin orderto gethelp.
Eightparticipantssawtherobotinthespeechcondition,whileelevensawitinthebeepcondi-
tion,inwhichtherobot’sgreetingwasreplacedbyabeepseries;thus,inthesecondcondition,the
robotleavesthepolitewelcomemessageawayandinsteadsimplyusesaseriesofbeepstoattract
theparticipant’sattention;inaddition,itlooksbackandforthbetweenthedesiredobjectandthe
participantonemore time thanin thespeechcondition.
4.3 AnalysisoftheInteractions
Theinteractionswereanalyzedconcerningthesceneattended-toinresponsetoeachoftherobot’s
behaviors. That is, we investigated whether each participant displays an orientation to the base
scene, the proximal scene or the distal scene and encode each response as one of the three. In
particular, we code a user’s behavior as attention to the basescene (see Table 3) if there is no
reactiontotherobot’sbehavioratall(becauseininteractionsbetweenhumans,sinceinteractants
need to signal to each other how they understand each others’ behaviors, lack of response to a
partner’sactionisrare),2orwhentheparticipantsdrawattentiontothematerialpropertiesofthe
robot, for example, by pointing out that it cannot do anything, or by walking around it, reading
postersbehindit,etc.
In contrast, we code as attention to the proximal scene when people attend to the robot (e.g.
by watching it) and thus display an understanding of the robot being in the course of carrying
out an extended activity, i.e. when they observe it for longer periods of time. Another example
of attention to the proximal scene is when participants assume that the robot is doing something
meaningful, but do not attribute emotions or its own agenda into it, for instance, when the robot
is turning to the shelf to get help while participants wave at it to make it perceive them and thus
display theirinterpretationof therobot’smovement asan attemptto scantheroom.
2As one anonymous reviewer pointed out, there may be intercultural differences concerning what behaviors are conven-
tionallyexpectedandalsohowtheyareinterpretedacrosscultures,andtheremaybeculturesinwhichitisacceptableor
even normatively expected not to respond to another person’s verbal statements, possibly also depending on social roles
or social status. This is of course possible and would have to be taken into account in the analysis. That is, when analyz-
ing what understandings people display of the robot’s behavior, we have to base our analysis on our knowledge of the
social meanings of the cultural community in which the interaction occurs. The method proposed relies on people’s own
sense-making processes, which are always shaped by socio-cultural norms and expectations. The current analysis relies
ontheconventionalpracticesuncoveredintheconversationanalyticliterature[e.g.Sacksetal. 1974]forthesamecultural
contextin whichthe datawereelicited,namelytheU.S. [cf.Fischer etal. 2014].
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 15 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:15
Finally,wecodeasattentiontothe distalscenewhenparticipantsindicatethattheyexpectthe
robot to have its own agenda (for instance, by asking what it wants), when they suspect human
wishes,suchashopingtogetaglassofwater,orwhentheyrespondpolitelyandreciprocatesocial
behavior[Nass& Moon 2000].
Below is an informal rendering of an example interaction; because of spatial constraints only
one analysis is presented in detail, and to make it as random as possible, the analysis presented
concernsthefirstinteractionelicited(participantH101)3(see Table 4).Theparticipant’sbehavior
cannow beanalyzed accordingtowhichsceneitis orientedto.
Therobot’sfirstactionistomoveitsupperpart,whichwasintendedtoindicatethattherobot
sees the participant and thus turns its head towards him or her. The participant does not notice
thisaction,however.Whilewecannotbecertainthatparticipantswouldhavenoticedsuchamove
fromahumaninthesameposition,therobotisstilltreatedlikeanyotherpieceoffurnitureinthe
roombynot beingattendedto (i.e.at baselevel).
Therobot’snextactionistoplaycannedspeech,namelyapolitegreeting.Duringthegreeting,
the participant briefly looks up and down again. After a pause of about two seconds, the partic-
ipant responds to the robot’s greeting by reciprocating it, thus attending to the distal scene in
which two equals participate in a polite exchange. At the same time, he does not look at the ro-
bot while it is speaking (which is unlike communication among humans, since listeners usually
look at speakers while they are speaking [cf., for instance, Andrist et al. 2014]), and also the long
pause before the greeting would indicate trouble in human interaction [e.g. Levinson 1983]–t h e
usual response time in conversation is about 300 to 500 milliseconds [Jefferson 2004], with some
slightinterculturalvariation[cf.Stiversetal. 2009].Thus,whiletheparticipant’sgreetingitselfis
oriented towards the distal scene, other interactional behaviors are rather oriented at a commu-
nication partner that does not require attention to the social norms of human conversation (and
thus relate more to the base scene). To sum up, the participant’s looking at the robot during the
greeting is encoded as attention to the proximal scene, the long pause is understood as oriented
tothebasescene,while thereciprocalgreetingis codedasorientationtothedistalscene.
Inresponsetotherobot’snextutterance,theparticipantdoesnotreactatall,thuswithholding
feedbacknecessaryforthejointmanagementofinteraction[cf.Sacksetal. 1974]bynotproviding
evidence of his understanding of the partner’s utterance. This behavior is consequently coded as
attentiontothebasescene.
The robot produces a series of beeps then, which the participant repeats after he finishes his
questionnaire;hethusdisplaysthatherecognizesitasattention-getting,buttreatsitasnon-social
(comparethistothewaysR2D2’sbeepsarerespondedtoinStarWars).Wethereforesuggestthis
behaviortorespondto theproximalscene:a robotsignalingto get attention.
Therobot’sturningtotheshelfistheninterpretedas‘looking,’ascanbeseenfromthewaving
gesture and the question “do you see me?”, i.e. it is treated as a very basic, but directed behavior;
thus,theparticipantrespondstotheproximalscene.Similarly,hedoesnotunderstandtherobot’s
gesturetowardstheshelfasbasedonitsownagenda;instead,heprovidestherobotwithareason
to move the arm towards the shelf by giving an instruction (“pick a book”). This means that he
doesnotattributeintentionorvolitiontotherobot,whichcorrespondstoattentiontotheproximal
scene.
However,hethenofferstherobot,notjustthecup,but“aglassofwater,”i.e.addressingahuman
need,hencerespondingtothedistalscene.Inthenextstep,theparticipantexaggeratestheaction,
squeezing the cup into the robot’s gripper and indicating the futility of the operation. Thus, he
responds first to the proximal and then to the base scene. Finally, he walks away, indicating no
3Transcription conventions: “word” =verbalutterance; <par>word </par>=parallelspeech; <P>=pause.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 16 ====
4:16 K. Fischer
Table 4. Interaction between Participant H101 and thePR2
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 17 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:17
Fig. 1. Progression of H101’s responses to the robot’s actions (y-axis) in terms of orientation to the base,
proximal anddistallevel.
social obligation to negotiate the end of the interaction [cf. Schegloff & Sacks 1973in contrast],
thusorientingtowardsthebasesceneagain.
Theparticipant’sbehaviorisvisualizedinFigure 1,whichillustrateshowhisbehaviorchanges
between the base, proximal and distal scenes (y-axis) in response to the different robot behaviors
(x-axis).Alinediagramwaschosentohighlighttheprogressionofanthropomorphizingbehavior
overtime(eventhoughtherearenotransitionsbetweenthethreelevelsastheconnectionsmight
suggest), because the novelty of the method proposed here is that it can document the dynamic
unfoldingof anthropomorphizingbehavioroverthecourseof theinteraction.
As the diagram summarizes, the participant switches back and forth between attention to the
distal,proximaland basescenewithinthisone minuteof interaction(59seconds).
4.4 Analysisof thewholedataset
All19interactionswereanalyzedbasedonthedepictionmodelinthesamewayasdescribedabove.
Inordertomeasuretheinterraterreliabilityofthecodingschemepresented,fourinteractionswere
analyzed by an independent coder, a master student in an IT program on web communication
design, on the basis of the text in section 3and the example analyses in section 4,w h i c hs e r v e d
as his only instruction. The comparison of the analyses by the first author and the independent
coderreveals 93.74%agreementand a Cohen’skappaof 0.874.
Data analysis shows that every single interaction is unique in terms of attending to the robot,
following therobot’sattentiontotheshelf,moving towardstherobot,andhelping.
Forexample,participantH111behavedverydifferentlyfromparticipantH101byfirstignoring
the robot (base scene – the robot is a machine that needs no attention) and then by trying to
make sense of the robot’s actions (proximal scene – the robot’s actions indicate something) (see
Table5).
AnotherexampleshowinganothertypeofresponseisproducedbyH112,whorespondstothe
robotin socialwaysinitially,butthenlargely ignores it(seeTable 6):
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 18 ====
4:18 K. Fischer
Table 5. Participant H111
Interaction Code Explanation
H111: filling out form
Pr2: turns head towards participant. (base) no response
Pr2: ‘‘Hello, my name is Pr2. How are you?’’ base no response
(4secs)
Pr2: ‘‘It’s great to meet you.’’ proximal understands robot
to be in the
process of doing
somethingH111: looks at robot
Pr2: Enjoy your visit at Willow Garage.
Pr2: ‘‘beep beep - beep beep’’
H111: looks down at form base no response
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
111: looks at robot. proximal understands robot
to be in the
process of doing
somethingPr2: lifts and lowers arm, lifts and lowers
arm
H111: looks down at form base no response /
prioritizes own
workPr2: lifts arm
Pr2: looks down
Pr2: looks at participant.
(8secs)
H111: pushes away form, looks at robot and
moves towards shelfproximal understands robot
to attend to the
shelf Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
H111: looks at robot, looks at shelf, looks at
robot. looks at shelf, steps towards shelf,
looks at robot, looks at cup/shelf, inspects
robotproximal
Pr2: turns head towards participant’s original
positionunderstands robot
to be in the
process of doing
somethingH111: steps back a little, looking at robot
proximal
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
H111: keeps looking at robot, then moves
around robot and inspects back of robotbase treats robot as
artifact
Pr2: turns head towards participant’s original
position
Pr2: turns head towards shelf. understands the
robot to index
something on the
shelfH111: keeps looking at robot, then follows
robot’s extended arm, looking at shelf, then
looks down looks at shelf, then steps back,
looking at lowest shelf. bends downproximal
towards lowest shelf, then keeps inspecting
shelf. looks at robot, then down at floor,
back at robot, looks at watch, back to robot,
towards shelf, then around, then walks around
and away from the robotbase treats robot as
one artifact out
of others (like
the shelf)
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 19 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:19
Table 6. Participant H112
H112: filling out form
Pr2: turns head towards participant. (base) no response
Pr2: ‘‘Hello, my name is Pr2. How are you?’’
(6secs) base delayed response
understands robot as
producing a friendly
greetingH112: looks at robot, smiles, looks down at form distal
Pr2: ‘‘It’s great to meet you. Enjoy your visit
at Willow Garage.’’
H112: nods, looks up at robot, waves at robot distal understands robot to
be in the process of
doing something
directed at the shelfPr2: ‘‘beep beep - beep beep’’ base
Pr2: turns head towards shelf. proximal
H112: smiles, looks at shelf
Pr2: lifts and lowers arm, lifts and lowers and
lifts armproximal interprets robot’s
head movement as
directed towards her,
but without intentionPr2: looks down
Pr2: looks at participant. proximal
H112: smiles, waves at robot
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
Pr2: looks at participant.
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
H112: looks towards shelf, then back to robot proximal understands that the
robot’s behavior is
directedPr2: looks at participant.
Pr2: turns head towards shelf.
(31secs)
H112: looks away, looks around, glances briefly
at robot twice, then looks down at form.base treats robot as one
aspect of context
The variability in participants’ behaviors towards the robot is reflected in Figure 2, which rep-
resents the eight participants’ responses to the robot’s nine different behaviors (on the x-axis) in
the speech condition. As Figure 2illustrates, the eight participants in the speech condition em-
ploy a wide range of behaviors in unique combinations in interaction with the robot. That is, no
robot behavior is responded to in the same way by all participants. It shows that most, but not
all,participantsrespondtothedistalsceneevokedwhentherobotproducesapolitegreeting,and
again many but not all participants attend to the distal scene after the robot’s gesturing for help.
However, as Figure 2additionally illustrates, all participants also produce behaviors in between
that indicate their interpretation of the robot as machine-like, and in general the time courses of
their responses to the base, proximal and distal scene vary considerably. The analysis shows that
no direct correspondence between robot behavior and participant responses is emerging, so that
participants’actionsarenot ‘triggered’bytherobot’sactionsin similar ways.
Comparing the behavior of the participants in the speech condition now with the participants
inthe‘beep’-condition,inwhichtherobotdidnotgreettheparticipantsbutattractedtheiratten-
tion by means of a series of beeps, shows that even though much intrapersonal variation can be
observedhere,too,andnosinglerobotbehaviorisrespondedtobytheparticipantsinawaythat
would appropriately be described as ‘triggered’, the overall distribution indicates that the initial
useofspeechinthespeechconditionhasanimpactonpeople’soverallbehavior.Thus,whilethe
robot’sbehaviorsdonottriggeranyspecificresponses,theanthropomorphicdesignofitsbehav-
iorinCondition1,i.e.thechoiceofhumanlanguage,hasaneffectonhowtherobotisresponded
toin general.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 20 ====
4:20 K. Fischer
Fig.2. Attentiontobase,proximalanddistalscenebythe8participantsinthespeechcondition(represented
by alineeach) over thecourseof theinteraction(thenineactions of the robot).
Figure3showsthatwhentheverbalgreetingbytherobotisreplacedbyabeepseries,responses
at the distal level occur later in the interaction, if at all. While some participants do not respond
to the robot’s depictions at the distal level at all, five participants do, but at different moments
in the interaction. In fact, like the analysis of participants’ behavior in the speech condition, the
analysis of the beep condition indicates unique patterns and frequent switches between levels by
theparticipants.
The different distributions of responses at the base, proximal and distal level in the two con-
ditions can now be quantitatively compared. An independent sample Chi-Square test was used
to compare participants’ behaviors in the speech versus the beep condition; the results ( X2=
12.94,df=2, p=.00155) show a significantly different distribution in the extent to which peo-
pletreattherobotasamachinecomparedtotheextenttowhichtheyshowanthropomorphizing
behavior,basedonthepresenceorabsenceoftheverbalframingutteranceatthebeginningofthe
interaction.
5 DISCUSSION
In this paper, I have proposed a qualitative methodology that addresses people’s observable be-
haviorsinresponsetoarobot’sactionsintermsofdisplaysoftheirunderstandingsofitsactions,
following conversation analytic principles. The data analyzed were particularly well suited for
that purpose since each robot behavior had been carefully crafted with all three levels in mind:
The‘puppetinterface’bymeansofwhichtherobot’sbehaviorsaredefined[Pantofaruetal. 2013]
allowstheencodingoftheproximalscene(e.g.robotliftingitsarm)intermsofitsphysicalprop-
erties,suchasconfigurationsofitsmotorsandjoints(basescene);theproximalsceneinturnhad
beencreatedwiththedistalsceneinmind:havingtherobotaskforhelpnon-verbally(seeTable 3).
Theencodingofparticipants’behaviorsthenjustneededtocheckforeachoftherobot’sbehaviors
to whichofthethreescenesparticipantsare oriented.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 21 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:21
Fig. 3. Attention to base (1), proximal (2) and distal (3) scene by the 11 participants in the beep condition
(representedbyaline each) over thecourseof theinteraction (thetenactions of therobot).
The results show high intra- and interpersonal variation in the response to each of the robot’s
actions, such that no two participants acted in similar ways over the course of these interactions.
Thus, participants differ with respect to what they respond to at what level. This is in line with
previousworkshowinginterpersonalvariationintreatingrobotsassocialactors[Epleyetal. 2007;
Fischer2011,2016;L e ee ta l . 2010]. Furthermore, not a single user responded to the distal scene
only, which means that not a single participant treated the robot as a social actor over the course
of the whole interaction. Moreover, some participants did not respond to the robot’s behavior at
theproximalor distallevelat alland thusdid not treatitin ananthropomorphicway.
Towhatextentdotheresultscorrespondtoothermethodsofmeasuringanthropomorphism?In
theoriginalstudy[Fischeretal. 2014],weusedaquestionnairetoassesspeople’sperceptionsofthe
robot after the experiment. Table 6reports the questionnaire results from the original study for
the questions, how appealing, competent, intelligent, superior, safe, approachable, and confident
the robot was perceived on a 7-point Likert scale in the two conditions. The results show mean
ratings from 2.91 to 5.88, suggesting that the robot is attributed with human-like characteristics
to a medium degree on average. This medium degree of ascription of human-like characteristics
maycorrespondtothebackandforthbetweenthebase,proximalanddistalscenesobservedinthe
current analysis. Similarly, the standard deviations between 1.13 and 2.66 for the two conditions
maycorrespondtotheinterpersonalvariationthatwecanseeinFigures 3and4.Asignificantdif-
ferencebetweenthetwoconditionswasfoundonlyfortheattribute friendly(F(1,17) =7.42,p <.05,
η2=.30[cf.Fischeretal. 2014]),whichmaycorrespondtotheoveralldifferencesbetweenthetwo
conditionswithrespecttoresponsesattheproximalanddistallevelapparentfrom Figures 3and
4. However, since the questionnaire results present people’s post hocimpressions, the statistical
results do not replace the detailed analysis of people’s responses to the robot’s actions over the
courseoftheinteraction;thequantitativecomparisonofpeople’sorientationtothebase,proximal
and distal scene in the two condition shows that the method proposed can not only track partici-
pants’ anthropomorphizing behaviors over time, but also provide a more fine-grained analysis of
theeffectsofparticulardesign choices,suchasaddinga socialframingutterance.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 22 ====
4:22 K. Fischer
Table 7. Means(M) andStandardDeviations (sd)for theQuestionnaire
Datafor thetwoConditionsappealing
intelligent
competent
superior
safe
approachable
confident
friendly∗
beep:M 5.634.133.753.005.385.884.754.46
sd 1.192.232.661.851.771.132.251.42
speech:M 4.644.003.642.915.364.363.276.25
sd 2.011.781.501.582.162.111.851.42
A potential limitation of the method proposed could be that it relies on people’s displays of
their understandings of the robot’s behavior second by second, thus being tailored to identifying
anthropomorphizing behavior in response to robots’ interactional behavior in the moment, thus
not necessarily accounting for global effects, such as the effects of a robot’s anthropomorphic
design.However,asthedifferencesbetweenthetwoconditionsinthecasestudyillustrate,global
effects,suchasthoseduetosocialframing,dobecomeapparentinglobalchangesinparticipants’
localresponses,i.e.theirresponsesinthemoment.Themethodcanthusbeusedtoidentifysubtle
effects of individual social cues, also in a quantifiable way, as the statistical analysis of the effects
of social framing has shown, where the comparison between the conditions revealed that people
oriented to the base, proximal and distal scenes significantly differently, depending on whether
the robot used speech or a beep. Similarly, different user types may emerge in the same way; for
instance,differencesbetweenintrovertsandextrovertscouldbeidentifiedusingthismethodology.
Anotherpossibleobjectiontotheanalysispresentedmaybethattherobotchosenwasnotvery
human-like,andthatthebeep-seriesplayedinbothconditionsdrawsparticipants’attentiontothe
machine-likepropertiesoftherobot;consequently,thereasonforthefactthatpeopleswitchback
and forth between the different scenes depicted might be due to the fact that the robot provides
conflicting cues. That is, on the one hand, the robot was greeting them politely (thus evoking a
distal scene), on the other, it was trying to get the participants’ attention by beeping like a ma-
chine.Thiscriticismdoesnotaffectthemethodproposed,whichservestotracepeople’sbehavior
irrespective of how consistently the robot’s behavior is designed. Furthermore, the criticism only
applies to the speech condition since here signals from the human domain (speech) were mixed
with more basic robot behavior and appearance; in the beep condition, the robot only uses basic
behaviorsandaweakanthropomorphicdesign.Theanalysisofthebeepconditionstillshowsthat
people switch between depiction levels also in interactions with a consistently designed robot.
Moreover, much indirect evidence suggests that people generally navigate between the different
depictionlevels;forinstance,Fusselletal.’s[ 2008]findings,thatdifferentmethodsproducediffer-
ent results, indicate that people have no problems navigating between base, proximal and distal
scenes.Similarly,KoryWestlundetal.[ 2016]findthateventhoughchildrenrespondedsociallyto
therobotsintroduced,theydidnotobjecttotherobotbeingputintoaboxagainstitswill.Wesug-
gest that this is similar to applauding an actor (base scene) in his devil costume (proximal scene)
afteraperformanceforhavingbeenabrilliantMephistopheles(distalscene),wheretheaudience
also navigateswitheasebetweenthedifferentscenes[cf. Clark 2016].
Beingaqualitativemethod,whichreliesonmanualencoding,themethodproposedisrelatively
tiresome and thus restricted in applicability because of the manual labor involved. However, for
the specific points in the interactions analyzed and in response to certain robot behaviors, one
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 23 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:23
could easily imagine that a learning algorithm is applied to classify people’s behaviors automati-
cally. While we cannot simply classify a human action, say waving at the robot, as an instance of
abehavioratanyofthethreelevelsingeneralbecauseitmayhavedifferentfunctionsindifferent
contexts, to what level waving at the robot is oriented in response to a specific action could be
automatically assigned. For instance, when the robot is gesturing for help, waving can be auto-
matically assigned to the proximal level (the robot is in the course of scanning its environment),
whereasinothersituations,suchasinresponsetoagreeting,itcanbeautomaticallyclassifiedas
aresponseonthedistalscene.Thus,whilethemethodcanbecarriedoutmanually,anautomatic
analysisis principallypossible.
The fact that our student assistant could encode the data in highly similar ways without pre-
vious training and only on the basis of the current text furthermore indicates that the method is
easily learnable and replicable; this particular dataset may seem to have been easier to analyze
withthemethodproposedthanothersbecausetheintentionallycraftedrobotbehaviorsprovided
natural ways of segmenting the interaction and because of the three levels attended to in the ro-
botbehaviordesignusingthe‘puppet’interface,whichprovidedanintuitiveanchorpointforthe
analysis of the human participants’ behaviors. Still, as my brief analysis of the three studies by
Nakataetal.[ 1998],Tielmannetal.[ 2014]andHuang&Mutlu[ 2013]inSection 3.2indicates,itis
relatively straightforward to identify these three levels even post hocin all kinds of robot behav-
iors. An additional tutorial for the functional encoding and segmentation of the interactions can
bedownloaded a linkto thetutorialtobepublishedwiththemain article.
6 IMPLICATIONS
In this study, we have analyzed participants’ responses to a robot’s behaviors based on whether
they attend to the robot’s mechanical properties, the proximal scene evoked or the distal scene.
Thus, we have described people’s behaviors, not their mental models or mental attributions of
human-like properties to the robot; consequently, we cannot make assertions about what people
believeabouttherobot.4However,theresultsdoshowconsiderableintra-andinterpersonalvaria-
tioninthewaypeoplerespondtoidenticalrobotbehaviors,whichhastheoreticalimplicationsfor
ourunderstandingofanthropomorphism.Forinstance,wehavefoundthatparticipantsrespondto
therobot’sactionswithanthropomorphizingbehaviors,suchasreciprocatingagreeting,offering
help,askingwhatitwantsetc.,inonemoment,butthatinthenextmoment,theymayalsotreatit
like a machine. That is, even if some of the robot’s actions, such as the polite verbal greeting, are
often responded to in an anthropomorphizing manner at the distal level, this does not mean that
the robot is responded to with anthropomorphism with regard to other actions. Instead, people
shiftbetweentreatingtherobotlikeanotherhumanandtreatingitlikeamachinewithnoappar-
entdifficulty.Consequently,oneimplicationofthisstudyisthatpeopledonotanthropomorphize
robotsingeneral, butrespondanthropomorphicallytoindividualaspectsor behaviorsof robots.
From this perspective, it is misleading to assume that robots aresocial actors: People rather
seemtotreatrobotsassocialactorstemporarily.Thesefindingscastdoubtontheassumptionthat
people mindlessly attribute social characteristics to robots, as suggested in the media equation
hypothesis [Reeves & Nass 1996], which was further developed into the Computers Are Social
Actorsparadigm[Nass&Moon 2000].Instead,peopledonotseemtoconfuserobotswithhumans
sincetheyregularlyreturntotreatingtherobotasamachineinbetweentheiranthropomorphizing
behaviors.
4Similarly,becauseitreliesonpeople’sobservablebehavior,themethodcannotsafeguardagainstexperimentalbias,such
thatparticipantsmaybehaveinawaytopleasetheexperimenter,becauseitdoesnotaddressmotivationsandintentions,
just whatcanbeobserved.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 24 ====
4:24 K. Fischer
Furthermore, people’s anthropomorphizing behaviors do not seem to be ‘triggered’ by certain
robot behaviors or its appearance, as suggested, for instance, by Nass [ 2004], since behaviors on
theproximalanddistalleveloccuratvariousplacesintheinteractionsandnotdirectlyinreaction
to specificrobot behaviors,as theconceptof a’trigger’ wouldsuggest.
Moreover, we have seen that even if people do not interpret a robot’s behavior as mechan-
ical movement, they still do not necessarily expect the robot to have its own agenda. Thus,
anthropomorphismcomesindifferentdegrees,whichisreflectedinourdistinctionbetweenprox-
imalanddistalscenes(Clark&Fischerunderrevision).AnexampleisparticipantH101’sresponse
to the robot’s gesturing towards the shelf; while recognizing the robot’s behavior as attention to
theshelf,hedidnotexpecttherobottohaveitsownintentionforreachingupsinceherepeatedly
provided the robot with the instruction to pick a book. (The failure to attribute intention into the
robot in this situation does not keep him, however, from offering the robot a glass of water a few
seconds later, even though robots are not particularly good with water and certainly don’t need
any.) The example illustrates that anthropomorphism is not an all-or-none phenomenon. This is
in accordance with the suggestion by Ruijten et al. [ 2019] that some traits are more difficult to
attribute to a robot than others. However, approaches that see anthropomorphizing responses to
robots as based on a psychological disposition [e.g. Epley et al. 2007,2008; Epley2018; Ruijten
et al.2019] will also have problems explaining the intrapersonal variation over time. That is, if
a general disposition caused anthropomorphizing behaviors, people should either anthropomor-
phize the robot and treat it as if it was a person, or they should not. In contrast, what we can
observe is that people treat robots as if they had human-like characteristics in one second and as
iftheyhadnotin thenext.
Similarly, social constructivist approaches [e.g. Edwards 1994] do not necessarily explain the
interpersonaldifferencesandthechangesintheattributionofhuman-likecharacteristicstorobots,
either. Edwards [ 1994,2001], for instance, assumes intention attribution to be a common social
practice, which is used to make sense of other people’s behavior, as much as for making sense of
animals’androbots’behaviors,sinceintentionsandotherpsychologicalprocessesalwaysneedto
beinferred.Fromthisperspective,onemightexpectpeopletotreatrobotsinahuman-likemanner
throughout.
The method has furthermore some practical implications; for instance, it cannot only be used
to track subtle effects of certain social cues in the robot’s behavior and thus support the analysis
of the effects of certain design choices in the robot behavior development, it could also serve to
check at specific points in interaction to which depiction level the respective user is oriented and
to decide on that basis between different courses of future action, as suggested by Simmons et al.
[2011].Itcanthusbeusedto adapttherobot’sbehaviorinrealtime.
Tosumup,Ihavepresentedamethodtodescribethedynamicsofanthropomorphizingbehavior
in HRI. This method complements the set of methods already available to shed light on the dif-
ferent facets of anthropomorphism. The application of the method proposed here in a case study
revealed that people respond to different social ‘triggers’ differently and move between anthro-
pomorphizing and non-anthropomorphizing responses with apparent ease. These findings have
consequencesforexplanatoryaccountsofanthropomorphism(cf.Clark&Fischerunderrevision);
futureworkwillhavetodeterminetherelationshipbetweenpeople’santhropomorphizingbehav-
ior inresponseto therobotandtheirconceptsoftheserobots.
REFERENCES
S. Andrist, E.Spannan,andB.Mutlu.2013.Rhetoricalrobots: Makingrobots moreeffective speakers using linguisticcues
of expertise.In Proceedings of the2013 Human-Robot Interaction Conference pp.341–348.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 25 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:25
S. Andrist, X. Z. Tan, M. Gleicher, and B. Mutlu. 2014. Conversational gaze aversion for humanlike robots. In Proceedings
ofthe2014 ACM/IEEEInternational ConferenceonHuman-Robot Interaction (pp.25–32).ACM.
S. Andrist, M. Ziadee, H. Boukaram, B. Mutlu, and M. Sakr. 2015. Effects of culture on the credibility of robot speech:
A comparison between English and Arabic. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI’15). ACM.New York, NY, USA. 157–164.
T. Arnold and M. Scheutz. 2017. Beyond moral dilemmas: Exploring the ethical landscape in HRI. Proceedings of the 2017
International Conferenceon Human-Robot Interaction 445–452.
A. Bangerter and E. Major. 2013. Interactional theories of communication. In Cobley, P. & Schulz, P.J. (Eds.). Theories and
Modelsof Communication. Handbook of Communication Science . Berlin:DeGruyter. 257–271.
C. Bartneck, E. Croft, D. Kulic, and S. Zoghbi. 2009. Measurement instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, like-
ability,perceivedintelligence,andperceived safetyof robots. International Journal ofSocial Robotics 1,1 (2009)71–81.
J. B. Bavelas, L. Coates, and T. Johnson. 2000. Listeners as co-narrators. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79, 6
(2000),941–952.
J.M.Beer,A.D.Fisk,andW.A.Rogers.2014.Towardaframeworkforlevelsofrobotautonomyinhuman-robotinteraction.
Journal ofHuman-Robot Interaction 3,2(2014),74–99.
J. M. Bradshaw. 2013. From knowledge science to symbiosis science. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 71
(2013),171–176.
H.P.Branigan,M.J.Pickering,J.Pearson,andJ.McLean.2010.Linguisticalignmentbetweenpeopleandcomputers. Journal
ofPragmatics 42,2355–2368.
H.BraniganandJ.Pearson.2006.Alignmentinhuman-computerinteraction.InK.Fischer(Ed.), ProceedingsoftheWorkshop
on ‘How People Talk to Computers, Robots, and Other Artificial Communication Partners’ , Hansewissenschaftskolleg,
Delmenhorst,April 21–23,2006.SFB/TR8Report 010-092006.
D. Brščić, H. Kidokoro, Y. Suehiro, and T. Kanda. 2015. Escaping from children’s abuse of social robots. In Proceedings of
the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI’15) . Association for Computing
Machinery, NewYork, NY, USA, 59–66. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2696454.2696468
D.A.Bryant,J.Borenstein,andA.Howard.2020.Whyshouldwegender?Theeffectofrobotgenderingandoccupational
stereotypes on human trust and perceived competency. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction (pp.13–21).
C. M. Carpinella, A. B. Wyman, M. A. Perez, and S. J. Stroessner. 2017. The robotic social attributes scale (RoSAS): Devel-
opmentandvalidation. Proceedings ofHRI’17 , Vienna.
T. Chaminade, M. Zecca, S.-J. Blakemore, A. Takanishi, C. D. Frith, S. Micera, P. Dario, G. Rizzolatti, V. Gallese, and M. A.
Umilta. 2010. Brain response to a humanoid robot in areas implicated in the perception of human emotional gestures.
PloSONE 5,7(2010),e11577.
H. H.Clark. 1996. Using Language . Cambridge:CambridgeUniversity Press.
H. H.Clark andE. F.Schaefer. 1989.Contributing todiscourse. Cognitive Science 13,259–294.
H .H.Clark. 2016.Depictingasamethod of communication. Psychological Review 123,3(2016),324–347.
H.H. Clark andK.Fischer. (under revision): Robots asDynamicDepictions.
M. F. Damholdt C. Vestergaard, and J. Seibt. 2020. Testing for ‘Anthropomorphization’: A case for mixed methods in
human-robot interaction. In Jost C. et al. (eds) Human-Robot Interaction. Springer Series on Bio- and Neurosystems ,v o l
12.Springer, Cham
N.Epley,A.Waytz,andJ.T.Cacioppo.2007.Onseeinghuman:Athree-factortheoryofanthropomorphism. Psychological
Review114,4(2007),864.
N. Epley, A. Waytz, S. Akalis, and J. T. Cacioppo, 2008. When we need a human: Motivational determinants of anthropo-
morphism. Social Cognition 26,2,pp.143–155.
N. Epley. 2018. A mind like mine: The exceptionally ordinary underpinnings of anthropomorphism. Journal of the Associ-
ation for ConsumerResearch 3,4(2018),591–598.
F.A.EysselandandD.Kuchenbrandt.2012.Socialcategorizationofsocialrobots:Anthropomorphismasafunctionofrobot
group membership. British Journal of Social Psychology 51(2012),724–731.
R. Falconeand and C. Castelfranchi. 2001. The human in the loop of a delegated agent: The theory of adjustable social
autonomy. IEEETransactions of Systems,Man andCybernetics –Part A:Systems and Humans 31(2001),5.
J.Fink.2012.Anthropomorphismandhumanlikenessinthedesignofrobotsandhuman-robotinteraction. ICSR2012 ,pp .
199–208.
K.Fischer.2006.Whatcomputertalkisandisn’t. Human-ComputerConversationasInterculturalCommunication.Linguistics
–Computational Linguistics 17 ,Saarbrücken: AQ.
K. Fischer. 2011. Interpersonal variation in understanding robots as social actors. In Proceedings of HRI’11 , March 6-9th,
2011.Lausanne,Switzerland,pp.53–60.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 26 ====
4:26 K. Fischer
K. Fischer, K. Lohan, and K. Foth. 2012. Levels of embodiment: Linguistic analyses of factors influencing HRI. In 2012 7th
ACM/IEEEInternational ConferenceonHuman-Robot Interaction (HRI) (pp.463–470).IEEE.
K. Fischer, B. Soto, C. Pontafaru, and L. Takayama. 2014. The effects of social framing on people’s responses to
robots’ requests for help. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Robot-Human Interactive Communication – Ro-man’14,
Edinburgh.
K. Fischer, S. Yang,B.Mok, R.Maheshwari, D.Sirkin, and W.Ju. 2015.Initiatinginteractions andnegotiatingapproach:A
robotictrashcaninthefield. AAAISymposiumonTurn-takingandCoordinationinHuman-MachineInteraction ,Stanford,
March 2015.
Fogg and C. I. Nass. 1997. Silicon sycophants: Effects of computers that flatter. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies46,5(1997),551–561.
J.Forlizzi.2007.Howroboticproductsbecomesocialproducts:Anethnographicstudyofcleaninginthehome.In 20072nd
ACM/IEEEInternational ConferenceonHuman-Robot Interaction (HRI) (pp.129–136).IEEE.
S. R Fussell, S. Kiessler, L. D. Setlock, and V. Yew. 2008. How people anthropomorphize robots. Proceedings of HRI’08 ,
Amsterdam,p.145–152.
H.Garfinkel.1972.Remarksonethnomethodology.InJ.J.GumperzandD.Hymes(Eds.), DirectionsinSociolinguistics.The
Ethnographyof Communication . New York :Holt, RinehartandWinston.
F. Hegel. 2012. Effects of a robot’s aesthetic design on the attribution of social capabilities. Proceedings of the 21st Ro-Man
Conference ,Paris, France.
Chien-Ming Huang and Bilge Mutlu. 2013. Modeling and evaluating narrative gestures for humanlike robots. In Robotics:
Science andSystems , pp.57–64.2013.
J. Ham, M. van Esch, Y. Limpens, J. de Pee, J. J. Cabibihan, and S. S. Ge. 2012. The automaticity of social behavior towards
robots: The influence of cognitive load on interpersonal distance to approachable versus less approachable robots. In
Social Robotics. ICSR 2012 , S. S. Ge, O. Khatib, J. J. Cabibihan, R. Simmons, and M.-A. Williams (Eds.). Lecture Notes in
ComputerScience, vol7621.Springer,Berlin,Heidelberg.
I. Hutchby.2001. Conversationand Technology:From theTelephonetotheInternet .Cambridge:Polity.
G. Jefferson. 2004. Glossary of transcript symbols with an introduction. Pragmatics and Beyond New Series , 125 (2004),
13–34.
P. H. Kahn, Takayuki Kanda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, Brian T. Gill, Solace Shen, Heather E. Gary, Jolina H. Ruckert 2015. Will
peoplekeepthesecretofahumanoidrobot?:PsychologicalintimacyinHRI. ProceedingsoftheTenthAnnualACM/IEEE
International Conferenceon Human-Robot Interaction ,pp.173–180.
A. Klapper, R. Ramsey, D. Wigboldus, and E. S. Cross. 2014. The control of automatic imitation based on bottom–up and
top–downcuestoanimacy:Insightsfrombrainandbehavior. JournalofCognitiveNeuroscience 26,11(2014),2503–2513.
S. Kopp. 2006. How people talk to a virtual human - conversations from a real-world application. In K. Fischer (Ed.),
Proceedings of the Workshop on ‘How People Talk to Computers, Robots, and Other Artificial Communication Partners’ ,
Hansewissenschaftskolleg, Delmenhorst,April 21–23,2006,pp.131–139.SFB/TR8Report 010-092006.
S.Krach,F.Hegel,B.Wrede,G.Sagerer,F.Binkofski,andT.Kircher.2008.Canmachinesthink?InteractionandPerspective
TakingwithRobotsInvestigatedviafMRI. PloSONE 2008.
S. Kuz, H. Petruck, M. Heisterüber, H. Patel, B. Schumann, C. M. Schlick, and F. Binkofski. 2015. Mirror neurons and
human-robot interactionin assemblycells. Procedia Manufacturing 3(2015),402–408.
T.Law,M.Chita-Tegmark,andM.Scheutz.2020.Theinterplaybetweenemotionalintelligence,trust,andgenderinhuman–
robot interaction. International Journal ofSocial Robotics 1–13.
K.M.Lee,Y.Jung,J.Kim,andS.R.Kim.2006.Arephysicallyembodiedsocialagentsbetterthandisembodiedsocialagents?
Theeffectsofphysicalembodiment,tactileinteractionandpeople’slonelinessinhuman-robotinteraction. International
Journal ofHuman-Computer Studies 64(2006),962–973.
M.K.Lee,S.Kiesler,andJ.Forlizzi.2010.Receptionistorinformationkiosk:Howdopeopletalkwitharobot?In Computer
Supported Cooperative Work , Savannah,Georgia,pp.31–40.
Sau-laiLee,SaraKiesler,IvyYee-manLau,andChi-YueChiu.2005.Humanmentalmodelsofhumanoidrobots. Proceedings
ofICRA 2005 , Barcelona,Spain.
A. Leeper, K. Hsiao, M. Ciocarlie, L. Takayama, and D. Gossow. 2012. Strategies for human-in-the-loop robotic grasping.
Proc. ofHuman-Robot Interaction (HRI’12) , Boston, MA.
S. Lemaignan, J. Fink, and P. Dillenbourg. 2014. The dynamics of anthropomorphism in robotics. Proceedings of HRI’14 ,
p.226–227.
C. StephenLevinson.1983. Pragmatics . CambridgeUniversity Press.
C. Stephen Levinson. 2006. On the human ’interaction engine’. In N. C. Enfield and S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Roots of Human
Sociality: Culture,Cognition and Interaction , pp.39–69.Oxford/NewYork: Berg.
J. J. Li, W. Ju, and B. Reeves. 2017. Touching a mechanical body: Tactile contact with body parts of a humanoid robot is
physiologicallyarousing. Journal of Human-Robot Interaction 6,3(2017),118–130.
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 27 ====
TrackingAnthropomorphizing Behavior inHuman-Robot Interaction 4:27
H.Mieczkowski,S.XunLiu,J.Hancock,andB.Reeves.2019.HelpingNotHurting:ApplyingtheStereotypeContentModel
and BIAS Map to Social Robotics. Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction . Daegu,
Korea.
ToruNakata,TomomasaSato,TaketoshiMori,andHiroshiMizoguchi.1998.Expressionofemotionandintentionbyrobot
bodymovement.In Proceedings of the5th International ConferenceonAutonomous Systems .1998.
C. Nass and S. Sundar. 1996. Are programmers psychologically relevant to human-computer interaction? Paper presented
attheAnnual Meeting oftheInternational Communication Association .
C.NassandY.Moon.2000.Machinesandmindlessness:Socialresponsestocomputers. JournalofSocialIssues 56,1(2000),
81–103.
C. Nass. 2004. Etiquette equality: exhibitions and expectations of computer politeness. Communications of the ACM 47, 4
(2004),35–37.
C.Nass. 2010. TheMan WhoLied tohis Laptop: WhatMachines Teach us about Human Relationships .New York: Penguin.
C. Nass and S. Brave. 2005. Wired for Speech. How Voice Activates and Advances the Human- Computer Relationship .C a m -
bridge,MA.London: MIT Press.
Caroline Pantofaru, Austin Hendrix, Andreas Paepcke, Dirk Thomas, Sharon Marzouk, and Sarah Elliott. 2013. Program-
ming robots at the museum. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series . 305–308. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/
2485760.2485797 .
M. Paetzel, G. Perugia, and G. Castellano. 2020. The persistence of first impressions: The effect of repeated interactions
on the perception of a social robot. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction .73–82.
L. A. Penner. 2002. The causes of sustained volunteerism: An interactionist perspective. Journal of Social Issues 58 (2002),
447–468.
A. Powers and S. Kiesler. 2006. The advisor robot: Tracing people’s mental model from a robot’s physical attributes. Pro-
ceedings of theHuman-Robot Interaction ConferenceHRI’06 , Salt LakeCity,Utah,USA.
H. Preece,J. Rogers, andY.Sharp. 2015. Interaction Design:BeyondHuman ComputerInteraction (4th Edition).Wiley.
R. Read and T. Belpaeme. 2013. People interpret robotic non-linguistic utterances categorically. In Proceedings of the 8th
ACM/IEEEInternational ConferenceonHuman–Robot Interaction (HRI) . ACM,New York, pp.209–210.
R. Read and T. Belpaeme. 2014. Non-linguistic utterances should be used alongside language, rather than on their own or
asareplacement.In Proceedingsofthe9thACM/IEEEInternationalConferenceonHuman–RobotInteraction(HRI) .A CM,
NewYork, pp.276–277.
B.ReevesandC. Nass.1996. TheMedia Equation .Stanford: CSLI andCambridge:CambridgeUniversity Press.
B. Reeves and J. Hancock. 2020. Social robots are like real people: First impressions, attributes, and stereotyping of social
robots.Issue1,1(2020),1.
L.D.Riek.2017.Healthcarerobotics. Communications of theACM 60,11,pp.68–78.
A.Rosenthal-vonderPütten.andN.Krämer.2014.Howdesigncharacteristicsofrobotsdetermineevaluationanduncanny
valleyrelatedresponses. Computers in Human Behavior 36(2014),422–439.
P. A. M. Ruijten. 2015. Responses to human-like artificial agents: Effects of user and agent characteristics. Technische
Universiteit Eindhoven.
P.A.Ruijten,A.Haans,J.Ham,andC.J.Midden.2019.Perceivedhuman-likenessofsocialrobots:testingtheRaschmodel
asamethod for measuringanthropomorphism. International Journal of Social Robotics 11,3(2019),477–494.
H.Sacks.1984.Notesonmethodology.InJ.AtkinsonandJ.Heritage(Eds.), StructureofSocialAction:StudiesinConversation
Analysis,pp.21–27.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversity Press.
H. Sacks. 1996. Lectures onconversation,Volume I& II .Oxford:Blackwell.
H.Sacks,E.A.Schegloff,andG.Jefferson.1974.Asimplestsystematicsfortheorganizationofturn-takingforconversation.
Language 50,4(1974),696–735.
E.A. Schegloff andH.Sacks. 1973.Openingup closings. Semiotica 8,4(1973),289–327.
J. Seibt. 2017. Towards an ontology of simulated social interaction: Varieties of the “as if” for robots and humans. In R.
Hakli,J. Seibt(eds.), Sociality and Normativity forRobots,Studies in thePhilosophyof Sociality 9 .Springer.
S. Seo, D. Geiskkovitch, Masayuki Nakane, Corey King, and James E. Young. 2015. Poor thing! Would you feel sorry for a
simulatedrobot?Acomparisonofempathytowardaphysicalandasimulatedrobot,In Proceedingsofthe10thACM/IEEE
International Conferenceon Human-Robot Interaction, HRI’2015 , Portland,Oregon,USA.
R. Simmons, M. Makatchev, R. Kirby, M.K. Lee, I. Fanaswala, B. Browning, J. Forlizzi, and M. Sakr. 2011. Believable robot
characters. AIMagazine 32,4 (2011),39–52.
V. K. Sims, M. G. Chin, D. J. Sushil, D. J. Barber, T. Ballion, B. R. Clark, K. A. Garfield, M. J. Dolezal, R. Shumaker, and
N. Finkelstein. 2005. Anthropomorphism of robotic forms: A response to affordances? Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting oftheHuman Factors andErgonomics Society .
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol. 11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

==== Page 28 ====
4:28 K. Fischer
A.Stenzel,E.Chinellato,B.Tiradou,MariaA.delPobil,AngelP.,Lappe,MarkusandRomanLiepelt.2012.Whenhumanoid
robotsbecomehuman-likeinteractionpartners:Corepresentationofroboticactions. JournalofExperimentalPsychology
38,5(2012),1073–1077.
T.Stivers,N.J.Enfield,P.Brown,C.Englert,M.Hayashi,T.Heinemann,G.Hoymann,F.Rossano,J.P.DeRuiter,K.E.Yoon,
and S. C. Levinson. 2009. Universals and cultural variation in turn-taking in conversation. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106,26(2009),10587–10592.
MyrtheTielman,MarkNeerincx,John-JulesMeyer,andRosemarijnLooije.2014.Adaptiveemotionalexpressioninrobot-
child interaction. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , pp. 407–414. ACM,
2014.
K.M.Tsui,D.-J.Kim,A.Behal,D.Kontak,andH.A.Yanco.2011.Iwantthat:Human-in-the-loopcontrolofawheelchair-
mountedrobotic arm. Journal ofApplied Bionics andBiomechanics 8,1(2011),127–147.
S. Turkle, C. Breazeal, O. Dasté, and B. Scassellati. 2006. Encounters with kismet and cog: Children respond to relational
artifacts. Digital Media: Transformations in Human Communication . 120.
K. Walton.1993.Metaphorand prop oriented make-believe. European Journal ofPhilosophy 1,1(1993),39–57.
A. Weiss, R. Bernhaupt, D. Schwaiger, M. Altmaninger, R. Buchner, and M. Tscheligi. 2009. User experience evaluation
withaWizardofOzapproach:Technicalandmethodologicalconsiderations.In 9thIEEE-RASInternationalConference
on Humanoid Robots,Humanoids 2009 , Paris, France,December7–10,2009,pp.303–308.
Kory Westlund, M. Jacqueline, Marayna Martinez, Maryam Archie, Madhurima Das, and Cynthia Breazeal. 2016. Effects
offramingarobotasasocialagentorasamachineonchildren’ssocialbehavior. ProceedingsoftheHRI’16Conference,
Christchurch NZ.
S. A. Wensveen, J. P. Djajadiningrat, and C. J. Overbeeke. 2004. Interaction frogger: A design framework to couple action
and function through feedback and feedforward. In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems:
Processes,Practices, Methods,and Techniques (pp.177–184).ACM.
A. Wykowska, T. Chaminade, and G. Cheng. 2016. Embodied artificial agents for understanding human social cognition.
PhilosophicalTransactions oftheRoyal Society B: Biological Sciences 371,1693(2016),20150375.
J. Złotowski, H. Sumioka, F. Eyssel, S. Nishio, C. Bartneck, and H. Ishiguro. 2018. Model of dual anthropomorphism: The
relationshipbetweenthemediaequationeffectandimplicitanthropomorphism. InternationalJournalofSocialRobotics
10,5(2018),701–714.
Received November 2019; revised June 2020; accepted September 2020
ACM Transactions on Human-RobotInteraction, Vol.11,No. 1,Article 4.Publicationdate:October2021.

