==== Page 1 ====
Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2019: Tutorial Abstracts , pages 15–18
Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2, 2019. c2019 Association for Computational Linguistics15Transfer Learning in Natural Language Processing Tutorial
Sebastian Ruder1, Matthew Peters2, Swabha Swayamdipta3, Thomas Wolf4
1Insight Centre, NUI Galway & Aylien Ltd., Dublin
2Allen Institute for Artiﬁcal Intelligence
3Language Technologies Institute, CMU
4Huggingface Inc.
sebastian@ruder.io matthewp@allenai.org
swabha@cs.cmu.edu thomwolf@gmail.com
1 Introduction
The classic supervised machine learning paradigm
is based on learning in isolation , a single predic-
tive model for a task using a single dataset. This
approach requires a large number of training ex-
amples and performs best for well-deﬁned and
narrow tasks. Transfer learning refers to a set of
methods that extend this approach by leveraging
data from additional domains or tasks to train a
model with better generalization properties.
Over the last two years, the ﬁeld of Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) has witnessed the emer-
gence of several transfer learning methods and ar-
chitectures which signiﬁcantly improved upon the
state-of-the-art on a wide range of NLP tasks (Pe-
ters et al., 2018a; Howard and Ruder, 2018; Rad-
ford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018).
These improvements together with the wide
availability and ease of integration of these meth-
ods are reminiscent of the factors that led to the
success of pretrained word embeddings (Mikolov
et al., 2013) and ImageNet pretraining in computer
vision, and indicate that these methods will likely
become a common tool in the NLP landscape as
well as an important research direction.
We will present an overview of modern trans-
fer learning methods in NLP, how models are pre-
trained, what information the representations they
learn capture, and review examples and case stud-
ies on how these models can be integrated and
adapted in downstream NLP tasks.
2 Description
The tutorial will start with a broad overview of
transfer learning methods following Pan and Yang
(2010). As part of this overview, we will also
highlight connections to other related and promis-
ing directions of research such as meta-learning
(Gu et al., 2018), multilingual transfer learning,and continual learning (Lopez-Paz and Ranzato,
2017).
We will then focus on the current most promis-
ing area, sequential transfer learning where tasks
are learned in sequence. Sequential transfer learn-
ing consists of two stages: a pretraining phase
in which general representations are learned on a
source task or domain followed by an adaptation
phase during which the learned knowledge is ap-
plied to a target task or domain.
Our discussion of the pretraining stage will re-
view the main forms of pretraining methods com-
monly used today. We will try to provide atten-
dants with an overview of what type of informa-
tion these pretraining schemes are capturing and
how pretraining schemes are devised.
In particular, we will review unsupervised ap-
proaches which aim to model the dataset itself,
brieﬂy presenting non-neural approaches (Deer-
wester et al., 1990; Brown et al., 1993; Blei et al.,
2003) before detailing deep neural network ap-
proaches like auto-encoding/skip-thoughts models
(Dai and Le, 2015; Kiros et al., 2015; Hill et al.,
2016; Logeswaran and Lee, 2018) and the cur-
rent trend of language model-based approaches
(Dai and Le, 2015; Peters et al., 2018a; Howard
and Ruder, 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Devlin
et al., 2018). We will then describe supervised
approaches which make use of large annotated
datasets (Zoph et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017; Wi-
eting et al., 2016; Conneau et al., 2017; McCann
et al., 2017) before turning to distant supervision
approaches which use heuristics to automatically
label datasets (Mintz et al., 2009; Severyn and
Moschitti, 2015; Felbo et al., 2017; Yang et al.,
2017).
Our review of distant supervision approaches
will aim to provide attendants with a sense of how
they can design heuristics that can automatically
provide supervision in their own applications. Last

==== Page 2 ====
16but not least, we will highlight the use of multi-
task learning for pretraining (Subramanian et al.,
2018; Cer et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018).
This review of pretraining approaches will pro-
vide recommendations and discuss trade-offs of
pretraining tasks based on our own experiments
and recent studies (Zhang and Bowman, 2018;
Anonymous, 2019).
We will then shed some light on what the
learned representations can and cannot capture
based on recent studies (Conneau et al., 2018; Pe-
ters et al., 2018b). We will discuss trade-offs be-
tween different modelling architectures and high-
light the capabilities and deﬁciencies of individual
models.
In the second part of the tutorial, we will fo-
cus on the second phase of sequential training, the
adaptation phase as well as downstream applica-
tions. The adaptation phase involves a growing
panel of methods:
Architecture modiﬁcations can range from a
few additional embeddings to additional layers on
top of the pre-trained to the insertion of interven-
ing layers or modules inside the pre-trained model.
Optimization schedules for the adaptation
phase can involve ﬁne-tuning a varying portion of
the pre-trained model (Long et al., 2015; Felbo
et al., 2017; Howard and Ruder, 2018) with
speciﬁcally designed regularization (Wiese et al.,
2017; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) or even ﬁne-tuning
in sequence a model on a series of datasets using
several training objectives. We will summarize
current trends in adapting pre-trained model to
target tasks while highlighting best practices when
they can be identiﬁed.
We will then focus on a selection of downstream
applications such as classiﬁcation (Howard and
Ruder, 2018), natural language generation, struc-
tured prediction (Swayamdipta et al., 2018) or
other classiﬁcation tasks (Peters et al., 2018a; De-
vlin et al., 2018). This part will comprise hands-
on examples designed around representative tasks
and typical transfer learning schemes as detailed
before. We will aim to demonstrate through prac-
tical examples how NLP researchers and practi-
tioners can adapt these models to their own appli-
cations and provide them with a set of guidelines
for practical usage.
Finally, we will present open problems, chal-
lenges, and directions in transfer learning for NLP.3 Outline
This tutorial will be 3 hours long.
1.Introduction (15 minutes long): This sec-
tion will introduce the theme of the tutorial:
how transfer learning is used in current NLP.
It will position sequential transfer learning
among different transfer learning areas.
2.Pretraining (35 minutes): We will discuss
unsupervised, supervised, and distantly su-
pervised pretraining methods. As part of the
unsupervised methods, we will also highlight
seminal NLP approaches, such as LSA and
Brown clusters.
3.What do the representations capture (20
minutes): Before discussing how the pre-
trained representations can be used in down-
stream tasks, we will discuss ways to analyze
the representations and what properties they
have been observed to capture.
4.Break (20 minutes)
5.Adaptation (30 minutes): In this section, we
will present several ways to adapt these repre-
sentations, feature extraction and ﬁne-tuning.
We will discuss practical considerations such
as learning rate schedules, architecture mod-
iﬁcations, etc.
6.Down-stream applications (40 minutes): In
this section, we will highlight how pretrained
representations have been used in different
downstream tasks, such as text classiﬁca-
tion, natural language generation, structured
prediction, among others. We will present
hands-on examples and discuss best practices
for each category of tasks.
7.Open problems and directions (20 min-
utes): In this ﬁnal section, we will provide
an outlook into the future. We will highlight
both open problems and point to future re-
search directions.
4 Prerequisites
Machine Learning: Basic knowledge of com-
mon recent neural network architectures like
RNN, CNN, and Transformers.

==== Page 3 ====
17Computational linguistics: Familiarity with
standard NLP tasks such as text classiﬁca-
tion, natural language generation, and struc-
tured prediction.
5 Tutorial instructor information
Sebastian Ruder Sebastian Ruder is a research
scientist at DeepMind. His research focuses on
transfer learning in NLP. He has published widely
read reviews of related areas, such as multi-task
learning and cross-lingual word embeddings and
co-organized the NLP Session at the Deep Learn-
ing Indaba 2018.
Matthew Peters Matthew Peters is a research
scientist at AI2 focusing on large scale represen-
tation learning for NLP.
Swabha Swayamdipta Swabha Swayamdipta
is a PhD student at the Language Technologies In-
stitute at Carnegie Mellon University (currently a
visiting student at University of Washington). Her
primary research interests are developing efﬁcient
algorithms for structured prediction, with a focus
on incorporating inductive biases from syntactic
sources.
Thomas Wolf Thomas Wolf leads the Science
Team at Huggingface, a Brooklyn-based startup
working on open-domain dialog. He has open-
sourced several widely used libraries for co-
reference resolution and transfer learning models
in NLP and maintains a blog with practical tips
for training large-scale transfer-learning and meta-
learning models. His primary research interest is
Natural Language Generation.
6 Audience size estimate
Due to the broad appeal and relevancy of the con-
tent of our tutorial, we expect a large audience,
around 200 people.
References
Anonymous. 2019. Looking for ELMo’s friends:
Sentence-Level Pretraining Beyond Language Mod-
eling.
David M. Blei, Andrew Y . Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research , 3(4-5):993–1022.
Peter F. Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathemat-
ics of statistical machine translation: Parameter esti-
mation. Computational Linguistics , 19(2):263–311.Daniel Cer, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua,
and Nicole Limtiaco. 2018. Universal Sentence En-
coder.
Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Lo ¨ıc
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. 2017. Supervised
Learning of Universal Sentence Representations
from Natural Language Inference Data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing .
Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume
Lample, Lo ¨ıc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018.
What you can cram into a single vector: Probing
sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In
Proceedings of ACL 2018 .
Andrew M. Dai and Quoc V . Le. 2015. Semi-
supervised Sequence Learning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NIPS ’15) .
Scott Deerwester, Susan T Dumais, George W Fur-
nas, Thomas K Landauer, and Richard Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American society for information science ,
41(6):391–407.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Un-
derstanding.
Bjarke Felbo, Alan Mislove, Anders Søgaard, Iyad
Rahwan, and Sune Lehmann. 2017. Using millions
of emoji occurrences to learn any-domain represen-
tations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sar-
casm. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing.
Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Yun Chen, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Victor O K Li. 2018. Meta-Learning for Low-
Resource Neural Machine Translation. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP 2018 .
Felix Hill, Kyunghyun Cho, and Anna Korhonen. 2016.
Learning Distributed Representations of Sentences
from Unlabelled Data. In NAACL-HLT .
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. 2018. Universal
Language Model Fine-tuning for Text Classiﬁcation.
InProceedings of ACL 2018 .
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz,
Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A Rusu,
Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Ag-
nieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Clau-
dia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell.
2017. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
networks. PNAS .
Ryan Kiros, Yukun Zhu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
Richard S. Zemel, Antonio Torralba, Raquel Urta-
sun, and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Skip-Thought Vectors.
InProceedings of NIPS 2015 .

==== Page 4 ====
18Lajanugen Logeswaran and Honglak Lee. 2018. An
efﬁcient framework for learning sentence represen-
tations. In Proceedings of ICLR 2018 .
Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and
Michael I. Jordan. 2015. Learning Transferable Fea-
tures with Deep Adaptation Networks. In Proceed-
ings of ICML , volume 37, Lille, France.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2017.
Gradient Episodic Memory for Continuum Learn-
ing. In Proceedings of NIPS 2017 .
Bryan McCann, James Bradbury, Caiming Xiong, and
Richard Socher. 2017. Learned in Translation: Con-
textualized Word Vectors. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems .
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey
Dean. 2013. Distributed Representations of Words
and Phrases and their Compositionality. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems .
Mike Mintz, Steven Bills, Rion Snow, and Dan Juraf-
sky. 2009. Distant supervision for relation extrac-
tion without labeled data. In Proceedings of the 47th
Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of
the AFNLP , pages 1003–1011.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2010. A survey on
transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering , 22(10):1345–1359.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018a. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2018 .
Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Wen-tau Yih, Paul G Allen, and Computer Science.
2018b. Dissecting Contextual Word Embeddings:
Architecture and Representation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP 2018 .
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and
Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving Language Under-
standing by Generative Pre-Training.
Aliaksei Severyn and Alessandro Moschitti. 2015.
UNITN: Training Deep Convolutional Neural Net-
work for Twitter Sentiment Classiﬁcation. Proceed-
ings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation (SemEval 2015) , pages 464–469.
Sandeep Subramanian, Adam Trischler, Yoshua Ben-
gio, and Christopher J Pal. 2018. Learning Gen-
eral Purpose Distributed Sentence Representations
via Large Scale Multi-task Learning. In Proceed-
ings of ICLR 2018 .
Swabha Swayamdipta, Sam Thomson, Kenton Lee,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Chris Dyer, and Noah A. Smith.
2018. Syntactic Scaffolds for Semantic Structures.
InProceedings of EMNLP 2018 .Georg Wiese, Dirk Weissenborn, and Mariana Neves.
2017. Neural Domain Adaptation for Biomedical
Question Answering. In Proceedings of the 21st
Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL 2017) .
John Wieting, Mohit Bansal, Kevin Gimpel, and Karen
Livescu. 2016. Towards Universal Paraphrastic Sen-
tence Embeddings. In Proceedings of ICLR .
Jie Yang, Yue Zhang, and Fei Dong. 2017. Neural
Word Segmentation with Rich Pretraining. In Pro-
ceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2017) .
Kelly W Zhang and Samuel R Bowman. 2018.
Language Modeling Teaches You More Syn-
tax than Translation Does: Lessons Learned
Through Auxiliary Task Analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.10040 .
Barret Zoph, Deniz Yuret, Jonathan May, and Kevin
Knight. 2016. Transfer Learning for Low-Resource
Neural Machine Translation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP 2016 .

