==== Page 1 ====
Trends in audio signal feature extraction methods
Garima Sharma⇑, Kartikeyan Umapathy, Sridhar Krishnan
The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ryerson University, ON M5B 2K3, Canada
article info
Article history:
Received 6 August 2019Received in revised form 28 August 2019Accepted 1 September 2019Available online 23 September 2019
Keywords:
AudioSpeech
Signal
Feature extractionSurveyMachine learningabstract
Audio signal processing algorithms generally involves analysis of signal, extracting its properties, predict-
ing its behaviour, recognizing if any pattern is present in the signal, and how a particular signal is corre-
lated to another similar signals. Audio signal includes music, speech and environmental sounds. Over thelast few decades, audio signal processing has grown signiﬁcantly in terms of signal analysis and classiﬁ-
cation. And it has been proven that solutions of many existing issues can be solved by integrating the
modern machine learning (ML) algorithms with the audio signal processing techniques. The performanceof any ML algorithm depends on the features on which the training and testing is done. Hence featureextraction is one of the most vital part of a machine learning process. The aim of this study is to summa-
rize the literature of the audio signal processing specially focusing on the feature extraction techniques.
In this survey the temporal domain, frequency domain, cepstral domain, wavelet domain and time-frequency domain features are discussed in detail.
/C2112019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
In order to make machines and computer intelligent like
humans, we are using machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence
methods. Ideally, in today’s world we want computers to have
capability to make decisions like humans. One of the important
sense of humans is hearing. Fig. 1 helps us to understand how
human auditory system behaves over the listening range of
20 Hz–20 kHZ. It is a graph between sound pressure level (SPL)
in decibel and the audible frequency range [1,2] . The graph shows
the absolute threshold of hearing for different frequencies. Abso-
lute threshold of hearing is the minimum sound pressure level of
a pure tone that can be heard by a normal ear in silence. It is nice
to note that the human auditory system’s sensitivity is best
between frequency range 2 kHZ–5 kHZ where the threshold
reaches as low as /C09 db SPL [3]. Approximately, for music our ears
are sensitive between range 50 Hz and 15 kHZ while for speech the
ears are sensitive between 100 Hz and 4.5 kHZ.
Humans can easily classify between various sounds without
putting an extra effort e.g. we can easily classify between speech
and music, car and truck sounds, baby and adult speech quality,
various speakers, noise and useful sound etc. We want machines
would be able to classify between various sounds as humans can
do effortlessly. This problem is also called as machine hearing [4].This leads to the research area of acoustic scene classiﬁcation
(ASC) [15] where a machine is trained to classify between various
sounds that are present in an acoustic scene. Fig. 2 represents the
ASC model was ﬁrst proposed by Gerhard in [5].
Regardless of any particular aim, a ML system requires robust
and discriminatory features that helps a machine to learn accu-
rately and quickly. The intelligence of a machine is deﬁned bythe amount of training given to it. Normally the whole dataset isnot fed into the computer or machine during its training to learn
its properties, rather a reduced in size representation of the signals
is used to train the machine. This compact representation of a sig-nal is called as feature. The challenge is to extract right featuresensures the success of a ML algorithm. The features must be com-
pact in size but must highlight the characteristics of signal. The
Features are so selected that it reduces the size of a signal signiﬁ-cantly while still describing a signal completely and accurately.The reduced version of the signal improves the computational
complexity and time complexity of the ML algorithms which in
turn make it more suitable for real time applications. So, we cansay that feature extraction is a process of dimension reduction ofa signal which makes the signal more suitable for ML algorithms.
In this paper, we focus only on the features extracted from
speech signals and on the musical sound. The application area of
speech signals is very vast, to name a few like speech recognition
[6], speaker recognition [8], blind source separation [7,8] , speech
enhancement [9], pathological speech detection [10,11] , improving
pathological speech [11,12] , noise reduction, noise cancellation,
gender classiﬁcation, human-computer interaction [13] like
Apple’s Siri or Amazon’s alexa etc. While on the other hand, music
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.107020
0003-682X/ /C2112019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: garima.sharma@ryerson.ca (G. Sharma), kumapath@ryerson.
ca(K. Umapathy), krishnan@ryerson.ca (S. Krishnan).Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Acoustics
journal homepage: www.elsevi er.com/locate/apacoust


==== Page 2 ====
signals are analyzed in applications like mood detection [14], emo-
tion prediction, genre classiﬁcation [15], song tagging, singer clas-
siﬁcation etc.
The rest of the paper is organized as: Section 2explains the basic
structure of a typical ML system and explains in brief about the
audio types: speech, music and environmental sounds, Section 3dis-
cuss about the evolution of audio signal features and types of audio
features. Section 4explains the time domain features, frequency
domain features, time-frequency features, wavelet features, cep-
stral features, phase and eigen features and the last section discuss
about the critical analysis, conclusion and future work.
2. Structure of machine learning system
The basic structure of any typical audio ML system is deﬁned in
Fig. 3 . In the ﬁrst stage, the pre-processing is done on the audio sig-
nal. The pre-processing may involve noise cancellation, silence
reduction, normalization etc. The next stage is windowing of the
signal that helps us to analyze the possible non-stationary signal
as quasi-stationary signal. The whole signal can be studied and
analyzed by sliding the window over the whole length of the
signal. Using modern windowing methods, the size of the windowcan be made adaptive according to the characteristics of the signal.
After that, the feature extraction and feature selection steps are
taken. These steps decide the performance of the classiﬁer. Then
the selected features are fed into the classiﬁer for training and test-
ing and based on the classiﬁer’s prediction the decision is made.
2.1. Audio types
As discussed in Fig. 2 , the audible audio signals are categorized
into speech, music and environmental sounds. These are explained
in brief below:
Speech : Speech is produced by human beings by using combina-
tion of various organs like lungs, mouth, nose, abdomen and the
brain. The vocal tract and vocal cords play a major role in speech
production. The speech production starts at frequency of 100 Hz
and may go up to the frequency of 17 kHZ [17].
Music : Musical sounds are produced by musical instruments or
humans in order to produce harmony and expression of emotions.
Music can be described in various dimensions like genre, mood and
sound characteristics. Traditionally, music has been classiﬁed into
categories like rock, jazz, classical or pop. Ideally frequency range
of music varies from as low as 40 Hz and may go as high as up
to 19.5 kHZ [17].
Environmental sounds : In everyday life, we are surrounded by
endless number of environmental sounds like sound of car or any
other vehicle, running water, door bell, phone ring, factory noise,
animal sounds etc. These sounds spread over the whole audible
range. Fig. 4 shows the time domain structure of these 3 types of
sounds. Fig. 4 shows the audio signal for human speech, guitar note
and a car honk sound. The periodicity in the signal can be observed
in speech and music sounds, but it is hard to ﬁnd any periodicity in
environmental sounds.
It is clear from Fig. 4 that speech is continuous in nature and has
a smooth envelope, while guitar notes are of short duration and
non-continuous in nature. The ﬁre truck sound looks like noise
and have very high amplitude. These three sounds not only differ
in time domain, but also differ in frequency domain. Fig. 5 shows
the frequency spectra of these 3 sounds. It can be noted from the
Fig. 4 that the magnitude of the frequency spectrum of speech
Fig. 1. Absolute threshold of hearing [1].
Fig. 2. Sound Classiﬁcation.2 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 3 ====
signal is very less in comparison to the music and environmental
sound. This could be used speech/music classiﬁcation.
3. Audio feature extraction methods: evolution and types
Evolution of audio features: In simple terms, feature extraction is
a process of highlighting the most dominating and discriminating
characteristics of a signal. A suitable feature mimics the propertiesof a signal in a much compact way. The evolution of audio signal
features is explained in Fig. 6 . The evolution of audio features
can be sub-categorized into time domain, frequency domain, joint
time-frequency domain, and deep features. The oldest and simplest
features are extracted from the time domain. The time domain fea-
tures evolved up to late 1950s [18,19,21] . Till date the time domain
features plays an important role in audio analysis and classiﬁca-
tion. To analyze the spectrum of an audio signals, several features
like pitch, formants etc. were evolved from frequency domain and
employed in various application till date. The evolution of
frequency domain features was around 1950s to 1960s [20,22] .
In later 1960s, the joint time-frequency [23–25] feature extraction
algorithms were developed. Since then these features are used in
audio signal processing algorithms. Since the evolution of deep
learning, the deep features are extensively used in various applica-
tions, in audio signal processing deep features have been used
since 2010 in the area of acoustic scene classiﬁcation [127,128] ,
speaker recognition [130] and audio video analysis [129] .4. Audio signal feature extraction
4.1. Time domain features
Before discussing about the time domain features it is impor-
tant to discuss the concept of windowing in time domain. The sim-
plest way to analyze a signal is to analyze it in its original form. All
the sound signals we are discussing here is a time series signal i.e.
these signals evolves with time. By visualizing a signal in timedomain, we may analyze few key characteristics of a signal and this
information can be used in predicting and analyzing similar sig-
nals. This time domain analysis is simple till the signal is of short
time or reﬂects stationary properties over time. In real time audio
signals are non-stationary over the time. To analyze such non-
stationary signals windowing technique is employed and the long
non-stationary signal is analyzed as short chunks of quasi-
stationary signal.Windowing can be seen as multiplying a signal
with a window function that is zero everywhere except the region
of interest. The resultant windowed signal is the subset of the orig-
inal signal which is passed though the window, for rest of the time
the signal is zero. The simplest type of window is rectangular win-
dow which is deﬁned by Eq. (1):
WRðnÞ¼1;/C0M/C01
26n6M/C01
2
0; otherwise(
ð1Þ
Fig. 3. Typical Machine Learning System.
Fig. 4. Speech, Guitar and Fire Truck sound.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 3

==== Page 4 ====
The Fig. 7 explains the concept of windowing a signal when
using rectangular window as a function. In order to analyze the
whole signal, the window is slided over the time and moves from
the left most corner of the plot towards the right corner of the plot.
The size of the window is made adaptive and is changed according
to the characteristics of the original source signal in order to con-
vert the long non-stationary signal into small quasi-stationary sig-
nal. Fig. 8 explains the sliding process of an adaptive rectangular
window over a signal.
One problem with the rectangular window is the abrupt change
in its shape at the edges, which may cause distortion when the sig-
nal is being analyzed. The distortion is the result of the Gibbs phe-
nomenon. In order to handle this problem, we may use a window
function with smooth curves like Hamming or Hanning window.These window functions are zero at the edges and rises gradually
to be one in the middle of the window shape. With such window
functions, the edges of the signal are downgraded and the edge
effect because of Gibbs phenomenon is reduced.
Zero-crossing rate (ZCR): The ZCR of an audio frame is deﬁned as
the rate of change of sign of the signal during the frame. Mathe-
matically, it is the number of times a signal changes its sign from
positive to negative and vice versa, divided by the length of the
frame. In simple words, ZCR is the number of times signal crosses
the zero level in one second interval. The ZCR for ith frame with the
length N is deﬁned by Eq. (2)and explained in Fig. 9 as:
ZðiÞ¼1
2NXN
n¼1jsgn½xiðnÞ/C138 /C0sgn½xiðn/C01Þ/C138j ð 2Þ
Fig. 5. Speech, Guitar and Fire Truck sound frequency spectrum.
Fig. 6. Evolution of Audio Feature Extraction.4 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 5 ====
where sgn(.) is a sign function i.e
sgn½xiðNÞ/C138 ¼1;xiðnÞP0
0;xiðnÞ<0/C26
ð3Þ
ZCR is a very efﬁcient way to detect voice activity that determi-
nes whether a speech frame is voiced, unvoiced or silent. The ZCR
is higher for the unvoiced portions of the speech in comparison to
the voiced portion of the speech. Fig. 10 (a) represents the speech
signal and its ZCR. It is clear that ZCR for unvoiced segments are
very high than for the voiced segments. Of course, in ideal condi-tions the silence portion in a clean speech the ZCR must be equal
to zero.
ZCR is also a technique to estimate fundamental frequency (FF)
[28] of the speech. The ZCR is equal to the twice the frequency of
the signal. Hence, we can say that ZCR gives indirect information
about the frequency of the signal. Hence, this feature can be used
to design discriminator and classiﬁer [27].Fig. 10 (b) shows the
ZCR for music clip and it would be interesting to note that, the
ZCR for music is higher than that for the speech signal [56]. The
MATLAB pseudo code for calculating ZCR is given below:
Algorithm 1 : Zero crosing rate
1.Result : Zero Crossing Rate of a Signal
2. Initialization: mono-channel signal xiðnÞ
3. ZCR= sumðabsðdiffðxiðnÞ>0ÞÞÞ=length ðxiðnÞÞ
/C15Another type of ZCR based feature is called modiﬁed ZCR. The
modiﬁed ZCR is the Zero-crossing function with detrending
technique. In this method, Eq. (2)is modiﬁed and represented
in Eq. (4)as:
ZðiÞ¼1
2NXN
n¼1jsgn½^yiðnÞ/C138 /C0sgn½^yiðn/C01Þ/C138j ð 4Þ
where
^y¼^x/C0yd;^xis mean value of x ð5Þ
/C15Linear prediction ZCR: It is the ratio between ZCR of original
signal and the ZCR of prediction error obtained from a linear
prediction ﬁlter [33].
Hence, ZCR is used in many applications including music/speech
discrimination [29,30] , music genre classiﬁcation [32], voice activ-
ity detection [31] and vowel detection and analysis [145] .
Amplitude based features: These are based on very simple analy-
sis of temporal envelop of the signal. The various type of amplitude
based features are discussed below:
/C15Amplitude descriptor (AD): This feature helps to differentiate
between different type of sound envelopes by considering the
energy, variation of duration of signal segments from high and
low amplitudes by the means of adaptive threshold. This fea-
ture is mainly used in environmental sound classiﬁcation [34].
/C15Attach, Delay, Sustain, Release (ADSR) envelop: This ADSR
feature is used in music analysis and classiﬁcation between
musical genres.
Fig. 7. Windowing in Time Domain.
Fig. 8. Adaptive Windowing in Time Domain.
Fig. 9. Zero-Crossing in signal.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 5

==== Page 6 ====
The ADSR envelope feature is not achievable for most real time
sounds because the decay part is not clearly present, sustainpart is not present in speech and environmental sounds (only
present in music sounds). To deal with such a problem a mod-
iﬁed envelope based on attack and rest is used, it is called as AR
envelope. In this the decay part is not present and sustain and
release part is merged. The ADSR and AR envelopes are used
in timbre analysis of musical instruments [36].Fig. 11 shows
the ADSR and AR envelop for a signal. The MATLAB pseudo code
for ADSR envelope is given in algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 : ADSR envelope detection
1.Result : ADSR envelope
2. Input: Musical Key number, duration of key pressing
3.freq ¼440 /C32ððkeynum /C049Þ=12Þ .calculate
frequency for given key
4.t¼0:1=sampling frequency :duration
5.tone ¼sinð2/C3pi/C3freq/C3tÞ .generate sinusoidal
output tone
6.A¼linspace ð0;1;0;1/C3ðlength ðtoneÞÞ .rise 10
percent of signal
7.D¼linspace ð1;0:8;0:15/C3ðlength ðtoneÞÞ
.drop of 15
percent of signal
8.S¼linspace ð0:8;0:8;0:6/C3ðlength ðtoneÞÞ .delay of 60
percent of signal
9.R¼linspace ð0:8;0;0:15/C3ðlength ðtoneÞÞ .drop of 15
percent of signal
10.ADSR ¼½ADSR /C138
11. Multiply ADSR with tone and plot on MATLAB
/C15log attack time (LAT): It is the logarithmic (base 10) of the
time duration between the time starts to the time it reaches
its stable part. It has been used for musical onset detection
[61]and environmental sound recognition [39,40] .
Algorithm 3 : Log attack time
1.Result : Log attack time
2. LAT = log10ðtattackend /C0tattackstart Þ .t is time/C15Shimmer: Shimmer computes cycle-to-cycle variations of
the amplitude in a waveform. It is used in voice activitydetection, speaker recognition, speaker veriﬁcation [37],
classify musical sounds [38].
Energy based features:
/C15Short time energy (STE): The sound signals are non-stationary
in nature. As explained above, the non-stationary signal can
be transformed into small portions of quasi-stationary signals
using framing/windowing method. The energy through out
the signal is variable and hence it is not feasible to predict a
value. For this, the short time energy which is the energy from
a frame is calculated. STE [56] is deﬁned as average energy per
frame. The STE is low for unvoiced segments and high for voiced
segments. Fig. 12 shows the STE for speech and music. STE is
used to detect the voiced-unvoiced segments [31], music onset
detection [61], environmental sound detection [42], vowel
detection and analysis [145] and audio based surveillance sys-
tems [41]. The pseudo code for calculating STE is given in algo-
rithm 4.
Algorithm 4 : Short time energy calculation
1.Result : Short time energy value
2. Inputs: Audio signal ( x), window type, window
amplitude, window length
3. win = select a window function .rectangular,
hamming, hanning, blackmann etc.
4.xnew ¼x
2
5.STE¼xnew /C10win .convolution of window and signal
square
/C15Volume: Volume or Loudness of a sound is the one of the
most promising feature of a human auditory system. Math-
ematically, volume is deﬁned as the root mean square
(RMS) value of the magnitude of the signal within a frame.
It is used in speech/music discrimination [52], speech seg-
mentation and acoustic scene classiﬁcation [43]. algorithm
5 explains the pseudo code for calculating volume of an
audio signal.
Fig. 10. Comparison of ZCR for Speech and Music.6 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 7 ====
Algorithm 5 : Volume or loudness of audio signal
Result : Loudness of audio signal
1. Input: Audio signal ( x), sampling frequency (Fs)
2. loudness = integratedLoudness(x,Fs) .in-build
function of MATLAB
/C15Temporal centroid (TC): The temporal centroid is the time
averaged over the energy envelope. The temporal centroid
has been used in environmental sound recognition [42]
and acoustic scene classiﬁcation [43]. The algorithm for the
TC is given below:
Algorithm 6 : Temporal centroid
1.Result :T C
2. ﬁnd eðxÞ= energy envelope of the Audio signal ( x)
3. Multiply eðxÞby the signal itself
4. Find sum of the products of signal and energy envelope of
signal
5. TC = Divide the result by total energy envelope
Auto-correlation Based Features: Auto-correlation is a measure of
self-similarity of a signal in time domain. In simple words, it mea-
sures the similarity between the signal and its delayed version. Theauto-correlation value of +1 represents strong positive association,
/C01 represents a negative association and 0 shows no association.
The auto-correlation at lag zero is always 1, this is because the sig-
nal is always perfectly correlated with itself. Fig. 13 shows the val-
ues of auto-correlation of a speech signal with itself with a time lag
of 20. For example at time lag 1 the auto-correlation value is 0.8
that represents the 80% similarity of the signal to itself when the
signal is lag by 1 unit [35,44] .
Auto-correlation function is used to determine the periodicity
present in a signal. It is used to analyze musical beats and their
Fig. 11. Amplitude based envelope feature.
Fig. 12. STE from audio clips.
Fig. 13. Auto-correlation values of a Signal with Lag of 20.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 7

==== Page 8 ====
tempo. It is also used to estimate the pitch (fundamental fre-
quency) of a signal.
Rhythm Based: Rhythm in general is regular recurrence of pat-
tern over the time. The rhythm is found in musical instruments,
poetry (speech) and environmental sounds (e.g. bird chirping).
Some rhythm based features are speech duration, articulation rate,
phoneme duration, pause ratio, total duration, total pause dura-
tion, total vowel duration, pulse metric, pulse clarity, band period-
icity, beat tracker, beat histogram etc. Pulse metric is a measure
that uses the long-time band pass auto-correlation over a window
of 5 s. This feature is used in speech/music discrimination [33,52] ,
analysis of pathological speech [45], music genre classiﬁcation
[46], music instrument classiﬁcation.
4.2. Frequency domain features
Time domain graph shows the signal variation with respect to
time. To analyze a signal in terms of frequency, the time-domain
signal is converted into frequency domain signal by using Fourier
transform or auto-regression analysis. Frequency domain analysis
is a tool of utmost importance in audio signal processing. The
major frequency domain features are discussed below:
/C15Auto-regression based: Auto-regression based features are
extracted from linear prediction analysis of a signal. The most
common auto-regression based features are:
–Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) Coefﬁcients: LPC removes the
redundancy from a signal and tries to predict next values by
linearly combining the previous known coefﬁcients. LPC is
the all pole ﬁlter that represents the spectral envelope of a
digital speech in compressed form using linear prediction
model. LPC coefﬁcients are use for audio segmentation and
audio retrieval. In MATLAB there is a in-build function ‘‘lpc”
having parameters audio signal xand order of linear predictor.
Algorithm 7 : Extraction of LPC coefﬁcients
Result : LPC coefﬁcients
1. Input: Audio signal x.
2. Perform normalization and preemphasis on the signal x.
3. Implement frame blocking.
4. Perform windowing on the frame blocked signal.
5. Do auto-correlation analysis.
6. Analyze using liner prediction by using levinson-durbin
algorithm.
–Code Excited Linear Prediction (CELP): The CELP is based on
three techniques:
1. Use of linear prediction model to mimic vocal tract.
2. Use of adaptive or ﬁxed code-book entries as the excita-
tion signal to the linear prediction model.
3. The search is performed in a closed loop and in a percep-
tually weighted domain. CELP is a speech coding algo-
rithm and provides better quality than low bit rate
algorithms such as linear predictive coding Vocoders
and residual-exited linear prediction algorithms. This
features is the combination of Linear spectral frequency
and features related to pitch and residual signal. The
CELPs are used in environmental sound recognition [50].
–Linear Spectral Frequency: It is also called as linear spectral
pairs and useful in speech coding. LSF are used to represent
linear prediction coefﬁcients for the transmission over the
channel. A linear prediction polynomial is represented as
the average of pallindromic polynomial and antipallindro-mic polynomial. The pallindromic polynomial represents
the vocal tract when glottis is closed and the anti-
pallindromic polynomial represents the vocal tract when
glottis is open. The roots of the pallindromic and anti-
pallindromic polynomials are conjugate in nature and hence
half of the roots are transmitted. The LSF representation of
the Linear Prediction polynomial consists simply of the loca-
tion of the roots. This feature shows variation in value when
the glottis is closed and open. Hence, this feature is used in
voiced/unvoiced segment detection, speaker segmentation
[51] and speech/music discrimination [52].
/C15Peak Frequency: Peak frequency is simply the frequency of
maximum power. It gives an estimate about the most dominant
frequency present in the signal and also helps to calculate fun-
damental frequency of the signal. Peak frequency is a useful
parameter when we are classifying music and speech, gender
classiﬁcation etc. Fig. 14 shows the peak frequency from a single
sided FFT spectrum.
Algorithm 8 : Peak Frequency
1. Input: Audio signal ( x)
2. Covert the signal into frequency domain by using FFT.
3. Calculate the absolute value of the transformed signal.
4. Find the maximum value from the result of step 3.
/C15Method of Selection of Amplitudes of Frequency Multi-
expanded Filter based features: The Method of Selection
of Amplitudes of Frequency Multi-expanded (MSAF MULTI-
EXPANDED) ﬁlter based features are the hand-crafted fea-
tures specially used to detect faults in electric motors used
for drilling or grinding [147] or in detecting faulty commuta-
tor motor [151] . This is an acoustic feature that extracts the
differences between FFT spectra. The generalized algorithm
to extract MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED acoustic features is given
below:
Algorithm 9 : MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED acoustic features
1. Input: Acoustic signal captured from electric motors.
2. Compute FFT spectra of good and faulty acoustic signals.
3. Calculate difference between good and faulty spectra.
4. Compute the absolute value of the difference calculated.
5. Find common frequency components from the absolute
difference values.
6. Form groups of frequency components.
7. Form bandwidth of the frequencies to construct classes
for classiﬁcation.
8. Form a feature vector from those bandwidths.
Fig. 14. Peak Frequency of a Signal from single sided spectrum.8 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 9 ====
/C15Shortened method of frequencies selection MULTIEX-
PANDED: Very similar to MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED feature,
Shortened method of frequencies selection MULTIEXPANDED
(SMOFS-MULTIEXPANDED) is another hand crafted feature
that is too employed in industry applications speciﬁcally to
diagnose fault in motors [149] . The algorithm below explains
how SMOFS-MULTIEXPANDED features are extracted and
how these are different from MSAF-MULTIEXPANDED
features.
Algorithm 10 : SMOFS-MULTICRAFTED acoustic feature
1. Input: Vibrations captured from motors.
2. Extract FFTs from various healthy and faulty motor’s
vibration sounds.
3. Calculate absolute difference of the various FFTs.4. Select the frequency components greater than a
threshold.
5. Compute the variable threshold of selection of frequency
components using iterative methods.
6. Set the parameter: Threshold of common frequency
components MULTIEXPANDED extension.
7. Find common frequency components.
8. Form a ﬁnal feature vector from common frequency
components.
/C15STFT based features/Time-Frequency Features: A time-
frequency transform of a signal is the way of looking into
the signal having time on one axis and frequency on another.
The time-frequency analysis could be obtained by using
time-frequency distribution (TFD). Generally the time-
frequency domain is called as time-frequency representation
(TFR) obtained by TFD. The time-domain shows the varia-
tions in signal amplitude over the period of time, while in
frequency domain the magnitude of the frequency content
gives only frequency information but no time information.
A TFR bridges this gap and provide the time and frequency
resolution. STFT is the most common way to have a TFR.
Also, a TFR features are effective for analysis non-
stationary aspects of a signal such as trends, discontinuities
and patterns which is normally missed by the time or fre-
quency domain features [135] .
–Time-Frequency Matrix: By using the STFT, the time-domain
signal could be converted into TFR. However, this representa-tion contains a huge amount of data and information. For
example of the Guitar signal, sampled at 44.1 kHZ the TFD
with a resolution of 128 /C21024 gives 131,072 TF samples.
To reduce the dimension of the TF matrix the various decom-
position techniques could be employed to get the relevant
and compact TFR. Some well known TFD techniques are:
1. linear TFDs: These are the simplest form of TFDs and is
equal to the squared modulus of the STFT signal [139] .
The original size of this TFD is quite huge.
2. Quadratic TFDs: To make the TFD adaptive, the window
size is made adaptive with respect to the signal. The
wigner ville distribution (WVD) is the simplest quadratic
TFD. It is a great method to analyze signals in time-
frequency domain. This distribution doesn’t suffers from
leakage effects as STFT does. Hence it gives the best spec-
tral resolution. This feature has been used in analysis of
audio signals [119] and detecting industrial gear failures
[120] . It is also used in seismic data processing [121] . The
major drawback of the WVD is the generation of cross
terms due to its quadratic nature. This drawback is elim-
inated by Cohens class of bilinear TF representation.3. Positive TFDs: The positive TFDs gives positive terms and
are free from cross terms. The positive TFDs [138] are
based on the signal dependent kernels.
4. Matching pursuit TFDs: Matching pursuits TFD is based
on the matching pursuit decomposition that uses non-
orthogonal basis functions to decompose a signal into
gabor atoms with a variety of possible translations, mod-
ulations and scaling. These are highly used in environ-
mental sound classiﬁcation [135,139] .
This Time-frequency matrix could directly be used in various ap-
plications like classiﬁcation of environmental sounds [135,137] .
The TFD is used in industry too. For instance the vibrations gen-
erated by the motors is analyzed using TFD to ﬁnd the faulty motor
bearing present in the motor [148,150]
.
–Sub-band energy ratio: The sub-band coding breaks the sig-
nal into different frequency bands typically by using FFT or
STFT and encodes each one independently. The sub-band
energy ratio is deﬁned as the measure of normalized signal
energy along these different frequency bands. It has been
used for audio segmentation, environmental audio recogni-
tion [42] and music analysis [43].
–Spectrum envelope: The spectrum envelope is a log-
frequency power spectrum of a signal and can be used to
generate reduced spectrogram of the audio signal. The spec-
tral envelope when generated by linear prediction method, it
is called as linear prediction spectral envelope. Due to error
optimized by linear prediction, the spectral peaks of an
audio signal are more accurate and emphasis on the envel-
ope as they are in auditory system. This feature has been
used in music genre classiﬁcation [29,32] and environmental
sound recognition [42].
–Stereo panning spectrum feature (SPSF): In audio signal pro-
cessing, the stereo audio is converted into to mono channel
audio before proceeding for the processing [68]. Hence, the
information content present due to stereo panning is not
fully utilized. In order to answer this, stereo panning spec-
trum is considered. The frequency-domain source identiﬁca-
tion system based on cross-channel metric is called panning
index. The stereo panning spectrum holds the signals
between /C01 to +1 (0 is center). The main aim of this feature
is to calculate the stereo panning information for different
frequencies based on the STFT of left and right channel.
The basic idea behind the stereo panning spectrum is to
compare the left and right channel signals in the time-
frequency [70] representation to derive a 2-dimensional
map that identiﬁes the different panning gains associated
with each time-frequency bin. Many statistical features canbe derived from the stereo panning spectrum like: derivative
of panning index, panning root mean square for a particular
frequency band, panning for low medium and high frequen-
cies etc. This feature has been used in audio classiﬁcation,
separating audio sources [71], music information retrieval
[69] and music classiﬁcation [72].
–Group delay function (GDF): During frequency domain anal-
ysis of an audio signal, we generally avoid the phase infor-
mation and do analysis based on the real values. The
information in STFT phase function is extracted by calculat-
ing the derivative of the phase, this is called as group delay
function [73,75] . It is also known as negative derivative of
the phase. Group delay function reveals information about
the temporal events in a signal e.g. identifying spectral
peaks. The GDF can be: minimum phase GDF, maximum
phase GDF or mixed phase GDF. Generally formants are
extracted from GDFs and are used in various audio process-
ing algorithms. Another type of GDF is modiﬁed GDF,G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 9

==== Page 10 ====
in which the cepstral smoothing is done prior to GDF
computation which smooths the intrinsic spikes of the
signal. GDF is used in speaker identiﬁcation [74], speech
segmentation [73], language identiﬁcation etc.
/C15Envelope Modulation Spectrum (EMS) based : The envelope
modulation spectra represents the slow amplitude modulations
in the signal and distribution of energy in amplitude ﬂuctua-
tions across certain frequencies. The original audio signal is ﬁrst
ﬁltered into 9 octave bands with center frequencies of approx-
imately 30, 60, 120, 240, 480, 960, 1920, 3840, and 7680 Hz,
using eight-order Butterworth ﬁlters. Then the envelope of 10
signals: one original and 9 octave ﬁltered signals is extracted
using Hilbert transform. Once the envelope of each signal is
extracted, the mean is removed and the power spectrum for
each of the bands is estimated by evaluating the DFT usingthe Goertzel algorithm at frequencies 0–10 Hz. From the power
spectrum, six EMS metrics are computed for each of the 9
octave bands, and the full signal and it makes a 60-
dimensional feature vector. The 6 EMS features are:
–Peak frequency 0–10 Hz: It is the frequency corresponding
to the spectral peak with the maximum magnitude in the
spectrum.
–Peak amplitude: It is the absolute amplitude of the spectral
peak described above and it is seen as a measure of rhythm.
–Energy in spectrum 3–6 Hz: Energy in band 3–6 Hz is the
normalized energy present in the band and it corresponds
to the segment 167–333 ms which captures majority of syl-
lable duration in normal speech.
–Energy in spectrum 0–4 Hz: Human auditory system is most
sensitive around 4 Hz of modulation, this peak sensitivity
corresponds to the segment 0–250 ms which is quite close
to common syllable rate for speech.
–Energy in spectrum 4–10 Hz: This region of frequencies
focus on super segmental variations in the rhythm.
–Energy ratio between 0–4 Hz and 4–10 Hz: The energy below
4 Hz is uncorrelated with the energy in band 4–10 Hz. Hence
the ratio of these energies becomes a vital feature.
The EMS features is best used in classifying pathological
speech and control speech [47,48] .
Algorithm 11 : Envelope modulation energy in desired
frequency band
Result : Energy in desired frequency band
1. Input: Audio signal x
2. Find the spectrogram and cyclic frequencies of the signal.
3. Select the range of cyclic frequencies.
4. Calculate square of the spectrogram values.
5. Find summation of the squared spectrogram values.
6. Multiply the result number by 2, this gives energy in a
desired band.
/C15Long-term Avearge Spectrum (LTAS): LTAS captures atypi-
cal spectral information from the signal. LTAS [49] is used in
classifying pathological speech (like dysarthria, dyphasia
etc.) from the controlled normal speech. The intelligibility
of a speech is determined by the variations in nasality,
breath control and loudness of the speech. LTAS tries to cap-
ture these cues from each octave ﬁltered speech signal.
There are 9 octave ﬁlters used at center frequencies 30, 60,
120, 240, 480, 960, 1920, 3840 and 7680 Hz. From each
octave ﬁltered speech signal the following parameters are
determined and joined together to form a 99-dimensional
feature vector.– RMS value normalized/full band RMS value
– Normalized mean frame RMS
– Standard deviation of frame RMS
– Frame standard deviation normalized by full-band RMS
– Frame standard deviation normalized by band RMS
– Skewness of frame RMS
– Kurtosis of frame RMS
– Range of frame RMS
– Normalized range of frame RMS
– Pairwise variability of RMS energy between ensuing
frames
/C15Chroma related features: Chroma features are interesting and
powerful representation of music audio in which entire spec-
trum is mapped into 12 bins that represents the 12 semi-
tones (or chroma) of musical octave. It can be computed fromthe logarithmic short-time fourier transform of the sound sig-
nal. It is also called as chromagram. Another chroma based fea-
ture is chroma energy distribution normalized statistics. This
feature is used to identify similarity between different interpre-
tations of the music given.
/C15Tonality based features: The tonal sounds are actually the fun-
damental frequency of a harmonic stationary audio signal. In
music, tonality organizes the notes of the musical scale. The
main tonality based audio features are:
–Fundamental Frequency (FF): The fundamental frequency
F0 is the ﬁrst peak of the local normalized spectro-
temporal auto-correlation function. In simple terms, funda-
mental frequency is the lowest frequency of a periodic
waveform. For music, the fundamental frequency is the
musical pitch of a note that is perceived as the lowest partial
present. Fundamental frequency is an important feature and
used in music onset detection [61], environmental sound
recognition [39,40] and audio retrieval [63].
Algorithm 12 : Fundamental frequency F0
1.Result : Fundamental frequency (F0)
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Find the pitch of the audio signal by auto-correlation or
cepstral methods.
4. Pitch will give an estimate of the fundamental frequency
of the signal x.
–Pitch Histogram: Pitch histogram explains the pitch of a
signal in a more compact form. It has been highly used in
music genre classiﬁcation [15].
–Pitch Proﬁle: This feature is more accurate representation
of musical pitch and it has been used for musical key detec-
tion [64].
–Harmonicity: Harmonicity is a feature used to distinguish
between tonal and noise like sounds. It uses auto-
correlation function to ﬁnd periodicity in sound in time or
frequency domain.
–Harmonic-to-noise ratio: It is computed as the ratio
between the harmonic part of the signal to the rest of the
signal. It has been used in analyzing pathological voices
[65] and music-related applications.
–Jitter: It computes the variations of fundamental frequency,
that is, the average absolute difference between consecutive
periods of speech. It is used in speaker recognition [67], ana-
lyzing pathological voices, determine vocal and non-vocal
sounds [66].
/C15Spectrum shape based features:
–Spectral Centroid: Spectral Centroid indicates the where
the center of mass of the spectrum is located. It describes10 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 11 ====
the brightness of a sound signal and hence also called bright-
ness feature of a sound. It is computed considering the spec-
trum as a distribution which values are the frequencies and
the probabilities to observe these are the normalized ampli-
tude. Spectral centroid is an excellent measure of brightness
of sound signal and used to measure of timbre of music [53],
music classiﬁcation [29,30] , music mood classiﬁcation
[14,54] . Spectral Centroid of the music is higher than the
spectral centroid of speech [56]. The basic algorithm for cal-
culating spectral centroid is given below.
Algorithm 13 : Spectral centroid of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral Centroid l1
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Convert the signal into frequency domain.
4.l1¼ðPb2
k¼b1fkskÞ=ðPb2
k¼b1skÞ
where fkis the frequency corresponding to bin k and skis
the spectral value at bin k, b1and b2are band edges
–Spectral Center: This feature is closely related to the spec-
tral centroid. It is the measure of the median frequency pre-
sent in the signal spectrum. This is a median frequency
hence it balances the higher and lower energies. This feature
is applied in tracking rhythm in musical signals [55].
–Spectral roll-off: The spectral roll-off point is the frequency
so that 95% of the signal energy is contained below this fre-
quency. Spectral roll of is used in speech/music classiﬁcation
[56], music genre classiﬁcation [14,15,29,30] , musical
instrument classiﬁcation and audio-based surveillance sys-
tems [41].
Algorithm 14 : Spectral Roll-off point of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral Roll-off
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Transform the signal in frequency domain.
4.roll off point ¼isuch thatPi
k¼b1sk¼0:95ðPb2
k¼b1skÞ
where skis the spectral value at bin k and b1and b2are band
edges
–Spectral Spread: It is also called as Spectral Dispersion. This
feature is closely related to the bandwidth of the signal [55].
It can be described as average deviation of the rate-map
around its centroid. Noise like signals have wide spectral
spread than the pure tonal sounds which has small spectral
spread. It is generally, wide for music and environmental
sounds and comparatively narrow for speech like sounds
[56].Algorithm 15 : Spectral Spread of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral Spread l2
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Transform the signal in frequency domain.
4.l2¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃPb2
k¼b1ðfk/C0l1Þ2sk=Pb2
k¼b1skq
where fkis the frequency corresponding to bin k and skis
the spectral value at bin k,
b1and b2are band edges and l1is spectral centroid
–Spectral Skewness: Spectral skewness is the 3rd order statis-
tical value and it measure the symmetry of the spectrum
around its arithmetic mean value. This feature would be equal
to zero for silent segments and high for voiced parts.The
Skewness is the 3rd order statistical feature. Skewness equal
to zero describes symmetric distribution, skewness less than
zero indicates more energy to the right side of spectral distri-
bution and skewness greater than zero describes more energy
components are present on the left side of the spectrum. This
feature is used in mood detection [14,26] and music genre
classiﬁcation [29,32,46,57] , fault detection in motor bearings
[150] and Parkinson’s disease detection from speech [144] .
Fig. 15 represents the skewness for different spectrum.
Algorithm 16 : Spectral skewness of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral Skewness
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Transform the signal into frequency domain.
4.skewness ¼Pb2
k¼b1ðfk/C0l1Þ3sk=ðl2Þ3Pb2
k¼b1sk
where fkis the frequency corresponding to bin k and skis
the spectral value at bin k,
b1and b2are band edges, l1is spectral centroid and l2is
spectral spread
–Spectral Kurtosis: On the other hand, Kurtosis is the 4th
order statistical measure and describes the ﬂatness of the
spectrum around its mean value. For gaussian distributionthe spectral kurtosis has value 0, if kurtosis is less than 0,
we observe ﬂat distribution and if spectral kurtosis is greater
than 0, we observe sharp peaked spectral. Just like spectral
skewness, spectral Kurtosis is also used as a feature in music
genre classiﬁcation [29,32,57] and mood classiﬁcation
[14,26] , fault detection in bearing of electric motors [150]
and Parkinson’s disease detection from speech [144] .
Fig. 16 explains the kurtosis for different type of spectrum
for a function fðxÞor audio signal x.
Fig. 15. Skewness for different type of spectrum.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 11

==== Page 12 ====
Algorithm 17 : Spectral kurtosis of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral Kurosis
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Transform the signal into frequency domain.
4.kurtosis ¼Pb2
k¼b1ðfk/C0l1Þ4sk=ðl2Þ4Pb2
k¼b1sk
where fkis the frequency corresponding to bin k and skis
the spectral value at bin k,
b1and b2are band edges, l1is spectral centroid and l2is
spectral spread
–Spectral Slope: It is the measure of slope of the amplitude
of the signal and it is computed by linear regression. This
feature is used in speech analysis [58] and in identifying
speaker from a speech signal [59].
Algorithm 18 : Spectral slope of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral slope
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Transform the signal into frequency domain.
4.slope ¼Pb2
k¼b1ðfk/C0lfÞðsk/C0lsÞ=Pb2
k¼b1ðfk/C0lfÞ2
where fkis the frequency corresponding to bin k
skis the spectral value at bin k
b1and b2are band edges
lsis mean spectral value
lfis the mean frequency
–Spectral Decrease: It explains the average spectral-slope of
the rate-map representation, putting a strong emphasis on
low frequencies [60].
Algorithm 19 : Spectral slope of an audio signal
1.Result : Spectral decrease
2. Input: Audio signal xand sampling frequency fs.
3. Transform the signal into frequency domain.
4.spectral decrease ¼Pb2
k¼b1þ1ððsk/C0sb1Þ=ðk/C01ÞÞ=Pb2
k¼b1þ1sk
where skis the spectral value at bin k and b1and b2are band
edges
–Bandwidth: Spectral bandwidth is the second order statis-
tical value the determines the low bandwidth sounds from
the high frequency sounds. It is used in music classiﬁcation
[15] and environmental sound recognition [16].
–Spectral Flatness: Spectral ﬂatness is the measure of the
uniformity in the frequency distribution of the power spec-
trum. It is calculated as the ratio of the geometric mean to
the arithmetic mean. It can be used to distinguish betweenharmonic and noise like sounds. For harmonic sounds the
spectral ﬂatness is close to zero and for noise like sounds
the value of spectral ﬂatness is close to one. It is employed
in music onset detection [61], music classiﬁcation and audio
ﬁngerprinting [59].
Algorithm 20 : Steps to calculate spectral ﬂatness
1.Result : Spectral ﬂatness value
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. calculate the periodogram power spectral density of x.
4. Find the geometric mean of the periodogram signal.
5. Find arithmetic mean of the periodogram signal.
6. Calculate the ratio of geometic and arithmetic mean.
7. Result is the value of spectral ﬂatness.
–Spectral Crest Factor: In contrast to the spectral ﬂatness,
spectral crest factor determines how peaked is the power
spectrum of the sound signal. It is also used to distinguish
between harmonic/tonal sounds and noise like sounds. It is
higher for harmonic/tonal sounds and lower for noise like
sounds. This feature is also used for audio ﬁngerprinting
[59] and music classiﬁcation [29].
Algorithm 21 : Spectral crest factor algorithm
1.Result : Spectral crest factor of an audio
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Calculate peak amplitude of the signal x.
4. Calculate root mean square value of x.
5. Crest factor is the ratio between peak amplitude and RMS
value.
6. Convert the crest factor in decibles (if required).
–Entropy: Entropy is also the measure of uniformity of ﬂat-
ness, and it is computed as Shannon’s entropy or Renyi
entropy. This feature has been used for automatic speech
recognition [62].
The Shannon’s entropy for a signal could be calculated by
using formula /C0sumðPilogPiÞwhere Piis the sample class
probabilities.
–Spectral Flux: The spectral ﬂux is deﬁned as 2-norm of the
frame-to-frame spectral amplitude difference vector. It
points the sudden changes in the frequency energy distribu-
tion of sounds. This feature is used in speech/music discrim-
ination [27], music genre classiﬁcation [29,32] and
environmental sound classiﬁcation [39,40] .
–Octave based spectral contrast (OBSC): It is the difference
between peaks and valleys measured in sub-bands by octave
scale ﬁlters. It has been used for music classiﬁcation [29]and
music mood classiﬁcation [14,26] .
Fig. 16. Kurtosis for different type of spectrum.12 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 13 ====
Algorithm 22 : OBSC extarction algorithm
1.Result : OBSC feature
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Perform framing or windowing on the signal.
4. Take FFT of each framed signal.5. Divide the transformed signal into 6 octave scaled sub-
bands.
6. For each band, calculate peak and valley values.
7. Calculate the contrast of the peaks and valleys.
8. Valleys and contrast gives OBSC feature set.
4.3. Cepstral domain features
A cepstrum is obtained by taking the inverse Fourier transform
of the logarithm of the spectrum of the signal. There is a complex,
power, phase and real cepstrum. Among all of these, power cep-
strum is the one most relevant to the speech signal processing.
The analysis of the cepstrum is called as cepstrum analysis, que-
frency analysis (equivalent to frequency analysis in spectrum
domain) or liftering [76](equivalent to the ﬁltering in spectrum
domain). The cepstrum features are mainly used in pitch detection
[77,78] , speech recognition and speech enhancement [79]. The
cepstrum/cepstral features are discussed below:
/C15Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients (MFCCs): MFCCs are derived
from the cepstral representation of an audio clip. MFCCs repre-
sents short-time power spectrum of an audio clip based on the
discrete cosine transform of log power spectrum on a non-
linear mel scale. In MFCCs the frequency bands are equally
spaced on mel-scale, which mimics the human auditory system
very closely, making MFCCs key feature in various audio signal
processing applications. MFCCs has been widely used in speech
recognition [80,83] , speech enhancement [84], speaker recogni-
tion [81], music genre classiﬁcation [82], music information
retrieval [85], audio similarity measurement [82], vowel detec-
tion [145] etc.
Algorithm 23 : MFCC extraction
1.Result : Mel frequency cepstrum coefﬁcients
2. Input: Audio signal x
3. Frame the signal into short frames. .Use windowing
4. For each frame, calculate the periodogram estimate of the
power spectrum.
5. Apply the mel ﬁlter-bank to power spectrum, sum the
energy in each ﬁlter.
6. Take logarithm of ﬁlter-bank energies.
7.Take Discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the log ﬁlter-bank
energies.
8. Keep 2–13 DCT coefﬁcients, discard the rest.
/C15Linear Prediction Cepstral Coefﬁcients (LPCCs): The cepstrum
has number of advantages like soucre-ﬁlter separation,
orthogonality, compactness etc. These properties makes cep-
strum coefﬁcients robust and suitable for machine learning.
On the other hand, linear prediction coefﬁcients (LPC) are
too sensitive to numerical precision, hence it is desirable to
transform the LPC to the cepstral domain. The resultant
transformed coefﬁcients are called as LPCCs. We can say that
LPCCs are derived from LPCs. LPCCs has been used in various
application areas like speech recognition [86], speech analy-
sis[87], noise removal [88], music genre classiﬁcation [89]
etc. Algorithm below describes the steps to calculate LPCCs
from an audio signal.Algorithm 24 : LPCCs extraction
1.
Result : LPCCs feature
2. Input the audio signal x
3. Perform pre-emphasis on original signal.
4. Frame the signal using windowing method.5. Find the auto-correlation of the signal with itself.
6. Calculate LPC parameters.
7. Convert the LPC parameters in cepstral domain.
8. Result is LPCCs.
/C15Preceptual linear prediction (PLP) cepstral coefﬁcients: The PLP
coefﬁcients is based on the concepts: critical band spectral
resolution, equal-loudness curve and intensity loudness
power law [90]. The PLP coefﬁcients are derived from the
linear prediction coefﬁcients (LPC) by performing percep-
tual processing before auto-regressive modelling. After this
processing, the linear coefﬁcients are converted into cep-
stral coefﬁcients. It has been widely employed in emotion
recognition [91], speech recognition [92], baby crying
sound analysis [93], animal sound vocalization analysis
[94] etc.
Algorithm 25 : PLP cepstral extraction
1.Result : PLP cepstral coefﬁcients
2. Input the audio signal x
3. Perform windowing on signal.
4. Do critical band analysis.
5. Perform equal loudness and pre-emphasis.
6. Do intensity-loudness conversion.
7. Apply linear prediction algorithm.
8. Convert into cepstarl domain.
/C15Relative-spectral PLP (RASTA-PLP) feature: RASTA is a tech-
nique that applies a band-pass ﬁlter to the energy in each
frequency sub-band in order to smooth over short-term
noise variations and to remove any constant offset
resulting from static spectral coloration in the speech
signal. The RASTA-PLP features are robust to noise version
of PLP features. The advantage of the RASTA-PLP feature
is that it tries to incorporate noise cancellation feature
of human auditory system. This hybrid feature is
widely employed in speech recognition [95], gender
classiﬁcation [96], speaker veriﬁcation [97] etc. The
process to extract RASTA-PLP features is explained in
algorithm below.
Algorithm 26 : RASTA-PLP feature extarction
1.Result : RASTA-PLP feature set
2. Input the audio signal x
3. Perform pre-emphasis and windowing on original signal.
4. ﬁnd DFT of the windowed signal.
5. Perform critical bank analysis on DFT signal.
6. Take logarithm of the result of step 5.
7. Perform RASTA-ﬁltering. 8. Perform equal loudness and
pre-emphasis on RASTA ﬁltered signal.
9. Apply Intensity loudness power law.
10. Take inverse of logarithm of the result of step 9.
11. Perform auto-regressive modelling.
12. Convert into cepstral domain.
13. Result is the RASTA-PLP coefﬁcients.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 13

==== Page 14 ====
/C15Greenwood function cepstral coefﬁcients (GFCC): GFCCs [98]
were introduced as a generalized form of MFCCs. GFCCs
use mel-scale features that mimics the properties of HAS
and theoretically well-founded for nearly all terrestrial
mammals and give good vocal representation for nearly all
species. GFCCs can be implemented using very basic knowl-
edge of the minimum and maximum frequency range for a
particular species and is derived from greenwood equation.
Greenwood equation nearly maps the cochlear-frequency
position for all species. This feature is highly employed in
environmental sound recognition specially for animals and
bird sound classiﬁcation [99].
Algorithm 27 : GFCCs extraction
1.Result : Greenwood function cepstral coefﬁcients
2. Input: Audio signal ( x)
3. Frame the signal into short frames. .Use windowing
4. For each frame, calculate the periodogram estimate of the
power spectrum.
5. Apply the Greenwood-function scaled ﬁlter-bank to
power spectrum, sum the energy in each ﬁlter.
6. Take logarithm of ﬁlter-bank energies.
7. Take Discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the log ﬁlter-
bank energies.
8. Result is GFCCs.
/C15Gammatone cepstral coefﬁcients (GTCCs): The main problem
with the automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems is
noise reduction. In recent years, the GTCCs has shown noise
robustness in many ASR systems. GTCCs are based on gam-
matone ﬁlter banks, these ﬁlter banks give cochleagram as
the output which is actually the frequency-time representa-
tion of a sound signal. The extraction process of GTCCs is
similar to the extraction process of MFCCs except the mel-
ﬁlter bank is replaced by gammatone ﬁlter bank. Just like
MFCCs, GTCCs can also have additional features like delta
GTCCs, delta-delta GTCCs which are actually the ﬁrst and
second order derivatives of GTCCs. These group of cepstral
features are used in environmental sound recognition [100]
and speech recognition [101] .
Algorithm 28 : GTCCs extraction
1.Result : Gammatone cepstral coefﬁcients
2. Input: Audio signal ( x)
3. Frame the signal into short frames. .Use windowing
4. For each frame, calculate the periodogram estimate of the
power spectrum.
5. Apply the gammatone ﬁlter-bank to power spectrum,
sum the energy in each ﬁlter.
6. Take logarithm of ﬁlter-bank energies.
7. Take Discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the log ﬁlter-
bank energies.
8. Result is GTCCs.
4.4. Discrete wavelet transform domain features
The wavelet transform is another way to transform the time-
domain audio signal into a time-frequency representation. It com-putes the inner product of the signal with a member from family of
wavelets. There are two types of wavelets: continuous wavelet
transform (CWT) and discrete wavelet transform (DWT). The
wavelet specially DWT has the capacity to extract information
from non-stationary signals like audio. It overcomes the shortcom-
ings of the STFT that provides uniform time-frequency resolution.
DWT gives high time resolution and low frequency resolution for
higher frequencies and high frequency resolution and low time
resolution for lower frequencies. The approximations and detailed
coefﬁcients are generated by the wavelet transform that gives the
information about a signal. These approximations and detailed
coefﬁcients are called as wavelet features. These wavelet features
could be extracted either from wavelet transform or from wavelet
packet decomposition. In wavelets the approximation coefﬁcients
are decomposed while in wavelet packet decomposition/transformboth approximation and detailed components are decomposed.
Below Fig. 17 explain the difference between wavelet transform
and wavelet packet transform.
The conventional features like MFCCs, PLPC etc could be
extracted from the wavelet packet decomposition. Or these coefﬁ-
cients could be directly used as wavelet features. These features or
coefﬁcients are used in audio analysis [122]
, audio classiﬁcation
[123,136] , audio ﬁngerprinting [124] , content-based audio retrie-
val[125] , music classiﬁcation [126] , vowel detection in speech sig-
nals [145] , snore sound analysis [133] audio-visual emotion
recognition [134] , detecting fault bearing in electric motors [150]
etc.
4.5. Image/texture based features
/C15Local Binary Pattern (LBP): Local binary pattern is primary
used for computer vision applications like face detection, face
recognition, object detection etc. LBPs measures the local spa-
tial information and gray scale contrast. In audio signal pro-
cessing, the LBPs are extracted from the spectrograms of the
signals and used in audio scene classiﬁcation [112,113] ,
depression analysis from speech [114] snore sound discrimi-
nation [115] , emotion detection [117] , and pathological voice
(Cordectomy and frontolateral resection diseases) detection
[143] .
Algorithm 29 : Local Binary pattern from spectrogram
1.Result : LBP feature set
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Choose the radius of the mask and type of normalization.
6. Extarct LBP features from the gray scale image.
7. LBP are generated from each masked image subset.
/C15Local Ternary Patterns (LTPs): LTPs are the extension of the
LBPs. Just like LBPs the LTPs are extracted from the image
description of a signal like a spectrogram. But unlike LBPs,
it doesn’t threshold the pixels into binary pattern of 0’s
and 1’s, rather it uses a threshold constant to threshold pix-
els into three values i.e. /C01, 0 and 1. In this manner each
threshold pixel could have any of these three values and
neighbouring pixels could be combined after thresholding
into a ternary patterns.The LTPs are used in audio scene clas-14 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 15 ====
siﬁcation [140] , fall detection in elderly people by analyzing
environment sounds [141] , and in health care monitoring
using speech analysis [142] . The algorithm to extract LTPs
is explained below:
Algorithm 30 : Local Ternary Pattern Extraction
1.Result : Local ternary patterns
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Consider the image mask from where LTPs are to be
extracted.
6. Calculate the lower and upper bits using ternary function
and three threshold values /C01, 0 and 1.
7. Calculate lower and upper values using lower and upper
bits.
8. Construct lower and upper signals using lower and upper
bits.
9. Generate histogram from these signals.
10. Join the histograms to get LTPs.
/C15Histogram of gradients (HOG) feature: Just like LBPs, HOG fea-
tures are used to extract the time-frequency information
from the spectrograms. This feature also has been used in
acoustic scene classiﬁcation [113,116] ,snore sound discrim-
ination [115] , emotion detection [117] .
Algorithm 31 : HOG descriptor from spectrogram
1.Result : HOG descriptor
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Choose name-value pair arguments such as cell size,
block size etc.
6. Extaract HOG features from spectrogram.
7. Output is HOG feature from each cell or block of the
image.
/C15Scale invariant feature transform (SIFT): SIFT is also a feature
extraction algorithm in computer vision used initially for
detecting local information in images. This feature is also
employed on spectrograms of audio signals to detect the
local information. It has been highly used in emotion detec-
tion [117] and audio-video concept classiﬁcation [118] .Algorithm 32 : SIFT descriptor
1.Result : SIFT feature set
2. Input: Audio signal x.
3. Generate spectrogram from the audio signal.
4. Convert the RGB image of spectrogram into gray scale
image.
5. Perform scale-space extrema detection on gray scale
image.
6. Localize the keypoints.
7. Assign orientation to each keypoint.
8. Create keypoint descriptor called as SIFT descriptor.
4.6. Deep features
Deep learning has been proven to be a powerful technique to
extract high level features from low level information. The features
extracted from the hidden layers of various deep learning models is
known as deep features . The deep features could be extracted from
any deep leaning model like convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), deep neural networks (DNNs), recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), Deep stacked auto-encoder (SAE), unidirectional long short
term memory network (LSTM), bi-directional long short term
memory (BLSTM) and other similar models.
Deep features are extracted from the deep neural networks
(DNNs). The MFCCs or any other relevant audio feature is fed to
the DNNs as the input. The deep features depend on how deep
the neural network is. If we have shallow neural network, the deep
features given by lower layers can be thought of as speaker-
adapted features. And from the upper layers class-based discrimi-
natory features could be extracted. The deep features could also be
extracted from the bottleneck layer of a DNN. Fig. 18 shows the
extraction of deep features from bottleneck layer of a DNN. In this
ﬁgure DAF stands for deep audio features ).
Any CNN architecture consists of three major components: con-
volution layers, pooling layers and fully connected layers as shown
inFig. 19 . Convolution layers apply deﬁnite number of convolu-
tional ﬁlters on the spectrogram of an audio signal. The output of
this layer is called as feature map. Pooling layer decrease the
dimensions of the feature maps generated by convolutional layers
and hence reduce the processing time. Fully connected layers
extract global features from the local feature maps. The deep fea-
tures could be extracted from any of these layers, the initial layers
of the CNN gives deep features which is nothing but the informa-
tion about pixels and edges of the spectrogram. The higher layers
gives deep features which have highly discriminative. while the
deep features extracted from the fully connected layer gives globalFig. 17. Left: Wavelet Decomposition, Right: Wavelet packet decomposition.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 15

==== Page 16 ====
information. Hence, the signiﬁcance of the deep features highly
depends on the layer from which these are extracted.
Another type of artiﬁcial neural network is auto-encoder, which
is basically used for dimension reduction and works in an unsuper-vised manner. The stacked auto-encoder (SAE) is a neural network
having multiple layers of sparse auto-encoders in such a manner
that the output of the each layer is fed as the input to its successive
layer. Once the SAE is trained, the deep features could be extracted
from the hidden deep layers of the unsupervised trained SAE and
can be used for various applications.
In order to encode the sequential knowledge in the model,
RNNs are used. RNNs have advantages over DNNs as it has ﬂexibil-
ity to process sequential knowledge and have ability to memorize
information internally. The memory unit is called as LSTM. Unidi-
rectional or bi-directional LSTM are the types memory element. In
unidirectional LSTM the ﬂow of information is in just forward
direction while in BLSTM, one LSTM layer process the information
in forward direction and another LSTM layer process the informa-
tion in backward direction. The deep features could be extracted
from any deep layer of LSTM-RNN.
In audio signal processing, deep features have been used in
acoustic scene classiﬁcation [127,128] , speaker recognition [130] ,audio-video analysis [129] , gender recognition [146] , emotion
recognition [131] and spooﬁng detection [132] .
4.7. Sparsity in features
In numerical analysis, a sparse matrix is the one in which most
of the elements is zero and very few elements are non-zero. The
same concept can be applied to audio signals, which may have very
few non-zero components when represented in a particular
domain. For example, a pure tonal signal can be represented by
one single spike in frequency domain, hence we can say that signal
is sparse in frequency domain. Hence, very less number of features
are required to represent a signal if it has sparsity. Sparsity can be
achieved in any domain say time domain, frequency domain, time-
frequency domain, wavelet domain, cepstral domain etc. Once the
sparsity is achieved in any of the domains, the domain speciﬁc fea-
tures can be extracted and analyzed. For example, if sparsity is pre-
sent in cepstral domain, cepstral features can be extracted from the
compact sparse signal. This sparsity of a signal may ﬁnally leads to
compressing sensing. The sparsity can be realized by many meth-
ods, to name a few are:
Fig. 18. Deep feature from bottleneck layer.
Fig. 19. Basic structure of CNN.16 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 17 ====
/C15Matching Pursuit (MP)
/C15Orthogonal matching pursuit
/C15Stage wise greedy method
/C15Basic pursuit
/C15Coordinate descent etc.
The sparsity plays an important role in compressive sensing of
speech signals [108] , speech/music separation [109] and scalable
audio classiﬁcation [110] .
4.8. Other domains
/C15Eigen Domain features: The eigen domain features are the set of
features extracted from the eigen vectors of an audio signal.
Eigen vector of an audio signal is the most dominant vector/dimension present in the signal. The most dominant vector
[111] can be obtained by various techniques, the most exploited
is principal component analysis (PCA). Other techniques are
independent component analysis (ICA) and singular value
decomposition (SVD). These techniques project the originalaudio signal to the eigen-vector space. Most relevant eigen
domain features are MPEG-7 audio spectrum basis feature and
distortion discriminant analysis feature.
/C15Phase Domain:
–Modiﬁed group delay function (MODGDF): The modiﬁed
group delay function gives better spectral smoothing than
the standard group delay function. In context of speech, zeros
of the slowly varying envelope of speech represents the nasal
sounds. The zeros in speech are either within or outside the
unit circle since the zeros also have nonzero bandwidth
and produce spikes in the spectrum. In MODGDF these zeros
are suppressed leading to a smoother spectrum of the sound.
From this MODGDF, cepstral coefﬁcients could be extracted
and are called as MODGDF cepstral coefﬁcients. This feature
has been used in speech recognition [102] , speaker veriﬁca-
tion [103] and synthetic speech detection [104,105] .
–cosine normalized phase cepstral feature: These cepstral fea-
tures are derived by um-wrapping the phase spectrum of a
signal. The cosine normalization is done on this un-
wrapped signal and the cepstral coefﬁcients are extracted
Fig. 20. Benchmarking of audio features discussed.G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 17

==== Page 18 ====
by performing discrete cosine transform on the normalized
signal. This feature is used in spooﬁng detection [106] and
speaker recognition [107] .
5. Critical analysis and conclusion
In this work we have discussed about the various thresholds of
human auditory system and the classiﬁcation of sounds into
speech, music and environmental sounds. This review also coversthe evolution of the audio features in early 1950’s and their pro-
gress till date. This paper discuss the features from time domain,
frequency domain, time-frequency domain, cepstral domain, phase
domain,sparse domain, eigen domain, wavelet domain and image/-
texture based features. Fig. 20 gives the benchmarking of the audio
features discussed in this review article.
In this review work, we try to relate the current audio features
and their extraction algorithms which are suitable for machine
learning or machine hearing in the most popular domains of
Fig. 21. Summary of audio signal features according to their application area (Red color features shows most prominent features).18 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 19 ====
audio i.e. speech, music and environmental audio and their
applications.
Furthermore, we have tried to explain the pseudo code or algo-
rithm whatever applicable to explain the extraction process of an
audio feature. The MATLAB (version 2019) commands are men-
tioned wherever it is directly available for use, otherwise the
extraction algorithm is provided to have better understanding.
Fig. 21 gives the bird’s eye view to the audio application areas
and the list of respective audio features which are most suitable
for that very particular application. The features highlighted in
red color shows the most prominent features for that very partic-
ular application. The application areas exploited by the researchers
the most are: human speech based applications, applications
involving music signals and applications related to environmental
sounds. For speech signals, the most researched areas includespeech recognition, speech enhancement, speaker/gender recogni-
tion, voice activity detection, pathological speech analysis, blind
source separation and emotion recognition. Similarly, for music
based applications, the main focus of the state-of-the-art is on
music segmentation, music mood classiﬁcation, music analysis,
speech-music classiﬁcation and music genre classiﬁcation. For
environmental sounds, the most of the research converges into
applications such as acoustic scene classiﬁcation, audio ﬁnger-
printing, Industry applications and animal sound classiﬁcation.
For instance say under the category speech the one of the most
popular area of research is speaker/gender recognition. According
to the literature survey only few audio features have proven to be
most discriminatory and suitable for machine learning. In this case
shimmer, group delay function (GDF), fundamental frequency (FF),
harmonic-to-noise ratio, spectral slope, skewness, kurtosis, MFCCs,
LPCC RASTA-PLP and peak frequency are mostly used features. It
could be concluded that, not every feature provides good results
for every application. A researcher must look for the best hand
crafted features which are suitable for a particular application.
In future, a more comprehensive analysis of the audio signals,
acoustic signals and vibrations could be done. A detailed discussion
on feature and its behaviour with audio, acoustic or vibration sig-
nal would be an interesting analysis. We expect the change in
trends in audio signal feature extraction methods in future and
would like to analyze those new and emerging features used in
machine hearing and their relevant application areas.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the
online version, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.107020 .
References
[1]Sound M. Naerum. Bruel and Kjaer Co.; 1984 .
[2] Miller GA. The perception of speech McGraw-Hill. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill; 1951. https://doi.org/10.1037/11135-003 . Retrieved from http://ezproxy.
lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/614171122?accountid=13631 .
[3]
Johnson Keith. Acoustic and auditory phonetics. 3rd ed. Wiley-Blackwell;
2015 .
[4]Lyon RF. Machine hearing: an emerging ﬁeld [exploratory dsp]. IEEE Signal
Process Mag 2010;27(5):131–9 .
[5]Gerhard D. Audio signal classiﬁcation: history and current
techniques. Department of Computer Science, University of Regina; 2003 .
[6]Pieraccini R. The voice in the machine: building computers that understand
speech. MIT Press; 2012 .[7]Belouchrani A, Abed-Meraim K, Cardoso JF, Moulines E. A blind source
separation technique using second-order statistics. IEEE Trans Signal Process
1997;45(2):434–44 .
[8]Campbell JP. Speaker recognition: a tutorial. Proc IEEE 1997;85(9):
1437–62 .
[9]Loizou PC. Speech enhancement: theory and practice. CRC Press; 2007 .
[10] Lansford KL, Liss JM. Vowel acoustics in dysarthria: speech disorder diagnosis
and classiﬁcation. J Speech Lang Hearing Res 2014 .
[11] Dibazar AA, Narayanan S, Berger TW. Feature analysis for automatic detection
of pathological speech. In: Proceedings of the second joint 24th annual
conference and the annual fall meeting of the biomedical engineering society.Engineering in medicine and biology, vol. 1. IEEE; 2002. p. 182–3
.
[12] Yilmaz E, Ganzeboom MS, Cucchiarini C, Strik H. Combining non-pathological
data of different language varieties to improve DNN-HMM performance on
pathological speech; 2016. .
[13] Card SK. The psychology of human-computer interaction. CRC Press; 2018 .
[14] Lu L, Liu D, Zhang HJ. Automatic mood detection and tracking of music audio
signals. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Process 2006;14(1):5–18 .
[15] Tzanetakis G, Cook P. Musical genre classiﬁcation of audio signals. IEEE Trans
Speech Audio Process 2002;10(5):293–302 .
[16] Liu Z, Huang J, Wang Y, Chen T. Audio feature extraction and analysis for
scene classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of ﬁrst signal processing society
workshop on multimedia signal processing. IEEE; 1997. p. 343–8 .
[17] Snow WB. Audible frequency ranges of music, speech and noise. Bell Syst
Tech J 1931;10(4):616–27 .
[18] Smith CP. A phoneme detector. J Acoust Soc Am 1951;23(4):446–51 .
[19] Goldman-Eisler F. Speech analysis and mental processes. Lang Speech 1958;1
(1):59–75. https://doi.org/10.1177/002383095800100105 .
[20] Howard CR. Speech analysis-synthesis scheme using continuous parameters.
J Acoust Soc Am 1956;28(6):1091–8. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1908565 .
[21] Stevens KN. Autocorrelation analysis of speech sounds. J Acoust Soc Am
1950;22(6):769–71. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1906687 .
[22] Potter RK, Steinberg JC. Toward the speciﬁcation of speech. J Acoust Soc Am
1950;22(6):807–20. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1906694 .
[23] Gambardella G. A contribution to the theory of short-time spectral analysis
with nonuniform bandwidth ﬁlters. IEEE Trans Circuit Theory 1971;18
(4):455–60. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCT.1971.1083298 .
[24] Rihaczek A. Signal energy distribution in time and frequency. IEEE Trans Inf
Theory 1968;14(3):369–74. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.1968.105457 .
[25] Gambardella G. Time scaling and Short-Time spectral analysis. J Acoust Soc
Am 1968;44(6):1745–7. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1911332 .
[26] Bhat AS, Amith VS, Prasad NS, Mohan DM. An efﬁcient classiﬁcation algorithm
for music mood detection in western and hindi music using audio feature
extraction. In: 2014 ﬁfth international conference on signal and image
processing. p. 359–64 .
[27] Saunders J. Real-time discrimination of broadcast speech/music. 1996 IEEE
international conference on acoustics, speech, and signal processingconference proceedings, vol. 2. IEEE; 1996. p. 993–6
.
[28] Kedem B. Spectral analysis and discrimination by zero-crossings. Proc IEEE
1986;74(11):1477–93 .
[29] Li T, Ogihara M, Li Q. A comparative study on content-based music genre
classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 26th annual international ACM SIGIRconference on Research and development in information retrieval. ACM;
2003. p. 282–9
.
[30] Bergstra J, Casagrande N, Erhan D, Eck D, Kégl B. Aggregate features and
adaboost for music classiﬁcation. Mach Learn 2006;65(2–3):473–84 .
[31] Yang X, Tan B, Ding J, Zhang J, Gong J. Comparative study on voice activity
detection algorithm. In: 2010 International conference on electrical and
control engineering. IEEE; 2010. p. 599–602 .
[32] Ahrendt P, Meng A, Larsen J. Decision time horizon for music genre
classiﬁcation using short time features. In: 2004 12th European signal
processing conference. IEEE; 2004. p. 1293–6 .
[33] El-Maleh K, Klein M, Petrucci G, Kabal P. Speech/music discrimination for
multimedia applications. 2000 IEEE international conference on acoustics,speech, and signal processing. Proceedings (Cat. No. 00CH37100), vol. 4. IEEE;
2000. p. 2445–8
.
[34] Mitrovic D, Zeppelzauer M, Breiteneder C. Discrimination and retrieval of
animal sounds. In: 2006 12th international multi-media modelling
conference. IEEE; 2006. p. 5 .
[35] Peeters G. A large set of audio features for sound description (similarity and
classiﬁcation) in the CUIDADO project; 2004. .
[36] Burred JJ, Robel A, Sikora T. Dynamic spectral envelope modeling for timbre
analysis of musical instrument sounds. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Process
2010;18(3):663–74 .
[37] Farrús M, Hernando J, Ejarque P. Jitter and shimmer measurements for
speaker recognition. In: Eighth annual conference of the international speechcommunication association
.
[38] Jensen K. Pitch independent prototyping of musical sounds. In: 1999 IEEE
third workshop on multimedia signal processing (Cat. No. 99TH8451). IEEE;
1999. p. 215–20 .
[39] Muhammad G, Alghathbar K. Environment recognition from audio usingMPEG-7 features. In: 2009 Fourth international conference on embedded and
multimedia computing. IEEE; 2009. p. 1–6
.
[40] Valero X, Alías F. Applicability of MPEG-7 low level descriptors to
environmental sound source recognition. In: Proceedings 1st Euroregio
Conference, Ljubjana .G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 19

==== Page 20 ====
[41] Rabaoui A, Davy M, Rossignol S, Ellouze N. Using one-class SVMs and
wavelets for audio surveillance. IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 2008;3
(4):763–75 .
[42] Peltonen V, Tuomi J, Klapuri A, Huopaniemi J, Sorsa T. Computational auditory
scene recognition. In: 2002 IEEE international conference on acoustics,
speech, and signal processing, vol. 2. IEEE; 2002. p. II–1941 .
[43] Jiang H, Bai J, Zhang S, Xu B. SVM-based audio scene classiﬁcation. In: 2005
international conference on natural language processing and knowledge
engineering. IEEE; 2005. p. 131–6 .
[44] Ando Y. Autocorrelation-based features for speech representation. J Acoust
Soc Am 2013;133(5). https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4805418 . pp. 3292–3292.
[45] Sztaho D, Tulics MG, Vicsi K, Valalik I. Automatic estimation of severity of
parkinson’s disease based on speech rhythm related features. Paper
presented at the 000011-000016; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1109/
CogInfoCom.2017.8268208. .
[46] Tzanetakis G, Cook P. Musical genre classiﬁcation of audio signals. IEEE Trans
Speech Audio Process 2002;10(5):293–302 .
[47] Berisha V, Sandoval S, Utianski R, Liss J, Spanias A. Selecting disorder-speciﬁc
features for speech pathology ﬁngerprinting. Paper presented at the 7562-
7566; 2013. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP.2013.6639133. .
[48] Liss JM, LeGendre S, Lotto AJ. Discriminating dysarthria type from envelope
modulation spectra. J Speech Lang Hear Res 2010 .
[49] Mendoza E, Valencia N, Muñoz J, Trujillo H. Differences in voice quality
between men and women: use of the long-term average spectrum (LTAS). J
Voice 1996;10(1):59–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0892-1997(96)80019-1 .
[50] Tsau E, Kim SH, Kuo CCJ. Environmental sound recognition with CELP-based
features. In: ISSCS 2011-international symposium on signals, circuits and
systems. IEEE; 2011. p. 1–4 .
[51] Sarkar A, Sreenivas TV. Dynamic programming based segmentation approach
to LSF matrix reconstruction. In: Ninth European conference on speech
communication and technology .
[52] Fu Z, Lu G, Ting KM, Zhang D. A survey of audio-based music classiﬁcation and
annotation. IEEE Trans Multimedia 2011;13(2):303–19 .
[53] Agostini G, Longari M, Pollastri E. Musical instrument timbres classiﬁcation
with spectral features. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 2003;2003(1): 943279 .
[54] Wang F, Wang X, Shao B, Li T, Ogihara M. Tag integrated multi-label music
style classiﬁcation with hypergraph. In: ISMIR. p. 363–8 .
[55] Sethares WA, Morris RD, Sethares JC. Beat tracking of musical performances
using low-level audio features. IEEE Trans Speech Audio Process 2005;13
(2):275–85 .
[56] Al-Shoshan AI. Speech and music classiﬁcation and separation: a review. J
King Saud Univ-Eng Sci 2006;19(1):95–132 .
[57] Baniya BK, Lee J, Li ZN. Audio feature reduction and analysis for automatic
music genre classiﬁcation. In: 2014 IEEE international conference on systems,
man, and cybernetics (SMC). IEEE; 2014. p. 457–62 .
[58] Shukla S, Dandapat S, Prasanna SRM. Spectral slope based analysis and
classiﬁcation of stressed speech. Int J Speech Technol 2011;14(3):245 .
[59] Murthy HA, Beaufays F, Heck LP, Weintraub M. Robust text-independent
speaker identiﬁcation over telephone channels. IEEE Trans Speech Audio
Process 1999;7(5):554–68 .
[60] Peeters G, Giordano BL, Susini P, Misdariis N, McAdams S. The timbre toolbox:
extracting audio descriptors from musical signals. J Acoust Soc Am 2011;130(5):2902–16
.
[61] Smith D, Cheng E, Burnett IS. Musical onset detection using MPEG-7 audio
descriptors. Proceedings of the 20th international congress on acoustics (ICA),
Sydney, Australia, vol. 2327. p. 1014 .
[62] Misra H, Ikbal S, Bourlard H, Hermansky H. Spectral entropy based feature for
robust ASR. In: IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech, and signal
processing, vol. 1. IEEE; 2004. p. I–193 .
[63] Wold E, Blum T, Keislar D, Wheaten J. Content-based classiﬁcation, search,
and retrieval of audio. IEEE Multimedia 1996;3(3):27–36 .
[64] Zhu Y, Kankanhalli MS. Precise pitch proﬁle feature extraction from musical
audio for key detection. IEEE Trans Multimedia 2006;8(3):575–84 .
[65] Lee JW, Kim S, Kang HG. Detecting pathological speech using contourmodeling of harmonic-to-noise ratio. In: 2014 IEEE international conference
on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP). IEEE; 2014. p. 5969–73
.
[66] Murthy YS, Koolagudi SG. Classiﬁcation of vocal and non-vocal regions from
audio songs using spectral features and pitch variations. In: 2015 IEEE 28th
canadian conference on electrical and computer engineering (CCECE). IEEE;
2015. p. 1271–6 .
[67] Farrús M, Hernando J, Ejarque P. Jitter and shimmer measurements forspeaker recognition. In: Eighth annual conference of the international speech
communication association
.
[68] Tzanetakis G, Jones R, McNally K. Stereo panning features for classifying
recording production style. In: ISMIR. p. 441–4 .
[69] Tzanetakis G, Martins LG, McNally K, Jones R. Stereo panning information formusic information retrieval tasks. J Audio Eng Soc 2010;58(5):409–17
.
[70] Härmä A. Classiﬁcation of time-frequency regions in stereo audio. J Audio Eng
Soc 2011;59(10):707–20 .
[71] Avendano C. Frequency-domain source identiﬁcation and manipulation in
stereo mixes for enhancement, suppression and re-panning applications. In:2003 IEEE workshop on applications of signal processing to audio and
acoustics (IEEE Cat. No. 03TH8684). IEEE; 2003. p. 55–8
.
[72] Fu Z, Lu G, Ting KM, Zhang D. A survey of audio-based music classiﬁcation and
annotation. IEEE Trans Multimedia 2011;13(2):303–19 .[73] Murthy HA, Yegnanarayana B. Group delay functions and its applications in
speech technology. Sadhana 2011;36(5):745–82 .
[74] Hegde RM, Murthy HA, Rao GR. Application of the modiﬁed group delay
function to speaker identiﬁcation and discrimination. 2004 IEEE international
conference on acoustics, speech, and signal processing, vol. 1. IEEE; 2004. p.
I–517 .
[75] Smits R, Yegnanarayana B. Determination of instants of signiﬁcant excitation
in speech using group delay function. IEEE Trans Speech Audio Process
1995;3(5):325–33 .
[76] Bogert BP. The quefrency alanysis of time series for echoes; Cepstrum,
pseudo-autocovariance, cross-cepstrum and saphe cracking. Time Ser Anal1963:209–43
.
[77] Noll AM, Schroeder MR. Short-time ‘‘Cepstrum pitch detection. J Acoust Soc
Am 1964;36(5). 1030–1030 .
[78] Noll AM. Short-time spectrum and ‘‘cepstrum techniques for vocal-pitch
detection. J Acoust Soc Am 1964;36(2):296–302 .
[79] Moir TJ, Barrett JF. A kepstrum approach to ﬁltering, smoothing and
prediction with application to speech enhancement. Proc R Soc London SerA 2003;459(2040):2957–76
.
[80] Davis S, Mermelstein P. Comparison of parametric representations for
monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences. IEEE
Trans Acoust Speech Signal Process 1980;28(4):357–66. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TASSP.1980.1163420 .
[81] Sahidullah M, Saha G. Design, analysis and experimental evaluation of block
based transformation in MFCC computation for speaker recognition. Speech
Commun 2012;54(4):543–65 .
[82] Müller M. Information retrieval for music and motion, vol.
2. Heidelberg: Springer; 2007 .
[83] Davis S, Mermelstein P. Comparison of parametric representations for
monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences. IEEE
Trans Acoust Speech Signal Process 1980;28(4):357–66 .
[84] Krueger A, Haeb-Umbach R. Model-based feature enhancement for
reverberant speech recognition. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Process
2010;18(7):1692–707 .
[85] Hu N, Dannenberg RB, Tzanetakis G. Polyphonic audio matching andalignment for music retrieval. In: 2003 IEEE workshop on applications of
signal processing to audio and acoustics (IEEE Cat. No. 03TH8684). IEEE;
2003. p. 185–8
.
[86] Bernard A, Alwan A. Source and channel coding for remote speech recognition
over error-prone channels. 2001 IEEE international conference on acoustics,speech, and signal processing. Proceedings (Cat. No. 01CH37221), vol. 4. IEEE;
2001. p. 2613–6
.
[87] Kinjo T, Funaki K. On hmm speech recognition based on complex speech
analysis. In: IECON 2006–32nd annual conference on IEEE industrial
electronics. IEEE; 2006. p. 3477–80 .
[88] Chen J, Huang Y, Li Q, Paliwal KK. Recognition of noisy speech using dynamic
spectral subband centroids. IEEE Signal Process Lett 2004;11(2):258–61 .
[89] Maddage NC, Xu C, Wang Y. A SVM C based classiﬁcation approach to musical
audio; 2003. .
[90] Hermansky H. Perceptual linear predictive (PLP) analysis of speech. J Acoust
Soc Am 1990;87(4):1738–52 .
[91] Glodek M, Tschechne S, Layher G, Schels M, Brosch T, Scherer S, Schwenker F.Multiple classiﬁer systems for the classiﬁcation of audio-visual emotional
states. In: Affective computing and intelligent interaction. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer; 2011. p. 359–68
.
[92] Dave N. Feature extraction methods LPC, PLP and MFCC in speech recognition.
Int J Adv Res Eng Technol 2013;1(6):1–4 .
[93] Protopapas A, Eimas PD. Perceptual differences in infant cries revealed by
modiﬁcations of acoustic features. J Acoust Soc Am 1997;102(6):3723–34 .
[94] Clemins PJ, Johnson MT. Generalized perceptual linear prediction features for
animal vocalization analysis. J Acoust Soc Am 2006;120(1):527–34 .
[95] Koehler J, Morgan N, Hermansky H, Hirsch HG, Tong G. Integrating RASTA-PLP
into speech recognition. Proceedings of ICASSP’94. IEEE international
conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing, vol. 1. IEEE; 1994. p.I–421
.
[96] Zeng YM, Wu ZY, Falk T, Chan WY. Robust GMM based gender classiﬁcation
using pitch and RASTA-PLP parameters of speech. In: 2006 international
conference on machine learning and cybernetics. IEEE; 2006. p. 3376–9 .
[97] Hardt D, Fellbaum K. Spectral subtraction and RASTA-ﬁltering in text-
dependent HMM-based speaker veriﬁcation. 1997 IEEE international
conference on acoustics, speech, and signal processing. IEEE; 1997. p. 867–70 .
[98] Greenwood DD. A cochlear frequency-position function for several species-29
years later. J Acoust Soc Am 1990;87(6):2592–605 .
[99] Valero X, Alias F. Gammatone cepstral coefﬁcients: biologically inspired
features for non-speech audio classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans Multimedia 2012;14
(6):1684–9 .
[100] Valero X, Alias F. Gammatone cepstral coefﬁcients: biologically inspired
features for non-speech audio classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans Multimedia 2012;14
(6):1684–9 .
[101] Yin H, Hohmann V, Nadeu C. Acoustic features for speech recognition based
on Gammatone ﬁlterbank and instantaneous frequency. Speech Commun2011;53(5):707–15
.
[102] Hegde RM, Murthy HA, Gadde VRR. Signiﬁcance of the modiﬁed group delay
feature in speech recognition. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang Process 2007;15
(1):190–202. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASL.2006.876858 .20 G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020

==== Page 21 ====
[103] Liu Y, Tian Y, He L, Liu J, Johnson MT. Simultaneous utilization of spectral
magnitude and phase information to extract supervectors for speaker
veriﬁcation anti-spooﬁng. In: Sixteenth annual conference of the
international speech communication association .
[104] Sahidullah M, Kinnunen T, Hanilçi C. A comparison of features for synthetic
speech detection; 2015. .
[105] Wu Z, Chng ES, Li H. Detecting converted speech and natural speech for anti-
spooﬁng attack in speaker recognition. In: Thirteenth annual conference of
the international speech communication association .
[106] Das KA, George KK, Kumar CS, Veni S, Panda A. Modiﬁed gammatone
frequency cepstral coefﬁcients to improve spooﬁng detection. Paperpresented at the 50-55; 2016. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICACCI.2016.7732024 ..
[107]
Wu Z, Chng ES, Li H. Detecting converted speech and natural speech for anti-
spooﬁng attack in speaker recognition. In: Thirteenth annual conference of
the international speech communication association .
[108] Sreenivas TV, Kleijn WB. Compressive sensing for sparsely excited speech
signals. In: 2009 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and
signal processing. IEEE; 2009. p. 4125–8 .
[109] Grais EM, Erdogan H. Single channel speech-music separation using
matching pursuit and spectral masks. In: 2011 IEEE 19th signal
processing and communications applications conference (SIU). IEEE; 2011.
p. 323–6 .
[110] Henaff M, Jarrett K, Kavukcuoglu K, LeCun Y. Unsupervised learning of sparsefeatures for scalable audio classiﬁcation. In: ISMIR, vol. 11. p. 445
.
[111] Gu J, Lu L, Cai R, Zhang HJ, Yang J. Dominant feature vectors based audio
similarity measure. In: Paciﬁc-Rim conference on multimedia. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer; 2004. p. 890–7 .
[112] Abidin S, Togneri R, Sohel F. Spectrotemporal analysis using local binary
pattern variants for acoustic scene classiﬁcation. IEEE/ACM Trans Audio
Speech Lang Process 2018;26(11):2112–21. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TASLP.2018.2854861 .
[113] Yang W, Krishnan S. Combining temporal features by local binary pattern for
acoustic scene classiﬁcation. IEEE/ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process
2017;25(6):1315–21. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASLP.2017.2690558 .
[114] He L, Cao C. Automated depression analysis using convolutional neural
networks from speech. J Biomed Inf 2018;83:103–11. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jbi.2018.05.007 .
[115] Demir F, Sengur A, Cummins N, Amiriparian S, Schuller B. Low level texture
features for snore sound discrimination. In: Conference proceedings: annual
international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and biologysociety. IEEE engineering in medicine and biology society. Annual conference.
p. 413
.
[116] Rakotomamonjy A, Gasso G. Histogram of gradients of time-frequency
representations for audio scene classiﬁcation. IEEE/ACM Trans Audio
Speech Lang Process 2015;23(1):142–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TASLP.2014.2375575 .
[117] Sun B, Li L, Zuo T, Chen Y, Zhou G, Wu X. Combining multimodal features withhierarchical classiﬁer fusion for emotion recognition in the wild. In:
Proceedings of the 16th international conference on multimodal
interaction. ACM; 2014. p. 481–6
.
[118] Jiang W, Cotton C, Chang SF, Ellis D, Loui A. Short-term audio-visual atoms for
generic video concept classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACMinternational conference on multimedia. ACM; 2009. p. 5–14
.
[119] Preis D, Georgopoulos VC. Wigner distribution representation and analysis of
audio signals: an illustrated tutorial review. J Audio Eng Soc 1999;47
(12):1043–53 .
[120] Baydar N, Ball A. A comparative study of acoustic and vibration signals in
detection of gear failures using Wigner-Ville distribution. Mech Syst Signal
Process 2001;15(6):1091–107 .
[121] Boles P, Boashash B. Application of the cross-Wigner-Ville distribution to
seismic data processing. Longman Cheshire; 1992 .
[122] Tzanetakis G, Essl G, Cook P. Audio analysis using the discrete wavelet
transform. Proc. conf. in acoustics and music theory applications, vol. 66 .
[123] Lambrou T, Kudumakis P, Speller R, Sandler M, Linney A. Classiﬁcation ofaudio signals using statistical features on time and wavelet transform
domains. Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE international conference on acoustics,
speech and signal processing, ICASSP’98 (Cat. No. 98CH36181), vol. 6. IEEE;
1998. p. 3621–4
.
[124] Baluja S, Covell M. Waveprint: efﬁcient wavelet-based audio ﬁngerprinting.
Pattern Recogn 2008;41(11):3467–80 .
[125] Li G, Khokhar AA. Content-based indexing and retrieval of audio data usingwavelets. 2000 IEEE international conference on multimedia and expo.
ICME2000. Proceedings. Latest advances in the fast changing world of
multimedia (Cat. No. 00TH8532), vol. 2. IEEE; 2000. p. 885–8
.
[126] Liu Y, Xiang Q, Wang Y, Cai L. Cultural style based music classiﬁcation of
audio signals. In: 2009 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech andsignal processing. IEEE; 2009. p. 57–60
.[127] Li Y, Zhang X, Jin H, Li X, Wang Q, He Q, Huang Q. Using multi-stream
hierarchical deep neural network to extract deep audio feature for acoustic
event detection. Multimedia Tools Appl 2018;77(1):897–916. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11042-016-4332-z .
[128] Li Y, Li X, Zhang Y, Wang W, Liu M, Feng X. Acoustic scene classiﬁcation using
deep audio feature and BLSTM network. Paper presented at the 371-374;2018. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALIP.2018.8455765 ..
[129] Takahashi N, Gygli M, Van Gool L. AENet: learning deep audio features for
video analysis; 2017. .
[130] Rahmani MH, Almasganj F, Seyyedsalehi SA. Audio-visual feature fusion via
deep neural networks for automatic speech recognition. Digital SignalProcess 2018;82:54–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsp.2018.06.004
.
[131] Badshah AM, Rahim N, Ullah N, Ahmad J, Muhammad K, Lee MY, Kwon S, Baik
SW. Deep features-based speech emotion recognition for smart affective
services. Multimedia Tools Appl 2019;78(5):5571–89. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11042-017-5292-7 .
[132] Qian Y, Chen N, Yu K. Deep features for automatic spooﬁng detection. Speech
Commun 2016;85:43–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2016.10.007 .
[133] Qian K, Schmitt M, Janott C, Zhang Z, Heiser C, Hohenhorst W, Herzog M,
Hemmert W, Schuller B. A bag of wavelet features for snore sound
classiﬁcation. Ann Biomed Eng 2019;47(4):1000–11. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10439-019-02217-0 .
[134] Noor S, Dhrubo EA, Minhaz AT, Shahnaz C, Fattah SA. Audio visual emotion
recognition using cross correlation and wavelet packet domain features.
Paper presented at the 233-236; 2017. https://doi.org/10.1109/WIECON-ECE.
2017.8468871 ..
[135] Ghoraani B, Krishnan S. Time-frequency matrix feature extraction and
classiﬁcation of environmental audio signals. IEEE Trans Audio Speech LangProcess 2011;19(7):2197–209. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASL.2011.2118753
.
[136] Umapathy K, Krishnan S, Rao RK. Audio signal feature extraction and
classiﬁcation using local discriminant bases. IEEE Trans Audio Speech Lang
Process 2007;15(4):1236–46. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASL.2006.885921 .
[137] Umapathy K, Krishnan S, Jimaa S. Multigroup classiﬁcation of audio signals
using time-frequency parameters. IEEE Trans Multimedia 2005;7(2):308–15.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2005.843363 .
[138] Cohen L, Posch T. Positive time-frequency distribution functions. IEEE Trans
Acoust Speech Signal Process 1985;33(1):31–8 .
[139] Umapathy K, Ghoraani B, Krishnan S. Audio signal processing using time-
frequency approaches: coding, classiﬁcation, ﬁngerprinting, and watermarking.
EURASIP J Adv Signal Process 2010;2010(1):1–28. https://doi.org/10.1155/
2010/451695 .
[140] Tuncer T, Dogan S. Novel dynamic center based binary and ternary pattern
network using M4 pooling for real world voice recognition. Appl Acoust
2019;156:176–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.06.029 .
[141] Adnan SM, Irtaza A, Aziz S, Ullah MO, Javed A, Mahmood MT. Fall detection
through acoustic local ternary patterns. Appl Acoust 2018;140:296–300.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2018.06.013 .
[142] Hossain MS. Patient state recognition system for healthcare using speech and
facial expressions. J Med Syst 2016;40(12):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10916-016-0627-x .
[143] Tuncer T, Dogan S, Ertam F. Automatic voice based disease detection method
using one dimensional local binary pattern feature extraction network. ApplAcoust 2019;155:500–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.05.023
.
[144] Tuncer T, Dogan S. A novel octopus based Parkinson’s disease and gender
recognition method using vowels. Appl Acoust 2019;155:75–83. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.05.019 .
[145] Korkmaz Y, Boyací A, Tuncer T. Turkish vowel classiﬁcation based on acoustical
and decompositional features optimized by genetic algorithm. Appl Acoust
2019;154:28–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.04.027 .
[146] Ertam F. An effective gender recognition approach using voice data via
deeper LSTM networks. Appl Acoust 2019;156:351–8. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apacoust.2019.07.033 .
[147] Glowacz A. Fault detection of electric impact drills and coffee grinders using
acoustic signals. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 2019;19(2):269. https://doi.
org/10.3390/s19020269 .
[148] Lu S, Wang X, Liu F, He Q, Liu Y, Zhao J. Fault diagnosis of motor bearing by
analyzing a video clip. Math Probl Eng 2016;2016:1–11. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2016/8139273 .
[149] Glowacz A. Fault diagnosis of single-phase induction motor based on acoustic
signals. Mech Syst Signal Process 2019;117:65–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ymssp.2018.07.044 .
[150] Duan Z, Wu T, Guo S, Shao T, Malekian R, Li Z. Development and trend of
condition monitoring and fault diagnosis of multi-sensors information fusion
for rolling bearings: a review. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2018;96(1):803–19.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-017-1474-8 .
[151] Glowacz A. Acoustic-based fault diagnosis of commutator motor. Electronics
2018;7(11):299. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics7110299 .G. Sharma et al. / Applied Acoustics 158 (2020) 107020 21

