==== Page 1 ====
177Trustworthy AI: From Principles to Practices
BOLI,JDTechnology, ChinaandTsinghuaUniversity,China
PENG QI ,Amazon AWS AI Labs,USA
BOLIU,Walmart Inc., USA
SHUAI DI ,JDTechnology, China
JINGEN LIU ,JDTechnology, USA
JIQUAN PEI ,JDTechnology, China
JINFENG YI ,Frontis.AI,China
BOWENZHOU ,TsinghuaUniversity,ChinaandFrontis.AI,China
The rapid development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology has enabled the deployment of various sys-
tems based on it. However, many current AI systems are found vulnerable to imperceptible attacks, biased
againstunderrepresentedgroups,lackinginuserprivacyprotection.Theseshortcomingsdegradeuserexpe-
rience and erode people’s trust in all AI systems. In this review, we provide AI practitioners with a compre-
hensiveguideforbuildingtrustworthyAIsystems.Wefirstintroducethetheoreticalframeworkofimportant
aspectsofAItrustworthiness,includingrobustness,generalization,explainability,transparency,reproducibil-
ity,fairness,privacypreservation,andaccountability.Tounifycurrentlyavailablebutfragmentedapproaches
toward trustworthy AI, we organize them in a systematic approach that considers the entire lifecycle of AI
systems,rangingfromdataacquisitiontomodeldevelopment,tosystemdevelopmentanddeployment,finally
tocontinuousmonitoringandgovernance.Inthisframework,weofferconcreteactionitemsforpractitioners
andsocietalstakeholders(e.g.,researchers,engineers,andregulators)toimproveAItrustworthiness.Finally,
we identify key opportunities and challenges for the future development of trustworthy AI systems, where
we identifytheneed for aparadigm shifttowardcomprehensively trustworthyAI systems.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence ;Machine learning ;•General
and reference→Surveys and overviews;
AdditionalKeyWordsandPhrases:TrustworthyAI,robustness,generalization,explainability,transparency,
reproducibility, fairness,privacy protection, accountability
ACM Reference format:
Bo Li, Peng Qi, Bo Liu, Shuai Di, Jingen Liu, Jiquan Pei, Jinfeng Yi, and Bowen Zhou. 2023. Trustworthy AI:
From Principles toPractices. ACMComput. Surv. 55, 9, Article177 (January 2023), 46 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555803
Authors’ addresses: B. Li, JD Technology, Beijing, China and Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; email: prclibo@
gmail.com; P. Qi, Amazon AWS AI Labs, Seatle, WA, USA; email: qipeng.thu@gmail.com; B. Liu, Walmart Inc., Mountain
View,CA,USA;email:kfliubo@gmail.com;S.Di,JDTechnology,Beijing,China;email:dishuai@jd.com;J.Liu,JDTechnol-
ogy,MountainView,CA,USA;email:jingenliu@gmail.com;J.Pei,JDTechnology,Beijing,China;email:peijiquan@jd.com;
J. Yi, Frontis.AI, Beijing, China; email: jinfengyi.ustc@gmail.com; B. Zhou (corresponding author), Tsinghua University,
Beijing,ChinaandFrontis.AI, Beijing,China;email:zhoubowen@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2023Copyrightheld bytheowner/author(s). Publicationrights licensed toACM.
0360-0300/2023/01-ART177$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3555803
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.


==== Page 2 ====
177:2 B. Li et al.
1 INTRODUCTION
Therapiddevelopmentof ArtificialIntelligence(AI) continuestoprovidesignificanteconomic
andsocialbenefitstosociety.WiththewidespreadapplicationofAIinareassuchastransportation,
finance,medicine,security,andentertainment,thereisrisingsocietalawarenessthatweneedthese
systems to be trustworthy. This is because the breach of stakeholders’ trust can lead to severe so-
cietalconsequencesgiventhepervasivenessoftheseAIsystems.Suchbreachescanrangefrombi-
asedtreatmentbyautomatedsystemsinhiringandloandecisions[ 49,146]tothelossofhumanlife
[52]. By contrast, AI practitioners, including researchers, developers, and decision-makers, have
traditionally considered system performance (i.e., accuracy) to be the main metric in their work-
flows.ThismetricisfarfromsufficienttoreflectthetrustworthinessofAIsystems.Variousaspects
ofAIsystemsbeyondsystemperformanceshouldbeconsideredtoimprovetheirtrustworthiness,
includingbutnotlimitedtotheirrobustness,algorithmicfairness,explainability,andtransparency.
While most active academic research on AI trustworthiness has focused on the algorithmic
propertiesofmodels,advancementsinalgorithmicresearchaloneisinsufficientforbuildingtrust-
worthyAIproducts.Fromanindustrialperspective,thelifecycleofanAIproductconsistsofmul-
tiplestages,includingdatapreparation,algorithmicdesign,development,anddeploymentaswell
as operation, monitoring, and governance. Improving trustworthiness in any single aspect (e.g.,
robustness) involves efforts at multiple stages in this lifecycle, e.g., data sanitization, robust algo-
rithms, anomaly monitoring, and risk auditing. On the contrary, the breach of trust in any single
link or aspect can undermine the trustworthiness of the entire system. Therefore, AI trustworthi-
nessshouldbeestablishedand assessedsystematicallythroughoutthelifecycleof an AI system.
InadditiontotakingaholisticviewofthetrustworthinessofAIsystemsoverallstagesoftheir
lifecycle, it is important to understand the big picture of different aspects of AI trustworthiness.
In addition to pursuing AI trustworthiness by establishing requirements for each specific aspect,
we call attention to the combination of and interaction between these aspects, which are impor-
tant and underexplored topics for trustworthy real-world AI systems. For instance, the need for
data privacy might interfere with the desire to explain the system output in detail, and the pur-
suit of algorithmic fairness may be detrimental to the accuracy and robustness experienced by
some groups [ 284,361]. As a result, trivially combining systems to separately improve each as-
pect of trustworthiness does not guarantee a more trustworthy and effective end result. Instead,
elaborated joint optimization and tradeoffs between multiple aspects of trustworthiness are nec-
essary[47,158,331,361,380].
These facts suggest that a systematic approach is necessary to shift the current AI paradigm
toward trustworthiness. This requires awareness and cooperation from multi-disciplinary stake-
holders who work on different aspects of trustworthiness and different stages of the system’s
lifecycle. We have recently witnessed important developments in multi-disciplinary research on
trustworthy AI. From the perspective of technology, trustworthy AI has promoted the develop-
ment of adversarial learning, private learning, and the fairness and explainability of machine
learning (ML) . Some recent studies have organized these developments from the perspective of
eitherresearch[ 182,218,357]orengineering[ 57,62,199,338,353].Developmentsinnon-technical
areashavealsobeenreviewedinafewstudies,andinvolveguidelines[ 145,178,294],standardiza-
tion[210],andmanagementprocesses[ 31,274,301].Wehaveconductedadetailedanalysisofthe
variousreviews,includingalgorithmicresearch,engineeringpractices,andinstitutionalization,in
SectionA.2in the appendix. These fragmented reviews have mostly focused on specific views
of trustworthy AI. To synchronize these diverse developments in a systematic view, we organize
multi-disciplinaryknowledgeinanaccessiblemannerforAIpractitioners,andprovideactionable
andsystematicguidanceinthecontextofthelifecycleofanindustrialsystemtobuildtrustworthy
AI systems.Our main contributionsareasfollows:
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 3 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:3
•We dissect the entire lifecycle of the development and deployment of AI systems in indus-
trialapplications,anddiscusshowAItrustworthinesscanbeenhancedateachstage—from
data to AI models and from system deployment to its operation. We propose a systematic
framework to organize the multi-disciplinary and fragmented approaches toward trustwor-
thy AI and propose pursuing it as a continuous workflow to incorporate feedback at each
stage of thelifecycle of theAI system.
•We dissect the entire development and deployment lifecycle of AI systems in industrial ap-
plications and discusshow AI trustworthinesscan be enhancedat each stage—from data to
AI models and from system deployment to its operation. We propose a systematic frame-
worktoorganizethemulti-disciplinaryandfragmentedapproachestowardtrustworthyAI
and further propose to pursue AI trustworthiness as a continuous workflow to incorporate
feedback at each stage of the AI system lifecycle. We also analyze the relationship between
differentaspectsoftrustworthinessinpractice(mutualenhancementand,sometimes,trade-
offs).TheaimistoprovidestakeholdersofAIsystems,suchasresearchers,developers,oper-
ators,andlegalexperts,withanaccessibleandcomprehensiveguidetoquicklyunderstand
theapproachestowardAI trustworthiness(Section 3).
•WediscussoutstandingchallengesfacingtrustworthyAIonwhichtheresearchcommunity
and industrial practitioners should focus in the near future. We identify several key issues,
includingtheneedforadeeperandfundamentalunderstandingofseveralaspectsofAItrust-
worthiness(e.g.,robustness,fairness,andexplainability),theimportanceofuserawareness,
and thepromotionof inter-disciplinaryand internationalcollaboration(Section 4).
With these contributions, we aim to provide the practitioners and stakeholders of AI systems
not only with a comprehensive introduction to the foundations and future of AI trustworthiness
butalso withanoperationalguidebookforhow toconstructAI systemsthataretrustworthy.
2 AI TRUSTWORTHINESS: BEYOND PREDICTIVE ACCURACY
The success of ML technology in the past few decades has largely benefited from the accuracy-
basedperformancemeasurements.Byassessingtaskperformancebasedonquantitativeaccuracy
or loss, training AI models becomes tractable in the sense of optimization. Meanwhile, predictive
accuracyiswidelyadoptedtoindicatethesuperiorityofanAIproductoverothers.However,with
therecentwidespreadapplicationsofAI,thelimitationofanaccuracy-onlymeasurementhasbeen
exposedtoanumberofnewchallenges,rangingfrommaliciousattacksagainstAIsystemstomis-
usesofAIthatviolatehumanvalues.Tosolvetheseproblems,theAIcommunityhasrealizedinthe
lastdecadethatfactorsbeyondaccuracyshouldbeconsideredandimprovedwhenbuildinganAI
system.Anumberofenterprises[ 57,62,136,166,254,338],academia[ 122,199,218,301,322],pub-
lic sectors, and organizations [ 9,210,334] have recently identified these factors and summarized
themasprinciplesofAItrustworthiness.Theyincluderobustness,security,transparency,fairness,
and safety [ 178]. Comprehensive statistics relating to and comparisons between these principles
havebeenprovidedinReferences[ 145,178].Inthisarticle,westudytherepresentativeprinciples
that have recently garnered wide interest and are closely related to practical applications. These
principlescan becategorizedas follows:
•We consider representative requirements that pertain to technical challenges faced by cur-
rentAIsystems.Wereviewaspectsthathavesparkedwideinterestinrecenttechnicalstud-
ies,includingrobustness,explainability,transparency,1reproducibility,andgeneralization.
•We consider ethical requirements with broad concerns in recent literature [ 9,57,121,145,
178,199,218,301,334],includingfairness,privacy,and accountability.
1We followReference[ 333] toexcludetransparency asanethicalrequirement.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 4 ====
177:4 B. Li et al.
Fig. 1. The relation between different aspects of AI trustworthiness discussed in this survey. Note that im-
plicit interactionwidely exists between aspects,andwe cover onlyrepresentativeexplicit interactions.
In this section, we illustrate the motivation for and definition of each requirement. We also sur-
vey approaches to the evaluation of each requirement. It should also be noted that the selected
requirementsarenotorthogonal,andsomeofthemarecloselycorrelated.Weexplaintherelation-
ships with the corresponding requirements in this section. We also use Figure 1to visualize the
relationshipsbetweenaspects,includingtradeoffs,contributions,andmanifestation.
2.1 Robustness
Ingeneral,robustnessreferstotheabilityofanalgorithmorsystemtodealwithexecutionerrors,
erroneous inputs, or unseen data. Robustness is an important factor affecting the performance
of AI systems in empirical environments. The lack of robustness might also cause unintended or
harmful behavior by the system, thus diminishing its safety and trustworthiness. In the context
of ML systems, the term robustness is applicable to a diversity of situations. In this review, we
non-exhaustivelysummarizetherobustnessofanAIsystembycategorizingvulnerabilitiesatthe
levels of data,algorithms,andsystems,respectively.
Data.With the widespread application of AI systems, the environment in which an AI
model is deployed becomes more complicated and diverse. If an AI model is trained without
considering the diverse distributions of data in different scenarios, then its performance might
be significantly affected. Robustness against distributional shifts has been a common problem
in various applications of AI [ 19]. In high-stake applications, this problem is even more critical
owingtoitsnegativeeffectonsafetyandsecurity.Forexample,inthefieldofautonomousdriving,
besides developing a perceptual system working in sunny scenes, academia and the industry are
usingnumerousdevelopmentandtestingstrategiestoenhancetheperceptualperformanceofthe
vehiclesinnighttime/rainyscenestoguaranteethesystem’sreliabilityunderavarietyofweather
conditions[ 318,382].
Algorithms. It is widely recognized that AI models might be vulnerable to attacks by adver-
sarieswithmaliciousintentions.Amongthevariousformsofattacks,theadversarialattackandde-
fensesagainstithaveraisedconcernsinbothacademiaandtheindustryinrecentyears.Literature
has categorized the threat of adversarial attacks in several typical aspects and proposed various
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 5 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:5
defenseapproaches[ 12,69,213,304,373].Forexample,inReference[ 340],adversarialattackswere
categorized with respect to the attack timing. Decision-time attack perturbs input samples to mis-
leadthepredictionofagivenmodelsothatadversarycouldevadesecuritychecksorimpersonate
victims.Training-timeattack injectscarefullydesignedsamplesintothetrainingdatatochangethe
system’sresponsetospecificpatternsandisalsoknownas poisoningattack .Consideringtheprac-
ticalityofattacks,itisalsousefultonotethedifferencesofattacksintermsofthespacesinwhich
theyarecarriedout.Conventionalstudieshavemainlyfocusedon featurespaceattacks ,whichare
generateddirectlyastheinputfeaturesofamodel.Inmanypracticalscenarios,theadversariescan
modifyonlytheinputentitytoindirectlyproduceattack-relatedfeatures.Forexample,itiseasyfor
someonetowearadversarialpatternglassestoevadeafaceverificationsystembutdifficulttomod-
ifytheimagedatainmemory.Studiesonproducingrealizableentity-basedattacks( problemspace
attacks)haverecentlygarneredincreasinginterest[ 325,358].Algorithm-levelthreatsmightexist
invariousforms,inadditiontodirectlymisleadingAImodels. Modelstealing (a.k.a.the exploratory
attack)attemptstostealknowledgeaboutmodels.Althoughitdoesnotdirectlychangemodelbe-
havior,thestolen knowledgehassignificantvalue for generatingadversarialsamples [ 329].
Systems. System-level robustness against illegal inputs should also be carefully considered in
realistic AI products. The cases of illegal inputs can be extremely diverse in practical situations.
For example, an image with a very high resolution might cause an imperfect image recognition
systemtohang.Alidarperceptionsystemforanautonomousvehiclemightperceivelaserbeams
emitted by lidars in other vehicles and produce corrupted inputs. The presentation attack [275]
(a.k.a.spoof attack ) is another example that has generated wide concerns in recent years. It fakes
inputsby,forexample, photosormasks tofoolbiometricsystems.
Various approaches have been explored to prevent vulnerabilities in AI systems. The objective
of defense can be either proactive or reactive [ 227]. A proactive defense attempts to optimize the
AIsystemtobemorerobusttovariousinputswhileareactivedefenseaimsatdetectingpotential
securityissues,suchaschangingdistributionsoradversarialsamples.Representativeapproaches
to improve therobustnessofan AI systemareintroducedinSection 3.
Evaluation. EvaluatingtherobustnessofanAIsystemservesasanimportantmeansofavoiding
vulnerabilitiesandcontrollingrisks.Webrieflydescribetwogroupsofevaluations:robustnesstest
and mathematicalverification.
Robustness test. Testing has served as an essential approach to evaluate and enhance the
robustness not only of conventional software but also of AI systems. Conventional functional
test methodologies, such as the monkey test [115], provide effective approaches to evaluating the
system-levelrobustness.Moreover,aswillbeintroducedinSection 3.3.1,softwaretestingmethod-
ologies haverecentlybeenextended toevaluate robustnessagainst adversarialattacks[ 226,260].
In comparison with functional test, performance test, i.e., benchmarking, are more widely
adopted approach in the area of ML to evaluate system performance along various dimensions.
TestdatasetswithvariousdistributionsareusedtoevaluatetherobustnessofdatainMLresearch.
Inthecontextofadversarialattacks,theminimaladversarialperturbationisacoremetricofrobust-
ness,anditsempiricalupperbound,a.k.a.empiricalrobustness,onatestdatasethasbeenwidely
used [65,312]. From the attacker’s perspective, the rate of success of an attack also intuitively
measurestherobustnessofthesystem[ 312].
Mathematicalverification. Inheritedfromthetheoryofformalmethod,certifiedverification
oftheadversarialrobustnessofanAImodelhasledtogrowinginterest.Forexample,adversarial
robustness can be reflected by deriving a non-trivial and certified lower bound of the minimum
distortiontoan attackonan AI model[ 51,379].We introducethisdirectionin Section 3.2.1.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 6 ====
177:6 B. Li et al.
2.2 Generalization
GeneralizationhaslongbeenasourceofconcerninMLmodels.Itrepresentsthecapabilitytodistill
knowledge from limited training data to make accurate predictions regarding unseen data [ 133].
Although generalization is not a frequently mentioned direction in the context of trustworthy
AI, we find that its impact on AI trustworthiness should not be neglected and deserves specific
discussion.Ontheonehand,generalizationrequiresthatAIsystemsmakepredictionsonrealistic
data, even on domains or distributions on which they are not trained [ 133]. This significantly
affectsthereliabilityandriskofpracticalsystems.Ontheotherhand,AImodelsshouldbeableto
generalizewithouttheneedtoexhaustivelycollectandannotatelargeamountsofdataforvarious
domains [ 343,391], so that the deployment of AI systems in a wide range of applications is more
affordableand sustainable.
InthefieldofML,thecanonicalresearchongeneralizationtheoryhasfocusedontheprediction
of unseen data, which typically share the same distribution as the training data [ 133]. Although
AI models can achieve a reasonable accuracy on training datasets, it is known that a gap (a.k.a
generalization gap) exists between their training and testing accuracies. Approaches in different
areas, ranging from statistic learning to deep learning, have been studied to analyze this problem
andenhancethemodelgeneralization.Typicalrepresentativeslikecross-validation,regularization,
anddata augmentationcan befound inmany MLtextbooks[ 133].
Thecreationofamoderndata-drivenAImodelrequiresalargeamountofdataandannotations
in the training stage. This leads to a high cost for manufacturers and users for re-collecting and
re-annotating data to train the model for each task. The cost highlights the need to generalize
the knowledge of a model to different tasks, which not only reduces data cost but also improves
model performance in many cases. Various directions of research have been explored to address
knowledge generalization under different scenarios and configurations within the paradigm of
transferlearning[ 255,350].We review therepresentativeapproachesinSection 3.2.2.
TheinclusiveconceptofgeneralizationiscloselyrelatedtootheraspectsofAItrustworthiness,
especiallyrobustness.InthecontextofML,therobustnessagainstdistributionalshifts(Section 2.1)
is also considered a problem of generalization. This implies that the requirements of robustness
and generalization have some overlapping aspects. The relationship between adversarial robust-
ness and generalization is more complicated. As demonstrated in Reference [ 362], an algorithm
that is robust against small perturbations has better generalization. Recent research [ 271,331],
however, has noted that improving robustness by adversarial training may reduce the testing ac-
curacyandleadstoworsegeneralization.Toexplainthisphenomenon,Reference[ 116]hasargued
thattheadversarialrobustnesscorrespondstodifferentdatadistributionsthatmayhurtamodel’s
generalization.
Evaluation. Benchmarkingontestdatasetswithvariousdistributionsisawidelyusedapproach
toevaluatethegeneralizationofanAImodelinrealisticscenarios.Asummaryofcommonlyused
datasets and benchmarks for domain generalization can be found in Reference [ 391] and covers
thetasksof objectrecognition,actionrecognition,segmentation,andface recognition.
In terms of theoretical evaluation, past ML studies have developed rich approaches to measure
the bounds of a model’s generalization error. For example, Rademacher complexity [ 35]i sc o m -
monlyusedtodeterminehowwellamodelcanfitarandomassignmentofclasslabels.Inaddition,
theVapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension [ 337] is a measure of the capacity/complexity of a
learnablefunctionset.A largernumber ofVC dimensions indicatesahighercapacity.
Advances in the DNN has led to new developments in the theory of generalization. Reference
[377] observed that modern deep learning models can achieve a generalization gap despite their
massive capacity. This phenomenon has led to academic discussions on the generalization of the
Deep Neural Network (DNN) [23,39]. For example, Reference [ 39] examined generalization
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 7 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:7
from the perspective of the bias–variance tradeoff to explain and evaluate the generalization of
theDNN.
2.3 Explainability and Transparency
TheopaquenessofcomplexAIsystemshasledtowidespreadconcernsinacademia,theindustry,
and society at large. The problem of how DNNs outperform other conventional ML approaches
has been puzzling researchers [ 24]. From the perspective of practical systems, there is a demand
among users for the right to know the intention, business model, and technological mechanism
of AI products [ 9,135]. A variety of studies have addressed these problems in terms of nomencla-
ture including interpretability, explainability, and transparency [ 5,24,47,141,216,250]a n dh a v e
delvedintodifferentdefinitions.Tomakeourdiscussionmoreconciseandtargeted,wenarrowthe
coverageofexplainabilityandtransparencytoaddresstheaboveconcernsintheoreticalresearch
and practicalsystems,respectively.
•Explainability addressestounderstandhowan AI modelmakesdecision[ 24].
•Transparency considersAIasasoftwaresystem,andseekstodiscloseinformationregard-
ing itsentirelifecycle(cf.,“operatetransparently”in Reference[ 9]).
2.3.1 Explainability. Explainability, i.e., understanding how an AI model makes its decision,
stays at the core place of modern AI research and serves as a fundamental factor that determines
thetrustinAItechnology.ThemotivationfortheexplainabilityofAIcomesfromvariousaspects
[24,25]. From the perspective of scientific research, it is meaningful to understand all intrinsic
mechanismsofthedata,parameters,procedures,andoutcomesinanAIsystem.Themechanisms
also fundamentally determine AI trustworthiness. From the perspective of building AI products,
there exist various practical requirements on explainability. For operators like bank executives,
explainability helps understand the AI credit system to prevent potential defects in it [ 25,184].
Users like loan applicants are interested to know why they are rejected by the model, and what
theycandotoqualify[ 25].SeeReference[ 25]foradetailedanalysisofthevariousmotivationsof
explainability.
ExplainingMLmodelshasbeenanactivetopicnotonlyinMLresearchbutalsoinpsychological
researchinthepastfiveyears[ 5,24,47,141,216,250].Althoughthedefinitionoftheexplainability
of an AI model is still an open question, research has sought to address this problem from the
perspectives of AI [ 141,285] and psychology [ 144,245]. In summary, the relevant studies divide
explainability intotwo levels toexplain it.
•Modelexplainabilitybydesign. AseriesoffullyorpartiallyexplainableMLmodelshave
been designed in the past half-century of ML research. Representatives include linear re-
gression, trees, the k-nearest neighbors (KNN) , rule-based learners, generalized additive
model, and Bayesian models [ 24]. The design of explainable models remains an active area
in ML.
•Posthocmodelexplainability. Despitethegoodexplainabilityoftheaboveconventional
models, more complex models such as the DNN or Gradient Boosting Decision Tree
(GDBT)haveexhibitedbetterperformanceinrecentindustrialAIsystems.Becausetherel-
evant approaches still cannot holistically explain these complex models, researchers have
turnedtoposthocexplanation.Itaddressesamodel’sbehaviorbyanalyzingitsinput,inter-
mediateresult,andoutput.Arepresentativecategoryinthisveinapproximatesthedecision
surface either globally or locally by using an explainable ML model, i.e., explainer, such as
a linear model [ 225,279] and rules [ 140,280]. For deep learning models like the Convolu-
tionalNeuralNetwork(CNN) orthetransformer,theinspectionofintermediatefeatures
is awidely usedmeans of explainingmodel behavior[ 332,366].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 8 ====
177:8 B. Li et al.
Approaches to explainability are an active area of work in ML and have been comprehensively
surveyed in a variety of studies [ 24,47,141,250]. Representative algorithms to achieve the above
twolevels of explainability arereviewed inSection 3.2.3.
Evaluation. InadditiontotheproblemofexplainingAImodels,aunifiedevaluationofexplain-
ability has been recognized as a challenge. A major reason for this lies in the ambiguity of the
psychological outlining of explainability. To sidestep this problem, a variety of studies have used
qualitativemetricstoevaluateexplainabilitywithhumanparticipation.Representativeapproaches
includethefollowing:
•Subjective human evaluation. The methods of evaluation in this context include inter-
views,self-reports,questionnaires,andcasestudiesthatmeasure,e.g.,usersatisfaction,men-
talmodels, andtrust[ 144,155,267].
•Human–AItaskperformance. Intasksperformedwithhuman–AIcollaboration,thecol-
laborativeperformanceissignificantlyaffectedbythehumanunderstandingoftheAIcollab-
oratorandcanbeviewedasareflectionofthequalityofexplanation[ 249].Thisevaluation
hasbeenusedforthedevelopmentof,forinstance,recommendationsystems[ 198]anddata
analysis[ 132].
In addition, if explainability can be achieved by an explainer, then the performance of the latter,
suchasintermsoftheprecisionofapproximation( fidelity[140,279,280]),canbeusedtoindirectly
andquantitativelyevaluate explainability[ 16].
Despite the above evaluations, a direct quantitative measurement of explainability remains a
problem. Some naive measurements of model complexity, like tree depth [ 46] and the size of the
ruleset[202],havebeenstudiedassurrogateexplainabilitymetricsinpreviouswork.Webelieve
thataunifiedquantitativemetricliesattheveryheartoffundamentalAIresearch.Recentresearch
onthecomplexityofMLmodels[ 162]andtheircognitivefunctionalcomplexity[ 347]mayinspire
futureresearchona unifiedquantitativeevaluationmetric.
2.3.2 Transparency. Transparency requires the disclosure of the information on a system, and
haslongbeenarecognizedrequirementinsoftwareengineering[ 89,207].IntheAIindustry,this
requirement naturally covers the lifecycle of an AI system and helps stakeholders confirm that
appropriate design principles are reflected in it. Consider a biometric system for identification as
anexample.Usersaregenerallyconcernedwiththepurposeforwhichtheirbiometricinformation
iscollectedandhowitisused.Businessoperatorsareconcernedwiththeaccuracyandrobustness
against attacks so that they can control risks. Government sectors are concerned with whether
the AI system follows guidelines and regulations. On the whole, transparency serves as a basic
requirementto buildthepublic’strustin AI systems[ 22,178,189].
To render the lifecycle of an AI system transparent, a variety of information regarding its cre-
ation needs to be disclosed, including the design purposes, data sources, hardware requirements,
configurations, working conditions, expected usage, and system performance. A series of studies
have examined disclosing this information through appropriate documentation [ 22,129,156,246,
265].ThisisdiscussedinSection 3.5.1.Therecenttrend ofopensourcesystemsalsosignificantly
contributesto thealgorithmictransparencyof AI systems.
Owing to the complex and dynamic internal procedure of an AI system, facts regarding its
creation are not sufficient to fully reveal its mechanism. Hence, the transparency of the runtime
processanddecision-makingshouldalsobeconsideredinvariousscenarios.ForaninteractiveAI
system,anappropriatelydesigneduserinterfaceservesasanimportantmeanstodisclosetheun-
derlyingdecisionprocedure[ 10].Inmanysafety-criticalsystems,suchasautonomousdrivingve-
hicles,loggingsystems[ 29,261,369]arewidelyadoptedtotraceandanalyzethesystemexecution.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 9 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:9
Evaluation. Although a unified quantitative evaluation is not yet available, the qualitative eval-
uation of transparency has undergone recent advances in the AI industry. Assessment check-
lists[10,292]havebeenregardedasaneffectivemeanstoevaluateandenhancethetransparency
of a system. In the context of the psychology of users or the public, user studies or A/B test can
provide ausefulevaluationbasedonusersatisfaction[ 249].
Quality evaluations of AI documentation have also been explored in recent years. Some stud-
ies [22,129,156,246,273] have proposed standard practices to guide and evaluate the documen-
tation of an AI system. Reference [ 265] summarized the general qualitative dimensions for more
specifiedevaluations.
2.4 Reproducibility
Modern AI research involves both mathematical derivation and computational experiments. The
reproducibilityofthesecomputationalproceduresservesasanessentialsteptoverifyAIresearch.
In terms of AI trustworthiness, this verification facilitates the detection, analysis, and mitigation
of potential risks in an AI system, such as a vulnerability on specific inputs or unintended bias.
WiththegradualestablishmentoftheopencooperativeecosystemintheAIresearchcommunity,
reproducibilityisemergingasaconcernamongresearchersanddevelopers.Inadditiontoenabling
theeffectiveverificationofresearch,reproducibilityallowsthecommunitytoquicklyconvertthe
latestapproachesinto practiceorconductfollow-up research.
There has been a new trend in the AI research community to regard reproducibility as a re-
quirement when publicizing research [ 142]. We have seen major conferences, such as Neural
InformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS) ,InternationalConferenceonMachineLearn-
ing (ICML) ,a n dACM Multimedia (ACMMM) , introduce reproducibility-related policies or
programs [ 263] to encourage the reproducibility of works. To obtain a clear assessment, de-
grees of reproducibility have been studied in such works as the ACM Artifact Review and Ref-
erences [106,143]. For example, in Reference [ 143], the lowest degree of reproducibility requires
theexactreplicationofanexperimentwiththesameimplementationanddata,whileahigherde-
greerequiresusingdifferentimplementationsordata.Beyondthebasicverificationofresearch,a
higherdegreeofreproducibilitypromotesabetterunderstandingoftheresearchbydistinguishing
among thekeyfactorsinfluencingeffectiveness.
Some recently developed large scale pre-trained AI models, such as Generative Pre-trained
Transformer 3 (GPT-3) andBidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT), are representative of the challenges to the reproducibility of AI research. The creation
of these models involves specifically designed data collection strategies, efficient storage of big
data, communication and schedulingbetween distributedclusters,algorithm implementation,ap-
propriatesoftwareandhardwareenvironments,andotherkindsofknowhow.Thereproducibility
ofsuchamodelshouldbeconsideredoveritsentirelifecycle.Inrecentstudiesonthereproducibil-
ity of ML, this requirement has been decomposed into the reproducibility of data, methods, and
experiments[ 142,143,169],wherethelatterrangeoveraseriesoflifecycleartifactssuchascode,
documentation, software, hardware, and deployment configuration. Based on this methodology,
anincreasingnumberofMLplatformsarebeingdevelopedthatassistresearchersanddevelopers
bettertrackthelifecycle in areproduciblemanner [ 169,374].
Evaluation. ReproducibilitychecklistshavebeenrecentlywidelyadoptedinMLconferencesto
assess the reproducibility of submissions [ 263]. Beyond the replication of experiments in publica-
tion, References[ 142,143] also specifiedcheckliststo evaluate reproducibilityat varyingdegrees.
In addition to checklists, mechanisms such as challenges to reproducibility and paper tracks of
reproducibility have been adopted to evaluate the reproducibility of publications [ 118,263]. To
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 10 ====
177:10 B. Li et al.
quantitatively evaluate reproducibility in the context of challenges, a series of quantitative met-
ricshavebeenstudied.Forexample,References[ 53,118]designedmetricstoquantifyhowclosely
aninformation retrievalsystemcanbereproducedto itsorigins.
2.5 Fairness
When AI systems help us in areas such as hiring, financial risk assessment, and face identifi-
cation, systematic unfairness in their decisions might have negative social ramifications (e.g.,
underprivileged groups might experience systematic disadvantage in hiring decisions [ 49], or be
disproportionally impacted in criminal risk profiling [ 104,146,161]). This not only damages the
trust that various stakeholders have in AI but also hampers the development and application of
AI technology for the greater good. Therefore, it is important that practitioners keep in mind the
fairnessof AI systemsto avoid instillingorexacerbatingsocialbias[ 66,105,242].
AcommonobjectiveoffairnessinAIsystemsistomitigatetheeffectsofbiases.Themitigation
is non-trivial, because the biases can take various forms, such as data bias, model bias, and proce-
duralbias,intheprocessofdevelopingandapplyingAIsystems[ 242].Biasoftenmanifestsinthe
form of unfair treatment of different groupsof people based on their protected information (e.g.,
gender, race, and ethnicity). Therefore, group identity (sometimes also called sensitive variables )
and system response (prediction) are two factors influencing bias. Some cases also involve objec-
tiveground truths of a given task that one should consider when evaluating system fairness, e.g.,
whetheraperson’sspeechiscorrectlyrecognizedor theirface correctlyidentified.
Fairness can be applicable at multiple granularities of system behavior [ 66,242,339]. At each
granularity, we might be concerned with distributive fairness or fairness of the outcome, or proce-
duralfairness orfairnessoftheprocess(wereferthereadertoReference[ 137]foramoredetailed
discussion).In each case, we are commonly concerned with the aggregated behavior and the bias
thereinofanAIsystem,whichisreferredtoas statisticalfairness orgroupfairness .Incertainappli-
cations,itisalsohelpfultoconsider individualfairness orcounterfactualfairness ,especiallywhen
thesensitivevariablecanbemoreeasilydecoupledfromtheotherfeaturesthatshouldjustifiably
determinethesystem’sprediction[ 242].WhiletheformerismorewidelyapplicabletovariousML
tasks,e.g.,speechrecognitionandfaceidentification,thelattercanbecriticalincaseslikeresume
reviewingfor candidatescreening[ 44].
At the group level, researchers have identified three abstract principles to categorize different
types of fairness [ 66]. We illustrate them with a simple example of hiring applicants from a pop-
ulation consisting of 50% male and 50% female applicants, where gender is the sensitive variable
(examplesadaptedfromReferences[ 339,388]):
•Independence. Thisrequiresforthesystemoutcometobestatisticallyindependentofsen-
sitive variables. In our example, this requires that the rate of admission of male and female
candidatesbe equal(known as demographicparity [376]; seealso disparateimpact [117]).
•Separation. Independencedoesnotaccountforajustifiablecorrelationbetweentheground
truth and the sensitive variable (e.g., fewer female candidates might be able to lift 100-lb
goods more easily than male candidates). Separation therefore requires that the indepen-
denceprinciplehold,conditionedontheunderlyinggroundtruth.Thatis,ifthejobrequires
strength qualifications, then the rate of admission for qualified male and female candidates
should be equal (known as equal opportunity [147]; see also equal odds [43]a n daccuracy
equity[95]).
•Sufficiency. Sufficiencysimilarly considerstheground truthbutrequiresthatthetrueout-
comeandthesensitivevariablebeindependentwhenconditionedonthesamesystempredic-
tion.Thatis,giventhesamehiringdecisionpredictedbythemodel,wewantthesameratio
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 11 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:11
ofqualifiedcandidatesamongmaleandfemalecandidates(knownas testfairness [80,147]).
Thisisclosely relatedtomodel calibration[ 266].
Note that these principles are mutually exclusive under certain circumstances (e.g., indepen-
dence and separation cannot both hold when the sensitive variable is correlated with the ground
truth). Reference [ 187] has discussed the tradeoff between various fairness metrics. Furthermore,
Reference [ 84] advocated an extended view of these principles, where the utility of the predicted
and true outcomes is factored into consideration (e.g., the risk and cost of recidivism in violent
crimes compared with the cost of detention), and can be correlated with the sensitive variables.
We referthereaderto thiswork fora more detaileddiscussion.
Evaluation. Despite the simplicity of the abstract criteria outlined in the previous section, fair-
ness can manifest in many different forms following these principles (see Reference [ 66,356]f o r
comprehensive surveys, and Reference [ 228] for AI ethics’ checklists). We categorize metrics of
fairness according to the properties of models and tasks to help the reader choose appropriate
onesfor theirapplication:
Discretevs.continuousvariables. Thetaskoutput,modelprediction,andsensitivevariables
can all be discrete (e.g., classification and nationality), ranked (e.g., search engines, recommen-
dationsystems),orcontinuous(e.g.,regression,classifierscores,age,etc.)innature.Anempirical
correlationofdiscretevariablescanbeevaluatedwithstandardstatisticaltools,suchascorrelation
coefficients(Pearson/Kendall/Spearman)and AnalysisofVariance(ANOVA) ,whilecontinuous
variables oftenfurtherrequirebinning,quantization,orlossfunctionsto evaluatefairness[ 66].
Lossfunction. Thecriteriaoffairnessoftencannotbeexactlysatisfiedgiventhelimitationsof
empiricaldata(e.g.,demographicparitybetweengroupswhenhiringonlythreecandidates).Loss
functions are useful in this case to gauge how far we are from empirical fairness. The choice of
loss function can be informed by the nature of the variables of concern: If the variables represent
probabilities, then likelihood ratios are more meaningful (e.g., disparate impact [ 117]); for real-
valued regression, the difference between mean distances to the true value aggregated over each
group might be used instead to indicate whether we model one group significantly better than
another[ 59].
Multiple sensitive variables. In many applications, the desirable AI system should be fair to
more than one sensitive variables (e.g., the prediction of risk posed by a loan should be fair in
terms of both gender and ethnicity; inter alia, a recommendation system should ideally be fair
to both users and recommendees). One can either form a tradeoff of “marginal fairness” between
these variables when they are considered one at a time, i.e., evaluate the fairness of each vari-
able separately and combine the loss functions for final evaluation, or explore the full Cartesian
product [ 307] of all variables to achieve joint fairness, which typically requires more empirical
observationsbuttendsto satisfystrongerethicalrequirements.
2.6 Privacy Protection
Privacy protection mainly refers to protecting against unauthorized use of the data that can di-
rectly or indirectly identify a person or household. These data cover a wide range of information,
including name, age, gender, face image, fingerprints, and so on. Commitment to privacy protec-
tion is regarded as an important factor determining the trustworthiness of an AI system. The
recently released AI ethics guidelines also highlight privacy as one of the key concerns [ 9,178].
Governmentagenciesareformulatingagrowingnumberofpoliciestoregulatetheprivacyofdata.
TheGeneral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a representative legal framework, which
pushesenterprisestotakeeffectivemeasuresfor userprivacyprotection.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 12 ====
177:12 B. Li et al.
In addition to internal privacy protection within an enterprise, recent developments in data
exchange across AI stakeholders has yielded new challenges for privacy protection. For example,
when training a medical AI model, each healthcare institution typically only has data from the
local residents, which might be insufficient. This leads to the demand to collaborate with other
institutionsandjointlytrainamodel[ 299]withoutleakingprivateinformationacrossinstitutions.
Existing protection techniques penetrate the entire lifecycle of AI systems to address rising
concerns about privacy. In Section 3, we briefly review techniques to protect the privacy in data
collection and processing, model training (Section 3.2.5), and model deployment (Section 3.4.4).
The realization of privacy protection is also related to other aspects of trustworthy AI. For ex-
ample, the transparency principle is widely used in AI systems. It informs users of personal data
collection and enables privacy settings. In the development of privacy-preserving ML software,
such as federated learning (e.g., FATE and PySyft), open source is a common practice to increase
transparencyandcertifytheprotectivenessofthesystem.
Evaluation. Laws for data privacy protection like the GDPR require data protection impact
assessment(DPIA) ifanydataprocessingposesarisktodataprivacy.Measureshavetobetaken
to address the risk-related concerns and demonstrate compliance with the law [ 10]. Data privacy
protectionprofessionalsandotherstakeholdersneedtobe involved toevaluateit.
Previous research has devised various mathematical methods to formally verify the protective-
ness of privacy-preserving approaches. Typical verification can be conducted under assumptions
such as semi-honest security, which implies all participating parties follow a protocol to perform
thecomputationaltaskbutmaytrytoinferthedataofotherpartiesfromtheintermediateresults
of computation (e.g., Reference [ 215]). A stricter assumption is the malicious attack assumption,
whereeachparticipatingpartyneednotfollowthegivenprotocol,andcantakeanypossiblemea-
suretoinfer thedata [ 214].
In practical scenarios, the empirical evaluation of the risk of leakage of privacy is usually con-
sidered [283,360]. For example, Reference [ 283] showed that 15 demographic attributes were suf-
ficienttorender99%oftheparticipantsunique.Anassessmentofsuchdatare-identificationintu-
itively reflectsprotectivenesswhendesigninga datacollectionplan.
2.7 Accountability: A Holistic Evaluation throughout the above Requirements
We have described a series of requirements to build trustworthy AI. Accountability addresses the
regulation on AI systems to follow these requirements. With gradually improving legal and in-
stitutional norms on AI governance, accountability becomes a crucial factor for AI to sustainably
benefitsocietywithtrustworthiness[ 100].
Accountability runs through the entire lifecycle of an AI system and requires that the stake-
holders of an AI system be obligated to justify their design, implementation, and operation as
aligned with human values. At the level of executive, this justification is realized by considerate
productdesign,reliabletechniquearchitecture,aresponsibleassessmentofthepotentialimpacts,
andthedisclosureofinformationontheseaspects[ 209].Notethatintermsofinformationdisclo-
sure, transparency contributes the basic mechanism used to facilitate the accountability of an AI
system[94,100].
Fromaccountabilityisalsoderivedtheconceptofauditability,whichrequiresthejustificationof
asystemtobereviewed,assessed,andaudited[ 209].Algorithmicauditingisarecognizedapproach
toensuretheaccountabilityofanAIsystemandassessitsimpactonmultipledimensionsofhuman
values[272].SeealsoSection 3.5.2.
Evaluation. Checklist-based assessments have been studied to qualitatively evaluate account-
ability and auditability [ 10,315]. As mentioned in this section, we consider accountability to be
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 13 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:13
Fig. 2. The AI industry holds a connecting position to organize multi-disciplinary practitioners, including
users, academia, and government in the establishment of trustworthy AI. In Section 3, we discuss the cur-
rent approaches toward trustworthy AI in the five main stages of the lifecycle of an AI system, i.e., data
preparation, algorithmdesign,development, deployment, andmanagement.
the comprehensive justification of each concrete requirement of trustworthy AI. Its realization is
composedofevaluationsoftheserequirementsoverthelifecycleofanAIsystem[ 272].Hence,the
evaluationofaccountabilityisreflectedbytheextenttowhichtheserequirementsoftrustworthi-
nessand theirimpactcanbe evaluated.
3 TRUSTWORTHY AI: A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH
We have introduced the concepts relevant to trustworthy AI in Section 2. Since the early 2010s,
diverse AI stakeholders have made efforts to enhance AI trustworthiness. In Section Ain our
appendix, we briefly review their recent practices in multi-disciplinary areas, including research,
engineering,andregulation,andstudiesthatareexemplarsofindustrialapplications,includingon
facerecognition,autonomousdriving,and NaturalLanguageProcessing(NLP) .Thesepractices
have made important progress in improving AI trustworthiness.However, we find that this work
remains insufficient from the industrial perspective. As depicted in Section 1and Figure 2,t h eA I
industryholdsapositiontoconnectmulti-disciplinaryfieldsfortheestablishmentoftrustworthy
AI.Thispositionrequiresthatindustrialstakeholderslearnandorganizethesemulti-disciplinary
approachesandensuretrustworthinessthroughoutthelifecycle ofAI.
Inthissection,weprovideabriefsurveyoftechniquesusedforbuildingtrustworthyAIproducts
and organize them across the lifecycle of product development from an industrial perspective.
As shown by the solid-lined boxes in Figure 2, the lifecycle of the development of a typical AI
productcanbepartitionedintodatapreparation,algorithmdesign,development–deployment,and
management [ 26]. We review several critical algorithms, guidelines, and government regulations
thatarecloselyrelevanttothetrustworthinessofAIproductsineachstageoftheirlifecycle,with
the aim of providing a systematic approach and an easy-to-follow guide to practitioners from
varyingbackgroundstoestablishtrustworthyAI.Theapproachesandliteraturementionedinthis
sectionaresummarized in Figure 3and Table 1.
3.1 Data Preparation
Current AI technology is largely data driven. The appropriate management and exploitation of
data not only improves the performance of an AI system but also affects its trustworthiness. In
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 14 ====
177:14 B. Li et al.
Fig.3. Alook-uptablethatorganizessurveyedapproachestoAItrustworthinessfromdifferentperspectives
andindifferentstagesofthelifecycleoftheAIsystem.SomeapproachescanbeusedtoimproveAItrustwor-
thiness from multiple aspects, and are in multiple columns. We dim these duplicated blocks here through
stride-filling for better visualization. See the corresponding paragraphs in Section 3for the details of the
approaches.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 15 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:15
Table 1. RepresentativePapers of Approaches or Research Directions Mentioned in Section 3
Lifecycle Approaches Literature
Data
PreparationData CollectionBias Mitigation[ 66,242,339]
Data Provenance[ 154,172]
Data
PreprocessingAnomaly Detection[ 70,81,257,316]
Data Anonymozation [ 14,37,232,232]
DifferentialPrivacy[ 107,110,177]
Algorithm
DesignAdversarial
RobustnessAdversarialRobustness[ 12,19,45,69,304,346,373]
Poisoningdefense[ 213]
ExplainabilityML ExplainabilityML[ 24,47,101,101,141,250]
Model
GeneralizationModelGeneralization[ 1,23,38,124,133,183,377]
Domain Generalization [ 343,391]
Algorithmic Fairness Fairnessand biasmitigation [ 66,242,339]
Privacy ComputingSMPC [114,387]
FederatedLearning[ 180,365]
DevelopmentFunctionalTesting [164,235,381]
Performance
Benchmarking[40,56,88,93,123,127,153,238,248,307,327]
Simulation [42,50,54,103,192,205,323,324,359]
FormalVerification [164,298,335]
DeploymentAnomaly Monitoring [70,257,394]
Human-AI Interaction [72,179,301,326]
Fail-Safe Mechanism [126,160,230,252]
Hardware Security [264,287,364]
ManagementDocumentation [11,22,41,129,156,246]
Auditing [58,228,272,277,290,292,356]
Cooperation [27,90]
Workflow MLOps [165,233,303]
For research directions thatare widelystudied, weprovide thecorresponding surveys forreaders to referto. For
approachesor research directions without surveys available,weproviderepresentativetechnicalpapers.
this section, we consider two major aspects of data preparation, i.e., data collection and data pre-
processing.We alsodiscussthecorrespondingrequirementsoftrustworthyAI.
3.1.1 Data Collection. DatacollectionisafundamentalstageofthelifecycleofAIsystems.An
elaborately designed data collection strategy can conduce to the enhancement of AI trustworthi-
ness,suchas interms of fairnessand explainability.
Bias mitigation. Training and evaluation data are recognized as a common source of bias for
AI systems. Many types of bias might exist and plague fairness in data collection, requiring dif-
ferent processes and techniques to combat it (see Reference [ 242] for a comprehensive survey).
Biasmitigationtechniquesduringdatacollectioncanbedividedintotwobroadcategories:debias
sampling and debias annotation. The former concerns the identification of data points to use or
annotate,whilethelatterfocuseson choosingtheappropriateannotators.
When sampling data points to annotate, we note that a dataset reflecting the user population
doesnotguaranteefairness,becausestatisticalmethodsandmetricsmightfavormajoritygroups.
Thisbiascanbefurtheramplifiedifthemajoritygroupismorehomogeneousforthetask(e.g.,rec-
ognizingspeechinless-spokenaccentscanbenaturallyharderduetodatascarcity[ 191]).System
developersshouldthereforetaketaskdifficultyintoconsiderationwhendevelopingandevaluating
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 16 ====
177:16 B. Li et al.
fairAIsystems.However,choosingtheappropriateannotatorsisespeciallycrucialforunderrepre-
senteddata(e.g.,whenannotatingspeechrecognitiondata,mosthumansarealsopooratrecogniz-
ingrarelyheardaccents).Therefore,caremustbetakeninselectingthecorrectexperts,especially
when annotating data from underrepresented groups, to prevent human bias from creeping into
theannotateddata.
Explanation collection. Aside from model design and development, data collection is also
integral to building explainable AI systems. As will be mentioned in Section 3.2.3, adding an
explanation task to the AI model can help explain the intermediate features of the model. This
strategy is used in tasks like NLP-based reading comprehension by generating supporting sen-
tences[332,366].Totraintheexplanationtask,itishelpfultoconsidercollectingexplanationsor
informationthatmaynotdirectlybepartoftheendtask,eitherdirectlyfromannotators[ 354]or
withthehelpofautomatedapproaches[ 185].
Data Provenance. Data provenance requires recording the data lineage, including the source,
dependencies, contexts, and steps of processing [ 306]. By tracking the data lineage at the highest
resolution, data provenance can enhance the transparency, reproducibility, and accountability of
an AI system [ 154,172]. Moreover, recent research has shown that data provenance can be used
to mitigate data poisoning [ 33], thus enhancing the robustness and security of an AI system. The
technical realization of data provenance has been provided in Reference [ 154]. Tool chains [ 293]
anddocumentation[ 129]guideshavealsobeenstudiedforspecificscenariosinvolvingAIsystems.
To ensure that the provenance is tamper proof, the blockchain has been recently considered as a
promisingtooltocertifydata provenanceinAI [ 15,96].
3.1.2 Data Preprocessing. Before feeding data into an AI model, data preprocessing helps re-
moveinconsistentpollutionofthedatathatmightharmmodelbehaviorandsensitiveinformation
thatmight compromise userprivacy.
Anomaly Detection. Anomaly detection (a.k.a. outlier detection ) has long been an active area
ofML[70,81,257,316].DuetothesensitivityofMLmodelstooutlierdata,datacleaningbyanom-
aly detection serves as an effective approach to enhance performance. In recent studies, anomaly
detection has been shown to be useful in addressing some requirements of AI trustworthiness.
For example, fraudulent data can challenge the robustness and security of systems in areas such
as banking and insurance. Various approaches have been proposed to address this issue by using
anomalydetection[ 70].Thedetectionandmitigationofadversarialinputsisalsoconsideredtobe
ameanstodefendagainstevasionattacksanddatapoisoningattacks[ 12,213,304].Itisnotewor-
thy that the effectiveness of detection in high dimensions (e.g., images) is still limited [ 64]. The
mitigation ofadversarialattacksisalso referredtoas data sanitization [71,87,258].
Data Anonymization (DA). DA modifies the data so that the protected private information
cannotberecovered.Differentprinciplesofquantitativedataanonymizationhavebeendeveloped,
such ask-anonymity [ 288],(c,k)-safety [236], andδ-presence [ 253]. Data format-specific DA ap-
proaches have been studied for decades [ 171,372,386]. For example, private information in the
form of graph data for social networks can be potentially contained in properties of the vertices
of the graph, its link relationships, weights, or other graph metrics [ 390]. Ways of anonymizing
such data have been considered in the literature [ 37,220]. Specific DA methods have also been
designedforrelationaldata[ 262],set-valueddata[ 151,320],andimagedata[ 97,239].Guidelines
and standards have been formulated for data anonymization, such as the US HIPAA and the UK
ISB1523. Data pseudonymization [ 251] is also a relevant technique promoted by the GDPR. It re-
placesprivateinformation withnon-identifyingreferences.
Desirable data anonymization is expected to be immune from data de-anonymization or re-
identification attacks that try to recover private information from anonymized data [ 111,175].
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 17 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:17
For example, Reference [ 176] introduces several approaches into de-anonymize user information
fromgraphdata.Tomitigatetheriskofprivacyleakage,anopensourceplatformwasprovidedin
Reference[ 174]toevaluatetheprivacyprotection-relatedperformanceofgraphdataanonymiza-
tion algorithmsagainst de-anonymization attacks.
Differential privacy (DP). DP shares information of groups within datasets while withhold-
ing individual samples [ 108–110]. Typical DP can be formally defined by ϵ-differential privacy. It
measures the extent to which a (randomized) statistical function on the dataset reflects whether
an element has been removed [ 108]. DP has been explored in various data publishing tasks,
such as log data [ 159,385], set-valued data [ 76], correlated network data [ 75], and crowdsourced
data[278,344].Ithasalsobeenappliedtosingle-andmulti-machinecomputingenvironments,and
integratedwithMLmodelsforprotectingmodelprivacy[ 2,120,349].EnterpriseslikeApplehave
used DP to transform user data into a form from which the true data cannot be reproduced [ 21].
InReference[ 113],researchersproposedtheRAPPORalgorithmthatsatisfiesthedefinitionofDP.
The algorithm is used for crowdsourcing statistical analyses of user software. DP is also used to
improve therobustnessof AI modelsagainst adversarialsamples[ 204].
3.2 Algorithm Design
AnumberofaspectsoftrustworthyAIhavebeenaddressedasalgorithmicproblemsinthecontext
of AI research, and have attracted widespread interest. We organize recent technical approaches
bytheircorrespondingaspectsofAItrustworthiness,includingrobustness,explainability,fairness,
generalization,and privacyprotection,to providea quickreferenceforpractitioners.
3.2.1 Adversarial Robustness. The robustness of an AI model is significantly affected by the
trainingdataandthealgorithmsused.Wedescribeseveralrepresentativedirectionsinthissection.
Comprehensive surveys can be found in the literature such as References [ 12,19,45,69,213,304,
373].
Adversarialtraining .Sincethediscoveryofadversarialattacks,ithasbeenrecognizedthataug-
menting the training data with adversarial samples provides an intuitive approach for defense
against them. This is typically referred to as adversarial training [ 134,211,346]. The augmenta-
tion can be carried out in a brute-force manner by feeding both the original data and adversarial
samplesduringtraining[ 201],orbyusingaregularizationtermtoimplicitlyrepresentadversarial
samples [ 134]. Conventional adversarial training augments data with respect to specific attacks.
It can defend against the corresponding attack but is vulnerable to other kinds of attacks. Vari-
ous improvements have been studied to improve this defense [ 45,229,304]. Reference [ 328]a u g -
mentedthetrainingdatawithadversarialperturbationstransferredfromothermodels.Itisshown
to further provide defense against black-box attacks that do not require knowledge of the model
parameters This can help defend against black-box attacks, which do not require knowledge of
the model parameters. Reference [ 231] combined multiple types of perturbations into adversarial
trainingtoimprove therobustnessof themodelagainstmultiple typesof attacks.
Adversarial regularization . In addition to the regularization term that implicitly represents ad-
versarial samples, recent research further explores network structures or regularization to over-
come the vulnerabilities of the DNN to adversarial attacks. An intuitive motivation for this reg-
ularization is to prevent the outcome of the network from changing dramatically in case of
smallinputperturbations.Forexample,Reference[ 139]penalizedlargepartialderivativesofeach
layer to improve the stability of its output. A similar regularization on gradients was adopted by
Reference [ 286]. Parseval networks [ 82] train the network by imposing a regularization on the
Lipschitzconstantineachlayer.
Certified robustness . Adversarial training and regularization improve the robustness of AI mod-
elsinpracticebutcannottheoreticallyguaranteethatthemodelsworkreliably.Thisproblemhas
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 18 ====
177:18 B. Li et al.
prompted research to formally verify the robustness of models (a.k.a. certified robustness ). Recent
research on certified robustness has focused on robust training to deal with input perturbations.
For example, CNN-Cert [ 51], CROWN [ 379], Fast-lin, and Fast-lip [ 352] aim to minimize an up-
perboundoftheworst-caselossundergiveninputperturbations.Reference[ 152]insteadderives
a lower bound on the input manipulation required to change the decision of the classifier, and
uses it as a regularization term for robust training. To address the issue that the exact computa-
tionofsuchboundsisintractableforlargenetworks,variousrelaxationsorapproximations,such
asReferences[ 352,378],havebeenproposedasalternativestoregularization.Notethattheabove
researchmainlyoptimizesrobustnessonlylocallynearthegiventrainingdata.Toachievecertified
robustnessonunseeninputsaswell, globalrobustness hasrecentlyattractedtheinterestoftheAI
community [ 77,206].
It is also worth noting the recent trend of the intersection of certified robustness and the per-
spectiveofformalverification,whichaimsatdevelopingrigorousmathematicalspecificationand
techniques of verification for assurances of software correctness [ 83]. A recent survey by Refer-
ence[335] provideda thoroughreview of theformalverificationof neuralnetworks.
Poisoning defense. Typical poisoning or backdoor attacks contaminate the training data to mis-
lead model behavior. Besides avoiding suspicious data in the data sanitization stage, defensive
algorithmsagainstpoisoningdataareanactivearea[ 213].Thedefensehasbeenstudiedatdiffer-
entstagesofaDNNmodel.Forexample,basedontheobservationthatbackdoor-relatedneurons
areusuallyinactivatedforbenignsamples,Reference[ 219]proposedpruningtheseneuronsfrom
a network to remove the hidden backdoor. Neural Cleanse [ 342] proactively discovers backdoor
patterns in a model. The backdoor can then be avoided by the early detection of backdoor pat-
terns from the data or retraining the model to mitigate the backdoor. The detection of backdoor
attacks can also be carried out by analyzing the prediction on the model on specifically designed
benchmarkinginputs[ 194].
3.2.2 Model Generalization. Techniquesofmodelgeneralizationnotonlyaimtoimprovemodel
performancebutalsoexploretrainingAImodelswithlimiteddataandatlimitedcost.Wereview
representative approaches to model generalization, categorized as classic generalization and do-
main generalization.
Classic generalization mechanisms. As a fundamental principle of model generalization theory,
the bias–variance tradeoff indicates that a generalized model should maintain a balance between
underfittingandoverfitting[ 39,124].Foranoverfittedmodel,reducingcomplexity/capacitymight
lead to better generalization. Consider the neural network as an example. Adding a bottleneck
layer,whichhasfewerneuronsthanthelayersbothbelowandabove,toitcanhelpreducemodel
complexity andreduceoverfitting.
Otherthanadjustingthearchitectureofthemodel,onecanmitigateoverfittingtoobtainbetter
generalization via various explicit or implicit regularizations, such as early stopping [ 370], batch
normalization[ 167],dropout[ 309],dataaugmentation,andweightdecay[ 196].Theseregulariza-
tions are standard techniques to improve model generalization when the training data are much
smaller in size than the number of model parameters [ 337]. They aim to push learning to a sub-
spaceof a hypothesiswithmanageable complexity and reduce model complexity [ 377]. However,
[377] also observed that explicit regularization may improve generalization performance but is
insufficient to reduce generalization error. The generalization of the deep neural network is thus
stillan openproblem.
Domain generalization. A challenge for modern DNNs is their generalization of out-of-
distributiondata.ThischallengearisesfromvariouspracticalAItasks[ 343,391]intheareaoftrans-
ferlearning[ 255,350].Domainadaptation[ 343,391]aimstofinddomain-invariantfeaturessuch
thatanalgorithmcanachievesimilarperformancesacrossdomains.Asanotherexample,thegoal
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 19 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:19
offew-shotslearningistogeneralizemodeltonewtasksusingonlyafewexamples[ 78,348,371].
Meta-learning[ 336]attemptstolearnpriorknowledgeofgeneralizationfromanumberofsimilar
tasks. Feature similarity [ 190,308] has been used as a representative type of knowledge prior in
workssuchasthe Model-AgnosticMeta-Learning(MAML) [119],reinforcementlearning[ 212],
and memory-augmented neuralnetwork[ 38,291].
Modelpre-trainingisapopularmechanismtoleverageknowledgelearnedfromotherdomains,
and has recently achieved growing success in both academia and the industry. For example, in
computer vision, an established successful paradigm involves pre-training models on a large-
scale dataset, such as ImageNet, and then fine-tuning them on target tasks with fewer training
data [131,224,375]. This is because pre-trained feature representation can be used to transfer in-
formation to the target tasks [ 375]. Unsupervised pre-training has recently been very successful
in language processing (e.g., BERT [ 92]a n dG P T[ 269]) and computer vision tasks (e.g., Momen-
tum Contrast (MoCo) [150]a n dSequence Contrastive learning (SeCo) [368]). In addition,
self-supervised learning provides a good mechanism to learn a cross-modal feature representa-
tion.TheseincludethevisionandlanguagemodelsVL-BERT[ 313]andAuto-CapTIONs[ 256].To
explaintheeffectivenessofunsupervisedpre-training,[ 112]conductedaseriesofexperimentsto
illustratethatitcan drivelearningto thebasinsof minima thatyield bettergeneralization.
3.2.3 Explainable ML. Inthissection,wereviewrepresentativeapproachesforthetwoaspects
of MLexplainability mentionedin Section 2.3.1and theirapplicationtodifferent tasks.
Explainable ML model design. In spite of being recognized as disadvantageous in terms of per-
formance,explainablemodelshavebeenactivelyresearchedinrecentyears,andavarietyoffully
or partiallyexplainableMLmodels havebeenstudiedtopushtheirperformancelimit.
Self-explainable ML models. A number of self-explainable models have been studied in
ML over the years. The representative ones include the KNN, linear/logistic regression, decision
trees/rules, and probabilistic graphical models [ 24,47,141,250]. Note that the self-explainability
ofthesemodelsissometimesunderminedbytheircomplexity.Forexample,verycomplextreeor
rule structuresmight sometimes beconsideredincomprehensibleorunexplainable.
Some learning paradigms other than conventional models are also considered to be explain-
able, such as causal inference [ 197,259] and the knowledge graph [ 345]. These methods are also
expectedtoprovidevaluable inspirationto solvetheproblemofexplainability forML.
Beyond self-explainable ML models. Compared with black-box models, such as the DNN,
conventional self-explainable models have poor performance on complex tasks, such as image
classificationandtextcomprehension.Toachieveacompromisebetweenexplainabilityandperfor-
mance,hybridcombinationsofself-explainablemodelsandblack-boxmodelshavebeenproposed.
A typical design involves embedding an explainable bottleneck model into a DNN. For example,
previous research has embedded linear models and prototype selection to the DNN [ 16,20,73].
In the well-known class activation mapping [ 389], an average pooling layer at the end of a DNN
can also be regarded as an explainable linear bottleneck. Attention mechanisms [ 30,363]h a v e
also attracted recent interest and have been regarded as an explainable bottleneck in a DNN in
some studies [ 79,237]. However, this claim continues to be debated, because attention weights
representingdifferentexplanationscan producesimilar finalpredictions[ 170,355].
Posthocmodelexplanation. Inadditiontodesigningself-explainablemodels,understandinghow
a specific decision is made by black-box models is also an important problem. A major part of
research on this problem has addressed the methodology of post hoc model explanation and pro-
posedvariousapproaches.
Explainer approximation aims to mimic the behavior of a given model with explainable
models. This is also referred to as the global explanation of a model. Various approaches have
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 20 ====
177:20 B. Li et al.
been proposed to approximate ML models, such as random forests [ 317,392] and neural net-
works[28,86,393].Withtheriseofdeeplearninginthepastdecade,explainerapproximationon
theDNNhasadvancedastheknowledgedistillationproblemonexplainerssuchastrees[ 125,384].
Feature importance has been a continually active area of research on explainability. A repre-
sentative aspect uses local linear approximation to model the contribution of each feature to the
prediction. Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanation (LIME) [279]a n dSHapley Ad-
ditive exPlanation (SHAP) [225] are influential approaches that can be used for predictions on
tabular data, computer vision, and NLP. Gradients can reflect how features contribute to the pre-
dictedoutcome,andhavedrawngreatinterestinworkontheexplainabilityoftheDNN[ 297,305].
InNLPor ComputerVision(CV) ,gradientsortheirvariantsareusedtoback-tracethedecision
ofthemodeltothelocationofthemostintimatelyrelatedinput,intheformofsaliencymapsand
sentencehighlights[ 250,302,314,375].
Featureintrospection aimstoprovideasemanticexplanationofintermediatefeatures.Arep-
resentativeaspectattachesanextrabranchtoamodeltogenerateanexplanatoryoutcomethatis
interpretablebyahuman.Forexample,inNLP-basedreadingcomprehension,thegenerationofa
supportingsentenceservesasanexplanatorytaskinadditiontoanswergeneration[ 332,366].In
image recognition, part-template masks can be used to regularize feature maps to focus on local
semantic parts [ 383]. Concept attribution [ 47] is another aspect that maps a given feature space
to human-defined concepts. Similar ideas have been used in generative networks to gain control
overattributes,suchas thegender,age,and ethnicity,in a facegenerator[ 221].
Example-based explanation explains outcomes of the AI model by using the sample data.
Forexample,aninfluentialfunctionwasborrowedfromrobuststatisticsinReference[ 193]tofind
the most influential data instance for a given outcome. Counterfactual explanation [ 13,185,341]
worksinacontrarywaybyfindingtheboundarycasetofliptheoutcome.Thishelpsusersbetter
understandthedecisionsurfaceofthemodel.
3.2.4 Algorithmic Fairness. MethodstoreducebiasinAImodelsduringalgorithmdevelopment
can intervene before the data are fed into the model (pre-processing), when the model is being
trained(in-processing),or intomodelpredictionsafterit hasbeentrained(post-processing).
Pre-processing methods. Aside from debiasing the data collection process, we can debias data
beforemodel training.Common approachesincludethefollowing:
Adjusting sample importance. This is helpful especially if debiasing the data collection is
not sufficient or no longer possible. Common approaches include resampling [ 6], which involves
selecting a subset of the data, reweighting [ 60], which involves assigning different importance
valuestodataexamples,andadversariallearning[ 229],whichcanbeachievedthroughresampling
orreweightingwiththehelpofa trainedmodeltofind theoffendingcases.
Aside from helping to balance the classification accuracy, these approaches can be applied to
balance the cost of classification errors to improve performance on certain groups [ 163]( e . g . ,f o r
the screening of highly contagious and severe diseases, false negatives can be costlier than false
positives;see cost-sensitivelearning [321]).
Adjusting feature importance. Inadvertent correlation between features and sensitive vari-
ablescanleadtounfairness.Commonapproachesofdebiasingincluderepresentationtransforma-
tion[61],whichcanhelpadjusttherelativeimportanceoffeatures,andblinding[ 74],whichomits
featuresthataredirectly relatedtothesensitivevariables.
Data augmentation. Besides making direct use of the existing data samples, it is possible to
introduce additional samples that typically involves making changes to the available samples, in-
cludingthroughperturbationandrelabeling[ 60,85].
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 21 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:21
In-processing methods. Pre-processing techniques are not guaranteed to have the desired effect
during model training, because different models can leverage features and examples in different
ways.Thisiswherein-processingtechniquescanbe helpful:
Adjustingsampleimportance. Similartopre-processingmethods,reweighting[ 195]andad-
versariallearning[ 68]canbeusedforin-processing,withthepotentialofeithermakinguseofthe
modelparametersorpredictionsthatarenotyetfullyoptimizedtomoredirectlydebiasthemodel.
Optimization-related techniques. Alternatively, model fairness can be enforced more di-
rectlyviaoptimizationtechniques.Forinstance,quantitativefairnessmetricscanbeusedasregu-
larization [ 7]or constraintsfor theoptimization of themodelparameters[ 67].
Post-processing methods. Even if all precautions have been taken with regard to data curation
and model training, the resulting models might still exhibit unforeseen biases. Post-processing
techniques can be applied for debiasing, often with the help of auxiliary models or hyperparame-
terstoadjustthemodeloutput.Forinstance,optimizationtechniques(e.g.,constraintoptimization)
canbeappliedtotrainasmallermodeltotransformmodeloutputsorcalibratemodelconfidence
[186].Reweightingthepredictionsofmultiple models canalso helpreducebias[ 168].
3.2.5 Privacy Computing. Apartfromprivacy-preservingdataprocessingmethods,whichwere
introduced in Section 3.1.2, another line of methods preserve data privacy during model learning.
In this part, we briefly review the two popular categories of such algorithms: secure multi-party
computing,and federatedlearning.
Secure Multi-party Computing (SMPC) deals with the task whereby multiple data owners
compute a function, with the privacy of the data protected and no trusted third party serving as
coordinator.AtypicalSMPCprotocolsatisfiespropertiesofprivacy,correctness,independenceof
inputs,guaranteedoutputdelivery,andfairness[ 114,387].Thegarbledcircuitisarepresentative
paradigm for secure two-party computation [ 244,367]. Oblivious transfer is among the key tech-
niques. It guarantees that the sender does not know what information the receiver obtains from
thetransferredmessage.Forthemulti-partycondition,secretsharingisoneofthegenericframe-
works [181]. Each data instance is treated as a secret and split into several shares. These shares
arethendistributedtothemultipleparticipatingparties.Thecomputationofthefunctionvalueis
decomposedinto basicoperationsthatare computedfollowing thegiven protocol.
The use of SMPC in ML tasks has been studied in the context of both model-specific learn-
ing tasks, e.g., linear regression [ 128] and logistic regression [ 300], and generic model learning
tasks[247].SecureinferenceistheanemergingtopicthattailorstheSMPCforMLuse.Itsapplica-
tiontoMLisasaserviceinwhichtheserverholdsthemodelandclientsholdtheprivatedata.Tore-
ducethehighcostsofcomputationandcommunicationoftheSMPC,parameterquantizationand
functionapproximationwereusedtogetherwithcryptographicprotocolsinReferences[ 8,32].Sev-
eral tools have been open sourced, such as MP2ML [ 48], CryptoSPN [ 330], CrypTFlow [ 200,276],
and CrypTen[ 188].
Federated learning (FL) was initially proposed as a secure scheme to collaboratively train
an ML model on a data of user interactions with their devices [ 241]. It quickly gained extensive
interest in academia and the industry as a solution to collaborative model training tasks by using
data from multiple parties. It aims to address data privacy concerns that hinder ML algorithms
from properly using multiple data sources. It has been applied to numerous domains, such as
healthcare[ 282,299] and finance[ 223].
ExistingFLalgorithmscanbecategorizedintohorizontalFL,verticalFL,andfederatedtransfer
learning algorithms [ 365]. Horizontal FL refers to the scenario in which each party has differ-
ent samples but the samples share the same feature space. A training step is decomposed as to
firstcomputeoptimizationupdatesoneachclientandthenaggregatethemonacentralizedserver
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 22 ====
177:22 B. Li et al.
withoutknowingtheclients’privatedata[ 241].VerticalFLreferstothesettinginwhichallparties
share the same sample ID space but have different features. Reference [ 148] used homomorphic
encryption for vertical logistic regression-based model learning. In Reference [ 138], an efficient
method of kernel learning was proposed. Federated transfer learning is applicable to the condi-
tion in which none of the parties overlaps in either the sample or the feature space [ 222]. The
connectionbetweenFLandotherresearchtopics,suchasmulti-tasklearning,meta-learning,and
fairnesslearning,hasbeendiscussedinReference[ 180].ToexpediteFL-relatedresearchanddevel-
opment,manyopensourcelibrarieshavebeenreleased,suchasFATE,FedML[ 149],andFedlearn-
Algo [217].
3.3 Development
Themanufactureofreliableproductsrequiresconsiderableeffortinsoftwareengineering,andthis
is sometimes overlooked by AI developers. This lack of diligence, such as insufficient testing and
monitoring, may incur long-term costs in the subsequent lifecycle of AI products (a.k.a. techni-
cal debt[296]). Software engineering in the stages of development and deployment has recently
arousedwideconcernasanessentialconditionforreliableAIsystems[ 17,203].Moreover,various
techniquesresearchedforthisstagecancontributetothetrustworthinessofanAIsystem[ 17].In
thissection,we surveytherepresentativetechniques.
3.3.1 Functional Testing. Inherited from the workflow of canonical software engineering, the
testing methodology has drawn growing attention in the development of AI systems. In terms of
AI trustworthiness, testing serves as an effective approach to certify that the system is fulfilling
specificrequirements.RecentresearchhasexploredtoadaptfunctionaltestingtoAIsystems.This
hasbeenreviewedintheliterature,suchasReferences[ 164,235,381].Wedescribetwoaspectsof
adaptionfrom theliteraturethatareusefultoenhancethetrustworthinessof an AIsystem.
Test criteria. Different from canonical software engineering where exact equity is tested be-
tweentheactualandtheexpectedoutputsofasystem,anAIsystemisusuallytestedbyitspredic-
tiveaccuracyonaspecifictestingdataset.Beyondaccuracy,varioustestcriteriahavebeenstudied
tofurtherreflectandtestmorecomplexpropertiesofanAIsystem.Theconceptoftestcoveragein
softwaretestinghasbeentransplantedintoDNNmodels[ 226,260].Thenameofarepresentative
metric—neuron coverage [ 260]—figuratively illustrates that it measures the coverage of activated
neuronsinaDNNinanalogytocodebranchesincanonicalsoftwaretesting.Suchcoveragecriteria
areeffectivefor certifyingtherobustnessof aDNN againstadversarialattacks[ 226].
Testcasegeneration. Human-annotateddatasetsareinsufficientforthoroughlytestinganAI
system, and large-scale automatically generated test cases are widely used. Similar to canonical
software testing, the problem to automatically generate the expected ground truth, known as the
oracle problem [34], also occurs in the AI software testing scenario. The hand-crafted test case
template is an intuitive but effective approach in applications of NLP [ 281]. Metamorphic testing
is also a practical approach that converts the input/output pairs into new test cases. For example,
[382] transfers images of road scenes taken in daylight to rainy images by using Generative Ad-
versarialNetwork(GAN) asnewtestcases,andre-usestheoriginal,invariantannotationtotest
an autonomous driving systems. These testing cases are useful for evaluating the generalization
performanceofanAImodel.Asimilarmethodologywasadoptedbyaddingadversarialpatternsto
normal images to test adversarial robustness [ 226]. Simulated environments are also widely used
to test applications such as computer vision and reinforcement learning. We further review this
topicin Section 3.3.3.
3.3.2 Performance Benchmarking. Unlike conventional software, the functionality of AI sys-
tems is often not easily captured in functional test alone. To ensure that systems are trustworthy
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 23 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:23
in terms of different aspects of interest, benchmarking (a.k.a. performance testing in software en-
gineering)isoftenappliedtoensuresystemperformanceandstabilitywhenthesecharacteristics
can beautomatically measured.
Robustness is an important aspect of trustworthiness that is relatively amenable to automatic
evaluation. References [ 88,153] introduced a suite of black-box and white-box attacks to auto-
maticallyevaluatetherobustnessofAIsystems.Itcanpotentiallybeperformedasasanitycheck
before such systems are deployed to affect millions of users. Software fairness has also been a
concernsinceconventionalsoftwaretesting[ 56,127].CriteriaforAIsystemshavebeenstudiedto
spot issues of unfairness by investigating the correlation among sensitive attributes, system out-
comes,andthetruelabelwhenapplicabletowell-designeddiagnosticdatasets[ 327].Well-curated
datasetsandmetricshavebeenproposedintheliteraturetoevaluateperformanceonfairnessmet-
ricsthatareof interestfordifferent tasks[ 40,123,307].
More recently, there has been growing interest in benchmarking explainability when models
output explanations in NLP applications. For instance, Reference [ 238] asks crowd workers to
annotate salient pieces of text that lead to their belief that the text is hateful or offensive, and
examines how well model-predicted importance fits human annotations. Reference [ 93] instead
introduces partial perturbations to the text for human annotators, and observes if the system’s
explanationsmatchperturbationsthatchangehumandecisions.Inthemeantime,Reference[ 267]
reported that explainability benchmarking remains relatively difficult, because visual stimuli are
higherdimensionaland continuous.
3.3.3 Development by Simulation. While benchmarks serve to evaluate AI systems in terms of
predictivebehaviorgivenstaticdata,thebehaviorofmanysystemsisdeeplyrootedintheirinter-
actionswiththeworld.Forexample,benchmarkingautonomousvehiclesystemsonstaticscenar-
ios is insufficient to help us evaluate their performance on dynamic roadways. For these systems,
simulation oftenplaysan importantrolein ensuringtheirtrustworthinessbeforedeployment.
Robotics is a sub-fields of AI where simulations are most commonly used. Control systems for
robots can be compared and benchmarked in simulated environments such as Gazebo [ 192], Mu-
JoCo [324], and VerifAI [ 103]. Similarly, simulators for autonomous driving vehicles have been
widelyused,includingCARLA[ 102],TORCS[ 359],CarSim[ 42],andPRESCAN[ 323].Thesesoft-
wareplatformssimulatetheenvironmentinwhichrobotsandvehiclesoperateaswellastheactu-
ationofcontrolsonthesimulatedrobotsorcars.InNLP,especiallyconversationalAI,simulators
arewidelyusedtosimulateuserbehaviortotestsystemabilityandfulfilluserneedsbyengaging
in a dialog [ 205]. These simulators can help automatically ensure the performance of AI systems
in an interactiveenvironment anddiagnose issuesbeforetheirdeployment.
Despite the efficiency, flexibility, and replicability afforded by software simulators, they of-
ten still fall short of perfectly simulating constraints faced by the AI system when deployed as
well as environmental properties or variations in them. For AI systems that are deployed on em-
bedded or otherwise boxed hardware, it is important to understand the system behavior when
theyarerunonthehardwareusedinreal-worldscenarios.Hardware-in-the-loopsimulationscan
help developers understand system performance when it is run on chips, sensors, and actuators
in a simulated environment, and is particularly helpful for latency- and power-critical systems
like autonomous driving systems [ 50,54]. By taking real-world simulations a step further, one
can also construct controlled real-world environments for fully integrated AI systems to roam
around in (e.g., test tracks for self-driving cars with road signs and dummy obstacles). This pro-
vides more realistic measurements and assurances of performance before releasing such systems
to users.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 24 ====
177:24 B. Li et al.
3.4 Deployment
After development, AI systems are deployed on realistic products, and interact with the environ-
mentandusers.Toguaranteethatthesystemsaretrustworthy,anumberofapproachesshouldbe
consideredat thedeployment stage,suchas addingadditional componentsto monitor anomalies,
anddevelopingspecifichuman–AIinteractionmechanismsfortransparencyand explainability.
3.4.1 Anomaly Monitoring. Anomaly monitoring has become a well-established methodology
insoftwareengineering.IntermsofAIsystems,therangeofmonitoringhasbeenfurtherextended
tocoverdataoutliers,datadrifts,andmodelperformance.Asakeyingsafeguardforthesuccessful
operationofanAIsystem,monitoringprovidesthemeanstoenhancethesystem’strustworthiness
inmultiple aspects.Some representativeexamplesare discussedbelow.
Attackmonitoring hasbeenwidelyadoptedinconventionalSaaS,suchasfrauddetection[ 3]in
e-commerce systems. In terms of the recent emerging adversarial attacks, detection and monitor-
ing[243]ofsuchattackinputsisalsorecognizedasanimportantmeanstoensuresystemrobust-
ness.Datadriftmonitoring [268]providesimportantmeanstomaintainthegeneralizationofanAI
systemunderconceptchange[ 394]causedbydynamicenvironmentsuchasmarketchange[ 289].
Misusemonitoring isrecentlyalsoadoptedinseveralcloudAIservices[ 173]toavoidimproperuse
such as unauthorized population surveillance or individual tracking by face recognition, which
helpsensuretheproperalignment of ethicalvalues.
3.4.2 Human–AI Interaction. As an extension of human–computer interaction (HCI) ,
human–AI interaction has aroused wide attention in the AI industry [ 4,18]. Effective human–
AIinteractionaffectsthetrustworthinessofanAIsysteminmultipleaspects.Webrieflyillustrate
twotopics.
Userinterface servesasthemostintuitivefactoraffectinguserexperience.Itisamajormedium
foranAIsystemtodiscloseitsinternalinformationanddecision-makingproceduretousers,and
thus has an important effect on the transparency and explainability of the system [ 301,351]. Var-
ious approaches of interaction have been studied to enhance the explainability of AI, including
the visualization of ML models [ 72] and interactive parameter-tuning [ 351]. In addition to trans-
parency and explainability, the accessibility of the interface also significantly affects user expe-
rience of trustworthiness. AI-based techniques of interaction have enabled various new forms
of human–machine interfaces, such as chatbots, audio speech recognition, and gesture recogni-
tion,andmightresultinaccessibilityproblemsfordisabledpeople.Mitigatingsuchunfairnesshas
arousedconcernsinrecentresearch[ 179,326].
Human intervention , such as by monitoring failure or participating in decisions [ 295], has
been applied to various AI systems to compensate for limited performance. Advanced Driving
Assistance System (ADAS) can be considered a typical example of systems involving human
intervention, where the AI does the low-level driving work and the human makes the high-level
decision.Inadditiontocompensatingfordecision-making,humaninterventionprovidesinforma-
tivesupervisiontotrainorfine-tuneAIsystemsinmanyscenarios,suchastheshadowmode[ 319]
ofautonomousdrivingvehicles.Tominimizeandmakethebestuseofhumaneffortinsuchinter-
action, efficient design of patterns of human–machine cooperation is an emerging topic in inter-
disciplinary work on HCI and AI and is referred to as human-in-the-loop orinteractive machine
learning[157] in theliterature.
3.4.3 Fail-Safe Mechanisms. ConsideringtheimperfectionofcurrentAIsystems,itisimportant
toavoidharmwhenthesystemfailsinexceptionalcases.Bylearningfromconventionalreal-time
automation systems, the AI community has realized that a fail-safe mechanism or fallback plan
should be an essential part of the design of an AI system if its failure can cause harm or loss.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 25 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:25
This mechanism is also emerging as an important requirement in recent AI guidelines, such as
Reference [ 9]. The fail-safe design has been observedin multiple areas of robotics in the past few
years. In the area of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) , the fail-safe algorithm has been studied
foralongtimetoavoidfrequentcollisionofquadrocopters[ 126]andtoensuresafelandingupon
system failure [ 252]. In autonomous driving where safety is critical, a fail-safe mechanism like
standing still has become an indispensable component in Advanced Driver-Assistant System
(ADAS)products[ 160], and isbeingresearchedata higherlevelof automation[ 230].
3.4.4 Hardware Security. AI systems are widely deployed on various hardware platforms to
copewiththediversescenarios,rangingfromserversincomputingcenterstocellphonesandem-
beddedsystems.AttacksonOSandhardwareleadtonewrisks,suchasdatatamperingorstealing,
and threaten the robustness, security, and privacy of AI systems. Various approaches have been
studied to address this new threat [ 364]. From the perspective of hardware security, the concept
of atrusted execution environment (TEE) is a recent representative technique that has been
adoptedbymanyhardwaremanufacturers[ 287].ThegeneralmechanismoftheTEEistoprovide
a secure area for the data and the code. This area is not interfered with by the standard OS such
that the protected program cannot be attacked. ARM processors support TEE implementation us-
ingtheTrustZonedesign[ 264].TheysimultaneouslyrunasecureOSandanormalOSonasingle
core. The secure part provides a safe environment for sensitive information. The Intel Software
Guard Extensions implement the TEE by hardware-based memory encryption [ 240]. Its enclave
mechanismallowsfortheallocationofprotectedmemorytoholdprivateinformation.Suchsecu-
rity mechanisms have been used to protect sensitive information like biometric ID and financial
accountpasswordsandareapplicabletootherAIuse cases.
3.5 Management
AI practitioners such as researchers and developers have studied various techniques to improve
AItrustworthinessintheaforementionedstagesofthedata,algorithm,development,anddeploy-
mentstages.Beyondtheseconcreteapproaches,appropriatemanagementandgovernanceprovide
a holistic guarantee that trustworthiness is consistently aligned throughout the lifecycle of a AI
system. In this section, we introduce several executable approaches that facilitate the AI commu-
nity toimprove management andgovernance on AItrustworthiness.
3.5.1 Documentation. Conventional software engineering has accumulated a wealth of expe-
rience in leveraging documentation to assist development. Representative documentation types
include requirement documents, product design documents, architecture documents, code docu-
ments, and test documents [ 11]. Beyond conventional software engineering, multiple new types
of documents have been proposed to adapt to the ML training and testing mechanisms. Their
scopemayincludethepurposesandcharacteristicsofthemodel[ 246],datasets[ 41,129,156],and
services [ 22]. As mentioned in Sections 2.3.2and2.7, documentation is an effective and impor-
tant approach to enhance the system’s transparency and accountability by tracking, guiding, and
auditingitsentirelifecycle[ 272]andservesasacornerstoneofbuildingatrustworthyAIsystem.
3.5.2 Auditing. Withlessonslearnedfromsafety-criticalindustries,e.g.,financeandaerospace,
auditing has been recently recognized as an effective mechanism to examine whether an AI sys-
tem complies with specific principles [ 58,356]. In terms of the position of auditors, the auditing
process can be categorized as internal or external. Internal auditing enables self-assessment and
iterative improvement for manufacturers to follow the principles of trustworthiness. It can cover
the lifecycle of the system without the leakage of trade secrets [ 272]. However, external auditing
by independentpartiesis more effectiveingaining publictrust[ 58].
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 26 ====
177:26 B. Li et al.
Auditing might involve the entire or selective parts of the lifecycle of an AI system. A compre-
hensive framework of internal auditing can be found in Reference [ 272]. The means of auditing
might include interviews, documented artifacts, checklists, code review, testing, and impact as-
sessment. For example, documentation like product requirement documents, model cards [ 246],
and datasheets [ 129] serve as important references to understand the principle alignment during
development. Checklists are widely used as a straightforward qualitative approach to evaluate
fairness [ 228], transparency [ 292], and reproducibility [ 263]. Quantitative testing also serves as
a powerful approach and has been successfully executed to audit fairness in, for example, the
Gender Shade study [ 58]. Inspiredby the EU’s European Union’s Data Protection Impact As-
sessment(DPIA) ,theconceptof Algorithmic ImpactAssessmenthasbeenproposedto evaluate
theclaimsoftrustworthinessanddiscovernegativeeffects[ 277].Besidestheaboverepresentatives,
designsof approachesto algorithmicauditingcanbe foundin References[ 290,356].
3.5.3 Cooperation and Information Sharing. A ss h o w ni nF i g u r e 2, the establishment of trust-
worthyAIrequirescooperationbetweenstakeholders.Fromtheperspectiveofindustry,coopera-
tionwithacademiaenablesthefastapplicationofnewtechnologytoenhancetheperformanceof
the product and reduce the risk posed by it. Cooperation with regulators certifies the products as
appropriately following the principles of trustworthiness. Moreover, cooperation between indus-
trialenterpriseshelpsaddressconsensus-basedproblems,suchasdataexchange,standardization,
andecosystembuilding[ 27].RecentpracticesofAIstakeholdershaveshowntheefficacyofcoop-
erationinvariousdimensions.We summarize thesepracticesin thefollowingaspectsbelow.
Collaborativeresearchanddevelopment. Collaborationhasbeenasuccessfuldrivingforce
in the development of AI technology. To promote research on AI trustworthiness, stakeholders
are setting-up various forms of collaboration,such as researchworkshopson trustworthyAI and
cooperativeprojectslike DARPAXAI[ 144].
Trustworthy data exchange. The increasing business value of data raises the demand to ex-
change them across companies in various scenarios (e.g., the medical AI system in Section 2.6).
Beyond privacy-based computing techniques, the cooperation between data owners, technology
providers, and regulators is making progress in establishing an ecosystem of data exchange, and
solvingproblemssuchas datapricingand data authorization.
Cooperative development of regulation. Active participation in the development of stan-
dards and regulations serves as an important means for academia, the industry, and regulators to
align theirrequirementsand situations.
Incident sharing. The AI community has recently recognized incident sharing as an effective
approachtohighlightandpreventpotentialriskstoAIsystems[ 57].TheAIIncidentDatabase[ 91]
providesaninspiringexampleforstakeholderstosharenegativeAIincidentssothattheindustry
canavoid similar problems.
3.6 TrustAIOps: A Continuous Workflow toward Trustworthiness
TheproblemoftrustworthyAIarisesfromthefastdevelopmentofAItechnologyanditsemerging
applications.AItrustworthinessisnotawell-studiedstaticbartoreachbysomespecificsolutions.
The establishment of trustworthiness is a dynamic procedure. We have witnessed the evolution
of different dimensions of trustworthiness over the past decade [ 178]. For example, research on
adversarial attacks has increased concerns regarding adversarial robustness. The applications of
safety-criticalscenarioshaverenderedmorestringenttherequirementsofaccountabilityofanAI
system.ThedevelopmentofAIresearch,theevolutionoftheformsofAIproducts,andthechang-
ingperspectivesofsocietyimplythecontinualreformulationoftherequirementsofandsolutions
to trustworthiness. Therefore, we argue that beyond the requirements of an AI product, the AI
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 27 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:27
industryshouldconsidertrustworthinessasanethosofitsoperationalroutineandbepreparedto
continually enhancethetrustworthinessof itsproducts.
TheconstantenhancementofAItrustworthinesspositionsrequirementsonanewworkflowfor
the AI industry. Recent studies on industrial AI workflow extend the mechanism of DevOps [ 36]
to MLOps [ 233], to enable improvements in ML products. The concept of DevOps has been
adopted in modern software development to continually deploy software features and improve
their quality. MLOps [ 233] and its variants, such as ModelOps [ 165] and SafetyOps [ 303], extend
DevOps to cover the ML lifecycle of data preparation, training, validation, and deployment, in its
workflow.TheworkflowofMLOpsprovidesastartpointtobuildtheworkflowfortrustworthyAI.
ByintegratingtheMLlifecycle,MLOpsconnectsresearch,experimentation,andproductdevelop-
ment to enable the rapid leveraging of the theoretical development of trustworthy AI. A wealth
of toolchains of MLOps have been released recently to track AI artifacts such as data, model, and
meta-datatoincreasetheaccountabilityandreproducibilityofproducts[ 165].Recentresearchhas
sought to extend MLOps to further integrate trustworthiness into the AI workflow. For example,
[303]extended MLOpswithsafetyengineeringasSafetyOpsfor autonomousdriving.
As we have illustrated in this section, building trustworthiness requires the continual and sys-
tematicupgradeoftheAIlifecycle.ByextendingMLOps,wesummarizethisupgradeofpractices
as a new workflow, TrustAIOps , which focuses on imposing the requirements of trustworthiness
over theentireAI lifecycle.Thisnewworkflowcontainsthefollowing properties:
•Closecollaborationbetweeninter-disciplinaryroles. BuildingtrustworthyAIrequires
organizingdifferentroles,suchasMLresearchers,softwareengineers,safetyengineers,and
legalexperts.Closecollaborationmitigatesthegapinknowledgebetweenformsofexpertise
(e.g.,Reference[ 208],cf.,Sections 3.5.3andA.2).
•Aligned principles of trustworthiness. The risk of untrustworthiness exists in every
stage in the lifecycle of an AI system. Mitigating such risks requires that all stakeholders
in the AI industry be aware of and aligned with unified trustworthy principles (e.g., Refer-
ence[301],cf.,Section A.2).
•Extensive management of artifacts. An industrial AI system is built upon various arti-
factssuchasdata,code,models,configuration,productdesign,andoperationmanuals.The
elaborate management of these artifacts helps assess risk and increases reproducibility and
auditability(cf.,Section 3.5.1).
•Continuous feedback loops. Classical continuous integration and continuous develop-
ment (CI/CD) workflows provide effective mechanisms to improve the software through
feedback loops. In a trustworthy AI system, these feedback loops should connect and itera-
tivelyimprovethefivestagesofitslifecycle,i.e.,data,algorithm,development,deployment,
and management (e.g.,References[ 272,310]).
The evolution of the industrial workflow of AI is a natural reflection of the dynamic proce-
dure to establish its trustworthiness. By systematically organizing stages of the AI lifecycle and
inter-disciplinarypractitioners,theAIindustryisabletounderstandtherequirementsoftrustwor-
thiness from various perspectives, including technology, law, and society, and deliver continual
improvements.
4 CONCLUSION, CHALLENGES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
In this survey, we outlined the key aspects of trustworthiness that we think are essential to AI
systems. We introduced how AI systems can be evaluated and assessed on each of these aspects,
and reviewed current efforts in this direction in the industry. We further proposed a system-
atic approach to consider these aspects of trustworthiness in the entire lifecycle of real-world AI
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 28 ====
177:28 B. Li et al.
systems, which offers recommendations for every step of the development and use of these sys-
tems. We recognize that fully adopting this systematic approach to build trustworthy AI systems
requires that practitioners embrace the concepts underlying the key aspects that we have identi-
fied. More importantly, it requires a shift of focus from performance-driven AI totrust-driven AI.
Intheshortrun,thisshiftwillinevitablyinvolveside-effects,suchaslongerlearningtime,slowed
development, and/or increased cost to build AI systems. However, we encourage practitioners to
focusonthelong-termbenefitsofgainingthetrustofallstakeholdersforthesustaineduseandde-
velopmentofthesesystems.Inthissection,weconcludebydiscussingsomeoftheopenchallenges
andpotentialopportunitiesinthefuturedevelopment of trustworthyAI.
4.1 AI Trustworthiness as Long-term Research
Our understanding of AI trustworthiness is far from complete or universal and will inevitably
evolve as we develop new AI technologies and understand their societal impact more clearly.
This procedure requires long-term research in multiple key areas of AI. In this section, we dis-
cuss several open questions that we think are crucial to address for the future development of AI
trustworthiness.
4.1.1 Immaturity of Approaches to Trustworthiness. As mentioned in Section 2, several aspects
of AI trustworthiness, such as explainability and robustness, address the limitation of current AI
technologies.Despitewide interestin AI research,satisfactorysolutionsarestillfar fromreach.
Consider explainability as an example. Despite being an active field of AI research, it remains
poorly understood. Both current explanatory models and post hoc model explanation techniques
shareafewcommonissues,e.g.,(1)theexplanationisfragiletoperturbations[ 130],(2)theexpla-
nationisnotalwaysconsistentwithhumaninterpretation[ 47],and(3)itisdifficulttojudgeifthe
explanation is correct or faithful [ 250]. These problems pose important questions in the study of
explainabilityand providevaluable directionsof researchin theoreticalresearchon AI.
Another example is robustness. The arms race between adversarial attack and defense reflects
the immaturity of our understanding of the robustness of AI. As in other areas of security, at-
tacksevolvealongwiththedevelopmentofdefenses.Conventionaladversarialtraining[ 134]has
been shown to be easily fooled by subsequently developed attacks [ 328]. The corresponding de-
fense [328] is later shown to be vulnerable against new attacks [ 99]. This not only requires that
practitionersbeagileinadoptingdefensivetechniquestomitigatetheriskofnewattacksinapro-
cess of long-term and continual development but also poses long-term challenges to theoretical
research [ 270].
4.1.2 Frictional Impact of Trustworthy Aspects. A sw eh a v es h o w ni nS e c t i o n 2,t h e r ea r ea
wealth of connections and support between different aspects of trustworthiness. However, re-
searchhasshownthattherearefrictionsortradeoffsbetweentheseaspectsinsomecases,which
we review here.
IncreasedtransparencyimprovestrustinAIsystemsthroughinformationdisclosure.However,
disclosing inappropriateinformation might increase potential risks. For example, excessive trans-
parency on datasetsand algorithms might leak private data and commercial intellectualproperty.
Disclosure of detailed algorithmic mechanisms can also lead to the risk of targeted hacking [ 12].
However, an inappropriate explanation might also cause users to overly rely on the system and
follow wrong decisions of AI [ 311]. Therefore, the extent of transparency of an AI system should
bespecifiedcarefullyand differently fortheroles ofpublicusers,operators,and auditors.
Fromanalgorithmicperspective,theeffectsofdifferentobjectivesoftrustworthinessonmodel
performance remain insufficiently understood. Adversarial robustness increases the model’s gen-
eralizabilityandreducesoverfitting,buttendstonegativelyimpactitsoverallaccuracy[ 331,380].
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 29 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:29
A similar loss of accuracy occurs in explainable models [ 47]. Besides this trust–accuracy tradeoff,
algorithmic friction exists between the dimensions of trustworthiness. For example, adversarial
robustness and fairness can negatively affect each other during training [ 284,361]. Furthermore,
studies on fairness and explainability have shown several approaches to explanation to be un-
fair [98].
ThesefrictionaleffectssuggestthatAItrustworthinesscannotbeachievedthroughhillclimbing
onasetofdisjointcriteria.Compatibilityshouldbecarefullyconsideredwhenintegratingmultiple
requirementsintoasinglesystem.Recentstudies[ 361,380]provideagoodreferencetostartwith.
4.1.3 Limitations in Current Evaluations of Trustworthiness. Repeatable and quantitative mea-
surementsarethecornerstoneofscientificandengineeringprogress.However,despiteincreasing
researchinterestandefforts,thequantificationofmanyaspectsofAItrustworthinessremainselu-
sive.Ofthevariousaspectsthatwehavediscussedinthisarticle,theexplainability,transparency,
and accountability of AI systems are still seldom evaluated quantitatively, which makes it diffi-
culttoaccuratelycomparesystems.Developinggoodmethodsofquantitativeevaluationforthese
desiderata, we believe, will be an important first step in research on these aspects of AI trustwor-
thinessasa scientificendeavor,ratherthanapurely philosophicalone.
4.1.4 Challenges and Opportunities in the Era of Large-scale Pre-trained Models. Largescalepre-
trainedmodelshavebroughtdramaticbreakthroughsforAI.Theynotonlyshowthepotentialtoa
moregeneralformofAI[ 234]butalsobringnewchallengesandopportunitiestotheestablishment
of trustworthy AI. One of the most important properties of a large scale pre-trained model is the
ability to transfer its learned knowledge to new tasks in a manner of few-shot or zero-shot learn-
ing [55]. This largely fulfills people’s requirement on the generalization of AI, and is recognized
to hold great value in commercial applications. However, the risks of the large scale pre-trained
modelstobeuntrustworthyhavebeenrevealedbyrecentstudies.Forexample,thetrainingproce-
dureisknowntobecostlyanddifficulttoreproduceforthird-parties,asmentionedinSection 2.2.
Most downstream tasks have to directly adapt the pre-trained model without auditing its entire
lifecycle.Thisbusinessmodelposesariskthatdownstreamusersmightbeaffectedbyanybiases
presented in these models [ 234]. Privacy leakage is another issue that is recently revealed. Some
pre-trained models are reported to output training text data containing private user information
suchasaddresses[ 63].
Thedevelopmentandapplicationofthelargescalepre-trainedmodelsisaccelerating.Toguar-
antee that this advancement will benefit the society without causing new risks, it is worthwhile
forbothacademiaandtheindustrytocarefullystudyitspotentialimpactintheperspectiveofAI
trustworthiness.
4.2 End-User Awareness of the Importance of AI Trustworthiness
Other than developers and providers of AI systems, end-users are an important yet opt-ignored
group ofstakeholders.
BesideseducatingthegeneralpublicaboutthebasicconceptsofAItrustworthiness,developers
shouldconsiderhowitcanbepresentedtouserstodeliverhands-onexperiencesoftrustworthyAI
systems.Onepositivestepinthisdirectioninvolvesdemonstratingsystemlimitations(e.g.,Google
Translatedisplaystranslationsinmultiplegenderedpronounswhentheinputtextisungendered)
or explainable factors used for system prediction (e.g., recommendation systems can share user
traitsthatareusedincuratingads,like“femaleaged20–29”and“interestedintechnology”).Tak-
ing this a step further, we believe that it would enable the user to directly control these factors
(e.g.,usertraits)counterfactually,andjudgeforthemselveswhetherthesystemisfair,robust,and
trustworthy.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 30 ====
177:30 B. Li et al.
Finally, we recognize that not all aspects of trustworthiness can be equally easily conveyed
to end-users. For instance, the impact of privacy preservation or transparency cannot be easily
demonstratedtotheend-userwhenAIsystemsaredeployed.Webelievethatmediacoverageand
government regulationsregarding theseaspectscan beveryhelpfulin raisingpublicawareness.
4.3 Inter-disciplinary and International Cooperation
Anin-depthunderstandingofAItrustworthinessinvolvesnotonlythedevelopmentofbetterand
newer AI technologies, but also requires us to better understand the interactions between AI and
human society. We believe this calls for collaboration across various disciplines that reach far be-
yondcomputerscience.First,AIpractitionersshouldworkcloselywithdomainexpertswhenever
AItechnologiesaredeployedtotherealworldandhasimpactsonpeople,e.g.,inmedicine,finance,
transportation,and agriculture. Second, AI practitioners should seek advice from social scientists
to better understand the (often unintended) societal impacts of AI and work together to remedy
them,e.g.,theimpactofAI-automateddecisions,jobdisplacementinAI-impactedsectors,andthe
effectoftheuseofAIsystemsinsocialnetworks.Third,AIpractitionersshouldcarefullyconsider
howthetechnologyispresentedtothepublicaswellasinter-disciplinarycollaborators,andmake
suretocommunicate theknown limitationsof AI systemshonestlyand clearly.
In the meantime, the development of trustworthy AI is by no means a unique problem of any
single country, nor does the potential positive or negative effect of AI systems respect geopoliti-
cal borders. Despite the common portrayal of AI as a race between countries (see Section 3.2 of
Reference[ 145]),technologicaladvancesintheclimateofincreasedinternationalcollaborationare
farfromazero-sumgame.Itnotonlyallowsustobuildbettertechnologicalsolutionsbycombin-
ingdiverseideasfromdifferentbackgroundsbutalsohelpsusbetterservetheworld’spopulation
by recognizing our shared humanity as well as our unique differences. We believe that tight-knit
inter-disciplinary and international cooperation will serve as the bedrock for rapid and steady
developmentsin trustworthyAItechnology,whichwillin turnbenefithumanityat large.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Yanqing Chen, Jing Huang, Shuguang Zhang, and Liping Zhang
fortheirvaluablesuggestions.WealsothankYuHe,WenhanXu,XinyuanShan,ChenliangWang,
PengLiu,Jingling Fu,BaicunZhou,Hongbao Tian,Qili WangandErmo Huafor theirassistance.
REFERENCES
[1] DavidKrueger,NicolasBallas,StanislawJastrzebski,DevanshArpit,MaxinderS.Kanwal,TeganMaharaj,Emmanuel
Bengio,Asja Fischer, andAaron C.Courcille. Deep netsdon’t learnviamemorization. In ICLR(Workshop) .
[2] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016.
Deeplearningwithdifferentialprivacy.In ProceedingsoftheACMSIGSACConferenceonComputerandCommunica-
tions Security . 308–318.
[3] AishaAbdallah,MohdAizainiMaarof,andAnazidaZainal.2016.Frauddetectionsystem:Asurvey. J.Netw.Comput.
Appl.68(2016),90–113.
[4] Ashraf Abdul, Jo Vermeulen, Danding Wang, Brian Y. Lim, and Mohan Kankanhalli. 2018. Trends and trajectories
for explainable, accountable and intelligible systems: An hci research agenda. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–18.
[5] AminaAdadiandMohammedBerrada.2018.Peekinginsidetheblack-box:Asurveyonexplainableartificialintelli-
gence(XAI). IEEEAccess 6 (2018),52138–52160.
[6] Philip Adler, Casey Falk, Sorelle A. Friedler, Tionney Nix, Gabriel Rybeck, Carlos Scheidegger, Brandon Smith, and
Suresh Venkatasubramanian. 2018. Auditing black-box models for indirect influence. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 54, 1 (2018),
95–122.
[7] Sina Aghaei, Mohammad Javad Azizi, and Phebe Vayanos. 2019. Learning optimal and fair decision trees for non-
discriminative decision-making.In Proceedings oftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence ,Vol. 33.1418–1426.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 31 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:31
[8] NitinAgrawal,AliShahinShamsabadi,MattJ.Kusner,andAdriàGascón.2019.QUOTIENT:Two-partysecureneural
network training and prediction. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security. 1231–1247.
[9] AI HLEG,European Commission. 2021.Ethics guidelines fortrustworthy AI.
[10] AI HLEG, European Commission. 2020. Assessment list for trustworthy artificial intelligence (altai) for self-
assessment.
[11] Alberto Aimar.1998.Introduction tosoftwaredocumentation.
[12] Naveed Akhtar and Ajmal Mian. 2018. Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning in computer vision: A survey.
IeeeAccess 6(2018),14410–14430.
[13] ArjunR.Akula,KezeWang,ChangsongLiu,SariSaba-Sadiya,HongjingLu,SinisaTodorovic,JoyceChai,andSong-
Chun Zhu. 2022. CX-ToM: Counterfactual explanations with theory-of-mind for enhancing human trust in image
recognition models. Iscience25,1 (2022),103581.
[14] DalalAl-Azizy,DavidMillard,IraklisSymeonidis,KieronO’Hara,andNigelShadbolt.2015.Aliteraturesurveyand
classificationsondatadeanonymisation.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonRisksandSecurityofInternet
and Systems .Springer,36–51.
[15] Mohammed AlShamsi, Said A. Salloum, Muhammad Alshurideh, and Sherief Abdallah. 2021. Artificial intelligence
andblockchainfortransparencyingovernance.In ArtificialIntelligenceforSustainableDevelopment:Theory,Practice
and FutureApplications .Springer, 219–230.
[16] DavidAlvarezMelisandTommiJaakkola.2018.Towardsrobustinterpretabilitywithself-explainingneuralnetworks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31(2018).
[17] Saleema Amershi, Andrew Begel, Christian Bird, Robert DeLine, Harald Gall, Ece Kamar, Nachiappan Nagappan,
Besmira Nushi, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2019. Software engineering for machine learning: A case study. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice
(ICSE-SEIP’19) .IEEE, 291–300.
[18] SaleemaAmershi,DanWeld,MihaelaVorvoreanu,AdamFourney,BesmiraNushi,PennyCollisson,JinaSuh,Shamsi
Iqbal, Paul N. Bennett, Kori Inkpen, et al. 2019. Guidelines for human-AI interaction. In Proceedings of the Chi Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–13.
[19] Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. 2016. Concrete prob-
lemsinAI safety.arXiv:1606.06565.Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.06565 .
[20] PlamenAngelovandEduardoSoares.2020.Towardsexplainabledeepneuralnetworks(xDNN). NeuralNetworks 130
(2020),185–194.
[21] Apple. 2017. Differential Privacy. Retrieved February 20, 2021 from https://www.apple.com/privacy/docs/Differenti
al_Privacy_Overview.pdf .
[22] MatthewArnold,RachelK.E.Bellamy,MichaelHind,StephanieHoude,SameepMehta,AleksandraMojsilović,Ravi
Nair, K. Natesan Ramamurthy, Alexandra Olteanu, David Piorkowski, et al. 2019. FactSheets: Increasing trust in AI
services through supplier’s declarations of conformity. IBM J.Res. Dev. 63,4/5(2019),6–1.
[23] DevanshArpit,StanislawJastrzebski,NicolasBallas,DavidKrueger,EmmanuelBengio,MaxinderS.Kanwal,Tegan
Maharaj,AsjaFischer,AaronCourville,YoshuaBengio,etal.2017.Acloserlookatmemorizationindeepnetworks.
InProceedings oftheInternational Conference onMachine Learning .PMLR,233–242.
[24] Alejandro Barredo Arrieta, Natalia Díaz-Rodríguez, Javier Del Ser, Adrien Bennetot, Siham Tabik, Alberto Barbado,
Salvador García, Sergio Gil-López, Daniel Molina, Richard Benjamins, et al. 2020. Explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI): Concepts,taxonomies,opportunities andchallengestowardresponsible AI. Inf. Fus.58(2020),82–115.
[25] Vijay Arya, Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Pin-Yu Chen, Amit Dhurandhar, Michael Hind, Samuel C. Hoffman, Stephanie
Houde, Q. Vera Liao, Ronny Luss, Aleksandra Mojsilović, et al. 2019. One explanation does not fit all: A toolkit and
taxonomyof aiexplainabilitytechniques. arXiv:1909.03012.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.03012 .
[26] RobAshmore,RaduCalinescu,andColinPaterson.2021.Assuringthemachinelearninglifecycle:Desiderata,meth-
ods, andchallenges. ACMComput.Surv. 54,5(2021),1–39.
[27] AmandaAskell,MilesBrundage,andGillianHadfield.2019.TheroleofcooperationinresponsibleAIdevelopment.
arXiv:1907.04534.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.04534 .
[28] M. Gethsiyal Augasta and Thangairulappan Kathirvalavakumar. 2012. Reverse engineering the neural networks for
rule extractioninclassification problems. Neural Process.Lett. 35,2(2012),131–150.
[29] SerkanAyvazandSalihCemilCetin.2019.Witnessofthings:Blockchain-baseddistributeddecisionrecord-keeping
system for autonomous vehicles. Int.J.Intell.Unman. Syst. (2019).
[30] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
alignandtranslate.In 3rd International ConferenceonLearning Representations (ICLR’15) .
[31] Josef Baker-Brunnbauer. 2021. Taii framework for trustworthy ai systems. ROBONOMICS: The Journal of the Auto-
mated Economy , 2(2021),17–17.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 32 ====
177:32 B. Li et al.
[32] MarshallBall,BrentCarmer,TalMalkin,MikeRosulek,andNicholeSchimanski.2019.Garbledneuralnetworksare
practical. CryptologyePrint Archive .
[33] Nathalie Baracaldo, Bryant Chen, Heiko Ludwig, and Jaehoon Amir Safavi. 2017. Mitigating poisoning attacks on
machinelearningmodels:Adataprovenancebasedapproach.In Proceedingsofthe10thACMWorkshoponArtificial
Intelligence andSecurity . 103–110.
[34] Earl T. Barr, Mark Harman, Phil McMinn, Muzammil Shahbaz, and Shin Yoo. 2014. The oracle problem in software
testing:A survey. IEEETrans.Softw.Eng. 41,5(2014),507–525.
[35] Peter L. Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. 2002. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural
results.J.Mach. Learn.Res. 3(November2002),463–482.
[36] LenBass,IngoWeber,andLimingZhu.2015. DevOps:ASoftwareArchitect’sPerspective .Addison-WesleyProfessional.
[37] GhazalehBeigiandHuanLiu.2020.Asurveyonprivacyinsocialmedia:Identification,mitigation,andapplications.
A CMT r a ns.Da taSc i . 1,1(2020),1–38.
[38] Wei Zhang, Yang Yu, and Bowen Zhou. 2015. Structured Memory for Neural Turing Machines. arXiv: 1510.03931.
Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.03931 .
[39] Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. 2019. Reconciling modern machine-learning practice
andthe classicalbias–variancetrade-off. Proc. Natl.Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116,32(2019),15849–15854.
[40] Rachel K. E. Bellamy, Kuntal Dey, Michael Hind, Samuel C. Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Kalapriya Kannan, Pranay
Lohia, Jacquelyn Martino, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilović, et al. 2019. Ai fairness 360: An extensible toolkit
for detectingandmitigatingalgorithmicbias. IBM Journal ofResearch and Development 63,4/5(2019),4–1.
[41] Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018. Data statements for natural language processing: Toward mitigating
system biasandenablingbetterscience. Trans.Assoc.Comput. Linguist. 6(2018),587–604.
[42] Rahim F. Benekohal and Joseph Treiterer. 1988. CARSIM: Car-following model for simulation of traffic in normal
andstop-and-go conditions. Transp. Res. Rec. 1194(1988),99–111.
[43] RichardBerk,HodaHeidari,ShahinJabbari,MichaelKearns,andAaronRoth.2021.Fairnessincriminaljusticerisk
assessments: The stateof theart. Sociol.MethodsRes. 50,1 (2021),3–44.
[44] Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. Are emily and greg more employable than lakisha and jamal?
A fieldexperimentonlabormarket discrimination. Am.Econ.Rev. 94,4(2004),991–1013.
[45] SiddhantBhambri,SumanyuMuku,AvinashTulasi,andArunBalajiBuduru.2019.Asurveyofblack-boxadversarial
attacks oncomputer vision models.arXiv:1912.01667.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01667 .
[46] AlbertoBlanco-Justicia,JosepDomingo-Ferrer,SergioMartinez,andDavidSanchez.2020.Machinelearningexplain-
abilityviamicroaggregationandshallow decision trees. Knowl.-Bas.Syst. 194(2020),105532.
[47] Francesco Bodria, Fosca Giannotti, Riccardo Guidotti, Francesca Naretto, Dino Pedreschi, and Salvatore Rinzivillo.
2021. Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods for black box models. arXiv:2102.13076. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.13076 .
[48] Fabian Boemer, Rosario Cammarota, Daniel Demmler, Thomas Schneider, and Hossein Yalame. 2020. MP2ML: A
mixed-protocolmachinelearningframeworkforprivateinference.In Proceedingsofthe15thInternationalConference
on Availability, Reliability andSecurity . 1–10.
[49] Miranda BogenandAaron Rieke. 2018.Help Wanted:An Examinationof Hiring Algorithms, Equity, andBias.
[50] ThomasBokc,MarkusMaurer,andGeorgFarber.2007.Validationofthevehicleintheloop(vil);amilestoneforthe
simulation of driver assistance systems.In Proceedings of theIEEEIntelligentVehicles Symposium . IEEE, 612–617.
[51] AkhilanBoopathy,Tsui-WeiWeng,Pin-YuChen,SijiaLiu,andLucaDaniel.2019.Cnn-cert:Anefficientframework
forcertifyingrobustnessofconvolutionalneuralnetworks.In ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntel-
ligence, Vol. 33.3240–3247.
[52] NealE.Boudette.“ItHappenedSoFast”:InsideaFatalTeslaAutopilotAccident.Retrievedfrom https://www.nytimes.
com/2021/08/17/business/tesla-autopilot-accident.html .
[53] TimoBreuer,NicolaFerro,NorbertFuhr,MariaMaistro,TetsuyaSakai,PhilippSchaer,andIanSoboroff.2020.How
tomeasurethereproducibilityofsystem-orientedIRexperiments.In Proceedingsofthe43rdInternationalACMSIGIR
Conferenceon Research andDevelopmentin Information Retrieval . 349–358.
[54] Craig Brogle, Chao Zhang, Kai Li Lim, and Thomas Bräunl. 2019. Hardware-in-the-loop autonomous driving simu-
lationwithout real-timeconstraints. IEEETrans. Intell.Vehic. 4,3 (2019),375–384.
[55] TomBrown,BenjaminMann,NickRyder,MelanieSubbiah,JaredD.Kaplan,PrafullaDhariwal,ArvindNeelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process.Syst. 33(2020),1877–1901.
[56] YuriyBrunandAlexandraMeliou.2018.Softwarefairness.In Proceedingsofthe26thACMJointMeetingonEuropean
Software Engineering Conferenceand Symposium on theFoundations ofSoftware Engineering . 754–759.
[57] Miles Brundage, Shahar Avin, Jasmine Wang, Haydn Belfield, Gretchen Krueger, Gillian Hadfield, Heidy Khlaaf,
JingyingYang,HelenToner,RuthFong,etal.2020.TowardtrustworthyAIdevelopment:Mechanismsforsupporting
verifiableclaims.arXiv:2004.07213.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.07213 .
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 33 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:33
[58] Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. 2018. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender
classification.In ConferenceonFairness,Accountability and Transparency . PMLR,77–91.
[59] Toon Calders, Asim Karim, Faisal Kamiran, Wasif Ali, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2013. Controlling attribute effect in
linearregression. In Proceedings oftheIEEE13th International ConferenceonData Mining . IEEE, 71–80.
[60] ToonCaldersandSiccoVerwer.2010.Threenaivebayesapproachesfordiscrimination-freeclassification. DataMinl.
Knowl.Discov. 21,2(2010),277–292.
[61] Flavio P. Calmon, Dennis Wei, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and Kush R. Varshney.
2017. Optimized pre-processing for discrimination prevention. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on
Neural Information ProcessingSystems . 3995–4004.
[62] Rosario Cammarota, Matthias Schunter, Anand Rajan, Fabian Boemer, Ágnes Kiss, Amos Treiber, Christian Wein-
ert, Thomas Schneider, Emmanuel Stapf, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, et al. 2020. Trustworthy AI inference systems: An
industry research view.arXiv:2008.04449.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.04449 .
[63] NicholasCarlini,FlorianTramer,EricWallace,MatthewJagielski,ArielHerbert-Voss,KatherineLee,AdamRoberts,
Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, et al. 2021. Extracting training data from large language models. In Pro-
ceedings ofthe30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security’21) . 2633–2650.
[64] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2017. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten detection
methods. In Proceedings ofthe10th ACMWorkshoponArtificial Intelligence andSecurity . 3–14.
[65] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2017. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In Proceedings of
theIEEESymposium on Security and Privacy (SP’17) . IEEE, 39–57.
[66] Simon Caton and Christian Haas. 2020. Fairness in machine learning: A survey. arXiv:2010.04053. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.04053 .
[67] L.ElisaCelis,LingxiaoHuang,VijayKeswani,andNisheethK.Vishnoi.2019.Classificationwithfairnessconstraints:
A meta-algorithm with provable guarantees. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency. 319–328.
[68] L. Elisa Celis and Vijay Keswani. 2019. Improved adversarial learning for fair classification. arXiv:1901.10443. Re-
trievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.10443 .
[69] Anirban Chakraborty, Manaar Alam, Vishal Dey, Anupam Chattopadhyay, and Debdeep Mukhopadhyay. 2018. Ad-
versarial attacksanddefences:A survey. arXiv:1810.00069.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00069 .
[70] RaghavendraChalapathyandSanjayChawla.2019.Deeplearningforanomalydetection:Asurvey.arXiv:1901.03407.
Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.03407 .
[71] Patrick P. K. Chan, Zhi-Min He, Hongjiang Li, and Chien-Chang Hsu. 2018. Data sanitization against adversarial
labelcontaminationbasedondatacomplexity. Int.J.Mach. Learn.Cybernet. 9,6 (2018),1039–1052.
[72] AngelosChatzimparmpas,RafaelM.Martins,IlirJusufi,KostiantynKucher,FabriceRossi,andAndreasKerren.2020.
The state of the art in enhancing trust in machine learning models with the use of visualizations. In Computer
Graphics Forum , Vol. 39.Wiley OnlineLibrary,713–756.
[73] Chaofan Chen, Oscar Li, Daniel Tao, Alina Barnett, Cynthia Rudin, and Jonathan K. Su. 2019. This looks like that:
Deeplearningforinterpretableimagerecognition. Adv. Neural Inf.Process. Syst. 32(2019).
[74] Irene Chen, Fredrik D. Johansson, and David Sontag. 2018. Why is my classifier discriminatory? Adv. Neural Inf.
Process.Syst. 31(2018).
[75] RuiChen,BenjaminFung,PhilipS.Yu,andBipinC.Desai.2014.Correlatednetworkdatapublicationviadifferential
privacy.VLDBJ.23,4(2014),653–676.
[76] RuiChen,NomanMohammed,BenjaminC.M.Fung,BipinC.Desai,andLiXiong.2011.Publishingset-valueddata
viadifferentialprivacy. Proc. VLDBEndow. 4,11(2011),1087–1098.
[77] Yizheng Chen, Shiqi Wang, Yue Qin, Xiaojing Liao, Suman Jana, and David Wagner. 2021. Learning security clas-
sifiers with verified global robustness properties. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security . 477–494.
[78] YuCheng,MoYu,XiaoxiaoGuo,andBowenZhou.2019.Few-shotlearningwithmetametriclearners.In NIPS2017
WorkshoponMeta-Learning .
[79] EdwardChoi,MohammadTahaBahadori,JimengSun,JoshuaKulas,AndySchuetz,andWalterStewart.2016.Retain:
An interpretable predictive model for healthcare using reverse time attention mechanism. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
Syst.29(2016).
[80] Alexandra Chouldechova. 2017. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism prediction in-
struments. Big Data 5,2(2017),153–163.
[81] XuChu,IhabF.Ilyas,SanjayKrishnan,andJiannanWang.2016.Datacleaning:Overviewandemergingchallenges.
InProceedings oftheInternational Conference onManagement ofData . 2201–2206.
[82] Moustapha Cisse, Piotr Bojanowski, Edouard Grave, Yann Dauphin, and Nicolas Usunier. 2017. Parseval networks:
Improvingrobustness toadversarial examples.In International Conferenceon Machine Learning . PMLR,854–863.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 34 ====
177:34 B. Li et al.
[83] EdmundM.ClarkeandJeannetteM.Wing.1996.Formalmethods:Stateoftheartandfuturedirections. ACMComput.
Surv.28,4(1996),626–643.
[84] SamCorbett-DaviesandSharadGoel.2018.Themeasureandmismeasureoffairness:Acriticalreviewoffairmachine
learning.arXiv:1808.00023.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.00023 .
[85] BoCowgillandCatherineTucker.2017.Algorithmicbias:Acounterfactualperspective. NSFTrustworthyAlgorithms .
[86] MarkCravenandJudeShavlik.1995.Extractingtree-structuredrepresentationsoftrainednetworks. Adv.NeuralInf.
Process.Syst. 8(1995).
[87] GabrielaF.Cretu,AngelosStavrou,MichaelE.Locasto,SalvatoreJ.Stolfo,andAngelosD.Keromytis.2008.Casting
out demons: Sanitizing training data for anomaly sensors. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (SP’08) . IEEE, 81–95.
[88] FrancescoCroce,MaksymAndriushchenko,VikashSehwag,EdoardoDebenedetti,NicolasFlammarion,MungChi-
ang, Prateek Mittal, and Matthias Hein. 2021. RobustBench: A standardized adversarial robustness benchmark.
InProceedings of the 35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track
(Round 2) .
[89] Luiz Marcio Cysneiros and Vera Maria Benjamim Werneck. 2009. An initial analysis on how software transparency
andtrust influenceeach other.In Proceedings of theWorkshopon Requirements Engineering (WER’09) . Citeseer.
[90] Allan Dafoe, Edward Hughes, Yoram Bachrach, Tantum Collins, Kevin R. McKee, Joel Z. Leibo, Kate Larson, and
ThoreGraepel.2020.OpenproblemsincooperativeAI.arXiv:2012.08630.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.
08630.
[91] DavidDao. 2020.AwfulAI. Retrievedfrom https://github.com/daviddao/awful-ai .
[92] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang Chang, Lee Kenton, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter
of theAssociationfor Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,Volume 1(Longand ShortPapers) .
[93] Jay DeYoung, Sarthak Jain, Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Eric Lehman, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Byron C.
Wallace.2020.ERASER: A benchmarkto evaluaterationalized NLPmodels. Trans.Assoc. Comput.Linguist. (2020).
[94] Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2016.Accountability inalgorithmicdecision making. Commun. ACM 59,2(2016),56–62.
[95] William Dieterich, Christina Mendoza, and Tim Brennan. 2016. Compas risk scales: Demonstrating accuracy
equity and predictive parity. Retrieved from https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2998391-ProPublica-
CommentaryFinal-070616.html .
[96] Donna N. Dillenberger, Petr Novotny, Qi Zhang, Praveen Jayachandran, Himanshu Gupta, Sandeep Hans, Dinesh
Verma, Shreya Chakraborty, J. J. Thomas, M. M. Walli, et al. 2019. Blockchain analytics and artificial intelligence.
I B MJ.R e s.De v . 63,2/3(2019),5–1.
[97] AhmetEmirDirik,HüsrevTahaSencar,andNasirMemon.2014.Analysisofseam-carving-basedanonymizationof
imagesagainstPRNU noise pattern-basedsource attribution. IEEETrans.Inf.Forens.Sec. 9,12(2014),2277–2290.
[98] JonathanDodge,Q.VeraLiao,YunfengZhang,RachelK.E.Bellamy,andCaseyDugan.2019.Explainingmodels:An
empiricalstudyofhowexplanationsimpactfairnessjudgment.In Proceedingsofthe24thInternationalConferenceon
IntelligentUser Interfaces .275–285.
[99] YinpengDong,TianyuPang,HangSu,andJunZhu.2019.Evadingdefensestotransferableadversarialexamplesby
translation-invariant attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVFConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
4312–4321.
[100] Finale Doshi-Velez, Mason Kortz, Ryan Budish, Chris Bavitz, Sam Gershman, David O’Brien, Kate Scott, Stuart
Shieber,JamesWaldo,DavidWeinberger,etal.2018.AccountabilityofAIunderthelaw:Theroleofexplanation.In
Privacy Law Scholars Conference.
[101] FilipKarloDošilović,MarioBrčić,andNikicaHlupić.2018.Explainableartificialintelligence:Asurvey.In Proceedings
of the 41st International Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics
(MIPRO’18) . IEEE, 0210–0215.
[102] AlexeyDosovitskiy,GermanRos,FelipeCodevilla,AntonioLopez,andVladlenKoltun.2017.CARLA:Anopenurban
driving simulator.In ConferenceonRobotLearning . PMLR,1–16.
[103] TommasoDreossi,DanielJ.Fremont,ShromonaGhosh,EdwardKim,HadiRavanbakhsh,MarcellVazquez-Chanlatte,
andSanjitA.Seshia.2019.Verifai:Atoolkitfortheformaldesignandanalysisofartificialintelligence-basedsystems.
InProceedings of theInternational Conferenceon Computer Aided Verification . Springer, 432–442.
[104] Julia Dressel and Hany Farid. 2018. The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism. Sci. Adv.4, 1 (2018),
eaao5580.
[105] Pawel Drozdowski, Christian Rathgeb, Antitza Dantcheva, Naser Damer, and Christoph Busch. 2020. Demographic
biasin biometrics:A survey on anemergingchallenge. IEEETrans.Technol.Soc. 1,2(2020),89–103.
[106] Chris Drummond.2009.Replicabilityis notreproducibility: Nor is itgood science.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 35 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:35
[107] Cynthia Dwork. 2008. Differential privacy: A survey of results. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Theory andApplications of Models ofComputation .Springer, 1–19.
[108] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. 2006. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private
dataanalysis.In Theory ofCryptography Conference .Springer,265–284.
[109] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. 2016. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private
dataanalysis. J.Priv.Confid. 7,3(2016),17–51.
[110] Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. 2014. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends Theor.
Comput.Sci. 9,3-4(2014),211–407.
[111] Khaled ElEmam,Elizabeth Jonker, Luk Arbuckle, and BradleyMalin.2011.A systematicreview of re-identification
attackson healthdata. PLoSOne 6,12(2011),e28071.
[112] Dumitru Erhan, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Pascal Vincent. 2010. Why does unsupervised pre-training
help deep learning?. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . JMLR
Workshop andConferenceProceedings, 201–208.
[113] ÚlfarErlingsson,VasylPihur,andAleksandraKorolova.2014.Rappor:Randomizedaggregatableprivacy-preserving
ordinal response. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security .
1054–1067.
[114] David Evans, Vladimir Kolesnikov, Mike Rosulek, et al. 2018. A pragmatic introduction to secure multi-party com-
putation. Found.Trends Priv.Secur. 2,2-3(2018),70–246.
[115] Exforsys. 2011. What Is Monkey Testing. Retrieved July 9, 2021 from http://www.exforsys.com/tutorials/testing-
types/monkey-testing.html .
[116] Alhussein Fawzi, Hamza Fawzi, and Omar Fawzi. 2018. Adversarial vulnerability for any classifier. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process.Syst. 31(2018).
[117] MichaelFeldman,SorelleA.Friedler,JohnMoeller,CarlosScheidegger,andSureshVenkatasubramanian.2015.Certi-
fyingandremovingdisparateimpact.In Proceedingsofthe21thACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledge
Discovery and DataMining . 259–268.
[118] NicolaFerro,MariaMaistro,TetsuyaSakai,andIanSoboroff.2018.OverviewofCENTRE@CLEF2018:Afirsttalein
thesystematicreproducibilityrealm.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceoftheCross-LanguageEvaluation
Forum forEuropean Languages . Springer,239–246.
[119] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. 2017. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
networks. In International Conferenceon Machine Learning .PMLR,1126–1135.
[120] Sam Fletcher and Md Zahidul Islam. 2019. Decision tree classification with differential privacy: A survey. ACM
Comput.Surv. 52,4(2019),1–33.
[121] LucianoFloridi. 2019.Establishingthe rules forbuildingtrustworthy AI. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1,6(2019),261–262.
[122] LucianoFloridiandJoshCowls.2019.AunifiedframeworkoffiveprinciplesforAIinsociety. Harv.DataSci.Review
1,1(2019).
[123] Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Sonam Choudhary, Evan P. Hamilton, and
Derek Roth. 2019. A comparative study of fairness-enhancing interventions in machine learning. In Proceedings
oftheConferenceonFairness,Accountability, andTransparency . 329–338.
[124] Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, et al. 2001. The Elements of Statistical Learning ,V o l .1 .S p r i n g e r .
New York.
[125] NicholasFrosstandGeoffreyHinton.2017.Distillinganeuralnetworkintoasoftdecisiontree.In CEXWorkshopat
AI*IA 2017 Conference .
[126] ChanghongFu,MiguelA.Olivares-Mendez,RamonSuarez-Fernandez,andPascualCampoy.2014.Monocularvisual-
inertialSLAM-basedcollisionavoidancestrategyforfail-safeUAVusingfuzzylogiccontrollers. J.Intell.Robot.Syst.
73,1 (2014),513–533.
[127] SainyamGalhotra,YuriyBrun,andAlexandraMeliou.2017.Fairnesstesting:Testingsoftwarefordiscrimination.In
Proceedings ofthe11th JointMeeting onFoundations of Software Engineering . 498–510.
[128] Adrià Gascón, Phillipp Schoppmann, Borja Balle, Mariana Raykova, Jack Doerner, Samee Zahur, and David Evans.
2017. Privacy-preserving distributed linear regression on high-dimensional data. Proc. Priv. Enhanc. Technol. 2017,
4(2017),345–364.
[129] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé Iii,
andKateCrawford.2021.Datasheets fordatasets. Commun. ACM 64,12(2021),86–92.
[130] AmirataGhorbani,AbubakarAbid,andJamesZou.2019.Interpretationofneuralnetworksisfragile.In Proceedings
oftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence , Vol.33.3681–3688.
[131] RossGirshick,JeffDonahue,TrevorDarrell,andJitendraMalik.2014.Richfeaturehierarchiesforaccurateobjectde-
tectionandsemanticsegmentation.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition .
580–587.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 36 ====
177:36 B. Li et al.
[132] John R. Goodall, Eric D. Ragan, Chad A. Steed, Joel W. Reed, G. David Richardson, Kelly M. T. Huffer, Robert A.
Bridges,andJasonA.Laska.2018.Situ:Identifyingandexplainingsuspiciousbehaviorinnetworks. IEEETrans.Vis.
Comput. Graph. 25,1(2018),204–214.
[133] IanGoodfellow,Yoshua Bengio,andAaron Courville. 2016.Machinelearningbasics. Deep Learn. 1(2016),98–164.
[134] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
InProceedings of theInternational ConferenceonLearning Representations (ICLR’15) .
[135] Bryce Goodman and Seth Flaxman. 2017. European union regulations on algorithmic decision-making and a “right
to explanation.” AIMag.38,3(2017),50–57.
[136] Google. 2020. Responsible AI with TensorFlow. Retrieved February 20, 2021 https://blog.tensorflow.org/2020/06/
responsible-ai-with-tensorflow.html .
[137] Nina Grgić-Hlača, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Adrian Weller. 2018. Beyond distributive fair-
ness in algorithmic decision making: Feature selection for procedurally fair learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conferenceon Artificial Intelligence ,Vol. 32.
[138] Bin Gu, Zhiyuan Dang, Xiang Li, and Heng Huang. 2020. Federated doubly stochastic kernel learning for vertically
partitioned data. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining. 2483–2493.
[139] Shixiang Gu and Luca Rigazio. 2015. Towards deep neural network architectures robust to adversarial examples.
In3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’15), San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Workshop
Track Proceedings .
[140] Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Dino Pedreschi, Franco Turini, and Fosca Giannotti. 2018.
Localrule-basedexplanationsofblackboxdecisionsystems.arXiv:1805.10820.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/
1805.10820 .
[141] Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino Pedreschi. 2018. A
survey of methods for explainingblackboxmodels. ACMComput. Surv. 51,5 (2018),1–42.
[142] OddErikGundersen,YolandaGil,andDavidW.Aha.2018.OnreproducibleAI:Towardsreproducibleresearch,open
science, anddigitalscholarship in AI publications. AIMag.39,3(2018),56–68.
[143] Odd Erik Gundersen and Sigbjorn Kjensmo. 2018. State of the art: Reproducibility in artificial intelligence. In Pro-
ceedings oftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence , Vol.32.
[144] DavidGunningandDavidAha.2019.DARPA’sexplainableartificialintelligence(XAI)program. AIMag.40,2(2019),
44–58.
[145] Thilo Hagendorff. 2020.Theethics of AI ethics: An evaluationof guidelines. Minds Mach. 30,1(2020),99–120.
[146] KarenHao.2019.AIIsSendingPeopletoJail—AndGettingItWrong.RetrievedFebruary20,2021from https://www.
technologyreview.com/2019/01/21/137783/algorithms-criminal-justice-ai/ .Accessed: 2021-02-20.
[147] MoritzHardt,EricPrice,andNatiSrebro.2016.Equalityofopportunityinsupervisedlearning. Adv.Neur.Inf.Process.
Syst.29(2016).
[148] Stephen Hardy, Wilko Henecka, Hamish Ivey-Law, Richard Nock, Giorgio Patrini, Guillaume Smith, and Brian
Thorne. 2017. Private federated learning on vertically partitioned data via entity resolution and additively homo-
morphic encryption. arXiv:1711.10677.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.10677 .
[149] Chaoyang He, Songze Li, Jinhyun So, Xiao Zeng, Mi Zhang, Hongyi Wang, Xiaoyang Wang, Praneeth Vepakomma,
Abhishek Singh, Hang Qiu, et al. 2020. Fedml: A research library and benchmark for federated machine learning.
arXiv:2007.13518.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.13518 .
[150] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. 2020. Momentum contrast for unsupervised
visualrepresentationlearning.In ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition .
9729–9738.
[151] Yeye He and Jeffrey F. Naughton. 2009. Anonymization of set-valued data via top-down, local generalization. Proc.
VLDBEndow. 2,1(2009),934–945.
[152] Matthias Hein and Maksym Andriushchenko. 2017. Formal guarantees on the robustness of a classifier against ad-
versarial manipulation. Adv.Neur. Inf.Process.Syst. 30(2017).
[153] DanHendrycksandThomasDietterich.2019.Benchmarkingneuralnetworkrobustnesstocommoncorruptionsand
perturbations. In International Conference onLearningRepresentations .
[154] Melanie Herschel, Ralf Diestelkämper, and Houssem Ben Lahmar. 2017. A survey on provenance: What for? What
form? Whatfrom? VLDBJ.26,6(2017),881–906.
[155] Robert R. Hoffman, Shane T. Mueller, Gary Klein, and Jordan Litman. 2018. Metrics for explainable AI: Challenges
andprospects. arXiv:1812.04608.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.04608 .
[156] Sarah Holland, Ahmed Hosny, Sarah Newman, Joshua Joseph, and Kasia Chmielinski. 2020. The dataset nutrition
label.InData Protection andPrivacy, Volume 12:Data Protection andDemocracy ,V o l .3 .1 – 1 .
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 37 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:37
[157] Andreas Holzinger. 2016. Interactive machine learning for health informatics: When do we need the human-in-the-
loop?Brain Inf. 3,2(2016),119–131.
[158] Junyuan Hong, Haotao Wang, Zhangyang Wang, and Jiayu Zhou. 2021. Federated robustness propagation: Sharing
adversarialrobustness infederated learning.arXiv:2106.10196.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.10196 .
[159] YuanHong,JaideepVaidya,HaibingLu,PanagiotisKarras,andSanjayGoel.2014.Collaborativesearchlogsanitiza-
tion:Toward differentialprivacyandboosted utility. IEEETrans.Depend.Sec. Comput. 12,5(2014),504–518.
[160] MarkusHörwickandKarl-HeinzSiedersberger.2010.Strategyandarchitectureofasafetyconceptforfullyautomatic
andautonomousdrivingassistancesystems.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEIntelligentVehiclesSymposium .IEEE,955–960.
[161] Ayanna Howard and Jason Borenstein. 2018. The ugly truth about ourselves and our robot creations: The problem
of biasandsocial inequity. Sci. Eng.Ethics 24,5(2018),1521–1536.
[162] Xia Hu, Lingyang Chu, Jian Pei, Weiqing Liu, and Jiang Bian. 2021. Model complexity of deep learning: A survey.
Knowl.Inf.Syst. 63,10(2021),2585–2619.
[163] Chen Huang, Yining Li, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang. 2016. Learning deep representation for imbalanced
classification.In Proceedings of theIEEEConference onComputer Visionand PatternRecognition . 5375–5384.
[164] Xiaowei Huang, Daniel Kroening, Wenjie Ruan, James Sharp, Youcheng Sun, Emese Thamo, Min Wu, and Xinping
Yi.2020.Asurveyofsafetyandtrustworthinessofdeepneuralnetworks:Verification,testing,adversarialattackand
defence,andinterpretability. Comput. Sci. Rev. 37(2020),100270.
[165] WaldemarHummer,VinodMuthusamy,ThomasRausch,ParijatDube,KaoutarElMaghraoui,AnupamaMurthi,and
Punleuk Oum. 2019. Modelops: Cloud-based lifecycle management for reliable and trusted ai. In Proceedings of the
IEEEInternational ConferenceonCloudEngineering (IC2E’19) . IEEE, 113–120.
[166] IBM.TrustingAI.RetrievedFebruary20,2021from https://www.research.ibm.com/artificial-intelligence/trusted-ai/ .
[167] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internalcovariateshift.In International Conferenceon Machine Learning . PMLR,448–456.
[168] VasileiosIosifidis,BesnikFetahu,andEiriniNtoutsi.2019.Fae:Afairness-awareensembleframework.In Proceedings
oftheIEEEInternational Conferenceon Big Data(Big Data’19) . IEEE, 1375–1380.
[169] Richard Isdahl and Odd Erik Gundersen. 2019. Out-of-the-box reproducibility: A survey of machine learning plat-
forms.In Proceedings ofthe15th International Conferenceon Escience (eScience’19) . IEEE, 86–95.
[170] Sarthak Jain and Byron C. Wallace. 2019. Attention is not explanation. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and ShortPapers) . 3543–3556.
[171] Carolin E. M. Jakob, Florian Kohlmayer, Thierry Meurers, Jörg Janne Vehreschild, and Fabian Prasser. 2020. Design
andevaluationof adataanonymizationpipelinetopromoteopen scienceon COVID-19. Sci. Data 7,1(2020),1–10.
[172] MarijnJanssen,PaulBrous,ElsaEstevez,LuisS.Barbosa,andTomaszJanowski.2020.Datagovernance:Organizing
datafortrustworthy artificialintelligence. Go v ern.Inf.Qu a rt. 37,3(2020),101493.
[173] Seyyed Ahmad Javadi, Richard Cloete, Jennifer Cobbe, Michelle Seng Ah Lee, and Jatinder Singh. 2020. Monitoring
misuse for accountable’artificial intelligence as a service. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society . 300–306.
[174] Shouling Ji, Weiqing Li, Prateek Mittal, Xin Hu, and Raheem Beyah. 2015. {SecGraph}: A uniform and open-source
evaluation system for graph data anonymization and de-anonymization. In Proceedings of the 24th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIXSecurity’15) . 303–318.
[175] Shouling Ji, Weiqing Li, Mudhakar Srivatsa, and Raheem Beyah. 2014. Structural data de-anonymization: Quantifi-
cation, practice, and implications. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security. 1040–1053.
[176] Shouling Ji, Prateek Mittal, and Raheem Beyah. 2016. Graph data anonymization, de-anonymization attacks, and
de-anonymizabilityquantification:A survey. IEEECommun.Surv. Tutor. 19,2(2016),1305–1326.
[177] ZhanglongJi,ZacharyC.Lipton,andCharlesElkan.2014.Differentialprivacyandmachinelearning:Asurveyand
review.arXiv:1412.7584.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.7584 .
[178] AnnaJobin,MarcelloIenca,andEffyVayena.2019.ThegloballandscapeofAIethicsguidelines. Nat.Mach.Intell. 1,
9(2019),389–399.
[179] Sushant Kafle, Abraham Glasser, Sedeeq Al-khazraji, Larwan Berke, Matthew Seita, and Matt Huenerfauth. 2020.
Artificialintelligencefairnessinthecontextofaccessibilityresearchonintelligentsystemsforpeoplewhoaredeaf
or hard of hearing. ACMSIGACCESSAccess. Comput. 125(2020),1–1.
[180] Peter Kairouz, H. Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Kallista
Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. 2021. Advances and open problems in fed-
eratedlearning. Found.Trends Mach. Learn. 14,1–2(2021),1–210.
[181] Ehud Karnin, Jonathan Greene, and Martin Hellman. 1983. On secret sharing systems. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 29,
1(1983),35–41.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 38 ====
177:38 B. Li et al.
[182] Davinder Kaur, Suleyman Uslu, and Arjan Durresi. 2020. Requirements for trustworthy artificial intelligence—A
review. In Proceedings oftheInternational ConferenceonNetwork-Based Information Systems .Springer, 105–115.
[183] KenjiKawaguchi,LesliePackKaelbling,andYoshuaBengio.2017.Generalizationindeeplearning.arXiv:1710.05468.
Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.05468 .
[184] Been Kim and F. Doshi-Velez. 2018. Introduction to interpretable machine learning. In Proceedings of the CVPR’18
Tutorial onInterpretable Machine Learning for ComputerVision .
[185] BeenKim,RajivKhanna,andOluwasanmiO.Koyejo.2016.Examplesarenotenough,learntocriticize!criticismfor
interpretability. Adv.Neur. Inf.Process.Syst. 29(2016).
[186] MichaelKim,OmerReingold,andGuyRothblum.2018.Fairnessthroughcomputationally-boundedawareness. Adv.
Neur. Inf.Process.Syst. 31(2018).
[187] Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. 2016. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determination of
risk scores. In Proceedings ofInnovationsin Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS) .
[188] Brian Knott, Shobha Venkataraman, Awni Hannun, Shubho Sengupta, Mark Ibrahim, and Laurens van der Maaten.
2021.Crypten:Secure multi-partycomputationmeetsmachinelearning. Adv.Neur. Inf.Process.Syst. 34(2021).
[189] BranKnowlesandJohn T.Richards.2021.Thesanctionof authority: PromotingpublictrustinAI. In Proceedings of
theACMConferenceonFairness,Accountability, and Transparency . 262–271.
[190] Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel,andRuslanSalakhutdinov.2015.Siameseneuralnetworks forone-shot imagerecog-
nition. In ICMLDeep Learning Workshop ,V o l .2 .
[191] Allison Koenecke, Andrew Nam, Emily Lake, Joe Nudell, Minnie Quartey, Zion Mengesha, Connor Toups, John R.
Rickford, Dan Jurafsky, and Sharad Goel. 2020. Racial disparities in automated speech recognition. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 117,14(2020),7684–7689.
[192] Nathan Koenig and Andrew Howard. 2004. Design and use paradigms for gazebo, an open-source multi-robot sim-
ulator. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , Vol. 3. IEEE,
2149–2154.
[193] Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. 2017. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In International
ConferenceonMachine Learning .PMLR,1885–1894.
[194] SoheilKolouri,AniruddhaSaha,HamedPirsiavash,andHeikoHoffmann.2020.Universallitmuspatterns:Revealing
backdoor attacks in cnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
301–310.
[195] Emmanouil Krasanakis, Eleftherios Spyromitros-Xioufis, Symeon Papadopoulos, and Yiannis Kompatsiaris. 2018.
Adaptive sensitive reweighting to mitigate bias in fairness-aware classification. In Proceedings of the World Wide
Web Conference .853–862.
[196] Anders Krogh and John A. Hertz. 1992. A simple weight decay can improve generalization. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems .950–957.
[197] KunKuang,LianLi,ZhiGeng,LeiXu,KunZhang,BeishuiLiao,HuaxinHuang,PengDing,WangMiao,andZhichao
Jiang.2020.Causal inference. Engineering 6,3(2020),253–263.
[198] ToddKulesza,SimoneStumpf,MargaretBurnett,andIrwinKwan.2012.Tellmemore?Theeffectsofmentalmodel
soundness on personalizing an intelligent agent. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems .1–10.
[199] AbhishekKumar,TristanBraud,SasuTarkoma,andPanHui.2020.TrustworthyAIintheageofpervasivecomput-
ing and big data. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
Workshops (PerComWorkshops’20) .IEEE, 1–6.
[200] NishantKumar,MayankRathee,NishanthChandran,DivyaGupta,AseemRastogi,andRahulSharma.2020.Crypt-
flow: Secure tensorflow inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP’20) . IEEE, 336–
353.
[201] AlexeyKurakin,IanJ.Goodfellow,andSamyBengio.2018.Adversarialexamplesinthephysicalworld.In Artificial
Intelligence Safety and Security . Chapman& Hall/CRC,99–112.
[202] HimabinduLakkaraju,EceKamar,RichCaruana,andJureLeskovec.2017.Interpretable&explorableapproximations
of blackboxmodels. In The2017 Workshopon Fairness,Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning .
[203] Alexander Lavin, Ciaràn M. Gilligan-Lee, Alessya Visnjic, Siddha Ganju, Dava Newman, Sujoy Ganguly, Danny
Lange,AtılımGüneşBaydin,AmitSharma,AdamGibson,etal.2021.Technologyreadinesslevelsformachinelearn-
ingsystems. arXiv:2101.03989.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.03989 .
[204] Mathias Lecuyer, Vaggelis Atlidakis, Roxana Geambasu, Daniel Hsu, and Suman Jana. 2019. Certified robustness to
adversarialexampleswithdifferentialprivacy.In ProceedingsoftheIEEESymposiumonSecurityandPrivacy(SP’19) .
IEEE, 656–672.
[205] Sungjin Lee, Qi Zhu, Ryuichi Takanobu, Zheng Zhang, Yaoqin Zhang, Xiang Li, Jinchao Li, Baolin Peng, Xiujun Li,
Minlie Huang, and Jianfeng Gao. 2019. ConvLab: Multi-domain end-to-end dialog system platform. In Proceedings
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 39 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:39
of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations . Association for
ComputationalLinguistics, 64–69. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-3011
[206] KlasLeino,ZifanWang,andMattFredrikson.2021.Globally-robustneuralnetworks.In InternationalConferenceon
Machine Learning . PMLR,6212–6222.
[207] JulioCesarSampaiodoPradoLeiteandClaudiaCappelli.2010.Softwaretransparency. Bus.Inf.Syst.Eng. 2,3(2010),
127–139.
[208] Bruno Lepri, Nuria Oliver, Emmanuel Letouzé, Alex Pentland, and Patrick Vinck. 2018. Fair, transparent, and ac-
countablealgorithmicdecision-making processes. Philos.Technol. 31,4(2018),611–627.
[209] David Leslie. 2019. Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety: A guide for the responsible design and
implementationof AIsystems in thepublicsector. TheAlanTuring Institute.
[210] DaveLewis,DavidFilip,andHarshvardhanJ.Pandit.2021.AnontologyforstandardisingtrustworthyAI.In Factor-
ing Ethics in Technology,Policy Making, Regulation and AI ,65.
[211] Bo Li, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, and Xinyun Chen. 2016. A general retraining framework for scalable adversarial clas-
sification.In NIPS2016 Workshopon Adversarial Training .
[212] Ke LiandJitendraMalik.2017.Learningto optimize.In International Conference onLearningRepresentations .
[213] YimingLi,YongJiang,ZhifengLi,andShu-TaoXia.2017.Backdoorlearning:Asurvey. IEEETransactionsonNeural
Networks and Learning Systems .
[214] Yehuda Lindell.2020.Secure multipartycomputation. Communications oftheACM 64,1(2020),86–96.
[215] YehudaLindellandBennyPinkas.2009.Aproofofsecurityofyao’sprotocolfortwo-partycomputation. J.Cryptol.
22,2(2009),161–188.
[216] Zachary C. Lipton. 2018. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of interpretability
is bothimportantandslippery. Queue16,3(2018),31–57.
[217] Bo Liu, Chaowei Tan, Jiazhou Wang, Tao Zeng, Huasong Shan, Houpu Yao, Huang Heng, Peng Dai, Liefeng Bo,
and Yanqing Chen. 2021. Fedlearn-algo: A flexible open-source privacy-preserving machine learning platform.
arXiv:2107.04129.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.04129 .
[218] HaochenLiu,YiqiWang,WenqiFan,XiaoruiLiu,YaxinLi,ShailiJain,AnilK.Jain,andJiliangTang.2022.Trustwor-
thy ai:A computationalperspective. A CMT r a ns.I nte ll.S y st.T ec hnol ,Jun 2022.Just Accepted.
[219] KangLiu,BrendanDolan-Gavitt,andSiddharthGarg.2018.Fine-pruning:Defendingagainstbackdooringattackson
deepneuralnetworks.In InternationalSymposiumonResearchinAttacks,Intrusions,andDefenses .Springer,273–294.
[220] Kun Liu and Evimaria Terzi. 2008. Towards identity anonymization on graphs. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD
International ConferenceonManagement ofData . 93–106.
[221] MingLiu,YukangDing,MinXia,XiaoLiu,ErruiDing,WangmengZuo,andShileiWen.2019.STGAN:Aunifiedse-
lectivetransfernetworkforarbitraryimageattributeediting.In ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer
Vision and Pattern Recognition . 3673–3682.
[222] Yang Liu, Yan Kang, Chaoping Xing, Tianjian Chen, and Qiang Yang. 2020. A secure federated transfer learning
framework. IEEEIntell.Syst. 35,4(2020),70–82.
[223] Guodong Long, Yue Tan, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi Zhang. 2020. Federated learning for open banking. In Federated
Learning. Springer,240–254.
[224] JonathanLong,EvanShelhamer,andTrevorDarrell.2015.Fullyconvolutionalnetworksforsemanticsegmentation.
InProceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer Visionand PatternRecognition . 3431–3440.
[225] Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. 2017. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Adv. Neur. Inf. Proc.
Syst.30(2017),4765–4774.
[226] LeiMa,FelixJuefei-Xu,FuyuanZhang,JiyuanSun,MinhuiXue,BoLi,ChunyangChen,TingSu,LiLi,YangLiu,etal.
2018. Deepgauge: Multi-granularity testing criteria for deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE
International Conferenceon Automated Software Engineering . 120–131.
[227] Gabriel Resende Machado, Eugênio Silva, and Ronaldo Ribeiro Goldschmidt. 2021. Adversarial machine learning in
imageclassification: A survey towardthe defender’sperspective. ACMComput. Surv. 55,1(2021),1–38.
[228] Michael A. Madaio, Luke Stark, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, and Hanna Wallach. 2020. Co-designing checklists to
understand organizational challenges and opportunities around fairness in AI. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–14.
[229] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. 2018. Towards deep
learningmodelsresistant to adversarialattacks.In International ConferenceonLearning Representations .
[230] Silvia Magdici and Matthias Althoff. 2016. Fail-safe motion planning of autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings of the
IEEE19th International ConferenceonIntelligentTransportation Systems (ITSC’16) .IEEE, 452–458.
[231] PratyushMaini,EricWong,andZicoKolter.2020.Adversarialrobustnessagainsttheunionofmultipleperturbation
models.In International Conferenceon Machine Learning . PMLR,6640–6650.
[232] AbdulMajeedandSungchangLee.2020.Anonymizationtechniquesforprivacypreservingdatapublishing:Acom-
prehensive survey. IEEEAccess 9(2020),8512–8545.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 40 ====
177:40 B. Li et al.
[233] SasuMäkinen,HenrikSkogström,EeroLaaksonen,andTommiMikkonen.2021.Whoneedsmlops:Whatdatascien-
tists seek to accomplish and how can MLOps help? In Proceedings of theIEEE/ACM1stWorkshop on AI Engineering-
Software Engineering forAI(WAIN’21) . IEEE, 109–112.
[234] Christopher D.Manning.2022.Humanlanguageunderstanding & reasoning. Daedalus 151,2(2022),127–138.
[235] DusicaMarijanandArnaudGotlieb.2020.Softwaretestingformachinelearning.In ProceedingsoftheAAAIConfer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence ,Vol. 34.13576–13582.
[236] David J. Martin, Daniel Kifer, Ashwin Machanavajjhala, Johannes Gehrke, and Joseph Y. Halpern. 2007. Worst-case
background knowledge for privacy-preserving data publishing. In Proceedings of the IEEE 23rd International Confer-
ence onData Engineering . IEEE, 126–135.
[237] AndreMartinsandRamonAstudillo.2016.Fromsoftmaxtosparsemax:Asparsemodelofattentionandmulti-label
classification. In International Conferenceon Machine Learning . PMLR,1614–1623.
[238] Binny Mathew, Punyajoy Saha, Seid Muhie Yimam, Chris Biemann, Pawan Goyal, and Animesh Mukherjee. 2021.
HateXplain: A benchmark dataset for explainable hate speech detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence ,Vol. 35.14867–14875.
[239] Maxim Maximov, Ismail Elezi, and Laura Leal-Taixé. 2020. Ciagan: Conditional identity anonymization generative
adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 5447–
5456.
[240] FrankMcKeen,IlyaAlexandrovich,IttaiAnati,DrorCaspi,SimonJohnson,RebekahLeslie-Hurd,andCarlosRozas.
2016. Intel software guard extensions (intel sgx) support for dynamic memory management inside an enclave. In
Proceedings oftheHardware and Architectural Support forSecurity andPrivacy 2016 .1 – 9 .
[241] BrendanMcMahan,EiderMoore,DanielRamage,SethHampson,andBlaiseAguerayArcas.2017.Communication-
efficientlearningofdeepnetworksfromdecentralizeddata.In ArtificialIntelligenceandStatistics .PMLR,1273–1282.
[242] Ninareh Mehrabi, Fred Morstatter, Nripsuta Saxena, Kristina Lerman, and Aram Galstyan. 2021. A survey on bias
andfairness inmachinelearning. ACMComput.Surv. 54,6(2021),1–35.
[243] Jan Hendrik Metzen, Tim Genewein, Volker Fischer, and Bastian Bischoff. 2017. On detecting adversarial perturba-
tions.In5thInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations(ICLR’17),Toulon,France,April24-26,2017,Confer-
ence Track Proceedings .
[244] Silvio Micali, Oded Goldreich, and Avi Wigderson. 1987. How to play any mental game. In Proceedings of the 19th
ACMSymposium on Theory ofComputing (STOC’87) .ACM,218–229.
[245] TimMiller.2019.Explanationinartificialintelligence:Insightsfromthesocialsciences. Artif.Intell. 267(2019),1–38.
[246] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer,
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019. Model cards for model reporting. In Proceedings of the Conference
onFairness,Accountability, andTransparency . 220–229.
[247] Payman Mohassel and Yupeng Zhang. 2017. Secureml: A system for scalable privacy-preserving machine learning.
InProceedings of theIEEESymposium on Security and Privacy (SP’17) . IEEE, 19–38.
[248] Sina Mohseni, Jeremy E. Block, and Eric D. Ragan. 2018. A human-grounded evaluation benchmark for local expla-
nations of machinelearning.arXiv:1801.05075.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.1801.05075 .
[249] Sina Mohseni, Niloofar Zarei, and Eric D. Ragan. 2021. A multidisciplinary survey and framework for design and
evaluationof explainableAI systems. ACMTrans. Interacti. Intell.Syst. 11,3-4(2021),1–45.
[250] Christoph Molnar.2020.InterpretableMachineLearning.RetrievedfromLulu.com.
[251] Miranda Mourby, Elaine Mackey, Mark Elliot, Heather Gowans, Susan E. Wallace, Jessica Bell, Hannah Smith, Ster-
gios Aidinlis, and Jane Kaye. 2018. Are ‘pseudonymise’ data always personal data? Implications of the GDPR for
administrativedataresearch in theUK. Comput.Law Secur. Rev. 34,2 (2018),222–233.
[252] MarkWilfriedMüller.2016. IncreasedAutonomyforQuadrocopterSystems:TrajectoryGeneration,Fail-safeStrategies
and State Estimation .Ph.D.Dissertation. ETH Zurich.
[253] Mehmet Ercan Nergiz, Maurizio Atzori, and Chris Clifton. 2007. Hiding the presence of individuals from shared
databases.In Proceedings oftheACMSIGMODInternational Conference onManagement ofData . 665–676.
[254] OpenAI.2018.OpenAICharter. RetrievedFebruary 20,2021from https://openai.com/charter/ .
[255] Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2009. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 22, 10 (2009),
1345–1359.
[256] YingweiPan,YehaoLi,JianjieLuo,JunXu,TingYao,andTaoMei.2020.Auto-captionsonGIF:Alarge-scalevideo-
sentencedatasetforvision-languagepre-training.arXiv:2007.02375.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.02375 .
[257] GuansongPang,ChunhuaShen,LongbingCao,andAntonVanDenHengel.2021.Deeplearningforanomalydetec-
tion: A review. ACMComput. Surv. 54,2(2021),1–38.
[258] Andrea Paudice, Luis Muñoz-González, and Emil C. Lupu. 2018. Label sanitization against label flipping poisoning
attacks.In JointEuropean Conferenceon Machine Learning andKnowledge Discovery in Databases .Springer, 5–15.
[259] Judea Pearl.2009.Causalinferencein statistics:An overview. Stat. Surv. 3(2009),96–146.
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 41 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:41
[260] KexinPei,YinzhiCao,JunfengYang,andSumanJana.2017.Deepxplore:Automatedwhiteboxtestingofdeeplearn-
ingsystems. In Proceedings ofthe26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . 1–18.
[261] AntonioPérez,M.IsabelGarcía,ManuelNieto,JoséL.Pedraza,SantiagoRodríguez,andJuanZamorano.2010.Argos:
Anadvancedin-vehicledatarecorderonamassivelysensorizedvehicleforcardriverbehaviorexperimentation. IEEE
Trans.Intell.Transport. Syst. 11,2(2010),463–473.
[262] Zahid Pervaiz, Walid G. Aref, Arif Ghafoor, and Nagabhushana Prabhu. 2013. Accuracy-constrained privacy-
preserving access control mechanism for relationaldata. IEEETrans.Knowl.Data Eng. 26,4(2013),795–807.
[263] JoellePineau,PhilippeVincent-Lamarre,KoustuvSinha,VincentLarivière,AlinaBeygelzimer,Florenced’AlchéBuc,
Emily Fox, and Hugo Larochelle. 2021. Improving reproducibility in machine learning research: A report from the
NeurIPS 2019reproducibility program. J.Mach.Learn. Res. 22(2021).
[264] SandroPintoandNunoSantos.2019.Demystifyingarmtrustzone:Acomprehensivesurvey. ACMComput.Surv. 51,
6(2019),1–36.
[265] David Piorkowski, Daniel González, John Richards, and Stephanie Houde. 2020. Towards evaluating and elicit-
inghigh-qualitydocumentationforintelligentsystems.arXiv:2011.08774.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.
08774.
[266] GeoffPleiss,ManishRaghavan,FelixWu,JonKleinberg,andKilianQ.Weinberger.2017.Onfairnessandcalibration.
Adv.Neur. Inf.Process.Syst. 30(2017).
[267] ForoughPoursabzi-Sangdeh,DanielG.Goldstein,JakeM.Hofman,JenniferWortmanWortmanVaughan,andHanna
Wallach. 2021. Manipulating and measuring model interpretability. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems .1–52.
[268] Stephan Rabanser, Stephan Günnemann, and Zachary Lipton. 2019. Failing loudly: An empirical study of methods
for detectingdatasetshift. Adv.Neur.Inf.Process. Syst. 32(2019).
[269] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language understanding by
generativepre-training.
[270] Aditi Raghunathan, Jacob Steinhardt, and Percy Liang. 2018. Certified defenses against adversarial examples. In
Proceedings oftheInternational ConferenceonLearning Representations .
[271] Aditi Raghunathan, Sang Michael Xie, Fanny Yang, John C. Duchi, and Percy Liang. 2019. Adversarial training can
hurt generalization.In ICML2019 WorkshopDeep Phenomena .
[272] InioluwaDeborahRaji,AndrewSmart,RebeccaN.White,MargaretMitchell,TimnitGebru,BenHutchinson,Jamila
Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. 2020. Closing the AI accountability gap: Defining an end-to-end
framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency. 33–44.
[273] Inioluwa Deborah Raji and Jingying Yang. 2019. About ml: Annotation and benchmarking on understanding and
transparency of machine learning lifecycles. In Human-Centric Machine Learning workshop at Neural Information
Processing Systems conference 2019 .
[274] Bogdana Rakova, Jingying Yang, Henriette Cramer, and Rumman Chowdhury. 2021. Where responsible AI meets
reality:Practitionerperspectivesonenablersforshiftingorganizationalpractices. Proc.ACMHum.-Comput.Interact.
5,CSCW1 (2021),1–23.
[275] Raghavendra Ramachandra and Christoph Busch. 2017. Presentation attack detection methods for face recognition
systems: A comprehensivesurvey. ACMComput.Surv. 50,1(2017),1–37.
[276] DeevashwerRathee,Mayank Rathee,Nishant Kumar,Nishanth Chandran, DivyaGupta,Aseem Rastogi,andRahul
Sharma. 2020. CrypTFlow2: Practical 2-party secure inference. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer andCommunications Security . 325–342.
[277] Dillon Reisman, Jason Schultz, Kate Crawford, and Meredith Whittaker. 2018. Algorithmic impact assessments: A
practicalframeworkfor publicagencyaccountability.Retrievedfrom https://ainowinstitute.org/aiareport2018.pdf .
[278] Xuebin Ren, Chia-Mu Yu, Weiren Yu, Shusen Yang, Xinyu Yang, Julie A McCann, and S. Yu Philip. 2018. LoPub:
High-dimensional crowdsourced data publication with local differential privacy. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forens. Secur. 13, 9
(2018),2151–2166.
[279] MarcoTulioRibeiro,SameerSingh,andCarlosGuestrin.2016.“Whyshoulditrustyou?”Explainingthepredictions
ofanyclassifier.In Proceedingsofthe22ndACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandData
Mining. 1135–1144.
[280] MarcoTulioRibeiro,SameerSingh,andCarlosGuestrin.2018.Anchors:High-precisionmodel-agnosticexplanations.
InProceedings oftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence ,V o l .3 2 .
[281] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. 2020. Beyond accuracy: Behavioral test-
ing of NLP models with checklist. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics . 4902–4912.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 42 ====
177:42 B. Li et al.
[282] Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletari, Holger R. Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyridon Bakas, Math-
ieuN.Galtier,BennettA.Landman,KlausMaier-Hein,etal.2020.Thefutureofdigitalhealthwithfederatedlearning.
NPJ Digit. Med. 3,1(2020),1–7.
[283] LucRocher,JulienM.Hendrickx,andYves-AlexandreDeMontjoye.2019.Estimatingthesuccessofre-identifications
in incompletedatasetsusing generativemodels. Nat.Commun. 10,1(2019),1–9.
[284] Yuji Roh, Kangwook Lee, Steven Whang, and Changho Suh. 2020. FR-train: A mutual information-based approach
to fairandrobust training.In International ConferenceonMachine Learning . PMLR,8147–8157.
[285] AviRosenfeldandAriellaRichardson.2019.Explainabilityinhuman–agentsystems. Auton.AgentsMulti-AgentSyst.
33,6(2019),673–705.
[286] AndrewRossandFinaleDoshi-Velez.2018.Improvingtheadversarialrobustnessandinterpretabilityofdeepneural
networksbyregularizingtheirinputgradients.In ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence ,Vol.32.
[287] Mohamed Sabt, Mohammed Achemlal, and Abdelmadjid Bouabdallah. 2015. Trusted execution environment: What
itis,andwhatitisnot.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEInternationalConferenceonTrust,Security,andPrivacyinComput-
ing and Communications, IEEE International Conference on Big Data Science and Engineering, and IEEE International
SymposiumonParallelandDistributedProcessingwithApplications(Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA’15) ,Vol.1.IEEE,57–64.
[288] PierangelaSamaratiandLatanyaSweeney.1998.Protectingprivacywhendisclosinginformation:K-anonymityand
its enforcementthrough generalizationand suppression. Technicalreport, SRI International.
[289] Elena Samuylova. 2020. Machine Learning Monitoring: What It Is, and What We Are Missing. Retrieved May
18,2021from https://towardsdatascience.com/machine-learning-monitoring-what-it-is-and-what-we-are-missing-
e644268023ba .
[290] Christian Sandvig, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie Karahalios, and Cedric Langbort. 2014. Auditing algorithms: Research
methodsfordetectingdiscriminationoninternetplatforms.In ProceedingsoftheDataandDiscrimination:Converting
Critical ConcernsIntoProductive Inquiry 22(2014),4349–4357.
[291] Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. 2016. Meta-learning
withmemory-augmentedneuralnetworks. In International Conference onMachine Learning .PMLR,1842–1850.
[292] LauraSchelenz,AviSegal,andKobiGal.2020.Applyingtransparencyinartificialintelligencebasedpersonalization
systems. arXiv:2004.00935.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00935 .
[293] Sebastian Schelter, Joos-Hendrik Boese, Johannes Kirschnick, Thoralf Klein, and Stephan Seufert. 2017. Automati-
cally tracking metadata and provenance of machine learning experiments. In Machine Learning Systems Workshop
at NIPS.27–29.
[294] DanielSchiff,JasonBorenstein,JustinBiddle,andKellyLaas.2021.AIethicsinthepublic,private,andNGOsectors:
A review of aglobaldocumentcollection. IEEETrans.Technol.Soc. (2021).
[295] Albrecht Schmidt and Thomas Herrmann. 2017. Intervention user interfaces: A new interaction paradigm for auto-
matedsystems. Interactions 24,5(2017),40–45.
[296] DavidSculley,GaryHolt,DanielGolovin,EugeneDavydov,ToddPhillips,DietmarEbner,VinayChaudhary,Michael
Young,Jean-FrancoisCrespo,andDanDennison.2015.Hiddentechnicaldebtinmachinelearningsystems. Adv.Neur.
Inf.Process. Syst. 28(2015),2503–2511.
[297] RamprasaathR.Selvaraju,MichaelCogswell,AbhishekDas,RamakrishnaVedantam,DeviParikh,andDhruvBatra.
2017. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference onComputerVision .618–626.
[298] Sanjit A. Seshia, Dorsa Sadigh, and S. Shankar Sastry. 2022. Toward verified artificial intelligence. Communications
of theACM 65,7(2022),46–55.
[299] Micah J. Sheller, Brandon Edwards, G. Anthony Reina, Jason Martin, Sarthak Pati, Aikaterini Kotrotsou, Mikhail
Milchenko,WeilinXu,DanielMarcus,RivkaR.Colen,etal.2020.Federatedlearninginmedicine:Facilitatingmulti-
institutional collaborationswithout sharing patientdata. Sci. Rep.10,1(2020),1–12.
[300] Haoyi Shi, Chao Jiang, Wenrui Dai, Xiaoqian Jiang, Yuzhe Tang, Lucila Ohno-Machado, and Shuang Wang. 2016.
Secure multi-pArty computation grid LOgistic REgression (SMAC-GLORE). B M CM e d .I n f .D e c i s .M a k . 16, 3 (2016),
175–187.
[301] BenShneiderman.2020.Bridgingthegapbetweenethicsandpractice:Guidelinesforreliable,safe,andtrustworthy
Human-Centered AI systems. ACMTrans.Interact. Intell.Syst. 10,4 (2020),1–31.
[302] Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. 2017. Learning important features through propagating
activationdifferences. In International ConferenceonMachine Learning . PMLR,3145–3153.
[303] Umair Siddique. 2020.SafetyOps.arXiv:2008.04461.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.04461 .
[304] Samuel Henrique Silva and Peyman Najafirad. 2020. Opportunities and challenges in deep learning adversarial ro-
bustness: A survey. arXiv:2007.00753.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.00753 .
[305] Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2014. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising
imageclassificationmodelsandsaliencymaps.In Proceedingsofthe2ndInternationalConferenceonLearningRepre-
sentations (ICLR’14) .
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 43 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:43
[306] JatinderSingh,JenniferCobbe,andChrisNorval.2018.Decisionprovenance:Harnessingdataflowforaccountable
systems.IEEEAccess 7(2018),6562–6574.
[307] TomášSixta,JulioJacquesJunior,PauBuch-Cardona,EduardVazquez,andSergioEscalera.2020.Fairfacechallenge
ateccv 2020:Analyzing biasinfacerecognition.In European ConferenceonComputer Vision .Springer, 463–481.
[308] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. 2017. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Adv. Neur. Inf.
Process.Syst. 30(2017).
[309] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014. Dropout: A
simplewayto preventneuralnetworks from overfitting. J.Mach. Learn.Res. 15,1(2014),1929–1958.
[310] Brian Stanton, Theodore Jensen, et al. Trust and artificial intelligence. 2021. Draft NISTIR 8332, National Institute:
of Standards andTechnology.
[311] SimoneStumpf,AdrianBussone,andDympnaO’sullivan.2016.Explanationsconsideredharmful?userinteractions
withmachinelearningsystems.In ProceedingsoftheACMSIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems
(CHI).
[312] Dong Su, Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Jinfeng Yi, Pin-Yu Chen, and Yupeng Gao. 2018. Is robustness the cost of
accuracy?—A comprehensive study on the robustness of 18 deep image classification models. In Proceedings of the
European ConferenceonComputer Vision(ECCV’18) .631–648.
[313] WeijieSu,XizhouZhu,YueCao,BinLi,LeweiLu,FuruWei,andJifengDai.2019.VL-BERT:Pre-trainingofgeneric
visual-linguistic representations.In Proceedings of theInternational ConferenceonLearning Representations .
[314] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. 2017. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In International
ConferenceonMachine Learning . PMLR,3319–3328.
[315] Supreme Audit Institutions of Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and the UK. 2020. Auditing Machine
LearningAlgorithms. Retrievedfrom https://www.auditingalgorithms.net/index.html .
[316] Ki Hyun Tae, Yuji Roh, Young Hun Oh, Hyunsu Kim, and Steven Euijong Whang. 2019. Data cleaning for accurate,
fair,androbustmodels:Abigdata-AIintegrationapproach.In Proceedingsofthe3rdInternationalWorkshoponData
Management for End-to-EndMachine Learning .1 – 4 .
[317] SarahTan,MatveySoloviev,GilesHooker,andMartinT.Wells.2020.Treespaceprototypes:Anotherlookatmaking
treeensemblesinterpretable.In Proceedings oftheACM-IMSonFoundations ofData Science Conference .23–34.
[318] XinTan,YihengZhang,YingCao,LizhuangMa,andRynsonW.H.Lau.2021.Night-timesceneparsingwithalarge
realdataset. IEEETransactions onImage Processing ,30(2021),9085–9098.
[319] Brad Templaton. 2019. Tesla’s “Shadow” Testing Offers a Useful Advantage on the Biggest Problem in Robocars.
RetrievedJune15,2021from https://www.forbes.com/sites/bradtempleton/2019/04/29/teslas-shadow-testing-offers-
a-useful-advantage-on-the-biggest-problem-in-robocars/?sh=7a960b9e3c06 .
[320] Manolis Terrovitis, Nikos Mamoulis, and Panos Kalnis. 2008. Privacy-preserving anonymization of set-valued data.
Proc. VLDBEndow. 1,1(2008),115–125.
[321] NguyenThai-Nghe,ZenoGantner,andLarsSchmidt-Thieme.2010.Cost-sensitivelearningmethodsforimbalanced
data.InProceedings oftheInternational JointConferenceonNeural Networks (IJCNN’10) .IEEE, 1–8.
[322] ScottThiebes,SebastianLins,andAliSunyaev.2020.Trustworthyartificialintelligence. Electr.Markets (2020),1–18.
[323] Martijn Tideman. 2010. Scenario-based simulation environment for assistance systems. ATZautotechnology 10,
1(2010),28–32.
[324] EmanuelTodorov,TomErez,andYuvalTassa.2012.Mujoco:Aphysicsengineformodel-basedcontrol.In Proceedings
oftheIEEE/RSJ International ConferenceonIntelligentRobots and Systems .IEEE, 5026–5033.
[325] LiangTong,BoLi,ChenHajaj,ChaoweiXiao,NingZhang,andYevgeniyVorobeychik.2019.Improvingrobustness
of{ML}classifiers against realizable evasion attacks using conserved features. In Proceedings of the 28th USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIXSecurity’19) . 285–302.
[326] Cecília Torres, Walter Franklin, and Laura Martins. 2018. Accessibility in chatbots: The state of the art in favor of
users with visual impairment. In International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics . Springer, 623–
635.
[327] FlorianTramer,VaggelisAtlidakis,RoxanaGeambasu,DanielHsu,Jean-PierreHubaux,MathiasHumbert,AriJuels,
and Huang Lin. 2017. Fairtest: Discovering unwarranted associations in data-driven applications. In Proceedings of
theIEEEEuropean Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P’17) . IEEE, 401–416.
[328] Florian Tramèr, Alexey Kurakin, Nicolas Papernot, Ian Goodfellow, Dan Boneh, and Patrick McDaniel. 2018. En-
semble adversarial training: Attacks and defenses. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations .
[329] Florian Tramèr, Fan Zhang, Ari Juels, Michael K. Reiter, and Thomas Ristenpart. 2016. Stealing machine learning
models viaprediction {APIs}.I nProceedings of the25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIXSecurity’16) . 601–618.
[330] Amos Treiber, Alejandro Molina, Christian Weinert, Thomas Schneider, and Kristian Kersting. 2020. Cryptospn:
Privacypreservingsum-productnetworkinference.In 24thEuropeanConferenceonArtificialIntelligence(ECAI)2020,
Santiago de Compostela,Spain .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 44 ====
177:44 B. Li et al.
[331] Dimitris Tsipras, Shibani Santurkar, Logan Engstrom, Alexander Turner, and Aleksander Ma ¸dry. 2019. Robustness
m a yb ea to d d sw i t ha c c u r a c y .I n 7th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR’19), New Orleans,
LA,USA,May 6-9,2019 .
[332] Ming Tu, Kevin Huang, Guangtao Wang, Jing Huang, Xiaodong He, and Bowen Zhou. 2020. Select, answer and
explain: Interpretable multi-hop reading comprehension over multiple documents. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence ,Vol. 34.9073–9080.
[333] Matteo Turilli and Luciano Floridi. 2009. The ethics of information transparency. Ethics Inf. Technol. 11, 2 (2009),
105–112.
[334] UNI GlobalUnion. 2017.Top10principlesforethicalartificialintelligence.In TheFutureWorldof Work .
[335] CaterinaUrbanandAntoineMiné.2021.Areviewofformalmethodsappliedtomachinelearning.arXiv:2104.02466.
Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.02466 .
[336] Joaquin Vanschoren. 2018. Meta-learning: A survey. arXiv:1810.03548. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.
03548.
[337] Vladimir Vapnik.2013. TheNature ofStatistical Learning Theory .Springer Science & Business Media.
[338] Kush R. Varshney. 2019. Trustworthy machine learning and artificial intelligence. XRDS: Crossroads 25, 3 (2019),
26–29.
[339] SahilVermaandJuliaRubin.2018.Fairnessdefinitionsexplained.In ProceedingsoftheIEEE/ACMInternationalWork-
shopon Software Fairness (Fairware’18) . IEEE, 1–7.
[340] Yevgeniy Vorobeychik and Murat Kantarcioglu. 2018. Adversarial machine learning. Synth. Lect. Artif. Intell. Mach.
Learn.12,3 (2018),1–169.
[341] Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. 2017. Counterfactual explanations without opening the black
box:Automated decisions andthe GDPR. Harv. J.Law Technol. 31(2017),841.
[342] BolunWang,YuanshunYao,ShawnShan,HuiyingLi,BimalViswanath,HaitaoZheng,andBenY.Zhao.2019.Neural
cleanse: Identifying and mitigating backdoor attacks in neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Security andPrivacy (SP’19) . IEEE, 707–723.
[343] Jindong Wang, Cuiling Lan, Chang Liu, Yidong Ouyang, Wenjun Zeng, and Tao Qin. 2021. Generalizing to unseen
domains: A survey on domaingeneralization(unpublished).
[344] Qian Wang, Yan Zhang, Xiao Lu, Zhibo Wang, Zhan Qin, and Kui Ren. 2016. Real-time and spatio-temporal crowd-
sourcedsocialnetworkdatapublishingwithdifferentialprivacy. IEEETrans.Depend.Sec.Comput. 15,4(2016),591–
606.
[345] XiangWang,DingxianWang,CanranXu,XiangnanHe,YixinCao,andTat-SengChua.2019.Explainablereasoning
overknowledgegraphsforrecommendation.In ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence ,V ol.33.
5329–5336.
[346] Yisen Wang, Xingjun Ma, James Bailey, Jinfeng Yi, Bowen Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. 2019. On the convergence and
robustness of adversarial training. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’19) ,
Vol. 1.2.
[347] YingxuWangandJingqiuShao.2003.Measurementofthecognitivefunctionalcomplexityofsoftware.In Proceedings
of the2ndIEEEInternational ConferenceonCognitive Informatics. IEEE, 67–74.
[348] Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T. Kwok, and Lionel M. Ni. 2020. Generalizing from a few examples: A survey
on few-shotlearning. ACMComput.Surv. 53,3(2020),1–34.
[349] KangWei,JunLi,MingDing,ChuanMa,HowardH.Yang,FarhadFarokhi,ShiJin,TonyQ.S.Quek,andH.Vincent
Poor.2020.Federatedlearningwithdifferentialprivacy:Algorithmsandperformanceanalysis. IEEETrans.Inf.Forens.
Secur.15(2020),3454–3469.
[350] KarlWeiss,TaghiM.Khoshgoftaar,andDingDingWang.2016.Asurveyoftransferlearning. J.BigData 3,1(2016),
1–40.
[351] DanielS.WeldandGaganBansal.2019.Thechallengeofcraftingintelligibleintelligence. Commun.ACM 62,6(2019),
70–79.
[352] Tsui-WeiWeng,HuanZhang,Pin-YuChen,JinfengYi,DongSu,YupengGao,Cho-JuiHsieh,andLucaDaniel.2018.
Evaluatingtherobustnessofneuralnetworks:Anextremevaluetheoryapproach.In ProceedingsoftheInternational
ConferenceonLearning Representations .
[353] Chathurika S. Wickramasinghe, Daniel L. Marino, Javier Grandio, and Milos Manic. 2020. Trustworthy AI develop-
mentguidelinesforhumansysteminteraction.In Proceedingsofthe13thInternationalConferenceonHumanSystem
Interaction (HSI’20) . IEEE, 130–136.
[354] Sarah Wiegreffe and Ana Marasovic. 2021. Teach me to explain: A review of datasets for explainable natural lan-
guageprocessing.In Thirty-fifthConferenceonNeuralInformationProcessingSystemsDatasetsandBenchmarksTrack
(Round 1) .
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 45 ====
Trustworthy AI: From Principles toPractices 177:45
[355] SarahWiegreffeandYuvalPinter.2019.Attentionisnotnotexplanation.In ProceedingsoftheConferenceonEmpirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP’19) .11–20.
[356] Christo Wilson, Avijit Ghosh, Shan Jiang, Alan Mislove, Lewis Baker, Janelle Szary, Kelly Trindel, and Frida Polli.
2021.Buildingandauditingfairalgorithms:Acasestudyincandidatescreening.In ProceedingsoftheACMConference
onFairness,Accountability, and Transparency . 666–677.
[357] JeannetteM. Wing.2021.Trustworthy ai. Commun.ACM 64,10(2021),64–71.
[358] Tong Wu, Liang Tong, and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. 2020. Defending against physically realizable attacks on image
classification.In 8thInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations(ICLR’20),AddisAbaba,Ethiopia,April26-30,
2020.
[359] Bernhard Wymann, Eric Espié, Christophe Guionneau, Christos Dimitrakakis, Rémi Coulom, and Andrew Sumner.
2000.Torcs, theopenracing carsimulator.Retrieved from http://torcs.sourceforge.net .
[360] Weiyi Xia, Yongtai Liu, Zhiyu Wan, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Murat Kantacioglu, Steve Nyemba, Ellen Wright Clay-
ton,andBradleyA.Malin.2021.Enablingrealistichealthdatare-identificationrisk assessmentthrough adversarial
modeling. J.Am.Med. Inf.Assoc. 28,4(2021),744–752.
[361] Han Xu, Xiaorui Liu, Yaxin Li, Anil Jain, and Jiliang Tang. 2021. To be robust or to be fair: Towards fairness in
adversarialtraining.In International ConferenceonMachine Learning . PMLR,11492–11501.
[362] Huan Xu andShie Mannor. 2012.Robustness andgeneralization. Mach. Learn. 86,3(2012),391–423.
[363] KelvinXu,JimmyBa,RyanKiros,KyunghyunCho,AaronCourville,RuslanSalakhudinov,RichZemel,andYoshua
Bengio. 2015. Show, attend and tell: Neural image caption generation with visual attention. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning . PMLR,2048–2057.
[364] Qian Xu, Md Tanvir Arafin, and Gang Qu. 2021. Security of neural networks from hardware perspective: A survey
and beyond. In Proceedings of the 26th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC’21) . IEEE,
449–454.
[365] QiangYang,YangLiu,TianjianChen,andYongxinTong.2019.Federatedmachinelearning:Conceptandapplications.
ACMTrans. Intell.Syst.Technol. 10,2(2019),1–19.
[366] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2018. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the
Conferenceon Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . 2369–2380.
[367] AndrewC.Yao.1982.Protocolsforsecurecomputations.In Proceedingsofthe23rdAnnualSymposiumonFoundations
ofComputer Science (SFCS’82) .IEEE, 160–164.
[368] Ting Yao, Yiheng Zhang, Zhaofan Qiu, Yingwei Pan, and Tao Mei. 2021. Seco: Exploring sequence supervision for
unsupervised representationlearning.In AAAI,V o l.2.7.
[369] Yu Yao and Ella Atkins. 2020. The smart black box: A value-driven high-bandwidth automotive event data recorder.
IEEETrans.Intell.Transport.Sys. (2020).
[370] Yuan Yao, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Andrea Caponnetto. 2007. On early stopping in gradient descent learning. Constr.
Approx.26,2(2007),289–315.
[371] Mo Yu, Xiaoxiao Guo, Jinfeng Yi, Shiyu Chang, Saloni Potdar, Yu Cheng, Gerald Tesauro, Haoyu Wang, and Bowen
Zhou. 2018. Diverse few-shot text classification with multiple metrics. In Proceedings of the Human Language Tech-
nology:Conferenceof theNorthAmerican ChapteroftheAssociation ofComputational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT’18) .
[372] Mingxuan Yuan, Lei Chen, S. Yu Philip, and Ting Yu. 2011. Protecting sensitive labels in social network data
anonymization. IEEETrans.Knowl.DataEng. 25,3(2011),633–647.
[373] XiaoyongYuan,PanHe,QileZhu,andXiaolinLi.2019.Adversarialexamples:Attacksanddefensesfordeeplearning.
IEEETrans.Neural Netw.Learn.Syst. 30,9(2019),2805–2824.
[374] Matei Zaharia, Andrew Chen, Aaron Davidson, Ali Ghodsi, Sue Ann Hong, Andy Konwinski, Siddharth Murching,
Tomas Nykodym, Paul Ogilvie, Mani Parkhe, et al. 2018. Accelerating the machine learning lifecycle with MLflow.
IEEEDataEng. Bull. 41,4(2018),39–45.
[375] Matthew D. Zeiler and Rob Fergus. 2014. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In European Con-
ference onComputer Vision .Springer,818–833.
[376] Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. 2013. Learning fair representations. In Inter-
national Conferenceon Machine Learning .PMLR,325–333.
[377] Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. 2017. Understanding deep learn-
ingrequiresrethinkinggeneralization.In 5thInternationalConferenceonLearningRepresentations(ICLR’17),Toulon,
France, April 24-26, 2017, ConferenceTrack Proceedings .
[378] Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Chaowei Xiao, Bo Li, Duane Boning, and Cho Jui Hsieh. 2019. Towards stable and
efficienttrainingof verifiablyrobust neural networks. J.Environ.Sci. (Chin.) (2019).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No. 9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

==== Page 46 ====
177:46 B. Li et al.
[379] Huan Zhang, Tsui-Wei Weng, Pin-Yu Chen, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Luca Daniel. 2018. Efficient neural network robust-
ness certification withgeneralactivationfunctions. Adv.Neural Inf.Process.Syst. 31(2018).
[380] Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Jiantao Jiao, Eric Xing, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Michael Jordan. 2019. Theoreti-
callyprincipledtrade-offbetweenrobustnessandaccuracy.In InternationalConferenceonMachineLearning .PMLR,
7472–7482.
[381] JieM.Zhang,MarkHarman,LeiMa,andYangLiu.2022.Machinelearningtesting:Survey,landscapesandhorizons.
IEEETransactions onSoftware Engineering 48,1(2022),1–36.
[382] Mengshi Zhang, Yuqun Zhang, Lingming Zhang, Cong Liu, and Sarfraz Khurshid. 2018. Deeproad: Gan-based
metamorphic testing and input validation framework for autonomous driving systems. In Proceedings of the 33rd
IEEE/ACMInternational ConferenceonAutomated Software Engineering (ASE’18) .IEEE, 132–142.
[383] QuanshiZhang,YingNianWu,andSong-ChunZhu.2018.Interpretableconvolutionalneuralnetworks.In Proceed-
ings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition . 8827–8836.
[384] Quanshi Zhang, Yu Yang, Haotian Ma, and Ying Nian Wu. 2019. Interpreting cnns via decision trees. In Proceedings
of theIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputer VisionandPattern Recognition . 6261–6270.
[385] SicongZhang,HuiYang,andLisaSingh.2016.Anonymizingquerylogsbydifferentialprivacy.In Proceedingsofthe
39th International ACMSIGIR Conferenceon Research and Developmentin Information Retrieval . 753–756.
[386] Xuyun Zhang, Laurence T. Yang, Chang Liu, and Jinjun Chen. 2013. A scalable two-phase top-down specialization
approachfor dataanonymizationusing mapreduceon cloud. IEEETrans.Parallel Distrib. Syst. 25,2 (2013),363–373.
[387] Chuan Zhao, Shengnan Zhao, Minghao Zhao, Zhenxiang Chen, Chong-Zhi Gao, Hongwei Li, and Yu-an Tan. 2019.
Secure multi-partycomputation:Theory, practiceand applications. Inf.Sci.476(2019),357–372.
[388] Ziyuan Zhong. A Tutorial on Fairness in Machine Learning. Retrieved from https://towardsdatascience.com/a-
tutorial-on-fairness-in-machine-learning-3ff8ba1040cb .
[389] Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. 2016. Learning deep features
for discriminative localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
2921–2929.
[390] Bin Zhou, Jian Pei, and WoShun Luk. 2008. A brief survey on anonymization techniques for privacy preserving
publishingof social networkdata. ACMSIGKDDExplor.Newslett. 10,2(2008),12–22.
[391] Kaiyang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, Yu Qiao, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. 2022. Domain generalization: A survey. IEEE
Transactions onPatternAnalysis andMachine Intelligence .
[392] YichenZhouandGilesHooker.2016.Interpretingmodelsviasingletreeapproximation.arXiv:1610.09036.Retrieved
fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1610.09036 .
[393] Zhi-HuaZhou,YuanJiang,andShi-FuChen.2003.Extractingsymbolicrulesfromtrainedneuralnetworkensembles.
Ai Commun. 16,1(2003),3–15.
[394] Indr ˙eŽliobait ˙e,MykolaPechenizkiy,andJoaoGama.2016.Anoverviewofconceptdriftapplications. BigDataAnal.:
New Algor.New Soc. (2016),91–114.
Received 3October 2021; revised6May2022; accepted 2 August 2022
ACMComputingSurveys, Vol. 55,No.9,Article 177.Publicationdate:January 2023.

