==== Page 1 ====
This document is downloaded from DR‑NTU (https://dr.ntu.edu.sg)
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
Uncertainty‑aware model‑based reinforcement
learning: methodology and application in
autonomous driving
Wu, Jingda; Huang, Zhiyu; Lv, Chen
2022
Wu, J., Huang, Z. & Lv, C. (2022). Uncertainty‑aware model‑based reinforcement learning:
methodology and application in autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions On Intelligent
Vehicles, 8(1), 194‑203. https://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2022.3185159
https://hdl.handle.net/10356/178357
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2022.3185159
© 2022 IEEE. All rights reserved. This article may be downloaded for personal use only. Any
other use requires prior permission of the copyright holder. The Version of Record is
available online at http://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2022.3185159.
Downloaded on 09 Feb 2025 23:33:31 SGT

==== Page 2 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 1
Uncertainty-Aware Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning: Methodology and Application in
Autonomous Driving
Jingda Wu, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Zhiyu Huang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Chen Lv, Senior
Member, IEEE
Abstract —To further improve learning efficiency and per-
formance of reinforcement learning (RL), a novel uncertainty-
aware model-based RL method is proposed and validated in
autonomous driving scenarios in this paper. First, an action-
conditioned ensemble model with the capability of uncertainty
assessment is established as the environment model. Then, a novel
uncertainty-aware model-based RL method is developed based on
the adaptive truncation approach, providing virtual interactions
between the agent and environment model, and improving RL’s
learning efficiency and performance. The proposed method is
then implemented in end-to-end autonomous vehicle control
tasks, validated and compared with state-of-the-art methods
under various driving scenarios. Validation results suggest that
the proposed method outperforms the model-free RL approach
with respect to learning efficiency, and model-based approach
with respect to both efficiency and performance, demonstrating
its feasibility and effectiveness.
Index Terms —Model-based reinforcement learning, uncer-
tainty awareness, adaptive truncation, autonomous driving.
I. I NTRODUCTION
AS a crucial component of future mobility systems, au-
tonomous vehicles (A Vs) have been attracting great at-
tention from both academia and industry [1]–[3]. Developing
a safe, smart, and smooth autonomous driving strategy is of
great importance for promoting the deployment of A Vs in the
real world. Compared to rule-based strategies, learning-based
approaches are believed to be more advantageous in dealing
with challenging driving tasks, due to their powerful nonlinear
reasoning ability [4]–[8]. Among learning-based approaches,
reinforcement learning (RL) is very promising for solving
complex autonomous driving problems [9]. RL exhibits a
distinguished offline optimization ability which saves devel-
opers from heavy-duty rules design, and in the meantime, its
computational efficiency also relieves the harsh requirements
on onboard computing devices in real-time applications [10]–
[12].
For RL methods, the optimized policy is learned from
the interaction between the environment and the RL agent
[13]. Substantial RL-based applications in A Vs have been
J. Wu, Z. Huang, and C. Lv are with the School of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
639798. (e-mails: {jingda001,zhiyu001) }@e.ntu.edu.sg, lyuchen@ntu.edu.sg)
Corresponding author: C. Lv.
This work was supported in part by the Agency for Science, Technology
and Research (A*STAR) under Advanced Manufacturing and Engineering
(AME) Young Individual Research under Grant A2084c0156, and in part by
the Start-Up Grant, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.reported, and the main tasks include the optimization of
intelligent traffic flows [14], decision making [15], and control
of autonomous vehicles [16], [17]. Although these works show
a great post-training ability of RL in real-time applications,
they also reveal a crucial drawback that the offline training is
computationally intensive and time-consuming [18]. A reason
behind this is that the interactions between the agent and
environment are inefficient, and every single iteration can only
generate limited data [19].
To mitigate the abovementioned problem, the concept of
model-based RL (MBRL) has been proposed. Using data-
driven techniques, the characteristics, behaviors, and relation-
ships of the interactions between the actual environment and
the agent can be virtually modeled with acceptable accuracy.
The virtual environment model, which can predict the state
transitions according to the RL agent’s actions, generates ad-
ditional interaction data and accelerate the training process. In
this context, recently the MBRL method has attracted intensive
research interest from both theoretical and application aspects.
Model-based approaches can be divided into four types
following their different usage of the model [20]. The first
type is Dyna-style methods, in which interactions between RL
and the virtual environment are used to generate additional
data for improving RL efficiency [21]–[23]. The second type
refers to approaches incorporating model predictive control
(MPC) [24]. In these methods, an MPC controller optimizes
the RL agent’s behavior policy by predicting and planning
within the virtual environment at each training step. The
third type is the value augmentation scheme, which leverages
the iterative data generated from the virtual environment to
construct an intensified value function [25]–[27]. And the RL
training process is expected to be accelerated by facilitating
the convergence of the value function. The fourth type is the
analytic-gradient scheme. It constructs a differentiable model
to optimize the RL’s policy function through the gradient
value, which is the gradient of the model’s feedback with
respect to the policy function [20], [28].
Although the abovementioned MBRLs have validated fea-
sibility in simple environments, most of them can hardly be
transferred to autonomous driving tasks, since it is challenging
to accurately model the complex driving environment. An
inaccurate model will inevitably degrade the performances of
MBRLs to different extents [29]. Among candidates, analytic-
gradient approaches bear the brunt of model sensitivity since
they rely fully on the imaginary environment [30]. Value

==== Page 3 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 2
augmentation-based and MPC-based methods suffer deeply
from intractable importance sampling problems in inaccurate
models [10]. Hence, in the context of model inaccuracy, the
too-visible drawbacks of these three routes make Dyna-style
RL a promising choice. Nonetheless, the model inaccuracy
issue still remarkably affects the performance and should be
appropriately processed in designing the Dyna-style RL-based
autonomous driving strategy.
The model inaccuracy is evaluated by its uncertainty, which
refers to the uncertainty of outputs of the environment model
in facing various inputs. We quantify the output uncertainty
by the model ensemble technique. Based on that, we establish
a truncation mechanism to rule out the over unreliable data
by querying the model uncertainty for Dyna-style RLs. Three
main contributions of this paper are introduced as follows.
First, an uncertainty-aware environment model architecture is
proposed to predict the state transition dynamics and reward of
autonomous driving environments. Second, leveraging model
uncertainty, a novel adaptive prediction truncation method is
put forward to solve the performance degradation caused by
the inaccurate environment model in model-based RL algo-
rithms. Third, the developed MBRL method is implemented
in end-to-end autonomous driving tasks, and its performance is
validated to be advantageous against those of existing model-
based and model-free RL-based strategies across varying test-
ing scenarios.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
high-level uncertainty-aware model-based RL framework is
introduced in Section II. Then, the environment modeling ap-
proach is proposed in Section III. The model-based RL method
is developed based on the uncertainty-aware environment
model in Section IV. Section V introduces the implementation
detail of autonomous driving tasks. Section VI provides the
validation, results, and discussions. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section VII.
II. T HEUNCERTAINTY -AWARE MODEL -BASED
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FRAMEWORK
In this section, the high-level framework of the proposed
uncertainty-aware model-based RL for autonomous driving
is introduced. As illustrated in Fig. 1, An off-policy actor-
critic RL agent interacts with the actual driving environment.
The generated actual interaction data is stored in the experi-
ence buffer DEfor the update of RL. Besides, in our pro-
posed framework, an additional virtual environment model is
uniquely designed and evolved using actual interaction data to
map the transition dynamics of the actual driving environment.
In this way, we can generate more virtual experience DMvia
predictions by the environment model, and therefore expedite
the learning process of RL with fewer actual interactions and
iterations.
The virtual environment model starts its prediction from
an actual state and conducts a consecutive iteration process.
The virtual environment model is an ensemble of five sub
models, each of which has the same structure, receives the
same inputs, and conducts an independent prediction. This
ensemble environment model averages the five predictions as
Fig. 1. High-level architecture of the proposed uncertainty-aware MBRL
method with application in the autonomous driving task.
the adopted output and computes the ensemble variance, which
is used as an uncertainty estimation. The basic purpose of
using an ensemble model is to estimate the epistemic uncer-
tainty through the variance of predictions of sub-models. This
way, the number of iteration steps and unreliable predicted
experience can be adaptively determined and truncated based
on the assessed model uncertainty. The truncation threshold is
inversely related to the variance with proper parameters.
With a focus on autonomous driving tasks, traffic scenarios
are designed to validate the proposed method. The RL agent is
expected to conduct end-to-end lateral motion control without
violating designed constraints. And its training efficiency and
execution performance in autonomous driving scenarios are
studied in this work.
III. V IRTUAL ENVIRONMENT MODELING WITH
UNCERTAINTY ASSESSMENT
Under the developed RL framework, first, an environment
model is established for realizing rapid and uncertainty-aware
prediction of the agent-environment virtual interactions. A
parameterized model Mwith parameter ψis established
to predict the transition dynamics of autonomous driving
scenarios. This expected functionality can be realized through
an action-conditioned predictive model [31]. With the encoder-
decoder framework, the environment model takes the concate-
nation of state and prospective action as inputs, and outputs
the predicted next-step state and reward. The above mapping
relationship is expressed as:
st+1, rt← M ψ(st,at), (1)
where stdenotes the input state, atthe input action, rtthe
predicted reward, and st+1the predicted next-step state.
To achieve an accurate prediction, it is important to pro-
vide sufficient state information to the environment model.
Here situations of the ego vehicle and surrounding objects
are described by a perception-based state space. Specifically,
images are obtained from a camera view and processed into
semantic images, which are compressed to the state variable.
Predicting image states is challenging since it requires a
powerful high-dimensional representation as well as inferring

==== Page 4 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 3
64ൈ64ൈ1
Image state30ൈ30ൈ16
13ൈ13ൈ32
5ൈ5ൈ64
2ൈ2ൈ128
1ൈ1
Actionskip connection
64ൈ64ൈ1
Future image state
1ൈ1
Predicted reward
Embedding
DeconvolutionConvolution
Fully Connected
Concatenate Reshape
512ൈ1
128ൈ1
Output
512ൈ1latent 
code
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the sub-model of the virtual environment model.
behaviors of traffic participants. Thus, the environment model
is developed using a deep neural network, of which the
structure is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The outputs of an environment model can be either deter-
ministic or stochastic, subject to the nature of the actual en-
vironment. Without loss of generality, we assume that outputs
are stochastic, following a Gaussian distribution N[32], which
can be expressed by:
Mψ=µψ,Σψ, (2)
where µandΣrepresent the mean and covariance of the Gaus-
sian distribution, respectively. Then the transition dynamics of
the model can be represented as:
M(·|st,at) =N(µψ(st,at),Σψ(st,at)). (3)
A negative log-likelihood function is used for model train-
ing:
LM(ψ) =E(st,at)∼DElog Σ ψ
2+(dt−µψ)2
2Σψ+c
,(4)
where DErepresents the experience buffer of the training data,
drepresents the model outputs, i.e., the state and reward of
the next step, and cis a constant. Noted that the inputs of µψ
andΣψ, i.e., (st,at)are omitted in Eq 4 for brevity.
Then we identify the model inaccuracy given various in-
puts using the epistemic uncertainty [32]. Specifically, the
environment model manifests increased epistemic uncertainty
if encountering unseen states, which is directly linked to
inaccurate predictions. The ensemble approach is utilized to
quantify epistemic uncertainty. Several independent models are
initialized with the same structure and are trained separately
with different ordering of data, which can be expressed as:
Mens=M1
ψ, . . . ,MN
ψ, (5)
where N= 5 represents the ensemble size, as recommended
in [33]. And each of the sub-model has the same structure
described in Fig. 2. Thereafter, the environment model, virtual
environment model, and symbol Mrefers to the ensemble
unless otherwise stated.
Remark 1: the uncertainty of the environment model is
reflected in two aspects: aleatoric uncertainty (described in
Eq 3) and epistemic uncertainty (shown in Eq 5) [34], [35].
High epistemic uncertainty is usually attributed to receiving
unseen or undertrained inputs, such as images of uncommonweather conditions, road conditions, or unseen behaviors of
traffic participants. Consequently, the epistemic uncertainty
becomes the main cause of model inaccuracy, and we hope
to address this issue in this study.
IV. U NCERTAINTY -AWARE MODEL -BASED
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING ALGORITHM
Based on the above virtual environment modeling, an
uncertainty-aware MBRL is proposed in this section to im-
prove learning efficiency and asymptotic performance. First,
the adopted base algorithm is introduced. Then, the theoretical
boundary of MBRL for effective optimization is discussed. Fi-
nally, key innovations and the overall structure of the proposed
method are elaborated.
A. Soft Actor-Critic Algorithm
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) is utilized as the base algorithm for
developing the proposed new RL architecture [36]. Within the
SAC algorithm, the interaction between the RL agent and the
environment can be formulated as a Markov Decision Process,
denoted as M= (S,A,T, r). Specifically, Sis the state
space consisting of state variable s,Ais the action space
which describes candidate actions a,T(st+1|st,at)denotes
the transition dynamics of the environment, r:S × A → R
is the reward function. Additionally, we denote the trajectory
under a specific policy as τ= (st,at,st+1,at+1, . . .).
The goal of the SAC-RL algorithm is to pursue the optimal
policy π∗, which can be expressed as:
π∗= arg max
πEτ∼T,π"∞X
t=0γt(r(st,at) +αH(π(·|st)))#
,
(6)
where γis the discount factor, H(π(·)), which is defined
as−P
a∈Aπ(a|st) logπ(a|st), denotes the entropy of the
distribution of the policy π, and αis a temperature factor to
balance the objectives of getting high rewards and encouraging
explorations.
A critic function called soft- Qfunction is established to
represent the value of Eq 6, which is expressed as:
Q(st,at) =Eτ∼T,π
r(st,at) +γEst+1∼T(·|st,at)[V(st+1)]
,
(7)
where Vis the state value function that can be calculated as:
V(st) =Eat∼π[Q(st,at)−αlogπ(at|st)]. (8)
The deep neural network with parameter θis used for
approximation soft- Qfunction, and its objective can be cal-
culated by minimizing the Bellman residual:
LQ(θ) =1
2E(st,at,rt,st+1)∼D
Qθ(st,at)−

rt+γ[Qθ(st+1,at+1)−αlogπ(at+1|st+1)]2
,(9)
where Dis the experience buffer that stores the interactive
data and is used to train the function approximator.

==== Page 5 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 4
The policy function that outputs actions with maximized Q
values can be approximated by policy network π(ϕ), of which
the objective is calculated as:
Lπ(ϕ) =Est∼D[αlog (πϕ(fϕ(st)|st))−Qθ(st, fϕ(st))],
(10)
where fϕis a Gaussian distribution from the reparameteriza-
tion trick, which enables the policy network to be differen-
tiable.
B. Optimization Bound of the Inaccurate Model
Here, we discuss how to design a feasible model-based RL
under an inaccurate environment model. Considering policy
training using the experience replay buffer, the error ϵM
produced by the inaccurate model is bounded as:
ϵM= max
tEτ∼T,π
[DTV(T(st+1, rt|st,at)∥M(st+1, rt|st,at))],(11)
where DTVdenotes the total variance distance, and πdenotes
the policy to be evaluated.
Since actions are generated by the ever-updated policy, the
deviation between the policy to be evaluated and the policy
stored in the experience replay can be bounded by the error
ϵπ:
ϵπ≥DTV(π∥πD). (12)
Taking the cumulative reward subjected to a policy in the
actual environment as ηand its counterpart in the constructed
virtual environment model as ηM, we can achieve the rela-
tionship between ηandηMwithin kiteration steps as [37]:
ηπ≥ηπ
M−2rmax·C(ϵM, ϵπ, k), (13)
C(ϵM, ϵπ, k) ="
γk+1ϵπ
(1−γ)2+γkϵπ
1−γ+kϵM
1−γ#
. (14)
Eqs 13-14 indicate that the cumulative reward achieved in
the constructed virtual model can approach that of the actual
transition with a small region C. And C, which is associated
with model accuracy, is the bottleneck of MBRL performance.
In other words, we should decrease Cthroughout the learning
process to improve the performance of MBRLs.
Although the analytical solution of objective function Cis
difficult to be found, here we propose two useful principles.
First, Cis non-monotonic with respect to iteration step kbut
will be increased to infinite with the increasing prediction
horizon, as discount factor γis less than 1. Hence, it is
not recommended to overuse the virtual environment model
considering its inaccuracy. Second, the model error ϵMgives
monotonically increased C, which causes performance loss.
Therefore, we should decrease the prediction horizon kwhen
the prediction error ϵMis large and prolong the horizon when
ϵMis small. Following above two principles, we develop an
adaptive iteration-step adjustor, in the below section.C. Model Uncertainty-aware Iteration Truncation
The ensemble model constructed in Section III enables
evaluating the uncertainty of the environment model. In this
section, we utilize this uncertainty quantification to improve
the performance of MBRL.
For an arbitrary step, mean and variance of the ensemble
model can be calculated using outputs of sub-models:
µM(st,at) =1
NNX
n=1h
µMn
ψ(st,at)i
, (15)
σ2
M(st,at) =1
NNX
n=1σ2
Mn
ψ(st,at)+
1
N"NX
n=1µ2
Mn
ψ(st,at)−µ2
M(st,at)#
.(16)
Then, the uncertainty of the ensemble model can be set as:
ϵM∝σ2
M(st,at). (17)
MBRLs require a larger prediction length kto improve
the training speed, whereas Eq 14 suggests increasing k
will exacerbate asymptotic performance. To achieve a smart
balance, we propose an adaptive truncation method, instead
of the conventional fixed-step or infinity iteration scheme, to
determine the prediction horizon. Specifically, the prospective
length of k∗is calculated by a linear operation:
k∗=⌊clip 
−ω·σ2
M(st,at) +kbase,0, kmax
⌋, (18)
where ωis the weighting factor. kbase andkmax are the base
and the max value of the expected iteration length, respec-
tively. clip represents the clip function, and ⌊·⌋represents the
floor function which takes the greatest integer less than or
equal to the input. In this study, ω=−500,kbase= 3, and
kmax= 6 are the manually determined hyperparameters. The
above equation means that the iteration step can be varied from
zero (give up using the virtual environment model at this time
step) to a maximum of six steps.
Combining the above mechanism together with SAC in
Section IV-A, the procedure of the proposed uncertainty-aware
(UA)-MBRL algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.
Remark 2 : MBRLs use the environment model to generate
more interactions for training. Thus, they can exhibit higher
learning efficiency than model-free RLs. However, interactions
obtained from the virtual environment model inevitably deviate
from the real ones happening in actual environment. Thus,
theoretical asymptotic performances of MBRLs can be no
better than that of the model-free RLs. In practice, MBRLs
aim to eliminate the degradation caused by model inaccuracy,
achieving a more efficient learning process and comparable
asymptotic performances against model-free RLs, and this is
also the target of our algorithm in this paper.
V. A PPLICATION TO AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
In this section, the proposed UA-MBRL algorithm is applied
to end-to-end driving tasks.

==== Page 6 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 5
Algorithm 1: UA-MBRL
Initialize policy network πϕ, value networks Qθ;
Initialize maximum episode number of RL Nepi;
Initialize experience buffer DEfor storing actual data
andDMfor storing virtual data;
forepisode=1 to Nepido
Train environment ensemble MensonDE;
while not done do
Execute at=πϕ(st)in the actual environment;
Getst+1,rtand store (st,at, rt,st+1)toDE;
Get desired iteration length k∗with respect to
st+1andat+1=πϕ(st+1);
Letk=t+ 1;
while k≤t+k∗do
Choose a sub model nfrom the ensemble:
Mn
ψ∼ M ens;
Execute ak=πϕ(sk)inMn
ψ;
Getsk+1,rkand store (sk,ak, rk,sk+1)to
DM;
Letk←k+ 1;
end
Update πϕ,Qθusing data in both DMandDE;
Update the actual environment st←st+1;
end
end
A. Autonomous Driving Scenarios
The feasibility and effectiveness of UA-MBRL are validated
in autonomous driving tasks with respect to training and
testing processes, respectively. Adopted driving scenarios are
shown in Fig. 3. First, the driving scenario for RL training
is designed to be a one-way double-lane urban road, wherein
three stationary surrounding vehicles and two randomly mov-
ing pedestrians are set, as shown in Fig. 3(a). Adaptiveness and
robustness of the algorithm are validated under two additional
scenarios shown in Fig 3(b-c) in the RL testing phase. In Fig.
3(b), relative positions between surrounding vehicles and the
ego vehicle are different from Fig. 3(a), and one surrounding
vehicle has a driving velocity. Consequently, the ego vehicle in
this testing scenario is expected to conduct behaviors different
from those in the training scenario. In Fig. 3(c), the scenario
is more complex wherein all surrounding vehicles are not
stationary. We apply the proposed algorithm to end-to-end
autonomous driving tasks: the RL agent receives semantic
images and controls the steering wheel angle. Compared to
modular autonomous driving functions, this end-to-end control
is more challenging and poses a higher requirement on the
optimization ability of the used algorithm.
B. Optimization Problem Formulation
The proposed algorithm should be able to drive the ego
vehicle to move smoothly ahead, and avoid obstacles and any
potential crashes. Following above goals, objective function J
of the optimization problem is formulated as:
J=Ccolli+ω1·Cjerk+ω2·Clane, (19)
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the driving scenarios. SC means surrounding
cars, P denotes pedestrians, and EC represents ego car. The white dotted line
depicts one of the feasible trajectories that is expected to be performed by the
RL agent. (a): the scenario for RL training; (b) and (c): the scenarios only
for RL testing.
where ω1andω2weight different sub-objectives, respectively.
Ccolli quantifies the collision risk by potential functions, as:
Ccolli=−S1 
∥xego,lon ,xf,lon∥2
2
−S2
min
j 
∥xego,lat ,xj,lat∥2
2
,(20)
where xego,xfdenote position coordinates of the ego vehicle
and the frontal obstacle, respectively. Abbreviations lon,lat
denote the longitudinal and lateral positions. Subscript j
denotes the side obstacle (left and right road boundaries, as
well as surrounding vehicles and pedestrians if exist). S(·)
represents variant sigmoid functions that can normalize the
variable and ∥ · ∥ 2is the 2-norm operation.
Cjerk encourages smooth driving by penalizing the yaw rate
of the ego vehicle:
Cjerk=dΩego/dt, (21)
where Ωegodenotes the yaw angle.
Clane is the expected lateral position of the ego vehicle,
which is shown as:
Clane=∥xego,lat ,xtar,lat∥2
2, (22)
where xtar, lat denotes the target lateral position.
The longitudinal distance between the current and target
coordinates of the ego vehicle is set as a reward shaping term
to encourage RL exploration, shown as:
rE=S3(xtar,lon −xego,lon ). (23)
To minimize Eq 19 and encourage exploration, the reward
function of RL can be written as:
r=b− J − rE, (24)
where b∈R1is a bias, set as 0.1.
C. MBRL-based Autonomous Driving Strategy
State space and action space are defined in this section
to formulate the RL-based autonomous driving strategy. We

==== Page 7 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 6
use the frontal-view output by a semantic camera as the state
variable. State space Sis expressed as:
S={p|p∈[0,255]}64×64, (25)
where pdenotes the value of the 8-bit pixel. Since nowa-
days A Vs are usually equipped with multi-modal sensors for
environment perception, it is feasible to use multi-source
information fusion to synthesize a graphic environmental
representation. Based on this consideration, an image with a
suitable field of view, that can provide sufficient information
for the RL-based strategy design, is used as the state variable
in this study.
Since RL controls lateral behaviors of the ego vehicle,
action space Ais given by:
A={δ|δ∈[−π/2, π/2]}, (26)
where δdenotes the steering wheel angle. A negative value
means turning left, while a positive one refers to turning right.
In addition, longitudinal dynamics of the vehicle is con-
trolled by a proportional-integral controller, which is omitted
for brevity.
Hyperparameters of the UA-MBRL-based autonomous driv-
ing strategy are provided in Table I. We utilize neural networks
to construct function approximators of RL and virtual environ-
ment model. The network details are provided in Appendix
Tables A1-A3.
TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS OF THE MBRL- BASED AV S TRATEGY
Symbol Meaning Value
CDMBuffer size of virtual model experience 2e15
BM Batch size of model training 128
lM Initial learning rate of model training 5e-4
CDEBuffer size of practical experience 2e15
BRL Batch size of RL training 64
lRL Initial learning rate of RL training 1e-4
Nepi Maximum episode of RL training 500
α Temperature coefficient of RL training 5e-3
γ Discount factor of Qequation 0.97
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Experimental Set-up
In this section, we validate the proposed method in terms
of training process and RL testing. Then, we provide more
discussions and analysis on the method mechanism.
To achieve a high-fidelity validation, the CARLA simulator
is used to develop the driving environment [38]–[40]. Town10
of CARLA is used to establish driving scenarios. Simulations
are conducted on a computer with a CPU of intel i9-9900K and
a graphic card of Nvidia RTX 2080S. The control frequency
is 20 Hz. All associated learning algorithms and scripts are
programmed in python.
B. Training Results
The proposed virtual environment model and MBRL-based
autonomous driving strategy are trained according to Algo-
rithm 1. Thus, first, we evaluate the training performance ofthe constructed virtual environment model, as its quality is
crucial for the subsequently MBRL. Then, we evaluate training
efficiency and asymptotic performance of the proposed UA-
MBRL method.
Fig. 4 provides multiple metrics in training the environment
model. For a typical sub-model from the ensemble, its training
losses are provided in Fig. 4(a), where gradually declined
losses suggest being-improved model accuracy. In Fig. 4(b),
standard deviations of outputs of sub-models are calculated,
where the declining curve shows the decreased uncertainty
of the ensemble model. The synchronized declines of model
uncertainty and prediction error suggest that model uncertainty
can indeed reveal model accuracy.
Neutral 
Command
Right-turn 
Command
Time step=1 Time step=3 Time step=5(a)
(c)(b)
Fig. 4. An example of the prediction of the parameterized environment model.
(a) the loss value of the predicted reward and state suggested by the mean
squared error (MSE), (b) the standard deviation of predicted state variable of
the ensemble models, (c) a typical demonstration of the action-conditioned
iterative prediction processes starting from the same practical state. The three
consecutive images in the upper row indicate a predicted state transition
process under the continual and identical neutral command, and the images in
the bottom row correspond to the situations under the continual and identical
right-turn command. The images are with the format of model outputs and
RL inputs.
Furthermore, we visualize a typical process of the action-
conditioned prediction in Fig. 4(c) to illustrate the effective-
ness of model predictions. The inputs and outputs of the model
are the action and the predicted image state, respectively.
Two situations are evaluated according to different action
inputs, wherein our model starts from the same practical
initial state and executes iterative predictions. In all image
states, the ego vehicle appears at the bottom center, and
one adjacent vehicle appears on the right. In both situations,
the adjacent vehicle moves backward, validating the model’s
ability in predicting the longitudinal motion of the ego vehicle.
Additionally, two actions lead to distinct lateral behaviors of
the ego vehicle in predictions: 1) the neutral command leads
to a straight forward situation, 2) the right-turn instruction
causes a collision that makes the ego vehicle decelerate in

==== Page 8 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 7
time steps 3 and 5. According to the observations above, our
environment model can make predictions to be in line with
human expectations, indicating its feasibility. Nonetheless,
there are inevitably inaccuracies, such as the blurring of the
position of the adjacent vehicle. These prediction inaccuracies
would impair the performance of the RL training process.
Then we assess the RL training performance in autonomous
driving tasks using the episodic average reward. State-of-the-
art methods are used as benchmarks for comparative evalua-
tion. First, we use the model-assisted bootstrapped (MAB) [29]
approach to establish the instantiation of the SAC algorithm,
where the formed MAB-SAC can describe the capability of
current Dyna-style MBRLs. Then, the Vanilla-SAC is em-
ployed to represent the ability of the model-free RL scheme.
The comparison of rewards by different RL algorithms is
illustrated in Fig. 5. The training session repeats five times for
each algorithm. It is observed that our algorithm is superior
to all baselines in learning efficiency. Vanilla-SAC fails to
converge in the counted episodes, whereas our algorithm
achieves stable performance after around 300 episodes. More
specifically, our algorithm uses 280 episodes to reach the
termination reward of Vanilla-SAC, which saves 44.0% of the
time needed. The advantageous efficiency of our algorithm
against Vanilla-SAC is in line with expectations given the
existence of the environment model. However, the model-
based RL baseline, i.e., MAB, fails to achieve comparable
performance, even compared to Vanilla-SAC.
Model inaccuracy is responsible for the underperformance
of the model-based baseline. MAB-SAC is hindered from
improving its performance in real-world environments as a
result of the inaccurate prediction illustrated in Fig . 4(c). This
idea is supported by Fig. 5 where MAB with a short prediction
horizon outperforms that of a longer prediction horizon, given
that short iterative predictions are more accurate. By contrast,
our algorithm can adaptively truncate the prediction horizon to
mitigate the model inaccuracy issue, and effectively enhance
the learning capability. Overall, the above validation in the
training process highlights the superiority of the proposed
algorithm in learning performance.
050100150200250300350400450500
Training episode-8-6-4-20246RewardProposed
Vanilla-SAC
MAB-SAC(1)
MAB-SAC(2)
Fig. 5. The curves of the training reward of the proposed algorithm and
baselines. The solid lines represent the mean values of training curves, and
the error bands refer to 1- σintervals. The two schemes of MAB-SAC: (1)
and (2) denote using the environment model to iteratively predict 5 and 10
steps, respectively.C. Testing Results
In addition to the above-discussed training efficiency, the
implementation of well-trained RL-based autonomous driv-
ing strategies needs to be assessed. In this phase, strategies
generated by different RL algorithms are evaluated across
all three designed driving scenarios. Apart from foregoing
RL baselines, imitation learning (IL) is also introduced for
a more comprehensive comparison of learning-based au-
tonomous driving strategies. By using a PI controller with prior
knowledge, we can create demonstration control sequences for
IL training.
First, we test the effectiveness of different strategies in
completing tasks. In Fig. 6, the episode duration is used to
evaluate different strategies by measuring the distance the
driver travels until a collision occurs or the task is completed.
For the trained scenario, both the proposed algorithm and the
model-free algorithm, i.e., Vanilla-SAC, can generate well-
performed strategies to achieve high levels. In untrained sce-
narios, the proposed strategy and Vanilla-SAC can maintain
their capabilities, whereas IL deteriorates significantly. This
indicates the better adaptability of RL-based strategies. When
comparing only among RLs, our strategy and Vanilla-SAC
reach comparably good results. It is particularly satisfying
given the fact that MBRL algorithms are trained with inaccu-
rate prediction data. As a comparison, the other state-of-the-art
MBRL, i.e., MAB-SAC, has difficulty in controlling the ego
vehicle toward success in tasks.
Fig. 6. Barplots of the episode duration of the proposed strategy and baselines
in different testing scenarios, wherein the error bars represent the standard
deviations.
510 15 20 25 30 35-2024Lateral position (m)
510 15 20 25 30 35-3-2-10123Lateral velocity (m/s)Proposed Vanilla-SAC IL
510 15 20 25 30 35
Time (s)-0.6-0.4-0.200.20.4Yaw rate (deg/s)
Fig. 7. Results of the lateral velocities of the ego vehicle on the straight-line
driving scenario without surrounding obstacles under different strategies. The
positive value in the y-axis represents the leftward displacement relative to the
initial position, and the negative value represents the rightward displacement.
Next, driving smoothness as a second optimization target is
evaluated using the vehicle’s lateral velocity. In this regard, a

==== Page 9 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 8
driving task on a flat road without nearby obstacles is designed
in which a straight trajectory is expected to be pursued by the
ego vehicle. The zero lateral velocity is taken as the center and
the average absolute deviation (AAD) of the lateral velocity
of different strategies is calculated; a smaller AAD indicates a
smoother driving. The lateral velocities of three strategies are
shown in Fig. 7, while the MAB-SAC is discarded here since
it cannot complete the task. The proposed strategy achieves an
AAD of 0.2501 on average lateral speed deviation, which is
comparable to that of Vanilla-SAC (0.2494) and remarkably
better than IL (0.3386).
Lastly, we evaluate robustness of all the obtained strategies.
We re-conduct the experiments of Fig. 6 but impose an
additional noise (10% of the control domain) to the output of
the strategy, where the episode duration can be undermined by
noise injections. Gaussian noise is adopted since it can better
represent unknown compound noises coming from various
sources in real world applications. Episode durations under
noise are compared to non-noise ones (Fig. 6) using confronta-
tional barplots in Fig. 8. The roughly even divided bars indi-
cate that RL-based strategies achieve favorable robustness in
autonomous driving tasks. It is noted that this anti-noise ability
can be derived from the robust learning characteristic of the
maximum entropy RL algorithm, i.e., SAC algorithm, which is
not directly linked to the environment model. Nonetheless, the
proposed strategy enjoys good robustness, showing its great
potential in applications to autonomous driving.
0%50%100%
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15Episode Duration (100% stacked)Original Noise-injected
Proposed Vanilla-SAC MAB-SAC IL
Fig. 8. Robustness testing of the proposed algorithm and baselines in different
scenarios. Three bars in one cluster represent three testing scenarios defined
in Fig. 3.
0 100 200 300 400 500
Training episode0246Truncate step
02468
Fig. 9. Distribution of the truncating-step value of one typical state in the
training process. Gray points are actual truncating points, at which iterative
prediction is terminated. The distribution map is calculated based on the scatter
density.
050100150200250300350400450500
Training episode-8-6-4-20246RewardProposed
1-Step
5-Step
20-StepFig. 10. Curves of the training reward of the proposed algorithm and fix-
step baselines. Baselines adopt the same MBRL architecture but use fix-step
prediction instead of the truncation-based one.
-6-4-2024Average episode reward
*****
Proposed 1-Step 5-Step 20-Step-6-4-20246
1Average episode reward
Proposed 1-Step 5-Step 20-Step****
Fig. 11. Statistical results (examined by the t-test) of the training reward of
the proposed algorithm and fix-step baselines. Each bar represents the mean
value of rewards in 500 episodes of a candidate.
Overall, our algorithm achieves the same-level performance
as the model-free one. We remind that conventional MBRLs
suffer from inferior post-training performance to model-free
schemes due to prediction errors of the environment model.
In this regard, the comparable results shown in this section
demonstrated the superiority of our algorithm, since it provides
a considerable improvement in training speed compared to
Vanilla-SAC without compromising the ultimate performance.
D. Analysis and Discussion on the Truncation Mechanism
In this section we investigate the essence of the proposed
method. UA-MBRL is established on the adaptive truncation
of predicting horizon with referring to uncertainties of the
environment model. Thus, we first examine if the truncating
function works well with ever-changing model uncertainties,
and then check if the adaptive prediction truncation is indeed
the crucial point for improving the performance of MBRL.
We observe one specific state of the actual environment
and record the iterative prediction horizon starting from this
state during the whole training process. The prediction horizon
essentially reflects the utilization extent of the virtual environ-
ment model, which is expected to be varied with the uncer-
tainty of the model. The scatter density map of the prediction
horizon is plotted in Fig. 9. We find prediction horizons are
significantly decentralized at the early stage, which exactly
corresponds to the high uncertainty of the virtual environment
model. As the model uncertainty, i.e., output prediction error,
decreases with the training process, the prediction horizon is
increased and converged to the specified maximum value (6

==== Page 10 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 9
steps). Hence, the adaptive truncating functionality regarding
the prediction horizon is validated to be effective.
Then we explore if adaptively adjusting the prediction
horizon is useful to improve RL performance. An ablation
study on the effect of the adaptive truncation is conducted
and shown in Fig. 10. Within the proposed UA-MBRL ar-
chitecture, the fixed-step candidates fail to compete with the
adaptive truncation-based one in terms of learning efficiency
and performance. More specifically, a statistical comparison of
the results is provided in Fig. 11, where t-test results suggest a
significant margin between the proposed scheme and all three
fixed-step candidates. Hence, the proposed uncertainty-based
truncation is decisive to the algorithm performance. Apart
from the proposed method, an interesting finding is that the
longer the prediction horizon is, the worse performance the
algorithm achieves. Considering that long prediction horizons
induce high uncertainty and inaccuracy, this finding once
again validates the fundamental issue of the model inaccuracy
existing in MBRL methods. Future work will focus on the op-
timization of the truncation mechanism, such as adjusting the
truncation parameters and choosing the uncertainty evaluator.
VII. C ONCLUSION
To further improve learning efficiency and performance
of reinforcement learning, a novel uncertainty-aware model-
based RL method is proposed and validated in autonomous
driving scenarios in this paper. First, an action-conditioned
ensemble model with the capability of uncertainty assess-
ment is established as the environment model. Then, a novel
uncertainty-aware model-based RL method is developed based
on the adaptive truncation approach, providing virtual in-
teractions between the agent and environment model, and
improving RL’s learning efficiency and performance. The fea-
sibility and effectiveness of the proposed UA-MBRL method
are validated under the designed autonomous driving tasks.
Testing results show that UA-MBRL is advantageous over ex-
isting MBRL with respect to learning efficiency and execution
performance. UA-MBRL exhibits same-level task-completing
performance and robustness against the state-of-the-art model-
free RL in autonomous driving tasks. And the UA-MBRL
outperforms SAC by 44.0%, with respect to the learning
efficiency.
APPENDIX
TABLE A1
THENETWORK FOR THE ENVIRONMENT MODEL
Parameter Value
Input Shape (state+action) 64×64×1 + 1×1
Convolution Channels (to latent) [16,32,64,128]
Convolution Kernels 5×5, 5×5, 5×5, 4×4
Convolution Strides 2, 2, 2, 1
Deconvolution Channels (output mean+variance) [128,64,32,16+16]
Deconvolution Kernels 5×5, 6×6, 6×6, 6×6
Deconvolution Strides 2, 2, 2, 2
Action Embedding [512]
Dense Feature (to reward) (output mean+variance) [512,128,1+1]TABLE A2
THENETWORK FOR THE RL C RITIC
Parameter Value
Input Shape (state + action) 64×64×1 + 1×1
Convolution Features [8,16,32], kernel 6×6, Stride=2
Dense Feature [256, 64, 64, 1]
Action Embedding (to 2nd Dense) [64]
TABLE A3
THENETWORK FOR THE RL A CTOR
Parameter Value
Input Shape (state) 64×64×1
Convolution Features [8,16,32], kernel 6×6, Stride=2
Dense Feature [256, 64, 1]
REFERENCES
[1] J. Wang, X. Wang, T. Shen, Y . Wang, L. Li, Y . Tian, H. Yu, L. Chen,
J. Xin, X. Wu, N. Zheng, and F.-Y . Wang, “Parallel vision for long-
tail regularization: Initial results from ivfc autonomous driving testing,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , pp. 1–1, 2022.
[2] X. Zhang, A. Guo, Y . Ai, B. Tian, and L. Chen, “Real-time scheduling of
autonomous mining trucks via flow allocation-accelerated tabu search,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , pp. 1–1, 2022.
[3] I. Ahmad, X. Ge, and Q.-L. Han, “Communication-constrained active
suspension control for networked in-wheel motor-driven electric vehicles
with dynamic dampers,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles ,
pp. 1–1, 2022.
[4] X. Ge, S. Xiao, Q.-L. Han, X.-M. Zhang, and D. Ding, “Dynamic event-
triggered scheduling and platooning control co-design for automated
vehicles over vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Auto-
matica Sinica , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 31–46, 2022.
[5] D. Cao, X. Wang, L. Li, C. Lv, X. Na, Y . Xing, X. Li, Y . Li, Y . Chen,
and F. Wang, “Future directions of intelligent vehicles: Potentials, pos-
sibilities, and perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles ,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 7–10, 2022.
[6] X. Mo, Z. Huang, Y . Xing, and C. Lv, “Multi-agent trajectory prediction
with heterogeneous edge-enhanced graph attention network,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , pp. 1–14, 2022.
[7] Z. Hu, Y . Zhang, Y . Xing, Y . Zhao, D. Cao, and C. Lv, “Toward human-
centered automated driving: A novel spatiotemporal vision transformer-
enabled head tracker,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine , pp. 2–9,
2022.
[8] Y . Zhang, P. Hang, C. Huang, and C. Lv, “Human-like interactive
behavior generation for autonomous vehicles: A bayesian game-theoretic
approach with turing test,” Advanced Intelligent Systems , vol. 4, no. 5,
p. 2100211, 2022.
[9] Z. Huang, J. Wu, and C. Lv, “Efficient deep reinforcement learning with
imitative expert priors for autonomous driving,” IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks and Learning Systems , pp. 1–13, 2022.
[10] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An introduction .
MIT press, 2018.
[11] Z. Hu, Y . Xing, W. Gu, D. Cao, and C. Lv, “Driver anomaly quan-
tification for intelligent vehicles: A contrastive learning approach with
representation clustering,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles ,
pp. 1–1, 2022.
[12] X. He, H. Yang, Z. Hu, and C. Lv, “Robust lane change decision making
for autonomous vehicles: An observation adversarial reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , pp. 1–
1, 2022.
[13] C. G. Atkeson and J. C. Santamaria, “A comparison of direct and
model-based reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of international
conference on robotics and automation , vol. 4, pp. 3557–3564, IEEE,
1997.
[14] X. Liang, X. Du, G. Wang, and Z. Han, “A deep reinforcement learning
network for traffic light cycle control,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology , vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 1243–1253, 2019.
[15] J. Wu, Z. Huang, W. Huang, and C. Lv, “Prioritized experience-based
reinforcement learning with human guidance for autonomous driving,”

==== Page 11 ====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 10
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , pp. 1–15,
2022.
[16] A. E. Sallab, M. Abdou, E. Perot, and S. Yogamani, “Deep reinforce-
ment learning framework for autonomous driving,” Electronic Imaging ,
vol. 2017, no. 19, pp. 70–76, 2017.
[17] J. Wu, Z. Huang, C. Huang, Z. Hu, P. Hang, Y . Xing, and C. Lv,
“Human-in-the-loop deep reinforcement learning with application to
autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07246 , 2021.
[18] M. L. Littman, “Reinforcement learning improves behaviour from eval-
uative feedback,” Nature , vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 445–451, 2015.
[19] A. S. Polydoros and L. Nalpantidis, “Survey of model-based rein-
forcement learning: Applications on robotics,” Journal of Intelligent &
Robotic Systems , vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 153–173, 2017.
[20] G. Zhu, M. Zhang, H. Lee, and C. Zhang, “Bridging imagination
and reality for model-based deep reinforcement learning,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, pp. 8993–9006, 2020.
[21] S. Gu, T. Lillicrap, I. Sutskever, and S. Levine, “Continuous deep q-
learning with model-based acceleration,” in International conference on
machine learning , pp. 2829–2838, PMLR, 2016.
[22] Y . Guan, Y . Ren, S. E. Li, Q. Sun, L. Luo, and K. Li, “Centralized
cooperation for connected and automated vehicles at intersections by
proximal policy optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Tech-
nology , vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 12597–12608, 2020.
[23] L. Kaiser, M. Babaeizadeh, P. Milos, B. Osinski, R. H. Camp-
bell, K. Czechowski, D. Erhan, C. Finn, P. Kozakowski, S. Levine,
et al. , “Model-based reinforcement learning for atari,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.00374 , 2019.
[24] A. Nagabandi, G. Kahn, R. S. Fearing, and S. Levine, “Neural network
dynamics for model-based deep reinforcement learning with model-free
fine-tuning,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA) , pp. 7559–7566, IEEE, 2018.
[25] J. Buckman, D. Hafner, G. Tucker, E. Brevdo, and H. Lee, “Sample-
efficient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expan-
sion,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 31, 2018.
[26] V . Feinberg, A. Wan, I. Stoica, M. I. Jordan, J. E. Gonzalez, and
S. Levine, “Model-based value estimation for efficient model-free re-
inforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00101 , 2018.
[27] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van
Den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V . Panneershelvam,
M. Lanctot, et al. , “Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks
and tree search,” nature , vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, 2016.
[28] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to control: Learn-
ing behaviors by latent imagination,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603 ,
2019.
[29] G. Kalweit and J. Boedecker, “Uncertainty-driven imagination for con-
tinuous deep reinforcement learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning ,
pp. 195–206, PMLR, 2017.
[30] F. Berkenkamp, M. Turchetta, A. Schoellig, and A. Krause, “Safe model-
based reinforcement learning with stability guarantees,” Advances in
neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[31] C. Finn, I. Goodfellow, and S. Levine, “Unsupervised learning for
physical interaction through video prediction,” Advances in neural
information processing systems , vol. 29, 2016.
[32] M. Babaeizadeh, C. Finn, D. Erhan, R. H. Campbell, and
S. Levine, “Stochastic variational video prediction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.11252 , 2017.
[33] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” Advances in
neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[34] J. Duan, Y . Guan, S. E. Li, Y . Ren, Q. Sun, and B. Cheng, “Distributional
soft actor-critic: Off-policy reinforcement learning for addressing value
estimation errors,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems , pp. 1–15, 2021.
[35] J. Duan, S. E. Li, Y . Guan, Q. Sun, and B. Cheng, “Hierarchical
reinforcement learning for self-driving decision-making without reliance
on labelled driving data,” IET Intelligent Transport Systems , vol. 14,
no. 5, pp. 297–305, 2020.
[36] Z. Ahmed, N. Le Roux, M. Norouzi, and D. Schuurmans, “Under-
standing the impact of entropy on policy optimization,” in International
conference on machine learning , pp. 151–160, PMLR, 2019.
[37] M. Janner, J. Fu, M. Zhang, and S. Levine, “When to trust your model:
Model-based policy optimization,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , vol. 32, 2019.
[38] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V . Koltun, “Carla:
An open urban driving simulator,” in Conference on robot learning ,
pp. 1–16, PMLR, 2017.[39] Z. Huang, C. Lv, Y . Xing, and J. Wu, “Multi-modal sensor fusion-
based deep neural network for end-to-end autonomous driving with
scene understanding,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 11781–
11790, 2020.
[40] J. Wu, Z. Huang, P. Hang, C. Huang, N. De Boer, and C. Lv,
“Digital twin-enabled reinforcement learning for end-to-end autonomous
driving,” in 2021 IEEE 1st International Conference on Digital Twins
and Parallel Intelligence (DTPI) , pp. 62–65, IEEE, 2021.
Wu Jingda (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) re-
ceived his B.S. (2016) and M.S. (2019) in mechani-
cal engineering from Beijing Institute of Technology,
China. He is currently working on his Ph.D. degree
with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engi-
neering, Nanyang Technological University, Singa-
pore.
His research interests include human guidance-
based reinforcement learning algorithms, human-
artificial intelligence (AI) collaborated driving strat-
egy design, decision-making and end-to-end control
of autonomous vehicles, and data-driven energy management of electrified
vehicles.
Zhiyu Huang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
received his B.E. degree from the school of Automo-
bile Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing,
China, in 2019. He is currently pursuing his Ph.D.
degree with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore.
His current research interests include machine
learning for prediction and decision-making in auto-
mated driving and human-machine interactions.
Chen Lv (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in Automotive Engineering from Tsinghua
University, China, in January 2016. He is currently
an Assistant Professor with the School of Mechan-
ical and Aerospace Engineering and the Cluster
Director in Future Mobility Solutions at Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. His research
focuses on automated driving, and human–machine
systems, where he has contributed 2 books, over 100
articles and obtained 12 granted patents.
Dr. Lv received many awards and honors, selec-
tively including the Highly Commended Paper Award of IMechE U.K. in
2012, the IEEE IV Best Workshop/Special Session Paper Award in 2018, the
Automotive Innovation Best Paper Award in 2020, the winner of the Waymo
Open Dataset Challenges at CVPR 2021, and the Machines Young Investigator
Award in 2022. He serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYS-
TEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , and
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES.

