==== Page 1 ====
 
Repositório ISCTE-IUL
 
Deposited in Repositório ISCTE-IUL : 
2019-05-25
 
Deposited version:
Post-print
 
Peer-review status of attached file:
Peer-reviewed
 
Citation for published item:
Loureiro, S. M. C., Guerreiro, J., Eloy, S., Langaro, D. & Panchapakesan, P. (2019). Understanding
the use of Virtual Reality in Marketing: a text mining-based review. Journal of Business Research.
100, 514-530
 
Further information on publisher's website:
10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.10.055
 
Publisher's copyright statement:
This is the peer reviewed version of the following article: Loureiro, S. M. C., Guerreiro, J., Eloy, S.,
Langaro, D. & Panchapakesan, P. (2019). Understanding the use of Virtual Reality in Marketing: a
text mining-based review. Journal of Business Research. 100, 514-530, which has been published in
final form at https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.10.055. This article may be used for non-
commercial purposes in accordance with the Publisher's Terms and Conditions for self-archiving.
Use policy
Creative Commons CC BY 4.0
The full-text may be used and/or reproduced, and given to third parties in any format or medium, without prior permission or
charge, for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes provided that:
• a full bibliographic reference is made to the original source
• a link is made to the metadata record in the Repository
• the full-text is not changed in any way
The full-text must not be sold in any format or medium without the formal permission of the copyright holders.
Serviços de Informação e Documentação, Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL)
Av. das Forças Armadas, Edifício II, 1649-026 Lisboa Portugal
Phone: +(351) 217 903 024 | e-mail: administrador.repositorio@iscte-iul.pt
https://repositorio.iscte-iul.pt

==== Page 2 ====
1 
 POST -PRINT VERSION  
Loureiro, S. M. C., Guerreiro, J., Eloy, S., Langaro, D., & Panchapakesan, P. (2018). 
Understanding the use of Virtual Reality in Marketing: A text mining -based review.  Journal of 
Business Researc h. 
-- 
Understanding the use of Virtual R eality in Marketing: a text min ing-based review  
 
Abstract  
The current study intends to highlight the most relevant studies in simulated realities with 
special attention to VR and marketing, show ing how studies have evolved over time and 
discuss ing the findings. A text-mining approach using a Bayesian statistical topic model 
called latent Dirichlet al location is employed to conduct a comprehensive analysis of 150 
articles from 115 journals , all indexed in Web of Science .  
The f indings reve al seven relevant topics, as well as the number of articles published over 
time, the authors most cited in VR papers  and the leading journals in each topic . The 
article also provides theoretical and practi cal implications and suggestions for further 
research.  
Keywords:  virtual realit y; simulated realities ; marketing ; text mining . 
 
1. Introduction  
Virtual environments have flourished in the last decade as a way to elicit new and exciting 
consumer experiences as technological innovation allowed marketers to use such 
advancements in commercial applications. The total market size worldwide for virtual 
environments (particularly virtual and augmented reality) is expected to move from 27 
billion U.S. dollars in 2018 to 209.2  billion U.S. dollars in 202 2 (Statista, 2018), thus 
showing that there are new market opportunities to be explored.  
Research on appl ied virtual reality ( VR) dates back to the 1990s with the work of 
relevant authors such as  Milgram , Takemura,  Utsumi  and Kishino  (1994) , Brooks (1999) , 

==== Page 3 ====
2 
 Slater  and Wilbur  (1997)  and Steuer (1992) . Milgram et al . (1994 , p. 283) propose  a 
taxonomy to differentiate the technologies available for experienc ing combinations of 
reality and virtuality  and describe VR as the environment “in which the participant -
observer is totally immersed in a completely s ynthetic world, which may or may not 
mimic the properties of a real -world environment”. From the applications of VR 
envisaged by Brooks in the 1990s (1999)  as a vehicle for simulation and entertainment, 
the range of acceptance and use of VR has enlarged considerably and now includ es, for 
example , tourism (e.g., Abergel et al. , 2016; Jeng et al. , 2017 ; Yeh et al., 2017 ), retailin g 
(e.g., Evans & Wurster 1999; Krasonikolakis et al. , 2014)  and medic al and educational 
issues (e.g., Abboudi et al., 2012; Abboudi et al., 2013 ).  
Several studies show that the product/brand stimuli can come from consumers´ 
experiences in virtual reality (e.g., Verhagen et al., 2014; Bigné et al., 2016; Yeh et al., 
2017) w ith concepts such as attachment, engagement and identity being induced by 
virtual objects (e.g., Koles & Nagy, 2012; N agy & Koles, 2014; Grewal, Roggeveen  & 
Nordfalt , 2017) , as well as purchase behaviours (Krasonikolakis et al., 2014) . Thus,  
studies on this field tend to apply the S(stimuli) -O(organism) -R(response) framework 
(Eroglu, Machleit & Davis, 2003; R oschk, Loureiro & Breitsohl, 2017) . This framework 
represents the stimuli (as atm ospheric cues) influenc ing consumers’ emotional and 
cognitive states (organism), which, in turn,  result  in approach or avoidance behaviour  
(e.g., intention to stay, revisit, purchase or not). 
The extended adoption of VR technologies is promoting economic grow th and 
creating new opportunities (e.g.,  Verhagen et al., 2014;  Grewal et al. , 2017).  As these 
technologies evolve, they tend to increasingly infl uence marketing and business 
decisions. This trend leads to a call for studies reveal ing the state -of-the-art of research 
on VR. Yet, in this context a critical literature review reveals a shortage of studies on  

==== Page 4 ====
3 
 applications and use of VR. Indeed,  few studies of this type  exist , related to areas such as 
gaming ( Makri  & Vlachopoulos, 2017 ), medicine ( van Bennek om, Koning & Denys, 
2017; Howard, 2017 ) and education ( Hainey, Connolly, Boyle, Wilson &  Razak, 2016 ). 
As far as we know , no article has focused directly on applications relevant to marketing.  
Thus, the present study attempts to : (i) highlight  the most rele vant studies on simulated 
realities with special attention to VR and marketing; (ii) show how studies have evolved 
over time and  (ii) discuss the main findings . To address these objectives, 150 articles from 
115 journals were analysed using t ext-mining approach.   
The first contribution of the current study is to derive  and present  the seven most  
relevant topics which classify the discussion related to VR and marketing around common  
themes, providing a structured morphology of the existing literature  and revealing main 
authors and journals . As the second contribution, we provide an overview of  the literature 
on simulated realities with special attention to VR applications in marketing.  As a third 
contribution, we propose a research agenda fo r future studies making use of VR 
technologies in the field of marketing.  
The current  study  is divided in  six main sections. The second section gives an 
overview o f the concepts and techniques related to simulated realities , namely the 
Virtuality Reality continuum with a special focus on Virtual Reality . The method used to 
collect and analy se the data is described in the third  section , followed by a section where 
we present the results of the analysis undertaken with the data obtained. Overall 
discussion, conclusions and implications on the use of VR in marketing a ppear  in the last 
two section s. 
 

==== Page 5 ====
4 
 2. Overview o f simulated realities  
2.1 Concept ualization  
The ability to  simulat e different forms of reality through technology  has opened up new 
forms of  interact ing with the world  and created a new set  of possibilities for brands . The 
simulation of reality allows users and consumers to access real -time information in 
several way s. From the broad spectrum of the Reality -Virtuality continuum as stated by 
Milgram et al. (1994)  three types of technolog ical solutions are being increasingly 
presented to consumers : (1) Virtual Reality,  (2) Augmented Reality, (3) Spatial 
Augmented Reality . 
A Virtual Reality (VR) environment is a completely synthetic world that may or 
may not mimic the real world and in which the participant is immersed  (Milgram et al., 
1994) . The real environment and the VR  are at the opposite ends of the Reality -Virtuality 
continuum where other types of combinations of virtuality and reality exist . Augmented 
Reality (AR) relates purely virtual environments to purely real environments. In AR , the 
observer sees the real world  and also sees virtual objects overlaid  on the real world , 
usually by wearing see -through displays (Bimber & Raskar , 2005) . Spatial Augmented 
Reality  (SAR) is a type of AR that can be  used in areas where traditional AR is not 
possible , for instance,  on large surfaces such as spatial ly-aligned wall projections (also 
commonly named 3D video mapping).  Augmented Virtuality (AV) exists when in a 
totally virtual environment some real objects are overlaid. An example of this AV is when 
a projection of the real person is overlaid  on a virtual environment . Within this spectru m, 
Mixed Reality environments (MR) are th ose where  real and virtual objects coexist in a 
single display in different types of combination (Milgram et al. , 1994) . 
AR has seen a b oom in commercial applications in the last decade, particularly 
since smartphones have new technologies embedded in each device such as GPS (Global 

==== Page 6 ====
5 
 Positioning System) and have become ubiquitous as a means of searching for information. 
This gro wth allowed AR to become used in developing applications in many different 
sectors such as medicine, architecture, retailing and the tourism marketing industry (e.g., 
Bui, 2000; Grewal et al. , 2017 ). SAR has all the advantages of AR a s well as  enabl ing the  
augment ation of  real scale scene elements without the need of in -between devices 
allowing consumers to see 3D virtual environments that are in sync with their physical 
environment, letting them feel as if the new stimuli are in fact real (Roo & Hach et, 2017) . 
Some of the products that we now experience as physical ones may one day become 
virtual products displayed using SAR in a way that consumers might think they are really 
interacting with a physical product.  
Despite the important uses of AR and SAR technology, its technology is based on 
the physical environment and sometimes consumers need to be transported to a new 
setting where they can experiment what it would be like to be there enjoying a specific 
service or using a specific product. In such cases, an immersive simulated reality , such as 
those allowed by Virtual Reality (VR) technologies , has played an important role in 
engaging consumers in new and exciting experiences.  VR has been used successfully in 
various fields of study such as arc hitectural planning  (Schnabel et al. , 2001; Dorta & 
Pérez 2006) , rehabilitation medicine and health (Gourlay et al., 2000; Rizzo et al., 2011) , 
military applications (Manojlovich et al., 2003) , industrial a pplications (Wang & Li, 
2004)  and commerce (Krasonikolakis et al. , 2014; van Herpen et al. , 2016) , among others . 
2.2 Techn ology and Immersion  
Definitions of VR vary between th ose concentrat ing on  the technological apparatus, 
specifying hardware varieties and flavours, and th ose related to the human experience, 
focusing on the concept of presence (Steuer, 1992) . Immersive VR refers to the 
construction of a virtual world where users feel immersed as if they were part of the 

==== Page 7 ====
6 
 virtual environment. VR interfaces are diverse, ranging from movable devices suc h as 
VR headsets consisting of head -mounted glasses with a screen in front of the eyes, to non -
movable ones such as specially designed rooms with multiple large screens. Several types 
of Head Mounted Displays (HDM) have been developed over the years and mo st now 
have stereoscopic displays, tracking systems and a wide field of vision. By having 
gyroscopes and accelerometers, these devices can recognize the user’s position and 
therefore position the scene according to that information.  
Fixed devices like larg e VR screen -based systems have been developed and used 
in several areas of knowledge. The CAVE (Cave Automatic Virtual Environment), a fully 
immersive VR system, is normally a cubic room where, on all the walls except one, 
stereoscopic images are projected , allowing the user, wearing stereoscopic glasses, to feel 
they are experiencing a real world. Smaller devices, such as just one big flat screen, a 
composition of smaller screens, curved screens, hemispheric screens and other types, 
allow VR experiences wi th lower levels of immersion.  
The ability to present users with (virtual) reality at a full scale is an advantage of 
a VR system compared to displaying digital content in other types of devices such as 
computer screens. Besides this type of visualization, several immersive VR sets have 
dynamic binaural sound. As well as normal interaction via mouse, keyboard and game 
devices, interaction with the VR system is possible via gestures (3D position trackers 
measure body motion and act accordingly) and speech. Al though not as well developed, 
immersive VR can also allow unique forms of physical or quasi -physical interaction when 
using haptic systems such as data gloves with tracking sensors (Mizell et al., 2002) .  
Unlike VR techniques, AR and SAR  “generate images somewhere on the optical 
path in between the observer’s eyes and the physical object to be augmented” (Bimber & 
Raskar 2005, p. 71) . In AR the observer sees the real world through some kind of Head -

==== Page 8 ====
7 
 Mounted Display (HMD) or video screen and virtual objects are overlaid on the real 
world. Users can experience AR through a direct vision device like a head -mounted see -
through device (e.g., Hololens, other AR glasses and retinal displays), or an indirect 
vision display like a han d-held see -through display (e.g., tablets and smartphones). Both 
types of devices have a limited field of vision which does not provide the user with a 
complete view of the reality that is augmented or a full sense of presence. SAR is 
completely detached f rom the users, allowing them to have free hands, eyes and head and 
can assume different techniques as explained by Bimber and Raskar  (2005) , such as 
screen -based video see -through displays, spatial optical see -through displays and 
projection -based spatial displays. Projector -based spatial displays project images directly 
on the surfaces of a physical object an d usually take advantage of the volumes of that 
object. These projections can be performed by static, steerable and multiple projectors 
and may be based on static or video digital content, with or without stereoscopy.  
With VE, the notions of immersion  and sense  of presence  were introduced. These 
notions are intrinsically related because greater immersion is commonly related to a 
stronger  sense  of presence as well as the opposite. Immersion  relates to what the system 
delivers from a technical perspective and can be objectively measured , while presence 
relates to the human experience of the given environment.  
Immersion is a VE system’s ability to deliver an inclusive (where the physical reality 
is shut out), extensive (concerning the inclusion of sensory modalities), surrounding (how 
panoramic the VR is) and vivid (resolution, fidelity, variety of energy) illus ion of reality 
to the senses of a human participant (Slater & Wilbur, 1997) . VE can be fully immersive 
(e.g., CAVE, HDM with a wide field of vision), semi -immersive (e.g. stereoscopic 
powerwall) and non -immersive (e.g., desktops). The sense  of presence is the extent to 
which the observer feels present within the display scene (Milgram et al., 1994)  and can 

==== Page 9 ====
8 
 be assessed as individuals’ propensity to respond to virtually generated sensory data as if 
they were real (Sanchez -Vives & Slater, 2005) .  
2.3 VR and consumers’ experience  
Different mixed reality equipment enables dif ferent levels of immersion and sense  of 
presence , which can be measured to assess the effectiveness of the impact they cause in 
users (Slater et al., 1994; Witmer & Singer, 1998) . Exam ples of these differences are 
influenced by the hardware used, e.g. monitor -based are exocentric or non -immersive, 
large screens are semi -immersive environments and CAVE facilities and HDM are 
considered to be fully -immersive environments. Other complementary equipment such as 
datagloves, tracking systems, sensors like Kinect and 3D sound increase the sense of 
presence and enables a riche r interaction between the VE and user s, augmenting their 
engagement  
Steuer  (1992)  discusses how vividness and interactivity are complementary and the 
more vivid and interactive a VE is the higher sense of presence it creates. Although a 
higher sense of presence enables a close r relation with the VE, Steuer refers to the work 
of McLuhan (1964)  where the author states th at an extremely high vivid VE can also have 
the negative impact of decreasing the ability to interact with it and therefore decrease the 
engagement between consumers and VE.  
VR has been extensively used in areas where consumers are the main target. For 
tourism, Guttentag  (2010)  argues that the acceptance of VR as a substitute of reality will 
be determined by tourist s’ attitudes toward authenticity and their motivations and 
constraints. According to the author , different technology -driven experiences, 
considering interactivity, authenticity and realism, may produce different behaviours in 
consumers and this is an area in need of further research. Although the visual stimulus is 
the most present and, for most users, the mo st relevant, research has been done to measure 

==== Page 10 ====
9 
 how other au dio, tactile, olfactory and taste  stimuli  have an  impact on users’  behaviours 
(Dinh et al., 1999; Iw ata et al., 2004; Gutierrez, Thalmann & Vexo, 2008; Chandrasekera 
& Souza, 2015) .    
 
3. Method  
3.1 Text Mining approach  
The current study  empl oys a statistical topic model called latent Dirichlet allocation 
(LDA) to find lat ent topics in the literature  review . LDA has been widely used to reveal  
latent topics in text using scholarly literature documents , and it  is based on Latent 
Semantic Indexin g (LSI) and probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing (pLSI) algorithms 
(Deerwester et al., 1990; Hofmann, 1999) . First presented by Blei et al. (2003), LDA has 
recently been shown to accurately group discussions into correlated words to allow 
researchers to conduct a literature analysis guided by such a structure (Choi et al., 2017; 
Moro et al., 2017; Amado et al., 2017; Moro et al., 2015, Griffiths &  Steyvers, 2004). 
LDA uses a hierarchical Bayesian analysis which follows a generative process that 
assumes topics derive from a Dirichlet distribution over words and each document comes 
from a distribution over topics. LDA is a mixed -membership model where each word 
may belong to multiple topics which is an advantage over single -membership clustering. 
LDA models calculate the subsequent  probability of each word belong ing to a given topic, 
which allows researchers to orde r such words according to their correlation with the topic. 
A second step is usually to make a profile of each topic given their most correlated terms 
to find the underlying discussion. In the same way, LDA also presents subsequent  
probabilities of each document belong ing to each topic, thus allowing researchers to find 
the most discussed topics in eac h paper (Blei et al., 2003).  

==== Page 11 ====
10 
 Figure 1 shows the generative process followed by LDA, in which (1) for each 
topic K, it draws a distrib ution over words such as, 𝛽⃗𝑘𝐷𝑖𝑟 𝑣(𝜂), (2) for each document D, 
it draws a vector of topic proportions such as, 𝜃⃗𝑑 ~ 𝐷𝑖𝑟 (𝛼⃗), (3) for each word, it draws a 
topic assignment 𝑍𝑑,𝑛~ 𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡 (𝜃⃗𝑑),𝑍𝑑,𝑛∈{1….𝐾} and a word such as 
𝑊𝑑,𝑛~ 𝑀𝑢𝑙 𝑡(𝛽⃗𝑧𝑑,𝑛),𝑊𝑑,𝑛∈{1….𝑉} (Blei & Lafferty, 2009) . 
INSERT Figure 1. ABOUT HERE  
Due to the effort needed to compute the distribution over words, approximate 
inference techniques are often used to optimize such computation, such as collapsed 
variational infere nce (Teh, Newman & Welling, 2007 ), expectation propagation (Minka 
& Lafferty, 2002), and Gibbs sampling ( Griffiths &  Steyvers, 2004 ). Gibbs sampling is a 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm and was used in the current paper due to its 
convergence and per formance capabilities.  
To reveal  topics in textual information, text mining  steps have to be taken to 
prepare the data for use by LDA. The first step is to define the corpora  in a raw format 
without any formatting. Words are usually converted to lower spaces and white spaces 
and numbers are removed from each corpus (Meyer, Hornik &  Feinerer , 2008). A final 
transformation requires all auxiliary terms called stopwords  (e.g., terms such as “the”, 
“as”, that”), or any words in the domain of study to be eliminated (Delen  & Crossland, 
2008). The group of treated documents are  then used to form a document -term-matrix 
(DTM) that counts the frequencies of each term per document and is later reduced by 
using penalty functions to reduce outliers (Blei  & Lafferty , 2009; Meyer  et al. , 2008; 
Delen  & Crossland , 2008). LDA models are then applied to the DTM to reveal  latent 
topics.  
3.2 Sample and procedure  

==== Page 12 ====
11 
 A first query with the term “VIRTUAL REALITY” was performed in Web of Science 
(WOS ) and revealed 12.534 articles on the subject of  VR. However, a closer look at WOS 
categories reveal that most of them belong to Computer Science, Engineering, Medical 
and other fields not related to Marketing. Thus, we performed a second search on WOS 
for latent topics related to VR and Marketing issue s with the query expressed in the text 
below.  The search process was conducted for words in the title, abstract and keywords. 
The terms of the query were selected based on Marketing functions (supported  on the 
conceptualization of Marketing and Marketing research of American Marketing 
Association)  that may be impacted by VR  (AMA, 2013) . Some of the words were 
followed by a wildcard to account for multiple possible terms under the root word.  
TS=("VIRTUAL REALITY" AND (MARKETING OR "CONSUMER BE HAVIOR" OR 
"CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR" OR ADVERTIS* OR BRAND* OR "SUPPLY CHAIN" OR PRIC* 
OR "SOCIAL MEDIA" OR SERVICE*) ) 
 
Results from the query were filtered to return only papers  in English  in peer -
review journals. A first look at the dispersion of the papers among many different journals 
shows that although the query is focused on marketing terms, papers appeared in a very 
wide range of journals.  The 617  papers that compl ied with these criteria  were then filtered 
according to a systematic literature review bec ause most of them still were not focused 
on Marketing itself  but mainly on Computer Science and Medical topics. Figure 2 shows 
the dispersion of the most frequent categories of WOS in the 617 papers collected.  
INSERT Figure 2. ABOUT HERE  
The systematic analysis process follows the three major criteria: validity (how 
accurate is the study and information presented in articles to treat what we intend to 
investigate , that is , VR in marketing ); reliability (the consistency and the degree of 
replication of th e results and the possibility to generalize); credibility (with regard to 
articles published in well -reputed journals worldwide); integrity (regarded as how reliable 

==== Page 13 ====
12 
 the research is and if it adopts, or not, precision in the selected research process ) (Nill & 
Schibrowsky, 2007 ; Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, Altman & Altman, 2009 ). After systematic 
analysis of the  titles, keywords,  abstracts and text of each paper, a final set of 150 papers 
were selected for  deeper content analysis. During the process, two researchers 
independently identified potentially relevant articles and confli cts between researchers 
were subsequently discussed  to achieve the final set of papers . Conflicts between 
researchers were  subsequently discussed, such that agreement was > 0.85 (Cohen ’s 
Kappa  coefficient) . Figure 3 shows the process used for selecting the final set of papers 
and Figure 4 shows the dispersion of these  papers over time.  
The first papers extracted date back to 1994 (Williams, 1994; Cernousek 1994) 
while the last paper collected was published in 201 8 (Markopoulos &  Hosanagar, 2018) . 
Figure 4 also shows the mean 5 -year JCR impact factor (5Y -IF) of journals that published 
those papers in each year group. An interesting effect shows that the impact of the papers 
publi shed on the topic has been increasing linearly but the mean 5Y -IF has dropped since 
2015 . A possible explanation may be  that as the number of papers increase s so does the 
dispersion of the number of journals publishing them . Since 2015 , papers on VR in 
Marketing have been published in 51 different journals, while in 2010 -2014 only 29 
journals published such papers, 26 in 2005 -2009, 13 in 2000 -2004, 12 in 1995 -1999 and 
only 2 in 1990 -1995 . While until 2015 those papers were published in higher ranked 
journals, since then they have started to be published in lower 5Y -IF journals as well.  
INSERT  Figure 3. ABOUT HERE  
INSERT Figure 4. ABOUT HERE  
 
The paper abstra cts were extracted and transformed according to the best practices 
in text -mining analysis (Guerreiro et al., 2016). R was used to convert text into a 

==== Page 14 ====
13 
 structured document -term matrix using “ tm” and “topicmodels”  library. All text was 
converted to lower case and the corpus was stripped from whitespaces, punctuation and 
numbers. English stopwords  and core keywords such as “virtual”, “reality” and “virtual 
reality” were removed from text. Although such terms are frequent in the text, they may 
jeopardize the cohesion of the topics given their high frequency overall (Guerreiro et al., 
2016).  A final t okenization was performed on the text so that individual or co -occurring 
terms ( n-gram s depending on the prefix, gra m means a set of co -occurring words within 
a given window and when computing the n -grams we typically move one word forward ) 
were chosen. Si ngle term ( unigrams ) and two-term ( bigrams ) n-grams  were selected for 
analysis. The document -term matrix was treated for sparsity and revealed a total of 2125 
n-grams  over 150 documents.  
In order to group latent topics discussed in the literature according  to co -
occurrence of words, latent Dirichelet allocation (LDA) topic models using Gibbs 
sampling method ( Griffiths &Steyvers, 2004; Cao et al., 2009; Geman  & Geman, 1984)  
was used. Regarding  select ion of the K number of topics that could be st represent the  
underlying groups of discussions in the papers, a set of possible LDA models were 
developed with K=2  topics to K=60 topics. Figure 5 shows the results for each LDA 
model. Measures for choosing the best K were derived from the work of Griffiths and 
Steyvers  (2004 ) and Cao et al. (2009 ). 
INSERT Figure 5. ABOUT HERE  
According to Guerreiro et al. (2016), the ideal number of clusters/topics is attained 
when the variability explained does not change significantly by adding more clusters. A 
small number of  topics produce topics that are too general, while a big number of topics 
may reduce the interpretability of the results (Pavlinek  & Podgorelec, 2017). The number 
of optimal topics (K) was selected w hen there was a more negative likelihood after the 

==== Page 15 ====
14 
 model first stabilized its variability and just before the log -likelihood started to increase 
again. Using Cao et al. (2009) and Griffiths and Steyvers (2004) measures, 7 topics is 
where this effect occurs. Selecting fewer  than 7 topics would reduce explained va riability 
sharply and a higher K could add little to the explained variability.  
3.3 Topic modelling  
The LDA model was run using the Gibbs sampling method with 2,000 iterations (Griffiths 
& Steyvers (2004). A burn -in period (samples from the beginning of the Markov chain 
that are often discarded due to poor accuracy) of 4,000 iterations was used. After applying 
this model , the most correlated terms with each topic were obtained. Table 1 shows  the 
seven topics after being label led according to the  most frequent noun terms within each 
topic. The table  1 also presents the four journals mo st correlated with each topic along 
with their 5Y -IF and a list of the three papers most correlated with each topic . 
INSERT Table 1. ABOUT HERE  
Results show that most topics are aligned with VR issues stem ming  from the query 
used to collect the papers. The number of papers per topic w as classified according to the 
subsequent  probability of each paper belong ing to each topic. The papers were classified 
as belonging to the topic they were most correlated with . Figure 6 shows that the topic 
with mo st papers is Experiential Marketing (31 papers), the second topic groups 
discussions around  Manufacturing and New Prod uct Development (29 papers),  the third 
most frequent topic discusses Virtual Setting (23 papers) and the fourth topic uses terms 
around Interaction (21 papers).  
INSERT Figure 6. ABOUT HERE  
A final analysis revealed that a  total of 7145 references were cited from  the 150 
original papers. Table 2 shows the most referenced  papers and the journal they were 

==== Page 16 ====
15 
 published  in, which reveal s the sources most frequently used when discussing VR in the 
field of Marketing . 
INSERT Table 2 . ABOUT HERE  
4. Results  
T1. VIRTUAL SETTING.  This topic aggregates  studies that explore virtual settings 
using the technology of VR. Concerns about how the store setting can influence 
customers’ emotions and response have been a fruitful research stream, since Mehrabian 
and Russe ll’s model (1974). Donovan and Rossiter (1982) are the first to use the 
S(stimuli) –O(organism) –R(response) framework in a retail context. When applied in a 
retail setting, the stimuli are operationalized as atmospheric cues, organism as consumers’ 
emotional and cognitive states (e.g., pleasure, arousal and dominance), and response as 
approach/avoidance behavio urs (e.g., satisfaction, purchase, visit, recommendation or 
patronage intention ) (Fiore, Yah  & Yoh 2000; Grewal et al., 2003; Doucé , Lieve  & 
Janssens, 2013). The stimuli entered consumers’ mind s in a traditional retail environment 
(Eroglu et al., 2001, 2003), but also in the  online context (e.g., Dailey, 2004; Griffith, 
2005; Kim, Fiore & Lee, 2007). However , the online environment lacks some fa ctors of 
the offline environment, such as temperature, odo ur, texture or people (Loureiro &  
Roschk, 2014; Roschk  et al., 2017). These same factors may become stimuli for virtual 
reality settings, with the evolution of the technology. For instance, Hassoune h and 
Brengman’s (2011) study involves fragrance, where bubbles float around the avatar ’s 
head making other avatar s aware of the virtual existence of the fragrance.  
Near the end of the first decade of 21th century, studies on virtual commerce in 
the virtua l reality setting become more frequent (e.g., Vrechopoulos, Apostolou  & 
Koutsiouris, 2009; Wasko, Teigland, Leidner  & Jarvenpaa, 2011). Through VR 
technology, the store interior has been analysed in terms of its influence on consumers ’ 

==== Page 17 ====
16 
 shopping behaviour for real -life and virtual products (Domina, Lee  & MacGillivray, 
2012; Hassouneh  & Brengman 2015), a nd on in -world branding opportunities 
(Hassouneh  & Brengman, 2011; Muzellec, Lynn  & Lambkin, 2012).  
The virtual store setting could be a representation of fashion retail, furniture retail, 
but also a supermarket, a restaurant or other place at a certain destination, like a museum 
or hotel (e.g., Hwang, Yoon  & Bendle, 2012; Dad, Davies  & Rehman, 2016; Mazursky 
& Vinitzky, 2005; Waterlander, Jiang, Steenhuis  & Mhurchu, 2015; Kim & Krishnan, 
2015; Krasonikolakis, Vrechopoulos, Pouloudi  & Dimitriadis, 2018). In virtual store s, 
researchers tend to study mainly the ambient conditions (e.g., colours, décor, lighting, 
background music), space (e.g.,  layout, equipment, furniture), artefacts (e.g., symbols, 
style décor), information provided, and the social component (e.g., crowd, employees, 
customers, avatars).  
Giving some examples , Krasonikolakis, Vrechopoulos  & Pouloudi (2014) find 
that core store features and security and privacy are the most important store selection 
factors in virtual environments and that sales in virtual worlds are predicted by the 
frequency of visiting and the time spent within such stores. Dad, Davies and Rehman 
(2016) propos e a framework to explore the effect of 3D virtual reality retail stores' 
environment cues (physical, social, socially symbolic and natural dimensions) on 
shoppers' behaviour. Dad, Rehman, Kear and Davies (2018) focus their empirical study 
on the effect of music (atmospheric cue) in 3D virtual retail stores on shoppers' emotions 
and behaviour. Van Herpen, van den Broek, van Trijp and Yu (2016) highlight that virtual 
reality can improve realism in responses to shelf allocation. Consumers tend ed to buy 
more pr oducts and spen d more money ( on biscuits and fruit & vegetables), bought more 
national brands, and responded more strongly to price promotions in virtual reality 
settings than in the physical store. Krasonikolakis et al. (2018), however, change the focus 

==== Page 18 ====
17 
 of the stimulus to the virtual layout of the store and explore the influence on enjoyment, 
entertainment, ease of navigation, customer experience and purchase intentions.  
Other studies are more devoted to the relationship between atmospherics and 
AIDA (atte ntion, interest, desire and action) or crow ding and customers’ responses (e.g., 
Hwang, Yoon &  Bendle, 2012; Yeh, Wang, Li & Lin, 2017). Mazursky and Vinitzky, 
(2005) are concerned with consumer search processes, providing support for the 
importance of shop ping duration, number of brands examined, and the search sequence. 
In line  with Mazursky and Vinitzky (2005), Kim and Krishnan (2015) focus their 
attention on consumers ’ uncertainty about subjective product quality in the consumer 
search processes, finding  that consumers do not buy expensive products online if there is 
a high degree of product uncertainty, even when they have accumulated much online 
shopping experience. Yet, Waterlander et al. (2015) claim that consumer search pattern s 
and processes in virt ual setting s are comparable to those in real life, wh ich contradict s to 
some extent the study by  van Herpen et al. (2016).  
Overall, virtual setting studies tend to be experiments, where the sample size 
range s from 100 to 200 participants  (e.g.,  Waterlander et al., 2015; Yeh et al., 2017; Dad 
et al., 2018 ). Data are treated using statistics like t -student test, ANOVA, ANCOVA or 
multiple regressions (e.g. Krasonikolakis et al., 2014; Waterlander et al., 2015; Yeh et al., 
2017; Dad et al., 2018). M ore recently, researchers  have  started to use structural equations 
and the sample size tend s to rise , ranging between 300 and 400 (e.g., Krasonikolakis et 
al., 2018). In addition to the small sample size, participants are usually undergraduate or 
graduate students, which hinders  generalization  (about 80%)  
T2. MANUFACTURING & NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT.  VR is being 
increasingly used in the manufacturing field to develop new projects in stage -gate 
processes and in interactions with customers and suppliers (Sethi  & Iqbal, 2008). Stage-

==== Page 19 ====
18 
 gate projects divide  the new product development process into a set of discrete and 
identifiable stages (e.g., preliminary investigation , concept development and testing, 
business plan development, product development, testing and validation, full production, 
and market l aunch) (Cooper, 2001). The objective at each gate is to allow projects that 
adequately satisfy screening criteria (operat ionalized in the form of a standard checklist 
or scorecards) to proceed further. Thus, projects that do not fulfil the criteria must be 
recycled or set aside. The interface with marketing and consumers usually occur s in the 
first stages (when the new ideas  emerge) and later at the prototype stage  before launch ing 
on the  market. Here , VR can help greatly in the interaction with consumers and even with 
other stakeholders. Indeed, VR allows simulation of real processes and products for 
different purposes, for instance, staff training, prototype design, manufacturing 
optimization and marketing ( Choi & Cheung, 2008; Bae &  Leem, 2014), meet ing market 
demands (Duffy &  Salvendy, 2000; Souza, Sacco & Porto, 2006), by  increasing product 
quality and giving a faster res ponse to the market (Manesh, Schaefer  & Hashemipour, 
2011), and reduc ing uncertainty about consumer acceptance (Rosenberger &  
Dechernatony, 1995).  
VR is also applied to teleoperation of real processes in dangerous environments 
or in micro and macro scale m anufacturing. However, VR is not only applied to radical 
innovation, as it can  reduce time and costs in incremental innovation, shorten the product 
innovation cycle, and lead to increases in product quality, helping industry to reduce the 
time-to-market an d contributing to the joint process with consumers and even other 
stakeholders (e.g., Souza, Sacco & Porto, 2006; Hoffmann, Stefani & Patel, 2006). 
Through simulations, assessment and modification of a product design, VR can contribute 
to improving the dev elopment process of new products in an iterative process reducing 

==== Page 20 ====
19 
 the manufacturing and material costs of prototypes (particularly in the automotive 
industry) ( Choi & Cheung, 2008; Lawson et al., 2016 ). 
 These articles present techniques for new product de velopment (NPD), 
suggestions for production planning processes with stakeholder cooperatio n, 
development of prototyping systems, or simulation modelling to be used to explore how 
sales practice influences adoption decisions, customer satisfaction and the ultimate 
evolution of the market (e.g., Swann, 2001;  Mujber, Szecsi & Hashmi, 2005; Souza et al., 
2006; Lawson et al., 2016). Therefore, the studies provide the conditions for evaluating 
products and prototypes in realistic virtual space, showing  the inter face between 
manufacturing and the marketing process, but they do not show experiments, surveys or 
other qualitative or quantitative research usually employed in marketing research , for 
example,  focus group s and  interviews.  
T3. GAZE TRACKING AND SERVICE CO NFIGURATION . This topic comprises 
studies related to the use of VR to develop service configuration, reduce uncertainty in 
the buying decision process and the use of gaze tracking (Markopoulos &  Hosanagar, 
2018). Gaze tracking (or eye tracking) is the proc ess of electronically locating the point 
of a person's gaze or following and recording the movement of the point of gaze, which 
can be done through methods involving attachments to the eye or using the images of the 
eye taken without any physical contact ( e.g., Rojas, Contero, Bartomeu  & Guixeres, 2015; 
Arabadzhiyska, Tursun, Myszkowski, Seidel &  Didyk, 2017; Mompean, Aragon, Prieto 
& Artal, 2018). Eye movement data provide a detailed reflection of cognitive information 
processing in many different kinds of  displays visualized by participants (e.g., products 
package d in a virtual scenario, virtual bottles, colo urs and hills in a virtual scenario of a 
landscape, information in yellow pages) (e.g., Lohse, 1997). With this process , 
researchers have access to in formation from  the point of view of participants at every 

==== Page 21 ====
20 
 single captured moment of time. The information gathered allows researchers to 
reconstruct the chronology of the customer -product relationship  and contribut es to 
understand ing consumers ’ buying -decision  process  (Katicic, Häfner  & Ovtcharova, 
2015).  
By working with gaze tracking  in VR, any type of simulated environment can be 
designed, where visual stimuli and research scenarios can be easily and quickly repeated  
- all in a timely, cost -efficient manner. For instance,  using these tools  Bigné, Llinares and 
Torrecilla (2016) point out that the key driver of additional brand choices is the time 
buyers spend on the first choice, showing that the allocation of less  time to the first-choice  
triggers addi tional purchases within the product category and, therefore, increases sales. 
In another study, Rojas et al. (2015) prepare a photographic and a virtual representation 
of a beer bottle to be analy sed by consumers. Eye -tracking analysis confirms that the 
orientation of the bottle and how it is presented also affect consumer perception.  
VR with eye -tracking could even be used to develop service configuration in  an 
online setting. Several studies present  different modules to perform product analysis and 
provid e decision -making information. Thus, users can configure and virtually experience 
the products that they want to purchase on any client workstation (Choi, Kang, Bae  & 
Cho, 2001). Consumers can also contribute to service configuration (e.g., service 
conditi ons, security, typology of the service) using adapted modules allowing them  to 
organize the service elements (e.g., Wang, Chai  & Qi, 2011; Fang, Zhang, Sensoy  & 
Magnenat -Thalmann, 2014; Zhang, Zhao  & Gupta, 2018).  
The studies belonging to this set of arti cles tend to use experiments as a process 
to test the technology developed to aggregate VR and gaze tracking. The sample size 
tends to be up to 100, students are the prefer red participants, and descriptive statistics are 
used (e.g., means, percentages)  (about 80%)  (e.g., Rojas, Contero, Bartomeu & Guixeres, 

==== Page 22 ====
21 
 2015; Arabadzhiyska, Tursun, Myszkowski, Seidel & Didyk, 2017; Mompean, Aragon, 
Prieto & Artal, 2018) . 
T4. INTERACTION . Studies on this topic are devoted to  the value of VR in the 
relationship between company /brands and partners (particular  consumers) where 
interac tion processes are developed , which may lead us to value co -creation or simply co -
creation  (e.g., Scholz & Smith, 2016; Jung &  tom Dieck, 2017) . Recently, co -creation 
has becom e an important concept in marketing. Indeed, co -creation is about joint creation 
of value by the company and the customer, joint problem definition and problem solving , 
and create s an experience environment in which consumers can have active dialogue and 
co-construct personalized experiences (Prahalad & Ramaswamy, 2004a; Prahalad & 
Ramaswamy, 2004b) .  
Following this conceptualization, Jung and tom Dieck (2017) p ropose a value co -
creation framework through examining the opportunities of implementing augmented 
reality, virtual reality and 3D printing into the visitor experience at cultural heritage 
places. In their case -study approach, the authors suggest that the effective use of multiple 
technologies in the context of cultural heritage places (which  could be extended to other 
contexts) contributes to the co -creation of value for both cultural heritage organizations, 
during the visitors’ pre-visit, onsite and post -visit experience.  
When evaluating the influence of VR on the relationship process , some authors  
point to mental workload as an intrinsic influencing characteristic  (e.g., Glacer , 1997; 
Arafa, 2017 ; Scholz & Smith, 2016 ). This id ea is proposed by Glacer  (1997 ), with the 
author claiming  this aspect as an important barrier to VR expansion. Later, this idea is 
further developed by Zhao et al. (2017) , who regard  it as gender -related, with males 
presenting significantly higher mental workload than females, due to men being more 

==== Page 23 ====
22 
 focused on the product’s characteristics and therefore driven by rational thinking, 
demanding more mental availability than females.  
Overall, t he studie s in this group combine conceptual propositions (e .g., Arafa, 
2017 ; Jung & tom Dieck, 2017) with experimental designs  and case studies  (with sample 
sizes less than 100) (e.g., Zhao et al., 2017) with no VR plug -ins adopted.  
T5. EXPERIENTIAL MARKETING.  Overall, this topic joins  studies explor ing how 
VR can improve and transform consumers’  experience (e.g., Li &  Meshkova, 2013; 
Verhagen et al., 2014; Van Kerrebroeck, Brengman  & Willems, 2017; Leanza, 2017).  For 
instance, Li and Meshkova (2013) examine whe ther the increased realism of a virtual 
store compared to pictorial (2D) stimuli elicits consumer behaviour that is more in line 
with behaviour in a physical store. The results indicate that VR can improve realism in 
responses to shelf allocation, which se ems to make these tools promising for use in the 
retail context.  
In this topic , some studies employ the term telepresence, meaning that VR evoke s 
the sensation of presence, which comprises interactivity and vividness (Steuer, 1992; 
Cummings  & Bailenson , 2016 ). The first represents the extent to which users can modify 
the form and content of an environment in real time (Steuer, 1992); Cummings  & 
Bailenson , 2016) . Vividness refers to the quality of the images and the sense of movement 
in the surroundings (Coyle & Thorson, 2001; Cheng et al., 2014). The last component 
tends to be the one mo st examined in the studies o n this topic, wh ich follows the 
perspective of Cheng et al. (2014), wh o suggest  that the influential power of vividness is 
three times more than that of interactivity. The research by Hyun and O’Keefe (2012) is 
an example of the use of the concept of teleprese nce. They investigate how telepresence 
influences perceived destination image. The article describes the use of telepresence in 
producing a model of destination image formation. Thus, the study concludes  that (i) 

==== Page 24 ====
23 
 whereas previous research shows that travel  information directly influences the formation 
of image without a mediator, telepresence can act as a mediator in online environments, 
(ii) the presence of varied Web -mediated information can have  a positive influence on 
telepresence, and indirectly lead t o a positive virtual destination image. In another study 
by Panic et al. (2011) on the impact of an interactive television public -service 
announcement (PSA) containing an anti -speeding message  on feelings of telepresence 
and behavioural intention, it is in dicated that when the threat levels of the program me and 
the PSA are both either low or high, exposure to the threatening information in the DAL 
(dedicated advertising location) does not generate a significantly higher feeling of 
telepresence. However, whe n a low -threat program me is followed by a high -threat PSA, 
the threat level of the DAL has a positive effect on telepresence. Finally, there is a positive 
effect of telepresence on the behavioural intention to reduce speeding, which is partly 
mediated by t he viewer's perceived efficacy of following the recommended behaviour. 
These studies show that the virtual environment is as effective as real -life situations and 
hence could be used for successful manipulation of consumer behaviour.  
Regarding the concept of vividness, we can highlight three studies where the 
concept is used as a mediator between stimuli and response. Thus, vividness in 
commercial websites is associated with more positive and more enduring attitudes 
toward s the website and the advertising and indirectly elicits a positive effect on brand 
attitude , which stimulates consumers' purchase intentions (Cauberghe, Geuens  & De 
Pelsmacker, 2011; Van Kerrebroeck et al., 2017). The virtual experience conducted by 
Shen and Khalifa (2012) reveal s that vividness has a significant effect on buying impulses 
over and above traditional marketing/product stimuli.  
These studies tend to use real scenarios (films representing places, stores, 
destinations) wh ich are visualized using  VR equipment (e.g., Oculus Rift, HTC Vive, 

==== Page 25 ====
24 
 Google Cardboard, Samsung Gear VR), particularly since 2014 when th is equipment 
became more accessible in the market. Although most studie s (about 80%)  tend to use 
graduate and undergraduate students, particularl y those that develop experiments with  a 
sample size between 100 and 200 (e.g., Panic et al., 2011; Cauberghe et al., 2011), when 
using real scenarios, the sample tend s to be above 300 (e.g., Hyun & O'Keefe, 2012; 
Cheng et al., 2014). The y tend to be quanti tative studies where the most common 
statistical techniques are t -test, ANOVA, ANCOVA and structural equations. Finally, it 
is worth noting that we have found a study whose participants are elderly  (Jeng et al. , 
2017) . In the study, each elderly respondent  experienced the activities (leisure activities 
in VR) for ten weeks. The findings show that experience value is not only able to 
effectively predict behavio ural intentions (including purchases and ongoing 
participation), but it is also a mediating variabl e in the relationship between experience 
quality and behavio ural intentions.  
T6. VR APPLICATIONS . This topic comprises studies that explore applications of VR, 
where the use algorithms like avatars (as human representation in virtual setting ) are the 
most analysed  (about 60%) . An avatar represents an electronic presence of the user inside 
the virtual world, resembl ing a real human being ( Dad, Davies & Kear, 2016) and 
behaving as such while interacting with other s (Kim, Kim & Cho, 2011; Suh, Kim & Suh, 
2011) . The business applications of avatars in marketing are of various types with 
individuals trading virtual items in flagship stores, being exposed to virtual advertising 
(billboards and multimedia) and event sponsorship. Marketing research is also  presented 
as an important application, with companies using virtual worlds to observe the attitudes 
and motivations of their residents and implementing product testing and co -creation of 
virtual and real products.  

==== Page 26 ====
25 
  As the use of the virtual world evolves, Finch and Yang (2016) focus the 
discussion around the intellectual property of user -generated content (UGC) created in 
entertainment and games VR platforms. In these contexts, the discussion on intellectual 
property emerges as platforms commercial ly explore content that is developed by their 
users, including avatars. The authors analy se various court decisions and find no clear 
jurisprudence established, proposing that future studies evolve on that matter.  
 The effectiveness of avatars in performin g their various applications is largely 
associated with the level of self -congruity and functional congruity perceived by the user, 
with users reacting more positively in situations where they perceive similarity to the 
characters (Suh, Kim  & Suh, 2011). T he need for robust similarity and accurate real -time 
visualization impose s various technical challenges related to image capturing , with the 
reconstructed 3D models often lacking sharpness and definition (Anton, Kurillo  & 
Bajcsy, 2018).  In order to deliver  a more accurate experience, the adoption of head 
mounted displays (HMD) involve s the recommended inclusion of augmented context -
based interactions, combining stories, visuals and sounds for a richer experience, as 
opposed to a virtual reality environment that simply replicates the existing real world 
(Kang, 2018). Finally, th ese studies tend to be conceptual and de scribe how new 
algorit hms and systems ma y improve and complement the use  of VR in different 
activities , such as online marketing , multimedia experience in VR retailing o r the use of 
augmented information in immersive virtual reality environments  (e.g., Finch and Yang, 
2016; Anton, Kurillo & Bajcsy, 2018) . 
T7. COMMUNICATION & SOCIAL MEDIA . Studies on this topic are mostly 
focused on the use of VR in media communications, exploring it in relation to  future 
perspectives associated with social media platforms ( Kane, 2017 ; Lytras et al., 2015 ; 
Lytras et al., 2017 ) and its use in advertising.                                           

==== Page 27 ====
26 
 Regarding the effects of VR on social media, there is a common understanding of 
its potential to transform the social interactions occurring on these online platforms, with 
a clear reconfiguration of traditional concepts and conversion among virtual and physical 
contexts ( e.g. Klischewski, 2014; Lyntras et al., 2015). However, no shared vision seems 
to exist yet on how this conversion will take p lace, with multiple formats occurring (e .g., 
VR dedicated channels on You tube).  The changes in social media and advertising imply 
that from a technological point of view the immersive and wearable technologies have 
their adoption increased (Lyntras et al ., 2015). This perspective implies that the barriers 
associated with financial costs and user experience could be addressed properly in the 
future, with head -mounted displays, shutter glasses and cyber gloves expanding their 
adoption (Thrush & Bodary, 2000 ).  
Regarding the use of VR in advertising, studies focus on comparing the effects of 
traditional brand communications with VR brand communications. The findings support 
the positive effects of VR -enhanced approaches o n purchase intentions (V erhagen et al. , 
2014; Li, Daugherty & Biocca, 2002; Suh & Lee, 2005) , with the mediating effects 
associated with brand knowledge ( Suh & Lee, 2005; Mitra, Raymond  & Hopkins, 2008) 
and brand attitude (Li, Daugherty  & Biocca, 2002; Suh & Lee, 2005; Dobrowolski et al., 
2014) resulting from the increased affective dimension of the VR brand experience.  
These results are of particular relevance for experience -based products´ attributes 
(those that require users to touch or feel) which have very limited  inspection prior to 
purchase in traditional brand communications ( Li, Daugherty  & Biocca, 2002; Jiang & 
Benbasat, 2004). In the context of VR communications, consumers enjoy a more visual 
and functional control (Jiang & Benbasat, 2004), which allow s better inspection of 
products, with positive effects on diagnosticity (consumers ’ ability to diagnose the 
product attributes prior to purchase) and on the flow experienced as a result of visual and 

==== Page 28 ====
27 
 functional interactivity and vividness (Li, Daugherty & Biocca,2002 ; Jiang &  Benbasat, 
2004 ).  
Concerning  product diagnosticity, Li, Daugherty and Biocca (2002) attribute the 
positive effects of VR to the illusion of presence which creates new virtual product cues. 
The reasoning behind this is that the new cues virtually created compensate at least 
partially for the absence of the physical cues traditionally used in purchase decisions. As 
an example, the decision on a leather jacket is influenced by the visual inspection 
consumers can enjoy a s they zoom in and out, inspecting the material ’s quality based on 
its brightness, fitting and colours instead of its touch (Li, Daugherty  & Biocca, 2002). 
This understanding is supported by other studies that associate the positive effects of VR 
communica tions with perceived product tangibility resulting from consumers´ cognitive 
access to extended product cues ( Verhagen et al., 2014).   
In sum , the articles included in this topic highlight  conceptual contributions and 
experimental designs, with the VR tec hnologies tested being limited to 3D image rotation 
(Li, Daugherty  & Biocca, 2002; Suh & Lee, 2005; Verhagen et al., 2014) and sound 
animation (Mitra, Raymond  & Hopkins, 2008; Dobrowolski et al., 2014). Few studies 
(about 10%) use VR plug -ins (Suh & Lee, 2005; Dobrowolski et al., 2014).  
 
5. Overall d iscussion  
Virtual reality has been a technique employed by practitioners and academics to plan, 
develop and communicate new and existent products (e.g., goods, services, places, 
destinations, packages) or brands (Mujber et al., 2005; Guttentag, 2010; Cheng & Wang, 
2011; Shen & Khalifa, 2012; Bae &  Leem, 2014; Dad et al., 2016; Ketelaar et al., 2017).  
When consider ing the whole group of articles published in journals belonging to Web of 
Science (WOS) and us ing VR as the featured technology, we see that most of them ( over 

==== Page 29 ====
28 
 90%) deal with the VR equipment or software and related technologies, medical issues 
and training, geographical information system (GIS), following by pilot training, 
education, and gaming. Indeed, one of the first applications of VR and related 
technologies is the incorporation of computer -based virtual reality technology in medical 
education (e.g., surgical training) (e.g., Wexner et al., 2009; White et al., 2010; Abboudi 
et al., 2013) . VR has been successfully employed in training surgeons, and VR simulators 
aid progression along the learning curve for this rapidly developing surgical technique 
within a safe training environment. Thus, users with disabilities may benefit from using 
VR, as can elderly users, as Jeng et al. (2017) find in their study of leisure activities.  
Although still not directly related to marketing, s tudies in geographical 
information system s are also prolific in operating a local government's landscape and 
urban planni ng activities via a website. Implementing GIS systems help s build a more 
realistic landscape and urban planning models and facilitate s the location of streets, tours, 
museums and other attractions or facilities for both resident s and tourists ( Rau & Cheng,  
2013) . Close to this issue we can also find studies on the use of VR to assist students in 
their learning process (Freina  & Ott, 2015; Hainey et al., 2016). Finally, we also find a 
mixed group of articles presenting studies where gamification ( the applica tion of typical 
elements of game playing (e.g. point scoring, competition with others, rules of play) to 
other areas of activity) is incorporated in VR and used to be more captivating for students 
(Hainey et al., 2016; Makri  & Vlachopoulos, 2017). As the use of VR technologies in 
gaming evolves, the importance of image quality (Rau & Cheng, 2013) ergonomics , 
computational speed (Rau & Cheng, 2013) and costs (Torrente et al., 2014) emerge s.  
 The studies connecting marketing issues and VR are still scarce w hen compar ed 
to all those on  VR extracted from Web of Science (WOS). To date, journals considered 
as top tier in the marketing field (for instance , on the  ABS list 2018) (Harzing, 2018) have 

==== Page 30 ====
29 
 not been prolific in publishing studies about the use of VR and r elated techniques in 
marketing.  Even so, w e point out Grewal et al. ’s (2017) article which gives a very brief 
glimpse of VR and AR in retail. They claim that VR and AR is a promis ing area  that is 
just beginning to take shape .   
Consistent with the seminal  theories on  marketing , proposed  and communicated 
by Kotler (1967), Howard and Sheth (1969) or Sheth (1973), we can trace the roots of 
studies on VR connected to marketing. Therefore, consumer buying -behavio ur and 
consumer decision -making work as a process leading marketeers, researchers and 
practitioners to continuously  discuss how to design, plan and manage the process where by 
consumers go from pre -purchase and purchase to post -purchase stages.  
 Starting wit h the pre -purchase stage, marketing academics consider all consumers 
experience the firm/brand before purchase, for instance: search ing for information about 
alternative products/brands through advertising and all form s of marketing 
communication, acknowle dging the reputation and credibility of the firm/brand and 
evaluati ng alternatives (e.g., Pieters, Baumgartner  & Allen 1995; Baek, Kim  & Yu, 2010; 
Swoboda,  Berg  & Schramm -Klein,  2013 ). Thus, VR technology can contribute to 
promot ing brand/firms acting as advertising, simulating the product/package, testing 
products (e.g., virtual car test drive) and collaborating in the process of developing new 
products. Connected to these themes we find the topics  of communication and social 
media (e.g., Huhn et al., 2011) , manufacturing and new product development - 
particularly in the process of launch ing the new product (e.g., Choi, Jo, Lee & Do Noh, 
2010) or VR applications (e.g., Dad et al., 2016). In sum, all marketing communication 
that allow s consumers to visualize products through VR and related technologies 
contribut es to a more vivid representation of the advertising, enriching consumers ’ 
imagina tion and eliciting more positive attitudes. However , the pre-purchase phase can 

==== Page 31 ====
30 
 also include ot her stakeholders. During the process of develop ing new products, VR 
technology can be used not only by potential consumers, but also by potential suppliers 
and distributors in the supply chain.  
More and more brands are using VR in their communication campa igns. For 
example, hotels and destinations , by allowing the place to be visited at home ( e.g., 
Marriott International, Thomas Cook or Shangri -La hotels & resort) or the automobile 
industry by providing VR test drives (e.g., Volvo) (Stott, 2018; Shangri -la, 2018; 
Marriott, 2018).  
 Purchase encompasses all relationships and interactions consumers establish with 
brands/firms. We find this same idea of relationship and exchange at the core of the 
definition of marketing provided by AMA (2013). Thus, marketing m odels studying how 
brands control the marketing -mix elements (e.g., attributes of product/service, price, sales 
force, information and convenience) and how they affect consumer satisfaction and 
loyalty have received great  attention in the marketing literat ure (e.g., Bitner, 199 2; Baker 
et al. 2002; Dorotic, Bijmolt  & Verhoef , 2012; R oschk et al., 2017) in general and in 
studies integrat ing VR technology in the marketing context (e.g., Li &  Meshkova, 2013; 
Dad et al., 2016; van Herpen et al., 2016; Bigné et a l., 2016; Van Kerrebroeck et al., 
2017).  
Integrated in this stream of research we can point out two of the most prominent 
topics in terms of the number of papers: virtual setting and experiential marketing. 
Although studies on the topic of gaze tracking and service configuration are still scarce, 
this topic is also associated with the purchase phase. As presented  before, VR with gaze -
tracking can leverage the insights gathered from studies on atmospheric  cues in virtual 
worlds and the experience provided,  by following -up eye movement. This process 

==== Page 32 ====
31 
 complements traditional surveys measuring constructs like satisfaction, brand choice or 
enjoyment.  
One example of a company using VR simulating the purchase phase is Carrefour, 
which create s virtual environments  in which consumers can visualize the various products 
on offer (Carrefour, 2016). Other cases are IKEA (2018), where customers can organize 
and re -organize the layout and design of a room or TESCO Pele (2018), a store devoted 
to football merchandi se. 
The third stage includes customers’  interactions and exchanges with brands after 
the actual purchase. Traditionally, here we may consider consumption, engagement, post -
purchase services, service recovery, repurchase or customer engagement processes (e.g., 
through brand communities, online reviewers) (e.g., Kelley & Davis 1994; Bolton 1998; 
Hollebeek, Glynn  & Brodie, 2014) . Regarding the traditional issues studied in this stage, 
we may claim that neither  academics nor practitioners have paid the same attention a s 
they did to the last two phases. This is particularly true for VR in the marketing context. 
Nevertheless, some elements  of this post -purchase phase exist in some studies in the topic 
of interaction. For instance, when approach ing the co -creation process which can occur 
in the first stages of develop ing a new product, but also when brand and consumers 
continuously cooperate and interact in improving the product (e.g., Jung &  tom Dieck, 
2017). In this vein, future research could analy se how VR technology could contribute to 
service recovery or engagement processes.  
Overall, when consider ing the whole set of studies analysed on VR in marketing , 
we can highlight four major gaps: (i) a lack of studies de voted  to the post -purchase phase 
and in the second place  the studies associated to the  pre-purchase phase, (ii) no studies 
examin ing how consumer s’ past experience can influence their decision -making process 
and consumption behavio ur, (iii) the majority of studies us ing graduate and undergraduate 

==== Page 33 ====
32 
 students to participant in experiments and surveys, which is not representativ e of other 
consumers, (iv) sample size  is usually less than 200 for studies that develop artificial 
virtual settings (without a real existence) and hi gher in the case of real films about a 
landscape, a hotel or a store which  researchers ask participants to visualize using VR 
technology , (v) although Second Life (SL) is one of the most mature virtual worlds 
(VWs), we find only four studies conduct ing experiments in this scenario.   
 
6. Conclusion s and implications  
The results of a text-mining approach provide seven  topics for VR in the marketing 
context. We identified the number of articles published over time, the authors who 
published most frequently and the leading journals in each topic.  
Overall, the findings reveal that the seven topics can be allocated to three major 
phases in the process of the relationship  between  firms/brands and stakeholders, 
particularly c onsumers . We claim that the pre-purchase phase can include  the topics of 
communication and social media , manufacturing and new product development and VR 
applications. In this stage , we recognize that VR has been used very often in 
manufacturing, in projects to desig n and market -test new products and incrementally 
improve existent ones. This type of technology  is particularly important in the automotive 
industry in the interface between suppliers and customers, as well as in virtual test driving.  
In the purchase phase , two of the most prolific topics  emerge  -virtual setting and 
experiential marketing  - and t he topic with the lowe st number o f paper s called gaze 
tracking and service configuration. To date , the post-purchase phase has not be en the 
focus of researchers who investigate the association of VR with the  marketing context. 
However, as explained, interaction is the topic  the most related to this phase.  

==== Page 34 ====
33 
 Finally, two sectors stand out  as the most studied : tourism (hospitality and cultural  
contexts) and retailing . Here , in hospitality  and cultural contexts , VR has interest ing 
applications, emerging as a threat to the travel industry, as a mean s of reduc ing the 
negative impacts of tourism and as a marketing tool that helps to increase a destination’s  
appeal. Senses such as sight, sound, touch, smell and taste could be integrated in VR 
experiences to increase the feeling of being in the place and creating a desire in tourists  
to visit those places in the future. In the hospitality industry , experiments have used the 
virtual servicescape to analyse the effect of stimuli on consumers’ emotional state and 
their behavio ur or brand preference and choice process. Serious leisure contexts (e.g., 
museums) are conducting visitors through virtual wor lds and experiences, where the 
feeling is of  travelling to the past. Retailing is also using virtual setting s to simulat e stores 
(e.g., supermarket s), where products can be selected and purchased using mobile 
applications. The way marketers are communicati ng and promoting  products /services and 
brands is another field undergoing major  transformation.  
6.1 Managerial implications  
The current study offers insights for managers. First, VR contribute s to creat ing stimuli 
to enhance the customer experience from evaluation and decision -making to actual  
purchase and repurchase intentions. Consumers can participate  in the process of 
developing new products from the beginning of the project  until testing the 
products /service before purchase. Along this process, t hey can make  suggestions  and 
point out negative issues in joint co -creation with companies.  
Managers should also be more active in  setting up virtual flagship stores in virtual 
worlds for promotion  purposes  by sponsoring an event or through press release s of their 
activities in virtual worlds. Tourism organizations should not remain  outside virtual 
worlds. They need to be more active  in promot ing different destinations by  means of 

==== Page 35 ====
34 
 developing 3D cities, hotels and destinations on virtual islands simulated to the real 
world ’s tourist destinations.  
Second, Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) can benefit from virtual worlds by 
utilizing virtual magazines and newspaper s as an alternative to real ones. This virtual 
world and platforms are more interactive than tradi tional communication tools and 
contribute to customer  engagement  with the brand and the company . In internal 
communications, online platforms and virtual worlds can facilitate meetings between  
partners and employees living in different parts of the world.  
Finally, in marketing courses, VR can help lecture rs and students to integrat e 
theory and practical experiences, by simulat ing real marketing situation s, setting up real 
scenario s and provid ing countless activities for experimental learning. Branding and 
advertising projects for undergraduate and graduate students can be developed using VR 
techniques. This new marketing tool can be used in both face -to-face and distance 
learning courses.  
6.2 Future research  
Based on the studies analysed, we suggest five main avenues  for further research.  First, 
foundation theories. S -O-R framework has been employed as the core theoretical 
foundation for studies. However , in the future, researchers may consider other theories 
and theoretical frameworks as a support for th eir studies. For instance, although a few 
studies in VR and not necessarily VR in marketing use TAM (Technology Acceptance 
Model), the number of studies is scarce, and researchers may want to consider go ing 
further and adapt ing the UTAUT (Unified Theory of  Acceptance and Use of Technology) 
model and extensions ( e.g., Venkatesh et al., 2003).  Another traditional theor y in 
marketing is the Theory of Planned Behaviour, which links consumer s’ belie fs and 
behavio urs. Thus, belie fs regarding  VR technology and the experience provided may be 

==== Page 36 ====
35 
 associated with consumers ’ attitud e and behaviours  (e.g., Ajzen, 1991) . The theory of 
self-expansion come s from social psychology and may offer support for some studies , 
since individuals have a natural des ire to enhance their potential efficacy  and resources 
(through material, social  or informational resources ) (e.g., Aron & Aron, 1997; Aron  et 
al., 2013 ). Self-expansion is also related to flow (a mental state characterized by  full 
immersion, energized focus, and enjoyment and conce ntrated focus on an activity) and is 
similarly often characterized by high positive affect ( e.g., Csíkszentmihályi, 2008 ).  Thus, 
the immersive experience provided by VR and the other related technologies may 
motiv ate consumers  to experience VR and also self -expand through relationships with 
others in virtual environments (e.g., avatar  or other simulation of human identity ). 
Secondly, moderators  and mediators . Previous stu dies tend to regard  constructs 
such as pleasure, arousal, vividness  and telepresence as m ediators  between stimuli and 
behavioural intentions. However , we suggest other m ediators , such as  the involvement 
with the product/brand or setting and atmospheric responsiveness  (Eroglu et al., 2001) or 
consider other cognitive states related to thinking  and learning (engagement as suggested 
by Hollebeek et al., 2014) or memory creation ( e.g., Kastenholz et al., 2018) . Moderators 
are sparsely  analysed. We find a few studies comparing male s and female s (e.g., Zhao et 
al. (2017), but we cannot fully understand the possible differences in perceptions  of 
experiences between gender s. Future studies could  explore other socio -demographic 
variables - such as age, education level , technical skills  - or personality traits  (e.g., 
extroversion versus introversion, self -esteem , empathy, internal locus of control  or the 
feeling of control over the virtual environment ) or even cultural issues  (which can lead to 
cross -cultural studies) . Past experience with VR technologies should not be neglected  as 
a moderator, since the number of times VR is used could change the emotions and the 
sensation of novelty toward s the technology . Finally,  longitudinal follow -up studies are 

==== Page 37 ====
36 
 advisable  due to the continuous evolution of tec hnologies  and customer s becoming  
accustomed to such experiences.  
Third, sample and data collection. The studies analysed tend to use students as 
consumers, but in the future other groups must be invited to participat e (actual users). 
Particularly older consumers should be involved in these studies, asking them how they 
feel these technologies could improve their social and personal well -being. This target 
can be important not only for consumer studies, but also for ci tizens when some social 
equipment is projected, or for tourists who intend to visit a destination.  Sample size and 
the data collection process are also a concern. Prior studies tend mostly to use sample s 
between 100 and 200 , and convenience samples , which does not allow generalization, 
Therefore, in future researchers should be more careful and use randomized or quota 
samples to avoid bias  and reach  more accurate conclusions.  
Fourth, measurements  and equipment . The use of questionnaires and scales to  
measure perceptions , particularly for level s of immersion , presence or enjoyment. Further 
research should use more often sensors and psychological analys is to avoid bias.  In this 
line, researchers should consider  that different VR equipment (e.g., Samsung Gear VR or 
Google Cardboard or Oculus Rift) can vary in levels of immersion capability and simulate 
different types of actions and interactions, making it  difficult t o compar e studies a s 
findings c annot be generalized to other equipment.  Finally, multi-sensory simulations in 
VR studies and the implications for consumer behaviour are recommended for contexts 
such as retail, education, hospitality and destination, and manufacturing.  
Finally , technology -driven experience with VR. Future res earch can analy se the 
influence of factors such as screen size, image motion, a stereoscopic presentation, or a 
realistic and  detailed design on VR experience s. A tool (e.g., measurement scale) that 
could measure different dimensions of VR experiences is recommende d (e.g., emotional, 

==== Page 38 ====
37 
 psychological and cognitive dimensions). With this tool  it will be easier to go further in 
understanding antecedents of the outcomes of VR experiences.  
References  
Abboudi, H., Khan, M.S., Aboumarzouk, O., Guru, K.A., Challacombe, B., Da sgupta, P., 
& Ahmed, K. (2013). Current status of validation for robotic surgery simulators a 
systematic review. BJU International , 111(2), 194 -205. doi: 10.1111/j.1464 -
410X.2012.11270.x  
Abergel, V., Saleri, R., Bergerot, L. & de Luca, L. (2016). Personal hand -held devices 
and virtual reality passive technologies for digital heritage browsing: Lesson learnt 
with the KIVI project. SCIRES -IT - Scientific Research and Information Technology , 
6(1), 67 –78, doi: 10.2423/i22394303v6n1p67.  
Ajzen, I. (1991) . The theory of planned behavior.  Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes . 50(2), 179 –211. doi:10.1016/0749 -5978(91)90020 -T. 
AMA (2013). https://www.ama.org/AboutAMA/Pages/Definition -of-Marketing.aspx  
Amado, A., Cortez, P., Rita, P., & Moro, S. (2017). Research trends on Big Data in 
Marketing: A text mining and topic modeling based literature analysis, European 
Research on Management and Business Economics (in press), doi: 
10.1016/j.iedeen.2017.06.002  
Anderson, J. C., &  Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation modeling in practice: A 
review and recommended two -step approach. Psychological Bulletin , 103(3), 411 –
423. doi: 10.1037/0033 -2909.103.3.411  
Anton, D., Kurillo, G., &  Bajcsy, R. (2018). User experience and interaction performance 
in 2D/3D telecollaboration . Future generation computer systems , 82, 77 -88.doi: 
10.1016/j.future.2017.12.055  
Arabadzhiyska, E., Tursun, O. T., Myszkowski, K., Seidel, H. P., &  Didyk, P. (2017). 
Saccade Landing Position Prediction for Gaze -Contingent Rendering. ACM 
transactions on graphics, 36 (4), 1 -12. doi: 10.1145/3072959.3073642  
Arafa, M. N. (2017). A chilles as a marketing tool for virtual heritage applications . 
ArchNet -IJAR , 11(3), 109 -118. doi: 10.26687/archnet -ijar.v11i3.1385  
Ariely, D., &  Levav, J. (2000). Sequential choice in group settings: Taking the road less 
traveled and less enjoyed. Journal of Consumer Research , 27(3), 279 -290. doi: 
10.1086/317585  
Aron, A., & Aron, E. (1997). Self -expansion motivation and including other in the self. 
In S. Duck (Ed.) Handbook of personal relationships  (2nd ed., pp. 251 –270). 
Chichester, UK: Wiley.  
Aron, A., Lewandowski, G.W. Jr., Mashek, D., & Aron, E.N. (2013). The self -expansion 
model of motivation and cognition in close relationships.  In J. A. Simpson & L. 
Campbell  (Eds.) The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 90 -115). New York: 
Oxford University Press.  
Bae, D. J., &Leem, C. S. (2014). A visual interactive method for service prototyping. 
Managing service quality, 24 (4), 339 -362. doi:10.1108/MSQ -12-2013 -0281 
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models.  
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 16(1), 74 -94. doi: 
10.1007/BF02723327  
Baek, T. H., Kim, J., &  Yu, J. H. (2010). The differential roles of brand credibility and 
brand prestige in consumer brand choice. Psychology & Marketing,27 (7), 662 -678. 
doi:10.1002/mar.20350  

==== Page 39 ====
38 
 Baker, J., Grewal, D., & Parasuraman, A. (1994). The influence of store environment on 
quality inferences and store image. Journal of Academy of Marketing Science, 22 , 
328–339. 
Baker, J. A., Parasuraman, G. D., Voss, G. B. (2002). The influence of multiple store 
environment cues on perceived merchandise value and patronage intentions. Journa l 
of Marketing, 66 (2), 120 -141.doi:10.1509/jmkg.66.2.120.18470  
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator –mediator variable distinction in 
social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51(6), 1173 -
1182 .https://www.sesp.org/files/The%20Moderator -Baron.pdf  
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation. The Journal 
of Machine Learning Research,3 , 993 –1022. Retrieved 
from http://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume3/blei03a/blei03a.pdf  
Bigné, E., Llinares, C., &  Torrecilla, C. (2016). Elapsed time on first buying triggers 
brand choices within a category: A virtual r eality -based study. Journal of Business 
Research , 69(4), 1423 -1427 . doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.10.119  
Bimber, O., &  Raskar, R. (2005). Spatial Augmented Reality Merging Real and Virtual 
Worlds . Cambridge, MA: A K Peters . 
Biocca, F. (1992). Communication within virtual reality: Creating a space for research. 
Journal of Communication , 42(4), 5 –22. doi: 10.1111/j.1460 -2466.1992.tb00810.x  
Biocca, F. (1997). The cyborg's dilemma: Progressive embodiment in virtual 
environments. Journal of Computer -Mediated Communication , 3(2). doi: 
10.1111/j.1083 -6101.1997.tb00070.x  
Bitner, M. J. (1992). Servicescapes: The impact of physical surroundings on customers 
and employees. Journal of Marketing, 56 , 57–71. doi:10.2307/1252042  
Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2009). Topic models. In A. N. Srivastava & M. Sahami 
(Eds.), Text mining: classification, clustering, and applications  (pp. 71 –94). Boca 
Raton: CRC Press.  
Bolton, R. N. (1998). A Dynamic Model of the Duration of the Customer’s Relationship 
with a Continuous Service Provider: The Role of Satisfaction. Marketing Science, 
17(1), 45 –65. doi:10.1287/mksc.17.1.45  
Brooks, F. P. (1999). What’s real about virtual reality? IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications , 19(6), 16 -27. doi:10.1109/38.799723  
Bui, T. (2000). Building agent -based corporate information systems: An application to 
telemedicine. European Journal of Operational Research , 122(2), 242 -257. 
doi:10.1016/S0377 -2217(99)00231 -3  
Buchroithner, M. (2002). Creating the virtual Eiger North Face. ISPRS Journal of 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , 57(1 -2), 114 -125. doi:10.1016/S0924 -
2716(02)00109 -0 
Buhalis, D., & Law, R. (2008). Progress in information technology and tourism 
management: 20 years on and 10 years after the Internet -the state of eTourism 
research. Tourism Management,  29(4), 609 –623. doi: 10.1016/j.tourm an.2008.01.005  
Cao, J., Xia, T., Li, J., Zhang, Y., & Tang, S. (2009). A density -based method for 
adaptive LDA model selection. Neurocomputing , 72(7 -9), 1775 -1781. doi: 
10.1016/j.neucom.2008.06.011  
Carrefour (2016). Virtual reality showcased in 228 hyperma rkets throughout 
France.Retrieved from http://www.carrefour.com/current -news/virtual -reality -
showcased -in-228-hyper markets -throughoutfrance. Accessed 24/11/2016  (accessed 
on 12 May 2018)  
Cauberghe, V., Geuens, M. & De Pelsmacker, P.  (2011) . Context effects of TV 

==== Page 40 ====
39 
 programme -induced interactivity and telepresence on advertising 
responses, International Journal of Advertising ,30(4), 641-663,doi: 10.2501/IJA -30-4-
641-663 
Cernousek, M. (1994). The Mass -Media Landscape - A Reframing. SociologickyCasopis , 
30(1), 35 -42. 
Chandrasekera, T., & Souza, N. D. (2015). Virtual environments with soundscapes: a 
study on immersion and effects of spatial abilities. Environment and Planning B: 
Planning and Design, 42 , 1003 –1019. doi: 10.1068/b130087p  
Chen, T. C., Ku, K. C., & Ying, T. C. (2012). A process -based collaborative model of 
marine tourism service system –The case of Green Island area, Taiwan. Ocean & 
coastal management , 64, 37-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2012.04.009  
Cheng, L. -K., Chieng, M. -H., &  Chieng, W. -H. (2014). Measuring virtual experience in 
a three -dimensional virtual reality interactive simulator environment: a structural 
equation modeling approach. Virtual Reality, 18 (3), 173 -188. doi:10.1007/s10055 -
014-0244 -2 
Cheng, Y., & Wang, S. H. (2 011). Applying a 3D virtual learning environment to 
facilitate student’s application ability –The case of marketing. Computers in Human 
Behavior , 27(1), 576 -584.  doi:  10.1016/j.chb.2010.10.008  
Cheong, R. (1995). The virtual threat to travel and tourism. Tourism Management , 16(6), 
417–422. doi:10.1016/0261 -5177(95)00049 -T 
Choi, S. H., & Cheung, H. H. (2008). A versatile virtual prototyping system for rapid 
product development. Computers in Industry , 59(5), 477-488. doi:  
10.1016/j.compind.2007.12.003  
Choi, S., Jo, H., Lee, J., & Do Noh, S. (2010). A Rule -based System for the Automated 
Creation of VR Data for Virtual Plant Review. Concurrent engineering -research and 
applications, 18 (3), 165 -183. doi:10.1177/1063293X10379763  
Choi, I., Kang, Y., Bae, S., & Cho, H. (2001). A virtual reality system for product 
configuration and analysis based on Web, VRML, and CORBA. International journal 
of industrial engineering -theory applications and practice, 8 (2), 105 -114. 
Choi, H. S., Lee, W. S., &  Sohn S. Y., (2017). Analyzing research trends in personal 
information privacy using topic modeling, Computers & Security , 67(June), 244 -253. 
doi:1 0.1016/j.cose.2017.03.007  
Cooper, R. G.  (2001). Winning at New products: accelerating the process from idea to 
launch.  New York: Perseus Publishing.  
Coyle, J. R., & Thorson, E. (2001). The effects of progressive levels of interactivity and 
vividness in web marketing sites. Journal of advertisin g, 30 (3), 65 -77. 
doi:10.1080/00913367.2001.10673646  
Csíkszentmihályi, M. (2008).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  New York, 
NY: Harper Perenni al. 
Cummings , J. J,  & Bailenson , J. N. (2016). How Immersive Is Enough? A Meta -Analysis 
of the Effect of Immersive Technology on User Presence. Media psychology, 19 (2), 
272-309. doi:10.1080/15213269.2015.1015740  
Dad, A. M., Davies, B., & Rehman, A. A. (2016). 3D Servicescape Model: Atmo spheric 
Qualities of Virtual Reality Retailing. International journal of advanced computer 
science and applications, 7 (2), 25 -38. doi:10.14569/IJACSA.2016.070204  
Dad, A. M., Rehman, A. A., Kear, A., & Davies, B. J. (2018). The Effect of Music on 
Shoppers' Shopping Behaviour in Virtual Reality Retail Stores: Mediation Analysis.  
International journal of advanced computer science and applications , 9(1), 135 -145. 
doi: 10.14569/IJACSA.2018.090118  

==== Page 41 ====
40 
 Dailey, L. (2004). Navigational web atmospherics explaining the influence of restrictive 
navigation cues. Journal of Business Research, 57 , 795 –803. doi:10.1016/S0148 -
2963(02)00364 -8 
Deerwester, S. C., Dumais, S. T., Landauer, T. K., Furnas, G. W. & Harshman, R. A. 
(1990). Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science , 41(6), 391 –407. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097 -
4571(199009)41:6%3C391::AID -ASI1%3E3.0.CO;2 -9 
Delen, D., &  Crossland, M. D. (2008). Seeding the survey and analysis of research 
literature with text mining. Expert Systems with Applications , 34(3), 1707 –1720. doi:  
10.1016/j.eswa.2007.01.035  
Dinh, H. Q., Walker, N.,  Hodges, L. F., Song, Ch., & Kobayashi, A. (1999 ). Evaluating 
the importance of multi -sensory input on memory and the sense of presence in virtual 
environments. In Proceedings of IEEE virtual reality  (pp. 222 –228). 
doi:10.1109/VR.1999.756955.  
Dobrowolski, P., Pochwatko, G., Skorko, M., & Bielecki, M. (2 014). The Effects of 
Virtual Experience on Attitudes Toward Real Brands. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, 
and Social Networking , 17(2), 125 -128. doi: 10.1089/cyber.2012.0613  
Domina, T., Lee, S. -E., MacGillivray, M. (2012). Understanding factors affecting 
consumer  intention to shop in a virtual world. Journal of Retailing and Consumer 
Services 19 , 613 -620. doi:  10.1016/j.jretconser.2012.08.001  
Donovan, R. J., & Rossiter, J. R. (1982). Store atmosphere: An environmental psychology 
approach. Journal of Retailing, 58 (1), 34 –57.doi:1 0.1016/0022 -4359(94)90037 -X 
Dorotic, M., Bijmolt, T. H. A., &  Verhoef, P. C. (2012). Loyalty Programmes: Current 
Knowledge and Research Directions. International Journal of Management Reviews , 
14(3), 217 -237. doi: 10.1111/j.1468 -2370.2011.00314.x  
Dorta, T., & Pérez, E. (2006). Immersive Drafted Virtual Reality a new approach for 
ideation within virtual reality. In L. Combs & C. Perry (Eds.).  Proceedings of the 25th 
Annual Conference of the Association for Computer -Aided Design in Architecture  
(pp.304 –316). Washington: University of Cincinnati. Retrieved from  
http://www.hybridlab.umontreal.ca/documents/13 -ACADIA2006a.p df 
Doucé, L., & Janssens, W. (2013). The Presence of a Pleasant Ambient Scent in a Fashion 
Store: The Moderating Role of Shopping Motivation and Affect Intensity. 
Environment and Behavior, 45 (2), 215 –38. doi:10.1177/0013916511410421  
Duffy, V.G., &  Salvendy, G. (2000). Concurrent engineering and virtual reality for 
human resource planning. Computers in Industry , 42(2-3), 109 -125. 
doi:10.1016/S0166 -3615(99)00065 -2 
Eroglu, S. A., Machleit, K. A., & Davis, L. M. (2001). Atmospheric qualities of online 
retailing: A conceptual model and implications. Journal of Business Research, 54 , 
177–184. doi: 10.1016/S0148 -2963(99)00087 -9 
Eroglu, S. A., Machleit, K. A., & Davis, L. M. (2003). Empirical testing of a model of 
online store atmospherics and shopper responses. Psychology & Marketing , 20(2), 
139–150. doi: 10.1002/mar.10064.  
Evans, P., & Wurster, T. S. (1999). Getting real about v irtual commerce. Harvard 
Business Review , 77(6), 83 –94, doi:10.1111/j.1460 -2466.2010.01532.x.  
Fang, H., Zhang, J., Sensoy, M., &  Magnenat -Thalmann, N. (2014). Reputation 
mechanism for e -commerce in virtual reality environments. Electronic commerce 
research  and applications, 13 (6), 409 -422. doi:  10.1016/j.elerap.2014.08.002  
Finch, R., & Yang, J.C. (2016). Rights to User Generated Content in a VR World . Journal 
of intellectual property law and management , 9(1), 135 -145. 
doi:10.6521/NTUTJIPLM.2016.5(1).4   

==== Page 42 ====
41 
 Fiore, A. M., Kim, J., & Lee, H. -H. (2005). Effect of image interactivity technology on 
consumer responses toward the online retailer. Journal of Interactive Mar keting,  19(3), 
38–53. doi: 10.1002/dir.20042  
Fiore, A. M., Yah. X., & Yoh, E. (2000). Effects of a Product Display and Environmental 
Fragrancing on Approach Responses and Pleasurable Experiences. Psychology &  
Marketing, 17 (1), 27 –54. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1520 -6793(200001)17:1<27::AID -
MAR3>3.0.CO;2 -C 
Fishbein, M., &  Ajzen, I. (1975). Beliefs, attitude, intention and behavior: An 
introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison -Wesley.  
Fornell, C., &  Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with 
unobservable variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research , 18(1), 
39-50. doi: 10.2307/3151312  
Fortin, D. R., & Dholakia, R. R. (2005). Interactivity and vividness effects o n social 
presence and involvement with a web -based advertisement. Journal of Business 
Research , 58(3), 387 –396. doi: 10.1016/S0148 -2963(03)00106 -1 
Freina, L., &  Ott, M. (2015, January). A literature review on immersive virtual reality in 
education: state of the art and perspectives. In The International Scientific Conference 
eLearning and Software for Education  (Vol. 1, p. 133). "Carol I" National Defence 
Univers ity. Bucharest: Romania. doi:10.1.1.725.5493  
Grewal, D., Baker, J., Levy, M., & Voss, G. B. (2003). The Effects of Wait Expectations 
and Store Atmosphere Evaluations on Patronage Intentions in Service -Intensive 
Retail Stores. Journal of Retailing, 79 (4), 259 –68. doi: 10.1016/j.jretai.2003.09.006  
Geman, S. &  Geman, D. (1984). Stochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distributions, and the 
Bayesian Restoration of Images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence , vol. PA MI-6, no. 6, (pp. 721 -741). doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.1984.4767596  
Glaser, S. (1997). The real world and virtual worlds. Internet Research , 7(4), 246 -
251.doi: 10.1108/10662249710187  
Gourlay, D., Lun, K. C ., Lee, Y. N ., & Tay, J . (2000). Virtual reality for relearning daily 
living skills. International Journal of Medical Informatics , 60(3), 255 –261. 
doi:10.1016/S1386 -5056(00)00100 -3 
Grewal, D., Roggeveen, A. L., & Nordfalt, J. (2017). The Future of Retailing. Journal of 
Retailing , 93(1), 1 –6. doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2016.12.008  
Griffith, D. A. (2005). An examination of the influences of store layout in online retailing. 
Journal of Business Research, 58 , 1391 –1396. doi:  10.1016/j.jbusres.2002.08.001  
Griffiths, T. L., &  Steyvers, M. (2004). Finding scientific topics. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 101(1), 5228 –5235. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.0307752101  
Guerreiro, J., Rita, P., & Trigueiros, D. (2016). A Text Mining -Based Review of Cause -
Related Marketing Literature. Journal of Business Ethics . 139(1), 111 -128. 
doi:10.1007/s10551 -015-2622 -4 
Gutierrez, M. A., Thalmann, D. & Vexo, F.  (2008). Stepping Into Virtual Reality: A 
Practical Approach . London: Springer.  
Guttentag, D. A. (2010). Virtual reality: Applications and implications for tourism. 
Tourism Management, 31 (5), 637 -651. doi:  10.1016/j.tourman.2009.07.003  
Hainey, T., Connolly, T. M., Boyle, E. A., Wilson, A., &  Razak, A. (2016). A systematic 
literature review of games -based learning empirical evidence in primary education. 
Computers & Education , 102, 202 -223. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2016.09.00 1 
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., Anderson, R. E., & Tatham, R. L. (1998). 
Multivariate data analysis (Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 207 -219). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice hall.  

==== Page 43 ====
42 
 Harzing, (2018). 62nd edition of the Journal Quality List on -line. Retrieved  from 
https://harzing.com/blog/2018/04/62nd -edition -of-the-journal -quality -list-on-line 
(accessed on 21 of May 2018)  
Hassouneh D., &  Brengman M. (2011) Virtual worlds: A gateway for SMEs toward 
internationalization. Journal of Brand Management, 19 , 72 -90. 
doi:10.1057/bm.2011.24  
Hassouneh, D., &  Brengman, M. (2015). Retailing in Social Virtual Worlds: Developing 
a Typology of Virtual Store Atmospherics. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 
16, 218 -241. http:// www.jecr.org/node/471  
Hofmann, T. (1999). Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In Proceedings of the 22nd 
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval  (pp. 50 –57).doi: 10.1145/312624.312649  
Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (1996). Marketing in hypermedia computer -mediated 
environments: Conceptual foundations. Journal of Marketing , 60(3), 50 -68.doi: 
10.2307/1251841  
Hoffmann, H., Stefani, O., & Patel, H. (2006). Extending the desktop workplace by a 
portable virtual reality system. International journal of human -computer studies, 
64(3), 170 -181. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.08.003  
Hollebeek, L. D., Glynn, M. S., & Brodie, R. J. (2014). Consumer Brand Engagement in 
Social Media: Conceptualization, Scale Development, and Validation. Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 28 (2), 149 –65. doi:  10.1016/j.intmar.2013.12.002  
Howard, M. C. (2017). A meta -analysis and systematic literature review of virtual reality 
rehabilitation programs. Computers in Human Behavior , 70, 317 -327. doi:  
10.1016/j.chb.2017.01.013  
Howard, J.A., &  Sheth, J. (1969). The theory of buyer behavior . New York: John Wiley 
& Sons . 
Huhn, A. E., Ketelaar, P., Khan, V. J., Nuijten, K., & van Gisbergen, M. (2011). I localize, 
I advertise and I create effect? A study on the Perceived Ad Intrusiveness of Location 
Based Advertising within a virtual supermarket. Tijdschrift  Voor  
Communicatiewetenschap , 39(4), 21 -41. 
Hyun, M. Y., & O'Keefe, R. M. (2012). Virtual destination image: Testing a telepresence 
model. Journal of Busi ness Research , 65(1), 29 -35. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.07.011  
Hwang, J., Yoon, S.Y., &  Bendle, L.J. (2012). Desired privacy and the impact of 
crowding on customer emotions and approach -avoidance responses waiting in a virtual 
reality restaurant.  International journal of contemporary hospitality management , 
24(2), 224 -250. doi:10.1108/09596111211206150  
IKEA (2018). IKEA. Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5_znFPj5Lis  
(accessed on 13 May 2018)  
Iwata, H., Yano , H., Uemura , T., &  Moriya , T. (2004). Food simulator: a haptic interface 
for biting. In Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality 2004  (pp. 51 –57). Washington, 
D.C. doi:10.1109/VR.2004.1310055.  
Jamhawi, M. M., &  Hajahjah, Z. A. (2016). It -innovation and technologies transfer to 
heritage sites: the case of Madaba, Jordan. Mediterranean Archaeology & 
Archaeometry , 16(2), 41 -46. doi:  10.5281/zenodo.47541  
Jeng, M. -Y., Pai, F. -Y., & Yeh, T. -M. (2017). The virtual reali ty leisure activities 
experience on elderly people. Applied Research in Quality of Life , 12(1), 49 –65, 
doi:10.1007/s11482 -016-9452 -0 
Jiang, Z., &  Benbasat, I. (2004). Virtual product experience: Effects of visual and 
functional control of products on perce ived diagnosticity and flow in electronic 

==== Page 44 ====
43 
 shopping. Journal of Management Information Systems , 21(3), 111 -114. doi: 
10.2307/3250951  
Jung, T. H., &  tom Dieck, M. C. (2017). Augmented reality, virtual reality and 3D 
printing for the co -creation of value for the visitor experience at cultural heritage 
places. Journal of Place Management and Development , 10(2), 140 -151. doi: 
10.1108/JPMD -07-2016 -0045  
Kane, G. C. (2017). The evolutionary implications of social media for organizational 
knowledge management. Information and organization , 27(1), 37 -46. doi: 
10.1016/j.infoandorg.2017.01.001  
Kang, J . (2018). Effect of Interaction Based on Augmented Context i n Immersive Virtual 
Reality Environment. Wireless personal communications , 98(2), 1931 -1940. doi: 
10.1007/s11277 -017-4954 -0 
Kastenholz, E., Carneiro, M., Marques, C.P., Loureiro, S.M.C. (2018). The dimensions 
of rural tourism experience: impacts on arousal, memory and satisfaction, Journal of 
Travel and Tourism Marketing, 35(2), 189-201. doi: 
10.1080/10548408.2017.1350617  
Katicic, J., Häfner, P., &  Ovtcharova, J. (2015). Methodology for emotional assessment 
of product design by customers in virtual reality. Presence: teleoperators and virtual 
environments, 24 (1), 62 -72. doi: 10.1162/PRES_a_00215  
Kelley, S. W., Mark, A., & Davis, M. D. (1994). Antecedents to Customer Expectations 
for Service Recovery. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 22 (December), 
52–61. doi:10.1177/0092070394221005  
Ketelaar, P. E., B ernritter, S. F., van't Riet, J., Hühn, A. E., van Woudenberg, T. J., Müller, 
B. C., & Janssen, L. (2017). Disentangling location -based advertising: the effects of 
location congruency and medium type on consumers' ad attention and brand choice. 
Internation al Journal of Advertising , 36(2), 356 -367. doi: 
10.1080/02650487.2015.1093810  
Kim, T., &  Biocca, F. (1997). Telepresence via television: Two dimensions of 
telepresence may have different connections to memory and persuasion. Journal of 
Computer -Mediated Communication , 3(2). doi: 10.1111/j.1083 -
6101.1997.tb00073.x  
Kim, J., Fiore, A. M., & Lee, H. (2007). Influences of online store perception, shopping 
enjoyment, and shopping involvement on consumer patronage behavior towards an 
online retailer. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 14 , 95–107. doi:  
10.1016/j.jretconser.2006.05.001  
Kim, J. W., Ji, S. H., Kim, S. Y., & Cho, H. G. (2011). A New Communication Network 
Model for Chat Agents in Virtual Space. KSII Transactions on Internet & Information 
Systems , 5(2), 287-312.doi: 10.3837/tiis.2011.02.003  
Kim, Y. & Krishnan, R. (2015). On Product -Level Uncertainty and Online Purchase 
Behavior: An Empirical Analysis. Management Sci ence, 61(10), 2449 -2467. 
doi:10.1287/mnsc.2014.2063  
Klein, L. R. (2003). Creating virtual product experiences: The role of telepresence. 
Journal of Interactive Marketing , 17(1), 41 –55. doi. 10.1002/dir.10046  
Klischewski,  R. (2014). When virtual reality meets realpolitik: Social media shaping the 
Arab government –citizen relationship. Government Information Quarterly , 31(3), 
358-364. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2013.10.015  
Koles, B., & Nagy, P. (2012). Who is portrayed in Second Life: Dr. Jekyll or Mr. Hyde? 
The extent of congruence between real life and virtual identity. Journal of Virtual 
Worlds Research , 5(1), 1 –17. doi:10.4101/jvwr.v5i1.2150  
Kotler, Ph. (1967). Marketing M anagement: analysis, planning and control . Englewood 

==== Page 45 ====
44 
 Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
Krasonikolakis, I., Vrechopoulos, A., & Pouloudi, A. (2014). Store selection criteria and 
sales prediction in virtual worlds. Information & Management , 51(6), 641-652. 
doi:10.1016/j.im.2014.05.017  
Krasonikolakis, I., Vrechopoulos, A., Pouloudi, A., Dimitriadis, S. (2018). Store layout 
effects on consumer behavior in 3D online stores. European journal of marketing , 
52(5/6), 1223 -1256. doi:10.1108/EJM -03-2015 -0183  
Lawson, G., Salanitri, D., & Waterfield, B. (2016). Future directions for the development 
of virtual reality within an automotive manufacturer. Applied Ergonomics , 53(part B), 
323-330. doi: 10.1016/j.apergo.2015.06.024  
Leanza, F. (2017). Consumer Neuroscience: the traditional and VR TV Commercial. 
Neuropsychological trends , 21(1), 81 -90. doi:10.7358/neur -2017 -021-lean 
Lee, K. C., &  Chung, N. (2008). Empirical analysis of consumer reaction to the virtual 
reality shopping mall. Computers in Human Behavior, 24(1), 88 –104. doi: 
10.1016/j.chb.2007.01.018  
Li, H., Daugherty, T. 6 Biocca, F. (2001), Characteristics of virtual experiences in 
electronic commerce: a protocol analysis. Journal of Interactive Marketing , 15(3), 13 -
30. doi: 10.1002/dir.1013  
Li, H., Daugherty, T., &  Biocca, F. (2002). Impact of 3 -D advertising on product 
knowledge, brand attitude, and purchase intention: The mediating role of presence. 
Journal of advertising , 31(3), 43 -57. doi: 10.1080/00913367.2002.10673675  
Li, H., Daugherty, T., &  Biocca, F. (2003). The role of virtual experience in consumer 
learning. Journal of Consumer Psychology , 13(4), 395 –407. doi: 
10.1207/S15327663JCP1304_07  
Li, T., &  Meshkova, Z. (2013). Examining the impact of rich media on consumer 
willingness to pay in online stores. Electro nic Commerce Research and Applications , 
12(6), 449 -461. doi: 10.1016/j.elerap.2013.07.001  
Lohse, G. L. (1997). Consumer eye movement patterns on yellow pages advertising.  
Journal of Advertising, 26 (1), 61 -73. doi:10.1080/00913367.1997.10673518  
Lombard, M., & Ditton, T. (1997). At the heart of it all: The concept of presence. Journal 
of Computer‐Mediated Communication , 3(2). doi : 10.1111/j.1083 -
6101.1997.tb00072.x  
Loureiro, S.M.C., &  Roschk, H. (2014). Differential Effects of Atmospheric Cues on 
Emotions and Loyalty Intention with Respect to Age  under Online/Offline 
Environment. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services,21 (2), 211 –219. 
doi:10.1016/j.jretconser.2013.09.001  
Lytras, M.D., Al -Halabi, W., Zhang, J.X., Haraty, R.A., &  Masud, M. (2015). Enabling 
Technologies and Business Infrastructures for Next Gen eration Social Media: Big 
Data, Cloud Computing, Internet of Things and Virtual Reality.  Journal of universal 
computer science , 21(11), 1379 -
1384.https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/7eee/2c3f457367f085a9a888ef0366a96ffd78e2
.pdf 
Lytras, M. D., Raghavan, V., & Damiani, E. (2017). Big data and data analytics research: 
from metaphors to value space for collective wisdom in human decision making and 
smart machines. International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems , 
13(1), 1 -10. doi: 10.4018/IJSWIS.2017010101  
Makri, A., &  Vlachopoulos, D. (2017). The effect of games and simulations on higher 
education: a systematic literature review. International Journal of Educational 
Technology in Higher Education , 14(1), 14 -22. doi:10.1186/s41239 -017-0062 -1 
Manesh, H. F., Schaefer, D., &  Hashemipour, M. (2011). Information requirements 

==== Page 46 ====
45 
 analysis for holonic manufacturing systems in a virtual environment. International. 
Journal of advanced manufacturing technology, 53 (1/4), 385 -398. 
doi:10.1007/s00170 -010-2822 -0 
Manojlovich, J., Manojlovich, J.M., Chen, J., & Lewis, M. (2003). UTSAF: a multi -
agent -based framework for supporting military -based distributed interactive 
simulations in 3D virtual e nvironments. In S. Chick, P. J. Sánchez, D. Ferrin, & D. J. 
Morrice  (Eds.), P roceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning 
and Cybernetic (pp. 960 –968). North Bangkok:King Mongkut's University  of 
Technology.  doi:10.1109/WSC.2003.1261517  
Markopoulos, P.M., &  Hosanagar, K. (2018). A Model of Product Design and 
Information Disclosure Investments. Management science, 64 (2), 739 -759. 
doi:10.1287/mnsc.2016.2634  
Marriott (2018). Marriott. Retrieved from:  http://retail -innovation.com/marriott -
introduce -virtual -reality -travel  (accessed on 12 of May 2018)  
Mazursky, D., &  Vinitzky, G. (2005). Modifying co nsumer search processes in enhanced 
on-line interfaces. Journal of business research , 58(10), 1299 -1309. doi:  
10.1016/j.jbusres.2005.01.003  
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media:  The extensions of man . New York: Penguin.  
McMillan, S. J., & Hwang, J. S. (2002). Measures of perceived interactivity: An 
explorati on of the role of direction of communication, user control, and time in shaping 
perceptions of interactivity. Journal of Advertising , 31(3), 29 -42. doi: 
10.1080/00913367.2002.10673674  
Mehrabian, A., & Russell, J. A. (1974). An approach to environmental psy chology . 
Cambrige, MA: MIT Press.  
Menon, S., & Kahn, B. (2002). Cross -category effects of induced arousal and pleasure on 
the Internet shopping experience.  Journal of Retailing , 78(1), 31 –40. doi: 
10.1016/S0022 -4359(01)00064 -1 
Meyer, D., Hornik, K. , & Feinerer  (2008). Text mining infrastructure in R.  Journal 
of Statistical Software , 25(5), 1 –54. doi: 10.18637/jss.v025.i05  
Milgram, P. Takemura, H., Utsumi, A., & Kishino, F. (1994). Augmented Reality: A class 
of displays on the reality -virtuality continu um. Systems Research. In Hari Das  (Ed.). 
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies  (vol. 2351, pp.282 –292). Boston: 
Photonics for Industrial Applications . doi:10.1117/12.197321  
Minka, T. &  Lafferty, J. (2002). Expectation -propagation for the generative aspect 
model. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth conference on Uncertainty in artificial 
intelligence  (pp.352 –359).  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v33/peltola14.pdf  
Mitra, A., Raymond, M. A., & H opkins, C. D. (2008). Can consumers recognize 
misleading advertising content in a media rich online environment? Psychology & 
Marketing , 25(7), 655 -674. doi: 10.1002/mar.20230  
Mizell, D., Jones , S. P., Slater , M., & Spanlang , B. (2002). Comparing immersive virtual 
reality with  other display modes for visualizing complex 3D geometry . London: 
University College London, Department of Computer Science.  
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D.G., & Altman, D. (2009). Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta -Analyses: The PRISMA 
Statement. PLoS Medicine , 8(7716), 336 -341. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097  
Mollen, A., & Wilson, H. (2010). Engagement, telepresence and interactivity in online 
consumer experience: Reconciling scholastic and managerial perspectives. Journal 
of Business Research, 63(9 –10), 919 –925. doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.05.014  

==== Page 47 ====
46 
 Mompean, J., Aragon, J. L., Prieto, P. M., Artal, P. (2018). Design of an accurate and 
high-speed binocular pupil tracking system based on GPGPUs. Journal of 
supercomputing, 74 (5), 1836 -1862. doi:10.1007/s11227 -017-2193 -5 
Moro, S., Cortez, P., & Rita P. (2015). Business intelligence in banking: A literature 
analysis from 2002 to 2013 using text m ining and latent Dirichlet allocation, Expert 
Systems with Applications , 42(3), 1314 -1324. doi:  10.1016/j.eswa.2014.09.024  
Moro, S., Rita, P., Cortez, P. (2017). A text mining approach to analyzing Annals 
literature, Annals of Tourism Research , 66, 208 -210. doi:  
10.1016/j. annals .2017.07.011  
Mujber, T. S., Szecsi, T., & Hashmi, M. S. J. (2005). A new hybrid dynamic modelling 
approach for process planning. Journal of materials processing technology, 167 (1), 
22-32. doi:  10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2004.09.086  
Muzelle c, L., Lynn, T., & Lambkin, M. (2012). Branding in fictional and virtual 
environments: Introducing a new conceptual domain and research agenda European. 
Journal of Marketing, 46 , 811 -826 doi:10.1108/03090561211214618  
Nagy, P., &  Koles, B. (2014). My Avatar and Her Beloved Possession: Characteristics of 
Attachment to Virtual Objects. Psychology & Marketing , 31(12), 1122 –1135. 
doi:10.1002/mar.20759  
Nill, A., &  Schibrowsky, J. A. (2007). Research on marketing ethics: a systematic re view 
of the literature. Journal of Macromarketing , 27(3), 256 –273. 
doi:10.1177/0276146707304733  
Novak, T., Hoffman, P., Donna, L. and Yung, Y. -F. (2000), Measuring the customer 
experience in online environments: a structural modeling approach, Marketing 
Science , 19(1), 22 -42. doi: 10.1287/mksc.19.1.22.15184  
Panić, K., Cauberghe, V., & De Pelsmacker, P. (2011). Impact of an interactive anti -
speeding threat appeal: how much threat is too much?. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, 
and Social Networking , 14(5), 281 -289. doi: 10.1089/cyber.2009.0303  
Pavlinek, M., &  Podgorelec, V. (2017). Text classification method based on self -training 
and LDA topic models. Expert Systems with Applications, 80 , 83 -93.doi: 
10.1016/j.eswa.2017.03.020  
Pieters, R., Baumgartner, H., & Allen, D. (1995). A MeansEnd Chain Approach to 
Consumer Goal Structures. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12 (3), 
227–44.doi:10.1016/0167 -8116(95)00023 -U 
Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2004a). Co -creation experiences: The next practice 
in value creation . Journal of Interactive Marketing 18(3), 5 -14. doi: 
10.1108/10878570410699249  
Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2004b). Co‐creating unique value with 
customers.  Strategy & Leadership , 32(3), 4 -9, doi: 10.1108/10878570410699249  
Rau, J. Y., & Cheng, C. K. ( 2013). A cost -effective strategy for multi -scale photo -realistic 
building modeling and web -based 3 -D GIS applications in real estate. Computers, 
Environment and Urban Systems , 38, 35 -44. 
doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2012.10.006  
Rizzo, A., R equejo, P .,Winstein, C. J ., Lange, B ., Ragusa, G ., Merians, A .,Patton 
J., Banerjee, P ., & Aisen, M . (2011). Virtual reality applications for addressing the 
needs of those aging with disability. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics , 
163, 510 –516. doi: 10.3233/978 -1-60750 -706-2-510 
Rojas, J. C., Contero, M., Bartomeu, N., &  Guixeres, J. (2015). Using Combined Bipolar 
Semantic Scales and Eye -Tracking Metrics to Compare Consumer Perception of Real 
and Virtual Bottles. Packaging technology and science, 28 (12), 1047 -1056. doi: 
10.10 02/pts.2178  

==== Page 48 ====
47 
 Roo, J. S., & Hachet, M. (2017). Towards a hybrid space combining spatial augmented 
reality and virtual reality. In M. Marchal, R. Teather, & B. H. Thomas (Eds.),  IEEE 
Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI)  (pp.195 –198). Los Angeles, California. 
doi:10.1109/3DUI.2017.7893339  
Roschk, H., Loureiro, S.M.C., & Breitsohl, J. (2017). Calibrating 30 years of 
experimental research:   A meta -analysis of the atmospheric effects of music, scent, 
and color. Journal of Retailing , 93(2), 228 -240. doi: 10.1016/j.jretai.2016.10.001  
Rosenberger, P. J., &  Dechernatony, L. (1995). Virtual -reality techniques in NPD 
research. Journal of the market research society, 37 (4), 345 -355. 
doi:10.1177/147078539503700402  
Sanchez -Vives, M. V., & Slater, M. (2005). From presence to consciousness through 
virtual reality. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 6(4), 332 –339. doi: 10.1038/nrn1651  
Schnabel, M.A., Kvan, T., Kruijff, E., & Donath, D.  (2001). The First Virtual 
Environment Design Studio. In H. Penttila  & H. Penttillä  (Eds.), 19th eCAADe 
Conference Proceedings  (pp.394 –400).  Helsinki: Helsinki University of Technology 
(HUT).  Retrieved from http://courses.arch.hku.hk/vds/veds01/db  
Scholz, J., & Smith, A. N. (2016). Augmented reality: Designing immersive experiences 
that maximi ze consumer engagement. Business Horizons , 59(2), 149 -161. doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2015.10.003  
Sheth, J. N. (1973). A model of industrial buyer behavior. The Journal of marketing , 
37(4), 50 -56. doi: 10.2307/1250358  
Sethi, R., & Iqbal, Z. ( 2008 ) Stage -Gate Controls, Learning Failure, and Adverse Effect 
on Novel New Products. Journal of Marketing, 72 (1), 118 -134. 
doi:10.1509/jmkg.72.1.118  
Shangri -la (2018). Shangri -la. Retrievd from: http://www.shangri -
la.com/vr/en/index.htm  (accessed on 18  May 2018)  
Shen , K. N., & Khalifa , M. (2012). System design effects on online impulse 
buying.  Internet Research, 22 (4), 396 -425, doi:10.1108/10662241211250962  
Slater, M., Usoh, M. & Steed, A. (1994). Depth of Presence in Immersive Virtual 
Environments . Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 3(2), 130 –144. 
doi:10.1162/pres.1994.3.2.130  
Slater, M. & Wilbur, S. (1997). A Framework for Immersive Virtual Environments 
(FIVE): Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environments. Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 6(6), 603 –616. 
doi:10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603  
Souza, M. C. F., Sacco, M., & Porto, A. J. V. (2006). Virtual manufacturing as a way for 
the factory of the future. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing , 17(6), 725 -735. d oi: 
10.1007/s10845 -006-0041 -1 
Statista (2018). Forecast augmented (AR) and virtual reality (VR) market size worldwide 
from 2016 to 2022 (in billion U.S. dollars).  Retrieved from 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/591181/global -augmented -virtual -reality -market -
size/ (accessed on 4 of June 2018).  
Steuer, J. (1992). Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions Determining Telepresence. 
Journal of Communication, 42 , 73- 93 doi:10.1111/j.1460 -2466.1992.tb00812.x  
Stott, J. (2018). Virtual reality: Content marketing’s next big trend. Retrieved from 
https://econ sultancy.com/blog/68401 -virtualreality -content -marketing -s-next-big-
trend/. (accessed on 5 January 2018 ) 
Suh, K. S., Kim, H., & Suh, E. K. (2011). What if your avatar looks like you? Dual -
congruity perspectives for avatar use. MIS Quarterly , 35(3), 711 -729. Retrieved from 

==== Page 49 ====
48 
 https://misq.org/what -if-your-avatar -looks -like-you-dual-congruity -perspectives -for-
avatar -use.html  
Suh, K. S., & Lee, Y. E. (2005). The effects of virtual reality on consumer learning: an 
empirical investigation. MIS Quarterly , 29(4), 673-697. doi: 10.2307/25148705  
Swann, G. M. P. (2001). Sales practice and market evolution: the case of virtual reality. 
International journal of industrial organization, 19 (7), 1119 -1139. 
doi:10.1016/S0167 -7187(01)00066 -2. 
Swoboda,  B., Berg,  B., & Schramm -Klein,  H. (2013).  Reciprocal  effects  of the corporate  
reputation  and store  equity  of retailers . Journal of Retailing, 89 (4), 447 –459. 
TESCO Pele (2018). TESCO Pele. Retrieved from: https://www.independent.co.uk/life -
style/gadgets -and-tech/tesco -dreams -big-with-fully -immersive -virtual -reality -tesco -
store -for-the-oculus -rift-9211854.html  (accessed on 25 of May 2018)  
Teh, Y. W., Newman, D., & Welling, M. (2007). A collapsed variational Bayesian 
inference algorithm for latent Dirichlet allocation. In Advances in neural i nformation 
processing systems  (pp. 1353 -1360).  https://papers.nips.cc/paper/3113 -a-collapsed -
variational -bayesian -inference -algorithm -for-latent -dirichlet -allocation.pdf  
Thrush, E.A., &  Bodary, M. (2000). Virtual reality, combat, and communication. Journal  
of business and technical communication, 14(3), 315 -327. doi:  
10.1177/105065190001400304  
Torrente, J., Blanco, Á. D., Serrano Laguna, Á., Vallejo Pinto, J. Á., Moreno -Ger, P., & 
Fernández Manjón, B. (2014). Towards a low cost adaptation of educational game s for 
people with disabilities. Computer Science and Information Systems ,11(1), 369 -391. 
doi:10.2298/CSIS121209013T  
van Bennekom, M. J., de Koning, P. P., &  Denys, D. (2017). Virtual Reality Objectifies 
the Diagnosis of Psychiatric Disorders: A Literature Review. Frontiers in Psychiatry , 
8, 163. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00163  
van Herpen, E., van den Broek, E., van Trijp, H. C. M., & Yu, T. (2016). Can a virtual 
supermarket bring realism into the lab? Comparing shopping behavior using virtual 
and pictorial store representations to behavior in a physical store. Appetite , 107, 196 -
207. doi:  10.1016/j.appet.2016.07.033  
van Kerrebroeck, H., Brengman, M., & Willems, K. (2017). When brands come to life: 
experimental research on the vividness effect of Virtual Reality in transformational 
marketing communications. Virtual reality, 21 (4), 177 -191. doi: 10.1007/s10055 -017-
0306 -3 
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M.G., Davis, G.B., & Davis, F.D. (2003). User Acceptance of 
Information Technology: Toward a Unified View. MIS Quarterly , 27(3), 425 –478. 
https://nwresearch.wikispaces.com/file/view/Venkatesh+User+Acceptance+of+Infor
mation+Technology +2003.pdf  
Verhagen, T., Vonkeman, C., Feldberg, F., &  Verhagen, P. (2014). Present it like it is 
here: Creating local presence to improve online product experiences. Computers in 
human behavior , 39(October ), 270 -280. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2014.07.036  
Vrechopoulos, A.P., Apostolou, K., Koutsiouris, V. (2009). Virtual reality retailing on 
the web: emerging consumer behavioral patterns. The International Review of Retail, 
Distribution and Consu mer Research , 19 (5), 469 –482. 
doi:10.1080/09593960903445194  
Wang, X. H., Chai, C. W., Qi, Y. S. (2011). Application Research of Feeding Device 
Based on Virtual Reality Technology. Advanced science letters, 4 (6/7), 2170 -2173.  
Wang, Q.H. & Li, J.R. (2004). A desktop VR prototype for industrial training 
applications. Virtual Reality, 7 (3–4), 187 –197. doi: 10.1007/s10055 -004-0127 -z 

==== Page 50 ====
49 
 Wasko, M., Teigland, R., Leidner, D., &  Jarvenpaa, S. (2011). Stepping into the Internet: 
new ventures in virtual worlds. MIS Quarterly, 35 (3), 645 –652.Ddoi: 
10.2307/23042801  
Waterlander, W. E., Jiang, Y. N., Steenhuis, I. H. M., &  Mhurchu, C. N. (2015). Using a 
3D Virtual Supermarket to Measure  Food Purchase Behavior: A Validation Study. 
Journal of medical internet research, 17 (4), e -107-e-111. doi:10.2196/jmir.3774  
Wexner, S. D., Bergamaschi, R., Lacy, A., Udo, J., Brolmann, H., Kennedy, R. H., &  
John, H. (2009). The current status of robotic pelvic surgery: results of a multinational 
interdisciplinary consensus conference. Surgical Endoscopy and Other Interventional 
Techniques , 23(2), 438–443. doi: 10.1007/s00464 -008-0202 -8 
White, M. A., DeHaan, A . P., Stephens, D. D., Maes, A. A., &  Maatman, T. J. (2010). 
Validation of a High Fidelity Adult Ureteroscopy and Renoscopy Simulator. Journal 
of Urology , 183(2), 673 -7. doi:  10.1016/j.juro.2009.10.013.  
Williams , T. (1994). Virtual -Reality Systems Challenge Designers and Application 
Developers. Computer Design , 33(12), 53-70. 
Witmer, B. G., & Singer, M. J. (1998). Measuring Presence in Virtual Environments: A 
Presence Questionnaire. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 7(3), 
225–240. doi:10.1162/105474698565686  
Yeh, C. H., Wang, Y. S., Li, H. T., & Lin, S. Y. (2017). The effect of information 
presentation modes on tourists' responses in Internet marketing: the moderating role 
of emotions. Journal  of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 34 (8), 1018 -1032. 
doi:1 0.1080/10548408.2016.1276509  
Zhang, H., Zhao, L., & Gupta, S. (2018). The role of online product recommendations on 
customer decision making and loyalty in social shopping communities. International 
journal of information management, 38 (1), 150 -166.doi: 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.07.006  
Zhao, Y., Heida, T., van Wegen, E. E., Bloem, B. R., & van Wezel, R. J. (2015). E -health 
support in people with Parkinson’s disease with smart glasses: a survey of user 
requirements and expectations in the Netherlands. Journal of Parkinson's disease , 
5(2), 369 -378. doi: 10.3233/JPD -150568  
Zhao, H., Huang, F.X., Spence, C., & Wan, X.A. (2017). Visual Search for Wines with a 
Triangle on the Label in a Virtual Store. Frontiers in psychology , 8, 1-11. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02173  
Zhou, Y.Y. (2017) . The Application  and Development of Virtual Reality Technology in 
the Advertisement Design. Agro food industry hi-tech, 28(3), 3184 -3187. doi: 
10.1007/978 -3-642-23456 -9_4 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 51 ====
50 
  
  

==== Page 52 ====
51 
  
Figure 1. LDA generation procedure (Blei  & Lafferty, 2009)  
 
Figure 2. Distribution of papers according to WOS categories (WOS, 2018)  
 


==== Page 53 ====
52 
  
Figure 3. Process fo r selecting the final papers for analysis  
 
 
12.534 potentially relevant articles 
identified from WOS in 
“VIRTUAL REALITY”
617 potentially relevant articles 
reviewed for more detailed 
information11.919 articles excluded after fine-
tuning the query for Marketing 
related papers .
467 articles excluded after text
review andremoval ofduplicates
150 articles identified in final 
analysis

==== Page 54 ====
53 
  
Figure 4. Number of Papers per Year Group and 5 -Year Impact Factor  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Log-likelihood and perplexity metrics for evaluating K  
 


==== Page 55 ====
54 
 TOPIC NAME  TOPIC 
TERMS  FOCUS  
TOP JOURNALS WITH HIGHER 
5-Y IMPACT FACTOR IN TOP 10  MOST 
CORRELATED 
PAPERS  
T1. VIRTUAL 
SETTING  online, 
consumers, 
consumer, store, 
real, shopping, 
participants, 
products, 
environments, 
supermarket  Consumer  
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL INTERNET 
RESEARCH (5.835)  
INFORMATION & MANAGEMENT (4.283)  
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE (4.131)  
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS RESEARCH 
(4.108)  (vanHerpen et al., 2016)  
(Waterlander et al., 2015)  
(Krasonikolakis et al., 
2018)  
T2. 
MANUFACTURIN
G & NEW 
PRODUCT 
DEVELOPMENT  design, 
environment, 
new, systems, 
development, 
market, process, 
manufacturing, 
approach, 
simulation  Stakeholder 
(mainly 
consumer 
and 
supplier)  MANAGING SERVICE QUALITY (3.466)  
JOURNAL OF MATERIALS  PROCESSING 
TECHNOLOGY (3.372)  
COMPUTERS IN INDUSTRY (2.731)  
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING 
TECHNOLOGY (2.298)  (Bae&Leem, 2014)  
(Mujber et al., 2005)  
(Manesh et al., 2011)  
T3. GAZE 
TRACKING AND 
SERVICE 
CONFIGURATION  product, 
information, 
systems, 
products, quality, 
provide, data, 
show, evaluation, 
visualization  Consumer  ACM TRANSACTIONS ON GRAPHICS 
(5.300)  
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (4.713)  
JOURNAL OF BUSINESS RESEARCH 
(4.108)  
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE (4.131)  
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE RESEARCH 
AND APPLICATIONS (3.181)  (Choi et al., 2001)  
(Markopoulos&Hosanagar, 
2018)  
(Arabadzhiyska et al., 
2017)  
T4. INTERACTION  technology, 
interactive, 
application, 
tourism, value, 
video, future, 
effective, 
experiences, 
augmented  Consumer  JOURNAL OF THE ACADEMY OF 
MARKETING SCIENCE (9.505)  
COMPUTERS IN HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
(4.252)  
BUSINESS HORIZONS (3.329)  
BEHAVIOUR & INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (1.775)  (Zhou, 2017)  
(Jung & tom Dieck, 2017)  
(Scholz & Smith, 2016)  
T5. 
EXPERIENTIAL 
MARKETING  experience,  
effect, effects, 
presence, 
interactivity, 
significant, 
positive, 
customers, 
toward, findings  Consumer  
INTERNET RESEARCH (4.580)  
COMPUTERS IN HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
(4.252)  
CYBERPSYCHOLOGY BEHAVIOR AND 
SOCIAL NETWORKING (3.886)  
JOURNAL OF ADVERTISING (3.640)  (Hwang, Yoon &Bendle, 
2012)  
(Panic, 
Cauberghe&Cauberghe, 
2011)  
(Coyle &Thorson, 2001 ) 
T6. VR 
APPLICATIONS  users, 
applications, 
based, internet, 
world, service, 
user, 
communication, 
services, however  Consumer  MIS QUARTERLY (12.222)  
MULTIMEDIA TOOLS AND 
APPLICATIONS (1.572)  
SERVICE INDUSTRIES JOURNAL (1.461)  
WIRELESS PERSONAL 
COMMUNICATIONS (0.906)  (Suh, Kim, & Suh, 2011)  
(Kim, Kim & Cho, 2011)  
(Dad, Davies & Kear, 2016)  
 
T7. 
COMMUNICATIO
N & SOCIAL 
MEDIA  media, social, 
new, web, social 
media, 
knowledge, 
potential, 
technologies, 
management, 
understanding  Consumer  GOVERNMENT INFORMATION 
QUARTERLY (5.111)  
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF 
ADVERTISING (3.168)  
INFORMATION AND ORGANIZATION 
(3.162)  
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL ON 
SEMANTIC WEB AND INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (1.768)  (Lytras et al., 2015)  
(Lytras, 
Raghavan&Damiani, 2017)  
(Klischewski, 2014)  
Note. The example papers presented in the table are sorted by size of the correlation with the topic  
Table 1. The seven topics found in the Virtual Reality literature, their 10 most frequent 
terms and journals.  
 

==== Page 56 ====
55 
  
 
 
Figure 6. Number of papers per Topic and Average 5 -Year Impact Factor.  
 
Citation  Journal /Book  #  
(Steuer, 1992)  JOURNAL OF  COMMUN ICATION  36 
(Hoffman & Novak, 1996)  JOURNAL OF  MARKETING  17 
(Li, Daugherty &Biocca, 2001)  JOURNAL OF  INTERACT IVE MARK ETING  15 
(Novak, Hoffman, Donna & Yung, 2000)  MARKET ING SCIENCE  15 
(Li, Daugherty &Bioca, 2002)  JOURNAL OF  ADVERTISING  14 
(Suh & Lee, 2005)  MIS QUART ERLY  14 
(Witmer & Singer, 1998)  PRESENCE -TELEOP ERATORS AND  
VIRT UAL ENVIRONMENTS  14 
(Coyle & Thorson, 2001)  JOURNAL OF  ADVERTISING  12 
(Fornell&Larcker, 1981)  JOURNAL OF  MARKETING RES EARCH  12 
(Lombard & Ditton, 1997)  JOURNAL OF COMPUTER MEDIATED  
COMMUNICATION  12 
(Klein, 2003)  JOURNAL OF  INTERACT IVE MARK ETING  11 
(Biocca, 1997)  JOURNAL OF COMPUTER MEDIATED 
COMMUNICATION  10 
(Biocca, 1992)  JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATION  9 
(Anderson &Gerbing, 1988)  PSYCHOL OGICAL  BULL ETIN  8 
(Li, Daugherty &Biocca, 2003)  JOURNAL OF  CONSUM ER PSYCHOL OGY  8 
(Mehrabian& Russell, 1974)  AN APPROACH TO ENV IRONMENTAL  
PSYCHOL OGY (BOOK)  8 
(Baron & Kenny, 1986)  JOURNAL OF  PERS ONALITY AND  
SOC IAL PSYCHOL OGY  7 
(Donovan & Rossiter, 1982)  JOURNAL OF  RETAILING  7 


==== Page 57 ====
56 
 (Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson & Tatham, 1998)  MULTIVARIATE DATA AN ALYSIS  7 
(Lee & Chung, 2008)  COMPUT ERSIN HUM AN BEHAV IOR 7 
(McMillan & Hwang, 2002)  JOURNAL OF  ADVERTISING  7 
(Fishbein &Ajzen, 1975)  BELIEF ATTITUDE INTE NTION AND 
BEHAVIOR: AN INTRODUCTION TO 
THEORY AND RESEARCH (BOOK)  7 
(Ariely&Levav, 2000)  JOURNAL OF  CONSUM ER RESEARCH  6 
(Bitner, 1992)  JOURNAL OF  MARKETING  6 
(Buhalis& Law, 2008)  TOURISM MANAGE MENT  6 
(Fiore, Kim & Lee, 2005)  JOURNAL OF  INTERACT IVE MARK ETING  6 
(Fortin & Dholakia, 2005)  JOURNAL OF  BUS INESS  RESEARCH  6 
(Guttentag , 2010)  TOURISM MANAGE MENT  6 
(Kim & Biocca, 1997)  JOURNAL OF COMPUTER MEDIATED 
COMMUNICATION  6 
(Menon & Kahn, 2002)  JOURNAL OF  RETAILING  6 
(Mollen& Wilson, 2010)  JOURNAL OF  BUS INESS  RESEARCH  6 
(Bagozzi& Yi, 1988)  JOURNAL OF THE  ACAD EMY OF  
MARKET ING SCIENCE  6 
 
Table 2. Most cited papers on VR in Marketing field . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==== Page 58 ====
57 
 Highlights  
 
-Comprehensive analysis of 150 articles on  Virtua l Reality in Marketing  related journals  
-Citation analysis reveals the most cited papers on Virtual Reality in Marketing  related 
journals  
-S(stimuli) -O(organism) -R(response) framework is the most employed as a theoretical 
foundation  
-Tendency to overuse student samples ranging between 100 and 200 participants  
-Pleasure, arousal, telepresence and vividness are the most common mediators  
-Virtual reality is mainly employed in the pre -purchase and purchase phases of the buying 
process  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

