==== Page 1 ====
Gillani, N., Eynon, R., Chiabaut, C., & Finkel, K.  (2023). Unpacking the “Black Box” of AI in Education . Educational 
Technology & Society , 26(1), 99-111. https://doi.org/10.30191/ETS .202301_26(1).00 08  
99 ISSN 1436 -4522 (online) and 1176 -3647 (print). DOI 10.30191/ETS . This article of Educational Technology & Society  is available under Creative Commons CC -BY-
NC-ND 3.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-nd/3.0/). For further queries , please contact Editors at ets .editors@ gmail.com . 
 Unpacking the “Black Box” of AI in Education  
 
Nabeel Gillani1*, Rebecca Eynon2, Catherine Chiabaut3 and Kelsey Finkel3 
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA // 2University of Oxford, UK // 3The Robertson Foundation, USA // 
ngillani@mit.edu // rebecca .eynon@oii.ox.ac.uk // catherine.chiabaut@robertson.org  
 // kelsey.finkel@robertson.org  
*Corresponding author  
 
ABSTRACT:  Recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) have sparked renewed interest in its potential to 
improve education.  However, AI is a l oose umbrella term that refers to a collection of methods, capabilities, and 
limitations —many of which are often not explicitly articulated by researchers, education technology companies, 
or other AI developers.  In this paper, we seek to clarify what “AI” is and the potential it holds to both advance 
and hamper educational opportunities that may improve the human condition . We offer a basic introduction to 
different methods and philosophies underpinning AI, discuss recent advances , explore applications to e ducation, 
and highlight key limitations and risks.  We conclude with a set of questions that educationalists may ask as they 
encounter AI in their research and practice . Our hope is to make often jargon -laden terms and concepts 
accessible, so that all are e quipped to understand, interrogate, and ultimately shape the development of human -
centered AI in education.  
 
Keywords:  K-12 education, Artificial intelligence in education, Educational data mining, Learning analytics, 
Natural language processing   
 
 
1. Intr oduction  
 
Rapid advances in artificial intelligence (AI) over the past several years have raised new questions about the role 
that machines might play in both promoting and impeding humanity.  The field of education has been no 
different.  Emerging AI capabi lities are enabling machines to fuse and make sense of larger, more diverse 
datasets in increasingly efficient ways. While these affordances of scale, diversity, and efficiency might help 
generate insights and guide actions to improve educational opportuni ties and outcomes, they also come with 
several technical limitations and related practical risks —like failures to generalize and identify causal 
relationships —that threaten to perpetuate unfair or harmful applications.  Thus, and rightfully so, the re -
emerg ence of AI has sparked new debates about the political, pedagogic, and practical implications of its 
application in educational contexts (Shum & Luckin, 2019). These debates are critical, especially if we wish for 
machines to be able to better -serve the hu man actors —teachers, learners, administrators, and others in 
education —who may benefit from their emerging capabilities.  
 
Engaging productively in these debates, however, requires one to understand some of the methodological 
paradigms and practices specifi c to Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED).  However, researchers and 
practitioners not trained in computer science or engineering may find the rapidly advancing field of AI 
inaccessible. In this article, we try to address this gap, providing an overv iew of the meanings, methods, and 
limitations of AI as a re -emerging field and how these intersect with AI’s applications in education. In doing so, 
we hope to build on previous introductions to this topic (e.g. , Luckin, 2018; Holmes et al., 2019) and crit ical 
works that connect data models with ethical and social debates (Perrotta & Williamson, 2018; Perrotta & 
Selwyn , 2020).  By opening up the “Black Box” of AI for those outside of the field, we hope to further human -
centered AI in education by empowering all stakeholders, regardless of disciplinary background, to contribute to 
the development of AI that recognizes and champions human capabilities (Li & Etchemendy, 2018; Yang et al., 
2021).  
 
 
2. Defining “AI”  
 
As Artificial Intelligence evolves, the term “A I” has acquired mystical and rhetorical qualities (Eynon & Young, 
2020).  Some recent advances are impressive: we now have machines that can discover new drug formulas 
(Popova et al., 2018), predict elusive protein structures (AlphaFold  Team , 2020), generat e full -length written 
stories (Brown et al., 2020), and beat world -class performers in games like Starcraft, Go, and Chess (AlphaStar  
Team , 2019; Silver et al ., 2018).  Still, demystifying AI is an important  first step towards  understanding its inner 
workin gs and applications. While the capabilities and performance of today’s AI systems are unprecedented, 
many of the core algorithms that govern how they work are rooted in methods dating back to the early 20th 
century (Tuomi, 2018).  Furthermore, while current  incarnations of AI have achieved unprecedented degrees of 

==== Page 2 ====
 
100 sophistication, the “I” of AI systems remains quite rudimentary —as evidenced by how poorly these systems 
often perform on tasks that humans find intuitive.  Such technical limitations entail importa nt risks and ethical 
considerations which have significant bearings on the application of AI to the field of education. Before delving 
into these risks, we expand on two schools of AI that are frequently used in education —machine learning and 
rule-based AI —and outline some of their common applications.  
 
 
2.1. Machine learning -based AI  
 
2.1.1. Machine learning paradigms: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning  
 
Machine learning algorithms are designed to mine large datasets to uncover —or “learn ”—latent rules and 
patterns that may help inform some future decision.  For example, imagine a large school system has asked a 
research team to develop a tool that accurately predicts what a student’s GPA will be at the end of a given school 
year. “Supervis ed learning” is one approach to machine learning that could help them tackle this problem.  With 
supervised learning, machines are provided a historical dataset of inputs, or features (e.g., student -level 
characteristics like demographic data, attend ance re cords, test scores ), along with a target output, or attribute 
(e.g., GPA).  A model  is then applied to the dataset to learn how these features map to the target attribute  by 
testing out different hypotheses about the relationship to or path from student -level characteristics to GPA.  The 
labels (historical GPAs) of the data in the set help “supervise” the model by indicating how far off its predictions 
are from the observed or existing (i.e., ground -truth) values.  This occurs iteratively for each data point, 
eventually “training” the model by updating the weights it attaches to the inputs or other variables it uses to make 
predictions.  These weights are often the quantities “learned” by the machine (hence, the term “machine 
learning”).  Linear regression offers  a classic approach to supervised machine learning.  In fact, many modern 
approaches using neural networks (described in more detail below), while often described in quasi -mystical 
terms in press articles, operate in fundamentally similar ways and seek to a chieve similar outcomes as linear 
regression.  The scenario in the Supplementary Materials offers additional details about these similarities and 
differences.   
 
In contrast to supervised learning, “unsupervised learning” is a process by which a machine perf orms statistical 
pattern recognition without access to ground -truth labels for the desired output.  A common application of 
unsupervised learning is clustering.  Say a school system asked a research team to develop a “typology” of 
students based on their dif ferent characteristics, to help design and target student supports.  They could use a 
standard clustering algorithm (e.g., the popular “k -means” algorithm proposed by Hartigan  and Wong, 1979) to 
learn a grouping of students that differentiates them from oth er (also automatically inferred) groups.  Our 
resultant groups —or clusters —may comprise students who perform similarly; who take similar classes; live in 
similar parts of the city; or have some other set of related characteristics.  
 
A third paradigm of mac hine learning is “reinforcement learning ,” which has recently been used, among other 
applications, to develop powerful gameplay systems (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2018).  In education, 
some researchers have started to explore applications of r einforcement learning to intelligent tutoring systems 
(Reddy et al., 2017).  At its core, a reinforcement learning algorithm accepts as an input the state of the world 
(e.g., the questions a student has answered correctly or incorrectly in an intelligent tu toring environment of a 
game) and uses this to decide upon some action (e.g., which question to ask the student next).  The action —either 
immediately or over the course of time —eventually contributes to some outcome (e.g. , mastering a concept).  The 
value of  this outcome is then used to assign positive or negative rewards to the algorithm to encourage or 
discourage similar actions when faced with similar states of the world in the future.  Reinforcement learning 
algorithms have been around for several decades (Kaelbling et al., 1996), but have resurged over the past few 
years with large quantities of training data and computational resources more readily available.  
 
 
2.1.2. Machine learning philosophies: frequentist and Bayesian  
 
The paradigms above reflect a “ frequentist” philosophy of machine learning: inferences ( like predictions, cluster 
assignments, and other insights that inform decisions) are made largely based on the frequencies of patterns 
revealed in the training data (Bayyari & Berger, 2004).  By contr ast, “Bayesian” machine learning models 
explicitly incorporate pre -existing beliefs (“priors”) alongside the patterns revealed by training data to produce 
some posterior “belief” or inference about the world (Bayyari & Berger, 2004).   
 

==== Page 3 ====
 
101 Say, for example, a biased coin is tossed 1 00 times and yields heads on 30 instances . Two friends make a bet that 
they can infer the true bias of the coin and predict the next 100 tosses.  One trains a frequentist machine learning 
model on the observed coin tosses, which si mply factors in the observed data.  The model infers the bias as 
equalling a  30% likelihood of landing on heads.  The other friend, however, devises and trains a Bayesian model : 
in addition to factoring in the observed number of heads, she also factors in a pri or belief drawn from most 
normal coin tossing activities: that there is distribution of possible chances that the coin will land on heads 
(centered around what we usually expect from coins, 50%).  On the next 100 tosses, both observe 40 heads.  In 
this insta nce, factoring in prior beliefs into the model —instead of simply trusting the observed data —produced 
an inference of the coin’s bias as falling between 30% and 50%, which was more accurate than trusting only the 
data from the initial set of coin tosses.  
 
Since they rely on both observed data and prior beliefs, Bayesian methods can sometimes help overcome sparsity 
in datasets —like our limited number of coin tosses —in order to make more accurate predictions.  In other cases, 
such prior beliefs may themselves b e biased and therefore make models less accurate than if they were trained 
only on observations.  Whether a Bayesian or frequentist model is more appropriate to use depends on the nature 
of the problem at hand.  Interestingly, many believe that the rich stru cture of Bayesian models reflects aspects of 
human cognition (Tenenbaum et al., 2011), making them “truer -to-nature” AI . However,  many methods for 
conducting Bayesian posterior inference do not scale well to large datasets, making them difficult to deploy in 
several real -world settings.  In practice, many approaches to machine learning can be implemented from either a 
Bayesian or Frequentist point of view.  
 
 
2.1.3. The rise of deep learning  
 
Deep learning —a popular approach to m achine learning —has become th e dominant school of AI in recent years 
owing largely to a resurgent interest in neural networks.  Neural networks take inspiration from connectionist 
philosophies of cognitive science (Elman et al., 1996) and generally operate by learning (possibly nonline ar) 
relationships between several input variables in order to produce predictions as accurately as possible (see the 
machine learning scenario in the Supplementary Materials for more details).  They are the core, modular  building 
blocks that make  deep learn ing systems “deep” : combining smaller neural networks together to form larger ones 
by feeding  the outputs of one as inputs to another can enable the discovery of more complex and granular 
relationships between these inputs and outputs (LeCun et al., 2015).  Neural networks can manifest through a 
number of different algorithmic architectures, e.g., Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs (Goodfellow et al., 
2016)), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs (Goodfellow et al., 2016)), and Transformers (Vaswani et al., 
2017) —which underpin recent advances in natural language processing like the popular BERT model (Devlin et 
al., 2019).  Each of these architectures differ in how they process and transform inputs into outputs.  Furthermore, 
RNNs and Transformers are generally bet ter-suited for tasks that involve time -series data, whereas CNNs are 
often applied to image processing problems.  Still, while their precise structures and implementations may differ, 
many of these architectures are trained, evaluated, and eventually used i n similar ways.  
 
Deep learning has been driven by advances across three major areas over the past several years: data, algorithms, 
and hardware.  Large, easy -to-access datasets have enabled, for example, the recent “GPT -3” language model —
which is trained on  over 570 gigabytes of text found across the  open internet (Brown et al., 2020).  The model is 
simply trained to predict the next word in a corpus of text given some sequence of preceding words.  The result is 
a powerful system that can generate entire belie vable stories —an exciting possibility, but also of particular 
concern in our current era of misinformation  (OpenAI  Team , 2019).   
 
In cases where large datasets are not available for a specific task , algorithmic advances like “transfer learning” 
can help  (Pan & Yang, 2009) . Transfer learning enables a model to “pre -train” itself —i.e., initialize its 
parameters —using the outputs of a training process conducted for a separate but related task  for which enough 
data is available . The model can then “fine -tune” o n—or adapt itself to —a smaller dataset that more closely 
represents the task at hand.  For example, early warning systems to detect students likely to drop out may be 
developed for districts that lack a breadth or depth of historical data by “borrowing” the  predictive capacities of 
models pre -trained on data from larger school settings as a starting point (Coleman et al., 2019).  Pre-training, 
however, may also contribute to the amplification and propagation of biases across models.   
 
Finally, recent h ardware  accelerations  like Graphics Processing Units (GPUs)  and Tensor Processing Units 
(TPUs, Hennessy & Patterson, 2019)  are enabling more time -efficient computation, yet their energy demands 
and associated costs have raised concerns about their potential envir onmental impacts (García -Martín et al., 
2019)  and contribution to widening divides between the AI capabilities of large companies and smaller research 
groups (Hao, 2019).  

==== Page 4 ====
 
102 2.2. Rule -based AI  
 
Machine learning systems can be powerful, particularly for probl ems where the “rules” needed to produce 
certain outcomes (e.g., the weights to be applied to students’ characteristics in order to produce GPA predictions) 
are not known and hence must be inferred from data.  However, there are also problems for which the r ules are 
known, but applying these rules can be cumbersome or time -consuming.  For these types of problems, “rule -
based” approaches to AI —in which computers manipulate data based on a set of pre -defined logical 
propositions, instead of ones inferred from pa tterns in the data —are often used.   
 
One such problem in education is school bus routing.  Large school districts often have fleets of school buses that 
must be scheduled and routed to different stops in order to ensure students get to school on time and sa fely 
(Bertsimas et al., 2019).  In this problem, the rules an AI w ould consider might include: different carrying 
capacities for each bus; times by which certain groups of students must get to school; or specific roads buses can 
and cannot take.  A social pl anner implementing this algorithm may seek to optimize for multiple objective 
functions: for example, minimizing costs and travel times and/or maximizing the diversity of the student body 
that travels together on any given bus.   
 
The most naive rule -based AI algorithm would use a brute force approach to solve this problem, evaluating every 
possible combination of bus, student, and route assignments and selecting the one that yields the most optimal 
response vis -a-vis our multiple objectives.  For many large real-world problems, however, this approach is 
infeasible and could quite literally take hundreds of years (or longer) to compute (Cook, 2012).  To this end, rule -
based AI algorithms often use sophisticated solution strategies to prune down a large set of p ossible 
combinations to a feasible subset that is much easier and more efficient to search through (e.g., Van Hentenryck 
& Michel, 2009).  Unlike machine learning systems, rule -based models will not necessarily make more accurate 
decisions with a larger sca le or diversity of data.  In fact, scale and diversity of data can pose challenges to rule -
based AI algorithms because they increase the size and complexity of the problem at hand.  This said, these 
challenges will likely be alleviated by the increased algor ithmic and hardware efficiencies afforded by the 
current wave of AI described above.  
 
While their underlying mechanisms might differ, r ule-based AI need not be completely distinct from machine 
learning.  For example, we may have historical data on bus route s and road conditions (e.g., traffic patterns) 
which we can use to predict travel times.  We can then leverage these predicted travel times as inputs into our 
objective function during the optimization process.   
 
 
3. Applications of AI in education  
 
Despite  recent interest in applications of AI and education, the two fields have intersected for some time ( e.g., 
Aleven & Koedinger, 2002) —which has long raised important philosophical and ethical questions. This next 
section provides an overview of recent appli cations of AI in education and highlights some of their limitations 
and broader implications.  These examples, far from exhaustive, have been selected in order to highlight the ways 
in which the scale and diversity of available d ata—along with improvements in computational efficiency —have 
created new opportunities for using AI to potentially improve the human condition through educational 
applications.  For a more in -depth review of how AI and other data mining techniques can be applied to 
education -related p roblems, we refer readers to several existing review papers ( e.g., Romero & Ventura, 2010; 
Koedinger et al., 2015; Fischer et al., 2020).  
 
 
3.1. Intelligent tutoring systems  
 
Intelligent tutoring systems (ITS) are a popular application of AI in education.  ITS are tools that seek to adapt to 
students’ existing knowledge and skills, or learning states, to help them build skills in more personalized ways.  
The “I” in ITS often has different definitions for different tools.  For example, some ITS are machine lea rning -
based systems that seek to develop (sometimes Bayesian) learner models trained to maximize the likelihood of a 
student answering a provided question correctly, conditional on their history of responses (Ritter, 2007).  In other 
cases, developers might  simply train a system to predict the likelihood of “correctness” as accurately as possible 
(e.g., using deep reinforcement learning a la Reddy et al., 2017).  These systems then provide students with 
problems that are most likely to be at their “learning e dge” —i.e., the problems they haven’t yet answered that 
they are most likely to answer correctly, given their prior history of answers.  These machine learning systems 
have the capacity to make more accurate predictions of a student’s learning edge as they d raw on larger and more 

==== Page 5 ====
 
103 disparate historical sources of student performance and behavior —many of which are becoming more ubiquitous 
through computer -aided tutoring and assessment platforms.  Other ITS, like (Kelly et al., 2013), pre -define simple 
rules —like correctly answering three similar questions in a row —to determine if and when a student has 
mastered some concept.   
 
Experimental evidence has largely shown ITS to be effective in increasing students’ grades and test scores (J -
PAL  Evidence Review , 2019).  Of course, grades and test scores offer only one (limited) view into student 
learning.  Crucially, much of the existing efficacy research on ITS has not specifically analysed which underlying 
AI methods make them more or less effective. As such, it is unclea r to what extent machine learning vs rule -
based systems are responsible for helping students improve their outcomes.  As machine learning technologies 
continue to offer new opportunities for personalizing instruction, it will be important to identify the pr ecise 
elements of these systems that offer the greatest promise for enhancing student learning. There is also a need to 
better understand the contexts in which these ITS systems can be meaningfully deployed as a resource for 
teachers and students in ways t hat do not inadvertently narrow the aims and purposes of Education (Biesta, 
2015).  
 
 
3.2. Assessment and feedback  
 
Proponents of AI, particularly machine -learning based systems that seek to infer students’ knowledge states from 
the growing scale and divers ity of data available on digital learning platforms like Khan Academy , argue these 
systems  have the capacity to obviate the need for explicit formative and summative assessments, by seeking to 
infer students’ knowledge states from the growing scale and div ersity of data available on such digital learning 
platforms (Piech et al., 2015) and other systems instrumented for “learning analytics” (Gašević et al., 2015).  
After all, if it is possible to know what a student knows based on how they answer questions in  an ITS, why 
administer an assessment at all?  This line of reasoning, of course, does not consider the positive effects exam 
preparation and studying can have on learning (Karpicke & Roediger III, 2008).   
 
Automated assessment of writing submissions is a popular, albeit complex, example of how machine learning 
might support assessment . To date, most research has focused on training machine learning models to assess 
foundational attributes of writing —for example, spelling, vocabulary, and grammar.  Other syst ems have used 
machine learning to train models that are able to replicate human scores for a given essay (Dong et al., 2017). 
Growing as a writer, however, requires much more than feedback on the mechanics of writing  or collapsing a 
rich composition down t o a single grade.  To this end, (Fiacco et al., 2019) recently designed a neural network -
based machine learning system to identify which rhetorical structures were present in sentences contained within 
a corpus of research study articles: for example, which  sentences sought to describe the study, provide context on 
the study’s methods, or frame new knowledge.  
 
Despite the advancing capabilities of these systems, however, some concerns remain. For instance, it would be 
important to train these AI on a divers e set of linguistic data to fuel their accuracy and minimize bias. M ore work 
also needs to be done to understand how they might inadvertently negatively impact writing development and 
written work in the same ways as plagiarism detection software has (Ross  & Macleod, 2020), and more 
generally, how student surveillance via constant data collection may impact students (Eynon, 2013).  Thus, 
although assessment and feedback is a core focus of AIED, the most appropriate ways to deploy AI for particular 
activities  and in specific contexts remains an area of debate.  
 
 
3.3. Coaching and counselling  
 
The role of coaches and counsellors in schools are multifaceted, time -intensive, and costly.  Researchers have 
therefore started to explore how some of their tasks can be automated.  For example, several studies have 
demonstrated how text -message reminders can help facilitate specific outcomes no rmally under counsellors’ 
purview : e.g., ensuring that graduated high school seniors take the steps needed to matriculate at colleg e in the 
fall (Castleman & Page, 2015) and keeping parents updated about their children’s academics (Bergman & Chen, 
2019). 
 
Recent efforts have also leveraged AI to enable a richer set of interactions between students and “counselors .” A 
recent study (Pag e & Gehlbach, 2017) deployed an AI chatbot to answer questions about forms students would 
need to fill out before starting college at Georgia State University (GSU).  The authors indicate that the chatbot 
was trained using deep reinforcement learning —the sa me technology that has enabled state -of-the-art advances 

==== Page 6 ====
 
104 in automated gameplay (AlphaStar  Team , 2019) —though the exact methods for training and evaluating these 
models in the context of the chatbot are unclear.  The researchers found that the AI -powered sys tem was 
comparable in enhancing college enrolment rates to prior studies that primarily involved human counselors.  As 
more dialogue agent  systems are deployed across campuses , the scale and breadth of available linguistic corpora 
for training models with s marter response strategies are likely to grow.  Nevertheless , a number of open research 
questions persist —particularly concerning how well these systems can serve a diverse student body in answering 
complex educational questions.  
 
      
3.4. (Large) school systems -level processes  
 
At the school systems -level, AI is being used to achieve several objectives, including the equitable 
implementation of school choice.  Over the past two decades, a strand of economics research has focused on 
developing rule -based AI  algorithms for districts that offer families choices on where to send their children to 
school.  These algorithms have been designed to be “strategy -proof ,” matching students to schools in ways that 
do not enable families to “game the system” by mis -statin g preferences in order to exploit loopholes that would 
increase their likelihood of receiving a spot at one of their top choice schools (Pathak & Sönmez, 2008).  This is 
particularly important for those parents who do not have the resources, social capital,  or knowledge necessary  to 
“game the system .” Of course, “strategy -proofness” only helps further equity to the extent that other parts of the 
system are also equitable (Goldstein, 2019).   
 
AI has also been used to help with a range of planning and forecast ing tasks, particularly in larger school -
systems or by those working across large systems of schools. Working with Boston Public Schools, researchers 
built a machine learning model that forecasts changes in demand for schools in response to certain school choice 
policy changes (Pathak & Shi, 2015).  As more data accrues across the diverse spectrum  of families in these 
systems, such models have the potential to become more accurate —and perhaps also shed more light on the 
preferences of families who belong to traditionally underrepresented segments of the population . School districts 
have also turned to rule -based AI systems to help achieve greater logistical efficiency —for example, by 
producing “optimal” bus routes as discussed earlier in this paper —and to sav e money (Bertsimas et al., 2019).  
Yet such systems have been met with mixed reception from some of the families they ultimately impact 
(Scharfenberg, 2018).  Additionally, to improve teacher placement in schools, Teach for America (TFA) designed 
and tested a matching algorithm similar to the school choice matching algorithm described above, to factor in 
both teacher and school preferences; TFA subsequently saw a slight positive effect on students’ academic 
outcomes (Davis, 2017).  With continued increases in computational efficiency, t hese rule -based systems promise 
to be able to operate on larger, more complex proble ms concerning more students, teachers, and other 
stakeholders in the years ahead. Yet these need to be developed with an awareness of concerns ab out the use of 
such market -driven principles to develop an equitable education system ( e.g., Ball, 2017; Biesta, 2015) . 
 
 
3.5. Predicting outcomes  
 
Machine learning systems have  garnered significant attention for their ability to “predict the future” —often  in 
the form of “early warning systems .” These systems, often using different forms of regression, mine large troves 
of historical student data to predict which students are most at risk of failing an exam, dropping out of high 
school or college, etc. (Far ia et al., 2017).  Experimental evidence has suggested that deploying these systems can 
help reduce chronic absenteeism and course failure (Faria et al., 2017).  While early warning systems do not 
always require machine learning —e.g., a simple rule -based sys tem could trigger a warning if a student’s GPA 
falls below a certain level —machine learning -based systems have the potential to identify and exploit patterns of 
which school leaders may not be aware.  These systems can also pool data across disparate contex ts to improve 
individual predictions.  For example, small school districts might face a “cold start” problem: they simply do not 
have enough historical data to train an accurate machine learning model —requiring them to “borrow” data from 
other school distri cts to improve accuracy  (e.g., Coleman et al., 2019).  Increasing scale and diversity of data may 
enable such applications of transfer learning, and more generally, extend the possible applications of machine 
learning to educational settings that have previ ously been left out.  
 
Unfortunately, these warning systems can have several drawbacks.  Being able to predict how well a student is 
going to do in a particular class might help encourage students to take more advanced classes ( Bergman  et al. , 
2021)—but it c ould also lead to tracking, which might limit a student’s desire and ability to explore new topics, 
particularly in college and university.  School leaders may also struggle to calibrate interventions based on the 
outputs of a model. If a model indicates th e probability that any given student drops out of high school, at what 

==== Page 7 ====
 
105 point should an intervention be triggered —when there is a 20% chance of a student dropping out?  51%?  90%?  
Even if a school leader feels equipped to intervene after analyzing the data, t here is a fundamental question about 
the obligation to act (Eynon, 2013 ; Prinsloo et al., 2017; Hakimi et al., 2021): which students should receive 
support? And what if the model has a high false -negative rate —meaning there could be many students who 
actua lly need intervention but weren’t flagged by the model as such?  These are difficult questions and, at 
present, there are no standardized responses; school systems approach these questions differently depending on 
their own knowledge and needs.  
 
 
4. Limitat ions and risks of modern machine learning systems  
 
Readers from varied sub -fields of education, learning sciences and data science will bring different critical lenses 
to the areas and applications previously discussed. Here, we will draw from (Lake et al. , 2016) and other 
researchers to discuss several technical limitations of modern machine learning systems and some risks that arise 
from them. We will also look at the key gaps that still exist between what many believe AI can do in 2021, what 
it can actua lly do (and not do), and how these limitations have important implications for education.  
 
 
4.1. Limitations of modern machine learning systems  
 
4.1.1. Transparency and interpretability  
 
Neural network approaches to machine learning are powerful, but their  inner workings are usually not  
transparent, making them difficult to interpret. One implication of this is that it may not be clear which inputs 
were responsible for driving decisions.  For example, in the case of early warning systems, a school leader mig ht 
be informed of the likelihood of any given student failing a course, but not which characteristics of the student 
are most associated with this prediction.  The school leader might obviate this problem by opting for a more 
interpretable, non-deep  learnin g-based model, but this may require sacrificing some degree of predictive 
accuracy.  These are not always salient tradeoffs, but when they arise, it is often unclear how they should be 
made.  Fortunately, model interpretability is an active area of deep lear ning research  with several recent advances 
(e.g., Sundarajan et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018).  These advances are critical for equity and inclusion in education, 
as they open the door to enabling a wider range of stakeholders —including parents and students who may be 
affected by such algorithms —to understand, interrogate, and ultimately improve their applications (although see 
Ananny  & Crawford , 2018; Tsai et al., 2019 for discussions of questions of the burden such moves could place 
on individuals).     
 
A m ore fundamental issue with machine -learning based systems,  even those that do not leverage deep neural 
networks , is causal attribution.  Machine learning models are designed to identify and exploit correlations (not 
necessarily causal relationships) between  variables in order to make predictions.  For example,  a school leader’s 
early warning system might highlight poverty status, prior grade history, and disciplinary actions as student -level 
factors associated with a higher likelihood of course failure , witho ut explaining the underlying causes  of failure.  
Misunderstanding under lying causes may lead to faulty or incomplete interventions, and ultimately, a 
perpetuation (or exacerbation) of the underlying educational challenges educationalists are seeking to addr ess. 
Advances in machine learning methods for causal analysis ( e.g., Johan sson et al., 2016) are attempting to help 
separate out correlation from causation. However, grasping a rich understanding of causal processes in settings 
as complex as education usua lly requires much more than technical solutions.  
 
 
4.1.2. Abstract reasoning and learning how to learn  
 
Humans are very good at two things that AI -powered machines are not: abstract reasoning and learning how to 
learn. For example, while machines can learn  to play a variety of games better than champion -calibre players, 
they require training on simulations of hundreds of thousands or millions of games to learn how to do so.  
Humans, by contrast, often learn gameplay simply by watching someone else play for a  few minutes (Lake et al., 
2016).  This is  partly  because we are remarkably adept at abstract reasoning: ascertaining the fundamental rules 
of a particular task to generalize and apply these rules to other similar but distinct endeavors.  Teachers do this al l 
the time: unlike most intelligent tutoring systems, they do not need to observe a large number of question 
responses from a student in order to identify and begin addressing key conceptual gaps.  
 

==== Page 8 ====
 
106 An important type of abstract reasoning is learning how to  learn.  Throughout our lives, we have likely played 
several games, and these experiences have made it easier for us to learn the rules and dynamics of new games.  
Such “meta learning” is a popular area of machine learning research. At present, however, the complex reasoning 
done by humans is broken down into discrete processes for the machines, including teaching a machine “where 
to focus” in the space of input data (Xu et al., 2015) or how to automatically update different parts of its own 
architecture (And rychowicz et al., 2016; Zoph & Le, 2016) in order to make better predictions. Perhaps 
unsurprisingly, this machine “meta learning” generally lacks the higher -order thinking, reflection, and planning 
woven throughout human meta -learning.  Without this abilit y to lear n how to learn, we must be skeptical of how 
well AI can support students, understanding the complex in - and out -of-school factors that impact learning.  AI, 
for example, may be able to suggest problems to students to work on, but will be limited in  identifying why 
students continue to get certain types of problems right or wrong —especially if those factors transcend cognitive, 
skill-based challenges and extend to the home environment or other social forces affecting the child.  
 
 
4.2. Risks that stem  from machine learning’s limitations  
 
4.2.1. Failures in generalizing  
 
Because machine learning models often fail to develop a deep, intuitive understanding of the task they are built 
to perform, they can subsequently fail to generalize to new settings tha n what they were trained for (Murphy, 
2012).  This sometimes leads them to “catastrophically forget” how to perform tasks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), or 
become brittle in the face of “adversarial” inputs.  Adversarial inputs are data examples —often derived b y 
making small perturbations to training set examples —that are designed to fool a machine learning model into 
making an incorrect decision.  As an example, (Brown et al., 2017) showed how an object recognition system that 
could classify an image as containi ng a banana with high confidence could easily be fooled into making an 
incorrect classification simply by adding a small sticker of a toaster to the image.  One of the key reasons for this 
brittleness is probably the fact that the model has not “really lear ned” what a banana is, beyond a collection of 
pixels arranged in a certain way.  We can play such a scenario out to imagine several concerning possibilities in 
education , for example: a  ranking system that places a student in a remedial class because of the ir test score 
similarity to a historical batch of remedial students, without factoring in other variables that might better -indicate 
their likelihood of succeeding in more advanced courses (Bergman et al., 2021) ; facial recognition 
misclassifications in cr iminal justice applications that lead to the wrongful incarceration of students or their 
family members (Hill, 2020); and many more.  These scenarios have inspired new directions for building more 
robust deep learning models (e.g. , Tjeng et al., 2019), but the need for awareness about what such models are 
“doing ” in technical terms will remain crucial . 
 
  
4.2.2. Bias and fairness  
 
Lacking a general understanding of the “how” and “why” behind most decisions, many machine learning models 
often recapitulate bia ses in their training data —and hence, risk perpetuating these biases at scale.  For example, a 
recent study illustrated the drastically poor performance of several commercial facial recognition technologies 
when seeking to identify the faces of black women —due in part to underrepresentation in their training data 
(Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018).  In healthcare, a system for neurological disorder screening based on human 
speech proved more accurate for individuals who spoke a particular dialect of Canadian English (Gershgorn, 
2018).  Such shortcomings prevail  in education too —with AIED applications favouring certain groups in the 
content taught, the ways material is covered, and the accuracy of predictions and appropriateness of interventions 
(Mayfield et. al., 2019) . The UK’s intention of using predictive models to assign final grades in the wake of 2020 
school closures due to the COVID -19 pandemic illustrates this risk: under the modelling scheme, which was 
eventually dropped, highly -qualified and capable students f rom historically lower -performing (and lower -
resourced) schools were more likely to receive marks lower than what their teachers would have assigned, 
whereas students in traditionally high -performing private received higher predicted scores (BBC, 2020).   
 
Ultimately, fairness is a highly complex concept, particularly when applied to education (Mayfield et al., 2019); 
and when and how educationalists choose to use AIED is itself a complex ethical question, even if and when 
those AIs are optimized to root out  bias. Addressing the technical limitations of machine learning will help 
mitigate the risks outlined above, but it will be insufficient to preempt the full range of educational and ethical 
issues related to AIED, specifically the application of AI in prac tice. Multiple significant and important critiques 
of AIED, and of the use of data in education more broadly, center on issues such as privacy, instrumentalism, 
surveillance, performance, and governance (Jarke & Berieter, 2019; Holmes, et al., 2021; Willia mson 2017).    

==== Page 9 ====
 
107 We hope that the technical explanations and considerations outlined in this paper can help inform conversations 
and decision -making around issues of fair and equitable use —even if they are insufficient to resolve them.  
 
 
5. Discussion and conclusion  
 
As we have explored, AI is not “one thing”; in this paper we have focused on the more technical aspects of AI to 
highlight the myriad of (sometimes complementary) computational techniques that collectively constitute AI.  
Understanding the working s, limitations, and risks associated with each —and especially those powered by 
machine learning —is critical to developing and deploying them wisely, thoughtfully, and with proper human 
oversight.  Educationalists who do not have a background in computer sci ence or engineering have a vital role to 
play in this endeavor.  To aid with this, we offer the following guiding questions that educationalists may ask as 
they encounter applications of AI in education, to ensure AI is used ethically, responsibly, and ulti mately to 
improve the human condition:  
 
• What kind of AI is it?  The examples contained in this paper illustrate how different types of AI can (and 
cannot) help solve different problems in education, and may help educationalists form a judgement about 
their applicability and risks within their own contexts. Asking this question may encourage a recognition of 
both human expertise and the realities of the ‘intelligence’ of AI systems.  
 
• Does the AI enable something that would be difficult or impossible to achi eve without it?  Unpacking 
any benefits of the scale or diversity of data that the AI operates on, or any efficiencies it enables and 
weighing them against associated risks or limitations may help justify its usefulness.  If an AI -powered 
system does not ena ble capabilities or benefits that could be achieved without it, it may not be worth 
deploying.  Just because AI can be used to power an education technology system, does not mean it should  
be. 
 
• What are the potential risks or drawbacks of deploying this tec hnology?  Even in cases where AI might 
enable high -impact new capabilities, there are likely to be critical failure modes that could lead to 
unintended, perverse outcomes.  Understanding the possibility of, and anticipating, these outcomes is of 
essential im portance.   
 
• How equitably are the anticipated benefits and risks distributed across different groups of students 
and families?  AI, especially machine learning -based systems, can “learn,” replicate, and scale bias and 
inequity. It is therefore important to question whether AI systems might underserve or discriminate against 
students and families from low -income or minority backgrounds; with disabilities; experiencing varying 
levels of linguistic proficiency; or facing other vulnerabilities. Asking about past  performance or evidence of 
bias, or about steps taken to ensure equity in application, could be helpful.  
 
• If you could wave a magic wand and change anything about this technology, what would it be?  All 
technologies (including those powered by AI) have be en designed with a set of values, practices, and use -
cases in mind —and therefore, can be changed, even if they appear opaque or difficult to understand.  Those 
who are closest to the application of AI in educational settings should refuse to accept the stat us quo, using 
their observations and wisdom to share feedback with system developers in order to spark changes that help 
improve the human experience with education.  
 
If and how AI should be designed and used in education remains an active question, which can only be answered 
through conversations between and across different academic communities. As prior work argues, this will 
require AI researchers and engineers to work with educationalists to better -understand the theory and practice of 
education. Howev er, w e hope we have successfully argued that equally important is the need for educationalists 
to understand the more technical aspects of theory and practice of AI, especially when critiquing, rejecting or 
adapting it for their own efforts. Through the pr ovision of an overview of current AI techniques, their use in 
education, and key limitations and risks, we hope this article will contribute to these on -going conversations and 
help advance the quest for AIED to improve the human condition.   
 
 
Acknowledgem ent 
 
We would like to thank John Hood and Eric Chu for many helpful ideas and comments that helped shape this 
paper.  No human subjects were involved in this research.  The authors report no conflicts of interest.  

==== Page 10 ====
 
108 References  
 
Aleven, V. A. W. M. M. , & Koedin ger, K. R. (2002). An Effective metacognitive strategy: learning by doing and explaining 
with a computer ‐based Cognitive Tutor. Cognitive Science , 26(2), 147 –179. 
AlphaFold Team . (2020).  AlphaFold: A Solution to a 50 -year-old grand challenge in biology . De epMind Blog, 
https://deepmind.com/blog/article/alphafold -a-solution -to-a-50-year-old-grand -challenge -in-biology  
AlphaStar Team (2019).  AlphaStar: Mastering the Real -Time Strategy Game StarCraft II.  DeepMind Blog, 
https://deepmind.com/blog/alphastar -mastering -real-time-strategy -game -starcraft -ii/ 
Ananny, M. , & Crawford, K. (2018). Seeing without knowing: Limitations of the transparency ideal and its applica tion to 
algorithmic accountability. New Media & Society , 20(3), 973 -989. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816676645  
Andrychowicz, M. , Denil, M., Gomez, S., Hoffman, M. W., Pfau, D., Schaul, T., Shillingford, B. , & de Freitas, N.  (2016). 
“Learning to learn by  gradient descent by gradient descent.” In Proceedings of 30th Conference on Neural Information  
Processing Systems (NIPS). https://proceedings.neurips. cc/paper/2016/file/fb87582825f9d28a8d42c5e5e5e8b23d -Paper.pdf  
Ball, S. J. (2017). The Education debate . Policy Press.  
Bergman, P., Kopko, E., & Rodriguez, J. E.  (2021). Using predictive analytics to track students : Evidence fr om a seven  
college experiment . NBER Working Paper No. 28948.  https://doi.org/ 10.3386/w28948  
Bayyari, M. J. , & Berger, J. O. (2004). The Interplay of Bayesian and frequentist an alysis. Statistical Science , 19(1), 58–80. 
BBC (2020).  A-Levels and GCSEs: How did the exam algorithm work?  British Broadcasting Company . 
https://www.bbc.com/news/explainers -53807730  
Bergman, P. , & Chen, E.W. (201 9). Leveraging parents: The Impact of high-frequency information on student achie vement.  
Journal of Human Resources, 56 (1), 125 -158. 
Bertsimas, D., Delarue, A. , & Martin, S. (2019). Optimizing schools’ start time and bus routes. PNAS , 116(13), 5943 –5948.  
Biesta, G. J. (2015). Good education in an age of measurement: Ethics, politics, democrac y. Routledge.  
Brown, T. B., Mané, D., Roy, A., Abadi, M., & Gilmer, J. (2017). Adversarial patch. PsyArXiv . 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1712.09665  
Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., S astry, G., Askell, 
A., Agarwal, S., Herbert -Voss, A., Krueger, G., Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D., Wu, J., Winter, C., Hesse, 
C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M., Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish, S., Radford, A., S utskever, I., & 
Amodei, D. (2020). Language models are few -shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33 , 1877 -
1901.  
Buolamwini, J., & Gebru, T. (2018). Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classifi cation. 
In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research  (Vol. 81 , pp. 77 -91). https://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a.html  
Castleman, B., & Page, L. C. (2015). Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and peer mentor outreach increase 
college goi ng among low -income high school graduates. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 115, 144 -160. 
Coleman, C., Baker, R. , & Stephenson, S. (2019). A Better cold-start for early prediction of student at -risk status in new 
school distr icts. In Proceeding s of the 12th International Conference on Educational Data Mining  (pp. 732–737). 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED599170.pdf  
Cook, W. J. (2012). In pursuit of the traveling salesman : Mathematics at the limits of computation . Princeton University 
Press . 
Davis, J.  M. V. (2017). The Short and long run impacts of centralized clearinghouses : Evidence from matching teach for 
America teachers to schools . Job Market Paper . https://ideas.repec.org/p/jmp/jm2017/pda791.html  
Devlin, J., Chang, M .-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2019). BERT: Pretraining of deep bidirectional transformers for 
language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) . 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf  
Dong, F., Zhang, Y., & Yang, J. (2017). Attention -based recurrent convolutional neural network for automatic essay scoring . 
In Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computational Natural Languag e Learning (CoNLL 2017)  (pp. 153–162). 
Association for Computational Linguistics.  
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff -Smith, A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K.  (1996). Neural network modeling 
and connectionism, No. 10.  Rethinking innateness: A Connectionist perspective on development.  The MIT Press.  
Eynon, R. (2013). The Rise of Big Data: What does it mean for education, technology, and media research? Learning, Media 
and Technology , 38(3), 237 –240. 

==== Page 11 ====
 
109 Eynon, R., & Erin Y. (2020). Methodology, legend, and rhetoric : The Constructions of AI by academia, industry, and policy 
groups for lifelong learning . Science, Technology, & Human Values, 46 (1), 166 -191. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243920906475   
Faria, A. -M., Sorensen, N., Heppen, J., Bowdon, J., T aylor, S., Eisner, R., & Foster, S. (2017). Getting students on track for 
graduation: Impacts of the Early Warning Intervention and Monitoring System after one year (REL 2017 –272).  U.S. 
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Cen ter for Education Evaluation and Regional 
Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Midwest. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED573814.pdf  
Fiacco, J., Cotos, E. , & Rosé, C. (2019). Towards enabling feedback on rhetorical structure with neural sequence models . In 
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge  (pp. 310–319). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3303772.3303808  
Fischer, C., Parados, Z. , & Baker, R. (2020). Mining big data in education : Affordances and challenges . Review of Research 
in Education, 44 (1), 130 -160.  
García -Martín, E., Faviola Rodrigues, C., Riley, G. , & Grahn, H. ( 2019 ). Estimation of energy consumption in machine 
learning . Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 134 , 75–88. 
Gašević, D., Dawson, S. , & Siemens, G. (2015). Let’s not forget: Learning analytics are about learning. TechTrends , 59(1), 
64–70. 
Gershgorn, D. (2018). If AI is going to be the world’s doctor, it needs better textbooks . Quartz . https://qz.com/1367177/if -ai-
is-going -to-be-the-worlds -doctor -it-needs -better -textbooks/  
Goldstein, D. (2019).  San Francisco had an ambitious plan to tackle school seg regation.  It made it worse . The New York 
Times . https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/25/us/san -francisco -school -segregation.html  
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2 016).  Deep learning . MIT Press.  
Hakimi, L., Eynon, R., & Murphy, V. A. (2021). The Ethics of using digital trace data in education: A Thematic review of the 
research landsc ape. Review of Educational Research , 91(5), 671 -717. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654 3211020116  
Hao, K. (2019). The Computing power needed to train AI is now rising seven times faster than ever before . MIT Technology 
Review . https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/11/11/132004/the -computing -power -needed -to-train-ai-is-now-rising -
seven -times -faster -than-ever-before/  
Hartigan, J. A. , & Wong, M. A. (1979). Algorithm AS 136: A K -Means clustering algorithm . Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society Series C (Applied Statistics) , 28(1), 100 –108. 
Hennessy, J. L. , & Patterson, D. A. (2019). A New golden age for computer architecture.  Communications of the ACM , 62(2), 
48–60. 
Hill, K.  (2020). Wron gfully accused by an algorithm.  The New York Times . 
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/24/technology/facial -recognition -arrest.html  
Holmes, W., Bialik, M ., & Fadel, C. (2019).  Artificial intelligence in education : Promises and implications for teaching and 
learning . Center for Curriculum Redesign.  
Holmes, W., Porayska -Pomsta, K., Holstein, K., Sutherland, E., Baker, T., Shum, S.  B., Santos, O.  C., Rodrigo, M.  T., 
Cukurova, M., Bittencourt, I.  I., & Koedinger, K.  R. (2021 ). Ethics of AI in education: Towards a community -wide 
framework. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education , 32, 504 –526. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593 -021-
00239 -1 
Jarke, J. , & Breiter, A. (2019). The Datafication of education. Learning, Media and Technology, 44 (1), 1-6. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17439884.2019.1573833  
Johansson, F. D., Shalit, U., & Sontag, D. (2016). Learning representations for counterfactual inference . In Proceedings of 
the 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning  (pp. 3020 -3029) . 
https://proceeding s.mlr.press/v48/johansson16.html  
J-PAL Evidence Review. (2019). “Will technology transform education for the better ?” Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action 
Lab. 
Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L., & Moore, A. W. (1996). Reinforcement learning: A Survey. Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research , 4, 237 -285. 
Karpicke, J. D. , & Roediger III, H. L. (2008). The Critical importance of retrieval for learning . Science , 319(5865 ), 966 –968. 
Kelly, K., Heffernan, N., Heffernan, C., Goldman, S., Pellegrino, J. , & Goldstei n, D.  S. (2013). Estimating the effect of web -
based homewor k. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education  (pp. 824–827). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642-39112 -5_122  

==== Page 12 ====
 
110 Kim, B., Wattenberg M., Gilmer, J., Cai C., Wexler J., Viegas, F., & Sayres, R. (2018). Interpretability beyond feature 
attribution : Quantitative Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV) . In Proceedings  of the 35th International 
Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR  (Vol. 80 , pp. 2668 -2677) . https://proceedings.mlr.pr ess/v80/kim18d.html  
Kirkpatrick, J. et al. (2017). Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. PNAS , 114(13), 3521 –3526.  
Koedinger, K. R., D’Mello, S., McLaughlin, E. A., Pardos, Z. A., & Rosé, C. P. (2015). Data mining and education. WIREs 
Cogn itive Science , 6(4), 333 –353. 
Lake, B., Ullman, T., Tenenbaum, J., & Gershman, S. (2017). Building machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, Vol. 40 , E253. https://doi .org/10.1017/S0140525X16001837  
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature , 521, 436 –444. 
Li, F.  F., & Etchemendy, J. (2018).  Introducing Stanford’s human -centered AI initiative . 
https://hai.stanford.edu/news/introducing -stanfords -human -centered -ai-initiative  
Luckin, R. (2018). Machine learning and human intelligence : The Future of education for the 21st century . UCL IOE Press.  
Mayfiel d, E., Madaio, M., Prabhumoye, S. , Gerritsen, D. , McLaughlin, B., Dixon -Román, E ., & Black, A. W. (2019). Equity 
beyond bias in language technologies for education.  In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP 
for Building Educational  Applications  (pp. 444 -460). Association for Computational Linguistics. 
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W19 -4446  
Mnih, V. , Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. 
K., Ostrovski, G., Pete rsen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik, A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D., Wierstra, D., Legg, S., & 
Hassabis, D.  (2015). Human -level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 518, 529 –533. 
Murphy, K. (2012). Machine learning: A Probabilistic pers pective. MIT Press.  
OpenAI Team. (2019). GPT -2: 1.5B Release . OpenAI Blog . https://openai.com/blog/gpt -2-1-5b-release/  
Page, L. C. , & Gehlbach, H. (2017). How an artificially intelligent virtua l assistant helps students navigate the road to 
college . AERA Op en, 3(4). https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858417749220  
Pan, S. J. , & Yang, Q. (2009). A Survey on transfer learning . IEEE Transactions on K nowledge and Data Engineering , 
22(10), 1345 –1359.  
Pathak, P. A. , & Shi, P. (2015). How well do structural demand models work? Counterfactual predictions in school choice. 
Journal of Econometrics, 222 (1), 161 -195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2020.07.0 31  
Pathak, P.  A., & Sönmez, T. (2008). Leveling the playing field : Sincere and sophisticated players in the Boston me chanism. 
American Economic Review , 98(4), 1636 –1652.  
Perrotta, C. , & Selwyn, N. (2020). Deep learning goes to school: toward a relational understanding of AI in education. 
Learning, Media and Technology , 45(3), 251-269. 
Perrotta, C. , & Williamson, B. (2018). The Social life of learning analytics : Cluster analysis and the “performance ” of 
algorithmic education. Learning, Media and Technology , 43(1), 3-16. 
Piech, C., Bassen, J., Huang, J., Ganguli, S., Sahami, M., Guibas, L. , & Sohl-Dickstein, J. (2015). Deep knowledge tracing . In 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28 (NIPS)  (pp. 505 -513). Neural Information Processing Systems.  
Popova, M., Isayev, O., & Tropsha, A. (2018). Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug design.  Science Advances , 4(7). 
https:doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aap7885  
Prinsloo, P ., & Slade, S. (2017). An Elephant in the learning analytics room: the obligation to a ct. In Proceedings of the 
seventh international learning analytics & knowledge conference  (pp. 46 -55). https://doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027406  
Reddy, S., Levine, S. , & Dragan, A. (2017). Accelerating human learning with deep reinforcement learning . In Proc eedings 
of the NIPS’17 Workshop on Teaching Machines, Robots, and Humans  (pp. 1-9). https://siddharth.io/files/deep -tutor.pdf  
Ritter, S., Kulikowich, J., Lei, P.  W., McGuire, C.  L., & Morgan, P. (2007). What evidence matters ? A Randomized field trial 
of co gnitive tutor Algebra I . Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, 162 (13), 13-20. 
Romero, C. , &Ventura, S. (2010). Educational data mining : A Review of the state of the art . IEEE Transactions on Systems 
Man and Cybernetics Part C (Application s and Reviews) , 40(6), 601 –618. 
Ross, J. , & Macleod, H. (2018). Surveillance,  (dis) trust and teaching with plagiarism detection technology . In Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on Networked Learning  (pp. 235 -242). 
https://www.networkedlearn ingconference.org.uk/abstracts/papers/ross_25.pdf  
Scharfenberg, D. (2018). Computers can solve your problem . You may not like the answer.  The Boston Globe . 
https://apps.b ostonglobe.com/ideas/graphics/2018/09/equity -machine/  

==== Page 13 ====
 
111 Shum, S. J. B, & Luckin, R. (2019). Learning analytics and AI: Politics, pedagogy and practices. British Journal of 
Educational Technology, 50 (6), 2785 -2793.  
Silver, A., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, M., Guez, A., Lanctot, M., Sifre, L., Kumaran, D., Graepel, T., 
Lillicrap, T., Simonyan, K. , & Hassabis, D. (2018). A General reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, Shogi, 
and Go through self -play. Science , 362(6419 ), 114 0–1144.  
Sundarajan, M., Taly, A. , & Yan, Q. (2017). Axiomatic attribution for deep networks.  Proceedings of the 34th International 
Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR  (Vol. 70, pp. 3319 -3328).  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/sundararajan17a.html  
Tenenba um, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman,  N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind: Statistics,  structure, and 
abstraction. Science , 331(6022 ), 1279 –1285.  
Tjeng, V., Xiao, K., & Tedrake, R. (2019). Evaluating robustness of neural networks with mixed intege r programming . In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1711.07356  
Tsai, Y .-S., Perotta, C., & Gašević, D. (2019). Empowering learners with personalised learning approaches? Agency, e quity 
and transparency in the context of learning analytics. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education , 45(4), 554 -567. 
Tuomi, I. (2018). The Impact of artificial int elligence on learning, teaching, and education . JRC Science for Policy Report, 
European Commission . Publications Office of the European Union. https://doi.org/10.2760/12297  
Van Hentenryck, P. , & Michel, L. (2009). Constraint -based local search . MIT Press.  
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomes, A. N., Kaiser, L., & Polosukhi, I. (2017). Attention is 
all you need . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3f5ee243547dee91f bd053c1c4a845aa -Abstract.html  
Williamson, B. (2017). Big data in education: The Digital future of learning, policy and practice . SAGE.  
Xu, K., Ba, J., Kiros, R., Cho, K., Courville, A., Salakhudinov, R., Zemel, R., & Bengio, Y. (2015). Show, attend and te ll: 
Neural image caption generation with visual attention. In  International conference on machine learning  (pp. 2048 -2057). 
PMLR.  
Yang, S. J. H., Ogata, H., Matsui, T., & Chen, N.  S. (2021). Human -centered artificial intelligence in education: Seeing the 
invisible through the visible. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence , 2, 100008.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100008  
Zoph, B. , & Le, Q. V. (2016). Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning . 
https://doi.org/10.48550 /arXiv.1611.01578  

