==== Page 1 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1
Unsupervised Representation Learning for Time
Series: A Review
Qianwen Meng, Hangwei Qian, Yong Liu, Yonghui Xu, Zhiqi Shen, and Lizhen Cui, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract —Unsupervised representation learning approaches
aim to learn discriminative feature representations from unla-
beled data, without the requirement of annotating every sam-
ple. Enabling unsupervised representation learning is extremely
crucial for time series data, due to its unique annotation
bottleneck caused by its complex characteristics and lack of
visual cues compared with other data modalities. In recent years,
unsupervised representation learning techniques have advanced
rapidly in various domains. However, there is a lack of systematic
analysis of unsupervised representation learning approaches for
time series. To fill the gap, we conduct a comprehensive literature
review of existing rapidly evolving unsupervised representation
learning approaches for time series. Moreover, we also develop a
unified and standardized library, named ULTS ( i.e.,Unsupervised
Learning for Time Series), to facilitate fast implementations
and unified evaluations on various models. With ULTS, we
empirically evaluate state-of-the-art approaches, especially the
rapidly evolving contrastive learning methods, on 9 diverse real-
world datasets. We further discuss practical considerations as
well as open research challenges on unsupervised representation
learning for time series to facilitate future research in this field.
Index Terms —Time series, representation learning, unsuper-
vised learning, contrastive learning, self-supervised learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
TIME series data can record the changing trends of
variables over time and are ubiquitous across various
fields such as Internet of Things (IoT) [1, 2, 3], industry
4.0 [4, 5], financial services [6], and healthcare services [7, 8].
In order to extract and infer useful information from complex
raw time series data, time series representation learning has
emerged as an effective learning paradigm. On the one hand,
This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program
of China No. 2021YFF0900800; the Major Scientific and Technological
Innovation Project of Shandong Province No. 2021CXGC010108; the Nat-
ural Science Foundation of Shandong Province No. ZR202111180007; the
Fundamental Research Fund of Shandong University, and the Chinese Gov-
ernment Scholarship - High Level Postgraduate Program of China Scholarship
Council. (Corresponding authors: Hangwei Qian; Lizhen Cui.)
Q. Meng is with the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China,
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, Shandong
University, Jinan, China (Email: mqw sdu@mail.sdu.edu.cn).
H. Qian is with Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR,
Singapore (Email: qian hangwei@cfar.a-star.edu.sg).
Y . Liu is with Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active
Living for the Elderly (LILY), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
(Email: stephenliu@ntu.edu.sg).
Y . Xu is with the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, Shandong
University, Jinan, China (Email: xuyonghui@sdu.edu.cn).
Z. Shen is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore (Email: zqshen@ntu.edu.sg).
L. Cui is with the School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research, Shandong
University, Jinan, China (Email: clz@sdu.edu.cn).the learned latent representations can capture potentially valu-
able information within time series and reveal the underlying
mechanisms of the corresponding systems or phenomena.
On the other hand, high-quality representations are essen-
tial for numerous downstream tasks, including time series
classification [9, 10, 11], forecasting [12, 13, 14, 15], and
clustering [16, 17]. Pervasive raw time series data are collected
through a wide spectrum of sensors or wearable devices with
varying frequencies [18]. Annotating corresponding labels for
such data, however, is inevitably inefficient and could be
erroneous due to the lack of obvious visual patterns in the
raw data. This would inhibit the training of conventional
supervised learning models since full label annotations are
required beforehand. Weakly-supervised learning methods can
alleviate the annotation challenge to some extent, but they still
necessitate partial or coarse labels for model training [19].
In this paper, we turn to the techniques that aim to learn
high-quality representations from raw time series data in an
unsupervised learning manner.
In general, unsupervised representation learning aims to
extract latent representations from complex raw time series
data without human supervision [28]. Previous studies have
shown remarkable performance with joint clustering and fea-
ture learning approaches [29]. However, clustering primarily
focuses on identifying specific data patterns and can be unre-
liable due to the poor generality of predefined priors [30]. The
advent of deep learning techniques has led to the widespread
adoption of auto-encoders and seq-to-seq models for repre-
sentation learning [31]. These approaches employ appropriate
learning objectives, such as self-reconstruction and context
prediction, to learn meaningful representations [16, 32]. Never-
theless, accurately reconstructing the complex time series data
remains challenging, especially with the high-frequency phys-
iological signals [33, 34]. Recently, self-supervised learning is
emerging as a new paradigm, which induces supervision by
designing pretext tasks instead of relying on pre-defined prior
knowledge [35, 36, 37]. Diverging from fully unsupervised
approaches, self-supervised learning methods leverage pretext
tasks to autonomously generate labels by utilizing intrinsic
information derived from the unlabeled data [38]. The learning
efficiency can be improved through discriminative pre-training
based on self-generated supervised signals that are freely
obtained from the raw data [25, 39, 40, 41].
More recently, self-supervised learning has made significant
leaps fueled by advancements in contrastive learning, which
employs the instance discrimination pretext task to bring simi-
lar pairs closer while pushing dissimilar pairs apart in the fea-
ture space [42]. Contrastive learning has achieved remarkablearXiv:2308.01578v1  [cs.LG]  3 Aug 2023

==== Page 2 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2
SurveysApplications Core Techniques Types
Main ContributionsClassification
Forecasting
Others
Supervised
Unsupervised
Deep
Non-deep
Univariate
Multivariate
[10] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They classify algorithms according to the type of discriminatory features the
technique is attempting to find. The algorithms are grouped into those that
use the whole series, intervals, shapelets or repeating pattern counts.
[11] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review recently proposed bespoke multivariate time series classification
algorithms based on deep learning, shapelets and bag-of-words approaches.
[20] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They group deep learning approaches for time series classification into
generative models including auto-encoders and echo state networks, and
discriminative models including feature engineering and end-to-end methods.
[21] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They examine the current state of eXplainable AI (XAI) methods with a focus
on approaches for opening up deep learning black boxes including MLPs,
RNNs, CNNs and ResNets for the task of time series classification.
[22] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They categorize early classification approaches for incomplete time series into
4 exclusive categories based on their proposed solution strategies, including
prefix-based, shapelet-based, model-based and miscellaneous ones.
[23] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They propose a taxonomy of distance-based classifiers, including KNN-based,
distance features-based and distance kernels-based ones.
[14] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review 3 categories of deep learning architectures for time series
forecasting, including MLPs, RNNs and CNNs.
[12] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They classify deep learning methods for time series forecasting by application
domains (energy and fuels, image and video, finance, industry, health, etc.)
and network architectures (ENN, LSTM, GRU, BRNN, DFFNN, CNN, TCN).
[24] ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They divide compression algorithms into dictionary-based methods, functional
approximation, auto-encoders, and sequential algorithms.
[25] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review approaches specifically proposed for multi-modal and temporal
data, then categorize discriminative self-supervised representation learning
models into pretext, contrastive, clustering and regularisation-based models.
[26] ✓✓ ✓ They divide main research orientations into 3 subfields: dimensionality reduc-
tion (time series representation), similarity measures and data mining tasks.
[27] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ They review a variety of feature learning algorithms that have been developed
to explicitly capture temporal relationships (such as RBM, AE, RNN, TDNN).
Ours ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Our comprehensive review encompasses a broad spectrum of unsupervised
representation learning methods, including both established and novel ap-
proaches, with a particular emphasis on the latest advancements in contrastive
learning techniques. Furthermore, we develop a unified and standardized
library called ULTS, which serves as a valuable resource for convenient
empirical evaluations and comparisons of these methods.
TABLE I
COMPARISONS OF EXISTING RELATED SURVEYS ON TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING .
advantages in representation learning for various types of data,
including image [43, 44, 45, 46], video [47, 48, 49] and time
series [50, 51, 52, 53]. Alignment serves as a key motivation
in representation learning methods [54]. Specifically, in the
context of contrastive learning, alignment involves the map-
ping of 2 samples that form a positive pair to nearby features,
resulting in a high degree of invariance to unneeded noise
factors. Contrastive learning primarily focuses on 3 levels,
namely instance-level contrast [55, 56, 57], prototype-level
contrast [58, 59, 60], and temporal-level contrast [33, 51, 61].
The instance-level contrast treats samples independently and
distinguishes them by pulling positive pairs together and push-
ing negative pairs apart [62]. Prototype-level contrast, instead,
goes beyond the independence assumption and exploits latent
cluster information present within samples. Researchers havedemonstrated that the learned representations are expected to
retain higher-level semantic information by taking advantage
of additional prior information brought by clustering [58, 59,
63, 64]. Furthermore, considering the temporal dependency
inherent in time series data, researchers have explored the
feasibility of distinguishing contextual information at a fine-
grained temporal level [50, 51, 52].
As shown in Table I, existing empirical surveys primarily fo-
cus on end-to-end models associated with specific downstream
tasks such as time series classification [10, 11, 31, 65], fore-
casting [12, 14], or anomaly detection [1, 2]. However, they
tend to overlook the crucial representation learning process
that precedes these downstream tasks. The models reviewed
in current surveys primarily prioritize the optimization of the
entire end-to-end model, neglecting the in-depth exploration

==== Page 3 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3
of learning meaningful representations. Consequently, there is
a lack of systematic analysis of unsupervised representation
learning methods that prioritize the acquisition of effective
representations, whose efficacy on downstream tasks can be
verified by appending simple classifiers or predictors on top
of frozen representations. In addition, existing related surveys
fail to cover the rapidly evolving self-supervised approaches,
especially contrastive learning techniques. It can be observed
that approximately half of existing surveys primarily focus
on models that employ non-deep fundamental methods as
their core techniques. Among the surveys that do incorporate
deep learning models, the emphasis is mainly on supervised
approaches. In addition, most of them exclusively cover tra-
ditional methods within a completely unsupervised setting,
such as clustering [16, 66] or reconstruction-based meth-
ods [20, 24], thereby overlooking numerous contemporary and
highly effective techniques like self-supervised learning that
have proven to yield superior results in recent years. To fill
this gap, we carry out this extensive review of representation
learning methods for time series from an unsupervised deep
learning perspective.
Our comprehensive literature review encompasses i)the
deep clustering methods, ii)the reconstruction-based meth-
ods, and iii)the self-supervised learning methods particularly
contrastive learning methods. The purpose of this review is
to provide readers with a clear and thorough overview of
cutting-edge research in the field of unsupervised time series
representation learning. In addition, we observe that it is
extremely difficult to conduct fair comparisons to evaluate
existing works due to the rapid evolution and various tax-
onomies of unsupervised learning methods. These evaluations
often differ in components such as augmentation methods,
backbones, and even datasets, making it difficult to draw
meaningful comparisons. Consequently, there is a lack of com-
prehensive benchmark evaluations that can offer researchers
a holistic understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of
existing approaches from various perspectives. We notice that
the previous work [20] conducted an experimental evaluation
of pure discriminative time series classification models, but
excluded representation learning methods. In this work, we
aim to bridge this gap by developing a unified and standardized
library ULTS1to enable quick and convenient evaluations
of unsupervised representation learning approaches for time
series. Furthermore, we conduct empirical evaluations over
state-of-the-art approaches on 9 diverse real-world datasets
within this unified evaluation testbed. Our evaluation serves
as a valuable reference for understanding the strengths and
applicable scenarios of different models, helping researchers
design and evaluate customized models in the future. Overall,
the main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
•We conduct a comprehensive literature review of unsuper-
vised representation learning approaches for time series,
and propose an up-to-date taxonomy that categorizes
different approaches.
•We develop a standardized library ULTS, to conveniently
evaluate various models in a unified testbed, and conduct
1The library ULTS is available at https://github.com/mqwfrog/ULTS.empirical evaluations of state-of-the-art methods, partic-
ularly contrastive ones, on 9 diverse real-world datasets.
•We discuss practical considerations as well as open re-
search challenges on unsupervised learning for time series
and provide new insights to facilitate future research in
this field.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
we introduce the definitions and terminology that are used
throughout this paper, and propose a taxonomy that classifies
existing unsupervised representation learning methods for time
series. Additionally, we introduce a unified and standardized
library ULTS that integrates 17 representative models encom-
passing various categories. Then, we briefly review related
works including deep clustering, reconstruction-based and
self-supervised learning methods in Section III, Section IV,
and Section V respectively. Finally, we conclude this paper
and discuss promising future research directions in Section VI.
II. O VERVIEW
A. Definitions and Terminology
Time series representation learning holds utmost signifi-
cance in time series modeling, as it strives to extract meaning-
ful and informative latent representations within the reservoir
space from the intricate raw complex time series data. The pri-
mary obstacle in time series representation learning lies in the
lack of well-annotated labels, resulting in insufficient super-
visory signals for training supervised models. Consequently,
unsupervised learning approaches are devised to tackle this
challenge by creating various pretext tasks that generate self-
generated labels without relying on human supervision. We
consider a set of Ntime series X={xi}N
i=1, where xi∈
RT×Vdenotes a sequence of time series data collected from
Vvariables within Ttimestamps. When V= 1, it becomes
the univariate time series. In general, we can formulate the
problem as follows: given an original time series xi, unsuper-
vised representation learning aims to learn an encoder fe(·)
that can map xiinto a D-dimensional representation vector zi
in the latent space. A crucial measure to assess the quality and
effectiveness of the acquired representations is their ability to
serve subsequent downstream tasks. Consequently, once the
latent representations are obtained, they are frozen without
further modification, and then can be utilized as input for
downstream tasks such as classification, forecasting, cluster-
ing, and anomaly detection to evaluate their performance. The
unified mathematical notations used throughout this paper are
summarized in Table II.
Notations Descriptions
X The set of original time series data
Z The set of learned representations in the latent space
C The set of cluster centroids (prototypes)
N The number of samples
V The number of variables
T The number of timestamps (the length of time series)
fe(·) The encoder that maps original data Xto representations Z
fd(·) The decoder that uses representations Zto reconstruct original data X
h(·) The nonlinear projection head to remap the representations
fm(·) The momentum encoder
TABLE II
LIST OF MATHEMATICAL NOTATIONS USED THROUGHOUT THIS PAPER .

==== Page 4 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4
Self-supervised Learning MethodsDeep Clustering
Methods
Predictive Methods
TST [104]
CaSS [103]
CPC [56]EEG -SSL [71]
Wave2vec [ 102]Adversarial MethodsSection Ⅲ Section Ⅴ
Section Ⅴ - A Section  Ⅴ - B
TS-TCC [51]Unsupervised Representation Learning Methods for Time Series
Contrastive Methods
Section  Ⅴ - C
Instance-level
Contrast
SimCLR [43]
MoCo [45]
BYOL [44]
CPC [56]
SimSiam [57]Section  Ⅴ - C1
TimeCLR [105]
MCL [106]Prototype-level
Contrast
SwAV [59]
PCL [58]
CCL [64]
CC [81]
MHCCL [60]Section  Ⅴ - C2
SCCL [80]
SLIC [82]Temporal-level
Contrast
TS2Vec [ 52]
TS-TCC [51]
TNC [33]
TCL [61]
T-Loss [50]Section  Ⅴ - C3
BTSF [112]
CoST [113]ODC [29]DEC [78]
IDFD [63]DTCR [77]Deep Cluster [67]
CRLI [76]Reconstruction-
based Methods
Section  Ⅳ
TimeNet [32]
Deco nv [68]
HeartSpace [ 87]
SimMTM [90]MBTGMM [89]
CRT [88]TimeGAN [69]
MAD-GAN [97]
TSGAN [98]
RGAN [96]
DIVERSIFY [101]TimeVAE [70]
Fig. 1. An up-to-date taxonomy of unsupervised representation learning methods for time series, including a) Deep Clustering Methods b) Reconstruction-
based Methods and c) Self-supervised Learning Methods. The self-supervised learning methods can be further divided into adversarial methods, predictive
methods and contrastive methods, depending on different types of pretext tasks employed for acquiring self-supervised signals.
B. A Taxonomy of Unsupervised Representation Learning
Methods for Time Series
As presented in Figure 1, we classify the existing un-
supervised representation learning methods for time series
into 3 categories: deep clustering, reconstruction-based, and
self-supervised learning methods. Deep clustering methods
typically combine traditional clustering techniques with deep
learning neural networks, utilizing clustering results as labels
for representation learning while updating clustering results
based on learned representations. Reconstruction-based meth-
ods usually employ auto-encoders or seq-to-seq models to
reconstruct either partial or the entire raw time series through
joint training with decoders. More recently, self-supervised
learning has gained popularity for extracting meaningful rep-
resentations from unlabeled data as it avoids the need for
manual annotation by designing pretext tasks. We further
categorize self-supervised learning methods into adversarial,
predictive, and contrastive ones, depending on different types
of pretext tasks employed for acquiring self-supervised signals.
Adversarial methods discriminate between fake and real data
by using the discriminator, where the fake data similar to
training data are produced by the generator. Predictive methods
involve predicting future inputs from past inputs, predicting
the original view from some other corrupted views, or predict-
ing masked parts from unmasked parts. Contrastive methods
perform distance discrimination using self-supervised signals
generated from data augmentations. Specifically, contrastive
methods can be subdivided into fine-grained subcategories
according to different levels of contrast, including instance-
level, prototype-level, and temporal-level approaches. Figure 2shows the organization of the research in unsupervised learn-
ing techniques for time series, based on the 3 main categories
outlined in our proposed up-to-date taxonomy.
Adversarial Methods
Contrastive Methods
Predictive MethodsInstance-level
 Contrast
Temporal-level
Contrast TS2Vec [52]
TNC [33]
TCL [61]
T-Loss [50] 
BTSF [112]
CoST [113]SimCL R [43]
TimeCLR [105]
MoCo [45]
BYOL [44]
CPC [56]
SimSiam [57]
MCL [106]SwAV [59]
PCL [58]
CCL  [64]
SCCL  [80]
CC [81]
SLIC [82]
MHCCL  [60]DeepCluster [67]
CRLI [76]
DTCR [77]
DEC [78]
ODC [29]
IDFD [63]Deep Clustering
Methods
TST [104]
EEG-SSL [71]
Wave2vec [102]
CaSS [103]Self-supervised Learning MethodsReconstruction-based
MethodsTimeNet [32]
Deconv [68]
HeartSpace [87]
MBTGM M [89]
SimM TM [90]
CRT [88]TimeGAN [69]
MAD-GAN [97]
TSGAN [98]
RGAN [96]
TimeVAE [70]
DIVERSIFY [101]
Prototype-level
Contrast
CPC [56]
TS-TCC [51]
Fig. 2. The organization of the research in unsupervised learning techniques
for time series, based on 3 main categories outlined in our proposed taxonomy.
C. The ULTS Library
We have developed ULTS, a unified and standardized library
under the PyTorch framework, to facilitate comparisons of
existing models for unsupervised time series representation
learning. ULTS integrates 17 state-of-the-art models, providing
a unified testbed environment for evaluation. This library
covers 2 deep clustering models, 2 reconstruction-based mod-
els, and 13 self-supervised learning models consisting of 2

==== Page 5 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5
adversarial models, 2 predictive models, and 9 contrastive
models. Table III lists all the models implemented in our
ULTS library. ULTS also offers various flexible options for
data augmentation transformations in both time and frequency
domains. By default, it applies a combination of the weak aug-
mentation ( i.e.,jitter-and-scale) and the strong augmentation
(i.e., permutation-and-jitter), which aligns with the strategy
used in TS-TCC [51]. For more implementation details, please
refer to the ULTS website. The comprehensive empirical
experimental evaluation and analysis conducted by ULTS are
provided in the Supplementary Materials.
1st Category 2nd Category 3rd Category Model
Deep Clustering- - DeepCluster [67]
IDFD [63]
Reconstruction-based- - TimeNet [32]
Deconv [68]
Self-supervisedAdversarial- TimeGAN [69]
TimeV AE [70]
Predictive- EEG-SSL [71]
TST [104]
ContrastiveInstance-LevelSimCLR [43]
BYOL [44]
CPC [56]
Prototype-LevelSwA V [59]
PCL [58]
MHCCL [60]
Temporal-LevelTS2Vec [52]
TS-TCC [51]
T-Loss [50]
TABLE III
MODELS IMPLEMENTED IN ULTS LIBRARY .
III. D EEPCLUSTERING METHODS
Joint clustering and feature learning approaches have shown
remarkable performance in unsupervised representation learn-
ing [29]. The primary objective is to discover underlying
similar patterns and structures within data without relying on
explicit labels or annotations. Traditional clustering algorithms
such as flat clustering [16, 72], hierarchical clustering [73]
and spectral clustering [74] essentially employ handcrafted
feature extractors to group samples with similar characteris-
tics together. However, these methods often exhibit limited
performance when applied to time series data due to the
complex and high-dimensional structures inherited therein.
Simple distance-based metrics in traditional clustering struggle
to effectively represent these intricate structures. Additionally,
manually extracted features usually lack quality guarantees
and the process is not automated. Deep neural networks have
the ability to learn complex and hierarchical representations
of data, making them well-suited for capturing the intricate
nature of time series data. In this case, the integration of
traditional clustering techniques with deep learning, known
as deep clustering, has garnered significant attention from
researchers. Deep clustering methods break down the barriers
between clustering and representation learning, allowing for
the iterative optimization of the clustering-oriented objective
to learn mappings from the input space to a new latent
space [29, 75]. The iterative optimization approaches such asDeepCluster [67] and ODC [29] enable the neural network
and the clustering algorithm to mutually reinforce each other
through interactive learning, leading to improved performance
and more meaningful representations. CRLI [76], DTCR [77]
and DEC [78] employ auto-encoder architectures as backbones
and jointly optimize the reconstruction loss and clustering loss.
In addition to the widely used K-Means clustering, spectral
clustering is also explored by IDFD [63] to learn clustering-
friendly representations. It is worth noting that clustering
assignments can serve as self-supervised signals, thereby fa-
cilitating the self-learning process. Particularly, state-of-the-art
contrastive learning highlights the importance of the alignment
property that encourages the samples with similar features or
semantic categories to be close in the low-dimensional space,
which is also essential for deep clustering [79]. In this case, re-
cent studies that leverage clustering-based contrastive learning
to acquire highly effective representations with higher-level se-
mantic information have emerged [58, 59, 60, 64, 80, 81, 82],
which will be discussed in Section V-C2. More details of deep
clustering methods for unsupervised representation learning
are listed as follows.
1) DeepCluster [67]: DeepCluster iteratively groups sam-
ples with the standard K-Means clustering algorithm, and uses
the clustering assignments as supervised signals to update the
weights of the network. Initially, the model extracts repre-
sentations through the convolutional network. Subsequently,
similar representations are grouped into the same class through
clustering, and the resulting clustering labels are then utilized
to train the classifier. However, such an iterative approach is
susceptible to the accumulation of errors during the alternating
stages of representation learning and clustering. Consequently,
sub-optimal clustering performance may arise as a result.
2) CRLI [76]: Clustering Representation Learning on In-
complete time series data (CRLI) jointly optimizes the imputa-
tion and clustering process to obtain more discriminant values
for clustering, so that the learned representations possess good
clustering property. In addition to reconstructing the original
input time series, CRLI also encourages the learned represen-
tations to form cluster structures by integrating the standard
soft K-means objective into the encoder-decoder network.
3) DTCR [77]: Deep Temporal Clustering Representation
(DTCR) integrates the temporal reconstruction and K-Means
objective into the seq-to-seq model to generate cluster-specific
temporal representations. To further enhance the capability
of the encoder, DTCR proposes an auxiliary classification
task and a fake-sample generation strategy involving the
random shuffling of certain time steps. The model employs
bidirectional dilated recurrent neural networks as the encoder,
enabling the learned representations to effectively capture the
temporal dynamics and multi-scale characteristics present in
the original time series data.
4) DEC [78]: Deep Embedded Clustering (DEC) achieves
joint optimization by iteratively optimizing a KL divergence-
based clustering objective with a centroid-based probability
distribution. The underlying assumption of DEC is that the
initial classifier’s highly confident predictions are mostly ac-
curate. In contrast to DTCR [77] that directly optimizes the
K-Means process, DEC enhances the clustering performance

==== Page 6 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6
following the initialization in the new feature space with a
stacked auto-encoder(SAE) and standard K-Means.
5) ODC [29]: Online Deep Clustering (ODC) devises
a joint clustering and feature learning paradigm with high
stability by performing clustering and network update si-
multaneously rather than performing them alternatively. To
achieve this, ODC introduces novel techniques including loss
re-weighting according to the number of samples in each class,
and processing small clusters in advance to avoid ODC from
getting stuck into trivial solutions. Loss re-weighting helps
to prevent the formation of huge clusters and eliminates ex-
tremely small clusters in advance. Specifically, the samples and
centroids’ memories are initialized via K-Means clustering,
and then the uninterrupted ODC is performed iteratively.
6) IDFD [63]: Inspired by the properties of classical
spectral clustering, IDFD applies deep representation learning
via instance discrimination to clustering. In addition, IDFD in-
troduces a softmax-formulated feature decorrelation constraint
for learning presentations in the latent space to achieve stable
improvements in clustering performance. The instance dis-
crimination module is used to capture the similarities among
data, while the feature decorrelation module is used to remove
the redundant correlations among features.
IV. R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED METHODS
Compared to deep clustering methods that jointly learn rep-
resentations and clustering assignments, reconstruction-based
methods instead prioritize minimizing the discrepancy between
the reconstructed output and the raw input, effectively training
the network to disregard insignificant data that may contain
noise [83, 84, 85]. Reconstruction-based methods generally
adopt utilize an encoder-decoder architecture to reconstruct
the original input data from a modified or incomplete version
of the input data. They learn meaningful representations by
emphasizing the salient features and filtering out irrelevant
or noisy information in the data [86]. Approaches such as
TimeNet [32] and Deconv [68] reconstruct the whole time
series in a reverse order to cater to the characteristics of time
series data. Particularly, HeartSpace [87] segments the heart
rate data into day-long time series because human behavior
presents day-long regularities. In addition, CRT [88] and
MBTGMM [89] are able to capture long-term dependencies
by utilizing transformer encoders compared to those that use
convolutional neural networks [68, 87]. Unlike methods such
as SimMTM [90] that mask certain segments of time series
data for construction, CRT [88] drops segments instead, pre-
serving the original pattern and minimizing noise introduced
during representation learning. The effectiveness of learned
representations is evaluated by how accurately the decoder
can regenerate the input data. Such evaluation ensures that
the model captures and encodes crucial information from the
input while maintaining the capacity to reconstruct it faithfully.
Consequently, reconstruction can also be utilized as a pretext
task into self-supervised learning since the generalization per-
formance of pre-trained representations in downstream tasks
can be further enhanced by reconstructing richer contextual in-
formation [91]. Below are additional details of reconstruction-
based methods used for unsupervised representation learning.1) TimeNet [32]: TimeNet tackles the challenges associated
with time series data, including the varying lengths and
the data scarcity. To reconstruct the time series, TimeNet
employs a sequence auto-encoder (SAE) network based on
the sequence-to-sequence model to transform the original time
series of varying lengths into fixed-dimensional representa-
tions. The encoder RNN serves as a pre-trained model while
the decoder RNN operates in reverse order, aligning with the
inherent temporal nature of time series data. They are trained
jointly to minimize the reconstruction error on time series.
2) Deconv [68]: Deconv utilizes deconvolutional networks
that employ inverse operations of convolution and pooling to
reconstruct time series data. This reverse procedure of con-
volution enables the reconstruction of hidden representations
within the network. The output of traditional unpooling layers
is usually an enlarged but sparse activation map, which may
lead to a loss of expressiveness in complex features required
for accurate reconstruction. To address this, Deconv combines
unpooling and deconvolution techniques to effectively capture
the cross-channel correlations with convolutions. By doing so,
it forces the pooling operation to perform dimension reduction
along each position of the individual channel, enabling more
robust reconstructions of the time series data.
3) HeartSpace [87]: HeartSpace designs a deep auto-
encoder module to reconstruct the day-specific time series to
latent representations, and optimizes parameters through the
Siamese-triplet network optimization strategy. The optimiza-
tion is based on the reconstruction loss and Siamese-triple
loss, where the Siamese-triple loss is constructed by sampling
the intra-series and the inter-series. To mitigate the side effect
caused by zero padding, HeartSpace introduces a dual-stage
gating mechanism into the convolutional auto-encoder module
to re-weight the hidden units. The channel-wise and temporal-
wise gating mechanisms focus on capturing dependencies in
the channel dimension and temporal dimension, respectively.
4) MBTGMM [89]: MBTGMM focuses on learning repre-
sentations of time series and detecting anomalies based on the
reconstruction error, where the anomalies are associated with
high reconstruction errors. MBTGMM utilizes a multi-branch
transformer-based model, which is designed to capture both
short-term and long-term temporal dependencies in the time
series while learning the context-aware representations. The
learned representations are then fed into a Gaussian mixture
model to estimate the density of learned normal representa-
tions. By identifying low-density regions, MBTGMM is able
to effectively detect anomalies in the raw time series data.
5) SimMTM [90]: SimMTM offers an effective approach
for recovering masked time points by leveraging the weighted
aggregation of neighbors outside the manifold. Directly mask-
ing a portion of time points can severely disrupt the temporal
variations present in the original time series. Such disruption
poses significant challenges for guiding representation learning
of time series during reconstruction. SimMTM facilitates the
reconstruction by assembling the ruined but complementary
temporal variations from multiple masked series. In addition
to the reconstruction loss, SimMTM incorporates a constraint
loss to guide the series-wise representation learning based on
the neighborhood assumption of the time series manifold.

==== Page 7 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7
6) CRT [88]: Motivated by observations that dropping is
better than masking, adding phase aids in frequency learning,
and cross-domain learning is more effective than single-
domain learning, CRT utilizes the cross-domain dropping-
reconstruction task to facilitate effective representation learn-
ing. CRT slices the input into patches and randomly drops
some sliced patches, where the remaining patches are projected
as 3 types (time, magnitude, or phase) of embeddings using a
transformer encoder. Then, CRT uses a transformer decoder to
reconstruct original data from the 3 types of data separately,
enabling the model to receive segments of real data without
corrupted zeros portions. This helps maximally preserve the
global context and capture the intrinsic long-term dependen-
cies.
V. S ELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING METHODS
In past years, supervised learning has achieved success in
directly learning semantic information from a vast number
of labeled samples. However, it requires a large amount
of annotated training data and is often tailored to specific
tasks, making the trained models less transferable. To address
these challenges, self-supervised learning has emerged as a
promising technique in representation learning. It eliminates
the need for expensive manual labeling by designing diverse
pretext tasks that automatically generate useful supervised
signals from the original data. In this section, we classify
self-supervised learning methods into 3 categories: adversarial
methods, predictive methods and contrastive methods. These
categories reflect different types of pretext tasks employed in
different methods to generate self-supervised signals. Adver-
sarial methods learn representations by distinguishing between
the generated fake data and the real data. Predictive methods
focus on learning representations by predicting missing or
transformed parts of the original input. Contrastive methods
instead focus on learning discriminative representations by
emphasizing similarities and differences between samples.
A. Adversarial Methods
Adversarial methods treat distinguishing real data from fake
data as a pretext task to learn robust representations for
time series [92]. In previous studies, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) demonstrate their ability on augmenting
smaller time series datasets by generating previously unseen
data [93]. The explicit reconstruction cost minimized by GANs
tends to emphasize the higher-level semantic details in learned
representations [94]. Conventional GAN-based methods facili-
tate the acquisition of representations by leveraging backprop-
agation signals through a competitive process that involves
two parameterized feed-forward neural networks, namely, a
generator and a discriminator [95]. These methods usually
create a two-player mini-max game, where the generator tries
to improve its ability to deceive the discriminator, and the
discriminator tries to become more adept at distinguishing
real from fake data [92]. By iteratively training the generator
and discriminator in an adversarial manner, such methods
encourage the generator to learn representations that effec-
tively capture important characteristics of the underlying datadistribution. Adversarial methods differ from reconstruction-
based methods in that they consider not only reconstruction
errors from the generator but also prediction errors from
the discriminator. This joint optimization process encourages
the generator to generate more realistic samples while the
discriminator becomes more proficient at detecting generated
samples. In addition to conventional GANs, variants of GANs
can be designed, such as incorporating RNNs [96] or au-
toregressive models [69] to capture temporal dependencies.
Furthermore, unlike studies [69, 96, 97, 98] that utilize GANs
to generate synthetic time series data, TimeV AE [70] instead
employs variational auto-encoders to facilitate data generation.
According to [70], the standard approach of discriminating
real data versus synthetic data is insufficient to capture tem-
poral dependencies. Hence, TimeV AE [70] injects temporal
structures within the decoder to ensure that the synthetic data
exhibit desired temporal patterns. Further details about the
aforementioned adversarial methods are provided as follows.
1) TimeGAN [69]: TimeGAN merges the advantages of
the GAN framework’s versatility with the control afforded by
training in autoregressive models. It achieves this by integrat-
ing a learned embedding space that is jointly optimized using
both supervised and adversarial objectives. This approach
enables the adversarial network to capture and replicate the
temporal dynamics present in the training data during the
sampling process. The embedding network plays a crucial
role by establishing a reversible mapping between the features
and latent representations, thereby effectively reducing the
dimensionality of the adversarial learning space.
2) MAD-GAN [97]: MAD-GAN performs multivariate
anomaly detection with GAN to identify whether the testing
data conform to the normal data distributions. MAD-GAN
leverages a generator and discriminator trained by the GAN
framework to capture the intricate multivariate correlations
contained in time series data. The GAN-trained generator
produces fake time series by taking sequences from a random
latent space as input, while the GAN-trained discriminator
learns to detect fake data from real data in an unsupervised
manner. To optimize the model, MAD-GAN designs a com-
bined anomaly score called DR-score, which incorporates both
discrimination and reconstruction aspects. This allows for the
effective detection of anomalies within the time series data.
3) TSGAN [98]: Time Series GAN (TSGAN) is designed
to address the challenges of generating realistic time series
data, particularly in domains where data acquisition is difficult
or limited. TSGAN utilizes 2 GANs, one regular and one
conditional, to model and generate synthetic time series ex-
amples. The architecture leverages the concepts of Wasserstein
GANs (WGANs) [99] and conditional GANs (CGANs) [100]
to improve the quality and relevance of the generated data.
TSGAN has shown promising results in generating realistic
1D signals across various data types, such as sensor, medical,
simulated, and motion data. It also demonstrates superior
performance in real applications, such as creating classifiers
based on synthetic data.
4) RGAN [96]: Recurrent GAN (RGAN) generates real-
valued multi-dimensional time series with improved realism
and coherence. RGAN works by utilizing recurrent neural

==== Page 8 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8
networks (RNNs) in both the generator and discriminator
components of the GAN framework. By incorporating RNNs,
RGAN can capture temporal dependencies and generate se-
quences that exhibit realistic patterns and dynamics. This
approach is particularly valuable for generating realistic med-
ical time series data, where capturing temporal relationships
is crucial for accurate modeling and analysis. The use of
RNNs in both the generator and discriminator sets RGAN
apart from traditional GAN architectures and contributes to
its effectiveness in generating realistic time series data.
5) TimeVAE [70]: TimeV AE utilizes a decoder that allows
for the incorporation of user-defined distributions, enabling
flexibility in the generated data. TimeV AE is trained by using
the evidence lower bound loss function. A weight is used
on the reconstruction error, allowing for the adjustment of
emphasis placed on the reconstruction loss compared to the
KL-Divergence loss between the encoded latent space distri-
bution and the prior. In addition, TimeV AE injects temporal
structures including level, trend, and seasonal components into
the data generation process within the decoder to enhance the
interpretability of the modeled data generation process.
6) DIVERSIFY [101]: DIVERSIFY employs an adversarial
game strategy to simultaneously maximize the ’worst-case’
distribution scenario while minimizing distribution divergence.
Specifically, it learns to segment time series data into distinct
latent sub-domains, aiming to maximize the distribution gap
at the segment level to preserve diversities. Simultaneously,
it also focuses on reducing distribution divergence between
these obtained latent domains to achieve domain-invariant
representations. This approach leverages the inherent presence
of diverse latent distributions in time series data, such as
distinct activity patterns exhibited by multiple individuals.
B. Predictive Methods
Predictive methods learn meaningful representations that
capture the underlying shared information between different
parts of time series data by maximizing the mutual information
derived from related slices of original time series or diverse
views generated by data augmentations. The size of mutual
information indicates the strength of dependencies between re-
lated slices or augmented views. Compared to reconstruction-
based methods, predictive methods help eliminate the need to
reconstruct the complete input and learn representations by
predicting future, missing or contextual information. Hence,
they usually utilize context prediction or cross-view predic-
tion as the pretext task to predict partial data based on
limited views. The key insight of predictive methods is to
learn representations by predicting future or mixed values of
partial time series [56, 102, 103], predicting whether time
windows are sampled from the same temporal context or
not [71, 104], or predicting the cross-view representations of
original samples [51]. Such mechanism can be served as a
pretext task for contrastive learning as well, and methods such
as CPC [56] and TS-TCC [51] combine predictive coding
and noise-contrastive estimation to induce the latent space to
capture information that is maximally useful for prediction.
Further elaboration about CPC [56] and TS-TCC [51] will beintroduced in Section V-C. Below are the additional details
of the remaining predictive methods used for unsupervised
representation learning.
1) TST [104]: TST employs a transformer encoder to
extract dense representations of time series. This is achieved
through an input denoising objective, where the model is
trained to reconstruct the entire input under noise corruption,
typically using Gaussian noise. Unlike methods that rely on
additional unlabeled samples, TST maximizes the utilization
of existing samples for representation learning by employing
an unsupervised autoregressive objective. TST encourages the
model to attend to both preceding and succeeding segments
within individual variables, as well as the contemporary values
of the other variables within time series, enabling the model
to capture complex relationships across different dimensions.
2) EEG-SSL [71]: EEG-SSL focuses on predicting whether
time windows are sampled from the same temporal context
or not. EEG-SSL aims to learn informative representations
from EEG time series data by employing 2 kinds of temporal-
based pretext tasks: relative positioning and temporal shuffling.
In the relative positioning task, EEG-SSL predicts whether 2
time windows in the EEG signals are closer or farther apart in
time. The temporal shuffling task involves predicting whether
the selected time windows are in their original order or have
been shuffled. By training on these pretext tasks, EEG-SSL is
able to capture temporal dependencies and extract meaningful
representations from EEG time series data.
3) Wave2vec [102]: Wave2vec aims to predict the next time
step based on the given signal context. Wave2vec consists
of 2 multi-layer convolutional neural networks: an encoder
network that converts raw audio signals into a latent space,
and a context network that combines multiple time-steps of the
encoder’s output to obtain contextualized representations. The
pre-training approach allows Wave2vec to learn meaningful
audio representations that can capture the temporal dependen-
cies and facilitate the downstream audio processing tasks.
4) CaSS [103]: Prior research primarily emphasizes the
pretext task and tends to overlook the intricate issue of
encoding time series data, which often yields unsatisfactory
outcomes. In contrast, CaSS comprehensively addresses this
challenge from 2 aspects: encoder and pretext task. CaSS
introduces a channel-aware transformer architecture, which is
specifically designed to capture the intricate relationships be-
tween different time channels within time series. Furthermore,
CaSS integrates 2 innovative pretext tasks, namely next trend
prediction and contextual similarity, to further enhance the
encoding process.
C. Contrastive Methods
Contrastive methods learn meaningful representations from
time series by optimizing self-discrimination tasks. Instead of
directly modeling the complex raw data, they employ pretext
tasks that leverage the underlying similarity between samples,
which eliminates the need for reconstructing the complete
input and allows for the discovery of contextualized underly-
ing factors of variations [107]. Contrastive methods typically
generate augmented views of the raw data through various

==== Page 9 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9
Models Main Contributions Backbones DA Datasets Evaluations Metrics
SimCLR [43] SimCLR advocates for a learnable nonlinear transforma-
tion bridging the representation and the contrastive loss
to enhance the quality of learned representations, and
highlights the significance of larger batch sizes, more
training steps, and the composition of data augmentations.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
CIFAR-10Classification,
TransferabilityACC
TimeCLR [105] TimeCLR extends SimCLR to the time series domain,
amalgamating the benefits of dynamic time warping data
augmentation tailored for univariate time series, and the
potent feature extraction capability of InceptionTime, thus
facilitating the acquisition of representations.InceptionTime ✓ Hand Atlas Classification ACC,
F1
MoCo [45] MoCo maintains a dynamic queue to enrich the set of
negative samples, and proposes a slowly progressing key
encoder, implemented as a momentum-based moving av-
erage of the query encoder, to preserve the consistency of
key representations.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
CIFAR-10Classification,
TransferabilityACC
BYOL [44] BYOL removes the need of using negative samples, and
employs a predictor on top of the online network to learn
the mapping from the online encoder to the target encoder,
which helps prevent mode collapse.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
CIFAR,
SUN397,
VOC07, DTDClassification,
TransferabilityACC
CPC [56] CPC extracts compact latent representations to encode
predictions over the future observations by combining
autoregressive modeling and noise-contrastive estimation
with intuitions from predictive coding.ResNet, GRU LibriSpeech,
ImageNet,
BookCorpusClassification ACC
SimSiam [57] Simsiam learns representations by using Siamese archi-
tectures without negative sample pairs, large batches and
momentum encoders. SimSiam tackles the mode collapse
problem by using the stop-gradient mechanism.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
VOC07, COCOClassification,
TransferabilityACC
MCL [106] MCL learns representations through the injection of noise.
Inspired by label smoothing, MCL adopts mixup that
creates new samples by convex combinations of training
examples, and predicts the strength of the mixing compo-
nent based on 2 data points and the augmented sample.FCN ✓ UCR Datasets,
UEA DatasetsClassification,
TransferabilityACC
TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF INSTANCE -LEVEL CONTRASTIVE METHODS FOR TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING . DA INDICATES WHETHER THE MODEL
UTILIZES DATA AUGMENTATIONS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , F1 REFERS TO F1SCORE .
transformations and then learn representations by contrasting
positive samples against negative samples [108]. Exploring
negative samples in a completely unsupervised manner can
be challenging for contrastive learning, as it often encounters
hard negative samples with features that are highly similar to
anchors but have different labels. To address this, researchers
have explored various techniques to introduce more negatives,
such as increasing the batch size [43] or exploiting external
data structures [45, 58]. There are also studies that remove
the need of using negative samples and instead use other
strategies such as utilizing a predictor [44], a stop-gradient op-
eration [57], or clustering [59] to learn the mapping. Within the
realm of computer vision, contrastive methods are commonly
categorized into instance-level and prototype-level methods,
with each approach focusing on different levels of contrast.
Additionally, there are specific methods tailored for time series
data, which consider the temporal-level contrast. We analyze
the similarities and differences between these representative
contrastive models in terms of their main contributions, back-
bone architectures, data augmentations (DA), datasets, evalua-
tion strategies, and performance metrics. Contrastive learning
enables the discovery of informative representations in timeseries data without relying on explicit reconstruction tasks.
This analysis provides insights into the key characteristics and
approaches of representative contrastive models in the field
of representation learning for time series data. The concise
overview of instance-level, prototype-level, and temporal-level
methods can be found in Table IV, Table V, and Table VI,
respectively. The following sections provide more in-depth
details about these methods.
1) Instance-level Contrastive Learning Models: Instance-
level contrastive learning models treat individual samples
independently for the purpose of instance discrimination. They
utilize data augmentations to transform original inputs into
a new embedding space. Within this space, augmentations
derived from the same sample are considered as positive pairs,
while those from different samples are treated as negative
pairs. During training, these models are optimized by maxi-
mizing the similarity between representations of positive pairs,
while simultaneously minimizing the similarity between repre-
sentations of negative pairs. Instance-level contrastive methods
achieve significant performance improvement by setting larger
batch size [43], using stronger augmentations [105, 106],
or introducing an additional storage space to store more

==== Page 10 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10
contrastive candidates [45, 109]. However, these methods can
be memory-intensive, and ensuring the consistency of repre-
sentations is challenging when randomly extracting negative
samples from an additional storage space. Recent advance-
ments in non-contrastive learning, which eliminate the need for
negative samples, have exhibited promising outcomes [110].
BYOL [44] and SimSiam [57] serve as exemplars, achieving
remarkable results without the reliance on negative samples.
These methods leverage an additional learnable predictor
and employ a stop-gradient operation to prevent collapsing,
contributing to their successful performance [111]. Table IV
provides a succinct summary of instance-level contrastive
methods for time series representation learning. Further elab-
oration concerning these methods are explicated below.
a) SimCLR [43]: SimCLR greatly improves the quality
of representation learning by introducing a learnable nonlinear
projection between the representation and the contrastive loss.
Since the representation obtained from the encoder retains
information related to data augmentations, the role of the
nonlinear layer is to remove such information and allow repre-
sentations to reflect the essence of data. This aids in preventing
similarity-based losses from discarding crucial features during
training. SimCLR randomly draws a minibatch of Nsamples
and generates 2Naugmented views by applying geometric
and appearance transformations sequentially from the same
minibatch. Among these augmented views, a positive pair is
formed by selecting 2views derived from the same original
sample. The remaining 2(N−1)augmented views within the
minibatch are treated as negative ones. Such a sampling strat-
egy has been widely adopted in various contrastive models.
b) TimeCLR [105]: Direct applying SimCLR to the time
series field usually performs poorly due to data augmentation
and the feature extractor not being adapted to the temporal
dependencies within the time series data. TimeCLR adopts
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) data augmentation not only
generates DTW-targeted phase shifts and amplitude changes,
but also retains the structure and feature information of
the time series. In addition, TimeCLR adopts InceptionTime
which has good feature extraction capabilities as the feature
extractor, to convert the time series into the corresponding
representations in an end-to-end manner.
c) MoCo [45]: MoCo leverages a moving-averaged mo-
mentum encoder and maintains a dynamic queue to enhance
negative sampling in contrastive learning. The dynamic queue
stores a diverse set of samples, enabling the decoupling of
dictionary size from the minibatch size and facilitating the
contrastive learning process. In each minibatch, MoCo treats
the encoded queries and their corresponding keys as positive
sample pairs, while the negative samples are selected from the
remaining samples in the dynamic queue. This approach helps
enhance the quality and diversity of the contrastive learning
process in MoCo.
d) BYOL [44]: BYOL utilizes a pair of neural networks
to perform training, namely the online network and the target
network. The online network is trained to predict the represen-
tation of the target network, and the target network is updated
with a slow-moving average of the online network. BYOL
exclusively treats 2 different augmented views of the samesample as the positive pair and learns representations without
explicitly using negative pairs, which provides new insight into
negative sampling in contrastive learning. Then, the augmen-
tations of the same sample are fed into both the online and
target networks, which interact and mutually learn from one
another. BYOL directly bootstraps the representations, which
makes it more robust to the choice of augmentations.
e) CPC [56]: Contrastive Predictive Coding (CPC) en-
codes the underlying shared information between different
parts of the original high-dimensional signal, while discarding
low-level information and noise that is more local. The com-
bination of predictive coding and a probabilistic contrastive
loss enables CPC to extract slow features that maximize
the mutual information between the encoded representations
that span many time steps. CPC utilizes an encoder and an
autoregressive model to reduce the dimensionality of the high-
dimensional signal, and then uses noise-contrastive estima-
tion to predict future representations. The encoder maps the
input high-dimensional signal to a latent vector in a lower-
dimensional space, and the autoregressive model aggregates
the latent vectors from previous and current time steps.
f) SimSiam [57]: Simsiam explores the use of Siamese
architectures in representation learning and adopts the stop-
gradient operation to prevent collapsing, while getting rid of
negative samples, large batches and momentum encoders. The
learning mechanism of SimSiam is similar to the Expectation-
Maximization (EM) algorithm to estimate the expected value
after data augmentation. Siamese networks are chosen as the
backbone due to their ability to incorporate inductive biases for
modeling invariance, which aids in capturing essential features
during representation learning.
g) MCL [106]: The inherent invariances within time
series data are often unknown beforehand, and incautious
application can lead to representations where dissimilar sam-
ples are embedded in close proximity. MCL exploits a data
augmentation scheme in which new samples are generated
by mixing 2 data samples with a mixing component. The
pretext task motivated through label smoothing is to predict
the strength of the mixing component based on the 2 data
points and the augmented sample. In addition, MCL is tasked
with predicting the mixing factor instead of hard decisions to
tackle the problem of overconfidence in neural networks.
2) Prototype-level Contrastive Learning Models: To ad-
dress the limitation that instance-level contrastive learning
models tend to treat semantically similar samples as nega-
tives, prototype-level contrastive learning models break the
independence between samples, and explore to exploit the
implicit semantics shared by samples within the same cluster.
By incorporating the additional prior information brought by
clustering, the learned representations are expected to preserve
more higher-level semantic information [60]. Prototype-level
contrastive learning models consider groups of similar samples
as clusters and pull the representations of samples from
different augmented views but belonging to the same class
(with similar semantics) together in the embedding space
during contrastive learning. For instance, CC [81], SwA V [59]
and PCL [58] are such methods that perform clustering-based
discrimination between groups of similar samples. However,

==== Page 11 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11
Models Main Contributions Backbones DA Datasets Evaluations Metrics
SwA V [59] SwA V optimizes the learned representations by developing
a swapped prediction mechanism to simultaneously perform
scalable online clustering while enforcing the consistency
between cluster assignments produced for different aug-
mented views of the same sample.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
VOC07, COCOClassification,
TransferabilityACC
PCL [58] PCL formulates prototypical contrastive learning as an
Expectation-Maximization algorithm to perform clustering
and representation learning iteratively. The E-step aims to
find the distribution of prototypes via clustering and the M-
step aims to optimize the network via contrastive learning.ResNet ✓ ImageNet,
VOC07,
Places205,
COCOClassification,
Clustering,
Object DetectionACC,
AMI
CCL [64] CCL refines the learned representations acquired through
deep convolutional neural networks by discovering dataset
clusters with high purity and typically few samples per clus-
ter, and leverage these cluster assignments as the potentially
noisy supervision.CNN ✓ BBT-0101, BF-
0502, ACCIOClassification,
ClusteringACC,
Precision,
Recall,
F1
SCCL [80] SCCL leverages contrastive learning for short text cluster-
ing to promote better separated and less dispersed clusters.
It effectively combines the top-down clustering with the
bottom-up instance-wise contrastive learning to achieve
better inter-cluster distance and intra-cluster distance.DistilBERT ✓ AgNews, Tweet,
SearchSnippets,
StackOverflow,
Biomedical,
GooglenewsClustering ACC,
NMI
CC [81] CC seamlessly integrates deep clustering and representation
learning by revealing that the row and column of the feature
matrix intrinsically correspond to the instance and cluster
representation when projecting instances into a subspace
whose dimensionality is equal to the cluster number.ResNet ✓ CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100,
STL-10,
ImageNet-10Classification,
ClusteringACC,
NMI,
ARI
SLIC [82] SLIC combines iterative clustering with multi-view en-
coding and temporal discrimination to learn view-invariant
video representations and fine-grained motion features. The
clustering assignments are used to guide the sampling of
positive and negative pairs for updating representations.CNN ✓ UCF101,
HMDB51,
Kinetics400Classification,
Video RetrievalRecall
MHCCL [60] MHCCL incorporates the implicit semantic information ob-
tained from hierarchical clustering to guide the construction
of contrastive pairs. MHCCL exploits downward masking
to filter out fake negatives and supplement positives, while
also employing upward masking to refine prototypes.ResNet ✓ HAR, WISDM,
SHAR, Epilepsy,
UEA DatasetsClassification ACC,
MF1, κ
TABLE V
SUMMARY OF PROTOTYPE -LEVEL CONTRASTIVE METHODS FOR TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING . DA INDICATES WHETHER THE MODEL
UTILIZES DATA AUGMENTATIONS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , AMI REFERS TO ADJUSTED MUTUAL INFORMATION , NMI REFERS TO NORMALIZED
MUTUAL INFORMATION , F1 REFERS TO F1SCORE , ARI REFERS TO ADJUSTED RAND INDEX , MF1 REFERS TO MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE ,ANDκ
REFERS TO COHEN ’S KAPPA COEFFICIENT .
these methods require prior knowledge to pre-specify the
number of clusters, which is non-trivial for the unlabeled
time series data. What’s worse, the flat clustering algorithms
they adopt can only capture a single hierarchy of semantics,
which is insufficient to reflect the ground-truth data distri-
butions. Recently, methods such as CCL [64], SLIC [82]
and MHCCL [60] have merged to incorporate hierarchical
clustering into contrastive learning. By exploring the hierar-
chical structures, these methods are able to capture diverse
granularities of semantics in time series data. The differences
among the varying prototype-level contrastive learning models
lie in the selection of cluster centroids, clustering methods, and
cluster-level sampling strategies. Table V provides a succinct
summary of prototype-level contrastive methods for time series
representation learning. Further elaboration on these methods
is explicated below.
a) SwAV [59]: SwA V enhances representation learning
in a distinctive manner by leveraging cluster assignmentsand a swapped prediction mechanism to perform contrasting.
SwA V assigns samples to different clusters rather than directly
contrasting samples, where the cluster assignments are used to
construct the implied contrastive pairs. Instead of approximat-
ing each sample into a hard assignment, the soft assignment is
produced by the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm. Then, the implied
positive pair is formed by the one augmented view and the
cluster assignment of the other view, and the remaining pairs
are treated as implied negative pairs. The swapped prediction
mechanism involves predicting the cluster assignment of one
augmented view from the other augmented view.
b) PCL [58]: PCL formulates the prototypical con-
trastive learning framework as an Expectation-Maximization
(EM) algorithm. The framework consists of 2 iterative steps:
the E-step and the M-step. In the E-step, PCL performs
clustering to find the distribution of prototypes. In the M-
step, the network is optimized through contrastive learning.
The total loss is composed of a standard InfoNCE loss for

==== Page 12 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12
instance-level contrast and a ProtoNCE loss for prototype-
level contrast. The instance-level sampling follows the same
strategy as MoCo [45]. For prototype-level contrast, each
sample forms a positive pair with its corresponding prototype,
which represents the centroid of the cluster it belongs to. The
remaining prototypes are considered negative ones.
c) CCL [64]: Clustering-based Contrastive Learning
(CCL) learns cluster-based representations without relying on
prior knowledge of the number of clusters. It automatically
obtains labels from natural groupings using hierarchical clus-
tering that does not require any hyper-parameters. To construct
positive and negative pairs, CCL leverages clusters with high
purity and a few samples at early hierarchical partitions. For
each data point within a cluster, CCL randomly samples from
the same or nearest cluster to create one positive pair, while
using samples from the farthest clusters to create 2 negative
pairs. This approach ensures that the generated pairs capture
both intra-cluster similarities and inter-cluster differences.
d) SCCL [80]: SCCL focuses on short text data and
develops a joint model that leverages the beneficial properties
of instance-wise contrastive learning to improve unsupervised
clustering. This is implemented by jointly optimizing a top-
down clustering loss over the original data samples and a
bottom-up instance-wise contrastive loss over the associated
augmented pairs. The Student’s t-distribution is utilized to
compute the probability of assigning each sample to different
clusters. The instance-wise contrastive learning focuses on
distance discrimination, while unsupervised clustering focuses
on clustering-based discrimination between groups of samples
with higher-level semantic concepts.
e) CC [81]: Contrastive Clustering (CC) regards rows
of the feature matrix projected from augmentations as soft
labels of samples, while treating columns as prototype-level
representations distributed over the dataset. This is motivated
by the observation of “label as representation” when the di-
mensionality of representations during projection matches the
number of clusters. CC simultaneously learns discriminative
representations and performs online clustering in an end-to-
end manner. It adopts a dual contrastive learning strategy that
operates at both the instance level and cluster level to extract
informative representations.
f) SLIC [82]: SLIC is an iterative clustering-based con-
trastive learning framework to learn feature representations
from human action videos. SLIC integrates iterative clustering
with multi-view encoding and a temporal discrimination loss
to sample harder positives and negatives during pre-training.
The encoder is optimized by incorporating a temporal dis-
crimination loss and an instance-based triplet loss. To be
specific, SLIC alternates between periodically clustering video
representations to produce cluster assignments, which are used
to inform the sampling of positive and negative pairs to update
the video representations, by minimizing a triplet margin loss.
g) MHCCL [60]: MHCCL incorporates implicit hierar-
chical semantic information obtained by hierarchical clustering
into contrastive learning. This is inspired by the observation
of the multi-granularity of clustering. The novel bidirectional
masking strategies are employed to guide the selection of posi-
tive and negative pairs for multi-level contrast. Specifically, up-ward masking helps remove outliers while refining prototypes
to accelerate the hierarchical clustering process and enhance
the quality of clustering. Meanwhile, downward masking helps
supplement latent positives and filter out fake negatives for
effective contrastive learning. In this way, MHCCL enables
the extraction of informative representations that capture both
fine-grained and high-level semantic information.
3) Temporal-level Contrastive Learning Models: Although
contrastive learning methods have demonstrated remarkable
success in the field of computer vision, their application
to time series data often ignores the intricate characteristics
that are inherent to such data. Acknowledging this limitation,
researchers have recently turned their attention towards investi-
gating the influence of timestamps, and have begun developing
specifically tailored strategies to address the challenge posed
by time series data. Instance-level contrastive learning models
are able to learn general representations that capture the overall
characteristics of the entire time series. These representations
provide a holistic view of data and can be useful for tasks that
require a global understanding of the sequence. Temporal-level
contrastive learning models instead focus on capturing scale-
invariant representations at each individual timestamp. By con-
sidering both instance-level and temporal-level representation
learning strategies, researchers aim to enhance the capability
of contrastive learning methods in capturing the complexities
inherent in time series data. Existing temporal-level contrastive
learning models either consider the temporal dependencies
by leveraging temporal contrasting modules [33, 50, 51], or
focus on capturing multi-scale contextual information across
different granularities [52, 61, 112, 113]. Approaches such
as T-Loss [50] and TNC [33] utilize the information from
the neighborhood to construct positive and negative samples
for contrastive learning. TS-TCC [51] instead designs time-
series-specific augmented views for pair constructions and
performs cross-view temporal contrasting to learn represen-
tations. There also exist methods that explicitly emphasize
the timestamp-level [52] or segment-level [61, 112, 113]
representations in addition to the entire time-series level.
These models are designed to capture fine-grained temporal
patterns and variations, enabling them to extract more detailed
and localized information from time series. However, they
may ignore the higher-level semantic information which is
involved in the entire set of time series. Incorporating potential
semantic information such as class labels can help eliminate
fake negative samples of the same class, thereby reducing
noise in contrastive learning. Table VI provides a succinct
summary of temporal-level contrastive methods for time series
representation learning. Further elaboration on these methods
is explicated below.
a) TS2Vec [52]: TS2Vec utilizes multi-scale contextual
information with granularities to distinguish samples. It en-
ables the learning of timestamp-level representations, while
also supporting instance-level representations of the entire time
series by applying max pooling strategy across timestamps.
TS2Vec eliminates the need of the input projection layer so
that masks can be directly applied to raw input by setting
masked timestamps to zeros. Through the masking of latent
vectors rather than the raw values, the model acquires the

==== Page 13 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13
Models Main Contributions Backbones DA Datasets Evaluations Metrics
TS2Vec [52] TS2Vec utilizes multi-scale contextual information at both
timestamp-level and instance-level to distinguish positive
and negative samples, thereby improving the generaliza-
tion capability of the representation model and effectively
handling time series data with missing values.Dilated CNN ✓ UEA Datasets,
ETT Datasets,
ElectricityClassification,
ForecastingACC,
MSE,
MAE
TS-TCC [51] TS-TCC constructs simple yet efficient time-series-specific
augmented views to perform temporal and contextual con-
trasting, and designs a tough cross-view prediction task to
learn the robust and discriminative representations.CNN, Trans-
former✓ HAR, Sleep-EDF,
Epilepsy, FDClassification,
TransferabilityACC, MF1
TNC [33] TNC learns the underlying dynamics of non-stationary
signals and models the progression over time by defining
a temporal neighborhood. It incorporates concepts from
Positive-Unlabeled learning to account for potential bias
introduced in sampling negative examples for contrastive
loss.Bidirectional
RNNSimulation, ECG
Waveform, HARClassification,
ClusteringACC,
AUPRC,
Silhouette
Score, DBI
TCL [61] TCL learns representations for time series that allow
optimal discrimination of different time segments based on
the temporal non-stationary structure captured by nonlinear
independent component analysis.Nonlinear
ICAMEG Classification ACC
T-Loss [50] T-Loss learns scalable representations by taking highly
variable lengths and sparse labeling properties of time
series data into account. It employs an efficient triplet loss
with time-based negative sampling to differentiate anchors
from negatives, and assimilate anchors with positives.Causal CNN UEA Datasets,
UCI Datasets,
UCR DatasetsClassification,
TransferabilityACC
BTSF [112] BTSF applies dropout to generate diverse views for repre-
sentation learning, and devises iterative bilinear temporal-
spectral fusion to explicitly model pairwise cross-domain
dependencies for discriminating and enriching representa-
tions in a fusion-and-squeeze manner.Causal CNN ✓ HAR, Sleep-EDF,
ECG Waveform,
ETT Datasets,
Weather, SAaT,
WADI, SMD,
SMAP, MSLClassification,
Forecasting,
Anomaly
DetectionACC,
AUPRC,
MSE,
MAE, F1
CoST [113] CoST simulates interventions on the error variable via data
augmentation and exploits prior knowledge to learn time
series representations. It leverages inductive biases in the
model architecture to learn disentangled seasonal and trend
representations via contrastive learning.Causal CNN ✓ ETT Datasets,
Electricity,
WeatherForecasting MSE,
MAE
TABLE VI
SUMMARY OF TEMPORAL -LEVEL CONTRASTIVE METHODS FOR TIME SERIES REPRESENTATION LEARNING . DA INDICATES WHETHER THE MODEL
UTILIZES DATA AUGMENTATIONS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , AUPRC REFERS TO THE AREA UNDER THE PRECISION -RECALL CURVE , DBI REFERS TO
DAVIES -BOULDIN INDEX , F1 REFERS TO F1SCORE , MF1 REFERS TO MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE , MSE REFERS TO MEAN SQUARE ERROR ,AND MAE
REFERS TO MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR .
capability to distinguish between masking tokens and original
values.
b) TS-TCC [51]: TS-TCC employs a combination of
time-series-specific weak augmentations ( i.e.,jitter-and-scale)
and strong augmentations ( i.e.,permutation-and-jitter) on orig-
inal data. This approach aims to enhance the quality of the
learned features through contrastive learning. TS-TCC designs
cross-view temporal and contextual contrasting modules to
learn robust and discriminative representations. The temporal
contrasting module focuses on capturing the temporal de-
pendency within the data. The contextual contrasting module
performs a cross-view prediction task to predict the future of
one view based on the past of the other view.
c) TNC [33]: TNC addresses potential bias in negative
samples by employing a sample weight adjustment strategy.
Instead of randomly selecting negative examples from the data
distribution, TNC utilizes Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning
without explicitly using negative samples. In PU learning, thecombinations of positive and negative samples are treated as
unlabeled data. TNC considers samples from the neighborhood
as positive examples and samples outside the neighborhood
as unlabeled examples. This approach helps mitigate bias and
improves the accuracy of the learning process.
d) TCL [61]: TCL aims to learn representations that cap-
ture the temporal non-stationary structure of time series data,
enabling optimal discrimination of different time segments.
TCL combines a heuristic principle for analyzing temporal
structure with a rigorous treatment of a nonlinear independent
component analysis model [114]. The model is trained through
a multinomial logistic regression classifier, which aims to
accurately discriminate all time segments in a time series by
utilizing the segment indices as labels for the data points.
e) T-Loss [50]: T-Loss learns scalable general-purpose
representations by considering inherent characteristics of time
series, including highly variable lengths and sparse labeling.
It introduces an efficient unsupervised triplet loss that utilizes

==== Page 14 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14
time-based negative sampling and leverages the encoder’s
resilience to handle time series of unequal lengths. A random
sub-series from a given time series is considered the anchor,
while any sub-series of the anchor is treated as the positive
sample. Sub-series from randomly selected series are treated
as negative samples. The model is optimized to distinguish an-
chors from negatives while assimilating anchors and positives,
enabling the learning of discriminative representations.
f) BTSF [112]: Prior works primarily use time-based
augmentations to sample positive and negative pairs for con-
trastive training. However, these approaches mainly rely on
segment-level augmentations derived from time slicing, which
can introduce sampling bias and incorrect optimization due to
the loss of global context. Furthermore, they often overlook the
incorporation of spectral information in representations. BTSF
devises a novel iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion
approach to explicitly encode the affinities of numerous time-
frequency pairs, and employs instance-level augmentation with
a simple dropout applied to the entire time series, thereby
capturing long-term dependencies more effectively.
g) CoST [113]: An effective representation should pos-
sess the capability to disentangle multiple explanatory sources,
enabling robustness against complex and richly structured
variations. CoST leverages inductive biases within the model
architecture to learn disentangled seasonal and trend rep-
resentations. Additionally, it introduces a novel frequency
domain contrastive loss to encourage the development of
discriminative seasonal representations. By providing insights
from a causal perspective, CoST highlights the advantages of
learning disentangled seasonal-trend representations through
contrastive learning for time series forecasting.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
A. Summary of The Review
Time series representation learning aims to map the time
series into a latent space where the learned semantic-rich
representations then can be effectively utilized to benefit down-
stream tasks such as classification and forecasting. In recent
years, numerous unsupervised representation learning methods
have been proposed, resulting in a dilemma over selecting
the most suitable approach for downstream tasks of interest,
especially those tasks on time series data. To fill this gap, in
this work, we conduct a thorough literature review of existing
methods for time series representation learning, aiming to
propose a comprehensive categorization of these approaches.
In addition to analysis, we perform empirical evaluations, with
a focus on state-of-the-art contrastive methods, using 9 public
real-world datasets from diverse domains. The purpose of this
experimental evaluation is to offer readers a better, faster, and
more comprehensive understanding of cutting-edge research
in unsupervised time series representation learning.
B. Future Research Directions
Contrastive learning has emerged as a powerful unsuper-
vised learning approach due to its capability for capturing rich
representations without relying on explicit labels. However,
there exist notable challenges that need to be addressed tofully harness the potential of contrastive learning. One critical
challenge that warrants consideration is automatic data aug-
mentation, which plays a crucial role in contrastive learning as
it generates diverse data covering unexplored input space while
preserving correct labels for learning more robust and gener-
alizable representations. However, the augmentation transfor-
mations selected by current manual selection strategies based
on empirical observations or domain knowledge can be sub-
optimal. Hence, developing efficient strategies for automatic
data augmentation optimization is imperative. In addition, the
primary goal of contrastive learning is to distinguish between
similar and dissimilar samples, promoting the learning of
discriminative features. Consequently, constructing effective
contrastive pairs becomes crucial, particularly in selecting
appropriate negative sampling methods, as they directly influ-
ence the quality and informativeness of the learned represen-
tations. Moreover, efficiency and scalability pose significant
challenges for contrastive learning models, especially as the
amount and dimensions of input data expand. Developing
scalable architectures and efficient algorithms is essential to
handle the computational demands of large-scale real-world
tasks. Furthermore, overfitting and poor generalization are
also common challenges encountered in contrastive learning
models. Pre-trained models often struggle to generalize to new
data distributions with different statistical properties from the
training data, which can hinder their performance on samples
from novel classes or unseen domains. By addressing these
challenges, the potential of contrastive learning can be fully
realized, enabling the extraction of rich representations from
unlabeled data, and facilitating breakthroughs in diverse appli-
cations. we delve deeper into the aforementioned challenges
in the following.
1) Automatic Data Augmentation Optimization: Data aug-
mentation is a vital component in contrastive learning as it
increases diversity and mitigates the risk of false negatives. A
theoretical framework [115] has been proposed to assess the
transferability of contrastive learning, with a focus on investi-
gating the impact of data augmentation on its performance.
The findings indicate that the effectiveness of contrastive
learning in downstream tasks is heavily influenced by the
selection of data augmentation techniques. The selection of
appropriate augmentations is critical to ensure the preservation
of semantic consistency among labels and to foster general-
ization and robustness, thereby preventing overfitting on the
original data. Automating the process of augmentation opti-
mization becomes imperative in order to efficiently identify the
most effective augmentation transformations that maximize the
learning potential of the model while maintaining the desired
properties of the representations [116]. The future direction
involves developing novel augmentation transformations tai-
lored to time series data and devising efficient strategies to
automatically optimize the combinations and parameters of
augmentation transformations within a fixed transformation
space. Existing data augmentation transformations for time
series data [51, 52, 117, 118] are heuristic and are usually sub-
optimal as they are manually designed or selected based on
empirical observations or domain knowledge [119]. There are
several existing works that focus on augmentations specifically

==== Page 15 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 15
designed for image data. For instance, Mixup-noise is utilized
in [120] to generate augmentations by mixing data samples
either at the input or hidden-state levels, without explicitly
leveraging the underlying data manifold structure. Distribu-
tion divergence is employed in [121] between weakly and
strongly augmented samples over the representation bank to
supervise the retrieval of strongly augmented queries from a
pool of instances. Time series data possess unique charac-
teristics and temporal dependencies that require specialized
transformations. Conventional time series data augmentations
may disrupt the inherent strong temporal dependencies present
in the data [105]. In this case, designing novel augmentation
transformations that can capture temporal patterns, variations,
and dependencies in time series data is still an open problem
that requires further exploration. In addition, optimizing the
combinations and parameters of various augmentation trans-
formations becomes challenging due to the large transforma-
tion space involved. Every augmentation promotes invariance
to a specific transformation, which can be advantageous in
certain scenarios and detrimental in others [122]. Reinforce-
ment Learning (RL) emerges as a promising solution to
automatically search for optimal sub-policies of augmentation
transformations and their associated parameters. RL-based
methods [123, 124] formulate the optimization as a discrete
search problem and use reward signals to guide the search
process. However, these approaches often demand extensive
computational resources due to the size of the search space,
making them inefficient for practical usage. Thus, it is still
an ongoing problem to design more efficient strategies for
automatic data augmentation optimization.
2) Designing Appropriate Contrasting Views: The selection
of appropriate augmentation transformations to form the pos-
itive pairs is a decisive aspect in contrastive learning [114].
Designing appropriate contrasting views usually requires do-
main knowledge, intuition, trial-and-error and luck [125].
Existing studies [126, 127] suggest that contrastive learning
tends to generate sub-optimal representations in the presence
of noisy views such as false positive pairs. This is because
representations of these noisy views are forced to align with
each other even if there is no apparent shared information.
However, there is no guarantee that all task-relevant infor-
mation is shared between views [128]. Current contrastive
learning approaches [43, 45, 55, 58] commonly consider
either the remaining data within the same batch or a large
buffer as the default source of negative samples. However,
samples with similar higher-level implicit semantics, are easily
treated as negative ones [60, 64, 82]. Recent studies has
started to tackle this problem by incorporating the information
of nearest-neighbors to enrich the set of semantic positives
as they find that a generic query sample and its neighbors
are likely to belong to the same class [129, 130, 131].
Note that, however, such binary instance labeling is insuf-
ficient to measure correlations between different samples,
there still exist numerous promising avenues for exploring
different approaches to measure the similarity of neighbors,
offering greater semantic variations compared to pre-defined
transformations [132]. Negative sampling is also critical in
constructing contrastive pairs, yet choosing the appropriatesampling method and number of negative samples can be
challenging. The presence of a collision-coverage trade-off
indicates that the ideal number of negative examples should be
scaled according to the number of underlying concepts present
in the data [133, 134]. The occurrence of false negatives
adversely affects the discrimination of individual samples as
they are erroneously pushed away [60]. One direction of
exploration is to eliminate the need of negative samples [44].
However, negative cancellation relies on a sufficient number
of clearly distinguishable positive samples. If the positive
samples lack clear separability or exhibit significant intra-
class variations, the model may still encounter difficulties
in discerning between positive and negative pairs, leading to
sub-optimal performance. An alternative direction to enhance
negative sampling is to employ filtering techniques. These
techniques involve selecting negative samples that meet spe-
cific criteria, such as similarity or density thresholds, to help
the model focus on more informative and diverse negatives.
However, it is important to ensure that valuable negative
samples are not inadvertently excluded, and that the selected
negatives effectively challenge the discrimination ability of
models. In addition, clustering techniques can also be em-
ployed to group similar negative samples together, reducing
the chance of false negatives and promoting more effective
discrimination [60, 64, 80].
3) Efficiency and Scalability: Due to the inherent charac-
teristics of time series data including variable duration, high
dimensionality and high frequency, a time series represen-
tation learning framework should satisfy 2 essential criteria
simultaneously: efficiency and scalability [135, 136]. Although
researchers have made notable efforts in improving the effi-
ciency and scalability of contrastive models such as adopting
early stopping, increasing batch size, applying diverse data
augmentations and adopting contrastive regularizations [44,
45, 55, 136], there are still unexplored directions. One poten-
tial direction is to develop memory-efficient network architec-
tures to reduce the computational and memory requirements
of contrastive models, such as those equipped with weight
sharing or pruning. Another way is to incorporate transfer
learning, where pre-trained models serve as an initial stage for
contrastive learning. Such approaches leverage the knowledge
gained from a pre-trained model and fine-tune the model
with contrastive learning, thereby reducing training time and
computational resources. Additionally, distillation techniques,
which compress large models into smaller ones while preserv-
ing functionality, are also worth exploring. These approaches
have the potential to reduce training time and memory require-
ments in contrastive learning while maintaining or enhancing
performance. Improving the scalability of contrastive learning
models is crucial particularly when encountered with large-
scale and high-dimensional time series inputs. Techniques such
as distributed training, approximate nearest neighbor search
and online learning can also be incorporated to enhance the
scalability of contrastive models while ensuring efficiency.
4) Overfitting and Generalization: Overfitting and poor
generalization are common problems in contrastive learning
methods. Recent findings suggest that dropout serves as a
form of minimal data augmentation within the contrastive

==== Page 16 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16
learning process, and removing it could result in a repre-
sentation collapse in natural language processing tasks [137].
A theoretical investigation into the generalization ability of
contrastive learning reveals key insights regarding its effec-
tiveness, highlighting the significance of the alignment of
positive samples, the divergence of class centers, and the
concentration of augmented data [79]. Contrastive learning
models may struggle to generalize to new data distributions
with different statistical properties from those of the training
data. As a result, the pre-trained model becomes proficient at
recognizing samples from the base class but performs poorly
on samples from novel classes due to overfitting [138]. In
order to address the challenges, a promising research direction
is to investigate the application of pre-trained contrastive
learning models under the few-shot learning setting. Few-shot
learning is a learning paradigm that aims to recognize new
samples using only a limited number of labeled examples.
While such solutions have been explored extensively in the
field of computer vision [139, 140], their applicability in time
series data remains an open area for further investigation.
Alternatively, another research direction is to leverage few-shot
learning to pre-train a model using a small number of labeled
examples, enabling the model to capture essential information
from limited data. The pre-trained model can then be fine-
tuned using contrastive learning, with the objective of maxi-
mizing similarity between positive examples and minimizing
similarity between negative examples. This two-step process
offers the potential for the model to learn representations that
are both discriminative and transferable, leading to improved
generalization on unseen data and novel classes.
5) Robustness Verification: An effective representation
should possess the ability to disentangle diverse explanatory
sources, enabling robustness to withstand complex and in-
tricately structured variations [113]. The goal of robustness
verification is to prove that small perturbations on the designed
model do not change the advisories produced for certain
inputs [141]. Recent research has investigated the feasibility
of learning provably robust deep neural networks that are
verifiably guaranteed to be robust to adversarial perturbations
under some specified attack models [142]. Although there
are methods for discovering the adversarial perturbations,
the capacity to verify their absence remains limited [141].
Existing studies demonstrate that the robustness of contrastive
learning models can be improved by augmenting the training
set with adversarial samples [115, 125, 143]. More future
work can be explored on measuring the performance under
adversarial attacks or other relevant factors. There also ex-
ist studies [144] which prove that the representation matrix
learned by contrastive learning boosts robustness by preventing
deep neural networks from overfitting. The robustness metrics
used in existing methods such as robust accuracy, however,
demonstrate a strong correlation with the attack algorithms,
image labels, and downstream tasks in the field of computer vi-
sion [143]. These factors hence may introduce inconsistencies
and reduce the reliability of robustness metrics in the context
of contrastive learning. From another perspective, there are
unique characteristics such as frequency and amplitude in time
series data that are valuable for consideration. Consequently,it is crucial to explore the design of robustness verification
metrics that are specifically tailored to address the intricacies
of time series data, ensuring their effectiveness in assessing
the robustness of such data.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Sgueglia, A. D. Sorbo, C. A. Visaggio, and G. Can-
fora, “A systematic literature review of iot time series
anomaly detection solutions,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 134, pp. 170–186, 2022.
[2] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection
for iot time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–6494, 2020.
[3] Y . Jiao and C. Wang, “A blockchain-based trusted
upload scheme for the internet of things nodes,” In-
ternational Journal of Crowd Science , vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
92–97, 2022.
[4] J. I. Porta, M. A. Dom ´ınguez, and F. Tamarit, “Auto-
matic data imputation in time series processing using
neural networks for industry and medical datasets,” in
SIMBig , ser. Communications in Computer and Infor-
mation Science, vol. 1577. Springer, 2021, pp. 3–16.
[5] J. Polge, J. Robert, and Y . L. Traon, “A case driven
study of the use of time series classification for flexi-
bility in industry 4.0,” Sensors , vol. 20, no. 24, p. 7273,
2020.
[6] O. B. Sezer, M. U. Gudelek, and A. M. ¨Ozbayoglu,
“Financial time series forecasting with deep learning :
A systematic literature review: 2005-2019,” Appl. Soft
Comput. , vol. 90, p. 106181, 2020.
[7] C. Sun, S. Hong, M. Song, and H. Li, “A review of
deep learning methods for irregularly sampled medical
time series data,” CoRR , vol. abs/2010.12493, 2020.
[8] C. Guo, M. Lu, and J. Chen, “An evaluation of time se-
ries summary statistics as features for clinical prediction
tasks,” BMC Medical Informatics Decis. Mak. , vol. 20,
no. 1, p. 48, 2020.
[9] P. Sch ¨afer and U. Leser, “Multivariate time se-
ries classification with WEASEL+MUSE,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1711.11343, 2017.
[10] A. J. Bagnall, J. Lines, A. Bostrom, J. Large, and E. J.
Keogh, “The great time series classification bake off:
a review and experimental evaluation of recent algo-
rithmic advances,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov. , vol. 31,
no. 3, pp. 606–660, 2017.
[11] A. P. Ruiz, M. Flynn, J. Large, M. Middlehurst, and
A. J. Bagnall, “The great multivariate time series clas-
sification bake off: a review and experimental evaluation
of recent algorithmic advances,” Data Min. Knowl.
Discov. , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 401–449, 2021.
[12] J. F. Torres, D. Hadjout, A. Sebaa, F. Mart ´ınez- ´Alvarez,
and A. Troncoso, “Deep learning for time series fore-
casting: A survey,” Big Data , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 3–21,
2021.
[13] K. M. Ahmad, G. He, W. Yu, X. Xu, J. Kumar, and
M. A. Saleem, “A survey on semi-parametric machine
learning technique for time series forecasting,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2104.00871, 2021.

==== Page 17 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17
[14] P. Lara-Ben ´ıtez, M. Carranza-Garc ´ıa, and J. C.
Riquelme, “An experimental review on deep learning
architectures for time series forecasting,” Int. J. Neural
Syst., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 2 130 001:1–2 130 001:28, 2021.
[15] H. Wang, Y . Li, and H. V . Zhao, “Caseload prediction
using graphical evolutionary game theory and time se-
ries analysis,” International Journal of Crowd Science ,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 142–149, 2022.
[16] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning
representations for time series clustering,” in NeurIPS ,
2019, pp. 3776–3786.
[17] S. Rambhatla, Z. Che, and Y . Liu, “I-SEA: importance
sampling and expected alignment-based deep distance
metric learning for time series analysis and embedding,”
inAAAI . AAAI Press, 2022, pp. 8045–8053.
[18] J. Tang, S. Wu, L. Wei, W. Liu, T. Qin, Z. Zhou,
and J. Gu, “Energy-efficient sensory data collection
based on spatiotemporal correlation in iot networks,”
International Journal of Crowd Science , vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 34–43, 2022.
[19] H. Qian, S. J. Pan, and C. Miao, “Weakly-supervised
sensor-based activity segmentation and recognition via
learning from distributions,” Artif. Intell. , vol. 292, p.
103429, 2021.
[20] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and
P. Muller, “Deep learning for time series classification:
a review,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov. , vol. 33, no. 4, pp.
917–963, 2019.
[21] I. Simic, V . Sabol, and E. E. Veas, “XAI methods for
neural time series classification: A brief review,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2108.08009, 2021.
[22] A. Gupta, H. P. Gupta, B. Biswas, and T. Dutta,
“Approaches and applications of early classification of
time series: A review,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell. , vol. 1,
no. 1, pp. 47–61, 2020.
[23] A. Abanda, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on
distance based time series classification,” Data Min.
Knowl. Discov. , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 378–412, 2019.
[24] G. Chiarot and C. Silvestri, “Time series compression:
a survey,” CoRR , vol. abs/2101.08784, 2021.
[25] S. Deldari, H. Xue, A. Saeed, J. He, D. V . Smith, and
F. D. Salim, “Beyond just vision: A review on self-
supervised representation learning on multimodal and
temporal data,” CoRR , vol. abs/2206.02353, 2022.
[26] A. Fakhrazari and H. Vakilzadian, “A survey on time
series data mining,” in EIT. IEEE, 2017, pp. 476–481.
[27] M. L ¨angkvist, L. Karlsson, and A. Loutfi, “A review
of unsupervised feature learning and deep learning for
time-series modeling,” Pattern Recognit. Lett. , vol. 42,
pp. 11–24, 2014.
[28] Y . Li, Z. Chen, D. Zha, M. Du, J. Ni, D. Zhang,
H. Chen, and X. Hu, “Towards learning disentangled
representations for time series,” in KDD . ACM, 2022,
pp. 3270–3278.
[29] X. Zhan, J. Xie, Z. Liu, Y . Ong, and C. C. Loy,
“Online deep clustering for unsupervised representation
learning,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation /
IEEE, 2020, pp. 6687–6696.[30] L. Ge, Z. Yang, and W. Ji, “Crowd evolution method
based on intelligence level clustering,” International
Journal of Crowd Science , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 204–215,
2021.
[31] P. Vadiraja and M. A. Chattha, “A survey on knowl-
edge integration techniques with artificial neural net-
works for seq-2-seq/time series models,” CoRR , vol.
abs/2008.05972, 2020.
[32] P. Malhotra, V . TV , L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G. Shroff,
“Timenet: Pre-trained deep recurrent neural network for
time series classification,” in ESANN , 2017.
[33] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsuper-
vised representation learning for time series with tempo-
ral neighborhood coding,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net,
2021.
[34] P. Sarkar and A. Etemad, “Self-supervised ECG repre-
sentation learning for emotion recognition,” CoRR , vol.
abs/2002.03898, 2020.
[35] Y . Xie, Z. Xu, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised
learning of graph neural networks: A unified review,”
CoRR , vol. abs/2102.10757, 2021.
[36] S. Albelwi, “Survey on self-supervised learning: Aux-
iliary pretext tasks and contrastive learning methods in
imaging,” Entropy , vol. 24, no. 4, p. 551, 2022.
[37] A. Khan, S. AlBarri, and M. A. Manzoor, “Contrastive
self-supervised learning: A survey on different architec-
tures,” in ICAI . IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–6.
[38] H. Qian, T. Tian, and C. Miao, “What makes good con-
trastive learning on small-scale wearable-based tasks?”
inKDD . ACM, 2022, pp. 3761–3771.
[39] I. Misra and L. van der Maaten, “Self-supervised
learning of pretext-invariant representations,” in CVPR .
Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2020, pp. 6706–
6716.
[40] A. Kolesnikov, X. Zhai, and L. Beyer, “Revisiting self-
supervised visual representation learning,” in CVPR .
Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019, pp. 1920–
1929.
[41] Q. Xie, M. Luong, E. H. Hovy, and Q. V . Le, “Self-
training with noisy student improves imagenet classifi-
cation,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation / IEEE,
2020, pp. 10 684–10 695.
[42] T. Huynh, S. Kornblith, M. R. Walter, M. Maire,
and M. Khademi, “Boosting contrastive self-supervised
learning with false negative cancellation,” in WACV .
IEEE, 2022, pp. 986–996.
[43] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton,
“A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual
representations,” in ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 119. PMLR, 2020, pp. 1597–
1607.
[44] J. Grill, F. Strub, F. Altch ´e, C. Tallec, P. H. Richemond,
E. Buchatskaya, C. Doersch, B. ´A. Pires, Z. Guo,
M. G. Azar, B. Piot, K. Kavukcuoglu, R. Munos, and
M. Valko, “Bootstrap your own latent - A new approach
to self-supervised learning,” in NeurIPS , 2020.
[45] K. He, H. Fan, Y . Wu, S. Xie, and R. B. Girshick, “Mo-
mentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation

==== Page 18 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 18
learning,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation /
IEEE, 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[46] P. Chen, D. Huang, D. He, X. Long, R. Zeng, S. Wen,
M. Tan, and C. Gan, “Rspnet: Relative speed percep-
tion for unsupervised video representation learning,” in
AAAI . AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 1045–1053.
[47] I. R. Dave, R. Gupta, M. N. Rizve, and M. Shah,
“TCLR: temporal contrastive learning for video repre-
sentation,” Comput. Vis. Image Underst. , vol. 219, p.
103406, 2022.
[48] S. Ma, Z. Zeng, D. McDuff, and Y . Song, “Active con-
trastive learning of audio-visual video representations,”
inICLR . OpenReview.net, 2021.
[49] R. Qian, T. Meng, B. Gong, M. Yang, H. Wang, S. J.
Belongie, and Y . Cui, “Spatiotemporal contrastive video
representation learning,” in CVPR . Computer Vision
Foundation / IEEE, 2021, pp. 6964–6974.
[50] J. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsuper-
vised scalable representation learning for multivariate
time series,” in NeurIPS , 2019, pp. 4652–4663.
[51] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C. K. Kwoh,
X. Li, and C. Guan, “Time-series representation learn-
ing via temporal and contextual contrasting,” in IJCAI .
ijcai.org, 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
[52] Z. Yue, Y . Wang, J. Duan, T. Yang, C. Huang, Y . Tong,
and B. Xu, “Ts2vec: Towards universal representation
of time series,” in AAAI . AAAI Press, 2022, pp. 8980–
8987.
[53] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y . Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long,
“Timesnet: Temporal 2d-variation modeling for general
time series analysis,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2023.
[54] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive repre-
sentation learning through alignment and uniformity on
the hypersphere,” in ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 119. PMLR, 2020, pp. 9929–
9939.
[55] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, K. Swersky, M. Norouzi, and
G. E. Hinton, “Big self-supervised models are strong
semi-supervised learners,” in NeurIPS , 2020.
[56] A. van den Oord, Y . Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation
learning with contrastive predictive coding,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1807.03748, 2018.
[57] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple siamese rep-
resentation learning,” in CVPR . Computer Vision
Foundation / IEEE, 2021, pp. 15 750–15 758.
[58] J. Li, P. Zhou, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi, “Prototypical
contrastive learning of unsupervised representations,” in
ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2021.
[59] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski,
and A. Joulin, “Unsupervised learning of visual features
by contrasting cluster assignments,” in NeurIPS , 2020.
[60] Q. Meng, H. Qian, Y . Liu, Y . Xu, Z. Shen, and
L. Cui, “MHCCL: masked hierarchical cluster-wise
contrastive learning for multivariate time series,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2212.01141, 2022.
[61] A. Hyv ¨arinen and H. Morioka, “Unsupervised feature
extraction by time-contrastive learning and nonlinear
ICA,” in NIPS , 2016, pp. 3765–3773.[62] Y . Wang, Q. Zhang, Y . Wang, J. Yang, and Z. Lin,
“Chaos is a ladder: A new theoretical understanding of
contrastive learning via augmentation overlap,” in ICLR .
OpenReview.net, 2022.
[63] Y . Tao, K. Takagi, and K. Nakata, “Clustering-friendly
representation learning via instance discrimination and
feature decorrelation,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2021.
[64] V . Sharma, M. Tapaswi, M. S. Sarfraz, and R. Stiefel-
hagen, “Clustering based contrastive learning for im-
proving face representations,” in FG. IEEE, 2020, pp.
109–116.
[65] O. L. Hasna and R. Potolea, “Time series - A taxonomy
based survey,” in ICCP . IEEE, 2017, pp. 231–238.
[66] T. W. Liao, “Clustering of time series data - a survey,”
Pattern Recognit. , vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1857–1874, 2005.
[67] M. Caron, P. Bojanowski, A. Joulin, and M. Douze,
“Deep clustering for unsupervised learning of visual
features,” in ECCV (14) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 11218. Springer, 2018, pp. 139–156.
[68] W. Song, L. Liu, M. Liu, W. Wang, X. Wang, and
Y . Song, “Representation learning with deconvolution
for multivariate time series classification and visualiza-
tion,” in ICPCSEE (1) , ser. Communications in Com-
puter and Information Science, vol. 1257. Springer,
2020, pp. 310–326.
[69] J. Yoon, D. Jarrett, and M. van der Schaar, “Time-series
generative adversarial networks,” in NeurIPS , 2019, pp.
5509–5519.
[70] A. Desai, C. Freeman, Z. Wang, and I. Beaver,
“Timevae: A variational auto-encoder for multivariate
time series generation,” CoRR , vol. abs/2111.08095,
2021.
[71] H. J. Banville, G. Moffat, I. Albuquerque, D. Enge-
mann, A. Hyv ¨arinen, and A. Gramfort, “Self-supervised
representation learning from electroencephalography
signals,” in MLSP . IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[72] M. S. Sarfraz, V . Sharma, and R. Stiefelhagen, “Ef-
ficient parameter-free clustering using first neighbor
relations,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation /
IEEE, 2019, pp. 8934–8943.
[73] S. Shin, K. Song, and I. Moon, “Hierarchically clustered
representation learning,” in AAAI . AAAI Press, 2020,
pp. 5776–5783.
[74] C. Zhang, H. Fu, J. Wang, W. Li, X. Cao, and Q. Hu,
“Tensorized multi-view subspace representation learn-
ing,” Int. J. Comput. Vis. , vol. 128, no. 8, pp. 2344–
2361, 2020.
[75] S. Zhou, H. Xu, Z. Zheng, J. Chen, Z. Li, J. Bu, J. Wu,
X. Wang, W. Zhu, and M. Ester, “A comprehensive
survey on deep clustering: Taxonomy, challenges, and
future directions,” CoRR , vol. abs/2206.07579, 2022.
[76] Q. Ma, C. Chen, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning
representations for incomplete time series clustering,”
inAAAI . AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 8837–8846.
[77] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning
representations for time series clustering,” in NeurIPS ,
2019, pp. 3776–3786.
[78] J. Xie, R. B. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “Unsupervised

==== Page 19 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 19
deep embedding for clustering analysis,” in ICML , ser.
JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, vol. 48.
JMLR.org, 2016, pp. 478–487.
[79] W. Huang, M. Yi, X. Zhao, and Z. Jiang, “Towards the
generalization of contrastive self-supervised learning,”
inICLR . OpenReview.net, 2023.
[80] D. Zhang, F. Nan, X. Wei, S. Li, H. Zhu, K. R.
McKeown, R. Nallapati, A. O. Arnold, and B. Xiang,
“Supporting clustering with contrastive learning,” in
NAACL-HLT . Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2021, pp. 5419–5430.
[81] Y . Li, P. Hu, J. Z. Liu, D. Peng, J. T. Zhou, and X. Peng,
“Contrastive clustering,” in AAAI . AAAI Press, 2021,
pp. 8547–8555.
[82] S. H. Khorasgani, Y . Chen, and F. Shkurti, “SLIC: self-
supervised learning with iterative clustering for human
action videos,” in CVPR . IEEE, 2022, pp. 16 070–
16 080.
[83] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the
dimensionality of data with neural networks,” science ,
vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507, 2006.
[84] W. Yu, I. Y . Kim, and C. Mechefske, “Analysis of
different rnn autoencoder variants for time series classi-
fication and machine prognostics,” Mechanical Systems
and Signal Processing , vol. 149, p. 107322, 2021.
[85] X. Lyu, M. H ¨user, S. L. Hyland, G. Zerveas, and
G. R ¨atsch, “Improving clinical predictions through un-
supervised time series representation learning,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/1812.00490, 2018.
[86] A. Xiao, J. Huang, D. Guan, and S. Lu, “Unsupervised
representation learning for point clouds: A survey,”
CoRR , vol. abs/2202.13589, 2022.
[87] X. Wu, C. Huang, P. Robles-Granda, and N. V . Chawla,
“Representation learning on variable length and in-
complete wearable-sensory time series,” CoRR , vol.
abs/2002.03595, 2020.
[88] W. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Geng, and S. Hong, “Cross re-
construction transformer for self-supervised time series
representation learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/2205.09928,
2022.
[89] R. Zhang, F. Cheng, and A. Pandey, “Representation
learning using a multi-branch transformer for industrial
time series anomaly detection,” in KDD 2022 Workshop
on Mining and Learning from Time Series – Deep
Forecasting: Models, Interpretability, and Applications ,
2022.
[90] J. Dong, H. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, and
M. Long, “Simmtm: A simple pre-training frame-
work for masked time-series modeling,” CoRR , vol.
abs/2302.00861, 2023.
[91] H. Zhou, C. Lu, S. Yang, X. Han, and Y . Yu, “Preserva-
tional learning improves self-supervised medical image
models by reconstructing diverse contexts,” in ICCV .
IEEE, 2021, pp. 3479–3489.
[92] M. Mehralian and B. Karasfi, “Rdcgan: Unsupervised
representation learning with regularized deep convo-
lutional generative adversarial networks,” in 2018 9th
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Robotics and2nd Asia-Pacific International Symposium , 2018, pp.
31–38.
[93] E. Brophy, Z. Wang, Q. She, and T. Ward, “Genera-
tive adversarial networks in time series: A survey and
taxonomy,” CoRR , vol. abs/2107.11098, 2021.
[94] J. Donahue and K. Simonyan, “Large scale adversarial
representation learning,” in NeurIPS , 2019, pp. 10 541–
10 551.
[95] A. Creswell, T. White, V . Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran,
B. Sengupta, and A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial
networks: An overview,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag. ,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65, 2018.
[96] C. Esteban, S. L. Hyland, and G. R ¨atsch, “Real-valued
(medical) time series generation with recurrent condi-
tional gans,” CoRR , vol. abs/1706.02633, 2017.
[97] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S. Ng,
“MAD-GAN: multivariate anomaly detection for time
series data with generative adversarial networks,” in
ICANN (4) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 11730. Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.
[98] K. E. Smith and A. O. Smith, “Conditional GAN
for timeseries generation,” CoRR , vol. abs/2006.16477,
2020.
[99] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein
GAN,” CoRR , vol. abs/1701.07875, 2017.
[100] M. Mirza and S. Osindero, “Conditional generative
adversarial nets,” CoRR , vol. abs/1411.1784, 2014.
[101] W. Lu, J. Wang, X. Sun, Y . Chen, and X. Xie, “Out-
of-distribution representation learning for time series
classification,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2023.
[102] S. Schneider, A. Baevski, R. Collobert, and M. Auli,
“wav2vec: Unsupervised pre-training for speech recog-
nition,” in INTERSPEECH . ISCA, 2019, pp. 3465–
3469.
[103] Y . Chen, X. Zhou, Z. Xing, Z. Liu, and M. Xu, “Cass:
A channel-aware self-supervised representation learning
framework for multivariate time series classification,” in
DASFAA (2) , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 13246. Springer, 2022, pp. 375–390.
[104] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and
C. Eickhoff, “A transformer-based framework for mul-
tivariate time series representation learning,” in KDD .
ACM, 2021, pp. 2114–2124.
[105] X. Yang, Z. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Timeclr: A self-
supervised contrastive learning framework for univariate
time series representation,” Knowl. Based Syst. , vol.
245, p. 108606, 2022.
[106] K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampffmeyer, K. Ø. Mikalsen,
and R. Jenssen, “Mixing up contrastive learning: Self-
supervised representation learning for time series,” Pat-
tern Recognit. Lett. , vol. 155, pp. 54–61, 2022.
[107] A. Mohamed, H. Lee, L. Borgholt, J. D. Havtorn,
J. Edin, C. Igel, K. Kirchhoff, S. Li, K. Livescu,
L. Maaløe, T. N. Sainath, and S. Watanabe, “Self-
supervised speech representation learning: A review,”
CoRR , vol. abs/2205.10643, 2022.
[108] Y . Zhu, Y . Xu, Q. Liu, and S. Wu, “An empirical study
of graph contrastive learning,” in NeurIPS Datasets and

==== Page 20 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 20
Benchmarks , 2021.
[109] Z. Wu, Y . Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised
feature learning via non-parametric instance-level dis-
crimination,” CoRR , vol. abs/1805.01978, 2018.
[110] A. Pokle, J. Tian, Y . Li, and A. Risteski, “Contrasting
the landscape of contrastive and non-contrastive learn-
ing,” in AISTATS , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 151. PMLR, 2022, pp. 8592–8618.
[111] Y . Tian, X. Chen, and S. Ganguli, “Understanding
self-supervised learning dynamics without contrastive
pairs,” in ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 139. PMLR, 2021, pp. 10 268–10 278.
[112] L. Yang and S. Hong, “Unsupervised time-series rep-
resentation learning with iterative bilinear temporal-
spectral fusion,” in ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 162. PMLR, 2022, pp. 25 038–
25 054.
[113] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. C. H. Hoi,
“Cost: Contrastive learning of disentangled seasonal-
trend representations for time series forecasting,” in
ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2022.
[114] R. S. Zimmermann, Y . Sharma, S. Schneider,
M. Bethge, and W. Brendel, “Contrastive learning
inverts the data generating process,” in ICML , ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 139.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 12 979–12 990.
[115] X. Zhao, T. Du, Y . Wang, J. Yao, and W. Huang, “Arcl:
Enhancing contrastive learning with augmentation-
robust representations,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net,
2023.
[116] H. Ling, Z. Jiang, Y . Luo, S. Ji, and N. Zou, “Learning
fair graph representations via automated data augmen-
tations,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2023.
[117] Q. Wen, L. Sun, F. Yang, X. Song, J. Gao, X. Wang,
and H. Xu, “Time series data augmentation for deep
learning: A survey,” in IJCAI . ijcai.org, 2021, pp.
4653–4660.
[118] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of data
augmentation for time series classification with neural
networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/2007.15951, 2020.
[119] M. T. Nonnenmacher, L. Oldenburg, I. Steinwart, and
D. Reeb, “Utilizing expert features for contrastive
learning of time-series representations,” in ICML , ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 162.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 16 969–16 989.
[120] V . Verma, T. Luong, K. Kawaguchi, H. Pham, and Q. V .
Le, “Towards domain-agnostic contrastive learning,” in
ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 139. PMLR, 2021, pp. 10 530–10 541.
[121] X. Wang and G. Qi, “Contrastive learning with stronger
augmentations,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. In-
tell., vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 5549–5560, 2023.
[122] T. Xiao, X. Wang, A. A. Efros, and T. Darrell, “What
should not be contrastive in contrastive learning,” in
ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2021.
[123] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, D. Man ´e, V . Vasudevan, and
Q. V . Le, “Autoaugment: Learning augmentation strate-
gies from data,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation/ IEEE, 2019, pp. 113–123.
[124] S. Lim, I. Kim, T. Kim, C. Kim, and S. Kim, “Fast
autoaugment,” in NeurIPS , 2019, pp. 6662–6672.
[125] C. Chuang, R. D. Hjelm, X. Wang, V . Vineet, N. Joshi,
A. Torralba, S. Jegelka, and Y . Song, “Robust con-
trastive learning against noisy views,” in CVPR . IEEE,
2022, pp. 16 649–16 660.
[126] P. Morgado, I. Misra, and N. Vasconcelos, “Robust
audio-visual instance discrimination,” in CVPR . Com-
puter Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2021, pp. 12 934–
12 945.
[127] Y . Tian, C. Sun, B. Poole, D. Krishnan, C. Schmid, and
P. Isola, “What makes for good views for contrastive
learning?” in NeurIPS , 2020.
[128] H. Wang, X. Guo, Z. Deng, and Y . Lu, “Rethinking min-
imal sufficient representation in contrastive learning,” in
CVPR . IEEE, 2022, pp. 16 020–16 029.
[129] M. Bosnjak, P. H. Richemond, N. Tomasev, F. Strub,
J. C. Walker, F. Hill, L. H. Buesing, R. Pascanu,
C. Blundell, and J. Mitrovic, “Semppl: Predicting
pseudo-labels for better contrastive representations,” in
ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2023.
[130] C. Ge, J. Wang, Z. Tong, S. Chen, Y . Song, and P. Luo,
“Soft neighbors are positive supporters in contrastive
visual representation learning,” in ICLR . OpenRe-
view.net, 2023.
[131] Z. Zhong, E. Fini, S. Roy, Z. Luo, E. Ricci, and N. Sebe,
“Neighborhood contrastive learning for novel class dis-
covery,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation /
IEEE, 2021, pp. 10 867–10 875.
[132] D. Dwibedi, Y . Aytar, J. Tompson, P. Sermanet, and
A. Zisserman, “With a little help from my friends:
Nearest-neighbor contrastive learning of visual repre-
sentations,” in ICCV . IEEE, 2021, pp. 9568–9577.
[133] J. T. Ash, S. Goel, A. Krishnamurthy, and D. Misra,
“Investigating the role of negatives in contrastive rep-
resentation learning,” in AISTATS , ser. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 151. PMLR, 2022,
pp. 7187–7209.
[134] P. Awasthi, N. Dikkala, and P. Kamath, “Do more nega-
tive samples necessarily hurt in contrastive learning?” in
ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 162. PMLR, 2022, pp. 1101–1116.
[135] A. D. Nguyen, T. H. Tran, H. H. Pham, P. L. Nguyen,
and L. M. Nguyen, “Learning robust and consistent
time series representations: A dilated inception-based
approach,” CoRR , vol. abs/2306.06579, 2023.
[136] Z. Shi, J. Chen, K. Li, J. Raghuram, X. Wu, Y . Liang,
and S. Jha, “The trade-off between universality and la-
bel efficiency of representations from contrastive learn-
ing,” in ICLR . OpenReview.net, 2023.
[137] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “Simcse: Simple con-
trastive learning of sentence embeddings,” in EMNLP
(1). Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021,
pp. 6894–6910.
[138] Z. Yang, J. Wang, and Y . Zhu, “Few-shot classification
with contrastive learning,” in ECCV (20) , ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13680. Springer,

==== Page 21 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 21
2022, pp. 293–309.
[139] B. Sun, B. Li, S. Cai, Y . Yuan, and C. Zhang, “FSCE:
few-shot object detection via contrastive proposal en-
coding,” in CVPR . Computer Vision Foundation /
IEEE, 2021, pp. 7352–7362.
[140] C. Liu, Y . Fu, C. Xu, S. Yang, J. Li, C. Wang, and
L. Zhang, “Learning a few-shot embedding model with
contrastive learning,” in AAAI . AAAI Press, 2021, pp.
8635–8643.
[141] G. Katz, C. W. Barrett, D. L. Dill, K. Julian, and M. J.
Kochenderfer, “Reluplex: An efficient SMT solver for
verifying deep neural networks,” in CAV (1) , ser. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10426. Springer,
2017, pp. 97–117.
[142] E. Wong, F. R. Schmidt, J. H. Metzen, and J. Z. Kolter,
“Scaling provable adversarial defenses,” in NeurIPS ,
2018, pp. 8410–8419.
[143] Z. Wang and W. Liu, “Robustness verification for con-
trastive learning,” in ICML , ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 162. PMLR, 2022, pp. 22 865–
22 883.
[144] Y . Xue, K. Whitecross, and B. Mirzasoleiman, “In-
vestigating why contrastive learning benefits robustness
against label noise,” in ICML , ser. Proceedings of Ma-
chine Learning Research, vol. 162. PMLR, 2022, pp.
24 851–24 871.
[145] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual
learning for image recognition,” in CVPR . IEEE
Computer Society, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[146] H. I. Fawaz, B. Lucas, G. Forestier, C. Pelletier, D. F.
Schmidt, J. Weber, G. I. Webb, L. Idoumghar, P. Muller,
and F. Petitjean, “Inceptiontime: Finding alexnet for
time series classification,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov. ,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1936–1962, 2020.
[147] E. D. Cubuk, B. Zoph, J. Shlens, and Q. Le, “Ran-
daugment: Practical automated data augmentation with
a reduced search space,” in NeurIPS , 2020.
[148] E. Fons, P. Dawson, X. Zeng, J. A. Keane, and A. Iosi-
fidis, “Adaptive weighting scheme for automatic time-
series data augmentation,” CoRR , vol. abs/2102.08310,
2021.
Qianwen Meng is currently a Ph.D student in
School of Software, Shandong University, China,
and Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelli-
gence Research, Shandong University, China. She
received the Master’s degree in School of Software,
Shandong University, China in 2020, and the Bach-
elor’s degree in School of Computer Science and
Technology, Shandong University, China in 2017.
Her research interests mainly lie in representation
learning, unsupervised learning, time series model-
ing, and disease risk prediction.
Hangwei Qian is a research scientist at Centre for
Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore.
She was previously a Wallenberg-NTU Presidential
Postdoctoral Fellow from 2020 to 2022. She ob-
tained her Ph.D. in School of Computer Science and
Engineering at NTU, Singapore in 2020 and B.E.
from University of Science and Technology of China
(USTC) in 2015. Her research interests include unsu-
pervised learning, transfer learning, kernel methods,
and wearable-based studies. She has published top-
tier academic articles in KDD, AAAI, IJCAI, AIJ
and FAccT.
Yong Liu is a Senior Principal Researcher at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab. Prior to joining Huawei, he was
a Senior Research Scientist at Nanyang Technolog-
ical University (NTU), a Data Scientist at NTUC
Enterprise, and a Research Scientist at Institute for
Infocomm Research (I2R), A*STAR, Singapore. He
received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Engineering
from NTU in 2016 and B.S. degree in Electronic
Science and Technology from University of Science
and Technology of China (USTC) in 2008. His
research interests include recommendation systems,
natural language processing, and knowledge graph. He has been invited as a
PC member of major conferences such as KDD, SIGIR, ACL, IJCAI, AAAI,
and reviewer for IEEE/ACM transactions.
Yonghui Xu is a professor at Joint SDU-NTU
Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR),
Shandong University. Before that, he was a research
fellow in the Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of
Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly (LILY),
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He
received his Ph.D. from the School of Computer Sci-
ence and Engineering at South China University of
Technology in 2017 and BS from the Department of
Mathematics and Information Science Engineering
at Henan University of China in 2011. His research
areas include various topics in Trustworthy AI, knowledge graphs, expert
systems and their applications in e-commerce and healthcare.
Zhiqi Shen received the B.Sc. degree in computer
science and technology from Peking University, Bei-
jing, China, the M.Eng. degree in computer en-
gineering from the Beijing University of Technol-
ogy, Beijing, and the Ph.D. degree from Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. He is a Se-
nior Lecturer and a Senior Research Scientist with
the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University. His current re-
search interests include multiagent systems, goal-
oriented modeling, agent augmented interactive me-
dia, and interactive storytelling.
Lizhen Cui (IET Fellow, IEEE Senior Member)
is a professor and doctoral supervisor at School
of Software, Shandong University. He is the Co-
Director of Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial
Intelligence Research (C-FAIR) and Research Cen-
ter of Software and Data Engineering, Shandong
University. He received his B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
degrees from Shandong University, Jinan, China, in
1999, 2002 and 2005, respectively. He has published
over 200 high-level academic articles in TKDE,
TPAMI, TPDS, TSC, TCC, TNNLS, AAAI, SIGIR,
CIKM, BIBM, ICDCS, DASFAA, ICWS, ICSOC, AAMAS, and MICCAI.
He regularly serves as PC for prestigious conferences ( i.e., KDD, IJCAI,
and CIKM) and reviewers for IEEE/ACM Transactions Journals. His research
interests include big data analysis, data mining, and crowd science.

==== Page 22 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 22
Supplementary Materials
APPENDIX
EMPIRICAL EVALUATIONS AND ANALYSIS
We reorganize the publicly available benchmark multivariate
time series datasets, and select 9 commonly used datasets for
evaluation. Then, we introduce the experimental setup and
evaluation metrics used to assess the performance. Finally, we
present a comprehensive comparison of the selected state-of-
the-art models, with a particular focus on contrasting methods.
A. Datasets
In the field of multivariate time series analysis, there are
mainly from 3 archives of datasets, including UCI2, UEA3
and MTS4. Particularly, it is important to note that there may
be some overlap and discrepancies within these datasets. In
this work, we carefully reorganize the multivariate time series
datasets considering multiple aspects, including application
domains, sequence lengths, number of samples, variables, and
classes, to ensure our evaluation cover datasets with diverse
characteristics. Our reorganization allows for a more system-
atic and comprehensive analysis of the datasets in relation to
their specific characteristics.
•UCI archive: The UCI archive contains 85 multivariate
time series datasets specifically curated for classification
tasks. These datasets encompass a wide range of applica-
tion fields, such as audio spectra classification, business,
ECG/EEG classification, human activity recognition, gas
detection, motion classification, etc. More details are
listed in Table VIII.
•UEA archive: The UEA archive collects 30 multivariate
time series classification datasets that span various ap-
plication domains, including audio spectra classification,
ECG/EEG/MEG classification, human activity recogni-
tion, motion classification, etc. More details are listed in
Table IX.
•MTS archive: The MTS archive, also known as Bay-
dogan’s archive, consists of 13 multivariate time series
datasets covering applications of audio spectra classifica-
tion, ECG classification, human activity recognition, mo-
tion classification, etc. More details are listed in Table X.
Additionally, we also prioritize datasets that have been
widely adopted in existing research works. Considering the
fact that MTS has lower usage and has significant overlap with
UEA and UCI, we ultimately select 9 representative datasets
primarily from the UCI and UEA archives for evaluation.
These datasets include PhonemeSpectra (PS), DuckDuckGeese
(DDG), EigenWorms (EW), PenDigits (PD), Epileptic Seizure
Recognition (Epilepsy), FingerMovements (FM), Human Ac-
tivity Recognition Using Smartphones (HAR), Smartphone
and Smartwatch Activity and Biometrics Dataset (WISDM)
and UniMiB SHAR (SHAR). They encompass various appli-
cation fields, such as digits, images, and biology. For datasets
2http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets.php
3http://www.timeseriesclassification.com/dataset.php
4http://www.mustafabaydogan.com/multivariate-time-series-discretization-
for-classification.htmlfrom UEA, we utilize the pre-defined train-test split. For the
remaining datasets from the UCI archive, we partition the data
into 80% for training and 20% for testing. Detailed informa-
tion about the selected datasets can be found in Table VII.
B. Experimental Setup
We conduct linear evaluation to assess the performance of
state-of-the-art unsupervised learning models, with a particular
focus on various contrastive methods, on 9 representative
datasets mentioned in Section A. All models are implemented
using the PyTorch framework, and the experimental evalua-
tions are conducted on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU
for efficient computation. To ensure a fair comparison, we
follow the standard linear benchmarking evaluation scheme
employed in [43, 51, 56]. This involves freezing the represen-
tations pre-trained by each unsupervised model and attaching
a linear classifier on top of the frozen representations. The
linear classifier is a logistic regression classifier, which consists
of a fully-connected layer followed by the softmax activation
function. We disable gradient computation on the inputs to the
linear classifier. The classification performance is measured
by using the following 3 commonly used metrics: ACC
(Accuracy), MF1 (macro-averaged F1 score) and κ(Cohen’s
Kappa coefficient). All the models are trained for 200 epochs.
The mean and standard deviation of empirical results obtained
from 5 repeated experiments are reported for each metric.
•ACC: Accuracy is the ratio of the number of correctly
classified samples to the total number of samples, i.e.,
ACC =TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN, where TP, TN, FP, FN are true
positive, true negative, false positive and false negative.
•MF1: Macro-averaged F1 score is calculated as the arith-
metic mean of individual classes’ F1 score, i.e., MF1
=2×PR
P+R, where Precision P and Recall R are calculated
by P =TP
TP+FP,R=TP
TP+FN.
•κ: Cohen’s Kappa coefficient measures the inter-annotator
agreement that expresses the level of agreement between
predicted and true labels on classification, i.e.,κ=
ACC−pe
1−pe, where pe=[(TP+FN)∗(TP+FP)+(FP+TN)∗(FN+TN)]
N2
is the hypothetical probability of chance agreement, and
Ndenotes the total number of samples.
Task Archive Dataset N V Classes Length
ASC UEA PS 6,668 11 39 217
UEA DDG 100 1,345 5 270
MC UEA EW 259 6 5 17,984
UCI/UEA PD 10,992 2 10 8
EC UCI Epilepsy 12,500 1 2 178
UEA FM 416 28 2 50
HAR UCI HAR 10,299 9 6 128
UCI WISDM 4,091 3 6 200
Others SHAR 11,771 3 17 151
TABLE VII
STATISTICAL INFORMATION OF THE SELECTED TIME SERIES
CLASSIFICATION DATASETS FOR EVALUATION . ASC REFERS TO AUDIO
SPECTRA CLASSIFICATION , MC REFERS TO MOTION CLASSIFICATION ,
EC REFERS TO ECG/EEG/EMG/MEG C LASSIFICATION ,AND HAR
REFERS TO HUMAN ACTIVITY RECOGNITION .NDENOTES THE NUMBER
OF SAMPLES AND VDENOTES THE NUMBER OF VARIABLES . CLASSES
REFER TO THE NUMBER OF CLASSES IN EACH DATASET AND LENGTH
REFERS TO THE LENGTH OF EACH TIME SERIES .

==== Page 23 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 23
Dataset Application N V
FMA: A Dataset For Music Analysis Audio Spectra Classification 106,574 518
Japanese V owels Audio Spectra Classification 640 12
Spoken Arabic Digit Audio Spectra Classification 8,800 13
BAUM-1 Audio Spectra Classification 1,184 -
BAUM-2 Audio Spectra Classification 1,047 -
3W dataset Business 1984 8
CNNpred: CNN-based stock market prediction using a diverse set of variables Business 1,985 84
Dow Jones Index Business 750 16
ISTANBUL STOCK EXCHANGE Business 536 8
Machine Learning based ZZAlpha Ltd. Stock Recommendations 2012-2014 Business 314,080 -
Online Retail Business 541,909 8
Online Retail II Business 1,067,371 8
MHEALTH Dataset ECG Classification 120 23
EEG Eye State EEG Classification 14,980 15
EEG Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential Signals EEG Classification 9,200 16
Epileptic Seizure Recognition EEG Classification 11,500 179
EMG data for gestures EMG Classification 30,000 6
EMG Physical Action Data Set EMG Classification 10,000 8
sEMG for Basic Hand movements EMG Classification 3,000 2,500
Robot Execution Failures Failure Detection 463 90
AI4I 2020 Predictive Maintenance Dataset Failure Detection 10,000 14
Breath Metabolomics Gas Detection 104 1,656
Gas Sensor Array Drift Dataset at Different Concentrations Gas Detection 13,910 129
Gas sensor array exposed to turbulent gas mixtures Gas Detection 180 150,000
Gas sensor array temperature modulation Gas Detection 4,095,000 20
Gas sensor array under dynamic gas mixtures Gas Detection 4,178,504 19
Gas sensor array under flow modulation Gas Detection 58 120,432
Gas sensor arrays in open sampling settings Gas Detection 18,000 1,950,000
Gas sensors for home activity monitoring Gas Detection 919,438 11
Ozone Level Detection Gas Detection 2,536 73
Twin gas sensor arrays Gas Detection 640 480,000
Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) Recognition Using Binary Sensors Human Activity Recognition 2,747 -
Activity Recognition from Single Chest-Mounted Accelerometer Human Activity Recognition - -
Activity Recognition system based on Multisensor data fusion (AReM) Human Activity Recognition 42,240 6
Bar Crawl: Detecting Heavy Drinking Human Activity Recognition 14,057,567 3
Basketball dataset Human Activity Recognition 10,000 7
Daily and Sports Activities Human Activity Recognition 9,120 5,625
Daphnet Freezing of Gait Human Activity Recognition 237 9
Dataset for ADL Recognition with Wrist-worn Accelerometer Human Activity Recognition 3 14
Heterogeneity Activity Recognition Human Activity Recognition 43,930,257 16
Human Activity Recognition from Continuous Ambient Sensor Data Human Activity Recognition 13,956,534 37
Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Human Activity Recognition 10,299 561
Intelligent Media Accelerometer and Gyroscope (IM-AccGyro) Dataset Human Activity Recognition 800 9
Localization Data for Person Activity Human Activity Recognition 164,860 8
MEx Human Activity Recognition 6,262 710
OPPORTUNITY Activity Recognition Human Activity Recognition 2,551 242
PAMAP2 Physical Activity Monitoring Human Activity Recognition 3,850,505 52
REALDISP Activity Recognition Dataset Human Activity Recognition 1,419 120
selfBACK Human Activity Recognition 26,136 6
Simulated Falls and Daily Living Activities Data Set Human Activity Recognition 3,060 138
Smartphone Dataset for Human Activity Recognition in Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) Human Activity Recognition 5,744 561
Smartphone-Based Recognition of Human Activities and Postural Transitions Human Activity Recognition 10,929 561
User Identification From Walking Activity Human Activity Recognition - -
Vicon Physical Action Data Set Human Activity Recognition 3,000 27
WISDM Smartphone and Smartwatch Activity and Biometrics Dataset Human Activity Recognition 15,630,426 6
BLE RSSI dataset for Indoor localization Indoor localization 23,570 5
BLE RSSI Dataset for Indoor localization and Navigation Indoor localization 6,611 15
Geo-Magnetic field and WLAN dataset for indoor localisation from wristband and smartphone Indoor localization 153,540 25
Hybrid Indoor Positioning Dataset from WiFi RSSI, Bluetooth and magnetometer Indoor localization 1,540 65
UJIIndoorLoc-Mag Indoor localization 40,000 13
Kitsune Network Attack Dataset Malware/Attack Identification 27,170,754 115
URL Reputation Malware/Attack Identification 2,396,130 3,231,961
Detect Malware Types Malware/Attack Identification 7,107 280
Dynamic Features of VirusShare Executables Malware/Attack Identification 107,888 482
BitcoinHeistRansomwareAddressDataset Malware/Attack Identification 2,916,697 10
Character Trajectories Motion Classification 2,858 3
Gesture Phase Segmentation Motion Classification 9,900 50
Indoor User Movement Prediction from RSS data Motion Classification 13,197 4
Pedestrian in Traffic Dataset Motion Classification 4,760 14
WESAD (Wearable Stress and Affect Detection) Motion Classification 63,000,000 12
Australian Sign Language signs Motion Classification 6,650 15
Australian Sign Language signs (High Quality) Motion Classification 2,565 22
PEMS-SF Others 440 138,672
Parking Birmingham Others 35,717 4
Occupancy Detection Others 20,560 7
Synthetic Control Chart Time Series Others 600 6
Crop mapping using fused optical-radar data set Others 325,834 175
Absenteeism at work Others 740 21
Educational Process Mining (EPM): A Learning Analytics Data Set Others 230,318 13
Productivity Prediction of Garment Employees Others 1,197 15
Buzz in social media Others 140,000 77
Condition monitoring of hydraulic systems Others 2,205 43,680
Open University Learning Analytics dataset Others - -
Data for Software Engineering Teamwork Assessment in Education Setting Others 74 102
Behavior of the urban traffic of the city of Sao Paulo in Brazil Others 135 18
TABLE VIII
THEUCI M ULTIVARIATE TIMESERIES CLASSIFICATION ARCHIVE - 85 D ATASETS .NDENOTES THE NUMBER OF SAMPLES AND VDENOTES THE
NUMBER OF VARIABLES . CLASSES REFER TO THE NUMBER OF CLASSES IN EACH DATASET AND LENGTH REFERS TO THE LENGTH OF EACH TIME SERIES .

==== Page 24 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 24
Dataset Application N V Classes Length
DuckDuckGeese Audio Spectra Classification 100 1,345 5 270
Heartbeat Audio Spectra Classification 409 61 2 405
InsectWingbeat Audio Spectra Classification 50,000 200 10 30
JapaneseV owels Audio Spectra Classification 640 12 9 29
PhonemeSpectra Audio Spectra Classification 6,668 11 39 217
SpokenArabicDigits Audio Spectra Classification 8,798 13 10 93
AtrialFibrillation ECG Classification 30 2 3 640
StandWalkJump ECG Classification 27 4 3 2,500
FaceDetection EEG/MEG Classification 9,414 144 2 62
FingerMovements EEG/MEG Classification 416 28 2 50
HandMovementDirection EEG/MEG Classification 234 10 4 400
MotorImagery EEG/MEG Classification 378 64 2 3,000
SelfRegulationSCP1 EEG/MEG Classification 561 6 2 896
SelfRegulationSCP2 EEG/MEG Classification 380 7 2 1,152
BasicMotions Human Activity Recognition 80 6 4 100
Cricket Human Activity Recognition 180 6 12 1,197
Epilepsy Human Activity Recognition 275 3 4 206
ERing Human Activity Recognition 300 4 6 65
Handwriting Human Activity Recognition 1,000 3 26 152
Libras Human Activity Recognition 360 2 15 45
NATOPS Human Activity Recognition 360 24 6 51
RacketSports Human Activity Recognition 303 6 4 30
UWaveGestureLibrary Human Activity Recognition 440 3 8 315
ArticularyWordRecognition Motion Classification 575 9 25 144
CharacterTrajectories Motion Classification 2,858 3 20 182
EigenWorms Motion Classification 259 6 5 17,984
PenDigits Motion Classification 10,992 2 10 8
EthanolConcentration Others 524 3 4 1,751
LSST Others 4,925 6 14 36
PEMS-SF Others 440 963 7 144
TABLE IX
THEUEA M ULTIVARIATE TIMESERIES CLASSIFICATION ARCHIVE - 30 D ATASETS .NDENOTES THE NUMBER OF SAMPLES AND VDENOTES THE
NUMBER OF VARIABLES . CLASSES REFER TO THE NUMBER OF CLASSES IN EACH DATASET AND LENGTH REFERS TO THE LENGTH OF EACH TIME SERIES .
Dataset Application N V Classes Length
ArabicDigits Audio Spectra Classification 8,800 13 10 4 - 93
JapaneseV owels Audio Spectra Classification 640 12 9 7 - 29
ECG ECG Classification 200 2 2 39 - 152
Libras Human Activity Recognition 360 2 15 45
UWave Human Activity Recognition 4,478 3 8 315
AUSLAN Motion Classification 2,565 22 95 45 - 136
CharacterTrajectories Motion Classification 2,858 3 20 109 - 205
CMUsubject16 Motion Classification 58 62 2 127 - 580
KickvsPunch Motion Classification 26 62 2 274 - 841
WalkvsRun Motion Classification 44 62 2 128 - 1,918
NetFlow Others 1,337 4 2 50 - 997
PEMS Others 440 963 7 144
Wafer Others 1,194 6 2 104 - 198
TABLE X
THEMTS M ULTIVARIATE TIMESERIES CLASSIFICATION ARCHIVE - 13 D ATASETS .NDENOTES THE NUMBER OF SAMPLES AND VDENOTES THE
NUMBER OF VARIABLES . CLASSES REFER TO THE NUMBER OF CLASSES IN EACH DATASET AND LENGTH REFERS TO THE LENGTH OF EACH TIME SERIES .

==== Page 25 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 25
Category ModelHAR WISDM Epilepsy
ACC MF1 κ ACC MF1 κ ACC MF1 κ
Deep ClusteringDeepCluster 69.95±2.47 67.41 ±2.19 63.43 ±2.20 72.89±2.38 70.39 ±3.16 68.07 ±3.45 86.07±1.84 80.99 ±1.97 76.43 ±2.18
IDFD 67.07±1.62 64.12 ±1.45 60.87 ±1.40 68.14±1.82 64.78 ±1.91 61.08 ±1.93 79.56±1.73 74.84 ±1.52 70.24 ±1.56
Reconstruction-basedTimeNet 74.61±2.42 73.64 ±2.51 70.35 ±2.73 79.23±2.76 71.82 ±2.73 70.49 ±3.04 89.32±1.39 85.71 ±1.43 75.76 ±1.92
Deconv 71.53±1.65 70.76 ±1.84 62.72 ±2.39 75.76±2.30 69.45 ±2.79 66.28 ±3.21 85.44±1.92 79.85 ±2.08 76.01 ±2.57
Self-supervised TimeGAN 73.57±1.96 70.04 ±1.94 66.71 ±2.30 79.22±2.61 72.43 ±2.88 69.26 ±3.03 89.79±1.24 86.55 ±1.36 74.83 ±1.77
-Adversarial TimeV AE 70.69±2.07 65.61 ±2.41 61.45 ±2.89 74.46±2.97 67.93 ±3.41 64.10 ±3.94 86.91±1.17 82.40 ±1.41 76.98 ±2.56
-Predictive EEG-SSL 65.34±1.63 63.75 ±1.37 57.20 ±1.22 70.67±1.11 66.50 ±0.93 62.44 ±1.07 93.72±0.45 89.15 ±0.93 77.65 ±1.64
TST 70.73±2.29 66.36 ±2.03 63.14 ±2.74 76.68±2.85 70.06 ±2.94 67.30 ±3.41 91.21±0.88 87.64 ±1.33 87.49 ±1.75
-Contrastive SimCLR 81.06±2.35 80.62 ±2.31 77.25 ±2.82 83.04±4.21 75.83 ±6.47 75.15 ±6.27 93.00±0.57 88.09 ±0.97 76.27 ±1.93
BYOL 89.46±0.17 89.31 ±0.17 87.33 ±0.20 87.84±0.38 84.02 ±0.77 82.43 ±0.57 98.08±0.09 96.99 ±0.15 93.99 ±0.30
SwA V 68.81±1.50 66.69 ±1.56 62.41 ±1.81 73.44±1.28 53.90 ±3.56 59.75 ±2.29 94.30±0.85 90.80 ±1.37 81.62 ±2.73
PCL 74.49±1.95 65.02 ±1.69 71.96 ±2.12 69.47±1.51 61.75 ±3.29 56.36 ±2.57 89.93±1.34 87.68 ±1.42 85.78 ±1.88
TS-TCC 89.22±0.70 89.23 ±0.76 87.03 ±0.85 81.48±0.98 69.17 ±2.25 73.13 ±1.33 97.19±0.18 95.47 ±0.31 90.94 ±0.61
T-Loss 91.06±0.94 90.94 ±0.96 89.26 ±1.13 91.48±1.05 88.79 ±1.53 87.79 ±1.51 96.94±0.20 95.20 ±0.30 90.41 ±0.61
TABLE XI
COMPARISONS BETWEEN DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF UNSUPERVISED LEARNING METHODS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , MF1 REFERS TO
MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE ,ANDκREFERS TO COHEN ’S KAPPA COEFFICIENT .
C. Results and Discussions
We choose 3 time series datasets for conducting compar-
isons among various categories of unsupervised learning meth-
ods. Following this analysis, due to the promising results and
growing popularity of contrastive learning methods over other
unsupervised learning methods, we allocate special emphasis
on contrastive learning methods covering multiple levels of
contrast in the following subsections.
1) A comparative analysis of different categories of un-
supervised learning methods: The comparisons between dif-
ferent categories of unsupervised learning methods on 3 se-
lected datasets are presented in Table XI. In general, self-
supervised learning approaches outperform deep clustering
and reconstruction-based methods. Such performance gain in-
dicates that self-supervised models offer improved representa-
tion learning capabilities. This can be attributed to the broader
range of pretext tasks, such as predicting missing elements,
temporal order, or context, which encourage the model to learn
rich and meaningful representations. This diversity of tasks
enables the model to capture different aspects of the data,
leading to more comprehensive and robust representations.
Particularly, contrastive methods have demonstrated promising
results in most datasets as they distinguish samples from
multiple views without the need for explicit labels. Such
discrimination allows the learned representations to be more
effective in capturing meaningful differences between data
samples. Instead, adversarial methods such as TimeGAN [69]
and TimeV AE [70] assume specific data distributions, re-
quire iterative optimization and often are more challenging to
converge. These methods can be computationally expensive
and require larger amounts of data for training. Whereas,
contrastive methods are less sensitive to the data distribution
compared to adversarial methods and are generally easier
to train. Additionally, predictive methods including EEG-
SSL [71] and TST [104], tend to perform worse than most
contrastive methods. This is because predictive methods rely
on a large number of given contexts to accurately predict part
of the data, which can be challenging in practice. Conversely,contrastive methods can make better use of the available data
by focusing on differentiating between a smaller number of
similar and dissimilar data pairs.
Dataset Level Model ACC MF1 κ
EpilepsyInstanceSimCLR 93.00±0.57 88.09±0.97 76.27±1.93
BYOL 98.08±0.09 96.99±0.15 93.99±0.30
CPC 96.61±0.43 94.44±0.69 88.67±1.22
PrototypeSwA V 94.30±0.85 90.80±1.37 81.62±2.73
PCL 89.93±1.34 87.68±1.42 85.78±1.88
MHCCL 97.85±0.49 95.44±0.82 91.08±1.57
TemporalTS2Vec 96.32±0.23 94.27±0.37 88.54±0.74
TS-TCC 97.19±0.18 95.47±0.31 90.94±0.61
T-Loss 96.94±0.20 95.20±0.30 90.41±0.61
HARInstanceSimCLR 81.06±2.35 80.62±2.31 77.25±2.82
BYOL 89.46±0.17 89.31±0.17 87.33±0.20
CPC 83.85±1.51 83.27±1.66 79.76±1.90
PrototypeSwA V 68.81±1.50 66.69±1.56 62.41±1.81
PCL 74.49±1.95 65.02±1.69 71.96±2.12
MHCCL 91.60±1.06 91.77±1.11 89.90±1.27
TemporalTS2Vec 90.47±0.66 90.46±0.64 89.15±0.79
TS-TCC 89.22±0.70 89.23±0.76 87.03±0.85
T-Loss 91.06±0.94 90.94±0.96 89.26±1.13
SHARInstanceSimCLR 67.22±1.76 53.05±2.42 63.84±1.97
BYOL 67.00±0.98 59.30±1.30 63.62±1.10
CPC 68.57±1.40 62.44±1.77 61.62±0.96
PrototypeSwA V 57.49±2.75 58.82±2.53 58.89±3.50
PCL 56.28±1.47 49.42±1.62 51.78±1.65
MHCCL 83.42±1.76 78.45±2.09 80.58±1.84
TemporalTS2Vec 82.94±2.91 77.89±2.95 78.94±3.20
TS-TCC 70.80±0.75 64.28±0.72 67.74±0.85
T-Loss 80.88±3.94 77.06±3.44 79.65±4.35
WISDMInstanceSimCLR 83.04±4.21 75.83±6.47 75.15±6.27
BYOL 87.84±0.38 84.02±0.77 82.43±0.57
CPC 80.35±0.98 73.24±1.21 72.23±1.07
PrototypeSwA V 73.44±1.28 53.90±3.56 59.75±2.29
PCL 69.47±1.51 61.75±3.29 56.36±2.57
MHCCL 93.60±1.06 91.70±1.10 90.96±1.08
TemporalTS2Vec 92.33±1.05 90.27±1.07 90.36±1.49
TS-TCC 81.48±0.98 69.17±2.25 73.13±1.33
T-Loss 91.48±1.05 88.79±1.53 87.79±1.51
TABLE XII
ACOMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT LEVELS OF CONTRAST ON 4
DATASETS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , MF1 REFERS TO
MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE ,ANDκREFERS TO COHEN ’S KAPPA
COEFFICIENT .
2) A comparative analysis of performing different levels of
contrast: We conducted a specific comparison and analysis of

==== Page 26 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 26
Dataset Level Model ACC MF1 κ
InstanceSimCLR 40.00±0.60 39.01±0.69 25.00±0.74
BYOL 51.60±1.20 52.04±1.34 39.50±1.50
CPC 44.72±2.19 42.90±3.45 30.77±4.16
PrototypeSwA V 52.40±3.44 50.95±4.46 40.50±4.30
DDG PCL 48.62±3.56 46.86±3.97 35.67±5.74
MHCCL 50.76±3.19 49.52±3.54 39.50±4.27
TemporalTS2Vec 52.00±3.27 51.02±3.64 40.00±4.08
TS-TCC 38.67±5.96 35.51±6.48 23.33±7.45
T-Loss 54.50±4.33 52.70±5.48 43.13±5.41
InstanceSimCLR 49.20±0.98 43.08±4.90 -0.69±2.29
BYOL 49.60±1.11 49.38±1.12 -0.49±2.22
CPC 49.73±1.45 44.76±1.69 -0.27±2.70
PrototypeSwA V 44.22±2.19 44.19±2.20 8.47±4.40
FM PCL 50.44±1.95 43.68±1.30 1.19±3.89
MHCCL 52.09±1.45 50.51±2.06 17.87±3.39
TemporalTS2Vec 50.00±1.63 49.99±1.64 -0.01±3.30
TS-TCC 50.17±1.60 49.07±2.10 0.33±4.58
T-Loss 50.50±1.72 50.33±1.76 4.01±6.65
InstanceSimCLR 93.35±0.17 93.27±0.17 92.61±0.19
BYOL 94.93±0.08 94.96±0.07 94.37±0.09
CPC 92.03±0.32 91.00±0.35 90.04±0.36
PrototypeSwA V 78.02±2.86 76.86±3.06 71.10±3.19
PD PCL 86.18±1.25 83.36±1.11 80.69±1.01
MHCCL 98.69±0.41 98.71±0.55 97.43±0.72
TemporalTS2Vec 97.83±0.24 97.80±0.25 97.59±0.27
TS-TCC 97.44±0.23 97.45±0.23 97.16±0.26
T-Loss 97.86±0.52 97.87±0.52 97.63±0.57
InstanceSimCLR 15.14±0.30 12.64±0.33 12.91±0.31
BYOL 12.08±0.21 11.62±0.19 9.77±0.21
CPC 14.31±0.78 14.32±0.77 9.95±0.84
PrototypeSwA V 11.66±0.64 8.92±0.58 9.33±0.65
PS PCL 8.92±1.04 8.96±1.24 6.53±1.49
MHCCL 15.43±0.79 14.29±0.76 12.63±0.79
TemporalTS2Vec 15.69±0.90 15.69±0.95 13.47±0.92
TS-TCC 10.90±0.76 9.16±0.65 8.56±0.78
T-Loss 18.60±0.25 18.15±0.28 16.46±0.25
InstanceSimCLR 60.87±1.84 55.62±4.69 47.99±3.27
BYOL 79.39±0.84 75.12±1.05 71.84±1.19
CPC 67.03±1.38 63.06±1.38 58.26±1.53
PrototypeSwA V 43.75±1.80 35.16±2.31 21.82±2.27
EW PCL 43.28±1.06 40.02±2.01 22.58±1.59
MHCCL 79.10±2.21 76.01±1.45 69.53±1.90
TemporalTS2Vec 82.80±2.52 81.59±3.73 80.74±3.41
TS-TCC 73.21±1.44 64.33±0.81 63.41±1.17
T-Loss 75.00±3.39 67.85±3.64 65.12±4.91
TABLE XIII
ACOMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT LEVELS OF CONTRAST ON
UEA DATASETS . ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , MF1 REFERS TO
MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE ,ANDκREFERS TO COHEN ’S KAPPA
COEFFICIENT .
contrastive methods focusing on different levels of contrast.
Table XIII shows the comparative analysis at different levels
of contrast on UEA datasets, and the results on 4 other datasets
are shown in Table XII. From the results, it can be observed
that contrastive learning models such as TS2Vec [52], TS-
TCC [51] and T-Loss [50], which emphasize the impact at the
temporal level, achieve better results compared to methods that
focus on instance-level or prototype-level contrast. However,
prototype-level contrastive learning models such as SwA V [59]
and PCL [58], which have shown great success in image data,
do not perform as well in time series data. These methods
usually employ flat clustering algorithms, which are capable
of capturing only a single hierarchy of semantic clusters.
Nonetheless, the result obtained from one clustering iteration
cannot be consistently relied upon as there is no assurance
of their accuracy, rendering them inadequate. In this case,Dataset Metric ResNet-18 ResNet-50 InceptionTime
HARACC 78.70±2.27 81.06±2.35 82.25±1.94
MF1 78.44±2.19 80.62±2.31 80.56±2.28
κ 76.21±2.43 77.25±2.82 78.39±2.65
WISDMACC 86.94±1.92 83.04±4.21 87.46±1.87
MF1 81.65±3.26 75.83±6.47 82.14±2.85
κ 80.91±2.95 75.15±6.27 81.62±2.24
EpilepsyACC 93.42±0.26 93.00±0.57 93.68±0.41
MF1 88.72±0.54 88.09±0.97 88.80±0.64
κ 77.54±1.06 76.27±1.93 77.89±1.39
TABLE XIV
THE CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE OF USING DIFFERENT BACKBONES
INSIMCLR. ACC REFERS TO ACCURACY , MF1 REFERS TO
MACRO -AVERAGED F1SCORE ,ANDκREFERS TO COHEN ’S KAPPA
COEFFICIENT .
it is worth noting that MHCCL [60] demonstrates superior
performance as it incorporates hierarchical clustering into the
construction of contrastive pairs, which helps address the
limitation of flat clustering algorithms.
3) A comparative analysis of using different backbones:
Table XIV presents a comparative analysis of employing
different backbones in the SimCLR model for unsupervised
time series representation learning. Typically, we find that most
models summarized in Table IV, Table V and Table VI utilize
ResNets [145] as the backbone and achieve satisfactory perfor-
mance. Therefore, we compare the results of using ResNet-18
and ResNet-50 as backbones. Furthermore, we evaluate Incep-
tionTime [146], which is specifically designed for time series
data by incorporating the temporal dependencies. As shown
in Table XIV, InceptionTime outperforms the general-purpose
ResNets in most datasets. This observation highlights the
capability of InceptionTime to identify both local and global
shape patterns ( i.e.,low-level and high-level features) in time
series data. InceptionTime proves to be exceptionally fitting
for time series data due to its utilization of 1D convolutions
with multiple kernel sizes in parallel. This approach facilitates
efficient feature extraction on time series data across various
scales, making it well-suited to capture diverse granularities of
semantics in time series data. In contrast, ResNets primarily
rely on 2D convolutions and are optimized for image data,
which may not yield the same level of effectiveness when
applied to time series data analysis.
4) A comparative analysis of employing different augmenta-
tion selection strategies: Table XV presents the classification
accuracy of employing different data augmentation selection
strategies. We evaluate 4 strategies in 3 popular contrastive
learning models on 3 datasets. As shown in Table XV, we com-
pare the original strategy (Original) used in each model with 3
alternative augmentation selection strategies. The specified one
(Specified) follows the implementation in TS-TCC [51] which
employs simple yet efficient transformations that can fit any
time series data to create a strong and a weak view. Therefore,
the specified strategy is equivalent to the original one in TS-
TCC model. Both the aforementioned original and specified
augmentation selection strategies are developed based on do-
main expert knowledge and empirical results. Additionally, we
also compare with 2 automatic selection strategies including
RandAugment [147] and W-Augment [148]. Nevertheless, it

==== Page 27 ====
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 27
is noteworthy that the advancements achieved through the
utilization of automatic augmentation selection strategies have
shown minimal improvement. In some cases, the performance
does not surpass that of the original performance. Conse-
quently, developing automatic augmentation selection strate-
gies specifically tailored for time series data or optimizing
the combinations of various transformations remains an open
problem for boosting contrastive learning.
Dataset Strategy SimCLR TS-TCC BYOL
HAROriginal 81.83±2.18 89.22±0.70 89.36±2.09
Specified 81.06±2.35 89.22±0.70 89.46±0.17
RandAugment 81.02±2.37 87.94±2.14 89.90±2.37
W-Augment 81.27±1.66 87.57±1.69 89.35±1.96
WISDMOriginal 83.71±3.48 81.48±0.98 87.91±2.42
Specified 83.04±4.21 81.48±0.98 87.84±0.38
RandAugment 82.78±2.69 82.32±2.36 88.03±2.99
W-Augment 84.30±1.85 82.47±1.87 87.84±2.25
EpilepsyOriginal 92.97±1.62 97.19±0.18 97.64±1.23
Specified 93.00±0.57 97.19±0.18 98.08±0.09
RandAugment 93.26±2.17 98.04±0.64 98.06±0.91
W-Augment 92.19±1.79 97.52±0.92 97.67±0.79
TABLE XV
THE CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF EMPLOYING DIFFERENT DATA
AUGMENTATION SELECTION STRATEGIES .

