==== Page 1 ====
Unsupervised Learning for Real-World Super-Resolution
Andreas Lugmayr Martin Danelljan Radu Timofte
CVL, ETH Z ¨urich, Switzerland
Abstract
Most current super-resolution methods rely on low and
high resolution image pairs to train a network in a fully
supervised manner. However, such image pairs are not
available in real-world applications. Instead of directly
addressing this problem, most works employ the popular
bicubic downsampling strategy to artiﬁcially generate a
corresponding low resolution image. Unfortunately, this
strategy introduces signiﬁcant artifacts, removing natural
sensor noise and other real-world characteristics. Super-
resolution networks trained on such bicubic images there-
fore struggle to generalize to natural images.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised approach for
image super-resolution. Given only unpaired data, we learn
to invert the effects of bicubic downsampling in order to re-
store the natural image characteristics present in the data.
This allows us to generate realistic image pairs, faith-
fully reﬂecting the distribution of real-world images. Our
super-resolution network can therefore be trained with di-
rect pixel-wise supervision in the high resolution domain,
while robustly generalizing to real input. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in quantitative and quali-
tative experiments.
1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) aims to enhance the resolution of
natural images. Recent years have seen an increased inter-
est in the problem, driven by emerging applications. Most
notably, current generations of smartphones allow for the
deployment of powerful image enhancement techniques,
based on machine learning approaches. This calls for super-
resolution methods that can be applied to natural images,
that are often subject to signiﬁcant levels of sensor noise,
compression artifacts or other corruptions encountered in
applications. In this work, we therefore address the prob-
lem of super-resolution in the real-world setting.
Real-world SR poses a fundamental challenge that has
been largely ignored until very recently. The lack of nat-
ural low resolution (LR) and high resolution (HR) image
pairs greatly complicates the evaluation and training of SR
?
?
?
?Original ESRGAN Ours Ground Truth
Figure 1. Super-resolving ( 4) natural images (left) with ESR-
GAN [35], trained on bicubic LR images, and our unsupervised
approach. Ground truth data is unavailable in the real-world set-
ting. Our approach learns to handle sensor noise and other artifacts
in natural images, while ESRGAN fails to generalize.
methods. Therefore, research in the ﬁeld has long relied
on the use of known degradation operators such as bicubic
kernel in order to artiﬁcially generate a corresponding LR
image [9, 31, 34]. While this straight-forward approach en-
ables simple and efﬁcient benchmarking and generation of
virtually unlimited training data, it comes with signiﬁcant
drawbacks. Bicubic downsampling can drastically change
the natural characteristics of an image by, e.g., removing
sensor noise and compression artifacts.
State-of-the-art methods trained only to reconstruct im-
ages artiﬁcially downsampled with a bicubic kernel, do not
generalize to natural images. As visualized in Figure 1,
even small levels of noise causes a network trained only on
bicubic images, in this case ESRGAN [35], to output sig-
niﬁcant artifacts. In fact, this is expected as deep learning
methods are known to be sensitive to signiﬁcant differences
1arXiv:1909.09629v1  [eess.IV]  20 Sep 2019

==== Page 2 ====
between the train and test distributions. The ESRGAN has
not seen noisy input images during train-time due to the
smoothing effects introduced by bicubic downsampling.
In this work, we present a novel way of training a generic
method in order to overcome the challenges of real-world
SR. We address the shift between training and testing distri-
butions arising from the bicubic downsampling by learning
the corresponding inverse mapping operation. To this end,
we train a mapping from the bicubic images to the distri-
bution of real-world LR images. By employing cycle con-
sistency losses [40], we learn this mapping in a fully unsu-
pervised manner. The learned network is applied on bicu-
bically downsampled images to generate paired LR and HR
images that follow the real-world distribution. This allows
us to learn the SR network on a realistic dataset, unaffected
by the bicubic shift. Furthermore, the SR network is trained
with direct pixel-wise supervision in the HR domain, with-
out the need of any paired ground-truth data. Visual results
of our approach on natural images is shown in Figure 1.
Due to the unavailability of paired data, we introduce a
protocol for benchmarking real-world SR methods, based
on simulating natural degradations. We analyze our ap-
proach in two scenarios, namely Domain (DSR) and Clean
Super-Resolution (CSR). In the former case, the real-world
data distribution is deﬁned by one set of natural images.
However, our approach generalizes to the case when the
real-world input and output distributions of the SR network
are different. We therefore introduce the CSR task, where
the goal is to achieve a clean super-resolved image, deﬁned
by a separate output distribution of high-quality images. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the afore-
mentioned benchmark, and compare it to baseline methods
and state-of-the-art approaches. Finally, we show qualita-
tive results for the task of super-resolving real-world smart-
phone images on the DPED [17] dataset.
2. Related Work
Until very recently, single image super-resolution (SISR)
methods were primarily benchmarked in terms of PSNR,
for the task of super-resolving bicubic downsampled im-
ages. While traditionally addressed with classical tech-
niques [19, 12, 29, 36, 15], current approaches [9, 10, 22,
23, 26, 11, 2, 3, 14, 16] employ deep learning methodolo-
gies to train a mapping from LR to HR. Among the latter,
EDSR [26] notably introduced a ResNet inspired architec-
ture, better adapted for the task at hand. For training the net-
work however, these methods rely on the L1 or L2 losses.
While these losses are closely related to the PSNR evalua-
tion metric, they do not preserve the natural image charac-
teristics, generally leading to a blurry result [38]. To address
this problem, Ledig et al. [24] introduced an objective func-
tion aimed at perceptually more pleasing results. The novel
objectives were a GAN discriminator and a loss computedin the VGG feature space. While providing inferior PSNR
compared to state-of-the-art, the super-resolved images ex-
perienced signiﬁcantly better perceptual quality. Following
this philosophy, the recent winner of the PIRM2018 [18]
challenge ESRGAN [35], proposed further architectural im-
provements to further enhance the perceptual quality.
Despite their success, the aforementioned approaches are
severely limited by their reliance on the bicubic downsam-
pling operation for training data generation. This opera-
tion eliminates most high frequency components and there-
fore, signiﬁcantly altering the natural image characteristics,
such as noise, compression artifacts, and other corruptions.
The bicubic assumption therefore rarely reﬂects the real-
world scenario. Blind SR generalizes the problem by as-
suming LR and HR image pairs with an unknown degrada-
tion and downsampling kernel. Early attempts [4] to this
problem include explicitly estimating the unknown point
spread function itself [28, 13]. Another direction of re-
search aims to completely remove the need for external
training data by performing image-speciﬁc SR. Following
this idea, ZSSR [30] trains a lightweight network using only
the testing image itself, by performing extensive data aug-
mentation. However, this approach still employs a ﬁx down-
sampling operation to generate synthetic pairs at test time.
Furthermore, the image-speciﬁc learning leads to extremely
slow prediction.
A few recent works address the unsupervised SR setting,
where no paired LR-HR pairs are given and the relation be-
tween LR and HR images is unknown. The Cycle-in-Cycle
network [37] learns a mapping from the original input im-
age to a clean image space, using a framework that employs
cycle consistency losses. The SR network itself is trained
by only employing indirect supervision in the LR domain,
in addition to the usual perceptual GAN-discriminator. In
contrast, our framework allows direct supervision in the HR
domain, resulting in better training of the SR network itself.
Furthermore, instead of “cleaning” the input image during
train and test time, we learn a mapping to the original in-
put domain for only the training. Another work focuses on
the downsampling process [21] in order to improve the SR.
However, SR is only performed on images with the learned
downsampling operation, and is therefore not applicable to
our real-world scenario. Also Bulat et al. [5] focus on the
problem of learning the downsampling process. However,
this approach speciﬁcally addresses the problem of super-
resolving faces, where strong content priors can be learned
by the network. In contrast, we tackle the general SR prob-
lem, not putting any assumptions on the image content.
Lastly, recent works [39, 7, 6] propose strategies to capture
real LR-HR image pairs. However, these methods rely on
complicated data collection procedures, requiring special-
ized hardware, that is difﬁcult and expensive to scale. Our
approach operates without the need of any additional data,

==== Page 3 ====
greatly increasing its use and applicability.
3. Proposed Method
3.1. The Super-Resolution Problem
In essence, super-resolution (SR) is the problem of in-
creasing the resolution of natural images. However, this
problem comes with a fundamental challenge that has been
largely ignored up until very recently. Namely, the lack of
natural LR and HR image pairs, which are needed for evalu-
ation and training. Therefore, research in SR has long relied
on the use of known downscaling operators (e.g. bicubic) in
order to artiﬁcially generate a corresponding LR image pair.
While this simpliﬁcation has historically also served the de-
velopment of SR methods, it is fundamentally limiting.
Bicubic downsampling can drastically change the nat-
ural characteristics of an image by, e.g., removing sensor
noise and compression artefacts. A real-world example is
shown in Figure 2. The natural image (left) is affected by
natrual sensor noise. However, the corresponding bicubi-
cally downsampled image does not preserve these charac-
teristics. Hence, a network trained to super-resolve the lat-
ter image cannot be expected to generalize to the original
real-world distribution.
To formalize the problem, we let Xdenote the natural
image we wish to super-resolve. We also introduce the dis-
tributionpXof such natural images XpXon which we
want our SR approach to operate. In practice, pXcould
be deﬁned as images obtained from a speciﬁc camera or a
dataset of real-world images. The aim is to learn a func-
tionSthat maps an image XpXto a high resolution
image ^Y=S(X)that is distributed according to the output
distribution pY. In applications, we could have pY=pX,
meaning that we want the characteristics of the image to
remain unchanged after super-resolution. We term this set-
ting domain-speciﬁc super-resolution (DSR). Another alter-
native would be to let pYbe deﬁned by a set of high-quality
images, which we call clean super-resolution (CSR) setting.
For most real-world applications it is incredibly hard
and strenuous to collect natural image pairs (X;Y )for SR.
In classical SR this is addressed by artiﬁcially construct-
ing the input image Z=B(Y), whereBis the bicubic
downsampling operation. The task is then aimed to super-
resolveZto match the original image S(Z)Y. How-
ever, as illustrated in Figure 2, the bicubically downsam-
pled images ZpZdo not match the input distribution,
i.e.pZ6=pX. Unfortunately, methods trained in this man-
ner struggle when supplied with real data XpX.
Related to our discussion is the concept of blind SR. In
this setting, the input images Xare assumed to be gener-
ated from the output images Ywith some ﬁxed and sim-
ple transformation that is unknown. Often, a more general
downsampling kernel kis used in combination with a non-
Original Crop Bicubic Restored
Figure 2. Here we visualize the effects for bicubic downsampling
and compare it to our domain distribution learning. The original
HR image contains signiﬁcant sensor noise, which almost com-
pletely disappears after bicubic downsampling. This is clearly ob-
served when compared with the same-resolution crop of the origi-
nal image. Our learned mapping Grestores the image characteris-
tics present in the original image (right).
linear degradation function fdeg, such thatX=fdeg(kY).
Some methods try to ﬁnd the kernel kfrom data or learn the
transformation end-to-end.
3.2. Overview
The real-world SR setting, addressed in this work, can
be seen as a generalization of blind SR. In our approach, we
assume no particular relation, such as a parameterized trans-
formation, between the input Xand outputYimages. We
only assume that a set of input image samples fXigM
i=1
pXand a set of output image samples fYjgN
j=1pYare
available. These image samples are not paired. Given this
data, the problem is to learn a mapping Sthat can super-
resolve a new image XpXsuch thatS(X)pY. In
order to train Sfrom such unpaired data, we learn a func-
tion ^X=G(Z)that maps the bicubically downsampled
imageZ=B(Y)from the output distribution to an image
sample ^XpXthat ﬁts the input distribution pX. This
effectively constructs an input-output training pair (^X;Y ),
allowing the SR network Sto be learned in a supervised
manner such that S(^X)Y. The main advantage of our
approach is that the SR network can be trained with direct
pixel-wise supervision in the HR domain. The proposed
framework is depicted in Figure 3.
We ﬁrst train the generator G, called the domain dis-
tribution network , in a conditional GAN setting. This is
performed by employing a discriminator network aiming to
differentiate the generated images ^X=G(B(Y));YpY
from true input images XpX. Since no paired output
is available, we enforce a cycle consistency loss by em-
ploying a second generator Fmapping input images Xto
^Z=F(X)pZ. Crucially, we train the domain distri-
bution network Gindependently from the SR network S.
While, this may seem counter intuitive at ﬁrst, it is clearly
motivated from the fact that the networks GandShave
fundamentally conﬂicting objectives. The aim of Gis to
map a bicubically downsampled image Z=B(Y)from
the output distribution to an image ^Xfollowing the input
distributionpX, such that a faithful training sample (^X;Y )
is generated for the SR network. The network Ssimply

==== Page 4 ====
YˆB
G
FDZS
DXDY
 ℒCyc  ℒCyc ℒ1, VGGY~pY
Z~pZ Xˆ
Zˆ
X~pXSuper-Resolution
Domain-CorrectionℒGANℒGANℒGANFigure 3. Schematic overview of our approach. In the ﬁrst step, we learn the domain distribution network G, depicted in blue. Given
unpaired data from the input pXand output pYdistributions, the generator Gis trained in a GAN framework by employing cycle consis-
tency losses. The SR network Sis trained in a second stage, depicted in orange, using pairs (^X; Y)generated by our domain distribution
network G.
aims to super-resolve any image from pX. If both networks
were to be trained jointly using the cycle-consistency loss
forS(G(B(Y)))Y, the networks SandGwould col-
laborate in order to minimize the aforementioned loss. This
leads to severe overﬁtting and poor generalization. As il-
lustrated in Figure 3, we train the SR network is a second
separate training stage, using the training pairs generated by
the network G.
3.3. Domain Distribution Learning
The task of the domain distribution learning ^X=G(Z)
is to map a bicubic downsampled image from the output
distributionZ=B(Y)to the input distribution pX. Since
we do not have access to paired samples, we need to venture
into unsupervised learning territories. We ﬁrstly employ a
GAN discriminator DX, tasked to differentiate between the
generatedG(Z)and images drawn from the input distribu-
tionpX. For this, we employ the original GAN formulation,
LGAN(G;D X) =EXpX[logDX(X)] + (1)
EYpY[log(1 DX(G(B(Y)))]:
To preserve the image content, despite the lack of paired
images, we employ cycle consistency losses [8]. A sec-
ond generator Fis tasked to map images from the input do-
mainpXto the domain of bicubic downsampled images pZ,
whereZ=B(Y). We then add cycle consistency losses as,
Lcyc(X;Y ) =EYpY[jjF(G(B(Y))) B(Y)jj1] + (2)
EXpX[jjG(F(X)) Xjj1]:
They constrain the generators GandFto be each others ap-
proximate inverses. Hence, the image shall be preserved if
mapped through Gand thenFback to the original domain.Analogous to (2), we add a discriminator DZand similar
loss on the bicubic side. The full objective is thus,
LDDL(G;F;D X;DY) =LGAN(G;D X) + (3)
LGAN(F;D Z) +Lcyc(G;F):
The full architecture is shown in Figure 3 (blue).
Network architectures For our experiments we designed
the domain distribution mapping Gbased on the CycleGAN
architecture [8]. The generators GandFuse a ResNet
architecture with nine blocks. We replace the transposed
convolution layers with bi-linear upsampling followed by
a standard convolution. We found this to be beneﬁcial for
learning stability, and it effectively removed checkerboard
pattern artifacts. Furthermore, we found the tanh non-
linearity on the output to be harmful for color consistency,
and therefore use no non-linear activation at the output. The
discriminators DXandDYconsist of a three-layer network
architecture that operate on a patch level [25, 20].
Training details We adopt the training procedure proposed
in CycleGAN, using 200 epochs and the Adam optimizer
with1= 0:5. The starting learning rate is set to 0:0002 .
3.4. Super-Resolution Learning
Here we describe the learning of the SR network S. In
the absence of paired ground-truth data, we train the net-
work with pairs (^Xj;Yj), where the input image ^Xj=
G(B(Yj))is generated by our domain distribution network
G. We employ the pixel-wise content loss [26],
L1(S) =EYpYkS(^X) Yk1: (4)
Following the success of SRGAN [24], we also employ the
VGG feature loss, that is known to better correlate with per-

==== Page 5 ====
ceptual quality
LVGG(S) =EYpYk(S(^X)) (Y)k2
2: (5)
Here,denotes the feature activations extracted from the
VGG network. We extract the features at the same depth
as SRGAN, which is after the activation of the 4th convolu-
tional layer, before the 5th maxpooling layer.
For better perceptual quality, we further employ a GAN
discriminator DY. To this end, we adopt the relativistic dis-
criminator employed in ESRGAN [35]. As opposed to the
conventional discriminator, providing an absolute real/fake
probability for each image, a relative score real/fake is esti-
mated compared to a set of real of fake images.
DY(Y;^Y)(C) =(C(Y) E[C(^Y)])) (6)
WhereC(Y)is the raw discriminator output and is the
sigmoid function. The SR network is trained with added
perceptual loss,
LRaGAN (S;C) = EYpY[log(1 DY(Y;S(X)))]
 EXpX[log(DY(S(X);Y))]:(7)
This results in the total loss of
L(S;D) =LVGG(S) +LRaGAN (S;C) +L1(S):(8)
The GAN loss is multiplied by a weight , balancing the
guidance of the two pixel-wise losses LVGG andLRaGAN
against the GAN loss LGAN.
Network architecture Our approach is agnostic to the spe-
ciﬁc architecture of the SR network S. For simplicity, we
adopt the recently proposed ESRGAN architecture, which
is the winner of the PIRM 2018 challenge [18]. It in-
troduced a new building block called Residual-in-Residual
Dense Blocks, improving stability of training. We augment
the ESRGAN network with a ﬁnal color adjustment layer,
to ensure a faithful reproduction of the color palette in the
input LR image. This layer adjusts the local mean RGB
value to that of the low-resolution image.
Training details To train our SR network, we start from
pre-trained ESRGAN [35] generator and discriminator net-
works. We then perform 50000 training iterations. We use
that ADAM optimizer with an initial learning rate of 10 4
and set1= 0:9andbeta 2= 0:999for both the Genera-
tor and Discriminator. We use the learning rate schedule in
[35], decreasing it by a factor of 0.5 after 10%, 20%, 40%
and 60% of the total number of iterations.
4. Experiments
In this section, we present comprehensive quantitative
and qualitative evaluation of our approach. We ﬁrst discuss
the setup and datasets employed in our experiments. De-
tailed results are provided in the supplementary material.
4 ↓ Distribution
Shifting  Distribution
ShiftingDSR  
V alidation  CSR  
V alidation  X˜Y Y˜
Y˜ Y X
X˜X
Domain-Speciﬁc Super-Resolution (DSR)
Clean Super-Resolution (CSR) 
 
 X
YTraining Input  
Training Output   
 
 
 X˜
Y˜Evaluation Input  
Evaluation Ground T ruth Figure 4. Overview of our data generation procedure for bench-
marking unsupervised SR methods. See text for details.
4.1. Experimental Setup
We present a novel strategy for evaluating real-world SR
methods. In traditional SR the bicubic downsampled im-
ageZ=B(Y)is super-resolved and compared to Y. In
the real-world scenario, we do not have access to a ground-
truth image, complicating quantitative analysis. On the
other hand, we can closely simulate the real-world scenario
by constructing the sets input fXigM
i=1pXand output
fYjgN
j=1pYtraining images by applying downscaling
and synthetic degradations to a dataset of original images.
The type of degradation is unknown to the SR approach.
For evaluation, we further generate a set of ground truth
pairs (~Xi;~Yi), where ~XipXand~YipY. These are
inaccessible to the network during training, and only used
for evaluation purposes. We consider two scenarios: DSR
and CSR, detailed below.
Domain-Speciﬁc Super-Resolution (DSR) The input
Xand targetYimages shares the same real-world distri-
bution, i.e.pX=pY. Thus, the aim is to produce super-
resolved images ^Ythat are of the same distribution as its in-
put images. The training set is generated by ﬁrst downsam-
pling the image and then simulating the real-world degra-
dation. In the DSR case the same training set fXigM
i=1rep-
resents both the input pXand outputpYdistribution. For
evaluation, the input image ~Xiis constructed using the same
procedure as for the training images Xi. The corresponding
ground-truth output image ~Yiis obtained by directly adding
the degradation to the original HR image. The procedure is
visualized in Figure 4.
InClean Super-Resolution (CSR) , the goal is to super-
resolve an input image Xsuch that the output image ^Yﬁts
another distribution pY. We letpYbe deﬁned by a dataset
of high quality images. Therefore, we employ the unaltered
original image from the dataset to be the ground-truth out-
put~Yi. The corresponding LR image ~Xiused for the eval-
uation is generated as in the DSR case above. We also em-
ploy the same training set of input images fXigM
i=1as for
the DSR. In the CSR case however, the output training data
fYjgN
j=1represent a different distribution of clean images.

==== Page 6 ====
PSNR = 20.81 PSNR =1 PSNR = 18.90
LPIPS = 0.7889 LPIPS = 0 LPIPS = 0.2737
EDSR GT Ours
Figure 5. While the PSNR is only dependend on the pixel-wise
distance between GT and the prediction, LPIPS is a more elaborate
measure that takes the perceptual quality into account. Although
the EDSR image is perceptually much worse than the prediction
of our method, it scores higher in PSNR. The LPIPS distance is
56% smaller for our method, which is perceptually superior.
These are generated by bicubically downsampling the origi-
nal image. The resulting image thus represents a clean ideal
output from the SR network. See Figure 4 for a schematic
description of the procedure.
Degradations To model the real-world setting we eval-
uate unsupervised SR approaches using two types of im-
age degradations: JPEG compression artifacts and simu-
lated sensor noise. In case of JPEG artifacts we use a qual-
ity setting of 30. JPEG compression artifacts are a com-
mon when applying super-resolution to images captured by
smartphones or acquired from the internet. In the second
case, we employ white Gaussian noise with a standard de-
viation of= 8. This simulates the case of real-world
sensor noise present in e.g., low light conditions or small
sensor sizes.
Quantitative Evaluation Measures In order to quanti-
tatively compare the different approaches we use the dis-
tance metrics PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS. While PSNR and
SSIM are handcrafted methods, LPIPS is a learned metric
for perceptual similarity [38] between two images. In Fig-
ure 5 we provide a comparison of PSNR and the LPIPS,
measures using the model provided by the authors.
Datasets We use the DF2K [35] dataset that was in-
troduced for learning the ESRGAN. It is a merge of the
DIV2K [32] with 800 and the Flickr2K [32] dataset with
2640 images. The mean size of DF2K is 1439x1935. We
also perform experiments on the DPED [17] dataset, ac-
quired by a smartphone camera. It contains natural images
with real-world sensor noise and other effects.
4.2. Ablation Study
For our ablation study we use the DF2K dataset as train-
ing data and the validation image from DIV2K to measure
the performance of the different methods. The quantitative
comparison is done using the PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS mea-
sures. For comparisons, we mainly consider the LPIPS dis-
tance due to its higher correlation with perceptual similarity.
We evaluate four different approaches for the DSR andSensor Noise JPEG Artifacts
Method "PSNR"SSIM#LPIPS"PSNR"SSIM#LPIPSDSR Unsuperv.Baseline 18.46 0.23 0.8182 22.22 0.41 0.6319
Cleaning the input 19.81 0.32 0.5737 22.23 0.56 0.4295
Low res. supervision 21.46 0.36 0.4363 20.00 0.49 0.4483
Ours 22.43 0.40 0.2897 23.30 0.62 0.3732
DSR Supervised (ref.) 23.97 0.48 0.1778 22.97 0.59 0.3526CSR Unsuperv.Baseline 18.48 0.23 0.7532 23.15 0.60 0.4887
Cleaning the input 22.10 0.55 0.4516 20.28 0.46 0.4889
Low res. supervision 22.03 0.55 0.4401 20.16 0.49 0.4752
Ours 22.42 0.55 0.3645 22.80 0.57 0.3729
CSR Supervised (ref.) 25.54 0.70 0.2103 22.60 0.58 0.3484
Table 1. Comparison of the four different versions in our ablation
study for the DSR (upper half) and CSR (lower half) setting. We
validate the methods on the DIV2K dataset. We also compare with
training the SR network with full supervision, providing an upper
bound for unsupervised methods. Our approach achieves supe-
rior perceptual quality measured by the LPIPS distance for sensor
noise and JPEG artifacts.
CSR setting. All methods are trained using the same set-
tings. For SR network we employ a pretrained ESRGAN
model that is then ﬁne-tuned for each method, as described
below. Quantitative and visual results are shown in Table 1
and Figure 6 respectively.
Baseline First, we compare with the standard approach
of training the network on LR images generated by bicu-
bic downsampling. For this purpose, we ﬁnetune the ESR-
GAN using image pairs (Z;Y). In the case of sensor noise,
the baseline achieves signiﬁcantly inferior performance for
both DSR and CSR (Table 1) compared to ours. This is due
to the smoothing behaviour of the bicubic downsampling.
The baseline ESRGAN does thus not see appropriate lev-
els of noise during training. This leads to severe artifacts in
both the DSR and CSR case (Figure 6). Our approach also
improves in the case of JPEG artifacts, leading to a 24%
improvement in LPIPS in the CSR case.
Cleaning the input Another strategy for tackling the
shift between train and test distribution, caused by the bicu-
bic downsampling, is to map the input image Xto the bicu-
bic distribution ^Z=F(X)pZbefore applying the SR
network, as proposed in [37]. With this strategy, the SR net-
workSis trained using bicubic data, exactly as in the base-
line setting discussed previously. During inference, the in-
put imageXis super-resolved as ^Y=S(F(X)). In fact, in
our approach, we already train such a mapping Fto ensure
cycle consistency in the training of domain correction net-
workG(Section 3.3). Since our training is fully symmetric
between the two domains, including the architectures of F
andG, we use the generator Ftrained in our framework for
a fair comparison.
In case of sensor noise, this version improve the results
compared to the baseline method, suggesting that some of
the domain shift problem is alleviated. However, our ap-
proach further improves the LPIPS distance by 50% in the
DSR and 19% in the CSR case. This is partly due to the
fact that the SR network acts directly on the input image

==== Page 7 ====
DSR - JPEG DSR - Sensor Noise
 CSR - JPEG CSR - Sensor Noise
BaselineCleaning the
inputLow resolution
supervisionOurs GT
Figure 6. Ablation Study for DSR (Top) and CSR (Bottom) set-
tings for four different versions using the DIV2K validation set.
Our approach, in the second most right column, provides favor-
able results despite the strong noise or JPEG artifacts in the input
images. The compared baseline variations generate strong artifacts
in most cases. In the CSR JPEG case we observe a slightly blurred
result compared to ground truth. This is due to the loss of detail
caused by the JPEG compression.
X, while the mapping Fcan introduce artifacts or remove
information. Our approach also achieves a signiﬁcant im-
provement in the JPEG case.
Low resolution supervision Here, we compare our ap-
proach with performing supervision in the LR domain. Sim-
ilar to [37], we add another generator network Hthat maps
the super-resolved image ^Yback to the original domain.
We then perform the direct pixel-wise supervision in the LR
domain instead , using the same losses L1andLVGGto en-
sureH(^Y)X. We observed that this approach leads to
stronger GAN hallucinations, as shown in Figure 6. This
tendency is also observed in the quantitative results, obtain-
ing signiﬁcantly worse LPIPS and PSNR in all cases. This
demonstrates the importance of direct HR supervision pro-
vided by our method.
Fully supervised To assess the performance of our ap-
proach, we compare with fully supervised training using
paired samples, otherwise unavailable to the network. We
generate paired data (~Xi;~Yi)using the same strategy em-
ployed for evaluation, i.e. by applying the ground-truth
degradation. The ESRGAN is then ﬁnetuned on this dataSensor Noise JPEG Artifacts
Method "PSNR"SSIM#LPIPS"PSNR"SSIM#LPIPSDSRZSSR 23.65 0.47 0.6925 24.20 0.65 0.4584
EDSR 23.39 0.44 0.7137 24.12 0.65 0.4525
ESRGAN 17.17 0.19 0.7363 22.90 0.61 0.4447
ESRGAN FT 18.08 0.22 0.6233 23.24 0.62 0.4129
Ours 22.43 0.40 0.2897 23.30 0.62 0.3732CSRZSSR 24.87 0.60 0.6466 23.92 0.64 0.5447
EDSR 24.46 0.53 0.6824 23.83 0.63 0.5454
ESRGAN 17.39 0.19 0.9434 22.67 0.59 0.5069
ESRGAN FT IN 18.35 0.23 0.7595 23.01 0.60 0.4903
ESRGAN FT OUT 17.35 0.19 0.9040 22.82 0.59 0.5087
Ours 22.42 0.55 0.3645 22.80 0.57 0.3729
Table 2. Comparison to state-of-the-art super-resolution methods
on the DIV2K dataset using the DSR and CSR setting. Our ap-
proach achieves the best perceptual results in both sensor noise
and JPEG artifact case.
directly. Note that the ground-truth degradation operation is
unknown for all other methods in this comparison. We ob-
serve that our approach achieves performance much closer
to this upper bound for both DSR and CSR. In particular in
the case of JPEG artifacts, where our unsupervised method
is only slightly worse than full supervision.
4.3. State-of-the-art Comparison on DIV2K
In the following we compare our approach with other
state-of-the-art methods: ZSSR [30], EDSR [26], ESR-
GAN [35]. Therefore we use the original code and trained
models. The method ZSSR applies a Zero-Shot learning
strategy, where weights are learned for each image individ-
ually. The EDSR trains a ResNet-based model without per-
ceptual loss. ESRGAN applies the same SR architecture
and perceptual losses as in our approach. Both EDSR and
ESRGAN are trained using bicubic supervision.
We also report the results of ﬁnetuning the ESRGAN on
the same training data employed by our approach. In the
case of CSR, where two distinct training sets are available,
we further compare with ﬁnetuning the ESRGAN on each
of those. The method ”ESRGAN FT IN” is trained on the
set of input images, while ”ESRGAN FT OUT” is trained
on the set of output images. In all cases we follow the same
training procedure as [35], constructing the corresponding
LR image using bicubic downsampling.
We evaluate the aforementioned approaches on the
DIV2K validation set using the DSR and CSR setting as
described in Section 4.1. Results for the DSR and CSR set-
tings are reported in Table 2.
Sensor Noise In the case of Sensor noise, the ESRGAN
provides poor perceptual quality with LPIPS distances of
0:7363 and0:9434 for DSR and CSR. Finetuning the model
on the given data only provides minor improvements. This
is due to the domain distribution shift caused by the bicubic
downsampling leading to clean input images during train-
ing. EDSR experiences better robustness to noisy input with
LPIPS values of 0:7137 and0:6824 for DSR and CSR re-
spectively. Among previous approaches ZSSR achieves the

==== Page 8 ====
JPEG Sensor Noise
Ours (DSR) ZSSR EDSR ESRGANESRGAN
FT INESRGAN
FT OUTOurs (DSR) Ours (CSR) GT
Figure 7. Qualitative comparison between our approach and four
state-of-the-art approaches. Our approach is able to recover the
original distribution. This is due to the input and output domain
awareness that the other methods lack of.
best performance, owing to its zero-shot learning strategy.
Our unsupervised approach achieves the best overall per-
ceptual quality, signiﬁcantly reducing the LPIPS error met-
ric by 58% and44% for DSR and CSR respectively, in the
sensor noise setting.
As show in Figure 7 the ESRGAN approaches produce
strong artifacts in the case of noisy input. This is likely due
to the perceptual loss that encourages the network to out-
put high-frequency components in order to provide a sharp
image. In contrast, our method do not suffer from such
artifacts despite employing a strong perceptual loss. This
demonstrates that our SR network has learned signiﬁcant
robustness towards image noise, though our unsupervised
training strategy.
JPEG Compression In the DSR case, where SR is per-
formed within the same domain, our approach achieves a
signiﬁcantly lower LPIPS distance compared to state-of-
the-art. For CSR, where the task is to additionally clean
the input from artifacts, our approach has a strong advan-
tage, reducing the LPIPS by more than 0:17. However, as
shown in Figure 7, the difference in perceptual quality is not
fully captured by the quantitative results. All compared ap-
proaches produces highly visible block artifacts, stemming
from the JPEG compression of the input image. In contrast,
our approach provides visually pleasing output without such
artifacts.
4.4. Real-World Evaluation on the DPED Dataset
In this section we apply our method to the original im-
ages of the DPED iPhone3 dataset [17]. It contains natu-
ral images, which include real-world degradations due to
poor sensor and lens quality. We train our model using
the training split to represent both the input and output dis-
tributions. We also ﬁnetune the ESRGAN model on the
same data, as described in the previous experiment. Since
ground-truth images are not available in this real-world set-
ting, we show a diverse set of qualitative examples from the
DPED iPhone3 validation set in Figure S5. The artifacts
produced by ZSSR, EDSR, ESRGAN and ESRGAN Fine-
Ours (DSR) Input Ours (DSR) Ours (CSR) ZSSR EDSR ESRGAN ESRGAN FT
Figure 8. Qualitative comparison on real-world images from the
DEPD dataset. Due to the training setup of other state-of-the-art
methods they produce large artifacts on real-world data while our
methods (DSR, CSR) can super-resolve those images in a percep-
tual satisfying manner.
tuned are of similar nature as in the sensor noise case in the
DIV2K setting in Figure 7. Note that these limitations in
previous approaches cannot be alleviated by more training
data or architectural designs. Instead these issues originate
from an oversimpliﬁed problem formulation not reﬂected in
most real-world applications. Our approach is able to over-
come the limitations of previous methods by learning the in-
put image distribution. Our approach generate high-quality
images, with very few artifacts.
5. Conclusion
We tackle the problem of real-world super-resolution,
where no paired data is available. To avoid the artifacts
caused by bicubic downsampling, we learn a network that
restores the low resolution image to the real-world image
distribution. This allows us to generate realistic training
pairs for our super-resolution model. Lastly, we propose a
benchmark, based on the DIV2K dataset, for quantitatively
evaluating real-world super-resolution approaches. Experi-
ments are performed on our real-world benchmark and the
DPED datasets. Compared previous methods, our approach
generalizes to natural images, affected by signiﬁcant sensor
noise, compression artifacts and other effects.
Acknowledgements. This work was partly supported by
ETH General Fund, Amazon through an AWS grant, Nvidia
through a GPU grant, and Huawei.
References
[1] E. Agustsson and R. Timofte. Ntire 2017 challenge on single
image super-resolution: Dataset and study. In CVPR Work-

==== Page 9 ====
shops , 2017. 10, 11
[2] N. Ahn, B. Kang, and K.-A. Sohn. Fast, accurate, and
lightweight super-resolution with cascading residual net-
work. In ECCV , 2018. 2
[3] N. Ahn, B. Kang, and K.-A. Sohn. Image super-resolution
via progressive cascading residual network. In CVPR , 2018.
2
[4] I. Begin and F. Ferrie. Blind super-resolution using a
learning-based approach. In ICPR , 2004. 2
[5] A. Bulat, J. Yang, and G. Tzimiropoulos. To learn image
super-resolution, use a gan to learn how to do image degra-
dation ﬁrst. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.11458 , 2018. 2
[6] J. Cai, S. Gu, R. Timofte, and L. Zhang. Ntire 2019 chal-
lenge on real image super-resolution: Methods and results.
InCVPR Workshops , June 2019. 2
[7] C. Chen, Z. Xiong, X. Tian, Z.-J. Zha, and F. Wu. Camera
lens super-resolution. In CVPR , 2019. 2
[8] C. Chu, A. Zhmoginov, and M. Sandler. Cyclegan, a master
of steganography. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.02950 , 2017. 4
[9] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang. Learning a deep
convolutional network for image super-resolution. In ECCV ,
2014. 1, 2
[10] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang. Image super-
resolution using deep convolutional networks. TPAMI ,
38(2):295–307, 2016. 2
[11] Y . Fan, H. Shi, J. Yu, D. Liu, W. Han, H. Yu, Z. Wang,
X. Wang, and T. S. Huang. Balanced two-stage residual net-
works for image super-resolution. In CVPR , 2017. 2
[12] W. T. Freeman, T. R. Jones, and E. C. Pasztor. Example-
based super-resolution. IEEE Computer graphics and Appli-
cations , 2002. 2
[13] J. Gu, H. Lu, W. Zuo, and C. Dong. Blind super-resolution
with iterative kernel correction. In CVPR , 2019. 2
[14] M. Haris, G. Shakhnarovich, and N. Ukita. Deep back-
projection networks for super-resolution. In CVPR , 2018.
2
[15] J.-B. Huang, A. Singh, and N. Ahuja. Single image super-
resolution from transformed self-exemplars. In CVPR , 2015.
2
[16] Y . Huang and M. Qin. Densely connected high order resid-
ual network for single frame image super resolution. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1804.05902 , 2018. 2
[17] A. Ignatov, N. Kobyshev, R. Timofte, K. Vanhoey, and
L. Van Gool. Dslr-quality photos on mobile devices with
deep convolutional networks. In ICCV , 2017. 2, 6, 8
[18] A. Ignatov, R. Timofte, T. Van Vu, T. M. Luu, T. X. Pham,
C. Van Nguyen, Y . Kim, J.-S. Choi, M. Kim, J. Huang, et al.
Pirm challenge on perceptual image enhancement on smart-
phones: Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01641 , 2018. 2,
5
[19] M. Irani and S. Peleg. Improving resolution by image regis-
tration. CVGIP , 1991. 2
[20] P. Isola, J.-Y . Zhu, T. Zhou, and A. A. Efros. Image-to-image
translation with conditional adversarial networks. 2017. 4
[21] H. Kim, M. Choi, B. Lim, and K. M. Lee. Task-aware image
downscaling. ECCV , 2018. 2[22] J. Kim, J. Kwon Lee, and K. Mu Lee. Accurate image super-
resolution using very deep convolutional networks. In CVPR ,
2016. 2
[23] W.-S. Lai, J.-B. Huang, N. Ahuja, and M.-H. Yang. Deep
laplacian pyramid networks for fast and accurate super-
resolution. In CVPR , 2017. 2
[24] C. Ledig, L. Theis, F. Husz ´ar, J. Caballero, A. Cunningham,
A. Acosta, A. P. Aitken, A. Tejani, J. Totz, Z. Wang, et al.
Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a genera-
tive adversarial network. CVPR , 2017. 2, 4
[25] C. Li and M. Wand. Precomputed real-time texture synthesis
with markovian generative adversarial networks. In ECCV ,
2016. 4
[26] B. Lim, S. Son, H. Kim, S. Nah, and K. M. Lee. Enhanced
deep residual networks for single image super-resolution.
CVPR , 2017. 2, 4, 7, 10
[27] A. Lugmayr, M. Danelljan, R. Timofte, et al. Aim 2019 chal-
lenge on real-world image super-resolution: Methods and re-
sults. ICCV Workshops , 2019. 10
[28] T. Michaeli and M. Irani. Nonparametric blind super-
resolution. In ICCV , 2013. 2
[29] S. C. Park, M. K. Park, and M. G. Kang. Super-resolution
image reconstruction: a technical overview. IEEE signal pro-
cessing magazine , 2003. 2
[30] A. Shocher, N. Cohen, and M. Irani. Zero-shot super-
resolution using deep internal learning. In CVPR , 2018. 2,
7, 10
[31] Y . Tai, J. Yang, X. Liu, and C. Xu. Memnet: A persistent
memory network for image restoration. In ICCV , 2017. 1
[32] R. Timofte, E. Agustsson, L. Van Gool, M.-H. Yang,
L. Zhang, B. Lim, S. Son, H. Kim, S. Nah, K. M. Lee,
et al. Ntire 2017 challenge on single image super-resolution:
Methods and results. CVPR Workshops , 2017. 6, 10
[33] R. Timofte, S. Gu, J. Wu, and L. Van Gool. Ntire 2018 chal-
lenge on single image super-resolution: methods and results.
InCVPR Workshops , 2018. 10
[34] T. Tong, G. Li, X. Liu, and Q. Gao. Image super-resolution
using dense skip connections. In ICCV , 2017. 1
[35] X. Wang, K. Yu, S. Wu, J. Gu, Y . Liu, C. Dong, C. C. Loy,
Y . Qiao, and X. Tang. Esrgan: Enhanced super-resolution
generative adversarial networks. ECCV , 2018. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7,
10, 11
[36] J. Yang, J. Wright, T. S. Huang, and Y . Ma. Image super-
resolution via sparse representation. TIP, 2010. 2
[37] Y . Yuan12, S. Liu134, J. Zhang1, Y . Zhang3, C. Dong1, and
L. Lin1. Unsupervised image super-resolution using cycle-
in-cycle generative adversarial networks. CVPR Workshops ,
2018. 2, 6, 7
[38] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang.
The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a percep-
tual metric. CVPR , 2018. 2, 6, 10
[39] X. Zhang, Q. Chen, R. Ng, and V . Koltun. Zoom to learn,
learn to zoom. In CVPR , 2019. 2
[40] J.-Y . Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros. Unpaired image-
to-image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial net-
works. ICCV , 2017. 2

==== Page 10 ====
Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material we provide additional de-
tails and results. In Sections S1 and S2 we perform an
additional experiment on the AIM 2019 and NTIRE 2018
challenge datasets respectively. Section S3 provides illus-
trations and further details of the approaches analyzed in the
ablative experiments. We provide further details of our real-
world SR benchmarking procedure in Section S4. Example
output images of our learned domain transfer mapping Gis
shown in Section S5. We show additional qualitative visual
results in Section S6. Finally, we analyze failure cases in
Section S7.
S1. AIM 2019 Real-World Super Resolution
Challenge
In addition to the experiment settings presented in sec-
tion 4.1, we introduce the real-world SR benchmark em-
ployed in the recent AIM 2019 Real-World Super Resolu-
tion Challenge [27]. We use the same overall procedure
as described in section 4.1, but employ a more complex
degradation mapping, composed of several different opera-
tions. The input domain train images fXigM
i=1are obtained
by directly adding the degradation to the high-resolution
Flickr2K [32] images, while we use the clean DIV2K [1]
train split for the target domain set fYjgN
j=1. For valida-
tion and testing we use the corresponding splits from the
DIV2K. The results of our approach compared to state-of-
the-art methods are shown in Table S1 and S2. Note that
Track 1 and 2 correspond to the DSR and CRS settings
respectively. Our approach achieves superior LPIPS score
compared to previous approaches.
S2. NTIRE 2018 Evaluation
We perform an additional experiment on the NTIRE
2018 [33] challenge. To evaluate the approaches in the un-
supervised scenario, we use the Track 2: Realistic Mild
4adverse conditions . In this setting, the an unknown
Method "PSNR"SSIM#LPIPSDSRZSSR 25.24 0.61 0.6613
EDSR 25.24 0.60 0.6698
ESRGAN 22.49 0.50 0.5829
ESRGAN FT 24.60 0.55 0.4482
Ours 24.81 0.56 0.4376CSRZSSR 22.42 0.61 0.5996
EDSR 22.36 0.60 0.6150
ESRGAN 20.69 0.51 0.5604
ESRGAN FT IN 21.40 0.52 0.5191
ESRGAN FT OUT 21.66 0.55 0.5282
Ours 21.59 0.55 0.4720
Table S1. Comparison to state-of-the-art super-resolution methods
on the AIM Real World Super-Resolution Challenge dataset using
the DSR (Track 1) and CSR (Track 2) settings on the validation
set.degradation operation has been applied to the low resolu-
tion images to simulate realistic sensor noise and motion
blur. The goal is to produce clean output images, similar to
our CSR scenario. Although LR and HR training pairs are
provided, we do not utilize the paired data. As performed
in the paper, we train our approach in the fully unsuper-
vised real-world setting, using only unpaired LR and HR
images. Compared to the ofﬁcial challenge [33], our ap-
proach is thus trained in considerably harder, but more real-
istic conditions.
The results are provided in Table S3. We compare our
approach to simple bicubic upscaling, ZSSR [30], EDSR
[26] and the approaches considered in our ablative study:
the baseline ESRGAN [35], Cleaning the Input, and Low
resolution supervision. See Section 4.2 in the main paper
and Section S3 here for more details about the latter base-
line versions. Results are reported in terms of LPIPS [38],
PSNR and SSIM. Since our goal is perceptual super reso-
lution, we focus on the LPIPS metric. A comparison be-
tween these metrics are shown in Figure 5. Although na ¨ıve
bicubic upscaling achieves the best PSNR in Table S3, our
approach clearly achieves better perceptual results, as indi-
cated by the LPIPS metric. Among the compared previous
SR methods, the baseline ESRGAN achieves the best per-
formance with an LPIPS of 0:2534 . Employing the genera-
torFto clean the input image during inference improves the
LPIPS metric to 0:2272 . Using supervision in the low res-
olution domain yields an LPIPS of 0:2038 . Our approach,
based on the domain distribution learning, allowing direct
supervision in the high resolution domain, achieves the best
LPIPS of 0:1858 . This additional experiment demonstrates
the same trend as the results shown in the main paper.
S3. Details of the Baseline Approaches
Here we provide additional details of the ablative meth-
ods evaluated in Section 4.2 in the paper. Figure S1 illus-
trate the three baseline versions, along with our approach.
In the baseline ESRGAN version (Figure S1a), we follow
Method "PSNR"SSIM#LPIPSDSRBicubic 25.34 0.61 0.7331
EDSR 25.14 0.60 0.6657
ESRGAN 22.57 0.51 0.5770
ESRGAN FT 24.54 0.56 0.4458
Ours 24.22 0.54 0.4356
Fully Supervised 24.22 0.55 0.3011CSRBicubic 22.37 0.63 0.6602
EDSR 22.35 0.62 0.5959
ESRGAN 20.76 0.52 0.5539
ESRGAN FT IN 21.36 0.54 0.5275
ESRGAN FT OUT 21.94 0.59 0.5083
Ours 21.17 0.54 0.4594
Fully Supervised 22.80 0.65 0.2928
Table S2. Comparison to state-of-the-art super-resolution methods
on the AIM Real World Super-Resolution Challenge dataset using
the DSR (Track 1) and CSR (Track 2) settings on the test set.

==== Page 11 ====
the same protocol to generate the low resolution training
samples as ESRGAN to ﬁnetune the pretrained model. The
super-resolution network is trained to reconstruct images
that are bicubic downsampled by B. As shown, this pro-
duces strong artifacts due to the mismatch of input domains
during the training and testing phases. A ﬁrst approach
to match the input distribution of the super-resolution net-
work is to ﬁrst clean the low resolution image during test
time (Figure S1b). The domain distribution mapping Fis
learned using cycle consistency loss to map input images
to the domain of bicubic downsampled images. Another
way to obtain matching domains during train and test time
is to do supervision in low resolution, as one can directly
use the natural image as low resolution input for training
(Figure S1c).
In Our approach (Figure S1d we make sure that the in-
puts during train and test are matching by applying the map-
pingGduring training to invert the effects of bicubic down-
sampling on the image distribution. This mapping is learned
by our with unsupervised domain distribution learning (Sec-
tion 3.3). Compared to the version in Figure S1b, our ap-
proach requires no extra network for processing the input
image during test-time, before the super-resoution is ap-
plied. Instead, our approach leans to super-resolve natural
images directly. Moreover, in contrast to Figure S1c, we do
a pixel-wise supervision in high resolution with the original
natural image, which helps the super-resolution network to
produce crisp, photo-realistic images.
S4. Real-world SR Benchmarking Details
Here, we provide additional details of the proposed
benchmarking procedure and dataset for real-world super-
resolution methods. In classical super-resolution, the low
resolution images for training and evaluation are con-
structed by applying bicubic downsampling to a dataset of
natural images. Therefore, those methods are only evalu-
ated on how well they super-resolve images that were down-
sampled the same way as during training. However, in
the real-world setting the aim is to super-resolve natural
images to a higher resolution that is unseen during train-
ing. Thus, the desired high resolution images are not avail-
able for training the super-resolution network. To reﬂect
this crucial aspect in the proposed benchmarking procedure
for real-world super-resolution, we apply different proce-dures for constructing training and test data. Importantly,
the training data only contains low resolution images, while
the original high resolution images are only used when eval-
uating the methods. Thus the ﬁnal desired image resolution
is unseen during training, as in real-world applications.
We construct the train and test images for real-world
super-resolution, based on a dataset of original images. An
illustration of the procedure is shown in Figure 4 (also
shown in the main paper). For evaluation we construct an
input-output image pair. The input image is obtained by
ﬁrst downsampling the original image and then applying the
degradation transformation to simulate the real-world case.
Since the degradation is heavily affected by image down-
sampling, it is always applied after the downsampling pro-
cedure. In the domain-speciﬁc super-resolution case (DSR),
where the goal is to super-resolve the image while preserv-
ing the original characteristics, we construct the ground-
truth output image by applying the same degradation op-
eration directly to the original image. In the clean super-
resolution case, we employ the original image as ground-
truth. The training set is constructed by ﬁrst downsampling
the original image and then applying the degradation oper-
ation. In the CSR case, a set of clean images are also avail-
able during training (see Section 4.1 in the paper). These are
constructed by only applying bicubic downsampling to the
original images, and no degradations. Note that no images
of the original resolution, used for evaluation, are available
for training.
In this work, we employ the DF2K [35] dataset, consist-
ing of DIV2K [1] and Flikr2K [35] datasets. The dataset
speciﬁcations are summarized in Table S4. For testing, the
100 validation images in DIV2K are used. The training sets
are constructed using the 3450 training images in DF2K.
The images for training and evaluation has no overlap. We
always employ 4downsampling, and evaluate the meth-
ods for sensor noise and JPEG degradation, as described in
the paper (Section 4.1).
S5. Domain Mapping Examples
As described in Section 3.3 of the main paper, we learn
a generatorGthat transfers the downsampled images to the
natural domain. In Figure S2 and Figure S3 we show how
the downsampled images are transferred to images with sen-
sor noise and JPEG artifacts respectively. In the sensor
Bicubic ZSSR EDSR ESRGAN (Baseline) Cleaning the Input Low resolution supervision Ours
LPIPS# 0.2537 0.2320 0.2534 0.2670 0.2272 0.2038 0.1858
PSNR" 22.72 22.66 22.48 21.10 20.56 19.98 18.89
SSIM" 0.52 0.51 0.49 0.37 0.42 0.47 0.49
Table S3. Comparison of the different state-of-the-art methods and three versions of our ablation study for the DSR. We validate the
methods on the DIV2K Track 2 dataset, which was published for the NTIRE2018 Challenge. Our approach achieves superior perceptual
quality measured by the LPIPS distance.

==== Page 12 ====
S S
Domain Mismatch  
B=Train Test
⚡(a) Baseline
S
F✔
Matching Domain  
S B=Train Test (b) Cleaning the input
S
G
Matching Domain  
S B=HTrain Test
✔
(c) Low resolution supervision
S
G
Matching Domain  
S B=Train Test
✔ (d) Ours
BBicubic Downsampling SSuper-Resolution Network
FCleaning Network GDomain Distribution NetworkHDownsampling Network
Figure S1. The four different approaches for real-world super-resolution analyzed in the ablation study (Section 4.2 in the paper). For each
method, we illustrate how the super-resolution network Sis trained (left) and applied during inference. Pixel-wise supervision is indicated
by “=”, while the discriminator losses are omitted for clarity.
Dataset Num. images Mean image size Set
DF2K 3450 1439x1935 Training
DIV2K 100 1451x1979 Testing
Table S4. Datasets that were used for our experiments.noise case one can see a Gaussian noise like image char-
acteristics. In the JPEG case, the generator Ghas learned to
simulate blocky compression artifacts, especially at sharp
edges.

==== Page 13 ====
S6. Visual Results
Visual examples from the NTIRE2018 challenge evalu-
ation (Section S2) is shown in Figure S4. We also show
additional visual examples for the real-world DPED iPhone
dataset in Figure S5.
S7. Failure Cases
We developed our method in order to match the natural
input domain during test time also for real-world datasets
with signiﬁcant noise or JPEG artifacts. This requires a do-
main distribution learning that also introduces some arti-
facts by itself as shown in the ﬁrst row of Figure S2. When
training the network on clean high quality data, for which
bicubic downsampling does not have a big effect on the im-
age distribution, our method has slightly more artifacts due
to the domain transfer learning.

==== Page 14 ====
InputZ Output ^X GTX
Figure S2. Visual example output images of the domain distri-
bution learning network Gwhen trained with images corrupted
with sensor noise . The Input is the bicubic downsampled image
Z, Output the image that is transferred to the natural distribution
^X=G(Z)and GT show the real degradation applied to Z.
InputZ Output ^X GTX
Figure S3. Visual example output images of the domain distribu-
tion learning network Gwhen trained with images corrupted with
JPEG compression . The Input is the bicubic downsampled image
Z, Output the image that is transferred to the natural distribution
^X=G(Z)and GT show the real degradation applied to Z.

==== Page 15 ====
GT Bicubic ZSSR EDSR ESRGAN Cleaning the inputLow resolution
supervisionOurs
Figure S4. Qualitative comparison on the NTIRE2018 Track 2 challenge.

==== Page 16 ====
Input Input Ours ZSSR EDSR ESRGAN ESRGAN FT
Figure S5. Qualitative comparison on real-world images from the DPED dataset (Section 4.4 in the paper). Our approach achieve superior
perceptual quality. As this is the real-world dataset, the ground-truth does not exist for the super-resolution.

