==== Page 1 ====
Urban Driving with Conditional Imitation Learning
Jeffrey Hawke, Richard Shen, Corina Gurau, Siddharth Sharma, Daniele Reda, Nikolay Nikolov
Przemysław Mazur, Sean Micklethwaite, Nicolas Grifﬁths, Amar Shah, Alex Kendall
Abstract — Hand-crafting generalised decision-making rules
for real-world urban autonomous driving is hard. Alternatively,
learning behaviour from easy-to-collect human driving demon-
strations is appealing. Prior work has studied imitation learning
(IL) for autonomous driving with a number of limitations.
Examples include only performing lane-following rather than
following a user-deﬁned route, only using a single camera view
or heavily cropped frames lacking state observability, only
lateral (steering) control, but not longitudinal (speed) control
and a lack of interaction with trafﬁc. Importantly, the majority
of such systems have been primarily evaluated in simulation - a
simple domain, which lacks real-world complexities. Motivated
by these challenges, we focus on learning representations of se-
mantics, geometry and motion with computer vision for IL from
human driving demonstrations. As our main contribution, we
present an end-to-end conditional imitation learning approach,
combining both lateral and longitudinal control on a real vehicle
for following urban routes with simple trafﬁc. We address
inherent dataset bias by data balancing, training our ﬁnal policy
on approximately 30 hours of demonstrations gathered over six
months. We evaluate our method on an autonomous vehicle by
driving 35km of novel routes in European urban streets.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Driving in complex environments is hard, even for hu-
mans, with complex spatial reasoning capabilities. Urban
roads are frequently highly unstructured: unclear or missing
lane markings, double-parked cars, narrow spaces, unusual
obstacles and other agents who follow the road rules to
widely varying degrees. Driving autonomously in these en-
vironments is an even more difﬁcult robotics challenge.
The state space of the problem is large; coming up with
a driving policy that can drive reasonably well and safely
in a sufﬁciently wide variety of situations remains an open
challenge. Additionally, while the action space is small, a
good driving policy likely requires a combination of high-
level hierarchical reasoning and low-level control.
There are two main established paradigms for solving the
problem of autonomous driving: a traditional engineering-
based approach and a data-driven, machine-learning ap-
proach. The former performs well in structured driving
environments, such as highways or modern suburban devel-
opments, where explicitly addressing different scenarios is
tractable and sufﬁcient for human-like driving [1], [2], [3].
This approach is more mature, and the focus of commercial
efforts today. However, is still unclear if this can scale to
deploying fully autonomous vehicles world-wide, in complex
urban scenarios with wider variation and visual diversity.
In comparison, data driven methods avoid hand-crafted
rules and learns from human driving demonstrations by
The authors are with Wayve, in London, UK. Equal contribution.
research@wayve.aitraining a policy that maps sensor inputs, such as images, to
control commands or a simple motion plan (e.g., steering and
speed). Importantly, such an approach has greater potential
to generalise to the large state space and address variations
such as weather, time of day, lighting, surroundings, type of
roads and behaviour of external agents. The attraction here
is that we have seen learned approaches to many vision tasks
outperform hand-crafted approaches. We expect that it will
also be possible to do so for learned visual control.
Prior works primarily explore the data-driven approach in
the context of imitation learning, but to date address only a
subset of the state space [4], [5] or the action space [6].
In more recent work, [7] learn both steering and speed,
conditioned on a route command (e.g. turn left, go straight,
etc.), but evaluate the method on a small-sized toy vehicle
in structured scenarios with no trafﬁc. Similarly, [6] address
control conditioned on a route with GPS localisation, though
learn only lateral control (steering) for driving empty roads.
Our main contribution is the development of an end-to-end
conditional imitation learning approach, which, to the best
of our knowledge, is the ﬁrst fully learned demonstration
of complete control of a real vehicle, following a user-
prescribed route in complex urban scenarios. Additionally,
we include the ﬁrst examples of a learned driving policy
reacting to other trafﬁc participants. Our method requires
monocular camera images as input and can be conditioned on
a route command (e.g., taking a turn at an intersection) [7],
in order to follow the speciﬁed route.
Importantly, we utilise small amounts of driving data
such that our ﬁnal policy is trained on only 30 hours of
demonstrations collected over six months, yet it generalised
to routes it has not been trained to perform. We train
and evaluate1on European urban streets: a challenging,
unstructured domain in contrast to simulated environments,
or structured motorways and suburban streets.
The novel contributions of this work are:
the ﬁrst end-to-end learned control policy able to drive
an autonomous vehicle in dense urban environments,
a solution to the causal confusion problem, allowing
motion information to be provided to the model for both
lateral and longitudinal control of the vehicle,
demonstration of data efﬁciency, showing that it is
possible to learn a model capable of decision making
in urban trafﬁc with only 30 hours of training data,
comprehensive performance evaluation of end-to-end
deep learning policies driving 35km on public roads.
1A video of the learned system driving a vehicle on urban streets is
available at https://wayve.ai/blog/learned-urban-drivingarXiv:1912.00177v2  [cs.CV]  5 Dec 2019

==== Page 2 ====
||
||||||||
c
RouteCommand Perception SensorFusion Control
Leftcamera
Centercamera
Rightcamera
SteeringandSpeedFig. 1: We demonstrate conditional route following using an end-to-end learned driving policy in dense urban driving
scenarios, including simple trafﬁc following behaviour. We frame this single fully differentiable architecture conceptually in
terms of perception ,sensor fusion andcontrol components. The division is purely semantic. Each camera provides an image
(or images where using optical ﬂow) to the perception encoders, generating a learned computer vision representation for
driving. We generate various perception outputs from this intermediate representation, of semantics, geometry, and motion,
shown in Figure 2. The output features are compressed by sensor fusion and concatenated ( jjdenotes concatenation). Based
on this representation and a route command c, the network outputs a short motion plan in steering and speed.
II. R ELATED WORK
The ﬁrst application of imitation learning (IL) to au-
tonomous driving was ALVINN [5], predicting steering from
images and laser range data. Recently, IL for autonomous
driving has received renewed interest due to advances in
deep learning. [4], [8] demonstrated an end-to-end network,
controlling steering from single camera for lane following
on empty roads. [9] adds conditional navigation to this
same approach. [7] learn longitudinal and lateral control via
conditional imitation learning, following route commands on
a remote control car in a static environment. [6] develop a
steering-only system that learns to navigate a road network
using multiple cameras and a 2D map for localisation,
however it uses heavily cropped images, and is dependent
on localisation and route map generation.
The CARLA simulator [10] has enabled signiﬁcant work
on learning to drive. One example is the work of [11],
which established a new behaviour cloning benchmark for
driving in simulation. However, simulation cannot capture
real-world complexities, and achieving high performance in
simulation is signiﬁcantly simpler due to a state space with
less entropy, and the ability to generate near-inﬁnite data.
Several approaches have transferred policies from simulation
to the real world. [12] use semantic segmentation masks
as input and waypoints as output. [13] learn a control
latent space that allows domain transfer between simulation
and real world. Sim-to-real approaches are promising, but
policy transfer is not always effective and robust performance
requires careful domain randomisation [14], [15], [16].
Rather than learning a driving policy from egocentric
camera images, [17] and [18] present approaches to usingimitation learning based on a bird’s eye view (BEV) of
a scene (using a fused scene representation and LiDAR
data respectively, neither being fully end-to-end due to the
need for prior perception and/or mapping). However, both
approaches require additional infrastructure in the form of
perception, sensor fusion, and high-deﬁnition (HD) mapping:
in preference to this, we advocate for learning from raw sen-
sor (camera) inputs, rather than intermediate representations.
Recently, model-based reinforcement learning (RL) for
learning driving from simulated LiDAR data by [19], but
it has yet to be evaluated in real urban environments. Ap-
proaches with low dimensional data have shown promising
results in off-road track driving [20]. Model-free RL has also
been studied for real-world rural lane following [21].
Our work ﬁts in the end-to-end imitation learning literature
and takes inspiration from the much of the work here. We
extend the capabilities of a driving policy beyond what has
been demonstrated to date: learning full lateral and longitu-
dinal control on a vehicle with conditional route following
and behaviour with trafﬁc. We develop new methods to
deploy our system to real world environments. Speciﬁcally,
we focus on urban streets, with routes not demonstrated
during training, evaluated over 35km of urban driving.
III. M ETHOD
We begin with a brief introduction of imitation learning
(IL) and conditional IL, followed by a discussion of our
method and model architecture.
Consider a dataset of observation-action pairs
Dfhoi;aiigN
i=1, collected from expert demonstrations.
The goal of IL is to learn a policy (ot) :O!A that

==== Page 3 ====
Fig. 2: An example of perception from the intermediate
learned features of the three forward-facing cameras on our
vehicle in a typical urban scene (forward-left, forward, and
forward-right). From top to bottom: RGB input, segmenta-
tion, monocular depth, and optical ﬂow.
maps observations otto actions atat every time step and
is able to imitate the expert. The parameters of the policy
are optimized by minimizing a distance Lbetween the
predicted action and the expert action:
min
X
iL 
(oi);ai
(1)
Conditional IL (CIL) [7] seeks to additionally condition
the policy on some high-level command cthat can convey
the user intent at test time. Such a command can serve
to disambiguate multi-modal behaviour: for example, when
a car approaches an intersection, the camera input is not
sufﬁcient to predict whether the car should turn left or right,
or go straight. Providing a route command chelps resolving
the ambiguity. The CIL objective can be written as:
min
X
iL 
(oi;ci);ai
(2)
A. Model Architecture
Our method learns directly from images and outputs a
local motion plan for speed and steering. The driving policy
is a fully end-to-end neural network, but we conceptually
structure it with three separate components: perception ,sen-
sor fusion andcontrol . We use a combination of pretrained
and trainable layers to learn a robust driving policy. Figure 1
outlines the architectural details discussed below.
1) Perception: The perception component of our system
consists of a deep encoder-decoder similar to multitask
segmentation and monocular depth [22]. It receives an image
as observation and is trained to reconstruct RGB, depth
and segmentation. For driving, we use the encoded features,
which contain compressed information about the appearance,
the semantics, and distance estimation. In principle, such rep-
resentations could be learned simultaneously with the driving
policy, for example, through distillation. Alternatively, the
labelled control data could be labelled for perceptual tasks.
However, to improve data efﬁciency and robustness when
learning control, we pretrain the perception network onseveral large, heterogeneous, research vision datasets [23],
[24], [25], [26], [27].
The perception architecture above does not have any
temporal information about the scene. One solution is to use
concatenated representations of the past nframes, but this
did not perform well in our experiments. Instead, we use
intermediate features from an optical ﬂow model similar to
[28], and concatenate this to form features rich in semantics,
geometry, and motion information.
Apart from the single forward-facing camera, in some of
our experiments we additionally use a left-facing and a right-
facing view. In this case, the perception component treats
each of these frames independently. Figure 2 provides an
example of the perception output on input images.
2) Sensor Fusion: The purpose of the sensor fusion
component is to aggregate information from the different
sensors and process them into a single representation of the
scene, useful for driving.
Singleview . In the case of a single camera, the model is
composed of a simple feedforward architecture of convolu-
tional and fully-connected layers.
Multiview . Based on single-frame observations from 3
cameras: front, left and right (Figure 1). Driving with a
single view means the model must predict an action without
full observability of the necessary state (e.g., losing sight
of the adjacent kerb while approaching a junction). En-
hancing observability with multiple views should improve
behaviour in these situations. However, we found that naively
incorporating all camera features led to over-reliance on
spurious information in the side views. Thus, we occasionally
corrupt the side view encoder outputs during training, using
the augmentation procedure described below for ﬂow. We
also apply self-attention [29] on the perception output of
each camera, allowing the network to model long-range
dependencies across the entire image and focus on the parts
of the image that are important for driving.
Multiview and Flow . Additionally to the Multiview ar-
chitecture above, optical ﬂow is computed only for the front
camera using the last two consecutive frames. The ﬂow
features are concatenated to the perception features for the
front camera and then processed by sensor fusion.
Access to more information, such as motion, can actually
lead to worse performance. As discussed by [11], [30],
imitation learning in particular can suffer from causal confu-
sion: unless an explicit causal model is maintained, spurious
correlations cannot be distinguished from true causes in the
demonstrations. For example, inputting the current speed to
the policy causes it to learn a trivial identity mapping, making
the car unable to start from a static position. While [30]
propose a way to learn a causal graph, it assumes access
to a disentangled representation and its complexity grows
exponentially with the number of features.
Instead, we propose a method, which cannot determine
the causal structure, but can overcome the causal confusion
problem and scale to large number of features. Given an input
x, we add random noise, e.g. Gaussian, and apply dropout
[31] on the noise with probability 0:5for the full duration
of training. This allows the model to use the true value of x

==== Page 4 ====
when available and breaks the correlation the rest of the time,
forcing the model to focus on other features to determine the
correct output. Applying this approach on the ﬂow features
during training allowed the model to use explicit motion
information without learning the trivial solution of an identity
mapping for speed and steering.
3) Control: The control module consists of several fully-
connected layers that process the representation computed
by sensor fusion. At this stage, we also input a driving route
command ct, corresponding to one of go-straight ,turn-left
orturn-right , as a one-hot-encoded vector. We found that
inputting the command multiple times at different stages of
the network improves robustness of the model.
We selected this encoding of a route to ground this
approach with those demonstrated in CARLA [7], [11], [12],
[32]. In practice, this limits real world testing to grid-like
intersections. We use this encoding for the approach outlined
here, but we favour a richer learned route embedding similar
to [6], [33].
The output of the control module consists of a simple
parameterised motion plan for lateral and longitudinal con-
trol. In particular, we assume that the vehicle motion is
locally linear and we output a line, parameterised by the
current prediction ytand a slope mt, for both speed and
steering. During training, we minimise the mean squared
error between the expert actions, taken over Ntimesteps
into the future, and the corresponding actions predicted by
the network motion plan:
N 1X
n=0n(yt+mtn at+n)2(3)
whereis a future discount factor, nis the time difference
between steps tandt+n,ytandmtare the outputs
of the network for ot, and at+nis the expert speed and
steering control at timestep t+n. Predicting such trend
into the future provides for smoother vehicle motion and
demonstrated better performance both in closed loop and
open loop testing.
B. Data
Driving data is inherently heavily imbalanced, where most
of the captured data will be driving near-straight in the
middle of a lane, as shown in Figure 4. To mitigate this,
during training we sample data uniformly across lateral and
longitudinal control dimensions. We found that this avoids
the need for data augmentation [17] or synthesis [4], though
these approaches can be helpful.
We split the data into k1bins by steering value,
deﬁningx0;xkas the minimal and maximal steering values
and the bin edges x1;:::;xk 1. We deﬁne the edges such
that the product of the number of data in each bin and the
width of that bin (i.e. xj xj 1) are equal across all bins,
ﬁnding these edges using gradient descent. Having deﬁned
the edges, we then assign weights to data:
wj=xj xj 1
NjW
xk x0; (4)wherewjdenotes the weight of data in the j-th bin,Nj—
the number of data in that bin and W— the total weight of
the dataset (equal to the number of data). The total weight
of each bin is proportional to its width as opposed to the
number of data. The second factor is for normalisation: it
ensures that the total dataset weight is W. We recursively
apply this to balance each bin w.r.t. speed.
IV. E XPERIMENTS
The purpose of our experiments is to evaluate the impact
of the following features on the driving performance of the
policy:
Using computer vision to learn explicit visual represen-
tations of the scene, in contrast to learning end-to-end
strictly from the control loss,
Improving the learned latent representation by provid-
ing wider state observability through multiple camera
views, and adding temporal information via optical ﬂow,
Understanding inﬂuence of training data diversity on
driving performance.
To assess these questions, we train the following models:
SV: Single view model. Based on the network described
in Section III-A, using only the forward facing camera.
The parameters of the perception module are pretrained
and frozen while training the sensor fusion and the
control modules. A local linear motion plan for speed
and steering is predicted over 1s in the future. This
model serves as our baseline.
MV: Multiview model. As SV , but camera observations
from forward, left, and right views are integrated by the
sensor fusion module as described in III-A.2.
MVF: Multiview and Flow model. As MV , but with
additional optical ﬂow information.
SV75: As SV , but using only the ﬁrst 75% of the
training data. The latter 25% of the data was discarded,
degrading the diversity while retaining comparable tem-
poral correlation.
SV50: As SV75, but using only 50% of the training
data (discarding the most recent 50%).
SV25: As SV75, but using only 25% of the training
data (discarding the most recent 75%).
SVE2E: Same as SV , but trained fully end-to-end with
randomly initialised parameters.
SVE2EFT: E2E ﬁne-tuned perception. SV model with
a second E2E ﬁne-tuning stage.
SVE2EPT: Same as SVE2E, but perception parameters
pretrained as in SV .
We evaluate all of the above models in closed loop
on real-world urban European streets using the procedure
described in Section IV-A and the metrics discussed in IV-
C. We note that we also evaluated the baseline model SV in
simulation with an in-house simulator: its performance was
signiﬁcantly better compared to the real world, highlighting
the simpliﬁcation of the problem by simulation.
A. Procedure
Data Collection . We collected data from human demon-
strations over the span of 6 months for a total of 30

==== Page 5 ====
driving hours in a densely populated, urban environment
representative of most European cities. The drivers involved
were not given any explicit instructions and were free to
choose random routes within the city. Collected data includes
front, left and right cameras as well as measurements of the
speed and steering controls from the driver. Images were
captured from rolling shutter cameras, synchronised within
5ms with a frame rate of 15Hz. Scalar values (e.g., speed)
were received at 100Hz. We used the front camera as the
primary clock, associating this with the latest received values
for the rest of the sensors. Route annotations were added
during postprocessing of the data, based on the route the
driver took. Table I and Figure 4 summarise the training and
test datasets.
Dataset Frames Distance (km) Time (hours) Drivers
Training 735K 613 27.2 8
Test 91K 89 3.4 1
TABLE I: Training and test driving datasets, collected over
a 6-month period in a typical European city.
Evaluation Procedure We evaluate the ability of a learned
driving system to perform tasks that are fundamental to urban
driving: following lanes, taking turns at intersections and
interacting with other road agents. We select two routes not
present in the training data in the same city, each approx-
imately 1km in length and measure the intervention rates
while autonomously completing the manoeuvres required in
order to reach the end of the route from the start. Each
route was selected to have dense intersections, and be a
largely Manhattan-like environment analogous to [7] to
avoid ambiguity with the route encoding. Figure 3 shows
the locations of these routes. Completing a route in a busy
urban environment implicitly entails navigating around other
dynamic agents such as vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians, to
which the model has to respond safely through actions such
as stopping or giving way.
Each model was commanded to drive the route in both di-
rections, each of which counts as an attempt. Should a given
model have ﬁve interventions within a single route attempt,
the attempt was terminated early. Models with consistently
poor performance were evaluated on fewer attempts.
We additionally evaluate these models interacting with
another vehicle, following a pace car which periodically
stopped throughout the driving route. During these tests, we
measure intervention rates for stopping behind a stationary
vehicle or failing to follow the pace car.
The interventions as well as their types are left to the
judgment of the safety-driver, who is able to take over control
whenever the model exhibits poor behaviour. Evaluating a
driving policy’s performance in terms of the number and
type of interventions is preferable to computing low level
metrics (e.g., cross-track error to a path) as there are multiple
solutions to performing the task correctly.
We note that neither of the testing routes has been seen
by the model during training, though the data has some
overlap with some sections. While stopping for and following
vehicles is a common occurrence in the data, the particulartest vehicle used was not seen during training.
Finally, the testing environment will inevitably contain
time-dependent factors beyond our control - this is expected
for outdoor mobile robot trials. Examples include the posi-
tion and appearance of parked and dynamic vehicles, weather
conditions, presence and behaviour of other agents, however,
we have controlled for these factors as much as possible
by running trials with batches of models in succession.
Fundamentally, this real-world constraint forces a driving
system to generalise: each attempt of the same route is novel
in a different way, e.g., weather, lighting, road users, static
objects.
B. Training Procedure
The network described in Sections III-A is trained jointly
using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) using batches of size
256for200kiterations. The initial learning rate is set to 0:01
and decayed linearly during training, while momentum and
weight decay are set to 0:9and0:0001 respectively.
In total, the network architecture used here consisted of
13 26M trainable parameters, varying depending on the
perception encoder used, and the number of cameras.
Model Perception Sensor Fusion Control Total
SV 10.4M 2.2M 705K 13.3M
MV 10.4M 6.5M 442K 17.4M
MVF 19.1M 6.5M 442K 26.1M
TABLE II: Number of trainable parameters in each concep-
tual group within the network architectures used here.
C. Metrics
We need a principled way of identifying which of the
models may perform best under closed-loop test conditions.
For this purpose we use open-loop metrics of the control
policy, computed on a hold-out validation dataset. As dis-
cussed by [34] and [35], the correlation between ofﬂine open-
loop metrics and online closed-loop performance is weak.
We observed similar results, but we found some utility in
using open-loop weighted mean absolute error for speed and
steering as a proxy for real world performance (referred
to in Table III as Balanced MAE). In particular, we used
this metric on the test dataset in Table I to select models
for deployment. For the experimental results, we adopt the
following closed-loop metrics:
Intervention rate, computed as metres per intervention,
Intervention rate only during lane following (a subset
of the previous metric),
Success rate of turning manoeuvres (left, right),
Intervention rate while following a pace car, travelling
at up to 15km/h,
Success rate of stopping behind a pace car.
In addition to the rate of interventions, we also provide
their type using the following categories:
Obstacle : e.g., prevention of crashing into an obstacle
such as a parked car or road works,
Road position : e.g., wrong side of trafﬁc or dangerous
proximity to the kerb,

==== Page 6 ====
(a) Training collection area
 (b) Test route A
 (c) Test route B
Fig. 3: We collect exemplar driving data by driving through the European urban area in 3a. We evaluate the learned driving
policy performance in two urban routes, each approximately 1km in length with multiple intersections. Both routes are dense
urban scenes which broadly fall into a Manhattan-like grid structure, with a mix of road widths. Models tested on each
route are evaluated in both directions: note that route A takes a slightly different route on the return due to safety-driver
visibility at an intersection. The driving environment is comparable to the scene shown in Figure 2.
(a) Steering ( %)
 (b) Speed (km/h)
(c) Time of day (hour)
 (d) Throttle (%)
Fig. 4: We collect training data driving across a European
city (see the heatmap in 3a, showing data density). The data,
as is typical, is imbalanced, with the majority driving straight
(4a), and a signiﬁcant portion stationary (4b).
Disobeyed navigation : e.g., drove straight instead of
turning left,
Failed manoeuvre : e.g., attempted the correct turn, but
failed to complete the manoeuvre,
Dynamic vehicle : e.g., acted poorly with other trafﬁc,
such as not stopping behind a car.
Finally, while these metrics provide quantitative results,
they fail to capture qualitative properties. We therefore pro-
vide some commentary on the models’ observed behaviour.
D. Results
Table III outlines the experimental results. A total of
34:4km of driving was performed under automation, pri-
oritising the SV , MV , and MVF models. We consider the
performance in a static environment ( driving manoeuvres )
independently of the performance following a pace car
(trafﬁc following ).
1) Representation Learning with Computer Vision: Com-
paring the performance of SV to the E2E trained models
(SVE2E, SVE2EFT, and SVE2EPT) suggests that learned
scene understanding is a critical component for a robust
representation for driving. Both fully E2E trained models
(SVE2E, SVE2EPT) perform very poorly.
We attribute this to the fact that our perception model
is signiﬁcantly more robust to the diversity of appearancepresent in real world driving images [36], in part inﬂuenced
by the additional data seen during the initial perception
training phase. In robotics we must consider methods which
prioritise data efﬁciency: we will never have the luxury
of inﬁnite data. For example, here we train on 30 hours
of driving, not nearly sufﬁcient to cover the diversity of
appearance in real world scenes.
We observed that the E2E trained models performed com-
parably to SV when operating in shaded environments, but
poorly in bright sunlight. We attribute this to the appearance
change between our training data and the test environment:
the data was gathered in winter, three months prior to
tests being conducted in spring. Additionally, the ﬁne-tuned
model performs similarly to the baseline: on this basis we
recommend using pretrained perception due to the wider
beneﬁts of interpretability.
2) Improving the learned state: observability and tem-
poral information: Firstly we consider the performance of
multiview models compared to the the singleview baseline.
We see an improvement in driving performance when pro-
viding the model with a more complete view of the scene.
This is apparent when considering the disobeyed navigation
interventions: the SV model systematically fails to take
certain turns. For example, if the side road is narrow, it
tends to drive straight past, ignoring the route. Equally,
the model commonly cuts the near-side kerb while turning.
Both these failure modes are attributable to the fact that the
forward facing camera has no visibility of this part of the
scene. Multiview models tend not to exhibit these failure
modes. Qualitatively, we found the MV models to provide a
much larger buffer around the kerb, however both models
would exhibit the same failure mode of poor positioning
behind parked cars around turns without space to correct. We
attribute this failure mode to the low perception resolution
and rather simple action representation used in this work.
Secondly, we consider the beneﬁt of augmenting the
learned representation with temporal state, describing the
motion present in the scene with optical ﬂow. MVF performs
slightly worse than MV in these metrics. We attribute this
to a lower signal-to-noise ratio given the increased dimen-
sionality, though we consider these to be largely compara-
ble. Where this motion information clearly has beneﬁt is
behaviour with other vehicles (stopping): the model with

==== Page 7 ====
ModelAttempts Distance (m) Intervention rate (m/int) Success Rate (%) Open Loop
A B Manoeuvres (LF only) Trafﬁc follow Manoeuvres (LF only) Trafﬁc Follow Turn: Left Turn: Right Stop: Car MAE Bal-MAE
SV 14 12 5113 (4094) 3158 222 (372) 121 74% (N=31) 87% (N=31) 69% (N=36) 0.0715 0.0630
MV 14 12 5811 (4613) 3440 306 (659) 191 70% (N=23) 86% (N=36) 65% (N=40) 0.0744 0.0706
MVF 14 12 5313 (4086) 2569 253 (511) 161 78% (N=32) 82% (N=34) 81% (N=36) 0.0633 0.0612
SV75 2 2 2777 (2258) - 154 (376) - 57% (N=13) 80% (N=17) - 0.0985 0.0993
SV50 2 4 2624 (2145) - 67 (98) - 54% (N=19) 50% (N=16) - 0.0995 0.1015
SV25 2 - 926 (746) - 44 (50) - 33% (N=6) 71% (N=7) - 0.1081 0.1129
SVE2E 2 2 823 (615) - 30 (30) - 42% (N=12) 100% (N=5) - 0.1410 0.1365
SVE2EFT 2 2 1591 (759) - 177 (379) - 69% (N=16) 90% (N=21) - 0.0769 0.0801
SVE2EPT 2 2 260 (177) - 26 (59) - 33% (N=3) 0% (N=5) - 0.0966 0.0946
TABLE III: Driving performance metrics evaluated on routes A and B (see IV and IV-A). Trafﬁc Follow andManoeuvres
present the metrics for following the routes with and without a pace car. The LF only metrics refer to lane following. In
Success Rate ,Nrefers to the number of manoeuvre attempts.
(a) Performance trend with increasing data
 (b) Interventions by type
Fig. 5: From the results in Table III we make a number of observations. In 5a we see a clear relationship between data
quantity and SV model performance (showing mean, s.d.). Inspecting the interventions types in 5b we observe that the
addition of optical ﬂow improves dynamic vehicle behaviour, but potentially suffers due to a lower signal-to-noise ratio with
increased dimensionality.
motion information responds to other agents more robustly,
demonstrated by a success rate increase from 65% to 81%.
3) Inﬂuence of data quantity and diversity on perfor-
mance: The learned driving policies presented here need
signiﬁcant further work to be comparable to human driving.
We consider the inﬂuence of data quantity on SV model
performance, observing a direct correlation in Figure 5a. Re-
moving a quarter of the data notably degrades performance,
and models trained with less data are almost undriveable.
We attribute this to a reduction in data diversity. As with the
E2E trained models, we found that the reduced data models
were able to perform manoeuvres in certain circumstances.
Qualitatively, all models tested perform notably better during
environmental conditions closer to the collection period
(concluded three months prior to these experiments). We
observed that, in the best case, these models drove nearly
2km without intervention. While we do not know the upper
limit on performance for the effect of data, it is clear that
more data than our training set — and more diversity — is
likely to improve performance.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
We present a conditional imitation learning approach
which combines both lateral and longitudinal control on
a real vehicle. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst to learn a policy that can drive on a full-size vehiclewith full vehicle actuation control in complex real-world
urban scenarios with simple trafﬁc. Our ﬁndings indicate that
learning intermediate representations using computer vision
yields models which signiﬁcantly outperform fully end-to-
end trained models. Furthermore, we highlight the impor-
tance of data diversity and addressing dataset bias. Reduced
state observability models (i.e., single view) can perform
some manoeuvres, but have systematic failure modes. In-
creased observability through the addition of multiple camera
views helps, but requires dealing with causal confusion.
The method presented here has a number of fundamental
limitations which we believe are essential for achieving (and
exceeding) human-level driving. For example, it does not
have access to long-term dependencies and cannot ‘reason’
about the road scene. This method also lacks a predictive
long-term planning model, important for safe interaction with
occluded dynamic agents. There are many promising direc-
tions for future work. The time and safety measures required
to run a policy in closed loop remains a major constraint.
Therefore, being able to robustly evaluate a policy ofﬂine
and quantify its performance is important area for research.
Including the ability to learn from corrective interventions
(e.g., [37], [21]) is another vital direction for future work, and
for generalising to real-world complexities across different
cities.

==== Page 8 ====
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our colleagues for their support for this work:
Andrew Jones, Nikhil Mohan, Alex Bewley, Edward Liu,
John-Mark Allen, Julia Gomes, and Yani Ioannou.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Thrun, M. Montemerlo, H. Dahlkamp, D. Stavens, A. Aron,
J. Diebel, P. Fong, J. Gale, M. Halpenny, G. Hoffmann, K. Lau,
C. Oakley, M. Palatucci, V . Pratt, P. Stang, S. Strohband, C. Dupont,
L.-E. Jendrossek, C. Koelen, C. Markey, C. Rummel, J. van Niekerk,
E. Jensen, P. Alessandrini, G. Bradski, B. Davies, S. Ettinger,
A. Kaehler, A. Neﬁan, and P. Mahoney, “Stanley: The robot
that won the darpa grand challenge: Research articles,” J. Robot.
Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 661–692, Sep. 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rob.v23:9
[2] E. D. Dickmanns, “The development of machine vision for road
vehicles in the last decade,” in Intelligent Vehicle Symposium, 2002.
IEEE , vol. 1. IEEE, 2002, pp. 268–281.
[3] J. Leonard, J. How, S. Teller, M. Berger, S. Campbell, G. Fiore,
L. Fletcher, E. Frazzoli, A. Huang, S. Karaman et al. , “A perception-
driven autonomous urban vehicle,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 25,
no. 10, pp. 727–774, 2008.
[4] M. Bojarski, D. D. Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp,
P. Goyal, L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang,
X. Zhang, J. Zhao, and K. Zieba, “End to End Learning for
Self-Driving Cars,” CoRR , vol. abs/1604.07316, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.07316
[5] D. A. Pomerleau, “Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural
network,” in Advances in neural information processing systems , 1989,
pp. 305–313.
[6] A. Amini, G. Rosman, S. Karaman, and D. Rus, “Variational end-to-
end navigation and localization,” in 2019 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2019.
[7] F. Codevilla, M. Mueller, A. L ´opez, V . Koltun, and A. Dosovitskiy,
“End-to-end driving via conditional imitation learning,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE,
2018, pp. 1–9.
[8] M. Bojarski, P. Yeres, A. Choromanska, K. Choromanski, B. Firner,
L. Jackel, and U. Muller, “Explaining how a deep neural net-
work trained with end-to-end learning steers a car,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.07911 , 2017.
[9] C. Hubschneider, A. Bauer, M. Weber, and J. M. Z ¨ollner, “Adding
navigation to the equation: Turning decisions for end-to-end vehicle
control,” in 2017 IEEE 20th International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITSC) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[10] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V . Koltun, “Carla:
An open urban driving simulator,” in Conference on Robot Learning ,
2017, pp. 1–16.
[11] F. Codevilla, E. Santana, A. M. L ´opez, and A. Gaidon, “Exploring the
limitations of behavior cloning for autonomous driving,” CoRR , vol.
abs/1904.08980, 2019.
[12] M. Mueller, A. Dosovitskiy, B. Ghanem, and V . Koltun, “Driving
Policy Transfer via Modularity and Abstraction,” in Proceedings of
The 2nd Conference on Robot Learning , vol. 87, 2018, pp. 1–15.
[13] A. Bewley, J. Rigley, Y . Liu, J. Hawke, R. Shen, V .-D. Lam, and
A. Kendall, “Learning to drive from simulation without real world
labels,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA) , 2018.
[14] M. Andrychowicz, B. Baker, M. Chociej, R. Jozefowicz, B. Mc-
Grew, J. Pachocki, A. Petron, M. Plappert, G. Powell, A. Ray
et al. , “Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.00177 , 2018.
[15] J. Tobin, L. Biewald, R. Duan, M. Andrychowicz, A. Handa, V . Kumar,
B. McGrew, A. Ray, J. Schneider, P. Welinder et al. , “Domain
randomization and generative models for robotic grasping,” in 2018
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 3482–3489.
[16] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Sim-to-
real transfer of robotic control with dynamics randomization,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[17] M. Bansal, A. Krizhevsky, and A. Ogale, “Chauffeurnet: Learning to
drive by imitating the best and synthesizing the worst,” in Proceedings
of Robotics: Science and Systems , FreiburgimBreisgau, Germany, June
2019.[18] W. Zeng, W. Luo, S. Suo, A. Sadat, B. Yang, S. Casas, and R. Urtasun,
“End-to-end interpretable neural motion planner,” in The IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June
2019.
[19] N. Rhinehart, R. McAllister, and S. Levine, “Deep imitative models for
ﬂexible inference, planning, and control,” CoRR , vol. abs/1810.06544,
2018.
[20] G. Williams, N. Wagener, B. Goldfain, P. Drews, J. M. Rehg, B. Boots,
and E. A. Theodorou, “Information theoretic mpc for model-based
reinforcement learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA) , 2017, pp. 1714–1721.
[21] A. Kendall, J. Hawke, D. Janz, P. Mazur, D. Reda, J.-M. Allen, V .-D.
Lam, A. Bewley, and A. Shah, “Learning to drive in a day,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,
2018.
[22] A. Kendall, Y . Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using uncer-
tainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,” in The IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June
2018.
[23] F. Yu, W. Xian, Y . Chen, F. Liu, M. Liao, V . Madhavan, and T. Darrell,
“Bdd100k: A diverse driving video database with scalable annotation
tooling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04687 , 2018.
[24] G. Neuhold, T. Ollmann, S. Rota Bul `o, and P. Kontschieder, “The
mapillary vistas dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes,”
inInternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mapillary.com/dataset/vistas
[25] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Be-
nenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele, “The cityscapes dataset
for semantic urban scene understanding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp.
3213–3223.
[26] L. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille,
“Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets,
atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848,
April 2018.
[27] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics:
The kitti dataset,” International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR) ,
2013.
[28] D. Sun, X. Yang, M.-Y . Liu, and J. Kautz, “Pwc-net: Cnns for optical
ﬂow using pyramid, warping, and cost volume,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018,
pp. 8934–8943.
[29] H. Zhang, I. Goodfellow, D. Metaxas, and A. Odena, “Self-attention
generative adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.08318 ,
2018.
[30] P. de Haan, D. Jayaraman, and S. Levine, “Causal confusion in
imitation learning,” CoRR , vol. abs/1905.11979, 2019. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11979
[31] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from
overﬁtting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 15, pp. 1929–
1958, 2014.
[32] N. Rhinehart, R. McAllister, and S. Levine, “Deep imitative mod-
els for ﬂexible inference, planning, and control,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.06544 , 2018.
[33] S. Hecker, D. Dai, and L. Van Gool, “End-to-End Learning of
Driving Models with Surround-View Cameras and Route Planners,”
inEuropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2018.
[34] F. Codevilla, A. M. Lopez, V . Koltun, and A. Dosovitskiy, “On
ofﬂine evaluation of vision-based driving models,” in The European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , September 2018.
[35] X. Liang, T. Wang, L. Yang, and E. Xing, “Cirl: Controllable imitative
reinforcement learning for vision-based self-driving,” in The European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , September 2018.
[36] W. Maddern, G. Pascoe, C. Linegar, and P. Newman, “1 Year,
1000km: The Oxford RobotCar Dataset,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research (IJRR) , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 3–15, 2017. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0278364916679498
[37] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation
learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, G. Gordon, D. Dunson, and M. Dudk, Eds., vol. 15. Fort
Lauderdale, FL, USA: PMLR, 11–13 Apr 2011, pp. 627–635.

