==== Page 1 ====
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046Citation: Bokhari, S.A.A.; Myeong, S.
Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Smart
Cities for Smart Decision-Making: A
Social Innovation Perspective.
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su14020620
Academic Editors: Marwa Mahmoud
and Maria Perez-Ortiz
Received: 26 November 2021
Accepted: 4 January 2022
Published: 6 January 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Article
Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Smart Cities for Smart
Decision-Making: A Social Innovation Perspective
Syed Asad A. Bokhari1
and Seunghwan Myeong2,*
1Center of Security Convergence & eGovernance, Inha University, Incheon 22212, Korea;
asad.bokhari@inha.edu
2Department of Public Administration, Inha University, Incheon 22212, Korea
*Correspondence: shmyeong@inha.ac.kr
Abstract: The goal of this study is to investigate the direct and indirect relationships that exist between
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), social innovation (SI), and smart decision-making (SDM). This study used
a survey design and collected cross-sectional data from South Korea and Pakistan using survey
questionnaires. Four hundred sixty respondents from the public and private sectors were obtained
and empirically analyzed using SPSS multiple regression. The study discovered a strong and positive
mediating effect of SI between the relationship of AI and SDM, as predicted. Previous researchers
have investigated some of the factors that inﬂuence the decision-making process. This study adds
to the social science literature by examining the impact of a mediating factor on decision-making.
The ﬁndings of this study will contribute to the local government in building smart cities such that
the factor of social innovations should be involved in the decision-making process because smart
decision-making would share such collected data with entrepreneurs, businesses, and industries and
would beneﬁt society and all relevant stakeholders, including such social innovators.
Keywords: smart cities; artificial intelligence; social innovation; smart decision-making; mediating role
1. Introduction
The use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in smart cities, its effect on governance, decision-
making, innovative discipline, and prospects of revolution have been a topic of discussion
in debate and practice recent years [ 1–6]. Data generation utilizing AI is possible in
government and private sectors exploring new approaches to understand our world. The
availability of big data may be effective in optimum usage of resources while making
informed decisions [ 7]. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the Internet of Things [ 8,9] can positively
inﬂuence smart decision-making [ 10]. At present, AI is becoming a need for daily life
and organizational procedures as technology has taken great dives in empowering AI
advancement [ 11]. AI contributes to smart cities’ decision-making because smart decision-
making utilizes a systematic and organized approach to collect data and applies rational
decision-making systems rather than using hit and miss, instinct, or generalizing from
overall experience [12].
“Smart cities” is a multidimensional notion and has been deﬁned differently by nu-
merous scholars. However, the compulsory prerequisite to being a smart city is to attain
sustainable social, environmental, and economic development and improve the living
standards of society by utilizing Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and
AI [13]. The technological aspect of a smart city in the decision-making process can be
deﬁned as “a technologically interconnected city” or the use of artiﬁcial intelligence with
big data to accomplish the intelligence and efﬁciency in managing the city’s resources [ 14].
A study about smart decision-making in smart cities using big data [ 12] introduced a
three-layer framework characterizing a smart city as an “instrumented, interconnected,
and intelligence”. Smart cities in the implemented phase utilize artiﬁcial intelligence and
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14020620 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

==== Page 2 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 2 of 17
IoT for data acquisition by using surveillance cameras, meters, and sensor-based systems
for real-time data and from open data sources and social media for quick response. The
data collected through AI, IoT, and other sources are integrated and then transformed
into a piece of relative information in the “interconnected” phase to deliver better insights
for smart decision-making. Finally, transformed information gathered through data is
envisioned to understand the city’s demands, requirements, needs, and policies. Hence, it
can contribute to well-informed and smart decision-making [15,16].
The role of artiﬁcial intelligence in the SDM process has long been discussed and
acknowledged by many smart city scholars [ 17–20]. However, different factors can impact
decision-making in smart cities. Several scholars [ 21,22] have recently highlighted that
decision-making in smart cities is not affected by ICT only. However, the city managers
should listen to the people and stakeholders of the society and include them in this process.
Evidently, [ 23] found how digital towns may be utilized to embed planning and decision-
making and design codes into the city’s e-governance. Moreover, [ 24] suggested several
measures available to improve the energy efﬁciency of smart cities, and city managers must
compensate for energy, environmental, social, and ﬁnancial factors to make smart decisions.
Although it is found that AI has a positive impact on smart decision-making in smart cities,
we believe that other important factors mediate between these two variables.
Despite the extensive research outline explained above, our knowledge of the exact
use of AI on the SDM process in smart cities is still limited and inconsistent in many ways.
For instance, [ 25] argued that transparency should be seen both in designing AI assistants
and the decision-making process, ensuring more legitimacy in the public eye rather than
in the process. The advancement of AI in the form of learning algorithms is beneﬁcial in
expanding our comprehension of how the elevated smart city operates, but it is challenging
to see how such approaches could ever dominate decision-making in the near future [ 2].
What anticipated is that AI will inform the SDM process in the same manner that various
computer instruments serve as the foundation of planning support systems. Moreover, [ 4]
identiﬁed the challenges linked with the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence-based systems on
smart decision-making. They proposed a set of suggestions for IS scholars and discussed the
integration of AI support to replace humans in decision-making in particular. Jarrahi [ 26]
provided a more pragmatic and proactive perspective by highlighting the complementarity
of humans and AI by examining how the strength of each one can be utilized in the decision-
making process in organizations characterized by complexity, uncertainty, and equivocality.
Hence, the involvement of humans is important, and AI assistance can be utilized as a part
of the decision-making process. Another signiﬁcant weakness, we believe, is the lack of a
foundational theoretical framework linking AI and the smart decision-making process via
the mediating role of social innovation (the design and implementation of new solutions).
In their study, [ 27] proposed a research framework to simplify the interaction between
technology and social innovation to develop timely, pre-emptive, and sustainable plans
and strategies for decision-making. They have ﬁgured out how to use economic incentives
to beneﬁt society while also protecting the environment. Gibson-Graham and Roelvink [ 28]
also highlighted a framework about social innovation, explaining that it is concerned with
relegated social groups and their involvement in social decision-making. Drawing on these
frameworks, we propose that the relationship between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart
decision-making is indirect, rather than direct, mediated through social innovation.
This research aims to see how artiﬁcial intelligence, with the help of social innovation,
inﬂuences decision-making in smart cities. To the best of our knowledge, we uncovered this
gap in existing work, and we believe that our research will contribute to the literature on
artiﬁcial intelligence and smart cities. This research will help academics and government of-
ﬁcials better understand the need for social innovation and how it inﬂuences the interaction
between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making in smart governance systems.
The remainder of the research is structured as follows: The literature review and
hypothesis building are explained in Section 2 after the introduction in Section 1. Section 3
describes the research methodology, data gathering, and data analysis. Tables, ﬁgures, and

==== Page 3 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 3 of 17
diagrams are used in Section 4 to present the ﬁndings. Finally, in Section 5, concluding
remarks, limitations, and research directions are discussed.
2. Literature Review and Hypothesis
2.1. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Although artiﬁcial intelligence has received minimal attention in the public sector,
there is an increased tendency in concentration, as seen by an increase in AI studies
and technical reports [ 3,29–32]. In these studies, the beneﬁts of artiﬁcial intelligence
applications in the public sector have been highlighted across numerous government
departments, showing that AI’s vast potential is impeded by technical, organizational, and
policy challenges [29].
Previously, researchers have demonstrated the critical role of artiﬁcial intelligence in
the rational decision-making processes, making a city smart and encouraging a high quality
of life in practice. Scholl and AlAwadhi [ 30] highlighted how AI-enabled governance
enables cities to collaborate to create smart services that no single city can provide. Smart
governance in smart cities encourages data collection from sensors and other sources to
improve urban safety governance [ 33]. For example, the South Korean government recently
used artiﬁcial intelligence to combat the COVID-19 epidemic by encouraging proactive
information exchange, assisting citizens in understanding the issue, and implementing
recently released safety protocols [34].
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in smart cities has become a critical aspect of cities facing
massive challenges such as conﬁrming social presence, sustainability, public health and
safety, prosperity, and making smart decisions [ 35,36]. When cities face such encounters,
they implement a variety of concepts to transmute their cities into smart cities. This pro-
gression contains a variety of AI strategies that are generally endorsed by urban politicians
who create the governing systems, as well as other experts all over the world [ 35]. Al-
though several ICT tools, such as databases and dashboards, can help decision-making,
artiﬁcial intelligence stands out because of its three design characteristics. However, the
most important feature is automated learning and decision-making procedures through
advanced mathematical representations of problems [32].
In their study, [ 25] created a framework to analyze transparency in AI decision-making
in the socio-technological system, and they asserted that a conﬁned type of transparency
in the shape of justiﬁcations for decisions—both regarding the design of AI assistants and
the decisions taken by them—has the potential to ensure more legitimacy in the eyes of
the public than transparency in process. When it comes to apparent legitimacy, we must
greatly prefer that our AI assistants justify themselves rather than opening their code, etc.
for public feedback. The same holds true for decision-makers’ decisions during the process
of setting goals and pertinent factors for the assistants.
By overwhelming common mistakes in administrative decision-making, artiﬁcial
intelligence provides a method for improving power structure in government. These
common problems include inappropriate forecasts on important administrative tasks such
as awarding a small business loan, unrestricted bias such policing unreliable citation rates,
and decision quality varying due to differences in accuracy between managers or over
time owing to decision exhaustion [ 4,37]. AI can help solve such problems by being more
consistent with diminishing variance and prejudice, more accurate, more lucrative by
reducing labor costs associated with repetitive tasks, and less corruptible by founding a
stronger link between data inputs and decisions [32].
2.2. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Smart Cities and Decision-Making
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has proven useful in decision-making in various ﬁelds,
including smart cities, medical tests and diagnostics, organizations, the public and private
sector, and medicine. Previous research, for instance, found that AI can reliably identify
diseases as precisely, and especially in ophthalmology [ 38], complex treatment decisions
may be handled better by AI modeling than by intuition alone, and there is potential to

==== Page 4 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 4 of 17
expand this framework as a technical infrastructure for personalized medicine [ 39]. The
application of contemporary AI techniques to forecast high-impact weather is expanding
our capability to scrutinize massive numbers of data in order to extract perceptions and
correct, appropriate guidance for human weather analysts and decision-makers [ 40], in
complex tasks. AI with exceptional quantitative, computational, and analytical abilities
has outstripped humans with algorithmic decision-making. When combined, big data in
organizations [ 26] and the advancement of AI in the method of machine learning will be
beneﬁcial in expanding our perception of how the high-frequency, real-time city operates,
but it is hard to see how such approaches could ever inﬂuence decision-making in the very
near future [2].
Smart cities are highly complexly built, with extremely sophisticated integrated tech-
nologies that contain a substantial number of sensors and equipment linked to comput-
erized systems that include analytics, surveillance, and decision-making algorithms [ 41]
and use of Internet of Things in smart cities [ 42]. The notion of a “smart city” is difﬁcult to
explain due of its complexities. Numerous scholars’ attempts to provide a relevant and
complete deﬁnition center on individuals or communities, or on their living standards [ 43].
Only a few mention the role of public and private organizations in promoting standard
of living, while others focus on the ecological impact of urbanization activities and use of
information communication infrastructure [ 44,45]. We, in our study, focus on the deﬁnition
by Caragliu [ 46], which explains that a city is considered smart when investments are made
social, and human capital and conventional and information communication technology
infrastructure support long-term economic development and a better quality of life while
managing natural resources efﬁciently via participatory governance.
AI informs the decision-making process in the same manner that various computer
technologies serve as the foundation of planning support systems. In terms of smart city
planning, few tools have been produced to demonstrate how AI may advance the state
of the art. Years ago, it dabbled with expert systems. However, they fell out of favor as
overly simplistic and apparent, despite some of the capabilities that resulted from these
innovations [ 47]. Numerous researchers emphasized that processing and interpreting
big data collected via AI is a vital step towards enriching the decision-making in smart
cities [ 1,12,18]. As cities are becoming smart and digitized globally by installing sensors,
computer cores, and other communication networks [ 48], as pushed by the modern notion
of “Smart”, this is becoming increasingly possible [ 1]. These digital ideas are linked to AI
and machine learning technologies, which enable collecting near real-time data, allowing
for a better knowledge of how cities change, adapt, and respond to diverse environments.
Allam and Dhunny [ 1] agreed that big data analysis might help urban city governors for
smart decision-making and help cities assist socio-economic factors while assuring the
execution of policies. Hence, we develop the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1. Artiﬁcial intelligence, by using big data, has a positive inﬂuence on smart decision-
making in smart cities.
2.3. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Social Innovation, and Smart Decision-Making
As a signiﬁcant dimension, this variable emphasizes “collaboration” between govern-
ment, community, and other stakeholders that contribute to the decision-making process
in smart cities. Megacities require a strong managerial structure to facilitate collaboration
between the society and government to make better policy and smart decision-making for
integrated administration [ 49,50]. It necessitates integrating internal governance structures
and establishing partnerships with external organizations [ 51]. A study about the determi-
nants of factors that contribute to smart city development [ 6] concluded that public–private
partnership is one of the ﬁve factors that make a city smarter. They explained that citizens’
or residents’ participation in urban policy decisions is not merely as beneﬁciaries simply;
rather, they contribute to the overall decision-making process and the government. Local

==== Page 5 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 5 of 17
governments in smart cities involve their communities, private organizations, and other
social actors to make better policies and decision-making beneﬁcial for everyone.
To improve cities’ social, economic, and ecological performance, this style of col-
lective smart governance aims to build “innovation hubs” [ 52] by fostering constructive
links between networks of actors, information centers, and resource institutions. The
Amsterdam Smart City illustrates collaborative urban governance by displaying a unique
relationship between municipal administration, private businesses, research institutes,
start-up investors, entrepreneurs, innovators, ordinary citizens, and other relative stake-
holders [ 53,54]. With the assistance from the extended cooperation of more than 2207 people
and organizations, Amsterdam city, being smart, developed numerous projects spanning
six areas that include infrastructure and technology involving energy, water, waste man-
agement, transportation, the living standard of citizens, and education [ 55]. Governors of
this city brand it as an “urban living lab”, inviting usage of collected data through artiﬁcial
intelligence to entrepreneurs from private and public sources to create apps and test pilot
creative ideas for bettering businesses and services. Engaging inhabitants and communities
through the “Smart Citizen” program, which recruits people to participate as data agents,
is vital for developing a smart city [ 56]. Amsterdam residents operate as data collection
agents, exhibiting their knowledge on sustainability issues and directly connecting with
their city, assisting in the city’s advancement as a smart city.
Social innovation denotes “penetration of business ideas, management practices, and
market principles into the world of non-proﬁts and government” [ 57]. Artiﬁcial intelligence
has a great potential to impact the way social actors engage themselves and interact with
their government for decision-making. Although artiﬁcial intelligence is not the sole
solution to problems between city government and stakeholders, it is one of the strong tools
to increase the efﬁciency of city government for policy and decision-making by involving
stakeholders through social innovation. Implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence in social
innovation may also indicate how the city government can provide stimulus to other
evolving digital devices for decision-making [ 58]. Several researchers emphasized the
inﬂuence of artiﬁcial intelligence on social innovation [ 59], the impact of social innovation
on smart decision-making [ 28], and the overall impact of artiﬁcial intelligence on smart
decision-making [ 4], structural equation modeling of mediation, and moderation with
contextual factors. Further, as [ 60] argued in their study, some direct relationships depend
on contextual factors, so we tried to investigate the mediation impact of contextual variables:
social innovation between independent and dependent variables. Believing the previous
theories and research, we can develop our hypothesis as follows:
Hypothesis 2. Artiﬁcial intelligence contributes to social innovation positively in smart cities.
Hypothesis 3. Social innovation contributes to smart decision-making positively in smart cities.
Hypothesis 4. Artiﬁcial intelligence, using big data, has a positive inﬂuence on smart decision-
making in smart cities mediated by social innovation.
3. Research Methodology
The primary goal of this research is to create a framework for a comprehensive
understanding of the interaction between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making,
with social innovation acting as a moderator. Longitudinal research is carried out to
evaluate the hypothesis produced in this study and assess the test outcomes. It consists of
investigations of community perceptions of the role of AI in decision-making. Primary data
for this study were gathered. A total of 416 participants completed and returned survey
questionnaires provided to them by emails, mail posts, and online, allowing us to improve
the construct reliability and validity [61].

==== Page 6 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 6 of 17
3.1. Sample and Data Collection
The study sample encompasses two different economies in Asia, namely Pakistan and
South Korea. The main reason to select these two countries to collect data samples is to
conduct a comparative analysis because South Korea is a developed country with a higher
implementation of AI in decision-making [ 62]. However, Pakistan is relatively less devel-
oped and striving to achieve its targets to implement AI in all cities for decision-making.
The questionnaire for this study was grounded on relevant previous literature. We
employed literature research and subject matter experts in social innovation to construct
the scale instrument’s content validity [ 63]. Because the questionnaire was created in Urdu
and English and a Korean version was given, back-translation from English to Korean
and then from Korean to English, and from English to Urdu and then Urdu to English,
was performed to ensure the content’s correctness. The Korean and Urdu versions were
evaluated to see if the assertions were clear and intelligible, and it was examined again
by specialists after the material was amended. The amended Korean and Urdu versions
were then used to pre-test the 20 participants from Pakistan and Korea before sending the
surveys to a mass population.
Participants were asked to complete a survey questionnaire on their opinions on the
use of artiﬁcial intelligence in smart cities, social innovation, and smart decision-making
by local governments. The survey questionnaire, which included questions regarding the
trustworthiness of AI, the impact of AI on society, public conﬁdence in AI, unemployment
caused by AI, and the usage of AI for public service, was developed after evaluating prior
research and was adapted from it [ 64,65]. Social innovation questions, in the second seg-
ment, concerning social entrepreneurship, social economy, local, and regional development,
and design thinking were adapted from prior research [ 66,67]. Finally, the construct smart
decision-making was measured by using ﬁve components such as use of new technologies
for decision-making, data collection through sensors, optimistic solution for difﬁcult situa-
tions, optimal and timely decision-making, and use of all available alternatives for smart
decision-making [68].
A cross-sectional questionnaire survey was published online on social media in differ-
ent groups and sent through emails in September 2021. The target audience for our survey
was the Pakistani and the South Korean populations aged between 20 and 65 years, and
they were requested to ﬁll the survey questionnaire and send them back to us through
email. Four hundred thirty-seven completed and usable questionnaire responses were
eventually collected, with 52% (227) from South Korea and 48% (210) from Pakistan. A t-test
was employed to detect any prejudice between early and late replies, but no signiﬁcant
variation was identiﬁed between the two sets of observations. Different demographic
individualities by country of the data sample are shown in Table 1 below. We did not ﬁnd
any missing values from any of the participant’s survey answers.
The sample data collected through the surveys were then analyzed utilizing the sta-
tistical program SPSS version 21. We used analytical methods such as correlation, factor
analysis, multiple regression, and path analysis. The aspects of artiﬁcial intelligence, social
innovation, and smart decision-making were identiﬁed using an exploratory factor analysis
technique that was previously used by numerous scholars [ 69]. For path analysis, ordinary
least squares regression allows a dependent variable in one equation to become an inde-
pendent variable in another. As a result, it was utilized to explore the relationship between
social innovation and smart decision-making using a variety of metrics. Path coefﬁcients
may also deconstruct associations between dependent and independent constructs into
direct and indirect impacts to identify mediating inﬂuences. Teeratansirikool [ 69] used
this method to test the mediating role of competitive strategy on the association between a
ﬁrm’s cost leadership and ﬁrm performance.
Several previous scholars have focused on comparative analysis studies between
developed and developing countries on different topics; for example, [ 70] aimed to compare
payments for environmental services, [ 71] intended to study the contribution of SMEs in
economic development, [ 71] compared impact of capital ﬂows and the stock market on

==== Page 7 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 7 of 17
countries’ economic growth, and [ 72] conducted a comparative analysis of price instability
on demand of oil in developed and developing countries. Most previous studies about
the comparative analysis between developed and developing countries were based on
existing real-time data [ 73]. However, the reason to use South Korea and Pakistan in our
study is that no previous studies analyzed the public’s perception to examine the impact
of AI on decision-making in developed and developing countries simultaneously. The
main reason for using two countries in our study is that Korea is a developed country
where public managers implement AI-based decision-making policies, but Pakistan is a
developing country where implementation of AI is partial or low in the decision-making
process. Hence, this study tried to analyze the public’s perception in these countries.
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of survey participants.
Group N %
Countries
Korea 210 48
Pakistan 227 52
Total 437 100
Gender
Korea Male 128 29
Korea Female 82 19
Pakistan Male 157 36
Pakistan Female 70 16
Total 437 100
Age
20–35 160 37
36–50 198 45
51–65 79 18
Education
High School 47 11
University 252 58
Master’s Degree 120 27
Ph.D. 18 04
3.2. Measures
To estimate the construct of this study, we collected data using three types of sur-
vey questionnaires. The survey form was uploaded in different groups on social media
and sent to people from different walks of life by mail and emails to collect as many re-
sponses as possible. Participants were asked to complete questionnaires regarding their
perceptions of artiﬁcial intelligence, social innovation, and their overall inﬂuence on smart
decision-making. Participants’ gender, age, and education were used as control variables in
demographic characteristics. We received 465 responses to our survey, but 28 of them had
missing values, so we eliminated them from our data, leaving 437 to study our constructions.
Artiﬁcial intelligence was a predicted variable in our study framework, decision-making
was an outcome variable, and social innovation was a mediator. Participants’ survey
responses were analyzed using a ﬁve-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5, with 1 being
“strongly disagree” and 5 being “strongly agree”. The survey questionnaire scored artiﬁcial
intelligence by three substances, social innovation by four, and smart decision-making by
four objects.
We started our survey questionnaire with ﬁve questions for each variable, but we
found some questions irrelevant while conducting factor analysis, so we removed 2 ques-
tions from AI and 1 question from social innovation and SDM variables. Using 3 or 4 items
to investigate a variable is consistent with several previous studies where scholars used
similar components to examine their variables. For instance, [ 68] used 4 items to inves-
tigate competitive strategy; [ 74] utilized 3 items for entrepreneurial education, 3 items
for entrepreneurial self-efﬁciency, 4 items for entrepreneurial attitude, and 4 items for
an entrepreneurial mindset to observe these variables; and [ 75] used 3 elements for or-

==== Page 8 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 8 of 17
ganizational commitment and 4 components for organizational culture to examine these
constructs. A questionnaire to measure the components is given in Appendix A.
3.3. Data Analysis
For this study, SPSS software was utilized to evaluate the collected sample, and a
multiple regression and bootstrap approach was performed to examine our hypothesis. In
recent years, social science research has indicated a strong dependence on the bootstrap
approach as one of the best traditional approaches for investigating mediating factors
in social scientiﬁc domains [ 76]. Further, multiple regression using SPSS is regarded as
one of the best novel alternatives to previous traditional analysis tools due to numerous
recent improvements such as conﬁrmatory analysis, non-linear impacts, and mediating and
moderating impacts [ 77]. Numerous previous scholars proposed multiple regression statis-
tical methods to examine the mediation effects using primary and secondary data [78,79] .
Although several researchers used structural equational modelling (SEM) to investigate
interaction mediation effects between independent and dependent variables [ 80,81], we
assumed that multiple regression using SPSS is the best method for this study to explore
our ﬁndings following [81] probed mediation effect of information on decision-making.
Conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) was conducted to create a measurement model
of entire self-rating scales by a convergent validity test. The modiﬁcation index is then
used to select objects in the variables. The component with the greatest modiﬁcation index
value was removed ﬁrst, and so on until the desired goodness of ﬁts was achieved. Most
goodness of ﬁt indicators exceeded the cut-off threshold speciﬁed, but a few factor loadings
were below the minimum required level of 0.5. Hence, we removed them to obtain valid
data for our framework. It is conﬁrmed that factor loadings of all components of observed
variables are greater than the critical point of 0.5 [ 82]. The absolute model ﬁt index was
discovered using the goodness-of-ﬁt test, which assessed whether the data sample matches
an overall framework’s connecting path map.
We now reach the critical decision of whether the measurement model that we have
described is valid after it has been deﬁned and after it has passed all the essential reliability
and validity tests. This was accomplished by determining the appropriate standard of
goodness-of-ﬁt for the model ﬁt. The goodness of ﬁt is the ability to determine how well
the model ﬁts into the dataset’s variance–covariance structure. Based on evaluation criteria
for quantitative measurements, the CFA measurement and structural model ﬁt the data
well. Cronbach’s alpha coefﬁcients were used to evaluate the measurements’ reliability, and
construct correlation was used to assess the validity of the sample. Previous research was
used to construct the items for each variable. These indexes can provide superior evidence
about construct reliability and validity. The acceptance level of Cronbach’s alpha should be
above the threshold of 0.50.
Figure 1 demonstrates our research model where artiﬁcial intelligence depicts inde-
pendence, dependence on smart decision-making, and social innovation as mediating
variables. Our research model indicates a direct effect of artiﬁcial intelligence on smart
decision-making, but with the inclusion of social innovation in the ﬁrst model, the direct
linear relationship turned to a mediating relationship. Three basic techniques are used for
statistical mediation analysis: (1) causal stages, (2) coefﬁcient difference, and (3) coefﬁcient
product [ 83]. All these strategies rely on data from the three regression equations listed
below, following the examples by [84]:
SDM = 10+11AI +12CONTROLS +21 (1)
SI =20+21AI +22CONTROLS +22 (2)
SDM = 30+31AI +32SI +33CONTROLS +23 (3)
where 10, B20, and30are intercepts, SDM indicates the dependent variable, AI describes
the independent variable, SI is the mediator, 11,21, and31are the coefﬁcients relating
the independent variable and the dependent variable, 32is the coefﬁcient concerning

==== Page 9 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 9 of 17
the mediator to the dependent variable attuned for the independent variable, and 21,22,
and23represent error terms in variables. B 12,22, and32with CONTROLS designate to
control gender, age, education, and nationality variables.
Sustainability 2021 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 17 
 
decision-making, but with the inclusion of social innovation in the first model, the direct 
linear relationship turned to a mediating relationship. Three basic techniques are used for 
statistical mediation analysis: (1) causal stages, (2) coefficient difference, and (3) coefficient product [83]. All these strategies rely on data  from the three regression equations listed 
below, following the examples by [84]: 
SDM = β10 + β11AI + β12CONTROLS + ∈1 (1)
SI = β20 + β21AI + β22CONTROLS + ∈2 (2)
SDM = β30 + β31AI + β32SI + β33 CONTROLS + ∈3 (3)
where β10, Β20, and β30 are intercepts, SDM indicates the dependent variable, AI describes 
the independent variable, SI is the mediator, β11, β21, and β31 are the coefficients relating 
the independent variable and the dependent variable, β32 is the coefficient concerning the 
mediator to the dependent variable a ttuned for the independent variable, and ∈1, ∈2, and 
∈3 represent error terms in variables. Β12, β22, and β32 with CONTROLS designate to control 
gender, age, education, and nationality variables. 
 
Figure 1. Mediating role of social innovation between AI on SDM in smart cities. 
4. Results 
Table 2 describes the outcomes of KMO for all three variables (AI as independent, SI 
as mediating, and SDM as depen dent variable) is 0.531, which is greater than 0.001. This 
suggests that the data sample size utilized for this research was adequate. Further, the 
Chi-square result is 777.933 with a substantial significant level of 0.000, which is again 
satisfactory. 
Table 2. Bartlett Sphericity Test and KMO of Self Rating Items. 
Factors No of 
Items Component N KMO Bartlett Test 
Chi-Square Sig 
Artificial Intelligence 3 0.960 437 
0.531 777.933 0.000 Social Innovation 4 0.786 437 
Smart Decision-Making 4 0.861 437 
As explained in Table 3 below, the reliability analysis for 11 items were used to de-
termine artificial intelligence’s influence as an independent variable, smart decision-mak-
ing as a dependent variable, and social innovation as a mediator factor. The 11 questions given below were dispersed as follows: 3 items were allocated to artificial intelligence, 4 
objects were assigned to social innovation, and 4 to smart decision-making. We utilized 
reliability analysis to discover the reliability for each factor. The outcomes revealed that 
Figure 1. Mediating role of social innovation between AI on SDM in smart cities.
4. Results
Table 2 describes the outcomes of KMO for all three variables (AI as independent,
SI as mediating, and SDM as dependent variable) is 0.531, which is greater than 0.001.
This suggests that the data sample size utilized for this research was adequate. Further,
the Chi-square result is 777.933 with a substantial signiﬁcant level of 0.000, which is
again satisfactory.
Table 2. Bartlett Sphericity Test and KMO of Self Rating Items.
Factors No of Items Component N KMOBartlett Test
Chi-Square Sig
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 3 0.960 437
0.531 777.933 0.000 Social Innovation 4 0.786 437
Smart Decision-Making 4 0.861 437
As explained in Table 3 below, the reliability analysis for 11 items were used to deter-
mine artiﬁcial intelligence’s inﬂuence as an independent variable, smart decision-making
as a dependent variable, and social innovation as a mediator factor. The 11 questions
given below were dispersed as follows: 3 items were allocated to artiﬁcial intelligence,
4 objects were assigned to social innovation, and 4 to smart decision-making. We utilized
reliability analysis to discover the reliability for each factor. The outcomes revealed that
overall, Cronbach’s Alpha was 0.914 of a total of 11 items with a sample size of 437, which
indicated that all questions used to measure all the three factors were reliable for this study.
Moreover, factor loadings for each component were greater than 0.7, except that of one
A2, which was found to be 0.584. However, several previous studies accepted factors with
a value higher than 0.5, so we added it as a reliable component. Factor loading for each
component greater than 0.5 means that all questions asked from participants and used to
measure factors were reliable and valid for this research. Table 2 describes the outcomes of
KMO for all three variables (AI as independent, SI as mediating, and SDM as dependent
variable) is 0.531, which is greater than 0.001. It suggests that the data sample size utilized
for this research was adequate. Further, the Chi-square result is 777.933 with a substantial
signiﬁcant level of 0.000, which is again satisfactory.

==== Page 10 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 10 of 17
Table 3. Construct Reliability and Validity.
Cronbach’s Alpha Cronbach’s Alpha Based on Standardized Items N of Items
0.914 0.916 11
Component
1 2 3
AI1 0.945
AI2 0.584
AI3 0.812
SI1 0.771
SI2 0.701
SI3 0.724
SI4 0.754
SDM1 0.833
SDM2 0.857
SDM3 0.850
SDM4 0.860
Table 4 explains the correlation among different variables, data reliability, and de-
scriptive statistics. The value of the mean for artiﬁcial intelligence was 3.855 (SD = 0.804),
indicating that respondents showed that they agreed to respond to the usage of AI in smart
cities for decision-making and for social innovation 3.872 (SD = 0.754), showing that most
respondents believed in social innovation for decision-making using big data, and for
smart decision-making, the value was 1.266 (SD = 3.302), indicating that respondents were
agreed strongly with smart decision-making in smart cities with SI and AI. The correlation
between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making was (r = 0.811 **; p< 0.01), which
showed a signiﬁcant positive relationship between both variables.
Table 4. Descriptive statistics, correlation coefﬁcients, and reliability coefﬁcients for variables.
Variable Mean SD AI SI SDM GEN AGE EDU
AI 3.855 0.804 0.794
SI 3.872 0.754 0.679 ** 0.812
SDM 3.302 1.266 0.811 ** 0.414 ** 0.931
GEN 0.61 0.488  0.487 ** 0.165 ** 0.480 ** 1
AGE 1.84 0.693 0.088 0.331 **  0.067 0.303 ** 1
EDU 2.71 0.863  0.083 0.034 0.103 * 0.101 * 0.050 1
Notes: *, ** Correlation is signiﬁcant at 0.05, 0.01 level (2-tailed), and Cronbach’s alpha to test reliability is given
on the diagonal line.
The correlation of artiﬁcial intelligence with social innovation was (0.679 **; p< 0.01),
which revealed a similarly positive and signiﬁcant relationship between AI and SI as as-
sumed in the second hypothesis. Further, correlation (r = 0.414 **; p< 0.01) between social
innovation and smart decision-making indicated a positive and signiﬁcant relationship
between independent and dependent variables, as anticipated in the third hypothesis. The
Sobel test was conducted to test the mediating role of social innovation between the relation-
ship of artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making. Results from the Sobel Test given
below explained a mediation association between independent and dependent variables.
Table 5 reveals a hierarchal multiple regression analysis to examine our research
hypothesis, which stated that social innovation mediates artiﬁcial intelligence and smart
decision-making. Regarding model 1, referring to the direct relationship between artiﬁcial
intelligence and smart decision-making, the value of B = 1.276, and the value of Beta = 0.811
with p-value = 0.000, which implies a substantial and positive relationship between artiﬁcial
intelligence and smart decision-making, supporting our ﬁrst hypothesis. As for model 2,

==== Page 11 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 11 of 17
which applied multiple regression analysis to discover both artiﬁcial intelligence as an
independent variable and social innovation as a mediator variable with smart decision-
making as a dependent variable, the outcomes revealed that the value of B = 1.545, and
the value of Beta = 0.981 with p-value 0.000, as an indirect relationship between artiﬁcial
intelligence and smart decision-making; on the other hand, the value of B = 0.422, and
the value of Beta = 0.252 with p-value 0.000 as mediation between social innovation and
smart decision-making. The ﬁndings established a positive and substantial direct and
indirect association between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making. Moreover,
social innovation has a strong positive and signiﬁcant mediating impact between artiﬁcial
intelligence and smart decision-making; hence, hypotheses 2, 3, and 4 are signiﬁcantly
supported empirically.
Table 5. Hierarchical multiple regression, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Social Innovation, and Smart
Decision-Making.
Coefﬁcientsa
ModelUnstandardized Coefﬁcients Standardized Coefﬁcients
t Sig.
B Std. Error Beta
1(Constant) 1.619 0.174 9.298 0.000
AI 1.276 0.044 0.811 28.861 0.000
2(Constant) 1.021 0.187 5.470 0.000
AI 1.545 0.057 0.981 27.018 0.000
SI 0.422 0.061 0.252 6.929 0.000
aDependent Variable: SDM.
Table 6 demonstrates the outcomes of the Sobel test to analyze the mediation analysis.
The results reveal the direct association between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-
making, p-value = 0.000. It suggested that there is a considerable and positive direct
correlation between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making. Furthermore, p-
value is 0.000 as an indirect association between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-
making. Moreover, the results proved a signiﬁcant and progressive direct and indirect
afﬁliation between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-making; social innovation has a
substantial positive and signiﬁcant mediating role between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart
decision-making.
Table 6. Sobel Test.
Input Test Test Statistic: Std. Error: p-Value:
a 1.545 Sobel test: 6.70315028 0.09726621 0.000
b 0.422 Aroian test: 6.69887152 0.09732833 0.000
Sa 0.057 Goodman test: 6.70743726 0.09720404 0.000
Sb 0.061
5. Discussions and Implications
5.1. Discussions
Because of sophisticated algorithms, big data, and greater storage and processing
capacity, AI systems are augmented with integrated components of digital systems, dramat-
ically inﬂuencing decision-making. As a result, there is a growing demand for researchers
of IT system social science to comprehend and analyze the impact of artiﬁcial intelligence
on decision-making and contribute to the practical success and theoretical advancement of
AI applications [ 4]. Furthermore, we must identify and examine the indirect elements that
might inﬂuence the good or negative relationship between AI and decision-making. This

==== Page 12 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 12 of 17
study aims to meet this need by recognizing, evaluating, and researching an important
component in this research ﬁeld, namely social innovation. Several earlier researchers
discovered a moderating effect of elements between AI and decision-making [ 85] and
the mediating inﬂuence of elements between two constructs [ 86,87]. We implied social
innovation as mediating factor to investigate the relationship between artiﬁcial intelligence
and smart decision-making.
This study looked speciﬁcally at social innovation as a mediating element that might
inﬂuence big data’s smart decision-making process. The ﬁndings demonstrated a signif-
icant mediating role of social innovation between AI and SDM. First, we looked at the
direct association between AI and SDM, which was signed between both variables. Then,
we incorporated social innovation as a moderating variable between independent and
independent variables. An analysis of the direct and indirect interactions between AI, SI,
and SDM revealed a substantial direct relationship between AI and SDM and an entire
mediating inﬂuence of SI between AI and SDM. Smart city managers can gather, convert,
and transport data using surveillance cameras, environmental sensors, electronic billboards,
trafﬁc management systems, charging stations, Wi-Fi, and other devices. While there is a
high degree of AI use in the city, there is a greater possibility that the city’s governance will
be better and that choices for the public will be made wisely.
This research aims to determine if social innovation has a mediating effect between
external construct AI and endogenous construct SDM. We demonstrated this link with
empirical evidence that it exists and is highly supported when studied. The ﬁrst hypothesis
predicted a substantial relationship between artiﬁcial intelligence and smart decision-
making, which was established correctly, and we discovered signiﬁcant outcomes. We
employed SPSS software and regression analysis to establish the strength and signiﬁcance of
these relationships, which were substantially and signiﬁcantly positive. Local governments
in cities employ gadgets and devices connected to the internet. They are inﬂuenced by the
usage of big data acquired through sensors and other artiﬁcial intelligence sources, which
is a good sign.
Further, the second hypothesis predicted a direct inﬂuence of artiﬁcial intelligence on
social innovation. The third hypothesis implicated a direct positive relationship between
social innovation and smart decision-making. We proved this with an empirical investiga-
tion; hence, we conclude that such relationships exist between independent and dependent
variables. Finally, we determined with our experimental testimony that social innovation
has a strong, substantial mediating impact between AI and SDM, as we anticipated in our
fourth hypothesis.
5.2. Implications
The ﬁndings of this study have ramiﬁcations for local city managers and smart city
governors. Because our research was done in the public and private sectors in Pakistan and
South Korea, city managers and governors may beneﬁt from it in various ways. Small or
rural communities may not beneﬁt from this study due to a lack of resources, technology,
social inclusion, political power, and other variables, but larger cities in these nations may
beneﬁt. The major goal of this study is smart decision-making; thus, we have emphasized
the aspects that contribute positively and substantially so that local government managers
should keep these factors in mind when developing public policies and choices. Sensors
are becoming essential types of data collecting equipment that may be utilized for decision-
making in smart cities for improved governance. Furthermore, local government can
share such collected data with entrepreneurs, businesses, and industries, as well as for the
prosperity of the society, and all relevant stakeholders, including such social innovators,
should be involved in the decision-making process by local government, bearing in mind
that such decisions will affect them directly or indirectly.
Because of various limitations, the ﬁndings and comments in this research should
be interpreted with vigilance. Our ﬁrst potential drawback is the very small sample size
of 437 survey questions. Although there have been multiple earlier studies with smaller

==== Page 13 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 13 of 17
sample sizes than ours, we feel that the outcomes may be different with a larger sample size.
Next, while we worked hard to avoid any social or nationalist pressures on the participants,
it is conceivable that some of the contenders sensed some implied communal or patriotism,
which required them to respond to the questions in favor of their country because people of
many nationalities wants to demonstrate their nation as being better. Lastly, this survey was
done in both developed and emerging economies, and most respondents were educated
and earned a middle-income. There is a chance that the results will change if the sample is
drawn from various economies or drawn from a population with a low level of education
and income.
6. Conclusions and Future Research
Artiﬁcial intelligence has proven to be beneﬁcial in a variety of industries. As AI has
grown in popularity because of big data, enhanced algorithms, and increased processing
power and storage, AI systems are becoming an integrated component of digital systems
and signiﬁcantly inﬂuence smart decision-making. Consequently, there is a growing need
for social science and information systems researchers to examine and comprehend the
ramiﬁcations for decision-making and contribute to AI technologies’ academic growth
and empirical success. This work intends to meet this requirement by analyzing and
emphasizing the curative function of social innovation in the relationship of AI and smart
decision-making, emphasizing the signiﬁcant issues and opportunities for future studies.
Four research hypotheses are presented, focused on the usage and inﬂuence of AI for
decision-making, with social innovation acting as a mediator. Our multiple regression
results using SPSS suggest that AI using big data generated from sensors signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences social innovation and smart decision-making in smart cities. Furthermore, it is
statistically proven that social innovation plays a substantial and important mediating role
in the interaction between AI and smart decision-making.
Although the hypotheses given in this study are primarily for study in AI for decision-
making and social innovation mediation, they can also offer valuable recommendations for
research on the application and effect of AI in general, the impact of AI on decision-making
on different industries, and, most importantly, the analysis of these signiﬁcant relationships
in different contexts using interaction variables to achieve interesting outcomes.
Author Contributions: S.A.A.B.; conceptualization, methodology, validation, Formal Analysis, inves-
tigation, Writing—Original draft preparation, S.M.; conceptualization, methodology, writing—review
and editing, funding acquisition. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by Inha University (66287-01).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created in this study. Data sharing is not applicable
to this research.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Appendix A
Questionnaire Items
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
 In my opinion, Information from artificial intelligence science community is trustworthy ;
 In my opinion, artiﬁcial intelligence science community has much inﬂuence on society;
 I have very much conﬁdence in the artiﬁcial intelligence science community;
 In my opinion, artiﬁcial intelligence is contributing to unemployment in my country;
 In my opinion, government should utilize artiﬁcial intelligence for public services.

==== Page 14 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 14 of 17
Social Innovation
 In my opinion, social entrepreneurship works for betterment of the community and
not to make proﬁts;
 In my opinion, social Economy has primacy of the individuals and the social objective
over capital;
 In my opinion, local and regional development helps to raise living standard of the
people in urban area;
 In my opinion, design thinking guides the decision/policy makers to plan the city better .
Smart Decision-making
 In my opinion, local government uses new technologies rather than using old methods
for decision-making;
 In my opinion, local government gathers lot of data on any opportunity that arises to
decide better for public;
 In my opinion, whenever local government face a difﬁcult situation, its optimistic
about ﬁnding a good solution for public;
 In my opinion, my local government doesn’t delay decision-making for public when-
ever it needed before it’s too late;
 In my opinion, local government considers all the available alternatives for decision-making .
References
1. Allam, Z.; Dhunny, Z.A. On big data, artiﬁcial intelligence and smart cities. Cities 2019 ,89, 80–91. [CrossRef]
2. Batty, M. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Smart Cities ; SAGE Publications Sage: London, UK, 2018.
3. Collins, C.; Dennehy, D.; Conboy, K.; Mikalef, P . Artiﬁcial intelligence in information systems research: A systematic literature
review and research agenda. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2021 ,60, 102383. [CrossRef]
4. Duan, Y.; Edwards, J.S.; Dwivedi, Y.K. Artiﬁcial intelligence for decision making in the era of Big Data–evolution, challenges and
research agenda. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2019 ,48, 63–71. [CrossRef]
5. Mikalef, P .; Lemmer, K.; Schaefer, C.; Ylinen, M.; Fjørtoft, S.O.; Torvatn, H.Y.; Gupta, M.; Niehaves, B. Enabling AI capabilities in
government agencies: A study of determinants for European municipalities. Gov. Inf. Q. 2021 , 101596. [CrossRef]
6. Myeong, S.; Jung, Y.; Lee, E. A study on determinant factors in smart city development: An analytic hierarchy process analysis.
Sustainability 2018 ,10, 2606. [CrossRef]
7. Alam, J.R.; Sajid, A.; Talib, R.; Niaz, M. A review on the role of big data in business. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Mob. Comput. 2014 ,3,
446–453.
8. Russell, S.; Norvig, P . Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach ; Prentice Hall: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2002.
9. Zanella, A.; Bui, N.; Castellani, A.; Vangelista, L.; Zorzi, M. Internet of things for smart cities. IEEE Internet Things J. 2014 ,1, 22–32.
[CrossRef]
10. Pomerol, J.-C. Artiﬁcial intelligence and human decision making. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 1997 ,99, 3–25. [CrossRef]
11. Raisch, S.; Krakowski, S. Artiﬁcial intelligence and management: The automation–augmentation paradox. Acad. Manag. Rev.
2021 ,46, 192–210. [CrossRef]
12. Berntzen, L.; Johannessen, M.R.; El-Gazzar, R. Smart Cities, Big Data and Smart Decision-making-Understanding “Big Data”
in Smart City Applications. In Proceedings of the ICDS 2018, The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and
eGovernments, Rome, Italy, 25–29 March 2018.
13. Vesco, A. Handbook of Research on Social, Economic, and Environmental Sustainability in the Development of Smart Cities ; IGI Global:
Hershey, PA, USA, 2015.
14. Atlam, H.F.; Walters, R.J.; Wills, G.B. Fog computing and the internet of things: A review. Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2018 ,2, 10.
[CrossRef]
15. Albino, V .; Berardi, U.; Dangelico, R.M. Smart cities: Deﬁnitions, dimensions, performance, and initiatives. J. Urban Technol. 2015 ,
22, 3–21. [CrossRef]
16. Harrison, C.; Eckman, B.; Hamilton, R.; Hartswick, P .; Kalagnanam, J.; Paraszczak, J.; Williams, P . Foundations for smarter cities.
IBM J. Res. Dev. 2010 ,54, 1–16. [CrossRef]
17. Ahad, M.A.; Paiva, S.; Tripathi, G.; Feroz, N. Enabling technologies and sustainable smart cities. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020 ,61,
102301. [CrossRef]
18. Ben Rjab, A.; Mellouli, S. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Smart Cities: Systematic Literature Network Analysis. In Proceedings of the
12th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, Melbourne, Australia, 3–5 April 2019.
19. Thakker, D.; Mishra, B.K.; Abdullatif, A.; Mazumdar, S.; Simpson, S. Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Developing Smart
Cities Solutions. Smart Cities 2020 ,3, 65. [CrossRef]
20. Voda, A.I.; Radu, L.D. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of smart cities. Broad Res. Artif. Intell. Neurosci. 2018 ,9, 110–127.

==== Page 15 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 15 of 17
21. Lopes, N.V . Smart governance: A key factor for smart cities implementation. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Grid and Smart Cities (ICSGSC), Singapore, 23–26 July 2017.
22. Vrabie, C.; Tirziu, A. E-Participation–A Key Factor in Developing Smart Cities. Available online: https://ideas.repec.org/p/pra/
mprapa/77707.html (accessed on 13 October 2021).
23. Deakin, M.; Al Waer, H. From intelligent to smart cities. Intell. Build. Int. 2011 ,3, 140–152. [CrossRef]
24. Diakaki, C.; Grigoroudis, E.; Kabelis, N.; Kolokotsa, D.; Kalaitzakis, K.; Stavrakakis, G. A multi-objective decision model for the
improvement of energy efﬁciency in buildings. Energy 2010 ,35, 5483–5496. [CrossRef]
25. de Fine Licht, K.; de Fine Licht, J. Artiﬁcial intelligence, transparency, and public decision-making. AI Soc. 2020 ,35, 917–926.
[CrossRef]
26. Jarrahi, M.H. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of work: Human-AI symbiosis in organizational decision making. Bus. Horiz.
2018 ,61, 577–586. [CrossRef]
27. Morrar, R.; Arman, H.; Mousa, S. The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): A social innovation perspective. Technol. Innov.
Manag. Rev. 2017 ,7, 12–20. [CrossRef]
28. Gibson-Graham, J.; Roelvink, G. Social innovation for community economies. In Social Innovation and Territorial Development ;
Routledge: Oxfordshire, UK, 2016; pp. 41–54.
29. Kankanhalli, A.; Charalabidis, Y.; Mellouli, S. IoT and AI for Smart Government: A Research Agenda ; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2019.
30. Scholl, H.J.; AlAwadhi, S. Creating Smart Governance: The key to radical ICT overhaul at the City of Munich. Inf. Polity 2016 ,21,
21–42. [CrossRef]
31. Surya, L. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Public Sector. Int. J. Innov. Eng. Res. Technol. 2019 ,6, 2394–3696.
32. Young, M.M.; Bullock, J.B.; Lecy, J.D. Artiﬁcial discretion as a tool of governance: A framework for understanding the impact of
artiﬁcial intelligence on public administration. Perspect. Public Manag. Gov. 2019 ,2, 301–313. [CrossRef]
33. Meijer, A.; Thaens, M. Quantiﬁed street: Smart governance of urban safety. Inf. Polity 2018 ,23, 29–41. [CrossRef]
34. Park, Y.J.; Choe, Y.J.; Park, O.; Park, S.Y.; Kim, Y.-M.; Kim, J.; Kweon, S.; Woo, Y.; Gwack, J.; Kim, S.S.; et al. Contact tracing during
coronavirus disease outbreak, South Korea, 2020. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2020 ,26, 2465. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Gifﬁnger, R.; Kramar, H. Benchmarking, proﬁling and ranking of cities: The ‘European Smart Cities’ approach. In Place-Based
Performance Metrics in Building Sustainable Cities ; Routledge: Oxfordshire, UK, 2021.
36. Gil-Garcia, J.R.; Pardo, T.A.; Nam, T. What makes a city smart? Identifying core components and proposing an integrative and
comprehensive conceptualization. Inf. Polity 2015 ,20, 61–87. [CrossRef]
37. Phillips-Wren, G.; Jain, L. Artiﬁcial intelligence for decision making. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge-
Based and Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems, Bournemouth, UK, 9–11 October 2006.
38. Kermany, D.S.; Goldbaum, M.; Cai, W.; Valentim, C.C.; Liang, H.; Baxter, S.L.; McKeown, A.; Yan, F.; Wu, X.; Yan, F.; et al.
Identifying medical diagnoses and treatable diseases by image-based deep learning. Cell2018 ,172, 1122–1131.e1129. [CrossRef]
39. Bennett, C.C.; Hauser, K. Artiﬁcial intelligence framework for simulating clinical decision-making: A Markov decision process
approach. Artif. Intell. Med. 2013 ,57, 9–19. [CrossRef]
40. McGovern, A.; Elmore, K.L.; Gagne, D.J.; Haupt, S.E.; Karstens, C.D.; Lagerquist, R.; Smith, T.; Williams, J.K. Using artiﬁcial
intelligence to improve real-time decision-making for high-impact weather. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 2017 ,98, 2073–2090.
[CrossRef]
41. Hall, R.E.; Bowerman, B.; Braverman, J.; Taylor, J.; Todosow, H.; Von Wimmersperg, U. The Vision of a Smart City ; Brookhaven
National Lab.: Upton, NY, USA, 2000.
42. Arasteh, H.; Hosseinnezhad, V .; Loia, V .; Tommasetti, A.; Troisi, O.; Shaﬁe-khah, M.; Siano, P . Iot-based smart cities: A survey. In
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Environment and Electrical Engineering (EEEIC), Florence, Italy,
7–10 June 2016.
43. Cardullo, P .; Kitchin, R. Smart urbanism and smart citizenship: The neoliberal logic of ‘citizen-focused’smart cities in Europe.
Environ. Plan. C Politics Space 2019 ,37, 813–830. [CrossRef]
44. Dameri, R.P . Searching for smart city deﬁnition: A comprehensive proposal. Int. J. Comput. Technol. 2013 ,11, 2544–2551.
[CrossRef]
45. Gaur, A.; Scotney, B.; Parr, G.; McClean, S. Smart city architecture and its applications based on IoT. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2015 ,52,
1089–1094. [CrossRef]
46. Caragliu, A.; Del Bo, C.; Nijkamp, P . Smart cities in Europe. J. Urban Technol. 2011 ,18, 65–82. [CrossRef]
47. Batty, M.; Yeh, T. The Promise of Expert Systems for Urban Planning ; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1991.
48. Alvarez, R. The relevance of informational infrastructures in future cities. Field Actions Sci. Rep. J. Field Actions 2017 ,17, 12–15.
49. Conway, S. Interactive governance: Advancing the paradigm. Administration 2020 ,68, 63–68. [CrossRef]
50. Torfing, J.; Peters, B.G.; Pierre, J.; Sørensen, E. Interactive Governance: Advancing the Paradigm ; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK , 2012 .
51. Meijer, A.; Bol ívar, M.P .R. Governing the smart city: A review of the literature on smart urban governance. Int. Rev. Adm. Sci.
2016 ,82, 392–408. [CrossRef]
52. Kundu, D. Urban development programmes in India: A critique of JNNURM. Soc. Chang. 2014 ,44, 615–632. [CrossRef]
53. Capra, C.F. The Smart City and its citizens: Governance and citizen participation in Amsterdam Smart City. Int. J. E-Plan. Res.
(IJEPR) 2016 ,5, 20–38. [CrossRef]

==== Page 16 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 16 of 17
54. Mora, L.; Bolici, R. How to become a smart city: Learning from Amsterdam. In Proceedings of the International conference on
Smart and Sustainable Planning for Cities and Regions, Bolzano, Italy, 22–24 March 2015.
55. Capra, C.F. The smart city and its citizens: Governance and citizen participation in Amsterdam Smart City. In Smart Cities and
Smart Spaces: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications ; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2019; pp. 1407–1427.
56. Somayya, M.; Ramaswamy, R. Amsterdam Smart City (ASC): Fishing village to sustainable city. WIT Trans. Ecol. Environ. 2016 ,
204, 831–842.
57. Phills, J.A.; Deiglmeier, K.; Miller, D.T. Rediscovering social innovation. Stanf. Soc. Innov. Rev. 2008 ,6, 34–43.
58. Mehr, H.; Ash, H.; Fellow, D. Artiﬁcial intelligence for citizen services and government. Ash Cent. Democr. Gov. Innov. Harv.
Kennedy Sch. 2017 , 1–12. Available online: https://ash.harvard.edu/ﬁles/ash/ﬁles/artiﬁcial_intelligence_for_citizen_services.pdf
(accessed on 18 October 2021).
59. Dargham, M.; Hachimi, H. Artiﬁcial Intelligence & the emergence of social innovation Case of the Group” Cr édit Agricole” in Mo-
rocco. In Proceedings of the 2021 7th International Conference on Optimization and Applications (ICOA), Wolfenbüttel, Germany ,
19–20 May 2021.
60. Little, T.D.; Card, N.A.; Bovaird, J.A.; Preacher, K.J.; Crandall, C.S. Structural equation modeling of mediation and moderation
with contextual factors. Modeling Contextual Eff. Longitud. Stud. 2007 ,1, 207–230.
61. Ma, S.-J.; Wang, W.-J.; Tang, M.; Chen, H.; Ding, F. Evaluation of the construct reliability and validity of the DSM-5 Self-Rated
Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure-Chinese version in maintenance hemodialysis patients. J. Int. Med. Res. 2021 ,49,
3000605211012661. [CrossRef]
62. Kim, H.-S. Decision-making in artiﬁcial intelligence: Is it always correct? J. Korean Med. Sci. 2020 ,35, e1. [CrossRef]
63. Osburg, T.; Schmidpeter, R. Social innovation. In Solutions for a Sustainable Future ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013.
64. Müller, V .C.; Bostrom, N. Future progress in artiﬁcial intelligence: A survey of expert opinion. In Fundamental Issues of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp. 555–572.
65. Ongena, Y.P .; Haan, M.; Yakar, D.; Kwee, T.C. Patients’ views on the implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence in radiology:
Development and validation of a standardized questionnaire. Eur. Radiol. 2020 ,30, 1033–1040. [CrossRef]
66. Kleverbeck, M.; Krlev, G.; Mildenberger, G.; Strambach, S.; Thurmann, J.-F.; Terstriep, J.; Wloka, L. Indicators for measuring social
innovation. Atlas Soc. Innov. 2019 ,2, 98–101.
67. Mulgan, G.; Joseph, K.; Norman, W. Indicators for social innovation. In Handbook of Innovation Indicators and Measurement ; Edward
Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham, UK, 2013.
68. Klug, H.; Kmoch, A. Operationalizing environmental indicators for real time multi-purpose decision making and action support.
Ecol. Model. 2015 ,295, 66–74. [CrossRef]
69. Teeratansirikool, L.; Siengthai, S.; Badir, Y.; Charoenngam, C. Competitive strategies and ﬁrm performance: The mediating role of
performance measurement. Int. J. Product. Perform. Manag. 2013 ,62, 168–184. [CrossRef]
70. Wunder, S.; Engel, S.; Pagiola, S. Taking stock: A comparative analysis of payments for environmental services programs in
developed and developing countries. Ecol. Econ. 2008 ,65, 834–852. [CrossRef]
71. Pandya, V .M. Comparative analysis of development of SMEs in developed and developing countries. In Proceedings of the 2012
International Conference on Business and Management, Tallinn, Estonia, 3–6 September 2012.
72. Jobling, A.; Jamasb, T. Price volatility and demand for oil: A comparative analysis of developed and developing countries. Econ.
Anal. Policy 2017 ,53, 96–113. [CrossRef]
73. Choong, C.-K.; Baharumshah, A.Z.; Yusop, Z.; Habibullah, M.S. Private capital ﬂows, stock market and economic growth in
developed and developing countries: A comparative analysis. Jpn. World Econ. 2010 ,22, 107–117. [CrossRef]
74. Wardana, L.W.; Narmaditya, B.S.; Wibowo, A.; Mahendra, A.M.; Wibowo, N.A.; Harwida, G.; Rohman, A.N. The impact of
entrepreneurship education and students’ entrepreneurial mindset: The mediating role of attitude and self-efﬁcacy. Heliyon 2020 ,
6, e04922. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Nikpour, A. The impact of organizational culture on organizational performance: The mediating role of employee’s organizational
commitment. Int. J. Organ. Leadersh. 2017 ,6, 65–72. [CrossRef]
76. Albright, J.J.; Marinova, D.M. Estimating Multilevel Models Using SPSS, Stata, SAS and R ; Indiana University: Bloomington, IN, USA , 2015 .
77. Rosopa, P .J.; Stone-Romero, E.F. Problems with detecting assumed mediation using the hierarchical multiple regression strategy.
Hum. Resour. Manag. Rev. 2008 ,18, 294–310. [CrossRef]
78. Preacher, K.J.; Hayes, A.F. SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple mediation models. Behav. Res.
Methods Instrum. Comput. 2004 ,36, 717–731. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Li, S.D. Testing mediation using multiple regression and structural equation modeling analyses in secondary data. Eval. Rev.
2011 ,35, 240–268. [CrossRef]
80. Gunzler, D.; Chen, T.; Wu, P .; Zhang, H. Introduction to mediation analysis with structural equation modeling. Shanghai Arch.
Psychiatry 2013 ,25, 390.
81. Wan Omar, W.; Hussin, F. Transformational leadership style and job satisfaction relationship: A study of structural equation
modeling (SEM). Int. J. Acad. Res. Bus. Soc. Sci. 2013 ,3, 346–365.
82. Gill, S.; Khurshid, M.K.; Mahmood, S.; Ali, A. Factors effecting investment decision making behavior: The mediating role of
information searches. Eur. Online J. Nat. Soc. Sci. 2018 ,7, 758–767.
83. Hair, J.F. Multivariate Data Analysis ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2009.

==== Page 17 ====
Sustainability 2022 ,14, 620 17 of 17
84. MacKinnon, D.P .; Krull, J.L.; Lockwood, C.M. Equivalence of the mediation, confounding and suppression effect. Prev. Sci. 2000 ,
1, 173–181. [CrossRef]
85. Howell, D.C. Statistical Methods for Psychology ; Cengage Learning: Boston, MA, USA, 2012.
86. Chinchanachokchai, S.; Thontirawong, P .; Chinchanachokchai, P . A tale of two recommender systems: The moderating role of
consumer expertise on artiﬁcial intelligence based product recommendations. J. Retail. Consum. Serv. 2021 ,61, 102528. [CrossRef]
87. Panichayakorn, T.; Jermsittiparsert, K. Mobilizing Organizational Performance through Robotic and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Awareness in Mediating Role of Supply Chain Agility. Int. J. Supply Chain. Manag. 2019 ,8, 757–768.

