==== Page 1 ====
Using NLP and Machine Learning to Detect Data
Privacy Violations
Paulo Silva, Carolina Gonc ¸alves, Carolina Godinho, Nuno Antunes, Marilia Curado
CISUC, Department of Informatics Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
pmgsilva@dei.uc.pt, [mariapg,godinho]@student.dei.uc.pt, [nmsa,marilia]@dei.uc.pt
Abstract —Privacy concerns are constantly increasing in differ-
ent sectors. Regulations such as the EU’s General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) are pressuring organizations to handle the
individual’s data with reinforced caution. As information systems
deal with increasingly large amounts of personal data in essential
services, there is a lack of mechanisms to help organizations in
protecting the involved data subjects.
In this paper, we propose and evaluate the use of Named Entity
Recognition as a way to identify, monitor and validate Personally
Identiﬁable Information. In our experiments, we used three of
the most well-known Natural Language Processing tools (NLTK,
Stanford CoreNLP, and spaCy). First, we assess the effectiveness
of the tools with a generic dataset. Then, machine learning models
are trained and evaluated with datasets built on data that contain
personally identiﬁable information.
The results show that models’ performance was highly positive
in accurately classifying both generic and more context-speciﬁc
data. We observe the relationship between the datasets’ training
size and respective performance and estimate the appropriate size
for model training within this context. Furthermore, we discuss
how our proposal can effectively act as a Privacy Enhancing
Technology as well as the potential risks and associated impacts.
Index Terms —Privacy Violations, Machine Learning, Natural
Language Processing, Personally Identiﬁable Information
I. I NTRODUCTION
Privacy concerns are becoming more evident in most various
sectors. Recent data breaches and privacy scandals have likely
triggered discussion, more speciﬁc policy-making and further
research within the area. To comply with regulations and efﬁ-
ciently increase privacy assurances, it is necessary to develop
mechanisms that can not only provide such privacy assurances
but also with increased automation and reliability. In the
scope of data privacy, the automated monitoring of Personally
Identiﬁable Information (PII) can effectively be measured in
terms of reliability while being properly automated at the same
time.
Certain public or private organizations are legally bound to
release contractual information, to publish anonymized data
or to store sensitive data. Such data may contain sensitive
information (e.g., persons’ names, addresses, identiﬁcation
details, ﬁnancial or employment information) about not only
organizations but individuals as well. The data should be
autonomously and effectively monitored not only due to its
nature but also its size when considering big data. As the data
can be released in an unstructured format (i.e., text), the usageofMachine Learning (ML) naturally qualiﬁes for this task.
Within the ML domain, Natural Language Processing (NLP)
andNamed Entity Recognition (NER) allow for a transparent
monitoring and detection of PII, thus uncovering potential
privacy violations.
In this work, we start by analyzing three NLP tools regard-
ing their characteristics and capabilities. Further on, we used
a generic publicly available dataset to assess the performance
of the NLP tools. It was possible to observe that the F1score
of our models was approximately 90% in the best cases. Then,
we searched for data-sets that contained any type of publicly
available PII like names, addresses, contract numbers or other
related types (e.g., publicly released contracts). Moreover,
we manually tagged the entities to train the models. We
discovered that in the best cases, the F1scores were equally
high, with approximately 90% score. Finally, we assessed the
generalization capabilities of the models. Following, a list of
our main contributions:
1) Evaluation of NLP tools’ performance with general-
purpose and multi-dimension data-sets;
2) Manual labeling (gold-standard) of publicly available
datasets with entities such as names, address, employ-
ment, organizations, and others;
3) Analysis of NLP tools’ performance on correctly retriev-
ing entities classiﬁed as PII on publicly available data;
4) Presentation of proof of concept NER models for PII
monitoring and respective discussion of its applicability
as a Privacy Enhancing Technology.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II provides the necessary background regarding NLP and
the Machine Learning techniques used in NLP. Section III
presents related work in the ﬁeld. Section V explains the
methodology followed, provides a comparison of the features
and characteristics of the three NLP tools used, the datasets
used and metrics. Section VI presents the experimental results
obtained. Section VII discusses the lessons learned and the
applicability of our proposal. Section VIII concludes the paper
and highlights the main ﬁndings.
II. B ACKGROUND
NLP is a branch of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and ML
that helps computers understand, interpret and manipulate
human language. NLP pipelines usually start by performing

==== Page 2 ====
text or speech recognition and speech-to-text, depending on
the application. Then, it continues by dividing the text into
tokens. These tokens can be words, punctuation or numbers.
The various NLP tools use different techniques for associating
meaning to each token or combination of tokens. Nonetheless,
the underlying process is similar for all.
NER, one of NLP’s sub-tasks, seeks to ﬁnd and classify
named entities present in a text into speciﬁc and pre-deﬁned
categories [1]. Those categories can be people’s names, ad-
dresses, states, countries, money, organizations, laws or any
other kind of PII. With NER it is possible to automatically scan
text documents, data structures (or any other text ﬁle container)
and understand the importance of those entities in the context
of the text. Performing NER with different NLP tools may lead
to different NER performances due to its internal mechanisms.
Also, a NER system designed within a tool for one project may
execute differently in another project or not do the task at all
[2].
Several applications and usage of machine learning are
based on supervised learning [3], as is NLP. In the exper-
imental part of this paper, different NLP tools are used and
supervised learning is used to train machine learning models in
all the tools. In the case of Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK),
a Naive Bayes classiﬁer [4] and Hidden Markov Models
(HMM) [5] are applied. For Stanford CoreNLP, Conditional
Random Fields (CRFs) are applied. CRFs are probabilistic
models that perform segmentation and labeling of sequential
data [5], which is the case of text used in NLP tasks. Finally,
spaCy uses Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [6] with
pre-trained word vectors [7] to train its models.
III. R ELATED WORK
It is possible to ﬁnd in the literature extensive work and
publications regarding NLP, its characteristics, and its per-
formance. For instance, Omran and Treude [8] perform a
systematic literature review on how to choose an NLP library.
The most commonly mentioned NLP tools are the NLTK,
Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy.
The NLP’s sub-task that is more suitable for the type of
analysis we refer to is NER as this method uses models
to classify the entities (e.g., Persons or Locations) it ﬁnds
in the input text. Jiang et al. [9] reviewed tools to assess
which ones are more accurate in NER. Of course, this can
be applied in a wide variety of ﬁelds. For instance, Ritter et
al. [10] used NER to recognize Named Entities in tweets. On
a different application, Vlachos [11] evaluated NER systems
for biomedical data.
Despite the availability of comprehensive NLP research in
the literature, there is insufﬁcient work relating to NER, PII,
its implications, and possible use cases. There are links with
clinical or biomedical data but not in the broad spectrum
of PII, which encompasses many different kinds of personal
information. We argue that using NLP and NER models can be
a very adequate Privacy Enhancing Technology when applied
in privacy-preserving data analysis (e.g., active or passive
monitoring of text for compliance veriﬁcation) as this avoidsthe usage of dictionary approaches and the involvement of
human operators. Supporting our claims are the results of the
experimental work we conducted with different NLP tools.
IV. NLP T OOLS
NLTK [12] is one of the most well-known NLP tools. It
is community-driven and open-source Python software, which
allows the manipulation of different corpora, categorizing text
or analyzing linguistic structure (e.g., tokenization, Part of
Speech (POS) tagging or NER). Its development and open
source contributions give it a large market adoption for NLP
starters and many other simple other activities. Although
it could have the potential to perform better in production
environments (with further improvements and development),
it usually serves as a base tool for several academic courses
and NLP teaching activities.
The Stanford CoreNLP [13] tool stands out as a reference
tool in the ﬁeld of NLP. The tool is open-source, developed
in Java and, among other features, it is capable of performing
sentiment analysis, dependency parsing, or NER, for instance.
When compared with NLTK, the Stanford CoreNLP offers
additional standard features out of the box (e.g., dependency
parsing). Similar to NLTK, continuous development allows it
to perform better at each new software release - surpassing
NLTK. It is not only used for academic purposes or NLP
introduction, but it is also been more referenced in more
production environments.
In 2016, ExplosionAI introduced spaCy [14] as the fastest
NLP library in the world. The fact is that it is not only fast, but
also performs well against similar tools and supports similar
features. Furthermore, as an advantage, spaCy has both Neural
Networks (NNs) models and Integrated Word Vectors. Also,
with their new tokenization algorithm a better balance between
performance, ease of deﬁnition, and ease of alignment into the
original string are ensured.
V. E XPERIMENTAL APPROACH AND DATA
It was necessary to devise a methodology to determine
to which extent NLP and NER can effectively be used to
reliably detect and identify PII, and ultimately used as Privacy
Enhancing Technologies (PETs). For that purpose, we used
different NLP tools and trained (and tested) NER models
with different data. This allows us to evaluate not only the
models we train but also the NLP tools used: NLTK, Stanford
CoreNLP, and spaCy.
The approach followed is divided into three parts: the
ﬁrst with generic data, the second with publicly available
contracts containing PII, and the third with mixed datasets.
The three parts involve the training and validation of machine
learning models. The following sections provide the necessary
information for each part.
A. Generic Data
We started by gathering generic data that was already tagged
with named entities. For this purpose, we used Kaggle [15]
- an online community for sharing and improving datasets.

==== Page 3 ====
The datasets used in the experiments were based on the
Groningen Meaning Bank data [16], which are composed or
public domain English text. The datasets contain, for instance,
news, reports and other public domain publications.
To better evaluate the performance of the tools and respec-
tive models we partitioned the dataset in smaller chunks. The
objective was to assess how the performance of the models
was affected by the datasets’ size (e.g., number of tokens
or sentences). Also, this provided an estimate of the amount
of data (i.e., sentences or tokens) that are necessary to train
models and achieve desirable results.
The dataset had 1.354.149 tokens. Therefore, to evaluate
performance of the NLP tools, as well as the models’ classiﬁ-
cation capabilities using data with different sizes, the dataset
was sliced in smaller portions (5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40% ,
50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90% and 100%). For each portion was
then applied the 70% and 30% proportion rule for training
and validation, respectively. In the second stage, the dataset
contained 19.838 tokens (equivalent to 1150 sentences). Thus,
no size reduction was performed. The training and validation
proportions of 70%-30% were kept unchanged.
B. Publicly available data with PII
At this point, the procedure was identical to the ﬁrst.
The only difference was the data, which focused on publicly
available data containing PII. The dataset created was a fusion
between contracts available in online sites [17], [18] and other
contracts from the U.S Department of Defense (DoD) [19].
After retrieving publicly available contracts in PDF format,
it was necessary to extract the information and convert it to
text ﬁles using the PyPDF2 Python library. Only then, it was
possible to perform the necessary tokenization and proceed
with the manual tagging of entities.
The focus was on different kinds of entities, namely the ones
described next (which are at the same time PII). For that, it
was necessary to search legal and publicly available datasets
containing these kinds of entities as much as possible. Finally,
it was possible to ﬁnd datasets containing such information.
One kind of source was the U.S. DoD, where they publish
the daily expenses of the military branches [19]; the other
sources are publicly available contracts found online [17], [18].
It is possible to observe that from the total list of entities we
have deﬁned, 68% of them were labeled during the annotation
process.
C. Mixed datasets
To address the generalization capabilities of our models we
merged different datasets for training. Additionally, we used
United States (US) voters’ registration data [20] to increase
the diversity of the dataset.
We generated a mixed dataset that was composed of a
combination of 120K lines of the V oters dataset and 50K lines
of the Kaggle dataset. Moreover, we used different validations
ﬁles. For instance, training models with generic datasets (e.g.,
Kaggle) validating with context-speciﬁc datasets (e.g., U.S
DoD contracts or US voters’ registration data).D. Model Training and Evaluation
For all datasets, it was necessary to divide the original
dataset into two. The ﬁrst part for training (70%) and the
second part for validation (30%). After performing the pre-
processing of the datasets, it was possible to proceed to the
model training and evaluation of each tool. Training a model
requires quality data in sufﬁcient amounts. With the manual-
labeling (also known as gold-labeling) complete, it is possible
to process with the model training. For each tool, the default
settings were kept unchanged.
After training the model, it is necessary to evaluate the
models’ performance. This is, assess how well it predicts
entities using datasets that it has never processed before. For
that, we provide each model with validation datasets which
are equally labeled, as the training datasets. Each model
then classiﬁes the entities in the validation dataset and then
compares the results to the actual tag that corresponds to each
entity.
E. Metrics
Following the previous procedures, after the model evalua-
tion is completed, it is possible to determine the precision,
recall, accuracy, and F1scores of each NER model. This
provides the necessary information to analyze and discuss not
only the models’ performance but the respective capability of
identifying PII.
To analyze and evaluate the performance of the NLP tools
and respective NER system, it is necessary to identify the
number of True Positives (TP), True Negatives (TN), False
Positives (FP) and False Negatives (FN) derived from the
model classiﬁcation. Such values allow the computation of the
Precision and Recall of the models and ultimately the F1score
(a harmonic mean of the two).
The time spent on training each model, as well as the num-
ber of iterations (also known as epochs) were also registered.
With these values, it is also possible to assess the models’
training performance in terms of speed and optimization
capabilities.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The following section describes the results obtained in the
different parts of the experimental work.
A. Generic Data
Figure 1 shows the results of the three NLP tools with
generic data partitioned in different sizes. NLTK obtained a
F1score of 0.47 using the smallest portion of the dataset
(2.5%). Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy reached approximately
0.65. The entire dataset (100%) achieved the best results:
NLTK achieved approximately 0.67, while Stanford CoreNLP
and spaCy obtained 0.84 and 0.86, respectively. There was no
signiﬁcant difference between the 20%-sized dataset and the
larger ones that follow. The F1score difference between the
20%-sized dataset and the full dataset is between 0.03 and
0.05, between Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy.

==== Page 4 ====
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
2.50%5%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%F1 Scores
NLTKStanfordSpacy (<500 iter)Spacy (500 iter)Fig. 1. F 1Scores (NLTK, Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy)
In our experiments, the worst performance was NLTK.
On the other hand, although Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy
achieved similar results, the best performance was achieved
with spaCy, although with a small margin. The results indicate
that without any comprehensive tuning of the model training
settings, spaCy provides the best results for F1-Score. Addi-
tionally, we observed than training the models for less than
500 iterations provides similar results and requires much less
training time.
Regarding training time, NLTK was the fastest. The elapsed
time was 2 seconds for the smallest dataset and 75 seconds
for the largest dataset. Stanford CoreNLP takes approximately
10 minutes to train the smallest dataset. On the other hand, it
takes approximately 120 minutes to train the largest dataset.
The training time with spaCy differs according to the number
of training iterations. Setting a maximum of 500 iterations,
the training time for the largest dataset was 6000 minutes.
However, when the number of iterations is reduced to approx-
imately half, the same dataset size takes only 2000 minutes
and the F1scores are very similar. Therefore, it is possible
to achieve good results while spending less time training.
According to spaCy’s documentation, developers should ex-
periment with different parameters and ﬁne-tune the model in
order to provide the best results.
B. Publicly Available Data with PII
Figure 2 shows the precision, recall, and F1scores obtained
while evaluating the models that were created from manually-
labeled contracts. It was possible to observe that NLTK’s
best results were approximately 0.45. On the other hand,
Stanford CoreNLP and spaCy reached very similar values
(approximately 0.90). Moreover, the difference between these
two is 0.01, being Stanford CoreNLP the one with better
results in this case.
Regarding the model-training time, the results have shown
that it is not necessary to spend a great amount of time (or
training iterations) to devise a system that is able to correctly
retrieve PII-related entities. The longest session takes approxi-
mately 6500 seconds in spaCy, while Stanford CoreNLP takes
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
NLTKSTANFORDSpaCyF1 Scores
PRECISIONRECALLF1Fig. 2. F 1Scores, Precision and Recall values (NLTK, Stanford CoreNLP
and spaCy)
approximately 1125 seconds and performs similarly in terms
ofF1score .
The less positive aspect is the time necessary for manually
hand-labeling the data fed to the models. Each document took
an average of 4.75 hours of work. The measure indicates the
time spent by one person labeling the entities in the referred
datasets. Afterward, each document was reviewed by at least
one other person for consistency purposes.
It becomes evident that the models perform similarly re-
gardless of having generic or PII-speciﬁc content for training
purposes. By knowing the behavior of the machine learning
algorithms behind such systems, one could say that this should
be the expected outcome. However, the size of the sample
may not fully deﬁne the model’s behavior with other kinds of
data. Nevertheless, we see that with approximately 20 hours
of manual labeling, it is possible to create a model able to
identify entities such as person, city, title, employment details,
and others.
C. Mixed Datasets
Since NLTK and Stanford CoreNLP do not support re-
training, spaCy was the only tool used in this scenario. Figure
3 shows the results obtained while evaluating models using
datasets from different domains, but also re-training existent
models.
In the ﬁrst case, the model was evaluated with the validation
section of the 20% Kaggle dataset and the results were not
good. On the other hand (second and third case), using a
validation dataset that resembles more to the re-training data
shows better results. Therefore, the results of the re-trained
the models (ﬁrst three cases) suggest that the models tend to
forget previous information and retain more recent data.
The last three cases depicted in Figure 3 indicate the
generalization capabilities of spaCy models are low.
VII. D ISCUSSION
Considering all the collected results, it is now possible
to further discuss the lessons learned throughout the exper-
imental work. Therefore, the following section highlights the

==== Page 5 ====
Fig. 3. F 1Scores, Precision and Recall values of the training and re-training
sessions with spaCy
main conclusions of this work, the applicability and utility
of our proposal as a Privacy Enhancing Technology (PET),
and ﬁnally, the potential risks and impacts associated with
performing data analysis with such mechanisms.
A. Lessons Learned
Performing each step of our approach allowed us to derive
several conclusions about our work. Not only regarding NLP,
NER or ML but mainly how the combination of such tech-
nologies can be used for the sake of privacy protection. As
such, we highlight the main lessons and ﬁndings of this work:
1) Dataset Size and Classiﬁcation Accuracy: During the
model training with generic data, there was a much larger
sample available. There was a total of 47959 sentences (the
same as 1.354.149 tokens) readily available and labeled.
Dividing the dataset in smaller chunks allowed us to also verify
when (i.e., dataset size) would the classiﬁcation performance
metric ( F1score ) stabilize.
We concluded that 20% of the total dataset size was already
sufﬁcient to provide results that are very similar to the ones
obtained using the full-sized dataset. The proportion of 20% is
equivalent to 9590 total sentences, and the F1score variation is
0.01, 0.03, and 0.05 for NLTK, Stanford CoreNLP, and spaCy,
respectively.
2) Manual-labeling Effort: Manually labeling data is time-
consuming. Nevertheless, it is essential unless there are other
sources of labeled data. However, since PII is a very sensitive
type of information, it is not as readily available as other types
of data. Therefore, it was possible to realize that it is not
feasible (mainly for smaller teams) to manually label large
amounts of data.
To counter this issue, we consider two possibilities. The ﬁrst
is to assess the feasibility and reliability of using a synthetic
data generator [21]. The second possibility is to recur to
online annotation services. However, the latter still depends
on ﬁnding appropriate and sufﬁcient datasets, which is hard.Nevertheless, future work is likely to pursue one of these two
approaches.
3) Data Diversiﬁcation: As previously stated, it is hard
to retrieve quality data that matches our requirements (e.g.,
containing publicly available PII). It is natural since this is
the type of information that should be kept out of the public
domain or out the reach of any individual. Moreover, we
noticed that the generalization capabilities of the models are
not optimal.
At the same time, based on the entities we deﬁned as
PII, we used 68% of them during the labeling process. This
means we are not fully reaching all of our system’s potential
in terms of types of personal data that are identiﬁed. To
overcome this issue, we expect to employ one of the two
possibilities mentioned before (i.e., synthetic data generator
or online annotation services).
B. Applicability as a Privacy Enhancing Technology
The main objective of the work described in this document
was to devise an approach that combines the aforementioned
technologies and provides an effective Privacy Enhancing
Technology. There are several use cases where our approach
could be effectively enforced. Such use cases are described
next.
1) Data Validation: General data validation is enforced in a
variety of services and ﬁelds. From validation of text boxes in
web pages to more complex processes that ensure the delivery
of clean and validated data. With our approach, systems could
be able to not only validate data types and formats but also
the contents. Systems managing text data inputs (e.g., forms)
would be able to distinguish if the inputs match the actual
description. For instance, our system would be capable of
generating a warning if the ”Comments” ﬁelds (or any other
insensitive ﬁeld) would be ﬁlled with sensitive data (i.e., PII).
This way avoiding the submission of sensitive information in
unnecessary circumstances.
2) PII Discovery: The discovery of PII is closely linked
to the previous point. This allows not only to perform data
validation but also to discover previously unidentiﬁed PII.
This kind of monitoring can be applied in several scenarios.
For instance, transactions or information exchanges between
systems and/or users, documents or databases. In fact, any
other kind of big data processing task, always depending
on the context and the privacy implications. This would
allow the system to warn users (i.e., data owners) or systems
administrators so they could take appropriate actions.
3) Permission Checking: Another advantage of our system
is for permission checking purposes. In this case, permission-
based systems would be able to map and verify if the ac-
tual data matches the textual description of the respective
permissions granted. However, in this particular situation,
it would be necessary to devise and implement an Natural
Language Understanding (NLU) module for the extraction of
the meaning of such permissions. In systems where there no
such textual descriptions of the permissions, it is possible to

==== Page 6 ====
directly map the permission type, to the PII type, thus allowing
permission veriﬁcation on a higher level.
4) Compliance and Transparency: On top of all the possi-
ble application scenarios, there is the need for compliance with
privacy regulations (e.g., General Data Privacy Regulation
(GDPR) or other privacy-related regulations). Therefore, the
enforcement of our system is intended to be open and trans-
parent. With open-source code, the system’s design becomes
available for peer review. Additionally, it shows how all the
data is processed and then discarded every time it runs. This
is because our system relies on ephemeral storage and it does
not communicate with any other service for PII data exchange.
C. Potential Risks and Impacts
Even though there are many beneﬁts and advantages as-
sociated with this concept, there still risks and less positive
impacts. For instance, if these mechanisms are misused, they
can lead to unlawfully searches in data repositories to look
for PII. This disadvantage goes against the privacy rights and
assurances that we are striving to protect.
Another problem faced in the experimental work was the
difﬁculty in obtaining reliable data for the model training
phase. It was quite hard due to the lack of publicly available
PII. Consequently, we did not possess the desirable amount
of data for the third part of our work. Additionally, directly
related to this issue is the fact that manually labeling data is
very expensive. It demands several resources and a lot of time.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we discussed how our proposed usage of NLP
and ML can be used to detect data privacy violations. In the
process, we evaluated the effectiveness of three NLP tools
and their NER sub-tasks in discovering PII. Ultimately, we
discussed the applicability as a PET.
We developed an experimental setup where different ML
models were trained and evaluated with generic as well as
context-speciﬁc datasets. We also show that related work
usually focuses on speciﬁc areas such as clinical or biomed-
ical data and not PII in its broader deﬁnition. Whereas our
method can equally include such data. The positive results of
our proposal are veriﬁed by two main NLP tools (Stanford
CoreNLP and spaCy).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work presented in this paper was partially carried out
in the scope of the PoSeID-on project - Protection and control
of Secured Information by means of a privacy enhanced
Dashboard, Grant Agreement Number: 786713. H2020-DS-
2016-2017/ DS-08-2017.
REFERENCES
[1] L. J., S. A., H. J., , and L. C., “A survey on recent advances in named
entity recognition from deep learning models,” in Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics . Santa
Fe, New Mexico, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug.
2018, pp. 2145–2158.[2] R. L. and R. D., “Design challenges and misconceptions in
named entity recognition,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning ,
ser. CoNLL ’09. Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2009, pp. 147–155. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1596374.1596399
[3] A. T., Types of Machine Learning Algorithms . Rijeka, Croatia: InTech,
02 2010, ch. 3, p. 366.
[4] C. J., H. H., T. S., and Q. Y ., “Feature selection for text classiﬁcation
with na ¨ıve bayes,” Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 36, no. 3, pp.
5432–5435, 2009.
[5] L. J., M. A., and P. F., “Conditional random ﬁelds:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data,”
inProceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Machine
Learning , ser. ICML ’01. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2001, pp. 282–289. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645530.655813
[6] Z. L. and S. P., “A survey of randomized algorithms for training neural
networks,” Information Sciences , vol. 364, pp. 146–155, 2016.
[7] P. J., S. R., and M. C., “Glove: Global vectors for word representation,”
inProceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . Doha, Qatar: Association
for Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
[8] O. F. and T. C., “Choosing an nlp library for analyzing software
documentation: A systematic literature review and a series of
experiments,” in Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Mining Software Repositories , ser. MSR ’17. Piscataway,
NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2017, pp. 187–197. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2017.42
[9] J. R., B. R., and L. H., “Evaluating and combining name entity recog-
nition systems,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Named Entity Workshop .
Berlin, Germany: Association for Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2016,
pp. 21–27.
[10] R. A., C. S, Mausam, and E. O, “Named entity recognition in tweets:
An experimental study,” in Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Edinburgh,
Scotland, UK.: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2011,
pp. 1524–1534.
[11] V . A., “Evaluating and combining and biomedical named entity recog-
nition systems,” in Biological, translational, and clinical language
processing . Prague, Czech Republic: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Jun. 2007, pp. 199–200.
[12] B. S., K. E., and L. E., Natural Language Processing with Python .
Boston, USA: O’Reilly Media, 01 2009.
[13] M. C., S. M., B. J., F. J., B. S., and M. D., “The Stanford CoreNLP
natural language processing toolkit,” in Proceedings of 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System
Demonstrations . Baltimore, Maryland: Association for Computational
Linguistics, Jun. 2014, pp. 55–60.
[14] ExplosionAI. (2019) spacy - industrial-strength natural language
processing. [Online]. Available: https://spacy.io
[15] Kaggle. (2019) An online community of data scientists and machine
learners. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com
[16] U. of Groningen. (2019) Groningen meaning bank. [Online]. Available:
https://gmb.let.rug.nl
[17] T. D. of Information Resources. (2019) Our mission
is to provide technology leadership, technology solu-
tions. [Online]. Available: https://dir.texas.gov/View-Search/Contracts-
Detail.aspx?contractnumber=DIR-TSO-4101
[18] Metrolink. (2019) Metrolink is southern california’s
premier regional passenger rail system serving over
55 stations across the region. [Online]. Available:
https://www.metrolinktrains.com/globalassets/about/contracts/may-
26-2019/contract-no.-sp452-16-conformed-contract-fully-executed.pdf
[19] U. D. O. Defense. (2019) Ofﬁcial website for u.s. department of defense.
[Online]. Available: https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Contracts
[20] N. C. S. B. of Elections. (2020) Election results data. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncsbe.gov/Public-Records-Data-Info/Election-Results-Data
[21] MostlyAI. (2019) Creating ai-generated synthetic data. [Online].
Available: https://mostly.ai

