==== Page 1 ====
Variational Few-Shot Learning
Jian Zhang1Chenglong Zhao1Bingbing Ni1∗Minghao Xu1Xiaokang Yang2
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{stevenash0822,cl-zhao,nibingbing,xuminghao118,xkyang }@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
We propose a variational Bayesian framework for en-
hancing few-shot learning performance. This idea is mo-
tivated by the fact that single point based metric learning
approaches are inherently noise-vulnerable and easy-to-be-
biased. In a nutshell, stochastic variational inference is in-
voked to approximate bias-eliminated class speciﬁc sam-
ple distributions. In the meantime, a classiﬁer-free pre-
diction is attained by leveraging the distribution statistics
on novel samples. Extensive experimental results on sev-
eral benchmarks well demonstrate the effectiveness of our
distribution-driven few-shot learning framework over pre-
vious point estimates based methods, in terms of superior
classiﬁcation accuracy and robustness.
1. Introduction
Relying on substantial labelled data, deep learning [27,
41, 20] based approaches have led a series of breakthroughs
in computer vision community. However, collecting and
annotating such a scale of data are both labor-intensive, se-
riously restricting their practicability in actual applications.
Inspired by human visual system, which has the instinct to
recognize novel objects by learning with only a few exam-
ples, few-shot learning [9] is proposed to mimic this ability.
More explicitly, we consider a common few-shot learn-
ing scenario where a learning agent, acquiring decision-
making strategy with substantial data during training, is ex-
erted on previously unseen classes with limited auxiliary su-
pervision during test. Many prior works [25, 45, 7, 6] stress
on learning a well-organized matching mechanism. This
mechanism attempts to seek a best match between support
set(scarce labelled data) and target set (unlabelled data),
via parametric [35, 18] or non-parametric [45, 42] meth-
ods as measurement. While non-parametric methods utilize
designated metric, its counterpart parametric methods lever-
age neural network to measure the similarity. The essence
∗Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni
(a) Point Estimate
(b) Our Method
……
Target Set
 Support Set…
Figure 1. Variational few-shot learning: (a) Prior works choose
a speciﬁc point to represent each class. (b) Our method estimates
the distributions of each class. Best viewed in color.
of both methods is to search for the nearest support class of
target data within an embedding space.
As mentioned above, points of the same class scatter in
a certain range of embedding space. A common manner is
that choosing a speciﬁc point ( e.g. central point) to represent
the same class points, which can be represented as point
estimates . Despite their favorable performance in public
datasets, there exists two issues: 1) Estimating such a spe-
ciﬁc point is difﬁcult when limited support points distribute
unevenly in embedding space. For instance, prototype-
based methods [42, 15, 1] compute the mean of embed-
ded support examples for each class, which is vulnerable
to noise since data is severely limited. 2) They are lack of
interpretability since a single embedding is insufﬁcient for
indicating a class. We consider that each point of the same
class is not isolated in embedding space, but is sampled
from a high-dimensional distribution. As shown in Figure
1, it is obvious that the distributions of each class have su-
perior descriptive power than several points.
To explicitly address the issues caused by point esti-
mate methods, we propose a distribution estimate frame-
work via variational inference. While exact inference is
computationally intractable, variational inference is a the-
oretically attractive method and suitable for computation.
1685


==== Page 2 ====
Previous work [8] applying variational inference requires
a full dataset through the model, inefﬁciently aggregating
the embeddings of all elements ﬁrst to generate the distri-
bution. We instead share the distribution generation mecha-
nism across elements of both support and target set and then
merge them into large class-speciﬁc distributions. By esti-
mating distributions of each class, we can straightforwardly
calculate the conﬁdence of each class the target point be-
longs to and perform classiﬁcation by the conﬁdence. This
facilitates use of the entire distribution rather than sample
from it, which makes our method immune from the sample
bias. In a nutshell, the key of our method is to precisely
infer these distributions and concisely predict outputs with
distributions. We show that a combination between few-
shot learning and variational inference can be extended to
greatly eliminate the bias of original point estimates and im-
prove performance in prediction. Furthermore, our method
allows for full Bayesian analysis of the model, and it’s sig-
niﬁcantly more interpretable over prior arts.
Notably, our variational learning method estimates
distributions via tightening intra-class relationships. A
classiﬁer-free prediction is then obtained via calculating the
sample probabilities of target samples from those estimated
distributions. This metric is proven to be an extension of
weighted Euclidean distance where class-speciﬁc features
are strengthened and irrelevant features are suppressed.
Our method is evaluated on public benchmarks and re-
sults in state-of-the-art performance w.r.t. few-shot classi-
ﬁcation accuracy. Not only that, we achieve lowest vari-
ance compared with contemporary methods, which is mean-
ingful for many real world applications where robustness
of prediction is extremely desired, e.g., autonomous driv-
ing or medical diagnosis [49]. Additionally, we extend
our variational-based learning strategy on a recently re-
leased one-shot segmentation benchmark [31], achieving
incremental progress over the initial architecture. It further
demonstrates the transportability of the proposed method.
2. Related work
Metric-learning based approaches. Metric learning
approaches attempt to map the few-shot labelled and un-
labelled points into a non-linear embedding space and per-
form classiﬁcation by assessing which labelled points are
closest to the unlabelled points. The key assumption of
those approaches is that they can learn feature embeddings
which preserve the intrinsic class relationships. Koch et
al. [25] pioneer Siamese network to generate embeddings of
same/different pairs and compute a weighted L1metric for
measuring the similarity. Vinyals et al. [45] propose Match-
ing Network to accumulate information on a given task with
memory mechanism and utilize cosine distance in an atten-
tion kernel as measurement. In Prototypical Network [42],
a metric space is learned in which nearest neighbor classi-ﬁcation can be performed with prototype representations of
each class. Sung et al. [43] introduce a learnable similar-
ity metric by calculating the relation score between query
images and the prototype of each class. On this basis, label-
propagation-related approaches [29, 22] are developed to
explore intra-class or inter-class relationships in the classiﬁ-
cation task. In addition, contrastive loss [17, 25] and triplet
loss [40, 44] are used for strengthen learned metrics by fully
exploring pair/triplet relationships within the dataset.
We emphasize that metric-learning methods are re-
stricted in the quality of feature embeddings. This point
estimate approach is sensitive to sample noise from random
selection of support dataset and inductive bias from scarce
data. In contrast, we estimate class-speciﬁc distributions in-
stead, which possesses general stability and interpretability.
Meta-learning based approaches. The natural incon-
sistency between training and testing data is a bottleneck
of contemporary few-shot learning. A generic term, “meta-
learning”, is ﬁrst formulated to tackle this problem. The
core of primary methods [10, 33, 11] is to initialize weight
conﬁguration that can be swiftly ﬁne-tuned in test phase
within a fewsteps. In MAML [10],parameters are optimized
within a task pool so that they can be quickly adapted to a
particular task. In “Optimization as a model” [37], a LSTM-
based meta-learner is trained to coverage a learner classi-
ﬁer. Considering time-consuming drawback of ﬁne-tuning
in test phase, recent works [39, 4, 26] inference in a feed-
forward pass. [15, 36, 48, 16, 3] further implicitly adopt
meta-learning as an auxiliary phase to predict the parame-
ters from the activations in the last stage.
Data augmentation based approaches. Data insufﬁ-
ciency and overﬁtting remain huge challenges. To alleviate
it, GAN-based techs [46, 19, 47] exploit diverse training
data patterns and apply it into test phase to expand the sup-
port set capacity. Ren et al. [38] and Garcia et al. [13] also
beneﬁt from leveraging unlabelled data, where the former is
to reﬁne class centroids and the latter is to construct graph-
ical models. Nevertheless, these data-augmented methods
fail to thoroughly solve the issue as they might introduce
noise when improper patterns are deployed.
3. Methodology
3.1. Problem Formulation
Suppose we sample a small support set S=
{(xi,yi)}K×C
i=1⊂X×Yof pairs of inputs xi∈Xand
corresponding outputs yi∈Y(e.g., labels or masks in clas-
siﬁcation and segmentation tasks), where Klabelled sam-
ples for each of Cunique classes are obtained, a target set
T={(/tildewidexi,/tildewideyi)}N×C
i=1⊂X×Yis similarly formed with an-
otherNsamples for each of Cclasses. Notably, /tildewideyiis only
available in training phase, remaining the target set unla-
belled during testing. The large collection X×Yin training
1686


==== Page 3 ====
phase do not overlap with those in test phase, which means
none of test classes will be seen during training.
AC-wayK-shot learning problem is formulated to pre-
dict outputs of the target set Twith the prior knowledge
mined from support set S, which is deﬁned as:
ˆy= argmax
/tildewidey∈Cp(/tildewidey|/tildewidex,S), (1)
wherep(/tildewidey|/tildewidex,S)is the probability of classifying a certain
target sample/tildewidexwith the class /tildewideyconditioned on S. In the
standard setting of few-shot learning [31], SandTare de-
noted as sample/query set in training phase and support/test
set in test phase, respectively. Here we unify the notations
intosupport /target set on both phases for clarity.
3.2. Point Estimate Revisit
Prior point estimate methods explicitly learn an embed-
ding function h(x), that maps support examples into a space
where examples from the same class are close and those
from different classes are distant. A designated measure-
ments(/tildewidex,r)is then applied to a test sample /tildewidexand former
generated embeddings rto compute similarity scores. Gen-
erally, the whole process can be deﬁned as:
ˆy= argmax
{y|(x,y)∈S}s/parenleftbig
/tildewidex,h(x)/parenrightbig
(2)
However, there are two important issues: 1) Scarce sup-
port data makes it hard to correctly estimate speciﬁc embed-
dings. 2) Data distribution inconsistency between training
and test phase easily incurs overﬁtting of a point estimate
system. To alleviate those problems, we are motivated to
concentrate on estimating distributions of each class, which
are robust to limited data than point estimate.
3.3. From Point to Distribution: A Variational
Learning Strategy
3.3.1 Variational Inference for Few-shot Learning
Instead of ﬁnding such a biased point estimate in embedding
space, distributions of each class can be predicted. From
this perspective, we regard our goal as to infer the output of
/tildewidexby computing the conﬁdence p(/tildewidey|/tildewidex,z), wherezdenotes
the distribution of entire dataset T. However, to learn the
distribution of zin Bayes rule p(z|T) =p(z)p(T |z)/p(T)
involves a computation intractable integral. One of approx-
imating approaches is variational inference, which is a the-
oretically attractive method and easy to compute. In vari-
ational inference, we approximate the true posterior dis-
tribution with a parameterized distribution qφ(z|S)condi-
tional on Sby minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence
DKL(qφ(z|S)||p(z|T)). Concretely, minimizing the KL
divergence is equivalent to maximize the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) [24] in Eq. 3.logp(T) = log/integraldisplayp(T,z)
qφ(z|S)qφ(z|S)dz
≥Eqφ(z|S)logp(T |z)p(z)
qφ(z|S).(3)
To emphasize our maximization goal ELBO(φ), we ex-
tract the last term in Eq. 3, which has the same form as:
ELBO(φ) =Eqφ(z|S)/bracketleftbig
logp(T |z)/bracketrightbig
−DKL/parenleftbig
qφ(z|S)||p(z)/parenrightbig
.
(4)
This objective function includes two terms. The ﬁrst
term tries to maximize the likelihood to improve the con-
ﬁdence of prediction, and the second term ﬁnds the ap-
proximate posterior distribution by minimizing the KL di-
vergence. p(z)represents the prior distribution in Bayes
Learning, which is assigned to a certain distribution in most
cases [24]. However, we emphasize that a manually ﬁxed
prior impedes our method’s generalization capability due to
the huge discrepancy between training and test phase. Thus,
we make full use of target and support dataset to obtain
prior distribution by pθ(z|T,S). In this paper, qφ(z|S)and
pθ(z|T,S)are both modelled as parameterized networks,
and optimized in an end-to-end manner. As we leverage the
neural network to obtain the prior, we rewrite the ELBO
maximization goal as follows:
ELBO(φ,θ) =Eqφ(z|S)/bracketleftbig
logp(T |z)/bracketrightbig
−DKL/parenleftbig
qφ(z|S)||pθ(z|T,S)/parenrightbig
.(5)
Once the few-shot learning problem is casted as a vari-
ational inference problem, our task then lies in two-fold:
how we precisely estimate the distribution of zand how we
leverage the distribution to estimate the output /tildewideyof target
set, which are in detail discussed in Section 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.
3.3.2 Precise Estimation of Distribution
As shown in Eq. 5, a KL-divergence between the posterior
and prior distributions need to be calculated. In few-shot
learning problem, we estimate class-speciﬁc distributions
by referring to the given output y. Specially in a C-way
few-shot learning scheme, the support set is further split
intoCsubsetS1,...,SC, each containing a certain class.
Similar partition is also applied on target set. In this case,
Cposterior distribution conditional on the support set is to
approach the same quantity of priors. As a consequence, we
elaborate the second term in Eq. 5 with a class-speciﬁc KL
divergence Lintra as:
Lintra=C/summationdisplay
i=1DKL/parenleftbig
qφ(z|Si)||pθ(z|Ti,Si)/parenrightbig
. (6)
Then the problem lies in how to deﬁne posterior distri-
butionqφ(z|Si)and prior distribution pθ(z|Ti,Si), namely,
1687


==== Page 4 ====
Support Set
Target Set
ℒ𝑹𝑹
ℒ𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊
…Feature
ExtractorShared data pool
Aggregated
DistributionEmbedding Distribution
Figure 2. Diagram of the proposed method in a 1-shot, 3-way exemplar. Our variational method shares the identical mechanism to generate
the distribution of each support and target data, and then aggregate them into class-speciﬁc distributions. By back-propagating errors of
two loss terms ( i.e.,LRfor penalizing classiﬁcation mistake. Lintra for correcting the relationship within the same class), the framework
acquire transferable distribution estimation knowledge that is amenable to unseen tasks in test phase. Best viewed in color.
how to obtain class-speciﬁc distributions. Details are dis-
cussed as follows:
Generate statistics for single data. While there is much
freedom in the form qφandpθ, we assume that latent vari-
ablezwithin the same class satisﬁes multivariate Gaussian
with a mean and diagonal covariance structure. For the pur-
pose of learning latent distribution( i.e., learning the class
mean and variance) quickly from a single instance, a statis-
tics generating pipeline is tailored with two cascaded struc-
tures and an additional transform function: 1) A feature ex-
tractorF(x;ϕF)extracts a representation rfrom single data
x. 2) A raw generator G(r;ϕG)takes the representation
as input and directly split the output into two equivalent
partsµrawandσ2
rawwith equal dimensions. 3) A trans-
form function is applied to σ2
rawto yield the ﬁnal variance
vectorσ2whileµrawremains identical to yield the ﬁnal
meanµ. The entire process is formulated as follows:
/bracketleftbig
µraw,σ2
raw/bracketrightbig
=G/parenleftbig
F(x;ϕF);ϕG/parenrightbig
,
µ=µraw,
σ2=|w|∗S(σ2
raw)+|b|.(7)
In practical application, FandGare modeled as convolu-
tional networks and fully-connected layers with learnable
parameters ϕFandϕG, respectively. The transform func-
tion is a Sigmoid mapping S(·)with learnable scale wand
offsetb, rescaling the raw variance vector σ2
rawto a new
range(|b|,|w|+|b|). We clarify that predicting a well-
constrained variance vector is of great signiﬁcance for sub-
sequent estimation in Section 4.2. The predicted mean µ
and variance σ2for single data jointly comprise N(µ,σ2)
to denote corresponding class distribution. Nevertheless,
it is not reliable of the distribution generated from single
data without extra supervision. Although each data con-tains sufﬁcient class information, we still require estimating
posterior distribution and approaching prior on a large set
to eliminate class-irrelevant representation of a single data.
Estimate posterior distribution. It is of low conﬁdence
to generate posterior distribution with single data. We then
impose support subsets of the same class on making a more
precise distribution estimation. Unlike the strategy ( i.e.,
generate distributions with an averaged feature of a mini-
batch) frequently adopted in [21, 14, 8], which implies ev-
ery sample weighs the same, our method uniﬁes distribution
of every single data into the ﬁnal one. Concretely, given n
data with generated mean {µi|i= 1,...,n}and variance/braceleftbig
σ2
i|i= 1,...,n/bracerightbig
, we estimate the overall distribution pa-
rametersµandσ2on the following criterion:
µ=/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1σ−2
i/parenrightBigg−1/parenleftBiggn/summationdisplay
i=1σ−2
iµi/parenrightBigg
,
σ2=/parenleftbigg/summationtextn
i=1σ−2
i
n/parenrightbigg−1
.(8)
On one hand, the overall mean in Eq. 8 is a variance-
weighted linear combination of individual components.
And components with small variance are allocated big
weights. On the other hand, the overall variance tends to
approach the least variance component. To minimize dis-
turbance, the network tends to predict small variance for
those data which lies in the class center (more representa-
tive), but predict relatively large variance for those at the
boundary (less representative). Otherwise either uniform
variance or the converse situation results in misleading ag-
gregation because of undersampling in support set. Thus,
our aggregation choice aims to ease the burden of automat-
ically selecting the most representative components.
1688


==== Page 5 ====
Approach prior distribution. Similarly as the aggre-
gating posterior distribution conditional on the support set,
the prior distribution is accessed with a larger combination
of support and target set. With smoothed class-irrelevant in-
formation along with the larger set, the prior focuses more
on class-speciﬁc information and is thus well-ﬁtted for a
discriminative process. We then approach our estimated
posterior with the prior, force the network capable of lo-
cating representative information from small support set.
3.3.3 Predict Output with Distribution
With class-speciﬁc distribution estimated from support set,
we solve the classiﬁcation task in a straightforward way to
calculate the probability of target data. The ﬁnal prediction
is consistent with the maximum probability among classes.
Explicitly, we encode the target sample xinto class dis-
tribution and utilize the mean vector µ(x)to represent it, as
the mean vector centralizes the class information extracted
from this sample. The posterior distribution qφ(z|Sc)con-
ditional on category csatisﬁesN(µc,σ2
c), where the vari-
ance vector indicates the signiﬁcance of different dimen-
sions. We thus denote Pr/parenleftbig
µ(x)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
as the probabil-
ity ofµ(x)if sampled from the distribution qφ(z|Sc), which
is calculated as follows:
Pr/parenleftbig
µ(x)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
=N/parenleftbig
µ(x);µc,σ2
c/parenrightbig
. (9)
Those probabilities, are transformed into logarithmic
form and then normalized with a softmax function to repre-
sent the conﬁdence of which category the sample xbelongs
to. On this basis, we reformulate the ﬁrst term in Eq. 5 to
derive the recognition loss LRfor the whole target set Tas:
LR=T/summationdisplay
(xi,yi)log/parenleftbigg
1+C/summationdisplay
c/ne}ationslash=yiPr/parenleftbig
µ(xi)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
Pr/parenleftbig
µ(xi)|qφ(z|Syi)/parenrightbig/parenrightbigg
.(10)
Overall loss function. By tightening the intra-class re-
lationship and fulﬁlling the recognition gap, the overall loss
function is established as:
L=LR+Lintra. (11)
3.3.4 Implementation Details
Figure 2 illustrates our overall framework. Similarly as
many recent methods [43, 32], we follow their four-block
convolutional architecture to form our feature extractor F.
Each block contains a 3×3convolution with 64 ﬁlters, a
batch normalization, a ReLU non-linear layer and a 2×2
max-pooling layer. A little difference is that we clip the
max-pooling layer of the last two blocks. Thus, the output
size of the feature extractor is 64×5×5 = 1600 . Taking the
representation as input, we then construct the raw generatorGby a fully-connected layer of 128 dimensions. After ap-
plying the transformation function Hand aggregation rules
mentioned in Section 3.3.2, 64-dimensional distributions of
support and target sets are achieved. We emphasize that our
ﬁnal distributions are consistent with embeddings of those
comparable works w.r.t. the number of dimensions.
The training procedure is split into 2 stages. In ﬁrst stage,
we only train the feature extractor with the entire super-
vised training set. This is done in exactly the same way as
any other standard recognition model. In second stage, we
awaken the whole architecture and allocate distinct learning
strategy for two learnable components. We use an initial
learning rate of 10−4and10−3for the feature extractor F
and the raw generator G, respectively. Those two learning
rates are cut by half every 5000 episodes. All of our train-
able parameters are trained via Adam optimizer [23].
3.4. Discussion
Relation with previous variational arts. Recent works
[8, 21] have already imposed variational inference on few-
shot scenario. However, they are both generative models fo-
cusing more on reconstruction and utilizing ﬁxed standard
Gaussian prior to guide the latent space exploration. We
argue that our framework is the ﬁrst discriminative model
to tackle with few-shot problem via variational inference,
to the best of our knowledge. Also, our method improves
generalization by exploiting the dataset to weaken irrele-
vant features and obtain class-speciﬁc prior. Our recogni-
tion performance degenerates to those two methods only if
data distribution is identical between training and testing,
which is not the case in few-shot learning.
Relation with euclidean distance metric. Even though
widely used for evaluating the similarity between support
and target features [42, 12], in the presence of noise Eu-
clidean distance loses in performance, due to equal contri-
bution over all features. In our framework, we predict the
log-probability from Gaussian distribution as the metric, to
overcome this drawback by weighting features on each di-
mension. Under the assumption of multivariate Gaussian
densities, we can rewrite our metric Das:
D= logPr/parenleftbig
µ(x)|qφ(z|Sc)/parenrightbig
,
=−1
2d/summationdisplay
i=1(µi(x)−µc,i)2
σ2
c,i−d/summationdisplay
i=1logσc,i−d
2log2π,
(12)
whereddenotes the feature dimension and idenotes the i-
th component of the vector. Thus, our proposed metric is
equivalent to a combination of a weighted Euclidean dis-
tance, a variance regularization term and a constant. By
giving low weight ( i.e., big variance) to noisy features and
high weight ( i.e., small variance) to class-speciﬁc features,
a reliable similarity measurement is achieved.
1689


==== Page 6 ====
4. Experiments
We evaluate our approach on two few-shot related tasks:
classiﬁcation on Omniglot [28] and miniImagenet [45]
dataset and segmentation on a recent published benchmark
called cluttered Omniglot [31].
4.1. Few­shot Classiﬁcation
4.1.1 Omniglot
Omniglot [28] is a handwritten characters dataset of 1623
classes from 50 alphabets, where each class consists of 20
samples drawn by different people. Following the same
setup ﬁrst introduced in [45], we split the dataset into a
training set of 1200 classes and a test set of the rest. We then
resize the characters to 28×28, and augment the dataset
through three rotated versions ( 90◦,180◦,270◦).
Under the C-wayK-shot setting, we form an episode
by randomly picking Kimages from the support set and
15 from the target set for each of Csampled classes. We
compute few-shot classiﬁcation accuracy by averaging the
results over 1000 generated episodes in test phase, as shown
in Table 1. Our variational method achieves better recog-
nition performance than state-of-the-arts in majority cases.
Although we do not hit the best performance for 5-shot 20-
way classiﬁcation, our results are still in low variance com-
pared with more complicated structures (like SNAIL [32]).
Crucially, we reach those results with no extra classiﬁers,
which saves memory overhead.
4.1.2 mini Imagenet
mini Imagenet [45] is a more challenging dataset, consist-
ing of84×84RGB images from 100 classes with 600 sam-
ples per class. Similarly as [37], the entire dataset is split
into 64, 16 and 20 classes for training, validation and test-
ing, respectively. For fair comparison, 16 validation classes
are only used for model selection.
We mirrors the conﬁguration of Omniglot experiment
except for two minor changes: 1) As the input size is ex-
panded to 84×84, we reserve the last two max-pooling lay-
ers in feature extractor Fto maintain a 1600-dimensional
representation r; 2) Considering miniImagenet is more
complex for generalizing well to unseen classes, we in-
crease the initial learning rate of feature extractor to 2∗10−4
in stage 2 for correcting the pre-trained features in stage 1.
We compute few-shot classiﬁcation accuracy by av-
eraging the results over 600 generated episodes in test
phase, as summarized in Table 2. Recent works leverage
ResNet [20]-like network to consolidate extracted features,
which is of great assistance to strengthen the recognition
capability. Thus, for fair comparison, we implement an-
other backbone by substituting the relatively weak feature
extractor ( i.e., four-blocks architecture) for the ResNet-12Setup5-way Acc. 20-way Acc.
1-shot 5-shot 1-shot 5-shot
VHE [21] - - 95.2 98.8
NS [8] 98.1 99.5 93.2 98.1
MN [45] 98.1 98.9 93.8 98.5
PN [42] 98.8 99.7 96.0 98.9
MM-Net [5] 99.3 99.8 97.2 98.9
L2C [43] 99.6(0.2) 99.8(0.1) 97.6(0.2) 99.1(0.1)
SNAIL [32] 99.07(0.16) 99.78(0.09) 97.64(0.30) 99.36 (0.18)
Ours 99.67 (0.13) 99.83 (0.06) 97.95 (0.17) 99.24(0.10)
Table 1. Few-shot classiﬁcation accuracy (%) on Omniglot. All
results are averaged over 1000 episodes and reported with 95%
conﬁdence intervals (represented within the bracket). The best
performance is indicated in bold .
as widely adopted in [32, 34, 2]. We argue that few-shot
learning is more of a strategy-learning procedure than a
representation-learning process, which is to some extent
demonstrated by our superior performance for both simple
ConvNet and ResNet implementations.
Another observation is that the advantages of 5-shot clas-
siﬁcation results are less noticeable than of 1-shot scenario.
Considering the 5-way setting with ConvNet, our method
surpasses published state-of-the-art 0.95% for 1-shot but
falls behind for 5-shot. We attribute this phenomenon to the
stability in lower training shots, since our method can ex-
tract class information better from scarce support data via
variational inference. When more support data is available,
the bonus of variational inference will be decreased.
It is worth noticing that our method achieves the lowest
variance, which means our prediction results are notﬂuctu-
ant w.r.t. random selection of support and target set.
4.1.3 Experimetnal Analysis
Stability analysis. Figure 3 shows the similarity ma-
trix learned by Prototypical Net and our method, with the
same ConvNet backbone under 5-way 5-shot settings. The
metrics are negative Euclidean distance and negative log-
probability, respectively. We clarify that the matrix is asym-
metric, as it is pair-wise constructed between randomly se-
lected support subset (5 images per class, 5 classes) and
corresponding target subset. Note that the 5 support images
in the same class do notcluster into a class representation
but perform independently as in 1-shot scenario, to exam-
ine the system stability if sampling different test batches.
Thus, each cell consisting of 5×5grids illustrates the diver-
gence between two classes, as well as the intra-class simi-
larities. The higher intra-class similarities demonstrates that
our probability metric is more vulnerable to sampling noise
under a well-designed Bayesian scheme, compared to stan-
dard Euclidean distance.
Training conﬁguration analysis. Although it is a con-
sensus to remain consistency between training and test
1690


==== Page 7 ====
Pipeline Setup Fine Tune 5-way 1-shot 5-way 5-shot
Backbone ConvNet ResNet ConvNet ResNet
MAML [10] Y 48.70 ±1.84 - 63.11 ±0.92 -
Prototypical Net [42] N 49.42 ±0.78 - 68.20 ±0.66 -
Learning to Compare [43] N 50.44 ±0.82 - 65.32 ±0.70 -
SNAIL [32] N - 55.71 ±0.99 - 68.88 ±0.92
TADAM [34] N - 58.50 ±0.30 - 76.70 ±0.30
Qiao et al. [36] N 54.43 ±0.40 59.60 ±0.41 67.87 ±0.20 73.74±0.19
Without Forgetting [15] N 56.20 ±0.86 55.45 ±0.89 72.81±0.62 70.13 ±0.68
Our Variational Method N 57.15±0.31 61.23±0.26 71.54±0.23 77.69±0.17
Table 2. Few-shot classiﬁcation accuracy (%) on miniImagenet. All results are averaged over 600 episodes and reported with 95% conﬁ-
dence intervals. The best performance is indicated in bold and the lowest variance is colored in red. Best viewed in color.
(a) Prototypcial Net [42]
 (b) Ours
Figure 3. Similarity matrix of Prototypcial Net and our method on
miniImagenet. Horizontal axis: 5 target images per class. Vertical
axis: 5 support images per class. Cell: 5*5 comparison between
two classes. Warmer colors denotes higher similarities.
phase in standard few-shot learning, we argue not all frame-
works beneﬁt the most from this identical settings. We de-
sign two experiments to study the inﬂuence of various train-
ing conﬁgurations: 1) different support size; 2) different
target size, which are denoted as “k-shot” and “k-target”
in Figure 4. It is well observed that increasing target size
during training will lead to the performance gain, while re-
maining the same support size during training is a better
choice considering the stability.
4.2. Ablation Study
To assess the effects of different components, we con-
duct an ablation study on miniImagenet, with detailed re-
sults in Table 3.
Aggregate embeddings / aggregate distributions. First
we examine the performance of our system without the pro-
posed aggregation rules on distributions. To maintain the
structural integrity, we aggregate embeddings of the same
class with an average-pooling layer and generate corre-
sponding distribution on this basis instead. This alternative
operation is abbreviated to “aggregate embeddings” while
ours is denoted by “aggregate distributions” for clarity. We
observe that the latter drastically exceeds the former w.r.t.
5-shot classiﬁcation accuracy, which means our designated
aggregation rules better expolit signiﬁcance of each sample.
Without / with transform function. We validate the hy-
(a) Different support size
 (b) Different target size
Figure 4. Model performance on 5-way miniImagenet with various
training conﬁgurations. x-axis: different size of support or target
set during training. y-axis: 1-shot or 5-shot test accuracy. Error
bars indicate 95% conﬁdence intervals over 600 test episodes.
pothesis that a well-constrained variance is of signiﬁcance
to the system performance. In our approach, a transform
functionHwith two learnable scalars is applied to restrict
the ﬁnal variance to a certain range. If no constraint is ex-
erted on the estimated variance ( i.e., the transform function
is replaced with a simple ReLU nonlinearity), a sharp de-
crease in classiﬁcation accuracy is observed in both 1-shot
and 5-shot cases. Moreover, it incurs instability without
transform function. We infer that it remains a complicated
problem to simultaneously optimize the mean and the vari-
ance, where the network can be easily stuck in local optima
under the KL constraint ( e.g., two distributions approach
each other with small mean and big variance). With learn-
able scalars, the transform function is veriﬁed to generate
non-trival variance while maintaining the model ﬂexibility.
Multi-stage / end-to-end training. We further examine
whether an end-to-end training strategy degrades the perfor-
mance, in which case both feature extractor and distribution
generator are mutually tuned from scratch. Our network is
better ﬁtted in a 2-stage training scheme as the pre-trained
features assists in generalizing class distribution.
t-SNE visualization. We utilize t-SNE [30] to visualize
the learned representation of target set in a 5-way classi-
ﬁcation task. In detail, we repeat sampling from our esti-
mated distributions of each class to construct the ﬁnal 64-
dimensional features. As shown in Figure 5, representa-
1691


==== Page 8 ====
miniImagenet
AD TF MS 5-way 1-shot 5-way 5-shot
/check /check 54.89±1.37 65.62 ±0.94
/check /check 53.18±0.98 68.56 ±0.71
/check /check 55.17±0.64 69.13 ±0.50
/check /check /check 57.15±0.31 71.54±0.23
Table 3. Ablation study on our variational approach. All results
(%) are averaged over 600 episodes and reported with 95% conﬁ-
dence intervals on 5-way miniImagenet. The best performance is
highlighted . AD: aggregate distributions. TF: transform function.
MS: multi-stage training. Blank cell indicates operating in another
way or operating without it, as discussed in analysis.
(a) Our full model
 (b) End-to-end training
 (c) Aggregate embed-
dings
Figure 5. The t-SNE visualization of target set in a 5-way problem
under three different conﬁgurations.
tions of the same class are clustered closer in our full model
than other two conﬁgurations. While the model trained in
an end-to-end manner fails to split different categories, an-
other model adopting the ”aggregate embeddings” strategy
even slightly confuses the boundary of classes.
4.3. Few­shot Segmentation
We further evaluate our approach on a novel few-shot
segmentation benchmark [31]. This benchmark, called clut-
tered Omniglot , is developed from the original Omniglot
to form more complex cluttered scenes with multiple char-
acters. Concretely, a cluttered scene of 96×96pixels is
composed of a target character and massive distractors (3-
255 distinct characters), with each character of 32×32pix-
els placed at a random location. Given distortion manually
added to each character and occlusion in cluttered scenes, it
is a challenging task to ﬁnd the target character and produce
a pixelwise segmentation map, even difﬁcult for segmenting
previously unseen targets under few-shot settings.
As huge discrepancy lies in classiﬁcation and segmenta-
tion task, we make an incremental adjustment on the ba-
sis of proposed architecture MaskNet in this benchmark,
rather than reconstruct our model to adapt to the new task.
In training phase, MaskNet ﬁrst generates some proposals
with associated instance segmentations prediction, and then
decides which of these proposals is the best match by a dis-
criminator. We then deploy our variational learning strategy
by two modiﬁcations: 1) Instead of predicting embeddings
of generated proposals, we predict the distributions with
auxiliary proposals. Those auxiliary proposals are gener-ated in extra feed-forward passes with transformed versions
of target characters as input. 2) In test phase, we makes
the ﬁnal decision of the best proposal by the distance be-
tween target embeddings and proposal distributions. Thus,
by fairly comparing with the original well-performed archi-
tecture, this conﬁguration ensures a precise evaluation of
our variational learning method with minimal overhead.
Model 4 8 16 32 64 128 256
Siamese U-net 97.1 92.1 79.8 62.4 48.1 39.3 38.4
MaskNet 95.8 90.5 79.3 65.6 52.8 44.8 43.7
ours 97.9 93.5 83.4 67.0 53.9 45.4 43.2
Table 4. Few-shot segmentation accuracy (IOU in %) across dif-
ferent amounts of characters per cluttered scene. The best perfor-
mance is highlighted.
We report segmentation results in Table 4, using Inter-
section over Union (IOU) as measurement. Siamese U-net
also proposed in [31] serves as the baseline. We observe
that our variational strategy strengthens the original archi-
tecture MaskNet by a considerable margin. This is because
we improve the quality of segmentation proposals by mak-
ing them insensitive to the distortion of the input. With-
out any auxiliary information, our assumption that we can
well estimate the distribution of correct-located segmenta-
tion proposals fails in a seriously occluded situation, which
results in a slight decrease on performance with 255 distrac-
tors per cluttered scene.
5. Conclusion
We propose a variational Bayesian framework for few-
shot learning. Different from the deterministic point esti-
mate methods, we approximate class-speciﬁc distributions
instead and straightforwardly compute the probability of
novel input. This probabilistic-based metric is an exten-
sion of weighted Euclidean distance, further consolidating
the estimated distribution as irrelevant information is sup-
pressed. Our method requires no ﬁne-tuning before test and
is easy to implement on other task, which is of great ﬂexibil-
ity and transportability. It is further proven effective on few-
shot recognition and segmentation benchmarks, in terms of
superior classiﬁcation accuracy and robustness.
6. Acknowledgement
The work was partly supported by State Key Research
and Development Program (2016YFB1001003). This work
was also supported by National Science Foundation of
China U1611461 and China’s Thousand Youth Talents
Plan, STCSM 17511105401, 18DZ2270700 and MoE Key
Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, China.This work was sponsored by CCF-
Tencent Open Fund. This work was also jointly supported
by SJTU-Minivision joint research grant.
1692


==== Page 9 ====
References
[1] Kelsey R. Allen, Evan Shelhamer, Hanul Shin, and Joshua B.
Tenenbaum. Inﬁnite mixture prototypes for few-shot learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Machine Learning , pages 232–241, 2019.
[2] Matthias Bauer, Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Jakub Bartlomiej
Swiatkowski, Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf, and Richard E. Turner.
Discriminative k-shot learning using probabilistic models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00326 , 2017.
[3] Luca Bertinetto, Jo ˜ao F. Henriques, Philip H. S. Torr, and
Andrea Vedaldi. Meta-learning with differentiable closed-
form solvers. In 7th International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2019.
[4] Luca Bertinetto, Jo ˜ao F Henriques, Jack Valmadre, Philip
Torr, and Andrea Vedaldi. Learning feed-forward one-shot
learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 523–531, 2016.
[5] Qi Cai, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, Chenggang Yan, and Tao
Mei. Memory matching networks for one-shot image recog-
nition. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 4080–4088, 2018.
[6] Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank
Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer look at few-shot classi-
ﬁcation. In 7th International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations , 2019.
[7] Matthijs Douze, Arthur Szlam, Bharath Hariharan, and Herv
Jgou. Low-shot learning with large-scale diffusion. In The
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 3349–3358, 2018.
[8] Harrison Edwards and Amos Storkey. Towards a neural
statistician. In 5th International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2017.
[9] Li Fei-Fei, Rob Fergus, and Pietro Perona. One-shot learning
of object categories. IEEE transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence , pages 594–611, 2006.
[10] Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-
agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks.
InProceedings of the 34th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning , pages 1126–1135, 2017.
[11] Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning and
universality: Deep representations and gradient descent
can approximate any learning algorithm. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.11622 , 2017.
[12] Hang Gao, Zheng Shou, Alireza Zareian, Hanwang Zhang,
and Shih-Fu Chang. Low-shot learning via covariance-
preserving adversarial augmentation networks. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 983–993,
2018.
[13] Victor Garcia and Joan Bruna. Few-shot learning with graph
neural networks. In 6th International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations , 2018.
[14] Marta Garnelo, Jonathan Schwarz, Dan Rosenbaum, Fabio
Viola, Danilo J Rezende, SM Eslami, and Yee Whye Teh.
Neural processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01622 , 2018.
[15] Spyros Gidaris and Nikos Komodakis. Dynamic few-shot
visual learning without forgetting. In Proceedings of theIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition , pages 4367–4375, 2018.
[16] Spyros Gidaris and Nikos Komodakis. Generating classiﬁ-
cation weights with gnn denoising autoencoders for few-shot
learning. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , 2019.
[17] Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimension-
ality reduction by learning an invariant mapping. In IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition , pages 1735–1742, 2006.
[18] Xufeng Han, Thomas Leung, Yangqing Jia, Rahul Suk-
thankar, and Alexander C Berg. Matchnet: Unifying feature
and metric learning for patch-based matching. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 3279–3286, 2015.
[19] Bharath Hariharan and Ross Girshick. Low-shot visual
recognition by shrinking and hallucinating features. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision , pages 3018–3027, 2017.
[20] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 770–778, 2016.
[21] Luke B. Hewitt, Maxwell I. Nye, Andreea Gane, Tommi S.
Jaakkola, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. The variational ho-
moencoder: Learning to learn high capacity generative mod-
els from few examples. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth
Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , pages
988–997, 2018.
[22] Jongmin Kim, Taesup Kim, Sungwoong Kim, and Chang D
Yoo. Edge-labeling graph neural network for few-shot learn-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11–20, 2019.
[23] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In 3rd International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2015.
[24] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding vari-
ational bayes. In 2nd International Conference on Learning
Representations , 2014.
[25] Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Siamese neural networks for one-shot image recognition. In
ICML deep learning workshop , 2015.
[26] Jedrzej Kozerawski and Matthew Turk. Clear: Cumulative
learning for one-shot one-class image recognition. In The
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 3446–3455, 2018.
[27] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton.
Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural net-
works. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[28] Brenden Lake, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Jason Gross, and
Joshua Tenenbaum. One shot learning of simple visual con-
cepts. In Proceedings of the 33th Annual Meeting of the Cog-
nitive Science Society , 2011.
[29] Yanbin Liu, Juho Lee, Minseop Park, Saehoon Kim, Eunho
Yang, Sung Ju Hwang, and Yi Yang. Learning to propa-
gate labels: Transductive propagation network for few-shot
1693


==== Page 10 ====
learning. In 7th International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations , 2019.
[30] Laurens Van Der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing
data using t-sne. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
pages 2579–2605, 2008.
[31] Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, and Alexander S Ecker.
One-shot segmentation in clutter. In Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning , 2018.
[32] Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter
Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner. In 6th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
[33] Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On
ﬁrst-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.02999 , 2018.
[34] Boris N. Oreshkin, Pau Rodr ´ıguez L ´opez, and Alexandre La-
coste. TADAM: task dependent adaptive metric for improved
few-shot learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , pages 719–729, 2018.
[35] Hang Qi, Matthew Brown, and David G. Lowe. Low-shot
learning with imprinted weights. In The IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5822–
5830, 2018.
[36] Siyuan Qiao, Chenxi Liu, Wei Shen, and Alan L. Yuille.
Few-shot image recognition by predicting parameters from
activations. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 7229–7238, 2018.
[37] Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model
for few-shot learning. In 5th International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2017.
[38] Mengye Ren, Eleni Triantaﬁllou, Sachin Ravi, Jake Snell,
Kevin Swersky, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Hugo Larochelle,
and Richard S Zemel. Meta-learning for semi-supervised
few-shot classiﬁcation. In 6th International Conference on
Learning Representations , 2018.
[39] Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan
Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-learning with
memory-augmented neural networks. In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning , pages 1842–1850, 2016.
[40] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin.
Facenet: A uniﬁed embedding for face recognition and clus-
tering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 815–823, 2015.
[41] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep con-
volutional networks for large-scale image recognition. In
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2015.
[42] Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypi-
cal networks for few-shot learning. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , pages 4077–4087, 2017.
[43] Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip HS
Torr, and Timothy M Hospedales. Learning to compare: Re-
lation network for few-shot learning. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 1199–1208, 2018.
[44] Yaniv Taigman, Ming Yang, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Lior
Wolf. Web-scale training for face identiﬁcation. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 2746–2754, 2015.[45] Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan
Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one shot learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages
3630–3638, 2016.
[46] Yu-Xiong Wang, Ross Girshick, Martial Hebert, and Bharath
Hariharan. Low-shot learning from imaginary data. In The
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2018.
[47] Ruixiang Zhang, Tong Che, Zoubin Ghahramani, Yoshua
Bengio, and Yangqiu Song. Metagan: An adversarial ap-
proach to few-shot learning. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems , pages 2371–2380, 2018.
[48] Fang Zhao, Jian Zhao, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi Feng. Dy-
namic conditional networks for few-shot learning. In The Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision , pages 20–36, 2018.
[49] Wei Zhao, Jiancheng Yang, Yingli Sun, Cheng Li, Weilan
Wu, Liang Jin, Zhiming Yang, Bingbing Ni, Pan Gao, Peijun
Wang, Yanqing Hua, and Ming Li. 3d deep learning from
ct scans predicts tumor invasiveness of subcentimeter pul-
monary adenocarcinomas. Cancer Research , 78(24):6881–
6889, 2018.
1694


