==== Page 1 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation
and Editing with Natural Language Guidance
Katherine Crowson⋆1, Stella Biderman∗1,2, Daniel Kornis3, Dashiell Stander1,
Eric Hallahan1, Louis Castricato1,4, and Edward Raff2
1EleutherAI
2Booz Allen Hamilton
3AIDock
4Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract Generating and editing images from open domain text prompts
is a challenging task that heretofore has required expensive and specially
trained models. We demonstrate a novel methodology for both tasks
which is capable of producing images of high visual quality from text
prompts of significant semantic complexity without any training by us-
ing a multimodal encoder to guide image generations. We demonstrate
on a variety of tasks how using CLIP [40] to guide VQGAN [12] pro-
duces higher visual quality outputs than prior, less flexible approaches
like minDALL-E [20], GLIDE [36] and Open-Edit [26], despite not be-
ing trained for the tasks presented. Our code is available in a public
repository.
Keywords: generative adversarial networks; grounded language; image
manipulation
1 Introduction
Using free-form text to generate or manipulate high-quality images is a challeng-
ing task, requiring a grounded learning between visual and textual representa-
tions. Manipulating images in an open domain context was first proposed by the
seminal Open-Edit [26], which allowed text prompts to alter an image’s content.
This was done mostly with semantically simple transformations (e.g., turn a red
apple green), and does not allow generation of images. Soon after DALL-E [41]
and GLIDE [36] were developed, both of which can perform generation (and
inpainting) from arbitrary text prompts, but do not themselves enable image
manipulation.
In this work we propose the first a unified approach to semantic image gener-
ation and editing, leveraging a pretrained joint image-text encoder [40] to steer
an image generative model [12]. Our methodology works by using the multimodal
encoder to define a loss function evaluating the similarity of a (text, image) pair
and backpropagating to the latent space of the image generator. We iteratively
⋆Co-first authorsarXiv:2204.08583v2  [cs.CV]  4 Sep 2022

==== Page 2 ====
2 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
update the candidate generation until it is sufficiently similar to the target text.
The difference between using our technique for generation and editing is merely
a matter of initializing the generator with a particular image (for editing) or
with random noise (for generation).
A significant advantage of our methodology is the lack of additional training
required. Only a pretrained image generator and a joint image-text encoder are
necessary, while all three of Liu et al. [26], Ramesh et al. [41], and Nichol et al.
[36] require training similar models from scratch. Additionally Ramesh et al. [41]
and Nichol et al. [36] train generators from scratch.
We demonstrate several significant contributions, including:
1. High visual quality for both generation and manipulation of images.
2. High semantic fidelity between text and generation, especially when seman-
tically unlikely content co-occurs.
3. Efficiency in that our method requires no additional training beyond the pre-
trained models, using only a small amount of optimization per inference.
4. The value of open development and research. This technique was developed
in public and open collaboration has been integral to its rapid real-world
success. Non-authors have already extended our approach to other modalities
(e.g., replacing text for audio) and commercial applications.
The rest of our manuscript is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss
how of how our methodology works, resulting in a simple and easy-to-apply
approach for combing multiple modalities for generation or manipulation. The
efficacy of vqgan-clip in generating high quality and semantically relevant
images is shown in Section 3, followed by superior manipulation ability in Sec-
tion 4. The design choices of vqgan-clip to obtain both high image quality and
fast generation are validated by ablations in Section 5, and Section 6 discusses
resource usage and efficiency considerations. As our approach has been public
since April 2021, we are able to show further validation by external groups in
Section 7. This use includes extensions to other modalities, showing the flexibil-
ity of our approach, as well as commercial use of vqgan-clip that demonstrate
its success at handling open-domain prompts and images to a satisfying degree.
Finally we conclude in Section 8.
2 Our Methodology
To demonstrate our method’s effectiveness we apply it using VQGAN [12] and
CLIP [40] as pre-trained models, and so refer to our approach as vqgan-clip .
We stress, however, that our approach is not specific to either model and that
subsequent work has already shown success that builds on our work using other
models [6, 13, 30, 50], and even in other modalities [19, 54].
We start with a text prompt and use a GAN to iteratively generate candi-
date images, at each step using CLIP to improve the image. We optimize the
image by treating the squared spherical distance between the embedding of the

==== Page 3 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 3
candidate and the embedding of the text prompt as a loss function, and differ-
entiating through CLIP with respect to the GAN’s latent vector representation
of the image, which we refer to as the “z-vector” following Oord, Vinyals, and
Kavukcuoglu [38]. This process is outlined in Fig. 1
Figure 1: Diagram showing how augmentations are added to stabilize and im-
prove the optimization. Multiple crops, each with different random augmenta-
tions, are applied to produce an average loss over a single source generation.
This improves the results with respect to a single latent Z-vector.
To generate an image, the “initial image” contains random pixel values. The
optimization process is repeated to alter the image, until the output image grad-
ually improves such that it semantically matches the target text. We can also
edit existing images by starting with the image-to-edit as the “initial image”.
The text prompt used to describe how we want the image to change is used
identically to the text prompt for generating an image, and no changes to the
architecture exist between generation and manipulation besides how the ‘initial
image” is selected.
We use Adam [21] to do the actual optimization, a learning rate of 0 .15,
β= (0.9,0.999), and run for 400 iterations for the experiments in this paper.
2.1 Discrete Latent Spaces for Images
Unlike the naturally discrete nature of text, the space of naturally occurring im-
ages is inherently continuous and not trivially discretized. Prior work by Oord,
Vinyals, and Kavukcuoglu [38] borrows techniques from vector quantization
(VQ) to represent a variety of modalities with discrete latent representations by
building a codebook vocabulary with a finite set of learned embeddings. Given a
codebook of vocabulary size Kwith embedding dimension nk,Z={zi}K
k∈Rnk.
This is applied to images by constructing a convolutional autoencoder with
encoder Eand decoder G. An input image x∈Iis first embedded with the
encoder z=E(x). We can then compute the vector quantized embedding xas
zq= argmin
zk∈Z∥zi,j−zk∥

==== Page 4 ====
4 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
which we can then multiply back through the vocabulary in order to perform
reconstruction. We can then use a straight-through estimator on the quantization
step in order to allow the CNN and codebook to be jointly trained end-to-end.
We use the popular VQGAN [12] model for the experiments in this paper.
2.2 Contrastive Text-Image Models
To guide the generative model, we need a way to adjust the similarity of a
candidate generation with the guidance text. To achieve this, we use CLIP, [40],
a joint text-image encoder trained by using contrastive learning. We use CLIP to
embed text prompts and candidate generated images independently and measure
the cosine similarity between the embeddings. This similarity is then reframed
as a loss that we can use gradient descent to minimize.
2.3 Augmentations
One challenge of using vqgan-clip is that gradient updates from the CLIP loss
are quite noisy if calculated on a single image. To overcome this we take the
generated candidate image and modify it many times, producing a large number
of augmented images. We take random crops of the candidate image and then
apply further augmentations such as flipping, color jitter, noising, etc. [42]. Most
high level semantic features of an image are relatively invariant to these changes,
so averaging the CLIP loss with respect to all of the augmented images reduces
the variance of each update step. There is a risk that a random crop might
dramatically change the semantic content of an image (e.g. by cropping out an
important object), but we find that in practice this does not cause any issues.
For the results presented in this paper we used an augmentation pipeline
consisting of: random horizontal flips, random affine projections, random per-
spective projections, random color jitter, and adding random Gaussian noise.
2.4 Regularizing the Latent Vector
When using an unconstrained VQGAN for image generation, we found that
outputs tended to be unstructured. Adding augmentations helps with general
coherence, but the final output will often still contain patches of unwanted tex-
tures. To solve this problem we apply a weighted L2regularization to the the
z-vector.
This produces a regularized loss function given by the equation
Loss =LCLIP +α·1
NNX
i=0Z2
i
where αis the regularization weight. This encourages parsimony in the represen-
tation, sending low information codes in VQGAN’s codebook to zero. In practice
we note that regularization appears to improve the coherence of the output and
produces a better structured image. We decay the regularization term by 0 .005
over the course of generation.

==== Page 5 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 5
2.5 Additional Components
Our methodology is highly flexible and can be extended straightforwardly de-
pending on the use-case and context due to the ease of integrating additional
interventions on the intermediate steps of image generation. Researchers using
our framework have introduced a number of additional components, ranging
from using ensembles [7], to using B´ ezier curves for latent representations [14,
6], to using perturbations to make the results more robust to adversaries [27].
Although they aren’t used in the main experiments of this paper, we wish to call
attention to two in particular that we use frequently: “prompt addition” and
masked image editing. We give an overview of both here, and provide additional
experiments and information in Appendix G
Prompt Addition: We have found that our users are often interested in applying
multiple text prompts at the same time. This can be achieved by computing
the loss against multiple target texts simultaneously and adding the results. In
Appendix G.1 we use this tool to explore the semantic cohesion of vqgan-clip ’s
generations.
Masking: A common technique in image generation and editing is masking , where
a portion of an image is identified ahead of time as being where a model should
edit5vqgan-clip is compatible with masking by zeroing out the gradients in
parts of the latent vector that one wishes to not change. However vqgan-clip
can also leverage the semantic knowledge of CLIP to perform self-masking with-
out any non-textual human input.
3 Semantic Image Generation
The primary application of our methodology is for generating images from text.
In contrast to previous work on this topic [41, 36, 53], we do not perceive creat-
ing photo-realistic images or images that could convince a human that they are
real photographs as our primary goal. Our focus is on producing images of high
visual quality that are semantically meaningful in relation to a natural language
prompt, which we demonstrate in this section. This in fact requires abandoning
photo-realism when prompts may ask for artistic or explicitly unrealistic gener-
ations and edits. A loosely curated set of example generations is presented in
Fig. 2.
Asvqgan-clip has been publicly available for almost a year, we have had the
opportunity to observe people experimenting with and building off of vqgan-
clip in the wild. In Appendix D we show a sample of artwork created by people
other than the authors of this paper are included to demonstrate the power and
range of vqgan-clip .
5In the context of image this is often referred to as “infilling,” but we will use “mask-
ing” as a general term to refer to both.

==== Page 6 ====
6 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
(a) Oil painting of a
candy dish of glass
candies, mints, and
other assorted sweets
(b) A colored pencil
drawing of a waterfall
(c) A fantasy paint-
ing of a city in a deep
valley by Ivan Aiva-
zovsky
(d) A beautiful paint-
ing of a building in a
serene landscape
(e) sketch of a 3D
printer by Leonardo
da Vinci
(f) an autogyro flying
car, trending on art-
station
(g) an astronaut in
the style of van Gogh
(h) Baba Yaga’s
house + fantasy art
(i) pickled eggs, tem-
pera on wood
(j) effervescent hope
 (k) the Tower of Ba-
bel by J.M.W. Turner
(l) a futuristic city in
synthwave style
Figure 2: Example vqgan-clip generations and their text prompts. Prompts
selected to demonstrate a range of visual styles that vqgan-clip is capable of
producing including classical art (g, i), modern art (l), drawings (e), oils (a), and
others not included due to space.

==== Page 7 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 7
3.1 Artistic Impressions
We find that vqgan-clip is able to evoke the artistic style of famous artists and
major artistic styles from around the world. Fig. 2 features “an astronaut in the
style of van Gogh” whose background evokes Starry Night and “the Tower of
Babel by J. M. W. Turner” which draws on Turner’s color palate and use of light.
Another way this can be seen is by directly asking for “a painting by [name]”
or “art by [name].” In Fig. 3 we present six images created this way drawing on
artists from different regions, time periods, and artistic styles. While the images
often are missing cohesion (most likely due to the vagueness of “a painting” as
a prompt) they are each markedly reminiscent of the artist in question. While
CLIP would obviously find these images visually similar to other works by the
artist, we also find that non-CLIP-based image similarity approaches reliably
identify these images as visually similar to work by the artists. To validate this
we queried Google’s Reverse Image Search using each generation in Fig. 3, and
in every case a real painting by the target artist was the most similar image.
(a) van Gogh
 (b) Picasso
 (c) Hokusai
(d) Turner
 (e) Kahlo
 (f) Mehretu
Figure 3: Stylistic impressions of famous artists. Third party tools like Google’s
Reverse Image Search indicate that real paintings by the target artists are the
most visually similar images in every case.
3.2 Comparisons to Other Approaches
The closest prior work in open domain generation of images comes from DALL-E
[41] and GLIDE [36], which claim to train very large pretrained text-to-image

==== Page 8 ====
8 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
models. DALL-E and GLIDE are purported to be 12 billion and 5 billion pa-
rameters, respectively, while vqgan-clip together is 227 million. Unfortunately,
we were denied permission to study the models purported in the respective pa-
pers by their authors. We instead use the verifiable state-of-the-art models using
each methodology methodologies. This includes the independent implementa-
tion minDALL-E [20] (1.3 B parameters) and two versions of GLIDE (783 M
parameters without CLIP and 941 M with) released by OpenAI6.
To evaluate our model, we recruited humans and asked them to rate the
alignment of (text, image) pairs on a scale of 1 (low) to 5 (high). In particular,
they were directed to rate higher quality images that do not match the prompt
lower than lower quality images that do. Prompts were selected based on prin-
ciples learned from our experience working with these models but without prior
knowledge of how the models would behave on the particular prompts in ques-
tion. All prompts and generated images can be found in Appendix D. To provide
the maximal advantage to our competitors, minDALL-E and GLIDE examples
are cherry-picked best-of-five, while vqgan-clip examples are uncherry-picked
(best-of-one). Table 1 shows the mean score per prompt for each model. We find
that humans overwhelmingly view the generations using our technique as more
aligned with the input text.
A B C D E F G H I J K L Mean
minDALL-E 3.3 2.3 3.2 3.7 1.5 2.7 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.0 3.5 2.3 2.7
GLIDE (CF) 3.0 4.0 2.7 3.2 1.3 2.5 1.3 1.2 2.0 2.3 2.0 2.8 2.3
GLIDE (CLIP) 3.2 4.0 2.8 4.8 3.0 2.7 1.8 2.5 3.7 2.3 3.7 5.0 3.3
VQGAN-CLIP 4.3 5.0 4.8 5.0 4.5 4.5 4.8 4.7 4.2 3.8 4.7 4.74.6
Table 1: Mean human ratings of generations by each model on a score of 1 (worst)
to 5 (best).
3.3 Qualitative Analysis
A sampling of representative results is shown in Fig. 4 for four different prompts
using minDALL-E, two variants of GLIDE, and our vqgan-clip . Further com-
parisons, including the prompts in Fig. 2, can be found in Appendix E. We find
that the minDALL-E and the GLIDE models are much more variable in the
quality of their generations. While they are able to produce images that are
clearly recognizable in response to the prompts “the universal library trending
on artstation” and “a charcoal drawing of a cathedral,” their generations in
response to “a child’s drawing of a baseball game” are largely unrecognizable
6It is important to stress that at time of writing there was no verifiable evidence
for the existence or performance of either of these models other than the word of
OpenAI employees. That such assertions are taken seriously as science is a symptom
of the pervasive power disparities across machine learning research [5, 23, 29, 49]

==== Page 9 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 9
(a) the univer-
sal library trend-
ing on artstation
(b) a charcoal
drawing of a
cathedral
(c) a child’s
drawing of a
baseball game
(d) a forest ren-
dered in low poly
Figure 4: Text based generations of images. Top to bottom: minDALL-E, GLIDE
(CLIP-guided), GLIDE (CF-guided), and our vqgan-clip .
and their responses to “a forest rendered in low poly” ignore the later half of
the prompt. These latter cases demonstrate the low semantic relevance of prior
methods’ output given the prompt.
The “child’s drawing” case is of particular note here in that a child’s drawing
is expected to have lower visual clarity and lack of structure. That vqgan-
clip is able to correctly modulate its ability for fine details is thus of note to
show that vqgan-clip is not intrinsically biased toward producing fine details
when inappropriate, and correctly identifies the appropriate context of multi-
part prompts. Further evidence of this can be found in Figs. 11 to 14 where
vqgan-clip is able to produce generations for the prompts “A colored pencil
drawing of a waterfall” and “sketch of a 3D printer by Leonardo da Vinci”
that showcase the properties of the medium (visible strokes, the use of shading,
the fact that the image is created on a piece of paper) while still producing a
compelling visual image.

==== Page 10 ====
10 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
4 Semantic Image Editing
As far as we are aware, our framework is the first in the literature to be able
to perform semantic image generation and semantic image editing. There are
other examples in the literature of generative models that can perform style
transfer [39], image inpainting [36, 41], and other types of image manipulation
[37], but we note that each of these represent distinct tasks from open domain
semantic image editing. By contrast, to adapt our generation methodology to
image editing all that is required is to replace the randomly initialized starting
image with the image we wish to edit.
4.1 Comparison to State-of-the-Art
For semantic image editing we compare to Open-Edit [26]. As far as we are
aware, Open-Edit is the only published research on open domain semantic image
editing other than our work. To avoid giving any accidental advantage to our
methodology, we focus primarily on the domains presented as examples in Liu
et al. [26] such as changing colors and textures. We use the default settings for
their model and the same prompting structure as in their paper.
Color editing Here we prompt the model to change the dominant color palette
without degrading the image quality or any of the finer details. The results can
be seen in Fig. 5, where prior Open-Edit causes destructive transformations of
the content of the image. In the second case the “Red bus” also shows a single
desired target for manipulation that is respected by vqgan-clip , but Open-Edit
causes a change in coloration of the entire image.
Instruction Original VQGAN-CLIP Open-Edit
“Green”
“Red Bus”
Figure 5: Examples of editing the color in an image. Original on the left, our
vqgan-clip in the middle, and Open-Edit on the right. vqgan-clip better
maintains original structure of the content while limiting unintended distortion.

==== Page 11 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 11
Weather Modification Another use case that Liu et al. [26] highlight as a
success of their model is weather modification, changing the overall weather
conditions present in an image. Results on this task are shown in Fig. 6, where
Open-Edit’s reliance on edge maps to maintain structure show a limitation in
editing ability. The needed alterations often change more of the image content
that would violate the edge maps, preventing Open-Edit from being as successful
in achieving the desired content change.
Instruction Original VQGAN-CLIP Open-Edit
“Foggy Sky →Clear Sky”
“Clear Sky →Cloudy Sky”
“Cloudy →Sunny”
Figure 6: Weather alteration can required greater alteration of scene structure
that Open-Edit is not able to perform, as shown in the “Cloudy →Sunny”
example that needs to alter the sky in addition to brightness levels.
Misc We include extra miscellaneous examples to emphasize that this is open
domain image editing and the performance is not limited to select types of
transformations. These are shown in Fig. 7, and we note the “wooden” and
“focused” examples demonstrate a task with less correlative semantics. This
further requires a more robust grounding between modalities for success and
the ability of our approach to better handle a breadth of possible inputs for
open-domain prompts and images.

==== Page 12 ====
12 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
Instruction Original VQGAN-CLIP Open-Edit
“Wooden”
“Withered Flowers”
“Focused”
Figure 7: More challenging modifications that required greater linguistic ground-
ing to visual content to achieve, again showing vqgan-clip is better able to edit
image content.
5 Ablations on Components
5.1 Latent Vector Regularization
Prior versions of this work used a methodology called Codebook Sampling, which
optimizes a categorical distribution over a grid superimposed on the latent vec-
tors. We found this approach was too slow for interactive use, and did leave
considerable room for visual improvement. In Fig. 8 we show the improvement
in quality of our current approach compared to the prior. By adding a regulariza-
tion term Section 2.4, we obtain a methodology that is both faster and produces
higher quality images than Codebook Sampling, giving the results presented in
this paper. Our approach to regularization is incompatible with Codebook Sam-
pling because of the tendency of Codebook Sampling to commit to particular
codes early in training before the effects of regularization manifest.
5.2 Number of Augmentations
In Fig. 9 we ablate the number of augmentations to show their importance in
consistent result quality.
We find that the affine augmentation reduces clutter and unwanted duplica-
tive generations, prospective augmentation improves the consistency of the 3D
geometry, the noise augmentation improves the isolation of the foreground from
the background.

==== Page 13 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 13
(a) a forest ren-
dered in the Un-
real Engine
(b) a watercolor
painting of the
universal library
(c) An oil paint-
ing of The New
York City Sky-
line by Natalia
Goncharova
(d) the gateway
between dreams
trending on Art-
Statio
Figure 8: Comparisons between codebook sampling (top), z-quantize (middle),
and z-quantize with MSE regularization methods (bottom). Notice that z-
quantize with regularization is able to produce finer details than alternative
options, while non-regularized and codebook tend to yield muddled images.
6 Resource Considerations
Our approach runs in (935 .2±20.4) s on an NVIDIA Tesla K80 and (229 .5±
26.2) s on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti (10 runs in each sample). This is
approximately three times slower than minDALL-E and ten times slower than
GLIDE (filtered) in our testing. Although we would like to analyze the trade-offs
involved with the fact that both models required extensive pretraining none of
the papers we compare to report their training requirements in enough detail
to analyze the trade-offs brought about by this difference. We encourage the
authors to release more information about their models so that more complete
analysis can be done.
6.1 Efficiency as a Value
One of the goals of this research7is to increase the accessibility of AI image gener-
ative and editing tools. We have deliberately limited our approach to something
that requires less than 11 GB of VRAM, so that it fits inside widely available
7The inclusion of this section is heavily inspired by Birhane et al. [4]

==== Page 14 ====
14 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
no augmentation one augmentation all augmentations
a child’s drawing of a cathedral
Random Affine Transformation
the universal library,
rendered in the Unreal Engine
Random Perspective
a cityscape at night,
rendered in the 8k resolution.
Random Noise
Figure 9: Examples of the impacts of various augmentations. Left the right:
unaugmented, only the named augmentation, all augmentations.
commercial GPUs such as K80s. This GPU is particularly important from an
accessibility standpoint, as it is the largest GPU that can be easily obtained
using a free account on Google Colaboratory. The full generative process takes
less than 3 minutes in a Google Colab notebook, making this a viable approach
for anyone with access to the internet and a Google account.
Researchers with significantly more resources can obtain higher quality im-
ages using various augmentations left out of this paper, such as using an ensemble
or additional auxiliary models to regularize the generations. While pushing the
performance of our methodology to the maximum is a worthwhile endeavour, the
fact that we can outperform the current state-of-the-art while running on freely
available resources is something that we view as particularly worth highlighting.
We leave determining the optimal framework with unbound resources to future
work.
6.2 Runtime Analysis
DALL-E [41], GLIDE [36], and Open-Edit [26] all also incorporate image gener-
ators and joint text-image encoders into their architecture. Unlike our method
however, they require computationally intensive training and finetuning. This
invites the question of trade-offs between training and inference time. Unfortu-
nately, none of the aforementioned papers report their training requirements in
enough detail to estimate their training requirements. We are however able to es-
timate how long minDALL-E [20], the current state-of-the-art DALL-E model,
takes to train at 504 V100-hours for the base model plus an additional 288
V100-hours to finetune on ImageNet [9]. Through private communication with

==== Page 15 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 15
the authors, we were able to learn that GLIDE (filtered) required 400 A100-days
to train, which we approximate as 19 ,200 V100-hours for ease of comparison.
Model K80 P100 V100 Training
minDALL-E 216 .0s±07.6s60.0s±5.5s016.3s±2.7s792 V100-hours
GLIDE (filtered) 096 .2s±00.1s19.2s±0.3s009.7s±1.1s19,200 V100-hours
vqgan-clip 935.2s±20.4s654.3s±10.1s188.3s±1.2s0 V100-hours
Table 2: Run-time of minDALL-E, GLIDE (filtered) and vqgan-clip on a va-
riety of GPUs. Each cell shows the mean and standard deviation of a 10-run
sample. We exclude Open-Edit due to a lack of information about its train-
ing costs. minDALL-E becomes cheaper than vqgan-clip after 858 V100-hours
have been expended while GLIDE (filtered) requires 20200 V100-hours.
On all hardwares evaluated, our model is substantially slower than both
minDALL-E and GLIDE (filtered). However. In terms of trade-offs between
training and inference on V100 GPUs, minDALL-E’s total cost becomes cheaper
than vqgan-clip at≈15,800 generations, while GLIDE(filtered) requires ≈
384,000. In terms of compute expended, minDALL-E becomes cheaper than
vqgan-clip after 858 V100-hours while GLIDE (filtered) requires 20200 V100-
hours. While cost and efficiency concerns depend significantly on individual
contexts, the fact that GLIDE (filtered) only becomes as efficient as vqgan-
clip efficient after tens of thousands of dollars of compute have been expended
substantially limits researchers’ ability to experiment with and iterate on the
methodology. The same applies to minDALL-E, albeit with a price tag in the
thousands rather than tens of thousands.
7 Adoption of VQGAN-CLIP
A unique aspect of vqgan-clip has been its public development over the past
year, which has resulted in an active community of users and real-world impact
within and beyond classical computer vision. Kwon and Ye [22], Frans, Soros,
and Witkowski [14], Chen, Dumay, and Tang [6], Liu et al. [27], and Tian and
Ha [50] create additional components (see Section 2.5) that they insert into
our framework to improve performance in particular target domains. Michel et
al. [30], Fei et al. [13], and Nichol et al. [36] evaluate their pretrained models
by substituting them in for VQGAN or CLIP in our framework. Avrahami,
Lischinski, and Fried [2] and Gu et al. [16] use our framework with diffusion
models in place of GANs.
Beyond computer vision, Yang and Buehler [55] show that it is useful in the
materials engineering design processes. Wu et al. [54] and Jang, Shin, and Kim
[19] builds on our work by using the framework to perform sound-guided image

==== Page 16 ====
16 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
generation. In the domain of affective computing and HCI, Galanos, Liapis, and
Yannakakis [15] has further found vqgan-clip able to elicit targeted emotions
from viewers.
This last example helps explain the widespread commercial adoption of vqgan-
clip, with over a dozen commercial apps built to provide it as a service and over
500 NFTs produced using our method sold8. A sampling of commercial websites
using vqgan-clip include NightCafe, Wombo Art, snowpixel.app, starryai.com,
neuralblender.com, and hypnogram.xyz. Collectively, across these sites, vqgan-
clip has been used over 10 million times, showing the veracity of our approach
to handle unstructured and diverse user content.
8 Conclusion
We have presented vqgan-clip , a method of generating and manipulating im-
ages based on only human written text prompts. The quality of our model’s
generations have high visual fidelity and remain faithful to the textual prompt,
outperforming prior approaches like DALL-E and GLIDE. The fidelity has been
externally validated by commercial success and use by multiple companies. Com-
pared to the only comparable approach to text based image editing, vqgan-clip
continues to produce higher quality visual images — especially when the textual
prompt and image content have low semantic similarity. Our ablation studies
show the use of augmented images during the optimization process is a key fac-
tor to our method’s success and that a code-book approach would sacrifice both
speed and quality in our approach.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge Ryan Murdock, who developed a very similar
technique for combining VQGAN and CLIP simultaneously to us [33, 34] but did
not release his approach. Ryan was invited to coauthor this paper and declined.
We are also indebted to the thousands of people who have used and built upon
our methods and given us feedback that has allowed us to continue to improve
our techniques.
Many of the experiments in this paper were made possible by CoreWeave.
CoreWeave also provides compute for a free public demo in the EleutherAI
Discord server which enabled the methods described in this paper to be iterated
on rapidly by a great many people. The bot that runs the demo was created by
Discord user BoneAmputee.
References
1. Ali, S., and Parikh, D.: Telling Creative Stories Using Generative Visual Aids,
(2021). arXiv: 2110.14810v1 [cs.HC]
8https://twitter.com/quasimondo/status/1438601395087753217

==== Page 17 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 17
2. Avrahami, O., Lischinski, D., and Fried, O.: Blended Diffusion for Text-driven
Editing of Natural Images, (2021). arXiv: 2111.14818v1 [cs.CV]
3. Bau, D., Liu, S., Wang, T., Zhu, J.-Y., and Torralba, A.: Rewriting a deep gener-
ative model. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 351–369 (2020)
4. Birhane, A., Kalluri, P., Card, D., Agnew, W., Dotan, R., and Bao, M.: The val-
ues encoded in machine learning research. In: 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 173–184 (2022)
5. Black, S., Biderman, S., Hallahan, E., Anthony, Q., Gao, L., Golding, L., He,
H., Leahy, C., McDonell, K., Phang, J., Pieler, M., Prashanth, U.S., Purohit, S.,
Reynolds, L., Tow, J., Wang, B., and Weinbach, S.: GPT-NeoX-20B: An Open-
Source Autoregressive Language Model. preprint (2022)
6. Chen, G., Dumay, A., and Tang, M.: diffvg+CLIP: Generating Painting Trajecto-
ries from Text. preprint (2021)
7. Couairon, G., Grechka, A., Verbeek, J., Schwenk, H., and Cord, M.: FlexIT: To-
wards Flexible Semantic Image Translation, (2022). arXiv: 2203.04705 [cs.CV]
8. De Cao, N., Aziz, W., and Titov, I.: Editing Factual Knowledge in Language Mod-
els, (2021). arXiv: 2104.08164v2 [cs.CL]
9. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-
scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pp. 248–255 (2009)
10. Dong, H., Yu, S., Wu, C., and Guo, Y.: Semantic Image Synthesis via Adversarial
Learning. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pp. 5706–5714 (2017)
11. Eichenberg, C., Black, S., Weinbach, S., Parcalabescu, L., and Frank, A.: MAGMA
– Multimodal Augmentation of Generative Models through Adapter-based Fine-
tuning, (2021). arXiv: 2112.05253v1 [cs.CV]
12. Esser, P., Rombach, R., and Ommer, B.: Taming Transformers for High-Resolution
Image Synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pp. 12873–12883 (2021)
13. Fei, N., Lu, Z., Gao, Y., Yang, G., Huo, Y., Wen, J., Lu, H., Song, R., Gao,
X., Xiang, T., Sun, H., and Wen, J.-R.: WenLan 2.0: Make AI Imagine via a
Multimodal Foundation Model, (2021). arXiv: 2110.14378v1 [cs.AI]
14. Frans, K., Soros, L., and Witkowski, O.: CLIPDraw: Exploring Text-to-Drawing
Synthesis through Language-Image Encoders, (2021). arXiv: 2106.14843v1 [cs.CV]
15. Galanos, T., Liapis, A., and Yannakakis, G.N.: AffectGAN: Affect-Based Gen-
erative Art Driven by Semantics. In: 9th International Conference on Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction Workshops and Demos (ACIIW) (2021)
16. Gu, S., Chen, D., Bao, J., Wen, F., Zhang, B., Chen, D., Yuan, L., and Guo,
B.: Vector Quantized Diffusion Model for Text-to-Image Synthesis, (2021). arXiv:
2111.14822v3 [cs.CV]
17. Houlsby, N., Giurgiu, A., Jastrzebski, S., Morrone, B., De Laroussilhe, Q., Ges-
mundo, A., Attariyan, M., and Gelly, S.: Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
NLP. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799 (2019)
18. Hu, X., Yu, P., Knight, K., Ji, H., Li, B., and Shi, H.: MUSE: Textual Attributes
Guided Portrait Painting Generation. In: 2021 IEEE 4th International Conference
on Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval (MIPR), pp. 386–392 (2021)
19. Jang, J., Shin, S., and Kim, Y.: Music2Video: Automatic Generation of Music
Video with fusion of audio and text, (2022). arXiv: 2201.03809v1 [cs.SD]
20. MISC

==== Page 18 ====
18 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
21. Kingma, D.P., and Ba, J.: Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization, (2014).
arXiv: 1412.6980v9 [cs.LG]
22. Kwon, G., and Ye, J.C.: CLIPstyler: Image Style Transfer with a Single Text
Condition, (2021). arXiv: 2112.00374v2 [cs.CV]
23. Leahy, C., and Biderman, S.: The hard problem of aligning AI to human values.
The State of AI Ethics Report 4, 180–183 (2021)
24. Lester, B., Al-Rfou, R., and Constant, N.: The Power of Scale for Parameter-
Efficient Prompt Tuning, (2021). arXiv: 2104.08691v2 [cs.CL]
25. Li, B., Qi, X., Lukasiewicz, T., and Torr, P.H.: Manigan: Text-guided image ma-
nipulation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 7880–7889 (2020)
26. Liu, X., Lin, Z., Zhang, J., Zhao, H., Tran, Q., Wang, X., and Li, H.: Open-edit:
Open-domain image manipulation with open-vocabulary instructions. In: Com-
puter Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28,
2020, Proceedings, Part XI 16, pp. 89–106 (2020)
27. Liu, X., Gong, C., Wu, L., Zhang, S., Su, H., and Liu, Q.: FuseDream: Training-
Free Text-to-Image Generation with Improved CLIP+GAN Space Optimization,
(2021). arXiv: 2112.01573v1 [cs.CV]
28. Matena, M., and Raffel, C.: Merging Models with Fisher-Weighted Averaging,
(2021). arXiv: 2111.09832v1 [cs.LG]
29. Miceli, M., Posada, J., and Yang, T.: Studying up machine learning data: Why talk
about bias when we mean power? Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
Interaction 6(GROUP), 1–14 (2022)
30. Michel, O., Bar-On, R., Liu, R., Benaim, S., and Hanocka, R.: Text2Mesh: Text-
Driven Neural Stylization for Meshes, (2021). arXiv: 2112.03221v1 [cs.CV]
31. Mitchell, E., Lin, C., Bosselut, A., Finn, C., and Manning, C.D.: Fast Model Editing
at Scale, (2021). arXiv: 2110.11309v1 [cs.LG]
32. Mordvintsev, A., Olah, C., and Tyka, M.: DeepDream - a code example for visualiz-
ing Neural Networks, (2015). https://ai.googleblog.com/2015/07/deepdream-
code-example-for-visualizing.html
33. Murdock, R.: “The Taming Transformers decoder really just goes! And this is with
very little work.” https://twitter.com/advadnoun/status/1367556678896394240
34. Murdock, R.: “Working on using the RN50x4 version of CLIP with the Taming
Transformers VQGAN.” https://twitter.com/advadnoun/status/1368081153375105027
35. Nam, S., Kim, Y., and Kim, S.J.: Text-Adaptive Generative Adversarial Net-
works: Manipulating Images with Natural Language. In: Bengio, S., Wallach, H.,
Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Garnett, R. (eds.) Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 42–51. Curran Associates, Inc. (2018)
36. Nichol, A., Dhariwal, P., Ramesh, A., Shyam, P., Mishkin, P., McGrew, B., Sutskever,
I., and Chen, M.: GLIDE: Towards Photorealistic Image Generation and Editing
with Text-Guided Diffusion Models, (2021). arXiv: 2112.10741v3 [cs.CV]
37. Ntavelis, E., Romero, A., Kastanis, I., Van Gool, L., and Timofte, R.: SESAME:
semantic editing of scenes by adding, manipulating or erasing objects. In: European
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 394–411 (2020)
38. Oord, A. van den, Vinyals, O., and Kavukcuoglu, K.: Neural Discrete Representa-
tion Learning. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6309–
6318. Curran Associates, Inc. (2017)
39. Patashnik, O., Wu, Z., Shechtman, E., Cohen-Or, D., and Lischinski, D.: Style-
CLIP: Text-Driven Manipulation of StyleGAN Imagery. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2085–2094 (2021)

==== Page 19 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 19
40. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry,
G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., Krueger, G., and Sutskever, I.: Learning
Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In: Meila, M.,
and Zhang, T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR (2021)
41. Ramesh, A., Pavlov, M., Goh, G., Gray, S., Voss, C., Radford, A., Chen, M.,
and Sutskever, I.: Zero-Shot Text-to-Image Generation. In: Meila, M., and Zhang,
T. (eds.) Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR (2021)
42. Riba, E., Mishkin, D., Ponsa, D., Rublee, E., and Bradski, G.R.: Kornia: an Open
Source Differentiable Computer Vision Library for PyTorch. In: 2020 IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 3663–3672 (2020)
43. Sayers, D., Sousa-Silva, R., H¨ ohn, S., Ahmedi, L., Allkivi-Metsoja, K., Anastasiou,
D., Beˇ nuˇ s, ˇS., Bowker, L., Byty¸ ci, E., Catala, A., C ¸epani, A., Chac´ on-Beltr´ an, R.,
Dadi, S., Dalipi, F., Despotovic, V., Doczekalska, A., Drude, S., Fort, K., Fuchs, R.,
Galinski, C., Gobbo, F., Gungor, T., Guo, S., H¨ ockner, K., L´ ancos, P., Libal, T.,
Jantunen, T., Jones, D., Klimova, B., Korkmaz, E., Mauˇ cec Mirjam, S., Melo, M.,
Meunier, F., Migge, B., Mititelu Verginica, B., N´ ev´ eol, A., Rossi, A., Pareja-Lora,
A., Sanchez-Stockhammer, C., S ¸ahin, A., Soltan, A., Soria, C., Shaikh, S., Turchi,
M., and Yildirim Yayilgan, S.: The Dawn of the Human-Machine Era: A forecast
of new and emerging language technologies. (2021)
44. Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., and Batra,
D.: Grad-CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-based Lo-
calization. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pp. 618–626 (2017)
45. Sharir, O., Peleg, B., and Shoham, Y.: The Cost of Training NLP Models: A Concise
Overview. (2020)
46. Shocher, A., Gandelsman, Y., Mosseri, I., Yarom, M., Irani, M., Freeman, W.T.,
and Dekel, T.: Semantic Pyramid for Image Generation. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7457–
7466 (2020). doi:10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00748
47. Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., and Zisserman, A.: Deep Inside Convolutional Net-
works: Visualising Image Classification Models and Saliency Maps, (2014). arXiv:
1312.6034v2 [cs.CV]
48. Snell, C.: Alien Dreams: An Emerging Art Scene, (2020). https://ml.berkeley.
edu/blog/posts/clip-art/
49. Tao, Y., and Varshney, K.R.: Insiders and Outsiders in Research on Machine Learn-
ing and Society. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02279 (2021)
50. Tian, Y., and Ha, D.: Modern Evolution Strategies for Creativity: Fitting Concrete
Images and Abstract Concepts, (2021). arXiv: 2109.08857v2 [cs.NE]
51. Tsimpoukelli, M., Menick, J., Cabi, S., Eslami, S.A., Vinyals, O., and Hill, F.:
Multimodal Few-Shot Learning with Frozen Language Models. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (2021)
52. Underwood, T.: Mapping the latent spaces of culture, (2021). https://tedunderwood.
com/2021/10/21/latent-spaces-of-culture/
53. Wang, Z., Liu, W., He, Q., Wu, X., and Yi, Z.: CLIP-GEN: Language-Free Training
of a Text-to-Image Generator with CLIP, (2022). arXiv: 2203.00386v1 [cs.CV]
54. Wu, H.-H., Seetharaman, P., Kumar, K., and Bello, J.P.: Wav2CLIP: Learning
Robust Audio Representations From CLIP, (2021). arXiv: 2110.11499v2 [cs.SD]

==== Page 20 ====
20 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
55. Yang, Z., and Buehler, M.J.: Words to Matter: De novo Architected Materials
Design Using Transformer Neural Networks. Frontiers in Materials 8, 417 (2021)
56. Yosinski, J., Clune, J., Nguyen, A., Fuchs, T., and Lipson, H.: Understanding Neu-
ral Networks Through Deep Visualization, (2015). arXiv: 1506.06579v1 [cs.CV]
A Author Contributions
Katherine Crowson: Originated the idea of combining VQGAN withCLIP and
lead the development of the approach.
Stella Biderman: Lead the experimentation and writing of the paper.
Daniel Kornis: developed latent vector regularization and carried out experi-
ments on Open-Edit.
Dashiell Stander: Assisted with generative experiments and the writing of the
paper.
Eric Hallahan: Assisted with generative experiments and the writing of the
paper.
Louis Castricato: Developed semantic image editing and masking techniques.
Edward Raff: Advised the project, proposed ablation experiments, and assisted
in the writing of the paper.
B Additional Related Work
B.1 Image Generation and Editing
While there is a significant literature on semantic image generation and editing
beyond those cited in the main body of the paper, it is overwhelmingly work that
imposes strong constraints on and assumptions about the inputs it work with.
Closed domain work such as Dong et al. [10], Nam, Kim, and Kim [35], Li et al.
[25], and Patashnik et al. [39] achieves much higher quality images, but comes
at the cost of being afunctional outside the domain the model was trained on.
Other authors simplify the problem by using non-textual auxiliary inputs [46,
37] or filtering the inputs to a small, pre-defined vocabulary [18].
B.2 CNN Visualisation and Interpretability
Our approach is surprisingly similar to older work on visualizing and interpreting
convolutional neural networks. Techniques for identifying what region(s) of an
image lead to it being assigned a label by a classifier such as Simonyan, Vedaldi,
and Zisserman [47], Selvaraju et al. [44], and Yosinski et al. [56] operate on
similar principles to our backpropagating of the CLIP loss, and DeepDream [32]
uses the same core idea of iteratively updating an image to match a label.

==== Page 21 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 21
B.3 Building Multimodal Models Cheaply
Due to the high cost of training large, state-of-the-art transformer models [45, 5],
methodologies that allow one to build off of previously trained models cheaply
are highly valuable. The bulk of the existing literature on this topic focuses
on editing or updating existing (typically unimodal) models in both computer
vision [3] and natural language processing [8, 31, 28].
Another thread of research aims to leverage prompting to efficiently produce
multimodal models from unimodal ones. Tsimpoukelli et al. [51] shows that
an input-dependent version of prompt tuning [24] enables them to convert a
7 billion parameter language model into a multimodal model by only training
68 million of the parameters. Building on their success, Eichenberg et al. [11]
replace the prompt tuning with adapters [17] and incorporate CLIP embeddings,
enabling them to train a state-of-the-art visual question answering transformer
at a fraction of the cost of doing so from scratch. Our work continues in this
theme by removing the training entirely, at the cost of a modest increase in
generation time.
C Observations of Public Use
As our models have been public for nearly a year at time-of-writing, we have
had the opportunity to study how people use vqgan-clip in the wild. While a
systematic study is far outside the scope of this paper, we summarize our main
observations in the hopes of guiding future human-computer interaction inves-
tigations. These observations are largely informed by casual conversations and
interviews with users of our methodology, and by in situ observation of people
interacting with the model. For further discussion of the HCI and sociological
influences on generative modeling, we direct an interested reader to Snell [48],
Underwood [52], and Ali and Parikh [1].
Human-AI Co-Creation The overwhelming feedback we have gotten from users
is that they view vqgan-clip not as an AI working in a vacuum but as an AI
and a human working together to generate art. Users have also created new (and
unintended) ways of working with vqgan-clip that increase their direct agency
over the art created. The most prominent example of this is that many users
halt generation early to edit the partial generations directly, before restarting
generation from their newly edited image. In this way users can remove arti-
facts, discourage undesirable components of an image, and try alternative paths
through the optimization landscape.
Notebook-based development The overwhelming majority of people who have
picked up and iterated on the methodologies described in this paper use note-
books such as Jupyter Notebook and Google Colab to do their work, instead of
traditional repositories and scripts. Based on our conversations with users, the
cause of this appears to be two-fold: widespread popularity among people who
do not identify as computer scientists or developers and a lack of the necessary

==== Page 22 ====
22 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
computational resources to run the model locally. Similar considerations drive
the popularity of websites that offer vqgan-clip -as-a-service and the bot in our
Discord server.
Iterated prompting While the typical methodology in machine learning for im-
proving results from an algorithm focus on improvements to the training data
or algorithm, our users have exhibited a strong preference for modifying the
prompts they provide instead. We view this as exemplifying “natural language
as an API,” [43] wherein the actual mapping between the images and the text
is less important than the fact that text is a natural medium for human inter-
action. The end-goal is to obtain desirable images using whatever text input is
necessary .
D Additional Generations
The following is a selection of artwork generated using our technique by people
other than the authors of this paper, often with highly complex prompting. We
include them both to emphasize the diversity of artistic styles vqgan-clip is
capable of, as well as its widespread adoption. These images have served as the
covers of academic journals, sold for thousands of dollars, formed the basis for
physical paintings, and been displayed in art galleries.
E Additional Comparisons
The following images showcase the minDALL-E [20] and GLIDE (filtered) [36]
generations with the prompts found in Figure 3.

==== Page 23 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 23


==== Page 24 ====
24 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
(a) Oil painting of a
candy dish of glass
candies, mints, and
other assorted sweets
(b) A colored pencil
drawing of a waterfall
(c) A fantasy paint-
ing of a city in a deep
valley by Ivan Aiva-
zovsky
(d) A beautiful paint-
ing of a building in a
serene landscape
(e) sketch of a 3D
printer by Leonardo
da Vinci
(f) an autogyro flying
car, trending on art-
station
(g) an astronaut in
the style of van Gogh
(h) Baba Yaga’s
house + fantasy art
(i) pickled eggs, tem-
pera on wood
(j) effervescent hope
 (k) the Tower of Ba-
bel by J.M.W. Turner
(l) a futuristic city in
synthwave style
Figure 11: Example minDALL-E generations and their text prompts.

==== Page 25 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 25
(a) Oil painting of a
candy dish of glass
candies, mints, and
other assorted sweets
(b) A colored pencil
drawing of a waterfall
(c) A fantasy paint-
ing of a city in a deep
valley by Ivan Aiva-
zovsky
(d) A beautiful paint-
ing of a building in a
serene landscape
(e) sketch of a 3D
printer by Leonardo
da Vinci
(f) an autogyro flying
car, trending on art-
station
(g) an astronaut in
the style of van Gogh
(h) Baba Yaga’s
house + fantasy art
(i) pickled eggs, tem-
pera on wood
(j) effervescent hope
 (k) the Tower of Ba-
bel by J.M.W. Turner
(l) a futuristic city in
synthwave style
Figure 12: Example GLIDE (CLIP-Guided) generations and their text prompts.

==== Page 26 ====
26 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
(a) Oil painting of a
candy dish of glass
candies, mints, and
other assorted sweets
(b) A colored pencil
drawing of a waterfall
(c) A fantasy paint-
ing of a city in a deep
valley by Ivan Aiva-
zovsky
(d) A beautiful paint-
ing of a building in a
serene landscape
(e) sketch of a 3D
printer by Leonardo
da Vinci
(f) an autogyro flying
car, trending on art-
station
(g) an astronaut in
the style of van Gogh
(h) Baba Yaga’s
house + fantasy art
(i) pickled eggs, tem-
pera on wood
(j) effervescent hope
 (k) the Tower of Ba-
bel by J.M.W. Turner
(l) a futuristic city in
synthwave style
Figure 13: Example GLIDE (CF-Guided) generations and their text prompts.

==== Page 27 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 27
(a) Oil painting of a
candy dish of glass
candies, mints, and
other assorted sweets
(b) A colored pencil
drawing of a waterfall
(c) A fantasy paint-
ing of a city in a deep
valley by Ivan Aiva-
zovsky
(d) A beautiful paint-
ing of a building in a
serene landscape
(e) sketch of a 3D
printer by Leonardo
da Vinci
(f) an autogyro flying
car, trending on art-
station
(g) an astronaut in
the style of van Gogh
(h) Baba Yaga’s
house + fantasy art
(i) pickled eggs, tem-
pera on wood
(j) effervescent hope
 (k) the Tower of Ba-
bel by J.M.W. Turner
(l) a futuristic city in
synthwave style
Figure 14: Example vqgan-clip generations and their text prompts. This is the
same figure as Fig. 2 repeated for ease of comparison with Figs. 11 to 13.

==== Page 28 ====
28 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
F Comparison of Artistic Impressions
We find that minDALL-E and both GLIDE (filtered) models have a much more
tenuous understanding of famous artists than vqgan-clip does. To showcase
this we invent six fictional but plausible painting titles by each artist in Figure
4 and prompt the models to generate, e.g., “Willow Trees by van Gogh.” While
vqgan-clip is able to consistently produce something that is recognizably in
the style of the artist and containing the subject, we find that the other models
frequently fail to produce artwork that matches the prompt, either in subject or
in style.
We note that the GLIDE (filtered) models will frequently produce photoreal-
istic images, despite the fact that none of the artists produce photorealistic art-
work. As mentioned in Section 4, our primary goal is to produce high quality art
rather than photorealistic images. Consequently, GLIDE’s Hokusai generations
- despite undoubtably being images of rice fields - rate lowly in our estimation
as they have nothing in common with Hokusai’s artwork. GLIDE’s best results
are in response to the van Gogh prompt in which the models clearly generate
impressionistic images of trees, though the art resembles the work of Nicholas
Verrall (in the case of CLIP-guided) and William Langson Lathrop or Claude
Monet (CF-guided) far more so than van Gogh.
minDALL-E appears to be noticeably better at producing art, it frequently
fails to agree with the prompt in both subject and in style. Perhaps most jar-
ringly, in response to “A Self-Portrait by Kahlo” minDALL-E generates what is
clearly a painting of a person, but the subject is a white man instead of a Latin
woman.
As before, all images are cherrypicked best-of-five except for vqgan-clip
which is uncherrypicked. We omit ablations over various wordings of the prompt
as our exploratory testing indicated that it would effect the overall quality of
the generation but not the extent to which they match the prompts.

==== Page 29 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 29
(a) Willow Trees by van
Gogh
(b) The Woman by Picasso
 (c) Rice farming by Hokusai
Figure 15: Attempts to generate novel works of art by famous artists. Top to
bottom: minDALL-E, GLIDE (CLIP-guided), GLIDE (CF-guided), and our
vqgan-clip . While VQGAN-CLIP’s generation quality varies, it is the only
model that seems to have grasped the desired task.

==== Page 30 ====
30 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
(a) the Tower of Babel by
Turner
(b) A Self-Portrait by Kahlo
 (c) In Search of Lost Time
by Mehretu
Figure 16: Attempts to generate novel works of art by famous artists. Top to
bottom: minDALL-E, GLIDE (CLIP-guided), GLIDE (CF-guided), and our
vqgan-clip . While VQGAN-CLIP’s generation quality varies, it is the only
model that seems to have grasped the desired task.

==== Page 31 ====
VQGAN-CLIP: Open Domain Image Generation 31
G Additional Components
G.1 Prompt Addition
One topic of immense interest for text-to-image models is compositionality : the
extent to which the model is able to take multiple discrete concepts and combine
them. While a detailed analysis of compositionality in vqgan-clip is outside the
scope of this paper, we have observed that vqgan-clip is able to intelligently
combine multiple prompts. By providing two separate text inputs and averaging
the loss, we can effectively “add” the two prompts together. In Fig. 17 we show
that adding a content and a style prompt results in an image that is quite similar
to one produced by combining the style and content into a single prompt with
natural language. We view this as a rich and exciting area for future research.
(a) A baseball
game
(b) A watercolor
painting of a
baseball game
(c) A watercolor
painting + A
baseball game
(d) A watercolor
painting
(e) A farm
 (f) A charcoal
drawing of a farm
(g) A charcoal
drawing + A
farm
(h) A charcoal
drawing
Figure 17: A comparison of natural semantic combination and addition in the
latent space. Left to right: the original prompt, a natural language prompt, latent
space addition of prompts, and the descriptive modifier.
G.2 Masked Image Editing
Given a source phrase (text) spand a target phrase (text) tp, we aim to construct
an optimization rule that replaces all instances of spwithin a source image si
with tp, resulting in a target image (which is unknown at the beginning) ti.
To generate ti, we first need to mask the part component of our source image
that corresponds to sp, for instance if spis “Dog,” we need to mask the part

==== Page 32 ====
32 K Crowson, S Biderman et al.
of the image containing a dog. We can utilize CLIP in a zero shot setting to
perform masking as follows:
1. Crop siinto a number of smaller sub images, ˜S={Sk
i}N
k=1
2.∀i∈˜S, compute L(i) =f(i)·g(sp), where f(·) denotes our image encoder
andg(·) denotes our text encoder.
3. Record the value of L(i) at the center of the crop of i
4. Normalize the resulting grey scale image, this is now our mask
Figure 18: Two examples of masked editing, showing Jacket →Fur and Wind-
mills→Mushrooms.
We can then threshold this mask in order to determine which components
of the mask actually contain our object of interest. In practice, we compute the
threshold as two standard deviations below the average weight.
During generation, we crop and augment our current generated image and
for every crop we compute the distance of the embedding of this crop to the
embedding of the original image. This is used to preserve some notion of structure
that was present in the original image. Similarly, we compute the distance of this
embedded crop against the target phrase.
By minimizing a weighted sum of these distances, we can perform in-image
object replacement and editing. See Figure 18.

