==== Page 1 ====
sensors
Article
Wall-Following Behavior for a Disinfection Robot
Using Type 1 and Type 2 Fuzzy Logic Systems
M. A. Viraj J. Muthugala *
 , S. M. Bhagya P . Samarakoon
 , Madan Mohan Rayguru
 ,
Balakrishnan Ramalingam
 and Mohan Rajesh Elara
Engineering Product Development Pillar, Singapore University of Technology and Design,
8 Somapah Rd, Singapore 487372, Singapore; bhagya_samarakoon@mymail.sutd.edu.sg (S.M.B.P .S.);
madan_rayguru@sutd.edu.sg (M.M.R.); balakrishnan@sutd.edu.sg (B.R.); rajeshelara@sutd.edu.sg (M.R.E.)
*Correspondence: viraj_jagathpriya@sutd.edu.sg
Received: 14 June 2020; Accepted: 5 August 2020; Published: 9 August 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Infectious diseases are caused by pathogenic microorganisms, whose transmission can
lead to global pandemics like COVID-19. Contact with contaminated surfaces or objects is one of
the major channels of spreading infectious diseases among the community. Therefore, the typical
contaminable surfaces, such as walls and handrails, should often be cleaned using disinfectants.
Nevertheless, safety and efﬁciency are the major concerns of the utilization of human labor in this
process. Thereby, attention has drifted toward developing robotic solutions for the disinfection of
contaminable surfaces. A robot intended for disinfecting walls should be capable of following the wall
concerned, while maintaining a given distance, to be effective. The ability to operate in an unknown
environment while coping with uncertainties is crucial for a wall disinfection robot intended for
deployment in public spaces. Therefore, this paper contributes to the state-of-the-art by proposing a
novel method of establishing the wall-following behavior for a wall disinfection robot using fuzzy
logic. A non-singleton Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and a non-singleton Interval Type 2
Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS) are developed in this regard. The wall-following behavior of the two
fuzzy systems was evaluated through simulations by considering heterogeneous wall arrangements.
The simulation results validate the real-world applicability of the proposed FLSs for establishing
the wall-following behavior for a wall disinfection robot. Furthermore, the statistical outcomes show
that the IT2-FLS has signiﬁcantly superior performance than the T1-FLS in this application.
Keywords: wall following; fuzzy logic systems; wall disinfection; healthcare robotics
1. Introduction
Emerging infectious diseases affect global socioeconomic stability [ 1]. These infectious diseases
are caused by pathogenic microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses, parasites, or fungi. A majority
of diseases can transmit from person to person, and an infectious disease might lead to a pandemic
when it spreads globally in an uncontrollable manner. COVID-19, which is a rapidly spreading virus
through both direct and indirect contact, can be taken as an example [ 2–4]. Almost all countries are
facing difﬁculties due to this pandemic. The worst aspect of this disease is that a proportion of infected
people do not exhibit the symptoms, and their contact areas such as walls, furniture, door handles ,
and handrails are a threat to other healthy persons. These contaminable surfaces should be frequently
disinfected to avoid contact with the virus [5,6].
Conventionally, human laborers conduct the disinfection of public places such as hospitals.
They face the risk of exposure to pathogenic organisms when they engage in disinfecting those
possible contact areas. The scarcity of human labor is also a major issue during a pandemic situation.
Thereby, the conventional disinfection methods that involve extensive human labor face the difﬁculty
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445; doi:10.3390/s20164445 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

==== Page 2 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 2 of 22
of adequately conducting the disinfection of public places. This difﬁculty hinders the control of the
spread of an infectious disease (e.g., COVID-19) among the community. As a solution to this dilemma,
robots can be utilized [7–12].
The indirect transmission of an infectious disease can be caused by contacting/touching
contaminated respiratory droplets in public places. Walls can easily be contaminated with these
pathogenic droplets due to closer contact with persons. The highest likely areas are long corridors in
hospitals, nursing homes, rapid transit stations, and community centers. Therefore, the walls of these
places should often be disinfected to avoid the community spread of the diseases. Robots can be used
for spraying disinfectant agents, directing ultraviolet light, or mopping to disinfect the walls [ 9,11–13].
Much work has been conducted on the development of teleoperated robots to provide medical
care in outbreaks of an infectious disease, alleviating the risk of workers [ 14–16]. Although these
teleoperated robots could be adopted for disinfecting walls, they require the continuous involvement
of a human operator. Furthermore, telerobotic control consists of a combination of a master, a slave,
and a human operator. Although the individual components are stable in isolation, when combined
together, they may be unstable. Therefore, the autonomous abilities of robots are preferred for a
robot intended for wall disinfection processes. The critical requirement of an autonomous robot for
disinfecting walls is the ability to appropriately follow a wall.
Wall-following behavior for a robot can be achieved by adopting line-following capabilities [ 17,18].
However, a perceivable line should be marked on the ﬂoor near a wall. Hence, the adoption of the
line-following methods for the wall-following behavior of a disinfection robot is not a feasible solution
for larger environments and general public places. Many research studies have been conducted on
navigating a robot in an environment by using Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
techniques [ 19,20]. These methods are capable of navigating a robot in a given trajectory within an
environment previously mapped. Therefore, robot navigation methods based on SLAM could be
adopted for wall following. However, these methods are prone to fail in situations when a map is
not correctly matched with the corresponding actual environment. Moreover, a robot requires an
accurate map of an environment, where the robot is deployed. Furthermore, accurately mapping
of and navigation in larger environments with fewer features such as corridors in hospitals are
problematic. Thereby, there are practical concerns about the usage of SLAM based navigation methods
for a robot intended for disinfecting walls in public spaces. In addition to these concerns, autonomous
robots with online path planning and decision-making abilities could outperform robots that use
ofﬂine methods [ 21–23]. Therefore, robots with online path planning abilities are preferred for a wall
disinfection robot.
The uncertain handling capacity of fuzzy logic has been exploited by many literature works,
on the online decision making intended for wall following. A method based on a Type 1 Fuzzy
Logic System (T1-FLS) for safely guiding a wheelchair through wall following was proposed in [ 24].
The work [ 25] proposed an Interval Type 2 Fuzzy System (IT2-FLS) to ensure the safety of navigation
through wall following. However, the focus of the work [ 24,25] was ensuring the safety by avoiding
the possible collisions with walls, and the methods were not intended for maintaining a given distance
from a wall during navigation. Thereby, the cited work could not be adapted for a wall disinfection
robot. Methods based on PID controllers for maintaining a given distance from a wall during the
wall following have been proposed [ 26,27]. However, the cited methods were designed for following
merely straight walls and require the tuning of the gains for different set-points. This assumption
hinders the applicability of the methods to a wall disinfection robot.
The wall-following behavior of different machine learning methods such as neural networks was
studied in [ 28–32], where a majority of the cited work compared the performances of these methods.
An open source database that contains the required action of the robot’s corresponding sensor readings
for a particular scenario has been used for both training and testing of the algorithms. Moreover,
the cited work compared the robot’s action classiﬁcation ability of the algorithms with corresponding
inputs. However, real experiments or simulations with a robot were not conducted for veriﬁcation

==== Page 3 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 3 of 22
other than evaluating the classiﬁcation ability of the testing dataset. The requirement of training
considering all the probable situations for the generalization is the major drawback of these machine
learning methods proposed for wall following.
Many studies have been conducted to develop the ability of the wall following in robots using
T1-FLSs tuned by methods such as genetic algorithms [ 33], ant colony optimization [ 34], bee colony
optimization [ 35,36], and differential evolution [ 37]. In addition to that, the work [ 38,39] proposed
IT2-FLSs tuned by reinforcement ant optimization and differential evolution, respectively, to establish
wall-following behavior. These optimization based fuzzy logic systems are capable of learning the
required maneuvering actions to follow walls after training on environments. However, these methods
have been designed in such a way that the training is speciﬁc for a particular lateral distance from a
wall. If the lateral distance from a wall needs to be changed to a new value, the FLSs must be retrained
considering the new value before the operation. Moreover, the lateral distance from a wall could not
be adjusted per the requirement of the disinfection process before retraining the FLSs. The requirement
of training/tuning, considering a large number of possible scenarios for generalization, is the primary
concern of these fuzzy logic systems based on optimization techniques.
Much work has been conducted on the development of T1-FLSs based on expert knowledge for
developing wall-following ability in mobile robots [ 40–43]. Moreover, these FLSs based on expert
knowledge have been proposed to resolve the limitation of FLSs tuned through optimization methods.
The work [ 40] compared and contrasted the performance of a PID controller and a T1-FLS designed for
establishing wall-following behavior. The main interest of the work was to improve the performance in
terms of time taken for following a wall, and the performance of maintaining a desired lateral distance
was not evaluated in this work. The T1-FLS proposed in [ 41] utilizes sonar sensor readings of a mobile
robot to realize wall-following behavior. The work [ 42,43] proposed a behavior based fuzzy controller
consisting of three independent T1-FLSs for wall-following. This controller switches between the three
T1-FLSs based on the contexts of wall following, straight, left corner, and right corner. The switching
between the FLSs is performed based o then conditions evaluated through range sensor readings. Thus,
the switching might be rigid in the case of sensor noises. Furthermore, three independent T1-FLSs were
required for realizing the wall following using the controller proposed in [ 42,43]. The T1-FLSs proposed
in [40–43] were capable of realizing the wall-following behavior of a mobile robot, and they could
resolve the limitation of FLSs tuned through optimization methods. Nevertheless, the FLSs proposed
in [40–43] were designed considering a speciﬁc lateral distance maintained from a wall. Moreover,
the membership functions of FLSs must be redesigned to facilitate the alteration of the desired lateral
distance. This limitation of the state-of-the-art FLSs designed for wall-following hinders the ﬂexible
utilization in a mobile robot intended for wall disinfection. According to [ 44,45], an IT2-FLS has more
ability to cope with uncertainties compared to a T1-FLS in general cases. Nevertheless, a comparison
between a T1-FLS and IT2-FLS for establishing the wall-following behavior of a robot has not
been conducted.
This paper proposes a novel method for establishing the wall-following behavior for a wall
disinfection robot with the focus on enhancing the ability to maintain a given target distance from
a wall. The proposed method has the ability to alter the target distance based on user requirements
withoutperforming any redesign work. This ability ensures the ﬂexibility of the utilization of the
proposed method in a mobile robot intended for wall disinfection over the state-of-the-art FLSs
designed for wall following. A non-singleton Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and a non-singleton
Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS) are individually considered for the proposed method.
The ability of the T1-FLS and IT2-FLS to maintain a target distance from a wall during the wall
following is systematically evaluated as a core contribution to the state-of-the-art. An overview of
the proposed system for wall disinfection is given in Section 2. The FLSs proposed for establishing
wall-following behavior are proposed in Section 3. The validation of the proposed FLSs, including a
comparison between the T1-FLS and IT2-FLS, is discussed in Section 4. Concluding remarks are given
in Section 5.

==== Page 4 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 4 of 22
2. System Overview
An overview of the proposed method is depicted in Figure 1. The base of the wall disinfection
robot consists of a differential drive unit, which carries the mechanisms related to the wall disinfection
process. It is expected to have either a sprayer gun that sprays a disinfectant agent or ultraviolet light.
This disinfection mechanism is directed to the side of the robot (left or right). The effectiveness of a
disinfection process depends on the distance between the robot and the wall. For example, if the robot
sprays a disinfectant agent, the area coverage and the concentration on the wall surface depend on
the distance from the wall. If ultraviolet light is used, the intensity on a wall surface depends on the
distance from the wall. Hence, the robot needs to maintain a given lateral target distance (i.e., dT) from
the wall throughout the process while moving forward.
wall
Path expected 
to be followedDiffusion of 
Disinfectant agent 
Robot
wall
Robot𝑑1
𝑑2
𝑑3
𝑑4
𝑑5
𝑑6𝑑0
𝑑𝑇𝑣
𝜔
Range 
sensor
handlingRobot
model Fuzzy Logic 
System
(FLS)
For Wall -following 
BehaviorLateral 
error 
estimator𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓
𝑑𝑆𝑣
𝜔𝜔𝐿
𝜔𝑅
[𝑑0−6]
𝑑𝑇
Figure 1. System overview.
The robot is intended to be operated in an unknown environment, and the robot is expected
to perform maneuvering based on the wall arrangement to follow the wall while maintaining the
target distance, dT. The robot can perceive the arrangement of the wall through a set of range sensors
attached to the robot. A set of Time of Flight (ToF) range sensors is used in this regard. Furthermore,
the proposed method has the ability to use sonar sensors since the gap between sensors was considered
as 15, which can provide adequate separation for the sonar sensors. The distances measured from the
range sensors were considered as d0,d1,d2,d3,d4,d5, and d6. It should be noted that the right side
of the robot was also ﬁxed with a set of range sensors with a similar arrangement, and those are not
depicted here since the interest in this case is the left side. The front and left side regions were deﬁned
in such a way that they represent natural human perception. According to [ 46,47], the front and left
regions are dominated from  22.5to 22.5(maximum at 0) and from 67.5to 112.5(maximum at
90), respectively. A gap of 15between the sensors was considered for the sonar sensors. Thus,
d0andd1were placed at 0and 15to cover the front region (a sensor was placed at  15for the wall
following from the right). The sensors d2,d3,d4,d5, and d6were ﬁxed at 60, 75, 90, 105, and 120,
respectively, to cover the left region. The lateral distance of the robot with the sidewall is deﬁned as dS.
The closest position within the left region is considered as dSin this regard. Thus, dSin a situation is
obtained as dS=minfd2,d3,d4,d5,d6g. The range sensor handling module communicates with the
sensors and outputs the processed sensor information.
The robot should determine its maneuvering to maintain dSatdTfor realizing the wall following
and the proper disinfection process. The lateral error between the desired and the actual lateral
distance, ed, is taken as ed=dT dS. The lateral distance error ( ed) and the rate of change of ed(i.e., ˙ed)
are fed to the Fuzzy Logic System (FLS) proposed for wall-following behavior. edand ˙edare determined
by the lateral error estimator based on dSanddT(dTis a user-deﬁned constant). The distance from an
obstacle at the front (i.e., df) is also fed to the FLS. The range sensors d0andd1are the corresponding

==== Page 5 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 5 of 22
sensors in the case of the wall following from the left. The closest distance within the frontal region
is considered to ensure safety. Thus, dfis deﬁned as df=minfd0,d1g. The FLS determines the
reference/desired linear velocity ( v) and angular velocity ( w) of the robot required to properly follow
the wall based on its inputs. A Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and an Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic
System (IT2-FLS) were considered for the FLS proposed for wall-following behavior. The linear velocity
(v) and angular velocity ( w) determined by the FLS are fed into the robot model, where it determines
the required/reference angular velocities of the left and right wheels of the robot ( wLandwR). In other
words, the output of the FLS decides the set-point inputs for the lower level PID controllers acting
on DC motors attached to the wheels. For the sake of brevity and without any loss of generality,
the desired/reference terms are dropped in the remainder of the paper. The variation of the angular
velocities of the wheels makes the robot follow the wall as expected.
3. Fuzzy Logic System for Wall-Following Behavior
A Fuzzy Logic System (FLS) can map the input space with the output space of a control problem
based on a set of linguistic rules [ 48,49]. Fuzzy logic can be considered as a reliable modeling method
that can model any complex system or process without knowing the exact underlying dynamics [ 50–52].
In the case of wall-following behavior, the exact dynamics of the robot and an environment is not
certain. Nevertheless, the required control actions for wall-following behavior could be explained
using linguistic expressions based on expert knowledge [ 53]. Furthermore, the sensory information
retrieved from the range sensors of the robot is imprecise due to sensor noise. On the contrary,
fuzzy logic has proven to be effective at inferring control actions while coping with imprecise sensor
information [ 54,55]. In addition to that, fuzzy logic has often been used for the navigation of robots
in unknown environments [ 53,56]. Therefore, fuzzy logic was used to establish the wall-following
behavior for the robot. Two fuzzy logic systems, a Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and an Interval
Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS), were individually considered to realize the required goals of
wall-following behavior.
3.1. Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System
The architecture of the Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) proposed for establishing the
wall-following behavior of a mobile robot is depicted in Figure 2. The inputs of the FLS are the
lateral distance from the wall error (i.e., ed), the rate of change of lateral distance from the wall error
(i.e., ˙ed), and the distance from the front obstacle (i.e., df). The outputs of the T1-FLS are the angular
velocity (i.e., w) and linear velocity (i.e., v) of the robot. The inputs are fuzziﬁed in the fuzziﬁcation
layer by using the input membership functions given in Figure 3a–c for ed,˙ed, and df, respectively.
Non-singleton fuzzy sets are deﬁned for the input membership functions since they can cope more
effectively with uncertainties than the singleton counterparts [ 57]. The corresponding fuzziﬁed values
are deﬁned as med(ed),m˙ed(˙ed), and mdf(df).
FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣Type -reducer𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
Figure 2. Architecture of the Type 1 Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS).

==== Page 6 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 6 of 22
(c)(b)(a)𝜇𝑒𝑑
𝜇ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜇𝑑𝑓(d)
(e)𝜇𝑣𝜇𝜔
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓ሶ𝑒𝑑N NS            Z            PS               P
N NS            Z            PS               PN NS                   Z                   PS                P
VC     C                    FL M                                     H
Figure 3. Membership functions of the T1-FLS. ( a–c) input membership function for ed,˙ed, and df,
respectively. ( d,e) Output membership function for wand v, respectively. Fuzzy labels are deﬁned
as N: “Negative,” NS: “Negative Small,” Z: “Zero,” PS: “Positive Small,” P: “Positive,” VC: “Very
Close,” C: “Close,” F: “Far,” L: “Low,” M: “Medium,” H: “High.” The universe of discourse of the
membership functions is deﬁned in the normalized scale, and they should be adapted based on the
hardware capabilities of the robot. It should be noted that human expert knowledge was utilized to
prune the membership functions.
The input fuzzy sets are mapped to output fuzzy sets during the inferencing with the aid of a set
of linguistic rules stored in the rule base. The rule base of the T1-FLS is given in Table 1. The rule base
is deﬁned based on human expert knowledge. Moreover, the necessary control actions are inferred in
this stage. The ﬁring strength of the ithrule, Ri, can be inferred as given in (1) by considering the min
and max operators as the t-norm and t-conorm, respectively.
Ri=minfmedi(ed),m˙edi(˙ed),mdfi(df)g (1)
Table 1. Rule base of the FLSs.
df= F˙ed\ed N NS Z PS P
Nw= P
v= Hw= P
v= Hw= P
v= Hw= PS
v= Hw= Z
v= H
NSw= P
v= Hw= P
v= Hw= PS
v= Hw= Z
v= Hw= NS
v= H
Zw= P
v= Hw= PS
v= Hw= Z
v= Hw= NS
v= Hw= N
v= H
PSw= PS
v= Hw= Z
v= Hw= NS
v= Hw= N
v= Hw= N
v= H
Pw= Z
v= Hw= NS
v= Hw= N
v= Hw= N
v= Hw= N
v= H
df= Cw= NS
v= M
df= VCw= N
v= S
The corresponding output fuzzy sets are clipped by the respective ﬁring strength of the ithrule
as given in (2) by considering the Mamdani implication, where mw0
i(w)andmv0
i(v)are the inferred ith

==== Page 7 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 7 of 22
consequents of the outputs wandv, respectively. The fuzzy consequents of all the rules are aggregated
into a single fuzzy set for each output ( mw0forwandmv0forv) as given in (3) by considering the fuzzy
max operator for the aggregation, where Nis the number of rules.
mw0
i(w) =minfRi,mwi(w)g
mv0
i(v) =minfRi,mvi(v)g(2)
mw0(w) =maxfmw0
1(w),mw0
2(w), ..,mw0
i(w), ..,mw0
N(w)g
mv0(v) =maxfmv0
1(v),mv0
2(v), ..,mv0
i(v), ..,mv0
N(v)g(3)
The aggregated fuzzy consequents are defuzziﬁed in the defuzziﬁcation layer to obtain the
deterministic control actions to control angular velocity, w, and linear velocity, v. The defuzziﬁed
crisp outputs can be obtained as in (4) based on the center of the area method. The expected decision
surface of the proposed T1-FLS, which visualizes the variation of the two outputs in accordance with
the inputs, is given in Figure 4.
w=R
wmw0(w)dwR
mw0(w)dw
v=R
vmv0(v)dvR
mv0(v)dv(4)
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑣
𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑓
𝑣
𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑓𝑑𝑓=0.5 𝑑𝑓=0.5
ሶ𝑒𝑑=0ሶ𝑒𝑑=0(a) (b)
(c) (d)
𝜔
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓=0.5
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓=0.5
𝑣
ሶ𝑒𝑑=0
𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑓
 𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑓𝑣ሶ𝑒𝑑=0(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 4. Decision surface of the T1-FLS. ( a) Variation of wwith edand ˙ed, when df=0.5. (b) Variation
ofvwith edand ˙ed, when df=0.5. (c) Variation of wwith edand df, when ˙ed=0. (d) Variation of v
with edanddf, when ˙ed=0.
3.2. Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System
Type 2 Fuzzy Logic Systems (T2-FLSs) have proven to be more effective at coping with
uncertainties with respect to the T1-FLSs since they allow extra degrees of freedom for modeling
an uncertain situation or process [ 44,45]. Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic Systems (IT2-FLSs) are a subtype
within the general T2-FLSs. An IT2-FLS has a simpler structure and requires lower computational
power than a general T2-FLS, which led researchers to utilize IT2-FLS in practical applications [ 58,59].

==== Page 8 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 8 of 22
Nevertheless, IT2-FLSs are more complex and require high computational power while providing
better performance than that of T1-FLSs.
The architecture of the proposed IT2-FLS for establishing wall-following behavior is depicted in
Figure 5. The set of inputs and outputs used here is similar to the proposed T1-FLS. The inputs are
initially fuzziﬁed in the fuzziﬁcation layer with the aid of the input membership functions shown in
Figure 6. Nevertheless, the fuzziﬁcation process moderately differs from the T1-FLS. A fuzzy set of
an IT2-FLS has a Footprint Of Uncertainty (FOU), which is bounded by two fuzzy sets in a T1-FLS,
the Lower Membership Function (LMF) and the Upper Membership Function (UMF) (see Figure 6).
Thereby, fuzziﬁcation of the input by an IT2-FLS leads to a range instead of a crisp value for the
activation degree. This range can be obtained by fuzzifying an input considering the LMF and UMF
separately. Based on this formulation, the corresponding fuzziﬁed inputs of the proposed IT2-FLS
can be deﬁned as [med(ed),med(ed)],[m˙ed(˙ed),m˙ed(˙ed)], and [mdf(df),mdf(df)]for the inputs ed,˙ed, and df,
respectively, where “_” and “ ¯” denote resultants from the LMF and UMF, respectively. Moreover,
two crisp values are obtained per fuzzy set during the fuzziﬁcation of an input.
FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣FuzzificationInferencingRule base
Defuzzification𝜔
𝑣Type -reducer𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
𝑒𝑑
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
Figure 5. Architecture of the Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS).
(c)(b)(a)𝜇𝑒𝑑
𝜇ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜇𝑑𝑓(d)
(e)𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓ሶ𝑒𝑑𝜇𝑣𝜇𝜔 ෩𝑁 ෪𝑁𝑆 ෨𝑍 ෪𝑃𝑆 ෨𝑃
෩𝑁 ෪𝑁𝑆 ෨𝑍 ෪𝑃𝑆 ෨𝑃෩𝑁 ෪𝑁𝑆 ෨𝑍 ෪𝑃𝑆 ෨𝑃
෪𝑉𝐶ሚ𝐶෨𝐹෨𝐿 ෩𝑀 ෩𝐻
Figure 6. Membership functions of the IT2-FLS. ( a–c) Input membership function for ed,˙ed, and df,
respectively. ( d,e) Output membership function for wand v, respectively. The upper membership
function and lower membership function of each fuzzy set are annotated as UpperMF and LowerMF.
The Footprint Of Uncertainty (FOU) is represented by the shaded area. Fuzzy labels are deﬁned as
N: “Negative,” NS: “Negative Small,” Z: “Zero,” PS: “Positive Small,” P: “Positive,” VC: “Very Close,”
C: “Close,” F: “Far,” L: “Low,” M: “Medium,” H: “High.” The universe of discourse of the membership
functions is deﬁned in the normalized scale, and they should be adapted based on the hardware
capabilities of the robot. It should be noted that the membership functions were pruned based on
human expert knowledge.
Similar to the T1-FLS, the proposed IT2-FLS uses a rule base for the inferencing. The same rule
base deﬁned for T1-FLS given in Table 1 is used in the proposed IT2-FLS. In contrast, two ﬁring
strengths are received for a rule considering LMFs and UMFs. The ﬁring strength of LMFs, Ri,

==== Page 9 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 9 of 22
and UMFs, Ri, of the ith rule can be obtained as in (5). Min and max fuzzy operators are considered as
t-norm and t-conorm operators. Moreover, each rule has a range for the ﬁring strength instead of a
crisp ﬁring strength.
Ri=minfmedi(ed),m˙edi(˙ed),mdfi(df)g
Ri=minfmedi(ed),m˙edi(˙ed),mdfi(df)g
˜Ri[Ri,Ri](5)
The corresponding LMFs and UMFs of the outputs are clipped by the range of ﬁring strength
based on the Mamdani implication. This implication yields the fuzzy consequents ˜mw0
i(w)and ˜mv0
i(v)
for the outputs wandv, respectively, for the ith rule as given in (6). Moreover, each rule produces an
interval Type 2 fuzzy set as a consequent for an output. It should be notated that mw0
i(w)andmw0
i(w)
represent the LMF and UMF of ˜mw0
i(w), which is an interval Type 2 fuzzy set. The same notation is
also used for ˜mv0
i(v).
mw0
i(w) =minfRi,mwi(w)g
mw0
i(w) =minfRi,mwi(w)g
mv0
i(v) =minfRi,mvi(v)g
mv0
i(v) =minfRi,mvi(v)g(6)
Similar to the T1-FLS, the inferred LMFs and UMFs of inferred output fuzzy sets are aggregated
considering the fuzzy max operator. The aggregated output fuzzy sets, ˜mw0(w)and ˜mv0(v), can be
obtained as in (7) for the outputs wand v. However, the aggregated fuzzy sets are interval Type 2
fuzzy sets, and hence, the fuzzy sets cannot be directly defuzziﬁed the same as Type 1 fuzzy sets.
To facilitate the defuzziﬁcation, a step called type reduction, which reduces an interval Type 2 fuzzy
set to an interval-valued Type 1 fuzzy set, is performed in the type reducer. The Karnik–Mendel [ 60]
algorithm is used for the type reduction in the proposed FLS. An interval Type 1 fuzzy set resulting
from the type reduction has a range with a lower limit and an upper limit. Suppose cw
Landcw
Rare the
lower and upper limits of the output wand cv
Land cv
Rare the lower and upper limits of the output
v. These lower and upper limits can be estimated as given in (8) and (9). Here, Nwand Nvare the
number of samples taken across the universe of discourse of the outputs wandv, respectively. Lwand
Rware switch points corresponding to the output w, and Lvand Rvare switch points relevant to the
output v. These switch points are iteratively estimated using the Karnik–Mendel method [60].
˜mw0(w) =maxf˜mw0
1(w),˜mw0
2(w), ..,˜mw0
i(w), ..,˜mw0
N(w)g
˜mv0(v) =maxf˜mv0
1(v),˜mv0
2(v), ..,˜mv0
i(v), ..,˜mv0
N(v)g(7)
cw
L=åLw
j=1wjmw0(wj) +åNw
j=Lw+1wjmw0(wj)
åLw
j=1mw0(wj) +åNw
j=Lw+1mw0(wj)
cw
R=åRw
j=1wjmw0(wj) +åNw
j=Rw+1wjmw0(wj)
åRw
j=1mw0(wj) +åNw
j=Rw+1mw0(wj)(8)
cv
L=åLv
j=1vjmv0(vj) +åNv
j=Lv+1vjmv0(vj)
åLv
j=1mv0(vj) +åNv
j=Lv+1mv0(vj)
cw
R=åRv
j=1vjmv0(vj) +åNv
j=Rv+1vjmv0(vj)
åRv
j=1mv0(vj) +åNv
j=Rv+1mv0(vj)(9)

==== Page 10 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 10 of 22
The ﬁnal defuzziﬁed outputs can be obtained as in (10). The expected decision surface of the
proposed IT2-FLS, which visualizes the variation of the two outputs in accordance with the inputs,
is given in Figure 7. The decision surfaces of the proposed IT2-FLS show higher non-linearity than
those of the proposed T1-FLS.
w=cw
L+cw
R
2
v=cv
L+cv
R
2(10)
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝑣
𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑓
𝑣
𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑓𝑑𝑓=0.5 𝑑𝑓=0.5
ሶ𝑒𝑑=0ሶ𝑒𝑑=0(a) (b)
(c) (d)
𝜔
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓=0.5
𝑒𝑑ሶ𝑒𝑑𝑑𝑓=0.5
𝑣
ሶ𝑒𝑑=0
𝑒𝑑𝜔
𝑑𝑓
 𝑒𝑑 𝑑𝑓𝑣ሶ𝑒𝑑=0(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 7. Decision surfaces of the IT2-FLS. ( a) Variation of wwith edand ˙ed, when df=0.5. (b) Variation
ofvwith edand ˙ed, when df=0.5. (c) Variation of wwith edand df, when ˙ed=0. (d) Variation of v
with edanddf, when ˙ed=0.
4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Validation Setup
A simulation was conducted using MATLAB Simulink to validate the characteristics and
performance of wall-following behavior established for a robot by using the proposed Type 1 Fuzzy
Logic System (T1-FLS) and Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS). The validation process
was conducted in two phases. The characteristics of the proposed FLSs were analyzed in the ﬁrst
phase by considering heterogeneous situations of typical walls. In the second phase, the average
absolute displacement error of the paths (deﬁned as E=RT
0jdej/Twhere Tis the total run time in a
test case) followed by the robot with the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS was compared by simulation trails on
complex heterogeneous wall arrangements. The performance of the proposed method with different
lateral distances to be maintained by the robot from a wall (i.e., with different dT) was examined in the
third phase of the validation. The inputs, deand ˙de, and outputs, wand v, of the FLSs were directly
taken/fed from/to the robot without taking a calibration gain. However, a calibration gain of 0.2
was used for the input, df, of the FLSs. Besides, the inputs were truncated to the respective universe
of discourse of the input space. The maximum ranges of the distance sensors were assumed as 4 m.
The resolution of the range sensors was considered as 1 cm for the simulation. The lateral distance to

==== Page 11 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 11 of 22
be maintained by the robot from the wall (i.e., dT) was conﬁgured as 0.5 m for the ﬁrst and second
phases of the validation. The maximum linear velocity of the robot was assumed as 1 m/s. This value
was chosen based on the requirements of the disinfection process, as well as the typical parameters of
mobile robot bases.
4.2. The Characteristics of Wall-Following Behavior
In this phase of the validation, heterogeneous scenarios where the robot encounters typical walls
such as corners and curves were considered individually to analyze the characteristics of the proposed
FLSs for wall-following behavior. The arrangement of walls in the test cases of the ﬁrst phase of the
validation is shown in Figure 8 along with the resulting trails of the robot with the T1-FLS and the
IT2-FLS. The variations of the parameters of the FLSs corresponding to the test cases are given in
Figure 9. It should be noted that for each test case, initially, the robot was placed in such a way that the
robot’s heading was parallel to the tangent to the wall surface, and dS=dT.
A wall arrangement with a right-angle corner, as shown in Figure 8a, was considered for the
case “a”. The robot was placed on the inner side of a right-angle corner of a wall. A robot could often
encounter this sort of wall segment when applying the disinfectant. The traced path of the robot for
both FLSs are annotated on the map. The corresponding variations of the inputs and the outputs of
the FLSs are given in Figure 9. Initially, dfwas 0.75, where it activated only the “Far” fuzzy set of
the input for df. As a result of sole activation of the “Far” set of df, the robot velocity, v, was at its
maximum, and the robot tried to minimize edby varying w. When the robot moved toward the corner,
dfdecreased gradually. When dfdropped to a level that activated the “Close” set, vstarted to decrease,
andwstarted to increase in the clockwise direction to turn the robot to the right. This behavior helped
the robot follow the right-angle turn of the wall at the corner. However, after completion of the turn at
the corner, the robot had a small ed. The robot managed to steady edafter a few oscillations, which were
small in magnitude (less than 0.1 m). The peak magnitudes and the number of the oscillations of the
IT2-FLS were lower than those of the T1-FLS. The average absolute displacement error of the robot’s
path ( E) was 0.04 m and 0.02 m for the case of the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS, respectively, indicating a
slightly better performance for the IT2-FLS than the T1-FLS in this case. The results of the case “a”
veriﬁed that both proposed FLSs for wall-following behavior were capable of coping with a situation
where there could be right-angle corners in inner wall segments.
A situation where a robot moves along the outer surface of a wall segment that has a right-angle
corner was considered for the case “b” (see Figure 9b). Both conﬁgurations of the robot followed
the ﬁrst leg of the wall without having a lateral error ( ed=0). In this case, the robot could not
identify the corner by considering df, similar to the case “a”. Nevertheless, soon after the robot passes
the ﬁrst leg of the wall, it perceives the outward turn of the wall through ed. Therefore, both the
FLSs took necessary action to turn the robot to the left by raising win the anti-clockwise direction.
After that, both FLSs were capable of following the second wall segment as expected. Similar to the
case “a”, both FLSs were able to maintain a lower E(0.03 m and 0.02 m for the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS,
respectively). The IT2-FLS showed better performance than that of the T1-FLS. The characteristics
identiﬁed from this case validated the ability of the proposed FLSs to follow the outer surface of a
right-angle wall corner.
The characteristics of the proposed FLSs in following a curve wall from the inner side were
evaluated in the case “d” shown in Figure 8c. The robot was successful at following the curved wall in
both conﬁgurations (i.e., with the T1-FLS and with the IT2-FLS) while having a lower E(0.07 m and
0.05 m for the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS, respectively). In the case “d”, the proposed FLSs were tested
when the robot was following the same curved wall from outside (see Figure 8d). The proposed FLSs
were capable of following the wall surface while maintaining the average lateral error, E, within an
acceptable range (0.06 m and 0.04 m for the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS, respectively) for the disinfection
process. The IT2-FLS exhibited a steady path with lower peaks of edcompared to the T1-FLS, yielding
a superior performance. The characteristics of the proposed FLSs identiﬁed from the cases “c” and “d”

==== Page 12 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 12 of 22
validated the ability of the proposed systems to cope with curved walls when following the inner and
outer sides.
E = 10.26   14.49
7.943 12.14
3.506  5.442
4.252 6.618
2.413  2.841
5.725 6.564
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)T1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
Wall
T1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
Wall
T1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
Wall
Figure 8. Wall-following behavior of the robot with the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS during the test cases.
(a) An inner wall segment of a right-angle corner. ( b) An outer wall segment of a right-angle corner.
(c) An inner surface of a curved wall. ( d) An outer surface of a curved wall. ( e) A wall segment with a
small negative dent. ( f) A wall segment with a small positive dent.

==== Page 13 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 13 of 22
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓
ሶ𝑒𝑑
𝜔
𝑣𝑒𝑑
𝑑𝑓Case a: T1 -FLS
Case e: IT2 -FLSCase b: T1 -FLS
Case c: T1 -FLS Case d: T1 -FLS
Case e: T1 -FLS Case f: T1 -FLSCase b: IT2 -FLS
Case c: IT2 -FLS Case d: IT2 -FLSCase a: IT2 -FLS
Case f: IT2 -FLSt (s) t (s) t (s) t (s)
t (s) t (s) t (s) t (s)
t (s) t (s) t (s) t (s)
Figure 9. The variation of the inputs and outputs of the T1-FLS and the IT2-FLS during the test cases given in Figure 8.

==== Page 14 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 14 of 22
A scenario where there was a small negative dent in the wall surface (see Figure 8e) was considered
for the case “e”. This kind of negative dent can be commonly found in corridors due to the inclusion
of doors. In contrast, a situation where there was a small positive dent in a wall (see Figure 8f) was
considered for the case “f”. This sort of situation is commonly created by structures like pillars and
beams. Thereby, the analysis of the characteristics of the proposed FLSs during such situations is
crucial. Initially, the robot smoothly followed the wall, and when it encountered a dent, a change in
the trajectory was triggered by the FLSs. This triggering allowed the robot to safely pass the positive
dent in the case “f”. The robot with the IT2-FLS showed smoother paths than the T1-FLS, where Ewas
0.02 m (Case “e”) and 0.05 m (Case “f”) for the IT2-FLS and 0.03 m (Case “e”) and 0.03 m (Case “f”)
for the T1-FLS. The identiﬁed characteristics validated the ability of the proposed FLSs to cope with
possible negative and positive dents in walls when performing the wall following.
In all the test cases, both proposed FLSs were effective at successfully maintaining the distance
from the wall within an acceptable range during the wall following. Moreover, the proposed FLSs
could be utilized for establishing the wall-following behavior of a robot intended for disinfecting
walls. However, better performance could be observed from the IT2-FLS compared to the TL-FLS.
Therefore, a performance comparison of the two FLSs was conducted in the second phase of the
validation (given in Section 4.3) by considering complex wall arrangements.
4.3. Performance Comparison of Wall-Following Behavior
In this phase of the validation, the performance of the proposed FLSs was compared by
considering complex wall arrangements. The wall arrangements considered in this regard are shown
in Figure 10. Similar to the ﬁrst phase of the validation, initially in these cases, the robot was placed
in such a way that the robot’s heading was parallel to the tangent to the wall surface, and dS=dT.
A total of 12 heterogeneous wall arrangements were considered, and the robot (with the T1-FLS and
with the IT2-FLS) was allowed to follow the wall for 200 s in each case. The trajectories of the robot
were captured. The traced paths of the robot during these test cases were also annotated. A video
compiled from the simulations of this phase can be found as a supplementary multimedia attachment.
According to the obtained results of these 12 cases, both proposed FLSs for wall-following
behavior were capable of successfully following the wall arrangement of the test cases. However,
the IT1-FLS generated smoother paths for the robot than the T1-FLS. The average lateral error of
each case (i.e., E) was calculated for both FLSs to analyze this performance variation quantitatively.
In all cases except Case “k”, the robot with the IT2-FLS had a lower Ethan that of T1-FLS. The mean
variation of Eobtained for the test cases is given in Figure 11a with error bars drawn to represent
the standard error. In addition to that, the corresponding box plots of Eare given in Figure 11b to
provide insights into the data distribution. The mean of Efor the T1-FLS was 6.1 cm, with a standard
deviation of 1.5. In contrast, the mean of Efor the IT2-FLS was 4.9 cm, with a standard deviation
of 1.3. A paired t-test was conducted to evaluate the statistical signiﬁcance between the two means.
According to the test outcomes, the IT2-FLS had a signiﬁcantly lower mean for Ecompared to that of
the T1-FLS ( t(11)=7.19,p=0.000 ). Furthermore, this error reduction was large according to the effect
size calculated based on Cohen’s d (Cohen’s d = 0.86; Cohen’s d >0.8 is considered as a large effect
size [ 61]). Therefore, it can be concluded that the IT2-FLS had signiﬁcantly superior performance than
the T1-FLS in wall-following behavior, and the performance difference was noteworthy.

==== Page 15 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 15 of 22
Case A Case B Case C Case D
Case E Case F Case G Case H
Case I Case J Case K Case LT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
Wall
T1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
Wall
T1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
WallT1-FLS
IT2-FLS
Wall
Figure 10. The traced path of the robot during the second phase of the validation. Cases A to L represent the test scenarios.

==== Page 16 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 16 of 22
T1-FLS     IT2 -FLS                          T1 -FLS          IT2 -FLS          E(cm)E(cm)
(a) (b)
Figure 11. (a) Mean of average lateral error, E, during the test cases of the second phase of validation.
The error bars are drawn to represent the standard error. ( b) The corresponding box plot of E. The box
plot has the usual standard notation; box: interquartile range, horizontal line: median, whiskers:
minimum and maximum, and plus sign: outliers.
4.4. Performance of Wall-Following with Different Lateral Distances
In the third phase of the validation, the wall-following ability of the proposed method was
examined by conﬁguring different lateral distances (i.e., dT). Only the proposed IT2-FLS was
considered in this regard since superior performance was observed. Environments similar to the
ﬁrst four cases of the ﬁrst phase of the experiment were considered. Figure 12 shows the resulting
trails of the robot with different conﬁgurations of dT. Three settings of dT,dT= 0.5 m, 0.75 m, and 1.0 m
were considered for the analysis.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
𝑑𝑇=0.50m
𝑑𝑇=0.75m
𝑑𝑇=1.00m𝑑𝑇=0.50m
𝑑𝑇=0.75m
𝑑𝑇=1.00m
𝑑𝑇=0.50m
𝑑𝑇=0.75m
𝑑𝑇=1.00m𝑑𝑇=0.50m
𝑑𝑇=0.75m
𝑑𝑇=1.00m
Figure 12. Wall-following behavior of the IT2-FLS with different settings of dT. (a) An inner wall
segment of a right-angle corner. ( b) An outer wall segment of a right-angle corner. ( c) An inner surface
of a curved wall. ( d) An outer surface of a curved wall

==== Page 17 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 17 of 22
According to the traced path of the robot, the robot was capable of adequately following the wall
segment of each environment for all the conﬁgurations of dT. The average lateral errors (i.e., E) of
the cases of dT= 0.5 m, 0.75 m, and 1.0 m were observed as 3.66 cm (SD = 0.41), 3.53 cm (SD = 0.63),
and 3.87 cm ( SD = 1.41 ), respectively. Moreover, an adequate level of performance could be observed
even though dTwas altered. This behavior implied that the proposed FLS was generalized for a ﬁnite
range of dTinstead of a speciﬁc value. Therefore, it can be concluded that the lateral distance of a
wall-following task can be altered per the user requirements without the requirement of any redesign
work of the proposed FLS.
4.5. Discussion
The characteristics of the proposed FLSs were evaluated in the ﬁrst phase of the validation.
The test cases of this phase consisted of typical heterogeneous situations that could be encountered by
a robot during the wall following. The path followed by the robot and the variation of the inputs and
outputs of the FLSs were analyzed in this regard. The wall-following performance of the proposed
FLSs was analyzed and compared in the second phase of the validation by considering complex wall
arrangements. Based on the outcomes of all the test cases (including both the ﬁrst and second phase),
it can be concluded that both proposed FLSs were effectively capable of coping with typical situations
expected during wall-following behavior. Moreover, the proposed FLSs were suitable for establishing
the wall-following behavior for a robot deployed for wall disinfection tasks.
In the second phase of validation, the performances of the proposed FLSs in maintaining the
desired distance from a wall were compared. Complex wall arrangements that could be encountered
by a disinfection robot were considered in this regard. This consideration supported the generalization
of the outcomes. In addition to that, statistical analysis was conducted to ascertain the generalizability.
The statistical outcomes conﬁrmed that the proposed IT2-FLS had signiﬁcantly superior performance
to the proposed T1-FLS for wall-following behavior. Moreover, the proposed IT1-FLS was more
suitable for a wall disinfection robot since it could follow a given wall while maintaining the distance
from the wall more accurately.
The evaluation and comparison of the performance were conducted based on the distance
maintaining performance, and the other performance indicators such as time and energy usage were
not considered. However, the ability to maintain a given distance from a wall while wall following is
the most crucial aspect for a wall disinfection robot. Hence, the consideration of distance maintaining
ability for the performance evaluation and comparison was justiﬁable. The consideration of other
performance indicators such as time and energy for the analysis is proposed for future work.
The state-of-the-art wall-following methods based on FLSs tuned by optimization techniques
(e.g., [ 33–39]) require training before utilization. Furthermore, these methods are not designed in a
way that the system is generalized to the lateral distance. Hence, retraining is required to alter the
lateral distance to be maintained from a wall. On the other hand, the FLSs designed for wall following
based on expert knowledge do not require training. However, state-of-the-art FLSs proposed in this
regard (e.g., [ 40–43]) have been designed considering a speciﬁc lateral distance to be maintained from
a wall. Moreover, the state-of-the-art FLSs designed for wall-following behavior require redesigning
of the FLSs in the case of altering the distance. In contrast, the FLSs proposed in this paper do
not require such redesigning since the FLSs consider the parameters related to the error of lateral
distance. Moreover, the membership functions of the FLSs are independent of the lateral distance.
The ﬂexibility of altering the lateral distance to be maintained in a wall-following task is useful for a
robot intended for wall disinfecting since the lateral distance has to be altered per the requirement of
the disinfecting process.
Most of the time, the proposed method for establishing the wall-following behavior is capable of
maintaining a given distance from a wall during a wall-following task. However, the deviations of
the distance from the desired distance could be observed in concave regions. The method proposed
for wall-following behavior is expected to be utilized in a wall disinfection robot that uses either a

==== Page 18 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 18 of 22
disinfectant spraying mechanism or ultraviolet light directed at the wall. Thereby, occasional minor
deviations of the distance from the wall surface would not hinder the effectiveness of a robot-aided
disinfection task. However, fusing a method to adapt the parameters of the spraying mechanism
or ultraviolet light, such as intensity, based on the present distance from a wall, would beneﬁt from
further improving the effectiveness of the method proposed in this paper. For example, if the distance
from the wall was higher than the desired one, the spaying mechanism could be adapted to have
slightly more pressure. Further exploration in this direction is proposed for future work.
If there is an object beside a wall, the robot considers such an object as a part of the wall. If there is
an object beside the wall, contaminating the wall itself is less likely since the wall segment itself would
not be contactable by people. However, the likelihood of contaminating such objects would be high.
Therefore, considering an object beside a wall as a part of the wall is desirable and would not hinder
the effectiveness.
The implications discussed earlier were derived based on the characteristics and performance of
the proposed method identiﬁed based on the simulation results. The simulations were conducted by
considering realistic parameters and models for the robot and environments. Thereby, the results of
the simulation would not greatly deviate from real-world experiments. Moreover, the implications
concluded in the paper would be applicable to real-world scenarios. The robot’s effective workspace is
planar due to the following reasons. The robot perceives only planner information of the environment
from the range sensors placed surrounding the robot in the same plane. Furthermore, the robot’s
actions are limited to a planer workspace since only the navigation of the robot is considered in
the paper. Therefore, a 2D simulation environment is adequate for evaluating the behavior and the
performance of the work proposed in the paper. Real-world experiments with a robot equipped with a
disinfection mechanism are expected to be conducted in the next phase of the work.
5. Conclusions
Robot-aided solutions are demanded to disinfect possibly contaminated surfaces to reduce the
spread of infectious diseases. A wall disinfection robot should be capable of following a given wall
while maintaining a speciﬁed distance from the wall. The ability to maintain the speciﬁed distance
from the wall is crucial for the effective sterilization of the wall surface since the intensity of the
disinfectant agent applied on the wall depends on the distance. The disinfectant agent can be either a
sprayable liquid, a gas, or ultraviolet light directed at the wall. Therefore, this paper proposed a novel
method to establish the wall-following behavior for a disinfection robot.
The proposed method was designed in such a way that it enables a robot to follow a wall of an
unknown environment by online path planning based on the range sensor information. Fuzzy logic
was used for establishing the wall-following behavior based on the range sensor inputs. A Type 1
Fuzzy Logic System (T1-FLS) and an Interval Type 2 Fuzzy Logic System (IT2-FLS) were proposed in
this regard. The FLSs were designed in such a way that they were generalized from the lateral distance
to be maintained from a wall. Moreover, users can alter the lateral distance per the requirements
without performing any redesign work of the system. The FLSs take the information perceived from
range sensors as inputs and determine the linear velocity and the angular velocity of the robot required
to follow a wall successfully.
Simulations were conducted to evaluate the characteristics and performance of the proposed FLSs.
Heterogeneous test cases that consisted of typical wall arrangements were considered in the simulation.
According to the simulation results, both proposed FLSs (i.e., T1-FLS and IT2-FLS) were capable of
adequately following walls as expected for a wall disinfection robot. A superior performance could be
observed from the IT2-FLS compared to that of the T1-FLS, and this performance difference was large
and statistically signiﬁcant. The real-world applicability of the proposed method was veriﬁed from the
simulations, and it is expected that real-world trials will be conducted in the next phase of the work.

==== Page 19 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 19 of 22
Supplementary Materials: The following are available at http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/20/16/4445/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.A.V .J.M. and M.R.E.; methodology, M.A.V .J.M. and S.M.B.P .S.;
software, S.M.B.P .S., M.M.R., and B.R.; validation, M.A.V .J.M., M.M.R., and B.R.; formal analysis, M.A.V .J.M.
and S.M.B.P .S.; writing, original draft preparation, M.A.V .J.M., S.M.B.P .S., and M.M.R.; writing, review and editing,
B.R. and M.R.E.; supervision, M.R.E.; project administration, M.R.E.; funding acquisition, M.R.E. All authors read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research is supported by the National Robotics Programme under its Robotics Enabling Capabilities
and Technologies (Funding Agency Project No. 192 25 00051), National Robotics Programme, under its Robot
Domain Speciﬁc (Funding Agency Project No. 192 22 00058) and administered by the Agency for Science,
Technology and Research.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; nor in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. Morens, D.M.; Fauci, A.S. Emerging infectious diseases: Threats to human health and global stability.
PLoS Pathog 2013 ,9, e1003467. [CrossRef]
2. Lee, K.M.; Jung, K. Factors Inﬂuencing the Response to Infectious Diseases: Focusing on the Case of SARS
and MERS in South Korea. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019 ,16, 1432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Cai, J.; Sun, W.; Huang, J.; Gamber, M.; Wu, J.; He, G. Indirect Virus Transmission in Cluster of COVID-19
Cases, Wenzhou, China, 2020. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2020 ,26, 1343–1345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Sohrabi, C.; Alsaﬁ, Z.; O’Neill, N.; Khan, M.; Kerwan, A.; Al-Jabir, A.; Iosiﬁdis, C.; Agha, R. World Health
Organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19). Int. J. Surg.
2020 ,76, 71–76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Kass, N.; Kahn, J.; Buckland, A.; Paul, A.; Expert Working Group. Ethics Guidance for the Public Health
Containment of Serious Infectious Disease Outbreaks in Low-Income Settings: Lessons from Ebola ; Johns Hopkins
University: Baltimore, MD, USA, 2019.
6. World Health Organization. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Situation Report ; World Health
Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2020; Volume 72.
7. Bentancor, M.; Vidal, S. Programmable and low-cost ultraviolet room disinfection device. HardwareX
2018 ,4, e00046. [CrossRef]
8. Begi´ c, A. Application of Service Robots for Disinfection in Medical Institutions. In Proceeding of the
International Symposium on Innovative and Interdisciplinary Applications of Advanced Technologies,
Teslic, Bosna and Herzegovina, 25–28 May 2017.
9. Fleming, M.; Patrick, A.; Gryskevicz, M.; Masroor, N.; Hassmer, L.; Shimp, K.; Cooper, K.; Doll, M.;
Stevens, M.; Bearman, G. Deployment of a touchless ultraviolet light robot for terminal room disinfection:
The importance of audit and feedback. Am. J. Infect. Control 2018 ,46, 241–243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Stewart, M. Robotic Disinfection System. U.S. Patent Application 15/167,309, 22 September 2016.
11. Yang, G.Z.; Nelson, B.J.; Murphy, R.R.; Choset, H.; Christensen, H.; Collins, S.H.; Dario, P .; Goldberg, K.;
Ikuta, K.; Jacobstein, N.; et al. Combating COVID-19—The role of robotics in managing public health and
infectious diseases. Sci. Robot. 2020 ,5, eabb5589. [CrossRef]
12. Ramalingam, B.; Yin, J.; Rajesh Elara, M.; Tamilselvam, Y.K.; Mohan Rayguru, M.; Muthugala, M.;
Félix Gómez, B. A Human Support Robot for the Cleaning and Maintenance of Door Handles Using
a Deep-Learning Framework. Sensors 2020 ,20, 3543. [CrossRef]
13. Cepolina, F.E.; Muscolo, G.G. Design of a robot for hygienization of walls in hospital environments.
In Proceedings of the ISR/Robotik 2014; 41st International Symposium on Robotics, Munich, Germany,
2–3 June 2014.
14. Kraft, K.; Smart, W.D. Seeing is comforting: Effects of teleoperator visibility in robot-mediated health care.
In Proceedings of the 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI),
Christchurch, New Zealand, 7–10 March 2016.
15. Jakubiak, J.; Drwi˛ ega, M.; Kurnicki, A. Development of a mobile platform for a remote medical teleoperation
robot. In Proceedings of the 2016 21st International Conference on Methods and Models in Automation and
Robotics (MMAR), Miedzyzdroje, Poland, 29 August–1 September 2016.

==== Page 20 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 20 of 22
16. Mettler, T.; Sprenger, M.; Winter, R. Service robots in hospitals: New perspectives on niche evolution and
technology affordances. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 2017 ,26, 451–468. [CrossRef]
17. Wang, X.; Zhang, G.; Sun, Y.; Cao, J.; Wan, L.; Sheng, M.; Liu, Y. AUV near-wall-following control based on
adaptive disturbance observer. Ocean Eng. 2019 ,190, 106429. [CrossRef]
18. Wolfe, B.; Lu, P .H. Wall Following Robot. U.S. Patent 9,877,630, 30 January 2018.
19. Lee, T.J.; Kim, C.H.; Cho, D.I.D. A monocular vision sensor based efﬁcient SLAM method for indoor service
robots. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2018 ,66, 318–328. [CrossRef]
20. Wang, S.; Kobayashi, Y.; Ravankar, A.A.; Ravankar, A.; Emaru, T. A Novel Approach for Lidar-Based Robot
Localization in a Scale-Drifted Map Constructed Using Monocular SLAM. Sensors 2019 ,19, 2230. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
21. Samarakoon, S.M.B.P .; Muthugala, M.A.V .J.; Le, A.V .; Elara, M.R. hTetro-Inﬁ: A Reconﬁgurable Floor
Cleaning Robot with Inﬁnite Morphologies. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 69816–69828. [CrossRef]
22. Hu, X.; Chen, L.; Tang, B.; Cao, D.; He, H. Dynamic path planning for autonomous driving on various roads
with avoidance of static and moving obstacles. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2018 ,100, 482–500. [CrossRef]
23. Connell, D.; La, H.M. Dynamic path planning and replanning for mobile robots using rrt. In Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), Banff, AB, Canada,
5–8 October 2017; pp. 1429–1434.
24. Lee, Y.T.; Chiu, C.S.; Kuo, I.T. Fuzzy wall-following control of a wheelchair. In Proceedings of the 2017 Joint
17th World Congress of International Fuzzy Systems Association and 9th International Conference on Soft
Computing and Intelligent Systems (IFSA-SCIS), Otsu, Japan, 27–30 June 2017.
25. Silva, W.A.; Rabelo, R.A.; Santana, A.M. Safe autonomous navigation with a wall-following robot using
interval Type 2 Fuzzy System in uncertain environments. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), San Diego, CA, USA, 5–8 October 2014.
26. Zhu, K.; Cheng, C.; Wang, C.; Zhang, F. Wall-Following Control of Multi-robot Based on Moving Target
Tracking and Obstacle Avoidance. In Proceeding of the International Conference on Cognitive Systems and
Signal Processing, Bejing, China, 29 November–1 December 2017.
27. Suwoyo, H.; Tian, Y.; Deng, C.; Adriansyah, A. Improving a Wall-Following Robot Performance with a
PID-Genetic Algorithm Controller. Proceeding Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci. Inform. 2018 ,5, 314–318.
28. Hammad, I.; El-Sankary, K.; Gu, J. A Comparative Study on Machine Learning Algorithms for the Control
of a Wall Following Robot. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics (ROBIO), Dali, China, 6–8 December 2019.
29. Dash, T. Automatic navigation of wall following mobile robot using adaptive resonance theory of type 1.
Biol. Inspired Cogn. Archit. 2015 ,12, 1–8. [CrossRef]
30. Dash, T.; Swain, R.R.; Nayak, T. Automatic navigation of wall-following mobile robot using a hybrid
metaheuristic assisted neural network. Data Sci. 2017 , 1–17.
31. Dash, T.; Sahu, S.R.; Nayak, T.; Mishra, G. Neural network approach to control wall-following robot
navigation. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Communications,
Control and Computing Technologies, Ramanathapuram, India, 8–10 May 2014.
32. Dash, T.; Nayak, T.; Swain, R.R. Controlling wall following robot navigation based on gravitational search
and feed forward neural network. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Perception and
Machine Intelligence, Kolkata, India, 26–27 February 2015
33. Braunstingl, R.; Mujika, J.; Uribe, J.P . A wall following robot with a fuzzy logic controller optimized
by a genetic algorithm. In Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems,
Yokohama, Japan, 20–24 March 1995.
34. Juang, C.F.; Jhan, Y.H.; Chen, Y.M.; Hsu, C.M. Evolutionary Wall-Following Hexapod Robot Using Advanced
Multiobjective Continuous Ant Colony Optimized Fuzzy Controller. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Dev. Syst. 2017 ,10,
585–594. [CrossRef]
35. Chen, C.; Du, H.; Lin, S. Mobile robot wall-following control by improved artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm
to design a compensatory fuzzy logic controller. In Proceedings of the 2017 14th International Conference
on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology
(ECTI-CON), Phuket, Thailand, 27–30 June 2017.
36. Lin, T.C.; Chen, C.C.; Lin, C.J. Wall-following and navigation control of mobile robot using reinforcement
learning based on dynamic group artiﬁcial bee colony. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2018 ,92, 343–357. [CrossRef]

==== Page 21 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 21 of 22
37. Juang, C.F.; Chen, Y.H.; Jhan, Y.H. Wall-following control of a hexapod robot using a data-driven fuzzy
controller learned through differential evolution. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2014 ,62, 611–619. [CrossRef]
38. Juang, C.F.; Hsu, C.H. Reinforcement ant optimized fuzzy controller for mobile-robot wall-following control.
IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 2009 ,56, 3931–3940. [CrossRef]
39. Hsu, C.H.; Juang, C.F. Evolutionary robot wall-following control using type 2 fuzzy controller with
species-DE-activated continuous ACO. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 2012 ,21, 100–112. [CrossRef]
40. Ratnayake, R.; De Silva, T.; Rodrigo, C. A Comparison of Fuzzy Logic Controller and PID Controller for
Differential Drive Wall-Following Mobile Robot. In Proceedings of the 2019 14th Conference on Industrial
and Information Systems (ICIIS), Kandy, Sri Lanka, 18–20 December 2019.
41. Budianto, A.; Pangabidin, R.; Syai’in, M.; Adhitya, R.; Subiyanto, L.; Khumaidi, A.; Rachman, I.;
Widiawan, B.; Joni, K.; Nurcahya, E. Analysis of artiﬁcial intelligence application using back propagation
neural network and fuzzy logic controller on wall-following autonomous mobile robot. In Proceedings
of the 2017 International Symposium on Electronics and Smart Devices (ISESD), Yogyakarta, Indonesia,
17–19 October 2017.
42. Lee, C.L.; Lin, C.J.; Lin, H.Y. Smart robot wall-following control using a sonar behavior based fuzzy controller
in unknown environments. Smart Sci. 2017 ,5, 160–166. [CrossRef]
43. Lin, T.; Lin, H.; Lin, C.; Chen, C. Mobile robot wall-following control using a behavior based fuzzy controller
in unknown environments. Iran. J. Fuzzy Syst. 2019 ,16, 113–124.
44. Mendel, J.; Hagras, H.; Tan, W.W.; Melek, W.W.; Ying, H. Introduction to Type 2 Fuzzy Logic Control: Theory and
Applications ; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2014.
45. Castillo, O. Introduction to type 2 fuzzy logic control. In Type 2 Fuzzy Logic in Intelligent Control Applications ;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012; pp. 3–5.
46. Muthugala, M.A.V .J.; Jayasekara, A.G.B.P . Improving the understanding of navigational commands by
adapting a robot’s directional perception based on the environment. J. Ambient. Intell. Smart Environ. 2019 ,
11, 135–148. [CrossRef]
47. Schiffer, S.; Ferrein, A.; Lakemeyer, G. Reasoning with qualitative positional information for domestic
domains in the situation calculus. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 2012 ,66, 273–300. [CrossRef]
48. Nguyen, H.T.; Walker, C.L.; Walker, E.A. A First Course in Fuzzy Logic ; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2018.
49. Zadeh, L.A. Is there a need for fuzzy logic? Inf. Sci. 2008 ,178, 2751–2779. [CrossRef]
50. Premachandra, C.; Gohara, R.; Ninomiya, T.; Kato, K. Smooth Automatic Stopping for Ultra-Compact
Vehicles. IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 2019 ,4, 561–568. [CrossRef]
51. Muthugala, M.A.V .J.; Vega-Heredia, M.; Vengadesh, A.; Sriharsha, G.; Elara, M.R. Design of an
Adhesion-Aware Façade Cleaning Robot. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Macau, China, 3–8 November 2019.
52. Ibarra, L.; Webb, C. Advantages of fuzzy control while dealing with complex/unknown model dynamics:
A quadcopter example. Available online: https://www.intechopen.com/books/new-applications-
of-artiﬁcialintelligence/advantages-of-fuzzy-control-while-dealing-with-complex-unknown-model-
dynamics-aquadcopter-example/ (accessed on 7 August 2020).
53. Faisal, M.; Algabri, M.; Abdelkader, B.M.; Dhahri, H.; Al Rahhal, M.M. Human expertise in mobile robot
navigation. IEEE Access 2017 ,6, 1694–1705. [CrossRef]
54. Muthugala, M.A.V .J.; Vega-Heredia, M.; Mohan, R.E.; Vishaal, S.R. Design and Control of a Wall Cleaning
Robot with Adhesion-Awareness. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 122.[CrossRef]
55. Phan, K.B.; Ha, H.T.; Hoang, S.V . Eliminating the Effect of Uncertainties of Cutting Forces by Fuzzy
Controller for Robots in Milling Process. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 1685. [CrossRef]
56. Dirik, M.; Castillo, O.; Kocamaz, A.F. Visual-Servoing Based Global Path Planning Using Interval Type 2
Fuzzy Logic Control. Axioms 2019 ,8, 58.[CrossRef]
57. Pourabdollah, A.; Wagner, C.; Aladi, J.H.; Garibaldi, J.M. Improved uncertainty capture for nonsingleton
fuzzy systems. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 2016 ,24, 1513–1524. [CrossRef]
58. Wu, D.; Mendel, J.M. Designing practical interval type 2 fuzzy logic systems made simple. In Proceedings
of the 2014 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), Beijing, China, 6–11 July 2014.
59. Wu, D. Approaches for reducing the computational cost of interval type 2 fuzzy logic systems: Overview
and comparisons. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 2012 ,21, 80–99. [CrossRef]

==== Page 22 ====
Sensors 2020 ,20, 4445 22 of 22
60. Karnik, N.N.; Mendel, J.M. Centroid of a type 2 fuzzy set. Inf. Sci. 2001 ,132, 195–220. [CrossRef]
61. Sawilowsky, S.S. New effect size rules of thumb. J. Mod. Appl. Stat. Methods 2009 ,8, 26. [CrossRef]
c2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

