==== Page 1 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 1 
  Abstract—Convolutional neural network (CNN) , with ability 
of feature learning  and nonlinear mapping , has demonstrated  its 
effectiveness in prognostic s and health management (PHM). 
However , explanation on  the physical meaning of a CNN 
architecture has  rarely been studied . In this paper, a novel wavelet 
driven deep neural network termed as  WaveletKernelNet  (WKN)  
is presented, where a continuous wavelet convolutional (CWConv) 
layer  is designed to replace the  first convolutional layer of the 
standard CNN . This  enables  the first CWConv layer to  discover 
more meaningful filters. Furthermore, only the scale parameter 
and translation parameter are directly learned from raw data at 
this CWConv  layer. This provides  a very effective  way to obtain  a 
customized filter bank , specifically tuned  for extracting defect -
related  impact component  embedded in the vibration signal . In 
addition , three experimental verification using data from 
laboratory envir onment are carried out to verify effectiveness of 
the proposed method  for mechanical fault diagnosis . The results 
show the importance of the designed CWConv layer and the 
output of CWConv layer is interpretable. Besides, it is found that 
WKN has fewer para meters, higher fault classification accuracy 
and faster convergence speed than  standard CNN . 
 
Index Terms —Prognostic and health management (PHM), 
convolutional neural network, continuous wavelet transform, 
continuous wavelet convolutional layer, machine fa ult diagnosis.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
ROGNOSTIC  and health management (PHM) in 
mechanical system ha s been applied widely to achieve 
predictive maintenance, including fault tracking, reduced 
downtime and asset preservation  [1-3]. The rise of PHM has 
benefited from the development of advanced sensing 
technology, wireless communication and computing systems in 
recent years, which have generated a large amount of data for 
manufacturing systems  [4], [5]. 
 Traditionally, PHM consists of three main phases: sensor 
signal acquisition, feature extract ion and selection, followed by 
fault classification and  fault prediction . Sensor signals are 
collected from  PHM system. Feature extraction and selection 
are the critical section s in fault diagnosis, even once became a 
research hotspot in PHM. For example, Li [6] proposed semi -
supervised k ernel Marginal Fisher analysis for feature 
extraction . It can catch sight of  the inherent manifold structure 
of the data set, and consider the tightness inside the class and 
the separability between classes.  Qiao [7] used empirical mode 
decomposition, fuzzy feature extract ion and support vector 
machines  to diagnose turbine generator sets under three  
different operating conditions . Chen [8] used the wavelet packet 
 
Tianfu Li, Zhibin Zhao, Chuang Sun , Li Cheng, Xuefeng Chen  and Ruqiang 
Yan are with School of Mechanical  Engineering, X i’an Jiaotong University, 
Xi’an , Shaanxi 710049,  China . Corresponding author: Ruqiang Yan , E-mail: 
yanruqiang@xjtu.edu.cn .  to extract features, and proposes an online monitoring model 
based on logistic regression to analyze the vibration signal of 
tool wear.  In the last stage, machine learning models are trained 
by the extracted featur es and output the results of fault 
predictions. However, these traditional fault diagnosis methods 
have some limitations in PHM . First, traditional methods rely 
on manually selected features. If the extracted features  are 
inadequate for the task, the perfo rmance of the final 
classification algorithm will be greatly degenerate d. Second, 
the handcrafted features are time -consuming, especially when 
dealing with large amounts of data, a nd even if the model is 
trained usin g the extracted features, the efficiency of the final 
prediction or classification still needs to be improved.  
Unlike the above methods, the Deep Learning (DL) approach 
provides an effective solution to overcome these limitations, in 
part because of their p owerful capabilities  in feature learning . 
The deep architecture has multiple hidden layers , this could 
allow the deep architecture learn the essential  features hidden 
in the monitoring data and improve diagnostic accuracy.  There 
are many kinds of neural ne twork structures in deep learning , 
such as deep belief network (DBN) [9], [10], auto -encoder (AE)  
[11], [12] and convolutional neural network (CNN)  [13], [14] . 
CNN  as a kind of DL architecture has been broadly  applied to 
many areas [16], such as  natural language processing  [17], 
speech recognition  [18], computer vision  [19].  
 In recent years, the DL  methods using CNN have swept the 
field of fault diagnosis and produced many remarkable 
achievements  [20-22]. From the perspective of network input , 
it can be classified into one -dimensional  input CNN  (1D-CNN ) 
and two -dimensional  input CNN  (2D-CNN ). For example, Eren  
[23] employed  compact adaptive 1D -CNN  classifier for a 
generic real -time induction bearing fault diagnosis system.  Jia 
[24] proposed a novel 1D -CNN framework for the fault 
diagnosis of three imbalanced bearing datasets . Besides, Yang 
[25] implemented  Fourier transform for the collected bearing 
signals and the obtained spectra were used as the input of the 
1D-CNN for bearing fault diagnosis . For 2D -CNN, Ding [26] 
proposed a multi -scale feature mining method based on wavelet 
packet energy image and de ep CNN for spindle bearing fault 
diagnosis.  
Although these  CNN based DL methods have achieved 
successful applications in PHM, there are still problems 
associated with them . A main  limitation of CNNs in mechanical 
fault diagnosis is that they operate in a black box, which  does 
not offer  insight into how to make the final decision. This may 
not only challenges the credibility of the decision itself, but also 
Robert X. Gao  is with Department of Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA . WaveletKernelNet : An Interpretable Deep Neural 
Network for Industrial Intelligent Diagnosis  
Tianfu Li, Student  Member, IEEE , Zhibin Zhao, Chuang Sun, Li Cheng,  
Xuefeng Chen, Senior Member, IEEE , Ruqiang Yan, Senior Member, IEEE , Robert X. Gao, Fellow, IEE E 
P 

==== Page 2 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 2 
limits further improvement of the CNN to accommodate a 
wider range of applications.  
The exploration of the interpretability of CNN h as not 
stopped.  Alekseev  [27] proposed an interpretable CNN call 
GaborNet . In this paper, Gabor wavelet is used as the 
convolution kernel of the neura l network for image input, which 
makes the convolutional combination interpretability.  Grezmak  
[28]  proposed  an interpretable CNN for gearbox fault d iagnosis 
based on layer-wise relevance  propagation . In order to find the 
physical meaning of convolutional (Conv) layer output, some 
studies have visualized the output of each layer of the CNN  [29], 
[30]. Bojarski  [31] proposed a novel CNN called PilotNet, and 
explain w hat it learn s and how  it makes its decisions by 
visualizing the feature map of each layer.   
Nonetheless, all these interpretable neural networks are 
mostly for 2D input. In mechanical fault diagnosis, we often get 
1D vibration signals, and there is no specific convolutional 
kernel design method to extract impuls ive component , which  is 
the essential signal component rel ated to machine fault. The 
results of Ref. [32] show t hat the first convolutional layer  is one 
of the most critical part of current  waveform -based CNNs . The 
first layer of CNN not only handles data with high-dimensional, 
but is also more su sceptible to the problem of vanishing 
gradient , especially when the network architect ure is very deep.  
This will lead to the learned filters of CNN typically employ a 
noisy and uncoordinated multi -band shape, particularly  in the 
case of few training sample s. These learned filters certainly 
make sense for the neural network, but they cannot effectively 
represent the mechanical signals. Therefore, it is desired  to 
design a network t hat can extract their features according to the 
characteristics of the signals.  
A promising approach to overcome the difficult y is explored  
in this paper , where a  continuous wavelet convolution layer 
(CWConv) layer is designed to replace the first convolution  
layer, which aims to help the CNNs discover filters with a 
certain physical meaning . Based on this, the wavelet driven 
CNN, termed as WaveletKernelNet  (WKN ), is proposed, which 
can make the output of the first layer of CNN interpretable.  The 
filter bank c haracteristics of standard CNN depend on a set of 
random ly initialized  parameters  (each element of the filter 
vector can be directly learned) . By comparison , WKN  
convolves  the input signal with a cluster  of parametrized 
wavelet dictionar ies that accomplish wavelet transform. The 
scale and translation parameter s are the only two parameters of 
the CWConv layer  learned  from input signal . This approach 
forces the first layer of the network to focus on extracting 
features of the input signals, making the result of network 
output has clear physical meaning and more robust to different 
data. The main contributions of our work can be  summarized as 
follows : 
1) WaveletKernelNet is designed to extract  fault feature s 
from  mechanical signals. The first convolution  layer is 
replaced by the CWConv layer . This is equivalent to 
adding some con straints to the waveform of the filters.  
Therefore, the essential semantic information with a clear 
physical meaning  can be extracted from high -dimensional 
data.  
2) The designed CWCo nv layer can extract the characteristics of the mechanical signal by means of inner product 
matching. This makes the feature maps acquired  in the first 
layer interpretable.  
3) The proposed CWConv layer is generalizable, and it can be 
applied to any existing convolution -based network. 
Besides, the parameters in the first convolutional layer are 
drastically reduced, and the convergence speed of the 
neural network is accelerated.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as: theoretical 
foundation about  replacing the CWConv layer with standard 
one is introduced in section II, based on which a novel machine 
fault diagnosis pipeline  is shown in Section III. In Section IV, 
three data sets were experimentally studied to verify the 
effectiveness of WKN . Beside s, in contrast test its performa nce 
were compared with other methods .  In Section V, we further 
discus s the i nterpretability  and properties of WKN . 
Conclusions are shown in Section  VI. 
II. THEORETICAL FOUNDATION  
A.  CNN  
CNN consists of an input layer, a number of  hidden layers  
for feature extraction, and an output layer to output the results . 
Generally, t he hidden layer contains  a convolution (Conv) layer, 
a pooling layer, an activation layer, and a full y connected  layer.  
In the convolutional layer , each randomly initialized  kernel 
convolves through the width and height of the input  as is shown 
in Fig. 1 . The k-th feature map of the l-th layer before the 
nonlinear activation has  the feature value
l
kh , which can be 
denoted as:  
 
kl l l
kk h w x b=  +  (1) 
where
l
kw  is the weight of k-th convolutional kernel of the l-th 
layer and
l
kb denotes  the bias. x is the input signal, * is the 
convolutional operator.  
Input signal 
Feature maps Kernel
(Random ly initialized ) Element -wise multiplication
Partial sum accumulation
L
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Convolution process of the standard Conv layer in CNN . 
An activation function is needed after the convolution 
operation. Since the feature map is nonlinearly activated, it can 
be denoted as:     
 
()ll
kkz f h=  (2) 
where  
l
kzis the activated feature maps.  
After the convolutional layer, a large number of feature maps 
will be obtained, so the pooling layer is often used for down 
sampling operation to achieve the purpose of reducing the 
parameters of the model and retaining the main features.  
Mathematically, a pooling operation is defined as:  

==== Page 3 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 3 
 
y ( ( ) )l+1 l+1 l l+1
kk f down z b=+  (3)          
where 
() down   is the down sampling function,
l+1  is the weight 
of the down sampling function of 
( - )l+1 th  layer. If the average 
pooling with filter size is 2× 2, the value of 
  equals to  1/4. 
After a series of stacked convolution and pooling layer s, the 
final feature map s are flattened and then classified or regressed 
by the fully  connected layer [33], [34]. The softmax  function is 
often used for classification tasks to predict the prob ability of 
different categories.  Cross entropy is often used as the loss 
function for CNN in model training , which can be de notes  as: 
 
ii
iH(r, p)= - rlog(p )   (4) 
where i is the number of class, 
0,1r is the sample label , p is 
the probability got from softmax  function. The cross entropy 
loss is used to compute  the erro r between the true  label  and the 
predicted probability . The gradient of the weight associated 
with the loss function is obtained by the back propagation  
algorithm , and the weight is updated by the stochastic gradient 
descent.  
B. Continuous Wavelet Transform  
Convolution operation in CNN as shown in Eq . (1) can be 
express ed as the inner product of t wo vectors in signal 
processing.  Also based on inner product, t he principle of the 
continuous wavelet transform (CWT ) is as follows.  
In the temporal domain,  a general  wavelet dictionary 
{ ( )} tu,s
[35-37] can be defined by dilating the parameter s > 0, 
and translat ing the parameter  
uR of the mother  wavelet 
() as 
follows:  
 
,1( ) ( )ustuts s−=  (5) 
where t denotes the time, s is a scale  parameter that is inversely 
proportional to frequ ency, and u is a translational parameter.  
The scale parameter  s can swell or compress the signal . When 
the scale parameter  is relatively low, the signal shrinks more, 
resulting in a more detailed result ing graph.  Besides , when the 
scale parameter  is relatively high, the signal is stretched out 
which means t hat the resulting graph will be presented in less 
detail.  
The CWT of signal 
g ( )xt=  is obtained by calculating the 
inner product with 
*
,(t)su  which can be expressed as  [38]: 
 
*
,1CWT ( ) g, (t) (t) ( )f u stuu,s x dts s−==   (6) 
where 
*()  denotes the complex conjugate of the mother 
wavelet 
() . Eq. (6) indicates t hat the CWT is similar to 
Fourier transform , where t he basis function used by the Fourier 
transform to implement inner product matching is a 
trigonometric function.  Besides, Fourier transform is full -band, 
so it does not have multi -scale propert ies, and the wavelet 
transform achieves multi -scale analysis of non -statio nary 
signals by two parameters.  The process of continuous wavelet 
transform is shown in Fig. 2, which contains  three steps.  
a) Select a wavele t basis function, then using Eq. (6) to 
calculate the similarity coefficient with a portion of the 
signal;  b) Shift the wavelet to the right by u and continue to calculate 
the similarity coefficient until all parts of the signal are 
calculated;  
c) Change the scale parameter s of the wavelet and repeat 
steps a) and b) until the analysis of all scales is completed.  
Time Shift u
···
1()tu
s s−
()xtShift
Shift
Shift
1 11()t
s s
1 11()tu
s s−
1 112()tu
s s−
1 11()t nu
s s−
Fig. 2. Signal continuous wavelet transform processes.  
After traversing all the scales, the signal x(t) is decomposed 
into a series of similarity coefficients. At the same time, the 
wavelet dictionary is used to transform the signal x(t) and 
project it to two -dimensional (2-D) time and scale dimensions.  
C. The Continuous Wavelet C onvolutional Layer 
The first layer of CNN  is very important. The feature map it 
extracts often affect s the entire model. Normally, the first layer 
of a standard CNN performs a set of time -domain convolutions 
between the input signal  and some  Finite Impulse Response 
(FIR) filters [39]. However, the impact  components in the 
signal cannot be accurately extracted by convolution  operations , 
besides, the extracted features also ha ve no physical meaning  
and are not human readable.  
To tackle this issue , according to the relationship between 
convolution operations and CWT, in WKN the first convolut ion 
layer is replaced by the CWConv layer,  where the CWConv 
layer consist of wavelet kernels with different scale parameter 
and translation parameter  as is shown in Fig. 3. 
Input signal 
 Element -wise multiplication
Partial sum accumulation
 
L
 
Wavelet kernel
1()tu
s s− 

 Readable feature maps
 
Fig. 3. The convolution pro cess of the CWConv layer in CNN.  
Conversely, the proposed WKN  performs  the convolution  
operation  with a predefin ed function 
,us(t) that depends  on 
two learnable parameters  and s only, as denoted  in the 
following equation:  
 
,us h (t) x=  (7)                  
where t he predefined function 
,us(t) can be some wavelet 
functions with time -domain expressions, and here 
h  denotes 
the result of the CWConv operation.  

==== Page 4 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 4 
In the back -propagation (BP)  [40] process, the CWConv 
layer as the first layer only needs to update the parameters u, s, 
and we have:  
 
,
,
,
,k
kk
us kk
u k
k k k u s k
k
us kk
s k
k k k u s kH H z h
u z h u
H H z h
s z h s
     ==           ==      (8)  
 
k
kk k u
k k suu
ss
=−=−  (9)     
where 
 is the  derivative operator , 
,k
us  is the k-th wavelet filter 
of the first layer with length L, and
,kkus represent its 
translation parameter and scale parameter , respectively. The 
parameter u, s will be updated by subtracting the product of the 
learning rate
 and the gradient
 .  
For example, the partial derivative 
,us
u
 and 
,us
s
 of 
Morlet wavelet dictionary  [42] can be obtained by the following 
steps.   
First, the real part of Morlet wavelet  is expressed as  
 
2
2( ) cos(5 )t
t Ce t−=  (10) 
where C is the normalized constant of signal reconstruction.  
   Second,  a wavelet dictionary is obtained as  
 
2
2()
2
,1(t) cos(5 )t-u
s
ustuCes s− −=  (11) 
   Third, according to th e chain derivative rule, partial 
derivatives of parameter s and parameter u can be obtained, as 
shown below.   
2
2
2
2()
, 2
2
()
2= cos(5 )
5sin(5 )t-u
us s
t-u
sC t u t ueu s s s
C t uess s −
− −−

−+  (12) 
 
2
2
2
2
2
2()
, 2
3
() 2
2
3
()
2
2cos(5 )
2
()cos(5 )
5( )sin(5 )t-u
us s
t-u
s
t-u
sC t uess s
C t u t uess s
C t u t - uess s −
−
− −=−
−−+
−+  (13) 
Therefore, the updates of parameter s and parameter u of 
Morlet wavelet convolutional layer can be made by bringing 
,us
u

and 
,us
s
  into Eq . (8) and Eq . (9). 
III.  MACHINE FAULT DIAGNOSIS USING WAVELET KERNEL NET 
A machine fault diagnosis pipeline is proposed  in this section. 
The proposed pipeline  can automatically learn the fault features 
and identify the working state of the machine from the original 
vibration signals.  The overall procedure of the proposed 
mechanical fault diagnosis  pipeline  is shown in Fig. 4. 
 After  vibration signals are  acquired by sensors installed on 
machines during operation , they are truncated through a sliding 
window  to form a set of sub -time series, which are used as the 
input of WKN . As the main purpose of this paper is to explore 
the value and significance of the CWConv layer , a relatively 
shallow backbone  in Ref. [13] is used , where its first layer is 
replaced by CWConv . Finally, the  WKN is trained by the 
training dataset, and the  testing dataset is u tilized  to verify  the 
effectiveness  of WKN  for fault diagnosis task.  
Algorithm by applying WKN  for mechanical  fault diagnosis 
is summarized below . 
 
CWConv layer
  Data preprocessing Data acquisition
CWConv for vibration signals Fault recognition (Softmax )
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Feature maps The selected backboneData acquisition  device Rotating machinery 
A
B
C
D
Accelerometers
 
Fig. 4. General pipeline of mechanical fault diagnosis.  

==== Page 5 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 5 
Algorithm : WaveletKernelNet for mechanical fault 
diagnosis  
1. Data preprocessing:  Maximum -Minimum 
normalization  
2. Model preparation  
1) Select a CNN model as the backbone;  
2) Replace the first standard Conv layer by CWConv 
layer.  
3. Model training : 
Input: Collected vibration signal  dataset
 12, , ,n X x x x=
 with fault label
12y ,y , ,yn
  
1) Train WaveletKernelNet  with the dataset X; 
2) Use Eq. (9) to update the first layer of the model, and 
use BP algorithm to update other layers of the model.  
Output: the WaveletKernelNet . 
4. Model validation : 
Input: Validate set of the machine.  
Output: Fault category of the machine and classification 
accuracy.  
IV. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION  
To discuss the properties of WKN  and validate  its 
effectiveness, experiments on t hree datasets including bearing 
fault dataset, helical gear fault dataset  and aeroengine bevel 
gear fault dataset  were conducted . In addition, contrast  
experiments are also implemented  to compare the performance  
of the proposed method with the standard CNN.  
A. Bearing Fault Dataset  
3
1
shaft drivemotor1 2
7
8
23
46
accelerometer gearbox4
fault/driven gear inner structure of the gearbox6 7 8normal /driving gear5
load5transmission 
ratio: 75/55
 
Fig. 5. Experimental facility.  
The bearing fault dataset are acquired from the bearing fault 
simulation machine, shown in Fig. 5. The test machine  mainly 
consist  of the test machine drive motor, transmission part, gear 
fault simulation system, magnetic powder actuator, loading 
system, bearing fault simulation and dynamic balance 
simulation. The motor speed is controlled through the controller. 
This experiment main ly simulates the fault part of the bearing 
fault of the test bench.  
The test was performed on 3,0205  tapered roller bearing with 
six prefabricated fault locations , including  cage, rolling element, 
upper edge of outer ring, middle of outer ring, lower edge  of 
outer ring, and inner ring . Fig. 6  illustrates some of the 
prefabricated faults . Together with the fault -free bearings, there 
are seven types of labels in total.  In the experiment, the spindle speed was  1,200 r/min, and f or each fault type, 2 minutes o f 
vibration data with sampling rate of 96 kHz was collected.   
For data preparation, a sliding  window is used to truncate  the 
vibration signal without overlap and each data sample contains  
1,000 data points.  After data preparation, t he entire  dataset is 
splited  into training  dataset and testing  dataset , randomly . For 
each failure mode , it contains 7 ,474 data sample s for model 
training and 1 ,869 data sample s for model testing. Therefore, 
the training set have  52,318 data samples and the testing set 
have  13,083  data sample . 
In this 7 -class classification task, three kind of CWConv 
layer  are designed  as the first layer of WKN, they  are formed 
by Mexhat wavelet  [41], Morlet wavelet [42] and Laplace 
wavelet  [43], respectively . In comparative experiments , we 
added a comparison experiment using the sin function as the 
first layer filter.  In model  settings, the length of the wavelet 
filter set s to 16  and u se Adam  as the optimizer . To verify the 
network stability  and reduce the effects of the randomness, we 
take the average of 20 experimen tal results as the final result.  
The experimental results are shown in Table I and Fig. 7 .  
 
Fig. 6. Some f ault types of tapered roller bearings. (a) outer ring fault; (b) inner 
ring fault; (c) cage fault; (d)rolling element fault.  
As can be see n from these results, all the three types of 
WaveletKernelNet s are able to achieve a higher classification 
accuracy  and a smaller training loss  than the standard  CNN . 
Besides, we can see the Laplace WaveletNet achieves  the 
highest mean classification accuracy and has the fastest 
convergence speed among the three WaveletKernelNet s. 
However, the SinCNN gets the lowest classification accuracy 
and the slowest convergence speed.  
TABLE I. 
    CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF BEARING DATASET  
Model  Mean accuracy  Variance  
MexhatWaveletNet  92.61%  0 
Morlet WaveletNet  92.85%  0 
Laplace WaveletNet  99.91%  0 
CNN  89.59%  0.041  
SinCNN  86.72%  0.001  
 


==== Page 6 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 6 
Fig. 7 . Training loss on  bearing   dataset.  
B. Helical Gear Fault Dataset  
The helical gear fault dataset was gathered  from the gear fault 
simulation test rig as shown in Fig. 5. Vibration signals were 
collected while the rotating speeds increased from 1,000 to 
1,040 rpm . During this experiment, i t mainly  tested two kind s 
of faults on the helical gear of the input shaft, including  tooth 
surface wear and tooth root crack. Among them,  tooth surface 
wear contain s two failure modes and tooth root crack contain s 
four failure modes. Together with the normal state, there are 
totally seven failure modes, as shown in Fig. 8 . 
(b) (a) (c)
2mm 3mm 4mm(b) (d)
1mm
(e)
 (f)
0.5mm
0.5mm
0.5mm
Fig. 8. Helical gear failure mode. (a)~( d) are tooth root crack. (e)~(f) are tooth 
surface wear.  
Therefore, the helical gear fault diagnosis  is considered  as a 
7-class classification task. The experiment settings are the same 
with the aforementioned bearing fault experiment. For each 
failure mode, it has 964 data samples for  training, so for this 7-
class classification task , the total number of training samples  
are 6,748 and t he testing data set contains 1,687 data sample s. 
The e xperimental results are shown in Table II and Fig. 9 . As 
can be observed in those results, the mean classification 
accuracy of the three kind of WKN s are higher than traditional 
CNN and SinCNN. Besides, we can see t hat the convergence 
speed of SinCNN is still the slowest one.  
TABLE  II. 
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF HELICAL GEAR DATASET  
Model  Mean accuracy  Variance  
MexhatWaveletNet  94.72%  0 
Morlet WaveletNet  95.15%  0 
Laplace WaveletNet  97.59%  0 
CNN  83.45%  0.081  
SinCNN  77.21%  0.002  
 
Fig. 9. Training loss on helical gear dataset.  C. Aeroengine Bevel Gear Fault Dataset  
Bevel gears shown in Fig. 1 0(a), as one of the transmission 
compon ents of aero -engines, play a  critical role in the 
reliability of aero -engine operations.  In order to identify its 
failure mode, we collect ed data of four failure modes through 
the device shown in the Fig. 10(b) and Fig . 10(c). D uring th e 
engine test , vibration  signal s of bevel gear were  acquired  by 
fixing  acceleration sensors on the accessory casing 
corresponding to the bevel gear . Three different working 
conditions with rotating speed in creased from 500rpm to 
3,900rpm are investigated . 
(c)
 (b) Engine 
blade
Test 
bench
S1 S2
S3Accessory 
Gearbox
(a)
 
Fig. 10. Schematic diagram of the vibration test position of a certain aircraft 
engine accessory.  (a) Aeroengine bevel gear . (b) A turboprop engine  and, (c) 
sensor position layout.  
For each working condition, the dataset contains three failure 
types and one  health state,  that is, broken teeth  (BT) , tooth 
surface wear  (TSW) , overhaul after returning to the factory  
(OAF) , no fault  (NF) . Each fault mode  under the same 
conditions has 800 data samples for model training and 200 data 
samples for model testing, thus there are 3,200 samples in 
model  training and 800 samples for test in each experiment.  
The experimental results are shown in Table III. The PCA 
visualization of classification results of Laplace WaveletNet 
under four working conditions  is shown in Fig. 11.  
As can be seen in those  results, in each working condition 
our WKN  outperforms  the traditional CNN and SinCNN . In 
addition, it can be found  that the diagnostic accuracy of 
Laplace Wavelet Net is the highest one, which in turn indicates 
the Laplace Wavelet Net matches vibration components  of the 
aeroengine bevel gear very well . 
TABLE III. 
CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF AEROENGINE BEVEL GAR FAULT DATASET  
Working 
Condition  Model  Mean 
accuracy  Variance  
500rpm  Morlet WaveletNet  87.48%  0 
Mexhat WaveletNet  87.86%  0 
Laplace WaveletNet  98.85%  0 
CNN  80.58%  0.009  
 SinCNN  86.41%  0 
2000rpm Morlet WaveletNet  97.98%  0.001  
 MexhatWaveletNet  95.20%  0.006  
 Laplace WaveletNet  98.65%  0.001  
 CNN  94.58%  0.018  
 SinCNN  88.92%  0.005  
3900rpm  Morlet WaveletNet  94.89%  0 
MexhatWaveletNet  96.25%  0 
Laplace WaveletNet  99.42%  0 
CNN  91.97%  0.010  
 SinCNN  81.49%  0.004  


==== Page 7 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 7 
1st Component
1st Component(b)
(c)1st Component(a)2nd Component
2nd Component2nd ComponentOAFNFTSWBT
 
Fig. 1 1. PCA visualization of fault cl assification results in Laplace WaveletNet 
under  three  working conditions .(a) working condition:500rpm; (b) working 
condition: 2,000rpm;  (c) working condition: 3,900rpm.  
 
V. MODEL INTERPRETABILITY  
In this section, we will discuss the interpretability and the 
convergence speed of the WKN. The interpretability of WKN 
will be illustrated from two aspects, that is, visualization of the 
feature map o f CWConv layer and its waveforms, and the 
perspective of inner product matching.  
A. The Feature Map of CWConv L ayer and Its W aveform  
For a clear explanation of the CWConv layer , we use one data 
sample shown in Fig.12 as the input signal and discuss the 
differ ence between the feature map of three kinds of CWConv 
layer, traditional Conv layer and sin function filter. Moreover, 
the difference from their waveforms before training and after 
training  is illustrated afterwards .  
 
Fig. 1 2. Signal sample . 
In this experiment, the networks were first trained by the 
bearing fault dataset. Then, the signal sample is input to this 
trained network, and extract the feature maps of the target layer. 
The extracted feature maps and its kernel waveforms are shown 
in Fig. 1 3 and Fig. 1 4, respectively  . 
For simplicity, the feature map of MexhatConv layer, 
MorletConv layer, LaplaceConv layer, traditional Conv layer  
and sin function layer are denoted as MexFM,  MorFM, LapFM, 
TCFM, and SFM,  respectively.  
As can be seen from Fig. 13,  the energy  of MexFM and 
MorFM are  dispersed in each frequency band of the signal.  On the contrary, the LapFM, the TCFM  and the SFM are more 
concentrated in the impact portion of the signal.  However, t he 
position and energy of the impact can be more clearl y indicated 
on the LapFM.  This can explain  why LaplaceWaveletNet is 
able to  perform the best in the three data sets. 
Moreover , as can be seen  in Fig. 14 , the traditional  CNN does 
not always learn filters with a well -defined waveform , and the 
wave form  of the standard CNN looks noisy  in some cases  (see 
Fig. 14 (g) and Fig. 14 (h)). WKN , instead,  has a fixed waveform 
that allows the resulting filter to have multi -scale and multi -
resolution analysis capabilities through  continuously learning 
the scale param eter and time -shift parameter from raw data.  
Therefore, WKN  can match the input waveform very well and 
extract the characteristics of the signal effectively.  
 
Fig. 13. The feature map of traditional CNN, WaveletKernelNet and SinCNN . 
(a) The feature map of conventional Conv layer ; (b) The feature map of 
MorletWavelet layer ; (c) The first feature map of Mex hatWavelet layer ; (d) The 
feature map of LaplaceWavelet layer ; (e) The feature map of Sin function layer . 
(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g) (h)before training after training
 
Fig. 14. Waveform of WaveletKernelNet and CNN before and after training. 
(a), (b) are the first and last waveforms of Mexh hatWaveletNet. (c), (d) are the 


==== Page 8 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 8 
first and last waveforms of Morlet WaveletNet. (e), (f) are the first and last 
waveforms of La place Wavele t; (g),  (h) are the first and last waveforms of CNN.  
B. Inner Product Matching  
It can be observed from the previous experiment results that 
LapalceWaveletNet  performs the best  in the all those three 
datasets, while the SinCNN perform the worst. This can be 
explained  from the perspective of inner product matching .  
The main fault feature of the bearing and gear vibration 
signals are the periodic impulses . The Laplace wavelet is a kind 
of unilaterally attenuated wavelet which is mainly used to 
extract the features of t he impact signal. Therefore, the designed 
LaplaceWaveletNet can match the impact component of the 
signal well, thus it can make the first layer of WKN  extract 
more informative  high-dimensional features . However, sin 
function is mainly used to extract the c haracteristics  of 
stationary periodic signals, thus SinCNN can't match the impact 
component of the signal well. In deep neural network, t his 
inappropriate filter , not only does not extract  the valuable  
feature s, but also brings the wrong information, which makes 
the SinCNN  perform even worse than the standard CNN . 
C. Hyperparameter and The Convergence Speed  
In the conventional convolutional layer, the numb er of 
parameters to be learned are  the product of the number of filters 
F and the length L of the filter, that is, F x L. However, a 
CWConv layer would only require F x 2 parameters  (a scale 
parameter, and a translation parameter are sufficient for design 
of each filter). Therefore, the parameters to be learned in the 
CWConv layer are reduced compared with the conventional 
convolutional layer, thus greatly accelerating the c onvergence 
speed of the network, t he architecture comparison of CNN  and 
WKN  is shown in Table IV. 
TABLE IV. 
ARCHITECTURE COMPARISON  BETWEEN CNN  AND WAVELET KERNEL NET 
CNN  WKN 
Layer Output  Param  Layer Output  Param  
Conv_1d  1x100x985  1,700 CWConv  1x100x985  200 
Conv_1d  1x6x981  3,006 Conv_1d  1x6x981  3,006 
Conv_1d  1x16x486  496 Conv_1d  1x16x486  496 
Avg_pool  1x16x16  0 Avg_pool  1x16x16  0 
Linear -1 1x120  30,840  Linear -1 1x120  30,840  
Linear -2 1x84 10,164  Linear -2 1x84 10,164  
Linear -3 1x7 595 Linear -3 1x7 595 
VI. CONCLUSION  
In this paper, a continuous wavelet convolution layer is 
presented  to replace the first conventional convolution layer of 
the standard CNN  to provide  a solution to discover filters with 
certain  physical meaning. Application of the presented WKN  
structure to machine fault diagnosis demonstrates its 
effectiveness.  Conclusion s of this paper is summarized as: 1) 
Using the physically meaningful wavelet convolutional layer as 
the first layer of the CNN improves  the model interpretability;  
2) Accuracy of machine fault diagnosis  is enhanced  compared 
with the standard CNN  models, which indicates CWConv  layer 
is able to improve performance of DL models.  The experiment 
results show the CWConv layer is interpretable and has fewer 
parameters than standard Conv layer, which makes the WKN 
have faster convergence speed . REFERENCES  
[1] C. Sun, M. Ma, and Z. Zhao, “Deep Transfer Learning Based on Sparse 
Auto -encoder  for Remaining Useful Life Prediction of Tool in 
Manufacturing,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol. 15, 
no. 4, pp. 2416 -2425, Nov. 2019.  
[2] B. An, Z. Zao,  S. Wang, et al. “Sparsity -assisted bearing fault diagnosis 
using multiscale period group  lasso,” ISA Transactions , Sept. 201 9. 
[Online]. Available:  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/scien ce/article/pii/S001905781930388x . 
[3] C. Sun, M. Ma, Z. Zhao, and X. Chen, “Sparse Deep Stacking Network 
for Fault Diagnosis of Motor,” IEEE Transactions on Industr ial 
Informatics , vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 3261 -3270, Mar. 2018.  
[4] D. Lund, C. MacGillivray, V. Turner, and M. Morales, “Worldwide and 
regional internet of things (IoT) 2014 –2020 forecast: A virtuous circle of 
proven value and demand,” Int. Data Corp., Framingham , MA, 
USA,Tech . Rep, 2014.  
[5] Z. Chen, and W. Li, “Multisensor Feature Fusion for Bearing Fault 
Diagnosis Using Sparse Auto -encoder and Deep Belief Network,” IEEE 
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 
1693 -1702, 2017.  
[6] Jiang, Li , J. Xuan , and T. Shi . "Feature extraction based on semi -
supervised kernel Marginal Fisher analysis and its application in bearing 
fault diagnosis," Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 41, no. 
2, pp. 113 -126, Dec. 2013.  
[7] H. Qiao , Z. J. He, et al. "Intelligent Fault Diagnosis in Power Plant Using 
Empirical Mode Decomposition, Fuzzy Feature Extraction and Support 
Vector Machines," Key Engineering Materials , vols. 293 -294, pp. 373 -
382, Sept. 2005.  
[8] B. Chen, X. Chen, B. Li, Z. He, H. Cao, a nd G. Cai, “Reliability 
estimation for cutting tools based on logistic regression model using 
vibration signals,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 25, 
no. 7, pp. 2526 -2537, Oct. 2011.  
[9] M. Ma, C. Sun, X. Chen, “Discriminative Deep Belief Networ ks with 
Ant Colony Optimization for Health Status Assessment of Machine,” 
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 66, no. 12, 
pp.  3115 -3125, Aug. 2017.  
[10] H. Shao, H. Jiang, and H. Zhang, “Electric Locomotive Bearing Fault 
Diagnosis Using a Novel Convolutional Deep Belief Network,” IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 2727 -2736,  
Aug. 2018.  
[11] M. Ma, Y. Qin, M. Haile, and Z.  Mao "Direct waveform extraction via a 
deep recurrent denoising autoencoder", Nondestructive C haracterization 
and Monitoring of Advanced Materials, Aerospace, Civil Infrastructure, 
and Transportation XIII , vol. 10971, Apr. 2019 . 
[12] L. Wen, L. Gao, X. Li, “A New Deep Transfer Learning Based on Sparse 
Auto -Encoder for Fault Diagnosis ,” IEEE Transactions  on Systems, Man, 
and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 136 -144, Jan. 2019.  
[13] L. C, Yann , K. Koray , et al. "Convolutional Networks and Applications 
in Vision," Proceedings of 2010 IEEE International Symposium on 
Circuits and Systems , DOI: 10.1109/ISCAS.2010.5537907, May, 2010.  
[14] A. Kamel, B. Sheng , P.  Yang , et al.  “Deep Convolutional Neural 
Networks for Human Action Recognition Using Depth Maps and 
Postures ,”  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: 
Systems , vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1 806-1819, Sept. 2019.  
[15] H. Wang, S. Li, L. Song, “A novel convolutional neural network based 
fault recognition method via image fusion of multi -vibration -signals,” 
Computers in Industry , vol.  105, pp.  182-190, Feb. 2019.  
[16] J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neu ral networks: An overview,” 
Neural Networks , vol. 61, pp. 85 –117, Jan. 2015.  
[17] R. Socher, Y. Bengio, and C. D. Manning, “Deep learning for NLP 
(without magic),” in Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2012. Stroudsburg, 
PA,USA: Association for Computational Linguistics , pp. 5 –5, Jul. 2012,  
[18] G. Hinton, “Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech 
recognition: The shared views of four research groups,” IEEE Signal 
Processing Magazine , vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82 –97, Nov. 2012.  
[19] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hin ton, “Imagenet classification 
with deep convolutional neural networks,” Proceedings of the 25th 
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 
vol. 1, pp. 1097 –1105. Jan. 2012  
[20] W. Long, "A New Convolutional Neural Network Based Data -Driven 
Fault Diagnosis Method," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , 
vol. 65, no.  7, pp. 5990 -5998, Jul. 2018.  
[21] P. Jun, Y. Zi, "LiftingNet: A Novel Deep Learning Network with 
Layerwise Feature Learning from Noisy Mechanical Data for Fault 

==== Page 9 ====
*This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, 
after which this version may no longer be accessible . 9 
Classification," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics , vol. 65, no. 
6, pp. 4973 -4982, Jun. 2018.  
[22] D. Peng, Z. Liu, H. Wang, " A Novel Deeper One -Dimensional CNN with 
Residual Learning for Fault Diagnosis of Wheelset Bearings in High -
Speed Trains," IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 10278 -10293, Dec. 2018.  
[23] L. Eren , T. Ince, S. Kiranyaz “A Generic Intelligent Bearing Fault 
Diagnosis System U sing Compact Adaptive 1D CNN Classifier ,” 
Journal of Signal Processing Systems , vol. 91 , no. 2, pp. 179-189, Feb. 
2019 . 
[24] F. Jia, Y . Lei, Na Lu , et al. "Deep normalized convolutional neural 
network for imbalanced  fault classification of machinery and its 
understanding via  visualization,"  Mechanical Systems and Signal 
Processing , vol.  110, pp. 349 -367, 2018 . 
[25] Y. Yang, P. Fu, Y. He, "Bearing Fault Automatic Classification Based 
on Deep Learning," IEEE Access , vol.  6, pp. 71540 -71554, Nov. 2018 . 
[26] X. Ding, and Q . He, “Energy -fluctuated multiscale feature learning with 
deep convnet for intelligent spindle bearing fault diagnosis,” IEEE 
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 
1926 -1935, Mar. 2017.  
[27] Alekseev, Andrey, and A. Bobe, "GaborNet: Gabor filters with learnable 
parameters in deep convolutional neural networks," arXiv:1904.13204, 
2019,  
[28] J. Grezmak, P. Wang, C. Sun, R. Gao “Explainable Convolutional Neural 
Network for Gearbox Fault Diagnosis,”  26th CIRP Life Cycle 
Engineering (LCE) Conference , vol.  80,pp.  476-481,2019.  
[29] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, "Learning Deep Features for 
Discriminative Localization," 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition , DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.3 19, Dec. 
2016.  
[30] Zeiler, Matthew D, and R. Fergus, "Visualizing and Understanding 
Convolutional Networks," Nov. 2013, arXiv:1311.2901.  
[31] M. Bojarski, P. Yeres, A. Choromanska, “Explaining how a deep neural 
network trained with end -to-end learning steers a car .,” 
arXiv:1704.07911, Apr. 2017.  
[32] M. Ravanelli, and Y. Bengio, "Speaker Recognition from Raw 
Waveform with SincNet," Dec. 2018, arXiv:1812.05920 . 
[33] J. Gu, “Recent advances in convolutional neural networks,” 
arXiv:1512.07108 , Dec. 2015.  
[34] G. E. Hinton, N. Srivas tava, A. Krizhevsky, “Improving neural networks 
by preventing co -adaptation of feature d etectors,” Jul. 2012, 
arXiv:1207.0580 . 
[35] R. Yan, R. Gao, “Wavelet transform:a mathematical tool for non -
stationary signal processing,” IEEE Instrumentation and Measuremen t 
Magazine , vol. 12, no. 5, pp.  34-44, Oct. 2009.   
[36] C. Li, M. Liang, “A generalized synchrosqueezing transform for 
enhancing signal time –frequency representation”, Signal Processing , vol. 
92, no. 9, pp. 2264 -2274, Sept. 2012.  
[37] K. Zhu, W.Y. San, G.S. Hong, “ Wavelet analysis of sensor signals for 
tool condition monitoring: a review and some new results,” International 
Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture , vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 537 –553, 
Jun. 2009.  
[38] O. Rioul, M. Vetterli, “Wavelets and signal processing,” IEEE Signal 
Processing Magazine , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 14 -38, Oct. 1991.  
[39] L. R. Rabiner, R. W. Schafer, “Theory and Applications of Digital 
Speech Processing,” NJ, Upper Saddle River:Prentice -Hall, Apr. 2010. 
[Online]. Available:   
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/6 6d6/0f4118a8b3992afbe6a8308ff90b
3925b073.pdf  
[40] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning internal 
representations by error propagation. Neurocomputing: foundations of 
research,” MIT Press , pp. 567, 1988.  
[41] Argüeso, Francisco, “The Mexican Hat Wavelet Family. Application to 
the study of non -Gaussianity in cosmic microwave backgound maps,” 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , vol. 369, no. 4, pp. 
1603 -1610, Jul. 2011.  
[42] W. Liu, B. Tang, “A hybrid time –frequency method based on impro ved 
Morlet wavelet and auto terms window,” Expert Systems with 
Applications , vol. 38, no.6, pp. 7575 –7581, Jun, 2011.  
[43] K.F. Al -Raheem, A. Roy, K.P. Ramachandran, “Application of the 
Laplace -wavelet combined with ANN for rolling bearing fault diagnosis,” 
Journal of Vibration and Acoustics , vol. 130, pp. 1 –9, 2008.  
 
 
  

