==== Page 1 ====
TYPEOriginal Research
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/seven.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
DOI/one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
OPENACCESS
EDITEDBY
Annette Kluge,
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany
REVIEWEDBY
Benedikt Leichtmann,
Johannes Kepler University of Linz, Austria
Marcus Grum,
University of Potsdam, Germany
*CORRESPONDENCE
Athanasios Mazarakis
ama@informatik.uni-kiel.de
Christian Bernhard-Skala
bernhard-skala@die-bonn.de
Martin Braun
martin.braun@iao.fraunhofer.de
Isabella Peters
ipe@informatik.uni-kiel.de
RECEIVED /one.tnum/one.tnum July /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
ACCEPTED /zero.tnum/five.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
PUBLISHED /two.tnum/seven.tnum October /two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum
CITATION
Mazarakis A, Bernhard-Skala C, Braun M and
Peters I (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum) What is critical for
human-centered AI at work? – Toward an
interdisciplinary theory.
Front. Artif. Intell. /six.tnum:/one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum.
doi: /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
COPYRIGHT
©/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum Mazarakis, Bernhard-Skala, Braun and
Peters. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons AttributionLicense (CC BY) . Theuse,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that
the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these
terms.What is critical for
human-centered AI at work? –
Toward an interdisciplinary theory
Athanasios Mazarakis/one.tnum*, Christian Bernhard-Skala/two.tnum*,
Martin Braun/three.tnum*and Isabella Peters/one.tnum*
/one.tnumZBW – Leibniz Information Centre for Economics, Web Science, Kiel, Germany,/two.tnumDepartment of
Organisation and Program Planning, German Institute for Adult Edu cation - Leibniz Centre for Lifelong
Learning, Bonn, Germany,/three.tnumFraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering, User Experie nce, Stuttgart,
Germany
Human-centered artiﬁcial intelligence (HCAI) has gained moment um in the
scientiﬁc discourse but still lacks clarity. In particular, discipli nary diﬀerences
regarding the scope of HCAI have become apparent and were criticized,
calling for a systematic mapping of conceptualizations—especia lly with regard
to the work context. This article compares how human factors and ergon omics
(HFE), psychology, human-computer interaction (HCI), informa tion science, and
adult education view HCAI and discusses their normative, theo retical, and
methodologicalapproachestowardHCAI,aswellastheimplication sforresearch
and practice. It will be argued that an interdisciplinary approach is cr itical for
developing, transferring, and implementing HCAI at work. Ad ditionally, it will be
shown that the presented disciplines are well-suited for concept ualizing HCAI
and bringing it into practice since they are united in one aspect: t hey all place
the human being in the center of their theory and research. Many cri tical aspects
for successful HCAI, as well as minimum ﬁelds of action, were furthe r identiﬁed,
such as human capability and controllability (HFE perspective) , autonomy and
trust (psychology and HCI perspective), learning and teaching de signs across
targetgroups(adulteducationperspective),asmuchasinforma tionbehaviorand
informationliteracy(informationscienceperspective).Assu ch,thearticlelaysthe
ground for a theory of human-centered interdisciplinary AI, i. e., the Synergistic
Human-AISymbiosisTheory(SHAST),whoseconceptualframeworkandf ounding
pillars will be introduced.
KEYWORDS
artiﬁcialintelligence,interdisciplinary,HCAI,humanfac torsandergonomics,information
science,human-computerinteraction(HCI),adulteducatio n,psychology
/one.tnum. Introduction
The excitement around artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is sparking a ﬂurry of activity by
researchers, developers, business leaders, and policy-makers worldwide. The promise of
groundbreaking advances from machine learning and other algorithms drives discussions
and attracts huge investments in, e.g., medical, manufacturing, and military innovations
(Shneiderman, 2022 ). However, much of the debate in society is associated with aspects
of whether or not AI will replace people in business activities ( Del Giudice et al.,
2023). In addition, trust in AI systems, transparency, and explaining such systems is not
straightforwardtoendusers( Laatoetal.,2022 ).
In a survey in Germany in May 2023, 46% of 1,220 respondents considered AI
technologies to be more of a risk for them personally, while only 39% saw opportunities in
AIsolutions.However,opennesstothesenewtechnologiesdecreaseswithageandincreases
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 2 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
with education: most younger people up to age 34 see AI as an
opportunity, as do individuals with a university degree ( Infratest
dimap,2023 ).Theresultsofprevioussurveysconductedworldwide
areconﬁrmed,althoughtheresultsdiﬀergreatlydependingonthe
economicdevelopmentineachcountry( Ipsos,2022 ).
More particularly, in the workplace, there is a risk of creating
a defeatist mentality among the employees when ignoring human
aspectsofAIimplementation.Similarexamplesexistfromthepast,
e.g., knowledge management faced the same challenges around
individual,organizational,andtechnologicalbarriers( Riege,2005 ).
Nevertheless, it is argued that high levels of human control and
automation are likely to simultaneously empower people and not
just emulate humans ( Shneiderman, 2020 ). The idea of human
centeredness in AI implementation binds these critical research
resultstogether.
Artiﬁcial intelligence is, by deﬁnition, a sequence of
mathematical models created by humans, which are executed
by computers. The OECD deﬁnes AI more precisely: “An AI
system is a machine-based system that can, for a given set of
human-deﬁnedobjectives,makepredictions,recommendations,or
decisions inﬂuencing real or virtual environments. [...] AI systems
are designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy” ( OECD.,
2019,p.23–24).Thisisareﬁnementofthedeﬁnitionof McCarthy
(2007, p. 2), in which AI is deﬁned as “[...] the science and
engineering of making intelligent machines, especially intelligent
computer programs. It is related to the similar task of using
computerstounderstandhumanintelligence,butAIdoesnothave
toconﬁneitselftomethodsthatarebiologicallyobservable.”
In general, Artiﬁcial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) and Artiﬁcial
General Intelligence (AGI) are distinguished. An AGI system
would be an autonomous agent that can learn unsupervised
(McLean et al., 2021 ). ANI has achieved enormous success in
determined situations with a low-dimensional phase space, such
as strategy games ( Lenzen, 2019 ). However, the methodology of
ANI performance can only be applied to a limited range of tasks
(LandgrebeandSmith,2022 ).
The organization of working processes may proﬁt from a
design approach that integrates human and technical intelligence.
Such an organization is achieved, among other things, when
humans and machines can use their speciﬁc skills and when
humans and machines mutually support each other in gaining
capabilities ( Braun, 2017 ). In this sense, human-centered AI
(HCAI) already consists of a set of standards, concepts, and
principles, like e.g., fairness, accountability, beneﬁcence, justice,
and explicability, to name a few ( Huchler et al., 2020 ). However,
these principles are not consistently implemented in practice
because of competing goals of productivity and cost-cutting,
which has been a traditional challenge of HFE ( Spitzley,
1980).
The present article aims at setting the foundations for
an interdisciplinary theory of human-centered AI. For this,
the article reﬂects in Section 6.2 on learnings from an
interdisciplinary research project, which is considered as
a demonstrator. This demonstrator combines normative,
theoretical, and methodological concepts from human factors
and ergonomics (HFE), psychology, human-computer interaction
(HCI), information science, and adult education to study AI
atwork.The article introduces each discipline’s perspective on human-
centricity and AI at work. It discusses the implications for
developing, transferring, and implementing AI at the workplace,
including disciplines not yet in the spotlight about HCAI at
work. By explaining the fruitful interplay of these disciplines
and how they contribute to human-centricity, we will ultimately
argue that a theory of human-centered AI will immensely beneﬁt
from incorporating critical concepts, norms, and theories from
the presented disciplines as well as from an interdisciplinary
approach.Thisarticle,therefore,shedslightondiﬀerentco-existing
perspectives on and criteria of human-centered AI and will show
how they can be meaningfully integrated to answer the research
question of what is critical for human-centered AI at work . So far,
thishasonlybeenconductedfor,e.g.,socialsciences( Miller,2019 )
and thus has not acknowledged or even included more diverse
disciplines.However,manyauthorshaveidentiﬁedanurgentneed
forcollaborationacrossdisciplinesforhumanstakeholders,e.g.,for
explainable AI ( Langer et al., 2021 ). This article contributes to this
research gap by introducing views from heterogeneous disciplines
witheitherafocusonindividuals,suchaspsychology,orafocuson
technology,suchasHCI.
Moreover, the article leverages insights from disciplines that
are either primarily concerned with a work context, such as HFE,
or disciplines that study the work context as one research object
amongst others, such as adult learning and information science.
Furthermore, it systematizes results from the diﬀerent disciplines
byusingtheﬁveperspectivesonhuman-centricityby Wilkensetal.
(2021).Inaddition,itidentiﬁesﬁeldsofactionforhuman-centered
AI implementation—such as supporting balanced workload,
information literacy, providing tailored learning opportunities
for low-skilled workers, enhancing technology acceptance, and
building trust. By that, it ﬁnally sets the foundation for a
synergistic human-AI symbiosis theory, which includes these
aspects of AI implementation. Overall, this article is written for an
interdisciplinary readership interested in human-centered AI. As
a result, this article has more of an explorative, descriptive, and
conceptualcharacter.
/two.tnum. Supporting balanced workload:
HCAI in human factors and
ergonomics
Humanfactorsandergonomics(HFE)hasdevelopedconcepts
and principles for work design, especially for human-technology
interaction. These concepts can be applied to AI systems in terms
of a division of functions between humans and AI. The principles
ofHFEinhibitamutuallyreinforcingrelationshipbetweenhumans
andAIbasedoncapabilitiesandethicaldesignprinciples.
/two.tnum./one.tnum. Deﬁning ergonomics and illustrating
the methodology
Ergonomics is the scientiﬁc discipline concerned with the
understanding of interactions among humans and other elements
of a system; ergonomics is also the profession that applies theory,
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 3 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
principles, data, and methods to design in order to optimize
humanwellbeingandoverallsystemperformance( IEA,2000 ).The
termsergonomics andhumanfactors areoftenusedinterchangeably
or as a unit (HFE). Domains of HFE are physical ergonomics
(i.e., human anthropometric, physiological, and biomechanical
characteristics as they relate to work), cognitive ergonomics (i.e.,
concerningmentalprocesses),andorganizationalergonomics(i.e.,
optimization of socio-technical systems, including their structures
and processes). HFE is a multidisciplinary, human-centered
integrating science that is not domain-speciﬁc ( ILO and IEA,
2021). HFE encompasses not only safety and health but also the
cognitiveandpsycho-socialaspectsatwork.Additionally,HFEcan
focus on micro ergonomic design aspects—including the design
of the procedures, the context, and the equipment and tools used
to perform tasks—as well as macro ergonomic design aspects—
including the work organization, types of jobs, technology, work
roles, and communication ( Wilson, 2014 ). Through their work
activity, human beings acquire experiences about physical and
social, external as well as internal reality, and they change by
self-reﬂection( Schön,1983 ).
A socio-technical “work system” is part of a work process in
which a task is accomplished. Through the interaction of working
humans with work equipment, the function of the system is
fulﬁlledwithintheworkspaceandworkenvironmentunderspeciﬁc
workingconditions( ISO6385,2016 ).“Workdesign”isacollective
term for measures for the purposeful and systematic design of
work objects, work processes, and working conditions. The aim
of work design is the optimal fulﬁllment of work tasks, taking
into account human development requirements and economic
eﬃciency ( Dyckhoﬀ, 2006 ). In order to increase productivity,
work design is based on the rational principle of labor division
and the systematization of work processes. The division of labor
supports specialization, which makes it possible to use machines
and automate work processes. Work design determines which
functions are automated and which remain with humans ( Baxter
and Sommerville, 2011 ). The systematization of work sequences
aims at their method-based optimization ( Schlick et al., 2018 ).
Since the division of labor goes along with external supply and a
loss of autonomy, the social dimension of human-centered work
seems to be indispensable; it is expressed, among other things,
in committed cooperation, fair work relationships, and learning
opportunities( Ulich,2011 ).
/two.tnum./two.tnum. Human-centered work design and
interactive human-technology systems
Human-centered work design refers to a problem-solving
approach from a human perspective and the interactions of the
working human with technical and organizational factors. One
application focus concerns interactive human-technology systems
(i.e.,interactiondesign).Forthispurpose,knowledgeandmethods
fromhumanfactors,ergonomics,usability,anduserexperienceare
applied. Human-centered design criteria are documented in legal
regulations,standards,andrules( Karwowskietal.,2021 ).
Human-centered work is characterized by balanced workload
situations in order to avoid over-and under-strain and thusto promote performance, job satisfaction, and learning ( Schlick
et al., 2018 ). Work activities should not harm the health of
the working person, should not-or at most temporarily-impair
their wellbeing, meet their needs, enable individual and collective
inﬂuenceonworkingconditionsandworksystems,andcontribute
to the development of their personality in the sense of promoting
their capability potentials and competencies ( Ulich, 2011 ). Design
dimensions include work content, time, process, conditions,
workplace,orequipment.
Concerning the design of interactive human-technology
systems,ISO 9241-2 (1992) Part 2 speciﬁes the human-centered
requirements of user orientation, variety, holism, meaningfulness,
thescopeforaction,socialsupport,anddevelopmentopportunity.
InISO 9241-110 (2020) Part 110 (interaction principles), the
human-centered design criteria of task appropriateness, self-
describability, expectation conformity, learnability, controllability,
error robustness, and user binding of technical systems are
concretized. ISO 9241-210 (2019) Part 210 (Human-centered
design for interactive systems) emphasizes the user experience,
whichdescribesthefunctionalandemotionalimpressionsofauser
when interacting with a product or service. If users’ requirements
aremetinausefulway,itispleasanttouseaproduct.
/two.tnum./three.tnum. Human work and human factors
Technical rationalization measures aim to raise work
productivity and reduce costs also by substituting the human
workforce with machines. Such automation eﬀorts can aﬀect both
physical and mental work. To automate sophisticated forms of
work that were previously preserved by humans, the use of AI
aims to imitate human intelligence ( Landgrebe and Smith, 2022 ).
In order to assess the extent to which AI can explain, predict, and
inﬂuencehumanbehaviorrequiresHFEexpertise.
Humans represent a physical, biological, social, and mental
entity. They are generally aware that they have a perception, a
mind, and a will. A basic requirement of human existence is to
access the natural and social environment through interpretive
understanding to gain meaning. In communicating with other
humans and interacting with the environment, humans gain
a deep understanding of the world ( Bender and Kolle, 2020 ).
On this basis, they can act purposefully even in the face of
incomplete and contradictory information ( Wilkens et al., 2014 ),
transfer existing experiential knowledge to new contexts through
the understanding of meaning, adopt diﬀerent perspectives, and
anticipate the consequences of their actions. However, the world
can only be understood through knowledge of concepts and
symbols that emanate from human intelligence ( Whorf, 1963 ).
Human intelligence is a complex neurological capacity including
reasoning, memory, consciousness, emotions, will, intention, and
moral judgment. Humans can take responsibility for acting
solidaristicandmorally( Böhle,2009 ).Suchsubjectiveandimplicit
competenciesarethebasisofknowledgeandinnovationwork:
•“Knowledgework”referstotheexecutionofworkordersthat
are to be carried out according to available (un-) complete
rules that the working person knows. Knowledge includes
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 4 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
explicit or implicit components that guide action but cannot
beverbalized.
•“Innovation work” refers to problem-ﬁnding and problem-
solving work assignments in which the goal and the path to
achieving the goal are not predetermined. Innovation work
includes unplannable or poorly plannable, unpredictable
intellectual performances, prognostic intellectual
performances that do not have precisely deﬁned goals,
and diagnostic intellectual performances for which no
algorithms can exist because it is unclear what is being
searchedforintheﬁrstplace( Hacker,2018 ).
ThereisincreasedinteresttosubstituteknowledgeworkbyAI.
However, as expected, signiﬁcant aspects of innovation work will
remainwithhumansinthefuture( Hacker,2018 ).
/two.tnum./four.tnum. HFE design criteria for HCAI
HCAIencompassesindividualsafety,thetrustworthinessofAI
operation, an appropriate division of functions between humans
and machines, and conducive working conditions ( Huchler et al.,
2020). Insofar as AI applications contribute to the automation of
knowledge work, the design criteria of conduciveness to learning
andsocialcompatibilitytakeonincreasedimportance.
HCAI ties in with the human capabilities and places the
mutual reinforcement of humans and AI at the center of
their interaction. Such reinforcement will be reached through a
complementarydivisionoffunctionsbetweenhumansandAIthat
takes into account the diﬀerences between human capabilities and
technicalfunctionalities( Rammert,2009 ).Thecoreprincipleofthe
complementarydivisionoffunctionsstrivesforhigherproductivity
and adaptivity through a lower overall degree of automation with
increasing partial automation and systematic integration of the
capabilities of the working human ( Huchler, 2022 ). In order to
cope with the uncertainties of work systems, human options of
control are extended, e.g., by informal work actions and work-
integrated learning processes. Appropriate competencies are to be
maintainedbydesigningtheinteractionbetweenhumansandAIin
alearner-friendlyway( Groteetal.,2000 ).
Regarding the social responsibility of AI applications, ethical
aspects need to be clariﬁed. Ethics focuses on speciﬁcally moral
action, especially with regard to its justiﬁability and reﬂection
(Bostrom and Yudkowsky, 2013 ). In AI use, ethical questions are
concretized in the phenomena of uncertainty and social inequality
(BrynjolfssonandMcAfee,2012 ):
•Uncertainty: Purposes of the use of technology are not or
not exclusively achieved, i.e., the relationship between
means and ends is not always comprehensible; this
manifests in insuﬃcient transparency, comprehensibility,
and manageability, as well as the irreversibility of
decision-makingprocesses.
•Social inequality: The people who suﬀer harm are not the
beneﬁciaries; inequality aﬀects personal and informational
autonomy in the use of data, the possibility of personal
development, decision-making power, and the economic
exploitationofworkresults.WhendesigningHCAIsystems,ethicalrulesshouldensurethat
human autonomy of decision and action is preserved with moral
intent(Floridietal.,2018 ).Currently,AIisnotyetcomprehensively
capable of making moral decisions. Moral principles are instead
speciﬁed by humans and implemented in the form of algorithms
that can lead to morally grounded actions as a result. An essential
principleofhuman-centereddesignispreservingandappropriately
usingthesemoralmeansofcontrolandaccess( Bülchmann,2020 ).
Thisalsorelatestothehumaninﬂuenceofexitpoints,ifnecessary.
Bostrom and Yudkowsky (2013) recommend four ethical
design principles of HCAI: An HCAI functioning should be (1)
comprehensible and (2) its actions predictable in principle; there
should be suﬃcient time for users to react and veto control in the
event of a potential malfunction. HCAI should (3) not be easily
manipulated, and if a malfunction does occur, (4) responsibility
shouldbeclearlydeﬁned.
HFE traditionally incorporates a variety of perspectives on
humanwork.Inthischapter,manymethodsanddeﬁnitionsofHFE
were presented, which are also relevant to the other disciplines.
HFE has a pragmatic concept for the design of work systems,
processes, and tools, including AI, some of which are documented
in regulations and standards. Knowledge of these methods and
deﬁnitions is cross-disciplinary relevant, and not limited to HFE,
andadditionallynecessarytopreparetheimplementationofHCAI
atwork.
/three.tnum. Information is the key: HCAI in
information science
Thetopic“human-centeredAI”hasnotgainedmuchattention
in information science; even “human-centricity” is not a much-
discussed concept due to how information science’s central object
of study — information — is conceptualized and deﬁned. In
the following, it will be argued that there is no need to be
explicit about “human-centricity” because, for one, information
does not exist outside of human beings, and second, information
behavioriscentraltothedevelopmentandevolutionofhumans.If
human-centered AI systems are considered information systems,
then several implications can be deduced for their design and
handling from this argumentation. Overall, there are three ways
how information science can conceptually approach human-
centeredAI:
(1) The meta-level that discusses HCAI against the discipline’s
pragmaticunderstandingofinformation.
(2) The information behavior perspective, which is considered
central to human life and that leads to the creation of
usermodels.
(3) Theliteracyaspectthatreﬂectsontheskillshumansneedto
handleAIsuccessfully.
/three.tnum./one.tnum. The meta-level: what is information?
In the literature, information is often characterized by using
the Semiotic Triangle by Charles Sanders Peirce since it has
been argued that information is the basis for the communicative
action (in the sense of information as a message, information
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 5 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
as a state) and a communicative act itself (in the sense of
exchanging knowledge/being informed, as a process; Henrichs,
2014). Accordingly, information has a triadic structure consisting
ofthefollowing:
•Object,meaningoftheinformationorsemantics,
•Sign(s)/syntax ,signalsfororphysicalcarrierofknowledgeand
formal-syntacticrepresentationofsigns,and
•Interpretant ,user/usageofinformation,orpragmatics.
Thisstructureisdynamicalsinceformingtherelationsbetween
the parts always entails some sort of transmission. The structure
is also relational, which results in the need to consider all
three parts of the triangle simultaneously when referring to
information since they are linked inseparably. Information science
deals with all three aspects of information, leading to multi-
and interdisciplinary studies with, e.g., computer science (that
mostly focuses on the signal part, for example, when building
digital libraries) or linguistics (focusing on the object part,
for example when constructing ontologies or other knowledge
organization systems). The most fruitful — and therefore most
central — avenue for information science concerns, however,
the pragmatics of information, which focuses on the human
part of information processing and how humans make use
of information. In a nutshell, information science seeks to
understand how and for what reasons humans need, gather,
and use information. It primarily asks from the interpretant
point of view: What is information used for? Which actions are
possible with that information, and what do humans need to
actproperly?
This understanding of information diﬀers from the deﬁnition
used in, e.g., computer science or telematics that focuses on
the signal and disregards the meaning of the information
(Shannon, 2001 ). Information science considers knowledge as
the raw material for the creation of information — knowledge
is possible information ( Rauch, 1988 ), and information is a
manifestation or representation of knowledge ( Kuhlen, 2004 ).
Since (formless) knowledge, which exists independently from
signals, needs to be brought into a (physical) form to be
transmitted ( Stock and Stock, 2015 ), it can be argued that
“information is a thing — knowledge is not” ( Jones, 2010 ).
If humans use that potential information for further action,
information materializes. In general, information is used to
decrease the amount of uncertainty a human experiences ( Wersig,
1974).
Therefore, information depends on the context in which
humans perceive it, and it can be diﬀerent with diﬀerent
contexts and diﬀerent humans. Humans construct information by
decoding the signal — information does not just exist (whereas
knowledge exists even without signals; Stock and Stock, 2015 ).
This construction takes place in social environments and via
means of communication. The recent popularity of ChatGPT and
generative language models for AI, as well as how interaction (or
communication)withthosesystemshasbeendesigned,isreﬂective
of the relevance of communication in information processes and
forinformationbehavior./three.tnum./two.tnum. Information behavior and user
modeling: traces toward the human
perspective
Reﬂections on the concept of information and studies on
how humans engage with information have mutually inﬂuenced
each other, developing a shared understanding of the subject.
Information behavior research, as a sub-discipline of information
science, is concerned with how and why humans interact
with information in diﬀerent informational contexts, including
how they use, create, and seek information ( Bates, 2017 ),
actively or passively ( Wilson, 2000 ), individually, collectively, or
collaboratively ( Reddy and Jansen, 2008 ). Information non-use,
such as information avoidance ( Golmann et al., 2017 ), is also part
of the research agenda as well as information sharing, (personal)
information management, information practices, information
experiences,andinformationdiscovery( GreifenederandSchlebbe,
2023).
It is remarkable that, similarly to the triadic structure that
considers the human, the interpretant, an inseparable part of
information ,theconceptof HumanInformationBehavior wasnever
adopted by the research community ( Bates, 2017 ). Information
behavior research underwent several so-called conceptual and
methodological turns that are also reﬂective of the increasing
relevance and attention the human being has been attributed
over the years: from understanding which information sources
and systems humans use to gather information, learning about
the information need that motivates humans to interact with
information(cognitiveturn)andtheiremotionsinvolved(aﬀective
turn), to the role of socio-cultural contexts (socio-cognitive turn)
and habitualized information practices (social-constructionist
turn) (Hartel, 2019 ). Information behavior can only be exposed by
humans — manifesting their (for outsiders’ implicit) relevance for
informationscienceagain.
This also becomes apparent by one central activity of
information behavior, i.e., the humans’ engagement in looking
for information. Case and Given (2016) emphasize that from
birth onwards, humans are prompted to seek information to
meet their fundamental needs. Information needs are driven by
those fundamental needs, often because the human recognizes
a lack of information to meet the fundamental needs ( Stock
and Stock, 2015 ). Information seeking behavior is activated
by concrete information needs and is, therefore, active and
intentional ( Case and Given, 2016 ). If a computer or IT system
is used to look for information, then Wilson(1999) speaks of
InformationSearching.
Informationbehaviorresearchisnotagoalinitself—likeother
disciplines,itseekstoadvanceinformationsystemstotoolsthatcan
be easily and eﬃciently used, that automatically adapt to changing
situations, and that are adaptable to the needs of their users
(Elbeshausen, 2023 ;Lewandowski and Womser-Hacker, 2023 ).
As has been argued, understanding information and information
behavioralwaysrequiresknowledgeabouthumans,e.g.,usersofan
AI system. The complexity of information behavior often prevents
the use of quantitative or statistical methods, so that qualitative
methodsarethemainapproach.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 6 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
User modeling is an important activity in this regard,
which aims to describe individual users to enable, for example,
personalization of search results or groups of typical users that
share certain characteristics (e.g., novices and experts). Latter
is often realized via personas that represent typical users of a
system with very concrete properties (an approach sometimes
criticized for replicating stereotypes; Marsden and Haag, 2016 ). If
the information system targets a broad user base, user modeling
can be a tough challenge since there is not only a large, diverse
group of (possible) users, but user behavior is also dynamic and
can change while using the system for particular tasks or over
time.Humansadjustinformationalpractices,tactics,andbehavior
dynamically to match contexts and to maximize the amount of
information they can get, e.g., by changing search terms ( Pirolli
andCard,1999 ).Inadditiontotheinformationalenvironmentand
contexts,theinformationbehaviorofapersonisalsoconnectedto
their personality ( Lewandowski and Womser-Hacker, 2023 ). The
principleofleasteﬀort( Zipf,1949 )isalsoapplicabletoinformation
behavior: humans tend only to spend the minimum eﬀort to
accomplish tasks, often only resulting in only a satisfying (but not
thebest)result.
Interactive information systems that more dynamically react
to users’ information behavior and that serve a variety of tasks,
need to even better understand humans, their needs, and context
to be accepted and add value. Ingwersen and Järvelin (2005)
argue — similar to the pragmatic deﬁnition of information —
that information systems are never used in isolation but are
always embedded in personal, organizational, cultural, and more
contexts and therefore need to be designed and evaluated within
those contexts. Users should be given the opportunity to use
informationsystemspurposefullytofocusonthetasktobefulﬁlled
without being bothered by the challenges of handling the system
(Elbeshausen,2023 ,p.474).Foreconomicreasons,inthecorporate
context,itisofparamountimportancetoknowwhichinformation
types and information services are meaningful for employees and
which information needs arise ( Stock and Stock, 2015 ).Gust von
Loh(2008)distinguishesbetweenobjectiveinformationneedsfrom
workers and employees that arise from a certain job position (e.g.,
because of the company strategy) and that are independent of a
particular staﬀ member, and subjective information needs that are
articulatedbyaspeciﬁcjobholderandthatstemfromuserstudies.
Here, strong connections to the human-computer interaction
(HCI) ﬁeld become apparent. Information science and HCI share
their focus on humans interacting with information systems, their
cognitive and contextual embeddedness while doing so, and the
subjective and objective information needs a system has to satisfy
(Jetter, 2023 ). Both disciplines acknowledge that the design of
humane (or human-centered) information systems (empirically
proven via usability-and user experience methods) beneﬁts from
theenrichmentofinformationandcontextualization.
Technical information systems may be unable to ﬁt all the
information behavioral aspects of a broad user base but may
need to focus on a selection of tasks or user types. Furthermore,
informationbehavioralsotakesplaceoutsideoftechnicalordigital
environments.Then,educatingtheuserstowardacertainbehavior
and increasing their knowledge about the information system and
environmentcouldbeanadditionalapproach./three.tnum./three.tnum. Information literacy as a prerequisite to
deal with AI
Although information is central to human development and
life, dealing with information in a good and meaningful way
is a skill that has to be acquired and cultivated — especially
with regard to the ever-increasing complexity of today’s digital
information environments. To be able to eﬃciently and ethically
deal with information in a particular context, to understand how
information is produced, evaluated, and distributed, how it can be
eﬀectively searched for, and to assess the personal informational
and thinking competencies critically are skills that are subsumed
under the term “information literacy” ( Griesbaum, 2023 ). The
UNESCO (2013) considers media and information literacy as a
core competency for democratic societies that enables citizens
to successfully engage and participate in private, vocational, and
societalactivities.Informationliteracyis,however—andsimilarly
as the concept at its core: information — a relational concept.
Its characteristics change with the information environments and
contexts in which human beings have to deal with information
(Griesbaum,2023 ).Thisalsopresumesthataninformation-literate
person has a certain amount of knowledge about the topic or
circumstances they are dealing with — but this is not always the
case.Hence,themorethepersonlacksexpertiseandknowledge,the
moretrustthepersonneedstoputintotheinformationecosystem.
Informationliteracythentransfersfromthetopicorsituationitself
to the evaluation of other information sources or experts whose
recommendationshavetobetrusted( Griesbaum,2023 ).
Despite its stated relevance, often, information literacy is
not an integral part of school education but rather embedded
in higher education and services of university libraries ( ACRL,
2016).Inwork-relatedcontexts,informationliteracyissuesbecome
apparent in enterprises with structured knowledge management
approaches ( Travis, 2017 ). However, Lloyd(2013) has found that
information literacy at the workplace is mainly reduced to socio-
cultural practices for collaboration. Middleton et al. (2018) could
show that information literacy is strongly connected to innovative
workpractices.
This hints toward an increasing need for information literacy
in complex information contexts as induced by AI systems.
Consequently, AI literacy is an emerging ﬁeld in information
science, borrowing most of the central aspects already embedded
in information literacy but also highlighting further skills and
normative claims ( Touretzky et al., 2019 ).Ng et al. (2021a,b)
performed a literature search on AI literacy to derive aspects
this concept entails. They found that all selected articles consider
knowing the basic functions of AI and how to use AI applications
in everyday life ethically (know and understand AI), as well as
applying AI knowledge, concepts, and applications in diﬀerent
scenarios(applyAI),thecorecompetenciesofAI-literatehumans.
Two-thirds of the analyzed articles also mention critical higher-
orderthinkingskills(suchasevaluating,appraising,predicting,and
designing)aspartofAIliteracy(evaluateandcreateAI).
Furthermore, the literature states that AI literacy is central
to the future workforce, simultaneously preparing humans to
eﬃcientlyuseandcriticallyevaluateAIandsparkingcareerinterest
in this ﬁeld ( Chai et al., 2020 ). Interestingly, the study revealed
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 7 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
that only 50% of the articles considered educating humans about
socially responsible behavior when using or designing AI as part
of AI literacy. Here the authors see room for improvement: “[...]
conceptualizing AI literacy with human-centered considerations
is crucial to building a future inclusive society” ( Ng et al., 2021a ,
p. 507). The evaluation of AI literacy itself is conducted via
knowledge tests, self-reporting, questionnaires, or observations
wheninteractingwithAI.
/four.tnum. Designing learning opportunities for
all: HCAI in adult education research
and adult learning
The core assumption of HFE is that human beings are able
andwillingtolearnandshapetheirworkinglives.Consideringthis
ﬁrst assumption, aspects of lifelong learning, adult and continuing
education, and adult learning at the workplace touch the core of
work design and human centeredness. At the same time, for many
years adult education policies and research have dealt with how
educational systems can eﬀectively provide knowledge and skills
for a technologically changing (working) society ( Merriam and
Bierema, 2013 ). The results of numerous research activities within
theadulteducationscientiﬁccommunitycontributetoshapingAI-
aﬀectedworkplacesinahuman-centeredway,whichfromanadult
educational perspective means a learning-centered way ( Harteis,
2022).
From the perspective of adult education research and policy,
it is a consensus that educational systems target fostering
the quality of educational processes and providing learning
opportunities equally ( UNESCO, 2019 ;BMAS and BMBF, 2021 ;
Council of the European Union, 2021 ;Autor:innengruppe
Bildungsberichterstattung,2022 ;OECD,2023 ).
Educational systems contribute to designing and establishing
learning opportunities . That means they contribute to channeling,
organizing, and monitoring informal, non-formal, and formal
(adult) learning processes. In democratic states, educational
systems aim to provide skills to individuals so that they can
actively participate in public and working life. At the same time,
quality learning processes within educational systems underlie
the expectancy to provide a qualiﬁed and employable workforce.
Scientiﬁc discourse treats these aspects using the two concepts of
individual self-regulation, on the one hand, and human resources,
on the other hand ( Autor:innengruppe Bildungsberichterstattung,
2022).
Work has a major role to play in education. First, work and
workinglifearesigniﬁcantﬁeldsofadultlearning.Humansubjects
acquire skills for and within their employment to stay employable.
Second, in Western-so-called working societies-work is a major
part of active participation in society, as it impacts, e.g., social
status and social and ﬁnancial resources as much as professional
and, therefore, social identity ( Kraus, 2008 ;Gericke, 2017 ). Third,
work in terms of work-based learning is a learning and teaching
methodology ( Bauer et al., 2004 ;Dehnbostel, 2022 ). Therefore, it
is an important quality criterion of professionally designed adult
and continuing education to take aspects of individuals’ (working)
lives,suchaspossiblerupturesin(working)biographiesandcareerdevelopment, as one starting point for developing and creating
learningopportunities.
Equality of opportunities in adult education refers to equal
accesstolearningopportunitiesasamajorchallengeforeducation
systems ( Käpplinger and Lichte, 2020 ;Council of the European
Union, 2021 ). It targets especially vulnerable and marginalized
groups such as migrants, low-qualiﬁed, unemployed, disabled, or
illiterate persons, who have diﬀerent learning needs regarding
content but also need diﬀerently structured learning opportunities
than high-skilled workers or middle-class citizens. Work has an
important role to play in the equality of learning opportunities.
According to the Adult Education Survey ( BMBF, 2022 ), for
years, more than 70 up to 75% of the adult learning activities
of the German population aged 16–65 have taken place during
daily working time or were ﬁnanced by the employer. A much
smaller and even decreasing part of adult learning activities was
work-related but based on individually generated ﬁnancial and
time resources (13% in 2012 – 8% in 2020), while the share of
individual non-work related learning activities is relatively stable
at about 17–18% ( BMBF, 2022 , p. 22). Major diﬀerences exist in
the participation rates of diﬀerent social groups. The employed
population shows a higher participation rate (46% in 2012 –
60% in 2020) than the unemployed population (13% in 2012
– 19% in 2020). The same applies when comparing the un-or
low-skilled population (30% in 2012 – 46% in 2020) with high-
qualiﬁed persons (about 70% in 2012 – 81% in 2020). Remarkably,
in the German adult population, learning activities are on the
rise in absolute numbers. At the same time, the diﬀerences
in share between certain social groups have not remarkably
diminished. These ﬁndings concerning the participation rates in
adultlearningvaryacrosscountries,stillthegapbetweenemployed
and unemployed, as much the high – and the low-skilled persons,
showstobeacentralchallengeinmoreorlessallOECDcountries
(EuropeanUnion,2021 ).
Against this background, an adult education research
perspective on human-centered AI implementation will
concentrate not only on how to provide quality learning
opportunities but it will focus as well on how to tailor these
quality opportunities for each social group. So, an adult education
research perspective contributes to human-centered AI, ﬁrst of
all, by analyzing if an educational system, an employer, or a single
workplace oﬀers learning opportunities for AI-based workplaces,
whomtheselearningopportunitiesaremadefor,andwhatkindof
learningopportunitiesareproposed.
/four.tnum./one.tnum. Designing learning: what skills should
we qualify for?
Regardingcontentsandneedsforskills,thereisconsensusthat
inadigitalizedandAI-basedworld,lifeandworktaskswillbecome
more complex. There are catalogs trying to capture and describe
important future skills. In the context of education and lifelong
learning, the European Commission’s Framework DigComp has
hadquiteanimpactintheﬁeldinGermany( JointResearchCenter
(JRC), 2022 ). Moreover, in higher education, the so-called twenty
ﬁrst-century skills play an important role ( Anandiadou and Claro,
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 8 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
2009;Schnabel, 2017 ). These two catalogs represent important
examples for a whole discussion that brings the importance of
futureskillstothefore.Theyconcentrateonskillsin
•Workingwithmedia,technology,information,anddata
•Virtual and face-to-face communication and collaboration
in diverse (e.g., interdisciplinary, intercultural,
intergenerational)contexts
•Creative problem solving, innovation, analytical and
criticalthought
•Flexibility, coping with ambiguity, self-motivation, and
workingindependently( Schnabel,2017 )
When thinking human centeredness from an adult learning
perspective, it is important to note that these skills will not replace
professional skills but will additionally be on top of professional
skills. Even more, they will be interlinked with professional skills.
So when preparing a workforce for an AI working world, degrees
will have to encompass professional skills as a basis plus these
futureskills.
/four.tnum./two.tnum. Designing learning: who should we
target and how?
Quality is not determined by knowing the skill needs and
contents of learning but also by methodologies that help to
teach these skills professionally, eﬀectively, and eﬃciently to a
whole range of target groups. When it comes to skill delivery
in companies, there is a vivid research landscape on how to
deliver sustainable learning success in digital transformation. The
learningandteachingmethodologiesinfocusrangefrominformal
learningintheworkplace,learningnuggets,non-formalworkshop
settings, or formal learning arrangements within chambers and
universities (e.g., Rohs and Ganz, 2015 ;Anderson and Rivera-
Vargas, 2020 ). From the company’s viewpoint, where there are
ﬁnancial and economic restrictions, these discussions are critical.
With a company’s decision to invest in one or another kind
of learning opportunity, it shapes structures and methodologies
of learning and, ﬁnally, participation rates in adult learning
opportunitiestoahighdegree.
Discussionsofteachingandlearningmethodologydiﬀerentiate
along the question of which knowledge or skill can be eﬃciently
and professionally taught in which setting to which target group.
Taking marginalized groups as an example, it is a common
educational argument based on Bourdieu ( Watkins and Tisdell,
2006) or biographical research ( Alheit, 2021 ) that low-skilled
people or functional illiterates have rather negatively experienced
learningthroughouttheirlives,sometimestheyhavegonethrough
biographies of failing in an educational system. Therefore, it is
highly challenging for professionally organized adult education to
getaccesstothesegroupsandtoteachthemeﬀectively-muchmore
challenging than teaching high-skilled people or managers who
havehadsuccessfullearningcareers.
Therefore, when implementing AI in a human-centered way,
quality learning opportunities need to ensure that all target
groups who are aﬀected by AI in the workplace get theopportunity to qualify for these changes. At the same time,
diﬀerent target groups will need diﬀerent skills in the workplace
and diﬀerent learning methodologies for acquiring these skills.
In addition, it is a professional adult education task to create
good learning opportunities with a well-ﬁtted methodology that
facilitates between the aﬀordances of a company within the digital
transformation,ontheonehand,andtheneedsofthetargetgroup
andtheirlearninghabits,ontheotherhand.
Intermsoflearningmethodologies,recentprojectshaveshown
(a) That professionally implemented learning projects in the
workplace can eﬀectively qualify low-skilled workers on the
job within digital transformation processes ( Goppold and
Frenz,2020 ).
(b) That worker’s councils have an important role to play as
facilitators of bringing together unskilled and low-skilled
workersorfunctionallyilliterateemployeeswithcontinuing
education activities. Still, the members of worker’s councils
needtobequaliﬁedtofulﬁlltheirrole( Lammersetal.,2022 ;
Arbeiter,2023 ).
In recent years, networked structures in adult education
have been brought to the fore (e.g., UNESCO, 2015 ). In the
case of implementing human-centered AI networks between
adult education providers, companies and worker’s councils will
probably be in favor of channeling professionally tailored learning
opportunities into companies. Taking Germany as an example,
vocational training providers create those networks in order to
target marginalized groups; in the case of high-skilled individuals,
universities of applied sciences have a mandate of developing
continuing education to create opportunities in cooperation with
companies ( Dollhausen and Lattke, 2020 ). It is an issue if these
networks allow scaling up learning opportunities for a whole
population or multiple companies and not to tailor adult learning
foronesinglecompany.
/five.tnum. Technology, autonomy, and trust:
HCAI in psychology and
human-computer interaction
Typically, the AI research community focuses on algorithmic
advances,deemingahuman-centeredapproachunnecessary,butat
thesametime,human-centeredthinkingisgainingpopularity,and
theAIcommunityisdiverse.However,thisnewthinkingchallenges
establishedpractices( Shneiderman,2022 ,p.40).Thisnewthinking
also inﬂuences the perception of psychology and HCI, which are
closely related, although they are separate disciplines, because
psychology plays a signiﬁcant role in HCI. For this reason, both
disciplines are discussed together in this section ( Clemmensen,
2006). From a psychological and human-computer interaction
(HCI) point of view, technology acceptance and adoption are also
becoming essential aspects of human-centered AI ( Del Giudice
et al., 2023 ), especially in human autonomy ( Bennett et al., 2023 )
and the development of guidelines for human-AI interaction
(Amershi et al., 2019 ). Such guidelines need to consider issues
with information overﬂow and should assist in using complex
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 9 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
systems ( Höök, 2000 ). This consideration can be achieved by
putting in place veriﬁcation measures or regulating levels of
human-controlled autonomy to prevent unintended adaptations
or activities by intelligent systems ( Amershi et al., 2019 ;Xu
et al., 2023 ). In addition, AI-driven inﬂuence techniques like
psychological targeting or digital nudging have raised ethical
worries about undermining autonomy ( Bermúdez et al., 2023 ).
Moreover, a series of recent studies found that employees who
work with AI systems are more likely to suﬀer loneliness,
which can lead to sleeplessness and increased drinking after
work(Tangetal.,2023 ).
Nevertheless, in HCI, the understanding of human autonomy
remains ambiguous ( Bennett et al., 2023 ). This ambiguity might
be attributed to an old controversy if people and computers
being in the same category or if, as many HCAI sympathizers
believe, vast diﬀerences exist ( Shneiderman, 2022 , p. 25), with
Shneiderman supporting the latter ( Shneiderman, 2022 , p. 31).
However, AI and its impact on the workplace are said to
be disruptive, including chatbot-based communication systems
that can demonstrate empathy through an understanding of
human behavior and psychology, allowing the chatbot to
connect with customers emotionally to ensure their satisfaction
and thus support the adoption of AI systems ( Krishnan
et al., 2022 ). AI diﬀers from HCAI by two key human-
centered aspects in terms of performance and the product.
The human-centered process is based on user experience
design methods and continuous human performance evaluation.
Furthermore, the human-centered product is emphasized by
human control to enhance human performance by designing
super tools with a high level of automation ( Shneiderman, 2022 ,
p.9).
Still, HCI acknowledges the importance of AI by highlighting
it in almost all of the current HCI grand challenges, like
human-technology symbiosis and human-environment
interactions, to name a few ( Stephanidis et al., 2019 ). This
is accompanied by six grand challenges of human-centered
AI: human wellbeing, responsible design of AI, privacy
aspects, AI-related design and evaluation frameworks, the
role of government and independent oversight, and ﬁnally,
HCAI interaction in general ( Garibay et al., 2023 ). HCAI
interaction especially plays a vital role at work, as economic
challenges meet with ethical and organizational considerations
(Garibay et al., 2023 ). This collection of grand challenges
reﬂects the almost symbiotic relationship between HCI
andAI.
Finally, the transition to human interaction with AI systems
by moving on from siloed machine intelligence to human-
controlledhybridintelligencecanbeconsideredanewopportunity
for HCI professionals to enable HCAI ( Xu et al., 2023 ).
A potential goal of human-centered AI design is to create
human-controlled AI using human-machine hybrid intelligence,
which emphasizes the integration of humans and machines
as a system, aided by the introduction of human functions
and roles that ensure human control of the system ( Xu
et al., 2023 , p. 503). However, such integration of humans
and machines is not without obstacles and unrealistic user
expectations, and negative emotional responses are often a source
ofconcern./five.tnum./one.tnum. Unrealistic user expectations
Exaggerated and unrealistic user expectations about AI-
based applications and absent design solutions to support
human-centered work can lead to frustration and questioning
the “intelligence” of such applications ( Luger and Sellen, 2016 ).
For example, high eﬃciency of search functions should be
combinedwithcuratedcontentandmeaningfulrecommendations
even without the necessary meta-information. These demands
raise hopes that may neglect the actual software and hardware
capabilitiesofresearchprojects,whichmayonlybefeasibleforvery
large companies. In addition, it is requested to combine, match,
and recommend diﬀerent kinds of heterogeneous data, even on
the internet, without considering resources. Although AI makes
signiﬁcantimprovementsdaily,thesearestillquiteunrealisticuser
expectationstoday.
One possible way to overcome these challenges of unrealistic
user expectations is to divide the AI-based processes into diﬀerent
phases. For example, Amershi et al. (2019) oﬀer 18 AI design
guidelines separated into four phases: the initial phase when
beginning to work with an AI-based application, during general
interaction, when things go wrong, and aspects considering long-
term experiences. A vital aspect of these guidelines is providing
supportandmanagingexpectations.Suchaspectsarenotunknown
totechnologyacceptancemodels.
/five.tnum./two.tnum. Building on technology acceptance
and trust
Technology acceptance models, e.g., TAM ( Davis, 1989 ),
UTAUT ( Venkatesh et al., 2003 ), and their extensions in various
ﬁelds (Kao and Huang, 2023 ), oﬀer a promising domain for an
evaluation concerning human-centered AI. TAM is a conceptual
model used to account for technology usage behavior, which has
beenconﬁrmedtobevalidinvarioustechnologiesamongdiﬀerent
groupsofpeople( Venkateshetal.,2003 ;Choungetal.,2023 ).The
originalTAMmodelpostulatesthattheintentiontousetechnology
inthefutureisdeterminedbytwokeyfactors:perceivedusefulness
andperceivedeaseofuse( Davis,1989 ).
Choung et al. (2023) integrated trust as an additional variable
in their extended TAM model. Their two studies conﬁrm that
trust is vital for accepting technology. Therefore, AI technologies
should be designed and implemented in a human-centered way;
consequently, their implementation should be easy to use, useful,
and trusted. In general, empirical ﬁndings support the assumption
that technology acceptance models help to explain the acceptance
of AI technologies ( Sohn and Kwon, 2020 ), including the aspect
of trust ( Choung et al., 2023 ). However, nevertheless, there are
limitationstotheirusage,whicharediscussedby Bagozzi(2007).
Users’ low level of trust in how their data is handled and
processed must also be adequately considered psychologically. AI,
ingeneral,canpredictuserbehaviorinawiderangeofapplications
by following digital traces of usage. Besides legal and ethical
challenges, psychologists call this approach digital phenotyping
when using elaborated smart sensing techniques and when it is
successfully assisted and analyzed by data mining and machine
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /zero.tnum/nine.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 10 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
learning tools ( Baumeister et al., 2023 ). This is not an entirely
new topic, as, e.g., user behavior in an online environment relates
to their personality and can be used to tailor content, improve
search results, and increase the eﬀectiveness of online advertising
(Kosinski et al., 2014 ), which is backed by many empirical studies
and summarized by Baumeister et al. (2023). At the same time,
ethical challenges are addressed by the human-in-the-loop design,
where individuals are asked to make a ﬁnal decision or action
(Shneiderman, 2022 ;Garibay et al., 2023 ;Xu et al., 2023 ), which
canalsohelptoimprovethetrusttoHCAI.
This is in line with results from an experiment by Westphal
et al.(2023), in which they empower users to adjust the
recommendations of human-AI collaboration systems and oﬀer
explanations for the reasoning of the systems. The idea behind
this approach is to counter low trust and limited understanding
of users dealing with recommendations of an AI system, and
at the same time, to keep in mind to achieve an adequate or
calibrated trust, meaning that, e.g., not to over trust the AI system
(Leichtmann et al., 2023b ). However, interestingly, explanations
could backﬁre because they can increase or signal task complexity,
whereasenhanceddecisioncontrolleadstohigherusercompliance
withsystemrecommendations( Westphaletal.,2023 ).Theseresults
aﬃrm that well-explained support can be essential to accept and
facilitate HCAI at work, leading to HCAI systems that explain
themselves, so-called human-centered explainable AI, which can
be accompanied by educational oﬀers and measures for providing
human-centeredexplainableAI.
/five.tnum./three.tnum. A glimpse into the near future:
explainable, understandable, and gamiﬁed
AI
Such explainable AI, especially if it is human-centered,
can be considered crucial. However, from a socio-technical
standpoint, AI should also be understandable to stakeholders
beyondexplainability( Habayeb,2022 ).Thiscanbeachievedwhen
implementinguser-participatedexperimentalevaluationbecauseit
isnecessarytoovercometherelativelysimpleunilateralevaluation
methodsthatonlyevaluateAIsystems’performance.
One way to implement this is to use, e.g., a gamiﬁed
crowdsourcingframeworkforexplainability( Tocchettietal.,2022 ),
whichusesgamedesignelementsinanon-gamecontext( Deterding
et al., 2011 ). However, current research focuses primarily on
strategic and system issues related to AI system performance
(Raftopoulos and Hamari, 2023 ), which limits the view of AI.
Furthermore,HCIshouldpromotetheevaluationofAIsystemsas
human-machinesystemsbyincludingtheend-userperspective( Xu
etal.,2023 ,p.505).Nevertheless,thismakesitnecessaryforHCIto
enhance its current methods. Constraints like focusing on single
user-computing artifacts with a limited context of use, lab-based
studies, or static human-machine functions are prevalent. Instead,
“in-the-wild studies,” the application of distributed contexts of
use, and longitudinal study designs are encouraged to address the
identiﬁeduniqueissuesofAIsystemstoinﬂuencethedevelopment
of AI systems in a human-centered way ( Xu et al., 2023 , p. 509–
512).Additionally, incentives for using artiﬁcial intelligence, e.g.,
gamiﬁcation, are also emerging topics of interest for human-
centered AI ( Mazarakis, 2021 ). Gamiﬁcation tries to bring the
motivating eﬀect associated with games to non-game situations
with the help of elements like badges, leaderboards, and points
(Mazarakis, 2021 , p. 279, 283). First studies conducted with
intelligent user interfaces and voice user interfaces like Amazon
Alexa,whicharealsoconsideredsocialrobotsandactiveappliances
in artiﬁcial intelligence ( Shneiderman, 2022 ), show the potential
to focus on empirical research for the acceptance of these
interfaces ( Bräuer and Mazarakis, 2022a ,b;Haghighat et al., 2023 ).
Nevertheless, explainable AI is also, in this use-case, key to
counteracting suspicion regarding the trust of social robots and
active appliances in artiﬁcial intelligence. For example, to achieve
transparent and accountable conversational AI and to include
suchasysteminagamiﬁedenvironment,interpretability,inherent
capability to explain, independent data, interactive learning, and
inquisitiveness are necessary ( Wahde and Virgolin, 2023 , p. 1856).
Inquisitiveness is meant to be by the AI to show curiosity and not
toannoytheusertoachievehumancenteredness.Curiositymeans
just displaying inquisitiveness in speciﬁc contexts, such as during
learning, so as not to disturb the user ( Wahde and Virgolin, 2023 ,
p.1865).
A further step is taken by Tocchetti et al. (2022), which
propose a gamiﬁed crowdsourcing framework for explainability.
Their crowdsourcing framework engages users on diﬀerent levels
than other platforms, primarily relying on extrinsic rewards.
The provided user education, in particular, would raise users’
understanding of the types of information that an AI system
requires, learns, and produces, improving users’ eﬃciency and
developing the users’ mindsets ( Tocchetti et al., 2022 , p. 7).
Furthermore, their work shows that a symbiosis of HCAI,
gamiﬁcation,andexplainableAIisalsopossiblewithgreatereﬀort
andexertion.Consequently,thisalsoresultsinanincreasedhuman
centeredness. A ﬁrst eﬀort of studies in game-based environments
yields promising results for explainable AI ( Leichtmann et al.,
2023a).
Diﬀerent scenarios for using gamiﬁed AI and gamiﬁcation
in the context of AI, in general, are possible. For example, Tan
and Cheah (2021) describe a work in progress and prototype for
developinganAI-enabledonlinelearningapplicationforlecturing
at a university physics. However, this scenario can be switched to
a work-related setting without much eﬀort. As education is one
of the main application areas of gamiﬁcation ( Mazarakis, 2021 ), a
combination with AI is obvious and already taking place ( Kurni
et al., 2023 ). In this case, ﬁrst data is collected for AI processes,
e.g., through step-by-step scaﬀolding instructions and feedback
to students by studying students’ progress in answering quiz
questions. Then, it is possible to implement adaptive assessments
to more accurately identify the student’s level of mastery, adjust
the diﬃculty level and the number of questions at each level
of diﬃculty, and ﬁnally, step between each level of progression
based on the student’s answer. Thereby, individual feedback,
which can then be used for learning analytics to improve,
optimize, or redesign the curriculum to meet the needs of speciﬁc
student cohorts, can be provided ( Mazarakis, 2013 ;Tan and
Cheah, 2021 ), e.g., for employer-provided training in diﬀerent
workscenarios.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/zero.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 11 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
/six.tnum. Discussion
This chapter presents conclusions from the previous chapters’
theory and practice and shows relations between them in
order to inform a synergistic human-centered AI theory. First
interdisciplinary human-centered AI perspectives are shown,
according to Wilkens et al. (2021), and how they relate to the
ﬁve disciplines. Then, interdisciplinary views of human-centricity
and their interrelations are matched with observations from a
demonstrator. These views have the goal of setting foundations
for an interdisciplinary synergistic theory of human-centered AI,
whichispresentedinSection6.3.
/six.tnum./one.tnum. Interdisciplinary perspectives on
human-centered AI
Wilkens et al. (2021) found ﬁve co-existing views in a
comprehensive literature review analyzing the signiﬁcance
of HCAI: a deﬁcit-oriented, a data reliability-oriented, a
protection-oriented, a potential-oriented, and a political-oriented
understandingofhowtoachievehuman-centricitywhiledeploying
AI in the workplace. These ﬁve perspectives reﬂect many aspects
of AI’s human-centricity, with varying levels of maturity along
each dimension. In order to put the results of this article into
context, the disciplines of information science, human-computer
interaction, psychology, and adult learning are related in Table1
to the ﬁve perspectives of Wilkens et al. (2021). HFE is inherent in
Wilkens et al. (2021) and would cover all ﬁve perspectives, so it is
notshownin Table1.
The perspectives of Wilkens et al. (2021) largely coincide with
the results of the demonstrator. Although all the perspectives
are covered, HFE is particularly concerned about the data
reliability-oriented understanding of HCAI and the potential-
orientedunderstanding .
Potential deﬁcits of data reliability aremainlyconsidered from
an ethical perspective since technical artifacts are not ascribed to
any moral competence; at best, they can imitate human moral
behavior.TakingintoaccounttheinstrumentalcharacterofAI,itis
rather necessary to consider fundamental conﬂicts of interest that
might favor immoral behavior. This, however, leaves the ﬁeld of
AIdesign.
Thepotential-orientedunderstanding promotesahybriddesign
approach corresponding to the “complementary division of
functions between humans and AI.” The mutual reinforcement of
humans and HCAI appears to be suitable for satisfactorily coping
with future, currently potentially unknown working requirements.
It emphasizes the evolutionary principle of humans, whose
behaviorisimitatedbyintelligentmachines,andthatwillultimately
bereﬂectedintheprecisionandreliabilityofmachineprocedures.
The information science perspective on human-centered AI
can be summarized mainly as protection-oriented ,potential-
oriented, andpolitical-oriented . It isprotection-oriented when it
studies how information systems should be designed so that
humans can easily and safely use them, and it is potential-oriented
sinceitconsidersinformationsystemssociotechnicalenvironments
in which humans co-construct information with the help oftechnology. In social settings, and especially at the workplace, the
political-oriented perspective is also part of information science’s
agenda,e.g.,intermsofinformationliteracy.
An adult education perspective, which in its tradition always
includes an advocacy perspective, can be contextualized as a
protection-oriented , apotential-oriented , and a policy-oriented
approach. It is protection-oriented when talking about qualifying
workers for correct decision-making in cooperation with AI
systems. It is potential-oriented when thinking about how to use
AI systems for quality learning opportunities, e.g., in learning
analytics. Finally, when reﬂecting on the advocacy tradition of
empowering social subjects, an adult education perspective is
politicallyoriented .
It is not surprising that from a HCI and psychology point
of view, most perspectives by Wilkens et al. (2021) are relevant,
as they touch technology and individual aspects at the same
time. Interestingly, the deﬁcit-oriented understanding and data
reliability-oriented understanding perspectives are more related
to HCI. So assisted tools that work through elaborated sensor
technologyarecommonto,e.g.,gamiﬁedandexplainableAI,which
areﬁeldsofHCI.
In contrast, the protection-oriented understanding and
potential-oriented understanding perspectives are closely related
to psychology. Unrealistic user expectations questioning the
“intelligence”ofAI,Inconnectionwithlossofautonomyandtrust,
are prevailing psychological aspects of human-centricity for these
two perspectives. Nevertheless, these areas can also be found in
HCI and, depending on the degree of technical implementation,
arelikelytobeassignedtoHCI.
It is clear from Table1that the disciplines do not cover all of
Wilkensetal. (2021)perspectives,buttherearediﬀerentemphases,
withanimbalanceexistingfortheﬁrsttwoperspectives.Thearticle
at hand shows that all disciplines are important for HCAI, with
HFEfunctioningasanumbrelladisciplineforHCAIatwork.This
makesthecallforaninterdisciplinaryviewobvious.Thefollowing
section will detail these views that are enriched by ﬁndings from
ademonstrator.
/six.tnum./two.tnum. Interdisciplinary views of
human-centered AI
This section presents the diﬀerent ﬁelds of action, the
relevant factors of human-centered AI from diﬀerent disciplines,
and the interdisciplinary views of HCAI, including possible
areas of collaboration. Adding insights from a demonstrator,
the foundations for a synergistic human-AI symbiosis theory
arerevealed.
ForHFE, human-centricity means involving humans in the
design of work systems, e.g., processes or tools. The design is
based on a comprehensive understanding of users, tasks, and
workenvironments.Human-centereddesignaimsatbalancedskill
and performance development as the basis of work productivity
and health. HFEcombines the human potential with technology.
From a HFE perspective, human-centered AI emphasizes that the
decision-making competence of humans and their intervention
in technical systems in doubt are weighted higher than that of
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/one.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 12 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
TABLE/one.tnum Analysisofhuman-centeredAIperspectivesforinformationscie nce,adulteducation,human-computerinteraction,andpsychologyac cording
toWilkensetal. (/two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/one.tnum).
Discipline Deﬁcit-oriented
(Perspective /one.tnum)Data reliability-
oriented
(Perspective /two.tnum)Protection-
oriented
(Perspective /three.tnum)Potential-oriented
(Perspective /four.tnum)Political-oriented
(Perspective /five.tnum)
Informationscience x x x
Adulteducation x x x
HCI x x
Psychology x x
AI machines. Information science and HCI provide details and
key features of how to calibrate this interaction of humans and
computers. A key factor lies in aspects of designing AI systems
withregardtopersonalityissues,searchbehavior,andinformation
literacyofusers.
From an adult education perspective, the success of human-
centered AI lies in providing learning opportunities across all
target groups aﬀected by AI. These learning opportunities need
to adapt to learners and their individual learning habits and
learning needs in terms of content and methodology instead of
one-ﬁts-all solutions. Especially marginalized learners will have to
be a focus. Information science can add to this perspective with
its diﬀerentiated insights on information literacy, a concept that
might be helpful when implementing HCAI solutions and, up-
to-date, is far away from being profoundly treated in the ﬁeld of
adult education with, e.g., low-skilled adults. Furthermore, HFE
perspectives can help in elaborating adult learning methodologies,
asHFEprovidesclearperspectivesonworkplacelearningandhow
itaddstoeﬀectivelearning.
Additionally, mutual reinforcement of humans and AI, which
considersethicalprinciplesduringdesign,isessentialandisactively
considered in information science , e.g., in aspects of usability and
interactiondesign.Especiallythemoreprofoundunderstandingof
sociotechnicalinformationsystemsandhowhumansinteractwith
digitalenvironmentsareessentialtoinformationscience.
Finally,for HCIandpsychology, human-centeredprocessesand
products are the foundation of human-centricity. As a result, user
experience design approaches and ongoing human performance
evaluationarerequired.Additionally,human-centeredAIproducts
areemphasizedbyhumancontrol( Shneiderman,2022 ,p.9).These
elements should be utilized to help tackle the six grand challenges
ofhuman-centeredAI:humanwellbeing,responsibledesignofAI,
privacy aspects, AI-related design and evaluation frameworks, the
role of government and independent oversight, and ﬁnally, HCAI
interaction in general ( Garibay et al., 2023 ). The overlap between
HFE and HCI is visible where interaction design is considered
from a perspective when knowledge and experience of usability
anduserexperienceareapplied.Thishelps,amongotherthings,to
implement technology acceptance models and, thus, to build trust
andsupportwhentheoverlapbetweenHFEandHCIisconsistently
implemented. In addition, HFE and psychology (and partly also
HCI) meet in the ﬁeld of human autonomy. Furthermore, the
relationshipbetweeninformationscienceandHCIisexempliﬁedin
theinteractionofanykindofinformationandthefocusonhuman-
centered systems, again considering usability and user experience.Recognition of the importance of information literacy should be
consideredanimportantlinkforHCAIinthisregard.
Inordertovalidatetheﬁndingscompiledhere,ademonstrator
is used. The project “Connect & Collect: AI-based Cloud for
Interdisciplinary Networked Research and Innovation for Future
Work (CoCo)” ( CoCo Website, 2023 ) promotes the transfer of
knowledge between HFE research and operational practice in
companiesaboutartiﬁcialintelligenceandisfundedbytheGerman
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). To support
ourtheorydevelopment,theCoCoprojectservesasademonstrator
to illustrate the interrelation between the diﬀerent disciplines. The
purpose of the demonstrator is to reveal the necessity of each
discipline, namely HFE, psychology, HCI, information science,
and adult education, to create successful HCAI implementation
at work and, therefore, to show the impact and potential in
society. Participants are predominantly transdisciplinary actors in
labor research from science, enterprises, unions, education, and
intermediaries pursuing an innovative new approach or applying
best practices and have joined forces in “Regional Competence
CentersforLaborResearch.”
It can be derived from the demonstrator that while many
companies are interested in implementing AI applications, they
shy away from the research and investment eﬀort involved in
developing company-speciﬁc solutions. Instead, they aim to use
proven AI applications. In this case, the importance of human-
centered AI design-especially regarding learning facilitation and
ethical-social compatibility-is not suﬃciently applied ( Pokorni
et al., 2021 ). Undesirable consequences usually emerge only after
a time delay and are rarely causally associated with AI use. An
essential part of the work of the demonstrator is to increase the
relevance of human-centered design of AI applications practically
andsystematically,whichwillalsoenhancetheroleofHFEexperts.
At the same time, it is crucial to qualify the workers for
the changes in the working society. The examples from the
demonstratorshowthat,whenimplementingAIsystemsonalarge
scale, it is important to develop and establish a broad range of
learningopportunitiesthatcanbeupscaledtodiversetargetgroups.
Within the digital transformation, especially marginalized groups
are at risk of getting lost in terms of workforce, labor markets,
and in a democratic society. There is a need to focus on these
marginalizedgroupswhenreferringtohumancenteredness.Adult
education providers and unions have an enormous role in this
challengebecausetheyhaveexpertiseinaccessingthemarginalized.
Human-centeredAIisstronglyrelatedtoHCIandpsychology,
albeit with diﬀerent emphases. As HCI has evolved from a mainly
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/two.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 13 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
technical ﬁeld to an interdisciplinary profession, the same can
be expected for HCAI. Nevertheless, there are critical challenges
to overcome, like explainability, trustworthiness, or unrealistic
user expectations. However, technology acceptance models can
be used to build trust to accept AI systems and make them
morehuman-centric,thuskeepingexpectationsinline.Ultimately,
achievinganexplainableAIcontributestothemutualcollaboration
and interaction of humans and AI. For ethical reasons, AI’s
instrumental character must always be considered. Furthermore,
AI can be made more accessible to stakeholders by implementing
gamiﬁcation, which can increase stakeholder commitment to
increased engagement with human-centered AI, especially in the
workplace.Finally,thedemonstratoracknowledgestheimportance
of ethical concerns by utilizing the human-in-the-loop concept,
thusincreasingtrust.
It can be concluded that the transfer of human-centered
research results into practical application is supported
by an interdisciplinary approach that combines diﬀerent
ideas, knowledge, and work methods. By displaying the
interrelationships between the disciplines, this article reveals
in the following section further directions for research as
well as concepts and features a (future) theory of HCAI
shouldentail.
/six.tnum./three.tnum. Setting foundations for a
human-centered interdisciplinary AI
theory: synergistic human-AI symbiosis
theory (SHAST)
In order to advance the research ﬁeld regarding human-
centered AI, a conceptualization of a Synergistic Human-AI
Symbiosis Theory (SHAST) has been started. SHAST takes into
account that the optimal deployment of artiﬁcial intelligence in
the workplace needs the establishment of a symbiotic relationship
between humans and AI systems, drawing upon the expertise of
ﬁvedistinctdisciplines:humanfactorsengineering(HFE),human-
computer interaction (HCI), psychology, information science,
and adult education. Based on the present ﬁndings, all ﬁve
disciplines appear to be necessary to successfully implement
HCAI in the workplace. SHAST envisions a future where
AI systems and humans collaborate synergistically to achieve
unprecedented levels of productivity and wellbeing. The ﬁve
disciplines presented here are predestined to contribute to the
future of HCAI, as they incorporate fundamental components of
human centeredness and address important ﬁelds of action for its
creationandimplementation.
SHAST posits that AI should be designed to augment
humancapabilities,fosterseamlessinteractions,andensureethical
practices. HFE is the foundational pillar, advocating for AI
systems that enhance human potential while preserving human
autonomy, decision-making, and overall work performance. HCI,
another elementary bedrock, focuses on user-centric design,
creating seamless and intuitive interactions between humans and
AI, fostering realistic user expectations, and minimizing friction
in collaborating with AI technologies that intuitively adapt to
user needs and preferences. Psychology’s role in SHAST revolvesTABLE/two.tnum Frameworkwithminimumﬁeldsofactionforthedisciplines.
Discipline Minimum ﬁelds of action
HFE •Balancedworkload
•Enhancinghumancapabilities
•Humancontrol
•Socialandethicalresponsibility
Informationscience •Pragmaticsofinformation
•Considercontextsandinformationbehavior
•Informationliteracy
Adulteducation •Includelow-skilledworkersandworkers’unions
•Tailoredlearningandteachingincoursesandthe
workplace
HCIandPsychology •Technologyacceptanceandadoption
•Humanautonomyandcontrol
•Realisticuserexpectations
•ExplainableAI
•Trust
around cultivating user trust, achieved through transparent AI
design and explainable algorithms. Information science considers
the pragmatic side of information, ensuring that humans can
eﬀectively and eﬃciently use information systems, for example,
by increasing their information literacy. Finally, adult education
plays a critical part in SHAST by cultivating digital literacy
and ensuring that individuals possess the skills to navigate
AI-powered environments, fostering learning opportunities for
a workforce to engage with AI technologies for innovation
and productivity eﬀectively, minimizing disparities, and enabling
broadparticipation.
SHAST proposes that human-AI symbiosis can be achieved
through an interplay of these disciplines, resulting in AI
technologiesthatempowerindividuals,enhancecollaboration,and
create a sustainable and equitable future. In fact, SHAST is based
on a framework that is presented in Table2. The outcomes from
theoryandpracticeshowminimumﬁeldsofactionforasuccessful
HCAIimplementation.
If fundamental aspects from the framework of the ﬁve
disciplines are missing for the implementation and application of
HCAI, then this will result in severe consequences and challenges
(Stephanidis et al., 2019 ;Garibay et al., 2023 ;Xu et al., 2023 ).
More precisely, it is postulated that when a discipline is not
adequately considered, there may be a failure to comply with
the minimum ﬁelds of action, and implementation may not
besuccessful.
Itremainsopenfordiscussionandempiricalresearchonwhich
disciplines would further be needed to support the development
of a widely applicable theory of human-centered AI. The article
aims to convincingly present the normative, theoretical, and
methodological concepts from human factors and ergonomics
(HFE), psychology, human-computer interaction, information
science, and adult education and why they are considered critical
buildingblocksforHCAIandSHAST.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/three.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 14 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
/seven.tnum. Conclusions for human-centered AI
at work from theory and practice
In the last section, the article summarizes how it contributes
to the ongoing scientiﬁc discussion on HCAI. Conclusions are
drawn for HCAI at work by leveraging insights from disciplines
focusing mainly on individuals (psychology), technology (HCI),
work (HFE), or work context as one research ﬁeld amongst others
(information science and adult learning). From the fundamental
disciplinary considerations and the current experiences and
observations from the demonstrator, theoretical implications are
derivedtobringHCAIinlinewithtoday’sdemandsofworkersand
companies to reﬂect human centeredness when dealing with the
complexity of information, data, and decisions. Furthermore, the
article also highlights the relevant internal logic of the individual
disciplinesandrevealspossiblemutualcomplementarity.Itmainly
argues that, although human-centered AI is a popular concept
across disciplines today ( Capel and Brereton, 2023 ), successful
HCAI and its design are in strong need for an interdisciplinary
approach,asalldisciplinesconceptualize“theirhumans”diﬀerently
intheirviewsandmethodologicalapproaches.
Besidesthediﬀerencesindetail,ourcomparisonofthediﬀerent
disciplinary approaches to conceptualizing HCAI and bringing
it into practice has revealed important similarities. All presented
disciplines have the human at their cores — the development
of human-centered AI systems is therefore deeply connected
to aspects considered central to humans and that cannot be
substituted with machines, such as learning and constructing
information. Technology, along with its AI systems, is considered
a means for human development-therefore putting the human in
a superior position, which also has to be guaranteed by certain
regulationstopreventAIfromoverrulinghumandecision-making.
The disciplines also widely agree that human-centricity can only
be achieved if struggles with the use of technology are minimized.
In the end, it is always a human being in a company who will
use technology. Depending on the degree of how much the AI
designandAIimplementationprocessreﬂectstheusers,including
their skills, trust, and their work tasks — the users will cope or
fail with technology within their workplace. Hence, raising the
issue of humans practically coping or failing with technology use
in the workplace as a common theoretical and practical problem
of human centeredness might open scientiﬁc discourse between
disciplinesandpracticeincompanies( Nowotnyetal.,2001 ).
This article is based on collaborative scholarly inquiry and
a review of discipline-speciﬁc literature on the phenomenon
of HCAI and joint reﬂection against the background of the
demonstrator used in our research to study HCAI. This led to the
ﬁndings and arguments in this article, which are summarized in
Table2. The article combines perspectives from ﬁve disciplines-
however, we are still in the ﬁrst step, i.e., conceptualization, of
a ﬁve-phase model for theory building in the applied sciences
(Swanson and Chermack, 2013 ). The need to include further
or remove disciplines will become obvious further down the
road of the Theory-Research-Practice Cycle that is followed and
will include operationalization, conﬁrmation, application, and
reﬁnement ( Swanson and Chermack, 2013 ) of the concept we
have come up with. Hence, this research is not ﬁnished but atthe beginning of understanding what might be critical for HCAI
atwork.
The ﬁrst results of the conceptualization stage concerned with
successful HCAI implementation at work and with the common
focal points of the ﬁve disciplines are the founding pillars for a
SynergisticHuman-AISymbiosisTheory(SHAST),whichanswers
the research question of what is critical for HCAI at work. It has
become apparent, however, that determining the critical aspects of
HCAI at work, enabling a symbiotic relationship between humans
and AI systems, and describing their interplay theoretically is
a complex task. Whether the challenge does not rather require
investigation of more minimum ﬁelds of action, more disciplinary
backgroundslike,e.g.,knowledgemanagement,economics,process
management, simulation theory, operation research, philosophy,
history,sociology,andmanymore,oratransdisciplinaryapproach
(Deﬁla and Di Giulio, 2018 ) involving all stakeholders in the
research, development, and implementation process of HCAI at
workremainsanopenquestion.IthasbeenarguedthatHCAIand
human centeredness will beneﬁt from considering many diﬀerent
scientiﬁcperspectives./one.tnumFurthermore,intoday’sworld,disciplinary
boundaries are ﬂuid and increasingly blurred, or new disciplines
are formed that encompass various aspects of other classical
disciplines.Weareawareofthis,butduetoasimpliﬁeddiscussion,
we limit ourselves to a few disciplines and outline them, knowing
thattheseboundariesareartiﬁcial.
The results from the demonstrator and our collaborative
inquiryhaveshownthatthedisciplinescoveredinthisarticlehave
many similar (and some diﬀerent) concepts and methods in their
portfoliosthataremostlikelycriticalforsuccessfullyimplementing
HCAIatwork.However,abroaderinterdisciplinarydiscussionand
researchareneededforacompleteviewofthetopic.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directedtothecorrespondingauthors.
Author contributions
AM: Conceptualization, Writing—original draft, Writing—
review & editing, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Methodology,
Project administration, Validation, Visualization. CB-S:
Conceptualization, Writing—original draft, Writing—review
& editing, Methodology, Project administration, Validation,
Visualization. MB: Conceptualization, Writing—original draft,
Writing—review & editing, Methodology, Project administration,
Validation, Visualization. IP: Conceptualization, Writing—
original draft, Writing—review & editing, Methodology, Project
administration,Validation,Visualization.
/one.tnumhttps://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics//five.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/human-c entered-
ai-at-work-common-ground-in-theories-and-methods
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/four.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 15 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
Funding
The author(s) declare ﬁnancial support was received for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
The CoCo project is funded by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research-grant numbers 02L19C000, 02L19C001,
and02L19C002.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the valuing and precise feedback of the
reviewers. It helped us to improve the present article and to
elaborateonitslineofargument.Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construedasapotentialconﬂictofinterest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsedbythepublisher.
References
ACRL (2016). Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education . Chicago,
IL:AssociationofCollegeandResearchLibraries.
Alheit,P.(2021).Biographicityas“mentalgrammar”ofpostmo dernlife.Eur.J.Res.
Educ.Learn.Adults 12,81–94.doi:10.3384/rela.2000-7426.ojs1845
Amershi, S., Weld, D., Vorvoreanu, M., Fourney, A., Nushi, B. , Collisson, P.,
et al. (2019). “Guidelines for human-AI interaction,” in Proceedings of the 2019
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’19 (New York, NY:
ACM),1–13.
Anandiadou,K.,andClaro,M.(2009). 21stCenturySkillsandCompetencesforNew
Millennium Learners in OECD Countries, OECD Education Working Papers , No. 41.
Washington,DC:OECDPublishing.
Anderson, T., and Rivera-Vargas, P. (2020). A critical look a t educational
technology from a distance education perspective. Digital Educ. Rev. 37, 208–229.
doi:10.1344/der.2020.37.208-229
Arbeiter, J. (2023). Acting between professional rules and ﬁn ancial resources in
the ﬁeld of work-oriented basic education. Zeitschrift für Weiterbildungsforschung 46,
87–102.doi:10.1007/s40955-023-00240-2
Autor:innengruppeBildungsberichterstattung(2022). BildunginDeutschland2022.
EinindikatorengestützterBerichtmiteinerAnalysezumBildungsper sonal.Bielefeld:wbv
Media.
Bagozzi,R.P.(2007).Thelegacyofthetechnologyacceptancem odelandaproposal
foraparadigmshift. J.Assoc.Inf.Syst. 8,244–254.doi:10.17705/1jais.00122
Bates, M. J. (2017). “Information behavior,” in Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Sciences. 4th Edn , eds. J. McDonald and M. Levine-Clark (Boca Raton:
CRCPress),2074–2085.
Bauer, J., Festner, D., Gruber, H., Harteis, C., and Heid, H. ( 2004). The eﬀects
of epistemological beliefs on workplace learning. J. Workpl. Learn. 16, 284–292.
doi:10.1108/13665620410545561
Baumeister,H.,Garatva,P.,Pryss,R.,Ropinski,T.,andMon tag,C.(2023).Digitale
Phänotypisierung in der Psychologie - ein Quantensprung in der psychologischen
Forschung? Psychol.Rundsch .74,89–106.doi:10.1026/0033-3042/a000609
Baxter, G., and Sommerville, I. (2011). Socio-technical syste ms: from
design methods to systems engineering. Interacting Comput. 23, 4–17.
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2010.07.003
Bender, E., and Kolle, A. (2020). “Climbing towards NLU–on mean ing, form, and
understanding in the age of data,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics ,Seattle,WA:AssociationforComputational
Linguistics,5185–5198.
Bennett, D., Metatla, O., Roudaut, A., and Mekler, E. D. (2023) . “How does HCI
understandhumanagencyandautonomy?”in Proceedingsofthe2023CHIConference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’23 (New York, NY: Association for
ComputingMachinery),1–18.
Bermúdez, J. P., Nyrup, R., Deterding, S., Mougenot, C., Mora dbakhti, L., You, F.,
et al. (2023). “What is a subliminal technique? An ethical perspec tive on AI-driven
inﬂuence,” in Proceedings of the IEEE ETHICS-2023 Conference (West Lafayette, IN:
IEEE),1–9.
BMAS and BMBF (2021). Nationale Weiterbildungsstrategie . Available online
at: https://www.bmas.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Aus-Weite rbildung/nws-fortfuehrung-und-weiterentwicklung.pdf?__blob=publicatio nFile&v=3 (accessed
June29,2023).
BMBF (2022). Weiterbildungsverhalten in Deutschland 2020 .Ergebnisse des Adult
EducationSurvey—AES-Trendbericht. Bonn:BMBF.
Böhle, F. (2009). “Weder Rationale Reﬂexion noch Präreﬂexive Pr aktik,” in
Erfahrungsgeleitet-Subjektivierendes Handeln, Handeln unter Unsicherhei t, eds. F.
BöhleandM.Weihrich(Wiesbaden:SpringerVS),203–230.
Bostrom, N., and Yudkowsky, E. (2013). “The ethics of artiﬁc ial intelligence,” in
CambridgeHandbookofArtiﬁcialIntelligence ,eds.K.Frankish,M.Willian,andW.M.
Ramsey(Cambridge:UniversityPress),316–334.
Bräuer,P.,andMazarakis,A.(2022a).“Alexa,canwedesigng amiﬁcationwithouta
screen?”-Implementingcooperativeandcompetitiveaudio-gam iﬁcationforintelligent
virtualassistants. Comput.Hum.Behav .135,107362.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2022.107362
Bräuer, P., and Mazarakis, A. (2022b). How to design audio-g amiﬁcation for
language learning with amazon Alexa? a long-term ﬁeld experiment. Int. J. Hum.
Comput.Int .12,1–18.doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2160228
Braun, M. (2017). “Arbeit 4.0: Der gesunde Mensch in der digi talisierten
Arbeitswelt,”in HandbuchderArbeitsmedizin ,edsD.Nowak,andS.Letzel(Landsberg:
Ecomed),1–24.
Brynjolfsson, E., and McAfee, A. (2012). Race Against the Machine: How the
Digital Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productiv ity, and Irreversibly
TransformingEmploymentandtheEconomy .LexingtonMA:DigitalFrontierPress.
Bülchmann, O. (2020). Künstliche Intelligenz und Ethik–ein ung leiches Paar?
WirtschaftsinformatikManage. 12,206–215.doi:10.1365/s35764-020-00256-0
Capel, T., and Brereton, M. (2023). “What is human-centered ab out human-
centered AI? A map of the research landscape,” in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’23 (New York, NY:
AssociationforComputingMachinery),1–23.doi:10.1145/3 544548.3580959
Case, D. O., and Given, L. M. (2016). Looking for Information: A Survey of
Research on Information Seeking, Needs, and Behavior, 4th Edn . Bingley: Emerald
GroupPublishing.
Chai, C. S., Lin, P. Y., Jong, M. S. Y., Dai, Y., Chiu, T. K., and Huang,
B. (2020). “Factors inﬂuencing students’ behavioral intent ion to continue artiﬁcial
intelligence learning,” in 2020 International Symposium on Educational Technology
(ISET).Piscataway,NJ:IEEE.
Choung, H., David, P., and Ross, A. (2023). Trust in AI and its role in
the acceptance of AI technologies. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Int . 39, 1727–1739.
doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2050543
Clemmensen,T.(2006).Whateverhappenedtothepsychologyofhum an-computer
interaction? Inf.Technol.People 19,121–151.doi:10.1108/09593840610673793
CoCo Website (2023). Connect & Collect: KI-Gestützte Cloud für die
Interdisziplinäre vernetzte Forschung und Innovation für die Zukunf tsarbeit. Available
onlineat: https://www.coco-projekt.de/ (accessedFebruary4,2023).
Council of the European Union (2021). Council Resolution on a New European
AgendaforAdultLearning2021-2030(2021/C504/02).
Davis,F.D.(1989).Perceivedusefulness,perceivedeaseofu se,anduseracceptance
ofinformationtechnology. MISQ.21,319–340.doi:10.2307/249008
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/five.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 16 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
Deﬁla, R., and Di Giulio, A. (2018). Transdisziplinär und Transformativ Forschen .
Wiesbaden:SpringerFachmedien.
Dehnbostel, P. (2022). Betriebliche Bildungsarbeit .Kompetenzbasierte Berufs-und
WeiterbildungindigitalenZeiten .Baltmannsweiler:SchneiderVerlagHohengehren.
Del Giudice, M., Scuotto, V., Orlando, B., and Mustilli, M. (2023 ). Toward
the human–centered approach. a revised model of individual ac ceptance
of AI. Hum. Resour. Manag. Rev . 33, 100856. doi: 10.1016/j.hrmr.2021.
100856
Deterding, S., Dixon, D., Khaled, R., and Nacke, L. (2011). “F rom Game Design
Elements to Gamefulness: Deﬁning ‘Gamiﬁcation.’,” in Proceedings of the 15th
internationalAcademicMindTrekConference:EnvisioningFutureMediaE nvironments
(London:ACMPress),9–15.
Dollhausen, K., and Lattke, S. (2020). “Organisation und Orga nisationsformen
wissenschaftlicher Weiterbildung,” in Handbuch wissenschaftliche Weiterbildung , eds.
W.JütteandM.Rohs(Wiesbaden:SpringerVS),99–121.
Dyckhoﬀ,H.(2006). Produktionstheorie,5thEdn .Berlin:Springer.
Elbeshausen, S. (2023). “C 10 Modellierung von Benutzer∗innen,
Kontextualisierung, Personalisierung,” in Grundlagen der Informationswissenschaft.
7th Edn, eds. R. Kuhlen, D. Lewandowski, W. Semar and C. Womser-Hacke r (Berlin:
DeGruyterSaur),467–476.
European Union (2021). Council Resolution on a New European Agenda
for Adult Learning 2021-2030 (2021/C 504/02). Oﬃcal Journal of t he European
Union.Available online at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?
uri=CELEX:32021G1214(01) (accessedAugust28,2023).
Floridi, L., Cowls, J., Beltrametti, M., Chatila, R., Chazerand , P., Dignum,
V., et al. (2018). AI4People—An ethical framework for a good AI s ociety:
opportunities, risks, principles, and recommendations. Mind Mach 28, 689–707.
doi:10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5
Garibay,O.O.,Winslow,B.,Andolina,S.,Antona,M.,Bodensc hatz,A.,Coursaris,
C.,etal.(2023).Sixhuman-centeredartiﬁcialintelligenceg randchallenges. Int.J.Hum.
Comput.Int .39,391–437.doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2153320
Gericke, E. (2017). Why returning to VET? –Results of a qualitative comparative.
study about English and German Mechatronics. International Journ al for Res. Vocat.
Educ.Train. 4,206–225.doi:10.13152/IJRVET.4.3.2
Golmann,R.,Hagmann,D.,andLoewenstein,G.(2017).Informat ionavoidance. J.
Econ.Lit. 55,96–135.doi:10.1257/jel.20151245
Goppold, M., and Frenz, M. (2020). Lernen im Prozess der Arbeit: E ntwicklung,
Umsetzung und Evaluation einer Weiterbildung zur manuellen Mon tage unter
Einsatz von Autorensystemen. Zeitschrift für Arbeitswissenschaft 74, 100–116.
doi:10.1007/s41449-020-00202-1
Greifeneder, E., and Schlebbe, K. (2023). “D 1 Information Beh aviour.
in Grundlagen der Informationswissenschaft,” in Grundlagen der
Informationswissenschaft. 7th edn. , eds. R. Kuhlen, D. Lewandowski, W. Semar
andC.Womser-Hacker(Berlin,Boston:DeGruyterSaur),497–5 10.
Griesbaum, J. (2023). “D 8 Informationskompetenz,” in Grundlagen der
Informationswissenschaft, 7th Edn. , eds. R. Kuhlen, D. Lewandowski, W. Semar, and
C.Womser-Hacker(Berlin:DeGruyterSaur),581–594.
Grote, G., Ryser, C., Wäﬂer, T., Windischer, A., and Weik, S. (20 00). Kompass–
a method for complementary function allocation in automated wor k systems. Int. J.
Hum.Comput.Stu. 52,267–287.doi:10.1006/ijhc.1999.0289
Gust von Loh, S. (2008). Wissensmanagement und Informations bedarfsanalyse
in kleinen und mittleren Unternehmen: Teil 2: Wissensmanagem ent in KMU. Inf.-
WissenschaftPraxis 59,127–135.
Habayeb, A. (2022). Explainable AI Isn’t Enough; We Need Understandable
AI. Techopedia. Available online at: https://www.techopedia.com/explainable-ai-isnt-
enough-we-need-understandable-ai/2/34671 (accessedJune24,2023).
Hacker, W. (2018). Menschengerechtes Arbeiten in der Digitalisierten Welt .
Zürich:VDF.
Haghighat, P., Nguyen, T., Valizadeh, M., Arvan, M., Parde, N ., Kim,
M., et al. (2023). Eﬀects of an intelligent virtual assistant on oﬃce task
performance and workload in a noisy environment. Appl. Ergon . 109, 103969.
doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2023.103969
Harteis, C. (2022). “Research on workplace learning in times of digitalisation,” in
Research Approaches on Workplace Learning: Insights from a Gro wing Field , eds. C.
Harteis, D. Gijbels, and E. Kyndt (Cham: Springer Internationa l Publishing) 415–428.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-89582-2
Hartel, J. (2019). Turn, Turn, Turn, Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information Science. Ljubljana (Slovenia),
June 16th-19th .https://informationr.net/ir/24-4/colis/colis1901.html (accessed June
29,2023).
Henrichs, N. (2014). “Sozialisation der information. Zum au fgabenspektrum
der informationswissenschaft,” in Menschsein im Informationszeitalter.
Informationswissenschaft mit Leidenschaft und Missionarischem Eifer,ed. N. Henrichs
(Glückstadt:VerlagWernerHülsbusch).Höök,K.(2000).Stepstotakebeforeintelligentuserinterfac esbecomereal. Interact.
Comput.12,409–426.doi:10.1016/S0953-5438(99)00006-5
Huchler, N. (2022). Komplementäre Arbeitsgestaltung. Grundris se eines Konzepts
zur Humanisierung der Arbeit mit KI. Zeitschrift für Arbeitswissenschaft 76, 158–175.
doi:10.1007/s41449-022-00319-5
Huchler,N.,Adolph,L.,Andre,E.,Bauer,W.,Reißner,N.,Müller ,N.,etal.(2020).
KriterienfürdieMensch–Maschine-InteraktionbeiKI .Ansätzefürdiemenschengerechte
Gestaltung in der Arbeitswelt–Whitepaper aus der Plattform Lernende S ysteme.
München:ACATECH.
IEA (2000). What is Ergonomics? Available online at: https://iea.cc/about/what-is-
ergonomics/ (accessedJuly11,2023).
ILO and IEA (2021). Principles and Guidelines for (HFE) Design and Management
ofWorkSystems .Geneva:JointDocumentbyILOandIEA.
Infratest dimap (2023). KI ist eher Risiko als Chance, nicht jedoch für Junge und
Bessergebildete. Umfragen Anal.-Infratest Dimap . Available online at: https://www.
infratest-dimap.de/umfragen-analysen/bundesweit/umfra gen/aktuell/kritischer-
ausblick-auf-deutsch-tuerkische-beziehungen-bei-wied erwahl-erdogans/ (accessed
May12,2023).
Ingwersen,P.,andJärvelin,K.(2005). TheTurn:IntegrationofInformationSeeking
andRetrievalinContext. Cham:SpringerScienceandBusinessMedia.
Ipsos (2022). Opinions About AI Vary Depending on Countries’ Level of Economic
Development. Ipsos . Available online at: https://www.ipsos.com/en/global-opinions-
about-ai-january-2022 (accessedMay132023).
ISO6385(2016). ErgonomicsPrinciplesintheDesignofWorkSystems .
ISO 9241-110 (2020). Ergonomics of Human-System Interaction - Part 110:
InteractionPrinciples .
ISO 9241-2 (1992). Ergonomic Requirements for Oﬃce Work With Visual Display
Terminals(VDTs)-Part2:GuidanceonTaskRequirements .
ISO9241-210(2019). ErgonomicsofHuman-SystemInteraction-Part210:Human-
CentredDesignforInteractiveSystems .
Jetter, H. C. (2023). “D 3 Mensch-Computer-Interaktion, Usa bility und User
Experience,” in Grundlagen der Informationswissenschaft, 7th Edn, eds. R. Kuhlen,
D. Lewandowski, W. Semar, and C. Womser-Hacker (Berlin, Bost on: De Gruyter
Saur),525–534.
Joint Research Center (JRC) (2022). DigComp 2.2: The Digital Competence
Framework for Citizens-With New Examples of Knowledge, Skills and A ttitudes. EU
Publications.doi:10.2760/115376
Jones, W. (2010). No knowledge but through information. First Monday 15, 3602.
doi:10.5210/fm.v15i9.3062
Kao, W.-K., and Huang, Y.-S. (2023). Service robots in full-an d limited-service
restaurants:extendingtechnologyacceptancemodel. J.Hosp.Tour.Manag. 54,10–21.
doi:10.1016/j.jhtm.2022.11.006
Käpplinger, B., and Lichte, N. (2020). The lockdown of physical co -operation
touchestheheartofadulteducation:adelphistudyonimmediat eandexpectedeﬀects
ofCOVID-19. Int.Rev.Educ. 66,777–795.doi:10.1007/s11159-020-09871-w
Karwowski, W., Szopa, A., and Soares, M. (2021). Handbook of Standards and
GuidelinesinHumanFactorsandErgonomics .BocaRaton,WA:CRCPress.
Kosinski, M., Bachrach, Y., Kohli, P., Stillwell, D., and Graepel, T. (2014).
Manifestations of user personality in website choice and beha viour on online social
networks. Mach.Learn .95,357–380.doi:10.1007/s10994-013-5415-y
Kraus,K.(2008).“Doesemployabilityputthegerman‘vocationa lorder’atrisk?An
analysis from the perspective of earning oriented pedagogy,” in Work, Education and
Employability , eds. P. Gonon, K. Kraus, J. Oelkers, and S. Stolz Dernbach (Bern : Peter
Lang),55–81.
Krishnan, C., Gupta, A., Gupta, A., and Singh, G. (2022). “Impact of artiﬁcial
intelligence-based chatbots on customer engagement and busi ness growth,” in
Deep Learning for Social Media Data Analytics Studies in Big Data., eds. T.-P.
Hong, L. Serrano-Estrada, A. Saxena, and A. Biswas (Cham: Spr inger International
Publishing),195–210.
Kuhlen, R. (2004). Information Grundlagen der praktischen Information und
Dokumentation,5thEdn .München:Saur,3–20.
Kurni,M.,Mohammed,M.S.,andSrinivasa,K.G.(2023).“AI-e nabledgamiﬁcation
ineducation,”in ABeginner’sGuidetoIntroduceArtiﬁcialIntelligenceinTeaching and
Learning,eds.M.Kurni,M.S.Mohammed,andS.KG(Cham:Springer),105 –114.
Laato,S.,Tiainen,M.,NajmulIslam,A.K.M.,andMäntymäki, M.(2022).Howto
explainAIsystemstoendusers:asystematicliteraturereview andresearchagenda. Int.
Res.32,1–31.doi:10.1108/INTR-08-2021-0600
Lammers, A., Lukowski, F., and Weis, K. (2022). The relations hip between works
councils and ﬁrms’ further training provision in times of tech nological change. Br. J.
Ind.Relat. 61,392–424.doi:10.1111/bjir.12710
Landgrebe, J., and Smith, B. (2022). Why Machines Will Never Rule the World:
ArtiﬁcialIntelligenceWithoutFear .Abingdon:Routledge.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/six.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 17 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
Langer, M., Oster, D., Speith, T., Hermanns, H., Kästner, L., Schmidt, E., et al.
(2021).Whatdowewantfromexplainableartiﬁcialintelligence( XAI)?–Astakeholder
perspectiveonXaiandaconceptualmodelguidinginterdisciplin aryxairesearch. Artif.
Int.296,103473.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2021.103473
Leichtmann, B., Hinterreiter, A., Humer, C., Streit, M., an d Mara, M. (2023a).
Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence improves human decision-mak ing: results from a
mushroom picking experiment at a public art festival. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Int. 12,
1–18.doi:10.1080/10447318.2023.2221605
Leichtmann,B.,Humer,C.,Hinterreiter,A.,Streit,M.,an dMara,M.(2023b).Eﬀects
ofexplainableartiﬁcialintelligenceontrustandhumanbehavio rinahigh-riskdecision
task.Comput.Hum.Behav. 139,107539.doi:10.1016/j.chb.2022.107539
Lenzen, M. (2019). Künstliche Intelligenz: Was sie kann & was uns erwartet .
München:Beck.
Lewandowski, D., and Womser-Hacker, C. (2023). “D 6 informa tion seeking
behaviour,” in Grundlagen der Informationswissenschaft, 7th Edn , eds. R. Kuhlen, D.
Lewandowski,W.Semar,andC.Womser-Hacker(Berlin:DeGruyt erSaur),553–566.
Lloyd, A. (2013). “Building information resilient workers: th e critical ground of
workplace information literacy. What have we learnt?” in Worldwide Commonalities
andChallengesinInformationLiteracyResearchandPractice:Euro peanConferenceon
InformationLiteracy,ECIL2013, Istanbul:SpringerInternationalPublishing,219–228.
Luger, E., and Sellen, A. (2016). ““Like having a really bad PA”: t he gulf between
user expectation and experience of conversational agents,” i nProceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’16 . New York, NY:
AssociationforComputingMachinery(ACM),5286–5297.
Marsden, N., and Haag, M. (2016). “Stereotypes and politics: re ﬂections on
personas,”in Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing
Systems CHI ’16 . New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM),
4017–4031.
Mazarakis,A.(2013).Likediamondsinthesky–howfeedback canboosttheamount
of available data for learning analytics. Int. J. Technol. Enhanc. Learn . 5, 107–116.
doi:10.1504/IJTEL.2013.059083
Mazarakis, A. (2021). Gamiﬁcation reloaded: current and fut ure trends in
gamiﬁcationscience. i-com20,279–294.doi:10.1515/icom-2021-0025
McCarthy, J. (2007). What is Artiﬁcial Intelligence? Stanford University . Available
online at: https://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/whatisai.pdf (accessed August 29,
2023).
McLean,S.,Read,G.J.,Thompson,J.,Baber,C.,Stanton,N.A. ,andSalmon,P.M.
(2021). The risks associated with artiﬁcial general intellig ence: a systematic review. J.
Exp.Theor.Artif.Int. 24,1–15.doi:10.1080/0952813X.2021.1964003
Merriam, S. B., and Bierema, L. L. (2013). Adult Learning: Linking Theory and
Practice.London:JohnWiley&Sons.
Middleton, L., Hall, H., Muir, L., and Raeside, R. (2018). The in teraction between
people, information and innovation: information literacy to un derpin innovative
work behaviour in a Finnish organization. Proc. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 55, 367–376.
doi:10.1002/pra2.2018.14505501040
Miller, T. (2019). Explanation in artiﬁcial intelligence: insigh ts from the social
sciences.Artif.Int. 267,1–38.doi:10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007
Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, K. W. S., and Qiao, M. S. (2021 a). AI literacy:
deﬁnition, teaching, evaluation and ethical issues. Proc. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 58,
504–509.doi:10.1002/pra2.487
Ng, D. T. K., Leung, J. K. L., Chu, S. K. W., and Qiao, M. S. (2021 b).
ConceptualizingAIliteracy:anexploratoryreview. Comput.Educ.Artif.Int. 2,100041.
doi:10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100041
Nowotny,H.,Scott,P.B.,andGibbons,M.(2001). Re-ThinkingScience .Knowledge
andthePublicinanAgeofUncertainty .Cambridge,MA:Polity.
OECD (2023). Equity and Inclusion in Education: Finding Strength through
Diversity.Paris:OECDPublishing.
OECD.(2019). ArtiﬁcialIntelligenceinSociety .Paris:OECDPublishing.
Pirolli, P., and Card, S. (1999). Information foraging. Psychol. Rev. 106, 643–675.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.106.4.643
Pokorni, B., Braun, M., and Knecht, C. (2021). Menschzentrierte KI-
Anwendungen in der Produktion. Praxis-erfahrungen und Leitfaden zu Bet rieblichen
Einführungsstrategien. Projektbericht im Fortschrittszentrum “Lern ende Systeme”.
Stuttgart:FraunhoferIAO.
Raftopoulos, M., and Hamari, J. (2023). “Artiﬁcial intelligenc e in the workplace:
implementation challenges and opportunities,” in Proceedings of the Americas
ConferenceonInformationSystems(AMCIS)2023 .Cancún:AMCIS.
Rammert, W. (2009). “Hybride Handlungsträgerschaft: Ein so ziotechnisches
ModellverteiltenHandelns,”in IntelligenteObjekte ,eds.O.HerzogandT.Schildhauer
(Berlin:Springer),23–33.
Rauch,W.(1988). WasistInformationswissenschaft? Graz:Kienreich.
Reddy, M. C., and Jansen, B. J. (2008). A model for understand ing collaborative
information behavior in context: a study of two healthcare te ams.Inf. Proc. Manage.
44,256–273.doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2006.12.010Riege,A.(2005).Three-dozenknowledge-sharingbarriersm anagersmustconsider.
J.Knowl.Manag .9,18–35.doi:10.1108/13673270510602746
Rohs, M., and Ganz, M. (2015). MOOCs and the claim of education for
all: a disillusion by empirical data. Int. Rev. Res. Open Distrib. Learn. 16, 1–19.
doi:10.19173/irrodl.v16i6.2033
Schlick, C., Bruder, R., and Luczak, H. (2018). Arbeitswissenschaft, 4th Edn. Berlin,
Heidelberg:SpringerVieweg.
Schnabel, D. (2017). Kompetenzen für die Arbeitswelt Von Heute und
Morgen: 21st Century Skills and Beyond . Available online at: https://
hochschulforumdigitalisierung.de/de/blog/kompetenzen-21 st-century-skills#:
$\sim$:text=Das%2021st%20Century%20Skills%20Modell%20dec kt%20vier
%20Kompetenzfelder,Kritisches%20Denken%204%20Flexibilit %C3%A4t%2C
%20Ambiguit%C3%A4tstoleranz%2C%20Eigenmotivation%2C% 20Selbst%C3
%A4ndiges%20Arbeiten (accessedJune29,2023).
Schön, D. (1983). The Reﬂective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action .
NewYork,NY:BasicBooks.
Shannon, C. (2001). A mathematical theory of communication .ACM SIGMOBILE
Mob.Comput.Commun.Rev. 5,3–55.doi:10.1145/584091.584093
Shneiderman, B. (2020). Human-centered artiﬁcial intellige nce: three fresh ideas.
AISTrans.Hum.-Comput.Interact .12,109–124.doi:10.17705/1thci.00131
Shneiderman, B. (2022). Human-Centered AI . New York, NY: Oxford
UniversityPress.
Sohn, K., and Kwon, O. (2020). Technology acceptance theories and factors
inﬂuencing artiﬁcial intelligence-based intelligent products. Telemat. Inform . 47,
101324.doi:10.1016/j.tele.2019.101324
Spitzley, H. (1980). Wissenschaftliche Betriebsführung, REFA-Methodenlehre und
NeuorientierungderArbeitswissenschaft .Frankfurt:Bund.
Stephanidis, C., Salvendy, G., Antona, M., Chen, J. Y. C., Dong, J., Duﬀy, V. G.,
et al. (2019). Seven HCI grand challenges. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Int . 35, 1229–1269.
doi:10.1080/10447318.2019.1619259
Stock, W., and Stock, M. (2015). Handbook of Information Science . Berlin: De
GruyterSaur.
Swanson,R.A.,andChermack,T.J.(2013). TheoryBuildinginAppliedDisciplines .
SanFrancisco,CA:Berrett-KoehlerPublishers.
Tan, D. Y., and Cheah, C. W. (2021). Developing a gamiﬁed AI-ena bled
online learning application to improve students’ perception of univ ersity
physics. Comput. Educ. Artif. Intell . 2, 100032. doi: 10.1016/j.caeai.2021.
100032
Tang, P. M., Koopman, J., Mai, K. M., De Cremer, D., Zhang, J. H. , Reynders, P.,
et al. (2023). No person is an island: unpacking the work and after -work intelligence.
J.Appl.consequencesofinteractingwithartiﬁcial Psychol.14,1–24.doi:10.1037/apl00
01103
Tocchetti, A., Corti, L., Brambilla, M., and Celino, I. (2022). EXP-crowd: a
gamiﬁed crowdsourcing framework for explainability. Front. Artif. Intell . 5, 826499.
doi:10.3389/frai.2022.826499
Touretzky, D., Gardner-McCune, C., Martin, F., and Seehorn , D.
(2019). Envisioning AI for K-12: what should every child know a bout AI?
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Int. 33, 9795–9799. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.330
19795
Travis, T. A. (2017). From the classroom to the boardroom: the impact of
information literacy instruction on workplace research skills. Educ. Lib. 34, 19–31.
doi:10.26443/el.v34i2.308
Ulich,E.(2011). Arbeitspsychologie.7thEdn .Zürich:VDFHochschulverlag.
UNESCO (2013). Global media and Information Literacy (MIL) Assessment
Framework:CountryReadinessandCompetencies .Paris:UNESCO.
UNESCO(2015). GlobalNetworkofLearningCities .GuidingDocument.Hamburg:
UNESCOInstituteforLifelongLearning.
UNESCO (2019). 4th Global Report on Adult Learning and Education . Hamburg:
UNESCOInstituteforLifelongLearning.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., and Davis, F. D. (200 3). User
acceptance of information technology: toward a uniﬁed view. MIS Q. 12, 425–478.
doi:10.2307/30036540
Wahde, M., and Virgolin, M. (2023). DAISY: an implementation of ﬁve core
principlesfortransparentandaccountableconversationalAI. Int.J.Hum.Comput.Int .
39,1856–1873.doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2081762
Watkins, B. J., and Tisdell, E. J. (2006). Negotiating the labyr inth from margin
to center: adult degree program administrators as program planne rs within Higher
Education Institutions. Adult Educ. Q. 56, 134–159. doi: 10.1177/0741713605
283433
Wersig, G. (1974). Information-Kommunikation-Dokumentation . Darmstadt:
WissenschaftlicheBuchgesellschaft.
Westphal, M., Vössing, M., Satzger, G., Yom-Tov, G. B., and Rafae li,
A. (2023). Decision control and explanations in human-AI collab oration:
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/seven.tnum frontiersin.org

==== Page 18 ====
Mazarakis et al. /one.tnum/zero.tnum./three.tnum/three.tnum/eight.tnum/nine.tnum/frai./two.tnum/zero.tnum/two.tnum/three.tnum./one.tnum/two.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum/zero.tnum/five.tnum/seven.tnum
improving user perceptions and compliance. Comput. Hum. Behav . 144, 107714.
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2023.107714
Whorf,B.L.(1963). Sprache,Denken, Wirklichkeit .BeiträgezurMetalinguistikund
Sprachphilosophie. Hamburg:Rowohlt.
Wilkens, U., Reyes, C. C., Treude, T., and Kluge, A. (2021). Understandings and
Perspectives of Human-Centered AI-a Transdisciplinary Literature Re view. In Bericht
zum67.ArbeitswissenschaftlichenKongress. Dortmund:GfA-Press.
Wilkens, U., Süße, T., and Voigt, B.-F. (2014). “Umgang mit Pa radoxien
von Industrie 4.0–Die Bedeutung reﬂexiven Arbeitshandelns, ” inIndustrie
4.0–Wie intelligente Vernetzung und kognitive Systeme unsere Arbeit
verändern , eds. W. Kersten, H. Koller, and H. Lödding (Berlin: GITO),
199–210.Wilson, J. R. (2014). Fundamentals of systems of ergonomics/h uman factors. Appl.
Ergon.45,5–13.doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2013.03.021
Wilson, T. D. (1999). Models in information behaviour researc h.J. Document. 55,
249–270.doi:10.1108/EUM0000000007145
Wilson, T. D. (2000). Human information behavior. Inf. Sci. 3, 49–55.
doi:10.28945/576
Xu, W., Dainoﬀ, M. J., Ge, L., and Gao, Z. (2023). Transitionin g to
human interaction with ai systems: new challenges and opportuni ties for HCI
professionals to enable human-centered AI. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Int . 39, 494–518.
doi:10.1080/10447318.2022.2041900
Zipf,G.K.(1949). HumanBehaviorandthePrincipleofLeastEﬀort .SanDiego,CA:
HafnerPublishingCompany.
Frontiersin ArtiﬁcialIntelligence /one.tnum/eight.tnum frontiersin.org

