==== Page 1 ====
https://doi.or g/10.1007/s13347-020-00435-2
RESEARCHARTICLE
WhatisInterpretability?
AdrianErasmus1,2·TylerD.P.Brunet2·EyalFisher3
Received:6July2020/Accepted:19October2020/
©TheAuthor(s)2020
Abstract
We argue that artificial networks are explainable and offer a novel theory of
interpretability. Two sets of conceptual questions are prominent in theoretical engage-
ments with artificial neural networks, especially in the context of medical artificial
intelligence: (1) Are networks explainable , and if so, what does it mean to explain the
output of a network? And (2) what does it mean for a network to be interpretable ?
We argue that accounts of “explanation” tailored specifically to neural networks have
ineffectively reinvented the wheel. In response to (1), we show how four familiar
accounts of explanation apply to neural networks as they would to any scientific phe-
nomenon. We diagnose the confusion about explaining neural networks within the
machine learning literature as an equivocation on “explainability,” “understandabil-
ity” and “interpretability.” To remedy this, we distinguish between these notions, and
answer (2) by offering a theory and typology of interpretation in machine learning.
Interpretation is something one does to an explanation with the aim of producing
another, more understandable, explanation. As with explanation, there are various
concepts and methods involved in interpretation: Total orPartial ,Global orLocal ,
andApproximative orIsomorphic . Our account of “interpretability” is consistent with
uses in the machine learning literature, in keeping with the philosophy of explana-
tion and understanding, and pays special attention to medical artificial intelligence
systems.
Keywords Interpretability ·Explainability ·XAI·Medical AI
1 Introduction
Two sets of conceptual problems have gained prominence in theoretical engagements
with artificial neural networks (ANNs). The first is whether ANNs are explainable ,
and, if they are, what it means to explain their outputs. The second is what it means
/envelopebackAdrian Erasmus
ade35@cam.ac.uk
Extended author information available on the last page of the article.Published online: 12 November 2020Philosophy & Technology (2021) 34:833–862

==== Page 2 ====
for an ANN to be interpretable . In this paper, we argue that ANNs are, in one sense,
already explainable and propose a novel theory of interpretability.
These issues often arise in discussions of medical AI systems (MAIS), where
reliance on artificial decision making in medical contexts could have serious conse-
quences. There is evidence that some of these systems have superior diagnostic andpredictive capabilities when compared to human experts (Esteva et al. 2017;F l e m i n g
2018; Rajpurkar et al. 2017; Tschandl et al. 2019). Indeed, many MAIS are already
deployed in the clinic, including algorithms aimed at diagnosing retinal disease (De
Fauw et al. 2018), and breast cancer treatment recommendations (Somashekhar et al.
2018) and screening (McKinney et al. 2020). For some, accomplishments like these
are a precursor to the promising incorporation of machine learning (ML) into effec-tive medical decision making (Wiens and Shenoy 2018). However, others have noted
problems facing MAIS, including vulnerabilities to nefariously motivated adversarial
attacks by various stakeholders in the healthcare system (Finlayson et al. 2019)a n d
algorithmic racial biases in the prediction of future health care needs due to objectivefunctions and training procedures (Obermeyer et al. 2019).
These problems have led to calls for MAIS, and ANNs in general, to be
explainable—that is, if an ANN makes a recommendation, there should be an expla-nation for its decision (Athey 2017; Aler Tubella et al. 2019). In the context of
healthcare, motivated by the need to justify artificial decisions to patients, some
argue that maximizing the benefits of MAIS requires that their outputs be explain-
able (Watson et al. 2019). Others argue that having explainable MAIS makes it easier
to recognize and remedy algorithmic rules which lead to inaccurate outputs (Caru-
ana et al. 2015). On this view, having an explanation allows us to evaluate a MAIS’
recommendations, which some argue is necessary for assessing the trustworthiness
of such systems (see Ribeiro et al. 2016; Mittelstadt et al. 2019).
Issues of explainability have become problematic due to the prominent view that
the accuracy of an AI system trades off against its explainability. We refer to this
as the Accuracy-Explainability ( AE) trade-off (Gunning 2017; London 2019). Many
of the problems MAIS are designed to solve are complicated enough that achieving
a high degree of accuracy requires highly complex ANNs. This, conjoined with the
assumption that highly complex ANNs are “less explainable,” leads to the peculiar
reasoning that if an AI system being more accurate entails low explainability, and iflow explainability entails an inability to assess trustworthiness, then a highly accurate
AI system entails an inability to assess trustworthiness. However, this strikes us as
unintuitive since, presumably, accuracy should count towards trustworthiness.
There are three common strategies for dealing with this problem. Some argue
that simplicity should be favored over accuracy when developing MAIS (Adkins2017;A t h e y 2017). Others argue that we simply need to develop ways of increasing
explainability (Gunning 2017). And for some, there is no problem at all since either
we face similar issues when dealing with human decision makers (London 2019;Z e r -
illi et al. 2019) or because simpler models may sometimes achieve the same degree of
accuracy as more complex algorithms for the same task (Rudin 2019). Yet, all these
approaches turn on what we mean by explanation and what features make explana-
tions “good” or “fitting” for a given account. The literature on ANNs in general, and834 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 3 ====
MAIS in particular, often makes use of the concepts of explainability, understand-
ability andinterpretability, but offer little critical engagement and contain persistent
disagreement on the definitions of these terms (Lipton 2018; Krishnan 2019). More-
over, a central problem plaguing the ML literature is the conflation of these concepts:
Explainability and understandability are treated as if they are synonymous withinterpretability.
Several philosophers have analyzed these concepts more carefully. Zednik ( 2019),
for instance, offers a pragmatic account of opacity to provide a normative framework
detailing different kinds of knowledge that ought to be required by different stake-holders. Explanations, on this view, are the basis for how such knowledge is acquired.Creel’s (2020) account of transparency aims at illuminating recent successes in
reducing algorithmic opacity and providing AI-explanations. Krishnan (2019) arguesthat pursuing definitions of interpretability, and related terms like explainability andunderstandability, is misguided because doing so reduces solutions to opacity-related
problems to merely finding ways to make ANNs more transparent. Her claim that
there are other solutions to these problems, while compelling, does not entail thatdefining interpretability in the context of ANNs should be wholly abandoned, par-
ticularly given the apparent conflation of terms. P ´aez (2019) recommends that focus
should be shifted from explanation to understanding, arguing that traditional expla-
nations of opaque systems are impossible and that understanding can be acquired by
other means which do not require such explanations. Such strategies, P ´aez argues,
exist in ML in the form of interpretive models aimed at understanding how an ANN
functions, and post hoc interpretability aimed at understanding individual decisions.
Taken together these accounts go some way to establishing interpretability as an
important concept in its own right and its use within ML. However, none provide anexplicit account of the term (see Section 4.1) or how it should be used in analyses of
ANNs (Sections 4.2–4.4).
Our first aim is to clearly set the concepts of explainability, understandability, and
interpretability apart. The explosion of different notions of “explanation” in the con-text of AI has reinvented the wheel; philosophers of science have been developingnotions of scientific explanation for nearly a century (Section 2). In contrast to P ´aez’s
(2019) claim that traditional explanations of ANNs are impossible, we argue that foursuch accounts—the Deductive Nomological ,Inductive Statistical, Causal Mechani-
cal,a n dNew Mechanist models—indeed apply to neural networks, as they would to
any scientific phenomenon (Section 3.1). In this sense there is no AE trade-off. The
source of much confusion within the literature is the conflation of “explainability,”“understandability,” and “interpretability” in cases where they are not interchange-
able. Many claims within and surrounding the ML literature are explicitly lodged
as calls for “explainability,” when it is the understandability of existing explanationsthat should be at issue. We briefly unpack the relationship between understanding
and explanation, showing that it is understanding that is defeasible by increasing
complexity (Section 3.2).
We then provide an explicit account of interpretability and offer a typology of
interpretation methods (Section 4). We argue that interpretation is a relation between
two explanations. During the process of interpretation, one explanation gives rise to a835 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 4 ====
more understandable explanation (Section 4.1). As with explanation, there are vari-
eties of interpretation: Total orPartial (Section 4.2), Global orLocal (Section 4.3),
and Approximative orIsomorphic (Section 4.4). Our account of interpretability is
consistent with many uses within AI, in keeping with philosophy of explanation
and understanding, and provided with special attention to the accuracy-complexityrelationship in MAIS.
2 TheIndefeasibilityofExplanation
In the aim for explainable AI (XAI) we ought to work with well-theorized concep-
tions of explanation. There are many accounts of scientific explanation; we deploy
those most germane to the problem of separating out “interpretability” as a spe-
cial epistemic activity. While the recent uses of concepts of “interpretability” and
“interpretation” are variously and sometimes inconsistently defined (see Section 4),
“explanation” has a far longer and more rigorous conceptual history. Philosophers
have reflected on the nature of explanation since before Socrates, but the modern
discussion began in the late 1940s with Hempel and Oppenheim ( 1948).
We focus on the four models of explanation that have received the most signif-
icant attention: The Deductive Nomological model; the Inductive Statistical model;the Casual Mechanical model; and, more recently, the New Mechanist model. In this
section, we will briefly outline each of these models and argue that explanations ofeach variety are indefeasible to complexity; that is, increasing the complexity of a
phenomenon does not make it any less explainable.
1Establishing the indefeasibility
of explanation is the first step to recognizing that the alleged trade-off between accu-
racy (complexity) of ANNs and their explainability is misguided. Conceiving of this
trade-off in terms of “explainability” has led to confusion in the debates surrounding
interpretability and trust in MAIS. We argue that when there is a trade-off at all, it is
with understanding, not explanation.
2.1 FourKindsofExplanation
Each model of explanation has the same broad structure. An explanation consists
of an explanandum ,a n explanans and some process of explanation connecting the
explanans to the explanandum (see Fig. 1).
ForDeductive Nomological (DN) explanation (see Fig. 2) in particular, a success-
ful explanation must satisfy two conditions (Hempel and Oppenheim 1948;H e m p e l
1965). First, the process of explanation must take the form of a sound deductive argu-
ment. Second, the explanans must have an essential nomic premise, i.e., at least one
law of nature orlaw-like proposition without which the deduction would be invalid.
For example, the movement of a steel bearing on a flat table can be explained usingthe law, “all ferrous metals are physically attracted to magnetic fields” in conjunctionwith the fact that magnet has been brought close to the bearing.
1Readers familiar with these accounts of explanation may safely skip to Section 2.2.836 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 5 ====
Fig.1 The general structure of explanation
While the DN model is good for illustrating the explanation of phenomena which
result from deterministic laws, it does not capture the characteristics of probabilis-
tic events. In response to this, Hempel (1965) introduced Inductive Statistical (IS)
explanation. IS explanation involves the inference of an individual event from a sta-
tistical law and empirical information about the event (see Fig. 2). For example, the
increased probability of having breast cancer given a mutated BRCA1 gene in con-
junction with a particular patient having a mutated BRCA1 gene explains the patient
having breast cancer. Here, the relation between the explanandum and the explanans
is inductive because all that can be inferred from the information given is there beinga higher or lower probability that the patient has breast cancer. If the probability of
having breast cancer given that the patient has a mutated BRCA1 gene were lower,
then even if the patient has breast cancer, this information cannot be used to explain
Fig.2 The structures of DN and IS explanation837 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 6 ====
it. The basic idea then is that the success of an IS explanation depends on whether
the explanans entails a higher probability of the explanandum obtaining.
Two decades after Hempel’s work on the DN and IS models, Salmon ( 1984) pro-
posed the Causal Mechanical (CM) model, which he claims highlights the central
role of causation in explanation.2The idea behind the CM model is that explanation
involves showing how the explanandum fits into the causal structure of the world.
There are two important aspects of causation which feature in CM explanations. The
most basic of these, a causal process , is the ability to transfer a mark or its own
physical structure in a spatio-temporally continuous way. An example of this wouldbe the movement of sound waves through air, or the movement of a particle throughspace. The second, a causal interaction, occurs when causal processes interact with
one another resulting in a modified structure. Examples include sound wave interfer-ence, or the collision of particles. A successful CM explanation involves citing someparts of the causal processes and causal interactions which lead to the phenomenon
in question (see Fig. 3). We might, for instance, explain the phenomenon of noise
cancellation by citing the existence of two sound waves, one with inverted phase to
the other (the causal processes) interfering with one another (the causal interaction).
A cluster of views of explanation has recently emerged, all termed New Mechanist
(NM). These views all center on the idea that providing a mechanism is important forexplanation, and originate largely from the work of Machamer et al. ( 2000), Bech-
tel (2011), and Craver and Darden (2013). The idea behind NM accounts is thatproviding an explanation involves showing how some phenomena arise from a col-lection of entities and activities (see Fig. 3).
3,4A successful explanation involves
identifying the entities and activities that bring about a phenomenon with regular-ity and without gaps, missing entities or activities. For example, an explanation ofprotein synthesis will need to identify the entities involved (ribosomes, aminoacyl-
tRNAs, mRNAs, GTP, etc.) and the activities (binding of mRNA to the ribosome,
hydrolysis of GTP, translocation of mRNA within the ribosome, etc.), which are
typically depicted in the form of a mechanistic diagram of the sort familiar from
textbook mechanisms. A mechanism also includes two special collections of enti-
ties and activities, the initial or “set-up” and the final or “termination” conditions, in
this case the binding of mRNA to the ribosome and the final release of a synthesized
protein respectively. However, to better describe biological mechanisms exhibitingcyclic organizations, some argue that such conditions are not necessary for mech-
anistic explanations (Bechtel 2011). Yet, since ANNs are never cyclic, Machamer
et al.’s characterization of mechanisms is apt for explaining such systems. Moreover,
2Prior to this, Salmon (1971) proposed his statistical relevance model of explanation. Although we do not
cover it here, it is worth noting that he does not wholly abandon the notion of statistical relevance, but
rather claims that one typically acquires information about statistically relevant relations before providing
a CM explanation.
3This conception of explanation derives from examination of molecular-biology and neurophysiology,
specifically, mechanisms of protein synthesis and neurotransmitter release.
4As Levy (2013) notes, advocates of the explanatory value of mechanisms are “fairly coy” (p. 102) about
defining the key notions, a matter further complicated by a lack of universal terminology. E.g., sometimes“parts” are discussed instead of “entities” (Bechtel 2006). However, for present purposes only the outlines
of the NM approach are required.838 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 7 ====
Fig.3 The structures of CM and NM explanation
when ANNs are recurrent, the pathways can always be unrolled and mechanistically
depicted.
There are several criticisms of the accounts of explanation described above (see
Salmon 1989; Skillings 2015; Godfrey-Smith 2016). While we do not have the space
to engage with all of these, there are two that may have implications for the arguments
that follow, and are thus worth addressing. First, it may be argued that some of the
typically cited challenges facing DN, IS, and CM explanations, such as explanatory
asymmetry and explanatory irrelevance, are the result of disregard for, or inadequate
treatment of the role of causation in explanation (Woodward 2003). Woodward’s
(2003) causal-interventionist account of explanation, according to which successful
explanations exhibit patterns of counterfactual dependence, may help deal with these
issues, particularly when it comes to the problem of explanatory relevance. Since weargue in Section 3that ANNs are explainable using the traditional models described
above, it may be argued that our account of interpretability could inherit some ofthese issues. We agree that the causal-interventionist account may be useful for solv-ing some questions about explainability, understandability, and interpretability in AI
(P´aez2019). Indeed, we describe interpretability processes in Section 4.3some of
which result in understandable explanations which include counterfactual informa-
tion, however, the causal-interventionist account includes pragmatic elements that
we maintain should not count against a phenomenon’s explainability, namely that
an explanation should be “deeper or more satisfying” (Woodward 2003: 190) than
those provided by DN, IS, or CM explanations. Of course, we agree that some expla-nations can be more preferable than others given some explanatory virtue, such as
simplicity, but we disagree that such virtues should be considered when evaluating
theexplainability of a phenomenon.
Second, proponents of the ontic conception of explanation, according to which
explanations are physical composites of the entities being represented, may argue thatthe characterization of NM explanation above is misguided. Explanations, on this
view, are not depictions orrepresentations of the mechanisms which constitute the
phenomenon, but rather physical entities themselves which actively contribute to the839 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 8 ====
causal structure of the world. Accordingly, there is “no question of explanations being
‘right’ or ‘wrong,’ or ‘good’ or ‘bad.’ They just are.” (Craver 2007: 27). The ontic
conception supports our position regarding the indefeasability of explanation below.
It does so, however, in a way we find problematic. On a strongly ontic conception of
explanation, there isan objective explanation of ANNs, provided only that there are
ANNs. Since there are ANNs, they would be automatically objectively explainable
on this conception of NM. But this purchases the indefeasibility thesis at the cost of
relevance to issues of explainability in ML. Calls for XAI are not, to our minds, calls
for objective explanations.
Like Craver (2007), we hold that what makes something an explanation is not
some set of pragmatic conditions such as whether it produces understanding, orwhether it is a “good” explanation because it satisfies some set of explanatory virtues,
but rather whether it accurately maps onto the world via any one of the explanationprocesses outlined above. Our concern with explanations and use of the concept of
explanation are with “explanatory texts” (Craver 2007), that is, how explanations are
given by scientists, ML researchers in particular. Nonetheless, our rejection of the
involvement of pragmatic conditions does not entail or require the strong ontic thesis
above. We only emphasize that, even if one finds an explanation undesirable because
it does not satisfy some particular set of explanatory virtues or pragmatic conditions,that does not make it any less an explanation. And if there is an explanation for a
given phenomenon, then that phenomenon is explainable.
2.2 TheIndefeasabilityThesis
Unfortunately, the well-developed typology of explanation models described above
is largely neglected in discussions of explainability in neural networks. Those who
argue for the inverse relationship between complexity and explainability for ANNs
have overlooked an important feature of explanation as it is understood above: its
indefeasibility . They often treat complex MAIS as though they had outgrown their
explainability, but this is not quite right. In fact, the explainability of a phenomenon—
such as the output of an AI system—depends only on the relationships between our
background theories and evidence, and the procedures of the explanation process
used. In other words, in each of the accounts of explanation introduced above, thefeatures that make something an explanation turn out to be invariant with respect to
the complexity of both the explanans and the explanandum. What the considerations
in this subsection illustrate is the following indefeasibility thesis for explanation ofthe phenomena characteristic of ANNs: Adding complexity to the explanation of the
phenomenon does not entail that the phenomenon is any less explainable .
This is not a claim about the quality, superiority, or goodness of a given explana-
tion. Our concern is whether increasing the complexity of a given explanation makesit no longer an explanation. We argue that, while increasing complexity may reduce
the quality of the explanation, by making it less preferable or understandable (seeSection 3.2), or even in some cases make it a bad explanation, it does notmake it
any less an explanation, and thus the explainability of the phenomenon of interest is
unaffected. We clarify this position by looking at each kind of explanation in turn.840 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 9 ====
Consider a DN explanation of some phenomenon beginning with a simple
explanans, a set of law-like premises Land empirical observations E, that con-
cludes with the explanandum/description of a phenomenon xafter a valid deduction.
What makes this a DN explanation is just that the explanandum is reached deduc-
tively using an explanans that is partially law-like. Now consider what happens if weexpand the explanans to include more premises, which are consistent with our best
background theories and evidence, say by substituting one of the law-like premises
for a set of nlaws jointly entailing it. This may make the explanans less manageable
or more difficult to understand, but we still have a DN explanation. That is, if xfol-
lows deductively from L+E, then it also follows from L
∗={L1+L2+...+Ln}+E,
where L1...nare (complexity-increasing) laws which, taken together, entail L.T h e
expansion of the explanans does not make its laws any less law-like nor its conclusionany less deductively valid. Put another way, the explanandum is no less explainable,since the connection to the explanans, no matter complexity, is still deduction.
We might also increase the complexity of a DN explanation by substituting the
empirical observations with a more complex set of observations, say by describingthem at a more concrete level of abstraction, or with more accuracy. To account for
how these observations play a role in explaining the phenomenon of interest, we may
require a more complex set of laws. Suppose we have the explanans L+Eas before,
and consider some more complex set of true laws L*and/or more complex set of
empirical observations E*from which xfollows. Since L*is a set of laws (or at
least law-like propositions), and E*is a set of empirical observations, the deduction
ofxfrom this (more complex) pair constitutes a DN explanation of x.A sa b o v e ,t h e
explainability of xdoes not depend on the complexity of its explanans, but on whether
the relationship between explanans and explanandum is deductive. To illustrate, con-sider the example of the steel bearing moving on the flat table from before. We might
increase the complexity of the explanation by noting more empirical observations,
such as the initial distance of the magnet from the bearing, surface friction forces, and
so on. Or we may explain the movement of the steel bearing by using more detailed
laws including those governing the total induced magnitude of force on the ferro-magnetic material’s volume, and laws of motion, among others. These laws, taken
together, entail that ferrous metals are attracted to magnetic fields. While this more
complex explanation may be more difficult to understand, and is by most accountsless appealing than the simpler one, it is still a DN explanation for the movement of
the steel bearing on the flat table.
Importantly, not all ways of changing an explanans are only additions of complex-
ity, some changes affect the quality of the explanation produced. For example, wemight change a satisfying DN explanation of the dissolution of salt to append adjunct
claims about the dissolution of “hexed salt” (see Kyburg ; Salmon 1989). In doing
so, we included irrelevant information, since the hexing presumably plays no part in
the dissolving of salt. However, we do not defeat a DN explanation by conjoining it
with adjunct, irrelevant premises—though perhaps we worsen it markedly. Note, ifwe had changed the explanans to say only that “all and only hexed salt dissolves” and
removed claims that “all salt dissolves,” then we would have failed to provide a DN
explanation—since that assumption is inconsistent with our best background theoriesand evidence. That sort of change is not an addition of complexity, it is a substi-841 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 10 ====
tution of logically distinct premises. Moreover, the complexity introduced in highly
accurate ANNs is not irrelevant in this way; there is no worry that explainability isdefeated by magical or irrelevant suppositions about complex MAIS.
The situation is somewhat different for IS explanations. Suppose we have an IS
explanation of some phenomenon starting with statistical laws Sand empirical facts
Eand ending with some inductively inferred conclusion as its explanandum, which
might be some particular outcome xor a probability of such an outcome Pr(x) =p
(see Woodward 1989, 2019). Now assume we discover that some other statistical
laws or empirical facts Care relevant to the phenomenon in question. Notice that
additional statistical laws or empirical facts will, under certain conditions, affect (theprobability of) the explanandum. However, our aim is not to show that increasing
the complexity of the explanans does not affect the support for the explanandum.
That is, if xfollows inductively from S+Ewith support p(orPr(x) =pfollows
inductively from S +E), then xfollows inductively from S+E+Cwith support
p±c(orPr(x) =p±cfollows inductively from S+E+C).
5What’s important
here is that despite increased complexity, the process of explanation is the same, sothe relationship between the explanans and explanandum remains one we are happy
to call explanation. Of course, the explanandum may thereafter be explained with
low probability, making the explanation less “successful” or “good,” but not makingthe explanandum less explainable by the inductive process of IS explanation.
Similarly, increasing the complexity of the explanans in CM explanations does
not make the explanandum any less explainable. Consider a CM explanation whichappeals to a particular set of causal processes Pand set of causal interactions Iwhich
together bring about phenomenon x. We might discover additional causal processes
and/or causal interactions, which are relevant to x(say by uncovering finer grained
details about the particular causal process) such that a more complex set of causal
processes P*and/or set of causal interactions I*together bring about x. While these
new sets of causal features may make the explanation harder to follow, they do notmake the CM explanation any less an explanation than before. In other words, just
because P*+I*is more complex than P+I, does not make xany less explain-
able by the former than it is by the latter. Similarly for an NM explanation. Such an
explanation will depict relevant entities Eand activities Aas responsible for the phe-
nomenon xin question. While the discovery of additional entities E*and/or activities
A*may make the explanation of xless intelligible, it does not make the phenomenon
any less explainable than before. Complex mechanisms are mechanisms no less.
Indeed, there may be system dynamics of some phenomena, such as a high degree
of stochasticity (Skillings 2015; Godfrey-Smith 2016), that make the discovery and
articulation of mechanisms or causal processes difficult, or proposed mechanisms
dissatisfying. Nonetheless, granted some existing mechanism or process, addingcomplexity to it in the form of entities and activities, even stochastic activities, does
not destroy the mechanism. Similarly, some may worry that complex ANNs are
nondecomposable, which is to say, they are impossible to (mechanistically) explain
5There are cases where the addition of an empirical fact may lead to a deductive explanation, for our
purpose we can treat this as a trivial case of inductive explanation, where the probability is zero or one.842 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 11 ====
because they are so hierarchically complex that we cannot assume that the interac-
tions between the relevant entities and their activities can be described linearly (seeBechtel and Richardson 2010). However, even if concerns surrounding nondecom-
posability are warranted in other domains, they do not apply to ANNs since suchsystems, as we argue below, can be described in NM terms.
Together, we take these considerations to establish the indefeasibility thesis as
stated above. The reader may justly worry that this thesis has been bought at toohefty a price, since they are asked to admit many “bad” or “dissatisfying” cases as
explanations. In part, this is just the price of doing science, where many explanations,
perhaps even many we find good or satisfying today, turn out not to live up to thestandards of good explanation. Of particular interest in this connection is when an
explanation is deemed bad or dissatisfying because it does not produce understand-
ing. Happily, some of the procedures of science in general and ML in particular aimdirectly at remedying this by producing better or more satisfying explanations from
those less so. We define and explicate these procedures in the context of ML below
(Sections 4.1–4.4), collectively under the heading of interpretability methods. Some
of these bad explanations are remedied in the course of good science. For now, we
turn to the specifics of applying these varieties of explanation to MAIS, confident that
the complexity added to MAIS is immaterial to explainability, even if dissatisfying.
3 TheExplanationintheMachine:MedicalAISystems
Having established the indefeasibility of explanation, we can apply it to the explain-ability of MAIS. In this section, we argue that even extremely complex MAIS canbe explained using each of the models of explanation outlined above. The upshot
here is that the trade-off problem is not one of explainability—we do have access
to explanations of MAIS. Taken together, each account of explanation applies to
ANNs as it would to any other scientific phenomenon of interest, what differs is
our capacity to understand these explanations. The precise problem is the difficultly
of understanding the explanations of complex ANNs. This is because, in contrast
to explanation, understanding is defeasible. The AE trade-off problem should there-
fore strictly be cast as an issue of providing understanding of complex AI systems.
Conveniently, a plausible solution to this problem has already been proposed: inter-
pretability. A further problem, however, is that there is little agreement over exactly
what interpretability is, an issue we deal with in Section 4.
3.1 MedicalAISystemsAreExplainable
It is possible to explain MAIS using each of the four models outlined above. What
follows are explanation-sketches (see Hempel 1965) of how ANNs can be explained
using each model. To illustrate, take a recent deep learning MAIS, developed by
MIT and MGH researchers, which is designed to identify and assess dense breast
tissue, an independent risk factor for breast cancer. An associated study shows that
this system closely matches the reliability of expert radiologists in evaluating breasttissue density and that the MAIS has been successfully deployed in a clinic setting843 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 12 ====
(Lehman et al. 2019). It is built on a ResNet-18 convolutional neural network (CNN)
used for computer vision tasks.6The model was trained and tested using a dataset of
58,894 randomly selected mammograms from 39,272 women between January 2009
and May 2011. Of these, 41,479 were used for training and 8,977 for testing. In the
testing phase, the MAIS matched with expert assessment at 77% across a standardBreast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS), which categorizes tissue in
four ways: fatty, scattered, heterogenous, and dense. In binary tests, either dense or
non-dense tissue, the model matched expert assessments at 87%. Subsequently, the
MAIS was deployed for testing in a clinical setting at MGH and performed well,
matching with expert assessments across all four BI-RADS categories at 90% andat 94% for binary tests. The basic idea is that the MAIS takes inputted images and
outputs a classification according to categories for breast cancer risk.
To understand how this MAIS can be explained, we must know a little about its
system architecture. The ResNet-18 consists of 18 layers. The first 17 layers areall convolution layers, and the last is a fully connected network. This type of ANN
model is most commonly used to classify images—it takes an image and outputs aclassification.
7This is done by feeding the image to the ANN’s input layer as a set
of numbers which then get processed through the ANNs weighted nodes and edgesand outputted as a vector of real numbers. Typically, the image will then be assignedto the most probable class.
The DN model can be used to explain any particular image classification produced
by this MAIS. A DN explanation of how the MAIS assesses an input image involveslisting the weights attached to each and every node and the informational routes indi-
cated by each and every edge at every convolution stage, and the weights of the fully
connected network along with the assigned numerical values being fed into the inputlayer and the network architecture. Once we have that, we can list the values for the
classifications the MAIS learned in the training and testing phases of development,
and see that its classification of the image is based on comparing the ranges of these
classifications with the output value of the image. In doing so, we are explaining the
explanandum—here, the MAIS classifying of image Ias classification c—using an
explanans consisting of a law-like premises—in this case, how the weights of all rel-
evant nodes and edges produced the output value, along with the law that an output
is assigned to the most probable class—and additional information about I—which
includes the set of input values assigned to I, and the output value c.
While the DN model gives us an explanation of specific classifications, the IS
model can help explain the probability that the MAIS’s classifications are accurate.Broadly, the accuracy of the outputs of ANNs can be explained by appealing to details
about the training process as statistical laws and the nature of the training data used as
6A CNN is an ANN particularly adept at detecting patterns in images. It uses convolutional layers to
split an image up into overlapping tiles, which are then analyzed for learned patterns before the signal is
outputted to subsequent layers (see Goodfellow et al. 2016, Chapter 9).
7While we use an example of a diagnostic MAIS, viz. a classifier, our arguments apply to ANNs designed
for other goals, such as automated planning and personalized recommendations.844 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 13 ====
empirical information.8If these, taken together, inductively entail a probability that
the ANN’s outputs are accurate, then we have successfully explained the accuracy of
the ANN’s outputs. In the case of the MAIS above, we can explain its high degree of
accuracy, here the matching with expert assessments, by citing the training procedure
and details about the mammogram image dataset used.
For CM explanations of ANNs, we would cite the causal processes and causal
interactions involved. This would entail describing the ANN using oft-used termsof art, drawing on biological analogies. ANNs are constituted by connected nodes,
sometimes referred to as artificial neurons that, like biological neurons, receive andsend information, or signals, via connections resembling biological synapses, termed
edges. Signals are typically approximations of real numbers that, when received by
nodes as inputs , are processed using some non-linear function of their weighted sum,
and sent as outputs to other nodes. Nodes typically have weights (and biases), which
are tuned when the ANN is trained. These weights control the strength of outputsignals and can, in the case of nodes with thresholds, determine whether a signal is
sent at all. The nodes in ANNs are typically organized into layers, which can perform
different tasks by processing their inputs in different ways. Two layers are special:
theinput layer where information is fed into the ANN and the output layer which
returns a result. Typically, each of the output nodes provides a probability that the
input belongs to a particular class. The connections between nodes are essentially
functions of the data that is fed into them. Information is fed into the input layer
and passes through the different layers until it reaches the output layer, producinga classification. This sort of description can be applied to particular ANNs like the
MAIS above. Feeding the mammogram image into the input layer of the ResNet-
18 and the convolutional operations of each layer are causal processes, while thesignals sent between the different nodes and layers are causal interactions. These
causal processes and interactions lead to the output of the MAIS.
For NM explanations of ANNs one has a choice between levels. We can explain
the phenomenon of classification at a high level of abstraction, including in our
mechanism only the coarse input-output depiction of an ANN; at the level of theabstraction of nodes, signals, and edges; or delve into the details of a mechanistic
explanation at the level of the hardware circuitry involved in computation. Jacobson
(1959), for example, shows how circuit-board diagrams generally can be abstractedinto simpler networks of nodes and connecting edges, and the same process can,
in principle, apply to any ANN. A circuit or hardware-level mechanistic depiction
requires specifying the relevant entities and activities involved and depicting howtheir arrangement and interconnection results in the computation of a classification
output from inputted image data. Arguably though, this sort of reduction to electrical
signals and processes of computation is not the ideal level of mechanistic explanation.Machamer et al. describe the importance of selecting the right level of explanation
8Karimi et al. ( 2020) deploy an approach that allows assessment of the classifications of ANNs on the basis
of causal information associated with the generation of training data. Provided such causal information is
obtained by statistical assessment of the target for MAIS classification, it can figure in either IS or CM
explanations of ANN accuracy.845 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 14 ====
in terms of “bottoming out” of mechanisms—describing mechanisms typically ends
at a level “accepted as relatively fundamental or taken as unproblematic” ( 2000: 13)
by a given discipline. In the context of explaining MAIS classification, we can pre-
sumably treat hardware processes as elementary and focus on ANN architecture. At
least, until there is some indication that features of MAIS classification turn on lowerlevel mechanisms, the explanation ends there.
Just as with CM explanation above, the essential features of an NM explanation
relevant to MAIS will involve identifying entities (nodes and layers) and activities
(signaling, input and output), start-up conditions (input data and configuration of the
network) and termination conditions (output of and thresholds for classification), theessentials of which are described above. Indeed, there may also be “higher level”
mechanistic explanations, which identify more intuitive activities of specific layers or
nodes, and these might be more easily “understood” or “visualized” than the mech-anistic depiction of the architecture of ANNs (see Section 4.1, and Lipton ( 2018)
on decomposability). But the existence of higher-level explanations does not preventNM explanation of MAIS at the level of ANNs themselves.
We stress the importance of distinguishing between whether a mechanism is sat-
isfactory or good at some level of abstraction, and whether it is a genuine NMexplanation. There is justifiable concern about whether a given NM explanation of anANN is a good one, particularly when that ANN itself is treated as a model of some
other phenomena we are interested in explaining (e.g., the mammalian neocortex,
see Buckner 2019). But the provision of an NM explanation must of course precede
assessment of its quality. Moreover, MAIS are in some ways actually simpler than the
usual targets for NM explanations—biological neurons—since the NM explanations
of MAIS in their current form need not account for chemical or analogue features ofartificial neurons.
The above discussion illustrates that explanations of ANNs are available to us. The
AE trade-off, posed as an issue of “explainability” as it commonly is in ML literature,
is therefore not as problematic as one might think.
It is worth considering a possible challenge to our position. Some have argued
that the traditional accounts of explanation outlined above are incomplete becausethey do not take pragmatic elements into account (e.g., van Fraassen 1980;A c h i n -
stein 1983). For instance, it has been suggested that explanations are only good or
successful when they provide understanding, and that explanations should exhibit
a proper relationship to their audience (Potochnik 2016). Consequently, some may
contend that our view fails to adequately account for the context or subject for which
a given explanation is intended. According to this objection, the explanations of
ANNs provided by the traditional models outlined above should not really be con-
sidered explanations at all since they do not guarantee understanding of the outputsgiven to us by AI systems. While our position is bound to be contentious to some
ML researchers and philosophers favoring pragmatic accounts of explanation, there
are several reasons for preferring it over such accounts—particularly in efforts todisentangle interpretability from explainability.
First, our view is compatible with widely accepted pluralism about explanation.
Pragmatic accounts are also pluralist, but part of the pragmatist argument against
traditional accounts is that these assume some overarching account of explanation846 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 15 ====
which covers all contexts, but this is misguided. When explaining ANNs, we can use
the account most suited to our given aims. That is, when providing explanations ofthese traditional sorts, we can account for features of explanatory contexts without
adopting a pragmatic account of explanation itself. Second, these traditional models
of explanation share a common structure (Fig. 1) that we find helpful in defining
interpretation. Indeed, since pragmatists do not dispute this common structure but add
to it, the general features of our account of interpretation are adaptable to pragmatic
accounts of explanation. Only, they will need to employ more conceptual machinery
than necessary to provide an analogous account of interpretability.
Third, and most important, one of the aims of this paper is to argue for the value
of separating explanation and understanding in the context of XAI. That is not tosay that these concepts are wholly separate. In the next subsection, we contend, in
line with much recent work in philosophy of understanding, that explanation andunderstanding are indeed related, just not as strictly as many ML researchers and
proponents of pragmatic accounts think. Further to this, by setting these notions apart
we demonstrate that the problem of complexity really lies in its tendency to trade offagainst understandability. This is crucial to developing an account of interpretability
which successfully describes many of the methods used by many ML researchers for
increasing understanding of ANNs.
3.2 SeparatingExplanationandUnderstanding
Before developing an account of interpretability we must parse part of the rela-
tionship between explanation and understanding. There has recently been a surge
of philosophical interest in the concept of understanding (see de Regt et al. 2009;
Strevens 2011, 2013; Potochnik 2016;d eR e g t 2017; Khalifa 2017). Although a full
characterization of the concept is well beyond the scope of this paper, these existingaccounts illuminate the important differences between understanding and explanation
which, we argue, illustrate the defeasibility of understanding.
Some contemporary accounts of science affect somewhat of a revolution by
switching focus from explanation to understanding. Because of this, some may betempted to align them with the pragmatic notions of explanation referred to previ-
ously. Common to these accounts, however, are the claims that (1) understandingnecessarily involves having an explanation and (2) understanding demands satisfying
some other condition(s) which are not dependent on the qualities of the explana-
tion alone .
9Though, there is little consensus about what these other conditions are.
Most agree with Potochnik (2016) that this will involve some relationship between
the explanation and the explainer or audience, but disagree about what relationship is
required. For instance, de Regt holds that, “A phenomenon P is understood scientifi-cally if and only if there is an explanation of P that is based on an intelligible theory
T and conforms to the basic epistemic values of empirical adequacy and internal
consistency” (2017, p. 93, our emphasis). Strevens ( 2013) argues that understanding
9A notable exception is Lipton (2009), who argues that we can have understanding without explanation.
However others, including Strevens (2013) and Khalifa (2017), have disputed this.847 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 16 ====
involves “grasping” a correct scientific explanation, and characterizes this in terms
of possessing a particular psychological state . Khalifa (2017) agrees that one under-
stands a phenomenon to the extent that they “grasp” an “explanatory nexus,” but
elaborates that grasping refers to a cognitive state resembling scientific knowledge.
In stating that an explanation is necessary for understanding, condition (1) helps
illustrate the untenability of the claim that if something fails to give rise to under-standing, then it is not an explanation. Accepting, in line with much current work on
understanding, that (1) is true amounts to accepting that if you understand some phe-
nomenon then you can explain it, or contrapositively that if you cannot explain some
phenomenon then you do not understand it. It would be false to conclude from (1)that if you do not understand some phenomenon then you cannot explain it. Simply
put, you can explain things you cannot understand—doing just this is surely a part
of the learning process and perhaps a psychological preliminary to understandinggenerally—you just cannot understand things you cannot explain.
Where explanation and understanding are set apart is in terms of (2). Whatever
particular view of understanding one may prefer—whether it’s “grasping,” “intelligi-bility,” “apprehending,” or “knowing”—it is, at least in part, subjective or contextual.
The intelligibility of a scientific theory, which is necessary for understanding in de
Regt’s account, is by his own lights dependent on a scientist’s being able to “rec-ognize the qualitatively characteristic consequences of T without performing exact
calculations” (2017, p. 102; also see de Regt and Dieks 2005). What this means is
that intelligibility, and thus understanding, partially relies on subjective features of
the individual who is trying to understand the phenomenon in question. For both
Khalifa and Strevens, grasping an explanation, and thus whether a given explanation
actually provides understanding, will turn on psychological features specific to theuser of that explanation, e.g., on features of the scientist, engineer, doctor or patient.
Plainly, what is understandable to Sally might not be to John; what is understandable
to the engineer of an ANN may not be to a radiologist or the person using a MAIS.
Taken together, (1) and (2) show two things: First, the pragmatic objection to
the explainability of ANNs is misguided, thus strengthening the argument thatexplainability is guaranteed by the sorts of things that appear in the explanans and
their relationship to the explanandum. That is why explainability is indefeasible
by increasing complexity: The properties of the explanans and relationship to theexplanandum remain the same come whatever complexity.
Second, because one’s understanding is conditional on subjective features
(whether psychological, cognitive, or contextual), it is not impervious to complexity.The ability some agent has to understand varies between individuals and is sensi-
tive to the complexity of both the explanans and the process of relating it to some
explanandum, phenomenon. Understanding, in contrast to explanation, isdefeasi-
ble. If ANNs are strictly speaking explainable but often those explanations are not
understandable, then what is needed is methods for making those explanations more
understandable. This is precisely the reason that we need to move beyond mereindividual explanations to interpretation.848 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 17 ====
4 Interpretability
[T]he paucity of critical writing in the machine learning community is prob-
lematic. When we have a solid problem formulation, flaws in methodology can
be addressed by articulating new methods. But when the problem formulationitself is flawed, neither algorithms nor experiments are sufficient to address the
underlying problem. (Lipton 2018)
We contend that much confusion in the debate about, and push for, XAI can beattributed to a conflation of explainability and interpretability. Interpretation has been
devised and variously defined within the sciences themselves (Ribeiro et al. 2016;
Mittelstadt et al. 2019; Lipton 2018; Krishnan 2019;P ´aez2019). We cannot fault
philosophers or scientists for misunderstanding the scientific notion of interpretationsince there is no single such notion to rely on. Indeed, interpretability is often con-nected directly with explanation and understanding, although by way of equation or
equivocation which we find unhelpful. Lipton ( 2018) says of interpretability that it
“reflects several distinct concepts,” which is to say that it is used inconsistently, or atbest equivocally. Indeed some, like Miller (2019, 8), are happy to accept the equation
of interpretability with explainability. Our view is that is it best to set these conceptsapart. We begin below with an account of interpretation, from which an account of
interpretability follows straightforwardly as the ability to provide an interpretation.
4.1 WhatisInterpretation?
Fundamentally, interpretation is something that one does to an explanation to make
it more understandable. When we do not find an explanation understandable, we ask
for it to be interpreted. We can also talk of “interpreting data,” “interpreting a phe-
nomenon,” or “interpreting an ANN” but when these do not mean precisely the samething as “explaining data,” “explaining a phenomenon,” or “explaining an ANN” then
these uses are derivative of the notion of interpretability we propose here. To “inter-
pret data” is to do something to an explanation of/involving data; to interpret an ANNis to do something to an explanation of/involving the ANN. An interpretation is also
something that is performed on each essential part of an explanation: one interprets an
explanans, process of explanation, and explanandum.
10An interpretation then gives
rise to another explanation, by one or a combination of the techniques of XAI, or
interpretability methods detailed below (Sections 4.2–4.4). Finally, when successful,
an interpretation gives rise to an explanation that is, in some way or another, more
understandable than the explanation we began with.
Take the example of the breast tissue classifier from before: We might start with
a traditional explanation, such as a DN explanation, of a particular output from the
MAIS. Given the complexity of such an explanation, it may be extremely difficult to
understand for most users; thus, one may ask for a more understandable explanation.We may then apply one of the interpretability methods with the aim of producing a
10Although in real cases, many of these components of interpretation may be implicit or trivial, i.e., one
may leave the explanandum unaffected (see Section 4.2below on partial interpretations).849 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 18 ====
new, more understandable explanation. To generate such understanding, one might
restrict an explanation to only that information pertaining to how an individual patientwas classified (local interpretation Section 4.3below). In doing so, we obtain a new
explanation from the old, although one presumably less complex—since localized toa single case—and hopefully thereby more understandable.
Terminology about interpretation methods often differs without changing the
overall concept. Zednik ( 2019), for example, identifies a number of techniques to
“render opaque computing systems transparent” (p. 8), such as input heatmapping
and feature-detector visualization. To our minds, insofar as transparency involves
production of explanations that are more understandable, these are cases of interpre-tation (specifically local and approximate interpretation Sections 4.3–4.4). Watson
and Floridi ( 2020) offer a formal framework, which they refer to as an “explanation
game,” by which proposed explanations are scored on three properties: Accuracy,simplicity, and relevance. Accuracy refers to how precisely the explanation models
the ANN’s processes from input to output. Simplicity is equated with the understand-
ability of the explanation for a given stakeholder. And relevance refers to whetherthe elements cited in the explanation are indeed responsible for the output being
explained. On this view, the goal of interpretable machine learning is to provide
explanations that maximize the balance between accuracy, simplicity, and relevance.Given that the explanation game aims at producing explanations that are more
understandable for a given user, we take this framework to be describing cases of
interpretation (specifically total and approximate interpretation Sections 4.2and4.4).
Indeed, that there is something like a connection to the production of greater under-
standing is perhaps the only consistent feature across accounts of interpretability on
offer.
Lipton (2018) and Krishnan (2019) make it clear that the notion of interpretability
is often undefined or presumed intuitive and implicit by scientists and engineers.Our choice to characterize interpretation at the level of explanations themselves is
in part an attempt to remedy this by providing a workable definition of the process
of interpretation. Furthermore, this view of interpretation does capture some of the
popular formulations of the notion offered within the ML community. Our account of
interpretation attempts to strike a balance between consistency with, and unification
of, scientific usage.
11
Consider the view of Ribeiro et al. ( 2016: 1136) on explanation of ANNs: “An
essential criterion for explanations is that they must be interpretable , i.e., provide
qualitative understanding between the input variables and the response.” One wayto read this is as asserting that interpretability is merely synonymous with under-
standability; another is to see it as a special case. If an explanation is already
11Providing an analysis of interpretation also runs into some of the same problems as philosophical
accounts of explanation, e.g., whether there is a specifically scientific notion of interpretation that is at
issue, or whether the idea is somehow continuous with quotidian examples such as “interpreting a work ofart” or “interpreting a foreign language.” That said, at least part of the success of philosophical accounts
of scientific explanation have been in their apparent ability to accommodate at least some of the more
common prima facie non-scientific cases of explanation, and we believe an account of interpretation can
follow suit.850 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 19 ====
understandable, then surely it is interpretable, since it gives rise to an understandable
explanation (itself), trivially. But, as we have noted, not all interpretable explanationsthemselves provide understanding—qualitative or otherwise. For that, we may have
to wait for an explanation to be interpreted and to give rise to another explanation
capable of providing the understanding lacking from the first.
We find it helpful to put this view of interpretation in vernacular like that used
to discuss the general structure of explanation (Fig. 1). While in explanation the
explanandum is some phenomena, diagram, or sentence asserting or describing a
phenomenon, in interpretation the thing being interpreted, the interpretandum ,i s
an explanation we begin with and that we find difficult to understand. Likewise,
while in explanation the explanans is a set of propositions which together explain the
explanandum, in an interpretation, the interpretans also is an explanation (perhaps
conjoined with some additional premises or observations) provided with the inten-
tion of being more easily understood. Overall, to provide an interpretation is to show
how the interpretans relates to the interpretandum via the process of interpretation
(Fig. 4).
Given this general structure of interpretation, we can then begin to classify
interpretation strategies and methods. In the remainder of this section we offer a
preliminary classification of interpretation methods with special attention given totheir application within MAIS. For instance, the interpretans might be shown by the
process of interpretation to be an approximation of the interpretandum, it might be
isomorphic to (but more familiar than) the interpretandum, or it might match the
interpretandum only locally, within a narrower range of explananda we find more
easily understood. These cases are presented in detail below.
4.2 TotalandPartialInterpretation
As noted above, both the interpretans and the interpretandum are explanations; each
consists of an explanans, explanation process, and explanandum. A case of total inter-
pretation is one in which the interpretans is totally different from the interpretandum.
In other words, one in which the explanans, explanation process, and explanandum
contained in the former differ in some way from the explanans, explanation process,
Fig.4 The general structure of total interpretation851 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 20 ====
and explanandum of the latter. For example, consider a simple substitution of vari-
ables. Suppose we have an explanation, derived from an ANN in a medical context,that mentions some variable vin each essential part, the explanandum itself being
some claim about v, e.g., that it is relevant to breast tissue classification. Coming to
this explanation without background information about the meaning of v, we might
likewise not understand the meaning of the explanandum. But supposing we are
allowed to provide such a meaning by further investigating the set-up of the MAIS,
e.g.,v=radiologically white tissue, we can construct a new explanation that speci-
fies this meaning in place of vin every essential part, thus changing every part of the
explanation. Here, the replacement of “v ”b y“ radiologically white tissue”i ne v e r y
part of an explanation, generating a new explanation without “ v,” is a process of total
interpretation. The new explanation, for example, will not explain that “v ” is relevant
to breast tissue classification, but that the presence of radiologically white tissue isrelevant to breast tissue classification.
12
Often, when we fail to understand an explanation of some phenomenon x,w e
want to interpret this explanation to provide understanding, but still want to obtainanexplanation of x . In such cases, what we want is to “adduce” an interpretans, the
explanandum of which is identical to the explanandum of the interpretandum (dia-grammed in the triangular Fig. 5, a special case of Fig. 4). That is, we can sometimes
provide a partial interpretation by showing how one explanans arises from another,
by some process of interpretation, itself providing some explanation of the very sameexplanandum. Put another way, a partial interpretation is just a re-explanation of thesame explanandum, equipped with a relationship between the new explanans and the
old.
This sort of interpretation is often what is aimed for early on in efforts to gen-
erate understandable explanations, since the desiderata of the initial explanationofxis understanding of x, and remains so after the demand for interpretation.
Indeed, another sort of partial interpretation involves interpreting only the process ofexplanation itself. Supposing we are given a DN explanation, where the process of
explanation, the deduction, is too complicated or long to be held in mind—consider
any explanation which requires a mathematical proof that relies on outsourcing steps
to a computer, such as Gonthier’s (2005) proof of the four color problem. Here the
aim is not to adduce any new explanans or explanandum, these are fixed, but to findsome new process of explanation, e.g., a more simple or succinct deduction. This
case is diagrammed in Fig. 6.
Failing a partial interpretation, we may aim to provide a total interpretation. But
this immediately raises a problem: what should the relationship between two expla-nations be such that I come to better understand one by coming to understand the
other? If I aim to understand xbut its explanation Eis unintelligible to me, and I am
given a total interpretation such that a second explanation E
/primeexplains x/prime, then there
12Notice that, by replacing variables everywhere in an explanation we also change the process of explana-
tion. Supposing for example that the explanation was DN, the change of variables will change the content
of the deduction of the explanandum from the explanans.852 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 21 ====
Fig. 5 A partial interpretation wherein the explanandum remains the same in both the interpretans and
interpretandum
ought to be a special relationship between EandE/primeif the latter is to provide any
understanding whatever about x.
Another way to put the problem of relating different explananda in a total inter-
pretation is by asking what sorts of relationships between phenomena are relevant to
scientific explanation: Similar phenomena can sometimes figure in explanations with
the same overall structure. For example, explanations of tissue classifications based
on radiological whiteness can inform explanations of classifications based on tissue
density. Provided we have some justification for substituting radiological whiteness
for tissue density, explanations on the basis of radiological whiteness can be totallyinterpreted by those referring to tissue density instead. The hope being that tissue den-
sity provides some understanding that radiological whiteness does not. Of course, the
similarity of two phenomena does not imply that there should be any understanding
gained about one via explanation of the other—understanding is too psychologi-
cally contingent for this—but such relationships are, methodologically, good places
to begin the search for understanding.
In the context of formal explanations, where our concern is not phenomena
themselves but the diagrams or descriptions thereof, these observations manifest asstrategies or methodologies of interpretation. That is, we can further classify total
Fig. 6 A partial interpretation wherein the process of interpretation used results in a new process of
explanation for an explanans and explanandum853 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 22 ====
interpretations according to whether the interpretans and interpretandum are related
byapproximation or by isomorphism —e.g., if E approximates E/prime,t h e nw eh a v e
some reason to think that E/primecan provide understanding about x . These two cases are
detailed below, but since both of these methods come in “local” and “global” forms,we address these notions first.
4.3 LocalandGlobalInterpretation
The ML literature is replete with claims about “local” explanation and interpretability
(see Ribeiro et al. 2016, 2018; Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Adebayo et al. 2018)
that, given the accounts of explanation favored among philosophers, are liable toconfuse. This is because the accounts of explanation are classified according to the
nature of their explanans (laws of nature/statistical laws/entities and activities) andthe process of explanation (deduction/induction/depiction), while the designation of
an interpretation as “local” is a comparative property of explananda. To our minds
the distinction between local and global interpretations is best captured as follows.Considering a pair of explanations EandE
/prime, with respective explananda DandD/prime,
E/primeis local relative to E if and only if D/primeis a subset of D. There are many methods
of doing this current in ML, however, common to all is the identification of such asubset.
Consider for a common example the Universal Law of Gravitation (ULG), which
states that the force of gravitation between any two objects is equal to the productof their masses over the square of the distance between them times the gravitational
constant. We can use this law in conjunction with a set of observations ( O) about
the masses and distances separating each planet in our solar system to explain (or
predict) the force that would (absent other interactions) attract every pair of planets
(G). Take this to be an explanation E:ULG +O→G. If we restrict ourselves
to explaining only the forces between each planet and earth ( L), we may likewise
restrict the ULG to the following Earthly Law of Gravitation (ELG): the forces of
gravitation between Earth and any other body is equal to the gravitational constant
on earth times the mass of the body over the square of the distance of that body
from earth. Note that inclusion of explananda can arise due to implication between
explanans’. In this case, ULG implies ELG but not vice versa, and this gives rise toan explanation E
/prime:ELG +O→L. Finally, since Lis a subset of G,E/primeis local
relative to E.
In the context of ML, a function-based example is also illuminating. Consider the
ANN which has learned to output the absolute value of its inputs. A (DN) explana-
tion of the output of this ANN will consist of the statement of the functional “law”
together with some input “observations,” these being the explanans, concluding withthe statement of the output as explanandum. This can essentially be seen as the func-
tionh(x)=|x|, giving the explanation E:“h(x) =|x|”+“O={x
i=− 1,xi+1=
1,...}”→“D={xi=| − 1|,xi+1=|1|,...}.” Another explanation that only
explains the outputs of positive inputs could likewise restrict the function h(x) to
x> 0, which is essentially the same as the function f( x)=x, giving the explanation
E/prime:“f( x) =x”+“O={xi=− 1,xi+1=1,...}”→“D/prime={xi+1=1,...}.” Since
D/primeis a subset of D, we conclude that E/primeis local relative to E. Here, to “adduce”854 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 23 ====
a local explanation involved recognizing that h(x)| x>0=f( x)|x>0=x, and while
in practice applications of constructing local explanations are surely more complex
than this, they each share this general theme: once we have decided to explain a sub-
set of our explanandum, we can sometimes make this work by adducing a restriction
on our explanans—one intended to make the new explanation more understandable.
Thus far we have just described “locality” as a comparative property of explana-
tions and based entirely on the inclusion of explananda. In practice, we usually startwith one complex explanation, and wish to interpret it, i.e., provide another, more
understandable explanation. One way to achieve this is to localize the explanation by
adducing another explanation that is local with respect to the explanation we beganwith. Many methods in ML (e.g., LIME, SHAP) identify this local subset of Dby
defining a geometric measure of distance between input values and building a model(e.g., a sparse linear model or shallow tree, Section 4.4) that approximates the more
global model in the environment of a particular input, as defined by this distance
metric. Once we have an explanation in hand (the interpretans) given by the locally
trained model, we can check to see that indeed it is local (by the process of inter-pretation) relative to our starting explanation (the interpretandum). The process of
interpretation in such cases is showing that the explanans of the interpretans is some-
how restricted from the explanans of the interpretandum, and demonstrating that the
explanandum of the interpretans is included in that of the interpretandum.
In the case of ANNs, our adduction of a restriction on the explanans amounts to
a restriction on the inputs to that ANN in essentially the same manner as described
for ordinary functional restrictions. In the most extreme cases of local interpretation
we move to an explanation of a single data point, a single classification. And in that
somewhat trivializing case, an explanation of the classification of the input can be
reduced to a selection of features of the input that most affect the output; such local
interpretations provide counterfactual information about which features of the input,
if intervened upon, would change the output. For example, local interpretation meth-
ods in MAIS often identify the particular pixels, present in an input image, that most
affect the classification output (P ´aez2019; Zednik 2019; see also Ribeiro et al. 2016).
In practice, methods for interpretation of predictions of machine learning algorithmsoften approximate the explanation, in addition to localizing it to a given datum, as
examined in the following section.
4.4 InterpretationbyApproximationorIsomorphism
When an explanation is too complex to be understandable to its user, a possible solu-
tion is to interpret the explanation by providing another, more understandable and
similar explanation. In general, measuring similarity depends on a prior choice of
some features to compare—mice may be similar to humans with respect to the effi-
cacy of some medication, but not similar in eloquence. In the context of MAIS, an
ANN can be thought of as a highly non-linear function f( x) . Approximating the
ANN predictions would entail providing a (more understandable
13) function g(x) ,
13Approximations of ANNs also have roles besides interpretation, e.g., saving computational time or
facilitating analysis, but are here considered only for that role.855 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 24 ====
such that the outputs of f( x) andg(x) are similar on some metric, e.g., the square
deviation,/integraltext
X(f (x) −g(x))2. When an ANN appears in some explanation, this
approximation can successfully figure in the process of interpretation precisely when
we expect g(x) to be more understandable thanf( x) .
Many people find linear functions and decision trees more understandable than
ANNs. Indeed, methods for interpretation of ANNs often aim to provide g(x) that is
either linear or tree-like, despite what some see as scant justification that these models
really are any more understandable (Lipton 2018). Still, some studies illustrate that
sparse rule lists and linear models fare well for human-interpretability (Lage et al.2019; Narayanan et al. 2018). Distillation methods work by training one model to
approximate the predictions given by another, and can be done either globally or
locally.
Linear models are used to provide local explanations. While linear models are
not flexible enough to globally approximate a neural network, they can provide ade-quate accuracy when the explanandum is small, such as a single prediction. For this
purpose, various methods have been developed that attempt to determine the set offeatures that are important to explaining the output of a given prediction (Ribeiro
et al. 2016; Mishra et al. 2017; Lundberg and Lee 2017;C h e ne ta l .2018, b).
These methods essentially localize the explanation of an ANN prediction to a small
neighborhood around a specific prediction (this being the new explanandum) and
approximate this localized explanation. For example, for the ANN described above
for the prediction of dense breast tissue, while a global explanation of what makestissue dense might be too complex to understand, an explanation of approximately
which pixels in a given mammogram led to it being classified as dense may be simple
enough to be understood by visual inspection.
Since linear models are often not flexible enough to provide sufficient global
approximations, global ANN distillation in particular involves using decision treesas the approximating model. When trees are more understandable, distillations are
thereby a method of interpretation by approximation. Trees and ANNs both have
quite a strong property as approximators .
14Both are “universal approximators,”
which means that they can approximate any continuous function to an arbitrary
degree of accuracy (Hornik et al. 1989). Since ANNs are continuous functions,
decision trees can therefore approximate neural networks to any accuracy.
The process of distilling a neural network into a tree involves generating input data
and using ANNs to get a prediction, then training a decision tree on the sets of input-
output pairs given by the ANN. One can always generate as much data as needed toachieve a desired level of similarity between the model outputs. Nonetheless, despite
theprima facie understandability of small trees as compared to networks, in practice
the distillation of useful ANNs tends to result in very large trees (Frosst and Hinton
2017).
Here we are faced with the understandability-accuracy trade-off, since one can
also sacrifice accuracy of a tree distillation by reducing or fixing its size or depth
14Importantly, this does not mean they are equivalent at learning tasks.856 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 25 ====
(Zhou et al. 2018), thereby presumably purchasing some understandability at the
expense of accuracy. Though we may gain some traction of understanding by initially
approximating an ANN, the upshot of this is that, as we increase the accuracy of
the approximating model, we wash out any understanding gained by approximation
itself and are left only with whatever advantage is offered by modelling (nearly) thesame process in a different sort of model. When we interpret some explanans that
includes an ANN into another including a tree, which approximates the first to an
arbitrary degree, we have, in a way, gone beyond approximation into interpretation
by isomorphism.
Since understanding has a psychological component, it has some mathematically
not well-behaved properties. For one, understanding is not isomorphism invariant.That is, if I understand a, the fact that ais isomorphic to bdoes notimply that I
understand b. Intuitively, my understanding of some statement of English does not
imply anything about my understanding of equivalent sentences in another language.This is because our understanding can turn on features of the specific presentation of
some notion and the background knowledge of the user of the explanation. Nonethe-less, the converse of this has been put to use as a method of interpretation. Indeed, if
I do not understand a, I may still understand some isomorphic b(due perhaps to my
familiarity with constructions in the language of b).
Perhaps the ubiquity of trees and tree-like structures in our everyday experience
explains the prevalence of tree distillations in ML; their familiarity evidently leads
to the idea that they will be understandable, and that may indeed be a reasonableassumption to make. Nonetheless, there is a very wide range of types of models
that can universally approximate, or are genuinely isomorphic to, ANNs. Candidate
alternative universal approximators include fuzzy systems (Zadeh 1965;W a n g 1992;
Kosko 1994;C a s t r o 1995; Yen et al., 1998, cf. Klement et al. 1999); Neural ODEs
(Chen et al. 2018, b; Zhang et al. 2019; and references therein) and nearest-neighbor
methods (Cover and Hart 1967; Stone 1977). When we have reason to believe that
any of these alternative models are “more understandable” than ANNs, we therebyhave reason to make use of these isomorphic models to provide an interpretans, i.e.,an explanation using the alternative model within its explanans, to serve the same
role that the ANN served in the interpretandum.
5 Conclusion
Conceiving of explanation according to those accounts offered within the philosophyof science disentangles the accuracy-explainability trade-off problem in AI, and in
doing so, deflates the apparently paradoxical relationship between trust and accuracywhich seems to plague debates in medical AI and the ML literature. Ifit is simply that
explainability is required for trust, there is no cause for worry, since highly accurate(and potentially complex) MAIS are just as explainable as simple ones. We resolvethis issue by using clearly defined accounts of explanation, and demarcating notions
of explanation from understanding and interpretation. Our account of interpretation
is explicitly positioned as distinct from accounts of explanation, while making clear
the connection that both have to understanding.857 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 26 ====
While explanation is a well-theorized notion within the theory and philosophy of
science, “interpretation” and a corresponding notion of “interpretability” are not (see
Lipton 2018). We have attempted to synthesize a notion of scientific “interpretabil-
ity,” from cases where it was notused synonymously with either “explainability”
or “understandability.” This was done to provide a theoretical framework that gen-eralizes the methods scientists and ML researchers often use for the purpose of
interpretation, and to help remedy this lacuna within the ML literature in particu-
lar and the neglect of inter-explanatory relationships in philosophy of explanation
broadly speaking. In the context of MAIS, there never really was a problem explain-
ing artificial networks. Rather, the problem has always been understanding theexplanations that were available, and our account of interpretation shows why.
We define interpretation as a process taking one explanation to another, more
understandable explanation. Understandability is at least partly psychological,depending not only on the phenomenon or its explanation but also on the user of the
explanation. Identifying the elements of explanations that make them understandable
broadly speaking is an active research topic in the social sciences (Miller 2019), but
beyond the scope of a theory of interpretation as such. Just as de Regt ( 2017)s a y sw e
need a general theory of understanding that is independent of our specific accounts ofexplanation, we require a general theory of interpretation that is independent of both.Our framework can thereby only be employed once we have made some theoretical
choices about what features of explanations indeed provide understanding, without
which the success of an interpretation cannot be assessed.
The ubiquitous presumption that only simple and/or linear models are “under-
standable” is liable to limit the potential scope of scientific interpretation; the useof non-linear and complex models should not be excluded at the outset. It seems alarge part of the stress on the point of explainability in discussions of ANNs and
MAIS boils down to an insistence that they be understandable to a non-specific and
correspondingly broad audience of clinicians, patients, and possibly the general pub-
lic. With such a diverse audience of users of explanations, perhaps simplicity is the
only proxy for understandability, and persistent demands for “explainable” ANNsare reducible to demands for simple and potentially correspondingly weak MAIS.
We can move away from this tendency to simplicity by demanding that ANNs be
interpretable in the sense defined here. That is, by demanding that we find ways
to convert explanations that are not understood into those that are more understand-
able in a user-relative way. That way, we might keep many complex and thus strong
MAIS while achieving broad understandability by, counter-intuitively, adding further“simplifying complexity” in the form of interpretation methods.
Acknowledgments The authors are grateful to Jacob Stegenga, Rune Nyrup, Adrian Currie, Daniel Steel,
Cristian Larroulet Philippi, Elizabeth Seger, Hamed Tabatabaei Ghomi, Mandy Wigdorowitz, Ariane
Hanemaayer, Zinhle Mncube, Victor Parchment, and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments
and discussions.
CompliancewithEthicalStandards
C o n f l i c to fI n t e r e s t The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.858 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 27 ====
Open
Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommonshorg/licenses/by/4.
0/.
References
Achinstein, P. (1983). The nature of explanation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Adebayo, J., Gilmer, J., Muelly, M., Goodfellow, I., Hardt, M., Kim, B. (2018). Sanity checks for saliency
maps. arXiv:1810.03292 [cs, stat].
Adkins, D.E. (2017). Machine learning and electronic health records: a paradigm shift. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 174(2), 93–94. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16101169 .
Aler Tubella, A., Theodorou, A., Dignum, F., Dignum, V . (2019). Governance by glass-box: implementing
transparent moral bounds for AI behaviour. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Presented at the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence IJCAI-19 Macao (pp. 5787–5793). China: International Joint Conferences
on Artificial Intelligence Organization. https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/802.
Athey, S. (2017). Beyond prediction: using big data for policy problems. Science, 355(6324), 483–485.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4321.
Bechtel, W. (2006). Discovering cell mechanisms: the creation of modern cell biology . New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Bechtel, W. (2011). Mechanism and biological explanation. Philosophy of Science, 78(4), 533–557.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R.C. (2010). Discovering complexity: decomposition and localization as
strategies in scientific research . Cambridge: MIT Press.
Buckner, C. (2019). Deep learning: a philosophical introduction. Philosophy Compass, 14 (10).
https://doi.org/10.1111/phc3.12625 .
Caruana, R., Lou, Y ., Gehrke, J., Koch, P., Sturm, M., Elhadad, N. (2015). Intelligible models for health-
care: predicting pneumonia risk and hospital 30-day readmission. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining—KDD ’15. Presented
at the the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference (pp. 1721–1730). Sydney: ACM Press.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2783258.2788613 .
Castro, J.L. (1995). Fuzzy logic controllers are universal approximators. IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics ,25(4), 629–635. https://doi.org/10.1109/21.370193 .
Chen, J., Song, L., Wainwright, M.J., Jordan, M.I. (2018). Learning to explain: an information-theoretic
perspective on model interpretation. arXiv: 1802.07814.
Chen, R.T.Q., Rubanova, Y ., Bettencourt, J., Duvenaud, D. (2018). Neural ordinary differential equations.
arXiv:1806.07366.
Cover, T., & Hart, P. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classification. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 13(1), 21–27. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.1967.1053964 .
Craver, C.F. (2007). Explaining the brain: mechanisms and the mosaic unity of neuroscience. Oxford
University Press: Oxford.
Craver, C.F., & Darden, L. (2013). In search of mechanisms: discoveries across the life sciences . London:
The University of Chicago Press.
Creel, K.A. (2020). Transparency in complex computational systems. Philosophy of Science.
https://doi.org/10.1086/709729 .
De Fauw, J., Ledsam, J.R., Romera-Paredes, B., Nikolov, S., Tomasev, N., Blackwell, S., et al. (2018).
Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis and referral in retinal disease. Nature Medicine ,
24(9), 1342–1350. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0107-6 .
de Regt, H.W. (2017). Understanding scientific understanding . New York: Oxford University Press.859 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 28 ====
de Regt, H.W., & Dieks, D. (2005). A contextual approach to scientific understanding. Synthese ,144(1),
137–170. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-005-5000-4 .
de Regt, H.W., Leonelli, S., Eigner, K. (Eds.) (2009). Scientific understanding: philosophical perspectives .
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt9qh59s .
Doshi-Velez, F., & Kim, B. (2017). Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
arXiv:1702.08608.
Esteva, A., Kuprel, B., Novoa, R.A., Ko, J., Swetter, S.M., Blau, H.M., Thrun, S. (2017). Dermatologist-
level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature ,542(7639), 115–118.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21056 .
Finlayson, S.G., Bowers, J.D., Ito, J., Zittrain, J.L., Beam, A.L., Kohane, I.S. (2019). Adversarial attacks
on medical machine learning. Science, 363(6433), 1287–1289. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aaw4399 .
Fleming, N. (2018). Computer-calculated compounds. Nature ,557, 555–557.
Frosst, N., & Hinton, G. (2017). Distilling a neural network into a soft decision tree. arXiv:1711.09784.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2016). Mind, matter, and metabolism. Journal of Philosophy ,113(10), 481–506.
https://doi.org/10.5840/jphil20161131034 .
Gonthier, G. (2005). A computer-checked proof of the Four Colour Theorem.Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y ., Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning . Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Gunning, D. (2017). Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), DARPA/I2O Program.Hempel, C.G. (1965). Aspects of scientific explanation and other essays in the philosophy of science .N e w
York: The Free Press.
Hempel, C.G., & Oppenheim, P. (1948). Studies in the logic of explanation. Philosophy of Science, 15(2),
135–175. https://doi.org/10.1086/286983 .
Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., White, H. (1989). Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approxi-
mators. Neural Networks, 2(5), 359–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(89)90020-8 .
Jacobson, H. (1959). The informational content of mechanisms and circuits. Information and Control ,
2(3), 285–296. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-9958(59)90231-1 .
Karimi, A.H., Sch ¨olkopf, B., Valera, I. (2020). Algorithmic recourse: from counterfactual explanations to
interventions. arXiv:2002.06278.
Khalifa, K. (2017). Understanding, explanation and scientific knowledge . New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Klement, E.P., Koczy, L.T., Moser, B. (1999). Are fuzzy systems universal approximators? International
Journal of General Systems ,28(2–3), 259–282. https://doi.org/10.1080/03081079908935238.
Kosko, B. (1994). Fuzzy systems as universal approximators. IEEE Transactions on Computers ,43(11),
1329–1333. https://doi.or
g/10.1109/12.324566 .
Krishnan, M. (2019). Against interpretability: a critical examination of the interpretability problem in
machine learning. Philosophy & Technology .https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-019-00372-9 .
Lage, I., Chen, E., He, J., Narayanan, M., Kim, B., Gershman, S., Doshi-Velez, F. (2019). An evaluation
of the human-interpretability of explanation. arXiv: 1902.00006.
Lehman, C.D., Yala, A., Schuster, T., Dontchos, B., Bahl, M., Swanson, K., Barzilay, R. (2019). Mammo-
graphic breast density assessment using deep learning: clinical implementation. Radiology ,290(1),
52–58. https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2018180694 .
Levy, A. (2013). Three kinds of new mechanism. Biology & Philosophy ,28(1), 99–114.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-012-9337-z .
Lipton, P. (2009). Understanding without explanation. In H.W. de Regt, S. Leonelli, K. Eigner (Eds.)
Scientific understanding: philosophical perspectives (pp. 43–63). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press.
Lipton, Z.C. (2018). The mythos of model interpretability. Queue, 16(3), 31–57.
London, A.J. (2019). Artificial intelligence and black-box medical decisions: accuracy versus explainabil-
ity.Hastings Center Report, 49(1), 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1002/hast.973 .
Lundberg, S., & Lee, S.-I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model predictions.
arXiv:1705.07874.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., Craver, C.F. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67(1),
1–25. https://doi.org/10.1086/392759 .
McKinney, S.M., Sieniek, M., Godbole, V ., Godwin, J., Antropova, N., Ashrafian, H., et al. (2020).
International evaluation of an AI system for breast cancer screening. Nature ,577(7788), 89–94.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1799-6 .860 A. Erasmus et al.

==== Page 29 ====
Miller,
T. (2019). Explanation in artificial intelligence: insights from the social sciences. Artificial
Intelligence, 267, 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2018.07.007.
Mishra, S., Sturm, B.L., Dixon, S. (2017). Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations for music
content analysis. ISMIR, 537–543.
Mittelstadt, B., Russell, C., Wachter, S. (2019). Explaining explanations in AI. In Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency—FAT* ’19. Presented at the Conference (pp.
279–288). Atlanta: ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287574 .
Narayanan, M., Chen, E., He, J., Kim, B., Gershman, S., Doshi-Velez, F. (2018). How do humans under-
stand explanations from machine learning systems?An evaluation of the human-interpretability of
explanation. arXiv: 1802.00682.
Obermeyer, Z., Powers, B., V ogeli, C., Mullainathan, S. (2019). Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used
to manage the health of populations. Science, 366(6464), 447–453. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aax2342.
P´aez, A. (2019). The pragmatic turn in explainable artificial intelligence (XAI). Minds and Machines ,
29(3), 441–459. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-019-09502-w .
Potochnik, A. (2016). Scientific explanation: putting communication first. Philosophy of Science, 83(5),
721–732. https://doi.org/10.1086/687858 .
Rajpurkar, P., Irvin, J., Zhu, K., Yang, B., Mehta, H., Duan, T., et al. (2017). CheXNet: radiologist-level
pneumonia detection on chest X-rays with deep learning. arXiv: 1711.05225.
Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C. (2016). “Why should I trust you?”: explaining the predictions of any
classifier. arXiv: 1602.04938.
Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C. (2018). Anchors: high-precision model-agnostic explanations. In
AAAI conference on Artificial Intelligence; Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .
Rudin, C. (2019). Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes deci-
sions and use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence ,1(5), 206–215.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-019-0048-x .
Salmon, W. (1971). Statistical explanation. In W. Salmon (Ed.) Statistical explanation & statistical
relevance (pp. 29–87): University of Pittsburgh Press.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientific explanation and the causal structure of the world . Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Salmon, W. (1989). Four decades of scientific explanation. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Skillings, D.J. (2015). Mechanistic explanation of biological processes. Philosophy of Science ,82(5),
1139–1151. https://doi.org/10.1086/683446 .
Somashekhar, S.P., Sep´ ulveda, M.-J., Puglielli, S., Norden, A.D., Shortliffe, E.H., Rohit Kumar,
C., et al. (2018). Watson for oncology and breast cancer treatment recommendations: agree-
ment with an expert multidisciplinary tumor board. Annals of Oncology ,29(2), 418–423.
https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdx781 .
Stone, C.J. (1977). Consistent nonparametric regression. The Annals of Statistics ,5(4), 595–620.
https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1176343886 .
Strevens, M. (2011). Depth: an account of scientific explanation. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Strevens, M. (2013). No understanding without explanation. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A ,44(3), 510–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsa.2012.12.005 .
Tschandl, P., Codella, N., Akay, B.N., Argenziano, G., Braun, R.P., Cabo, H., et al. (2019). Comparison of
the accuracy of human readers versus machine-learning algorithms for pigmented skin lesion classi-fication: an open, web-based, international, diagnostic study. The Lancet Oncology, 20(7), 938–947.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(19)30333-X .
van Fraassen, B.C. (1980). The scientific image . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wang, L.-X. (1992). Fuzzy systems are universal approximators. In 1992 Proceedings IEEE International
Conference on Fuzzy Systems. Presented at the 1992 Proceedings IEEE International Conference on
Fuzzy Systems (pp. 1163–1170). San Diego: IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/FUZZY .1992.258721 .
Watson, D.S., & Floridi, L. (2020). The explanation game: a formal framework for interpretable machine
learning. Synthese. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02629-9 .
Watson, D.S., Krutzinna, J., Bruce, I.N., Griffiths, C.E., McInnes, I.B., Barnes, M.R., Floridi,
L. (2019). Clinical applications of machine learning algorithms: beyond the black box. BMJ .
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l886.
Wiens, J., & Shenoy, E.S. (2018). Machine learning for healthcare: on the verge of a major shift in health-
care epidemiology. Clinical Infectious Diseases ,66(1), 149–153. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cix731 .861 What is Interpretability?

==== Page 30 ====
Woodward, J. (1989). The causal/mechanical model of explanation. In P. Kitcher, & W. Salmon (Eds.)
Scientific explanation (pp. 357–383). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen . Oxford: Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
0195155270.001.0001 .
Woodward, J. (2019). Scientific explanation. In E.N. Zalta (Ed.) The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy
(Winter, 2019). Metaphysics Research Lab : Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
win2019/entries/scientific-explanation.
Yen, J., Wang, L.iang., Gillespie, C.W. (1998). Improving the interpretability of TSK fuzzy models by
combining global learning and local learning. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, 6(4), 530–537.
https://doi.org/10.1109/91.728447 .
Zadeh, L.A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and Control ,8(3), 338–353. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0019-
9958(65)90241-X .
Zednik, C. (2019). Solving the black box problem: a normative framework for explainable artificial
intelligence. Philosophy & Technology .https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-019-00382-7 .
Zerilli, J., Knott, A., Maclaurin, J., Gavaghan, C. (2019). Transparency in algorithmic and human
decision-making: is there a double standard? Philosophy & Technology ,32(4), 661–683.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-018-0330-6 .
Zhang, T., Yao, Z., Gholami, A., Keutzer, K., Gonzalez, J., Biros, G., Mahoney, M. (2019). ANODEV2:
a coupled neural ODE evolution framework. arXiv: 1906.04596.
Zhou, Y ., Zhou, Z., Hooker, G. (2018). Approximation trees: statistical stability in model distillation.
arXiv:1808.07573.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Aﬃliations
AdrianErasmus1,2·TylerD.P.Brunet2·EyalFisher3
Tyler D. P. Brunet
tdpb2@cam.ac.uk
Eyal Fisher
ef388@cam.ac.uk
1Institute for the Future of Knowledge, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
2Department of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Cambridge, Free School Ln.,
Cambridge, CB2 3RH, UK
3Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, RobinsonWay, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK862 A. Erasmus et al.

