==== Page 1 ====
What Makes Multi-modal Learning
Better than Single (Provably)
Yu Huang1,∗, Chenzhuang Du1,*, Zihui Xue2, Xuanyao Chen3,4,
Hang Zhao1,4, Longbo Huang1,†
1Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2The University of Texas at Austin3Fudan University
4Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
Abstract
The world provides us with data of multiple modalities. Intuitively, models fusing
data from different modalities outperform their uni-modal counterparts, since more
information is aggregated. Recently, joining the success of deep learning, there is
an influential line of work on deep multi-modal learning, which has remarkable
empirical results on various applications. However, theoretical justifications in this
field are notably lacking.
Can multi-modal learning provably perform better than uni-modal?
In this paper, we answer this question under a most popular multi-modal fusion
framework, which firstly encodes features from different modalities into a common
latent space and seamlessly maps the latent representations into the task space. We
prove that learning with multiple modalities achieves a smaller population risk than
only using its subset of modalities. The main intuition is that the former has a more
accurate estimate of the latent space representation. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first theoretical treatment to capture important qualitative phenomena
observed in real multi-modal applications from the generalization perspective.
Combining with experiment results, we show that multi-modal learning does
possess an appealing formal guarantee.
1 Introduction
Our perception of the world is based on different modalities, e.g.sight, sound, movement, touch, and
even smell [ 36]. Inspired from the success of deep learning [ 26,21], deep multi-modal research is also
activated, which covers fields like audio-visual learning [ 8,43], RGB-D semantic segmentation [ 35,
20] and Visual Question Answering [17, 2].
While deep multi-modal learning shows excellent power in practice, theoretical understanding of deep
multi-modal learning is limited. Some recent works have been done towards this direction [ 39,48].
However, these works made strict assumptions on the probability distributions across different
modalities, which may not hold in real-life applications [ 30]. Notably, they do not take generalization
performance of multi-modal learning into consideration. Toward this end, the following fundamental
problem remains largely open:
∗equal contribution
†Correspondence to: longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

==== Page 2 ====
Figure 1: MvsNmodalities latent space representation , where the latter is a subset of the former.
zM,zNandz⋆are images on the latent space Zcorresponding to the representation mappings ˆgM,
ˆgNandg⋆.Midenotes modality i.
Can multi-modal learning provably performs better than uni-modal?
In this paper, we provably answer this question from two perspectives:
• (When) Under what conditions multi-modal performs better than uni-modal?
• (Why) What results in the performance gains ?
The framework we study is abstracted from the multi-modal fusion approaches, which is one of
the most researched topics of multi-modal learning [ 3]. Specifically, we first encode the complex
data from heterogeneous sources into a common latent space Z. The true latent representation is
g⋆in a function class G, and the task mapping h⋆is contained in a function class Hdefined on the
latent space. Our model corresponds to the recent progress of deep multi-modal learning on various
applications, such as scene classification [9] and action recognition [24, 43].
Under this composite framework, we provide the first theoretical analysis to shed light on what makes
multi-modal outperform uni-modal from the generalization perspective. We identify the relationship
between the population risk and the distance between a learned latent representation ˆgand the g⋆,
under the metric we will define later. Informally, closer to the true representation leads to less
population loss, which indicates that a better latent representation guarantees the end-to-end multi-
modal learning performance. Instead of simply considering the comparison of multi vs uni modalities,
we consider a general case, MvsNmodalities, which are distinct subsets of all modalities. We
focus on the condition that the latter is a subset of the former. Our second result is a bound for the
closeness between ˆgand the g⋆, from which we provably show that the latent representation ˆgM
learning from the Mmodalities is closer to the true g⋆than ˆgNlearning from Nmodalities. As
shown in Figure 1, ˆgMhas a more sufficient latent space exploration than ˆgN. Moreover, in a specific
linear regression model, we directly verify that using multiple modalities rather than its subset learns
a better latent representation.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
•We formalize the multi-modal learning problem into a theoretical framework. Firstly,
we show that the performance of multi-modal learning in terms of population risk can
be bounded by the latent representation quality , a novel metric we propose to measure
the distance from a learned latent representation to the true representation, which reveals
that the ability of learning the whole task coincides with the ability of learning the latent
representation when we have sufficient training samples.
•We derive an upper bound for the latent representation quality of training over a subset of
modalities. This directly implies a principle to guide us in modality selection, i.e., when
the number of sample size is large and multiple modalities can efficiently optimize the
empirical risk, using multi-modal to build a recognition or detection system can have a better
performance.
•Restricted to linear latent and task mapping, we provide rigorous theoretical analysis that
latent representation quality degrades when the subset of multiple modalities is applied.
2

==== Page 3 ====
Experiments are also carried out to empirically validate the theoretical observation that ˆgN
is inferior to ˆgM.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we review the related literature. The
formulation of multi-modal learning problem is described in Section 3. Main results are presented
in Section 4. In Section 5, we show simulation results to support our theoretical claims. Additional
discussions about the inefficiency of multi-modal learning are presented in Section 6. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section 7.
2 Related Work
Multi-modal Learning Applications Deep learning makes fusing different signals easier, which
enables us to develop many multi-modal frameworks. For example, [ 35,23,22,31,20] combine
RGB and depth images to improve semantic segmentation; [ 8,16] fuse audio with video to do scene
understanding; researchers also explore audio-visual source separation and localization [49, 11].
Theory of Multi-modal Learning On the theory side, in semi-supervised setting, [ 39] proposed a
novel method, Total Correlation Gain Maximization (TCGM), and theoretically proved that TCGM
can find the groundtruth Bayesian classifier given each modality. Moreover, CPM-Nets [ 48] showed
multi-view representation can recover the same performance as only using the single-view observation
by constructing the versatility. However, they made strict assumptions on the relationship across
different modalities, while our analysis does not require such additional assumptions. Besides,
previous multi-view analysis [ 37,1,45,13] typically assumes that each view alone is sufficient
to predict the target accurately, which may not hold in our multi-modal setting. For instance, it is
difficult to build a classifier just using a weak modality with limited labeled data, e.g., depth modality
in RGB-D images for object detection task [18].
Transfer Learning A line of work closely related to our composite learning framework is transfer
learning via representation learning, which firstly learns a shared representation on various tasks
and then transfers the learned representation to a new task. [ 40,7,32,10] have provided the sample
complexity bounds in the special case of the linear feature and linear task mapping. [ 41] introduces a
new notion of task diversity and provides a generalization bound with general tasks, features, and
losses. Unfortunately, the function class which contains feature mappings is the same across all
different tasks while our focus is that the function classes generated by different subsets modalities
are usually inconsistent.
Notation: Throughout the paper, we use ∥ · ∥ to denote the ℓ2norm. We also denote the set of
positive integer numbers less or equal than nby[n], i.e.[n]≜{1,2,···, n}.
3 The Multi-modal Learning Formulation
In this section, we present the Multi-modal Learning problem formulation. Specifically, we assume
that a given data x:= 
x(1),···, x(K)
consists of Kmodalities, where x(k)∈ X(k)the domain
set of the k-th modality. Denote X=X(1)× ··· × X(K). We use Yto denote the target domain
and use Zto denote a latent space. Then, we denote g⋆:X 7→ Z the true mapping from the input
space (using all of Kmodalities) to the latent space, and h⋆:Z 7→ Y is the true task mapping. For
instance, in aggregation-based multi-modal fusion, g⋆is an aggregation function compounding on K
seperate sub-networks and h⋆is a multi-layer neural network [44].
In the learning task, a data pair (x, y)∈ X × Y is generated from an unknown distribution D, such
that
PD(x, y)≜Py|x(y|h⋆◦g⋆(x))Px(x) (1)
Here h⋆◦g⋆(x) =h⋆(g⋆(x))represents the composite function of h⋆andg⋆.
In real-world settings, we often face incomplete multi-modal data, i.e., some modalities are not
observed. To take into account this situation, we let Mbe a subset of [K], and without loss of
generality, focus on the learning problem only using the modalities in M. Specifically, define
3

==== Page 4 ====
X′:= 
X(1)∪ {⊥}
×. . .× 
X(K)∪ {⊥}
as the extension of X, where x′∈ X′,x′
k=⊥means
that the k-th modality is not used (collected). Then we define a mapping pMfromXtoX′induced
byM:
pM(x)(k)=x(k)ifk∈ M
⊥ else
Also define p′
M:X′7→ X′as the extension of pM. LetG′denote a function class, which contains
the mapping from X′to the latent space Z, and define a function class GMas follows:
GM≜{gM:X 7→ Z | gM(x) :=g′(pM(x)), g′∈ G′} (2)
Given a data set S= ((xi, yi))m
i=1, where (xi, yi)is drawn i.i.d. from D, the learning objective is,
following the Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) principle [ 27], to find h∈ H andgM∈ GMto
jointly minimize the empirical risk, i.e.,
min ˆ r(h◦gM)≜1
mmX
i=1ℓ(h◦gM(xi), yi) (3)
s.t. h∈ H, gM∈ GM. (4)
where ℓ(·,·)is the loss function. Given ˆr(h◦gM), we similarly define its corresponding population
risk as
r(h◦gM) =E(xi,yi)∼D[ˆr(h◦gM)] (5)
Similar to [1, 41], we use the population risk to measure the performance of learning.
Example. As a concrete example of our model, consider the video classification problem under the
late-fusion model in [ 43]. In this case, each modality k, e.g. RGB frames, audio or optical flows, is
encoded by a deep network φk, and their features are fused and passed to a classifier C. If we train on
the first Mmodalities, we can let M= [M]. Then gMhas the form: φ1⊕φ2⊕ ··· ⊕ φM, where ⊕
denotes a fusion operation, e.g. self-attention ( Zis the output of gM), and his the classifier C. More
examples are provided in Appendix B.
Why Composite Framework ? Note that the composite multi-modal framework is often observed
in applications. In fact, in recent years, a large number of papers, e.g., [ 3,12,14,44,43,24], appear
to have utilized this framework in one way or another, even though the contributors did not clearly
summarize the relationship between their methods and this common underlying structure. However,
despite the popularity of the framework, existing works lack a very formal definition in theory.
What is Special about Multi-modal Learning? For the multi-modal representation x:= 
x(1),···, x(K)
consists of Kmodalities, we allow the dimension of the domain set of each
modality X(k)to be different, which well models the source of heterogeneity of each modality.
The relationships across different modalities are usually of varying levels due to the heterogeneous
sources. Therefore, compared to previous works [ 45,48], we make no assumptions on the relationship
across every single modality in our analysis, which makes it general to allow different correlations.
Moreover, the main assumption behind previous analysis [ 37,39,42] is that each view/modality
contains sufficient information for target tasks, which does not shed light on our analysis. It may not
hold in multi-modal applications [ 47], e.g., in object detecting task, it is known that depth images are
with lower accuracy than RGB images [18].
4 Main Results
In this section, we provide main theoretical results to rigorously establish various aspects of the
folklore claim that multi-modal is better than single. We first detail several assumptions throughout
this section.
Assumption 1. The loss function ℓ(·,·)isL-smooth with respect to the first coordinate, and is
bounded by a constant C.
Assumption 2. The true latent representation g⋆is contained in G, and the task mapping h⋆is
contained in H.
4

==== Page 5 ====
Assumption 1 is a classical regularity condition for loss function in theoretical analysis [ 27,41,40].
Assumption 2 is also be known as realizability condition in representation learning [ 41,10,40],
which ensures that the function class that we optimize over contains the true latent representation and
the task mapping.
Assumption 3. For any g′∈ G′andM ⊂ [K],g′◦p′
M∈ G′.
To understand Assumption 3, note that for any N ⊂ M ⊂ [K], by definition, for any gN∈ GN,
there exists g′∈ G′, s.t.
gN(x) =g′(pN(x)) =g′(p′
N(pM(x)))
Therefore, Assumption 3 directly implies gN∈ GM. Moreover, we have GN⊂ GM⊂ G, which
means that the inclusion relationship of modality subsets remains unchanged on the latent function
class induced by them. As an example, if G′is linear, represented as matrix G∈RQ×K. Also p′
M
can be represented as a diagonal matrix P∈RK×Kwith the i-th diagonal entry being 1fori∈ M
and0otherwise. In this case, Assumption 3 holds, i.e. G×P∈ G′. Moreover, G×Pis a matrix
withi-th column all be zero for i /∈ M , which is commonly used in the underfitting analysis in linear
regression [34].
4.1 Connection to Latent Representation Quality
Latent space is employed to better exploit the correlation among different modalities. Therefore,
we will naturally conjecture that the performance of training with different modalities is related to
its ability to learn latent space representation. In this section, we will formally characterize this
relationship.
In order to measure the goodness of a learned latent representation g, we introduce the following
definition of latent representation quality .
Definition 1. Given a data distribution with the form in (1), for any learned latent representation
mapping g∈ G, the latent representation quality is defined as
η(g) = inf
h∈H[r(h◦g)−r(h∗◦g∗)] (6)
Here infh∈Hr(h◦g)is the best achievable population risk with the fixed latent representation g.
Thus, to a certain extent, η(g)measures the loss incurred by the distance between gandg⋆.
Next, we recap the Rademacher complexity measure for model complexity. It will be used in
quantifying the population risk performance based on different modalities. Specifically, let Fbe
a class of vector-valued function Rd7→Rn. Let Z1, . . . , Z mbe i.i.d. random variables on Rd
following some distribution P.Denote the sample S= (Z1, . . . , Z m). The empirical Rademacher
complexity of Fwith respect to the sample Sis given by [5]
bRS(F) :=Eσ"
sup
f∈F1
mmX
i=1σif(Zi)#
where σ= (σ1, . . . , σ n)⊤withσiiid∼unif{−1,1}.The Rademacher complexity of Fis
Rm(F) =ESh
bRS(F)i
Now we present our first main result regarding multi-modal learning.
Theorem 1. LetS= ((xi, yi))m
i=1be a dataset of mexamples drawn i.i.d. according to D.Let
M,Nbe two distinct subsets of [K]. Assuming we have produced the empirical risk minimizers
(ˆhM,ˆgM)and(ˆhN,ˆgN), training with the MandNmodalities separately. Then, for all 1> δ > 0,
with probability at least 1−δ
2:
r
ˆhM◦ˆgM
−r
ˆhN◦ˆgN
≤γS(M,N) + 8LRm(H ◦ G M) +4C√m+ 2Cr
2 ln(2 /δ)
m(7)
where
γS(M,N)≜η(ˆgM)−η(ˆgN)□ (8)
5

==== Page 6 ====
Remark. A few remarks are in place. First of all, γS(M,N)defined in (8)compares the quality
between latent representations learning from MandNmodalities with respect to the given dataset S.
Theorem 1 bounds the difference of population risk training with two different subsets of modalities
byγS(M,N), which validates our conjecture that including more modalities is advantageous
in learning. Second, for the commonly used function classes in the field of machine learning,
Radamacher complexity for a sample of size m,Rm(F)is usually bounded byp
C(F)/m, where
C(F)represents the intrinsic property of function class F. Third, (7)can be written as γS(M,N) +
O(q
1
m)in order terms. This shows that as the number of sample size grows, the performance of
using different modalities mainly depends on its latent representation quality.
4.2 Upper Bound for Latent Space Exploration
Having establish the connection between the population risk difference with latent representation
quality, our next goal is to estimate how close the learned latent representation ˆgMis to the true
latent representation g⋆. The following theorem shows how the latent representation quality can be
controlled in the training process.
Theorem 2. LetS={(xi, yi)}m
i=1be a dataset of mexamples drawn i.i.d. according to D.LetM
be a subset of [K]. Assuming we have produced the empirical risk minimizers (ˆhM,ˆgM)training
with the Mmodalities. Then, for all 1> δ > 0,with probability at least 1−δ:
η(ˆgM)≤4LRm(H ◦ G M) + 4LRm(H ◦ G ) + 6Cr
2 ln(2 /δ)
m+ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S) (9)
where ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S)≜ˆr
ˆhM◦ˆgM
−ˆr(h⋆◦g⋆)is the centered empirical loss. □
Remark. Consider sets N ⊂ M ⊂ [K]. Under Assumption 3, GN⊂ GM⊂ G, optimizing over a
larger function class results in a smaller empirical risk. Therefore
ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S)≤ˆL(ˆhN◦ˆgN,S) (10)
Similar to the analysis in Theorem 1, the first term on the Right-hand Side (RHS), Rm(H ◦ G M)∼p
C(H ◦ G M)/mandRm(H ◦ G N)∼p
C(H ◦ G N)/m. Following the basic structural property
of Radamacher complexity [ 5], we have C(H ◦ G N)≤C(H ◦ G M). Therefore, Theorem 2 offers
the following principle for choosing modalities to improve the latent representation quality.
Principle: choose to learn with more modalities if:
ˆL(ˆhN◦ˆgN,S)−ˆL(ˆhM◦ˆgM,S)≥r
C(H ◦ G M)
m−r
C(H ◦ G N)
m
What this principle implies are twofold. (i) When the number of sample size mis large, the impact of
intrinsic complexity of function classes will be reduced. (ii) Using more modalities can efficiently
optimize the empirical risk, hence improve the latent representation quality.
Through the trade-off illustrated in the above principle, we provide theoretical evidence that when
N ⊂ M and training samples are sufficient, η(ˆgM)may be less than η(ˆgN), i.e.γS(M,N)≤0.
Moreover, combining with the conclusion from Theorem 1, if the sample size mis large enough,
γS(M,N)≤0guarantees r
ˆhM◦ˆgM
≤r
ˆhN◦ˆgN
, which indicates learning with the M
modalities outperforms only using its subset Nmodalities.
Role of the intrinsic property C(·)Hypothesis function classes are typically overparametrized in
deep learning, and will be extremely large for some typical measures, e.g., VC dimension, absolute
dimension. Some recent efforts aim to offer an explanation about why neural networks generalize
better with over-parametrization [ 28,29,4]. [28] suggest a novel complexity measure based on
unit-wise capacities, which implies if both in overparametrized settings, the complexity will not
change much or even decrease when we have more modalities (using more parameters). Thus, the
inequality in the principle is trivially satisfied, and we will choose to learn with more modalities.
6

==== Page 7 ====
4.3 Non-Positivity Guarantee
In this section, we focus on a composite linear data generating model to theoretically verify that the
γS(M,N)is indeed non-positive in this special case.3Specifically, we consider the case where the
mapping to the latent space and the task mapping are both linear. Formally, let the function class G
andHbe:
G=
g|g(x) =A⊤x,A∈Rd×n,A	
H=n
h|h(z) =β⊤z,β∈Rn,∥β∥ ≤Cbo(11)
where x= 
x(1),···,x(K)
is ad-dimensional vector, x(k)∈Rdkdenotes the feature vector for
thek-th modality andPK
k=1dk=d. Here, the distribution Px(·)satisfies that its covariance matrix
is positive definite. The data is generated by:
y= (β⋆)⊤A⋆⊤x+ϵ (12)
where r.v. ϵis independent of xand has zero-mean and bounded second moment. Note that in
practical multi-modal learning, usually only one layer is linear and the other is a neural network. For
instance, [ 50] employs the linear matrix to project the feature matrix from different modalities into a
common latent space for early dementia diagnosis, i.e., Gis linear. Another example is in pedestrian
detection [ 46], where a linear task mapping is adopted, i.e., His linear. Thus, our composite linear
model can be viewed as an approximation to such popular models, and our results can offer insights
into the performance of these models.
We consider a special case that M= [K]andN= [K−1]. Thus GM=Gand we have the
following result.
GN=(
g|g(x) =A1:PK−1
k=1dk
0⊤
x,A∈Rd×nwith orthonormal columns)
(13)
Proposition 1. Consider the dataset S={(xi, yi)}m
i=1generating from the linear model defined
in(12) withℓ2loss. Let M= [K]andN= [K−1]. Let ˆAM,ˆANdenote the projection matrix
estimated by M,Nmodalities. Assume that ˆAM,A⋆has orthonormal columns. If n=d, for
sufficiently large constant Cb, we have:
γS(M,N)≤0 (14)
In this special case, Proposition 1 directly guarantees that training with incomplete modalities
weakens the ability to learn a optimal latent representation. As a result, it also degrades the learning
performance.
5 Experiment
We conduct experiments to validate our theoretical results. The source of the data we consider is
two-fold, multi-modal real-world dataset and well-designed generated dataset.
5.1 Real-world dataset
Dataset. The natural dataset we use is the Interactive Emotional Dyadic Motion Capture (IEMO-
CAP) database, which is an acted multi-modal and multi-speaker database [ 6]. It contains three
modalities, Text, Video and Audio. We follow the data preprocessing method of [ 33] and obtain 100
dimensions data for audio, 100dimensions for text, and 500dimensions for video. There are six
labels here, namely, happy, sad, neutral, angry, excited and frustrated. We use 13200 data for training
and3410 for testing.
Training Setting. For all experiments on IEMOCAP, we use one linear neural network layer to
extract the latent feature, and we set the hidden dimension to be 128. In multi-modal network,
different modalities do not share encoders and we concatenate the features first, and then map the
3Proving that γS(M,N)≤0holds in general is open and will be an interesting future work.
7

==== Page 8 ====
feature to the task space. We use Adam [ 25] as the optimizer and set the learning rate to be 0.01,
with other hyper-parameters default. The batch size is 2048 for the data. For this classification task,
the top-1 accuracy is used for performance measurement. We use naively multi-modal late-fusion
training as our framework [ 43,9]. In Appendix C, we provide more discussions on stable multi-modal
training.
Connection to the Latent Representation Quality. The classification accuracy on IEMOCAP,
using different combinations of modalities are summarized in Table 1. All learning strategies using
multiple modalities outperform the single modal baseline. To validate Theorem 1, we calculate the
test accuracy difference between different subsets of modalities using the result in Table 1 and show
them in the third column of Table 3.
Moreover, we empirically evaluate the η(ˆgM)in the following way: freeze the encoder ˆgMobtained
through pretraining and then finetune to obtain a better classifier h. Having η(ˆgM)andη(ˆgN), the
values of γS(M,N)between different subsets of modalities are also presented in Table 3. Previous
discussions on Theorem 1 implies that the population risk difference between MandNmodalities
has the same sign as γS(M,N)when the sample size is large enough, and negativity implies
performance gains. Since we use accuracy as the measure, on the contrary, positivity indicates a
better performance in our settings. As shown in Table 3, when more modalities are added for learning,
the test accuracy difference and γS(M,N)are both positive, which confirms the important role of
latent representation quality characterized in Theorem 1.
Table 1: Test classification accuracy on IEMOCAP, using different combinations of modalities, only
Text, Text + Video, Text + Audio and Text + Video + Audio.
Modalities Test Acc
Text(T) 49.93 ±0.57
Text + Video(TV) 51.08 ±0.66
Text + Audio(TA) 53.03 ±0.21
Text + Video + Audio(TV A) 53.89±0.47
Table 2: Latent representation quality vs. The number of the sample size on IEMOCAP. Noting that
in this table, we show the results from naively end-to-end late-fusion training and in Appendix C, we
discuss on more stable multi-modal training methods.
Modalities Test Acc (Ratio of Sample Size)
10−410−310−210−11
T 23.66 ±1.28 29.08 ±3.34 45.63 ±0.29 48.30 ±1.31 49.93 ±0.57
TA 25.06±1.05 34.28±4.54 47.28±1.24 50.46±0.61 51.08 ±0.66
TV 24.71 ±0.87 38.37±3.12 46.54±1.62 49.50 ±1.04 53.03 ±0.21
TV A 24.71 ±0.76 32.24 ±1.17 46.39 ±3.82 50.75±1.45 53.89 ±0.47
Table 3: Comparison of test accuracy and latent representation quality among different combinations
of modalities.
MModalities NModalities Test Acc Difference γS(M,N)
TA T 1.15 1.36
TV T 3.10 3.57
TV A TV 0.86 0.19
TV A TA 2.81 2.4
Upper Bound for Latent Space Exploration. Table 3 also confirms our theoretical analysis in
Theorem 2. In all cases, the Nmodalities is a subset of Mmodalities, and correspondingly, a
positive γS(M,N)is observed. This indicates that Mmodalities has a more sufficient latent space
exploration than its subset Nmodalities.
8

==== Page 9 ====
We also attempt to understand the use of sample size for exploring the latent space. Table 2 presents
the latent representation quality ηobtained by using different numbers of sample size, which is
measured by the test accuracy of the pretrain+finetuned modal. Here, the ratio of sample size is set
to the total number of training samples. The corresponding curve is also ploted in Figure 2(a). As
the number of sample size grows, the increase in performance of ηis observed, which is in keeping
with the O(p
1/m)term in our upper bound for η. The phenomenon that the combination of Text,
Video and Audio (TV A) modalities underperforms the uni-modal when the number of sample size
is relatively small, can also be interpreted by the trade-off we discussed in Theorem 2. When there
are insufficient training examples, the intrinsic complexity of the function class induced by multiple
modalities dominates, thus weakening its latent representation quality.
(a) Latent representation quality vs.The ratio of the
sample size on IEMOCAP
(b) Latent representation quality vs. The number of
modalities on simulated data
Figure 2: Evaluation of the latent representation quality on different data sets
5.2 Synthetic Data
In this subsection, we investigate the effect of modality correlation on latent representation quality.
Typically, there are three situations for the correlation across each modality [ 39]. (i) Each modality
does not share information at all, that is, each modality only contains modal-specific information. (ii)
The other is that, all modalities only maintain the share information without unique information on
their own. (iii) The last is a moderate condition, i.e., each modal not only shares information, but also
owns modal-specific information. The reason to utilize simulated data in this section is due to the
fact that it is hard in practice to have natural datasets that possess the required degree of modality
correlation.
Data Generation. For the synthetic data, we have four modalities, denoted by m1, m2, m3, m4,
respectively, and the generation process is summarized as follows:
Step 1: Generate mi∼ N(0,I),i= 1,2,3,4, where miis i.i.d. 100-dimensional random vector;
Step 2: Generate mi←(1−w)·mi+w·m1fori= 2,3,4
Step 3: Generate the labels as follows. First, add the four modality vectors and calculate the
sum of coordinates. Then, obatin the 1-dimensional label, i.e. y= (m1+m2+m3+
m4).sum (dim= 1)
We can see that information from m1is shared across different modalities, and wcontrols how much
is shared, which one can use to measure the degree of overlaps. We tune it in {0.0,0.2,0.5,0.8,1.0}.
A high weight w(close to 1) indicates a high degree of overlaps, while w= 0means each modality
is totally independent and is non-overlapping.
Training Setting. We use the multi-layer perceptron neural network as our model. To be more
specific, we first use a linear layer to encode the input to a 10-dimension latent space and then we
map the latent feature to the output space. The first layer’s input dimension depends on the number
of modality. For example, if we use two modalities, the input dimension is 200. We use SGD as our
9

==== Page 10 ====
optimizer, and set a learning rate 0.01, momentum 0.9, batch size 10000 , training for 10000 steps.
The Mean Square Error (MSE) loss is considered for evaluation in this regression problem.
ηvs Modality Correlation Our aim is to discover the influence of modality correlation on the latent
representation quality η. To this end, Table 4 shows the ηwith the varying number of modalities under
different correlation conditions, which is measured by the MSE loss of the pretrain+finetuned modal.
The trend that the loss decreases as the number of modalities increases is described in Figure 2(b),
which also validates our analysis of Theorem 2. Moreover, Figure 2(b) shows that higher correlation
among modalities achieves a lower loss for η, which means a better latent representation. This
emphasizes the role of latent space to exploit the intrinsic correlations among different modalities.
Table 4: Latent representation quality among different correlation situations on synthetic data
Modalities MSE Loss (Degree of Overlap )
1 0.8 0.5 0.2 0.0
m1 0 12.04 ±0.39 75.89 ±1.28 193.28 ±1.08 301.92 ±7.85
m1, m2 0 8.16 ±0.17 51.25 ±1.06 129.81 ±4.36 207.45 ±4.68
m1, m2, m3 0 4.18 ±0.05 26.06 ±0.69 65.17 ±1.52 103.23 ±0.61
m1, m2, m3, m40 0 0 0 0
6 Discussion
It has been discovered that the use of multi-modal data in practice will degrade the performance of the
model in some cases[ 43,19,38,15]. These works identify the causes of performance drops of multi-
modal as interactions between modalities in the training stage and try to improve the performance
by proposing new optimization strategies. Therefore, to theoretically understand them, we need to
analyze the training process from the optimization perspective. Our results, on the other hand, mainly
focus on the generalization side, which is separated from optimization and assumes that we get the
best performance possible in training. Moreover, our theory is general and does not require additional
assumptions on the relationship across every single modality, which may be crucial for theoretically
analyzing the observations in a multi-modal performance drop. Understanding why multi-modal fails
in practice is a very interesting direction and worth further investigation in future research.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we formulate a multi-modal learning framework that has been extensively studied in the
empirical literature towards rigorously understanding why multi-modality outperforms single since
the former has access to a better latent space representation. The results answer the two questions:
when and why multi-modal outperforms uni-modal jointly. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first theoretical treatment to explain the superiority of multi-modal from the generalization standpoint.
The key takeaway message is that the success of multi-modal learning relies essentially on the better
quality of latent space representation, which points to an exciting direction that is worth further
investigation: to find which encoder is the bottleneck and focus on improving it. More importantly,
our work provides new insights for multi-modal theoretical research, and we hope this can encourage
more related research.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
The work of Yu Huang and Longbo Huang is supported in part by the Technology and Innovation
Major Project of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China under Grant 2020AAA0108400
and 2020AAA0108403.
10

==== Page 11 ====
References
[1]Massih-Reza Amini, Nicolas Usunier, Cyril Goutte, et al. Learning from multiple partially
observed views-an application to multilingual text categorization. In NIPS , volume 22, pages
28–36, 2009.
[2]Peter Anderson, Qi Wu, Damien Teney, Jake Bruce, Mark Johnson, Niko Sünderhauf, Ian Reid,
Stephen Gould, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Vision-and-language navigation: Interpreting
visually-grounded navigation instructions in real environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3674–3683, 2018.
[3]Tadas Baltrušaitis, Chaitanya Ahuja, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Multimodal machine learn-
ing: A survey and taxonomy. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,
41(2):423–443, 2018.
[4]Peter Bartlett, Dylan J Foster, and Matus Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for
neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08498 , 2017.
[5]Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds
and structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3(Nov):463–482, 2002.
[6]Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower, Samuel Kim,
Jeannette N Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth S Narayanan. Iemocap: Interactive emotional
dyadic motion capture database. Language resources and evaluation , 42(4):335–359, 2008.
[7]Giovanni Cavallanti, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Claudio Gentile. Linear algorithms for online
multitask classification. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:2901–2934, 2010.
[8]Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggsound: A large-scale
audio-visual dataset. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 721–725. IEEE, 2020.
[9]Chenzhuang Du, Tingle Li, Yichen Liu, Zixin Wen, Tianyu Hua, Yue Wang, and Hang Zhao.
Improving multi-modal learning with uni-modal teachers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11059 ,
2021.
[10] Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Qi Lei. Few-shot learning via learning
the representation, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09434 , 2020.
[11] Ariel Ephrat, Inbar Mosseri, Oran Lang, Tali Dekel, Kevin Wilson, Avinatan Hassidim,
William T Freeman, and Michael Rubinstein. Looking to listen at the cocktail party: A speaker-
independent audio-visual model for speech separation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03619 , 2018.
[12] Haytham M Fayek and Anurag Kumar. Large scale audiovisual learning of sounds with weakly
labeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01595 , 2020.
[13] Marco Federici, Anjan Dutta, Patrick Forré, Nate Kushman, and Zeynep Akata. Learning robust
representations via multi-view information bottleneck. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07017 , 2020.
[14] Christoph Feichtenhofer, Axel Pinz, and Andrew Zisserman. Convolutional two-stream network
fusion for video action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition , pages 1933–1941, 2016.
[15] Itai Gat, Idan Schwartz, Alexander Schwing, and Tamir Hazan. Removing bias in multi-
modal classifiers: Regularization by maximizing functional entropies. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.10802 , 2020.
[16] Jort F Gemmeke, Daniel PW Ellis, Dylan Freedman, Aren Jansen, Wade Lawrence, R Channing
Moore, Manoj Plakal, and Marvin Ritter. Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset
for audio events. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP) , pages 776–780. IEEE, 2017.
[17] Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making
the v in vqa matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering.
InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
6904–6913, 2017.
[18] Saurabh Gupta, Judy Hoffman, and Jitendra Malik. Cross modal distillation for supervision
transfer. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 2827–2836, 2016.
11

==== Page 12 ====
[19] Zongbo Han, Changqing Zhang, Huazhu Fu, and Joey Tianyi Zhou. Trusted multi-view
classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02051 , 2021.
[20] Caner Hazirbas, Lingni Ma, Csaba Domokos, and Daniel Cremers. Fusenet: Incorporating
depth into semantic segmentation via fusion-based cnn architecture. In Asian conference on
computer vision , pages 213–228. Springer, 2016.
[21] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[22] Xinxin Hu, Kailun Yang, Lei Fei, and Kaiwei Wang. Acnet: Attention based network to
exploit complementary features for rgbd semantic segmentation. In 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 1440–1444. IEEE, 2019.
[23] Jindong Jiang, Lunan Zheng, Fei Luo, and Zhijun Zhang. Rednet: Residual encoder-decoder
network for indoor rgb-d semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01054 , 2018.
[24] M Esat Kalfaoglu, Sinan Kalkan, and A Aydin Alatan. Late temporal modeling in 3d cnn
architectures with bert for action recognition. In European Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 731–747. Springer, 2020.
[25] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[26] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 25:1097–
1105, 2012.
[27] Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning .
MIT press, 2018.
[28] Behnam Neyshabur, Zhiyuan Li, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Yann LeCun, and Nathan Srebro.
Towards understanding the role of over-parametrization in generalization of neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12076 , 2018.
[29] Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. Norm-based capacity control in neural
networks. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 1376–1401. PMLR, 2015.
[30] Jiquan Ngiam, Aditya Khosla, Mingyu Kim, Juhan Nam, Honglak Lee, and Andrew Y Ng.
Multimodal deep learning. In ICML , 2011.
[31] Seong-Jin Park, Ki-Sang Hong, and Seungyong Lee. Rdfnet: Rgb-d multi-level residual feature
fusion for indoor semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
on computer vision , pages 4980–4989, 2017.
[32] Massimiliano Pontil and Andreas Maurer. Excess risk bounds for multitask learning with trace
norm regularization. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 55–76. PMLR, 2013.
[33] Soujanya Poria, Erik Cambria, Devamanyu Hazarika, Navonil Majumder, Amir Zadeh, and
Louis-Philippe Morency. Context-dependent sentiment analysis in user-generated videos. In
Proceedings of the 55th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume
1: Long papers) , pages 873–883, 2017.
[34] George AF Seber and Alan J Lee. Linear regression analysis , volume 329. John Wiley & Sons,
2012.
[35] Daniel Seichter, Mona Köhler, Benjamin Lewandowski, Tim Wengefeld, and Horst-Michael
Gross. Efficient rgb-d semantic segmentation for indoor scene analysis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.06961 , 2020.
[36] Linda Smith and Michael Gasser. The development of embodied cognition: Six lessons from
babies. Artificial life , 11(1-2):13–29, 2005.
[37] Karthik Sridharan and Sham M Kakade. An information theoretic framework for multi-view
learning. 2008.
[38] Mahesh Subedar, Ranganath Krishnan, Paulo Lopez Meyer, Omesh Tickoo, and Jonathan
Huang. Uncertainty-aware audiovisual activity recognition using deep bayesian variational
inference. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 6301–6310, 2019.
12

==== Page 13 ====
[39] Xinwei Sun, Yilun Xu, Peng Cao, Yuqing Kong, Lingjing Hu, Shanghang Zhang, and Yizhou
Wang. Tcgm: An information-theoretic framework for semi-supervised multi-modality learning.
InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision , pages 171–188. Springer, 2020.
[40] Nilesh Tripuraneni, Chi Jin, and Michael I Jordan. Provable meta-learning of linear representa-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11684 , 2020.
[41] Nilesh Tripuraneni, Michael Jordan, and Chi Jin. On the theory of transfer learning: The
importance of task diversity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33, 2020.
[42] Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Yue Wu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Louis-Philippe Morency. Self-
supervised learning from a multi-view perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05576 , 2020.
[43] Weiyao Wang, Du Tran, and Matt Feiszli. What makes training multi-modal classification
networks hard? In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) , pages 12692–12702. IEEE, 2020.
[44] Yikai Wang, Wenbing Huang, Fuchun Sun, Tingyang Xu, Yu Rong, and Junzhou Huang. Deep
multimodal fusion by channel exchanging. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
33, 2020.
[45] Chang Xu, Dacheng Tao, and Chao Xu. A survey on multi-view learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1304.5634 , 2013.
[46] Dan Xu, Wanli Ouyang, Elisa Ricci, Xiaogang Wang, and Nicu Sebe. Learning cross-modal
deep representations for robust pedestrian detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5363–5371, 2017.
[47] Yang Yang, Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, and Yuan Jiang. Auxiliary information regularized
machine for multiple modality feature learning. In Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence , 2015.
[48] Changqing Zhang, Huazhu Fu, Joey Tianyi Zhou, Qinghua Hu, et al. Cpm-nets: Cross partial
multi-view networks. 2019.
[49] Hang Zhao, Chuang Gan, Andrew Rouditchenko, Carl V ondrick, Josh McDermott, and Antonio
Torralba. The sound of pixels. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
(ECCV) , pages 570–586, 2018.
[50] Tao Zhou, Kim-Han Thung, Mingxia Liu, Feng Shi, Changqing Zhang, and Dinggang Shen.
Multi-modal latent space inducing ensemble svm classifier for early dementia diagnosis with
neuroimaging data. Medical image analysis , 60:101630, 2020.
13

