==== Page 1 ====
Vol.:(0123456789)1 3AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1239–1240 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-022-01433-y
CURMUDGEON CORNER
Will AI end privacy? How do we avoid an Orwellian future
Toby Walsh1
Received: 3 August 2021 / Accepted: 10 March 2022 / Published online: 7 April 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag London Ltd., part of Springer Nature 2022
Vince Cerf told the Federal Trade Commission in 2013 that 
“privacy may actually be an anomaly”. He justified this bold 
claim with the observation that “Privacy is something which 
has emerged out of the urban boom coming from the indus-
trial revolution.” 
There is a certain truth to his claims. Our conception of 
privacy has changed greatly across time and space. Even 
limited to a single culture, we see significant differences 
in privacy across history. Back in medieval England, for 
example, life was a lot less private. Most people could not 
afford to live in houses with separate living and bedrooms. 
The Industrial Revolution lifted the standard of living and 
made privacy more possible. However, privacy is more than 
having a room of one’s own. It is also about having the pri-
vacy to discuss political change and dangerous thoughts in 
private. To vote anonymously. To practice the religion of 
our choosing. To live the lifestyle we wish. And many other 
privacies that we have grown to expect.
A vital question then is how do we stop AI from tak -
ing away many of these privacies, much as George Orwell 
predicted in “1984”. In 2013, Abhishek Mehta, the CEO of 
Tresata noted “Just like oil was a natural resource powering 
the last industrial revolution, data is going to be the natu-
ral resource for this industrial revolution. Data is the core 
asset, and the core lubricant, for not just the entire economic 
models built around every single industry vertical but also 
the socioeconomic models.”
Artificial Intelligence has been and will continue to be 
a major consumer of that data. Machine learning methods 
like Deep Learning currently require millions, if not billions, 
of training examples. If data is the new oil, machine learn-
ing is the refinery. The analogy between data and oil is one 
that should not be taken too literally. There are some fun-
damental differences between data and oil. Oil is a precious and limited resource. Data is neither very precious nor very 
scarce. Oil can only be used once. Data can be re-used with-
out limit. Indeed, unlike oil, data can often be used to gener -
ate more data.
1  AI and privacy
But perhaps the biggest difference between oil and data is in 
ownership. Countries quickly claimed ownership of the oil 
beneath our feet and under our seas. But much data today 
is privately owned. Indeed, a few private data monopolies 
like Google and Facebook increasingly own most of our 
data. And whilst they are generating wealth from it, we the 
producers of that data are receiving little of the value. In 
addition, all this data is putting our privacy under increas-
ing threat.
There appear to be few boundaries on the data that tech-
nology companies are willing to collect. Bruce Schneier, a 
privacy and security expert observed that “Surveillance is 
the business model of the Internet”. Al Gore put it even more 
succinctly when he called it “the stalker economy”.
Why did Google think it should track your Android phone 
when you turned off your location and even removed your 
SIM card? Or Uber think it should track your location five 
minutes after your ride was over? Or Pokémon Go think it 
should have access to your entire Google account on iOS, 
including your email and browsing history? And George 
Orwell would likely have been surprised that it wasn’t the 
government that was putting surveillance devices into our 
homes but consumers paying their own money to tech com-
panies like Amazon to do so. Alexa, are you listening?
Of course, it’s not just technology companies that are 
starting to invade people’s privacy. States are also adopting 
new technologies to pry into our lives. The US State of Dela-
ware has put “smart” cameras into police cruisers to detect 
vehicles carrying fugitives, abducted children or missing 
seniors. Such uses might be unproblematic but what hap -
pens when a state starts using the same technology to track 
political activists or refugees? In China, police in Zhengzhou  * Toby Walsh 
 t.walsh@unsw.edu.au
1 School of Computer Science and Engineering, University 
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

==== Page 2 ====
1240 AI & SOCIETY (2023) 38:1239–1240
1 3
have used face recognition glasses. These glasses can pro-
cess 100,000 faces every second. You can’t hide in a crowd 
of demonstrators when such technology is being used.
Some may argue that the battle for our digital privacy is 
already lost. We have already irrevocably given up too much 
of our private information to Facebook, Google, Amazon 
and others. But we will shortly give up our analog privacy 
too. The challenge here is that we are connecting ourselves 
to smartwatches, fitness monitors, and other devices that 
monitor our analog selves. Our geographical location. Our 
heartbeat. Our blood pressure. And soon many other vital 
signs.
The benefits our obvious. The DeepHeart machine learn-
ing app for the Apple Watch can detect atrial fibrillation, 
hypertension and sleep apnea. And it can even use your 
heartbeat to predict the onset of diabetes with a remarkable 
85% accuracy. This is all part of the promise that Artificial 
Intelligence can make us healthier. But there are also many 
risks. What
2  AI and privacy
if your health fund increases your premiums every week you 
skip the gym? Or your employer fines you for working too 
slowly? Or an advertiser show you commercials to make 
your heart beat faster?
With our digital selves, we can lie. We can pretend to be 
someone that we are not. We can connect anonymously. But 
it is much harder to lie about your analog self. We have very 
little direct control of how fast our heartbeats or our pupils 
dilate. Imagine what a political party could do with access 
to everyone’s heartbeat? And we are giving this analog data 
away to private companies. For example, when you send 
your saliva off to AncestryDNA for genetic testing, you 
have to agree that you grant them “ a royalty-free, world -
wide, sublicensable, transferable license to host, transfer, 
process, analyze, distribute, and communicate your Genetic 
Information for the purposes of providing you products and 
services, conducting Ancestry’s research and product devel-
opment, enhancing Ancestry’s user experience, and making 
and offering personalized products and services.”
And if AncestryDNA happens to use your DNA to 
develop a cure for a rare genetic disease that you possess, 
you will probably have to pay for that cure. The Ances-
tryDNA terms and conditions make it clear that “you acquire 
no rights in any research or commercial products that may 
be developed by Ancestry using your Genetic Information.” 
Actually, it used to be worse. Before a media outcry, Ances-
tryDNA claimed a “perpetual” royalty-free license. Once 
they had your data, there was no way for you to get it back. 
At least now, you can ask for them to delete your data and 
not use it anymore.Analog data is not protected by any patient/doctor or 
patient privacy legislation. A company like FitBit or Ances-
tryDNA can do pretty much what they like with it that 
advances their business. FitBit can work out who is having 
sex and try to sell them some viagra. AncestryDNA can 
determine that you are at risk of Alzheimer’s and sell your 
details to a local care home.
As is the case in many other areas, Artificial Intelligence 
is not only part of the problem but is also a significant part of 
any cure. There are a number of ways in which AI can help 
preserve privacy. Perhaps one of the surest ways to keep hold 
of privacy is not to have your data leave your possession. We 
will soon have enough computing power on our devices that 
the computation can happen right there. Your smartphone 
will be smart enough to recognise your speech, understand 
your request, and act upon it without calling upon Google 
or any other service in the cloud. Your health monitor won’t 
have to share your vital statistics with FitBit or anyone else. 
It will track your heartbeat and identify for itself when you 
need to see a doctor.
3  AI and privacy
We will also soon have AI privacy assistants sitting on all 
our devices. Their sole job will be to protect your privacy 
and defend your security. They will monitor all incoming 
and outgoing data, and intervene whenever your privacy or 
security is threatened. Other technologies will also contrib-
ute to safeguarding our privacy. For example, quantum cryp-
tography will be commonplace, giving even greater security 
to our data. And technologies like differential privacy will 
be mature, letting us share data with others in society for the 
public good but without giving up our own privacy. Finally, 
if we can diversify those building the technology, we can 
hope for more inclusive and private outcomes that reflect 
better our different cultural values.
If we make the right choices today, privacy will not be 
a historical anomaly. It will be a technological given right.
Curmudgeon Corner Curmudgeon Corner is a short opinionated col-
umn on trends in technology, arts, science and society, commenting on 
issues of concern to the research community and wider society. Whilst 
the drive for super-human intelligence promotes potential benefits to 
wider society, it also raises deep concerns of existential risk, thereby 
highlighting the need for an ongoing conversation between technology 
and society. At the core of Curmudgeon concern is the question: What 
is it to be human in the age of the AI machine? - Editor.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

