==== Page 1 ====
              
City, University of London Institutional Repository
Citation: Gunning, D., Stefik, M., Choi, J., Miller, T., Stumpf, S. & Yang, G-Z. (2019). XAI-
Explainable artificial intelligence. Science Robotics, 4(37), eaay7120. doi: 
10.1126/scirobotics.aay7120 
This is the accepted version of the paper. 
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version. 
Permanent repository link:  https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/23405/
Link to published version : https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aay7120
Copyright: City Research Online aims to make research outputs of City, 
University of London available to a wider audience. Copyright and Moral Rights 
remain with the author(s) and/or copyright holders. URLs from City Research 
Online may be freely distributed and linked to.
Reuse: Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, 
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge. 
Provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a 
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is 
not changed in any way.  City Research Online


==== Page 2 ====
City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/             publications@city.ac.uk

==== Page 3 ====
 
Focus  
 
XAI - Explainable Artificial Intelligence  
 
David Gunning1, Mark Stefik, Jaesik Choi, Timothy Miller, Simone Stumpf, Guang -Zhong Yang  
Explanations are essential for users to effectively understand, trust, and manage powerful artificial intelligence 
applications.  
 
1. Introduction  
Recent successes in machine learning (ML) have led to a new wave of artificial intelligence (AI) 
applications that offer extensive benefits to a diverse range of fields. However, many of these systems 
are not able to explain their autonomous decisions and actions to human users. Explanations may not 
be essential for certain AI applications, and some AI re - searchers argue that the emphasis on expla - 
nation is misplaced, too difficult to achieve, and perhaps unnecessary. However, for many critical 
applicatio ns in defense, medicine, finance, and law, explanations are essential for users to understand, 
trust, and effectively manage these new, artificially intelligent partners [see recent reviews ( 1–3)].  
Recent AI successes are largely attributed to new ML tech niques that construct models in their internal 
representations. These in - clude support vector machines (SVMs), ran - dom forests, probabilistic 
graphical models, reinforcement learning (RL), and deep learning (DL) neural networks. Although these 
models exh ibit high performance, they are opaque in terms of explainability. There may be in - herent 
conflict between ML performance (e.g., predictive accuracy) and explainability. Often, the highest 
performing methods (e.g., DL) are the least explainable, and the m ost explainable (e.g., decision trees) 
are the least accurate. Figure 1 illustrates this with a notional graph of the performance - explainability 
tradeoff for some of the ML techniques.  
 
 
                                                           
1 David Gunning  – Defense Advanced Research Agency (DARPA), 675 N. Randolph St., Arlington VA 22201, now at Facebook AI Research, 770 Broadway,  
New York, NY 10003, E -mail: dgunning@fb.com . Mark Stefik  –  Palo Alto Research Center, 3 333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304. E -mail: 
stefik@parc.com . Jaesik Choi  - Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan, Republic of 
Korea, 44919. E -mail: jaesik@unist.ac.kr . Timothy Miller  - School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne,  Victoria 3010 
Australia, E-mail:  tmiller@unimelb.e du.au . Simone Stumpf  - Centre for HCI Design, School of Mathematics, Computer Science and Engineering. City, 
University of London, London EC1V 0HB, UK. E -mail: Simone.Stumpf.1@city.ac.uk  . Guang -Zhong Yang  – The Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, 
London SW7 2AZ, also The Institute of Medical Robotics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, E -mail: g.z.yang@imperial.ac.uk    
 

==== Page 4 ====
 
 
Figure 1.  Learning techniques and explainability. Concept adapted  from ( 9). (B) Interpretable models: ML AQ4 
techniques that learn more structured, interpretable, or causal models. Early examples included Bayesian rule  
lists, Bayesian program learning, learning models of causal relationships, and using stochastic gramma rs to  
learn more interpretable structure. Deep learning: Several design choices might produce more explainable 
representations (e.g., training data selection, architectural layers, loss functions, regularization, optimization 
techniques, and training seque nces). Model agnostic: Techniques that experiment with any given ML model, as a 
black box, to infer an approximate explainable model.  
 
2.  What is XAI  
The purpose of an explainable AI (XAI) sys - tem is to make its behavior more intelligible to humans by 
providing explanations. There are some general principles to help create effective, more human -
understandable AI systems: The XAI system should be able to explain its capabilities and understandings; 
explain what it has done, what it is doing now, and what will happen next; and dis - close the salient 
information that it is acting on ( 4).  
However, every explanation is set within a context that depends on the task, abilities, and expectations 
of the user of the AI system. The definitions of interpretability and ex - plainability are, thus, domain 
dependent and may not be defined independently  from a domain. Explanations can be full or partial. 
Models that are fully interpretable give full  
and completely transparent explanations. Models that are partially interpretable reveal important 
pieces of their reasoning process. Interpretable models ob ey “interpretability constraints” that are 
defined according to the domain (e.g., monotonicity with respect to certain variables and correlated 
variables obey particular relationships), whereas black box or unconstrained models do not neces - sarily 
obey th ese constraints. Partial expla - nations may include variable importance measures, local models 
that approximate global models at specific points and saliency maps.  
3.  XAI – Expectation from users  
XAI assumes that an explanation is provided to a n “end user” who depends on the decisions, 
recommendations, or actions produced by an AI system yet there could be many different kinds of 
Neural Nets
Deep
Learning
Statistical 
ModelsAOGs
SVMsGraphical
Models
Bayesian 
BeliefNets
SRL
CRFs     HBNs
MLNs
Markov 
ModelsEnsemble
Methods
Random
Forests
Decision
TreesLearning TechniquesLearning Performance
ExplainabilityFuture Techniques
Interpretable Models
Techniques to learn more structured, 
interpretable, causal models
Deep Learning
Improved deep learning techniques to 
learn explainable features
Model Agnostic
Techniques to infer an explainable model 
from any model as a black box

==== Page 5 ====
 
users, often at different time points in the development and use of the system  (5). For example, a type 
of user might be an intelligence analyst, judge or an operator. However, other users who demand an 
explanation of the system might be a developer or test operator who needs to understand where there 
might be areas of improvements. Yet another user might be policy -makers , who are trying to assess the 
fairness of the system.  Each user group may have a preferred ex - planation type that is able to 
communicate information in the most effective way. An effective explanation will take the target user 
group of the system into ac count, who might vary in their background knowledge and needs for what 
should be explained.  
4.  Explainability  - Evaluation and Measurement  
A number of ways of evaluating and measuring the effectiveness of an explanation have been proposed, 
however, there is currently no common means of measuring  if an XAI system is more intelligible to a 
user than a non -XAI system. Some of these measures are subjective measures from the user’s point of 
view, such as user satisfaction which can be measured through a subjective rating of the clarity and 
utility of an explanation. More objective measures for an explanation’s effectiveness might be task 
performanc e, i.e. , does the explanation improve the user’s decision -making.   Reliable and consistent 
measurement of the effects of explanations is still an open research question.  Evaluation and measure - 
ment for XAI systems include evaluation frameworks, common gro und [different think - ing and mutual 
understanding ( 6)], common sense, and argumentation [why ( 7)].  
5.  XAI – Issues and Challenges  
There remain  many active issues and challenges at the intersection of machine learning and explanation. 
These include  but are not limited to : 
1) Starting from computers versus starting from people ( 8). Should XAI systems tailor explanations to 
particular users? Should they consider the knowledge that users lack? How can we exploit explanations 
to aid interactive and huma n-in-the-loop learning, including enabling users to interact with explanations 
to provide feedback and steer learning?  
2) Accuracy versus interpretability. A major thread of XAI research on explanation explores techniques 
and limitations of interpretabili ty. Interpretability needs to consider tradeoffs involving accuracy and 
fidelity and to strike a “sweet spot” between accuracy, interpretability, and tractability.  
3) Using abstractions to simplify explanations. High -level patterns are the basis for descr ibing big plans 
in big steps. Automating the discovery of abstractions has long been a challenge, and understanding the 
discovery and sharing of abstractions in learning and explanation are at the frontier of XAI research 
today.  
4) Explaining competencies  versus explaining decisions. A sign of mastery by highly qualified experts is 
that they can reflect on new situations. It is necessary to help end users to understand the competencies 
of the AI systems in terms of what co mpetencies a particular AI system has, how the competencies 
should be measured, and whether an AI system has blind spots; that is, are there classes of solutions it 
can never find?  

==== Page 6 ====
 
From a human -centered research perspective, research on competencies and knowledge could take XAI 
beyond the  role of explaining a particular XAI system and helping its users to determine appropriate 
trust. In the future, XAIs may eventually have substantial social roles. These roles could include not only 
learning and ex - plaining to individuals but also coordin ating with other agents to connect knowledge, 
developing cross -disciplinary insights and common ground, partnering in teaching people and other 
agents, and drawing on previously discovered knowledge to accelerate the further discovery and 
application of kn owledge. From such a social perspective of knowledge understanding and generation, 
the future of XAI is just beginning.  
 
8.  References  
1. W. Samek, G. Montavon, A. Vedaldi, L. K. Hansen, K. R. Muller, Explainable AI: Interpreting, Explaining 
and Visualizing Deep Learning (Springer Nature, 2019).  
2. H. J. Escalante, S. Escalera, I. Guyon, X. Bar ó, 
Y. Güçlütürk, U. G üçlü, M. van Gerven, Explainable and Interpretable Models in Computer Vision and 
Machine Learning (Springer, 2018).  
3. O. Biran, C. Cotton, Explanation and justification in machine learning: A survey, paper presented at 
the IJCAI -17 Workshop on Explainable AI (XAI), Melbourne, Australia, 20 August 2017.  
4. V. Bellotti, K. Edwards, In telligibility and accountability: Human considerations in context -aware 
systems. Hum. Comput. Interact. 16, 193 –212 (2009).  
5. T. Kulesza, M. Burnett, W. Wong, S. Stumpf, Principles of explanatory debugging to personalize 
interactive machine learning, in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces (ACM, 2015), pp. 126 –137.  
6. H. H. Clark, S. E. Brennan, Grounding in communication, in Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition , 
L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, S. D. Teasley, Eds. (American Psychological Association, 1991), pp. 127 –
149.  
7. D. Wang, Q. Yang, A. Abdul, B. Y. Lim, Designing theory -driven user -centric explainable AI, in 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (ACM, 2019), paper  
no. 601.  
8. T. Miller, Explanation in artificial intelligence: Insights from the social sciences. Artif. Intell. 267, 1–38 
(2018).  
9. D. Gunning, Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), DARPA/I2O; 
www.cc.gatech.edu/~alanwags/DLAI2016/ (Gunning)%20IJC AI-16%20DLAI%20WS.pdf.  

