==== Page 1 ====
XNet: A convolutional neural network (CNN)
implementation for medical X-Ray image segmentation
suitable for small datasets
Joseph Bullock, Carolina Cuesta-L azaro, and Arnau Quera-Bofarull
Department of Physics, Durham University, UK
ABSTRACT
X-Ray image enhancement, along with many other medical image processing applications, requires the segmen-
tation of images into bone, soft tissue, and open beam regions. We apply a machine learning approach to this
problem, presenting an end-to-end solution which results in robust and ecient inference. Since medical insti-
tutions frequently do not have the resources to process and label the large quantity of X-Ray images usually
needed for neural network training, we design an end-to-end solution for small datasets, while achieving state-of-
the-art results. Our implementation produces an overall accuracy of 92%, F1 score of 0.92, and an AUC of 0.98,
surpassing classical image processing techniques, such as clustering and entropy based methods, while improving
upon the output of existing neural networks used for segmentation in non-medical contexts. The code used for
this project is available online.1
Keywords: X-Ray image segmentation, medical image processing, machine learning.
1. INTRODUCTION
X-Ray image segmentation is of great importance in many medical applications such as image enhancement, and
other processing tasks, computer assisted surgery, and anomaly detection. These applications regularly require
the segmentation of images into 3 categories: open beam, soft tissue and bone. Current methods rely heavily
on a complex system of classical image processing techniques, such as clustering approaches,2,3line uctuation
analysis,4or entropy-based methods,5,6which often require the tuning of hyperparameters for each body part
class. However, utilising machine learning oers several advantages over these traditional methods since: (i) it
naturally addresses noise, (ii) it generalises well to dierent body parts, and (iii) the segmented regions have
continuous boundaries.
Although the use of machine learning in the healthcare sector has grown signicantly in recent years, and
with it open source datasets have become more readily available,7{10we know of no publicly available labelled
dataset of X-Ray images that can be used in training a neural network for segmentation tasks as presented in
this paper. This means institutions wishing to train such a network must provide and label their own images.
X-Ray images are expensive to obtain, and manual labelling is time consuming, thus acquiring a large and varied
database may not be possible; a common issue raised when discussing the feasibility of neural networks for X-Ray
segmentation.11
We design a unique Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture to perform segmentation by extracting
ne grained features, while controlling the number of trainable parameters to prevent overtting. The network is
trained on 150 X-Ray images, with no scatter correction and comprising of 19 body parts in an imbalanced way.
This dataset, we believe, is of a manageable size to be created by a medical institution. We present our network,
and a full end-to-end description of it's implementation, including post-processing stages for the minimisation of
false positives, and optimisation of the F1 score. Despite our dataset being small compared to those used in many
machine learning applications, we achieve an overall accuracy signicantly higher, and more generalisable, than
Further author information: (Send correspondence to Joseph Bullock)
Joseph Bullock: E-mail: j.p.bullock[at]durham.ac.uk,
Carolina Cuesta-L azaro: E-mail: carolina.cuesta-lazaro[at]durham.ac.uk,
Arnau Quera-Bofarull: E-mail: arnau.quera-bofarull[at]durham.ac.ukarXiv:1812.00548v2  [cs.CV]  20 Apr 2019

==== Page 2 ====
work using classical image processing techniques.2{6,12Additionally, we show that our architecture outperforms
leading image segmentation networks developed for other applications.13
Our paper is structured as follows: after reviewing a selection of the existing literature in Section 2, we
discuss our dataset in Section 3 - how we collect and label the data, and the augmentation methods to prevent
overtting; in Section 4 we address the design and structure of our CNN, covering training and testing stages; the
results of the network are discussed in Section 5, where we also address the post-processing stage of false positive
reduction; a comparison of our results with other works from the classical and machine learning literature is
presented in Section 6, after which we discuss future applications and developments in Section 7.
2. RELATED WORK
Note that we provide this section not as an extensive literature review, but to lay the groundwork for where
the methodology and results of this work sit in the current research landscape. We include work from which
we have drawn important insights and information, while attempting to provide a pedagogical introduction to
the development of the eld of X-Ray image segmentation, along with modern image segmentation methods in
a broader context.
Methods for segmenting X-Ray images have been a constant topic in the literature for many years, due to
its role in image processing and other analysis based operations. Much previous work focuses on using classical
image processing techniques.11,14Pixel clustering based on similarity in certain parameters is a commonly
employed technique. Kubilay Pakin et al.2use clustering as a component of their segmentation algorithm,
achieving high accuracy scores, but requiring hyperparameter tuning for each body part class, while struggling
to produce smooth boundaries. Similarly, good results have been achieved by Wu and Mahfouz,3who employ
spectral clustering methods and produce much smoother boundaries, however, this application was tuned purely
to knee image analysis. Entropy-based approaches have been employed by Bandyopadhyay et al. ,5,6which have
enabled clean boundary identication, yet suer from extraneous edges such as bone cracks or image distortions.
Kazeminia et al.4build on this work, employing existing edge detection algorithms such as Sobel15andCanny ,16
while analysing the intensity uctuations in pixel rows to more accurately select the bone boundary. This work
is less sensitive to noise, however, loses some boundary continuity. Similarly, atlas models have been developed
for medical image segmentation, and an application to rib cage segmentation is given by Candemir et al.12From
such techniques the authors are able to generate complete segmentations, however, the boundaries remain noisy
and the area under the ROC curve (AUC) is highly dependent on the dataset analysed.
The growth of machine learning applications in the healthcare sector has been considerable in recent years.
Indeed, due to the large amount of information encoded in X-Ray images, focused research into their analysis
has been signicant. Aiding this advancement of research has been an increase in availability of X-Ray image
datasets, each tailored to dierent applications.7{10Using such datasets, many machine learning approaches
for the detection of anomalies, such as pneumonia,17pulmonary tuberculosis,18and thoracic diseased19have
been developed, as well as diagnosing a variety of diseases based on chest X-Rays.20Islam et al.21and Qin et
al.22provide comparisons of a range of neural networks applied to detecting anomalies in chest X-Rays. These
detection technologies usually perform image segmentation to localise the position of the anomaly, or of a certain
bone structure (most commonly the rib cage), and are carefully tuned to these applications. Additionally, due to
their architectures, many of the networks presented in the above literature would not be suitable for performing
a pixel-level segmentation over the entirety of the image.
Complete multi-class image segmentation is an active, high-growth area of research, most recently driven by
autonomous vehicle development. Neural networks have been at the forefront of this research and take various
forms including the encoder-decoder design similar to that presented in this paper,23{27and fully connected
networks.28Several applications of these networks also utilise the technique of image augmentation to aid
network generalisation and reduce the risk of overtting. Similarly, Badrinarayanan, Handa and Cipolla13
present a simplied version of the widely applied SegNet architecture,23showing improved performance on
small datasets. Indeed, it is against this simplied network, known as SegNet-Basic ,13that we benchmark our
network performance. It is noted that some networks have been specically designed for the total segmentation of
medical images, yet these applications have been largely constrained to the segmentation of cell structures.27,29,30

==== Page 3 ====
There have been examples of networks, such as U-Net,27being applied to other segmentation tasks in the eld
of X-Ray image segmentation,31but only in specic use cases.
3. DATA
3.1 Collection and Labelling
We use data collected from two sources at IBEX Innovations Ltd.:3269 CT scans images of feet, knees and
phantom heads, and 81 standard X-Ray images of dierent body and phantom body parts, of which the thorax
is the most underrepresented. Several images contain foreign metal objects, such screws and staples, which
we aim to classify as bone. The particular distribution among body part classes can be seen in Table 1. The
images have not been corrected for scatter eects; but they have been dark-corrected by removing the detector
background signal. Additionally, we pre-process each image by performing mean subtraction and pixel value
normalisation to within the range [  1;1]. The images are labelled using the free software Gimp ,33by assigning
a colour to each of the three distinct regions: open beam, soft tissue and bone. As a case study we specically
aim to minimise the soft tissue false positives, and so primarily avoid labelling any bone or open beam region as
soft tissue. Both the images and labels are resized to 200 200 pixels to match the network input shape.
Bodypart list
Ankle 10 Leg 1
Arm 3 Lumbar spine 6
Cervical 1 Neck of femur 15
Chest 1 Pelvis 2
Elbow 1 Shoulder 2
Femur 3 Thigh 8
Foot 29 Thorax 1
Hand 4 Tibia 4
Head 11 Wrist 11
Knee 36 Total: 150
Table 1: Number of images in each body part class on our dataset. Note that the dierent body part classes are highly
unbalanced.
3.2 Augmentation
Compared to previous successful applications of neural networks to image segmentation, our dataset is small.
There are 150 images in total, with unbalanced body part classes, representative of that which may be created
by a medical institution. Therefore, we articially augment the training images with the two-fold purpose of
creating a larger dataset, to avoid overtting, and balancing the dierent body part classes through augmented
oversampling. After experimenting with a variety of lters, we nd that elastic transformations are a crucial
component for generating realistic augmented images, combined with translations, rotations, shear and cropping.
For our dataset, we also nd augmenting to produce 500 images per body part class gives the highest validation
accuracy. If there is only one example of a particular body part, this image is placed in the test set and not used
for training.
4. ARCHITECTURE
4.1 XNet
XNet is based on an encoder -decoder style architecture commonly used in image segmentation.23{27
Encoder The encoder consists of a series of convolutional layers, for feature extraction, and max pooling
layers to downsample the input image. Breaking up the downsampling into a multiple stages allows for varying
levels of extraction, with increasingly global features learnt through the convolutional layers at each pooling
stage.

==== Page 4 ====
  Convolution +
Batch Normalization +
ReLU ActivationPooling Upsampling Softmax Activation
Feature concatenationInput:
Grayscale ImageOutput:
Segmented Image
Figure 1: Visualisation of XNet architecture including example input image, left, and output segmented mask, right.
Feature concatenation of same dimension layers helps to avoid losing ne-grained detail. Softmax activation function
provides nal pixel-wise classication.
Decoder After feature extraction, the decoder performs upsampling to generate a segmented mask of equal
dimension to the input image. Similar to the encoder, using a multistage upsampling process with convolutional
layers in between allows for varying degrees of ne grain feature reconstruction during upsampling, thus producing
dense feature maps.
Due to the small size of our dataset, we avoid large serial downsampling of the input image compared to
many other networks, particularly those used in image classication. We avoid this since performing a greater
number of downsamplings in series can be detrimental to accurate boundary level detail, particularly around
smaller structures. However, downsampling allows for learnable feature extraction, and so is important to include
in the network.
We present an architecture which incorporates a comparable, or greater, number of downsampling stages
for feature extraction as other segmentation networks, whilst avoiding overly-reducing image resolution. This
is achieved by using two encoder-decoder modules in succession, whilst storing encoder feature maps and using
them during the creation of the dense feature maps in the decoders (as can be seen in Figure 1).
Each convolutional layer is associated with a rectied-linear non-linearity (ReLU) activation function, and the
decoder upsamples the image using nearest-neighbours upsampling. Storage and use of the encoder feature maps
is performed through lter copying between layers of equivalent dimensions, meaning the model is less likely to
`forget' what it has previously learnt, thus decreasing the likelihood of loosing ne-grained detail after performing
downsampling (a technique used in several encoder-decoder networks23,27). At each convolutional layer we
employ L2 norm regularisation, with penalty parameter = 510 4, to improve network generalisation and
prevent overtting.34For more detailed information regarding network architecture and parameters, including
lter sizes, see the supplementary material.1
4.2 Training
We train our model on augmented data, thus increasing the number of training examples, thereby reducing the
chance of overtting. Of the 150 images in our original dataset, 108 are set aside for augmentation and training.
The remaining images are used in validation and testing stages in equal proportion.

==== Page 5 ====
The ground truth masks used for training are one-hot encoded. For each input pixel Xwe optimise the
categorical cross-entropy loss,
L(X;y) = X
iI(y;i) logp(Y=ijX); (1)
whereyis the output label generated by the network, p(Y=ijX) is the probability that the network assigns
the labeligiven the input data, and I(y;i) is the indicator function dened by
I(y;i) =(
0 ify6=i;
1 ify=i:(2)
We train using Adam optimisation35with learning rate 10 4.
Since our aim is to design a network that could also be retrained by a non-specialist institution who may not
have access to large memory GPUs, we choose small mini-batch and kernel sizes. We train on a batch size of 5
with each convolutional layer having a kernel size of 3 3. To optimise training time we use Early Stopping (see
Section 7.8 of Goodfellow, Bengio and Courville36) by monitoring `validation loss' with a patience of 20. The
validation set is not augmented and chosen by randomly selected at least one image from each body part class,
so as to avoid tuning to a bias dataset. Training using the above parameters took 7 hours on a GTX 1060 6GB
GPU.
4.3 Testing
We test our network on images without augmentation chosen in a similar way to the validation set. Indeed, we
manually classify certain images as `dicult' based on factors such as: bone structure complexity, noise, and the
contrast ratio. To ensure our network can handle such diculty, and generalise well, we ensure that the test
set contained a disproportionate number of these dicult cases. We carry out all testing before post-processing,
and the accuracy score is calculated using the categorical accuracy metric in Keras.37
Although we correct for body part class imbalance at the pre-processing stage, our dataset is still highly
imbalanced in the segmentation categories. The open beam region is both the most prevalent in the dataset
and the easiest to classify (during architecture development and hyperparameter tuning this category always
achieved the highest accuracy). Therefore, accuracy over all classes is not necessarily the most eective metric
by which to measure the model's performance.
For our applications we look for a balance between false positive reduction and true positive enhancement.
Therefore we use the F1 score as a measure of network performance. The comparison of accuracy and F1 scores
can be found in Section 5.
5. RESULTS
5.1 Network Performance
The network achieves an open beam, soft tissue, and bone classication accuracy of 96%, 94%, and 88% respec-
tively, and an overall weighted averaged accuracy of 92%. Additionally, we obtain an F1 score of 0.97, 0.87, and
0.90, in the open beam, soft tissue, and bone categories respectively. Taking into account class imbalance, the
overall weight averaged F1 score is 0.92. The summary of results is presented in Table 2. In Figure 3, we show
some predictions of images in our test set, with the confusion matrix computed over the test set presented in
Figure 2a. The network can be seen to perform well for dierent body parts, including on the more challenging,
due to its complexity and absence of training examples, chest region.
Category F1-Score AUC Accuracy Condence
Open Beam 0 :97 1:00 96% 99%
Soft tissue 0 :87 0:97 94% 95%
Bone 0 :90 0:97 88% 97%
Weighted average 0.92 0.98 92% 97%
Table 2: Evaluation metrics for the three categories, and their weighted averages.

==== Page 6 ====
Open Beam Soft TissueBone
Predicted labelOpen Beam
Soft Tissue
BoneTrue label0.99 0.01 0.00
0.01 0.82 0.17
0.03 0.04 0.93
 0.20.40.60.8(a) Confusion matrix
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
False Positive Rate0.00.20.40.60.81.0True Positive Rate
Open Beam ROC curve (AUC = 1.00)
Bone ROC curve (AUC = 0.97)
Tissue ROC curve (AUC = 0.97) (b) ROC curve
Figure 2: (a) Normalised confusion matrix of XNet results. Each row represents the instances in a class, while each
column shows the class predicted by the network for those instances. Here, most of the errors are made classifying soft
tissue as bone. (b) ROC curve showing the true positive rate against the false positive rate for the open-beam, bone and
soft-tissue categories. The area under the curve (AUC) for the dierent categories is shown.
Figure 3: Segmentation predictions from the test set. Top row images show a knee, phantom head and hand. Bottom
row shows a pelvis, ankle with a metallic bolt, and the lower half of a leg. The open beam area is shown in purple. Bone
is shown in yellow and soft tissue in green.
5.2 Calibration
Modern CNNs are often ill-calibrated, making them overcondent about their predictions.38For networks
broadly applicable to a variety of medical image segmentation tasks, such calibration error can be detrimental
to important post-processing steps, such as false positive reduction in a given category. The output of XNet is
a 3-dimensional probability map, where each pixel is assigned a probability of belonging to one of the dierent
categories. We dene network condence in a given category as
conf(X) =X
i2Xpi; (3)
whereXis the set of all pixels assigned to that category, and piis the probability that the ith pixel belongs to
said category.

==== Page 7 ====
A well calibrated network is dened as a network whose condence averaged over all output categories, is
close to the network's averaged accuracy.38We nd that our network is indeed well calibrated, as dened by this
metric, as can be seen in Figure 4. XNet is therefore well suited for the employment of a variety of post-processing
techniques to tailor the output depending on the use case.
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
Probability020406080% of samples
Avg. weighted Accuracy
Avg. weighted ConfidenceOpen Beam accuracy
Open Beam confidence
Soft Tissue accuracy
Soft Tissue confidence
Average weighted accuracy
Average weighted confidence
Bone accuracy
Bone confidence
Figure 4: Condence histogram across all categories, showing that the network is well calibrated. For the individual
categories, the best calibrated is soft tissue with a dierence of 1%. For open beam the dierence is 3%. The least calibrated
category is bone, with a dierence of 9%. Note: as mentioned, in our case study, when we carry out hyperparamter
optimisation we are focusing on minimising soft tissue false positives, so these results are as expected.
5.3 False Positive Reduction
The simplest way of obtaining a segmentation from the network output is to assign each pixel to the most likely
category. Nonetheless, with our objective of reducing soft tissue false positives in the soft tissue category, we
classify a pixel as soft tissue only if the network predicted probability is higher than a given threshold. Since
our network is well calibrated, this probability threshold reects the condence that we demand for a pixel to
be in this category. We nd that increasing this probability threshold reduces the number of false positives at
the expense of the number of true positives. For example, with a probability threshold of 0.90, the false positive
rate in the soft tissue class is reduced to 3%, while reducing the true positive rate to 71%. Choosing the ideal
probability threshold depends on the particular use case. We choose more severe thresholds for the body parts
that the network struggles more to segment. We obtain an area under the curve of 1.00 for the open beam
region and 0.97 for both the bone and soft tissue classes, thus demonstrating the high classication ability of our
network.
6. CONCLUSION
We develop a fully automatic method to segment medical X-Ray images given a small dataset. As a compromise
between having a deep network to extract high-level features and ne-grained detail, and a network that avoids
overtting to small datasets, we present an architecture with two encoder-decoder modules. We train this network

==== Page 8 ====
on a dataset consisting of 150 images, articially augmented to generate 7000 training images. Evaluating the
network performance we nd an overall accuracy of 92% and F1 score of 0.92, with an AUC of 0.98.
We benchmark our network against the popular SegNet design. Starting with the Segnet-Basic architecture,13
and carrying out a hyperparameter search similar to the one we do for XNet, the best result obtained gives a 2%
improvement on bone classication accuracy with respect to XNet, but at the expense of only having a 75% true
positive rate and 25% false positive rate in the soft tissue category (in comparison to our network which achieves
an 82% TP ratio, see Figure 2a). Additionally, we signicantly outperform this network when detecting the open
beam region. SegNet-Basic achieves F1 scores of 0.96, 0.83, and 0.90 for open beam, soft tissue and bone regions
respectively, with an overall weighted F1 score of 0.89, thus giving a lower F1 score in every category compared
to XNet (see Table 2). The full implementation of SegNet23has too many parameters to eectively t to such
a small dataset. Similarly, its size requires signicantly more computational power, thus making it impractical
for the purpose of being trainable by many medical institutions.
We also see a signicant improvement when benchmarking against state-of-the-art classical image processing
techniques. Figure 5 shows a comparison between our architecture and the work of Kazeminia et al. ,4who built
upon that of Bandyopadhyay et al.5,6The XNet segmentation produces smoothly connected boundaries around
the bone regions, in addition to dierentiating well between bone and soft tissue regions. It should be noted
that in producing this output, our algorithm was trained on a set of high resolution TIF images, as produced
by the X-Ray scanner, whereas this analysis was run on signicantly lower quality JPEG images, meaning our
network could not achieve its full potential on this image. Additionally, our training set does not contain any
feet viewed from the angle as seen in Figure 5, thus demonstrating the generalisability of our network.
Another classical example is the clustering based method presented by Kubilay Pakin et al. ,2which gives a
92% accuracy averaged over 14 images belonging to 5 body part classes. This accuracy score is calculated after
each of the two free parameters of the algorithm are ne-tuned for each individual image. Our approach obtains a
similar accuracy score in a larger, more diverse dataset, generalising well to 19 body part classes without specic
tuning.
Figure 5: Comparison of our algorithm, right, with the work of Kazeminia et al. ,4left, showing signicant improvement
in boundary smoothness
7. FUTURE WORK
As an improvement to our implementation, we wish to focus on reducing the false positive rate at the post-
processing stage. Additionally, there have been several attempts at rening segmentation mask outputs, such
as using conditional random elds.26Such methods could be applied to our work to further improve boundary
smoothness, and reduce the likelihood of false islands appearing in the mask. Another approach could be to train
an adversarial network, along with XNet, to detect inconsistencies between the network generated segmented
maps and the ground truth. However, such an implementation would signicantly increase the training time of
the network, while also increasing the risk of falling into local minima during training.

==== Page 9 ====
Furthermore, it would be interesting to diversify the classication categories to identify dierent bone types
or tissue materials. Identication of such dierences, particularly in the tissue region, is of great importance to
the medical eld since tissue abnormality detection is a highly non-trivial task when using X-Ray images.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are part of the Centre for Doctoral Training in Data Intensive Science at Durham University
supported by STFC grant number ST/P006744/1. The authors are grateful to IBEX Innovations Ltd.32for
hosting them and providing data, and to Kazeminia et al.4and Bandyopadhyay et al.6for providing images used
in their work. This work made use of the facilities of the Hamilton HPC Service of Durham University. This work
also used the DiRAC Data Centric system at Durham University, operated by the Institute for Computational
Cosmology on behalf of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facility ( www.dirac.ac.uk ). This equipment was funded by BIS
National E-infrastructure capital grant ST/K00042X/1, STFC capital grant ST/H008519/1, and STFC DiRAC
Operations grant ST/K003267/1 and Durham University. DiRAC is part of the National E-Infrastructure. The
authors are grateful to the above organisations for their support.
References
[1] Bullock, J., Cuesta-L azaro, C., and Quera-Bofarull, A., \XNet." https://github.com/JosephPB/XNet
(2018).
[2] Kubilay Pakin, S., Gaborski, R. S., Barski, L. L., Foos, D. H., and Parker, K. J., \Clustering approach
to bone and soft tissue segmentation of digital radiographic images of extremities," Journal of Electronic
Imaging 12, 12 { 12 { 10 (2003).
[3] Wu, J. and Mahfouz, M. R., \Robust x-ray image segmentation by spectral clustering and active shape
model," Journal of Medical Imaging 3(3), 034005 (2016).
[4] Kazeminia, S., Karimi, N., Mirmahboub, B., Soroushmehr, S. M. R., Samavi, S., and Najarian, K., \Bone
extraction in x-ray images by analysis of line uctuations," in [ 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (ICIP) ], 882{886 (2015).
[5] Bandyopadhyay, O., Chanda, B., and Bhattacharya, B., \Entropy-based automatic segmentation of bones
in digital x-ray images," Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence , 122{129 (2011).
[6] Bandyopadhyay, O., Biswas, A., Chanda, B., and Bhattacharya, B., \Bone contour tracing in digital x-ray
images based on adaptive thresholding," Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence 852, 465{473 (2013).
[7] Wang, X., Peng, Y., Lu, L., Lu, Z., Bagheri, M., and Summers, R. M., \Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale chest
x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised classication and localization of common thorax
diseases," in [ 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ], 3462{3471
(2017).
[8] Rajpurkar, P., Irvin, J., Bagul, A., Ding, D., Duan, T., Mehta, H., Yang, B., Zhu, K., Laird, D., Ball, R. L.,
Langlotz, C., Shpanskaya, K., Lungren, M. P., and Ng, A. Y., \MURA: Large Dataset for Abnormality
Detection in Musculoskeletal Radiographs," arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06957 (2017).
[9] Yan, K., Wang, X., Lu, L., and Summers, R. M., \Deeplesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion
annotations and universal lesion detection with deep learning," Journal of Medical Imaging 5, 5 { 5 { 11
(2018).
[10] Demner-Fushman, D., Kohli, M. D., Rosenman, M. B., Shooshan, S. E., Rodriguez, L., Antani, S., Thoma,
G. R., and McDonald, C. J., \Preparing a collection of radiology examinations for distribution and retrieval,"
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA 23(2), 304{310 (2016).
[11] Sharma, N. and Aggarwal, L. M., \Automated medical image segmentation techniques," Journal of Medical
Physics / Association of Medical Physicists of India 35(1), 3{14 (2010).

==== Page 10 ====
[12] Candemir, S., Jaeger, S., Antani, S., Bagci, U., Folio, L. R., Xu, Z., and Thoma, G., \Atlas-based rib-
bone detection in chest x-rays," Computerized medical imaging and graphics : the ocial journal of the
Computerized Medical Imaging Society 51, 32{39 (2016).
[13] Badrinarayanan, V., Handa, A., and Cipolla, R., \Segnet: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder architec-
ture for robust semantic pixel-wise labelling," arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.07293 (2015).
[14] Mansoor, A., Bagci, U., Foster, B., Xu, Z., Papadakis, G. Z., Folio, L. R., Udupa, J. K., and Mollura, D. J.,
\Segmentation and image analysis of abnormal lungs at ct: Current approaches, challenges, and future
trends," Radiographics 35(4), 1056{1076 (2015).
[15] Sobel, Irwin, F. G., \An isotropic 3x3 image gradient operator," Presentation at Stanford A.I. Project
(1968).
[16] Canny, J., \A computational approach to edge detection," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 8(6), 679{698 (1986).
[17] Rajpurkar, P., Irvin, J., Zhu, K., Yang, B., Mehta, H., Duan, T., Ding, D., Bagul, A., Langlotz, C.,
Shpanskaya, K., Lungren, M. P., and Ng, A. Y., \CheXNet: Radiologist-level pneumonia detection on chest
x-rays with deep learning," arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05225 (2017).
[18] Lakhani, P. and Sundaram, B., \Deep learning at chest radiography: Automated classication of pulmonary
tuberculosis by using convolutional neural networks," Radiology 284(2), 574{582 (2017). PMID: 28436741.
[19] Yan, C., Yao, J., Li, R., Xu, Z., and Huang, J., \Weakly Supervised Deep Learning for Thoracic Disease
Classication and Localization on Chest X-rays," arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06067 (2018).
[20] Yao, L., Poblenz, E., Dagunts, D., Covington, B., Bernard, D., and Lyman, K., \Learning to diagnose from
scratch by exploiting dependencies among labels," arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10501 (2017).
[21] Islam, M. T., Aowal, M. A., Minhaz, A. T., and Ashraf, K., \Abnormality detection and localization in
chest x-rays using deep convolutional neural networks," arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.09850 (2017).
[22] Qin, C., Yao, D., Shi, Y., and Song, Z., \Computer-aided detection in chest radiography based on articial
intelligence: a survey," BioMedical Engineering OnLine 17, 113 (2018).
[23] Badrinarayanan, V., Kendall, A., and Cipolla, R., \Segnet: A deep convolutional encoder-decoder archi-
tecture for image segmentation," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 39(12),
2481{2495 (2017).
[24] Hong, S., Noh, H., and Han, B., \Decoupled deep neural network for semi-supervised semantic segmen-
tation," in [ Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems -
Volume 1 ],NIPS'15 , 1495{1503, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (2015).
[25] Noh, H., Hong, S., and Han, B., \Learning deconvolution network for semantic segmentation," in [ Proceed-
ings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) ],ICCV '15 , 1520{1528, IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA (2015).
[26] Zheng, S., Jayasumana, S., Romera-Paredes, B., Vineet, V., Su, Z., Du, D., Huang, C., and Torr, P.
H. S., \Conditional random elds as recurrent neural networks," in [ 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV) ], 1529{1537 (2015).
[27] Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., and Brox, T., \U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image seg-
mentation," in [ Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention { MICCAI 2015 ], 234{241,
Springer International Publishing, Cham (2015).
[28] Long, J., Shelhamer, E., and Darrell, T., \Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation," in [ 2015
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ], 3431{3440 (2015).

==== Page 11 ====
[29] Ciresan, D., Giusti, A., Gambardella, L. M., and Schmidhuber, J., \Deep neural networks segment neuronal
membranes in electron microscopy images," in [ Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 ],
Pereira, F., Burges, C. J. C., Bottou, L., and Weinberger, K. Q., eds., 2843{2851, Curran Associates, Inc.
(2012).
[30] Arganda-Carreras, I., Turaga, S. C., Berger, D. R., Cire?an, D., Giusti, A., Gambardella, L. M., Schmidhu-
ber, J., Laptev, D., Dwivedi, S., Buhmann, J. M., Liu, T., Seyedhosseini, M., Tasdizen, T., Kamentsky, L.,
Burget, R., Uher, V., Tan, X., Sun, C., Pham, T. D., Bas, E., Uzunbas, M. G., Cardona, A., Schindelin,
J., and Seung, H. S., \Crowdsourcing the creation of image segmentation algorithms for connectomics,"
Frontiers in Neuroanatomy 9, 142 (2015).
[31] Norman, B., Pedoia, V., and Majumdar, S., \Use of 2d u-net convolutional neural networks for automated
cartilage and meniscus segmentation of knee mr imaging data to determine relaxometry and morphometry,"
Radiology 288(1), 177{185 (2018).
[32] IBEX Innovations Ltd., http://ibexinnovations.co.uk .
[33] \GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP)." https://www.gimp.org/ . Accessed: 2018.
[34] Krogh, A. and Hertz, J. A., \A simple weight decay can improve generalization," in [ Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 4 ], Moody, J. E., Hanson, S. J., and Lippmann, R. P., eds., 950{957,
Morgan-Kaufmann (1992).
[35] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J., \Adam: A method for stochastic optimization," arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980
(2014).
[36] Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A., [ Deep Learning ], MIT Press (2016). http://www.
deeplearningbook.org .
[37] Chollet, F. et al., \Keras." https://keras.io (2015).
[38] Guo, C., Pleiss, G., Sun, Y., and Weinberger, K. Q., \On Calibration of Modern Neural Networks," arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.04599 (2017).

