==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Chen, C.; Zheng, Z.; Xu, T.;
Guo, S.; Feng, S.; Yao, W.; Lan, Y.
YOLO-Based UAV Technology: A
Review of the Research and Its
Applications. Drones 2023 ,7, 190.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
drones7030190
Academic Editor: Anastasios Dimou
Received: 17 February 2023
Revised: 4 March 2023
Accepted: 7 March 2023
Published: 10 March 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
drones
Review
YOLO-Based UA V Technology: A Review of the Research and
Its Applications
Chunling Chen1, Ziyue Zheng1, Tongyu Xu1, Shuang Guo1, Shuai Feng1, Weixiang Yao1,*
and Yubin Lan2,*
1College of Information and Electrical Engineering, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang 110866, China
2College of Electronic Engineering and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou 510642, China
*Correspondence: yaoweixiang@syau.edu.cn (W.Y.); ylan@scau.edu.cn (Y.L.)
Abstract: In recent decades, scientiﬁc and technological developments have continued to increase in
speed, with researchers focusing not only on the innovation of single technologies but also on the
cross-fertilization of multidisciplinary technologies. Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) technology has
seen great progress in many aspects, such as geometric structure, ﬂight characteristics, and navigation
control. The You Only Look Once (YOLO) algorithm was developed and has been reﬁned over the
years to provide satisfactory performance for the real-time detection and classiﬁcation of multiple
targets. In the context of technology cross-fusion becoming a new focus, researchers have proposed
YOLO-based UAV technology (YBUT) by integrating the above two technologies. This proposed
integration succeeds in strengthening the application of emerging technologies and expanding the
idea of the development of YOLO algorithms and drone technology. Therefore, this paper presents
the development history of YBUT with reviews of the practical applications of YBUT in engineering,
transportation, agriculture, automation, and other ﬁelds. The aim is to help new users to quickly
understand YBUT and to help researchers, consumers, and stakeholders to quickly understand
the research progress of the technology. The future of YBUT is also discussed to help explore the
application of this technology in new areas.
Keywords: YOLO; UAV; object detection; interdisciplinary; application
1. Introduction
As science and technology develop, new ways of living and working emerge, and new
technologies with higher value gradually replace old ones. The value of new technologies
is not only the innovation and development of the technology but whether the technology
is effective in improving productivity and making a contribution to human society, i.e., the
application of new technologies to change traditional ways of addressing existing problems
to improve social productivity. Today, interdisciplinary or multiﬁeld cooperation is a
trendy topic; that is, mature technologies in multiple ﬁelds are combined to become a
new technology, and the advantages of various technologies are retained to compensate
for the disadvantages. The integration of existing technologies in multiple ﬁelds can not
only quickly generate new methods and ideas to address existing problems but can also
greatly reduce resource consumption. Currently, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) or
aerial robotics are in a period of rapid development [ 1], and target detection performance
based on the You Only Look Once (YOLO) algorithm [ 2] has reached a high level in
industry. The algorithm still needs to be modiﬁed and improved [ 3]. UAVs can carry a
variety of devices to accomplish different tasks. Examples of these tasks include spraying
liquid medicine [ 4], mapping [ 5], logistics transportation [ 6], disaster management [ 7],
aerial photography [ 8], and sowing fertilizer or seeds [ 9]. Object detection technology
based on the YOLO algorithm has been able to achieve human behavior analysis [ 10], face
mask recognition [ 11], medical diagnosis analysis [ 12], autonomous driving [ 13], trafﬁc
Drones 2023 ,7, 190. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones7030190 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones

==== Page 2 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 2 of 29
assessment [ 14], multitarget tracking [ 15], and robot vision [ 16]. However, UAVs face
complex scenarios or work with the need to maintain good data communication with
ground control terminals, so the innovation and development of UAV technology may be
limited by certain application environments. However, UAVs face complex scenarios or
work with the need to maintain good data communication with ground control terminals, so
the innovation and development of UAV technology may be limited by certain application
environments. Moreover, object detection technology based on the YOLO algorithm needs
to be deployed into high-performance processors and be used in conjunction with image or
video data, which places certain requirements on the scenarios where it is used. These two
technologies can be combined to create a new technology—YOLO-based UAV technology
(YBUT). UAVs provide more application scenarios for the YOLO algorithm, and the YOLO
algorithm can assist UAVs in completing more novel tasks. In this way, drone technology
and the YOLO algorithm can further facilitate people’s daily lives while contributing to the
productivity of their respective industries.
A UAV is often deﬁned as an unmanned ﬂying device that can either ﬂy autonomously
according to a course or program established within the system or can be manually con-
trolled by the controller. UAVs can be classiﬁed into various types depending on various
parameters. In recent years, as a hot spot in the new round of global scientiﬁc and techno-
logical revolution and industrial revolution, UAVs have been able to replace most of the
tasks that used to be completed by manned aircraft. At the same time, as UAV technology
continues to mature, the number of UAVs in countries around the world is increasing every
year, and according to Global commercial drone annual sales and sales statistics [ 17], as
illustrated in Figure 1, there will be approximately 2,679,000 UAVs in the world by 2025,
with a market size worth approximately USD 5.3 billion. With such a large number of
UAVs worldwide, it may be possible to make UAVs more valuable if they can be used as
aerial platforms to deploy YOLO algorithms.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of 31 
 
ment [7], aerial photography [8], and sowing fertilizer or seeds [9]. Object detectio n tech-
nology based on the YOLO algorithm has been able to achieve human behavior analysis 
[10], face mask recognition [11], medical diagnosis analysis [12], autonomous driving [13], 
traffic assessment [14], multitarget tracking [15], and robot vision [16].  However, UAVs 
face complex scenarios or work with the need to maintain good data communication with 
ground control terminals, so the innovation and development of UAV technology may be 
limited by certain application environments. However, UAVs face comple x scenarios or 
work with the need to maintain good data communication with ground control terminals, 
so the innovation and development of UAV technology may be limited by certain appli-
cation environments. Moreover, object detection technology based on the YOLO algo-
rithm needs to be deployed into high -performance processors and be used in conjunction 
with image or video data, which places certain requirements on the scenarios where it is 
used. These two technologies can be combined to create a new technology —YOLO -based 
UAV technology (YBUT). UAVs provide more application scenarios for the YOLO algo-
rithm, and the YOLO algorithm can assist UAVs in completing more novel tasks. In this 
way, drone technology and the YOLO algorithm can further facilitate people’s d aily lives 
while contributing to the productivity of their respective industries.  
A UAV is often defined as an unmanned flying device that can either fly autono-
mously according to a course or program established within the system or can be manu-
ally control led by the controller. UAVs can be classified into various types depending on 
various parameters. In recent years, as a hot spot in the new round of global scientific and 
technological revolution and industrial revolution, UAVs have been able to replace mo st 
of the tasks that used to be completed by manned aircraft. At the same time, as UAV tech-
nology continues to mature, the number of UAVs in countries around the world is in-
creasing every year, and according to Global commercial drone annual sales and sale s 
statistics [17], as illustrated in Figure 1, there will be approximately 2,679,000 UAVs in the 
world by 2025, with a market size worth approximately USD 5.3 billion. With such a large 
number of UAVs worldwide, it may be possible to make UAVs more valuabl e if they can 
be used as aerial platforms to deploy YOLO algorithms.  
 
Figure 1. Global commercial drone annual sales and sales statistics [17].  
YOLO is a widely used deep learning algorithm, because it is a classification -/regres-
sion-based object detectio n method, giving the algorithm its core strengths: a very simple 
structure, small model size, and fast computational speed. After seven years of develop-
ment since the introduction of YOLO (as of February 2023), researchers released seven 
Figure 1. Global commercial drone annual sales and sales statistics [17].
YOLO is a widely used deep learning algorithm, because it is a classification-/regression-
based object detection method, giving the algorithm its core strengths: a very simple structure,
small model size, and fast computational speed. After seven years of development since
the introduction of YOLO (as of February 2023), researchers released seven versions of the
YOLO algorithm [ 18–22]. After the YOLO algorithm was popularized, researchers and users
improved it for various applications due to its openness and ease of secondary develop-
ment, and various revisions were introduced, such as YOLODrone [ 23], YOLOv4_Drone [ 24],
VIT-YOLO [ 25], YOLO-RTUAV [ 26], YOLO-Neck [ 27],and YOLOv7-DeepSORT [ 28]. The
mechanism of the YOLO-based object detection algorithm is that the input image is resized
to the same size, and then the image is divided into a total of SSnetwork cells of equal

==== Page 3 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 3 of 29
size, and each individual network cell can detect objects within it. If the center of a detected
target falls into a network cell, that network cell will make a prediction about the target.
Each network cell may have N detection boxes, each of which not only calculates its own
position but also makes a prediction score. The score represents the likelihood that a
detection target is present in the predicted network cell. As there may be multiple boxes
in a network cell, YOLO will automatically select the highest-scoring target category for
prediction (see Figure 2).
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 31 
 
versions of the YO LO algorithm [18 –22]. After the YOLO algorithm was popularized, re-
searchers and users improved it for various applications due to its openness and ease of 
secondary development, and various revisions were introduced, such as YOLODrone 
[23], YOLOv4_Drone [2 4], VIT -YOLO [25], YOLO -RTUAV [26], YOLO -Neck [27], and 
YOLOv7 -DeepSORT [28]. The mechanism of the YOLO -based object detection algorithm 
is that the input image is resized to the same size, and then the image is divided into a 
total of S × S network cells of equal size, and each individual network cell can detect objects 
within it. If the center of a detected target falls into a network cell, that network cell will 
make a prediction about the target. Each network cell may have N detection boxes, each 
of whi ch not only calculates its own position but also makes a prediction score. The score 
represents the likelihood that a detection target is present in the predicted network cell. 
As there may be multiple boxes in a network cell, YOLO will automatically selec t the 
highest -scoring target category for prediction (see Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. YOLOv7 -based UAV technology architecture diagram (BN: batch normalization layer; AF: 
activation function layer).  
When UAVs are used for operations in various industries and when an operation 
involves target identification and positioning, manual operation is often required to con-
firm the goal location and operation location through real -time images transmitted by 
UAV  cameras, such as transport UAVs for precise parcel delivery. The process is tedious 
and cumbersome and requires a high level of UAV handling skills, which can easily lead 
to accidents and financial losses. Although YOLO -based target detection technology 
emerged late, it has been continuously improved and developed by researchers and al-
ready has a high accuracy rate in the fields of object detection and image recognition; the 
detection speed and accuracy have reached the forefront of the industry while play ing an 
important role in the application of target recognition in UAV aerial images [29]. Khang 
et al. [30] conducted experiments on the VisDrone2019 dataset containing 96 videos and 
39,988 annotated frames and evaluated deep learning detectors with FPS an d mAP as 
evaluation metrics, including Faster R -CNN, RFCN, SNIPER, YOLO, RetinaNet, and Cen-
terNet. Ammar et al. [31] evaluated the performance of convolutional neural network 
models, such as Faster R -CNN, YOLOv3, YOLOv4, and EfficientDet, using IoU, precis ion, 
recall, F1, AP, and mAP as evaluation metrics. The experimental results showed that 
YOLO is ideal for real -time target detection applications. If the UAV is equipped with an 
embedded processor deploying the YOLO algorithm, object detection recognition  can be 
Figure 2. YOLOv7-based UAV technology architecture diagram (BN: batch normalization layer;
AF: activation function layer).
When UAVs are used for operations in various industries and when an operation
involves target identiﬁcation and positioning, manual operation is often required to conﬁrm
the goal location and operation location through real-time images transmitted by UAV
cameras, such as transport UAVs for precise parcel delivery. The process is tedious and
cumbersome and requires a high level of UAV handling skills, which can easily lead to
accidents and ﬁnancial losses. Although YOLO-based target detection technology emerged
late, it has been continuously improved and developed by researchers and already has a
high accuracy rate in the ﬁelds of object detection and image recognition; the detection
speed and accuracy have reached the forefront of the industry while playing an important
role in the application of target recognition in UAV aerial images [ 29]. Khang et al. [ 30]
conducted experiments on the VisDrone2019 dataset containing 96 videos and 39,988
annotated frames and evaluated deep learning detectors with FPS and mAP as evaluation
metrics, including Faster R-CNN, RFCN, SNIPER, YOLO, RetinaNet, and CenterNet.
Ammar et al. [ 31] evaluated the performance of convolutional neural network models, such
as Faster R-CNN, YOLOv3, YOLOv4, and EfﬁcientDet, using IoU, precision, recall, F1, AP ,
and mAP as evaluation metrics. The experimental results showed that YOLO is ideal for
real-time target detection applications. If the UAV is equipped with an embedded processor
deploying the YOLO algorithm, object detection recognition can be realized on real-time
footage from the UAV camera, turning the two steps of UAV acquisition and computer
detection into simultaneous UAV acquisition and detection, which greatly saves operational
time and improves operational efﬁciency. The improvement in the level of autonomous
target recognition by drones can strongly promote the automation or unmanned operation
of drones in most industries.
Over the past few years, YBUT has become a popular research area of interest, but the
application scenarios and impact of the technology have yet to be enhanced; a summary
overview of the recent state of the application in this technology area is lacking. This

==== Page 4 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 4 of 29
paper, therefore, presents the history of YBUT and provides an overview of case studies
of the application of YBUT in several industry sectors, intending to provide researchers,
beginners, and consumers with a better understanding of the ﬁeld, as well as a reference
for the research and application of the technology in new areas. Here, we also discuss the
direction of the technology and provide an outlook on its application.
2. Survey Methodology
In this section, we explain the methodology and the idea behind the selection of the
papers studied and the main areas of application of YBUT. To screen the literature efﬁciently
and quickly for papers within the scope of this overview, a clear and simple screening
process was identiﬁed for the published literature, and its methodology is explained,
together with an analysis of the main research directions of interest in international and
Chinese journals.
2.1. Screening Methods for Research Papers Related to YBUT
To search for high-impact research/papers on aerial robots or UAVs that use deep
learning YOLO models/algorithms, many of the keywords come from top journals and
conferences, including the Web of Science Core Collection, KCI (Korean Journal Database),
MEDLINE®, SciELO Citation Index, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure indexed
journals, among others. The collected keywords were grouped into A1, A2, A3, and A4
groups and searched in various search engines; then, the results were then ﬁltered for the
next step. The keyword groupings used and the detailed search method for the articles are
shown in Figure 3.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 31 
 
realized on real -time footage from the UAV camera, turning the two steps of UAV acqui-
sition and computer detection into simultaneous UAV acquisition and detection, which 
greatly saves operational time and improves operational efficiency. The improv ement in 
the level of autonomous target recognition by drones can strongly promote the automa-
tion or unmanned operation of drones in most industries.  
Over the past few years, YBUT has become a popular research area of interest, but 
the application scenario s and impact of the technology have yet to be enhanced; a sum-
mary overview of the recent state of the application in this technology area is lacking. This 
paper, therefore, presents the history of YBUT and provides an overview of case studies 
of the applic ation of YBUT in several industry sectors, intending to provide researchers, 
beginners, and consumers with a better understanding of the field, as well as a reference 
for the research and application of the technology in new areas. Here, we also discuss th e 
direction of the technology and provide an outlook on its application.  
2. Survey Methodology  
In this section, we explain the methodology and the idea behind the selection of the 
papers studied and the main areas of application of YBUT. To screen the lite rature effi-
ciently and quickly for papers within the scope of this overview, a clear and simple screen-
ing process was identified for the published literature, and its methodology is explained, 
together with an analysis of the main research directions of in terest in international and 
Chinese journals.  
2.1. Screening Methods for Research Papers Related to YBUT  
To search for high -impact research/papers on aerial robots or UAVs that use deep 
learning YOLO models/algorithms, many of the keywords come from top jo urnals and 
conferences, including the Web of Science Core Collection, KCI (Korean Journal Data-
base), MEDLINE®, SciELO Citation Index, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure 
indexed journals, among others. The collected keywords were grouped into A1, A 2, A3, 
and A4 groups and searched in various search engines; then, the results were then filtered 
for the next step. The keyword groupings used and the detailed search method for the 
articles are shown in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. Literature search methods.  
With the Web of Science search engine as an example, after searching for the above 
keywords, 243 articles in 41 research fields were collected as of February 2023, containing 
the types of papers, conferences, revisions, letters, etc., with the specific subje ct directions 
shown in Table 1.  
  
Figure 3. Literature search methods.
With the Web of Science search engine as an example, after searching for the above
keywords, 243 articles in 41 research ﬁelds were collected as of February 2023, containing
the types of papers, conferences, revisions, letters, etc., with the speciﬁc subject directions
shown in Table 1.
Based on the applicability of the ﬁltered articles, we did not consider multiple topics,
such as revisions and letters. The articles were also rigorously reviewed for content to
remove articles that did not contribute to the topic of this research review, with a focus
on checking the image data within the article and the dataset used. At the same time,
the articles were veriﬁed and analyzed for algorithmic improvements and innovations,
and some articles were selected that were progressive or identiﬁed as implementable for
the development of the relevant industry. Finally, the introduction, discussion, summary,
and outlook of the articles, after the screening process was completed, were checked and
categorized. Each step of the methodology used in the screening process of the required
articles is shown in Figure 4.

==== Page 5 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 5 of 29
Table 1. Speciﬁc subject directions of the screened articles.
No. Research Fields No. Research Fields No. Research Fields No. Research Fields
1 Engineering 12 Transportation 23 Plant Sciences 34 Architecture
2 Computer Science 13 Optics 24 Forestry 35 Behavioral Sciences
3Automation Control
Systems14Physical Sciences
Other Topics25 Physical Geography 36Biodiversity
Conservation
4 Communication 15 Geology 26 Spectroscopy 37 Geography
5Instruments
Instrumentation16Environmental
Sciences Ecology27Geochemistry
Geophysics38Neurosciences
Neurology
6 Robotics 17 Energy Fuels 28 Materials Science 39 Parasitology
7 Business Economics 18Construction Building
Technology29Operations Research
Management Science40Radiology Nuclear
Medicine Medical
Imaging
8 Mathematics 19 Agriculture 30 Zoology 41 Mechanics
9Imaging Science
Photographic
Technology20Mathematical
Computational
Biology31Science Technology
Other Topics
10 Telecommunications 21 Physics 32 Remote Sensing
11 Chemistry 22 Acoustics 33 Fisheries
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 31 
 
Table 1. Specific subject directions of the screened articles.  
No. Research Fields  No. Research Fields  No. Research Fields  No. Research Fields  
1 Engineering  12 Transportation  23 Plant Sciences  34 Architecture  
2 Computer Science  13 Optics  24 Forestry  35 Behavioral Sciences  
3 Automation Control 
Systems  14 Physical Sciences 
Other Topics  25 Physical Geogra-
phy 36 Biodiversity Conserva-
tion 
4 Communication  15 Geology  26 Spectroscopy  37 Geography  
5 Instruments Instrumen-
tation  16 Environmental Sci-
ences Ecology  27 Geochemistry Geo-
physics  38 Neurosciences Neurol-
ogy 
6 Robotics  17 Energy Fuels  28 Materials Science  39 Parasitology  
7 Business Economics  18 Construction Build-
ing Technology  29 Operations Re-
search Manage-
ment Science  40 Radiology Nuclear 
Medicine Medical Im-
aging  
8 Mathematics  19 Agriculture  30 Zoology  41 Mechanics  
9 Imaging Science Photo-
graphic Technology  20 Mathematical Com-
putational Biology  31 Science Technology 
Other Topics    
10 Telecommunications  21 Physics  32 Remote Sensing    
11 Chemistry  22 Acoustics  33 Fisheries    
Based on the applicability of the filtered articles, we did not consider multiple topics, 
such as revisions and letters. The articles were also rigorously reviewed for content to 
remove articles that did not contribute to the topic of this research review, with a focus on 
checking the image data within the article and the dataset used. At the same time, the 
articles were verified and analyzed for algorithmic improvements and innovations, and 
some articles were selected that were progressive or identified as implementable for the 
development of the relevant industry. Finally, the introduction, discussion, summary, and 
outlook of the articles, after the screening process was completed, were checked and cat-
egorized. Each step of the methodology used in the screening process of the required ar-
ticles is shown in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. Literature survey methodology.  
2.2. Research Topics Utilizing YBUT  
Thro ugh the method described above, the search results were analyzed by using both 
English and Chinese search engines, such as Web of Science and China National 
Knowledge Infrastructure, to obtain the main research themes of English and Chinese 
Figure 4. Literature survey methodology.
2.2. Research Topics Utilizing YBUT
Through the method described above, the search results were analyzed by using both
English and Chinese search engines, such as Web of Science and China National Knowledge
Infrastructure, to obtain the main research themes of English and Chinese journals in the
relevant ﬁelds. Computer vision technology has developed a great variety of algorithms to
date, among which the YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016 and then ﬁrst applied in
2017 by Jiang et al. [ 32], who combined the YOLO algorithm with UAVs. Since then, the
YOLO algorithm and UAV fusion technology have been continuously developed, and there
has been a surge in related research results or applications. The technology has also moved
from an exploratory experiment to an academic research hotspot (see Figure 5).

==== Page 6 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 6 of 29
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 31 
 
journals in the  relevant fields. Computer vision technology has developed a great variety 
of algorithms to date, among which the YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016 and then 
first applied in 2017 by Jiang et al. [32], who combined the YOLO algorithm with UAVs. 
Since then , the YOLO algorithm and UAV fusion technology have been continuously de-
veloped, and there has been a surge in related research results or applications. The tech-
nology has also moved from an exploratory experiment to an academic research hotspot 
(see Figur e 5). 
 
Figure 5. Number of papers published in top journals and conferences (2017 –2022).  
Based on our survey of YBUT application areas, the information for popular topics 
in this field in English journals is summarized in a pie chart, as shown in the surv ey results 
in Figure 6. As seen from the pie chart, the popular topics are mainly in the industries of 
technical studies, engineering, and transportation, and the number of published papers 
or conference literature represents the interest of researchers. W e also surveyed Chinese 
journals on popular topics in this area and found that they focus more on the technical 
studies, engineering, and automation sectors. As UAV technology and YOLO algorithms 
continue to evolve, this technology is beginning to be explo red in most areas, and in a few 
areas, there have been some successes. The development and research of YBUT have been 
hot topics in top journals and conferences, and now the practical application of the tech-
nology is gradually attracting their interest.  
 
Figure 6. Survey of application areas for YBUT : (a) Popular areas of interest in English journals,  
(b) Popular areas of interest for Chinese journals.  
3. YBUT Development  
YBUT advances without the support of high -performance computer processors. 
UAVs have  moved from being operated manually by remote control to now being con-
trolled automatically by computers, and image recognition has moved from being run by 
Figure 5. Number of papers published in top journals and conferences (2017–2022).
Based on our survey of YBUT application areas, the information for popular topics in
this ﬁeld in English journals is summarized in a pie chart, as shown in the survey results
in Figure 6. As seen from the pie chart, the popular topics are mainly in the industries of
technical studies, engineering, and transportation, and the number of published papers
or conference literature represents the interest of researchers. We also surveyed Chinese
journals on popular topics in this area and found that they focus more on the technical
studies, engineering, and automation sectors. As UAV technology and YOLO algorithms
continue to evolve, this technology is beginning to be explored in most areas, and in a
few areas, there have been some successes. The development and research of YBUT have
been hot topics in top journals and conferences, and now the practical application of the
technology is gradually attracting their interest.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 31 
 
journals in the  relevant fields. Computer vision technology has developed a great variety 
of algorithms to date, among which the YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016 and then 
first applied in 2017 by Jiang et al. [32], who combined the YOLO algorithm with UAVs. 
Since then , the YOLO algorithm and UAV fusion technology have been continuously de-
veloped, and there has been a surge in related research results or applications. The tech-
nology has also moved from an exploratory experiment to an academic research hotspot 
(see Figur e 5). 
 
Figure 5. Number of papers published in top journals and conferences (2017 –2022).  
Based on our survey of YBUT application areas, the information for popular topics 
in this field in English journals is summarized in a pie chart, as shown in the surv ey results 
in Figure 6. As seen from the pie chart, the popular topics are mainly in the industries of 
technical studies, engineering, and transportation, and the number of published papers 
or conference literature represents the interest of researchers. W e also surveyed Chinese 
journals on popular topics in this area and found that they focus more on the technical 
studies, engineering, and automation sectors. As UAV technology and YOLO algorithms 
continue to evolve, this technology is beginning to be explo red in most areas, and in a few 
areas, there have been some successes. The development and research of YBUT have been 
hot topics in top journals and conferences, and now the practical application of the tech-
nology is gradually attracting their interest.  
 
Figure 6. Survey of application areas for YBUT : (a) Popular areas of interest in English journals,  
(b) Popular areas of interest for Chinese journals.  
3. YBUT Development  
YBUT advances without the support of high -performance computer processors. 
UAVs have  moved from being operated manually by remote control to now being con-
trolled automatically by computers, and image recognition has moved from being run by 
Figure 6. Survey of application areas for YBUT: ( a) Popular areas of interest in English journals,
(b) Popular areas of interest for Chinese journals.
3. YBUT Development
YBUT advances without the support of high-performance computer processors. UAVs
have moved from being operated manually by remote control to now being controlled
automatically by computers, and image recognition has moved from being run by computer
systems to now being run by onboard embedded systems for real-time detection and
recognition. Each of these technological advances has taken the application of technology
to a new level in some areas.
3.1. Early Development of YBUT
At the beginning of the research on YBUT, the technology was proposed because of
a technological fusion between UAV technology and YOLO algorithms in the context of
a trend towards cross-disciplinary development. Among other things, UAV technology
research began in the 1920s and has been developed, to date, with successful applications
in agriculture, surveillance, monitoring, trafﬁc construction, system transportation, system

==== Page 7 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 7 of 29
inspection, etc. The YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016 [ 2], and after several improve-
ments, it has reached the forefront of the object recognition ﬁeld in terms of detection speed,
detection accuracy, and recognition classiﬁcation.
The application of YBUT in real production operations started in 2017. In the early
stages of the YBUT application, the main working mechanism was image or video data
acquisition by UAVs, followed by object detection, identiﬁcation, and classiﬁcation by
computers running YOLO-based object detection algorithms. To explore methods to detect
vehicles from UAV-captured images for application in trafﬁc monitoring and management,
and as deep learning algorithms have shown signiﬁcant advantages in target detection,
researchers have tried to apply YOLO-based object detection algorithms to vehicle detec-
tion in UAV images. Jiang et al. [ 32] constructed a multisource data acquisition system by
integrating a thermal infrared imaging sensor and a visible-light imaging sensor on a UAV ,
corrected and aligned the images through feature point extraction and single response
matrix methods, and then performed image fusion on the multisource data. Finally, they uti-
lized a deep learning YOLO algorithm for data training and vehicle detection (see Figure 7 ).
The experimental results found that the inclusion of a thermal infrared image dataset could
improve the accuracy of vehicle detection and veriﬁed that the YOLO framework is an ad-
vanced and effective framework for real-time target detection. The ﬁrst attempt to combine
and apply the YOLO algorithm with UAV technology by Jiang et al. [ 32] demonstrated
the usability of YOLO-based UAV technology. Although the detection performance of
the early YOLOv1 algorithm was not very good, the experimental results were relatively
satisfactory as the ﬁrst exploration of the technology and the innovative incorporation of
thermal infrared image data.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 31 
 
computer systems to now being run by onboard embedded systems for real -time detec-
tion and recognitio n. Each of these technological advances has taken the application of 
technology to a new level in some areas.  
3.1. Early Development of YBUT  
At the beginning of the research on YBUT, the technology was proposed because of 
a technological fusion between UAV  technology and YOLO algorithms in the context of a 
trend towards cross -disciplinary development. Among other things, UAV technology re-
search began in the 1920s and has been developed, to date, with successful applications 
in agriculture, surveillance, mon itoring, traffic construction, system transportation, sys-
tem inspection, etc. The YOLO algorithm was proposed in 2016  [2], and after several im-
provements, it has reached the forefront of the object recognition field in terms of detec-
tion speed, detection a ccuracy, and recognition classification.  
The application of YBUT in real production operations started in 2017. In the early 
stages of the YBUT application, the main working mechanism was image or video data 
acquisition by UAVs, followed by object detectio n, identification, and classification by 
computers running YOLO -based object detection algorithms. To explore methods to de-
tect vehicles from UAV -captured images for application in traffic monitoring and man-
agement, and as deep learning algorithms have sho wn significant advantages in target 
detection, researchers have tried to apply YOLO -based object detection algorithms to ve-
hicle detection in UAV images. Jiang et al. [32] constructed a multisource data acquisition 
system by integrating a thermal infrared imaging sensor and a visible -light imaging sen-
sor on a UAV, corrected and aligned the images through feature point extraction and sin-
gle response matrix methods, and then performed image fusion on the multisource data. 
Finally, they utilized a deep learnin g YOLO algorithm for data training and vehicle detec-
tion (see Figure 7). The experimental results found that the inclusion of a thermal infrared 
image dataset could improve the accuracy of vehicle detection and verified that the YOLO 
framework is an advanc ed and effective framework for real -time target detection.  The first 
attempt to combine and apply the YOLO algorithm with UAV technology by Jiang et al. 
[32] demonstrated the usability of YOLO -based UAV technology. Although the detection 
performance of the  early YOLOv1 algorithm was not very good, the experimental results 
were relatively satisfactory as the first exploration of the technology and the innovative 
incorporation of thermal infrared image data.  
 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the proposed method by Jia ng et al. [32].  
Based on this study, Xu et al. [33] proposed an improved algorithm for small vehicle 
detection based on YOLOv2, whose detection structure model is shown in Figure 8. Com-
pared with the YOLOv2 model structure, the algorithm adds an additional  feature layer 
that can reach 1/32 of the input image in size, making the algorithm more adept at detect-
ing small targets and having higher localization accuracy than YOLOv2. This research has 
greatly contributed to researchers’ understanding of YBUT and h as also inspired research-
ers to make targeted improvements to the YOLO algorithm structure when carrying out 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the proposed method by Jiang et al. [32].
Based on this study, Xu et al. [ 33] proposed an improved algorithm for small vehi-
cle detection based on YOLOv2, whose detection structure model is shown in Figure 8.
Compared with the YOLOv2 model structure, the algorithm adds an additional feature
layer that can reach 1/32 of the input image in size, making the algorithm more adept
at detecting small targets and having higher localization accuracy than YOLOv2. This
research has greatly contributed to researchers’ understanding of YBUT and has also in-
spired researchers to make targeted improvements to the YOLO algorithm structure when
carrying out applications in this ﬁeld. Since then, Ruan et al. [ 34] and Yang et al. [ 35] have
further explored the application of YBUT in other ﬁelds.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 31 
 
applications in this field. Since then, Ruan et al.  [34] and Yang et al. [35] have further ex-
plored the application of YBUT in other fields.  
 
Figure 8. Dense YOLO network model [33].  
In addition, Ruan et al. [34] attempted to use a deep learning and vision -based drogue 
detection and localization method to address the accurate detection and localization of 
fog droplets for autonomous aerial refue ling of UAVs in complex environments. They 
used the trained YOLO algorithm for cone trace detection, the least squares ellipse fit to 
determine the long semiaxis of the ellipse after determining the fiducial location, and, fi-
nally, a monocular vision camer a for vertebral drogue localization (see Figure 9). The sim-
ulation experimental results show that the method can not only correctly identify cones 
in complex environments but also accurately locate cones in a range of 2.5 –45 m, indicat-
ing that the YOLO met hod has good results for target object detection and localization in 
various complex environments. Yang et al. [35] investigated a method to achieve real -time 
pedestrian detection and tracking on a mobile platform with multiple disturbances; they 
attempted  to use a UAV hovering in the air for data acquisition of special targets while 
using a ground station deployed with YOLOv2 to accept video streams from the UAV for 
analysis and detection. The results of outdoor pedestrian detection experiments showed 
the robustness of the method when the brightness varied and pedestrians continued to 
interfere, demonstrating that this is a stable method for exceptional pedestrian tracking 
on UAV platforms. Most of these early studies explored simple applications of the fus ion 
of the two technologies due to the lack of maturity of the technology fusion application, 
but the information gained from the research is of greater reference value for subsequent 
research on YBUT. An increasing number of researchers are focusing on an d exploring 
the field of YOLO -based UAVs, continuing to drive progress in the development of the 
field, and a new generation of YBUT has emerged as the performance of high -performance 
computer processors increases while the size of the hardware decreases.  
 
Figure 9. Drogue detection method [34].  
3.2. YBUT Develops by Leaps and Bounds  
As YBUT continues to evolve, a new generation has emerged in which the UAV is 
equipped with a high -performance processor rich in computing resources, within which 
YOLO -based o bject detection algorithms are deployed, allowing the processor to detect, 
to identify, and to classify mission objects in real time as the UAV collects data. Zhang et 
Figure 8. Dense YOLO network model [33].

==== Page 8 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 8 of 29
In addition, Ruan et al. [ 34] attempted to use a deep learning and vision-based drogue
detection and localization method to address the accurate detection and localization of
fog droplets for autonomous aerial refueling of UAVs in complex environments. They
used the trained YOLO algorithm for cone trace detection, the least squares ellipse ﬁt to
determine the long semiaxis of the ellipse after determining the ﬁducial location, and,
ﬁnally, a monocular vision camera for vertebral drogue localization (see Figure 9). The
simulation experimental results show that the method can not only correctly identify cones
in complex environments but also accurately locate cones in a range of 2.5–45 m, indicating
that the YOLO method has good results for target object detection and localization in
various complex environments. Yang et al. [ 35] investigated a method to achieve real-time
pedestrian detection and tracking on a mobile platform with multiple disturbances; they
attempted to use a UAV hovering in the air for data acquisition of special targets while
using a ground station deployed with YOLOv2 to accept video streams from the UAV for
analysis and detection. The results of outdoor pedestrian detection experiments showed
the robustness of the method when the brightness varied and pedestrians continued to
interfere, demonstrating that this is a stable method for exceptional pedestrian tracking
on UAV platforms. Most of these early studies explored simple applications of the fusion
of the two technologies due to the lack of maturity of the technology fusion application,
but the information gained from the research is of greater reference value for subsequent
research on YBUT. An increasing number of researchers are focusing on and exploring
the ﬁeld of YOLO-based UAVs, continuing to drive progress in the development of the
ﬁeld, and a new generation of YBUT has emerged as the performance of high-performance
computer processors increases while the size of the hardware decreases.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 31 
 
applications in this field. Since then, Ruan et al.  [34] and Yang et al. [35] have further ex-
plored the application of YBUT in other fields.  
 
Figure 8. Dense YOLO network model [33].  
In addition, Ruan et al. [34] attempted to use a deep learning and vision -based drogue 
detection and localization method to address the accurate detection and localization of 
fog droplets for autonomous aerial refue ling of UAVs in complex environments. They 
used the trained YOLO algorithm for cone trace detection, the least squares ellipse fit to 
determine the long semiaxis of the ellipse after determining the fiducial location, and, fi-
nally, a monocular vision camer a for vertebral drogue localization (see Figure 9). The sim-
ulation experimental results show that the method can not only correctly identify cones 
in complex environments but also accurately locate cones in a range of 2.5 –45 m, indicat-
ing that the YOLO met hod has good results for target object detection and localization in 
various complex environments. Yang et al. [35] investigated a method to achieve real -time 
pedestrian detection and tracking on a mobile platform with multiple disturbances; they 
attempted  to use a UAV hovering in the air for data acquisition of special targets while 
using a ground station deployed with YOLOv2 to accept video streams from the UAV for 
analysis and detection. The results of outdoor pedestrian detection experiments showed 
the robustness of the method when the brightness varied and pedestrians continued to 
interfere, demonstrating that this is a stable method for exceptional pedestrian tracking 
on UAV platforms. Most of these early studies explored simple applications of the fus ion 
of the two technologies due to the lack of maturity of the technology fusion application, 
but the information gained from the research is of greater reference value for subsequent 
research on YBUT. An increasing number of researchers are focusing on an d exploring 
the field of YOLO -based UAVs, continuing to drive progress in the development of the 
field, and a new generation of YBUT has emerged as the performance of high -performance 
computer processors increases while the size of the hardware decreases.  
 
Figure 9. Drogue detection method [34].  
3.2. YBUT Develops by Leaps and Bounds  
As YBUT continues to evolve, a new generation has emerged in which the UAV is 
equipped with a high -performance processor rich in computing resources, within which 
YOLO -based o bject detection algorithms are deployed, allowing the processor to detect, 
to identify, and to classify mission objects in real time as the UAV collects data. Zhang et 
Figure 9. Drogue detection method [34].
3.2. YBUT Develops by Leaps and Bounds
As YBUT continues to evolve, a new generation has emerged in which the UAV is
equipped with a high-performance processor rich in computing resources, within which
YOLO-based object detection algorithms are deployed, allowing the processor to de-
tect, to identify, and to classify mission objects in real time as the UAV collects data.
Zhang et al. [36], to explore the feasibility of a new generation of technology, embedded
the YOLOv3 algorithm into the resource-limited NVIDIA Jason TX1 platform environment
(see Figure 10) and had the UAV carry the embedded platform for real-time pedestrian
detection experiments. The experimental results demonstrated the feasibility of imple-
menting YOLO-based real-time target detection on a resource-limited mobile platform and
provided a reference for the development of next-generation YBUT. Alam et al. [ 37], to
alleviate the computational pressure on the onboard embedded processor of the UAVs and
to enhance the practicality of YBUT, proposed a cost-effective aerial surveillance system that
reserves the limited Tiny-YOLO computational requirements on the onboard embedded
processor Movidius VPU, shifts the large Tiny-YOLO computational tasks to the cloud, and
maintains minimal communication between the UAV and the cloud. Experimental results
showed that the system is six-times faster in target detection processing at frames per
second compared to the speed of other state-of-the-art approaches, while the application of
airborne-embedded processor technology reduces end-to-end latency and network resource
consumption (see Figure 11). Similar research was conducted by Dimithe et al. [ 38]. The

==== Page 9 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 9 of 29
new generation of YBUT brings the YOLO algorithm and drone technology closer together.
Although the new generation of YBUT does not show higher performance than previous
technologies due to the limited computational resources of the embedded processor on
board, the advantages of the new generation of YBUT were demonstrated with practical
results by Zhang et al. [ 36]. It is sufﬁcient to show that the future development of YBUT
will tend towards a high degree of integration of YOLO algorithms with UAV technology.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 31 
 
al. [36], to explore the feasibility of a new generation of technology, embedded the 
YOL Ov3 algorithm into the resource -limited NVIDIA Jason TX1 platform environment 
(see Figure 10) and had the UAV carry the embedded platform for real -time pedestrian 
detection experiments. The experimental results demonstrated the feasibility of imple-
menting YOLO -based real -time target detection on a resource -limited mobile platform 
and provided a reference for the development of next -generation YBUT. Alam et al. [37], 
to alleviate the computational pressure on the onboard embedded processor of the UAVs 
and to  enhance the practicality of YBUT, proposed a cost -effective aerial surveillance sys-
tem that reserves the limited Tiny -YOLO computational requirements on the onboard em-
bedded processor Movidius VPU, shifts the large Tiny -YOLO computational tasks to the 
cloud, and maintains minimal communication between the UAV and the cloud. Experi-
mental results showed that the system is six -times faster in target detection processing at 
frames per second compared to the speed of other state -of-the-art approaches, while the  
application of airborne -embedded processor technology reduces end -to-end latency and 
network resource consumption (see Figure 11). Similar research was conducted by 
Dimithe et al. [38].  The new generation of YBUT brings the YOLO algorithm and drone 
techno logy closer together. Although the new generation of YBUT does not show higher 
performance than previous technologies due to the limited computational resources of the 
embedded processor on board, the advantages of the new generation of YBUT were 
demonstra ted with practical results by Zhang et al. [36]. It is sufficient to show that the 
future development of YBUT will tend towards a high degree of integration of YOLO 
algorithms with UAV technology.  
 
Figure 10. Four -rotor monitoring UAV [36].  
 
Figure 11. Complete system design by Alam et al. [37].  
Based on this research, Cao et al. [39] proposed a target detection and tracking 
method based on the YOLO algorithm and the PID algorithm by using a new generation 
of high -performance embedded processo r, NVIDIA Jason TX2, in combination with the 
Figure 10. Four-rotor monitoring UAV [36].
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 31 
 
al. [36], to explore the feasibility of a new generation of technology, embedded the 
YOL Ov3 algorithm into the resource -limited NVIDIA Jason TX1 platform environment 
(see Figure 10) and had the UAV carry the embedded platform for real -time pedestrian 
detection experiments. The experimental results demonstrated the feasibility of imple-
menting YOLO -based real -time target detection on a resource -limited mobile platform 
and provided a reference for the development of next -generation YBUT. Alam et al. [37], 
to alleviate the computational pressure on the onboard embedded processor of the UAVs 
and to  enhance the practicality of YBUT, proposed a cost -effective aerial surveillance sys-
tem that reserves the limited Tiny -YOLO computational requirements on the onboard em-
bedded processor Movidius VPU, shifts the large Tiny -YOLO computational tasks to the 
cloud, and maintains minimal communication between the UAV and the cloud. Experi-
mental results showed that the system is six -times faster in target detection processing at 
frames per second compared to the speed of other state -of-the-art approaches, while the  
application of airborne -embedded processor technology reduces end -to-end latency and 
network resource consumption (see Figure 11). Similar research was conducted by 
Dimithe et al. [38].  The new generation of YBUT brings the YOLO algorithm and drone 
techno logy closer together. Although the new generation of YBUT does not show higher 
performance than previous technologies due to the limited computational resources of the 
embedded processor on board, the advantages of the new generation of YBUT were 
demonstra ted with practical results by Zhang et al. [36]. It is sufficient to show that the 
future development of YBUT will tend towards a high degree of integration of YOLO 
algorithms with UAV technology.  
 
Figure 10. Four -rotor monitoring UAV [36].  
 
Figure 11. Complete system design by Alam et al. [37].  
Based on this research, Cao et al. [39] proposed a target detection and tracking 
method based on the YOLO algorithm and the PID algorithm by using a new generation 
of high -performance embedded processo r, NVIDIA Jason TX2, in combination with the 
Figure 11. Complete system design by Alam et al. [37].
Based on this research, Cao et al. [ 39] proposed a target detection and tracking method
based on the YOLO algorithm and the PID algorithm by using a new generation of high-
performance embedded processor, NVIDIA Jason TX2, in combination with the pixhawk4
ﬂight control processor. The PID algorithm performs UAV ﬂight control, and the YOLO
algorithm is used to identify objects, to extract pixel coordinates and then to convert the
pixel coordinates to actual coordinates, where pixel coordinates were the coordinates of
the target object relative to the camera image. The actual coordinates were the relative
coordinates of the target in a spatial coordinate system constructed with the camera lens as
the coordinate origin. Experimental results showed that the method can effectively detect
ﬂight targets and perform real-time tracking tasks. Doukhi et al. [ 40] used a UAV equipped
with an Nvidia Jetson TX2 high-performance embedded processor and a PID controller.
Then, they deployed the YOLOv3 algorithm in the embedded processor to intuitively guide
the UAV to track the detected target by using the YOLO-based target detection algorithm,
while the PID controller was used to control the UAV ﬂight. Experimental results showed
that the proposed method successfully achieves a visual SLAM for localization and UAV
tracking ﬂight through the ﬁsheye camera only without external positioning sensors or the
introduction of GPS signals (see Figure 12). Aﬁﬁ et al. [ 41] proposed a robust framework
for multiscene pedestrian detection, which uses YOLO-v3 object detection as the backbone
detector (see Figure 13) and runs on the Nvidia Jetson TX2 embedded processor onboard

==== Page 10 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 10 of 29
the UAV . Experimental results from multiple scenarios of outdoor pedestrian detection
showed that the proposed detection framework showed better performance in terms
of mAP and FPS, as the computational resources of the embedded processor increase
compared to the YOLOv3 algorithm. To facilitate the development of a new generation
of YBUT, Zhao et al. [42] improved YOLOv3-tiny, resulting in an 86.1% decrease in the
model size, a 19.2% increase in AP50, and a 2.96-times faster detection speed than YOLOv3.
The experimental results demonstrated that the improved algorithm is more suitable for
low-end performance embedded processors in UAV target detection applications.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 31 
 
pixhawk4 flight control processor. The PID algorithm performs UAV flight control, and 
the YOLO algorithm is used to identify objects, to extract pixel coordinates and then to 
convert the pixel coordinates to act ual coordinates, where pixel coordinates were  the co-
ordinates of the target object relative to the camera image. The actual coordinates were  
the relative coordinates of the target in a spatial coordinate system constructed with the 
camera lens as the coord inate origin.  Experimental results showed that the method can 
effectively detect flight targets and perform real -time tracking tasks. Doukhi et al. [40] 
used a UAV equipped with an Nvidia Jetson TX2 high -performance embedded processor 
and a PID controller.  Then, they deployed the YOLOv3 algorithm in the embedded pro-
cessor to intuitively guide the UAV to track the detected target by using the YOLO -based 
target detection algorithm, while the PID controller was used to control the UAV flight. 
Experimental resu lts showed that the proposed method successfully achieves a visual 
SLAM for localization and UAV tracking flight through the fisheye camera only without 
external positioning sensors or the introduction of GPS signals (see Figure 12). Afifi et al. 
[41] prop osed a robust framework for multiscene pedestrian detection, which uses YOLO -
v3 object detection as the backbone detector (see Figure 13)  and runs on the Nvidia Jetson 
TX2 embedded processor onboard the UAV. Experimental results from multiple scenarios 
of outdoor pedestrian detection showed that the proposed detection framework showed 
better performance in terms of mAP and FPS, as the computational resources of the em-
bedded processor increase compared to the YOLOv3 algorithm. To facilitate the develop-
ment o f a new generation of YBUT, Zhao et al. [42] improved YOLOv3 -tiny, resulting in 
an 86.1% decrease in the model size, a 19.2% increase in AP50, and a 2.96 -times faster 
detection speed than YOLOv3. The experimental results demonstrated that the improved 
algo rithm is more suitable for low -end performance embedded processors in UAV target 
detection applications.  
 
Figure 12. Software architecture for deep -learning -based motion control [40].  The red circles in the 
diagram represent the input RGB images in the YO LOv3 algorithm, the orange circles represent 
the calculation process of the YOLOv3 algorithm, and the blue circles represent the target and 
bounding box data detected by the YOLOv3 algorithm.  
 
Figure 13. Workflow of the pedestrian detection framework [41] . 
Figure 12. Software architecture for deep-learning-based motion control [ 40]. The red circles in the
diagram represent the input RGB images in the YOLOv3 algorithm, the orange circles represent the
calculation process of the YOLOv3 algorithm, and the blue circles represent the target and bounding
box data detected by the YOLOv3 algorithm.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 31 
 
pixhawk4 flight control processor. The PID algorithm performs UAV flight control, and 
the YOLO algorithm is used to identify objects, to extract pixel coordinates and then to 
convert the pixel coordinates to act ual coordinates, where pixel coordinates were  the co-
ordinates of the target object relative to the camera image. The actual coordinates were  
the relative coordinates of the target in a spatial coordinate system constructed with the 
camera lens as the coord inate origin.  Experimental results showed that the method can 
effectively detect flight targets and perform real -time tracking tasks. Doukhi et al. [40] 
used a UAV equipped with an Nvidia Jetson TX2 high -performance embedded processor 
and a PID controller.  Then, they deployed the YOLOv3 algorithm in the embedded pro-
cessor to intuitively guide the UAV to track the detected target by using the YOLO -based 
target detection algorithm, while the PID controller was used to control the UAV flight. 
Experimental resu lts showed that the proposed method successfully achieves a visual 
SLAM for localization and UAV tracking flight through the fisheye camera only without 
external positioning sensors or the introduction of GPS signals (see Figure 12). Afifi et al. 
[41] prop osed a robust framework for multiscene pedestrian detection, which uses YOLO -
v3 object detection as the backbone detector (see Figure 13)  and runs on the Nvidia Jetson 
TX2 embedded processor onboard the UAV. Experimental results from multiple scenarios 
of outdoor pedestrian detection showed that the proposed detection framework showed 
better performance in terms of mAP and FPS, as the computational resources of the em-
bedded processor increase compared to the YOLOv3 algorithm. To facilitate the develop-
ment o f a new generation of YBUT, Zhao et al. [42] improved YOLOv3 -tiny, resulting in 
an 86.1% decrease in the model size, a 19.2% increase in AP50, and a 2.96 -times faster 
detection speed than YOLOv3. The experimental results demonstrated that the improved 
algo rithm is more suitable for low -end performance embedded processors in UAV target 
detection applications.  
 
Figure 12. Software architecture for deep -learning -based motion control [40].  The red circles in the 
diagram represent the input RGB images in the YO LOv3 algorithm, the orange circles represent 
the calculation process of the YOLOv3 algorithm, and the blue circles represent the target and 
bounding box data detected by the YOLOv3 algorithm.  
 
Figure 13. Workflow of the pedestrian detection framework [41] . 
Figure 13. Workﬂow of the pedestrian detection framework [41].
Although the new generation of YBUTs can simplify the operational steps in applica-
tions, can improve operational integrity, and can increase the adaptability of technology
applications, it is still difﬁcult to obtain satisfactory performance for complex applications
based on the limited computing power of existing embedded processors. At the same time,
high-performance embedded processors have been slow in development and may not be
able to match the computing performance of high-performance computer processors for
some time. Therefore, most researchers prefer applications that take the form of a UAV
collecting image or video data and a high-performance computer deploying YOLO for ob-
ject detection [ 43]. Regardless of which of the two approaches researchers take, each study
and application drives YBUT research forwards so that YBUT continues to be understood,
accepted, and used by researchers in other ﬁelds.
4. Practical Applications of YBUT in Several Fields
In recent years, UAV load capacity, as one of the key points of UAV technology devel-
opment, has achieved greater results, which provides the basis for carrying professional

==== Page 11 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 11 of 29
equipment embedded with YOLO algorithms for object identiﬁcation. The YOLO algorithm
has been very widely used in various ﬁelds for object identiﬁcation detection, while the
method of carrying embedded processors in UAVs for object identiﬁcation detection in the
air has only just started to become popular. With the development of UAV technology and
advances in algorithm performance, YBUT applications are expected to spread widely in
life and in production in the coming years. Examples of YBUT applications in engineering,
transportation, agriculture, automation, and other ﬁelds are outlined below, and these
application methods or application approaches are discussed.
4.1. Related Applications in the Field of Engineering
Engineering is the main activity of everyday production and an important way of
generating economic value. Amongst engineering operations, manual operations are both
an important way of increasing productivity and a hindrance to it. Highly efﬁcient large-
scale manual operations in engineering are bound to produce higher production values,
but there are also problems with overall production being affected by manual errors. With
the advent of the industrial age, large-scale machine production has gradually replaced
manual production, resulting in an exponential increase in output and a gradual reduction
in costs. However, certain special jobs still need to adhere to manual work, such as checking
power components of transmission lines and monitoring industrial instrumentation data.
Although these jobs are not very difﬁcult, the work is tedious, and it is very easy for staff to
become fatigued and negligent, resulting in serious consequences. With the progress of
UAV technology and the YOLO algorithm, some problems in engineering can be addressed
by using a machine instead of manual labor or manual operation of the machine, which
can alleviate the labor pressure on the staff to a considerable extent.
In engineering applications, YBUT has been successfully used and can, to a certain
extent, replace people in some operations. The more mature research ﬁelds in which YBUT
has been applied are transmission line detection [ 44], building surface detection [ 45], mov-
ing target tracking [ 46], gauge display reading [ 47], photovoltaic module detection [ 48], and
building identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation [ 49]. According to the current survey, YBUT appli-
cation research in the engineering ﬁeld, researchers prefer the direction of transmission line
detection. Objects, such as power line poles [ 50], insulators [ 51], electrical components [ 52],
distribution line poles [ 53], transmission towers [ 54], bird nests [ 55], and breakers [ 56], can
be accurately identiﬁed, classiﬁed, and located in complex environments. For example,
Bao et al. [ 57] proposed an end-to-end parallel mixed attention detection YOLO network
(PMA-YOLO) by collecting transmission line vibration damper data through UAVs and
then creating a dataset to train and test the model; the results showed that the model can
detect abnormal vibration dampers with an accuracy of 93.8% (see Figure 14). The success-
ful detection and classiﬁcation of various equipment and facilities in these transmission
lines lay the technical basis for the construction of future intelligent power systems.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 31 
 
(see Figure 14).  The successful detection and classification of various equipment and fa-
cilities i n these transmission lines lay the technical basis for the construction of future in-
telligent power systems.  
 
Figure 14. Experimental results of the PMA -YOLO network for the detection of anomalous vibration 
dampers [57].  The ground truth boxes and predict ion boxes for “rusty”, “defective ”, and “normal” 
dampers are shown in yellow, red, blue, and green, respectively.  
Recently, Alsanad et al. [58] proposed an improved YOLOv3 algorithm for small UAV 
detection in low -altitude airspace; experiments showed that the disclosed improved model of 
the algorithm can effectively detect low -altitude UAVs in complex environments (see Figure 
15) and can be successfully applied to the anti -drone research field to manage low -altitude 
airspace UAVs. The proposed method yielde d a further enhancement in the low -altitude 
small -UAV detection performance of YBUT based on previous studies [59 –62]. Other infor-
mation regarding YBUT applications in the engineering field is shown in Table 2.  
 
Figure 15. Results of the improved YOLOv3 algorithm for UAV detection [58].  
Figure 14. Experimental results of the PMA-YOLO network for the detection of anomalous vibration
dampers [ 57]. The ground truth boxes and prediction boxes for “rusty”, “defective”, and “normal”
dampers are shown in yellow, red, blue, and green, respectively.

==== Page 12 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 12 of 29
Recently, Alsanad et al. [ 58] proposed an improved YOLOv3 algorithm for small
UAV detection in low-altitude airspace; experiments showed that the disclosed improved
model of the algorithm can effectively detect low-altitude UAVs in complex environments
(see Figure 15) and can be successfully applied to the anti-drone research ﬁeld to manage
low-altitude airspace UAVs. The proposed method yielded a further enhancement in the
low-altitude small-UAV detection performance of YBUT based on previous studies [ 59–62].
Other information regarding YBUT applications in the engineering ﬁeld is shown in Table 2.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 31 
 
(see Figure 14).  The successful detection and classification of various equipment and fa-
cilities i n these transmission lines lay the technical basis for the construction of future in-
telligent power systems.  
 
Figure 14. Experimental results of the PMA -YOLO network for the detection of anomalous vibration 
dampers [57].  The ground truth boxes and predict ion boxes for “rusty”, “defective ”, and “normal” 
dampers are shown in yellow, red, blue, and green, respectively.  
Recently, Alsanad et al. [58] proposed an improved YOLOv3 algorithm for small UAV 
detection in low -altitude airspace; experiments showed that the disclosed improved model of 
the algorithm can effectively detect low -altitude UAVs in complex environments (see Figure 
15) and can be successfully applied to the anti -drone research field to manage low -altitude 
airspace UAVs. The proposed method yielde d a further enhancement in the low -altitude 
small -UAV detection performance of YBUT based on previous studies [59 –62]. Other infor-
mation regarding YBUT applications in the engineering field is shown in Table 2.  
 
Figure 15. Results of the improved YOLOv3 algorithm for UAV detection [58].  
Figure 15. Results of the improved YOLOv3 algorithm for UAV detection [58].
Table 2. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in engineering.
YOLO
ModelsReference Object Metric Paper Type Sensors Purpose
YOLOv2 Sousa et al. (2022) [63]Ceramic
detachmentPrecision 99%,
Recall 98%Journal Cameras Building surface inspection
YOLOv3Wang et al. (2019) [64] Small objects Accuracy 85% Conference paper Cameras Algorithmic research
Han et al. (2020) [65] InsulatorsPrecision 92.1%,
Recall 92.2%Journal Cameras Transmission line inspection
Yan et al. (2021) [66]Electrical
componentsN/A Conference paper Cameras Transmission line inspection
Liu et al. (2021) [67] InsulatorsPrecision 94%,
Recall 96%Journal Cameras Transmission line inspection
Kumar et al. (2021) [68] Concrete damage Accuracy 94.24% Journal Cameras Building surface inspection
Tu et al. (2021) [69]Power towers
and InsulatorsAccuracy 88% Journal Cameras Transmission line inspection
Ding Lu et al. (2021) [70] Holes and bolts N/A Journal CamerasAerial manipulation
platform
Yang et al. (2022) [71] Insulators mAP 94% Journal Cameras Transmission line inspection
YOLOv4Kim-Phuong et al.
(2021) [72]UAVs Accuracy 87.37% Conference paper Cameras Moving target tracking
YOLOv5 Wang et al. (2021) [73] Small objects mAP 81.1% Conference paper Cameras Algorithmic research

==== Page 13 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 13 of 29
YBUT is of great value to the engineering ﬁeld and the productivity of society. Al-
though there are still more engineering problems waiting to be resolved and more tradi-
tional manual methods waiting to be improved, YOLO algorithm object detection continues
to become more accurate and faster; UAVs are becoming more convenient and safer, and if
YBUT can continue to be used to develop innovations in the engineering ﬁeld, then YBUT
can create more value in the engineering ﬁeld.
4.2. Related Applications in the Field of Transportation
With the expansion of human space and the extension of people’s physical movement,
the dependence on transport for daily travel is increasing. This has led to a dramatic
increase in the size of roads and the number of vehicles over the last few decades. When
there are many roads and many means of transport, their management becomes very
important. The legislature has set up various trafﬁc regulations to limit their use to ensure a
stable order in life, but monitoring their compliance accurately and effectively is a problem
that persists. Although there are cameras all over the streets and alleys, this does not fully
detect all violations of the law and does not impose penalties.
To further manage and constrain the various modes of transportation in life, sev-
eral attempts have been made in the ﬁeld of transportation with YBUT. For example,
Feng et al. [ 74] proposed a YOLOv3-based method for UAV detection (see Figure 16).
Omar et al. [ 75] proposed an aerial image vehicle detection method based on the YOLOv4
algorithm (see Figure 17), and Liu et al. [ 76] proposed a method for the automatic detection
and tracking of vehicles in an urban environment by UAVs based on the YOLOv4 and
DeepSORT algorithms. These studies have yielded excellent results in motorized and non-
motorized vehicle recognition and classiﬁcation tasks based on datasets of air trafﬁc images
and have also enabled the automatic detection and tracking of urban vehicles. The accurate
identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of motor vehicles and non-motorized vehicles allows for
accurate restraint of their behavior according to road management rules in intelligent trafﬁc
management, while the automatic detection and tracking of vehicles can provide assistance
in the effective punishment of violations. The fundamental applied research on YBUT in
urban trafﬁc further accelerates the intelligent management of urban trafﬁc and contributes
to the creation of a civilized city.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 31 
 
allows for accurate restraint of their behavior according to road manageme nt rules in in-
telligent traffic management, while the automatic detection and tracking of vehicles can 
provide assistance in the effective punishment of violations. The fundamental applied re-
search on YBUT in urban traffic further accelerates the intellige nt management of urban 
traffic and contributes to the creation of a civilized city.  
 
Figure 16. Vehicle detection results based on urban road videos [74].  
 
Figure 17. (a) UAV acquisition images, ( b) UAV image detection results [75].  
Both urban traffic ma nagement applications and urban road management are im-
portant directions for the application of YBUT technology. Silva et al. [77] designed a dis-
tributed UAV platform deploying YOLOv4 to detect road damage (see Figure 18). Zhao 
et al. [78] proposed a YOLOv 3-based algorithm for UAV highway center mark detection, 
YOLO -Highway (see Figure 19). Recently, Ma et al. [79] proposed a new method for road 
damage detection based on YBUT, which experimentally showed better performance than 
previous similar studies and further promoted the application of road damage detection 
technology in urban road management. The intelligent management of urban traffic is not 
only the management of motor vehicles and non -motor vehicles but also the management 
of urban roads. The wides pread application of YBUT in the field of traffic greatly pro-
motes the process of intelligent management and has great significance for the conven-
ience of future residents’ lives. The expansion of the application of YBUT in urban road 
management is another  step forward in the promotion of intelligent urban traffic manage-
ment. Other information regarding YBUT applications in the transportation sector is 
shown in Table 3.  
Figure 16. Vehicle detection results based on urban road videos [74].

==== Page 14 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 14 of 29
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 31 
 
allows for accurate restraint of their behavior according to road manageme nt rules in in-
telligent traffic management, while the automatic detection and tracking of vehicles can 
provide assistance in the effective punishment of violations. The fundamental applied re-
search on YBUT in urban traffic further accelerates the intellige nt management of urban 
traffic and contributes to the creation of a civilized city.  
 
Figure 16. Vehicle detection results based on urban road videos [74].  
 
Figure 17. (a) UAV acquisition images, ( b) UAV image detection results [75].  
Both urban traffic ma nagement applications and urban road management are im-
portant directions for the application of YBUT technology. Silva et al. [77] designed a dis-
tributed UAV platform deploying YOLOv4 to detect road damage (see Figure 18). Zhao 
et al. [78] proposed a YOLOv 3-based algorithm for UAV highway center mark detection, 
YOLO -Highway (see Figure 19). Recently, Ma et al. [79] proposed a new method for road 
damage detection based on YBUT, which experimentally showed better performance than 
previous similar studies and further promoted the application of road damage detection 
technology in urban road management. The intelligent management of urban traffic is not 
only the management of motor vehicles and non -motor vehicles but also the management 
of urban roads. The wides pread application of YBUT in the field of traffic greatly pro-
motes the process of intelligent management and has great significance for the conven-
ience of future residents’ lives. The expansion of the application of YBUT in urban road 
management is another  step forward in the promotion of intelligent urban traffic manage-
ment. Other information regarding YBUT applications in the transportation sector is 
shown in Table 3.  
Figure 17. (a) UAV acquisition images, ( b) UAV image detection results [75].
Both urban trafﬁc management applications and urban road management are im-
portant directions for the application of YBUT technology. Silva et al. [ 77] designed a
distributed UAV platform deploying YOLOv4 to detect road damage (see Figure 18).
Zhao et al. [ 78] proposed a YOLOv3-based algorithm for UAV highway center mark de-
tection, YOLO-Highway (see Figure 19). Recently, Ma et al. [ 79] proposed a new method
for road damage detection based on YBUT, which experimentally showed better perfor-
mance than previous similar studies and further promoted the application of road damage
detection technology in urban road management. The intelligent management of urban
trafﬁc is not only the management of motor vehicles and non-motor vehicles but also the
management of urban roads. The widespread application of YBUT in the ﬁeld of trafﬁc
greatly promotes the process of intelligent management and has great signiﬁcance for the
convenience of future residents’ lives. The expansion of the application of YBUT in urban
road management is another step forward in the promotion of intelligent urban trafﬁc
management. Other information regarding YBUT applications in the transportation sector
is shown in Table 3.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 31 
 
 
Figure 18. Road damage detection results [77].  
 
Figure 19. Detection results for road signs in various environmental conditions [78].  
Table 3. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in transportation.  
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv2  Kim et al. (2019) [80]  Road cracks  mAP 33%  Journal  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
Sharma et al. (2022) 
[81] Railway 
tracks  Precision 74%, Ac-
curacy 85%, mAP 
70.7%  Journal  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
YOLOv3  Krump et al. (2019) 
[82] Vehicles  mAP 64.4%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Luo et al. (2020) [83]  Vehicles  mAP 97.49%  Journal  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Hassan et al. (2020) 
[84] Road cracks  Accuracy 92%, 
mAP 90%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
Chung et al. (2020) 
[85] Vehicles  mAP  35.08%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Li et al. (2021) [86]  Vehicles  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Traffic Management  
Chen et al. (2021) [87]  Vehicles  mAP 50.05%  Journal  Cameras  Vehicle tracking and 
speed estimation  
Rampriya  et al. (2022) 
[88] Obstacles on 
the railway 
track  Precision 70.68%, 
Accuracy 70.83%,  
Recall 73.64%  Journal  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
Gupta et al. (2022) [89]  Military ve-
hicles  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Military vehicle detec-
tion and classification  
YOLOv4  Golyak et al. (2020) 
[90] Vehicles  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras, 
Thermal 
imager  Detection of unmanned 
vehicles  
Emiyah et al. (2021) 
[91] Vehicles  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Vehicle detection and 
counting  
Luo et al. (2022) [92] Vehicles  mAP 71.97%  Journal  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Figure 18. Road damage detection results [77].
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 31 
 
 
Figure 18. Road damage detection results [77].  
 
Figure 19. Detection results for road signs in various environmental conditions [78].  
Table 3. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in transportation.  
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv2  Kim et al. (2019) [80]  Road cracks  mAP 33%  Journal  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
Sharma et al. (2022) 
[81] Railway 
tracks  Precision 74%, Ac-
curacy 85%, mAP 
70.7%  Journal  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
YOLOv3  Krump et al. (2019) 
[82] Vehicles  mAP 64.4%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Luo et al. (2020) [83]  Vehicles  mAP 97.49%  Journal  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Hassan et al. (2020) 
[84] Road cracks  Accuracy 92%, 
mAP 90%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
Chung et al. (2020) 
[85] Vehicles  mAP  35.08%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Li et al. (2021) [86]  Vehicles  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Traffic Management  
Chen et al. (2021) [87]  Vehicles  mAP 50.05%  Journal  Cameras  Vehicle tracking and 
speed estimation  
Rampriya  et al. (2022) 
[88] Obstacles on 
the railway 
track  Precision 70.68%, 
Accuracy 70.83%,  
Recall 73.64%  Journal  Cameras  Road safety inspection  
Gupta et al. (2022) [89]  Military ve-
hicles  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Military vehicle detec-
tion and classification  
YOLOv4  Golyak et al. (2020) 
[90] Vehicles  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras, 
Thermal 
imager  Detection of unmanned 
vehicles  
Emiyah et al. (2021) 
[91] Vehicles  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Vehicle detection and 
counting  
Luo et al. (2022) [92] Vehicles  mAP 71.97%  Journal  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Figure 19. Detection results for road signs in various environmental conditions [78].

==== Page 15 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 15 of 29
Table 3. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in transportation.
YOLO
ModelsReference Object Metric Paper Type Sensors Purpose
YOLOv2Kim et al. (2019) [80] Road cracks mAP 33% Journal Cameras Road safety inspection
Sharma et al. (2022) [81] Railway tracksPrecision 74%,
Accuracy 85%,
mAP 70.7%Journal Cameras Road safety inspection
YOLOv3Krump et al. (2019) [82] Vehicles mAP 64.4%Conference
paperCameras Algorithmic research
Luo et al. (2020) [83] Vehicles mAP 97.49% Journal Cameras Algorithmic research
Hassan et al. (2020) [84] Road cracksAccuracy 92%,
mAP 90%Conference
paperCameras Road safety inspection
Chung et al. (2020) [85] Vehicles mAP 35.08%Conference
paperCameras Algorithmic research
Li et al. (2021) [86] Vehicles N/A Journal Cameras Trafﬁc Management
Chen et al. (2021) [87] Vehicles mAP 50.05% Journal CamerasVehicle tracking and
speed estimation
Rampriya et al. (2022) [ 88]Obstacles on the
railway trackPrecision 70.68%,
Accuracy 70.83%,
Recall 73.64%Journal Cameras Road safety inspection
Gupta et al. (2022) [89] Military vehicles N/A Journal CamerasMilitary vehicle
detection and
classiﬁcation
YOLOv4Golyak et al. (2020) [90] Vehicles N/AConference
paperCameras,
Thermal imagerDetection of
unmanned vehicles
Emiyah et al. (2021) [91] Vehicles N/AConference
paperCamerasVehicle detection
and counting
Luo et al. (2022) [92] Vehicles mAP 71.97% Journal Cameras Algorithmic research
YOLOv5Feng and Yi (2022) [93] Vehicles mAP 89.74% Journal Cameras Trafﬁc Management
Chen et al. (2022) [94] VehiclesPrecision 91.9%,
Recall 82.5%,
mAP 89.6%Journal Cameras Trafﬁc Management
Luo et al. (2022) [95] Vehicles mAP 85.35% Journal Cameras Algorithmic research
The above shows that researchers have made considerable research progress in this
area and demonstrates the great potential of YOLO-based UAV application technology in
the transport sector. With the support of this technology, not only can the cost of trafﬁc
video acquisition and processing be signiﬁcantly reduced, but the spatial ﬂexibility of trafﬁc
supervision is also enhanced. Although fewer researchers have experimented in this area,
it is unlikely that the application of this technology is limited to scenarios, such as vehicle
inspection and road detection; there must exist many more applications that are more
beneﬁcial to people’s everyday lives.
4.3. Related Applications in the Field of Agriculture
In agriculture, there are often situations where failure to detect early symptoms of pests
and diseases can lead to major pest and disease disasters and severe economic losses. When
preventing or treating pests and diseases, there may also be excessive use of pesticides that
can lead to environmental pollution and reduced crop yields. Wild vegetables, which are
not commonly encountered every day, are often found in sites with lush vegetation, are less
productive but have high nutritional value, and ﬁnding them has always been a serious
challenge. We can use drones to perform some of the agricultural work and use the YOLO
algorithm to assist in this process, which can be much more efﬁcient and save time.
In this area of agriculture, many tricky jobs already have new solutions based on YBUT.
With the continuous development and extension of YBUT, it is now possible to detect differ-
ent targets and features among large plant species, such as in dead tree detection [ 96], pine
wilt nematode disease detection [ 97–99] (see Figure 20), pine wilt detection [ 100], oil palm
tree fruit detection [ 101], and other tasks. Additionally, YBUT can be applied in analyses
involving small plants, such as in weed detection around peas and strawberries [ 102] (see
Figure 21), ﬁeld wheat phenotype monitoring [ 103], and tomato germinator detection [ 104].
Moving targets, such as animals, can also be detected, classiﬁed, and counted with high

==== Page 16 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 16 of 29
accuracy [ 105] (see Figure 22). Other information on YBUT applications in the agricultural
sector is given in Table 4.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16 of 31 
 
YOLOv5  Feng and Yi (2022) 
[93] Vehicles  mAP 89.74%  Journal  Cameras  Traffic Management  
Chen et al. (2022) [94]  Vehicles  Precision 91.9%,  
Recall 82.5%, mAP 
89.6%  Journal  Cameras  Traffic Management  
Luo et al. (2022) [95]  Vehicles  mAP 85.35%  Journal  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
The above shows that researchers have made considerable research progress in this 
area and demonstrates the great potential of YOLO -based UAV application technology in 
the transport sector. With the support of this technology, not only can the cost of traffic 
video acquisition and processing be significantly reduced, but the spatial flexibility of traf-
fic supervision is also enhanced. Although f ewer researchers have experimented in this 
area, it is unlikely that the application of this technology is limited to scenarios, such as 
vehicle inspection and road detection; there must exist many more applications that are 
more beneficial to people’s eve ryday lives.  
4.3. Related Applications in the Field of Agriculture  
In agriculture, there are often situations where failure to detect early symptoms of 
pests and diseases can lead to major pest and disease disasters and severe economic losses. 
When prevent ing or treating pests and diseases, there may also be excessive use of pesti-
cides that can lead to environmental pollution and reduced crop yields. Wild vegetables, 
which are not commonly encountered every day, are often found in sites with lush vege-
tation , are less productive but have high nutritional value, and finding them has always 
been a serious challenge. We can use drones to perform some of the agricultural work and 
use the YOLO algorithm to assist in this process, which can be much more efficient a nd 
save time.  
In this area of agriculture, many tricky jobs already have new solutions based on 
YBUT. With the continuous development and extension of YBUT, it is now possible to 
detect different targets and features among large plant species, such as in d ead tree detec-
tion [96], pine wilt nematode disease detection [97 –99] (see Figure 20), pine wilt detection 
[100], oil palm tree fruit detection [101], and other tasks. Additionally, YBUT can be ap-
plied in analyses involving small plants, such as in weed de tection around peas and straw-
berries [102] (see Figure 21), field wheat phenotype monitoring [103], and tomato germi-
nator detection [104]. Moving targets, such as animals, can also be detected, classified, and 
counted with high accuracy [105] (see Figure 2 2). Other information on YBUT applications 
in the agricultural sector is given in Table 4.  
 
Figure 20. (a,b) are the original images of the diseased trees detection region, ( c,d) are the results 
of the MobileNetv2 -YOLOv4 algorithm for diseased trees detection of the region  [97].  
Figure 20. (a,b) are the original images of the diseased trees detection region, ( c,d) are the results of
the MobileNetv2-YOLOv4 algorithm for diseased trees detection of the region [97].
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 31 
 
 
Figure 21. Weed identification results for pea crop area and strawberry crop area [102].  
 
Figure 22. Detection counts of reindeer and sika deer by using the YOLOv5s improved model [105].  
Table 4. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in agriculture . 
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv3  Priya et al. (2021) 
[106]  Cattle  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Livestock manage-
ment  
Ulhaq et al. (2021) 
[107]  Animals  mAP 87.1%  Journal  Thermal im-
ager  Animal manage-
ment  
Petso et al. (2021) 
[108]  Animals  F1 96%  Journal  Cameras  Wildlife monitoring  
Guzel et al. (2021) 
[109]  Wild mustard  Precision 45 –
99% Journal  Cameras  Crop protection  
Hashim et al. (2021) 
[110]  Vegetation  Accuracy 84%  Journal  Multispectral 
camera  Hybrid Vegetation 
Detection  
YOLOv5  Idrissi et al. (2022) 
[111]  Burrow, Dead-
wood, Pine, 
Grass, Oak, 
Wood, Fire, Pe-
destrian  mAP 44.3%  Journal  Cameras  Evaluating the For-
est Ecosystem  
Jemaa  et al. (2022) 
[112]  Orchard tree  Precision 91%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Orchard tree man-
agement  
dos Santos et al. 
(2022) [113]  Leaf -cutting ants  Accuracy 98.45%  Journal  Cameras  Optimizing the use 
of pesticides  
Puliti and Astrup  
(2022) [114]  Tree damage  Precision 76%,  
Recall 78%  Journal  Cameras  Evaluating the For-
est Ecosystem  
Figure 21. Weed identiﬁcation results for pea crop area and strawberry crop area [102].
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 31 
 
 
Figure 21. Weed identification results for pea crop area and strawberry crop area [102].  
 
Figure 22. Detection counts of reindeer and sika deer by using the YOLOv5s improved model [105].  
Table 4. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in agriculture . 
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv3  Priya et al. (2021) 
[106]  Cattle  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Livestock manage-
ment  
Ulhaq et al. (2021) 
[107]  Animals  mAP 87.1%  Journal  Thermal im-
ager  Animal manage-
ment  
Petso et al. (2021) 
[108]  Animals  F1 96%  Journal  Cameras  Wildlife monitoring  
Guzel et al. (2021) 
[109]  Wild mustard  Precision 45 –
99% Journal  Cameras  Crop protection  
Hashim et al. (2021) 
[110]  Vegetation  Accuracy 84%  Journal  Multispectral 
camera  Hybrid Vegetation 
Detection  
YOLOv5  Idrissi et al. (2022) 
[111]  Burrow, Dead-
wood, Pine, 
Grass, Oak, 
Wood, Fire, Pe-
destrian  mAP 44.3%  Journal  Cameras  Evaluating the For-
est Ecosystem  
Jemaa  et al. (2022) 
[112]  Orchard tree  Precision 91%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Orchard tree man-
agement  
dos Santos et al. 
(2022) [113]  Leaf -cutting ants  Accuracy 98.45%  Journal  Cameras  Optimizing the use 
of pesticides  
Puliti and Astrup  
(2022) [114]  Tree damage  Precision 76%,  
Recall 78%  Journal  Cameras  Evaluating the For-
est Ecosystem  
Figure 22. Detection counts of reindeer and sika deer by using the YOLOv5s improved model [ 105].
In this section, we provide an overview of the applications of YBUT in agriculture, and
these exploratory applications point the way for expanding YOLO-based UAV applications
in agriculture. Although the technology is still at the beginning stage in agriculture and
many issues have not yet been resolved, such as dataset collection and sharing and stable
YOLO algorithms that are more suitable for applications, we believe that YBUT can aid
in the development of smart agriculture and has a broad scope of development in the
agricultural ﬁeld.

==== Page 17 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 17 of 29
Table 4. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in agriculture.
YOLO
ModelsReference Object Metric Paper Type Sensors Purpose
YOLOv3Priya et al. (2021) [106] Cattle N/AConference
paperCamerasLivestock
management
Ulhaq et al. (2021) [107] Animals mAP 87.1% JournalThermal
imagerAnimal management
Petso et al. (2021) [108] Animals F1 96% Journal Cameras Wildlife monitoring
Guzel et al. (2021) [109] Wild mustard Precision 45–99% Journal Cameras Crop protection
Hashim et al. (2021) [110] Vegetation Accuracy 84% JournalMultispectral
cameraHybrid Vegetation
Detection
YOLOv5Idrissi et al. (2022) [111]Burrow, Deadwood,
Pine, Grass, Oak,
Wood, Fire,
PedestrianmAP 44.3% Journal CamerasEvaluating the Forest
Ecosystem
Jemaa et al. (2022) [112] Orchard tree Precision 91%Conference
paperCamerasOrchard tree
management
dos Santos et al. (2022) [113] Leaf-cutting ants Accuracy 98.45% Journal CamerasOptimizing the use of
pesticides
Puliti and Astrup (2022) [114] Tree damagePrecision 76%,
Recall 78%Journal CamerasEvaluating the Forest
Ecosystem
4.4. Related Applications in the Field of Automation
The production method of the future is automated production with machines com-
pletely replacing manual labor. In everyday production, most operations require human
control of the machines, while some of the more technologically advanced production
operations have already been automated with machines replacing humans. In operations
where staff are involved in production, their main task is to control the machine, i.e., to
adjust the machine’s working status according to the real-time operational situation. The
combination of computer technology, which can now make decisions instead of humans,
and object detection technology based on the YOLO algorithm, which can detect the status
of the operation in real time and can provide feedback, can replace staff control of the machine
to a certain extent. If both technologies are applied to drone platforms, it may be possible to
reduce the labor pressure for workers and can increase the productivity of some industries.
To automate the use of YBUT in various applications, numerous researchers have
developed different supporting technologies. After many studies, the technology for the
detection, tracking, and avoidance of speciﬁc targets has matured and is now largely
automated [ 115–118]. Notably, YBUT has been effectively used for the detection and
localization of pedestrians [ 119–123]. Moreover, with an increase in unmanned mobility
concepts, certain applications have been rapidly automated. Kraft et al. [ 124] proposed
a YOLOv4-based method for locating litter in parks by using drones. The experimental
results showed that the drones can detect litter and can collect litter location data in a
ﬁxed area while marking the litter location on a map for sweepers to see for easy cleaning
(see Figure 23). In the future, the system can also work together with other equipment to
locate and automatically sweep up litter, completely reducing the workload of sweepers.
Liao et al. [ 125] proposed a UAV-based marine litter detection system that uses a UAV with
an improved YOLO algorithm for marine litter detection; their system transmits the results
to a ground-based monitoring platform via the internet to assist government agencies
in implementing management plans (see Figure 24). Other information regarding YBUT
applications in the automation sector is shown in Table 5.

==== Page 18 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 18 of 29
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 31 
 
In this section, we provide an overview of the applications of YBUT in agriculture, 
and these exploratory applications point the way for expanding YOLO -based UAV appli-
cations in agriculture. Although the technology is still at the beginning stage in agriculture 
and many issues have not yet been resolved, such as dataset collection and sharing and 
stable YOLO algorithms that are more suitabl e for applications, we believe that YBUT can 
aid in the development of smart agriculture and has a broad scope of development in the 
agricultural field.  
4.4. Related Applications in the Field of Automation  
The production method of the future is automated production with machines com-
pletely replacing manual labor. In everyday production, most operations require human 
control of the machines, while some of the more technologically advanced production op-
erations have already been automated with mach ines replacing humans. In operations 
where staff are involved in production, their main task is to control the machine, i.e., to 
adjust the machine’s working status according to the real -time operational situation. The 
combination of computer technology, w hich can now make decisions instead of humans, 
and object detection technology based on the YOLO algorithm, which can detect the status 
of the operation in real time and can provide feedback, can replace staff control of the 
machine to a certain extent. If  both technologies are applied to drone platforms, it may be 
possible to reduce the labor pressure for workers and can increase the productivity of 
some industries.  
To automate the use of YBUT in various applications, numerous researchers have 
developed di fferent supporting technologies. After many studies, the technology for the 
detection, tracking, and avoidance of specific targets has matured and is now largely au-
tomated [115 –118]. Notably, YBUT has been effectively used for the detection and locali-
zatio n of pedestrians [119 –123]. Moreover, with an increase in unmanned mobility con-
cepts, certain applications have been rapidly automated. Kraft et al. [124] proposed a 
YOLOv4 -based method for locating litter in parks by using drones. The experimental re-
sults  showed that the drones can detect litter and can collect litter location data in a fixed 
area while marking the litter location on a map for sweepers to see for easy cleaning (see 
Figure 23). In the future, the system can also work together with other equ ipment to locate 
and automatically sweep up litter, completely reducing the workload of sweepers. Liao et 
al. [125] proposed a UAV -based marine litter detection system that uses a UAV with an 
improved YOLO algorithm for marine litter detection; their syste m transmits the results 
to a ground -based monitoring platform via the internet to assist government agencies in 
implementing management plans (see Figure 24). Other information regarding YBUT ap-
plications in the automation sector is shown in Table 5.  
 
Figure 23. Results of UAV dataset detection using YOLOv4 [124].  
Figure 23. Results of UAV dataset detection using YOLOv4 [124].
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19 of 31 
 
 
Figure 24. Results of UAV litter detection at Badouzi fishing port [125].  
Table 5. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in automation . 
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv3  Liu et al. (2020) [126]  Small objects  mAP 
72.54%  Journal  Cameras  Small object detection  
Wang et al. (2020) [127]  UAVs  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Airport obstacle -free zone 
monitoring UAV system  
YOLOv4  Kong et al. (2022) [128]  Pedestrian  mAP 
39.32%  Journal  Cameras  Pedestrian Detection and 
Counting  
YOLOv5  Maharjan et al. (2022) 
[129]  River Plastic  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Plastic waste management  
The successful application of YBUT in the field of automation demonstrates a viable 
method for achieving an unmanned and automated future. The research information ob-
tained from existing exploratory practical applications provides a credible reference for 
reducing the pressure on human labor and increasing existing productivity lev els in the 
future. In the coming period, the research focus of YBUT in the engineering field should 
be on expanding the types of operations to which the technology can be applied, devel-
oping specialist drones, developing high -performance YOLO algorithms su itable for em-
bedded environments, and developing visual and convenient control systems.  
4.5. Related Applications in Other Fields  
In addition to the main areas of YBUT application discussed above, some researchers 
have explored completely new areas, experi mented with new methods, and used these 
methods to promote and enhance the applicability and usefulness of YBUT. Wyder et al. 
[130] integrated YBUT with vision service algorithms to successfully achieve the autono-
mous detection and tracking of moving targe ts in a GPS -limited environment. Quan, 
Herrmann et al. [131] proposed Project Vulture, an intelligent human –subject location sys-
tem for UAVs based on the YOLO algorithm, and the system possessed higher sensitivity 
than other peer systems in mountain rescue  operations. Similar content has been studied 
by Kashihara et al. [132] and Sambolek and Ivasic -Kos [133]. Arnold et al. [134] investi-
gated object classification functions and reactive group behavior in a dispersed autono-
mous heterogeneous swarm of UAVs de ployed with YOLO; their approach supported the 
identification of specific targets with a UAV, and other UAVs were able to learn the be-
havior accordingly. The experimental results showed that the system still performs well 
at 25 m from the building. Jing et  al. [135] proposed a neural network based on YOLOv5s -
ViT-BiFPN, which can assess the damage of rural houses after natural disasters using 
drone images (see Figure 25). Information regarding YBUT applications in other areas is 
shown in Table 6.  
Figure 24. Results of UAV litter detection at Badouzi ﬁshing port [125].
The successful application of YBUT in the ﬁeld of automation demonstrates a viable
method for achieving an unmanned and automated future. The research information
obtained from existing exploratory practical applications provides a credible reference for
reducing the pressure on human labor and increasing existing productivity levels in the
future. In the coming period, the research focus of YBUT in the engineering ﬁeld should be
on expanding the types of operations to which the technology can be applied, developing
specialist drones, developing high-performance YOLO algorithms suitable for embedded
environments, and developing visual and convenient control systems.
Table 5. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in automation.
YOLO
ModelsReference Object Metric Paper Type Sensors Purpose
YOLOv3Liu et al. (2020) [126] Small objects mAP 72.54% Journal CamerasSmall object
detection
Wang et al. (2020) [127] UAVs N/A Journal CamerasAirport obstacle-free
zone monitoring
UAV system
YOLOv4 Kong et al. (2022) [128] Pedestrian mAP 39.32% Journal CamerasPedestrian Detection
and Counting
YOLOv5 Maharjan et al. (2022) [129] River Plastic N/A Journal CamerasPlastic waste
management
4.5. Related Applications in Other Fields
In addition to the main areas of YBUT application discussed above, some researchers have
explored completely new areas, experimented with new methods, and used these methods to
promote and enhance the applicability and usefulness of YBUT. Wyder et al. [ 130] integrated
YBUT with vision service algorithms to successfully achieve the autonomous detection and
tracking of moving targets in a GPS-limited environment. Quan, Herrmann et al. [131] pro-
posed Project Vulture, an intelligent human–subject location system for UAVs based on
the YOLO algorithm, and the system possessed higher sensitivity than other peer systems
in mountain rescue operations. Similar content has been studied by Kashihara et al. [ 132]

==== Page 19 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 19 of 29
and Sambolek and Ivasic-Kos [ 133]. Arnold et al. [ 134] investigated object classiﬁcation
functions and reactive group behavior in a dispersed autonomous heterogeneous swarm of
UAVs deployed with YOLO; their approach supported the identiﬁcation of speciﬁc targets
with a UAV , and other UAVs were able to learn the behavior accordingly. The experimental
results showed that the system still performs well at 25 m from the building. Jing et al. [ 135]
proposed a neural network based on YOLOv5s-ViT-BiFPN, which can assess the damage
of rural houses after natural disasters using drone images (see Figure 25). Information
regarding YBUT applications in other areas is shown in Table 6.
Drones 2023 , 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  20 of 31 
 
 
Figure 25 . YOLOv5s -ViT-BiFPN algorithm for detecting damaged houses [135].  
Table 6. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in other fields . 
YOLO 
Models  Reference  Object  Metric  Paper Type  Sensors  Purpose  
YOLOv1  Ajmera and Singh 
(2020) [136]  Missing victim  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Urban Search and Rescue  
Sudholz et al. 
(2022) [137]  Rusa deer  N/A  Journal  Cameras, 
Thermal 
imager  The detection and monitoring 
of invasive species  
YOLOv2  Opromolla et al. 
(2019) [138]  UAVs  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Visual -based detection and 
tracking of cooperative UAVs  
Merizalde and 
Morillo (2021) 
[139]  Pedestrian  Rcall 90%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Real -time Social Distancing 
Detection  
YOLOv3  Kim et al. (2019) 
[140]  Mobile con-
struction re-
sources  Accuracy 
97.43%  Journal  Cameras  Protecting construction work-
ers 
Hong et al. (2019) 
[141]  Birds  N/A  Journal  Cameras  Wildlife monitoring  
Arola and 
Akhloufi (2019) 
[142]  UAVs  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Collaborative UAV research  
Zheng et al. (2019) 
[143]  Distress per-
sonnel  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  A Search and Rescue System 
for Maritime Personnel  
Silvirianti et al. 
(2019) [144]  UAV flight be-
havior  Accuracy 83%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Search and rescue for people 
in distress in the forest  
Zhang et al. (2019) 
[145]  Sea surface 
ships  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Algorithmic research  
Medeiros et al. 
(2021) [146]  Human pos-
ture N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Human posture guidance sys-
tem 
Sarosa et al. (2020) 
[147]  Victims of nat-
ural disasters  Accuracy 89%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Search and rescue for victims 
of natural disasters  
Rizk et al. (2021) 
[148]  Human  Accuracy 
78.78%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Search and rescue for victims 
of natural disasters  
Qi et al. (2021) 
[149]  Moving Target  N/A  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Moving target detection and 
tracking  
Panigrahi et al. 
(2021) [150]  Wildlife  mAP 95%  Conference 
paper  Cameras  Biodiversity analysis  
Figure 25. YOLOv5s-ViT-BiFPN algorithm for detecting damaged houses [135].
YBUT has been used successfully in various ﬁelds, which has greatly contributed to
the development of the industry and the advancement of technology for the beneﬁt of
society. From the above overview of the various areas, there is much more value to be
created by this technology. To create more value, we can improve and optimize existing
applications, expand the idea with examples of successful applications, and use this to
apply the technology to more areas.
Table 6. Overview of papers that explicitly address YBUT in other ﬁelds.
YOLO
ModelsReference Object Metric Paper Type Sensors Purpose
YOLOv1Ajmera and Singh (2020) [136] Missing victim N/A Conference paper Cameras Urban Search and Rescue
Sudholz et al. (2022) [137] Rusa deer N/A JournalCameras,
Thermal
imagerThe detection and monitoring
of invasive species
YOLOv2Opromolla et al. (2019) [138] UAVs N/A Journal CamerasVisual-based detection and
tracking of cooperative UAVs
Merizalde and Morillo
(2021) [139]Pedestrian Rcall 90% Conference paper CamerasReal-time Social
Distancing Detection
YOLOv3Kim et al. (2019) [140]Mobile construction
resourcesAccuracy
97.43%Journal Cameras Protecting construction workers
Hong et al. (2019) [141] Birds N/A Journal Cameras Wildlife monitoring
Arola and Akhlouﬁ (2019) [142] UAVs N/A Conference paper Cameras Collaborative UAV research
Zheng et al. (2019) [143] Distress personnel N/A Conference paper CamerasA Search and Rescue System for
Maritime Personnel
Silvirianti et al. (2019) [144] UAV ﬂight behaviorAccuracy
83%Conference paper CamerasSearch and rescue for people in
distress in the forest
Zhang et al. (2019) [145] Sea surface ships N/A Conference paper Cameras Algorithmic research
Medeiros et al. (2021) [146] Human posture N/A Conference paper CamerasHuman posture
guidance system
Sarosa et al. (2020) [147]Victims of natural
disastersAccuracy
89%Conference paper CamerasSearch and rescue for victims of
natural disasters
Rizk et al. (2021) [148] HumanAccuracy
78.78%Conference paper CamerasSearch and rescue for victims of
natural disasters
Qi et al. (2021) [149] Moving Target N/A Conference paper CamerasMoving target detection
and tracking
Panigrahi et al. (2021) [150] Wildlife mAP 95% Conference paper Cameras Biodiversity analysis
Wang et al. (2021) [151]Offshore Small
TargetsPrecision
92.7%, Recall
92.06%, mAP
95.58%Journal Cameras Algorithmic research
Tanwar et al. (2021) [152] Pedestrian N/A Journal CamerasReal-time Social
Distancing Detection
YOLOv5Gromada et al. (2022) [153] Military targets N/A JournalCameras,
Synthetic
aperture radarAlgorithmic research
Bahhar et al. (2023) [154] Wildﬁre and Smoke mAP 85.8% Journal Cameras Forest ﬁre detection

==== Page 20 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 20 of 29
5. Development Prospects
With the rapid development of YOLO-based object detection technology and special
UAV research, the YOLO-based UAV industry has set off a technological boom with
multiﬁeld applications and multidirectional development. With the assistance of a variety
of cutting-edge technologies, it is possible to improve productivity and quality of life and to
create economic beneﬁts while creating good ecological, environmental, and social beneﬁts.
YBUT shows increasingly obvious value and potential as it develops.
5.1. Improving the Quality of UAV Datasets and Training YOLO Algorithms Suitable for
Aerial Imagery
In the practical application of YBUT, it is often the case that accuracy and speed are high
for ground-based operational tests but low for aerial UAV operations, possibly due to the
unsuitability of the dataset used by recent target detection algorithms [ 155–158]. Therefore,
when collecting and selecting datasets to create models that perform as well as possible for
the UAV operational environment, the following should be noted: (1) When performing
image acquisition of the target, care should be taken that the acquisition equipment is as
consistent as possible and that the same equipment is used for acquisition from start to
ﬁnish so that the same-resolution image can be obtained. This helps ensure that the image
content is not distorted due to inconsistencies in image size during algorithm training.
(2) The dataset should be collected from as many different angles as possible, e.g., different
camera angles, weather differences, various light intensities, several poses of the target,
numerous target positions, and different target backgrounds. (3) When annotating the
target border category and coordinate information within the dataset, we need to reduce
the area of the background content within the border as much as possible and must ensure
that all the target content is placed within the border. When annotating multiple categories
of borders, we need to minimize the area of overlapping borders to avoid the algorithm
combining the two into the same content.
At the same time, to accelerate the progress of research on YOLO-based UAV object
recognition technology, it is recommended that most developers create good-performing
models, describe the content and application performance of the datasets used, and upload
them to the community for sharing.
5.2. Research into Object Detection Algorithms Suitable for UAV-Embedded Processors
In YBUT research, UAVs can carry limited hardware resources for mobile processors
and cannot be better transplanted to existing YOLO algorithms for application. Therefore,
lightweight target detection algorithms should be investigated for mobile processors with
limited resources, or performance optimization or network pruning model improvements
should be made to existing YOLO algorithms [ 159–164]. Liu et al. [ 165] proposed a Slice-
Concat structure based on YOLOv3 and YOLOv3-SPP , which can improve the target
detection speed by simply changing the width and height of the uniform input dataset.
Zhang et al. [ 166] proposed an intelligent approach for UAVs that combines machine
learning, traditional algorithms, and intelligent AI algorithms. The YOLOv3 algorithm
is then used to sense the location of objects in the environment and to classify them, and
ﬁnally, AI is used to evaluate the working state. Experiments showed that the method
has high computational speed and recognition accuracy, good generality, portability, and
scalability, and they proposed a new development direction for future UAV technology.
To quickly promote the YBUT and facilitate learning and application by other inter-
ested researchers or industry beginners, it is recommended that all peer researchers who
have successfully implemented the application for lightweight UAV models disclose their
optimization methods and model source code and provide detailed explanations of the
optimized parts and the optimized network structure.

==== Page 21 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 21 of 29
5.3. Developing Professional, Stable, and Reliable UAVs in Combination with the YOLO
Inspection Environment
Given the many areas of development of YBUT and the issues with UAVs themselves,
further development and promotion of UAVs with high professionalism, high environ-
mental adaptability, stability, and reliability should be carried out [ 167–172]. The overall
design of UAVs should be combined with the ﬁeld of UAV operations, while considering
the environment, to improve the professionalism of UAV operations and to ensure the
adaptability and stability of UAV operations. In terms of the UAV power system, we
should develop the core components of power motors or engines, improve the service life
of the core components, and reduce the total amount of the whole aircraft to improve the
practicality of UAVs. In terms of UAV onboard equipment, multisensor fusion technology
should continue to be developed and applied autonomously. In terms of UAV safety, the de-
velopment of UAV safety ﬂight algorithms is necessary. We also improve the UAV runaway
self-protection system, realize effective obstacle avoidance, runaway self-protection, fault
self-testing, and runaway warning functions. Moreover, we need to monitor all parameters
of the UAV itself to protect the users’ property.
5.4. Enhancing the Security of YBUT for Multiple Application Scenarios
The development of YBUT and its widespread use in various ﬁelds have led to the tech-
nology being gradually recognized by researchers, but in the pursuit of rapid technological
development, safety issues are often easily overlooked. In the daily application of YBUT,
UAVs mainly transmit data with ground control terminals by wireless communication,
which is easily interfered with and invaded by others, thus causing problems, such as loss
of control of UAVs and data information leakage [ 173]. In many application scenarios,
if a UAV is hacked by others and loses control of its ﬂight, it will not only pose a threat
to the UAV itself but also to the surrounding environment and may even endanger the
personal safety of the operator. To prevent relevant security issues from occurring, it is
vital to enhance the data security of the YBUT. Both the storage and transmission of data
information and the transmission of UAV movement control commands should be the
main targets for security enhancements in the YBUT.
5.5. Popularising YBUT Knowledge, Training Technical Application Talents, and Improving
Relevant Laws, Regulations, and Codes of Practice
Popularizing the knowledge of UAVs and YOLO algorithms and training composite
talents in UAV control and YOLO algorithm application should be the role of higher educa-
tion institutions, research units, relevant enterprises, and group organizations. Improving
relevant laws, regulations, and codes of practice is an inescapable responsibility of the
relevant legislative bodies in the face of the rise of new technological developments and
applications. Although YBUT is developing rapidly, it takes time to achieve autonomous
unmanned operation of drones, so talent for drone control should be cultivated to improve
the overall level of the industry and the scope of production and use in life. At the same
time, to adapt to the rapid iteration of YOLO algorithm versions, knowledge of YOLO
algorithm applications should be popularized, and the ability of relevant personnel to apply
YOLO algorithms should be improved to bring into play the diversity of YOLO-based
UAV operations. To further protect the legal rights of users and others, the YBUT must
be applied in strict accordance with relevant laws and regulations, and operators must be
trained to ensure the correct use of the YBUT.
6. Conclusions
In any period, social progress needs advanced productivity as a basis, and every
advancement needs time to develop. When an emerging ﬁeld becomes popular, the ﬁeld
then gathers most of the current resources to develop it so that it rapidly progresses
and spreads to other ﬁelds. Then, having been fully integrated with other ﬁelds, it is

==== Page 22 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 22 of 29
presented to people in the way of practical applications to address the needs of life so that
people beneﬁt.
In this literature review, we demonstrate that the combination of deep learning YOLO
algorithms and UAV technology can be of great use in the future, and an attempt is made
to introduce and to promote the technology to attract the attention of more researchers. In
this paper, we ﬁrst describe the development of YBUT, including the early developments
and leaps and bounds in the application of YOLO algorithms in conjunction with UAV
technology. Second, to promote YBUT, the main areas where researchers have applied the
technology and the recent state of research, as well as the exploration and experimentation
of the technology in certain new areas, are presented. It is clear from the article that YOLO-
based object detection algorithms could be a key enabler for future drone applications,
allowing drones to provide better productivity and greater convenience.
Currently, UAV technology and YOLO-based object detection are relatively well
established in their respective pre-existing ﬁelds, and the cross-fertilization of the two into
new technologies is becoming an increasingly important area. The results show that there
is a high degree of advantageous complementarity between UAV-derived aerial platforms
and YOLO algorithms for object detection. However, the application methodology and
performance of YBUT need to be further enhanced. The development of YBUT has, thus
far, seen more applications in engineering, transportation, agriculture, and automation
and less practice in other ﬁelds; the diffusion of the technology remains a challenge. The
future development of technology needs to take these four issues into account. The actual
detection performance of ground-acquired datasets applied directly to the training of
UAV-based object detection algorithms is not very satisfactory, and further dedicated high-
quality datasets need to be acquired. Deploying existing YOLO algorithms directly to
mobile processors through optimization can complete the current exploratory research
goals, but this step is still a long way from industrializing YBUT and requires dedicated
algorithms to be developed for the UAV hardware environment. For future applications of
the technology in more areas, a single specialist drone should be developed for speciﬁc use
environments. The timely development of talent for the development and application of
YBUT is also an effective way to rapidly promote the technology. To some extent, the rapid
diffusion of YBUT and the continuous identiﬁcation of new problems and needs during the
diffusion process, addressing new problems and meeting new needs, can also contribute to
technological progress.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.C. and Z.Z.; methodology, C.C.; software, S.F.; valida-
tion, C.C., Z.Z. and S.G.; formal analysis, T.X.; investigation, C.C.; resources, C.C.; data curation, Z.Z.;
writing—original draft preparation, C.C. and Z.Z.; writing—review and editing, W.Y.; visualization,
C.C. and Z.Z.; supervision, Y.L.; project administration, T.X. and W.Y.; funding acquisition, T.X., W.Y.
and Y.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by the General Program of Liaoning Provincial Educational
Department (LJKMZ20221059), the Key Tackling Program of Liaoning Provincial Educational Depart-
ment (LSNZD202005), and the 111 Project (D18019).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We sincerely thank Dongxu Su, Yihan Liu, Hongyang Zhou, and Ziqi Yu from
Shenyang Agricultural University for supporting this work.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

==== Page 23 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 23 of 29
Nomenclature
Acronyms Deﬁnition
UAV Unmanned aerial vehicle
YOLO You Only Look Once
YBUT YOLO-based UAV technology
UAVs Unmanned aerial vehicles
FPS Frames Per Second
mAP Mean average precision
Faster R-CNN Faster regional Convolutional Neural Network
RFCN Region-based Fully Convolutional Network
SNIPER Scale Normalization for Image Pyramids with Efﬁcient Resampling
IoU Intersection over union
F1 Harmonic mean of precision and recall
AP Average precision
VPU Vision Processing Unit
PID Proportional Integral Differential
SLAM Simultaneous localization and mapping
GPS Global Positioning System
DEEPSORT Deep Simple Online and Realtime Tracking
References
1. Fan, B.; Li, Y.; Zhang, R.; Fu, Q. Review on the technological development and application of UAV systems. Chin. J. Electron. 2020 ,
29, 199–207. [CrossRef]
2. Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the
2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 779–788.
3. Jiang, P .Y.; Ergu, D.; Liu, F.Y.; Cai, Y.; Ma, B. A review of yolo algorithm developments. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Information Technology and Quantitative Management (ITQM)—Developing Global Digital Economy after
COVID-19, Chengdu, China, 9–11 July 2021; pp. 1066–1073.
4. Ahmad, F.; Qiu, B.; Dong, X.; Ma, J.; Huang, X.; Ahmed, S.; Chandio, F.A. Effect of operational parameters of UAV sprayer on
spray deposition pattern in target and off-target zones during outer ﬁeld weed control application. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020 ,
172, 105305. [CrossRef]
5. Gasparovic, M.; Zrinjski, M.; BarkoviC, D.; Radocaj, D. An automatic method for weed mapping in oat ﬁelds based on UAV
imagery. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2020 ,173, 105385. [CrossRef]
6. Chu, L.; Li, X.; Xu, J.; Neiat, A.G.; Liu, X. A holistic service provision strategy for drone-as-a-service in MEC-based UAV delivery.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS)/IEEE World Congress on Services (IEEE SERVICES),
Chicago, IL, USA, 5–11 September 2021; pp. 669–674.
7. Nath, N.D.; Cheng, C.S.; Behzadan, A.H. Drone mapping of damage information in GPS-Denied disaster sites. Adv. Eng. Inform.
2022 ,51, 101450. [CrossRef]
8. Abate, A.F.; De Maio, L.; Distasi, R.; Narducci, F. Remote 3D face reconstruction by means of autonomous unmanned aerial
vehicles. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2021 ,147, 48–54. [CrossRef]
9. Su, D.; Yao, W.; Yu, F.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, Z.; Wang, Y.; Xu, T.; Chen, C. Single-neuron PID UAV variable fertilizer application control
system based on a weighted coefﬁcient learning correction. Agriculture 2022 ,12, 1019. [CrossRef]
10. Li, Y.; Dai, Z. Abnormal behavior detection in crowd scene using YOLO and Conv-AE. In Proceedings of the 33rd Chinese Control
and Decision Conference (CCDC), Kunming, China, 22–24 May 2021; pp. 1720–1725.
11. Yu, J.; Zhang, W. Face mask wearing detection algorithm based on improved YOLO-v4. Sensors 2021 ,21, 3263. [CrossRef]
12. Rivero-Palacio, M.; Alfonso-Morales, W.; Caicedo-Bravo, E.; IEEE. Mobile application for anemia detection through ocular
conjunctiva images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Colombian Conference on Applications of Computational Intelligence (ColCACI),
Cali, Colombia, 26–28 May 2021.
13. Liu, Y.; Hong, W. Target detection based on DB-YOLO in road environment. In Proceedings of the 33rd Chinese Control and
Decision Conference (CCDC), Kunming, China, 22–24 May 2021; pp. 1496–1501.
14. Azimjonov, J.; Ozmen, A. A real-time vehicle detection and a novel vehicle tracking systems for estimating and monitoring trafﬁc
ﬂow on highways. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2021 ,50, 101393. [CrossRef]
15. Lv, X.; Lian, X.; Tan, L.; Song, Y.; Wang, C. HPMC: A multi-target tracking algorithm for the IoT. Intell. Autom. Soft Comput. 2021 ,
28, 513–526. [CrossRef]
16. Chen, W.; Zhang, J.; Guo, B.; Wei, Q.; Zhu, Z. An apple detection method based on Des-YOLO v4 algorithm for harvesting robots
in complex environment. Math. Probl. Eng. 2021 ,2021 , 7351470. [CrossRef]
17. Buchholz, K.; Statista. Commercial Drones Are Taking Off. 2019. Available online: https://www.statista.com/chart/17201/
commecial-drones-projected-growth/ (accessed on 1 February 2023).

==== Page 24 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 24 of 29
18. Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. YOLO9000: Better, faster, stronger. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 7263–7271.
19. Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. Yolov3: An incremental improvement. arXiv 2018 , arXiv:1804.02767.
20. Bochkovskiy, A.; Wang, C.Y.; Liao, H.Y.M. Yolov4: Optimal speed and accuracy of object detection. arXiv 2020 , arXiv:2004.10934.
21. Li, C.; Li, L.; Jiang, H.; Weng, K.; Geng, Y.; Li, L.; Ke, Z.; Li, Q.; Cheng, M.; Nie, W.; et al. YOLOv6: A single-stage object detection
framework for industrial applications. arXiv 2022 , arXiv:2209.02976.
22. Wang, C.-Y.; Bochkovskiy, A.; Liao, H.-Y.M. YOLOv7: Trainable bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object
detectors. arXiv 2022 , arXiv:2207.02696.
23. Sahin, O.; Ozer, S. YOLODrone: Improved YOLO architecture for object detection in drone images. In Proceedings of the
44th International Conference on Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP), Brno, Czech Republic, 26–28 July 2021; pp.
361–365.
24. Tan, L.; Lv, X.; Lian, X.; Wang, G. YOLOv4_Drone: UAV image target detection based on an improved YOLOv4 algorithm.
Comput. Electr. Eng. 2021 ,93, 107261. [CrossRef]
25. Zhang, Z.; Lu, X.; Cao, G.; Yang, Y.; Jiao, L.; Liu, F.; Soc, I.C. ViT-YOLO: Transformer-based YOLO for object detection. In
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Montreal, BC, Canada, 11–17 October 2021 ;
pp. 2799–2808.
26. Koay, H.V .; Chuah, J.H.; Chow, C.-O.; Chang, Y.-L.; Yong, K.K. YOLO-RTUAV: Towards real-time vehicle detection through aerial
images with low-cost edge devices. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 4196. [CrossRef]
27. Wang, P .; Wu, L.; Qi, J.; Dai, J. Unmanned aerial vehicles object detection based on image haze removal under sea fog conditions.
IET Image Process. 2022 ,16, 2709–2721.
28. Yang, F.; Zhang, X.; Liu, B. Video object tracking based on YOLOv7 and DeepSORT. arXiv 2022 , arXiv:2207.12202.
29. Lin, Y.; Chen, T.; Liu, S.; Cai, Y.; Shi, H.; Zheng, D.; Lan, Y.; Yue, X.; Zhang, L. Quick and accurate monitoring peanut seedlings
emergence rate through UAV video and deep learning. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2022 ,197, 106938. [CrossRef]
30. Khang, N.; Nhut, T.H.; Phat, C.N.; Khanh-Duy, N.; Nguyen, D.V .; Nguyen, T.V . Detecting objects from space: An evaluation of
deep-learning modern approaches. Electronics 2020 ,9, 583.
31. Ammar, A.; Koubaa, A.; Benjdira, B. Deep-learning-based automated palm tree counting and geolocation in large farms from
aerial geotagged images. Agronomy 2021 ,11, 1458. [CrossRef]
32. Jiang, S.; Luo, B.; Liu, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, L. UAV-based vehicle detection by multi-source images. In Proceedings of the 2nd
CCF Chinese Conference on Computer Vision (CCCV), China Comp Federat, Tianjin, China, 12–14 October 2017.
33. Xu, Z.; Shi, H.; Li, N.; Xiang, C.; Zhou, H. Vehicle detection under UAV based on optimal dense YOLO method. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Systems and Informatics (ICSAI), Nanjing, China, 10–12 November 2018; pp. 407–411.
34. Ruan, W.; Wang, H.; Kou, Z.; Su, Z.; IEEE. Drogue detection and location for UAV autonomous aerial refueling based on deep
learning and vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE CSAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference (CGNCC), Xiamen, China,
10–12 August 2018.
35. Yang, Z.; Huang, Z.; Yang, Y.; Yang, F.; Yin, Z. Accurate specified-pedestrian tracking from unmanned aerial vehicles. In
Proceedings of the 18th IEEE International Conference on Communication Technology (IEEE ICCT), Chongqing, China ,
8–11 October 2018; pp. 1256–1260.
36. Zhang, D.; Shao, Y.; Mei, Y.; Chu, H.; Zhang, X.; Zhan, H.; Rao, Y. Using YOLO-based pedestrian detection for monitoring UA V . In
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Graphics and Image Processing (ICGIP), Chengdu, China, 12–14 December 2018 .
37. Alam, M.S.; Natesha, B.V .; Ashwin, T.S.; Guddeti, R.M.R. UAV based cost-effective real-time abnormal event detection using edge
computing. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2019 ,78, 35119–35134. [CrossRef]
38. Dimithe, C.O.B.; Reid, C.; Samata, B. Offboard machine learning through edge computing for robotic applications. In Proceedings
of the IEEE SoutheastCon Conference, St Petersburg, FL, USA, 19–22 April 2018.
39. Cao, M.; Chen, W.; Li, Y. Research on detection and tracking technology of quad-rotor aircraft based on open source ﬂight control.
In Proceedings of the 39th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), Shenyang, China, 27–29 July 2020; pp. 6509–6514.
40. Doukhi, O.; Hossain, S.; Lee, D.-J. Real-time deep learning for moving target detection and tracking using unmanned aerial
vehicle. J. Inst. Control. Robot. Syst. 2020 ,26, 295–301. [CrossRef]
41. Aﬁﬁ, M.; Ali, Y.; Amer, K.; Shaker, M.; Elhelw, M. Robust real-time pedestrian detection on embedded devices. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Conference on Machine Vision, Rome, Italy, 2–6 November 2020.
42. Zhao, L.; Zhang, Q.; Peng, B.; Liu, Y. Faster object detector for drone-captured images. J. Electron. Imaging 2022 ,31, 043033.
[CrossRef]
43. Zheng, A.; Fu, Y.; Dong, M.; Du, X.; Chen, Y.; Huang, J. interface identiﬁcation of automatic veriﬁcation system based on deep
learning. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE 16th Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ICIEA), Chengdu, China,
1–4 August 2021; pp. 46–49.
44. Ohta, H.; Sato, Y.; Mori, T.; Takaya, K.; Kroumov, V . Image acquisition of power line transmission towers using UAV and deep
learning technique for insulators localization and recognition. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on System
Theory, Control and Computing (ICSTCC), Sinaia, Romania, 9–11 October 2019; pp. 125–130.
45. Han, Q.; Liu, X.; Xu, J. Detection and location of steel structure surface cracks based on unmanned aerial vehicle images. J. Build.
Eng. 2022 ,50, 104098. [CrossRef]

==== Page 25 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 25 of 29
46. Cintas, E.; Ozyer, B.; Simsek, E. Vision-based moving UAV tracking by another UAV on low-cost hardware and a new ground
control station. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 194601–194611. [CrossRef]
47. Li, C.; Zheng, D.; Liu, L.; Zheng, X. A UAV-based machine vision algorithm for industrial gauge detecting and display reading.
In Proceedings of the 5th Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Intelligent Robot Systems (ACIRS), Singapore, 17–19 July 2020; pp. 109–115.
48. Starzynski, J.; Zawadzki, P .; Haranczyk, D. Machine learning in solar plants inspection automation. Energies 2022 ,15, 5966.
[CrossRef]
49. Kim, J.S.; Young, H.I. Analysis of building object detection based on the YOLO neural network using UAV images. J. Korean Soc.
Surv. Geod. Photogramm. Cartogr. 2021 ,39, 381–392.
50. Zhang, S.; Chen, B.; Wang, R.; Wang, J.; Zhong, L.; Gao, B. Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) vision-based detection of power line
poles by CPU-based deep learning method. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Annual International Conference on Cyber Technology
in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems (IEEE-CYBER), Suzhou, China, 29 July–2 August 2019; pp. 1630–1634.
51. Sadykova, D.; Pernebayeva, D.; Bagheri, M.; James, A. IN-YOLO: Real-time detection of outdoor high voltage insulators using
UAV imaging. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 2020 ,35, 1599–1601. [CrossRef]
52. Chen, H.; He, Z.; Shi, B.; Zhong, T. Research on recognition method of electrical components based on YOLO V3. IEEE Access
2019 ,7, 157818–157829. [CrossRef]
53. Chen, B.; Miao, X. Distribution line pole detection and counting based on YOLO using UAV inspection line video. J. Electr. Eng.
Technol. 2020 ,15, 997. [CrossRef]
54. Mo, Y.; Xie, R.; Pan, Q.; Zhang, B. Automatic power transmission towers detection based on the deep learning algorithm. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computer Engineering and Intelligent Control (ICCEIC), Chongqing, China,
12–14 November 2021; pp. 11–15.
55. Zhang, Z.; He, G. Recognition of bird nests on power transmission lines in aerial images based on improved YOLOv4. Front.
Energy Res. 2022 ,10, 435. [CrossRef]
56. Zheng, H.; Ping, Y.; Cui, Y.; Li, J. Intelligent diagnosis method of power equipment faults based on single-stage infrared image
target detection. IEEJ Trans. Electr. Electron. Eng. 2022 ,17, 1706–1716. [CrossRef]
57. Bao, W.; Ren, Y.; Wang, N.; Hu, G.; Yang, X. Detection of abnormal vibration dampers on transmission lines in UAV remote
sensing images with PMA-YOLO. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 4134. [CrossRef]
58. Alsanad, H.R.; Sadik, A.Z.; Ucan, O.N.; Ilyas, M.; Bayat, O. YOLO-V3 based real-time drone detection algorithm. Multimed. Tools
Appl. 2022 ,81, 26185–26198. [CrossRef]
59. Hu, Y.; Wu, X.; Zheng, G.; Liu, X. Object detection of UAV for anti-UAV based on improved YOLO v3. In Proceedings of the 38th
Chinese Control Conference (CCC), Guangzhou, China, 27–30 July 2019; pp. 8386–8390.
60. Yuan, X.; Xia, J.; Wu, J.; Shi, J.; Deng, L. Low altitude small UAV detection based on YOLO model. In Proceedings of the 39th
Chinese Control Conference (CCC), Shenyang, China, 27–29 July 2020; pp. 7362–7366.
61. Madasamy, K.; Shanmuganathan, V .; Kandasamy, V .; Lee, M.Y.; Thangadurai, M. OSDDY: Embedded system-based object
surveillance detection system with small drone using deep YOLO. EURASIP J. Image Video Process. 2021 ,2021 , 1–14. [CrossRef]
62. Cetin, E.; Barrado, C.; Pastor, E. Improving real-time drone detection for counter-drone systems .Aeronaut. J. 2021 ,125, 1871–1896.
[CrossRef]
63. Sousa, A.D.P .d.; Sousa, G.C.L.d.; Mau és, L.M.F. Using digital image processing and Unmanned Aerial V ehicle (UA V) for identifying
ceramic cladding detachment in building facades. Ambiente Constru ído2022 ,22, 199–213. [CrossRef]
64. Wang, J.; Jiang, S.; Song, W.; Yang, Y. A comparative study of small object detection algorithms. In Proceedings of the 38th Chinese
Control Conference (CCC), Guangzhou, China, 27–30 July 2019; pp. 8507–8512.
65. Han, J.; Yang, Z.; Xu, H.; Hu, G.; Zhang, C.; Li, H.; Lai, S.; Zeng, H. Search like an eagle: A cascaded model for insulator missing
faults detection in aerial images. Energies 2020 ,13, 713. [CrossRef]
66. Yan, J.; Hao, Y. Recognition method of electrical components based on improved YOLOv3. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Information Systems (ICAIIS), Chongqing, China, 28–30 May 2021.
67. Liu, C.; Wu, Y.; Liu, J.; Sun, Z. Improved YOLOv3 network for insulator detection in aerial images with diverse background
interference. Electronics 2021 ,10, 771. [CrossRef]
68. Kumar, P .; Batchu, S.; Swamy, S.N.; Kota, S.R. Real-time concrete damage detection using deep learning for high rise structures.
IEEE Access 2021 ,9, 112312–112331. [CrossRef]
69. Tu, R.; Zhu, Z.; Bai, Y.; Gao, M.; Ge, Z. Key parts of transmission line detection using improved YOLO v3. Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol.
2021 ,18, 747–754.
70. Ding, C.; Lu, L.; Wang, C.; Ding, C. Design, sensing, and control of a novel UAV platform for aerial drilling and screwing. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett. 2021 ,6, 3176–3183. [CrossRef]
71. Yang, Z.; Xu, Z.; Wang, Y. Bidirection-fusion-YOLOv3: An improved method for insulator defect detection using UAV image.
IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 2022 ,71, 1–8. [CrossRef]
72. Kim-Phuong, P .; Thai-Hoc, L.; Trung-Thanh, N.; Ngoc-Long, L.; Huu-Hung, N.; Van-Phuc, H. Multi-model deep learning
drone detection and tracking in complex background conditions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Advanced
Technologies for Communications (ATC), Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 14–16 October 2021; pp. 189–194.

==== Page 26 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 26 of 29
73. Wang, X.; Li, W.; Guo, W.; Cao, K. SPB-YOLO: An efﬁcient real-time detector for unmanned aerial vehicle images. In Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Information and Communication (IEEE ICAIIC), Jeju Island,
South Korea, 13–16 April 2021; pp. 99–104.
74. Feng, R.; Fan, C.; Li, Z.; Chen, X. Mixed road user trajectory extraction from moving aerial videos based on convolution neural
network detection. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 43508–43519. [CrossRef]
75. Omar, W.; Oh, Y.; Chung, J.; Lee, I. Aerial dataset integration for vehicle detection based on YOLOv4. Korean J. Remote Sensing
2021 ,37, 747–761.
76. Liu, X.; Zhang, Z. A Vision-based target detection, tracking, and positioning algorithm for unmanned aerial vehicle. Wirel.
Commun. Mob. Comput. 2021 ,2021 , 1–12. [CrossRef]
77. Silva, L.A.; San Blas, H.S.; Garcia, D.P .; Mendes, A.S.; Gonzalez, G.V . An architectural multi-agent system for a pavement
monitoring system with pothole recognition in UAV images. Sensors 2020 ,20, 6205. [CrossRef]
78. Zhao, Z.; Han, J.; Song, L. YOLO-Highway: An improved highway center marking detection model for unmanned aerial vehicle
autonomous ﬂight. Math. Probl. Eng. 2021 ,2021 , 1–14. [CrossRef]
79. Ma, D.; Fang, H.; Wang, N.; Zhang, C.; Dong, J.; Hu, H. Automatic detection and counting system for pavement cracks based on
PCGAN and YOLO-MF. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2022 ,23, 22166–22178. [CrossRef]
80. Kim, J.M.; Sekwon, H.; Chae, J.H.; Do, M. Road crack detection based on object detection algorithm using unmanned aerial
vehicle image. J. Korea Inst. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2019 ,18, 155–163. [CrossRef]
81. Sharma, R.; Patel, K.; Shah, S.; Aibin, M. Aerial footage analysis using computer vision for efﬁcient detection of points of interest
near railway tracks. Aerospace 2022 ,9, 370. [CrossRef]
82. Krump, M.; Russ, M.; Stuetz, P . Deep learning algorithms for vehicle detection on UAV platforms: First investigations on the
effects of synthetic training. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Modelling and Simulation for Autonomous
Systems (MESAS), Palermo, Italy, 29–31 October 2019; pp. 50–70.
83. Luo, X.; Tian, X.; Zhang, H.; Hou, W.; Leng, G.; Xu, W.; Jia, H.; He, X.; Wang, M.; Zhang, J. Fast automatic vehicle detection in
UAV images using convolutional neural networks. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1994. [CrossRef]
84. Hassan, S.A.; Han, S.H.; Shin, S.Y. Real-time road cracks detection based on improved deep convolutional neural network. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), London, Canada, 3 August–
1 September 2020.
85. Chung, Q.M.; Le, T.D.; Dang, T.V .; Vo, N.D.; Nguyen, T.V .; Khang, N. Data augmentation analysis in vehicle detection from aerial
videos. In Proceedings of the RIVF International Conference on Computing and Communication Technologies (RIVF), RMIT
University. Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 14–15 October 2020; pp. 367–369.
86. Li, Y.; Chen, Y.; Yuan, S.; Liu, J.; Zhao, X.; Yang, Y.; Liu, Y. Vehicle detection from road image sequences for intelligent trafﬁc
scheduling. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2021 ,95, 107406. [CrossRef]
87. Chen, Y.; Zhao, D.; Er, M.J.; Zhuang, Y.; Hu, H. A novel vehicle tracking and speed estimation with varying UAV altitude and
video resolution. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2021 ,42, 4441–4466. [CrossRef]
88. Rampriya, R.S.; Suganya, R.; Nathan, S.; Perumal, P .S. A comparative assessment of deep neural network models for detecting
obstacles in the real time aerial railway track images. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2022 ,36, 2018184. [CrossRef]
89. Gupta, P .; Pareek, B.; Singal, G.; Rao, D.V . Edge device based military vehicle detection and classiﬁcation from UAV . Multimed.
Tools Appl. 2022 ,81, 19813–19834. [CrossRef]
90. Golyak, I.S.; Anﬁmov, D.R.; Fufurin, I.L.; Nazolin, A.L.; Bashkin, S.V .; Glushkov, V .L.; Morozov, A.N. Optical multi-band detection
of unmanned aerial vehicles with YOLO v4 convolutional neural network. In Proceedings of the SPIE Future Sensing Technologies
Conference, Electr Network, Online, 9–13 November 2020.
91. Emiyah, C.; Nyarko, K.; Chavis, C.; Bhuyan, I. Extracting vehicle track information from unstabilized drone aerial videos using
YOLOv4 common object detector and computer vision. In Proceedings of the 6th Future Technologies Conference (FTC), Electr
Network, Online, 28–29 October 2021; pp. 232–239.
92. Luo, X.; Wu, Y.; Zhao, L. YOLOD: A target detection method for UAV aerial imagery. Remote Sens. 2022 ,14, 3240. [CrossRef]
93. Feng, J.; Yi, C. Lightweight detection network for arbitrary-oriented vehicles in UAV imagery via global attentive relation and
multi-path fusion. Drones 2022 ,6, 108. [CrossRef]
94. Chen, Z.; Cao, L.; Wang, Q. YOLOv5-based vehicle detection method for high-resolution UAV images. Mob. Inf. Syst. 2022 ,2022 ,
1828848. [CrossRef]
95. Luo, X.; Wu, Y.; Wang, F. Target detection method of UAV aerial imagery based on improved YOLOv5. Remote Sens. 2022 ,14,
5063. [CrossRef]
96. Wang, X.; Zhao, Q.; Jiang, P .; Zheng, Y.; Yuan, L.; Yuan, P . LDS-YOLO: A lightweight small object detection method for dead trees
from shelter forest. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2022 ,198, 107035. [CrossRef]
97. Sun, Z.; Ibrayim, M.; Hamdulla, A. Detection of pine wilt nematode from drone images using UAV . Sensors 2022 ,22, 4704.
[CrossRef]
98. Wu, B.; Liang, A.; Zhang, H.; Zhu, T.; Zou, Z.; Yang, D.; Tang, W.; Li, J.; Su, J. Application of conventional UAV-based high-
throughput object detection to the early diagnosis of pine wilt disease by deep learning. For. Ecol. Manag. 2021 ,486, 118986.
[CrossRef]
99. Zhou, Z.; Yang, X. Pine wilt disease detection in UAV-CAPTURED images. Int. J. Robot. Autom. 2022 ,37, 37–43. [CrossRef]

==== Page 27 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 27 of 29
100. Jintasuttisak, T.; Edirisinghe, E.; Elbattay, A. Deep neural network based date palm tree detection in drone imagery. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 2022 ,192, 106560. [CrossRef]
101. Junos, M.H.; Khairuddin, A.S.M.; Thannirmalai, S.; Dahari, M. Automatic detection of oil palm fruits from UAV images using an
improved YOLO model. Visual Comput. 2022 ,38, 2341–2355. [CrossRef]
102. Khan, S.; Tufail, M.; Khan, M.T.; Khan, Z.A.; Anwar, S. Deep learning-based identiﬁcation system of weeds and crops in strawberry
and pea ﬁelds for a precision agriculture sprayer. Precis. Agric. 2021 ,22, 1711–1727. [CrossRef]
103. Zhao, J.; Yan, J.; Xue, T.; Wang, S.; Qiu, X.; Yao, X.; Tian, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Cao, W.; Zhang, X. A deep learning method for oriented and
small wheat spike detection (OSWSDet) in UAV images. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2022 ,198, 107087. [CrossRef]
104. Egi, Y.; Hajyzadeh, M.; Eyceyurt, E. Drone-computer communication based tomato generative organ counting model using YOLO
V5 and deep-sort. Agriculture 2022 ,12, 1920. [CrossRef]
105. Xie, Y.; Jiang, J.; Bao, H.; Zhai, P .; Zhao, Y.; Zhou, X.; Jiang, G. Recognition of big mammal species in airborne thermal imaging
based on YOLO V5 algorithm. Integr. Zool. 2022 ,18, 333–352. [CrossRef]
106. Priya, R.D.; Devisurya, V .; Anitha, N.; Kalaivaani, N.; Keerthana, P .; Kumar, E.A. Automated cattle classiﬁcation and counting
using hybridized mask R-CNN and YOLOv3 algorithms. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Intelligent
Systems Design and Applications (ISDA), World Wide Web, Electr Network, Online, 13–15 December 2021; pp. 358–367.
107. Ulhaq, A.; Adams, P .; Cox, T.E.; Khan, A.; Low, T.; Paul, M. Automated detection of animals in low-resolution airborne thermal
imagery. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 3276. [CrossRef]
108. Petso, T.; Jamisola, R.S., Jr.; Mpoeleng, D.; Bennitt, E.; Mmereki, W. Automatic animal identiﬁcation from drone camera based on
point pattern analysis of herd behaviour. Ecol. Inform. 2021 ,66, 101485. [CrossRef]
109. Guzel, M.; Sin, B.; Turan, B.; Kadioglu, I. Real-time detection of wild mustard ( Sinapis arvensis L.) with deep learning (YOLO-v3).
Fresenius Environ. Bull. 2021 ,30, 12197–12203.
110. Hashim, W.; Eng, L.S.; Alkawsi, G.; Ismail, R.; Alkahtani, A.A.; Dzulkiﬂy, S.; Baashar, Y.; Hussain, A. A Hybrid vegetation
detection framework: Integrating vegetation indices and convolutional neural network. Symmetry 2021 ,13, 2190. [CrossRef]
111. Idrissi, M.; Hussain, A.; Barua, B.; Osman, A.; Abozariba, R.; Aneiba, A.; Asyhari, T. Evaluating the forest ecosystem through a
semi-autonomous quadruped robot and a hexacopter UAV . Sensors 2022 ,22, 5497. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Jemaa, H.; Bouachir, W.; Leblon, B.; Bouguila, N. Computer vision system for detecting orchard trees from UAV images. In
Proceedings of the 24th ISPRS Congress on Imaging Today, Foreseeing Tomorrow, Nice, France, 6–11 June 2022; pp. 661–668.
113. dos Santos, A.; Biesseck, B.J.G.; Latte, N.; Santos, I.C.d.L.; dos Santos, W.P .; Zanetti, R.; Zanuncio, J.C. Remote detection and
measurement of leaf-cutting ant nests using deep learning and an unmanned aerial vehicle. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2022 ,198,
107071. [CrossRef]
114. Puliti, S.; Astrup, R. Automatic detection of snow breakage at single tree level using YOLOv5 applied to UAV imagery. Int. J.
Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 2022 ,112, 102946. [CrossRef]
115. Chang-Jin, S. A study on pedestrians tracking using low altitude UAV . Trans. Korean Inst. Electr. Eng. P 2018 ,67, 227–232.
116. Barisic, A.; Car, M.; Bogdan, S. Vision-based system for a real-time detection and following of UAV . In Proceedings of the
International Workshop on Research, Education and Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems (RED UAS), Cranﬁeld University,
Cranﬁeld, UK, 25–27 November 2019; pp. 156–159.
117. Li, J.-M.; Chen, C.W.; Cheng, T.-H. Estimation and tracking of a moving target by unmanned aerial vehicles. In Proceedings of the
American Control Conference (ACC), Philadelphia, PA, USA, 10–12 July 2019; pp. 3944–3949.
118. Huang, Z.-Y.; Lai, Y.-C. Image-based sense and avoid of small scale UAV using deep learning approach. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Athens, Greece, 1–4 September 2020; pp. 545–550.
119. Jin, C.-J.; Shi, X.; Hui, T.; Li, D.; Ma, K. The automatic detection of pedestrians under the high-density conditions by deep learning
techniques. J. Adv. Transp. 2021 ,2021 , 1–11. [CrossRef]
120. Zhang, X.; Li, N.; Zhang, R. An improved lightweight network MobileNetv3 Based YOLOv3 for pedestrian detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer Engineering (ICCECE), Guangzhou,
China, 15–17 January 2021; pp. 114–118.
121. Boudjit, K.; Ramzan, N. Human detection based on deep learning YOLO-v2 for real-time UAV applications. J. Exp. Theor. Artif.
Intell. 2022 ,34, 527–544. [CrossRef]
122. Shao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Chu, H.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, D.; Rao, Y. AIR-YOLOv3: Aerial Infrared Pedestrian Detection via an Improved
YOLOv3 with Network Pruning. Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 3627. [CrossRef]
123. Kainz, O.; Gera, M.; Michalko, M.; Jakab, F. Experimental solution for estimating pedestrian locations from UAV imagery. Appl.
Sci.2022 ,12, 9485. [CrossRef]
124. Kraft, M.; Piechocki, M.; Ptak, B.; Walas, K. Autonomous, onboard vision-based trash and litter detection in low altitude aerial
images collected by an unmanned aerial vehicle. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 965. [CrossRef]
125. Liao, Y.-H.; Juang, J.-G. Real-time UAV trash monitoring system. Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 1838. [CrossRef]
126. Liu, M.; Wang, X.; Zhou, A.; Fu, X.; Ma, Y.; Piao, C. UAV-YOLO: Small object detection on unmanned aerial vehicle perspective.
Sensors 2020 ,20, 2238. [CrossRef]
127. Wang, L.; Ai, J.; Zhang, L.; Xing, Z. Design of airport obstacle-free zone monitoring UAV system based on computer vision.
Sensors 2020 ,20, 2475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 28 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 28 of 29
128. Kong, H.; Chen, Z.; Yue, W.; Ni, K. Improved YOLOv4 for pedestrian detection and counting in UAV images. Comput. Intell.
Neurosci. 2022 ,2022 , 6106853. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Maharjan, N.; Miyazaki, H.; Pati, B.M.; Dailey, M.N.; Shrestha, S.; Nakamura, T. Detection of river plastic using UAV sensor data
and deep learning. Remote Sens. 2022 ,14, 3049. [CrossRef]
130. Wyder, P .M.; Chen, Y.-S.; Lasrado, A.J.; Pelles, R.J.; Kwiatkowski, R.; Comas, E.O.A.; Kennedy, R.; Mangla, A.; Huang, Z.; Hu,
X.; et al. Autonomous drone hunter operating by deep learning and all-onboard computations in GPS-denied environments.
PLoS ONE 2019 ,14, e0225092. [CrossRef]
131. Quan, A.; Herrmann, C.; Soliman, H. Project Vulture: A prototype for using drones in search and rescue operations. In Proceedings
of the 15th Annual International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), Athens, Greece, 29–31 May
2019; pp. 619–624.
132. Kashihara, S.; Wicaksono, M.A.; Fall, D.; Niswar, M. Supportive information to ﬁnd victims from aerial video in search and
rescue operation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things and Intelligence System (IoTaIS), Bali,
Indonesia, 5–7 November 2019; pp. 56–61.
133. Sambolek, S.; Ivasic-Kos, M. Automatic person detection in search and rescue operations using deep CNN detectors. IEEE Access
2021 ,9, 37905–37922. [CrossRef]
134. Arnold, R.; Abruzzo, B.; Korpela, C. Towards a heterogeneous swarm for object classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE National
Aerospace and Electronics Conference (NAECON), Dayton, OH, USA, 15–19 July 2019; pp. 139–147.
135. Jing, Y.; Ren, Y.; Liu, Y.; Wang, D.; Yu, L. Automatic extraction of damaged houses by earthquake based on improved YOLOv5: A
case study in Yangbi. Remote Sens. 2022 ,14, 382. [CrossRef]
136. Ajmera, Y.; Singh, S.P . Autonomous UAV-based target search, tracking and following using reinforcement learning and YOLOFlow.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), Khalifa University. Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 4–6 November 2020; pp. 15–20.
137. Sudholz, A.; Denman, S.; Pople, A.; Brennan, M.; Amos, M.; Hamilton, G. A comparison of manual and automated detection of
rusa deer (Rusa timorensis) from RPAS-derived thermal imagery. Wildl. Res. 2022 ,49, 46–53. [CrossRef]
138. Opromolla, R.; Inchingolo, G.; Fasano, G. Airborne visual detection and tracking of cooperative UAVs exploiting deep learning.
Sensors 2019 ,19, 4332. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Merizalde, D.; Morillo, P . Real-time social distancing detection approach using YOLO and unmanned aerial vehicles. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Smart Technologies, Systems and Applications (SmartTech-IC), Quito,
Ecuador, 1–3 December 2021; pp. 114–127.
140. Kim, D.; Liu, M.; Lee, S.; Kamat, V .R. Remote proximity proximity monitoring between mobile construction resources using
camera-mounted UAVs. Autom. Constr. 2019 ,99, 168–182. [CrossRef]
141. Hong, S.-J.; Han, Y.; Kim, S.-Y.; Lee, A.-Y.; Kim, G. Application of deep-learning methods to bird detection using unmanned aerial
vehicle imagery. Sensors 2019 ,19, 1651. [CrossRef]
142. Arola, S.; Akhlouﬁ, M.A. Vision-based deep learning for UAVs collaboration. In Proceedings of the Conference on Unmanned
Systems Technology XXI, Baltimore, MD, USA, 16–18 April 2019.
143. Zheng, R.; Yang, R.; Lu, K.; Zhang, S. A search and rescue system for maritime personnel in disaster carried on unmanned
aerial vehicle. In Proceedings of the 18th International Symposium on Distributed Computing and Applications for Business
Engineering and Science (DCABES), Wuhan, China, 8–10 November 2019; pp. 43–47.
144. Silvirianti; Shin, S.Y. UAV based search and rescue with honeybee ﬂight behavior in forest. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering (ICMRE), Rome, Italy, 16–19 February 2019; pp. 182–187.
145. Zhang, X.; Shi, Z.; Wu, Z.; Liu, J. Sea surface ships detection method of UAV based on improved YOLOv3. In Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Graphics and Image Processing (ICGIP), Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China,
12–14 October 2019.
146. Medeiros, A.C.S.; Ratsamee, P .; Orlosky, J.; Uranishi, Y.; Higashida, M.; Takemura, H. UAV target-selection: 3D pointing interface
system for large-scale environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
Xian, China, 30 May–5 June 2021; pp. 3963–3969.
147. Sarosa, M.; Muna, N.; Rohadi, E.; IOP . Detection of natural disaster victims using You Only Look Once (YOLO). In Proceedings of
the 5th Annual Applied Science and Engineering Conference (AASEC), Bandung, Indonesia, 20–21 April 2020.
148. Rizk, M.; Slim, F.; Charara, J. Toward AI-Assisted UAV for human detection in search and rescue missions. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Decision Aid Sciences and Application (DASA), Sakheer, Bahrain, 7–8 December 2021.
149. Qi, D.; Li, Z.; Ren, B.; Lei, P .; Yang, X. Detection and tracking of a moving target for UAV based on machine vision. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on Control, Automation and Robotics (ICCAR), Singapore, 23–26 April 2021; pp. 173–178.
150. Panigrahi, S.; Maski, P .; Thondiyath, A. Deep learning based real-time biodiversity analysis using aerial vehicles. In Proceedings
of the 9th International Conference on Robot Intelligence Technology and Applications (RiTA), KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea,
16–17 December 2021; pp. 401–412.
151. Wang, Z.; Zhang, X.; Li, J.; Luan, K. A YOLO-based target detection model for offshore unmanned aerial vehicle data. Sustainability
2021 ,13, 12980. [CrossRef]
152. Tanwar, S.; Gupta, R.; Patel, M.M.; Shukla, A.; Sharma, G.; Davidson, I.E. Blockchain and AI-empowered social distancing scheme
to combat COVID-19 situations. IEEE Access 2021 ,9, 129830–129840. [CrossRef]

==== Page 29 ====
Drones 2023 ,7, 190 29 of 29
153. Gromada, K.; Siemiatkowska, B.; Stecz, W.; Plochocki, K.; Wozniak, K. Real-time object detection and classiﬁcation by UAV
equipped with SAR. Sensors 2022 ,22, 2068. [CrossRef]
154. Bahhar, C.; Ksibi, A.; Ayadi, M.; Jamjoom, M.M.; Ullah, Z.; Souﬁene, B.O.; Sakli, H. Wildﬁre and Smoke Detection Using Staged
YOLO Model and Ensemble CNN. Electronics 2023 ,12, 228. [CrossRef]
155. Narayanan, P .; Borel-Donohue, C.; Lee, H.; Kwon, H.; Rao, R. A real-time object detection framework for aerial imagery using
deep neural networks and synthetic training images. In Proceedings of the Conference on Signal Processing, Sensor/Information
Fusion, and Target Recognition XXVII, Orlando, FL, USA, 16–19 April 2018.
156. Borel-Donohue, C.; Young, S.S. Image quality and super resolution effects on object recognition using deep neural networks.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Multi-Domain Operations Applications,
Baltimore, MD, USA, 15–17 April 2019.
157. Krump, M.; Stuetz, P . UAV based vehicle detection with synthetic training: Identiﬁcation of performance factors using image de-
scriptors and machine learning. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Modelling and Simulation for Autonomous
Systems (MESAS), Prague, Czech Republic, 21 October 2020; pp. 62–85.
158. Laurito, G.; Fraser, B.; Rosser, K. Airborne localisation of small UAS using visual detection: A ﬁeld experiment. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Canberra, Australia, 1–4 December 2020; pp. 1435–1443.
159. Xing, C.; Liang, X.; Yang, R. Compact one-stage object detection network. In Proceedings of the 8th IEEE International Conference
on Computer Science and Network Technology (ICCSNT), Dalian, China, 20–22 November 2020; pp. 115–118.
160. Zhang, J.; Wang, P .; Zhao, Z.; Su, F. Pruned-YOLO: Learning efﬁcient object detector using model pruning. In Proceedings of the
30th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ICANN), Bratislava, Slovakia, 14–17 September 2021; pp. 34–45.
161. Wan, X.; Yu, J.; Tan, H.; Wang, J. LAG: Layered objects to generate better anchors for object detection in aerial images. Sensors
2022 ,22, 3891. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Shen, X.; Shi, G.; Ren, H.; Zhang, W. Biomimetic vision for zoom object detection based on improved vertical grid number YOLO
algorithm. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022 ,10, 847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Jiang, C.; Ren, H.; Ye, X.; Zhu, J.; Zeng, H.; Nan, Y.; Sun, M.; Ren, X.; Huo, H. Object detection from UAV thermal infrared images
and videos using YOLO models. Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 2022 ,112, 102912. [CrossRef]
164. Jawaharlalnehru, A.; Sambandham, T.; Sekar, V .; Ravikumar, D.; Loganathan, V .; Kannadasan, R.; Khan, A.A.; Wechtaisong, C.;
Haq, M.A.; Alhussen, A.; et al. Target object detection from Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) images based on improved YOLO
algorithm. Electronics 2022 ,11, 2343. [CrossRef]
165. Liu, X.; Wu, J. Finetuned YOLOv3 for getting four times the detection speed. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Knowledge Science, Engineering, and Management (KSEM), Tokyo, Japan, 14–16 August 2021; pp. 512–521.
166. Zhang, T.; Hu, X.; Xiao, J.; Zhang, G. A Machine learning method for vision-based unmanned aerial vehicle systems to understand
unknown environments. Sensors 2020 ,20, 3245. [CrossRef]
167. Qin, Z.; Wang, W.; Dammer, K.-H.; Guo, L.; Cao, Z. Ag-YOLO: A real-time low-cost detector for precise spraying with case study
of palms. Front. Plant Sci. 2021 ,12, 2974. [CrossRef]
168. Ho, M.J. Development of small multi-copter system for indoor collision avoidance ﬂight. J. Aerosp. Syst. Eng. 2021 ,15, 102–110.
169. Xing, Z.; Zhang, L.; Ai, J. Research of key technologies for multi-rotor UAV automatic aerial recovery system. Electron. Lett. 2022 ,
58, 277–279. [CrossRef]
170. Nepal, U.; Eslamiat, H. Comparing YOLOv3, YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 for autonomous landing spot detection in faulty UAVs.
Sensors 2022 ,22, 464. [CrossRef]
171. Lalak, M.; Wierzbicki, D. Automated detection of atypical aviation obstacles from UAV images using a YOLO algorithm. Sensors
2022 ,22, 6611. [CrossRef]
172. Lu, M.; Chen, H.; Lu, P . Perception and avoidance of multiple small fast moving objects for quadrotors with only low-cost RGBD
camera. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2022 ,7, 11657–11664. [CrossRef]
173. Wang, C.-N.; Yang, F.-C.; Vo, N.T.M.; Nguyen, V .T.T. Wireless communications for data security: Efﬁciency assessment of
cybersecurity industry—A promising application for UAVs. Drones 2022 ,6, 363. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

