==== Page 1 ====
 International Journal of  
Molecular Sciences
Review
“Bridging the Gap ” Everything that Could Have Been
Avoided If We Had Applied Gender Medicine,
Pharmacogenetics and Personalized Medicine in the
Gender-Omics and Sex-Omics Era
Donato Gemmati1,2,*
, Katia Varani2,3, Barbara Bramanti2,4
, Roberta Piva2,4,
Gloria Bonaccorsi2,5
, Alessandro Trentini4
, Maria Cristina Manfrinato4, Veronica Tisato6
,
Alessandra Car è2,7
and Tiziana Bellini2,4
1Department of Biomedical & Specialty Surgical Sciences, and Centre Haemostasis & Thrombosis,
University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
2University Center for Studies on Gender Medicine, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy;
katia.varani@unife.it (K.V .); barbara.bramanti@unife.it (B.B.); roberta.piva@unife.it (R.P .);
gloria.bonaccorsi@unife.it (G.B.); alessandra.care@iss.it (A.C.); tiziana.bellini@unife.it (T.B.)
3Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy
4Department of Biomedical & Specialty Surgical Sciences, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy;
alessandro.trentini@unife.it (A.T.); mmc@unife.it (M.C.M.)
5Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, and Menopause and Osteoporosis Centre,
University of Ferrara, 44124 Ferrara, Italy
6Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, and LTTA Centre, University of Ferrara,
44121 Ferrara, Italy; veronica.tisato@unife.it
7Center for Gender-speciﬁc Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanita’ (I.S.S.), 00161 Rome, Italy
*Correspondence: d.gemmati@unife.it; Tel.: +39-0532-455-841
Received: 6 November 2019; Accepted: 30 December 2019; Published: 31 December 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Gender medicine is the ﬁrst step of personalized medicine and patient-centred care, an
essential development to achieve the standard goal of a holistic approach to patients and diseases.
By addressing the interrelation and integration of biological markers (i.e., sex) with indicators of
psychological /cultural behaviour (i.e., gender), gender medicine represents the crucial assumption
for achieving the personalized health-care required in the third millennium. However, ‘sex’ and
‘gender’ are often misused as synonyms, leading to frequent misunderstandings in those who are
not deeply involved in the ﬁeld. Overall, we have to face the evidence that biological, genetic,
epigenetic, psycho-social, cultural, and environmental factors mutually interact in deﬁning sex /gender
dierences, and at the same time in establishing potential unwanted sex /gender disparities. Prioritizing
the role of sex /gender in physiological and pathological processes is crucial in terms of e cient
prevention, clinical signs’ identiﬁcation, prognosis deﬁnition, and therapy optimization. In this
regard, the omics-approach has become a powerful tool to identify sex /gender-speciﬁc disease
markers, with potential beneﬁts also in terms of socio-psychological wellbeing for each individual,
and cost-e ectiveness for National Healthcare systems. “ Being a male or being a female ” is indeed
important from a health point of view and it is no longer possible to avoid “ sex and gender lens ”
when approaching patients. Accordingly, personalized healthcare must be based on evidence from
targeted research studies aimed at understanding how sex and gender inﬂuence health across the
entire life span. The rapid development of genetic tools in the molecular medicine approaches and
their impact in healthcare is an example of highly specialized applications that have moved from
specialists to primary care providers (e.g., pharmacogenetic and pharmacogenomic applications
in routine medical practice). Gender medicine needs to follow the same path and become an
established medical approach. To face the genetic, molecular and pharmacological bases of the
existing sex /gender gap by means of omics approaches will pave the way to the discovery and
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296; doi:10.3390 /ijms21010296 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijms

==== Page 2 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 2 of 36
identiﬁcation of novel drug-targets /therapeutic protocols, personalized laboratory tests and diagnostic
procedures (sex /gender-omics). In this scenario, the aim of the present review is not to simply resume
the state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld, rather an opportunity to gain insights into gender medicine, spanning
from molecular up to social and psychological stances. The description and critical discussion of
some key selected multidisciplinary topics considered as paradigmatic of sex /gender di erences and
sex/gender inequalities will allow to draft and design strategies useful to ﬁll the existing gap and
move forward.
Keywords: gender medicine; sex disparities; genetics /molecular biomarkers; complex diseases;
pharmacogenetics; personalized medicine; tailored drug therapy; OMICs; sexomics and genderomics
1. Introduction
The risk of experiencing a particular disease characterized by speciﬁc prognosis and outcomes
may go behind the natural history of that pathology. It may depend on disparities in prevention,
diagnosis and treatment not properly targeted in di erent gender or sexes, or both. It is to be taken into
account that sex has biological features greatly inﬂuencing any disease at molecular or epidemiological
level, potentially a ecting in turn incidence, disease course or treatment output (Figure 1). In May
2014, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) announced that researchers should account for sex
and consider it a biological variable (SABV) in NIH-funded preclinical research [1].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 2 of 37 
 of the existing sex/gender gap by means of omics approaches will pave the way to the discovery 
and identification of novel drug -targets /therapeutic protocols, personalized laboratory tests and 
diagnostic procedures (sex/gender -omics). In this scenario, the aim of the present review is not to 
simply resume the state -of-the-art in the field, rather an opportunity to gain insights into gende r 
medicine, spanning from molecular up to social and psychological stances. The description and 
critical discussion of some key selected multidisciplinary topics considered as paradigmatic of 
sex/gender differences and sex/gender inequalities will allow to  draft and design strategies useful 
to fill the existing gap and move forward.  
Keywords:  gender medicine; sex disparities; genetics/molecular biomarkers; complex diseases; 
pharmacogenetics; personalized medicine; tailored drug therapy; OMICs; sexomics and 
genderomics  
 
1. Introduction  
The risk of experiencing a particular disease characterized by specific prognosis and outcomes 
may go behind the natural history of that pathology. It may depend on disparities in prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment not properl y targeted in different gender or sexes, or both. It is to be taken 
into account that sex has biological features greatly influencing any disease at molecular or 
epidemiological level, potentially affecting in turn incidence, disease course or treatment ou tput 
(Figure 1). In May 2014, the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) announced that researchers 
should account for sex and consider it a biological variable (SABV) in NIH -funded preclinical 
research [1]. 
 
Figure 1. Modified from Global Health Estimate d 2016 (www.who.int/healthinfo/ 
global_burden_disease/en/ ). d.: disease; PD: Parkinson’s disease; Haemorr.: Haemorrhagic; CVD: 
Cardiovascular Disease; def.: deficiency; circ.: circulatory; neurol.: neurological; MS: M ultiple 
Sclerosis; AD: Alzhe imer’s Dise ase; Musculosk.: musculoskeletal.  
Sex and gender are concepts of primarily relevance in the real world, where disease morbidity, 
risk factors, onset age, clinical phenotype and treatments may strongly differ between males and 
females.  While sex refers to b iological and genetic features, gender includes roles and relationships 
Figure 1. Modiﬁed from Global Health Estimated 2016 (www.who.int /healthinfo /global_burden_
disease /en/). d.: disease; PD: Parkinson’s disease; Haemorr.: Haemorrhagic; CVD: Cardiovascular
Disease; def.: deﬁciency; circ.: circulatory; neurol.: neurological; MS: Multiple Sclerosis; AD:
Alzheimer’s Disease; Musculosk.: musculoskeletal.
Sex and gender are concepts of primarily relevance in the real world, where disease morbidity, risk
factors, onset age, clinical phenotype and treatments may strongly di er between males and females.
While sex refers to biological and genetic features, gender includes roles and relationships also related
to socio-cultural rules and participation [ 2,3]. Everybody agrees that “ being a male or being a female ”

==== Page 3 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 3 of 36
makes the di erence, not only in a medical /healthcare perspective, but also in a social, economic and
cultural vision [4].
In the past, medicine was characterized by strong androcentric connotation, and for a long time
clinical studies have been mostly performed on male patients, generating results that were merely
transferred to females [ 5–8]. Accordingly, females were just one third of the enrolled patients in clinical
trials performed between 2002 and 2007 to evaluate cardiovascular devices, and unfortunately, the
number of recruited females did not increase over time [ 9]. In another context, it has been demonstrated
that the genomic proﬁle of non-small-cell lung cancer patients had strong sex di erences in signalling
pathways [ 10], suggesting that prognostic biomarkers could be di erent and should be selectively used
depending on sex. Despite this evidence, the female counterpart itself has been involved in studies
restricted to those distinctive branches of female medicine such as gynaecology and reproductive
medicine, or particular types of cancer. Finally, male sex also prevails in preclinical studies on animals,
creating severe bias on the transposition of results to the clinical practice [ 11–13]. The prejudice leading
to the exclusion of female animals was due to their higher biological variability compared to male
animals, mainly justiﬁed by sex hormone ﬂuctuations. Though, several reports highlighted that data
coming from preclinical experimentations based on female animals are useful and reliable [14–16].
In the recent past, there has been a growing attention to sex-based di erences in biology, genetics,
biomedical sciences and general medicine, ranging from the cellular level to whole organs and
organisms. As expected, this process quickly led to the generation of new insights into diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic issues, from basic research to the clinical level [ 17]. The overall message
is indeed the one published by Nature in 2010, which summarizes old and new problems in the title
“Putting gender on the agenda” [ 18]. Starting from the fact that animals have a sex [ 19], well known
dierences in gene expression have to exist in male versus female mice [ 20]. Based on the evidence that
companies and scientists may have arbitrarily performed their preclinical tests on male models, the
Editors of Nature concluded that “Medicine as it is currently applied to women is less evidence-based
than that being applied to men” [ 18]. The increasing attention towards sex and gender, along with
the interest that emerges from this kind of aware research, are now beginning to bridge the gap [ 21].
Thanks to the increased knowledge of the molecular, genetic and epigenetic bases of complex diseases,
and thanks to the personalized pharmacogenetic approach to drug design /prescription, several diseases
are now faced in a tailored fashion [ 22,23]. However, while the inclusion of sex is a process already
underway, with evident results from both preclinical and clinical trials, the impact of gender in
medical /biomedical ﬁelds is still at an early stage, with di culties and delays due to its intrinsic
complexity. Ongoing e orts aim to include and understand the role of gender in pharmacology [ 24,25].
To date, gender-related pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic di erences have been reported with
crucial implications on drugs e ects [ 26–30]. Overall, gender-speciﬁc pre-clinical models will increase
the deﬁnition of gender-oriented therapeutic protocols, in turn accelerating the development of
gender-speciﬁc drugs and the generation of gender-oriented and evidence-based guidelines [11,31].
Further, omic-sciences o er a useful and powerful analytical option in biomedical research, helping
the discovering of novel pharmaceutical targets, bio-molecular markers in a sex /gender-oriented
perspective [ 32–34]. Sex and gender, until now merely considered as confounding variables
(e.g., “sex and age data adjustment”), are becoming crucial variables in both preclinical and clinical
studies. However, while sex has a strong and well deﬁned genetic connotation, the term ‘gender’
shows a broader nuance with di erent meanings in biomedical and social sciences and is often used
improperly as a synonymous of ‘sex’ [ 35,36]. ‘Sex’ and ‘gender’ are no longer synonyms, considering
that cell lines have one sex, preclinical models have one sex, whilst humans have both gender and sex.
In this regard, it should be emphasized the role that the European Union (EU) has in supporting
targeted projects and actions. Among these, the GenderBasic Project was created to promote gender
integration in basic research [ 37,38], whereas the EUGIM Project to establish a European Curriculum
in gender medicine. In the ﬁeld of cardiovascular disease, the EUGeneHeart Project was generated
to develop new approaches for prevention and treatment of heart failure through the analysis of

==== Page 4 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 4 of 36
genomic signalling [ 39], while the GenCAD Project aimed to improve the knowledge on sex and gender
dierences in cardiovascular and other chronic diseases [ 40]. More recently, the European Network
for Gender Medicine (EUGenMed, EUGenNet) has developed a roadmap for implementing sex and
gender concepts in biomedical and health research [ 21,41–43]. Other actions designed to contribute to
gender equality have also been implemented, including the establishment of the European Institute for
Gender Equality (EIGE, [44]).
For this review, we selected paradigmatic medical issues, in which sex is a determining factor
in symptoms, outcome, treatment e cacy, prognosis or epidemiology, to identify di erent features
not properly considered to date, and ﬁnd possible candidates to overcome the sexual gap we have
created in the past. Speciﬁcally, the most representative gaps and di erences that best characterize
the single disease or a group of them from a biological, genetic, molecular or epidemiological point
of view, and that may inﬂuence the incidence, the course of the disease or the treatment output are
addressed. Overall, we critically discuss facts and mistakes with the aim of verifying whether and what
we have learned from the past, and of ﬁlling the gap in the light of an emerging new personalized
sex/gender-omics medicine.
2. Sex Disparity in Cardiovascular Disease
Among cardiovascular diseases, acute myocardial infarction (AMI) shows signiﬁcant di erences
in occurrence rate, prognosis and e cacy of treatment between male and female patients. Improvement
in the acute treatment has led to a dramatic increasing in the number of AMI survivors among those
with damaged heart. These patients are at risk of developing severe complications, like left ventricular
remodelling (LVR) and heart failure (HF), which are still considered orphans of speciﬁc prognostic
tools and e ective dedicated treatments [ 45,46]. AMI is the most frequent cause of LVR and HF and
patients often undergo to chronic and costly therapies, very frequent re-hospitalization and poor
quality of life, with a signiﬁcant gap among the two sexes [ 9,45,46]. Recently it has been reported that
“the incidence and prevalence of coronary artery disease in women has exceeded that in men over the
past four decades” [47,48].
AMI takes place from a complex interrelationship among genetic /epigenetic and environmental
risk factors, as it was revealed by several studies of pharmacogenetics and -genomics [ 49–51],
and more extensively conﬁrmed by omics investigations [ 32,33]. In addition, a very recent study
from the Multi-Analyte, Genetic, and Thrombogenic Markers of Atherosclerosis group (MAGMA)
found that females with angina are more thrombogenic than males, and this di erence may a ect
sex-related outcomes [ 52], also on the basis of undeniable genomics di erences. Moreover, the
Genetics of Subsequent Coronary Heart Disease consortium (GENIUS-CHD) was established to
discover and validate genetic variants and biomarkers for the risk assessment of subsequent ischemic
events along with novel drug targets for secondary prevention. It is considered a ﬁrst-class
initiative able to generate extraordinary results also in the ﬁeld of sex-oriented cardiology [ 53].
Our group has contributed for a long time to the disclosure of the genetics /pharmacogenetics bases
of myocardial infarction [ 54–59], and very recently we summarized our previous e orts and patents
[US2016363592 (A1); ITTO20130532 (A1)] in a Special Issue belonging to the “Novel Molecular
Targets for Cardioprotection: The EU-Cardioprotection Cost Action (CA16225)”, which suggest useful
sex-oriented prognostic biomarkers [60].
Noteworthy, the incidence of AMI is much lower among females under the age of 50 years
compared with males, but after the menopause, the rate in females dramatically increases, approaching
that of males [ 9,61]. For this reason, oestrogens were postulated to be cardioprotective but results
coming from recent randomized clinical trials challenge this hypothesis [ 61]. In addition, sex di erences
inﬂuence AMI pathophysiology, clinical presentation and clinical outcome. In detail, the mortality rate
after one or ﬁve years is higher in females than in males, and the former more frequently experience
heart wall remodelling, failure and stroke within ﬁve years from the ﬁrst ischemic accident. This
remains the poorest outcome, even considering several concomitant situations, like di erent age at

==== Page 5 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 5 of 36
presentation, genetic risk factors and comorbidities, as demonstrated by the higher in-hospital mortality,
the readmission rate within the ﬁrst thirty days or the longer follow-up [ 9]. Interestingly, results
coming from ﬁve Italian prospective registries conducted between 2001 and 2014, concluded that age
and sex speciﬁc di erences exist in the outcome of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction
(STEMI) [ 61,62]. Regardless of age, at discharge, females are at higher risk of re-hospitalization due to
dierent causes. Strong disparities between the two sexes were conﬁrmed also after adjustment for
confounding factors [ 63]. Accordingly, the in-hospital death was 3.2% for males and 8.4% for females,
and the latter have been found signiﬁcantly associated with in-hospital mortality. Finally, females
continue to experience higher post-AMI mortality and global poorer outcome (Figure 2) also despite
the improvements in reperfusion therapy tools [ 64]. In conclusion, despite a worldwide improvement
in STEMI care, females continue to experience higher in-hospital mortality, which is not completely
unexpected, as the most fundamental cardiovascular studies are primarily based on males [9,65].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 5 of 37 
 situations, like different age at presentation, genetic risk factors and comorbidities, as demonstrated 
by the higher in -hospital mortality, the readmission rate within the first thirty days or the longer 
follow -up [9]. Interestingly, results coming from five Italian prospective registries conducted between 
2001 and 2014, concluded that age and sex specific differences exist i n the outcome of patients with 
ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) [61,62]. Regardless of age, at discharge, females are at 
higher risk of re -hospitalization due to different causes. Strong disparities between the two sexes 
were confirmed also after  adjustment for confounding factors [63]. Accordingly, the in -hospital death 
was 3.2% for males and 8.4% for females, and the latter have been found significantly associated with 
in-hospital mortality. Finally, females continue to experience higher post -AMI mortality and global 
poorer outcome (Figure 2) also despite the improvements in reperfusion therapy tools [64]. In 
conclusion, despite a worldwide improvement in STEMI care, females continue to experience higher 
in-hospital mortality, which is not comple tely unexpected, as the most fundamental cardiovascular 
studies are primarily based on males [9,65]. 
 
Figure 2. Extreme clinical phenotypes and prognosis in male and female AMI patients. The increased 
AMI risk in males is balanced by a better prognosis, r esulting in enhanced AMI outcome. Conversely, 
the reduced AMI risk in females is characterized by a worst prognosis, resulting in a poor AMI 
outcome.  
Another key element is that postmenopausal females tend to develop HF with preserved ejection 
fraction, ch aracterized by diastolic dysfunction, whereas age -matching males develop HF with 
reduced ejection fraction, characterized by systolic dysfunction [66]. These differences are important 
because most drugs used to treat HF have been developed to treat those w ith reduced ejection 
fraction, and there are few effective treatment options for HF with preserved ejection fraction [67]. It 
is also possible that the aging process affects the heart of males and females differently, so that the 
latter are predisposed to problems of myocardial relaxation, while males mainly develop pump 
failure. As a result, males and females show a completely opposite trend in terms of hospitalization 
index for HF, which increases significantly with the age of the females compared with ag e-matching 
males [68]. A recent long -term study on LVR after the first AMI reports that, of the total number of 
patients who experienced LVR after one -year follow -up (31–38% in the two cohorts of the study), 
females were significantly over -represented (43 –46.5% vs 27 –36.5% for females and males 
respectively in the two studies) [69]. These data are extremely important since both cohorts of patients 
Figure 2. Extreme clinical phenotypes and prognosis in male and female AMI patients. The increased
AMI risk in males is balanced by a better prognosis, resulting in enhanced AMI outcome. Conversely,
the reduced AMI risk in females is characterized by a worst prognosis, resulting in a poor AMI outcome.
Another key element is that postmenopausal females tend to develop HF with preserved ejection
fraction, characterized by diastolic dysfunction, whereas age-matching males develop HF with reduced
ejection fraction, characterized by systolic dysfunction [ 66]. These di erences are important because
most drugs used to treat HF have been developed to treat those with reduced ejection fraction,
and there are few e ective treatment options for HF with preserved ejection fraction [ 67]. It is also
possible that the aging process a ects the heart of males and females di erently, so that the latter are
predisposed to problems of myocardial relaxation, while males mainly develop pump failure. As a
result, males and females show a completely opposite trend in terms of hospitalization index for HF,
which increases signiﬁcantly with the age of the females compared with age-matching males [ 68]. A
recent long-term study on LVR after the ﬁrst AMI reports that, of the total number of patients who
experienced LVR after one-year follow-up (31–38% in the two cohorts of the study), females were
signiﬁcantly over-represented (43–46.5% vs 27–36.5% for females and males respectively in the two
studies) [ 69]. These data are extremely important since both cohorts of patients in that study had a

==== Page 6 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 6 of 36
very high rate of secondary prevention medications after one year (i.e., beta-blockers 90–95% and
ACE inhibitors /angiotensin II R-blockers 93–97% respectively in the two studies). Interestingly, sex
hormones are associated di erently with the morphology of the remodelled heart wall, and a more
androgenic proﬁle is responsible for a greater imbalance in the heart mass /volume ratio in females
than in males [70].
In summary, remodelling is the main determinant of survival after recovery from AMI.
Observational clinical and post-mortem /experimental studies suggest important di erences between
females and males in the cardiac remodelling observed in response to di erent types of cardiac injuries
including infarction. Recommended therapies for AMI in females are similar to those in males, but
studies indicate that females are undertreated, which lead to worse outcomes [ 9,47]. Interestingly,
during the ﬁrst few hours after AMI, complex local healing processes and inﬂammatory reactions are
crucial in determining the risk of wall remodelling. Soluble molecules, resident and circulating cells
and micro-RNAs ﬁnely mediate inﬂammation and regenerative progression by determining the fate of
the heart after the infarction [ 71–74]. Basically, imbalance in any healing process and unrestrained ECM
proteolysis cause a delayed remedy, while lasting chronic lesions in any district may a ect the normal
organ /tissue functions with consequent failure and malfunction [ 75–77]. Since these complex processes
are in part genetically determined, molecular regenerative medicine, by providing molecular predictive
indicators, might help clinicians to recognize at risk populations also in a sex- or gender-oriented
direction [ 78–81]. Reperfusion therapy and systematic use of evidence-based medications have e ects
on LVR or HF but they cannot be considered dedicated therapeutic approaches. Prognostic biomarkers
able to score cases at higher risk to develop severe post-infarction complications (i.e., females) will
allow the early identiﬁcation of patients for whom the available standard care is not adequate. It is to be
taken into account that groups of males at higher risk could also beneﬁt from personalized approaches.
Overall, there is a mandatory need for a “holistic” sex speciﬁc approach (i.e., sex-oriented
omics-investigations “sex /genderomics”), from the use of in vitro and in vivo preclinical models
up to appropriate clinical studies with well-balanced male /female ratio cohorts. This will allow
the identiﬁcation of prognostic biomarkers to e ectively counteract sex-disparities and help in
designing sex-dedicated therapies [ 82]. If appropriately addressed, these approaches will represent a
signiﬁcant improvement in the cardiovascular disease management, and the potential of sex-speciﬁc
risk stratiﬁcation tools will positively inﬂuence the worldwide National Health Care Systems.
3. Sex Disparity in Cancer
Although in the last decades very important results based on novel therapeutic approaches have
been obtained, cancer is still a major cause of death today, with an increasing incidence worldwide [ 83].
It is well known that on average men live less than women (in Italy the average age is 80.8 and 85.2
years, respectively, according to data from the National Institute of Statistics), and this di erence is
even greater in populations with a higher life expectancy [84].
Sex- and /or gender-associated di erences in cancer incidence, prognosis, response to therapy and,
eventually, survival have been fully reported with epidemiological data that show, with few exceptions
(i.e., thyroid carcinoma), a general female advantage [ 85]. According to the Italian Cancer Registry
(AIRTUM), one in two men and one in three women have an average lifetime risk of developing cancer,
while one in three men and one in six women a mean probability of dying from cancer. However, at
present, few data exist on the mechanisms underlying these disparities. Among the key factors, we
primarily should consider the roles of sex chromosomes, sex hormones and immune responses.
Looking at di erences between female XX and male XY cells, evidence based data showed that
female cells have higher capabilities to overcome cellular stress through the induction of protective
mechanisms, like autophagy, and more antioxidant defenses than male cells [ 86]. In addition, the
random inactivation of one X-chromosome in each single female cell leads to mosaicism and in
turn to the advantages associated with genetic heterogeneity. Theoretically, inactivation should
balance the expression of X-linked genes between men and women; practically it is incomplete with

==== Page 7 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 7 of 36
a signiﬁcant amount of genes escaping this process to rate greater than 15% of the total. In fact, the
presence of mutations in tumour suppressor genes on a single allele, by retaining two functional
copies, might represent a protective mechanism [ 87]. It is important to note that the X-chromosome
is signiﬁcantly enriched for immune-related microRNAs whose deregulation has been associated
with the pathogenesis of many kinds of cancers. Recent data reported the identiﬁcation of nearly
120 microRNAs on the X-chromosome, in contrast to the four found on the Y-chromosome, whereas
autosomes on average contain 40-50 of them. These small non coding RNAs (20–25 nt long), acting as
post-transcriptional regulators of the gene expression, represent a really powerful regulatory system.
Since the X-chromosome is enriched also for immune-related coding genes, the option of sex-associated
functional loops can also be hypothesized [88].
Considering the role of sex hormones, oestrogens and androgens have been shown to modulate
immune responses, resulting in a di erent gender susceptibility to diseases [ 89]. Indeed, female immune
functions and responses are generally higher than in males, on one side sustaining a stronger immune
response against infections, on the other increasing susceptibility to develop autoimmune diseases [ 90].
Many important examples of cancer-associated gender di erences have been reported, and among
them we can highlight colorectal and bladder cancer as well as melanoma [ 91,92]. Colorectal cancer,
the third most common cancer in the world, is characterized by sex- and gender-speciﬁc di erences,
since women appear more prone than men to develop right-sided colon cancer, a more aggressive
form of this neoplasia. Interestingly, right and left localized tumours are associated with di erent
molecular abnormalities, i.e., microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF mutations are often observed in
right-sided colon cancer, whereas chromosomal instability and p53 mutations are more frequent in
left-sided tumours. Besides anatomic and physiological di erences of the colon (longer transverse
colon in women), hormonal factors might underlie the observed di erences, since oestrogen appears
to be a protective factor against MSI, as suggested by the increased risk of MSI-high colon cancer in
older women and by the reduced risk in postmenopausal women undergoing hormone replacement
therapy [93,94]. In addition, socio-cultural disparities, as dietary factors, should be considered.
Gender discrepancy also exists in the incidence of bladder carcinoma, the fourth most common
cancer in men and the seventeenth in women worldwide (Figure 3). However, women are more prone
to both recurrence and progression of the disease. One explanation could rely on di erences of female
and male anatomic sites: the higher frequency of infections (e.g., cystitis) in women might cause
delayed diagnoses with negative e ects on prognosis and quality of life. In addition, gender-associated
speciﬁcities, such as smoking habits and occupational risk factors, may play a role [95].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 7 of 37 
 signific ant amount of genes escaping  this process to rate greater than 15% of the total. In fact, the 
presence of mutations in tumour suppressor genes on a single allele, by retaining two functional 
copies, might represent a protective mechanism [87]. It is import ant to note that the X -chromosome 
is significantly enriched for immune -related microRNAs whose deregulation has been associated 
with the pathogenesis of many kinds of cancers. Recent data reported the identification of nearly 120 
microRNAs on the X -chromos ome, in contrast to the four found on the Y -chromosome, whereas 
autosomes on average contain 40 -50 of them. These small non coding RNAs (20 –25 nt long), acting 
as post -transcriptional regulators of the gene expression, represent a really powerful regulator y 
system. Since the X -chromosome is enriched also for immune -related coding genes, the option of sex -
associated functional loops can also be hypothesized [88]. 
Considering the role of sex hormones, oestrogens and androgens have been shown to modulate 
immun e responses, resulting in a different gender susceptibility to diseases [89]. Indeed, female 
immune functions and responses are generally higher than in males, on one side sustaining a stronger 
immune response against infections, on the other increasing su sceptibility to develop autoimmune 
diseases [90]. Many important examples of cancer -associated gender differences have been reported, 
and among them we can highlight colorectal and bladder cancer as well as melanoma [91,92]. 
Colorectal cancer, the third mo st common cancer in the world, is characterized by sex - and gender -
specific differences, since women appear more prone than men to develop right -sided colon cancer, 
a more aggressive form of this neoplasia. Interestingly, right and left localized tumours a re associated 
with different molecular abnormalities, i.e. , microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF  mutations are 
often observed in right -sided colon cancer, whereas chromosomal instability and p53 mutations are 
more frequent in left -sided tumours. Besid es anatomic and physiological differences of the colon 
(longer transverse colon in women), hormonal factors might underlie the observed differences, since 
oestrogen appears to be a protective factor against MSI, as suggested by the increased risk of MSI -
high colon cancer in older women and by the reduced risk in postmenopausal women undergoing 
hormone replacement therapy [93,94]. In addition, socio -cultural disparities, as dietary factors, 
should be considered.  
Gender discrepancy also exists in the incidenc e of bladder carcinoma, the fourth most common 
cancer in men and the seventeenth in women worldwide (Figure 3). However, women are more 
prone to both recurrence and progression of the disease. One explanation could rely on differences 
of female and male an atomic sites: the higher frequency of infections (e.g. , cystitis) in women might 
cause delayed diagnoses with negative effects on prognosis and quality of life. In addition, gender -
associated specificities, such as smoking habits and occupational risk fact ors, may play a role [95]. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic picture showing key examples of sex and gender disparities in cancer.  
Figure 3. Schematic picture showing key examples of sex and gender disparities in cancer.

==== Page 8 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 8 of 36
Finally, we should focus on cutaneous melanoma, which show better results in women compared
with men [ 96]. Although male /female incidence ratios vary widely across continents, the female
survival advantage has been reported very consistently everywhere and gender remains an independent
prognostic indicator after adjustment for thickness and body sites. Di erences in detection might be
explained by the known gender di erences in the body-site distribution: more truncal melanomas
in males and limb localization in females. Furthermore, men are less likely to engage in preventive
actions. Since cancer is the result of failed immune surveillance, the divergent e ects of male and
female sex hormones on anticancer immunity could contribute to the higher cancer incidence and
poorer outcome in men, particularly in highly antigenic tumours like melanoma [ 97]. In recent
years, several immunological therapies have been approved for di erent types of tumour, initially
based on blocking antibodies against the programmed death receptor-1 (PD1) or its ligand PDL1.
These target molecules are expressed on T-lymphocytes and on tumour cells and the receptor-ligand
binding interferes with T cell-mediated responses. Treatments with immune checkpoint inhibitors
(now developed against many other surface markers), impairing the receptor-ligand binding and the
consequent inhibitory response, promote the T-cell activation. A number of meta-analyses, run to
evaluate the e cacy of these inhibitors, showed a certain degree of heterogeneity between men and
women. The immune checkpoint inhibitors can improve the overall survival for patients with advanced
cancers, particularly melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancer, and the extent of the beneﬁt appears
sex-dependent. Unexpectedly, despite the overall strong female immune responses, the results derived
from clinical trials indicated a smaller beneﬁt for women [ 98,99]. A review paper analysing over 11,000
patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors (i.e., ipilimumab, tremelimumab, nivolumab,
or pembrolizumab) in twenty randomized controlled trials, evidenced that the overall survival was
consistently higher for men than for women, regardless of cancer histotype, line of treatment and type
of administered drug [ 99]. Further analysis, focused on phase III RCTs of ICIs e cacy in advanced
cancers, conﬁrmed the more favourable outcomes in men than in women, particularly with anti-CTLA-4
agents [ 100]. Even though the biological evidences behind the di erent e cacy in the two sexes are
still lacking, we could suppose that the female immune system has per se a strong e ect in determining
the anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD1 e cacy, thus possibly limiting the e ect of other variables. Although
we could note that the expression of PD-L1 appears to be directly or indirectly controlled by several
X-linked microRNAs [ 101], the suggested role of PD-L1 expression level as a predictive biomarker of
ecacy is quite controversial [102].
In conclusion, it is absolutely relevant that preclinical studies use animals of both sexes to
investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying cancer development and progression. Further, sex
and gender should be considered in clinical trials for more accurate diagnosis, correct stratiﬁcation of
patients and proper therapies. In the era of precision medicine, the goal will be to identify molecular
drivers, possibly di erent in males and females, to predict responders and non-responders and select
the best therapeutic action for each one. According to the recently approved Italian law 3 /2018, for
“Diusion and Application of Gender-speciﬁc Medicine in the National Health Service”, sex and /or
gender should be included in all the health care aspects, hopefully through new speciﬁc guidelines.
4. Sex Disparity in Neurodegenerative Disorders
Sex di erences exist in neurological and neurodegenerative diseases, and epidemiological studies
clearly indicate that both frequency and symptoms presentation have a dimorphic behaviour. The
most evident examples are represented by multiple sclerosis (MS), Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and
Parkinson’s disease, the ﬁrst two with a higher prevalence in females, the latter with a higher frequency
in males [ 103]. It has been established that sex di erences start during neurodevelopment and continue
throughout the growth, a ecting brain morphology and neuronal connectivity [ 104]. As such, sex
dierences may also reveal a di erential vulnerability towards neurodegenerative disorders, thus
providing the premises for the observed sex-based unbalanced frequency and severity. Neurological
and neurodegenerative disorders are characterised by di erent clinical phenotypes, pathogenesis,

==== Page 9 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 9 of 36
clinical onset and progression, they nonetheless share common patterns like the role of speciﬁc genetic
factors, the impact of gonadal hormones and the role of neuro-inﬂammatory processes /mediators.
Here, we will report on the progression of sex-oriented studies on the two major neurological disorders,
MS and AD.
4.1. Sex Disparity in Multiple Sclerosis
MS can be considered a prototypical sex-dimorphic neurodegenerative disease where (mainly
unknown) genetic and epigenetic factors may interact with environment and sex hormones to increase
disease susceptibility and progression (Figure 4) [ 105]. MS is a chronic inﬂammatory disease of the
central nervous system (CNS) with a supposed autoimmune base and unknown aetiology characterized,
in its more frequent form, by relapsing-remitting (RR) attacks [ 106]. These attacks represent a sequence
of events of inﬂammation, demyelination and axonal damage that recur over time and lead to variable
spectra of neurological symptoms and signs [ 107]. International literature conﬁrms the evidence that
MS is more frequent in females than in males with a ratio of nearly 3:1 and an earlier onset of the
disease, although males generally have a more progressive course and greater disability [104].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 9 of 37 
 like the role of specific genetic factors, the impact of gonadal hormones and the role of neuro -
inflammatory processes/mediators. Here, we will report on the progression of sex -oriented studies 
on the two major neurological disorders, MS and AD.  
4.1. Sex Disparity in Multiple Sclerosis  
MS can be considered a prototypical sex -dimorphic neurodegenerative disease where (mainly 
unknown) genetic and epigenetic factors may interact with  environment and sex hormones to 
increase disease susceptibility and progression (Figure 4) [105]. MS is a chronic inflammatory disease 
of the central nervous system (CNS) with a supposed autoimmune base and unknown aetiology 
characterized, in its more fre quent form, by relapsing -remitting (RR) attacks [106]. These attacks 
represent a sequence of events of inflammation,  demyelination and axonal damage that recur over 
time and lead to variable spectra of neurological symptoms and signs [107]. International l iterature 
confirms the evidence that MS is more frequent in females than in males with a ratio of nearly 3:1 and 
an earlier onset of the disease, although males generally have a more progressive course and greater 
disability [104]. 
 
Figure 4. Factors con curring to different MS risk in females with respect to males. Genetics (e.g. , HLA -
DRB1*1501 allele), epigenetics (e.g. , TLR7, CD40L, FoxP3), environment (e.g. , smoking and Vitamin 
D deficiency) and sex hormones (e.g. , oestradiol, progesterone, oestradiol and testosterone).  
The role of sex hormones in MS has been underlined in several studies, in which the most evident 
example is the so called “pregnancy effect”. Although the mechanisms are still far from clear, it has 
been observed that the symptoms decrea se during pregnancy, in correlation with increased levels of 
progesterone, oestradiol and estriol, thus returning to the previous stage of the disease or even to a 
worse stage after delivery, when the hormones revert to the basal condition [108]. This is n ot 
surprising since several observations confirmed the modulatory actions of sex hormones on immune 
cells [104,105], which is of paramount importance considering their role in MS pathogenesis. Indeed, 
immune cells mediate both neuro -inflammation and partly  axonal damage, the two main disease 
hallmarks leading to disease progression and increased patients’ disability. Basically, MS patients 
exhibit an impaired Blood Brain Barrier (BBB), which indicates infiltration of leukocyte into the CNS, 
reflecting in in creased circulating levels of active Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) [109–111]. The 
same is true for pro -inflammatory cytokines, which are found to be deranged and increased both in 
blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of MS patients compared to controls [112,113]. Similarly, 
biomarkers of axonal damage, in particular the neurofilament light subunit (NfL), are significantly 
higher in patients with MS and other neurodegenerative disorders [114–116]. 
Figure 4. Factors concurring to di erent MS risk in females with respect to males. Genetics (e.g.,
HLA-DRB1*1501 allele), epigenetics (e.g., TLR7, CD40L, FoxP3), environment (e.g., smoking and
Vitamin D deﬁciency) and sex hormones (e.g., oestradiol, progesterone, oestradiol and testosterone).
The role of sex hormones in MS has been underlined in several studies, in which the most evident
example is the so called “pregnancy e ect”. Although the mechanisms are still far from clear, it has
been observed that the symptoms decrease during pregnancy, in correlation with increased levels
of progesterone, oestradiol and estriol, thus returning to the previous stage of the disease or even
to a worse stage after delivery, when the hormones revert to the basal condition [ 108]. This is not
surprising since several observations conﬁrmed the modulatory actions of sex hormones on immune
cells [ 104,105], which is of paramount importance considering their role in MS pathogenesis. Indeed,
immune cells mediate both neuro-inﬂammation and partly axonal damage, the two main disease
hallmarks leading to disease progression and increased patients’ disability. Basically, MS patients
exhibit an impaired Blood Brain Barrier (BBB), which indicates inﬁltration of leukocyte into the CNS,
reﬂecting in increased circulating levels of active Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs) [ 109–111]. The
same is true for pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, which are found to be deranged and increased both
in blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) of MS patients compared to controls [ 112,113]. Similarly,

==== Page 10 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 10 of 36
biomarkers of axonal damage, in particular the neuroﬁlament light subunit (NfL), are signiﬁcantly
higher in patients with MS and other neurodegenerative disorders [114–116].
Despite the evident importance of the aforementioned biomarkers in MS physiopathology, the
possible dualistic inﬂuence of sex on the MS features in relation to their levels is still largely unexplored.
This is particularly evident for MMPs, for which the paucity of in vivo studies have only examined
cohorts of patients without MS, despite the undisputed importance of these enzymes in the disease [ 110].
The few studies on MS reported an upregulation of MMP-9 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) of females with the RR form [ 117] and a decreased expression of MMP-9 following treatment
with estriol in the preclinical model of the disease [ 118]. Currently, there is only one in vivo study
showing for the ﬁrst time increased cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) concentration of MMP-1 in females
with MS [ 119]. Because of the paucity of data, it is evident that several gaps and controversies
still exist in literature; therefore, more e ort should be put in this ﬁeld in order to discover novel
sex-speciﬁc biomarker patterns related to MS. Nonetheless, the few in vitro studies conducted so
far suggest that estriol, and in general female hormones, modulates MMPs more likely through an
indirect interference with downstream cascades (e.g., by activating /inhibition NfKB, AP-1 and STAT
transcription factors) mediated by interleukins (ILs) [ 120]. Contrariwise, information about a possible
inﬂuence of androgens on MMPs production from immune cells is still lacking. The aforementioned
connection is all the more important considering the involvement of cytokines derangement in MS.
Indeed, several works suggest that both female and male sex hormones have tremendous e ects on the
response and development of peripheral immune cells, depending on the type of receptor stimulated
and the origin of cells. For instance, a low concentration of the main oestrogen 17 -estradiol (E2)
seems to promote pro-inﬂammatory response. However, a high or supra-physiological concentration
of oestrogens inhibits pro-inﬂammatory responses, an e ect that is probably mediated by interferences
with collateral signalling cascades activated by the receptor [ 121]. Of note, the e ect of oestrogens
on immune cells is complex since their actions could be mediated by oestrogen receptors (ER) ER 
and ER, showing di erent outcomes based on the one stimulated [ 122]. Conversely, androgens seem
to play a positive role in the development and function of the innate immune cells, with a general
inhibitory action on adaptive immune cells [ 123]. Finally, androgens have been shown to inhibit the
Th1 di erentiation of CD4 +cells, a type of cells strictly related to MS [ 121]. These evidences were
also translated to MS with a pilot study showing that the treatment of PBMCs with estriol shifted
the T-cell phenotype from a Th1 proﬁle towards a more predominant Th2 phenotype [ 124]. This was
not the only observation of a sex bias on the cytokine levels in MS. Other studies found an impaired
response of females to myelin peptides (proteolipid protein peptides, PLP), with a stronger release of
IFN-but no secretion of IL-5 when compared to males, suggesting a skewed Th1 phenotype [ 125].
However, other studies found contrasting results, reporting no signiﬁcant sex di erences in some
cytokines (IFN- , IL-2, TNF-, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13). Though, females demonstrated a more predominant
pro-inﬂammatory proﬁle [ 126,127]. In addition, changes in secretion of cytokines were found to
be disease-phase dependent and a ected by sex: female patients compared to males have higher
pro-inﬂammatory cytokine levels in the progressive phase and lower levels in the relapsing phase [ 126].
Taken together, these evidences conﬁrm that the immune system is strongly inﬂuenced by sex and may
play an important role in determining the “gender gap” characteristic of MS, although the cause is
more likely to be multifactorial [128].
Finally, although still in its infancy, several lines of evidence are accumulating on the sex-based
dierences in axonal damage biomarkers in MS, particularly for the neuroﬁlament light chain (NfL).
Indeed, the most recent data coming from a meta-analysis published in 2019 [ 116], which included
more than 1600 MS patients (both RR and progressive), found that males had higher CSF levels of NfL
than females, an observation that was also reported for other neurological conditions like Alzheimer’s
disease [ 129]. Other relatively small single centre studies were unable to conﬁrm the sex inﬂuence on
NfL concentrations [ 130,131], yet some of these studies measured NfL in serum not considering CSF.
Although the employed assays are virtually the same and it has been reported a strong correlation

==== Page 11 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 11 of 36
between serum and CSF NfL levels [ 132], we cannot rule out that possible sex-related di erences
may primarily exist in brain with higher e ects on CSF rather than at systemic level. In addition,
the reduced sample size may also have weakened the statistical power to identify the rather small
eect size of sex (CSF male /female ratio for NfL mean values in untreated RR patients: 1.16; 95%
CI, 1.06-1.27) [ 116]. Nonetheless, the higher NfL values in male MS patients might in part explain
why they are characterized by more aggressive progression of disease and symptoms compared to
females, suggesting that the axonal damage may be more prominent in males. However, the same
pattern observed in healthy males may indicate that this peculiar characteristic is not speciﬁc to the
disease, but rather a sex-based biological feature [ 116]. Finally, brain iron homeostasis is known to
be disturbed in MS, and several genetic studies conﬁrmed di erent distributions of common gene
variant in MS subtypes and in sex [ 133,134]. Rare variants and variations in copy number were also
detected [135,136], as well as altered microRNA expression or dysregulated RNA splicing [137–139].
In conclusion, in vitro studies to explain the possible molecular mechanisms responsible for
the inﬂuence of sex hormone on axonal damage and biomarkers are still lacking. Our analysis
clearly highlights the existence of a knowledge gap responsible for the prevailing disparities in
neurodegenerative disorders. Accordingly, the scientiﬁc community is strongly pursuing this task in
order to achieve the ultimate goal of dedicated and personalized diagnosis and treatment of MS.
4.2. Sex Disparity in Alzheimer’s Disease
The worldwide picture of dementia is dramatically impressive, reporting about 50 million
people with cognitive and related functional disability which results in the ﬁfth leading cause of
death, according to data of WHO [ 140]. It has been estimated that more than one hundred million
people will globally experience dementia in 2050, with massive social and economic impact that
asks for straightforward interventions aimed at reducing this picture by improving and optimizing
earlier diagnosis and personalized treatments [ 140,141]. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a multifactorial
neurodegenerative disease and it represents the main form of dementia a ecting patients, accounting
for up to 80% of all cases in which sex, genetic, intellectual, as well as psychosocial factors might
play a role in favouring cognitive decline [ 142]. Of note, genetic susceptibility and intellectual /social /
psychosocial dynamics may di erentially a ect the cognitive decline onset and progression, with
crucial e ects on diagnosis time, prognosis and e cacy of therapeutic approaches [ 143]. Overall,
epidemiological studies highlight that females are at greater risk of dementia compared to males,
with a two-fold higher risk of AD [ 144–146], and although the risk of vascular dementia (the second
most common type of dementia accounting for 15–20% of cases [ 147]) is lower than in males, females
experience a more severe clinical phenotype [ 148]. The higher life-expectancy of females compared
to males makes nonetheless di cult to ﬁnd clear associations with the increased risk experienced by
females, that may also be a ected by additional factors like access to education and social or economic
status [143].
Several genetic contributors to the AD risk have been identiﬁed, including gene mutations,
splice variants, or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) [ 149]. Among the strongest genetic factor
involved in AD, the E4 allele of the Apolipoprotein E gene ( APOE ), has been deeply investigated and
it is now widely recognized as the strongest genetic factor in determining AD risk in the common
late-onset form [ 150]. Its involvement in other forms of dementia is now also emerging [ 151–154].
Subjects carrying the APOE -"4 allele are at higher risk in the overall population, while sex speciﬁc
analyses showed that females experience a more severe clinical phenotype and are at higher risk to
convert and progress from mild cognitive impairment towards the more severe AD [ 155,156]. Similarly,
variants of the oestrogen receptor -gene (ESR1) have been found involved in sex-speciﬁc delay of
the onset of AD in females [ 157]. Gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in AD signiﬁcantly
contribute to the di erent risk in speciﬁc groups of patients. In this respect, AD and other types of
cognitive impairment share the imbalance /alteration of the homeostasis of iron and lipids involved
in the reported sex-di erences. Iron and cholesterol accumulation has a strong inﬂuence on AD.

==== Page 12 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 12 of 36
Accordingly, associated gene variants might be appealing candidate for risk and disease progression
assessment. In this scenario, our group recently demonstrated that established genetic risk factors, like
the di erent APOE -alleles, might be a ected by key genetic backgrounds, making patients di erently
able to manage local iron accumulation [ 158] (Figure 5). Studies focused on the link between iron
and lipid homeostasis [ 159–162] conﬁrmed that the two pathways might share more than expected.
Accordingly, by extensive investigation of common iron-regulating gene variants, a new mechanism
of gene-gene interaction between iron genes and genes involved in the cholesterol metabolism by
APOE -HFE has been proposed, paving the way to translational pharmacogenetic studies focused on
the optimal tune of brain iron burden [ 163]. In this line, it has been found that also among other
common cognitive diseases, males showed signiﬁcantly higher peripheral iron levels compared to
females. Conversely, among AD patients, females reached males levels, suggesting that the APOE -gene
might be the key determinant in the processes of iron deposit in the brain, thus di erently contribute
to cognitive decline in the two sexes.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 12 of 37 
 share more than expected. Accordingly, by extensive investigation of common iron -regul ating gene 
variants, a new mechanism of gene -gene interaction between iron genes and genes involved in the 
cholesterol metabolism by APOE -HFE has been proposed,  paving the way to translational 
pharmacogenetic studies focused on the optimal tune of brain ir on burden [163]. In this line, it has 
been found that also among other common cognitive diseases, males showed significantly higher 
peripheral iron levels compared to females. Conversely, among AD patients, females reached males 
levels, suggesting that the  APOE -gene might be the key determinant in the processes of iron deposit 
in the brain, thus differently contribute to cognitive decline in the two sexes.  
 
Figure 5. Snapshot of key risk factors for the development of AD and other types of dementia.  
Fluctu ations of oestrogen levels during perimenopause to menopause transition have been also 
suggested to be responsible for the increased AD risk experienced by menopausal females [164]. In 
this regard, different APOE  genotypes have been reported to be differen tly responsive to oestrogens 
replacement treatment. Females carrying the APOE -ε4 allele showed the worst cognitive decline 
compared to untreated APOE -ε4 females, while APOE -ε2/3 females reported clinical improvements 
during oestrogen replacement therapy [165,166]. Accordingly, it has been recently suggested that 
different mechanism s, ranging from interactions between oestrogen receptors and ApoE to metabolic 
changes mediated by oestrogens might differentially affect APOE -carrier females [167]. Overall, 
oestrogen levels and oestrogen -based replacement therapies (including gender -transition therapies) 
will need to be carefully considered in the light of the APOE  carrier status to prevent undesired brain 
disorders and cognitive decline.  
Although accumulation/deposition of amyloid -beta (Aβ) peptides and neurofibrillary tangles 
are the main hallmarks of AD, neuroinflammatory markers are receiving growing attention as direct 
mediators of the disease and as potential modulatory factors able to synergize with  Aβ pathways in 
driving the disease progression [168]. 
In a recent work, Belloy and colleagues addressed the overall role of APOE 4 in AD, concluding 
that its pleiotropic nature asks for integrated and synergistic studies, perhaps on extreme clinical 
phenotypes, contextually addressin g neurologic, cardiovascular, and lipid driven inflammatory 
traits of the disease [150]. More efforts to better identify key pathways and molecular mechanisms 
underlying onset and progression of cognitive decline should be made also in the view of  the ongo ing 
Figure 5. Snapshot of key risk factors for the development of AD and other types of dementia.
Fluctuations of oestrogen levels during perimenopause to menopause transition have been also
suggested to be responsible for the increased AD risk experienced by menopausal females [ 164]. In
this regard, di erent APOE genotypes have been reported to be di erently responsive to oestrogens
replacement treatment. Females carrying the APOE -"4 allele showed the worst cognitive decline
compared to untreated APOE -"4 females, while APOE -"2/3 females reported clinical improvements
during oestrogen replacement therapy [ 165,166]. Accordingly, it has been recently suggested
that di erent mechanisms, ranging from interactions between oestrogen receptors and ApoE to
metabolic changes mediated by oestrogens might di erentially a ectAPOE -carrier females [ 167].
Overall, oestrogen levels and oestrogen-based replacement therapies (including gender-transition
therapies) will need to be carefully considered in the light of the APOE carrier status to prevent
undesired brain disorders and cognitive decline.
Although accumulation /deposition of amyloid-beta (A ) peptides and neuroﬁbrillary tangles
are the main hallmarks of AD, neuroinﬂammatory markers are receiving growing attention as direct

==== Page 13 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 13 of 36
mediators of the disease and as potential modulatory factors able to synergize with A pathways in
driving the disease progression [168].
In a recent work, Belloy and colleagues addressed the overall role of APOE 4 in AD, concluding
that its pleiotropic nature asks for integrated and synergistic studies, perhaps on extreme clinical
phenotypes, contextually addressing neurologic, cardiovascular, and lipid driven inﬂammatory traits of
the disease [ 150]. More e orts to better identify key pathways and molecular mechanisms underlying
onset and progression of cognitive decline should be made also in the view of the ongoing ageing
process of the worldwide population. The observation that dementia and CVD share common
metabolic risk factors including inﬂammation, oxidative stress and lipids, a ecting in turn both brain
and myocardium [ 158,169–172], encouraged proteomic studies aimed at recognizing sex di erences of
the molecular signature of these complex diseases [ 173–176]. In conclusion, the comprehension of the
molecular bases of the observed sex-di erences in neurological disorders would improve by including
both female and male animals in preclinical studies focused on brain OMICS change investigations [ 177].
The recognition that biological and genetic factors may be responsible for sex-related increased risk
does not make dementia or AD a sex-speciﬁc disease but rather ask for new sex /gender oriented
investigations and pharmacological studies.
5. Sex Disparity in Bone Homeostasis Diseases
A large number of studies have considered pathologies a ecting bone, which are numerous
and extremely heterogeneous. Bone is a highly dynamic tissue, constantly undergoing to catabolic
and anabolic processes to maintain its ﬂexibility and adapt to the demands of the organism for
growth, mechanical loading and mineral balance [ 178]. Bone homeostasis is due to the opposite and
complementary action of bone-forming cells (osteoblasts, OBs) and bone-resorbing cells (osteoclasts,
OCs). Their synergy is implemented in a functional anatomic structure known as the basic multicellular
unit (BMU) [ 179,180]. A considerable body of literature describes the e ects of imbalances in the
formation or resorption of bone, which may give rise to various diseases characterized by di erent levels
of bone-remodelling cycle impairment, like osteoporosis, Paget’s disease and osteopetrosis [ 178,181].
The knowledge on the mechanisms underlying the formation and maintenance of bone is rapidly
increasing, as well as the development of target therapeutic strategies against bone pathologies and
skeletal degeneration [ 178,182,183]. However, extensive investigations are hampered by the limited
accessibility of bone tissue, its mineralized nature, as well as by the complexity of the molecular aspects
of bone turnover processes. As a result, not much work has been done to explore the role of sex /gender
in the pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of bone diseases. Many critical issues
remain open and further research is needed to address emerging new challenges in this ﬁeld, and to
identify relevant therapeutic targets.
Currently, the most relevant approach to this complex thematic considers the numerous variables
that may a ect the physio-pathological bone microenvironment, namely:
 the heterogeneity of the cell population: osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and osteocytes are the primary
cells responsible for bone remodelling, yet other cells play a signiﬁcant role, included their progeny,
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), cells of the immune system, mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC),
adipocytes, endothelial cells and cells of the perivascular niche [178,184];
 the exposure over time to di erent combinations and doses of soluble molecules (nutrients and
hormones) [178,183,185,186];
 the di erences in the control of energy homeostasis [183,187];
 the signals that inﬂuence the MSC di erentiation, not only in the osteoblasts, but also in the
adipocytes, chondrocytes, and muscle cells [187–189];
 the cellular adaption to mechanical signals [190].
This complex picture is further complicated since all these variables are inﬂuenced by the age, but
also by sex /gender. Structural deterioration of bone tissue may be due to loss of bone mass (osteopenia,

==== Page 14 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 14 of 36
osteoporosis) [ 191–193], or to an abnormal bone density increase (osteopetrosis, Paget’s disease,
poisoning) [ 194,195]. Both occurrences, for di erent reasons (genetic, metabolic, primary, secondary,
etc.), lead to bone fragility and to an increased risk of fractures in females as in males [ 196–198]. Sex
hormones, oestrogens and androgens, inﬂuence the growth and the maintenance of the bones and are
responsible for sexual dimorphisms [ 178,199]. An extensive crosstalk between sex steroids and growth
factors such as IGF-1 and GH has been described, as well as their participation in the transduction of
mechanical signals in bone [ 200–202]. A decline in the circulating levels of these hormones leads to loss
of bone mass and functionality [ 200]. Qualitative and quantitative deﬁciencies drive the development
of osteoporosis, which is the most common pathology a ecting the bone [ 191–193]. This condition is
correlated to physiological aging, being prevalent in particular in post-menopausal women [ 191,203],
but can also occur as a consequence of pharmacologic treatment [ 197,203], or of feminizing hormone
therapy in transsexual men [ 204,205]. Often mistakenly considered a female disease, osteoporotic
fractures a ect one in ﬁve men over the age of 50, and this number is set to increase dramatically as
people around the world are ageing [ 198]. Evidence recently proposed shows that men are becoming
the “weaker sex” in terms of death and disability caused by osteoporosis; the health-care systems
simply disregard their bone health [ 198]. To date, osteoporosis in men remains underdiagnosed and
underestimated. E orts to reduce sex-disparities regarding osteoporosis are becoming imperative not
only to improve the quality of life of the male sex, but also of the transsexual adults [198,204,205].
A further challenge is represented by exploring the functional interactions between bone-related
diseases and molecular biomarkers and networks. Accordingly, omics studies (transcriptomics,
epigenomics, proteomics and metabolomics) performed on the human bone may reveal valuable sex
distinctive changes [ 206,207]. Thus, scientists and physicians who deal with skeletal disorders cannot
ignore anymore sex /gender-omics in both preclinical research and medical clinical trials.
6. Sex Disparity in Osteoporosis Risk and Prevention
Sex is a known key clinical risk factor for involutional osteoporosis, second in importance only to
aging. Oestrogen dependent menopausal bone loss is usually more critical in the spine rather than in
the hip and total body. Trabecular bone is lost by perforation with complete loss of trabeculae leading
to increased trabecular spacing; cortical bone is lost as a result of unbalanced intracortical remodelling,
which increases cortical microporosity, enlarge the intracortical canal surfaces and reduce cortical bone
accrual at the periosteum. With advancing age, trabecular bone loss declines because the trabeculae
disappear and the cortical bone loss become predominant.
In men, the gradual reduction in levels of sexual steroid hormones leads to a bone loss characterized
by reduced bone formation associated with modest increases in bone resorption, which causes a
progressive thinning of the trabeculae. Cortical bone loss in man is delayed over time compared to
women, determining a smaller microstructural deterioration and, consequently, lower reduction in
bone mineral density and a higher fracture risk at an older age [208,209].
Dierent cell types and mechanisms mediate the e ects of sex steroids on cancellous and cortical
bone. As previously reported, oestrogens exert anti-remodelling e ects in di erent ways by decreasing
osteoclastogenesis and inducing apoptosis in osteoclastic cells. Accordingly, they maintain bone
formation organizing commitment and di erentiation of osteoblastic cells, preventing their apoptosis
and modulating their activity. The anti-resorptive action of oestrogens is also due to the induction of
genes expression and synthesis of OPG (osteoprotegerin), a determinant factor of the RANKL /RANK
system. Furthermore, oestrogens reduce the apoptosis of the osteocyte (Figure 6). Recent studies have
shown that oestradiol levels are inversely associated with serum levels of sclerostin, a key inhibitor
of the Wnt-signalling produced by osteocytes, and that oestrogen deﬁciency may contribute to the
development of osteoporosis by decreasing the sensitivity of osteocytes to mechanical loading [ 210].
Finally, the oestrogen ability to improve calcium balance by regulating enterocyte calcium inﬂux
through ER has also been shown [ 211].Epidemiological evidences suggest that bioavailable oestradiol
(E2) and /or sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), but not serum testosterone levels are associated

==== Page 15 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 15 of 36
with bone loss in men. Results from study of murine models with cell-speciﬁc deletion of ER and
androgen receptor (AR) demonstrate that there are many cell types that mediate androgens e ects on
the bone in males. Yet, while the oestrogenic anti-resorptive e ect on cancellous bone is a direct one
with an action on osteoclasts, androgens play their anti-resorptive e ect indirectly through osteoblasts
and osteocytes [212].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 15 of 37 
  
Figure 6. Different actors and effects on bone formation/resorption ba lance according to different 
sexes. BMU: Basic Multicellular Unit; OPG: Osteoprotegerin; MHT: Menopausal Hormone Therapy; 
RANKL: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa -Β ligand; RANK: Receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa -Β. 
Since the main risk fa ctor for fragility fractures in postmenopausal women is the bone loss due 
to oestrogen deficiency, the menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) is a rational therapy for prevention 
of osteoporosis [213]. Convergent data from research studies and clinical trials in dicate that MHT, 
both in the form of combined oestrogen and progesterone or oestrogen alone, normalizes bone 
turnover and preserves bone mineral density (BMD) at all skeletal sites, significantly decreasing 
vertebral and non -vertebral fractures in long -term treated subjects [214]. This suggests that MHT 
may, at least in part, fill the gender gap in osteoporosis risk in particular if MHT is starting early after 
menopause. Oestrogen therapy, by influencing the lifespan of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, indeed, 
may reverse the oestradiol dependent component of the remodelling imbalance. It is to emphasize 
that remodelling imbalance occurring around the ages of 45 –50 years, produce irreversible deficits in 
bone volume, microstructural deterioration and bone fragil ity. Starting an anti -resorptive therapy in 
late postmenopause doesn’t reverse existing microstructural deterioration and doesn’t abolish bone 
fragility [215]. Despite the concern emerging from the large, long -term RCT Women’s Health 
Initiative (WHI) study  about the safety of hormonal replacement treatment, post hoc subgroup 
analyses, stratifying women according to their age and time since menopause, have allowed to better 
understand the relationship between MHT and cardio -vascular risk. Timing of MHT initi ation was 
shown to be a critical factor for the development of cardio -vascular diseases. According to the “timing 
hypothesis”, healthy symptomatic women who initiated MHT when aged younger than 60 years, or 
who were within 10 years after last menstrual per iod, have demonstrated a reduction in both 
coronary heart disease risk and all -cause mortality [216–218]. Moreover, the term ‘MHT’ does not 
identify a single treatment but different forms, doses and ways of administration of hormonal 
replacement therapy. T he concept of tailored MHT includes the choice of an effective and appropriate 
dose, type, and regimen that differs according to age, clinical characteristics and goals to achieve for 
each woman. The choice of the right progestin is critical as it can make  the difference in long -term 
outcomes [219]. Lastly, there is an unmet need for providing and approving testosterone treatments 
specific for women, formulated with the aim of approximating physiological testosterone 
concentrations for premenopausal women [220]. Nowadays just a few studies have evaluated the 
musculoskeletal effects of testosterone. The available data do not support an effect of testosterone 
treatment on BMD at the spine or femoral neck at 12 months; nevertheless, there is a need for clinical  
trials to evaluate the impact of testosterone treatment on musculoskeletal tissues. The main indication 
for MHT is the presence of vasomotor symptoms (VMS), which have been clearly associated with the 
Figure 6. Dierent actors and e ects on bone formation /resorption balance according to di erent
sexes. BMU: Basic Multicellular Unit; OPG: Osteoprotegerin; MHT: Menopausal Hormone Therapy;
RANKL: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand; RANK: Receptor activator of nuclear
factor kappa-B.
Since the main risk factor for fragility fractures in postmenopausal women is the bone loss due to
oestrogen deﬁciency, the menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) is a rational therapy for prevention of
osteoporosis [ 213]. Convergent data from research studies and clinical trials indicate that MHT, both
in the form of combined oestrogen and progesterone or oestrogen alone, normalizes bone turnover
and preserves bone mineral density (BMD) at all skeletal sites, signiﬁcantly decreasing vertebral and
non-vertebral fractures in long-term treated subjects [ 214]. This suggests that MHT may, at least in part,
ﬁll the gender gap in osteoporosis risk in particular if MHT is starting early after menopause. Oestrogen
therapy, by inﬂuencing the lifespan of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, indeed, may reverse the oestradiol
dependent component of the remodelling imbalance. It is to emphasize that remodelling imbalance
occurring around the ages of 45–50 years, produce irreversible deﬁcits in bone volume, microstructural
deterioration and bone fragility. Starting an anti-resorptive therapy in late postmenopause doesn’t
reverse existing microstructural deterioration and doesn’t abolish bone fragility [ 215]. Despite the
concern emerging from the large, long-term RCT Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) study about the
safety of hormonal replacement treatment, post hoc subgroup analyses, stratifying women according
to their age and time since menopause, have allowed to better understand the relationship between
MHT and cardio-vascular risk. Timing of MHT initiation was shown to be a critical factor for the
development of cardio-vascular diseases. According to the “timing hypothesis”, healthy symptomatic
women who initiated MHT when aged younger than 60 years, or who were within 10 years after last
menstrual period, have demonstrated a reduction in both coronary heart disease risk and all-cause
mortality [ 216–218]. Moreover, the term ‘MHT’ does not identify a single treatment but di erent forms,
doses and ways of administration of hormonal replacement therapy. The concept of tailored MHT
includes the choice of an e ective and appropriate dose, type, and regimen that di ers according to age,
clinical characteristics and goals to achieve for each woman. The choice of the right progestin is critical
as it can make the di erence in long-term outcomes [ 219]. Lastly, there is an unmet need for providing

==== Page 16 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 16 of 36
and approving testosterone treatments speciﬁc for women, formulated with the aim of approximating
physiological testosterone concentrations for premenopausal women [ 220]. Nowadays just a few
studies have evaluated the musculoskeletal e ects of testosterone. The available data do not support an
eect of testosterone treatment on BMD at the spine or femoral neck at 12 months; nevertheless, there
is a need for clinical trials to evaluate the impact of testosterone treatment on musculoskeletal tissues.
The main indication for MHT is the presence of vasomotor symptoms (VMS), which have been clearly
associated with the risk of cardio-vascular disease, osteoporosis and cognitive decline, as a clinical
marker of susceptibility to oestrogen deprivation. Thus, moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms can
be seen as independent predictors of low BMD and fracture risk [ 219]. By treating younger, healthy but
symptomatic, postmenopausal women, we target the population that can mostly proﬁt from tailored
MHT, with clear evidence of a deﬁnite long-term beneﬁt. Fear of breast cancer risk had probably the
greatest negative e ect on the use of MHT. Recently, The Lancet published a study by the Collaborative
Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer [ 221] in which data from 58 studies were combined
using a nested case-control study design to focus on the long-term e ects of MHT. They concluded
that women who initiated MHT shortly after menopause had a signiﬁcantly increased risk of invasive
breast cancer compared with never users. As pointed out by the International Menopause Society
(IMS) press release [ 222] it is important to emphasize that potential breast cancer risk is one component
of the beneﬁts /risk analysis of MHT use for an individual woman, and that this analysis needs to
include symptoms severity and potential beneﬁcial e ects of MHT on bone, cardiovascular health and
sexual life. Anyway, it is extremely important to note that this paper does not clarify the impact of
currently used hormonal therapy dosage and schemes on breast cancer risk [ 221]. Consequently, it
will be important to perform studies about the long-term risk-beneﬁt ratio of new MHT formulations,
doses and routes of administration. Virtually old hormonal formulations and doses, which are known
to be responsible of adverse breast e ects, can no longer be prescribed. Hence, individualization of
care is necessary in order to achieve a safe personalized menopausal hormonal treatment to counteract
the deleterious e ects of postmenopausal oestrogen deﬁciency on women’s bone health.
7. Sex Disparity in Morbidity /Mortality of Infectious Diseases
Infectious diseases have accompanied the human being likely from the beginning of its existence.
The presence of some kinds of infections may have been enhanced through past events and
cultural transitions, like those of the Neolithic Era, which brought humans and animals in close
contact, possibly fostering the interspeciﬁc spread of transmissible diseases [ 223]. Some trace of
animal-to-human transmission has been retrieved in ancient skeletons of victims [ 224]. The condition
of crowded settlements that can promote epidemic spread of communicable diseases among humans,
including through vectors [ 225,226], may have arisen during the Neolithic as well, about 12,000 years
before present.
In evolutionary terms, the long-lasting and repeated contact between humans and pathogens may
have induced co-evolutionary processes, which have modulated the co-existence of the two systems, if
not the eradication either of the pathogen or of human groups [ 223]. In the long time of coexistence with
their hosts, pathogens should have faced many sources of stress, including the biological variability of
the hosts, their di erent nutritional conditions, body sizes, immune status and physiology [227].
Co-existence may have modulated genomic variability in humans as well, particularly in those
genes distributed on autosomal chromosomes, which, under selective pressure, may have developed
higher incidence of protecting genetic variants. These genes have gained some attention [ 228]. Yet, the
major di erence among mammalian individuals, which persists at least from 180 millions of years [ 229],
the di erence between the two sexes, is not yet taken in account in many studies, despite the increasing
evidence that males and females may be di erently a ected, in terms of morbidity and /or mortality, by
infectious diseases. Notwithstanding, the ﬁrst study in this direction is quite old [230].
On one side, the di erences among sexes in terms of susceptibility, morbidity and mortality can
be due to distinct cultural behaviours, thus be related to their gender more than to their biological

==== Page 17 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 17 of 36
sex. Females and males di er in general for their exposition to pathogens due to their gender-speciﬁc
activities [ 231]. Men tend to be more often outside home, for instance for hunting in the wood, where
they could meet Ebola- [ 231] or otherwise infected animals, or being working on ships or docs dealing
with plague- [ 232] or otherwise infected goods. Women, in the majority of the societies, “are more
likely than men to be caregivers for the sick in both health-care settings and at home” [ 231]. Zoonosis
(i.e., diseases of animals and livestock), can occur more often in that gender traditionally providing
care for animals [ 231]. Finally, gender di erentiated access to health care in di erent societies may
also drive gender-based bias in the exposure to infectious diseases [ 231]. In India for example, ill boys
were observed to be brought to professional care signiﬁcantly sooner than ill girls [ 233], whereas in
Bangladesh, the time of admission at the hospital for children with diarrhoea di ered signiﬁcantly in
favour of boys [234].
Still, gender bias and behaviours cannot account alone for the disparities observed between sexes
in contact with communicable diseases. Biological di erences play a comparably important role.
Dissimilarities may be observed at any biological level, yet the chief di erence observed between males
and females consists in the broad inﬂuence that sex-hormones have demonstrated in the host immune
response [ 90,235,236]. The immune response of females against pathogens seems to be stronger in
respect to that of males [ 90,237,238]. Females tend to clear infections faster and show less probability
of infection persistence [ 237,239,240], due to oestrogen working as an activator of immunity, whereas
testosterone as a suppressor [ 241]. On the other hand, possibly for the same reason, females are more
prone to develop autoimmunity [237,239,240,242].
At the gene expression level, sexual dimorphism mainly involves the X chromosome, which
contains high proportions of immune-related genes and regulatory elements producing di erent
innate and adaptive immune responses to infections [ 243]. The e ects of the X chromosome are likely
independent from those of sex hormones, despite both systems inﬂuence the immune response [ 244].
Having two X chromosomes, and a complex regulating mechanism, X-heterozygous females can
activate a mosaic advantage, with the half of the cells expressing the wild type and the other half the
variant, compared to males having only one X chromosome [243].
Thus, and as a rule, men experience greater susceptibility to infectious diseases, as well as severity
of infection, when compared to women [ 239,240,242,245–247]. The progression to active tuberculosis
after infection with Mycobaterium tuberculosis is 1.5-times more likely in men than in women [ 248–250].
Studies devoted to clarify the genetic mechanism responsive of the sex bias have given contradictory
results, possibly because the outcomes have been concealed by the e ects of environmental factors,
as well as by the presence of di erent strains of the pathogen (reviewed in [ 243]). The region Xq26
was identiﬁed as susceptible to tuberculosis by the ﬁrst genome-wide linkage analysis, which anyway
did not consider sex bias [ 243,251]. Amoebic liver abscess (ALA), caused by the intestinal protozoan
parasite Entamoeba histolytica, represents an example of a parasitic disease with a bias toward males
(reviewed in [ 252]). Despite ethnic or cultural background, more than 80% of ALA cases worldwide
occurs in adult men, with an increasing risk from puberty to the highest during 30–50 years of age
(male-to-female ratio of approximately 7:1). A correlation of ALA’s occurrence with the increase in
levels of testosterone was suggested (reviewed in [ 252]). Malaria reports from a hypo-endemic area
of India, has showed as well a bias in infection by Plasmodium vivax and P . falciparum infections
towards pubertal males and a peak during 30-45 years of age, when compared with females of the
same age [ 252,253]. Men are also more frequently infected by leishmaniosis than women ([ 254–257]
reviewed in [ 252]), with a prevalence of American cutaneous leishmaniosis after the ﬁfteenth year
of age [ 252,256]. Cryptococcus neoformans causing meningitis has showed a distinct biological
behaviour towards male hosts, due to di erential macrophages’ activity and di erential expression of
the pathogen virulence genes in the two sexes [ 258]. A recent study [ 240], has proposed an alternative,
better, additional, explanation for sex-bias in infectious diseases, based on an evolutionary perspective.
Starting from a pathogen-centred viewpoint (instead of a host-centred), the authors formulated an
epidemiological model to test the hypothesis of a sex-preferential behaviour of pathogens in favour of

==== Page 18 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 18 of 36
women, due to their unique ability to give rise to vertical transmission through pregnancy, birth and /or
breast-feeding, in addition to the traditional horizontal spread. By developing sex-selective virulence
in favour of women, pathogens would enhance their possibility of dissemination, in particular during
prolonged breast-feeding. The model conﬁrmed that pathogens with a mixed (horizontal and vertical)
transmission evolve to be less virulent, thus providing an explanation for a lower virulence in females
than in males [240].
Nevertheless, during pregnancy there are important changes in the immune system of women,
which are not yet well understood [ 231]. Some diseases are demonstrated to be particularly virulent
during pregnancy or adversely a ect the foetus or breastfeeding baby [ 231]. Among non-immune
women, P . falciparum malaria is often more severe during pregnancy than at other times developing
a much higher parasitaemia. Women with leprosy have a greater risk of nerve deterioration during
pregnancy and lactation than at other times [231].
Yet, in some cases, even if not pregnant or breastfeeding, females are more prone to be a ected by
infections and die than males. Mortality from measles and whooping cough is greater in females, albeit
rates of measles infection are broadly similar for males and females [ 231,259]. Urinal trait infections
exhibit higher susceptibility and prevalence in women, but higher severity in men (reviewed in [ 260]).
This e ect cannot only be due to anatomical di erences of the urinal trait [ 261], since the main
sex-speciﬁc dissimilarities in the incidences of urinal trait infections has been observed in the life
period with the highest levels of sex-hormones [260].
In particular, for epidemic-prone infectious diseases, WHO observed: “Despite the potential
importance of di erences in sex and gender for the transmission, course and outcome of some infectious
diseases, little has been written about the implications of sex and gender for the surveillance of and
response to outbreaks, especially for diseases that are not sexually transmitted”. The WHO attributed
this phenomenon to the lack of interaction among di erent disciplines, like “epidemiology, medical
and biological sciences, social sciences and demography” [ 231]. They o ered to put di erent ﬁndings
together and translate them “into recommendations for WHO operational responses to outbreaks” [ 231].
More than a decade later, apparently, only few researchers have acted on these recommendations.
In conclusion, although evidence is mounting that not only sexual but also other kinds of infectious
diseases di erently act in females and males, researchers do not always distinguish between sexes and
the treatment provided to patients of both sexes tend to be the same [ 237,239,240]. One of the reason
for this gap is the lack of knowledge and information about sex-speciﬁc distinctions in morbidity
and mortality of many infectious pathologies [ 240,262]. Even in the case of epidemic-prone diseases,
more detailed information in the reports on patients would lead to a better understanding of sex bias
in infection and lethality, thus helping in the identiﬁcation of susceptible groups and development
of appropriate responses to avoid or stop outbreaks [ 231]. In the research ﬁeld, the di erential
consideration of data might help in a better understanding of the immune response mechanisms
involved and their evolution over time, which is the ﬁrst step on the pathway of setting a precise
pharmacological defence.
8. Sex Disparity in Pain Threshold and Feelings
Pain is a major healthcare problem worldwide that most a ect women. Acute pain can reasonably
be considered a symptom of disease or injury, whilst chronic and recurrent pain needs speciﬁc
medical and pharmacological care [ 263]. This complex experience, which shows signiﬁcant di erences
with respect to gender, derives from the integration between physical, psychic and socio-cultural
components. According to a survey of over 85 thousand adults in 17 countries around the world,
chronic pain symptoms of any kind a ict 45% of women, compared to 31% of men [ 264]. In recent
decades, the results of many studies examining the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain and its prevention
and treatment strategies have conﬁrmed that the pain threshold is sex-speciﬁc and females appear to
feel pain more intensely with a lower threshold than men [ 265]. Some studies have shown that health
medical sta treat a disease more seriously when a man reports it, even if the other people present

==== Page 19 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 19 of 36
the same symptoms. Accordingly, prescription of opioids is mainly aimed at men, while for women
the psychological components of the disease are more considered, and gender di erences could be
attributable to cultural inﬂuences [ 266]. Boys and girls grow up with di erent outlooks on pain: girls
often feel free to cry over small injuries, while boys feel extra pressure to hold back the tears [ 267].
Unfortunately for women, an emotional response can make a painful situation worse: women are
more likely than men to develop anxiety or depression that can increase feelings of pain and the risk of
disability [268].
The gender gap in pain threshold and feeling is probably linked to biological and genetics
dierences in male and female bodies and to their capability to respond in a di erent way to
pain. The knowledge of these di erences can shed light on the basic nature of pain and lead to
improved treatments for all patients [ 269]. Oestrogen receptors are distributed in many pain-related
regions in both the central and the peripheral nervous systems, so that oestrogens can inﬂuence the
generation and transmission of pain [ 270]. A connection has been observed between oestrogens and
the N-methyl- d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor 1, which is able to bind an excitatory neurotransmitter,
glutamate, involved in the generation, transmission and maintenance of various types of pain [ 271]. In
particular, NMDA receptors play a primary role in the transmission and regulation of information
regarding neuropathic pain and their expression is increased by the presence of oestrogens [ 272,273].
It has been also observed that gonadal oestradiol (E2) alters the sensation of pain through upregulation
of vanilloid receptors 1 (TRPV1) that plays a critical role in triggering pain. An increase in progesterone
seems to determine a down-regulation of TRPV1 receptors in the plasma membrane of sensory neurons,
decreasing the perception of pain under physiological conditions like pregnancy [ 274]. In contrast,
testosterone has been shown to play a key role in inhibiting the expression of TRPV1 at the sensory
ganglion level in a model of chronic inﬂammatory pain induced in rats, thus conﬁrming the presence
of sex di erences for neuropathic and /or chronic pain in both animals and humans.
Preclinical studies should be performed in male and female animals, and at di erent ages,
because hormonal cycles can also inﬂuence the results, whereas the nerve pathways of pain are
dierent [ 275]. Female rodents have a lower pain threshold in experimental models of hot thermal,
chemical, inﬂammatory and mechanical nociception [ 276]. As a consequence, it is better not just to
assume that data obtained from experiments conducted on male animals can be generalized to both
sexes, and not to transfer the results of clinical trials from male to female [ 277]. Males and females do not
have the same bodies and there are signiﬁcant di erences in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
which could modify drug doses, therapeutic e ect and toxicity [ 278]. Regarding the pain transmission
and the cellular involvement, the microglia appears to have a prominent role in the pain for males, but
not for females, who are more sensitive to the control of T-lymphocytes, a type of cell whose role is
known in sensitization to pain [ 279]. Clinical research is fundamental to verify whether the cellular
mechanisms of pain, as well as the involvement of cells and /or microglia, are di erent between men
and women in a similar way to those found in the animal models (Figure 7). It is evident that hormones
inﬂuence perception of pain: oestrogens mitigate pain with concentration-dependent mechanisms,
whereas testosterone reduces the sensitivity to chronic pain [ 280]. Pain responses seem to change
during life depending on hormonal variability: at puberty, the perception of pain increases in women,
while sex di erences in chronic pain rates disappear in menopause [ 281]. The gonadal hormones a ect
the incidence of pain, as it was observed in transsexuals who received cross sex hormones to develop
and maintain somatic characteristics of the opposite sex [ 282]. The male to female transsexuals showed
increased pain sensitivity with oestrogen treatment, whilst the female to male transsexuals treated
with testosterone reported a signiﬁcant reduction of the chronic pain [283].
The pharmaceutical market o ers the same pain-relieving drugs to everyone, even though
sex-di erentiated pharmacological treatments could work better. Numerous di culties have arisen
in identifying a pharmacological dosage according to sex, due to the lack of female subjects in
almost all clinical studies. In general, women in their reproductive age are excluded from the trials
due to rapid hormonal changes and possible pregnancy [ 284]. As far as the analgesic therapy is

==== Page 20 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 20 of 36
concerned, the response is di erent in males and females, since men are more sensitive to the use
of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, while morphine shows greater e cacy in women [ 285].
Several major factors can explain sex-di erences in the modulation of pain with opioids, such as
the neuro-anatomical organization and the neuro-physiological characteristics of the descending
inhibitory circuit, whilst no sex-di erence is known in the plasma concentration of morphine and /or its
metabolites [ 286]. A series of studies carried out on post-operative pain revealed that male patients
consumed morphine doses 2.4-times higher than women, conﬁrming that women are more sensitive
than men to morphine [ 287]. The hepatic metabolism of the opiates is di erent for men and women,
and these di erences depend on the presence of sex hormones in circulation and on their inﬂuence on
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenetics [269,288].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 20 of 37 
  
Figure 7.  Hypothesis of various cellular mechanisms involving pain transmission in females and 
males.  
The pharmaceutical market offers the same pain -relieving drugs to everyone, even though sex -
differentiated pharmacological treatments could work better. Numerous d ifficulties have arisen in 
identifying a pharmacological dosage according to sex, due to the lack of female subjects in almost 
all clinical studies. In general, women in their reproductive age are excluded from the trials due to 
rapid hormonal changes and possible pregnancy [284]. As far as the analgesic therapy is concerned, 
the response is different in males and females, since men are more sensitive to the use of non -steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, while morphine shows greater efficacy in women [285]. Several major 
factors can explain sex -differences in the modulation of pain with opioids, such as the neuro -
anatomical organization and the neuro -physiological characteristics of the descending inhibitory 
circuit, whilst no sex -difference is known in the p lasma concentration of morphine and/or its 
metabolites [286]. A series of studies carried out on post -operative pain revealed that male patients 
consumed morphine doses 2.4 -times higher than women, confirming that women are more sensitive 
than men to morph ine [287]. The hepatic metabolism of the opiates is different for men and women, 
and these differences depend on the presence of sex hormones in circulation and on their influence 
on pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and pharmacogenetics [269,288]. 
The aw areness that the biological basis of pain differs between males and females raises 
important questions in experimental research. Recommendations may be required to improve the 
regulation of the drugs with regard to sex and gender. The development of potent ial drugs with 
fewer negative side effects and more favourable pharmacological properties for both sexes could 
make an important contribution to gender medicine and pharmacology, as well as to the 
development of personalized health care to both women and m en. 
9. Sex/Gender Disparity in the OMICs Era: Sex -Omics and Gender -Omics  
Omics -sciences investigate the role of genes, proteins and metabolic pathways involved in 
disease susceptibility with the aim to improve diagnosis, prognosis and novel drug design. Be sides 
to genomics, proteomics and metabolomics, new omics have been proposed and referred as ”sex -
omics” and “gender -omics” aimed at investigating sex/gender specific aspects in biomedical sciences 
[289–291]. Whilst sex -omics is easier to be faced, knowing  the sex -related side of any pathological 
condition, gender -omics has a more complex and multifaceted nature that makes it difficult to be 
approached.  
Great progresses have been made in the milestones studies of Arthur P. Arnold on the “sexome”, 
defined as  the sum of sex -biased effects on gene networks and cell systems [292]. Several pathological 
conditions differently affect females and males, and this is an extraordinary occasion to find out risk 
Figure 7. Hypothesis of various cellular mechanisms involving pain transmission in females and males.
The awareness that the biological basis of pain di ers between males and females raises important
questions in experimental research. Recommendations may be required to improve the regulation of
the drugs with regard to sex and gender. The development of potential drugs with fewer negative
side e ects and more favourable pharmacological properties for both sexes could make an important
contribution to gender medicine and pharmacology, as well as to the development of personalized
health care to both women and men.
9. Sex /Gender Disparity in the OMICs Era: Sex-Omics and Gender-Omics
Omics-sciences investigate the role of genes, proteins and metabolic pathways involved in disease
susceptibility with the aim to improve diagnosis, prognosis and novel drug design. Besides to
genomics, proteomics and metabolomics, new omics have been proposed and referred as ”sex-omics”
and “gender-omics” aimed at investigating sex /gender speciﬁc aspects in biomedical sciences [ 289–291].
Whilst sex-omics is easier to be faced, knowing the sex-related side of any pathological condition,
gender-omics has a more complex and multifaceted nature that makes it di cult to be approached.
Great progresses have been made in the milestones studies of Arthur P . Arnold on the “sexome”,
deﬁned as the sum of sex-biased e ects on gene networks and cell systems [ 292]. Several pathological
conditions di erently a ect females and males, and this is an extraordinary occasion to ﬁnd out risk
and protection factors di erently expressed in the two sexes [ 293]. In brief, sex-biasing factors include
two X-chromosomes and ovarian secretions in females, and a single X chromosome, the Y-chromosome
and testicular secretions in males. Although, it might be considered a reducing consideration, this
model has dramatic biologic e ects, as shown in mouse tissues not directly involved in reproduction,
where transcriptome analyses showed sex di erences in 72% of the liver genes and in 68% of the

==== Page 21 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 21 of 36
adipose [ 20,292]. Of note, di erent sex-speciﬁc evolutionary processes have selected the two sex
chromosomes, and whilst the Y-chromosome would be expected to carry male-beneﬁting genes, the
X-chromosome should contain both male- and female-beneﬁting genes. Accordingly, sex di erences in
development and behavior are necessarily ascribed to those genes, which are di erentially expressed
in male and female cells, and selected for sex-speciﬁc roles. Considering the brain as a sexually
dimorphic organ molded by sex-speciﬁc selection pressures, genes on the sex chromosomes may
probably determine gender (i.e., sexually dimorphic phenotype) by inducing sex di erences and
sex-speciﬁc e ects on XX and XY brain cells [ 294], although the inﬂuence of the environment in any
individual life should not be disregarded.
Scientiﬁc developments in biomedical ﬁelds have identiﬁed the underlying causes of many
inherited or acquired human diseases that can be potentially faced by precision medicine with the
aim to have treatments tailored to each patient. Reductionism in biomedical research has resulted
in the identiﬁcation of the exact mutation in the genome, a defective molecule or a particular cell
phenotype responsible for that human disease counteracted by targeted therapies. To have a more
complete understanding and comprehensive explanation of the molecular pathogenesis of the disease
mechanisms, omics-sciences can greatly help in the recognition of intricate candidate pathways in those
complex diseases in which the one-gene-defect model or one disease-one assay-one drug principle is
not enough. Accordingly, gender medicine is a promising ﬁeld in which multi-omics approaches could
provide signiﬁcant input in terms of personalized medicine: in other words, sexomics and genderomics.
Important di erences between males and females, considered intrinsic natural di erences, are
already recognizable at the stage of the in utero zygote implantation and endure during prenatal
development, childhood and adulthood. Omics technologies, including genomics, epigenomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics, can be successfully applied to ﬁrstly investigate
those reasons responsible for the sex- and gender-related diversities in the pathophysiology and
etiopathogenesis of complex multifactorial and multigenic diseases [ 32,33]. Personalized-omics will
transform traditional medicine from symptoms-oriented diagnosis and treatment towards disease
prevention and very early diagnosis.
By considering symptoms-oriented diagnosis, we were focused only on late symptoms of a
manifest disease, neglecting important preclinical signs and speciﬁc symptoms useful as discriminant
in a personalized medicine approach. Also considering the same disease, male and female may
have completely di erent preclinical signs and /or disease progression and prognosis, as during the
acute phases of myocardial infarction. In addition, female /woman-speciﬁc risk factors, as body fat
distribution, or speciﬁc prognostic markers have been identiﬁed by proteomics investigations [ 33].
Accordingly, personalized omics-approaches can be strongly useful in earlier recognition of any
informative data in a broad range of pathologies.
Sex di erences and sexual dimorphism mainly involves the X-chromosome, which contains
high proportions of immune-related genes and regulatory elements, a ecting in turn the di erent
susceptibility to some complex diseases, such as certain kind of cancer, autoimmunity, infections, and
bone homeostasis related disorders, in which noticeable sex-di erences exist [ 295,296]. The rapid
technological progress and the excellent bioinformatics methods currently available yielded us a large
volumes of data needing sophisticate computational analyses for acquisition, storage, handling and
translation in an applicative personalized diagnostic /prognostic protocol [297].
By using multi-omics approaches, to integrate information about gene expression and protein
level and composition, we will have a wide-ranging comprehension on how sex and gender a ects
a particular disease or pathological condition (Figure 8). This novel approach, though complex and
dicult to obtain, is a fruitful tactic to make major progress and contribution in a personalized gender
medicine [298].

==== Page 22 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 22 of 36
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 , 20, x 22 of 37 
 difficult to obtain, is a fruitful tactic to make major progress and contribution in a personalized gender 
medicine [298]. 
 
Figure 8. Proposed sex -omics / gender -omics strategy for research and clinical approach t o diseases.  
Finally, omics sciences if sex and gender -oriented, will also help other important auxiliary 
health -related disciplines, such as those involved in food -sciences and nutrition, where efforts to 
recognize personalized diets in relationship to hea lth is the first step in preventive medicine [299]. 
One extraordinary field in which this could be applied is the multivitamin supplement (e.g. , folic 
acid) during the pre - and peri -conception period, not universally considered safe for every mother in 
absence of a detailed genomic analysis [300–302]. Finally, if part of these advances will be 
accomplished, this will significantly improve the global health at any age and stage and for any sex 
and gender cutting down health care costs of the Public Health Sy stems. Everyone must make their 
own effort, including scientists, governments, pharmaceutical companies, patient associations and 
scientific journals working together to ensure the success of this epochal transformation.  
10. Conclusions  
There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that there are sex and gender differences 
between clinical manifestations, disease progression, treatment efficacy and prognosis in several 
common or complex pathologic conditions. A number of faults and underestimations have be en 
performed in the past by not properly considering that different sexes have different genetic, 
biological and psychological features, which greatly influence the natural disease course, symptoms 
and treatment response. As personalized medicine and pharm acogenetics are taking hold in the 
common medical procedures, gender medicine and omics -approaches equally have to become part 
of the clinical practice. The present review article dealt with sex -specific manifestations of classical 
and less known pathologi es and situations in terms of impasse in the diagnostic, prognostic and 
treatment options we have at disposal in the clinical practice. Finally, there is a number of exciting 
challenges to face in the years to come, such as the inclusion of gender in both preclinical and clinical 
studies to understand any unrevealed male and female difference and intersection, with the final aim 
to achieve a fully inclusive personalized medicine : 
“It is also important to note that the study of sex/gender differences benefit s men as much as it benefits 
women. Therefore, when we fail to routinely consider the impact of sex/gender in research, we are leaving 
everyone’s health to chance ” [298]. 
Figure 8. Proposed sex-omics /gender-omics strategy for research and clinical approach to diseases.
Finally, omics sciences if sex and gender-oriented, will also help other important auxiliary
health-related disciplines, such as those involved in food-sciences and nutrition, where e orts to
recognize personalized diets in relationship to health is the ﬁrst step in preventive medicine [ 299]. One
extraordinary ﬁeld in which this could be applied is the multivitamin supplement (e.g., folic acid)
during the pre- and peri-conception period, not universally considered safe for every mother in absence
of a detailed genomic analysis [ 300–302]. Finally, if part of these advances will be accomplished, this
will signiﬁcantly improve the global health at any age and stage and for any sex and gender cutting
down health care costs of the Public Health Systems. Everyone must make their own e ort, including
scientists, governments, pharmaceutical companies, patient associations and scientiﬁc journals working
together to ensure the success of this epochal transformation.
10. Conclusions
There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that there are sex and gender di erences between
clinical manifestations, disease progression, treatment e cacy and prognosis in several common or
complex pathologic conditions. A number of faults and underestimations have been performed in the
past by not properly considering that di erent sexes have di erent genetic, biological and psychological
features, which greatly inﬂuence the natural disease course, symptoms and treatment response. As
personalized medicine and pharmacogenetics are taking hold in the common medical procedures,
gender medicine and omics-approaches equally have to become part of the clinical practice. The
present review article dealt with sex-speciﬁc manifestations of classical and less known pathologies
and situations in terms of impasse in the diagnostic, prognostic and treatment options we have at
disposal in the clinical practice. Finally, there is a number of exciting challenges to face in the years
to come, such as the inclusion of gender in both preclinical and clinical studies to understand any
unrevealed male and female di erence and intersection, with the ﬁnal aim to achieve a fully inclusive
personalized medicine:
“It is also important to note that the study of sex /gender di erences beneﬁts men as much as it beneﬁts
women. Therefore, when we fail to routinely consider the impact of sex /gender in research, we are
leaving everyone’s health to chance”. [298]
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research
(MIUR) 2017.

==== Page 23 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 23 of 36
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Clayton, J.A.; Collins, F.S. Policy: NIH to balance sex in cell and animal studies. Nature 2014 ,509, 282–283.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Vlasso , C. Gender di erences in determinants and consequences of health and illness. J. Health Popul. Nutr.
2007 ,25, 47–61. [PubMed]
3. Kimmel, M. The Gendered Society , 6th ed.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2016.
4. Lips, H.M. The Gender Gap in Possible Selves: Divergence of Academic Self-Views Among High School and
University Students. Sex Roles 2004 ,50, 357–371. [CrossRef]
5. Prakash, V .S.; Mansukhani, N.A.; Helenowski, I.B.; Woodru , T.K.; Kibbe, M.R. Sex Bias in Interventional
Clinical Trials. J. Womens Health 2018 ,27, 1342–1348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Kim, A.M.; Tingen, C.M.; Woodru , T.K. Sex bias in trials and treatment must end. Nature 2010 ,465, 688–689.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Harris, D.J.; Douglas, P .S. Enrollment of women in cardiovascular clinical trials funded by the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. N. Engl. J. Med. 2000 ,343, 475–480. [CrossRef]
8. Kim, E.S.; Carrigan, T.P .; Menon, V . Enrollment of women in National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute-funded
cardiovascular randomized controlled trials fails to meet current federal mandates for inclusion. J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 2008 ,52, 672–673. [CrossRef]
9. Mehta, L.S.; Beckie, T.M.; DeVon, H.A.; Grines, C.L.; Krumholz, H.M.; Johnson, M.N.; Lindley, K.J.;
Vaccarino, V .; Wang, T.Y.; Watson, K.E.; et al. Acute Myocardial Infarction in Women: A Scientiﬁc Statement
From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2016 ,133, 916–947. [CrossRef]
10. Mostertz, W.; Stevenson, M.; Acharya, C.; Chan, I.; Walters, K.; Lamlertthon, W.; Barry, W.; Crawford, J.;
Nevins, J.; Potti, A. Age- and sex-speciﬁc genomic proﬁles in non-small cell lung cancer. JAMA 2010 ,303,
535–543. [CrossRef]
11. Franconi, F.; Rosano, G.; Campesi, I. Need for gender-speciﬁc pre-analytical testing: The dark side of the
moon in laboratory testing. Int. J. Cardiol. 2015 ,179, 514–535. [CrossRef]
12. McCullough, L.D.; de Vries, G.J.; Miller, V .M.; Becker, J.B.; Sandberg, K.; McCarthy, M.M. NIH initiative to
balance sex of animals in preclinical studies: Generative questions to guide policy, implementation, and
metrics. Biol. Sex Di er.2014 ,5, 15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Zucker, I.; Beery, A.K. Males still dominate animal studies. Nature 2010 ,465, 690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Veliskova, J. Estrogens and epilepsy: Why are we so excited? Neuroscientist 2007 ,13, 77–88. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
15. Gold, S.M.; Voskuhl, R.R. Estrogen treatment in multiple sclerosis. J. Neurol. Sci. 2009 ,286, 99–103. [CrossRef]
16. Rosvall, K.A.; Bentz, A.B.; George, E.M. How research on female vertebrates contributes to an expanded
challenge hypothesis. Horm. Behav. 2019 , 104565. [CrossRef]
17. Legato, M.J.; Johnson, P .A.; Manson, J.E. Consideration of Sex Di erences in Medicine to Improve Health
Care and Patient Outcomes. JAMA 2016 ,316, 1865–1866. [CrossRef]
18. Putting gender on the agenda. Nature 2010 ,465, 665. [CrossRef]
19. Blaustein, J.D. Animals have a sex, and so should titles and methods sections of articles in Endocrinology.
Endocrinology 2012 ,153, 2539–2540. [CrossRef]
20. Yang, X.; Schadt, E.E.; Wang, S.; Wang, H.; Arnold, A.P .; Ingram-Drake, L.; Drake, T.A.; Lusis, A.J.
Tissue-speciﬁc expression and regulation of sexually dimorphic genes in mice. Genome Res. 2006 ,16,
995–1004. [CrossRef]
21. Oertelt-Prigione, S.; Dalibert, L.; Verdonk, P .; Stutz, E.Z.; Klinge, I. Implementation Strategies for
Gender-Sensitive Public Health Practice: A European Workshop. J. Womens Health 2017 ,26, 1255–1261.
[CrossRef]
22. Kaminsky, Z.; Wang, S.C.; Petronis, A. Complex disease, gender and epigenetics. Ann. Med. 2006 ,38,
530–544. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Sioud, M.; Melien, O. Treatment options and individualized medicine. Methods Mol. Biol. 2007 ,361, 327–340.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 24 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 24 of 36
24. Franconi, F.; Raparelli, V .; Regitz-Zagrosek, V . Sex and gender landscape in pharmacology. Pharmacol. Res.
2017 ,123, 93–94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Rodriquez, M.; Aquino, R.P .; D’Ursi, A.M. Is it time to integrate sex and gender into drug design and
development? Future Med. Chem. 2015 ,7, 557–559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Franconi, F.; Campesi, I. Sex and gender inﬂuences on pharmacological response: An overview. Expert Rev.
Clin. Pharmacol. 2014 ,7, 469–485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Basili, S.; Raparelli, V .; Proietti, M.; Tanzilli, G.; Franconi, F. Impact of sex and gender on the e cacy of
antiplatelet therapy: The female perspective. J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 2015 ,22, 109–125. [CrossRef]
28. Di Giosia, P .; Passacquale, G.; Petrarca, M.; Giorgini, P .; Marra, A.M.; Ferro, A. Gender di erences in
cardiovascular prophylaxis: Focus on antiplatelet treatment. Pharmacol. Res. 2017 ,119, 36–47. [CrossRef]
29. Pucci, G.; Alcidi, R.; Tap, L.; Battista, F.; Mattace-Raso, F.; Schillaci, G. Sex- and gender-related prevalence,
cardiovascular risk and therapeutic approach in metabolic syndrome: A review of the literature. Pharmacol.
Res. 2017 ,120, 34–42. [CrossRef]
30. Campesi, I.; Franconi, F.; Seghieri, G.; Meloni, M. Sex-gender-related therapeutic approaches for cardiovascular
complications associated with diabetes. Pharmacol. Res. 2017 ,119, 195–207. [CrossRef]
31. Franconi, F.; Campesi, I.; Colombo, D.; Antonini, P . Sex-Gender Variable: Methodological Recommendations
for Increasing Scientiﬁc Value of Clinical Studies. Cells 2019 ,8, 476. [CrossRef]
32. Chen, R.; Snyder, M. Promise of personalized omics to precision medicine. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol.
Med. 2013 ,5, 73–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Baetta, R.; Pontremoli, M.; Fernandez, A.M.; Spickett, C.M.; Banﬁ, C. Reprint of: Proteomics in cardiovascular
diseases: Unveiling sex and gender di erences in the era of precision medicine. J. Proteom. 2018 ,178, 57–72.
[CrossRef]
34. Legato, M.J. Gender-speciﬁc medicine in the genomic era. Clin. Sci. 2016 ,130, 1–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Miller, V .M. Why are sex and gender important to basic physiology and translational and individualized
medicine? Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 2014 ,306, H781–H788. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Legato, M.J. The “Biological Sex”. Available online: http: //www.genderbasic.nl /(accessed on 13
December 2019).
37. Legato, M.J. The “ biological sex or gender?” debate: “Everything ﬂows, nothing stands still. Nothing
endures but change”. Gend. Med. 2011 ,8, 161–163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Klinge, I. Gender perspectives in European research. Pharmacol. Res. 2008 ,58, 183–189. [CrossRef]
39. Available online: https: //cordis.europa.eu /project /id/18833 (accessed on 13 December 2019).
40. Available online: https: //eupha.org /gencad (accessed on 13 December 2019).
41. Available online: http: //www.eugenmed.eu /index.php /eugennet (accessed on 13 December 2019).
42. Cardiovascular Clinical Study Group; Regitz-Zagrosek, V .; Oertelt-Prigione, S.; Prescott, E.; Franconi, F.;
Gerdts, E.; Foryst-Ludwig, A.; Maas, A.H.; Kautzky-Willer, A.; Knappe-Wegner, D.; et al. Gender in
cardiovascular diseases: Impact on clinical manifestations, management, and outcomes. Eur. Heart J. 2016 ,
37, 24–34. [CrossRef]
43. Ventura-Clapier, R.; Dworatzek, E.; Seeland, U.; Kararigas, G.; Arnal, J.F.; Brunelleschi, S.; Carpenter, T.C.;
Erdmann, J.; Franconi, F.; Giannetta, E.; et al. Sex in basic research: Concepts in the cardiovascular ﬁeld.
Cardiovasc. Res. 2017 ,113, 711–724. [CrossRef]
44. Available online: https: //eige.europa.eu /about (accessed on 13 December 2019).
45. Available online: http: //www.worldheartfailure.org /WHFS (accessed on 24 October 2019).
46. Available online: http: //www.medicographia.com /2012/02/the-heart-failure-epidemic (accessed on 24
October 2019).
47. Davis, E.; Gorog, D.A.; Rihal, C.; Prasad, A.; Srinivasan, M. “Mind the gap” acute coronary syndrome in
women: A contemporary review of current clinical evidence. Int. J. Cardiol. 2017 ,227, 840–849. [CrossRef]
48. Oertelt-Prigione, S. Gender and cardiovascular disease in the workplace—It’s not just about pay gaps. Int. J.
Cardiol. 2018 ,262, 108–109. [CrossRef]
49. Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium; Kathiresan, S.; Voight, B.F.; Purcell, S.; Musunuru, K.;
Ardissino, D.; Mannucci, P .M.; Anand, S.; Engert, J.C.; Samani, N.J.; et al. Genome-wide association
of early-onset myocardial infarction with single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variants.
Nat. Genet. 2009 ,41, 334–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 25 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 25 of 36
50. Nakatochi, M.; Ichihara, S.; Yamamoto, K.; Naruse, K.; Yokota, S.; Asano, H.; Matsubara, T.; Yokota, M.
Epigenome-wide association of myocardial infarction with DNA methylation sites at loci related to
cardiovascular disease. Clin. Epigenet. 2017 ,9, 54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Webb, T.R.; Erdmann, J.; Stirrups, K.E.; Stitziel, N.O.; Masca, N.G.; Jansen, H.; Kanoni, S.; Nelson, C.P .;
Ferrario, P .G.; Konig, I.R.; et al. Systematic Evaluation of Pleiotropy Identiﬁes 6 Further Loci Associated
With Coronary Artery Disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2017 ,69, 823–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Chaudhary, R.; Sukhi, A.; Chaudhary, R.; Jindal, M.; Vyas, A.; Rout, A.; Bliden, K.; Tantry, U.; Gurbel, P .
Gender di erences in thrombogenicity among patients with angina and non-obstructive coronary artery
disease. J. Thromb. Thrombolysis 2019 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Patel, R.; Tragante, V .; Schmidt, A.F.; McCubrey, R.O.; Holmes, M.V .; Howe, L.J.; Direk, K.; Akerblom, A.;
Leander, K.; Virani, S.S.; et al. Subsequent Event Risk in Individuals with Established Coronary Heart
Disease: Design and Rationale of the GENIUS-CHD Consortium. Circ. Genom. Precis. Med. 2019 . [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
54. Gemmati, D.; Serino, M.L.; Trivellato, C.; Fiorini, S.; Scapoli, G.L. C677T substitution in the
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene as a risk factor for venous thrombosis and arterial disease
in selected patients. Haematologica 1999 ,84, 824–828.
55. Gemmati, D.; Serino, M.L.; Ongaro, A.; Tognazzo, S.; Moratelli, S.; Resca, R.; Moretti, M.; Scapoli, G.L.
A common mutation in the gene for coagulation factor XIII-A (VAL34Leu): A risk factor for primary
intracerebral hemorrhage is protective against atherothrombotic diseases. Am. J. Hematol. 2001 ,67, 183–188.
[CrossRef]
56. Campo, G.; Valgimigli, M.; Ferraresi, P .; Malagutti, P .; Baroni, M.; Arcozzi, C.; Gemmati, D.; Percoco, G.;
Parrinello, G.; Ferrari, R.; et al. Tissue factor and coagulation factor VII levels during acute myocardial
infarction: Association with genotype and adverse events. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 2006 ,26,
2800–2806. [CrossRef]
57. Gemmati, D.; Federici, F.; Campo, G.; Tognazzo, S.; Serino, M.L.; De Mattei, M.; Valgimigli, M.; Malagutti, P .;
Guardigli, G.; Ferraresi, P .; et al. Factor XIIIA-V34L and factor XIIIB-H95R gene variants: E ects on survival
in myocardial infarction patients. Mol. Med. 2007 ,13, 112–120. [CrossRef]
58. Gemmati, D.; Zeri, G.; Orioli, E.; Mari, R.; Moratelli, S.; Vigliano, M.; Marchesini, J.; Grossi, M.E.; Pecoraro, A.;
Cuneo, A.; et al. Factor XIII-A dynamics in acute myocardial infarction: A novel prognostic biomarker?
Thromb. Haemost. 2015 ,114, 123–132. [CrossRef]
59. Gemmati, D.; Vigliano, M.; Burini, F.; Mari, R.; El Mohsein, H.H.; Parmeggiani, F.; Serino, M.L. Coagulation
Factor XIIIA (F13A1): Novel Perspectives in Treatment and Pharmacogenetics. Curr. Pharm. Des. 2016 ,22,
1449–1459. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Ansani, L.; Marchesini, J.; Pestelli, G.; Luisi, G.A.; Scillitani, G.; Longo, G.; Milani, D.; Serino, M.L.;
Tisato, V .; Gemmati, D. F13A1 Gene Variant (V34L) and Residual Circulating FXIIIA Levels Predict Short-
and Long-Term Mortality in Acute Myocardial Infarction after Coronary Angioplasty. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018 ,
19, 2766. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. De Luca, L.; Marini, M.; Gonzini, L.; Boccanelli, A.; Casella, G.; Chiarella, F.; De Servi, S.; Di Chiara, A.;
Di Pasquale, G.; Olivari, Z.; et al. Contemporary Trends and Age-Speciﬁc Sex Di erences in Management
and Outcome for Patients With ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2016 ,5.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Dreyer, R.P .; Ranasinghe, I.; Wang, Y.; Dharmarajan, K.; Murugiah, K.; Nuti, S.V .; Hsieh, A.F.; Spertus, J.A.;
Krumholz, H.M. Sex Di erences in the Rate, Timing, and Principal Diagnoses of 30-Day Readmissions in
Younger Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction. Circulation 2015 ,132, 158–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Dreyer, R.P .; Dharmarajan, K.; Kennedy, K.F.; Jones, P .G.; Vaccarino, V .; Murugiah, K.; Nuti, S.V .;
Smolderen, K.G.; Buchanan, D.M.; Spertus, J.A.; et al. Sex Di erences in 1-Year All-Cause Rehospitalization
in Patients After Acute Myocardial Infarction: A Prospective Observational Study. Circulation 2017 ,135,
521–531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Writing Group, M.; Moza arian, D.; Benjamin, E.J.; Go, A.S.; Arnett, D.K.; Blaha, M.J.; Cushman, M.; Das, S.R.;
de Ferranti, S.; Despres, J.P .; et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2016 Update: A Report From the
American Heart Association. Circulation 2016 ,133, e38–e48. [CrossRef]
65. Wells, G.L. Cardiovascular Risk Factors: Does Sex Matter? Curr. Vasc. Pharmacol. 2016 ,14, 452–457.
[CrossRef]

==== Page 26 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 26 of 36
66. Dunlay, S.M.; Roger, V .L. Gender di erences in the pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and outcomes of
ischemic heart failure. Curr. Heart Fail. Rep. 2012 ,9, 267–276. [CrossRef]
67. Seeland, U.; Regitz-Zagrosek, V . Sex and gender di erences in cardiovascular drug therapy. Handb. Exp.
Pharmacol. 2012 , 211–236. [CrossRef]
68. Ranasinghe, I.; Wang, Y.; Dharmarajan, K.; Hsieh, A.F.; Bernheim, S.M.; Krumholz, H.M. Readmissions after
hospitalization for heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, or pneumonia among young and middle-aged
adults: A retrospective observational cohort study. PLoS Med. 2014 ,11, e1001737. [CrossRef]
69. Bauters, C.; Dubois, E.; Porouchani, S.; Saloux, E.; Fertin, M.; de Groote, P .; Lamblin, N.; Pinet, F. Long-term
prognostic impact of left ventricular remodeling after a ﬁrst myocardial infarction in modern clinical practice.
PLoS ONE 2017 ,12, e0188884. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70. Subramanya, V .; Zhao, D.; Ouyang, P .; Lima, J.A.; Vaidya, D.; Ndumele, C.E.; Bluemke, D.A.; Shah, S.J.;
Guallar, E.; Nwabuo, C.C.; et al. Sex hormone levels and change in left ventricular structure among men and
post-menopausal women: The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA). Maturitas 2018 ,108, 37–44.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Ter Horst, E.N.; Hakimzadeh, N.; van der Laan, A.M.; Krijnen, P .A.; Niessen, H.W.; Piek, J.J. Modulators
of Macrophage Polarization Inﬂuence Healing of the Infarcted Myocardium. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015 ,16,
29583–29591. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Chistiakov, D.A.; Orekhov, A.N.; Bobryshev, Y.V . Cardiac Extracellular Vesicles in Normal and Infarcted
Heart. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 63. [CrossRef]
73. Musial-Wysocka, A.; Kot, M.; Sulkowski, M.; Majka, M. Regenerative Potential of the Product “CardioCell”
Derived from the Wharton’s Jelly Mesenchymal Stem Cells for Treating Hindlimb Ischemia. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2019 ,20, 4632. [CrossRef]
74. Sun, T.; Dong, Y.H.; Du, W.; Shi, C.Y.; Wang, K.; Tariq, M.A.; Wang, J.X.; Li, P .F. The Role of MicroRNAs in
Myocardial Infarction: From Molecular Mechanism to Clinical Application. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 745.
[CrossRef]
75. Singh, A.V .; Subhashree, L.; Milani, P .; Gemmati, D.; Zamboni, P . Interplay of iron metallobiology,
metalloproteinases, and FXIII, and role of their gene variants in venous leg ulcer. Int. J. Low Extrem.
Wounds 2010 ,9, 166–179. [CrossRef]
76. Zamboni, P .; Gemmati, D. Clinical implications of gene polymorphisms in venous leg ulcer: A model in
tissue injury and reparative process. Thromb. Haemost. 2007 ,98, 131–137.
77. Zamboni, P .; De Mattei, M.; Ongaro, A.; Fogato, L.; Carandina, S.; De Palma, M.; Tognazzo, S.; Scapoli, G.L.;
Serino, M.L.; Caruso, A.; et al. Factor XIII contrasts the e ects of metalloproteinases in human dermal
ﬁbroblast cultured cells. Vasc. Endovasc. Surg. 2004 ,38, 431–438. [CrossRef]
78. Tognazzo, S.; Gemmati, D.; Palazzo, A.; Catozzi, L.; Carandina, S.; Legnaro, A.; Tacconi, G.; Scapoli, G.L.;
Zamboni, P . Prognostic role of factor XIII gene variants in nonhealing venous leg ulcers. J. Vasc. Surg. 2006 ,
44, 815–819. [CrossRef]
79. Gemmati, D.; Tognazzo, S.; Catozzi, L.; Federici, F.; De Palma, M.; Gianesini, S.; Scapoli, G.L.; De Mattei, M.;
Liboni, A.; Zamboni, P . Inﬂuence of gene polymorphisms in ulcer healing process after superﬁcial venous
surgery. J. Vasc. Surg. 2006 ,44, 554–562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Gemmati, D.; Tognazzo, S.; Serino, M.L.; Fogato, L.; Carandina, S.; De Palma, M.; Izzo, M.; De Mattei, M.;
Ongaro, A.; Scapoli, G.L.; et al. Factor XIII V34L polymorphism modulates the risk of chronic venous leg
ulcer progression and extension. Wound Repair Regen. 2004 ,12, 512–517. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81. Gemmati, D.; Occhionorelli, S.; Tisato, V .; Vigliano, M.; Longo, G.; Gonelli, A.; Sibilla, M.G.; Serino, M.L.;
Zamboni, P . Inherited genetic predispositions in F13A1 and F13B genes predict abdominal adhesion formation:
Identiﬁcation of gender prognostic indicators. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 16916. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Greiten, L.E.; Holditch, S.J.; Arunachalam, S.P .; Miller, V .M. Should there be sex-speciﬁc criteria for the
diagnosis and treatment of heart failure? J. Cardiovasc. Transl. Res. 2014 ,7, 139–155. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Falzone, L.; Salomone, S.; Libra, M. Evolution of Cancer Pharmacological Treatments at the Turn of the Third
Millennium. Front. Pharmacol. 2018 ,9, 1300. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Available online: www.istat.it /it/archivio /230897 (accessed on 24 October 2019).
85. Clocchiatti, A.; Cora, E.; Zhang, Y.; Dotto, G.P . Sexual dimorphism in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2016 ,16,
330–339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 27 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 27 of 36
86. Straface, E.; Gambardella, L.; Brandani, M.; Malorni, W. Sex di erences at cellular level: “Cells have a sex”.
Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 2012 , 49–65. [CrossRef]
87. Carrel, L.; Willard, H.F. X-inactivation proﬁle reveals extensive variability in X-linked gene expression in
females. Nature 2005 ,434, 400–404. [CrossRef]
88. Pinheiro, I.; Dejager, L.; Libert, C. X-chromosome-located microRNAs in immunity: Might they explain
male/female di erences? The X chromosome-genomic context may a ect X-located miRNAs and downstream
signalling, thereby contributing to the enhanced immune response of females. Bioessays 2011 ,33, 791–802.
[CrossRef]
89. Capone, I.; Marchetti, P .; Ascierto, P .A.; Malorni, W.; Gabriele, L. Sexual Dimorphism of Immune Responses:
A New Perspective in Cancer Immunotherapy. Front. Immunol. 2018 ,9, 552. [CrossRef]
90. Klein, S.L.; Flanagan, K.L. Sex di erences in immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2016 ,16, 626–638.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Gabriele, L.; Buoncervello, M.; Ascione, B.; Bellenghi, M.; Matarrese, P .; Care, A. The gender perspective
in cancer research and therapy: Novel insights and on-going hypotheses. Ann. Ist. Super. Sanita 2016 ,52,
213–222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Kim, S.E.; Paik, H.Y.; Yoon, H.; Lee, J.E.; Kim, N.; Sung, M.K. Sex- and gender-speciﬁc disparities in colorectal
cancer risk. World J. Gastroenterol. 2015 ,21, 5167–5175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Salem, M.E.; Weinberg, B.A.; Xiu, J.; El-Deiry, W.S.; Hwang, J.J.; Gatalica, Z.; Philip, P .A.; Shields, A.F.;
Lenz, H.J.; Marshall, J.L. Comparative molecular analyses of left-sided colon, right-sided colon, and rectal
cancers. Oncotarget 2017 ,8, 86356–86368. [CrossRef]
94. Marks, P .; Soave, A.; Shariat, S.F.; Fajkovic, H.; Fisch, M.; Rink, M. Female with bladder cancer: What and
why is there a di erence? Transl. Androl. Urol. 2016 ,5, 668–682. [CrossRef]
95. Gupta, S.; Artomov, M.; Goggins, W.; Daly, M.; Tsao, H. Gender Disparity and Mutation Burden in Metastatic
Melanoma. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2015 ,107. [CrossRef]
96. Roh, M.R.; Eliades, P .; Gupta, S.; Grant-Kels, J.M.; Tsao, H. Cutaneous melanoma in women. Int. J. Womens
Dermatol. 2017 ,3, S11–S15. [CrossRef]
97. Faramarzi, S.; Ghafouri-Fard, S. Melanoma: A prototype of cancer-testis antigen-expressing malignancies.
Immunotherapy 2017 ,9, 1103–1113. [CrossRef]
98. Botticelli, A.; Onesti, C.E.; Zizzari, I.; Cerbelli, B.; Sciattella, P .; Occhipinti, M.; Roberto, M.; Di Pietro, F.;
Bonifacino, A.; Ghidini, M.; et al. The sexist behaviour of immune checkpoint inhibitors in cancer therapy?
Oncotarget 2017 ,8, 99336–99346. [CrossRef]
99. Conforti, F.; Pala, L.; Bagnardi, V .; De Pas, T.; Martinetti, M.; Viale, G.; Gelber, R.D.; Goldhirsch, A. Cancer
immunotherapy e cacy and patients’ sex: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2018 ,19,
737–746. [CrossRef]
100. Grassadonia, A.; Sperduti, I.; Vici, P .; Iezzi, L.; Brocco, D.; Gamucci, T.; Pizzuti, L.; Maugeri-Sacca, M.;
Marchetti, P .; Cognetti, G.; et al. E ect of Gender on the Outcome of Patients Receiving Immune Checkpoint
Inhibitors for Advanced Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Phase III Randomized Clinical
Trials. J. Clin. Med. 2018 ,7, 542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Care, A.; Bellenghi, M.; Matarrese, P .; Gabriele, L.; Salvioli, S.; Malorni, W. Sex disparity in cancer: Roles of
microRNAs and related functional players. Cell Death Di er.2018 ,25, 477–485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Weng, Y.M.; Peng, M.; Hu, M.X.; Yao, Y.; Song, Q.B. Clinical and molecular characteristics associated with the
ecacy of PD-1 /PD-L1 inhibitors for solid tumors: A meta-analysis. OncoTargets Ther. 2018 ,11, 7529–7542.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Hanamsagar, R.; Bilbo, S.D. Sex di erences in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders: Focus
on microglial function and neuroinﬂammation during development. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2016 ,160,
127–133. [CrossRef]
104. Ullah, M.F.; Ahmad, A.; Bhat, S.H.; Abu-Duhier, F.M.; Barreto, G.E.; Ashraf, G.M. Impact of sex di erences
and gender speciﬁcity on behavioral characteristics and pathophysiology of neurodegenerative disorders.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2019 ,102, 95–105. [CrossRef]
105. Harbo, H.F.; Gold, R.; Tintore, M. Sex and gender issues in multiple sclerosis. Ther. Adv. Neurol. Disord. 2013 ,
6, 237–248. [CrossRef]
106. Compston, A.; Coles, A. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet 2008 ,372, 1502–1517. [CrossRef]

==== Page 28 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 28 of 36
107. Karussis, D. The diagnosis of multiple sclerosis and the various related demyelinating syndromes: A critical
review. J. Autoimmun. 2014 ,48-49 , 134–142. [CrossRef]
108. Airas, L.; Kaaja, R. Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis. Obstet. Med. 2012 ,5, 94–97. [CrossRef]
109. Fainardi, E.; Castellazzi, M.; Tamborino, C.; Trentini, A.; Manfrinato, M.C.; Baldi, E.; Tola, M.R.; Dallocchio, F.;
Granieri, E.; Bellini, T. Potential relevance of cerebrospinal ﬂuid and serum levels and intrathecal synthesis
of active matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) as markers of disease remission in patients with multiple
sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 2009 ,15, 547–554. [CrossRef]
110. Trentini, A.; Manfrinato, M.C.; Castellazzi, M.; Tamborino, C.; Roversi, G.; Volta, C.A.; Baldi, E.; Tola, M.R.;
Granieri, E.; Dallocchio, F.; et al. TIMP-1 resistant matrix metalloproteinase-9 is the predominant serum active
isoform associated with MRI activity in patients with multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 2015 ,21, 1121–1130.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Trentini, A.; Castellazzi, M.; Cervellati, C.; Manfrinato, M.C.; Tamborino, C.; Hanau, S.; Volta, C.A.; Baldi, E.;
Kostic, V .; Drulovic, J.; et al. Interplay between Matrix Metalloproteinase-9, Matrix Metalloproteinase-2, and
Interleukins in Multiple Sclerosis Patients. Dis. Markers 2016 ,2016 , 3672353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Kallaur, A.P .; Oliveira, S.R.; Colado Simao, A.N.; Delicato de Almeida, E.R.; Kaminami Morimoto, H.;
Lopes, J.; de Carvalho Jennings Pereira, W.L.; Marques Andrade, R.; Muliterno Pelegrino, L.; Donizete
Borelli, S.; et al. Cytokine proﬁle in relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis patients and the association between
progression and activity of the disease. Mol. Med. Rep. 2013 ,7, 1010–1020. [CrossRef]
113. Khaibullin, T.; Ivanova, V .; Martynova, E.; Cherepnev, G.; Khabirov, F.; Granatov, E.; Rizvanov, A.;
Khaiboullina, S. Elevated Levels of Proinﬂammatory Cytokines in Cerebrospinal Fluid of Multiple Sclerosis
Patients. Front. Immunol. 2017 ,8, 531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Trentini, A.; Comabella, M.; Tintore, M.; Koel-Simmelink, M.J.; Killestein, J.; Roos, B.; Rovira, A.; Korth, C.;
Ottis, P .; Blankenstein, M.A.; et al. N-acetylaspartate and neuroﬁlaments as biomarkers of axonal damage in
patients with progressive forms of multiple sclerosis. J. Neurol. 2014 ,261, 2338–2343. [CrossRef]
115. Khalil, M.; Enzinger, C.; Langkammer, C.; Ropele, S.; Mader, A.; Trentini, A.; Vane, M.L.; Wallner-Blazek, M.;
Bachmaier, G.; Archelos, J.J.; et al. CSF neuroﬁlament and N-acetylaspartate related brain changes in clinically
isolated syndrome. Mult. Scler. 2013 ,19, 436–442. [CrossRef]
116. Bridel, C.; van Wieringen, W.N.; Zetterberg, H.; Tijms, B.M.; Teunissen, C.E.; Alvarez-Cermeno, J.C.;
Andreasson, U.; Axelsson, M.; Backstrom, D.C.; Bartos, A.; et al. Diagnostic Value of Cerebrospinal Fluid
Neuroﬁlament Light Protein in Neurology: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Neurol. 2019 .
[CrossRef]
117. Hamedani, S.Y.; Taheri, M.; Sajjadi, E.; Omrani, M.D.; Mazdeh, M.; Arsang-Jang, S.; Panah, A.S.; Sayad, A.
Up regulation of MMP9 gene expression in female patients with multiple sclerosis. Hum. Antibodies 2016 ,24,
59–64. [CrossRef]
118. Gold, S.M.; Sasidhar, M.V .; Morales, L.B.; Du, S.; Sicotte, N.L.; Tiwari-Woodru , S.K.; Voskuhl, R.R. Estrogen
treatment decreases matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 in autoimmune demyelinating disease through
estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). Lab. Invest. 2009 ,89, 1076–1083. [CrossRef]
119. Castellazzi, M.; Ligi, D.; Contaldi, E.; Quartana, D.; Fonderico, M.; Borgatti, L.; Bellini, T.; Trentini, A.;
Granieri, E.; Fainardi, E.; et al. Multiplex Matrix Metalloproteinases Analysis in the Cerebrospinal Fluid
Reveals Potential Speciﬁc Patterns in Multiple Sclerosis Patients. Front. Neurol. 2018 ,9, 1080. [CrossRef]
120. Powell, B.S.; Dhaher, Y.Y.; Szleifer, I.G. Review of the Multiscale E ects of Female Sex Hormones on Matrix
Metalloproteinase-Mediated Collagen Degradation. Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2015 ,43, 401–428. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
121. Ramien, C.; Taenzer, A.; Lupu, A.; Heckmann, N.; Engler, J.B.; Patas, K.; Friese, M.A.; Gold, S.M. Sex e ects
on inﬂammatory and neurodegenerative processes in multiple sclerosis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2016 ,67,
137–146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Kovats, S. Estrogen receptors regulate innate immune cells and signalling pathways. Cell Immunol. 2015 ,294,
63–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Lai, J.J.; Lai, K.P .; Zeng, W.; Chuang, K.H.; Altuwaijri, S.; Chang, C. Androgen receptor inﬂuences on body
defense system via modulation of innate and adaptive immune systems: Lessons from conditional AR
knockout mice. Am. J. Pathol. 2012 ,181, 1504–1512. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Soldan, S.S.; Alvarez Retuerto, A.I.; Sicotte, N.L.; Voskuhl, R.R. Immune modulation in multiple sclerosis
patients treated with the pregnancy hormone estriol. J. Immunol. 2003 ,171, 6267–6274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 29 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 29 of 36
125. Pelfrey, C.M.; Cotleur, A.C.; Lee, J.C.; Rudick, R.A. Sex di erences in cytokine responses to myelin peptides
in multiple sclerosis. J. Neuroimmunol. 2002 ,130, 211–223. [CrossRef]
126. Eikelenboom, M.J.; Killestein, J.; Uitdehaag, B.M.; Polman, C.H. Sex di erences in proinﬂammatory cytokine
proﬁles of progressive patients in multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 2005 ,11, 520–523. [CrossRef]
127. Nguyen, L.T.; Ramanathan, M.; Weinstock-Guttman, B.; Baier, M.; Brownscheidle, C.; Jacobs, L.D. Sex
dierences in in vitro pro-inﬂammatory cytokine production from peripheral blood of multiple sclerosis
patients. J. Neurol. Sci. 2003 ,209, 93–99. [CrossRef]
128. Eikelenboom, M.J.; Killestein, J.; Kragt, J.J.; Uitdehaag, B.M.; Polman, C.H. Gender di erences in multiple
sclerosis: Cytokines and vitamin D. J. Neurol. Sci. 2009 ,286, 40–42. [CrossRef]
129. Lin, Y.S.; Lee, W.J.; Wang, S.J.; Fuh, J.L. Levels of plasma neuroﬁlament light chain and cognitive function in
patients with Alzheimer or Parkinson disease. Sci. Rep. 2018 ,8, 17368. [CrossRef]
130. Pawlitzki, M.; Schreiber, S.; Bittner, D.; Kreipe, J.; Leypoldt, F.; Rupprecht, K.; Carare, R.O.; Meuth, S.G.;
Vielhaber, S.; Kortvelyessy, P . CSF Neuroﬁlament Light Chain Levels in Primary Progressive MS: Signs of
Axonal Neurodegeneration. Front. Neurol. 2018 ,9, 1037. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Kuhle, J.; Kropshofer, H.; Haering, D.A.; Kundu, U.; Meinert, R.; Barro, C.; Dahlke, F.; Tomic, D.; Leppert, D.;
Kappos, L. Blood neuroﬁlament light chain as a biomarker of MS disease activity and treatment response.
Neurology 2019 ,92, e1007–e1015. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Bergman, J.; Dring, A.; Zetterberg, H.; Blennow, K.; Norgren, N.; Gilthorpe, J.; Bergenheim, T.; Svenningsson, A.
Neuroﬁlament light in CSF and serum is a sensitive marker for axonal white matter injury in MS. Neurol.
Neuroimmunol. Neuroinﬂamm. 2016 ,3, e271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Gemmati, D.; Zeri, G.; Orioli, E.; De Gaetano, F.E.; Salvi, F.; Bartolomei, I.; D’Alfonso, S.; Dall’osso, C.;
Leone, M.A.; Singh, A.V .; et al. Polymorphisms in the genes coding for iron binding and transporting
proteins are associated with disability, severity, and early progression in multiple sclerosis. BMC Med. Genet.
2012 ,13, 70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Sheykhansari, S.; Kozielski, K.; Bill, J.; Sitti, M.; Gemmati, D.; Zamboni, P .; Singh, A.V . Redox metals
homeostasis in multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A review. Cell Death Dis. 2018 ,9, 348.
[CrossRef]
135. Ziliotto, N.; Marchetti, G.; Scapoli, C.; Bovolenta, M.; Meneghetti, S.; Benazzo, A.; Lunghi, B.; Balestra, D.;
Laino, L.A.; Bozzini, N.; et al. C6orf10 Low-Frequency and Rare Variants in Italian Multiple Sclerosis Patients.
Front. Genet. 2019 ,10, 573. [CrossRef]
136. Ferlini, A.; Bovolenta, M.; Neri, M.; Gualandi, F.; Balboni, A.; Yuryev, A.; Salvi, F.; Gemmati, D.; Liboni, A.;
Zamboni, P . Custom CGH array proﬁling of copy number variations (CNVs) on chromosome 6p21.32 (HLA
locus) in patients with venous malformations associated with multiple sclerosis. BMC Med. Genet. 2010 ,11,
64. [CrossRef]
137. Paraboschi, E.M.; Solda, G.; Gemmati, D.; Orioli, E.; Zeri, G.; Benedetti, M.D.; Salviati, A.; Barizzone, N.;
Leone, M.; Duga, S.; et al. Genetic association and altered gene expression of mir-155 in multiple sclerosis
patients. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2011 ,12, 8695–8712. [CrossRef]
138. Paraboschi, E.M.; Rimoldi, V .; Solda, G.; Tabaglio, T.; Dall’Osso, C.; Saba, E.; Vigliano, M.; Salviati, A.;
Leone, M.; Benedetti, M.D.; et al. Functional variations modulating PRKCA expression and alternative
splicing predispose to multiple sclerosis. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2014 ,23, 6746–6761. [CrossRef]
139. Paraboschi, E.M.; Cardamone, G.; Rimoldi, V .; Gemmati, D.; Spreaﬁco, M.; Duga, S.; Solda, G.; Asselta, R.
Meta-Analysis of Multiple Sclerosis Microarray Data Reveals Dysregulation in RNA Splicing Regulatory
Genes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015 ,16, 23463–23481. [CrossRef]
140. Available online: https: //www.who.int /mental_health /neurology /dementia /en/(accessed on 8 December
2019).
141. Prince, M.; Bryce, R.; Albanese, E.; Wimo, A.; Ribeiro, W.; Ferri, C.P . The global prevalence of dementia:
A systematic review and metaanalysis. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 ,9, 63–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Van Cauwenberghe, C.; Van Broeckhoven, C.; Sleegers, K. The genetic landscape of Alzheimer disease:
Clinical implications and perspectives. Genet. Med. 2016 ,18, 421–430. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Wang, Y.; Du, Y.; Li, J.; Qiu, C. Lifespan Intellectual Factors, Genetic Susceptibility, and Cognitive Phenotypes
in Aging: Implications for Interventions. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2019 ,11, 129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Podcasy, J.L.; Epperson, C.N. Considering sex and gender in Alzheimer disease and other dementias.
Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 2016 ,18, 437–446. [PubMed]

==== Page 30 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 30 of 36
145. Mielke, M.M. Sex and Gender Di erences in Alzheimer’s Disease Dementia. Psychiatr. Times 2018 ,35, 14–17.
146. Laws, K.R.; Irvine, K.; Gale, T.M. Sex di erences in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 2018 ,31,
133–139. [CrossRef]
147. Wolters, F.J.; Ikram, M.A. Epidemiology of Vascular Dementia. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 2019 ,39,
1542–1549. [CrossRef]
148. Robison, L.S.; Gannon, O.J.; Salinero, A.E.; Zuloaga, K.L. Contributions of sex to cerebrovascular function
and pathology. Brain Res. 2019 ,1710 , 43–60. [CrossRef]
149. Eid, A.; Mhatre, I.; Richardson, J.R. Gene-environment interactions in Alzheimer’s disease: A potential path
to precision medicine. Pharmacol. Ther. 2019 ,199, 173–187. [CrossRef]
150. Belloy, M.E.; Napolioni, V .; Greicius, M.D. A Quarter Century of APOE and Alzheimer’s Disease: Progress to
Date and the Path Forward. Neuron 2019 ,101, 820–838. [CrossRef]
151. Rasmussen, K.L.; Tybjaerg-Hansen, A.; Nordestgaard, B.G.; Frikke-Schmidt, R. Absolute 10-year risk of
dementia by age, sex and APOE genotype: A population-based cohort study. CMAJ 2018 ,190, E1033–E1041.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Hansen, D.; Ling, H.; Lashley, T.; Holton, J.L.; Warner, T.T. Review: Clinical, neuropathological and genetic
features of Lewy body dementias. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 2019 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Pang, S.; Li, J.; Zhang, Y.; Chen, J. Meta-Analysis of the Relationship between the APOE Gene and the Onset
of Parkinson’s Disease Dementia. Parkinsons Dis. 2018 ,2018 , 9497147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Reinvang, I.; Espeseth, T.; Westlye, L.T. APOE-related biomarker proﬁles in non-pathological aging and early
phases of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2013 ,37, 1322–1335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Farrer, L.A.; Cupples, L.A.; Haines, J.L.; Hyman, B.; Kukull, W.A.; Mayeux, R.; Myers, R.H.;
Pericak-Vance, M.A.; Risch, N.; van Duijn, C.M. E ects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association
between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. APOE and Alzheimer Disease
Meta Analysis Consortium. JAMA 1997 ,278, 1349–1356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Beydoun, M.A.; Boueiz, A.; Abougergi, M.S.; Kitner-Triolo, M.H.; Beydoun, H.A.; Resnick, S.M.; O’Brien, R.;
Zonderman, A.B. Sex di erences in the association of the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele with incidence of
dementia, cognitive impairment, and decline. Neurobiol. Aging 2012 ,33, 720–731. [CrossRef]
157. Janicki, S.C.; Park, N.; Cheng, R.; Clark, L.N.; Lee, J.H.; Schupf, N. Estrogen receptor alpha variants a ect
age at onset of Alzheimer’s disease in a multiethnic female cohort. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 2014 ,38,
200–213. [CrossRef]
158. Tisato, V .; Zuliani, G.; Vigliano, M.; Longo, G.; Franchini, E.; Secchiero, P .; Zauli, G.; Paraboschi, E.M.; Vikram
Singh, A.; Serino, M.L.; et al. Gene-gene interactions among coding genes of iron-homeostasis proteins and
APOE-alleles in cognitive impairment diseases. PLoS ONE 2018 ,13, e0193867. [CrossRef]
159. Peters, D.G.; Connor, J.R.; Meadowcroft, M.D. The relationship between iron dyshomeostasis and
amyloidogenesis in Alzheimer’s disease: Two sides of the same coin. Neurobiol. Dis. 2015 ,81, 49–65.
[CrossRef]
160. Hardy, J.A.; Higgins, G.A. Alzheimer’s disease: The amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 1992 ,256, 184–185.
[CrossRef]
161. Tanzi, R.E.; Bertram, L. Twenty years of the Alzheimer’s disease amyloid hypothesis: A genetic perspective.
Cell2005 ,120, 545–555. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Bush, A.I.; Tanzi, R.E. Therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease based on the metal hypothesis. Neurotherapeutics
2008 ,5, 421–432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. Ali-Rahmani, F.; Schengrund, C.L.; Connor, J.R. HFE gene variants, iron, and lipids: A novel connection in
Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Pharmacol. 2014 ,5, 165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Riedel, B.C.; Thompson, P .M.; Brinton, R.D. Age, APOE and sex: Triad of risk of Alzheimer’s disease.
J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2016 ,160, 134–147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
165. Burger, H.G.; Dudley, E.C.; Robertson, D.M.; Dennerstein, L. Hormonal changes in the menopause transition.
Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 2002 ,57, 257–275. [CrossRef]
166. Li, R.; Cui, J.; Shen, Y. Brain sex matters: Estrogen in cognition and Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.
2014 ,389, 13–21. [CrossRef]
167. Toro, C.A.; Zhang, L.; Cao, J.; Cai, D. Sex di erences in Alzheimer’s disease: Understanding the molecular
impact. Brain Res. 2019 ,1719 , 194–207. [CrossRef]

==== Page 31 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 31 of 36
168. Webers, A.; Heneka, M.T.; Gleeson, P .A. The role of innate immune responses and neuroinﬂammation in
amyloid accumulation and progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Immunol. Cell Biol. 2019 . [CrossRef]
169. Cervellati, C.; Wood, P .L.; Romani, A.; Valacchi, G.; Squerzanti, M.; Sanz, J.M.; Ortolani, B.; Zuliani, G.
Oxidative challenge in Alzheimer’s disease: State of knowledge and future needs. J. Investig. Med. 2016 ,64,
21–32. [CrossRef]
170. Cervellati, C.; Valacchi, G.; Tisato, V .; Zuliani, G.; Marsillach, J. Evaluating the link between Paraoxonase-1
levels and Alzheimer’s disease development. Minerva Med. 2019 ,110, 238–250. [CrossRef]
171. Brombo, G.; Bonetti, F.; Ortolani, B.; Morieri, M.L.; Bosi, C.; Passaro, A.; Vigna, G.B.; Borgna, C.;
Arcidicono, M.V .; Tisato, V .; et al. Lower Plasma Klotho Concentrations Are Associated with Vascular
Dementia but Not Late-Onset Alzheimer’s Disease. Gerontology 2018 ,64, 414–421. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Tisato, V .; Rimondi, E.; Brombo, G.; Volpato, S.; Zurlo, A.; Zauli, G.; Secchiero, P .; Zuliani, G. Serum Soluble
Tumor Necrosis Factor-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand Levels in Older Subjects with Dementia and
Mild Cognitive Impairment. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 2016 ,41, 273–280. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Bundy, J.L.; Vied, C.; Badger, C.; Nowakowski, R.S. Sex-biased hippocampal pathology in the 5XFAD mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease: A multi-omic analysis. J. Comp. Neurol. 2019 ,527, 462–475. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
174. Strafella, C.; Caputo, V .; Galota, M.R.; Zampatti, S.; Marella, G.; Mauriello, S.; Cascella, R.; Giardina, E.
Application of Precision Medicine in Neurodegenerative Diseases. Front. Neurol. 2018 ,9, 701. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
175. Hosp, F.; Mann, M. A Primer on Concepts and Applications of Proteomics in Neuroscience. Neuron 2017 ,96,
558–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
176. Avramouli, A.; Vlamos, P .M. Integrating Omic Technologies in Alzheimer’s Disease. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.
2017 ,987, 177–184. [CrossRef]
177. Bundy, J.L.; Vied, C.; Nowakowski, R.S. Sex di erences in the molecular signature of the developing mouse
hippocampus. BMC Genom. 2017 ,18, 237. [CrossRef]
178. Zaidi, M.; Yuen, T.; Sun, L.; Rosen, C.J. Regulation of Skeletal Homeostasis. Endocr. Rev. 2018 ,39, 701–718.
[CrossRef]
179. Siddiqui, J.A.; Partridge, N.C. Physiological Bone Remodeling: Systemic Regulation and Growth Factor
Involvement. Physiology 2016 ,31, 233–245. [CrossRef]
180. Kenkre, J.S.; Bassett, J. The bone remodelling cycle. Ann. Clin. Biochem. 2018 ,55, 308–327. [CrossRef]
181. Feng, X.; McDonald, J.M. Disorders of bone remodeling. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 2011 ,6, 121–145. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
182. Stapleton, M.; Sawamoto, K.; Almeciga-Diaz, C.J.; Mackenzie, W.G.; Mason, R.W.; Orii, T.; Tomatsu, S.
Development of Bone Targeting Drugs. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2017 ,18, 1345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Loeer, J.; Duda, G.N.; Sass, F.A.; Dienelt, A. The Metabolic Microenvironment Steers Bone Tissue
Regeneration. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 2018 ,29, 99–110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
184. Kassem, M.; Bianco, P . Skeletal stem cells in space and time. Cell2015 ,160, 17–19. [CrossRef]
185. Tsai, T.L.; Li, W.J. Identiﬁcation of Bone Marrow-Derived Soluble Factors Regulating Human Mesenchymal
Stem Cells for Bone Regeneration. Stem Cell Rep. 2017 ,8, 387–400. [CrossRef]
186. Han, Y.; You, X.; Xing, W.; Zhang, Z.; Zou, W. Paracrine and endocrine actions of bone-the functions of
secretory proteins from osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts. Bone Res. 2018 ,6, 16. [CrossRef]
187. Szulc, P . Bone turnover: Biology and assessment tools. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2018 ,32,
725–738. [CrossRef]
188. Lopes, D.; Martins-Cruz, C.; Oliveira, M.B.; Mano, J.F. Bone physiology as inspiration for tissue regenerative
therapies. Biomaterials 2018 ,185, 240–275. [CrossRef]
189. Yellowley, C.E.; Genetos, D.C. Hypoxia Signalling in the Skeleton: Implications for Bone Health.
Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 2019 ,17, 26–35. [CrossRef]
190. Spyropoulou, A.; Karamesinis, K.; Basdra, E.K. Mechanotransduction pathways in bone pathobiology.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2015 ,1852 , 1700–1708. [CrossRef]
191. Compston, J.E.; McClung, M.R.; Leslie, W.D. Osteoporosis. Lancet 2019 ,393, 364–376. [CrossRef]
192. Fuggle, N.R.; Curtis, E.M.; Ward, K.A.; Harvey, N.C.; Dennison, E.M.; Cooper, C. Fracture prediction, imaging
and screening in osteoporosis. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2019 ,15, 535–547. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 32 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 32 of 36
193. Richards, J.B.; Zheng, H.F.; Spector, T.D. Genetics of osteoporosis from genome-wide association studies:
Advances and challenges. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2012 ,13, 576–588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
194. Sobacchi, C.; Schulz, A.; Coxon, F.P .; Villa, A.; Helfrich, M.H. Osteopetrosis: Genetics, treatment and new
insights into osteoclast function. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2013 ,9, 522–536. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Alonso, N.; Calero-Paniagua, I.; Del Pino-Montes, J. Clinical and Genetic Advances in Paget’s Disease of
Bone: A Review. Clin. Rev. Bone Miner. Metab. 2017 ,15, 37–48. [CrossRef]
196. Lee, W.C.; Guntur, A.R.; Long, F.; Rosen, C.J. Energy Metabolism of the Osteoblast: Implications for
Osteoporosis. Endocr. Rev. 2017 ,38, 255–266. [CrossRef]
197. Raterman, H.G.; Bultink, I.E.M.; Lems, W.F. Current Treatments and New Developments in the Management
of Glucocorticoid-induced Osteoporosis. Drugs 2019 ,79, 1065–1087. [CrossRef]
198. Adler, R.A. Update on osteoporosis in men. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2018 ,32, 759–772.
[CrossRef]
199. Zuo, H.; Wan, Y. Nuclear Receptors in Skeletal Homeostasis. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 2017 ,125, 71–107.
[CrossRef]
200. Khosla, S.; Monroe, D.G. Regulation of Bone Metabolism by Sex Steroids. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med.
2018 ,8. [CrossRef]
201. Yakar, S.; Werner, H.; Rosen, C.J. Insulin-like growth factors: Actions on the skeleton. J. Mol. Endocrinol.
2018 ,61, T115–T137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
202. Locatelli, V .; Bianchi, V .E. E ect of GH /IGF-1 on Bone Metabolism and Osteoporsosis. Int. J. Endocrinol. 2014 ,
2014 , 235060. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Ukon, Y.; Makino, T.; Kodama, J.; Tsukazaki, H.; Tateiwa, D.; Yoshikawa, H.; Kaito, T. Molecular-Based
Treatment Strategies for Osteoporosis: A Literature Review. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019 ,20, 2557. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
204. Van Caenegem, E.; Taes, Y.; Wierckx, K.; Vandewalle, S.; Toye, K.; Kaufman, J.M.; Schreiner, T.; Haraldsen, I.;
T’Sjoen, G. Low bone mass is prevalent in male-to-female transsexual persons before the start of cross-sex
hormonal therapy and gonadectomy. Bone 2013 ,54, 92–97. [CrossRef]
205. Van Caenegem, E.; Wierckx, K.; Taes, Y.; Dedecker, D.; Van de Peer, F.; Toye, K.; Kaufman, J.M.; T’Sjoen, G.
Bone mass, bone geometry, and body composition in female-to-male transsexual persons after long-term
cross-sex hormonal therapy. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2012 ,97, 2503–2511. [CrossRef]
206. Reppe, S.; Datta, H.K.; Gautvik, K.M. Omics analysis of human bone to identify genes and molecular
networks regulating skeletal remodeling in health and disease. Bone 2017 ,101, 88–95. [CrossRef]
207. Lv, H.; Jiang, F.; Guan, D.; Lu, C.; Guo, B.; Chan, C.; Peng, S.; Liu, B.; Guo, W.; Zhu, H.; et al. Metabolomics
and Its Application in the Development of Discovering Biomarkers for Osteoporosis Research. Int. J. Mol.
Sci.2016 ,17, 2018. [CrossRef]
208. Bjornerem, A.; Wang, X.; Bui, M.; Ghasem-Zadeh, A.; Hopper, J.L.; Zebaze, R.; Seeman, E. Menopause-Related
Appendicular Bone Loss is Mainly Cortical and Results in Increased Cortical Porosity. J. Bone Miner. Res.
2018 ,33, 598–605. [CrossRef]
209. Almeida, M.; Laurent, M.R.; Dubois, V .; Claessens, F.; O’Brien, C.A.; Bouillon, R.; Vanderschueren, D.;
Manolagas, S.C. Estrogens and Androgens in Skeletal Physiology and Pathophysiology. Physiol. Rev. 2017 ,
97, 135–187. [CrossRef]
210. Manolagas, S.C.; O’Brien, C.A.; Almeida, M. The role of estrogen and androgen receptors in bone health and
disease. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2013 ,9, 699–712. [CrossRef]
211. Vignozzi, L.; Malavolta, N.; Villa, P .; Mangili, G.; Migliaccio, S.; Lello, S. Consensus statement on the use
of HRT in postmenopausal women in the management of osteoporosis by SIE, SIOMMMS and SIGO. J.
Endocrinol. Invest. 2019 ,42, 609–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
212. Vanderschueren, D.; Laurent, M.R.; Claessens, F.; Gielen, E.; Lagerquist, M.K.; Vandenput, L.; Borjesson, A.E.;
Ohlsson, C. Sex steroid actions in male bone. Endocr. Rev. 2014 ,35, 906–960. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
213. Levin, V .A.; Jiang, X.; Kagan, R. Estrogen therapy for osteoporosis in the modern era. Osteoporos. Int. 2018 ,
29, 1049–1055. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
214. Jin, J. Hormone Therapy for Primary Prevention of Chronic Conditions in Postmenopausal Women. JAMA
2017 ,318, 2265. [CrossRef]
215. Ramchand, S.K.; Seeman, E. Advances and Unmet Needs in the Therapeutics of Bone Fragility. Front.
Endocrinol. 2018 ,9, 505. [CrossRef]

==== Page 33 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 33 of 36
216. Gurney, E.P .; Nachtigall, M.J.; Nachtigall, L.E.; Naftolin, F. The Women’s Health Initiative trial and related
studies: 10 years later: A clinician’s view. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2014 ,142, 4–11. [CrossRef]
217. Mikkola, T.S.; Tuomikoski, P .; Lyytinen, H.; Korhonen, P .; Hoti, F.; Vattulainen, P .; Gissler, M.; Ylikorkala, O.
Estradiol-based postmenopausal hormone therapy and risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.
Menopause 2015 ,22, 976–983. [CrossRef]
218. Barrett-Connor, E. Hormones and heart disease in women: The timing hypothesis. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2007 ,
166, 506–510. [CrossRef]
219. Gambacciani, M.; Cagnacci, A.; Lello, S. Hormone replacement therapy and prevention of chronic conditions.
Climacteric 2019 ,22, 303–306. [CrossRef]
220. Davis, S.R.; Baber, R.; Panay, N.; Bitzer, J.; Perez, S.C.; Islam, R.M.; Kaunitz, A.M.; Kingsberg, S.A.;
Lambrinoudaki, I.; Liu, J.; et al. Global Consensus Position Statement on the Use of Testosterone Therapy for
Women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2019 ,104, 4660–4666. [CrossRef]
221. Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer. Type and timing of menopausal hormone
therapy and breast cancer risk: Individual participant meta-analysis of the worldwide epidemiological
evidence. Lancet 2019 ,394, 1159–1168. [CrossRef]
222. Baber, R.J.; Panay, N.; Fenton, A.; A. Fenton the IMS Writing Group. 2016 IMS Recommendations on women’s
midlife health and menopause hormone therapy. Climacteric 2016 ,19, 109–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
223. Jared, D. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies ; W. W. Norton & Company: New York, NY, USA,
1997; Volume 14.
224. Kay, G.L.; Sergeant, M.J.; Giu ra, V .; Bandiera, P .; Milanese, M.; Bramanti, B.; Bianucci, R.; Pallen, M.J.
Recovery of a medieval Brucella melitensis genome using shotgun metagenomics. MBio 2014 ,5, e01337-14.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
225. Guellil, M.; Kersten, O.; Namouchi, A.; Bauer, E.L.; Derrick, M.; Jensen, A.Ø.; Stenseth, N.C.; Bramanti, B.
Genomic blueprint of a relapsing fever pathogen in 15th century Scandinavia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2018 ,115, 10422–10427. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
226. Rascovan, N.; Sjögren, K.-G.; Kristiansen, K.; Nielsen, R.; Willerslev, E.; Desnues, C.; Rasmussen, S. Emergence
and spread of basal lineages of Yersinia pestis during the Neolithic decline. Cell2019 ,176, 295–305. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
227. Hall, M.D.; Mideo, N. Linking sex di erences to the evolution of infectious disease life-histories. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2018 ,373, 20170431. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228. Bramanti, B.; Hummel, S.; Chiarelli, A.B.; Herrmann, B. Ancient DNA analysis of the delta F508 mutation.
Hum. Biol. 2003 ,75, 105–115. [CrossRef]
229. Hughes, J.F.; Page, D.C. The biology and evolution of mammalian Y chromosomes. Annu. Rev. Genet. 2015 ,
49, 507–527. [CrossRef]
230. Washburn, T.C.; Medearis, D.N.; Childs, B. Sex di erences in susceptibility to infections. Pediatrics 1965 ,35,
57–64.
231. World Health Organization. Addressing Sex and Gender in Epidemic-Prone Infectious Diseases ; World Health
Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.
232. Bramanti, B.; Dean, K.R.; Walløe, L.; Chr. Stenseth, N. The Third Plague Pandemic in Europe. Proc. R. Soc. B
2019 ,286, 20182429. [CrossRef]
233. Pandey, A.; Sengupta, P .G.; Mondal, S.K.; Gupta, D.N.; Manna, B.; Ghosh, S.; Sur, D.; Bhattacharya, S.K.
Gender di erences in healthcare-seeking during common illnesses in a rural community of West Bengal,
India. J. Health Popul. Nutr. 2002 ,20, 306–311.
234. Mitra, A.K.; Rahman, M.M.; Fuchs, G.J. Risk factors and gender di erentials for death among children
hospitalized with diarrhoea in Bangladesh. J. Health Popul. Nutr. 2000 ,18, 151–156. [PubMed]
235. Markle, J.G.; Fish, E.N. SeXX matters in immunity. Trends Immunol. 2014 ,35, 97–104. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
236. Reardon, S. Infections reveal inequality between the sexes. Nat. News 2016 ,534, 447. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
237. Fish, E.N. The X-ﬁles in immunity: Sex-based di erences predispose immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol.
2008 ,8, 737. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
238. Vom Steeg, L.G.; Klein, S.L. SeXX matters in infectious disease pathogenesis. PLoS Pathog. 2016 ,12, e1005374.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
239. Klein, S.L. Sex inﬂuences immune responses to viruses, and e cacy of prophylaxis and treatments for viral
diseases. Bioessays 2012 ,34, 1050–1059. [CrossRef]

==== Page 34 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 34 of 36
240. Úbeda, F.; Jansen, V .A.A. The evolution of sex-speciﬁc virulence in infectious diseases. Nat. Commun. 2016 ,
7, 13849. [CrossRef]
241. Klein, S.L.; Marriott, I.; Fish, E.N. Sex-based di erences in immune function and responses to vaccination.
Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2015 ,109, 9–15. [CrossRef]
242. Marriott, I.; Huet-Hudson, Y.M. Sexual dimorphism in innate immune responses to infectious organisms.
Immunol. Res. 2006 ,34, 177–192. [CrossRef]
243. Schurz, H.; Salie, M.; Tromp, G.; Hoal, E.G.; Kinnear, C.J.; Möller, M. The X chromosome and sex-speciﬁc
eects in infectious disease susceptibility. Hum. Genom. 2019 ,13, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
244. Jaillon, S.; Berthenet, K.; Garlanda, C. Sexual Dimorphism in Innate Immunity. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol.
2019 ,56, 308–321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
245. Guerra-Silveira, F.; Abad-Franch, F. Sex bias in infectious disease epidemiology: Patterns and processes.
PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e62390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. Klein, S.L. Hormonal and immunological mechanisms mediating sex di erences in parasite infection. Parasite
Immunol. 2004 ,26, 247–264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
247. Roberts, C.W.; Walker, W.; Alexander, J. Sex-associated hormones and immunity to protozoan parasites. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 2001 ,14, 476–488. [CrossRef]
248. Borgdor , M.W.; Veen, J.; Kalisvaart, N.A.; Nagelkerke, N. Mortality among tuberculosis patients in The
Netherlands in the period 1993–1995. Eur. Respir. J. 1998 ,11, 816–820. [CrossRef]
249. Jimenez-Corona, M.-E.; Garcia-Garcia, L.; DeRiemer, K.; Ferreyra-Reyes, L.; Bobadilla-del-Valle, M.;
Cano-Arellano, B.; Canizales-Quintero, S.; Martinez-Gamboa, A.; Small, P .M.; Sifuentes-Osornio, J. Gender
dierentials of pulmonary tuberculosis transmission and reactivation in an endemic area. Thorax 2006 ,61,
348–353. [CrossRef]
250. Zumla, A.; George, A.; Sharma, V .; Herbert, R.H.N.; Oxley, A.; Oliver, M. The WHO 2014 global tuberculosis
report—Further to go. Lancet Glob. Health 2015 ,3, e10–e12. [CrossRef]
251. Bellamy, R.; Beyers, N.; McAdam, K.P .W.J.; Ruwende, C.; Gie, R.; Samaai, P .; Bester, D.; Meyer, M.; Corrah, T.;
Collin, M. Genetic susceptibility to tuberculosis in Africans: A genome-wide scan. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2000 ,97, 8005–8009. [CrossRef]
252. Bernin, H.; Lotter, H. Sex bias in the outcome of human tropical infectious diseases: Inﬂuence of steroid
hormones. J. Infect. Dis. 2014 ,209, S107–S113. [CrossRef]
253. Pathak, S.; Rege, M.; Gogtay, N.J.; Aigal, U.; Sharma, S.K.; Valecha, N.; Bhanot, G.; Kshirsagar, N.A.; Sharma, S.
Age-dependent sex bias in clinical malarial disease in hypoendemic regions. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e35592.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
254. Karami, M.; Doudi, M.; Setorki, M. Assessing epidemiology of cutaneous leishmaniasis in Isfahan, Iran.
J. Vector Borne Dis. 2013 ,50, 30. [PubMed]
255. Marlow, M.A.; da Silva Mattos, M.; Makowiecky, M.E.; Eger, I.; Rossetto, A.L.; Grisard, E.C.; Steindel, M.
Divergent proﬁle of emerging cutaneous leishmaniasis in subtropical Brazil: New endemic areas in the
southern frontier. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e56177. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
256. Murback, N.D.N.; Hans Filho, G.; Nascimento, R.A.F.d.; Nakazato, K.R.d.O.; Dorval, M.E.M.C. American
cutaneous leishmaniasis: Clinical, epidemiological and laboratory studies conducted at a university teaching
hospital in Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil. An. Bras. Dermatol. 2011 ,86, 55–63. [CrossRef]
257. Sarkari, B.; Hatam, G.; Ghatee, M.A. Epidemiological features of visceral leishmaniasis in Fars province,
southern Iran. Iran. J. Public Health 2012 ,41, 94.
258. McClelland, E.E.; Hobbs, L.M.; Rivera, J.; Casadevall, A.; Potts, W.K.; Smith, J.M.; Ory, J.J. The role of host
gender in the pathogenesis of Cryptococcus neoformans infections. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e63632. [CrossRef]
259. Aaby, P .; Samb, B.; Simondon, F.; Seck, A.M.C.; Knudsen, K.; Whittle, H. Non-speciﬁc beneﬁcial e ect of
measles immunisation: Analysis of mortality studies from developing countries. BMJ 1995 ,311, 481–485.
[CrossRef]
260. Ingersoll, M.A. Sex di erences shape the response to infectious diseases. PLoS Pathog. 2017 ,13, e1006688.
[CrossRef]
261. Harper, M.; Fowlis, G. 3. Management of urinary tract infections in men. Trends Urol. Gynaecol. Sex. Health
2007 ,12, 30–35. [CrossRef]

==== Page 35 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 35 of 36
262. Furman, D.; Hejblum, B.P .; Simon, N.; Jojic, V .; Dekker, C.L.; Thi ébaut, R.; Tibshirani, R.J.; Davis, M.M.
Systems analysis of sex di erences reveals an immunosuppressive role for testosterone in the response to
inﬂuenza vaccination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014 ,111, 869–874. [CrossRef]
263. Dance, A. Why the sexes don’t feel pain the same way. Nature 2019 ,567, 448–450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
264. Fillingim, R.B.; King, C.D.; Ribeiro-Dasilva, M.C.; Rahim-Williams, B.; Riley, J.L., 3rd. Sex, gender, and pain:
A review of recent clinical and experimental ﬁndings. J. Pain 2009 ,10, 447–485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
265. Bartley, E.J.; Fillingim, R.B. Sex di erences in pain: A brief review of clinical and experimental ﬁndings. Br. J.
Anaesth. 2013 ,111, 52–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
266. Darnall, B.D.; Stacey, B.R.; Chou, R. Medical and psychological risks and consequences of long-term opioid
therapy in women. Pain Med. 2012 ,13, 1181–1211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
267. Christov-Moore, L.; Simpson, E.A.; Coude, G.; Grigaityte, K.; Iacoboni, M.; Ferrari, P .F. Empathy: Gender
eects in brain and behavior. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2014 ,46, 604–627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
268. Albert, P .R. Why is depression more prevalent in women? J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 2015 ,40, 219–221. [CrossRef]
269. Packiasabapathy, S.; Sadhasivam, S. Gender, genetics, and analgesia: Understanding the di erences in
response to pain relief. J. Pain Res. 2018 ,11, 2729–2739. [CrossRef]
270. Ray, S.K.; Samntaray, S.; Banik, N.L. Future directions for using estrogen receptor agonists in the treatment of
acute and chronic spinal cord injury. Neural Regen. Res. 2016 ,11, 1418–1419. [CrossRef]
271. Bi, R.; Foy, M.R.; Thompson, R.F.; Baudry, M. E ects of estrogen, age, and calpain on MAP kinase and NMDA
receptors in female rat brain. Neurobiol. Aging 2003 ,24, 977–983. [CrossRef]
272. Tang, B.; Ji, Y.; Traub, R.J. Estrogen alters spinal NMDA receptor activity via a PKA signalling pathway in a
visceral pain model in the rat. Pain 2008 ,137, 540–549. [CrossRef]
273. Deng, C.; Gu, Y.J.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, J. Estrogen a ects neuropathic pain through upregulating
N-methyl-D-aspartate acid receptor 1 expression in the dorsal root ganglion of rats. Neural Regen. Res. 2017 ,
12, 464–469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
274. Ortiz-Renteria, M.; Juarez-Contreras, R.; Gonzalez-Ramirez, R.; Islas, L.D.; Sierra-Ramirez, F.; Llorente, I.;
Simon, S.A.; Hiriart, M.; Rosenbaum, T.; Morales-Lazaro, S.L. TRPV1 channels and the progesterone receptor
Sig-1R interact to regulate pain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018 ,115, E1657–E1666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
275. Clark, J.D. Preclinical Pain Research: Can We Do Better? Anesthesiology 2016 ,125, 846–849. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
276. Travers, A. Gender and pain is it an issue? SAJAA 2009 ,15, 7–10. [CrossRef]
277. Mazure, C.M. Our evolving science: Studying the inﬂuence of sex in preclinical research. Biol. Sex Di er.
2016 ,7, 15. [CrossRef]
278. Mazure, C.M.; Jones, D.P . Twenty years and still counting: Including women as participants and studying
sex and gender in biomedical research. BMC Womens Health 2015 ,15, 94. [CrossRef]
279. Sorge, R.E.; LaCroix-Fralish, M.L.; Tuttle, A.H.; Sotocinal, S.G.; Austin, J.S.; Ritchie, J.; Chanda, M.L.;
Graham, A.C.; Topham, L.; Beggs, S.; et al. Spinal cord Toll-like receptor 4 mediates inﬂammatory and
neuropathic hypersensitivity in male but not female mice. J. Neurosci. 2011 ,31, 15450–15454. [CrossRef]
280. Sorge, R.E.; Mapplebeck, J.C.; Rosen, S.; Beggs, S.; Taves, S.; Alexander, J.K.; Martin, L.J.; Austin, J.S.;
Sotocinal, S.G.; Chen, D.; et al. Di erent immune cells mediate mechanical pain hypersensitivity in male and
female mice. Nat. Neurosci. 2015 ,18, 1081–1083. [CrossRef]
281. Yamamotova, A.; Hrabak, P .; Hribek, P .; Rokyta, R. Do multiple body modiﬁcations alter pain threshold?
Physiol. Res. 2017 ,66, S493–S500.
282. Belfer, I. Pain in women. Agri 2017 ,29, 51–54. [CrossRef]
283. Aloisi, A.M.; Bachiocco, V .; Costantino, A.; Stefani, R.; Ceccarelli, I.; Bertaccini, A.; Meriggiola, M.C. Cross-sex
hormone administration changes pain in transsexual women and men. Pain 2007 ,132, S60–S67. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
284. Fisher, J.A.; Ronald, L.M. Sex, gender, and pharmaceutical politics: From drug development to marketing.
Gend. Med. 2010 ,7, 357–370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
285. Doyle, H.H.; Eidson, L.N.; Sinkiewicz, D.M.; Murphy, A.Z. Sex Di erences in Microglia Activity within
the Periaqueductal Gray of the Rat: A Potential Mechanism Driving the Dimorphic E ects of Morphine.
J. Neurosci. 2017 ,37, 3202–3214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
286. Averitt, D.L.; Eidson, L.N.; Doyle, H.H.; Murphy, A.Z. Neuronal and glial factors contributing to sex
dierences in opioid modulation of pain. Neuropsychopharmacology 2019 ,44, 155–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

==== Page 36 ====
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 296 36 of 36
287. Aubrun, F.; Salvi, N.; Coriat, P .; Riou, B. Sex- and age-related di erences in morphine requirements for
postoperative pain relief. Anesthesiology 2005 ,103, 156–160. [CrossRef]
288. Els, C.; Jackson, T.D.; Kunyk, D.; Lappi, V .G.; Sonnenberg, B.; Hagtvedt, R.; Sharma, S.; Kolahdooz, F.;
Straube, S. Adverse events associated with medium- and long-term use of opioids for chronic non-cancer
pain: An overview of Cochrane Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2017 ,10, CD012509. [CrossRef]
289. Legato, M.; Glezerman, M. The International Society for Gender Medicine , 1st ed.; Academic Press: Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2017.
290. Gianazza, E.; Miller, I.; Guerrini, U.; Palazzolo, L.; Parravicini, C.; Eberini, I. Gender proteomics I. Which
proteins in non-sexual organs. J. Proteom. 2018 ,178, 7–17. [CrossRef]
291. Gianazza, E.; Miller, I.; Guerrini, U.; Palazzolo, L.; Parravicini, C.; Eberini, I. Gender proteomics II. Which
proteins in sexual organs. J. Proteom. 2018 ,178, 18–30. [CrossRef]
292. Arnold, A.P .; Lusis, A.J. Understanding the sexome: Measuring and reporting sex di erences in gene systems.
Endocrinology 2012 ,153, 2551–2555. [CrossRef]
293. Arnold, A.P . Promoting the understanding of sex di erences to enhance equity and excellence in biomedical
science. Biol. Sex Di er.2010 ,1, 1. [CrossRef]
294. Arnold, A.P . Sex chromosomes and brain gender. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2004 ,5, 701–708. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
295. Harvey, R.E.; Co man, K.E.; Miller, V .M. Women-speciﬁc factors to consider in risk, diagnosis and treatment
of cardiovascular disease. Womens Health 2015 ,11, 239–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
296. Dorak, M.T.; Karpuzoglu, E. Gender di erences in cancer susceptibility: An inadequately addressed issue.
Front. Genet. 2012 ,3, 268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
297. Available online: http: //ec.europa.eu /research /health /pdf/2013-10_personalised_medicine_en.pdf (accessed
on 13 December 2019).
298. Johnson, P .A.; Fitzgerald, T.; Glynn, A.; Salganico , A.; Wood, S.F.; Goldstein, J.M. Precision Medicine: How
Sex and Gender Drive Innovation. 2016. Available online: http: //www.tbf.org /~{}/media /TBFOrg /Files/
Reports /ConnorsCenterBrochure-2016.pdf2016 (accessed on 13 December 2016).
299. Panagiotou, G.; Nielsen, J. Nutritional systems biology: Deﬁnitions and approaches. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 2009 ,
29, 329–339. [CrossRef]
300. Hamishehkar, H.; Ranjdoost, F.; Asgharian, P .; Mahmoodpoor, A.; Sanaie, S. Vitamins, Are They Safe? Adv.
Pharm. Bull. 2016 ,6, 467–477. [CrossRef]
301. Biesalski, H.K.; Tinz, J. Multivitamin /mineral supplements: Rationale and safety—A systematic review.
Nutrition 2017 ,33, 76–82. [CrossRef]
302. Tisato, V .; Muggeo, P .; Lupiano, T.; Longo, G.; Serino, M.L.; Grassi, M.; Arcamone, E.; Secchiero, P .; Zauli, G.;
Santoro, N.; et al. Maternal Haplotypes in DHFR Promoter and MTHFR Gene in Tuning Childhood Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia Onset-Latency: Genetic /Epigenetic Mother /Child Dyad Study (GEMCDS). Genes
2019 ,10, 634. [CrossRef]
©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).

