==== Page 1 ====
Citation: Ahmad, Z.; Li, J.;
Mahmood, T. Adaptive
Hyperparameter Fine-Tuning for
Boosting the Robustness and Quality
of the Particle Swarm Optimization
Algorithm for Non-Linear RBF
Neural Network Modelling and Its
Applications. Mathematics 2023 ,11,
242. https://doi.org/10.3390/
math11010242
Academic Editors: António Lopes,
Omid Nikan and Zakieh Avazzadeh
Received: 4 December 2022
Revised: 26 December 2022
Accepted: 28 December 2022
Published: 3 Jaunary 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
mathematics
Article
Adaptive Hyperparameter Fine-T uning for Boosting the
Robustness and Quality of the Particle Swarm Optimization
Algorithm for Non-Linear RBF Neural Network Modelling and
Its Applications
Zohaib Ahmad1, Jianqiang Li1,2
and Tariq Mahmood3,*
1Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100024, China
2Beijing Engineering Research Center for IoT Software and Systems, Beijing 100124, China
3Faculty of Information Sciences, Vehari Campus, University of Education, Vehari 61100, Pakistan
*Correspondence: tmsherazi@ue.edu.pk
Simple Summary: A radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) is proposed for identifying
and diagnosing non-linear systems. The neural network developed was optimized not only for
RBFNN output layer parameters, including centers, width, and weights, but also for network size
(the count of neurons stored in the hidden layer). Two optimization methods, namely, particle swarm
optimization (PSO) and hybrid PSO coupled with a spiral-shaped mechanism (HPSO-SSM), were
used to train the RBFNN hyperparameters and network size. Simulation results showed that the
suggested technique outperformed other current approaches with respect to prediction precision and
network compactness.
Abstract: A method is proposed for recognizing and predicting non-linear systems employing a
radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) and robust hybrid particle swarm optimization (HPSO)
approach. A PSO is coupled with a spiral-shaped mechanism (HPSO-SSM) to optimize the PSO
performance by mitigating its constraints, such as sluggish convergence and the local minimum
dilemma. Three advancements are incorporated into the hypothesized HPSO-SSM algorithms to
achieve remarkable results. First, the diversity of the search process is promoted to update the
inertial weight wbased on the logistic map sequence. Then, two distinct parameters are trained in
the original position update algorithm to enhance the work efﬁciency of the successive generation.
Finally, the proposed approach employs a spiral-shaped mechanism as a local search operator inside
the optimum solution space. Moreover, the HPSO-SSM method concurrently improves the RBFNN
parameters and network size, building a model with a compact conﬁguration and higher precision.
Two non-linear benchmark functions and the total phosphorus (TP) modelling issue in a waste water
treatment process (WWTP) are utilized to assess the overall efﬁcacy of the creative technique. The
results of testing indicate that the projected HPSO-SSM-RBFNN algorithm performed very effectively.
Keywords: RBFNN; non-linear system modelling; time-series prediction; HPSO
MSC: 68T20
1. Introduction
It is widely recognized that many real-world problems can be addressed by employing
a non-linear model.
Hence, non-linear system modelling has been a consistent focus of research [ 1]. Several
novel methods have been used for the development of non-linear modelling systems,
including non-linear regression, multivariate statistical methods, and neural network-
based architectures [ 2,3]. Due to their efﬁcient approximation abilities, research interest in
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242. https://doi.org/10.3390/math11010242 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/mathematics

==== Page 2 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 2 of 16
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) has increased enormously [ 4,5]. In contrast to traditional
approaches, ANNs can model non-linear connections between input and output variables.
Artiﬁcial network-based techniques are used in several scientiﬁc and technical do-
mains and applications, such as non-linear systems modelling, adaptive learning control,
and pattern recognition strategies [ 6–9]. Various neural network topologies are available
due to their adaptability and extensive parameter-tuning options. RBFNN algorithms
have been widely utilized for modelling and controlling non-linear systems owing to their
universal computation capability and structural elegance [ 10]. It has been demonstrated
that the RBFNN approach can simulate any continuous function given adequate RBF neu-
rons [ 11]. Standard RBFNN learning-based algorithms can address problems in predicting
network sizes (the degree of RBF neurons) and updating hyperparameters (i.e., RBF center
coordinates, RBF neuron widths, and output weights) to attain the required approximation
precision [12,13].
Error back-propagation (BP) is one of the most used methods for modifying the
RBFNN architecture [ 14]. However, the BP approach results in a poor global search
experience and the problem of a prolonged convergence rate. Several studies have been
conducted to determine the local minimum. Recursive least squares (RLS) may yield a
more optimal convergence rate and heightened accuracy than the BP solution [ 15]. This
enhancement necessitates a set of very complex mathematical expressions and greater use
of computing resources. The RBFNN size has a substantial effect on its performance and it
is important to improve RBFNN size for overall performance enhancement. The adaptive
growth and pruning method [ 16] is used to develop a recurrent neural network, with the
hyperparameters ﬁne-tuned to enhance the network’s performance. The self-organizing
RBFNN network is then trained, while simultaneously modifying the network size and
features using forward and backward selection techniques [17].
Evolutionary algorithms (EA) have been used to boost the performance of networks.
Xiao et al. [ 18], and Sheng et al. [ 19] introduced evolutionary algorithms to develop an
RBFNN approach. Feng et al. [ 20] employed PSO to overcome the widespread convergence
time problem encountered while training RBFNNs, resulting in a PSO-based self-generating
RBFNN. Alexandridis et al. [ 21] proposed a new approach based on fuzzy means and PSO
algorithms for training RBFNNs. Abdi at al. [ 22] developed an RBFNN model using a
non-linear time-varying evolutionary PSO (NTVE-PSO) technique. An NTVE-PSO method
was used to assess the RBFNN’s optimal hyperparameters and network size concurrently
for time-series prediction problems. Other EA approaches, including the ant colony search
algorithm [ 23], genetic algorithms [ 24] and artiﬁcial immune systems [ 25] have been applied
to prediction problems.
From the perspective of evolutionary approaches, the PSO algorithm has a relatively
quick approximation speed for optimal outcomes, enabling it to optimize system param-
eters efﬁciently [ 26–28]. The PSO method continuously updates the particle’s position
using the particle’s current position, global extremum, and individual extremum. The
PSO algorithm can meet the challenge of continually optimizing functions. However, con-
verging in advance is more manageable (especially when dealing with highly non-linear
optimization problems) because the local optimization potential is restricted. The core
formula for position updates must balance exploration and exploitation throughout the
probe operation. This might impair the efﬁcacy of the accompanying algorithms. Moreover,
the current PSO-based algorithms need not fully use existing optimum solution data to
steer the search space.
To address these obstacles, a unique global optimization strategy, namely hybrid PSO
combined with a spiral-shaped mechanism (HPSO-SSM) [ 29,30], is proposed to design
RBFNNs with enhanced performance in the application of non-linear-system modelling and
prediction. The proposed HPSO-SSM-based RBF neural network (HPSO-SSM-RBFNN) has
dual advantages. Firstly, the logistic map sequence is employed in the original PSO method
to boost the search strategy’s variety. A unique position-updating model is incorporated for

==== Page 3 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 3 of 16
enhancing position quality and a spiral-shaped process. Second, the suggested HPSO-SSM
technique optimizes the RBFNN parameters and size.
The key contributions of the present study are as follows:
• To alleviate the limitations of PSO, such as sluggish convergence, eliminate the local
minimum dilemma and boost the quality of PSO outcomes, a hybrid HPSO-SSM
algorithm is developed.
• Three signiﬁcant improvements are made to the original PSO: First, a logistic map
sequence is used to adjust the inertial weight w, which provides sufﬁcient variety and
facilitates the avoidance of optimal solutions throughout the selection process.
• Second, a signiﬁcantly improved update equation for creating the next-generation
position is proposed, which can more effectively integrate exploration and exploitation.
• Third, a spiral-shaped mechanism (SSM) is coupled to the original PSO as a local
search strategy for the known optimum solution.
• Finally, the proposed HPSO-SSM approach is applied to optimize the network RBFNN
parameters and size. Two non-linear benchmark functions, namely, (1) Lorenz time-
series, (2) non-linear system identiﬁcation and (3) the total phosphorus (TP) modelling
problem in a waste water treatment process (WWTP), were tested. Simulation results
of the RBFNN trained by HPSO-SSM were obtained to assess its performance with
respect to the root mean squared error (RMSE). The presented HPSO-SSM-RBFNN is
designed to enable greater solution precision with smaller network size. The ﬁndings
indicate that this model is superior to other RBFNN models.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 explains the operational principles of the
RBF neural network. In Section 3 particle swarm optimization (PSO), the hybrid method
HPSO-SSM models and the new implementation strategy for HPSO-SSM-RBFNN are
described. Section 4 presents the ﬁndings for evaluation of several optimization techniques
applied to a variety of benchmark situations. The norms obtained are relevant to non-
linear structural analysis, time-series prediction of the Lorenz system, and TP estimation
in WWTP . These ﬁndings are compared to data for existing approaches. Finally, Section 5
highlights and summarizes the study’s results.
2. Methods and Materials
A uniﬁed hybrid approach is proposed for optimizing the hyperparameters and size
of RBFNNs. Optimization of neural networks remains a difﬁcult endeavour in the ﬁeld
of machine learning. Traditional training methods are often susceptible to local optima
and premature convergence, rendering them inefﬁcient for datasets containing multiple
attributes. However, EC-based training algorithms have become more widely considered
because of their robustness in overcoming the constraints of traditional methods. In the
present study, three benchmark datasets are used to investigate an integrated training
algorithm that combines particle swarm optimization (PSO) with a spiral-shaped mech-
anism (SSM). The proposed logistic map sequence boosts the search process diversity to
overcome the conventional PSO algorithm’s limitations, such as slow convergence, the
local minimum problem, and low-quality results. In addition, an updated algorithm and
spiral-shaped method are implemented to enhance the position features.
A novel machine-learning-based algorithm is proposed to handle imbalanced datasets,
which can be misleading when training algorithms during the classiﬁcation task. The
proposed approach contributes to improving algorithm performance and reducing the
problems of over-ﬁtting and under-ﬁtting. A strategy for creating a master feature vec-
tor (MFV) is also presented, which avoids the unfavourable effects of the classiﬁcation
scheme caused by data inconsistencies, missing values, and classiﬁcation-related issues.
The proposed MFV achieves high prediction performance scores, while addressing data
inconsistencies, issues related to missing values, and data imbalance problems. The primary
purpose of the present study is to boost data quality by introducing a cutting-edge approach
to impute missing thresholds and enrich the predictive performance of algorithms.

==== Page 4 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 4 of 16
2.1. Datasets
Three experiments were carried out to assess the efﬁcacy of the newly created algo-
rithms. Five hundred input-output data samples were collected from a natural small-scale
wastewater treatment plant in China (Beijing) between June 2019 and May 2020. After
denoising and normalizing employing the wavelet approach, 250 cases were selected for
model training and 150 for testing [ 31,32]. The proposed algorithm’s performance was
improved by discrediting attribute values and allowing missing values. The efﬁcacy of the
proposed hybrid HPSO-SSM-based RBF neural networks (HPSO-SSM-RBFNN) was eval-
uated using Lorenz time-series and non-linear system identiﬁcation benchmark datasets.
Experiments were then conducted on a real application issue for the TP modelling problem
in a WWTP to demonstrate the proposed algorithm’s superiority in prediction accuracy.
2.2. Data Enhancement
Initial data preprocessing was crucial for achieving the remarkable results obtained in
the experiments. Data-processing techniques used included data discretization, the imputa-
tion of missing values, and the accommodation of imbalanced data for the robust training
of the recommended models. Moreover, essential features were recognized throughout the
discretization procedure.
The proposed strategy eliminated noise from the dataset and enhanced the algorithm’s
performance.
2.3. Cutting-Edge Methods
2.3.1. Improved Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) Algorithms
PSO is a stochastic searching efﬁcient algorithm that mimics ﬁsh schooling and bird
ﬂocking within a swarm [ 33]. Each particle in PSO depicts a possible remedy within the
search range. In this study, every particle optimizes its onward path set on its optimal initial
position and the most suitable existing location of every particle to obtain the globally
optimal solution. A vector indicates the previous position of particle iduring the searching
phase, as described in Equation (1).
xi= (xi1,xi2,xi3, . . .xiD) (1)
Here, Dspeciﬁes the extent of the pest space and Nswarm size with i=1, 2, . . .N.
Every particle has a ﬂight velocity, explained by Equation (2).
vi= (vi1,vi2, . . .viD) (2)
Each particle’s velocity is based on its acquired memory so that it may explore all
of the search areas. Now, consider pbest i, the previous best position of the particle i, is
designated as pbest i=pbest i1,pbest i2,pbest i3,. . .pbest iD. Consequently, gbest i=gbest 1,
gbest 2, . . .gbest Dis stated to be the optimal position determined by the whole swarm.
The improved PSO algorithm requires adjustment of the ﬂight speed and position
every iteration. The updating methods of the ithparticle’s velocity vt+1
idand position xt+1
id
of the (t+1)thiteration and d-dimension are deﬁned using Equations (3) and (4).
vt+1
id=wvt
id+c1ri1(pbest id xt
id) +c2ri2(pbest d xt
id) (3)
xt+1
id=xt
id+vt+1
id(4)
where, r1iand r2iare random numbers within 0 and 1. wrepresents the inertia weight. c1
and c2, are the position constants also known as acceleration constants.
2.3.2. HPSO-SSM Algorithm
Although the PSO approach is effective for discovering an appropriate solution, it has
three drawbacks, including early convergence, inadequate imbalance between local and

==== Page 5 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 5 of 16
global search efﬁciency, and a lack of modiﬁcation near locally optimal locations. Here, a
new fused particle swarm optimization approach melded with a spiral-shaped mechanism
(HPSO-SSM) is proposed to overcome the inadequacies of PSO. In the suggested HPSO-
SSM approach, the original PSO is modiﬁed in three signiﬁcant ways. The PSO approach
uses a logistic map to update the inertia weight wto drive the result’s convergence toward
the global optimum solution, as represented in Equation (5).
wt=mwt 1(1 wt 1) (5)
Here, mis a positive constant (m=4)and tis the current iteration number. The
features of randomness and ergodicity of the sequence boost the algorithm’s capacity to
avoid locally optimum solutions.
In the proposed HPSO-SSM technique, the particle locations are updated in two
distinct ways. Firstly, spiral-shaped mechanisms are used, and, in the second step, the
modiﬁed standard PSO position update formula is implemented. The designed spiral-
shaped mechanism enhances the local recognition ability and maximizes the probability of
ﬁnding the PSO algorithm’s global result during the search phase. The trajectory of the
spiral-shaped process is computed based on the distance of the preceding and ithparticle
positions in the search area [ 34]. A suggested mechanism is proposed for developing the
next generation of particle locations to describe the two position update techniques.
A probability of 80% based on the results of several investigations was obtained.
The variable pdetermines the method using a random value within 0and 1selected
at every operation.
If the p>0.8, the spiral-shaped mechanism is applied; otherwise a modiﬁed updating
formula is used. Using Equation (6), the spiral-shaped mechanism determines the following
location of a particle.
xt+1
id=jgbest d xt
idjexp(bl)cos(2pl) +gbest d (6)
Here, brepresents a positive constant (b=2), and lis a random value between  1
and 1. Otherwise, the position is updated using the modiﬁed formula, as described in
Equation (7).
xt+1
id=<t
1xt
id+<t
2vt+1
id(7)
In Equation (7), the<1and<2are dynamic correction factors, introduced in the HPSO-
SSM algorithm to control the trade-off between exploration and exploitation throughout
the search process. Since, in the HPSO-SSM algorithm, the position values are limited to
the range between 0and 1, the formulas for the dynamic correction factors were slightly
modiﬁed, to preserve their functionality in the domain of the chosen objective function, as
illustrated in Equations (8)–(11).
<t
1=1

1+exp
a( min(SP)
max(SP)) t(8)
<t
2=1 <t
1 (9)
SPt
i=xt 1
i
M"
xt 1
i
M#T
(10)
M=max(jAminj,jAmaxj) (11)
where ais a constant (a=2)and SPis the modiﬁed position magnitude formula. Mis the
normalization factor in which Aminand Amaxdenote the boundaries of the search space.
The ﬂow diagram of the developed HPSO-SSM approach is shown in Figure 1.

==== Page 6 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 6 of 16
Figure 1. Step-wise description of the suggested HPSO-SSM algorithm.
2.3.3. RBFNN Architecture
The RBFNN is a straightforward network architecture with robust non-linear approx-
imation capability, resulting in an efﬁcient learning rate. The suggested model is based
on a multi-layer architecture comprising input, hidden, and output layers, as depicted in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. The multi-layer architecture of RBFNN algorithms comprises an input layer, hidden layer,
and output layer.
The RBF architecture transfers the vector from the input to the hidden layer. RBF
handles the concealed layer and has solid non-linear ﬁtting capability. The hidden layer
node remakes the non-linear operation into a high-dimensional linearly separable space
with the aid of the basis function. The ﬁnal predicted ﬁnding is yielded by linearly merging

==== Page 7 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 7 of 16
the outcomes of the hidden nodes. A Gaussian function is utilized as the RBF in the hidden
layer. Equation (12) illustrates ﬁnding of the ithhidden node.
fi(x) =Rkx cik=exp
 kx cik
2s2
i
(12)
Here, xrepresents the inputs of RBFNN; ciandsirepresent the hidden node’s centre
vector and width value, respectively. Equation (13) shows the RBFNN predicted output y.
y=H
å
i=1wiFi(x) (13)
In Equation (13),wirepresents the weight of the hidden nodes and i=1, 2, . . .,H,
Hdesignates the count of hidden nodes. During the learning phase, parameters (ci,si,
wi)and the hidden node are ﬁne-tuned using the training data samples. The HPSO-SSM
strategy is proposed to determine the best combination of these parameters iteratively.
3. Proposed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN Architecture
This section explores the HPSO-SSM-RBF-based neural network (HPSO-SSM-RBFNN)
with conﬁgurable network scope and parameters. During the learning phase, the position
of the ithparticle is described in Equation (14).
xi= [cT
i,1,si,1,wi,1,cT
i,2,si,2,wi,2. . .cT
i,Hi,si,Hi,wi,Hi] (14)
In Equation (14), the Hidenotes network size (number of hidden neurons) and Di=
(2+n)Hidescribes the dimension of the ithparticle. The HPSO-SSM-RBFNN approach
searches for the optimal particle to select the optimal RBFNN between all particles. The
dimensions of other particles may also be modiﬁed, as speciﬁed in Equation (15)
Hi=(
Hi 1i f Hbest <Hi
Hi 1i f HbestHi)
(15)
here, Hbest represents the best particle’s network size.
The following are the HPSO-SSM-RBFNN functioning procedures.
Step. 1: Initialize algorithm parameters, comprising the volume of swarm N, the
boundary of position xmaxand velocity vmax, the acceleration coefﬁcients c1and c2and
the maximum iteration number t=1. For each particle i, initialize t=1and pick two D-
dimensional vectors at random to initialize the xiposition and vivelocity of each particle i.
Step. 2 Encoding: The RBF algorithm is bound by each rule, including precedent and
subsequent parameters; hence, with the centre ci, the width si, and output weight wi, as
well as the network size, are evenly encoded into an individual. All individuals could
characterise the RBFNN structure.
Step. 3: Each particle’s ﬁtness value reﬂects the network’s precision. The RBFNN
hyperparameters and network size are optimized by determining the ﬁtness value of every
particle depending on the error criteria and network size. The less the ﬁtness value, the
more superior the ithapproach, as explained in Equation (16).
f(xi(t)) = Ei(t) +aHi(t) (16)
Here, f(xi(t))shows the cost value of ithparticle, Hiis the network size, and Ei(k)
is the root mean square error (RMSE). The RMSE is applied to assess the efﬁcacy of the
network, as in Equation (17).
Ei(t) =vuut1
TT
å
t=1(y(t) yd(t))2 (17)

==== Page 8 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 8 of 16
Here, yd(t)represents the required output, y(t)is the predicted network output, and
Tis number of data instances.
Step. 4: Compute the ﬁtness function for every particle iaccording to Equation (17).
Set each particle’s current position as the personal ﬁne ﬁtness gbest i. Then, as the global
ﬁnest ﬁtness gbest of the whole swarm, estimate the ﬁnest ﬁtness value.
Step. 5: Evaluate the velocities and positions of each of the particles outlined in
Equations (3) and (4).
Step. 6: Update the inertia weight wusing Equation (5).
Step. 7: Based on the results of many tests, the likelihood is set at 80%. The particle
position is updated by SSM using Equation (6).
Step. 8: Determine whether the current iterations exceed the highest number of
iterations. If that happens, the method terminates and produces an optimum solution.
Then, orders t=t+1, returns to Step 3, and enters into step9.
Step. 9: Calculate dynamic correction factors <1and<2using Equations (8) and (9).
Step. 10: Update the particle’s position using update formula Equation (7).
Step. 11: Update the network size Hiusing Equation (15).
Step. 12: Select the optimal particle position as the RBFNN structural parameter for
the network topology. Train the network to develop an RBFNN suitable for predicting
non-linear time-series.
The pseudo-code of the proposed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN model is represented in
Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code of HPSO-SSM-RBFNN
Input : Population size N, maximum number of iterations for optimization T,
dimensionality of decision variables
Output : trained HPSO-SSM-RBFNN
1Initialize algorithm relative parameters, c1,c2,vmin,vmax, population size N, and
maximal iterations T.
2Construct the topology structure of RBFNN for every particle and initialize the
position of the particles.
3Calculate the dimension of the particle Di(t)
4Estimate each particle with ﬁtness value (using Equation (16))
5Assess the RMSE (using Equation (17))
6Select the best position of particles as gbest from the swarm
7Set the position of each particle as pbest i
8T=1 to maximum iterations
9fori=1to N do
10 Update velocity v(t+1)
iand position x(t+1)
iof all particles (using Equations (3)
and (4))
11 Compute the inertia weight w (using Equation (5))
12end
13Deﬁne the awareness probability.
14ifp <= 0.8 then
15 Calculate dynamic correction factors <1and<2 (using Equations (8) and (9))
16 Update particle’s next position using updated formula (using Equation (7))
17end
18else
19 Update the particle’s next position using SSM (using Equation (6)) Update
network size Hi (using Equation (15))
20end
21Attain optimal value

==== Page 9 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 9 of 16
4. Results Analysis and Discussion
4.1. Experimental Discussion
The simulation results for three benchmark problems for the proposed RBFNN and
hybrid HPSO-SSM algorithm were compared with those of other state-of-the-art models.
These problems involve non-linear model identiﬁcation, time-series prediction of the
Lorenz system, and TP estimation in WWTP . Several experiments were carried out to verify
the effectiveness of the HPSO-SSM-RBFNNN, including consideration of two benchmark
optimization problems and TP estimation in WWTP . All datasets were normalized to the
range [ 1, 1]. The training datasets were gathered to construct the system model and
testing datasets were utilized to assess the model’s generalization competency. In addition,
the RMSE derived from Equation (17) was used to intuitively evaluate the performance of
HPSO-SSM-RBFNN. Many indicators were used for evaluation, including the values for
training and testing RMSE and the number of hidden neurons stored. The superior results
conﬁrm that the suggested technique achieves greater solution precision with a smaller
network size than other RBFNN models. Each experiment was carried out on the MATLAB
R2016b platform. Each experiment was assessed using an Intel(R) Core procession i7 with
a 3.8GHz, 16GB of RAM, and GTX 1020Ti NVIDIA graphics card.
4.2. Model Hyper-Parameters Fine-Tuning
The network architecture of HPSO-SSM-RBFNNN is critical in the training phase,
especially for the network size (Hi)and network parameters (ci,si,wi). These parameters
are set according to the corresponding tasks. To optimize the RBFNN, the PSO and HPSO-
SSM algorithms involve numerous control parameters, such as the number of iterations
for optimization, the number of particles, the inertia weight, acceleration coefﬁcients, and
random values linked to the social and cognitive features of the velocity update equation.
Additionally, the maximum velocity and coefﬁcient of constriction are determined to be
mainly operational control parameters if velocity clamping and constriction are utilized [ 35].
These factors greatly impact the solution’s performance, quality, and convergence rate. To
avoid early convergence, it is necessary to ﬁne-tune the parameters. Han et al. [36,37] pro-
posed efﬁcient neural network architectures for simulating uncertain non-linear dynamics.
The suggested strategy increased the particle’s searching capabilities by ﬁne-tuning the
network parameters and modifying the inertia weights concurrently with the network size
throughout the learning processes. The experimental ﬁndings suggest that the proposed
methods are more effective and have signiﬁcant potential for real-world application, such
as in the dynamical estimation of crucial parameters in WWTP systems and the adaptive
control of uncertain non-linear systems.
In the HPSO-SSM algorithm, the initial parameter settings, including the population
size, were ﬁxed at 30, while the maximum number of iterations for optimization was
dynamically adjusted in each testing experiment. In the ﬁrst testing experiment, the
prediction of Lorenz time-series, the iterations were set to 300; in the remaining two
testing experiments, the iterations were set to 200. Every particle’s minimum vminand
maximum velocity vmaxwere assigned in the interval of [ 1 1]. Conversely, every
particle’s minimum position xminand maximum position xmaxwere assigned in the interval
of[ 5, 5]. Additionally, control parameters were applied to the PSO and HPSO-SSM
algorithms. To achieve optimal results, the position constants c1and c2parameters required
to be adjusted during the proposed algorithm iterations; the ideal range for these values
was chosen to be in the range [0.5–2.5]. The starting value of the inertia weight wwas
set to 0.5. Each simulation experiment employed the proposed methodology with these
parameters adjusted to guarantee consistent results. The parameters used in the PSO and
HPSO-SSM algorithms are presented in Table 1 Setting the parameters of the RBFNN model
requires expert knowledge of the process, such as setting the initial number of hidden nodes
to3in the ﬁrst and third testing experiment and 6in the second testing experiment. All the
experiments were performed several times; the overall average was determined to avoid
the consequences of random initialization of particular network parameters. In HPSO-

==== Page 10 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 10 of 16
SSM-RBFNN, membership function parameters of each rule of RBFNN were encoded into
distinct particle position features. Each particle represents a particular RBFNN structure.
Particle swarm optimization proceeded until the ideal individual was determined. Among
the 40 best particles, the one with the smallest RMSE was chosen as the optimal RBFNN.
Table 1. PSO and HPSO-SSM parameter ﬁne-tuning conﬁguration.
Conﬁguration Value
Population Size 40
Iterations (Lorenz time-series) 300
Iterations (Non-linear system identiﬁcation) 200
Iterations (TP prediction in WWTP) 200
Inertia weight w 0.5
Constriction coefﬁcient (C) 1
r1,r2 Random in [0, 1]
c1,c2 Dynamic adjusts
HPSO Positive constants ( m,a,b) 4, 2, 2
4.3. Lorenz Time-Series Predicting Scheme
The Lorenz series is utilized as a standard in different applications for various prob-
lems [ 38]. The Lorenz series example is a collection of numerical models for atmospheric
convection.
The three-dimensional (3-D) and non-linear framework of the Lorenz series are deﬁned
as in Equation (18).8
>><
>>:dx
di=a( x+y)
dy
di=bx y+xz
dz
di=xy cz(18)
The model’s parameters are adjusted to a=10,b=28and c=8/3. The Kutta–Runge
method with phase 0.01 generates values for the Lorenz time sequence. y(k 3),y(k 2)
and y(k 1), and y(k 1)are employed to predict y(k)for each training pair. A total of
1500 samples were collected for model evaluation, of which 1000 were used for the training
and 500 for the testing set.
There were initially three hidden neurons in the suggested approach and the prede-
termined training RMSE was set at 0.01. Figure 3 shows the RMSE ﬁndings, such as the
number of hidden neurons during training, the predicted outcomes, and the predicted error
between the target ﬁndings and the proposed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN algorithm ﬁndings.
Figure 3a depicts the ﬁndings of hidden neurons against algorithm iterations during
the training period. As shown in Figure 3a, the ﬁnal number of hidden neurons was
approximately ﬁve. The training RMSE values of the proposed approach against algorithm
iterations are shown in Figure 3b, gradually decreasing and ﬁnally stabilizing at about
0.0107 . The obtained values highlight the proposed approach’s advantages with respect to
convergence speed and modelling precision. Figure 3c shows the prediction outputs of the
proposed approach HPSO-SSM-RBFNN against the target outputs. Figure 3c shows that
the prediction results based on HPSO-SSM-RBFNN accurately match the real pattern of
the Lorenz time-series test samples 1000 1500 . Figure 3d highlights the testing error ﬁnd-
ings for HPSO-SSM-RBFNN, showing that the suggested HPSO-SSM-RBFNN algorithms
produced excellent results, with a prediction error for the test samples 1000–1500 falling
within the range [ 0.03, 0.12 ].

==== Page 11 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 11 of 16
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 3. The presented approach’s efﬁcacy is measured in terms of ( a) comparison of hidden neurons
for the training of proposed and other conventional algorithms, ( b) RMSE values during the training
phase, ( c) predicted outcomes of HPSO-SSM-RBFNN during the testing phase, ( d) the prediction
errors during the testing phase.
4.4. Non-Linear Model Identiﬁcation
The non-linear models are applied to realistically characterize the neural network
performance [39], as expressed by Equation (19).
y(t+1) =0.72y(t) +0.025 y(t 1)u(t 1) +0.01u2(t 2) +0.2u(t 3) (19)
Two inputs, u(t),y(t)and y(t+1)are required for Equation (19).
The training inputs are constantly classiﬁed for approximately half of the training time
throughout the interval [ 2, 2].
In contrast, the rest of the training period comprises a single sinusoid signal emitted by
1.5sin(t/45). This method uses 1000 sample sizes earmarked for the training and testing

==== Page 12 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 12 of 16
phases. The check input signal is described as in Equation (19) to evaluate the speciﬁc proof
outcomes for the test signals.
u(t) =8
>>>><
>>>>:sin(p
25), 250 >t>0
1.00 500 t250
 1.00 750 t500
0.3 sin((pt
25) +0.1((pt
32) +0.6((pt
10)), 1000t750(20)
In the training stage, the HPSO-SSM-RBFNN algorithm and the training dataset are
used to obtain the trained network. In the evolving phase of the proposed approach, the
training RMSE value is set as the ﬁtness function. The results are displayed in Figure 4a–d.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 4. The presented approach’s efﬁcacy is measured in terms of ( a) the number of hidden neurons
during training, ( b) RMSE values in the training phase, ( c) the predicted results by HPSO-SSM-
RBFNN during the testing phase, ( d) prediction errors during the testing phase.
Figure 4a shows the ﬁndings for comparison of hidden neurons with the algorithm
iterations.
The initial number of hidden neurons in the proposed approach was set to six and
its ﬁnal number was nine. The training RMSE values of the proposed approach against
algorithm iterations are presented in Figure Figure 4b. The training RMSE values gradually

==== Page 13 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 13 of 16
decrease and ﬁnally stabilize at about 0.0029 , demonstrating that the proposed approach
can approximate the desired accuracy, while maintaining rapid convergence speed.
The testing data sample was utilized to assess the generalisation effectiveness of the
designed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN algorithm after network training. The one-step-ahead predic-
tion ﬁndings of HPSO-SSM-RBFNN for test samples 0 1000 are shown in Figure Figure 4c.
Figure 4c shows that the prediction results based on HPSO-SSM-RBFNN accurately match
the system output. Figure 4d illustrates that most testing errors for HPSO-SSM-RBFNN
were conﬁned to the range [ 0.03, 0.03 ], indicating that the suggested approach showed
superior testing performance.
4.5. Total Phosphorus (TP) Prognosis in WWTP
Wastewater treatment techniques are one of best options for tackling the challenge
of water contamination. The TPquantity is the fundamental parameter for determining
the performance of wastewater processes. The online computation of suitable TPvalues
is challenging in wastewater treatment. The developed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN was used to
estimate the TPvalue. Several easily observable measurements were selected as input
variables for the HPSO-SSM-RRBFNN, including pH, the concentration of dissolved oxygen
(DO), temperature (T), total suspended solids (TSS), and the inﬂuent TP. Experimental
datasets for the training of models were obtained from a wastewater treatment plant in
Beijing, China. After removing anomalous data, 250 instances for training and 150 samples
were utilized for testing. Figure 5a–d shows the experimental ﬁndings for the training and
testing approach.
Figure 5a shows the number of hidden neurons throughout the training period. With
eight hidden neurons, the designed HPSO-SSM-RBNN provided the most compact frame-
work of all the algorithms. Figure 5b shows the RMSE value of the suggested algorithms
during the training phase. The developed algorithm gave the smallest root mean square
error when comparing the training RMSE of the HPSO-SSM-RBFNN. In Figure 5c, the
TP values of the two prediction models, i.e., HPSO-SSM-RBFNN and the PSO-RBFNN
are plotted together with the actual values for the test data samples 0 150. Figure 5d
illustrates the modelling capability of the HPSO-SSM-RBFNN by displaying the error rates
of these two models. Figure 5d indicates that the proposed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN showed
higher prediction performance with the range of predicted error [ 0.2, 0.2 ].
In Table 2, the prediction values are compared for RBFNN [ 16], PSO-RBFNN [ 20],
and AI-PSO-RRBFNN [ 40] to demonstrate the performance of the designed HPSO-SSM-
RBFNN. The suggested HPSO-SSM-RBFNN produced the lowest (0.103 )testing RMSE
value, indicating that the suggested technique performed better than existing algorithms
for TP value prediction in the WWTP .
Table 2. Comparing the performance of suggested algorithms with conventional approaches.
AlgorithmsLorenz Time-Series Pre. Nonlinear System Ident. TP Prediction in WWTP
No. of
HNRMSE for
TrainingRMSE for
TestingNo. of
HNRMSE for
TrainingRMSE for
TestingNo. of
HNRMSE for
TrainingRMSE for
Testing
RBFNN [16] 10 0.073 0.098 10 0.073 0.098 10 0.227 0.409
PSO-RBF [20] 9 0.061 0.054 9 0.013 0.025 14 0.188 0.156
AI-PSO-RBFNN [40] 6 0.063 0.058 11 0.018 0.022 12 0.191 0.170
HPSO-SSM-RBFNN 5 0.017 0.013 9 0.0029 0.010 8 0.162 0.103

==== Page 14 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 14 of 16
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 5. The presented approach’s efﬁcacy is measured in terms of ( a) neurons buried during
training, ( b) the RMSE values in the training phase, ( c) prediction results during the testing phase,
(d) the proposed HPSO-SSM-RBFNN for total phosphorus (TP) prediction in WWTP .
4.6. Comparative Analysis with Cutting-Edge Methods
The effectiveness of the presented algorithms was evaluated for RBFNN [ 16], PSO-
RBFNN [ 20], and AI-PSO-RBFNN [ 40], as summarized in Table 2. Various indices were
selected for performance evaluation, including hidden neurons stored, and the training and
testing RMSE values. HPSO-SSM-RBFNN achieved the most compact network topology,
with six, nine, and eight hidden neurons and the lowest training and testing RMSE values
compared to the other standard techniques. In addition, HPSO-SSM-RBFNN is known for
its superior prediction and generalization capabilities. Hence, the experimental ﬁndings
demonstrate that the HPSO-SSM-RBFNN shows remarkable identiﬁcation capabilities with
a compact network architecture.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
An RBF computational approach for the detection of non-linear models is described.
The presented approach is based on the PSO convergence capacity and incorporates a
spiral search mechanism. The hybrid HPSO-SSM algorithm can simultaneously boost the
parameter and network topology of the RBFNN during the learning process. Performance
assessment of the suggested approach HPSO-SSM-RBFNN indicated a compact neural

==== Page 15 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 15 of 16
network. Experimental ﬁndings obtained indicate that the suggested strategy was effective
in minimizing prediction error and RMSE values relative to existing RBFNNs. The results
of the investigation are relevant to real-world applications. The number of simulation
results for different time series and different engineering models indicates potential for real-
world applications. The HPSO-SSM-RBFNN can calculate dynamical estimates of essential
parameters in WWTP systems and govern uncertain non-linear systems adaptively. In
the future, we intend to examine the effectiveness of the HPSO-SSM in training various
kinds of neural networks. Moreover, techniques to encourage use of the algorithm should
be considered.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.A.; methodology, Z.A.; validation, J.L.; formal analysis,
Z.A. and T.M.; investigation, T.M., resources, J.L.; data curation, T.M.; writing—original draft, Z.A.
and T.M.; visualization, T.M.; supervision, J.L. and T.M.; project administration, Z.A. and T.M.;
funding acquisition, J.L. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study is supported by the National Key R&D Program of China with the project no.
2020YFB2104402.
Data Availability Statement: Data is available and can be provided over the emails querying directly
to the author (ahmedzohaib03@gmail.com).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank China’s National Key R&D Program for pro-
viding the experimental facilities used to perform these experiments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Qiao, J.; Wang, G.; Li, X.; Li, W. A self-organizing deep belief network for nonlinear system modeling. Appl. Soft Comput. 2018 ,
65, 170–183. [CrossRef]
2. Chen, G.Y.; Gan, M.; Chen, C.P .; Li, H.X. Basis function matrix-based ﬂexible coefﬁcient autoregressive models: A framework for
time series and nonlinear system modeling. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2019 ,51, 614–623. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Qiao, J.; Wang, L.; Yang, C. Adaptive lasso echo state network based on modiﬁed Bayesian information criterion for nonlinear
system modeling. Neural Comput. Appl. 2019 ,31, 6163–6177. [CrossRef]
4. Kuriscak, E.; Marsalek, P .; Stroffek, J.; Toth, P .G. Biological context of Hebb learning in artiﬁcial neural networks, a review.
Neurocomputing 2015 ,152, 27–35. [CrossRef]
5. Jordan, M.I.; Mitchell, T.M. Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science 2015 ,349, 255–260. [CrossRef]
6. Adhikari, R. A neural network based linear ensemble framework for time series forecasting. Neurocomputing 2015 ,157, 231–242.
[CrossRef]
7. Mahmood, T.; Li, J.; Pei, Y.; Akhtar, F.; Imran, A.; Yaqub, M. An automatic detection and localization of mammographic
microcalciﬁcations ROI with multi-scale features using the radiomics analysis approach. Cancers 2021 ,13, 5916. [CrossRef]
8. Nguyen, H.N.; Zhou, J.; Kang, H.J. A calibration method for enhancing robot accuracy through integration of an extended
Kalman ﬁlter algorithm and an artiﬁcial neural network. Neurocomputing 2015 ,151, 996–1005. [CrossRef]
9. Mahmood, T.; Li, J.; Pei, Y.; Akhtar, F. An Automated In-Depth Feature Learning Algorithm for Breast Abnormality Prognosis
and Robust Characterization from Mammography Images Using Deep Transfer Learning. Biology 2021 ,10, 859. [CrossRef]
10. Huang, S.C.; Do, B.H. Radial basis function based neural network for motion detection in dynamic scenes. IEEE Trans. Cybern.
2013 ,44, 114–125. [CrossRef]
11. Yang, Y.; Wang, P .; Gao, X. A Novel Radial Basis Function Neural Network with High Generalization Performance for Nonlinear
Process Modelling. Processes 2022 ,10, 140. [CrossRef]
12. Faris, H.; Aljarah, I.; Mirjalili, S. Evolving radial basis function networks using moth–ﬂame optimizer. In Handbook of Neural
Computation ; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017; pp. 537–550.
13. Iqbal, S.; Qureshi, A.N.; Ullah, A.; Li, J.; Mahmood, T. Improving the Robustness and Quality of Biomedical CNN Models through
Adaptive Hyperparameter Tuning. Appl. Sci. 2022 ,12, 11870. [CrossRef]
14. Xu, Z.B.; Zhang, R.; Jing, W.F. When does online BP training converge? IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2009 ,20, 1529–1539. [PubMed]
15. Chen, B.; Zhao, S.; Zhu, P .; Principe, J.C. Quantized kernel recursive least squares algorithm. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.
2013 ,24, 1484–1491. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Han, H.G.; Zhang, S.; Qiao, J.F. An adaptive growing and pruning algorithm for designing recurrent neural network. Neurocom-
puting 2017 ,242, 51–62. [CrossRef]
17. Qiao, J.F.; Han, H.G. Identiﬁcation and modeling of nonlinear dynamical systems using a novel self-organizing RBF-based
approach. Automatica 2012 ,48, 1729–1734. [CrossRef]

==== Page 16 ====
Mathematics 2023 ,11, 242 16 of 16
18. Wu, X.J.; Zhu, X.J.; Cao, G.Y.; Tu, H.Y. Modeling a SOFC stack based on GA-RBF neural networks identiﬁcation. J. Power Sources
2007 ,167, 145–150. [CrossRef]
19. Chen, S.; Hong, X.; Harris, C.J. Particle swarm optimization aided orthogonal forward regression for uniﬁed data modeling.
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 2010 ,14, 477–499. [CrossRef]
20. Feng, H.M. Self-generation RBFNs using evolutional PSO learning. Neurocomputing 2006 ,70, 241–251. [CrossRef]
21. Alexandridis, A.; Chondrodima, E.; Sarimveis, H. Radial basis function network training using a nonsymmetric partition of the
input space and particle swarm optimization. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2012 ,24, 219–230. [CrossRef]
22. Abdi, H.; Moradi, M.; Rashidi, R. Hybrid transmission expansion planning and reactive power planning considering the real
network uncertainties. Int. J. Numer. Model. Electron. Netw. Devices Fields 2022 ,35, e2937. [CrossRef]
23. Zhou, X.; Ma, H.; Gu, J.; Chen, H.; Deng, W. Parameter adaptation-based ant colony optimization with dynamic hybrid
mechanism. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2022 ,114, 105139. [CrossRef]
24. Katoch, S.; Chauhan, S.S.; Kumar, V . A review on genetic algorithm: Past, present, and future. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2021 ,
80, 8091–8126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Kanwal, S.; Hussain, A.; Huang, K. Novel Artiﬁcial Immune Networks-based optimization of shallow machine learning (ML)
classiﬁers. Expert Syst. Appl. 2021 ,165, 113834. [CrossRef]
26. Bhatasana, M.; Marconnet, A. Machine-learning assisted optimization strategies for phase change materials embedded within
electronic packages. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2021 ,199, 117384. [CrossRef]
27. Fathi, V .; Montazer, G.A. An improvement in RBF learning algorithm based on PSO for real time applications. Neurocomputing
2013 ,111, 169–176. [CrossRef]
28. Han, M.; Fan, J.; Wang, J. A dynamic feedforward neural network based on Gaussian particle swarm optimization and its
application for predictive control. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 2011 ,22, 1457–1468. [CrossRef]
29. Chen, K.; Zhou, F.Y.; Yuan, X.F. Hybrid particle swarm optimization with spiral-shaped mechanism for feature selection. Expert
Syst. Appl. 2019 ,128, 140–156. [CrossRef]
30. Kareem, S.S.; Mostafa, R.R.; Hashim, F.A.; El-Bakry, H.M. An effective feature selection model using hybrid metaheuristic
algorithms for iot intrusion detection. Sensors 2022 ,22, 1396. [CrossRef]
31. Huang, M.; Zhang, T.; Ruan, J.; Chen, X. A new efﬁcient hybrid intelligent model for biodegradation process of DMP with fuzzy
wavelet neural networks. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 41239. [CrossRef]
32. Bao, Y.; Tian, Q.; Chen, M. A weighted algorithm based on normalized mutual information for estimating the chlorophyll-a
concentration in Inland Waters Using Geostationary Ocean Color Imager (GOCI) data. Remote. Sens. 2015 ,7, 11731–11752.
[CrossRef]
33. Eberhart, R.; Kennedy, J. A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. In Proceedings of the MHS’95. Proceedings of the Sixth
International Symposium on Micro Machine and Human Science, Nagoya, Japan, 4–6 October 1995; pp. 39–43.
34. Mirjalili, S.; Lewis, A. The whale optimization algorithm. Adv. Eng. Softw. 2016 ,95, 51–67. [CrossRef]
35. Engelbrecht, A.P . Computational Intelligence: An Introduction ; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2007.
36. Han, H.G.; Lu, W.; Hou, Y.; Qiao, J.F. An adaptive-PSO-based self-organizing RBF neural network. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
Learn. Syst. 2016 ,29, 104–117. [CrossRef]
37. Han, H.; Wu, X.; Zhang, L.; Tian, Y.; Qiao, J. Self-organizing RBF neural network using an adaptive gradient multiobjective
particle swarm optimization. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2017 ,49, 69–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Chen, H.; Gong, Y.; Hong, X. Online modeling with tunable RBF network. IEEE Trans. Cybern. 2013 ,43, 935–947. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
39. Han, H.; Zhou, W.; Qiao, J.; Feng, G. A direct self-constructing neural controller design for a class of nonlinear systems. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2015 ,26, 1312–1322. [CrossRef]
40. Nickabadi, A.; Ebadzadeh, M.M.; Safabakhsh, R. A novel particle swarm optimization algorithm with adaptive inertia weight.
Appl. Soft Comput. 2011 ,11, 3658–3670. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

