IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 29
[188]. This class of system is characterised by heterogeneous
networked agents, adaptive and goal oriented with respect to
the environment and joint optimisation and evolution of both
technical and social systems [189]. These properties are also
those that are characterised by agent based systems and make
such technologies ideal for representation of STDTs despite
computational cost [189], [190]. Hence, STDTs generate new
and different research challenges.
DTs of phenomena that include human interactions and
behaviours acquire complexity simply due to the involvement
of multiple disciplines. For example, DT models of cities for
monitoring pandemic behaviour have included social geogra-
phers, economists, medical practitioners as well as computer
scientists. Arriving at a shared understanding, common lan-
guage and a way of working demands new methodological
approaches as well as intuitive access to underpinning theory
from different disciplines [191].
Moving away from closed equations to systems that model
emergent behaviour presents expected validation challenges.
Recognising that a STDT has purpose beyond prediction
such as explanation is the first response [192]. STDTs can
be used for discovering new questions, demonstrating trade-
offs or experimentation with prevailing theories that lack
empirical understanding. Hence they represent a move away
from closed form analytical models. Models are a form of
theory building [193] and as such they can only be invalidated
so a more useful target is a form of accredited oraccepted
model based on standardised criteria and metrics [194]. As
STDTs become more established, policy oriented domain-
specific practice could lead to to libraries of accepted models,
encoding existing knowledge, that do not need to change
and are much less volatile. Given the emergent properties
of STDTs, such models need to be defined at both micro,
meso and macro levels. Building libraries of STDT models is
reminiscent of component based development practice and its
inherent challenges [195].
Validation of a model for STDT is closely related to
abstraction concerns and in particular the challenges that
arise from establishing an appropriate framing structure. The
complexity, multi-level and range of modelling required to
represent a socio-technical problem domain within a DT
require choices to be made in determining the scope and detail
of the environment to be modelled. This choice we can refer
to it as a conceptual problem frame . For example, Barat et
al. [191] in their city DT of Pune, for modelling the COVID-
19 pandemic, observe that existing agent based systems for
pandemic modelling do not show sufficient granularity of types
of people and their movements within the city, raising concerns
of model completeness.
Perhaps the most striking challenge that needs to be ad-
dressed is that arising from STDTs that include ML or other
algorithmic decision making. Ethical concerns come to the
fore when (1) conclusions drawn from inference are probable
and therefore an epistemic limitation; (2) traceability between
the input data and conclusion is not accessible and open to cri-
tique; (2) conclusions are dependent upon the quality of data;
or (4) the actions based on conclusions are discriminatory even
if well-founded [196]. Underpinnning these epistemically-based ethical issues is the encoding of value systems such
as privacy, transparency, security and so on. Understanding
value sensitive concerns and related approaches that explore
more fundamentally the nature of social requirements and
(unintended social impacts) of software remains an ongoing
project in software engineering [197] and requires study in
the context of STDTs.
C. Fidelity and rate of synchronization
A common misconception about the DT is that the virtual
twin should reflect the physical twin in its entirety, and that it
should gather and process all of its data in almost real-time.
However, these feats are not currently feasible, and certainly
not always necessary. As specified in our definition of the
DT, provided in Section II, the virtual representation’s fidelity
and rate of synchronization are specific to the DT’s use-cases.
For instance, for ambitious, nation-wide project like the U.S.
Air Force’s DT for weapon system development, the required
fidelity and responsiveness might impose prohibitive costs
[198]. On the other hand, for the purposes of traffic relief,
a DT that stores the coordinates and synchronization rates of
traffic lights, as well as the real-time traffic density, might
arguably perform almost as well as a DT that completely 3D
models the city’s infrastructure. As such, the DT’s granularity
and twinning rate requirements can be more, or less, lenient,
depending on its applications. The more stringent demands
for real-time, granular mirroring could be encountered in the
healthcare industry, for scenarios where the DT is used to
facilitate remote surgery.
D. Standardisation efforts
One of the most important features that could accelerate the
adoption of DTs within various industries is their modularity.
This could enable the rapid reproduction of DT processes and
their components. However, this dynamic environment could
become very complex, with different digital twins custom
built for different purposes, specific equipment type, specific
manufacturers, etc., these represent factors that could inhibit
the adoption and implementation of DTs across multiple
industries. These complexities could be eliminated through
standardisation.
Recently, one of the subcommittees (SC 412) of the Joint
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and Inter-
national Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Technical Com-
mittee (JTC 1)3has widened its scope and terms of references
to include DT, looking now into standardization in the area of
IoT and DTs, including their related technologies.
The ISO 23247-14standard for DT framework for manu-
facturing is currently under development. The first part of the
standard provides general principles and defines the require-
ments for developing DTs in manufacturing.
Similarly, the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST) in an attempt to standardize the DT technology,
2SC 41: https://bit.ly/3tf0hSM
3JTC 1: https://jtc1info.org/
4ISO 23247-1 Digital Twin Framework for Manufacturing:
https://www.iso.org/standard/75066.html