IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 7
the engineers, and the pilots. It was indeed the DT that saved
the day back in 1970.
The actual definition of the DT has always been at least am-
biguous, and the ever-growing number of publications in the
last few years has only added to the diversity of DT meanings.
It is generally observed, however, that the DT implementation
attempts so far seem to have been accomplished with the
support of a number of common enabling technologies, such
as: ML [17], TL [18], distributed computing (i.e. cloud, fog,
and edge computing) [19], the (Industrial) Internet of Things
(I/IoT) [20], CPS [21], and VR/AR [22].
Consequently, to get a good grasp on the general under-
standing of the DT we analysed the recent literature on the
DT definitions provided. The results indicate that the existing
DT definitions seem to center around five approaches as
summarised in Table III.
Each of the five definitions capture the essence of the DT,
but there is not complete overlapping between them:
•The first definition is a very popular one, and arguably
the oldest one, however it is very generic and it does not
offer insight into the constituent parts of the DT.
•The second definition is more comprehensive, as it de-
mystifies the DT and provides a bit of understanding
regarding two of its components (the physical and digital
objects). However, it claims that the DT is just an
intelligent digital model of a physical asset, with little
to no emphasis on the interaction between the two, its
requirements, and limitations. Some works [23], [24],
however, do make observations about the twinning rate
(i.e. the rate of synchronization between the two objects),
and mention that it is a requirement that depends on the
DT’s use case.
•The third definition completely ignores the bi-directional
communication requirement of a DT, essentially confus-
ing the DT with a digital shadow , which would more
accurately fit that description.
•The fourth definition focuses entirely on the components
of the DT, but it does not hint towards the capabilities of
a DT, making the definition too generic.
•The fifth definition shifts its attention to the services pro-
vided by the DT, but not on its structure and technologies
that enable said services.
To put the five definitions into a better perspective, we will
work through a hypothetical example. Consider the DT of an
autonomous car, where the virtual representation of the car
is able to continuously communicate with the physical asset
and become aware at all times of its state and environment
in order to make appropriate control decisions. The use-case
of autonomous driving imposes some strict requirements on
the DT, the most obvious of which are: ultra-low latency
communication between the real and virtual twins, large data
storage capacity, high processing power to reduce data-to-
insight delays, and high-fidelity virtual rendering of the car
and its environment.
Now, seeing this example through the lenses of the five
definitions, we would find that some of the above scenario’s
very important aspects are omitted. The first and third def-
initions claim that the DT only mirrors the life of its twin,so they do not envision the other half of the feedback loop
between the two entities, where the DT itself can control the
car based on its real-time data. The second definition comes
close to describing our DT, except that it makes no mention
of the DT’s requirements that might differ from use-case to
use-case: a DT of an autonomous car will need a higher rate
of synchronization than the DT of an industrial water boiler,
for instance. The fourth definition makes no mention of the
DT’s use-case at all, even though it is a deciding factor in the
choice of enabling technologies and other requirements (a DT
for lifetime monitoring of a car would not need a bi-directional
communication medium, unlike a DT for autonomous driving).
Lastly, the fifth definition focuses entirely on the use-case
and the services the DT can provide, but the use-case’s
requirements and the DT components are only implied via
the definitions of the services themselves, and not explicitly
stated as DT characteristics.
It is thus clear that there is a need for a comprehensive
definition of the DT. The definition needs to be specific enough
that it identifies the components of a DT, how they interact,
and what services it should provide, but also generic enough
that it can describe DTs across multiple industrial domains
and use cases.
As such, in this work, and many hereafter, we will refer
to the Digital Twin as a self-adapting, self-regulating, self-
monitoring, and self-diagnosing system-of-systems with the
following properties: (1) it is characterized by a symbiotic
relationship between a physical entity and its virtual represen-
tation, (2) its fidelity, rate of synchronization, and choice of
enabling technologies are tailored to its envisioned use cases,
and (3) it supports services that add operational and business
value to the physical entity.
We believe that this alternative provides a better understand-
ing of the DT concept, as it gives a precise indication of what
the DT is (i.e., a system-of-systems), what its components are
(i.e., physical and digital entities), how they interact (symbiotic
relationship, i.e., a mutually beneficial two-way interaction),
how their interaction is leveraged (i.e., to offer services that
bring operational and business value), how accurate and syn-
chronized the virtual asset should be, and what technologies
should be used to build it (i.e., use case-dependent). Looking
back on the DT example for autonomous driving, it is now
clear to see which are the DT’s components (the car and its
environment are the physical asset, while their virtual model
is the digital asset), that they interact through a bi-directional
communication medium (one for collecting data from the real
space, and another for delivering insights and commands from
the virtual twin), that the DT is supposed to, in our case, assist
the car in driving autonomously, and that this use-case implies
some specific restrictions (low-latency, high security, etc.).
The fundamental characteristics of a DT, which are the
motors that actually bring operational and business value to
the physical entity, lie centrally in the DT philosophy. The
“self-X” constructs distinguish a true DT from digital models
and shadows, and emphasize the usefulness of a DT in I4.0.
These traits are explained below:
•Self-adapting - a DT automatically reacts to changes
in its real twin’s environment and configuration, but it