IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 4
TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN THIS SURVEY PAPER ’S CONTRIBUTIONS AND OTHER RELATED WORKS IN THE LITERATURE .
LiteratureContributions
Definitions Market Potential Enabling Technologies Applications Case Studies Challenges
[6]   ×    ×  
[7]         
[8]  × ×  × ×
[9]    × ×   
[10] × ×      
[11]  ×       
[12]       ×  
[13]       ×  
[14]  ×     ×  
[15]        ×  
This survey            
 - in-depth coverage of the subject;
- partial coverage of the subject;
×- subject not addressed.
provided definition (“a dynamic digital replica of physical
assets, processes, and systems, which comprehensively mon-
itors their whole lifecycle”) reflects this aspect of the study.
Although the authors do not emphasise the full extent of the
DT definition, they do present the technologies that enable the
DT to become an avant-garde methodology for the specific
application of surveillance. The survey concludes with an
industrial use-case of the DT, dubbed Pavatar, and presents
the technical advantages and challenges of implementing this
project for an ultra-high voltage converter station.
Pires et al. [11] present a compact review of the DT’s
definitions, enabling technologies, and applications, ending
the paper with the exemplification of a case-study of the DT
and the challenges the concept will face before the industry
integrates it into its businesses. The authors also provide a
look at on-going research efforts towards building a DT for
a UR3 collaborative robot. The manuscript at hand aims to
complement this work with a wider array of references and
case studies.
Rasheed et al. [12] created a comprehensive DT survey
that analyses the paradigm from the perspectives of its value
(expressed via services and software platforms), applications,
enabling technologies, and challenges. The paper brings to-
gether works from various domains where the DT has been
tried and tested, as well as potential socio-economic impacts
that such a technology can have (i.e., loss of jobs, trainingnew workforce in DT specifics).
In [13], Tao et al. introduce a thorough analysis of 50
papers and 8 patents related to the DT. The authors cover the
concept of DT via a study of four perspectives: interaction and
collaboration between its constituents, data fusion, services,
and DT modeling and simulation. Then, the authors describe
the DT’s applicability in three main areas in its most prominent
industry, the manufacturing sector: DTs for product design, for
production, and for prognostics and health management. As
such, the paper draws its lessons from articles that are mostly
focused on the state of the art of DTs in the manufacturing
industry.
In [14], Huang et al. put together a detailed survey on the
AI-driven DTs in the context of smart manufacturing and
advanced robotics. The authors take into consideration the
advantages of using a DT as a driver for sustainability goals
in the manufacturing and robotics, by facilitating production
planning and control, quality control, dynamics control, pre-
dictive maintenance, and many other services. Additionally,
the authors focus on describing how AI techniques specifically
enable DTs across these two domains.
Finally, Fuller et al. in [15] propose an extensive survey on
DT, with a focus on its integration with IoT and data analytics
technologies. The paper also points out that there is a need for
a stable DT definition that consolidates all of the aspects that
make up a true DT. Afterwards, the survey goes on to discuss