IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 30
have released a draft NISTIR 8356 [199] covering the defini-
tion, common low-level operations, usage scenarios, and use-
cases examples.
Another initiative that has as a primary objective to influ-
ence the requirements for DT standards is the Digital Twin
Consortium5. The consortium consists of members from indus-
try, government, and academia that form a global ecosystem
aiming to accelerate the development, adoption, interoperabil-
ity, and security of DTs.
One proposed solution by Harper et al. [200] could be to
define a set of standardised Application Process Interfaces
(APIs) that could evolve over time. The advantage of this
approach is that different DTs could be developed using
different software and processes as long as they support the
defined set of APIs.
Microsoft developed the Digital Twin Definition Language6
(DTDL) that is used in their commercial services, such as IoT
Hub, IoT Central and Azure Digital Twins. However, DTDL
does not resource discovery and access and deals with resource
description only.
Consequently, the current lack of standardised approaches
when modelling digital twins open up new challenges when
dealing with their interoperability in order to maximize the
interconnectivity.
E. Data ownership and governance
Apart from standardisation, another closely related chal-
lenge is the data ownership and governance, that brings a new
question, specifically: Who owns the DT information? One
can anticipate that with the advancements in technologies, the
industry is moving towards a connected data ecosystem of DTs
with potential different owners of the physical assets as well
as the DTs. Additionally, the potential existence of an ecosys-
tem of DTs implies the need for a shared communication
framework for standardized data exchange between multiple
heterogeneous data sources. This scenario brings technical,
financial and legal aspects challenges that need to be clarified.
One solution would be to adopt the Industrial Data Space
(IDS)7concept that has been introduced in [201] to cater for
all these issues within the I4.0 framework. The IDS concept
represents a virtual data space that enforces data ownership
within a distributed environment, based on open standards
and existing technologies as well as common governance
models for data economy. As DTs are seen as part of I4.0,
the IDS model could be the answer for DTs data ownership
and governance. In parallel, an effort for constructing an
Information Management Framework (IMF) for the National
Digital Twin is carried out in [202], where the goal is to create
a common national information resource that can sustain a
country-wide DT.
F . Data security
There are two ways to approach the discussion on security
issues in DTs. The first one addresses the security of the
5Digital Twin Consortium: https://www.digitaltwinconsortium.org
6Digital Twin Definition Language: https://bit.ly/3jJ3EOV
7Industrial Data Space: https://internationaldataspaces.orgDT itself, starting from the physical servers that host the
DTs up until the safety and integrity of the software and
data communication links that animate the DT. The second
approach is about how the DT itself can provide security to
its real twin, as an additional valuable offering. This section
will touch on both of these aspects of security within DTs.
One of the central components of a DT is the communica-
tion medium that enables the symbiotic relationship between
the physical and virtual twins. This link effectively transports
all the data between the two entities, so it stands to reason that
it needs to guarantee impeccable data security. Every time data
flows to, and from, the real twin, or in-between the servers
hosting the DT itself, the risk of losing important information
is high, which calls for increased attention to preserving
data integrity [203]. This communication medium becomes
a potential area of weakness in front of data corruption and
theft, and it can create disturbances for businesses. As such,
data security principles, like privacy, authentication, integrity,
and traceability, need to be taken into account during DT
development. Some important measures that provide security
features are data encryption, access privileges, source code
automated scanning, penetration testing, and routine checkups
[204]. Emerging approaches to deal with these issues include
using blockchain technologies to ensure data privacy in the
communication between DT systems-of-systems [94]. Yaqoob
et al. [205] conducted an extensive research on how blockchain
has been integrated in the DTs across literature to also ensure
trust and transparency in various use cases.
Given that the DT is still an emerging technology, the
related literature still lacks a consensus on its security require-
ments. As we have discovered throughout this research work,
the use case and services envisioned for the DT can dictate
the architecture of the virtual twin. According to Gehrmann et
al. in [206], security measures should also be at the forefront
of the DT architects’ minds since they can have a significant
impact on the final DT model’s structure as well. The authors
also introduced the idea of using the DT as an enabler of
security in the communication between the physical twin and
other cloud-based services, of which DTs might make use.
In their work, all external communication with the physical
twin would be carried out exclusively via the virtual model,
through a synchronization gateway that filters all traffic to the
real twin, effectively isolating it from bad agents. A similar
approach was taken in [207], where the authors proposed using
the DT to filter out incoming commands to a smart inverter
and ensure that only the non-malicious ones are carried out.
G. Artificial General Intelligence, beyond human performance
In Section II of this manuscript, we have described the
DT as a self-adapting, self-regulating, self-monitoring, and
self-diagnosing system-of-systems, a definition which places
it under the span of another, broader category of human
ambitions: Artificial Intelligence. In fact, the idea of self-
improving artificial systems was part of the original proposal
made by McCarthy et al. in 1955 for the Darthmouth Summer
Research Project on AI, a project which is also sometimes
dubbed as the birthplace of AI [208]. Since then, significant