IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 31
progress has been carried out towards realizing the objectives
laid out in said proposal, and the term “AI” has now become
so popular that some voices have raised concerns about the
implications of integrating AI into our society [209]. However,
as Shevlin et al. emphasize in [210], there is an important
distinction to be made between the original meaning assigned
to AI by McCarthy et al. in 1955, and AI as it is understood
and marketed today. McCarthy’s proposal identified AI as a
machine that behaves “in ways that would be called intelligent
if a human were so behaving”, whereas nowadays, AI is
sometimes used to refer to systems that reach or surpass
human performance in specific tasks [211], [212]. The former
interpretation corresponds to what is today understood as
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI), while the latter is an
appropriate example of Artificial Narrow Intelligence (ANI)
[210].
However, although there is a great overlap between the
DT and AGI, there are some differences that stand out and
can make the DT an even more challenging task than AGI.
First, the versatility of the DT paradigm across industries
implies that it will, by definition, have a specialized kind of
intelligence that cannot be generalized to other domains, but
trains and excels in every possible task that pertains to the
physical twin’s use cases, including hypothetical scenarios.
In order for the DT to become truly self-evolving, just like
humans and animals are, it needs to be able to implement a
level of creativity that can make maximal use of its physical
twin’s unique features (i.e., learn to become as resourceful
with its physical structure as an animal is with its body).
This implies that, just like there is a need for standardized
benchmarks for validating human AGI, or animal intelligence-
mimicking AGI [210], there is also a requirement for perfor-
mance measures and benchmarks that can accurately evaluate
the DT for each industry and application. Validation metrics
aside, while current AI systems can definitely learn to perform
tasks even beyond human-level performance, they also lack
comprehension, and therefore cannot offer transparency into
their “reasoning” [213]. This lack of transparency invokes
skepticism, and can even impede development of DTs or AIs
due to lack of trust.
VIII. C ONCLUSIONS
This paper took an in-depth look at the existing and expand-
ing Digital Twin-related literature, and we drew some lessons
that will help the researchers in this field consolidate their
understanding of the DT and choose future directions that
need further development. In Section II, we took a look at
the variety of DT definitions that the papers reviewed in this
manuscript provided and we clustered them together according
to their similarity; then, we introduced a new, comprehensive
definition for the DT that covers important aspects that the
others might have missed. In Section III, we evaluated the
current level of adoption of the DT in the industry, and how
this paradigm is currently valued by various leading businesses
in this field. Section IV then dove into the technical aspects
of the DT, namely its enabling technologies, and how they
are being used to support the DT in delivering business valueacross various industries. Consequently, in Section V , we
described how the previously presented technologies help the
DT in providing a handful of services, ranging from smart
manufacturing to new generation communication technologies.
Section VI offered a closer look at three DT case studies in
order to present how the technology can be leveraged and what
requirements and limitations appear, based on the use case.
Finally, Section VII summarized the lessons we have learned
throughout this review, in order to point out interesting new
challenges to be addressed in the research community.
Overall, the DT finds itself accelerating in full force towards
I4.0, and its endless perceived potential makes it a central and
evermore popular player in the race. Its enabling technolo-
gies are continuously evolving, and each step towards their
improvement brings us closer to making true DTs a reality.
As the DT attracts research interest, the number of attempts at
developing it contour some common and persisting obstacles.
In the era of AI, the focus falls on the data, and the DT finds
itself in the middle of an information loop: it needs to be fed
carefully considered data to power its complex ML algorithms,
and then it further allows a better understanding of that data
via its interactive and predictive feats. With some challenging
puzzles in the way, the DT is steadily heading towards the
automation of industrial processes.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Laura, O. Clayton, S. Jeremy, and S. Kate, “How covid-19 has
pushed companies over the technology tipping point and transformed
business forever,” McKinsey & Company , vol. 5, 2020.
[2] S. Blackburn, L. LaBerge, C. O’Toole, and J. Schneider, “Digital
strategy in a time of crisis,” McKinsey Digital, April , vol. 22, 2020.
[3] U. Cisco, “Cisco annual internet report (2018–2023) white
paper,” Online](accessed September 12th, 2021) https://www.
cisco. com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executive-perspectives/annual-
internet-report/whitepaper-c11-741490. html , 2020.
[4] M. Grieves and J. Vickers, “Digital twin: Mitigating unpredictable, un-
desirable emergent behavior in complex systems,” in Transdisciplinary
perspectives on complex systems , pp. 85–113, Springer, 2017.
[5] M. E. Rose and J. R. Kitchin, “pybliometrics: Scriptable bibliometrics
using a python interface to scopus,” SoftwareX , vol. 10, p. 100263,
2019.
[6] B. R. Barricelli, E. Casiraghi, and D. Fogli, “A survey on digital twin:
definitions, characteristics, applications, and design implications,” IEEE
access , vol. 7, pp. 167653–167671, 2019.
[7] R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, “Digital twin in the iot context:
a survey on technical features, scenarios, and architectural models,”
Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785–1824, 2020.
[8] A. L ¨ocklin, M. M ¨uller, T. Jung, N. Jazdi, D. White, and M. Weyrich,
“Digital twin for verification and validation of industrial automa-
tion systems–a survey,” in 2020 25th IEEE International Conference
on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA) , vol. 1,
pp. 851–858, IEEE, 2020.
[9] F. Biesinger, B. Kraß, and M. Weyrich, “A survey on the necessity
for a digital twin of production in the automotive industry,” in 2019
23rd International Conference on Mechatronics Technology (ICMT) ,
pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2019.
[10] Y . He, J. Guo, and X. Zheng, “From surveillance to digital twin:
Challenges and recent advances of signal processing for industrial
internet of things,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 120–129, 2018.
[11] F. Pires, A. Cachada, J. Barbosa, A. P. Moreira, and P. Leit ˜ao, “Digital
twin in industry 4.0: Technologies, applications and challenges,” in
2019 IEEE 17th International Conference on Industrial Informatics
(INDIN) , vol. 1, pp. 721–726, IEEE, 2019.
[12] A. Rasheed, O. San, and T. Kvamsdal, “Digital twin: Values, challenges
and enablers from a modeling perspective,” Ieee Access , vol. 8,
pp. 21980–22012, 2020.