IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 13
boundary between CPS and DTs, as they boast similar features
and advantages and represent the smooth convergence between
reality and virtuality. To clear confusion, a study detailing a
comparison and correlation between the two paradigms has
been conducted in [36].
The second meaning of CPS is more down-to-earth. In
the literature, CPS sometimes refers to physical systems with
varying levels of complexity that are equipped with built-in
sensors, actuators, networking and computation capabilities,
and that are controlled digitally via computer-based algo-
rithms. It is clear that such CPS, compared to the ones in
the previous definition, require a lower level of intelligence
and digitalization. However, they do represent an enabling
technology for the DT, given that they are I4.0-ready physical
equipment that are proficient in reliable data acquisition,
process optimization with feedback inputs, and improved built-
in monitoring and control capabilities. Such CPS are an asset
for DTs to gather data securely from the physical processes
and perform regulatory control operations at the edge.
In the works that reference the first definition of CPS, the
authors rely on a generic architecture of CPS onto which they
build the DT [59], [51]. As such, the DT makes use of the
CPS-specific Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) and act as
Cyber-Physical System Nodes [29] in the virtual ecosystem,
or it assures managerial independence of heterogeneous inter-
connected systems [37].
The articles that interpret CPS according to the second
definition provided above use the computer-controlled system
as the physical counterpart of a virtual twin. These works dive
deeper into the implementation of adaptable DT simulations
via Functional Mock-up Units [52] or GA for scheduling op-
timization [53]. Others use the CPS-integrated Manufacturing
Execution System (MES) software as a downlink between the
virtual twin and the physical CPS [38], or leverage the DT to
facilitate, control, and monitor highly complex material flows
[54].
Table VII summarizes the contributions and advantages of
the literature works revised in this subsection. Again, the
bulk of CPS-integrating DTs comes from the manufacturing
industry, where significant efforts have been made to turn
conventional factory equipment into CPS by populating them
with sensors and connecting them to their virtual twins that
generate intelligent insight. The SOA, which is a founding
principle of CPS, serves as a decoupling strategy that allows
DT services to interact independently and efficiently.
E. Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality (VR/AR)
The Digital Twin’s goal of virtuality and reality convergence
seems to perfectly align with the driver behind two developing
technologies: Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality. Indeed,
VR aims to improve Human-Machine Interactions (HMI) via
3D computer-generated simulations with which the user can
intuitively interact through wearable electronic devices. In
other words, VR can help immerge human operators into a
digital environment. On the other hand, AR technologies make
use of wearable devices render 3D digital images onto a real-
world background. In essence, AR helps bring virtual informa-
tion in a physical environment. This section will explore howresearchers have leveraged these two cutting-edge technologies
to drive forward the DT paradigm.
In the healthcare industry, Laaki et al. [56] created a DT of
a remote surgery environment. The virtual representation of
the medical equipment in a given location can be accessed via
VR by health professionals from a remote location. In turn,
wearable devices (head-mounted displays) allow the doctors
to control a virtual robotic arm that operates on a dummy
patient. The DT then synchronizes the real and virtual twins of
the robotic arm, such that the user can directly and intuitively
control the physical asset via its DT.
Besides immersive and remote control of the real twin,
VR also enables human operators to interact with the virtual
twins of industrial equipment as they normally would with the
equipment itself, without interrupting the normal functioning
of the real entities. As such, engineers can devise new de-
ployable Circular Economy strategies to be implemented on
the real twin once thoroughly tested in the virtual world [96],
create high-quality artificial training sets for safety training in
scenarios where real data acquisition is risky or costly [97], or
have students and trainees learn how to operate the physical
twin by immersively interacting with and practising on their
DTs [98]–[100].
AR technologies can facilitate quick access to the DT
interfaces of real entities by superimposing their virtual data
and images onto the camera feed [101], when the camera is
pointed at the physical twin itself [102]. This feature allows
human operators to dynamically monitor DTs, without having
to go out of their way and connect to the computer that hosts
them.
According to one study [103], the VR/AR-enabled DT can
address three current challenges in HMI development: high-
fidelity virtual representations of physical assets, availability
of both real and simulated data, and intuitive interfaces for
human operators. However, for a complete merge between
the real and virtual worlds, neither technology is enough
by itself. Both technologies allow the user to interact with
the virtual representation of a physical entity, but they do
not allow the real and virtual surrounding environments to
interact with each other. For such cases, Mixed Reality (MR)
technologies combine the advantages of both VR and AR,
to bring digital models in the physical world and simulate
their processes under real circumstances [104]. Table VIII
summarizes the main findings of this review, highlighting the
main domains where VR/AR/MR technologies have enabled
the DT to provide immersive HMI, training and monitoring.
F . Modeling Methodologies
While not an enabling technology in-and-of-itself, the um-
brella of modeling methodologies covers a great range of
frameworks and software meant to guide developers towards
building a core component of the DT: the virtual representation
of the physical entity. Similarly to the DT definitions, the
modeling approaches also vary greatly across the literature,
that some researchers concluded that there is no consensus on
the subject [13], [105]. The challenge to overcome here sits in
the interdisciplinary and use case-specific nature of the DT. It