IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 3
the DT concept, it is still noteworthy that more and more
academics have taken some level of interest in the technology
over the years. It is also important to mention that the search
was accomplished via the “pybliometrics” package of Python,
developed by Rose and Kitchin [5].
Fig. 3. Number of articles in the Scopus database whose abstracts contain
the phrase “digital twin” across the years.
B. Related Surveys
There is currently a considerable number of publications
across literature that are dedicated to advance the concept of a
DT. In fact, there are so many articles that academics have also
put out a number of survey papers that were designed to re-
view the state-of-the-art in DT development, illuminate fellow
innovators on possible research gaps, questions and directions,
as well as guide the industry towards possible DT use cases
that might generate significant business value in their specific
domain. This work aims to complement the other existing
survey efforts and facilitate a complete understanding of the
DT, with its definitions, enabling technologies, applications,
and detailed use-cases and case-studies.
As such, Table I displays a comparison between a collection
of other survey articles covering comprehensive DT-related
literature, and the survey paper at hand. Table I puts in contrast
the contributions of this paper with other surveys’, in order to
highlight the novelty brought by the work at hand. The findings
of this study are analysed below in more detail.
Barricelli et al. [6] propose a study on the DT’s defini-
tions, characteristics, applications, and design implications.
The paper provides full coverage of the DT’s evolution,
from Michael Grieves’ concept to the state-of-the-art at the
time of its publishing. The authors set out to answer three
research questions, regarding the various definitions that the
DT has accumulated across the years, the paradigm’s main
characteristics (feature selection and extraction, that facilitate
the DT-characteristic Big Data analysis, pattern recognition
and ML, predictive and prescriptive analytics, etc.), as well
as the main domains where the DT had been applied at the
time of writing. In particular, the authors detail several DT
implementations across three different application domains:
manufacturing, healthcare, and aviation. The paper ends withthe design implications and challenges that developers should
take into account when considering such a system. In contrast,
this work’s goal is to expand Barricelli et al.’s contributions by
additionally discussing the market potential of the DT, going
into further details on the technologies that enable a DT’s
characteristics, and also providing a closer look at possible
use-cases in different industry domains.
Minerva et al. [7] proposed a comprehensive survey on
the architectural models of a DT, and they also discussed
the technical features of this concept (or, in other words, the
technical “must-haves”) that consolidate the DT definition.
The paper surveys different DT characteristics that were
highlighted in literature pertaining to various technological and
industrial domains, like manufacturing, AR/VR, multiagent
systems, virtualisation, and especially IoT. Additionally, the
authors applied proactive thinking and evidentiated some other
important characteristics of the DT that are often overlooked in
other research works, like data ownership, contextualisation,
augmentation, servitisation, etc. The paper covers the value
of the DT concept, including its market potential, before
diving into various detailed use-cases, like the digital city and
the digital patient. The survey ends with a consolidated DT
architectural model and illuminates the upcoming challenges.
While the article proposed by Minerva et al. contours the
definitions, enabling technologies and applications of a DT,
it does not go into details about which technologies can be
integrated into the DT in order to build those applications.
The survey at hand will attempt to fill that gap.
L¨ocklin et al. [8] published a survey paper that tackles
the DT’s use for verification and validation (V&V) purposes.
The authors mention that there are multiple DT definitions
in the literature, before settling on one definition that makes a
distinction between the Digital Twin, which is mainly referred
to as a tool for monitoring, verification and validation, and the
Intelligent Digital Twin, that can provide meaningful feedback
to its corresponding asset based on the acquired data. Further-
more, the survey is conducted around three research questions
that tackle how the DT can enable verification and validation,
the industrial domains where the DT is used for V&V , and
a classification of modalities in which the DT is leveraged
in the reviewed papers. As the title of the survey suggests,
it is dedicated to studying the application of verification and
validation within multiple industrial domains.
Biesinger et al. [9] conducted a survey on the necessity
of a DT in the automotive industry’s integration planning
processes. Unlike the previously presented articles, which
focused on reviewing scholarly works, this study has been
conducted by interviewing 22 production planners from var-
ious automotive manufacturing companies. The scope of the
paper, which is a case-study by itself, covers the demand of
an easily accessible and configurable DT for the specific use-
case of integration planning. As such, it is a great indicator of
the market potential that the DT has in this industrial sector,
but it does not delve into the possible solutions or enabling
technologies that could help implement a DT that is compliant
with the definitions that the authors provide in their work.
He et al. [10] proposed a survey focused mostly on the
monitoring and surveillance capabilities of the DT, and their