IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 25
Fig. 11. Conveyor Belt Snapshot of a Tea Manufacturing Plant
Fig. 12. Steps in the Process of Tea Manufacturing
placeholder for filter paper along with its cutting, folding, etc.
There are two transport wheels: upper andlower where the
operation of thread stitching and the cardboard using needle
is being done. This different steps in the process can be
clearly understood from the different steps in the process of
the tea manufacturing, as shown in Fig. 12. There are several
sequential steps and a relation between each step, right from
adding tea and herbs, or filter paper to packaging, checking
the weight of each box and also investigating rejections and
possible reuse of the materials.
There were 6 to 8 downtimes per day over a 24 hour period,
each lasting around 15 minutes. The activities during the
downtime included: change of product ,loading new feed of
raw materials ,equipment/mechanical failure ,misalignments
of material feed ,effect of new product on machine , etc.
Also, an accurate supervision of the facility during night
shift is difficult. The tea-bag manufacturing process was
studied in detail to detect and keep record on their anomalies,
observe any patterns, identify prospects for twin modelling
and predicting the maintenance needs of the machines. The
seven major anomalies identified included: (1) Thread knot
Anomaly; (2) Outer envelope print not centered; (3) No filter
bag in the outer envelope; (4) Tag paper print not centered;
(5) Outer envelope paper missing; (6) Faulty filter paper
tube; (7) Filter paper slicing. Given the varying nature of
the anomalies, they could be detected using multiple step
dedicated anomaly detection technique, typically, an N-stepapproach.
One of the major concerns for a DT is the quality of data
being fed. The lack of noise-free data being administered
has severe consequences such as sub-standard performance
of the twin [15]. This compels the DT to eliminate potential
aberrations from the data in order to keep up with its per-
formance. The demand for noise-free data has paved a way
for anomaly detection algorithms that would filter spurious
instances from datasets. The need for faster and more accurate
results obliges the algorithm to have an equilibrium between
the two performance parameters: accuracy and execution time.
The service of anomaly detection integrated within a virtual
twin demonstrates three of the DT’s main characteristic traits
enumerated in the definition we provided in Section II, namely:
self-adapting, self-monitoring, and self-diagnosing. Through
anomaly detection, the DT of the tea factory raises alarms
whenever its external environment changes in a way that the
DT is not able to recognize, allowing the operator or other
pre-defined routines to handle the exceptional anomalies. At
the same time, implementing anomaly detection implies the
existence of a monitoring mechanism that continuously ingests
data and checks for divergent behaviour within it. Lastly,
anomalies can be a sign of degradation in some of the physical
asset’s systems, so they could trigger pre-defined maintenance
pipelines to address these system health issues.
In order to validate this, a two-step anomaly detection