IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 22
An extensive amount of research has been followed
up in implementing anomaly detection with various ML
algorithms. As a consequence, several research problems
have been encountered by the researchers. Andrea et al. [164]
implemented anomaly detection on industrial data with a
semi-supervised learning approach. The dataset under study
consisted of a major portion of unlabelled data (unsupervised
learning) and a smaller portion of labelled data (supervised
learning). The choice of hybrid dataset for the said study
was influenced from the following facts: i) for the supervised
approach, additional efforts need to be invested in labelling
the data that is prone to be impractical for larger datasets,
and ii) an unsupervised algorithm learns by the means
of bulk statistics of majority behaviour, thus a smaller
unlabelled dataset might result in an ambiguous output. A DT
framework, by virtue of its simulation capabilities, generated
the unlabelled portion of dataset with normal samples that
simulated normal industrial operation. The latter half of
the dataset comprised of anomalous samples derived from
a real factory data. The article claims to have achieved a
higher score in its performance indices for semi-supervised
approach than the fully unsupervised approach (AUC scores
0.872 and 0.756 respectively). Maurizio et al. [165] proposed
a reference model using DTs for risk assessment analysis
in industrial process plants. They put forth a framework
for a smart factory that would enhance its productivity
while prioritizing the safety of human operators. The risk
identification and assessment aspect of the model called
for inclusion of an “Anomaly Detection and Prediction”
tool in the twin. The tool was developed while being fairly
inclusive of the twin-enabling technologies: i) development of
a communication and control system with sensors-actuators
at the edge and Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) at
controller station, where the wireless sensor networks helped
to gather the ground-level data to the twin, ii) development of
ML models by employing the received data to analyse, predict
the risk factors and educate the DT to invoke precautionary
actions. Notably in [88], a framework was proposed for
the monitoring and diagnostics of a fleet of aero-engines.
The framework implemented anomaly detection for fault
detection, isolation and identification. A physics-based model
of a three-shaft turbofan engine was developed and simulated
in-house. The simulation data for the said model and the
signatures of potential component faults were generated
by a DT. In order to simulate an entire fleet of engines,
production scatter simulation was implemented by the twin
that cloned multiple replicas of the engines with minimal
random variation.
The capability of DTs to analyse temporal data in real time
has proven to be a greater asset for targeting spurious events.
This statement has been validated by Xie et al. [166] who
have proposed a DT framework for crucial asset monitoring
in a building facility. The multi-layered twin architecture
mainly featured: i) the Digital Modelling layer that acquired
time series data in real-time and stored simulation data as
well as historical data, and ii) the Data/Integration layer
that analysed the data at hand and took informed decisions.The said analysis was assisted by the Bayesian Online
Change-point Detection (BOCD) algorithm that detected
suspicious instances upon investigating the sudden variations
in the time-series (change-points). The framework has
been demonstrated in a DT demonstrator laboratory at the
University of Cambridge. The experiment was conducted
on two identical cooling pumps for vibration monitoring
and the twin successfully identified anomalous vibrations.
On the similar lines, a group of researchers put forth a
blueprint for a unified DT for anomaly detection in Smart
Manufacturing [167]. A novel aspect of the said architecture
was a DT platform consisting multiple twins for every crucial
process/entity. A demonstration on a CNC facility proved
the significance of an anomaly detection scheme developed
by framework. A range of limits is devised by the twin
after thorough analysis of historical data. The instantaneous
values are referred against this range and dubious instances,
if any, are reported by the twin prior to unfortunate tool
damage. Further protocol dictates switching the device state
as “faulty”, requesting for maintenance and reconfiguration
of the facility topology until the device maintenance is
completed. Through this article, the eminence of machine
failure prediction by anomaly detection, reconfiguration and
rescheduling has been emphasized.
From the literature discussed above, it is observed that DT
proves its expertise in the field of anomaly detection owing
to its varied capabilities. The various problems or limitations
encountered in anomaly diagnostics such as the generation of
a reference model for comparison based on past data, lack of
simulation datasets, development of early prediction models
for analysis in real-time etc. have been addressed efficiently by
the DT. In conjunction with the enabling technologies, the DT
showcases capabilities such as flexibility to include analytical
tools in its core architecture [165], [166], [167], simulation of
training dataset [164] and anomalous dataset [88] for better
model training, compatibility with heterogeneous data and its
pragmatic integration [163], real-time analytics [166], [167]
and generation, preservation of signature copies of every entity
in extensive sensor networks [162] to resolve the problems that
are confronted with.
2) Predictive Maintenance: Another service that the Digital
Twin promises to provide is Predictive Maintenance. The
advantages in terms of cost, time, and resources that PdM can
demonstrably bring to the industry have been long sought-
after. Thus, significant research effort has already been in-
vested into developing working architectures that can accu-
rately predict a machine’s failure (i.e., self-diagnosing). For
example, Motaghare et al. [168] proposed a basic architecture
that outlines the components of a PdM system’s pipeline: data
acquisition, data analysis & state detection, health assessment
and prognosis, and maintenance actions & alerts. Although at
a first glance these functional blocks might seem rudimentary,
they in fact represent the founding pillars that support PdM
services, and they are predominant in many framework pro-
posals to this day. For example, the authors in [169] present a
PdM architecture for nuclear infrastructure whose components
greatly resemble the ones in the previously referenced work.