IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 21
Fig. 9. DT application: Anomaly Detection Framework
strategies involved in analysing the data and discovering
better insights is Diagnostic Analytics (DA), i.e., having a
profound look at the data to observe and interpret the causes
of events and behaviors. An effective and popular technique
recognized for DA is anomaly detection [159]. Anomaly
detection is a technique of fault diagnosis that detects sections
of data disobeying the normal, expected behaviour [160],
[161]. The DT-enabled anomaly detection has proven itself
an asset for the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) phase
of smart factories. As illustrated in the subsequent literature,
it is clear that incorporation of anomaly detection in DT
architectures has had a significant impact on the popularity
of DTs in the I4.0 ecosystems.
The anomaly detection work flow followed by researchers
in general is represented pictorially in Figure 9. Workflow
of Anomaly detection application with most common key
phases involved are shown in the Figure 9. It is observed that
uni variate or multi-variate models with single or multi step
detection models have significant effect on Anomaly detection
applications performance. The primary sources of data for
such anomaly detection applications are derived from industry
run-time data from the connected IoT devices or historical
data from database logs available. The DT models close to
their physical counterparts in an industry may also simulate
the data required along with the run-time and historical data
available.Data set identification and creation based on the user
specific applications is also determining factor to improve the
performance of the anomaly detection application. Anomalies
can be visualized with a right choice of algorithms based
on standard machine learning models. The choice amongsupervised, unsupervised and semi supervised learning models
is based on the availability of labelled data versus large data
requirements for the training. The DT application can arrive at
the next level PdM suggestions from the observations derived
from the anomaly detection outcomes shown in Figure 9.
In [162], the authors proposed an IoT-enabled “Living
Digital Twin” for additive manufacturing. The twin essentially
rooted for assuring higher productivity by monitoring the
system with analog sensors such as acoustic, vibration,
magnetic, etc. The basic protocol might seem rudimentary
due to the sensor-actuator action involved, but the twin
had a significant contribution in the aspect of anomaly
detection. The digital counterpart introduced the concept of
a fingerprint library to detect anomalies. The fingerprints
are the run-time values of asset parameters that compared
with the instantaneous IoT data from the physical systems to
detect potential anomalies.
A DT-enabled anomaly detection mechanism was proposed
in [163] for built asset monitoring. The detection process
asserted the need for cross-referencing the multiple data
sources for building facilities information. Owing to the data
inter-operability and re-usability aspects of the task, DT was
accepted as a comprehensive solution for the data integration
problem. Storing the data from heterogeneous sources into a
single, integrated format eased the detection process, meant
for every key asset in the building structure. The run-time
data of the assets, acquired in various data forms, was
encapsulated in a single data format that invariably assisted
the detection process many-fold.