IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 11
TABLE IV
OVERVIEW OF REVIEWED LITERATURE INTEGRATING ML INTO DIGITAL TWIN.
Domain ML Algorithm Reference Use and advantages of Machine Learning
ManufacturingRandom Forests,
AdaBoost,
LightGBM,
XGBoost[55]The four ML algorithms are used to improve the effectiveness and yield of productions in the petrochemical industry. In this
comparison, the authors tackle latency issues in ML responsiveness, time lag issues, and frequency unification across
time series data. The models are tested on real Big Data from the petrochemical industry.
DCNN [43]Deep Convolutional Neural Networks are used to analyse uCT scans of reinforcement materials and classify their
pixels accurately to create their digital material twins. The DCNN obtains better results than traditional ML.
DCNN [76]The DT is used to generate automatically labeled virtual images to construct synthetic datasets for DCNN training. The
model is adapted to classify real images via TL.
SSAE-based
DFDD[31]The DT produces artificial data to train a Stacked Sparse Autoencoder (SSAE) to learn the features with the highest
weight on fault diagnosis and life prediction. Data coming from the real twin is used to retrain the model, which has
integrated an Adaptation Layer to mitigate the differences between real and virtual data. The resulting model is called
Digital Twin-assisted Fault Diagnosis using Deep Transfer Learning (DFDD).
LSTM [44]A Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network is trained with artificial data to detect anomalies in virtual space. It is
retrained with few hours-worth of real data to detect anomalies in the real asset.
NetworkingDNN [39] DNNs are used to optimize energy consumption efficiency based on various Mobile Edge Computing network parameters.
ANN [56] Neural Networks are used to detect DoS attacks on the DT of a remote surgery environment.
RoboticsNatural DQN,
DDQN with PER[23]Deep RL (Natural Deep Q Learning, Double Q Networks with Prioritized Experience Replay) algorithms were used to learn
from both synthetic and real data to test various scheduling strategies in a manufacturing robot’s processes to
reduce down time costs, time, and other resources
PPO-based
DRL[58]Proximal Policy Optimisation-based (PPO) Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) was trained with virtual data from
the DT of a robotic arm. The physical twin learned to complete given tasks thanks to its training in the digital space.
Civil
EngineeringQuadratic
Discriminant[41]The DT’s underlying physics-based models generated synthetic failure data which the Quadratic Discriminant then
classified in various urgency levels.
ME-GP [42]Physics-based modeling, Mixture of Experts and Gaussian Processes were used to predict future machine states by
analysing multiple time-scale time series data.
Electrical
EngineeringANN [30]Artificial Neural Networks are used to predict the time series samples of the active power component sensor based on
historical data.
Fire
Protection
EngineeringGA [40]Genetic Algorithms are used to predict the environmental parameters that would favor devastatic fires, such that
they could be proactively prevented.
Space
IndustryHA-SSD and
MobileNet[85] Gesture recognition models, such as HA-SSD, are proposed to remotely control physical robots on-board spacecraft.
cloud-based DT can interpret and analyse in order to reduce
manufacturing uncertainty and complexity in fixed-position
assembly islands [57], optimise the functioning of power
equipment switchgear [24], provide PdM for automotive brake
pads [46], and visualise in real time the stress endured by metal
shelving brackets via Augmented Reality [47]. Other use-cases
benefit from these technologies as well, since smart sensors
and wearables can also be integrated in mobile equipment that
people carry, urban infrastructure, and interior appliances. The
richness of heterogeneous data that the IoT sensors bring can
be used to virtualise and visualise cities, allowing structural
simulations for hazards prevention [48], and to remotely
manage safety issues in the workplace [28].
Concurrently, the IoT/IIoT brings more than just data to
the DT system. In [91], the DT is built upon the traditional
IoT framework, and it is split into two parts: one at the edge,
and one in the cloud. Both essentially working also as the
gateways that connect the two corresponding media of the
IoT framework. Furthermore, while the IoT is a powerful
enabling technology of the DT, the DT itself can also act as
a supporting pillar for the IoT by providing a self-adaptive
and self-integrating digital abstraction of the IoT devices to
make the IoT framework resilient to dynamic changes [49],
or by allowing virtual simulations of large sensor networks
[50]. In the context of IIoT, equipping edge devices with MLsolutions can be a challenging task due to the limited resources
on the devices as well as the concerns about communications
with the cloud (low latencies, raw data privacy). As such, the
authors in [93] proposed building a DT of the Edge Network
that was able to leverage Federated Learning (FL) to re-train
aggregated models locally, on edge devices (thus avoiding
raw data transmissions), as well as optimize communication
efficiency using the DT’s updated mirroring of the network.
For additionally improved communication security for the
previously reviewed framework, the authors in [94] proposed
using the blockchain technology to store the aggregated model
parameters of the edge devices on the Base Station, making
the FL process even more robust to data privacy issues.
Another aspect that IoT contributes with into the DT de-
velopment is that it provides a platform that can understand
and translate data from multiple protocols. IoT devices are
usually built with certain communication standards in mind,
like MQTT, CoAP, MTConnect [90], OPC-UA [35], or 5G
uRRLC [92], and IoT is a bridge that connects those standards
with the higher-level abstraction that is the DT. The choice
of IoT devices, communication protocols, and IoT platforms
can influence a very important characteristic of the DT: the
synchronization rate between the real and virtual twins. We
have established before that this synchronization rate will
depend on the use-case of the DT. For time-sensitive applica-