IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 24
store, and process huge amounts of data has opened new
doors in the world of PdM, immensely facilitating the task.
However, that is not to say PdM has become an easy job.
The new approach presents other challenges in terms of time,
resources, and sets of skills that are required to deliver accurate
predictions of the RUL parameter.
A compromise between the complex, but transparent
physics-based models and efficient, but opaque data-driven
models, are hybrid models, where researchers have used both
approaches simultaneously in order to leverage the advantages
from both of them. In this context, Luo et al. [176] have
proposed a DT-based PdM scheme that uses physics-based
degradation and simulation models to generate theoretical
baselines for the machine state, as well as data-centric models
that consume real-time streams of data from the sensors
installed in the machine. This work has been summarised in
Figure 10, and the results of the hybrid model outperformed
both physics-driven and data-driven models in predicting the
tool wear of a CNC Machine Tool.
In order to achieve satisfying accuracy, PdM schemes that
rely solely on Big Data more often than not require massive
amounts of historical failure data. For example, Choi et al.
[177] proposed a method for predicting the maintenance needs
of an induction furnace with the help of neural networks.
Due to the nature of the ML algorithms used, as well as
the data-hungry aspect of PdM, the authors ended up using
a data set that consisted of measurements across 24 months.
Even then, the conclusion of the article admits that collecting
data during faulty scenario was deemed nigh impossible, as
running experiments with a failed induction furnace could have
been fatally dangerous. As such, the solution to this problem,
according to the researchers, was to place focus in their future
work on generating andsimulating erroneous data, instead of
measuring it. In [168], Wang et al. introduced a two-part PdM
scheme for the China’s High-Speed Railway equipment using
LSTM-RNN. As stated before, any DL approach requires
tremendous amounts of data for training. Of course, there is
plenty of data that can be generated by a nation-wide business
like China’s railway system, however it should be kept in
mind that the work’s target equipment, the Traction Power
Supply System, is engineered to be sturdy enough to have as
few failures as possible per year. As such, gathering historical
failure data proved once again to be a prolonged challenge.
In this direction, the authors proposed splitting the PdM
framework into two: a proactive maintenance system, and
apredictive maintenance system. The proactive maintenance
system deals with analysing the failure modes of the physical
asset to generate new failure data through stochastic modeling.
The PdM system is then trained using solely simulated data,
and the overall method is then validated using both simulated
data and field data. While it turns out that the model performs
predictably better on artificial test data rather than on real data,
the performance is still very good and it shows promise in the
direction of simulation-assisted PdM. Gugulothu et al. in [178]
invented an innovative and practical approach to RUL estima-
tion. Their work proves to be robust to noise, sensor inter-
dependencies across time, as well as data unavailability, which
are all issues that are very present in various data repositoriesin the industry. The proposed system uses “embeddings”, or
rather, hidden features extracted by a RNN encoder after it was
fed a fixed window-sized signal input from different sensors,
to extract the Health Index which will then be used to predict
the RUL. The remaining life estimation is done by comparing
the extracted Health Index with its previously seen values from
the training data. The work delivers on its promises, providing
a robust RUL estimator that can show good results, as long as
enough training data is provided.
It can be noted that many works in the literature are re-
searching ways to compensate for the low amount of historical
failure data made available by their target monitored physical
system. It becomes apparent that the quality of the data and,
equally important, the quantity of data are extremely important
boxes to check when developing failure prognosis solutions.
Over the years, the focus has shifted from model-based PdM,
where researchers came to the conclusion that developing a
stochastic model for a complex system can be nigh impossible,
towards data-driven approaches, where an algorithm can learn
from tremendous amounts of historical failure data. And this
shift in research direction can be justified. As an example
of model-based PdM, where limited amounts of data is not
considered a hard constraint, Wang et al. [179] proposed a
fault prognosis system for wind turbine bearing by making
use of analytical tools like the wavelet transform (for de-
noising and feature extraction), and Bayesian statistics for
providing RUL predictions backed by 90% credible intervals,
whose accuracy would increase over time. However the goal
in I4.0 is to bring PdM to all equipment, including those that
are too complex for statistical modeling, which is why the
data-driven approach has gained significant traction. And this
approach, as the name states, requires large amounts of data
that is not always available, especially in old machinery where
maintenance records have not been kept, or in equipment
whose uptime is so crucial that no run-to-failure scenarios
were allowed.
VI. D IGITAL TWIN: CASE STUDIES
This section will take a closer look at DT applications
and services by detailing three DT case studies that represent
main research directions carried out at the London Digital
Twin Research Centre1. The subsequent subsections will thus
summarize the research goals, findings, challenges, and future
directions for each case study in part.
A. A Look at the Tea Industry in India
An important case study that we carried out is from a multi-
national tea manufacturing company. It is a semi-automated
manufacturing company involving machines and human beings
to control them, who bring in several inaccuracies in their
processes. The tea bag manufacturing machine operated daily
on an average of 20 hours and 2 hours of rest period. Fig. 11
shows the snapshot of the different activities in the conveyor
belt of the tea manufacturing company; starting with tea
and herbs, dosage, blending, etc. Notably, there is a separate
1LDTRC website: https://dt.mdx.ac.uk/