IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 18
Fig. 7. Digital Twin in infrastructure
rise building in Rottweil, Germany. The new advanced el-
evator, which could move both vertically and horizontally,
was equipped with IoT systems and deployed via the Azure
DT framework. This DT is able to reduce the downtime
of the elevator significantly, provides information related to
elevator occupancy and usage to enhance the availability of
the elevator, which serves more than 10,000 people per day.
Moreover, the DT is reinforced by AI learning to optimize
travel times of frequent users.
b) Smart Infrastructure:
Ganguli and Adhikar [131] thoroughly presented a DT for
a Single Degree Of Freedom (SDOF) dynamic system, in
which a double time-scale system was proposed the first time.
Specifically, the fast time scale reflected the dynamic responses
of the real system and the slow one for the DT, and it was
found that such a multiple time-scales DT was able to capture
effects of mass and stiffness evolution on the SDOF simulta-
neously. Ding et al. [132] proposed a DT for a steel bridge
construction using BIM and IoT data from embedded sensors,
able to dynamically monitor the construction processes and
key related factors such as site resources, business processes,
field workers, as well as their live interaction, thus ensuring a
lean construction.
In order to develop a proactive maintenance system for
bridge structures, Shim et al. [133] proposed twin models
fusing entire lifecycle information from design, construction
to operation, and maintenance. The first model was built from
as-built documents using BIM, while the second model was
generated with the help of the 3D scanning technique using
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and laser scanner. A maintenance-oriented digital process connecting two models was also
elaborated to update the structure’s status continuously.
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) is an important topic
in civil engineering, thus Wagg et al. [134] explored a SHM-
oriented DT. Essentially, data-augmented modeling is imple-
mented to compensate for the discrepancy between numerical
models and physical counterparts, which involves two phases.
First, the discrepancy is qualitatively and quantitatively mea-
sured from the physical entity. Second, bias-corrected models
are calibrated based on the numerical model and measured
discrepancy, yielding augmented outputs which closely ap-
proach the real behavior of the structure over its working life.
Another concrete example of DT application in SHM is the
work of Kaewunruen et al. [135] for railway turnout systems,
which consists of many delicate and complex details and has a
critical role in ensuring the safety of the railway system. The
application is built by expanding the conventional 3D BIM
models to 6D models, involving three geometric dimensions,
time dimension, cost dimension and its sub-categories, and
carbon footprint dimension. Moreover, not only actual oper-
ation information are investigated, but data from historical
phases such as planning, design, pre-assembly to predicted
future action, i.e., maintenance, demolition are also taken into
account. A similar DT approach via 6D BIM is applied to
the renovation management of the King’s Cross station [136],
aiming at a more resource-economic and environment-friendly
model than traditional construction methods such as 2D paper
drawings, or 3D static numerical models.
With regards to the offshore structures, Akselos [137] has
developed a holistic DT framework coupling with parallel