IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 19
cloud computations, which can provide real-time risk-based
decisions in response to time-varying uncertainty encountered
by offshore structural engineering involving wave, wind, ma-
rine environment, and so on. As one of the leaders in the
power plant industry, General Electric has been devising a
sophisticated DT framework, a.k.a. Predix, [138] including
a spectrum of aspects of the physical entity ranging from
thermal, mechanical, material, electrical, economic, statistical,
environmental. This DT is expected to perform a wide range of
applications such as optimizing profitability, maximizing plant
safety, accurately forecasting productivity, profiling customers,
synchronizing operations of many machines on plants. For
this purpose, various advanced technologies have been im-
plemented in Predix: firstly, multimodal data analytics are re-
quired to automatically collect, update, and store a vast amount
of heterogeneous data involving: parametric data (temperature,
pressure), graphical data (infra imaging, camera), spectral data
(spectroscopy), time-series data (sensors, accelerometers), text
data (service records), historical data (maintenance database),
and so on. Secondly, the company deploys a number of digital
models encompassing physics-based models, i.e., thermody-
namic model, combustion model, transient dynamic model,
and data-driven models such as statistical process control, ML-
based anomaly detection, and DL regression and classification.
Finally, a knowledge network, called Expert Twin is explored
to connect experts across the enterprise around the world for
sharing data, knowledge, solution, and best practice.
c) Smart City:
In an attempt towards sustainable growth of the city as
well as a better quality of life for citizens, Francisco et
al. [139] investigated a DT paradigm for Smart City using
spatio-temporal data. At first, a digital replica of the city is
rebuilt in a virtual space using the Unity cross-platform; after
that, the researcher can navigate across the virtual city via VR
devices. In addition, an AR crowd-sourcing module allows for
integrating feedback of citizens about real infrastructures into
the platform parallelly. By doing so, the triangle interaction
human-infrastructure-technology is captured, analyzed, and
updated, serving to improve the sustainability and wellness
of the city.
Ruohomaki et al. [140] explored a Smart city platform using
DT for the city of Helsinki to enhance city management in var-
ious aspects, including urban landscape, energy consumption,
environment. At the base of the platform is the 3D city models
called CityGML integrating geographic information, geometry,
topology, and appearance. Next, sensor data are linked to city
models via an IoT platform called SenSorThings, composed of
two main parts: sensors for observation and thing, i.e., API,
for connection to the network. By doing so, the initial 3D
model is transformed into a semantic ecosystem with high
interoperability. Du et al. [141] presented a Proof of Concept
of DT for Smart City’s Information System at an individual
level, namely, Cog-DT, to reduce the cognitive overload for
residents and workers in the city. The first step of Cog-DT
involves using VR technology to gather personal cognitive
information such as neuroimaging, physiological, ergonomic.
Then, the second step is to simulate human cognition in
response to various information stimuli. Finally, an adaptiveinformation system is implemented to display engineering
information adjusted in a real-time fashion. In an attempt to
improve the long-term performance of the O&M service of
building and other infrastructure, Lu et al. [142] developed a 5-
layer DT architecture and applied it to the West Cambridge site
with more than 20 buildings and other facilities. The proposed
DT architecture can be extended further up to a city-sized
application. Their five main layers are data acquisition layer
including sensor data, weather, energy, security, culture, policy
data and so forth; transmission layer via the Internet, 4G/5G,
HTTP; digital modeling layer with the help of BIM, en-
ergy simulation model, weather simulation model; data/model
integration Layer powered by data analytics and AI; and
finally service layer providing multiple services such as energy
management, asset management, security management, etc. at
different levels for different stakeholders. Lin et al. [143] ex-
plored a DT application for Smart City’s underground parking
garage using Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) in conjunction
with BIM technologies for improving environmental manage-
ment. The WSN was composed of various sensors able to
monitor gas, temperature, the humidity of the garage, whose
data were later transferred to a central host with the help of
communication routers. On the other hand, a BIM model of the
garage is built by Autodesk Revit and Naviswork, providing a
detailed digital representation. When coupling the BIM model
with environmental data from sensors, the risk status, i.e., CO
gas level, user comfort level, are lively represented and can be
visually noticed with green/red color code.
3) Towards 5G/6G with Digital Twin: The future Industry
5.0 paradigm envisages removing any physical limitations and
building in virtual connectivity and capabilities that will enable
the seamless interaction between devices, humans and infras-
tructure [144]. Even though this digital transformation across
various industries will enable applications that serve different
purposes, they all have something in common: dependency
on reliable and strong connectivity enabled by the underlying
next generation network infrastructure (e.g., 5G/6G). The fifth
generation networks is already a key component in I4.0, since,
even in the DT technology, the connection of components and
devices is of utmost importance and communication latency
is expected to be less than a few milliseconds. In this context,
the relationship between 5G/6G and DT can be seen from two
different point of views. The first one, sees the 5G/6G network
as an enabler for different DT applications, while the second
one sees the DT as an enabler for 5G/6G by looking at the
DT of the network itself. Both point of views are addressed
in this section.
Communication technology is going to be the foundation of
industrial IoT, hence in [145] authors have presented a detailed
overview of 5G wireless transmissions and their application
prospects according to cyber-physical-based manufacturing
systems. Furthermore, a novel 5G-based industrial IoT archi-
tecture for smart manufacturing is proposed. In [146] authors
have taken an industrial robotic arm as a use case and have
performed an analysis of simulated robot with the effects of
simulated network for CPPS. The key contribution of the study
is the comparison and analysis of effects of using different
kinds of network types in a Gazebo simulated robot. The three