IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 14
TABLE VII
OVERVIEW OF REVIEWED LITERATURE INTEGRATING CPS INTO DIGITAL TWIN OR VICE -VERSA .
Domain Reference Use and advantages of CPS
Manufacturing[59] A four-layer CPS architecture is used to integrate a tri-model Digital Twin (Digital Model, Computational Model, and Graph-based Model)
[51] A five-layer CPS architecture (data store, pre-processing, model & algorithms, analysis, user interface) is used to integrate a Digital Twin.
[29] The Service Oriented Architecture of CPS is used to facilitate the integration of DT in CPPS.
[37] Digital Twins are used to virtually manage individual components’ issues (data ownership, version management, etc.) in a System of Systems.
[52] Functional Mock-Up Units are used to standardize the connection between a CPS and its DT, allowing for facile integration of physical systems in CPS.
[38] The CPS-specific MES software controls the physical CPS and communicates with the Matlab-based virtual twin.
[54]The DT is built upon an add-on software and communication infrastructure setup that controls, monitors and
connects a real material-handling system with a simulation-based decision support.
Logistics [53]The DT incorporates the predicted machine health into the production scheduling algorithm (Genetic Algorithm)
to optimize logistics tasks to avoid failure and prolong machine lifetime.
TABLE VIII
OVERVIEW OF REVIEWED LITERATURE INTEGRATING VR/AR INTO DIGITAL TWIN.
Domain VR/AR Reference Use and advantages of VR/AR
ManufacturingVR [96]The VR-based DT is used as a safe testing environment for developing new disassembly processes without interfering with
the real twin.
VR [98] The VR-based DT of an industrial robotic cell is used to teach robotics students on how to operate the real twin.
AR [102] AR is used to overlap digital information extracted from the DT onto a camera feed showing the real twin.
VR, AR [103] Both VR and AR are proposed to enhance HMI via intuitive and immersive interfaces for human operators.
VR, AR, MR [104] MR proposed to overlap the user’s perception of the physical and digital twins, converging reality and virtuality.
Healthcare VR [56] VR is used to integrate the medical professional into the DT of the patient and their environment via a head-mounted display.
Safety VR [97] VR is leveraged to create artificial images of humans wearing safety equipment in order to train ML algorithms via TL.
Robotics AR [101]AR is used to track the movements of a mobile robot via its DT. The virtual image of the robot and its trail are superimposed
on a camera feed, allowing real-time tracking.
Gastronomic VR, AR [99]VR- and AR-based DT of an ice cream machine is used for real-time monitoring and for training employees on how to
maneuver the real asset.
is indeed difficult to create a one-size-fits-all architecture for
such a versatile technology, given that its application scenario
can impose significant alterations to that architecture. This is
also part of the reason why the DT is also difficult to define.
For example, it is not always the case that the physical twin
is an actual, real object, characterized by a physical geometry.
As such, proposed modeling methodologies that imply the
existence of a physical object would not map well to use cases
like the DT of processes. On this note, the authors in [106]
proposed an architecture for the manufacturing industry that
breaks down the DT into three constituents, namely product
DT, process DT, and operation DT, with each component
having a seemingly different architecture. A different modeling
methodology, presented in [107], summarizes a manufacturing
DT as the synchronization between 3D modeling and mecha-
nism modeling.
Nevertheless, researchers in the field have come up withDT frameworks that abstract away from the use case-specific
details of implementing. Instead, they take a step back in order
to focus on the components one could reasonably expect to
find in any DT, no matter the application scenario. The authors
in [108] claim that a DT only requires two main components
to be whole, which are: a virtual representation of the physical
entity and an API. The authors also mention that the virtual
model does not require to include the 3D geometry of the
physical object, unless that is required by the DT’s use case.
In addition, other dimensions can be added to the DT, such
as: data storage, access control, methods, events, and a human-
machine interface. Similarly, other works [109] insist on the
importance of creating an API-like middleware that allows the
DT to connect to external systems. Riedelsheimer et al. [110]
proposed a methodology for building DTs for already-built,
complex, inter-disciplinary physical objects, with the aim to
optimize the systems’ sustainability throughout its lifetime.