IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 9
A Markets and Markets report [71] highlights attractive
growth opportunities in the DT market and stresses on the
increasing need for PdM and business optimisation. The report
also states that the market in North America recorded as high
as $1.32 billion, the largest share of the overall DT market
in 2019, and it is projected to reach $16.94 billion by 2026.
The paper forecasts that the global DT economy is expected
to grow from $3.2 billion in 2020 to $48.27 billion by 2026
with a Compound Annual Growth Rate of 58 %. Another
report by the Institution of Engineering and Technology [72]
echos the idea that the DT market is on the rise, although it
also mentions that industry-agnostic adoption at the time of
publication amounted to only 5% of enterprises. Nevertheless,
the authors are optimistic that the DT should pave the way to
I4.0.
IV. D IGITAL TWIN: ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
Although it is often referred to as a piece of technology in
and of itself, the DT can be more accurately thought of as
a system-of-systems, a meld of several enabling technologies
that construct an intelligent virtual representation of a phys-
ical entity and support a continuous two-way feedback loop
between the twins. At the same time, the enabling technologies
themselves can take many forms depending on the DT’s use
case. For example, although it is known that a communication
medium is needed between the real and digital twins, the
choice of the specific communication protocol is entirely
dependent on the communication requirements of the DT’s
application. These being said, this section will explore the
most common enabling technologies of the DT and provide
insight into how researchers from various industries have
chosen algorithms and frameworks that were fitting to their
use cases.
A. Machine Learning
One of the advantages of DT is that it brings awareness
(or intelligence, or understanding) to a physical asset that
would otherwise lack it. Of course, we are not referring to
the human understanding of “awareness” [73], but rather a
new kind of specialized intelligence that is able to understand
significant amounts of numerical data and draw domain-
specific conclusions from it faster than a human expert could.
Thus, the DT should be able to infer meaningful and actionable
information from the data that is generated by its physical twin
and its environment. In this scenario, ML techniques represent
the foundation, or the brain, of a DT.
Across the reviewed literature, researchers have employed
the whole array of ML algorithms types in their DT imple-
mentations: traditional ML [74], Deep Learning (DL) [75],
supervised ML [76], unsupervised ML [77], classification ML
[78], regression ML [79], Reinforcement Learning (RL) [80],
etc.
The applications and choices of ML models encountered in
this review are various and they depend on the use cases and
services of the proposed DTs. However, since ML algorithms
are ultimately used to solve optimization problems, one com-
mon approach is to employ data-driven models to minimiseor maximise a given process parameter. For example, in [39],
where the DT of a Mobile Edge Computing system had been
implemented, a Deep Neural Network (DNN) was used to
maximize energy consumption efficiency across the network
based on features like user association and resource allocation.
Similarly, the authors in [40] used Genetic Algorithms (GA) to
predict the circumstances that would favour most devastating
forest fires, such that they could be proactively prevented. In
[55], four ML algorithms (Random Forest, AdaBoost, Light-
GBM, and XGBoost) were able to learn from the equipment’s
sensor data and optimise production yield in the petrochemical
industry. The same approach is especially common in literature
focused on RL, where the algorithm learns by trying to
maximise a reward function. The reward that these models
attempt to maximise could be product quality outcome [23]
or other arbitrary mathematical reward functions [58].
Besides objective function optimisation, another application
of ML within DTs is to make predictions about the future be-
haviour of the physical asset. In this context, Artificial Neural
Networks (ANNs) have been used in [30] to predict future
samples of the active power component based on historical
time series data. However, ML models, and in particular DL
methods, are generally perceived as black-boxes [81]. This is
because they do not offer sufficient transparency into what
is motivating their predictions. On the other hand, in DT
applications, transparency is desirable, and often required (e.g.,
in applications such as fault identification and urgency clas-
sification [41], or anomaly detection and root cause analysis
[82]). Thus, researchers have looked for ways of integrating
both physics-based and data-driven models into the DT. On
this note, the authors in [42] combined these two approaches to
enable a prognosis service that predicts the future parameters
of a physical asset, even though said parameters evolved at
different time scales. As such, physics-based models were
used to preprocess data coming from multiple time-scale data
streams, while the ML models, Mixture of Experts and Gaus-
sian Processes (ME-GP), combined the extracted information
to predict future bahaviours of each time series parameter.
Another use case of ML in DT implementations is applica-
tion security. Indeed, the authors in [56] proposed a DT for
remote surgery services, and used neural networks to protect
the crucial connection between the physical and virtual worlds,
which has stringent requirements for availability and latency,
by detecting and preventing Denial of Service (DoS) attacks.
Whereas in other works, ML is used to bring intelligence to the
virtual representation of a physical asset, the study conducted
in [43] proposed Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (DC-
NNs) to create the digital replicas of fibrous materials from
real and synthetic images, and this constitutes an example of
ML being used to build DTs.
On the note of synthetic data creation, DTs can also be
used to generate artificial training data for ML models [76].
Of course, for such models to be able to generalise well
on real data, the distribution of the synthetic data they were
trained with has to closely resemble the distribution of the real
data from the test set [31]. This requires extremely accurate,
and thus complex, simulation engines. A workaround for this
challenge is offered by TL, where the ML model trained with