IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 16
Fig. 6. Digital Twin framework for smart manufacturing.
definition of a DT into four parts. A pre-DT is defined as a
virtual prototype for a system to reduce technical risks and root
out design problems before development. Any issues with the
system found on the virtual twin can be solved and corrected
on the physical system. An adaptive DT uses a user interface,
linking the two systems, allowing the virtual twin to under-
stand the preferences from the human operators in different
scenarios. Finally, an intelligent DT has all the characteristics
mentioned before; however, it contains unsupervised ML for
pattern detection in the physical system environment. The
results found to reduce repair costs and increase quality control
for a lowered amount of product defects.
Lee at al. in [118] proposed a DT framework for smart
manufacturing. More specifically, the authors introduced a
systematic integration of the DT in various levels of shop floor
design: unit level, system level, CPS level, and business level.
Figure 6 displays the workflow of the proposed architecture:
shop floor designs are initially tested against unit level Key
Performance Indicators (KPI) and are only selected for the
subsequent level testing if they satisfy them. Consequently, a
triage-based system filters out the designs that do not meet KPI
requirements at each level during the virtual implementation
of the shop floor. In the physical space, the selected designs
are implemented gradually across all levels, and the real
performance of the designs help optimize the KPIs in the
virtual domain.
In [119], Preuveneers et al. proposed the use of safeguarding
systems throughout the software of the DT system. These
safeguarding systems, coined ”software circuit breakers”, are
designed to handle local system errors to stop faults propagat-ing through the levels of the DT, as these have the potential
to be catastrophic. Such local failures can include:
•Missing sensor data
–Failed transmissions
–Disconnected sensors
•Broken Sensors
–Hardware failures or disconnected actuators
–Denial of service attacks
The results show that the addition of software circuit break-
ers in DT systems can station errors cascading into higher-level
systems, and keeps the fault local to that physical station. The
goal of this, however, is not directed at stopping the spread of
errors, more to isolate them, as different errors hold different
levels of severity.
In [120], J. Lee et al. investigated a DT-enabled predictive
maintenance framework for a CNC machine tool system using
DL. The authors outlined vital design characteristics and
requirements for integration of DTs in a CPS. The rapid
growth and requirements for IoT and ML mean data transfer
latency has to be as low as possible. The authors suggest 5G
will significantly contribute to the integration of ML and be
the backbone of DT technology. They also indicate that all
sensors should be developed into smart sensors for ease of
plug and play and scalable networking.
G. A. Gericke et al. [121] investigated the efficiency and
latency of communication and production rate of 500ml water
bottles with a cyber-physical bottling plant. Using Open Plat-
form Communication (OPC), they were able to give possible
positions of bottle-necks in production. Using this, the DT can