IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 17
also detect drops in production rates. The authors conclude
by pointing out the machines cannot rely on OPC as the
only connection to the physical system due to the significant
latency, ranging from 100ms to 500ms. They also found that
as the system scales, more OPC connections will be needed,
further slowing the system.
W. D. Lin et al. [122] carried out research on the design
and implementation of a DT on a CPS. The authors suggested
there are three layers of modules required to produce a DT
system:
•Operation Layer – used for tracking all physical assets
on the CPS
•Visualisation Layer – used for real-time simulation, tak-
ing the data gathered from the operation layer and pro-
vides a remote-monitoring function to allows companies
to be continuously updated on current production status
•Intelligence Layer – This takes all the information from
the previous two layers to create a historical data bank.
This layer will use this data bank, along with real-time
data, to perform efficiency and health monitoring.
The authors then took this design concept, implemented
it onto a prototype Surface Mounted Technology production
system, built of seven stations. This system worked and acted
as a validation to their prosed three-layer DT design concept.
H. R. Hasan et al [123] investigates the use of blockchain
technology as a way of optimising the DT format on a CPS.
The problem outlined in this paper is with the development
side of DTs. There is a need for monitoring the interaction
between design teams and workflows, so each change made
to the software can be accredited to a specific person, who
can be held accountable. This employs transparent history
monitoring, security and trust and ensures the trusted creation
of virtual models. The blockchain platform used was Solidity
- Ethereum smart contracts.
In [124] Kanak et al presents a blockchain-based model
for distributed and collective DT environments which is be-
coming essential in new “Any 4.0” era. They proposed a
novel approach to use security as a symmetric and asymmetric
cryptographic tool to be implemented at a hardware level. The
DT ecosystem proposed includes “X-by-design” and “X as-a-
service” principles where “X” is security, accountability and
integrity.
Similarly, the authors in [125] developed a simulation-
based CPS DT for blockchain enabled Industrial Hemp Supply
Chain (IHSC), which is utilized to improve the understanding
of a complete process pf supply chain, assist in quality
control verification and fast track the development of secure
and automated supply chain system. They present the two-
layer blockchain based data tracking, information sharing, and
interoperability framework for the end-to-end IHSC which can
greatly improve both security and efficiency.
In [126] a DT for an experimental assembly system based
on a belt conveyor system and an automatized line for quality
production check is proposed. They have created a DT for
Bowden holder from a 3D printer, which is composed of some
plastic components, fastener parts and a stepper motor. The
assembly was positioned in a fixture with ultra-high frequency
tags and IoT devices for identification of status and position.The inspection system included an industrial vision system
for checking presence of parts, inspecting the dimensions and
looking for errors before and after assembly operation.
Vach ´alek et al [127] presented a DT model of the production
line based on the simulation tool called Plant Simulation, made
by SIEMENS. This model was a detailed virtual copy of the
physical process involved in assembling the hydraulic pistons.
The goal was to extract the information about the number
of times there has been movement, to the data storage and
OPC data server of SIEMENS have been used to process this
information transfer.
2) Infrastructure: Civil infrastructures are highly valuable
assets, having vital societal roles and involving a large number
of people at every stage of its complex working life from
initial conceptual drawings, 3D numerical model, construction
activities to operational service, as shown in Fig. 7. Thus,
infrastructure management has been a subject of intense re-
search activity, aiming to maximize their safety and service
life while minimizing the building and maintenance costs. In
the following subsection, recent works investigating DT-based
paradigms unifying practical tools and expert knowledge with
novel advanced technologies are reviewed. Furthermore, a DT
application for Structural Health Monitoring developed by the
authors will be described in Section VI.
a) Smart Building:
A building consists of a number of components span-
ning different domains from energy, ventilation, heating, air-
condition, plumbing, mechanics, and so on. Thus, having
effective building management is challenging, especially with
a high-rise building or a commercial complex. Therefore, Lu
et al. [128] have developed a smart O&M management tool
using DT specialized in detecting anomalous behaviors. At
first, a dynamic and distributed data integration component
was built to integrate heterogeneous data from various daily-
updated databases using corresponding object IDs. Secondly,
intelligent anomaly detection functions were implemented
using the BOCD to identify suspected change points, related
time instants, locations, and even elaborate the causes of the
change points.
Lu et al. [129] have developed a dynamic DT in order to
improve asset maintenance and asset failure prediction in a
campus of the University of Cambridge. The DT framework
consists of five layers: (1) first, acquisition layer collecting
data from multiple sources including Building Information
Modelling (BIM), real-time IoT sensor data, asset registry, and
asset tagging data and space management data; (2) second,
transmission layer transmitting data collected from physical
device in the first layer to a central database using WiFi,
5G, low-power wide-area networks, etc.; (3) the third layer
is digital modeling, where different types of digital models
could be developed for various requests in DTs; (4) fourth, the
data/model integration layer provides real-time analysis, then
assess up-to-date asset condition and maintenance status with
the help of AI-based functions; (5) and lastly, the application
layer with visual interface facilitates the interaction between
DT and facility managers.
Thyssenkrupp, in collaboration with Microsoft [130], de-
veloped a DT framework for the elevator system in a high-