IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 28
based model, and a web application visualizing the data and
computed results. The cDTSHM is developed with the help
of the AWS cloud services; most of the programs are written
in Python, the ML-based model is implemented using the DL
library Pytorch, and the main input data for the framework are
the vibration data from accelerometer sensors. Fig. 14 depicts
the interface of the cDTSHM, including case studies carried
out.
The first case study to demonstrate the applicability of the
framework is a toy model of the Sydney Harbour bridge built
by using K’nex interlocking plastic rods. Next, one manually
excites the model by hand-shaking, where its vibration is
recorded by using a set of accelerometer sensors MPU-6050
uniformly distributed across the model. The SHM database
was empirically generated by hand-shaking the model; then
vibration data were collected through an array of accelerom-
eter sensors MPU-6050 and a microcontroller board Arduino
Uno. The damaged states of the model were introduced by
randomly removing one or two truss rods. After that, two data
analytic algorithms, including a lite mathematical model and a
ML-based model are developed to detect the structure status.
Furthermore, the latter could spatially localize the damage’s
location and quantize the damage severity.
The second case study used to validate the correctness of
the framework is a simplified laboratory model of a stayed-
cable bridge whose physical and numerical models are shown
in the corner of Fig. 14. The SHM procedure is realized
similarly to the first example, but the experiment data, in-
cluding excitation, vibration data, structure’s deformation are
controlled and measured more rigorously. The model is excited
by introducing an impulse force of very short duration through
an impact hammer; the structure’s status is then assessed
based on the loss level of prestressing strands which can be
manually modified by alternating the anchor bolts tightness. As
a result, the sDTSHM can provide highly accurate SHM results
with much less CPU time while bypassing the cumbersome
preprocessing modal analysis as in the conventional structural
identification methods.
For the third case study, the performance of the SHM
framework is tested with real data collected from the Z24
bridge in Switzerland [185]. For such a real structure, using
a lite mathematical model or shallow ML cannot provide
reliable SHM results. Thus, a highly modular architecture has
been devised, allowing switching different DL algorithms and
combining data from different sensors in a straightforward
way [186]. The results demonstrate that the data analytic
component of the cDTSHM outperforms competing methods
with a structural damage detection result of 90.1% with low
time complexity and budget memory storage.
Afterwards, the cDTSHM framework is applied to the Nam
O railway bridge located in central Vietnam. The bridge is
60 years old and constantly undergoes unfavorable factors
involving the corrosive maritime environment, dynamic and
heavy train loadings, etc. From the structural perspective,
the structure’s mode shapes and their high-order derivatives
are sensitive to damages; therefore, a knowledge-enhanced
deep 1D-CNN has been developed for automatically extracting
modal characteristics from raw vibration data to accuratelydetect and quantify connection stiffness reductions. The real-
ization steps and implementation details can be found in [187].
The results show that the framework could achieve accuracy up
to 95% even with minor damage (5% of stiffness reduction)
with faster convergence speed and more stable results than
counterparts, including the Multi-Layer Perceptron and other
DL architectures.
The four case studies illustrated in this subsection demon-
strate that the enabling technologies supporting a DT will vary
greatly, depending on the DT’s use-case, as also mentioned
in our definition, provided in Section II. Additionally, the
cDTSHM framework has been developed to exhibit self-
diagnosing and self-monitoring capabilities within several case
studies of bridges.
VII. L ESSONS LEARNED , RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The previous sections provided a comprehensive view of
the DT, commencing with its definition, market potential, en-
abling technologies, frameworks and applications, and, finally,
three case studies. Throughout the literature surveyed in this
manuscript, as well as our own experience in developing DTs,
we have learned important lessons and encountered significant
challenges that will contour future directions for us and the
research community. This section will delve into the most
significant of these concepts, detailing the obstacles that the
DT needs to overcome in order to realize its potential.
A. Investment costs
As mentioned in Section III, businesses still remain reluctant
to implement the DT because of its envisioned development
costs and difficult-to-quantify ROI. As a matter of fact, it is
rather challenging to put a price on the DT because of its
multi-disciplinary nature and use-case-specific particularities.
Additionally, the DT is rarely a product that generates direct
profit, since its core philosophy focuses primarily on saving
costs. With the exception of DT solution providers and the
healthcare industry, where the DT can indeed be a source
of revenue, other entrepreneurs will need detailed and long-
term plans of investment that emphasize the merits of DT
development before diving into such expenditures.
One important aspect that must be factored into the costs
when planning for DTs, is the ongoing maintenance require-
ments, such as: software updates that affect the DT, changes
to the physical asset, etc. Considering the total life cycle
of the DTs, one could anticipate that the maintenance and
management cost might represent the largest proportion of the
investment costs.
B. Social and ethical challenges
Digital Twin technology and applications are experiencing
a shift from engineering/physics based domains, where closed
equations are an appropriate modelling abstraction, to one
where the problem domain is socio-technical, leading to the
notion of Socio-Technical Digital Twins (STDT). Such a
problem domain utilises systems that comprise complex inter-
action between humans, machines and the work environment