IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 1
Digital Twins: A Survey on Enabling Technologies,
Challenges, Trends and Future Prospects
Stefan Mihai, Mahnoor Yaqoob, Dang V . Hung, William Davis, Praveer Towakel, Mohsin Raza, Mehmet
Karamanoglu, Balbir Barn, Dattaprasad Shetve, Raja V . Prasad, Hrishikesh Venkataraman, Ramona Trestian, and
Huan X. Nguyen
Abstract —Digital Twin (DT) is an emerging technology sur-
rounded by many promises, and potentials to reshape the future
of industries and society overall. A DT is a system-of-systems
which goes far beyond the traditional computer-based simulations
and analysis. It is a replication of all the elements, processes,
dynamics, and firmware of a physical system into a digital coun-
terpart. The two systems (physical and digital) exist side by side,
sharing all the inputs and operations using real-time data com-
munications and information transfer. With the incorporation of
Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), 3D models,
next generation mobile communications (5G/6G), Augmented
Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), distributed computing, Trans-
fer Learning (TL), and electronic sensors, the digital/virtual
counterpart of the real-world system is able to provide seamless
monitoring, analysis, evaluation and predictions. The DT offers a
platform for the testing and analysing of complex systems, which
would be impossible in traditional simulations and modular eval-
uations. However, the development of this technology faces many
challenges including the complexities in effective communication
and data accumulation, data unavailability to train Machine
Learning (ML) models, lack of processing power to support high
fidelity twins, the high need for interdisciplinary collaboration,
and the absence of standardized development methodologies and
validation measures. Being in the early stages of development,
DTs lack sufficient documentation. In this context, this survey
paper aims to cover the important aspects in realization of
the technology. The key enabling technologies, challenges and
prospects of DTs are highlighted. The paper provides a deep
insight into the technology, lists design goals and objectives,
highlights design challenges and limitations across industries,
discusses research and commercial developments, provides its
applications and use cases, offers case studies in industry,
infrastructure and healthcare, lists main service providers and
stakeholders, and covers developments to date, as well as viable
research dimensions for future developments in DTs.
Index Terms —Digital Twin, Digital Transformation, Smart
Manufacturing, Industry 4.0, Structural Health Monitoring, 5G.
S. Mihai, M. Yaqoob, W. Davis, P. Towakel, M. Karamanoglu, B. Barn,
R. Trestian, and H.X. Nguyen are with London Digital Twin Research
Centre, Middlesex University, The Burroughs, London, NW4 4BT. e-mails:
{SM3488, MY365, WD085, PT445 }@live.mdx.ac.uk; {m.karamanoglu,
b.barn, r.trestian, h.nguyen }@mdx.ac.uk (see https://dt.mdx.ac.uk/).
D.V . Hung is with National University of Civil Engineering, Vietnam. e-
mail: hungdv@nuce.edu.vn.
M. Raza is with Edge Hill University, L39 4QP, UK. e-mail:
mohsin.raza@edgehill.ac.uk.
D. Shetve, R. Prasad, and H. Venkataraman are with Indian Institute of
Information Technology, Sricity, India. e-mails: {dattaprasad.s, yrv.prasad,
hvraman }@iiits.in.
This work was supported in part by a UK India Education and Research
Initiative (UKIERI) grant, ID ’DST UKIERI-2018-19-011’, and in part by
an Institutional Links grant, ID 429715093, under the Newton Programme
Vietnam partnership. The grant is funded by the UK Department of Business,
Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) and delivered by the British Council.
Fig. 1. The Digital Twin’s central role in the Industry 4.0 era.
I. I NTRODUCTION
THE Fourth Industrial Revolution is in full bloom, and the
current global Covid-19 pandemic has even further accel-
erated the digital transformation by several years. The travel
restrictions, lockdowns, and pending economic decline have
forced industry executives to adapt their business prospects and
shift their focus from saving costs to increasing investments in
digital development [1]. Additionally, the global viral outbreak
has imposed a dynamic uncertainty upon the economic world,
and companies found themselves compelled to cope with and
quickly adapt to ever-changing conditions and restrictions in
order to survive or even rise above the circumstances [2].
However, even before the sanitary crisis, the efforts towards
digitalization were considerable. Cisco published their annual
Internet report in the first fiscal quarter of 2020, and they
predicted a significant growth in worldwide Internet users
(66% of the population in 2023, compared to 51% in 2018),
networked devices (3.6 devices per person in 2023, as opposed
to 2.4 in 2018), and reduced communication latency that
encourages the development of real-time interactive appli-
cations [3]. This forecast expansion of Internet coverage,
speed, and connections is giving way to an increased rate
of information dissemination, availability, and accessibility, as
well as growing opportunities of development and innovation.
The goals of Industry 4.0 (I4.0) align perfectly with this