IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 23
Fig. 10. DT-based PdM scheme using hybrid modeling.
Another PdM architecture that is rooted in the principles
of the one presented by Motaghare et al. is Cheng et al.’s
proposal in [170]. The paper introduces a solution for a bearing
production line, and its framework is based on Edge-Cloud
cooperation. In this architecture, the data pre-processing is
done at the edge-level, and the processing-heavy tasks, like
Remaining Useful Life (RUL) prediction, is delegated to the
cloud. This type of structure is preferable when the ML
algorithm used is actually a DL method. In that case, the
training can be too computationally-intensive to perform at
the edge, so instead it is deployed in the cloud. Indeed, for
the estimation of the RUL parameter, the authors used a DL
mixed algorithm, named in the paper ARIMA-LSTM model
(Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average - Long Short Term
Memory). In this system, ARIMA handles the prediction of
the linear part of the time-series data, while LSTM predicts
the non-linear components, which are then summed up to
offer a final prediction. ARIMA is also employed in [171]
as a technique of extracting the underlying trends in various
data streams coming from sensors. The trends identified in
heterogeneous time series data are then fed as features to a
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) algorithm that extracts
the most uncorrelated features to be fed into the RUL predictor.
For remaining life estimation, the authors propose the use of
a regression technique called the Support Vector Regression
model. Cachada et al. [172] presented a complex and detailed
architecture of an intelligent and PdM system that explores
the interdependent modules that would constitute a functional
block in a PdM framework. As such, the paper explains
how different approaches are needed for the data acquisition
block, depending on the type of input data: automated, semi-
automated, or manually introduced by an operator; it also
presents an offline data analysis scheme that also relies on
the LSTM DL algorithm for prediction of machine state, a
dynamic monitoring block that deals with visualisation and
early detection of failures, and an intelligent decision support
system for maintenance intervention that guides the operatorthrough simple instructions and visualisations, in a way that
reduces the need for technical knowledge, leaving room for
focus on the maintenance task at hand. In this scheme, adjacent
blocks communicate with each other in a sequential manner,
but as-needed communication between non-adjacent blocks is
also allowed for further automated optimisation.
As an overview of the proposed Predictive Maintenance
frameworks in the literature up to date, it seems that they
adopt the MIMOSA Open System Architecture for Condition-
Based Maintenance (OSA-CBM) [173], either completely, or
only the main parts of it.
For example, a variation of the OSA-CBM architecture is
proposed in [174], where the integration of CPS, DT, and DL
extensively rely on each other’s advantages to reduce the need
of human intervention usually required in a PdM scheme. In
fact, the work suggests a great reliance on DL algorithms
to completely remove manual feature engineering from the
PdM architect’s list of responsibilities. Instead, the introduced
framework claims DL algorithms can single-handedly manage
state detection (through automatic feature extraction), health
assessment, RUL estimation, and advisory generation through
closed feedback loop connections between different functional
layers of the architecture. Such an implementation would
undoubtedly require large amounts of resources in terms of
storage space, computational power, and smart equipment.
Liang et al. in [175] proposed a layered architecture for a
low latency deployment of a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) – based prognosis system. The proposed scheme
consists of three layers that share responsibilities effectively,
keeping high-speed processing capabilities on the terminal and
fog layers, close to the manufacturing equipment, and leaving
the training of the CNN to the cloud layer. Drawing the line,
it seems like the focus has shifted from the development
of extremely intricate mathematical health prognosis models,
which were tailored to be specific to the equipment, towards
data-driven models which predominantly rely on ML and, of
course, Big Data. The ability to reliably and quickly transport,