IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 20
types of networks used between robot controller and robot
are wired link, public LTE and the 5G uRLLC network. The
results showed that 5G outperforms LTE and wired network in
terms of productivity as well as the processing time increased
by 50%.
Furthermore, 5G (and beyond) and the DT can revolutionize
the cooperative vehicle infrastructure. The authors in [147]
have explored the implications of 5G based communication to
the intelligent V2X system called Providentia and proposed
scene detection, fusion and object detection strategies. The
vehicles in the Providentia system play two roles, first being
the source of information about the current state of vehicle and
its surroundings, second as a user of the DT system. All the
communications in this infrastructure is realized through on-
board 5G modems as well as 4G LTE. Similarly in [148] 5G
communication networks, more specifically edge devices, are
recommended for the real time data collection in DTs designed
for traffic congestion avoidance. The proposed solution for
road connectivity infrastructure involves real time situational
information gathering, collection of driver history using ML
algorithms, data lake, intelligent transport system, DTs and
blockchain services for vehicles. The application domain of
the DT technology is very vast, as the authors in [149] have
optimized the services of mobile edge computing using DT
and DL algorithms. Achieving ultra-reliable and low-latency
in mobile edge computing can be challenging because of
the possibility of losing the packets in case of deep fading
channels. Thus, in order to optimize the offloading probability,
a DT is developed in [149] which can evaluate the normalized
energy consumption, reliability of user association schemes
and delays. The DT will save the optimal option and store
it in memory as a training data for DL algorithms. Tactile
Internet or 5G will also revolutionize the traditional multi-
modal applications. Research has been carried out to evolve the
current state of the art media to multimodal media, where DTs
can facilitate the high quality interactions, like touching and
smelling the objects of remote environment [150]. Moreover,
the DT and 5G/6G will also play a vital role in autonomous
navigation systems [151] where autonomous ships can easily
be commanded and decisions regarding navigations are made
easy.
Smart manufacturing is one of the most important vertical
industries identified by 5GPPP and with the maturing of
network virtual functions and 5G, use of Virtual Network
Functions (VNF) in smart manufacturing is gaining popularity
in research community. To this context the authors of [152]
have presented a use case in the manufacturing industry
using the experience of a manufacturing company named
Weidmuller Group. The manufacturing network services in
the proposed use case are composed of different VNFs and it
is developed using SDK and 5GTANGO lightweight Network
Function Virtualization (NFV) prototyping platform. Similarly,
in [153], an efficient solution is proposed, called MIGRATE,
that implements virtual functions and virtual mobile devices
to represent physical processing devices. MIGRATE ensures
the successful and seamless transfer of software entities. Con-
nectivity in the future is highly dependent on development of
DT environments [154] that are actual representation of theirphysical counter parts. With the advent of future generation
networks, it is expected from the DT technology to represent
not only physical objects, but the biological world as well.
Fig. 8. The vision for DT-enabled next generation communications.
With the rapid advancements in smart technologies and
applications like holographic projection, VR, AR as well as
mission critical applications like remote surgery, that have
strict Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, current networks
including 5G will no longer be able to meet these expectations.
Although the deployment of 5G networks is not yet completed
at a large scale, many industry pioneers and technology leaders
are looking ahead at defining the next generation networks,
6G. 6G envisions interactions between three worlds: the hu-
man world (e.g., senses, bodies, intelligence, etc.), the digital
world (information, communication, computing, etc.); and the
physical world (objects, organisms, processes, etc.) [155].
Furthermore, 6G envisions network speed of 100 to 1000
times faster than that of 5G for accommodating new service
classes like further enhanced mobile broadband (FeMBB),
ultra-massive machine type communication (umMTC), and
enhanced ultra-reliable and low latency communication (eU-
RLLC) [156] and latency less than 1ms for ensuring safety in
mission critical communications and IIoT applications [157].
DT has great potential to provide for a digital environment
where future generation networks like 6G can evolve. Integrat-
ing DT within mobile networks is gaining popularity in the
industry from major tech companies like Ericsson, Huawei and
Nokia [158]. In this context, DT has the capability to contin-
uously monitor and analyze the performance of the network,
predict any unanticipated failures and optimize the network
performance by triggering intelligent decisions accordingly.
Figure 8 illustrates a vision of the 6G DT that facilitates the
live virtual replica of the whole or parts of the 6G network
to perform continuous monitoring and assessment through a
closed loop process between the physical entities and the
digital counterparts. The 6G DT powered by AI will enable
design and performance improvements and real time optimized
operations enforced on the physical 6G network.
B. Services
1) Anomaly Detection: The Digital Twin has gained its
significance in I4.0 by virtue of its intuitive and insightful role
in integrating data analytics into traditional manufacturing
facilities [15]. Through the analysis of run-time data incurred
from the physical systems, DTs have enabled smart factories’
engineers to know their facilities better. One of the many