IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 26
technique was developed by Shetve et al. [180] and was
evaluated for its data pre-processing capability.
The main drawback of the two-step approach was the dimin-
ishing accuracy with increasing outliers. Hence, the two-step
approach could be generalized to “ N-step approach”. Each
step would have its own technique that would be followed
by another technique in a sequential manner. The N-step
approach has been developed based on following key aspects:
1) Analysis of individual data instances
2) Evaluation of the relationship between neighboring points
3) Identification of the anomalies in dataset by the detection
algorithm
4) Evaluation of the performance of N-Step
The techniques selected for each step are as follows: Step
1: DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering with Appli-
cations in Noise) [181]; Step 2: Isolation Forest; Step 3:
LOF (Local Outlier Factor) [182]; Step 4: KNN (K-Nearest
Neighbour); Step 5: Hierarchical Classification based methods.
The reason for choosing the N-step approach in a particular
way is as explained. DBSCAN would provide a very good
separation of outliers from the overall data points, removing
all false positives. Isolation Forest removes the few left over
outliers that are located isolated from one another. Similarly,
LOF and other following techniques would remove only the
boundary located nodes; thereby removing the True negatives
and false positives, if any and increasing the success ratio.
A careful design of the N-step approach would result in
higher accuracy/success ratio with a minimal increase in the
computation time.
B. Festo Cyber-Physical Factory
Aside from anomaly detection, another important aspect
of DTs in manufacturing, which is also the DT’s original
purpose, is continuous real-time monitoring of equipment and
processes. It is important that smart factory workers have
access to always-available digital factory status reports that
are intuitive and remotely-accessible. This core feature of DTs
enable equipment owners and factory executives to oversee
the good functioning of their products and processes. Besides
actual operators, the monitoring service can be used by the
DT itself in order to maintain awareness, at all times, of its
physical asset’s current state and environment. This service
enables a core principle of the DT, detailed in Section II,
namely the ability to self-monitor.
On this premise, the work we conducted in [183] developed
a DT framework of a real production line, in order to establish
a continuous monitoring mechanism for the kinematics of the
factory. The physical twin in question is the Festo Cyber-
Physical Factory for I4.0 (CP-Lab) located at Middlesex Uni-
versity, a didactic model of an assembly line for mock mobile
phones. The smart factory is composed of six functional
stations, each equipped with a Human-Machine Interface,
and two transport (or bridge) stations. Figure 13 depicts the
physical twin on its left side, and it can be noted that it is
composed of two islands, each equipped with four stations. On
the first island, the first station is tasked with placing the backplastic cover of the mock mobile phone onto the carrier, which
is then carried to the next islands via a conveyor belt. The
second station is the manual station, where a human operator
will place a Printed Circuit Board (PCB) onto the back cover.
The third station visually inspects the product automatically, to
verify that the PCB that was previously added corresponds to
the correct order specifications. Lastly, a bridge station takes
the carrier and passes it on to an Automated Guided Vehicle
(AGV) that transports it towards the second island with its
next four stations. The second island is also equipped with a
bridge station that intercepts the AGV and sends the carrier
to the island’s second station, which places another plastic
cover on top of the product. The next station applies a pre-
defined pressure onto the product to seal the two plastic covers.
Finally, the last component of the assembly line is the furnace,
where the product is heated up to a user-defined temperature
to complete the order.
The kinematic model of this assembly line, which initially
only mirrored one station of the CP-Lab, was later migrated to
the Unity game engine, where the whole structure and motion
of the smart factory was modeled (right side of Figure 13).
In addition, the virtual model captures streams of sensor data
flowing from the CP-Lab via the TCP protocol. This led to the
development of a DT-based PdM framework that includes a
monitoring dashboard for the machine’s sensors (temperature
and power data) [184]. The framework makes use of real data
coming from the CP-Lab, as well as configuration data stored
on the DT, to better position the working regime, identify
working stations, and assess the health of individual stations
via data pertaining to the whole island. More specifically, the
framework targets the health of the furnace station of the sec-
ond island. Being that it is equipped with a powerful heating
element, the malfunctioning of this station could potentially
lead to a fire hazard, so it stands to reason that guaranteeing
its good health is a necessity. For this reason, the furnace
is also equipped with a “Safety Shutdown” mechanism, that
will completely halt operations if the temperature inside its
chamber surpasses 80oC, however, this system is also not
infallible. As such, the framework captures temperature data
from inside the furnace, as well as the power data pertaining
to the whole second island, to predict if, or when, the Safety
Shutdown mechanism will be triggered, in order to proactively
prevent it. The DT provides the configuration data of the
heating station (i.e., its real-time state) to help the framework
extract the furnace’s power consumption from the second
island’s power measurements. As such, in case the temperature
sensor or element inside the heating chamber are faulty, the
normal behaviour of the station can still be verified via its
power data. The DT of the CP-Lab can increase productivity
by preventing the unnecessary or anomalous triggering of the
Safety Shutdown mechanism, as well as promote safety by
predicting when the temperature inside the heating chamber
of the Tunnel Furnace Station reaches critical levels.
C. Structural Health Monitoring for Vietnam bridges
In this subsection, the Digital Twin framework for SHM
developed at London Digital Twin Research Centre, dubbed