IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 15
With the goal of creating the DT of a smart factory able to
manufacture customizable products, the authors introduced a
planning and development framework that integrates several
design and management frameworks, such as V-IoT, 8D-
Model, Design Elements, SCRUM, etc.
A more common approach to modeling methodologies that
can be found in the literature is the 5-dimensional DT initially
proposed by Tao et al. [111]. According to this work, the
five dimensions of the DT are: physical entity, virtual entity,
communication, data, and services. This break-down of the
paradigm allows for a decoupled architecture with orthogonal
elements, making it easier to understand. For this reason, many
researchers have based their modeling methodology proposals
on Tao’s work. Wang et al. [112] build on top of the 5D
DT to introduce a System Design Digital Twin which aims
at reducing the complexity of model-based system engineering
by closing the gap between the physical and theoretical design
processes. The authors in [113] proposed a DT information
modeling method dubbed GHOST (Geometry, History, Ob-
ject, Snapshot, Topology), representing an expansion of the
data element of Tao’s architecture. Its aim is to provide a
flexible framework for combining multi-source heterogeneous
information in complex DT systems. Wu et al. [114] presented
a methodology for building 5D DT models that is supported by
an improved version of the TRIZ function model. The TRIZ
function model describes a complex system by breaking it
down into various types of elements and relationships. In order
to provide further nuance and fidelity to the model, the authors
enhance TRIZ with behavioural logic via conditional flow
control, rules, and interactions with the external environment.
Finally, other existing architectures partially overlap with Tao’s
methodology. For example, Bazaz et al. [115] defined the DT
as an interconnection of five layers: data store layer, primary
processing layer, model and algorithms layer, analysis layer,
and the user interface component. Judging by the description
of each layer provided in the paper, Tao’s data dimension
corresponds to Bazaz’s data storage layer, the communication
element is similar to the primary processing layer, elements
of the virtual entity dimension can be found in the models
and algorithm layer, while Tao’s services element, it can be
argued, includes both the analysis and user interface layers.
Abstract modeling methodologies have seemingly slowly
begun to converge in the DT-related literature around Tao’s
5D model, depicted in Figure 5. However, the in-depth imple-
mentation details and technologies remain use case-specific. In
[116], the authors took a closer look at the specific frameworks
and software that can be used for DT development.
V. D IGITAL TWIN: USECASES AND SERVICES
As we have stated previously, the choice of enabling
technologies for the DT will be highly dependent on the
DT’s envisioned applications and services. In this section, we
will present how DT frameworks differ in their components
from one application scenario to another, and it will become
apparent how, even within the same use case, the DT structure
can vary greatly. As such, this section will be divided into
two central characteristics of the DT, as presented in the
Fig. 5. Five-dimensional DT architecture.
definition we provided in Section II, namely DT use cases
and DT services. There are many potential DT services and
use cases; however, within this section, we limit our survey
and discussion to some typical examples in each category to
demonstrate the concept and potential of the DT. This choice
of DT services and use cases also align well with the specific
case studies we present in Section VI.
A. Use Cases
1) Smart Factory and Industry 4.0: The current vision
of I4.0 aims to cut the costs of production, build efficiency
and give companies an increasingly versatile approach to
production. Factory stations now have the ability to com-
municate directly with one another, eliminating the need to
communicate via a central processing controller. This de-
centralisation through modularisation and the IoT increases
flexibility, opportunity and efficiency. Rather than a centralised
control unit delivering instructions to each machine to carry
out linear sequential steps, individual machines now inter-
communicate directly enabling the partly-finished product to
be passed straight on to the next station. As everything is now
processed locally, the production line is equipped to produce
any number of unique products, which was not previously
possible on single unit lines. By not having to communicate
with a centralised unit, the production line can run more
smoothly and efficiently. In addition to increased efficiency,
the new security sensors built into the autonomous modular
systems create a safe working environment for human oper-
atives, ensuring robots halt if they encounter an obstruction.
This has the added benefit of workers being able to touch
a robot to stop its motion without the need to activate an
isolator. The decentralization of manufacturing processes and
the increasing demand for customization leads to a need for
adaptive and intelligent production equipment. The DT aims
to address this challenge.
Makarov et al. in [117] investigated the design concept
of a DT, coining two new types of system and splitting the