IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 37
William Davis is currently a Master by Research
Student working on the Digital Twin Modelling for
Automation, Maintenance and Monitoring in Indus-
try 4.0 Smart Factory project. He received his BEng
degree in Mechatronics Engineering. His current
research interests include Blockchain, Digital Twin,
Mechatronics Systems.
Praveer Towakel received his B.Sc. degree in
Physics from the University of Mauritius in 2016,
and is currently pursuing a PhD within the discipline
of Design Engineering at Middlesex University. His
current research interests include Gesture Recogni-
tion, Radar Systems and Machine Learning.
Mohsin Raza is a senior lecturer at Department
of Computer Science, Edge Hill University, UK.
Prior to this, he worked as a Lecturer (2019-20)
at Northumbria University, UK, as a post-doctoral
fellow (2018-19) at Middlesex University, UK, as a
Demonstrator/Associate-Lecturer and Doctoral Fel-
low (2015-17) at Northumbria University UK, Ju-
nior lecturer (2010-12) and later as Lecturer (2012-
15) in Engineering department at Mohammad Ali
Jinnah University, Pakistan, and Hardware Support
Engineer (2009-10) at Unified Secure Services, Pak-
istan. He completed his PhD at Math, Physics and Electrical Engineering
Department, Northumbria University (NU), UK and BS (Hons) and MS
degrees in Electronic Engineering from Mohammad Ali Jinnah University
(MAJU), Pakistan. He served as a technical committee member for ICET
2012, SKIMA 2015, SKIMA 2017, WSGT 2017, CSNDSP 2018, SKIMA
2018, ICT 2019 and CSoNet 2019. He has also been a guest editor to
special issue on Heterogenous Internet of Medical Things in Int. Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks and reviewer of several journals including IEEE
Access, IEEE Comm. Letters, MDPI Sensors, Elsevier Vehicular Comms. and
Springer AJSE. His research interests include IoT, 5G and wireless networks,
autonomous transportation systems, machine learning, Industry 4.0 and digital
twins.
Mehmet Karamanoglu is currently serving as the
Head of Department of Design Engineering and
Mathematics in the Faculty of Science and Tech-
nology at Middlesex University and Professor of
Design Engineering. He is a member of several
professional bodies and societies, including a Fel-
lowship at Institution of Mechanical Engineers and
the Royal Society of Arts. He has spent significant
length of time working in collaboration with industry
in a variety of sectors and has managed numerous
Knowledge Transfer Partnership projects in the field
of Manufacturing Engineering and Automation. His research interest includes
engineering education, interplay between art, design and engineering, ad-
vanced manufacturing including optimisation, mechatronics and robotics. His
recent work included mass customisation, developing autonomous systems
and he is currently working on mathematical optimisation techniques and
cognitive manufacturing. In his wider area of work, he is the UK national
expert for Mechatronics and Automation competitions for WorldSkills UK.
Balbir Barn is Professor of Software Engineering
in the Computer Science Department at Middlesex
University. Balbir has extensive commercial research
experience working in research centres at Texas
Instruments and JP Morgan Chase as well as leading
on academic funded research (Over £2.5 million).
Balbir’s research is focused on model driven soft-
ware engineering where the goal is to use models as
abstractions and execution environments to support
complex decision making. In collaboration with TCS
research labs, Balbir is working on model driven
approaches for supporting Manufacturing 4.0 contexts through the design
and implementation of a simulation environment for Digital Twins that
accommodates value sensitive design principles. Balbir has published over
120 peer-reviewed papers in leading international conferences and journals
and is currently editing a book on the “Digital Enterprise” with IGI-Global.
Dattaprasad Shetve worked as a Junior Research
Fellow on the Digital Twin Modelling for Automa-
tion, Maintenance and Monitoring in Industry 4.0
Smart Factory project. He obtained his MTech de-
gree in Industrial Automation and Robotics from
Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal (2019) and
BE in Electronics Engineering from Goa College of
Engineering. His area of interest includes Embedded
Systems, Real-Time Operating Systems, Bare Metal
Programming, Embedded Linux, Device Driver De-
velopment.
Raja Prasad obtained his Ph.D. degree from Indian
Institute of Technology Hyderabad in the year 2016
under the supervision of Dr.P. Rajalakshmi. He is
currently working as an Assistant Professor with
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Sri City.
His research areas are centered on Wireless Sensor
Networks, Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks,
Smart Buildings, Net Zero Energy Buildings, Wire-
less Protocols for IoT applications, Smart Cities au-
tomated wireless sensor networks, Green networks,
and Internet of Things.
Hrishikesh Venkataraman did his MTech from IIT
Kanpur, from 2002-04 and his MTech thesis from
V odafone Chair for Mobile Communications, TU
Dresden, Germany in 2003-04.Subsequently, he did
his PhD from Jacobs University Bremen, Germany
where he was awarded the best Graduate Student in
September 2007. Dr. Venkataraman’s area of interest
is in wireless communication, connected cars and
device-to-device communication. Dr. Venkataraman
has more than 13 years of industry and research
experience, having worked with Irish national cen-
tre–RINCE (Research Institute for Networks and Communication Engineer-
ing), CTO Office of Tech Mahindra and Microverse Automation Pvt. Ltd. Dr.
Venkataraman is currently an Associate Professor and Faculty-in-Charge for
RD activities at Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT) Sri City, AP,
India. He has 3 PhD students and several research Honours students working
under him. Dr. Venkataraman has more than 60 publications in different
international conferences and journals, including in ACM, Elsevier, IEEE,
IET and Springer. He has edited 3 books, has one granted US patent, one
contribution in European Telecom Standards Institute (ETSI) and has been an
Editor of European Transactions of Telecommunications (ETT) for 5 years.