IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 6
Fig. 4. An overview of the survey paper’s contents.
the DT faces, and contours possible future directions, and
finally Section VIII summarizes the conclusions of this paper.
An overview of the organization and structure of this
paper is illustrated in Figure 4. Table II provides a list of
abbreviations used in this article.
II. D EFINITIONS OF THE DIGITAL TWIN
The Digital Twin is not a new paradigm. The premises
that initiated its advancements have been introduced more
than 50 years ago, amongst NASA’s many efforts of bringing
man in space. Indeed, the idea of virtually simulating real-
life scenarios that would normally require extensive resources
could not have had a more appropriate origin than NASA’s
early space programme, where high-fidelity (relative to the
technology standards at the time) simulators were used to train
astronauts for their upcoming remote journeys in the outer
space. But, surely, there is more to DTs than just simulation,
so the true precursor of this paradigm actually came to light
during NASA’s Apollo 13 [16] mission, when an unexpected
explosion caused a manned spacecraft to deviate from its
intended trajectory, endangering the astronauts on-board. Inresponse, the ground-based Mission Control was then tasked
to urgently simulate, in almost real-time, the erratic behaviour
of the spacecraft, and make optimal decisions to ensure its
safe return on Earth, in ever-critical conditions. The engineers
used the available spacecraft simulators, animated them with
real data coming from the space-bound physical ship and
its pilots, analysed possible scenarios, then communicated
optimal instructions to the stranded pilots to maneuver their
ship back home safely. The mission was a success.
Michael Grieves, in 2002, proposed a similar idea as a
means to drive forward the Product Lifecycle Management
paradigm (PLM), although, back then, he had not dubbed it as
“digital twin”, but as “Mirrored Spaces Model”. This precursor
of the DT consisted of the same three main pillars that lie at
the base of this technology today: real space, virtual space,
and the communication thread between them.
In the case of the Apollo incident, the real space was
represented by the physical spacecraft stranded in space, the
virtual space consisted of the ground-based simulators, and
the link between the two was characterised by the continuous
communication between the Mission Control, the spacecraft,