IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 10
artificial data can be adapted to perform good predictions on a
real test set. TL requires that the distributions of artificial and
real data be somewhat similar, such that only a small amount
of real data is needed to make the model generalise well once
deployed in production [44].
Another important use case of ML in DT implementations is
remote control assistance. In scenarios such as remote surgery
[83], [84] or space station maintenance [85], the DT can help
bridge the distance between the operators and the physical
twin. In the latter paper in particular, the authors proposed
the Hierarchical Attention Single-Shot Detector Network (HA-
SSD) for astronaut gesture recognition. The system is based
on the popular MobileNet architecture [86] for fast and com-
putationally inexpensive feature extractions, which could be
easily deployed on chips with low processing power. Such
a system is ideal for space station DTs where cameras and
surveillance equipment can detect and monitor faces, human
postures, gestures and body language.
Table IV summarizes the findings of integrating ML into
DT. It can be noted that most of the efforts towards DT
implementation come from the manufacturing industry. Con-
currently, the versatility of the technology makes it a promising
tool for other domains as well, such as civil engineering
or robotics. It is actually the vast array of existing and up-
and-coming ML and DL algorithms that grants the DT its
versatility. At the same time, the DT’s reliance on data-driven
analytics imposes some challenges: (1) traditional ML models
are actually built upon a sequence of carefully engineered
functional blocks that are tailored to increase efficiency on
the task at hand. Thus, designing such a pipeline can be a
resource-expensive task; (2) on the other hand, end-to-end DL
techniques remove some of that complexity, but they require
significant amounts of data for training and tuning, while also
offering no transparency into their predictions; (3) finally, on
the note of training data, generative ML models can be used
to create artificial data to compensate for the lack of real data.
However this could also induce bias in predictions if the two
distributions (i.e., real and synthetic) are not aligned.
B. Cloud, Fog, and Edge Computing
Depending on its use-case, DT can be used to mirror
systems across the whole spectrum of complexity, from unitary
elements, such as the movement axis of the Computerized
Numerical Control (CNC) machine tool [87], to an entire fleet
of aircraft [88]. The virtualisation of composite heterogeneous
machines or services always requires heavy computational
prowess. This demand, coupled with the DT’s characteristic
of real-virtual synchronisation, often calling for almost real-
time responsiveness, illuminates a need for distributed and
parallel computing. For this purpose and many others, cloud,
fog, and edge computing are frequently encountered in DT-
related literature. As such, this subsection will review how
researchers have integrated distributed computing into their
DT implementations, with an emphasis on the reason why this
enabling technology was mandatory for the works’ use-cases.
Table V highlights an overview of the papers reviewed
in this subsection. It is noteworthy that our search indicatedthat distributed computing and DT have been conjoined in
works mostly pertaining to the manufacturing sector. Even
papers focusing on DTs for logistics are mainly created to
help the logistics departments of the manufacturing industry,
again showing that there is an overwhelming focus on DT
development in this area.
The unison of cloud computing and DT creates a prosperous
environment for complex simulations, multi-variable analysis,
DL-based analytics, and Big Data storage. In this type of
system, the cloud platform acts as the data warehouse and also
provides heavy-processing capabilities, while the DT deals
with synchronising the physical and virtual assets [25], [32],
[45]. Additionally, a cloud platform allows the harmonious
connection and hosting of the virtual counterparts of the
heterogeneous subsystems that form a complex DT [33]. In the
healthcare industry, the cloud represents a shared information
platform between the medical service provider and the patients
[26], while in the manufacturing domain it can serve as a
common medium where enterprises can share data regarding
the failure modes and maintenance needs of similar equipment
to support DT-enabled Predictive Maintenance [89].
In applications that imply a great amount of data consump-
tion and processing, even the cloud can become overwhelmed.
To prevent this from happening, Hu et al. [90] reduce the
cloud workload by using the MTConnect protocol and a new
Knowledge Resource Centre to manage all communications
with the cloud-hosted DT. Another approach to avoid over-
dependence on the cloud is to use more forms of distributed
computing (i.e, cloud, fog, and edge) to manage different
layers of complex logistics and manufacturing systems [27],
[34].
C. Internet of Things
As previously mentioned, the research communities of
academia and the industry recognise the DT as a system
formed by three functional blocks: the physical asset, its
virtual counterpart, and the communication medium that binds
them together. Any DT proposal that misses or does not
envision the inclusion of any one of these three components
is therefore not a real DT. In this section, the focus will fall
on the role of the two-way connection between the digital and
real twins, and the recent literature works that detail how this
connection benefits the implementation of the DT. Table VI
provides an overview of the articles discussed in this section,
as well as their target domain and main contributions.
In this context, the Internet of Things and the Industrial
Internet of Things are the main enabling technologies that
can perfectly fit in-between the digital and real twins to
converge virtuality and reality. These paradigms are at the
center of I4.0 due to their ability to aggregate data from
multiple heterogeneous data sources via disparate communi-
cation mediums to facilitate data mining and alaytics through
distributed computing frameworks.
The main appeal of these technologies is represented by
the IIoT devices, like smart sensors, RFID tags, and smart
wearables, that are useful and cheap data sources [35] which
can paint meaningful virtual reflections of reality that the