IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 2
fast-paced and continuously-evolving digital transformation.
I4.0 aims to automate all the traditional, bare-metal industrial
practices, and it hopes to do so by bringing as much of the
of the equipment from the physical space into the virtual
domain. And this is where Digital Twins come into play.
DTs emerged as an experimental technology set to enable
replication of elements, functions, operations and dynamics
of physical systems into digital world, with better control at
testing, analysis, prediction and hazard prevention for sen-
sitive processes. However, the supporting technologies, until
recently, were not advanced enough to develop DTs for com-
plex systems or systems-of-systems. The recent developments
in Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence, data integration
Virtual/Augmented Reality, sensing, security, cloud storage,
Transfer Learning, data visualization and ultra-reliable low
latency communications (uRLLC) have enabled the implemen-
tation of the DT and its extended applications across several
industries. A technology thought to be capable of dealing
with isolated operations and processes, the DT can now offer
potential applications eventually replicating the processes,
elements, dynamics, firmware, connections and operations of
physical systems in digital world. Figure 1 illustrates the DT
as a supplier of various services across industries in I4.0.
The formation of a mirror image of a physical system in
the digital world offers unlimited possibilities. Interlinking the
physical and digital systems through seamless data transfer
allows the virtual system to exist simultaneously with the
physical system. Real-time data communications between the
physical and digital systems enable a synchronized and co-
herent operation of the real and virtual counterparts. Once in
the digital domain, optimized learning, information transfer,
analysis, visualization, optimization and planning can easily be
incorporated to see the potential improvements with suggested
changes. Thus, the DT can be used effectively to assess,
observe and validate the physical system, suggest changes and
visualize the potential improvements. Previously deemed as an
impossibility, DTs have arisen as one of the key technologies
with potential to reshape the future.
This survey paper aims to shine light on the recent ad-
vancements in the DT paradigm by reviewing the relevant
literature published over the last few years, in order to establish
a common understanding of this technology, explore its market
potential and trends, enumerate its most prominent enabling
technologies, offer an in-depth look at several applications,
frameworks, and case-studies that have been thoroughly doc-
umented, and finally discuss and share the learned lessons and
remaining challenges of this technological pacesetter.
A. Background and Motivation
The Digital Twin gained traction in 2002, after Michael
Grieves held a presentation at the University of Michigan,
which was entitled “Conceptual Ideal for Product Lifecycle
Management”. The original slide containing the proposed
concept was reproduced by Grieves and Vickers in [4] and
it can be noted that the early architecture of what would later
become the DT consisted of three main components:
•thereal space ,•thevirtual space ,
•thelinkserving as a communication medium between the
two spaces.
The implications of this idea were revolutionary for the
manufacturing industry, and other economic domains would
later pick up on this as well. The most important advantage
of the original DT was the conjoined lifetimes of the real
and virtual entities, starting from the creation of the pair, and
ending in their disposal. This feature suggests that the virtual
asset would, at all times, mirror the most recent representative
characteristics of the physical system, allowing remote moni-
toring throughout the whole lifetime of the physical object. As
such, while it was initially intended as a tool for monitoring the
lifecycle of a manufactured product, academia and the industry
soon realised that the DT concept can be fruitfully applied to
other economic domains as well.
Fig. 2. Interest trend in Digital Twin as seen through Google searches.
As a result of this realisation, research output has surged
and interest and representation of the digital twin has grown.
Figure 2 shows the global trend of interest into the term
“digital twin” as expressed via the normalized number of
Google searches across the last 11 years, and it can be noted
that the last few years have drawn increased attention to the
concept that Michael Grieves introduced back in 2002. The
“interest” shown on the Y-axis takes values between 0 and 100,
where a value of 100 denotes the highest popularity the search
term has seen during one month of the given time window,
and a value of 50 represents half of that maximum popularity.
While the Google Search trend is a representation of the
DT’s increasing general popularity across the years, it is
important to assess and understand how this growing attention
has been reflected in the research output throughout the
same time period. In this regard, we analysed the number
of publications within the Scopus document database that
included the phrase “digital twin”, for each year in the last
decade. Figure 3 shows the results of this analysis and, indeed,
it can be noted that increasing attention has been allocated to
the research and development of this revolutionary paradigm as
well. The bar plot shown in Figure 3 is the result of leveraging
the Scopus Search API to search for articles that contain the
specific phrase “digital twin” in their abstracts. While not
all of the found articles might have been devoted entirely to