The task involves determining whether the hypothesis follows from the premise, providing an answer of 'yes', 'no', or 'neutral'. 

1. Premise: Valence the void-brain, Valence the virtuous valet. Why couldn’t the figger choose his own portion of titanic anatomy to shaft? Did he think he was helping? 
   Hypothesis: Valence was helping 
   Answer: No

2. Premise: And I don’t want to have to lie to them. The kidnappers have given us until October the eleventh to deliver the document and I haven’t despaired of finding it before then. But if the police learn I’ve been to America they’ll ask why. 
   Hypothesis: he’s been to America 
   Answer: Yes

3. Premise: B: how’d you like to own a piece of property where your lake is going sour because of acid rain. A: Right. Right. B: It’s, uh, really a serious issue for those of us up in this, uh, sector up here. A: um, or do you hypothesize that most of the, uh, smog or air pollution comes from vehicles 
   Hypothesis: most of the smog or air pollution comes from vehicles 
   Answer: Neutral

4. Premise: A: and that rolling kind of, uh, B: Terrain. A: Yeah. is fairly famili-,. The thing that I thought was interesting was that the critics, apparently it’s going to win everything. B: Really? A: Uh, and I had been told, you know, you wouldn’t notice that it was three hours long, and all this, kind of,
   Hypothesis: it was three hours long 
   Answer: Neutral

5. Premise: A: I do too, so she couldn’t possibly turn them out like some of these popular writers, B: Huh-uh. A: but oh, her books are just incredible. I don’t think they’ve ever made a movie, do you? 
   Hypothesis: they’ve ever made a movie 
   Answer: Neutral

6. Premise: What had brought Gharr and Ten-huc and Pulvidon to the planet at the same time? Why were all of them so interested in why I was there? And if they somehow suspected that I was picking up something valuable why would any of them try to kill me before the pick-up? 
   Hypothesis: she was picking up something valuable 
   Answer: Neutral