4934.1 Datasets
All experiments have been performed on VQA 2.0
(Goyal et al., 2016) and Outside Knowledge-VQA
(OK-VQA) (Marino et al., 2019) datasets.
VQA 2.0 is a public dataset containing about
1.1 million questions and 204,721 images extracted
from the 265,016 images of the COCO dataset. At
least 3 questions (5.4 questions on average) are
provided per image, and each question is associ-
ated with 10 different answers obtained by crowd
sourcing. Since VQA 2.0 is a large dataset, we
only consider questions whose set of answers has
at least 9 identical ones. With this common prac-
tice, we can cast aside questions which have luke-
warm answers. The questions are divided in three
categories: Yes/No, Number, and Other. We are
especially interested in the ”Other” category, which
can require external knowledge to ﬁnd the correct
answer.
OK-VQA : To evaluate the performance of our
proposed model, we require questions which are
not answerable by direct analysis of the objects
detected in the image or the entities in the question.
Most of knowledge-based VQA datasets impose
hard constraints on their questions, such as being
generated by templates (KB-VQA (Wang et al.,
2015)) or directly obtained from existing knowl-
edge bases (FVQA (Wang et al., 2016)). We select
OK-VQA which is the only VQA dataset that re-
quires handling unstructured knowledge to answer
natural questions about images.
The OK-VQA dataset is composed of 14,031
images and 14,055 questions. For each question,
we select the unanimous answer as the ground-
truth answer. OK-VQA is divided into eleven cat-
egories: vehicles and transportation (VT); brands,
companies and products (BCP); objects, materials
and clothing (OMC); Sports and Recreation (SR);
Cooking and Food (CF); Geography, History, Lan-
guage and Culture (GHLC); People and Everyday
Life (PEL); plants and animals (PA); science and
technology (ST); weather and climate (WC). If a
question was classiﬁed as belonging to different
categories by different people, it was categorized
as ”Other”.
4.2 Implementation details
In this section, we provide the implementation de-
tails of our proposed model in different building
blocks.
Image embedding : Each image has a total of36 image region features ( nv= 36 ), each repre-
sented by a bounding box and an embedding vector
computed by pre-trained Faster R-CNN features
where dv= 2048 . Each bounding box includes a
5-dimensional spatial coordinate ( db= 5) corre-
sponding to the coordinates of the top-left point of
the bounding box, the coordinates of the bottom-
right point of the bounding box, and the covered
fraction of the image area.
Question embedding : The input questions are
embedded using BERT’s BASE model. Therefore,
each word is represented by a 768-D word embed-
ding ( dq= 768 ). Each question is divided into
16-token blocks ( nT= 16 ), starting with a [CLS]
token and ending with a [SEP] token. The an-
swers are transformed to one-hot encoding vectors.
Knowledge graph embedding : During our ex-
periments, we explored different node embeddings
for ConceptNet (e.g. GloVe (Pennington et al.,
2014), NumberBatch (Speer et al., 2016), and
(Malaviya et al., 2020)). We found that the embed-
ding generated by (Malaviya et al., 2020) works
best in our model.
Vision-Language representation : We initial-
ize our vision-language representation with pre-
trained ViLBERT features. The ViLBERT model
is built on the Conceptual Captions dataset (Sharma
et al., 2018), which is a collection of 3.3 million
image-caption pairs, to capture the diversity of vi-
sual content and learn some interactions between
images and text. Our vision-language module in-
cludes 6 layers of Transformer blocks with 8 and 12
attention heads in the visual stream and linguistic
streams, respectively.
Concept-Language representation : We train
the concept stream of our ConceptBert from
scratch. The module includes 6 layers of Trans-
former blocks with 12 attention heads.
Concept-Vision-Language embedding : We
have tested our concept-vision-language represen-
tation with dz= 512 anddz= 1024 . The best
results were reached using dz= 1024 . Our hypoth-
esis is that we can improve the capability of the
module by increasing dz. However, it leads to an
increase in the computational cost. We set R= 32
in Equation 5, the same value as in the CTI (Do
et al., 2019) for the slicing parameter.
Classiﬁer : We use a binary cross-entropy loss
with a batch size of 1024 over a maximum of 20
epochs on 8 Tesla GPUs. We use the BertAdam