491joint space z.dzis selected based on a trade-off
between the capability of the representation and
the computational cost.
3 Our approach
3.1 Input representations
The input to our model, ConceptBert, consists of
an image representation, a question representation,
and a knowledge graph representation module (cf.
the blue-dashed box in Figure 1) which are dis-
cussed in detail below.
Image representation: We use pre-trained
Faster R-CNN features (Anderson et al., 2017) to
extract a set of objects V=fviji= 1; :::; n vgper
image, where each object viis associated with a
visual feature vector vi2Rdvand bounding-box
coordinates bi2Rdb.
Question representation: Given a question
consisting of nTtokens, we use BERT embeddings
(Devlin et al., 2018) to generate question represen-
tation q2RnTdq. BERT operates over sequences
of discrete tokens consisting of vocabulary words
and a small set of special tokens, i.e., SEP,CLS,
andMASK . The representation of each token is a
sum of a token-speciﬁc learned embedding and en-
codings for position and segment. Position refers
to the token’s index in the sequence and segment
shows the index of the token’s sentence if multiple
sentences exist.
Knowledge graph representation: We use
ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2016) as the source of
common sense knowledge. ConceptNet is a mul-
tilingual knowledge base, representing words and
phrases that people use and the common sense re-
lationships between them. ConceptNet is a knowl-
edge graph built from several different sources
(mostly from Wiktionary, Open Mind Common
Sense (Singh et al., 2002) and Games with a pur-
pose such as Ahn et al.). It contains over 21 million
edges and over 8 million nodes. In this work, we
focus on the English vocabulary which contains
approximately 1.5 million nodes. To avoid the step
of the query construction and take full advantage
of the large scale KG, we exploit ConceptNet em-
bedding proposed in (Malaviya et al., 2020) and
generate the KG representation k2RnTdk.
This method uses Graph Convolutional Net-
works (Kipf and Welling, 2016) to incorporate
information from the local neighborhood of a node
in the graph. It includes an encoder and a decoder.A graph convolutional encoder takes a graph as in-
put, and encodes each node. The encoder operates
by sending messages from a node to its neighbors,
weighted by the relation type deﬁned by the edge.
This operation occurs in multiple layers, incorpo-
rating information multiple hops away from a node.
The last layer’s representation is used as the graph
embedding of the node.
3.2 Vision-Language representation
To learn joint representations of language qand
visual content V, we generate vision-attended lan-
guage features Vand language-attended visual fea-
tures Q(cf. the orange box in Figure 1) inspired
by VilBERT model (Lu et al., 2019).
Our vision-language module is mainly based on
two parallel BERT-style streams, which operate
over image regions and text segments (cf. Figure
2-a). Each stream is a succession of transformer
blocks and co-attentional transformer layers to en-
able information exchange between image and text
modalities. These exchanges are restricted between
speciﬁc layers and the text features go through
more processing than visual features. The ﬁnal
set of image features represent high-level informa-
tion of language features, and ﬁnal text features
include high-level vision features.
3.3 Concept-Language representation
The vision-language module represents the interac-
tions between the image and the question. However,
this module alone is not able to answer questions
that require insights that are neither in the image,
nor in the question. To this end, we propose the
concept-language representation to produce lan-
guage features conditioned on knowledge graph
embeddings (cf. the red box in Figure 1). It per-
forms knowledge-conditioned language attention
in the concept stream (Figure 2-b). With this sys-
tem, the model is able to incorporate common sense
knowledge to the question, and enhance the ques-
tion comprehension with the information found in
the knowledge graph.
The entities in the knowledge graph have both
contextual and relational information that we desire
to integrate in the question embedding. To this
purpose, we use an attentional transformer layer
which is a multi-layer bidirectional Transformer
using the encoder part of the original Transformer
(Vaswani et al., 2017).
The concept-language module is a series of