490
Figure 1: Model architecture of the proposed ConceptBert.
Most of the recent works are still based on the
idea of context-free word embeddings rather than
the pre-trained language representation (LR) model.
While the pre-trained LR model such as BERT
(Devlin et al., 2018) is an emerging direction, there
is little work on its fusion with KG and image
representation in VQA tasks. Liu et al. propose a
knowledge-based language representation and use
BERT as the token embedding method. However,
this model is also a query-based method. It collects
entity names involved in questions and queries their
corresponding triples from the KG. Then, it injects
queried entities into questions.
In this paper, we introduce a model which jointly
learns from visual, language, and KG embeddings
and captures image-question-knowledge speciﬁc
interactions. The pipeline of our approach is shown
in Figure 1. We compute a set of object, ques-
tion, and KG embeddings. The embedded inputs
are then passed through two main modules: i) the
vision-language representation, and ii) the concept-
language representation. The vision-language rep-
resentation module jointly enhances both the image
and question embeddings, each improving its con-
text representation with the other one. The concept-
language representation uses a KG embedding to in-
corporate relevant external information in the ques-
tion embedding. The outputs of these two modules
are then aggregated to represent concept-vision-
language embeddings and then fed to a classiﬁer to
predict the answer.
Our model is different from the previous meth-
ods since we use pre-trained image and language
features and fuse them with KG embeddings toincorporate the external knowledge into the VQA
task. Therefore, our model does not need additional
knowledge annotations or search queries and re-
duces computational costs. Furthermore, our work
represents an end-to-end pipeline that is fully train-
able.
In summary, the main contributions of our work
are:
1.Novel methodology to incorporate common
sense knowledge to VQA models (Figure 1)
2.Concept-aware representation to use knowl-
edge graph embeddings in VQA models (Fig-
ure 2-b)
3.Novel multimodal Concept-Visual-Language
embeddings (Section 3.4)
2 Problem formulation
Given a question q2Q grounded in an image
I2I and a knowledge graph G, the goal is to
predict a meaningful answer a2A. Let be the
parameters of the model pthat needs to be trained.
Therefore, the predicted answer ^aof our model is:
^a= arg max
a2Ap(ajI; q;G) (1)
In order to retrieve the correct answer, we aim to
learn a joint representation z2Rdzofq,I, andG
such that:
a= ^a= arg max
a2Ap(ajz) (2)
where ais the ground-truth answer. dzis a hy-
perparameter that represents the dimension of the