Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
Reward (r): We extend predictive HCI models of menu use to 
obtain reward estimates. A key feature of these models is to take 
into account the implicit cost of adaptations. Given a pair of menu 
designs and estimates of user expertise and interest, these models 
predict selection time for items for varying user strategies. For each 
model, the reward r then is the diference in average selection time, 
weighted by user interest. Rewards from multiple models can be 
combined using any of the objective functions given in section 4.1. 
When an adapted state is assumed to be displayed (visible) to 
the user, we simulate an interaction session (new clicks) based 
on user interest, and update expertise accordingly. Conversely, 
the system can use invisible states to withhold presentation and 
combine multiple adaptations, such that the state is used only as a 
pathway to another state without being displayed. Here, no user 
updates are applied. 
5.2 Models for Simulating Menu Search 
Several predictive models explain how users search within linear 
menus [5, 10, 12, 24, 40]. We build on these models to defne three 
search strategies, and use these to evaluate the utility of a menu 
design by simulating search tasks, illustrated in Figure 5: 
(1) Serial search : The user searches serially, from top to bottom, 
until the desired item is found in the menu. 
(2) Foraging search : Grouping of items is exploited such that the 
user only searches for the target within relevant groups. 
(3) Recall search : The user relies on memory to search for the 
desired item at an expected location in the menu. 
Our choice of the three models was made with the hypothesis that 
they would provide bounds for best-case and worst-case perfor-
mance. In the beginning, best-case performance would be governed 
by foraging and serial search, but as experience accumulates, the 
(rational) user would shift to foraging based and recall-based strate-
gies. But making the assumption that a user might – for reasons like 
lack of efort or interest – use a poor strategy allows us to defne a 
conservative policy for adaptation that is unlikely to annoy them. 
We note that it is possible to plug in additional search strategies (e.g. 
Random search [40]) without modifying the general architecture 
of the algorithm. 
Table 1: Key notations used in this section. 
Notation Description 
Target item i at location l 
Tmodel(i) il 
Search time for an item i with a given model 
δ Constant for cautious inspection cost of an item 
Constant surprise penalty when an item is not 
found as expected 
Ttrail Tc 
Constant pointing time when the cursor trails eye 
gaze 
Boolean relationship between items ik and il , from 
association matrix M 
B(il ) M(ik , il ) 
Activation level for i at l 
5.2.1 Serial search . When searching for a menu item ie at an 
expected position e, serial search [5, 13, 40] consists of a top-to-
bottom inspection of the menu, until the item is reached. Inspection (or reading) cost for any item il is given by: 
δ Tread(il ) = (6)1 + B(il )
where B(il ) is the activation of i at l, and δ is the cautious inspection 
cost constant when there is no activation. The total serial search 
time for a target at expected location e is thus given by: 
eÕ 
Tserial(ie ) = Tread(ij ) + Ttrail (7) 
j=1 
Where Ttrail is a constant pointing time assuming that the mouse 
cursor trails the eye-gaze (tracking strategy) during serial search 
[5, 10]. 
In an adapted menu, if the item’s new location a is before the 
expected location e (a ⩽ e), the search time reduces following 
Equation 7. However, if a is after e (a ⩾ e), surprise penalty Tc is 
imposed upon not fnding the item as expected. Following this, the 
user cautiously inspects the remaining items at a slower rate δ. The 
total search time is: 
Tserial(ia ) = Tserial(ie ) + Tc + (a − e)· δ + Tpointing (8) 
To support serial search, it is advantageous for an adaptive sys-
tem to move frequently-used items towards the top. 
5.2.2 Foraging search . Here, semantic structure (grouping) is 
exploited to avoid wasting time inspecting groups that most likely 
do not contain the target item [4]. The anchor, or frst element of 
a group, “signals” what is in the group. If the anchor is unrelated 
to the target, the user skips the group. If the anchor is related, the 
user performs a serial search within this group. 
Consider a menu where nд is the number of groups, nд (ie ) is the 
location of the group that contains the target (ie ), and e the expected 
target location within the group. M(дj , ie )∈[0, 1] specifes if ie is 
associated to an anchor дj . In a well-organised menu, where the 
anchor of one of the groups is related to the target item, foraging 
search time is: 
nÕд (ie )  
Tforage(ie ) = Tread(дj ) + (9) 
j=1 
min(e(дj ),s(дj ))Õ ª M(дj , ie )· Tread(ik )® + Ttrail 
k=1 ¬ 
where s(дj ) is the size of the group, and e(дj ) is the location of the 
target item te within group дj if it is located within the group, ∞ 
otherwise. Finally, Ttrail remains the constant pointing time when 
the mouse cursor trails the eye gaze. Thus, items within related 
groups are inspected serially until the target is successfully found. 
In a poorly organised menu, where the target item is not located 
within the expected group(s), a user frst attempts foraging search 
by inspecting all anchors, and all items within related anchors 
(given by Equation 9). Upon not fnding the item, a surprise penalty 
Tc is incurred, and the user reverts to serial search under caution 
from the top of the menu. 
To support foraging search, it is desirable for an adaptive system 
to create groups of related items, or eliminate groups where items 
have no associations.