Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
2.2 Machine learning 
The prevailing understanding is that learning is a key capability 
for adaptive systems [32]. Two learning capabilities are needed: (1) 
inference, the capability to update assumptions about the user based 
on observations; and (2) decision-making, the capability to choose 
appropriate adaptation in the light of assumptions about the user 
[41]. The two challenges can be relaxed, for example if user state is 
trivially known, or if the state is highly predictive of appropriate 
adaptation. In the latter case, the problem can be approached as a 
supervised learning problem, where a mapping is learned between 
user data and suitable adaptations. While this approach has been 
successful for input techniques, such as gesture recognition [57], it 
is an open question if this scales up to adaptive interfaces, which 
must not only learn user state but fexibly decide how to intervene 
in the user interface. A practical obstacle is how to obtain a dataset 
that describes the consequences of possible adaptations on possible 
users. 
In the rest of the section, we focus on the general case, where 
both inference and decision-making are required and non-trivial. 
2.3 Bandit systems and Bayesian optimisation 
Bandit systems are one of the most successful probabilistic ap-
proaches to this problem, not only for recommendation systems 
but also for interface design and adaptation [38]. Each adaptation 
is modelled as an ‘arm’ associated with a distribution describing 
expected gains. Given prior data and new evidence on the mea-
sured success of an adaptation, bandits use Bayes theorem to update 
expectation. Importantly, a principled solution is ofered to the ex-
ploration/exploitation problem. Methods like Thompson sampling 
can optimally balance between exploring actions, to learn about 
which actions work, and exploitation, to converge to good designs. 
Bayesian optimisation generalises bandit systems to the case of 
multiple interrelated decision variables [47]. It is a global optimisa-
tion method that tries to fnd optimal adaptation by probing to a 
black box function; here, the user. It is a robust and sample-efcient 
and well-suited for noisy, expensive-to-evaluate functions. The 
method uses a surrogate model for approximating the model ft 
across the parameter space and quantify uncertainty. This is neces-
sary for the acquisition rule to address the exploration–exploitation 
trade-of. This way, it is possible to learn adaptive responses via 
trial and error. Applications have been shown in human-in-the-loop 
design of interface features [15] and adaptation of low-dimensional 
design features [30]. However, while bandits and BO have been 
successful in simpler adaptation problems, like recommendations 
and calibration of interface parameters, their intrinsic limitation 
is that they are myopic; that is, they do not plan over a series of 
changes – a capability we need in adaptive interaction. 
2.4 Reinforcement learning 
Unlike bandits, reinforcement learning permits learning policies for 
sequences of actions where rewards are not immediately achievable. 
While applications have been shown for example in crowdsourcing 
[14], dialogue systems [58], and gaze-based interactions [20], a 
known limitation with the prevailing model-free RL approach is still 
the extensive amount of poor attempts (or trials) that are required to learn a good policy [50] This makes it poorly suitable for situations 
with very large state-action spaces. 
Model-based RL uses a predictive model to simulate possibilities 
without frst trying them out, which is useful for adaptive interfaces, 
because it signifcantly improves the efciency of fnding good 
solutions [28]. A policy can be determined with much fewer trials, 
and if the model is good, at times directly. Outside of user interfaces, 
we fnd applications of model-based RL, for example in board games, 
robots, video games [29], as well as behaviour-change applications, 
such as in generating behavioural instructions for people with 
dementia [23]. A grand obstacle for applications in adaptive systems 
is the model: where to get a good one? A related problem is that 
of drift: prediction errors can have a compounding, cumulative 
efect on planning performance. In HCI, although previous work 
has explored the use of model-free RL (e.g., see [35]), model-based 
RL has not been explored in adaptive interfaces at large, as far as 
we know. Also, while predictive models have been used for one-
shot design generation [42], design space exploration [53], and for 
selecting a single action in a myopic manner [27, 51], they have not 
been used for simulation-based planning in an adaptive system. 
In this paper, we approach the fundamental problem of select-
ing user interface adaptations by applying model-based RL, and 
exploiting predictive HCI models, to simulate and plan adaptations. 
3 PROBLEM FORMULATION 
We formulate the problem of adaptation as a stochastic sequential 
decision-making problem [7]. The adaptive system must decide what 
to adapt, if anything, given its observations. It should pick a se-
quence of adaptations in order to maximise their expected value 
to user over a longer window of interactions. For example, in our 
application example later on, we optimise for performance improve-
ments in menu selection tasks achievable over multiple sessions of 
interactions. Further, in a stochastic problem, the world is neither 
fully known nor under the control of the system. In our case, while 
the system can change the interface, it cannot change the human, 
which has its own latent processes. For example, humans learn 
and change interests. This complicates the problem: Any greed-
ily chosen adaptation may lead to irreversibly poor interactions 
later on. Thus, adaptations must be picked with a horizon of such 
developments in mind. 
In the following, we formulate this problem as a Markov decision 
process (MDP). The beneft of an MDP formulation is that it ofers a 
rigorous and actionable understanding of the problem. In particular, 
it (1) illuminates the decision problem, (2) links it to a body of 
theoretical results and practical approaches in AI and ML research, 
and (3) points toward appropriate algorithmic solutions. 
The problem of adaptive interfaces is that of maximising ex-
pected cumulative discounted rewards r(st , at ) from acting accord-
ing to an optimal policy π ∗ (see e.g. [26]): 
" #∞Õ 
π ∗ = argmax Eπ γ t r(st , at ) (1) 
π t =0p(st +1 |st , at ) 
where, 
• s ∈ S is a state of interaction; This consists of both the 
interface design ( d) and the user ( u)