CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
Open
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
ExitActivationsFrequency observeCurrent
DesignAdapted
DesignUser Planning with MCTS
d0 , u0
d0 , u0
Pairwise Item
AssociationsPredictive
ModelsPredictive
ModelsPredictive
Models
d11u11u0d0
undn
u1n1d1n1u1nd1n ...u0d0
u1d1undnu2d2 ...
r’(s’,a,s) Feasible Adaptations A
Move an item
Swap two items
Move a group
Swap two groups
Add/remove a separator
Do nothingOpen
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
ExitPredictions
min Δr, max Δr Move ‘Save’ 
to position 4
Pre-trained
Neural network
Figure 4: Menu adaptation with deep model-based RL. Given a current design and user observations, MCTS-based planning is 
used to select the next adaptation. Reward estimates are obtained either using predictive models or from a neural network. 
arrange icons on mobile homescreens, or reorganise application 
menus. Depending on the application, the goal or objective can dif-
fer and might include minimising selection time, increasing saliency, 
reducing cognitive load, increasing engagement, or a combination 
of them. The approach can handle diferent types of adaptations 
including the presentation of the graphical elements (position, size, 
colour, etc.) or their behaviour (number of elements, animations, 
etc.). 
For any application case, a core aspect of our approach relies 
on HCI models [42] to sufciently accurately capture the efects 
of these adaptations on the chosen goals. For instance, Fitts’ law 
[39] can be used to adapt the location and the size of an elements 
to minimise pointing time. Other practical limitations include the 
size of state–action space. In the following section, we demonstrate 
our approach with an application in adaptive menus, and present a 
novel HCI model to predict selection time in menus. 
5 APPLICATION: ADAPTIVE MENUS 
To demonstrate the applicability of our approach, we tackle a chal-
lenging and open question in the feld of adaptive interfaces: adap-
tive menus. Menus have received extensive attention in HCI re-
search because they are widely used, and adaptation has potential 
to improve usability [4, 55]. It is known that unexpected changes 
in menus can introduce a temporary performance drop, increase 
cognitive load, and potentially lead to the rejection of the adap-
tion/techniques [4, 55]. No general solution has been proposed 
for autonomous adaptation that could not only move items to the 
top, but handle reorganisations more comprehensively. We provide 
a general solution here considering linear menus with up to 20 
items, which covers a wide number of menus typically found in 
common operating systems, applications, and websites [3, 4, 6]. As 
menu adaptations, we only consider those modifying the position 
and grouping of items in the menus, leaving other presentation 
adaptations, such as highlighting and split menus, for future work. 
While we consider linear menus with textual labels, our solution 
can be extended to address the problem of adaptive homescreens 
(introduced in section 3) by extending the menu search model to 
consider two-dimensional grids and graphical icons. 5.1 Problem Defnition 
Following the general formulation in section 3, we frst defne the 
adaptive menu problem. Figure 4 presents an exemplary illustration. 
State (S): A state s ∈ S gives information about the menu design 
and the user. 
We defne a design d ∈ D as a pair < L, M > where L is a non-
hierarchical linear menu [40] containing an ordered list of items. An 
item is either a word or a separator (used to create semantic groups). 
M is an association matrix defning the semantic relatedness between 
menu items. In our implementation, M is given by the designer as 
binary relationships by specifying lists of related items. For common 
words, it can be inferred using word embedding models [43]. 
The system observes user clicks on menu items to approximate 
a user’s expertise and interest. We use a simplifed version of the 
learning component from ACT-R [1] to compute user expertise for 
each menu item il in a menu with n items: 
nÕ 
B(il ) = (T − Tj,il )−ρ (4) 
j=1 
where B(il ) is the level of activation of item i at location l in the 
memory, T is the current time, Tj,il is the time of the jth selection of 
il , and ρ is a decay parameter equal to 0.5. User interest (or prediction 
scheme [55]) is given by the frequency distribution of commands 
selected during the previous interaction session, containing N clicks. 
Additional statistical models of user interest and expertise [18, 19, 
21, 51], can be plugged into our architecture. 
Feasible Adaptations (A): The set of possible adaptations A, 
through which a menu can be reorganised, includes (1) moving a 
menu item to a certain position, (2) swapping two items, (3) adding 
or removing a separator, (4) moving an entire group, (5) swapping 
two groups, and (6) not making any changes. 
Transition function (p): We use MCTS, where the probabil-
ity of making an adaptation from state s0 to s1 is given by UCT 
(Equation 2). During planning, we balance between exploiting high-
reward adaptations and exploring others. When selecting an adap-
tation a to make on the current design d0, resulting in a new design 
d1, a greedy strategy is chosen: 
rjargmax (5) 
a nj