Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
designed to handle long-term dependencies, and is then passed to 
a fully connected layer. 
The concatenated inputs are passed to each network tail, which 
comprises two stacked fully connected layers. At the end of each 
tail, we use linear activation to predict each reward, since they are 
not bounded. For regularisation purposes, our architecture uses 
Dropout layers with drop rate 0.5 before each of the fully connected 
layers. This prevents overftting the model to the training data, 
improving generalisability to unseen data. The loss function for all 
model tails is the mean squared error (MSE), which is computed as 
the average of the squared diferences between the predicted and the 
actual values, which penalises large errors. We use the RMSProp 
optimiser, a popular stochastic gradient descent algorithm with 
momentums. We use learning rate η = 0.001 and decay factor 
β = 0.9 for the optimiser. We train the model for 200 epochs at 
most, using early stopping (10 epochs patience) to retain the best 
model weights, and monitor its performance on a validation set 
comprising 20% of training data. After training, our model achieved 
remarkable performance: MSE serial = 0.149, MSE f oraдe = 0.408, 
MSE r ecall = 0.431. 
6 EVALUATION 
We validate our method, applied to adaptive menus, through tech-
nical and empirical evaluations. 
6.1 Technical Evaluation 
We conducted a technical evaluation with realistic and challeng-
ing scenarios, where the adaptive system must adapt menus for 
simulated users. The two main questions we seek to answer are: 
(1) Can a model-based planning approach successfully and con-
sistently improve predicted usability? 
(2) Does our neural network based solution scale it up to address 
larger problem sizes? 
6.1.1 Tasks. 
Menu Designs and User Interest: We considered 3 menu sizes — 5, 
10, and 15 items — to address varying cases, from short contextual 
menus to longer application menus. In addition, up to 8 separa-
tors were allowed for grouping, resulting in menus with up to 23 
items. We picked common labels for menu items, where categories 
specifed pairwise associations (e.g. animals, furniture, vegetables, 
clothing). For each menu size, we created 4 starting menu designs 
by randomly assigning labels to item positions. We used a Zipfan 
distribution to reasonably model menu usage [13, 37]. We sampled 
8 diferent click histories by randomly assigning frequency to item 
labels. This resulted in 3×8×4 = 96 confgurations, each assigned 
to a diferent simulated user. 
Reward Estimation: We compare two methods of estimating re-
wards: model-based simulations and value neural network predictions. 
With model-based simulations, predictive models are used during 
roll-outs to estimate rewards for each state. With value network 
predictions, our pre-trained network models are used to predict 
value estimates for each state. 
6.1.2 Implementation. Our MCTS-based planning algorithm, and 
the predictive menu models, are implemented in Python 3.7. The 
value neural network is implemented with TensorFlow 2.0.0. We 
Gloves: 0.6
Carrot: 0.16Panda: 0.1Table: 0.06Beans: 0.06Bikini: 0.02(Others: 0)User Interest(Frequencies)
Predicted AverageSelection Time (s)
13.6s 7.2sCurrent AdaptedAdapt x 3Figure 7: A sample result from the simulation study, for a 15-
item menu design. In 3 steps, the menu was adapted to better 
suit the given user’s interests (‘Gloves’ group moved to the 
top), and improved some grouping (‘Carrot’ with ‘Potato’) as 
well. 
used a GNU/Linux server with an Intel Xeon Gold CPU @ 2.10 GHz 
(64 bit processor) for simulations. The execution of the study was 
automated such that trials were conducted sequentially, to avoid 
variations in computational resource usage. 
During each trial, a combination of {menu size × user history × 
menu design × objective function × reward source} was selected, 
and given as input to the system. In a constrained setting, the MCTS 
algorithm was allowed 400 iterations, and a shallow roll-out horizon 
of 4 steps, to build the search tree and fnd suitable adaptations. 
6.1.3 Result: Success Rate. With the above setup, we frst evaluated 
whether our approach, and implementation, could successfully iden-
tify promising adaptations. As dependent variable, we measured 
success rate of fnding benefcial adaptations. We defne a success-
ful trial as one where the predicted selection time is improved by 
adaptation. Figure 7 shows an example result for a challenging case 
with a 15-item menu. 
The overall success rate with model-based simulation was 92.7%, 
indicating that in most cases an improvement was found. Similarly, 
with the value network, success rate was 89.6%. These results sup-
port our approach towards planning menu adaptations that can 
improve user performance. 
6.1.4 Result: Scalability. To assess the scalability of our solution, 
we compared computation time for model-based simulations vs. 
value network predictions. In addition to the horizon of 4 steps 
used to evaluate success rate, we evaluated 3 other search depths –