CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Adaptive user interfaces can autonomously change the content, 
layout, or style of an interface to improve their ft with the user’s 
capabilities and interests. This paper looks at a foundational tech-
nical problem of adaptive interfaces that lies at the intersection 
of human–computer interaction and machine learning research: 
How to select adaptations? An adaptive system must decide what to 
adapt, and when – or when not – to make changes. Diferent com-
putational approaches to this problem have been studied, among 
others, rule-based systems, heuristics, bandits, Bayesian optimisa-
tion, and supervised learning (see section 2). Although positive em-
pirical results have been obtained (e.g., [4, 13, 17, 46, 49, 51, 52, 54]), 
known approaches have been criticised for being unpredictable and 
unreliable; they pick detrimental adaptations unacceptably often 
[16, 22, 33, 36, 56]. 
Estimation of utility is required for selecting an adaptation. Utility 
– in this case – refers to the usefulness of an adaptation to the user, 
or how it is perceived to beneft interaction when possible costs 
are taken into account. Picking an adaptation can be considered 
a hypothesis on how useful it is for user. Unfortunately, utility 
is very hard to estimate accurately – hard both at design time 
as well as interactively from the kind of data these systems have 
access to, such as clicks or viewing duration. In machine learning 
terms, utility is latent. Moreover, in adaptive interaction, utility 
is also non-stationary. That is, the skills and interests of the user 
evolve over time. A change that would make sense in the beginning 
when the user is novice with the design may be devastating for an 
experienced user. 
We believe that adaptive systems could provide greater benefts 
by planning sequences of adaptations that gracefully lead a user 
through gradual changes. However, non-stationarity makes plan-
ning challenging: considering only a short period of time (i.e. a 
short horizon) can result in suboptimal designs. An adaptation that 
is overft to a novice could be impossible to recover from later on 
when the user is more experienced. On the other hand, planning 
a long sequence of adaptations increases the size of search space, 
growing exponentially with the length of the planning horizon. 
Model-based reinforcement learning is here developed as a princi-
pled and efective approach to these issues. We defne the adaptation 
problem as a stochastic sequential decision problem [ 7], where the 
adaptive system should plan a sequence of adaptations over a long 
horizon. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a class of machine learning 
methods appropriate for this type of problems. Typically, a policy is 
learnt via trial-and-error that maximises future cumulative utility. 
Our RL approach is model-based as it uses predictive HCI models to 
estimate utility. These models simulate consequences – benefts and 
costs – of possible adaptation sequences without actually executing 
them [28, 50]. However, their application is conditioned on their 
accuracy: They should accurately predict short-term costs such as 
due to relearning as well as longer-term improvements to perfor-
mance. Generally, such models are available at least in the areas 
of pointing, menu interaction, and graphical layouts. In compari-
son with an alternative, the model-free approach, the model-based 
approach requires less training and better generalises across condi-
tions [28, 50]. However, fnding the best adaption – by assessing the 
value of each sequence of adaptations with predictive models – is computationally costly, especially when considering sequences of 
changes over a long horizon. To solve this computational problem 
in an online setting, we use a combination of Monte Carlo Tree 
Search (MCTS) for planning, and deep learning to boost perfor-
mance. To avoid extensive trial-and-error with users in the loop, 
our deep learning models are trained ofine using HCI models. 
Our general approach can be applied for various HCI applica-
tions, such as adaptive mobile homescreens, graphical layouts, and 
application menus. We demonstrate it specifcally in the context of 
adaptive menus. The task is to adapt the interface by changing the 
arrangement and grouping of menu items (Figure 1), thus improving 
the menu’s usability. We exploit and extend multiple menu search 
models from literature to estimate the upper and lower bounds of 
the value of an adaptation as well as their change as the user learns. 
This helps us form an adaptation policy that accounts for diferent 
user strategies and avoids adaptations that incur high costs to users. 
Our technical evaluation shows that our solution can tackle realistic 
problem sizes, and fnd favourable adaptations, on a commodity 
computer. Finally, we present results from an empirical evaluation 
where the approach compared favourably against a non-adaptive 
baseline design and a frequency-based adaptation policy. 
To sum up, this paper makes three key contributions: 
(1) A new formulation for adaptive interfaces that formalises 
them as a stochastic sequential decision-making problem; 
(2) Development of model-based reinforcement learning for 
planning adaptations in the case where users learn; 
(3) Application in adaptive menus with demonstrated benefts 
to usability. 
2 PREVIOUS WORK: MACHINE LEARNING 
METHODS FOR ADAPTIVE INTERFACES 
Our work contributes to methods for adaptive interfaces designed to 
operate autonomously, that is without explicit feedback or training 
samples from user. The core computational problem we review 
here is how to pick an adaptation; we do not cover issues like 
prior elicitation, explainability, nor the design space of intelligent 
interaction techniques. 
2.1 Rules, heuristics, and logic 
Early work on this topic studied rule systems, heuristics, and logic 
as the basis of deciding what to adapt (see, e.g., [44]). For exam-
ple, in menu-based interaction, most systems still follow a heuristic 
approach, where adaptation is picked based on hand-written heuris-
tics that exploit click frequency, visit duration, recency or other 
specifc features that can be computed from observation data [ 21]. 
These approaches, in general, are feasible only when sensed input 
is highly predictive of the most appropriate adaptation. Another 
limitation is that writing a comprehensive and accurate rule sys-
tem requires plenty of foresight. A rule system must be developed 
that, on the one hand, covers conceivable conditions the system 
can enter and, on the other, can graciously resolve conficts when 
multiple rules apply.