CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
Simulation
Value Network
4 6 8 1001020304050Completion Time in s (400 iterations)
Search Depth (Horizon)
Figure 8: Computation time for planning adaptations via 
model-based simulations vs. value network for varying 
search depths. Our value network exhibited consistent per-
formance for longer horizons. 
6, 8, and 10 – depicting a range of planning horizons, from short 
sequences to longer sequences. 
Figure 8 illustrates computation time results for each depth level 
(for 400 MCTS iterations). We observe that for depths ≤ 4, the value 
network does not provide much beneft. However, as search depth 
increases, while the computation time with our value network 
remains constant (mean M = 7.77s, SD = 1.0), it drastically increases 
with simulations (from M = 7.9s, SD = 3.5s at depth 4 to M = 39.0s, 
SD = 7.4 at depth 10). 
6.2 Empirical Evaluation 
The primary goal of this evaluation is to test whether our planning 
approach (henceforth MCTS) applied to linear menus improves 
performance in comparison with static menus (Static), and with 
the well-known frequency-based adaptive approach (Freqency) 
as a baseline (e.g. as in [34]). In MCTS, the menu adapts after each 
block by planning adaptations; in Static, the menu does not adapt 
over time; in Freqency, the menu adapts based on the frequency 
of clicks on menu items. To this end, we conducted a lab study 
where participants completed selection tasks in a within-subject 
design with three conditions (Static, Freqency, MCTS). 
6.2.1 Materials. For the experiment, linear menus with 15 item 
labels were randomly generated. Items labels were selected from 
common categories (e.g. animals, fruits, countries, etc.) to avoid 
prior biases. For each participant, two menus were generated for 
each of the three conditions, resulting in six unique menus. To 
avoid confusion, there were no overlaps in item labels or categories 
between the menus for a participant. 
For each menu within a condition, a Zipfan distribution, known 
to accurately capture real-world command selections [13, 37], with 
shape s = 1.5 was used to control the frequency distribution of 
target items. The same frequency distribution was used for all three 
conditions within a participant. Unique frequency distributions were generated for every participant, to consider variance in user 
interests. These frequency distributions were then used to generate 
sequences of target items, to be presented as stimulus during the 
trials. 
6.2.2 Participants. 18 participants (10 masculine, 8 feminine, 0 
others), aged 18 to 38 (mean 27.2), with varying educational back-
grounds, were opportunistically recruited. All participants reported 
frequent desktop or mobile, and web usage. Participation was com-
pensated with a movie ticket voucher (approx. €12.00). 
6.2.3 Apparatus. The experiment was conducted on a Macbook 
Pro, with a 15” Retina display. An Apple Magic Mouse with default 
tracking speed was used for selection tasks. The study interface 
was implemented using HTML and Javascript, and was displayed 
in a browser window. Timestamped cursor movements and clicks 
on menu items were recorded. 
6.2.4 Stimulus and Task. The target item name was displayed at 
the top of the browser window. Participants began a trial by clicking 
on a confrm button, upon which the menu was displayed directly 
below. Errors were logged, and participants had to select the target 
item to fnish the trial. Upon clicking the target item, the menu was 
hidden, and a short break was provided. 
6.2.5 Procedure and design. The experiment began with an intro-
ductory briefng and participant consent. In a within-subject exper-
imental design, each participant tested the three conditions (Static, 
Freqency, MCTS) sequentially. Condition order was counterbal-
anced between participants using a 3×3 Latin square. 
During each condition, the participant interacted with two difer-
ent menus during 3 blocks. Within a block, the two menus appeared 
in an alternating order, separated by short breaks (3 seconds). For 
each menu, 20 selection tasks (trials) were completed. We intro-
duced this design to refect the fact that (1) users perform several 
sessions of work in the real life (one session == 1 block), (2) users 
regularly switch between applications within a session, and thus 
use diferent menus [45]: we wanted to avoid undesirable efects due 
to repetitive selection within a single menu, and (3) each menu has 
a diferent selection frequency, given by two Zipfan distributions. 
Participants took mandatory breaks (1 minute) between two con-
secutive blocks, and longer breaks (5 minutes) between conditions 
where they answered open-ended interview questions. In summary, 
the design is: 18 participants × 3 conditions × 3 blocks × 2 menus 
× 20 selections = 6480 trials. 
6.2.6 Qantitative Results. 
Average Selection Time: We created a mixed-efect model for re-
peated measures analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) with se-
lection time (in ms) as dependent variable, conditions (Static, Fre-
qency, MCTS) as fxed independent variable, and participant ID 
and menu design as random variables. 
Condition had a statistically signifcant efect on selection time 
F (2, 17) = 5.47, p < 0.05, with grand means Static = 2283 ms, Fre-
qency = 2298 ms, and MCTS = 2162 ms (Figure 9a). Post-hoc test 
using Tukey HSD revealed that MCTS (2162 ms) was signifcantly 
faster (lower selection time) than both Freqency (2298 ms) and 
Static (2283 ms); the diference between Static and Freqency 
was not statistically signifcant.