Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
u0d0
u1d1undnu2d2
u11d11u1nd1nu0d0
u11d11
u1n1d1n1u1nd1nu0d0
undn
u11d11
u1n1d1n1u1nd1nu1n1d1n1u1nd1n
t1
t2t0 t2
t3
tH...
... ... ...u1d1undnu2d2 ...u0d0
u1d1undnu2d2 ...select
select
expandsimulate
or
estimate
backpropogatePredictive Models
Value Network
 vθ1. Selection 2. Expansion 3. Roll-out 4. Backpropogation
Figure 2: Model-based planning of adaptations using Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). Adaptations are selected using upper-
confdence trees (UCT). After expanding a new node (adaptation), reward estimates are obtained through roll-outs, and back-
propogated to the root node. The child with the highest value is picked as the next adaptation. 
4. Backpropagation : At the end of a simulation, the cumulative 
reward rj+1 is backpropagated from the newly-expanded state sj+1 
to the initial state s0, and values (rewards r and visits n) are updated. 
The above steps (1–4) are repeated several times to obtain value 
estimates for each adapted state. 
Selecting the next adaptation : Given these value estimates, 
the system can now choose the best adaptation (by setting C = 0 in 
Equation 2) to maximise expected utility for the user while avoiding 
costly changes. 
We support several ways for selecting adaptation that allows 
controlling for the trade-of between risk and gain. Our approach 
assumes that there are multiple predictive HCI models that bound 
the true behaviour, for example by ofering best-case and (realistic) 
worst-case estimates. Alternatively, predictive models can be in-
cluded to address multiple objectives, such as task completion time, 
cognitive load, and disruption [25]. Combining value estimations 
from all models, we can implement diferent objective functions, 
such as: 
(1) Average: The mean of rewards from each model gives total 
reward r, thus accounting for varying user strategies. 
(2) Optimistic: The system assumes optimal user strategy, and 
selects the model that maximises rewards. 
(3) Conservative: The system ensures that no user strategy is 
harmed by selecting the lowest-possible reward, and penal-
ising negative rewards. 
4.2 Value Estimation with Deep Neural 
Networks 
To address large problem sizes in online settings, where repeating 
a sufcient number of MCTS simulations to attain robust estimates 
is infeasible, we develop a deep neural network architecture that 
can efciently provide predictions in real-time. In place of roll-
outs, where simulations can be costly for longer horizons, a pre-
trained value network is used to directly obtain value estimates for 
unexplored states. 
... ...
......Concatenation
Input Branches 
(Model)InputDesign
FeaturesUser
Features
Output Branches
(Model)Value
PredictionsModel-based
Training DataFigure 3: Neural network architecture for obtaining value 
estimates. Training data is generated using HCI models. 
As illustrated in Figure 3, we propose an m-headed n-tailed ar-
chitecture that is trained end-to-end with backpropagation. Each of 
the m input parameters is treated as an independent model branch 
(head) that is eventually concatenated and passed to n independent 
model branches (tails). During ofine training, model-based data 
is generated using MCTS roll-outs from randomly sampled initial 
states. Value estimates, along with state (design and user) informa-
tion, are given as input samples to a deep neural network model. 
Elementary design and user features are parameterised with the 
neural network model. This is then used to predict value estimates 
for any given state in an online setting. Note that we decouple 
value estimations from objective functions (see above), leaving it 
up to the adaptive system to decide how to use information from 
multiple models. The main advantages of using neural networks 
for estimation are that they have high learning capacity, and can 
evaluate thousands of states in real-time without running expensive 
simulations. 
4.3 Applications in Adaptive Interfaces 
With certain conditions we outline here, the approach we outline 
is broadly useful across applications of adaptive interfaces. For ex-
ample, it can be used to adapt the structure of webpages layouts,