Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based 
Reinforcement Learning 
Kashyap Todi 
kashyap.todi@gmail.com 
Aalto University 
Finland 
Luis A. Leiva 
luis.leiva@uni.lu 
University of Luxembourg 
Luxembourg Gilles Bailly 
gilles.bailly@sorbonne-universite.fr 
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR 
France 
Antti Oulasvirta 
antti.oulasvirta@aalto.f 
Aalto University 
Finland 
t1tnCurrent
 State
Adapted
 Statesobserved
values
adaptOpen
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
ExitOpen
Save
Rename
Move To...PrintExportSave As...New
Duplicate
Exita1a2an
a1a2an
t0Open
Save
Rename
DuplicateMove To...ExportSave As...New
Print
Exitt0
t1
t2TimeCurrent Design Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Adapted Design Final Design
... ...
...s0
s1
s11s12s1ns2snestimated
values
Figure 1: We present a model-based reinforcement learning approach for adaptive UIs that can improve usability while avoid-
ing unexpected changes that surprise the user or require relearning. An interface is adapted by simulating several possible 
sequences of adaptations and evaluating them using predictive models in HCI. This approach avoids greedy, disadvantageous 
adaptations, and may anticipate possible user responses even with limited observation data. 
ABSTRACT 
Adapting an interface requires taking into account both the positive 
and negative efects that changes may have on the user. A carelessly 
picked adaptation may impose high costs to the user – for example, 
due to surprise or relearning efort – or “trap” the process to a 
suboptimal design immaturely. However, efects on users are hard 
to predict as they depend on factors that are latent and evolve 
over the course of interaction. We propose a novel approach for 
adaptive user interfaces that yields a conservative adaptation policy: 
It fnds benefcial changes when there are such and avoids changes 
when there are none. Our model-based reinforcement learning 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the frst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specifc permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan 
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8096-6/21/05...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445497 method plans sequences of adaptations and consults predictive 
HCI models to estimate their efects. We present empirical and 
simulation results from the case of adaptive menus, showing that 
the method outperforms both a non-adaptive and a frequency-based 
policy. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered computing → Interactive systems and 
tools. 
KEYWORDS 
Adaptive User Interfaces; Reinforcement Learning; Predictive Mod-
els; Monte Carlo Tree Search 
ACM Reference Format: 
Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2021. 
Adapting User Interfaces with Model-based Reinforcement Learning. In 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21), May 
8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https: 
//doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445497