CHI ’21, May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan Kashyap Todi, Gilles Bailly, Luis A. Leiva, and Anti Oulasvirta 
• a ∈ A is an adaptation; i.e. a change that can be carried out 
on the interface. 
• p is a transition function; it provides the probability of transi-
tioning from state s to state st +1 after performing adaptation 
a; i.e., p(st +1 |st , at ). 
• r is a reward collected for making adaptation a in state s. 
• γ is a discount factor controlling for how much to favour 
immediate (small γ ) vs. long-term (large γ ) reward. 
Consider the case of adapting the homescreen layout of smart-
phones, consisting of a grid of application icons. Here, a state s of 
the system consists of both the homescreen design d and latent state 
of the user u who is interacting with the device. More specifcally, 
the design d can encapsulate factors such as the arrangement of 
icons, their grouping or relationship to other icons, and other rele-
vant features. With regard to the user u, aspects such as expertise, 
interests, and abilities, can be considered. 
Given an initial homescreen design, with which the user has 
interacted, an adaptation a would result in a new design by, for 
example, changing the layout or ordering of icons. Upon adaptation, 
the transition function p specifes how the internal state of the user 
(e.g. their expertise) changes along with the external design state. 
The reward r then signifes the beneft an adaptation provides to 
the user by improving future interactions, for example, by reducing 
the time required to select an icon. Finally, the discount factor 
γ indicates to the adaptive system how immediate benefts and 
long-term improvements contribute towards the reward. Given 
this setting, the goal of the system is to fnd a suitable policy τ 
that can be used to select adaptations that maximise the estimated 
cumulative reward. 
Finding a policy to select adaptations can be challenging for adap-
tive interfaces. While the true state of the design is fully observable, 
the system does not have access to the true state of the user. We can 
only estimate it through HCI models, where predictions provide 
us a belief about the user status (for the theoretical implications of 
this, see [2]). Further, due to the lack of user feedback, computing 
reward is not straightforward. Instead, predictive HCI models can 
be used to build objective functions related to performance and 
re-learning costs. Note that this formulation does not take a stance 
on what is the ‘right’ objective function. Finally, at any given state, 
there is a large number of possible adaptations that can change the 
design. When considering a sequence of adaptations over a long 
horizon, the state space grows exponentially. In the following, we 
describe how these challenges are addressed via model-based RL. 
4 METHOD: DEEP MODEL-BASED 
REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 
The core of this approach considers planning: the selection of a 
sequence of adaptation with the goal of maximising utility to user. 
Planning algorithms such as minimax and A-star, among others, 
utilise a tree representation of the search space. They have found 
several applications (e.g. game-playing [8], circuit-routing [11], 
etc.). The tree consists of nodes, connected by branches, represent-
ing valid states and transitions between them. However, classic 
tree search algorithms often require expansion of the entire tree. This is computationally expensive given the large number of pos-
sible adaptations (breadth) and long horizons (depth) in adaptive 
interfaces. 
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has been successfully employed 
in various game-playing applications to plan a sequence of moves ef-
fciently (see [9]). MCTS can operate under uncertainty by analysing 
the most promising moves, and expanding tree nodes using random 
sampling based approaches. A well-known, inspiring application 
of MCTS is in AlphaGo [48], the computer program capable of 
playing the game of Go competitively against human players. A 
key insight here has been to incorporate neural networks to help 
predict which branches have highest expected value, and thereby 
deal with larger problem instances. In our work, we incorporate a 
value neural network to compute longer sequence cases faster. 
4.1 Planning with MCTS 
In contrast to game-playing applications, where a win/loss defnes 
the terminal state, our case does not have a well-defned horizon. 
The user could keep interacting for years. We thus need to estimate 
a cumulative reward over a horizon of reasonable length. In other 
parts, our solution follows standard implementations of MCTS 
(Figure 2): 
1. Selection : When a user concludes an interaction session, the 
root state s0 is given by the current design d0 and user observations 
u0. A state sj ∈ S is selected via Upper Confdence Trees (UCT), a 
widely used estimator in model-based planning [31]. A key feature 
is that it has a coefcient C to balance between exploration and 
exploitation when evaluating several possible UI adaptations: 
s 
rj ln niUCT = + C (2) nj nj 
where rj is the total reward for child state sj , nj is the number of 
times sj has been visited, and ni is the number of times parent state 
si has been visited. Exploration constant C in our application is set √ 
to 1/ 2 following convention. If all adaptations from the selected 
state sj have been previously explored, then selection is repeated 
until a leaf state is selected with unexplored adaptations. 
2. Expansion : The selected node sj is next expanded by picking 
an adaptation a ∈ A that results in a new state sj+1. At this point, 
nj+1, rj+1 = 0. In our application, we further assume that the ex-
panded state is either visible or invisible to the user. Invisibility can 
be exploited to plan multiple adaptations in a single turn. 
3. Roll-outs and simulations : During one roll-out, as the tree 
has no value estimates to inform the selection of consequential 
states, adaptations {a0, . . . , aN } ∈ A are chosen at random, and 
rewards are estimated using predictive HCI models. All models 
simulate what would happen with that adaptation sequence and 
return an estimate of values over the whole window. This is repeated 
for a fxed number of steps, given by the horizon H , and cumulative 
rewards are computed for each predictive model: 
HÕ 
rj+1 = rk (3) 
k=j+2