Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 1 | Literatures for the application of GAN in image processing.
References Model Public dataset
Mirza and Osindero ( 30) CGAN MNIST
Radford et al. ( 31) DCGAN LSUN, IMAGENET-1K
Nowozin et al. ( 32) f-GAN MNIST Digits, LSUN
Zhao et al. ( 34) EBGAN MNIST digit, LSUN, CelebA,
ImageNet
Arjovsky et al. ( 26) WGAN LSUN-Bedrooms
Karras et al. ( 37) proGAN CelebA, LSUN
Ledig et al. ( 12) SRGAN Set5, Set14, BSD100
Pathak et al. ( 38) Context
encoderParis Street View, ImageNet
stabilityareachievedbyusingdiﬀerentdistancemetricsbe tween
distributions, such as Energy-based GAN (EBGAN) ( 34), Least
SquaresGAN(LSGAN)( 35),etc.
Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Networks
(WGAN)
WGAN mainly improved GAN from the perspective of the
loss function. WGAN theoretically explained the reason for
the instability of GAN training, that is, cross entropy (JS
divergence) is not suitable for measuring the distance betw een
distributions with disjoint parts. Therefore, WGAN proposed
a new distance measurement method, Earth Moving Distance,
also known as Wasserstein distance or optimal transmission
distance, which refers to the minimum transmission quality t hat
converts the probability distribution qtop(probability density
is called probability quality in discrete cases) ( 26,36). The
superiority of Wasserstein distance compared to KL divergenc e
and JS divergence is that even if two distributions do not
overlap, Wasserstein distance can still reﬂect their distan ce. The
theoretical derivation and interpretation of WGAN are quite
complicated. The authors of WGAN ( 26) pointed out that the
use of Wasserstein distances needs to satisfy a strong conti nuity
condition,i.e.Lipchitzcontinuity.
Inshort,GANstillhasmanyunresolvedproblemsandcanbe
furtherimprovedinvariousaspects.
APPLICATION OF GAN IN IMAGE
PROCESSING
GAN is widely used in virtual image generation ( Table1).
Whether it is a face image, a room scene image, a real image
(37) such as a ﬂower or an animal, or an artistic creation image
such as an anime character ( 39), it can be learned using GAN to
generatenewsimilarimages( Figure1) .GANisfullyutilizingits
uniqueadvantagesandhasevolvedfromtheoriginalGANtoth e
progressively growing GAN (proGAN). Its imaging generation
capability has been greatly improved from 32 ×32 resolution to
2KtrueandfalseHDresolution( 37).
Image super-resolution task (SR) is to generate high-
resolution images from low-resolution images. Image
super-resolution algorithms are important in areas such asvideo surveillance, medical diagnostics, and remote sensing
applications. Super-resolution problem is actually an ill-pose d
problem because the lost high-frequency details are diﬃcult
to recover during the resolution of the image. Traditional
methods are generally interpolated, and interpolation inevit ably
creates blurring. However, GAN can learn the distribution of
high-resolution images to a certain extent, so that high-qu ality
images with better quality can be generated. CNN has also
achieved very good results in single-frame super-resolutio n
reconstruction and can achieve a higher peak signal-to-noise
ratio (PSNR) ( 40,41). However, most of them use MSE as the
objective function. Although a higher peak signal-to-noise r atio
can be achieved using MSE, when the image down-sampling is
higher(fourtimes),thereconstructedpicturewillbetoosmo oth
andlosedetails.Thus,in2016,SuperResolutionGAN(SRGAN)
was proposed by Ledig and others of Twitter. SRGAN was the
ﬁrst to propose the application of GAN to super-resolution
reconstruction ( 12). The generated model of SRGAN takes
a blurred low-resolution image as input and outputs a clear
image with high resolution. The discriminant model of SRGAN
determines whether the input image is a “true high-resolutio n
image” or a high-resolution image converted from a low-
resolution image. This greatly simpliﬁes the learning proces s
of the image super-resolution model. Because traditionally
conducting an image super-resolution needs to model some
high-frequencydetails,butherethepurposeofgeneratingmod el
training is simpliﬁed to the confusing discriminant model.
Comparedtopreviousresultsbasedondeeplearningmodelsfor
image super-resolution such as SRResNet, etc., GAN’s images
canprovidemoredetails.
Image inpainting refers to the process of reconstructing
missing or damaged parts of images and videos. It involves in
imageeditingandimagegenerationandisaprocessofartiﬁci ally
ﬁlling a region where information on the image is missing
according to certain rules. Conventional image inpainting
methods typically utilize undamaged image information to
estimate missing portions and autoﬁll the missing parts.
Therefore, a structure-based partial diﬀerential equation ( PDE)
image restoration algorithms were proposed. The repair process
of these models is similar to the diﬀusion phenomenon of
physics, and the key and the diﬃculty lies in how to build a
diﬀusionmodel.Whentheimagedamageareaislarge,therepair
eﬀect plummets. Texture-based image inpainting algorithms
emerged as the times require, and the eﬀect based on partial
diﬀerential equations was improved to some extent. Because th e
traditional image inpainting algorithms depend on the struct ure
ortextureinformationoftheimage,theycannotmeetbasicr epair
requirements, and often cannot achieve satisfactory resul ts,
when the image semantic information is missing. Deep learni ng
has strong learning ability and can learn advanced features
from images, so the inpainting problem can be solved with
such features ( 42–44). Image inpainting is a problem between
image editing and image generation, so using the GAN model
can solve this problem well. The solution for using GAN is
to input an image with missing part to the generator. The
generator will use this missing input image to generate a new
complete image. The discriminator will learn to judge whether
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164