Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
FIGURE 1 | Digital image diagram of GAN.
this image is realistic enough and feedback to the generator .
Through continuous training to optimize, the generator can
ﬁnally generate a complete image that is suﬃciently realisti c.
Then the inpainting was ﬁnished. Context encoder ( 38) is a
pioneeringworkofdeeplearningintheﬁeldofimageinpainting .
Pathak et al. ( 38) trains an encoder-decoder and combines
adversarialnetworklosstopredictthemissingportionaccor ding
tothecontextpixelandstructuralsemanticsofthemissinga rea.
The network is able to obtain a reasonable image structure an d
can quickly and accurately evaluate the repair results ( 45–47).
Because GAN’s generator and discriminator can be any form of
neural network, diﬀerent network architectures can be selec ted
forsolvingdiﬀerentproblems.Theautoencodermodelwasused
asthegeneratorpartinourpreviouswork( 3).Thisisbecausethe
autoencoder is also an important generative model. It encodes
the input data and generates new data through the decoding
operation. It can retain the characteristics of the original input
and introduce the newly generated part. Therefore, it can not
only keep the undefected part of the inpainting input, but also
generate some data for ﬁlling in the missing area by using
autoencoder. Our discriminator is a simple binary classiﬁca tion
discriminant neural network whose input are the generated
repaired image and the complete image in the original dataset.
By learning to distinguish between the two, the generator is
prompted to generate results that are more in line with the
dataset,therebycompletingtheinpainting.
APPLICATION OF GAN IN MEDICAL IMAGE
PROCESSING
Multiplefactorssuchastimecost,laborcost,economiccost, etc.
make it more diﬃcult for researchers to acquire labeled medi cal
images than normal images. However, there is a great demand
formedicalimagesbyscholarsnowadays.Forexample,thedee p
learning-based model can achieve a better performance in the
ﬁelds of medical image segmentation, classiﬁcation, regis tration,
etc. than the hand-crafted features when dealing with a larg e
amount of data ( 48). Traditional image augmentation methods
can be used for its purpose. However, the generated images by
traditional augmentation methods share a similar distribu tionwith the original ones ( 49,50). Those methods are not suitable
for the need of generating more incidences among diﬀerent
patients. Accordingly, GAN is used more popular in medical
image analysis, such as data augmentation and multi-modalit y
imagetranslations.
Recently, with the development of deep learning algorithms
and the growing of labeled image datasets, convolutional ne ural
networks (CNN)-based models ( 51) have achieved great success
in many computer vision tasks, such as object detection ( 52),
semantic segmentation ( 53), human action recognition ( 54)
andsoon.
Since 2014, many CNN-based medical image analysis works
(55,56) have shown great learning possibility when enough
imagesareavailableformodeltraining.ThedatabaselikeT CGA
(57) supplies a large number of images for some common
diseases. Since image acquisition and annotation is a time-
consumingprocess,imagedataformanydiseasesremainsscarc e.
There are many deep learning models that are pre-trained on
largerimagedatasetssuchasImageNet( 58),COCO( 59),andso
on.Transferlearning( 60)useslimitedlabeleddataforsupervised
training.Inthetransferlearningtasks,mostoftheweights ofthe
model keep ﬁxed and only the weights of the last several layer s
areﬁne-tunedonthenewdataset.Inthisway,awellpre-traine d
deepneuralnetworkisappliedinthemedicalimageanalysis.
Transfer learning may still suﬀer from lack of training
images(61).Asmentionedabove,traditionaldataaugmentation
methods can only generate data that share a close distribution
with the original ones. If the data set is too small, these met hods
almost have no eﬀort on the data augmentation. GAN ( 26)
supplies a solution to the lack of data in medical image analysis .
Inthefollowingsection,wewilldiscusstheapplicationsofsin gle
GANandCycle-GANinmedicalimageanalysis( Table2).
GAN Used in Medical Image Analysis
Pandeyetal.( 64)proposedatwo-stagestrategytogeneratenuclei
cell images and their corresponding masks based on GAN. In
their ﬁrst stage, a generator is trained to generate the synt hesis
masks from noise like conventional GAN model does. On their
second stage, a conditional GAN utilized real mask and rando m
noises to train a generator for synthesizing images. Finall y, they
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164