Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 2 | Literatures for the application of GAN in medical image proc essing.
References Model Public Dataset
Zhang et al. ( 62) PAC-GAN VIPeR, CUHK03, Market-1501
Dirvanauskas et al. ( 63) GAN/medical Miri TL
Pandey et al. ( 64) Two-stage
GAN/MedicalKaggle Data Science bowl’s ﬁrst
stage of competition
Frid-Adar et al. ( 65) GAN Private
Chen et al. ( 66,67) Dense GAN A large publicly accessible brain
structural MRI database
Mahapatra and
Bozorgtabar ( 68)Skip-
connection
GANhttp://www.eyepacs.com/
Yi and Babyn ( 69) SAGAN National Cancer Imaging Archive
Shitrit and Raviv ( 70) GAN Private
Zhu et al. ( 5) Cycle GAN Cityscapes, Google Maps, CMP
Facade Database, UT Zappos50K,
ImageNet
Wolterink et al. ( 71) Cycle GAN Private
Hiasa et al. ( 4) Cycle GAN Private
Huo et al. ( 72) Cycle GAN Private
Tanner et al. ( 73) Cycle GAN Private
Zhang et al. ( 74) Cycle GAN Private
Zhang et al. ( 75) Cycle GAN Private
utilizedthesetwogeneratorstogenerateimagesandmasksf rom
randomnoise.
Dirvanauskas et al. ( 63) generated human embryo cell
images for three stages (one-cell, two-cell, and four-cell) by a
conventional GAN model. All the synthesized images could be
used to facilitate the development, training, and evaluatio n for
embryoimageprocessingtasks.
Zhang et al. ( 62) used GAN-based model to solve the data
shortage problems in person re-identiﬁcation task. Two view
images (cross view images) are generated by a conditional
GAN from existing original images and skeleton images. Afte r
that, these cross-view images are sent into a discriminator for
personre-identiﬁcation.
Frid-Adar et al. ( 65) used two variations of GAN models to
generate synthetic liver lesions. The synthetic images con tained
the regions of interest (ROI) on abdomen CT images with
a resolution of 64 ×64. Experiment results showed that the
synthetic data augmentation from these two GAN models
improved classiﬁcation accuracy from 77.5 to 85.0% compared
totheclassicdataaugmentation.
Chen et al. ( 66) proposed a high-resolution MRI (HR MRI)
image generation architecture. Instead of generating 2D HR
MRIs,theauthorsgenerated3DHRMRIstolearn3Dstructures
of MRI volumetric images. However, 3D networks bring more
computing requirements. To solve this problem, the authors
used 3D dense net-based architecture ( 67) in the generator. By
combining 3D dense net and GAN, synthetic HR MRIs have
morelocalimagetexturesanddetails.
MahapatraandBozorgtabar( 68)usedlocalsaliencymapsand
GAN for generating high-resolution retinal images. In addi tion
to the GAN’s lost function, they also added local saliency lo ss
FIGURE 2 | The architecture of Cycle-GAN.
from the diﬀerence between HR images and low-resolution
imagesinthesaliencymaps.
Yi and Babyn ( 69) proposed a deep neural
network-based architecture for low dose CT denoizing.
The generator-synthesized denoized CT image was sent to a
sharpnessdetectionnetworkforcomparisonwithaconventiona l
CTimage.ThisbranchcontributesasharpnesslostfortheGAN
objectivefunction.
Shitrit and Raviv ( 70) applied GAN to accelerate the MRI
image generation process. Instead of generating MRI images
from existing MRI images, the authors used GAN to generate
missingk-space samples. Their approach can be used for time-
sensitiveorresolution-sensitiveMRIscantasks.
Huo et al. ( 72) proposed a similar GAN architecture for
splenomegaly segmentation. Instead of generating images fro m
randomnoises,theauthorsusedaU-Net( 76)basedarchitecture
to get a segmented version and a Dice lost function as the
discriminator. Isola et al. ( 77) used a Patch-GAN model as the
discriminatorforthepatchesfromboththegeneratedimages and
thegroundtruthimages.
Cycle-GAN Used in Medical Image Analysis
Cycle-GAN ( 5) is utilized to learn the mapping from a domain
image set X(orAinFigure2) to another domain image set Y
(orBinFigure2)whenthepairwisealignmentsbetweenthetwo
domains are unavailable. The forward generator is deﬁned as G
and the backward generator as F. The cycle consistency forces
F(G(x))≈xandG(F(y))≈y.F◦GorG◦Fworks similarly to an
auto-encoder( 78)forlearningtherepresentationsoftheoriginal
images.AsimilarmethodwaspresentedbyYietal.( 79).
It is essential that images from two diﬀerent sources must
have shared visual content, such as from wild horses to zebra s.
Normal image translation may be greatly aﬀected when there
is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between two domains. However, it
is more suitable for multi-modality medical image synthesi s,
such as synthesizing images from Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164