Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
are substituted into PdataandPg, respectively. The whole object
functionfordiscriminatoris:
V(G,D)=Ex∼Pdata/bracketleftbig
logD(x)/bracketrightbig
+Ex∼Pg[log(1−D(x))] (3)
By merging Equation (1) into (3), the objective function of t he
basicGANisdeﬁnedbyEquation(4):
min
Gmax
DV(G,D)=min
Gmax
DEx∼Pdata/bracketleftbig
logD(x)/bracketrightbig
+Ez∼Pz[log(1−D(G(z)))] (4)
By optimizing this objective function, we can get a GAN model.
GAN’s training can be regarded as a min–max optimization
process. The generator wants to deceive the discriminator, s o
it tries to maximize discriminator’s output when a fake sample
is presented to the discriminator. Instead, the discriminat or
attempts to distinguish the diﬀerence between real and false
samples.Consequently,discriminatortriestomaximize V(G,D)
while generator tries to minimize V(G,D), thus forming
the minimax relationship. During the training of GAN, the
parameters of G(θg) andD(θd) are continuously updated.
When the generator is undergoing training, the parameters of
the discriminator are ﬁxed. The data generated by the genera tor
is marked as fake and input into the discriminator. The error i s
calculated between the output of the discriminator D(G(z)) and
the sample label, and the parameters of generator are updated
using the error of BP algorithm. When the discriminator is
undergoingtraining,theparametersofthegeneratorbeingﬁ xed.
Discriminator gets positive sample xfrom the real data set, and
thegeneratorgeneratesanegativesample G(z).Theoutputofthe
discriminator and sample labels are used to calculate the err or.
Finally, the parameters of the discriminator are updated by th e
errorofBPalgorithm.
Ideally, the generator and discriminator are in equilibrium
whenPdata(x)=Pg(x). When the generator is ﬁxed, we can
take the derivative of V(D,G) to ﬁnd the optimal discriminator
D∗(x),asshownintheEquation(5).
D∗(x)=Pg(x)
Pg(x)+Pdata(x)(5)
BysubstitutingtheoptimaldiscriminatorintheEquation(3 ).
max
DV(G,D)=−2log2+2JSD(Pdata(x)/bardblPg(x)) (6)
The objective function can be further calculated as optimizi ng
the JS divergence of Pdata(x)andPg(x)under the optimal
discriminator( 26).
Development History of GAN
GAN is an excellent generative model. However, the original
GANmodelhasmanyproblems,suchasthevanishinggradient,
diﬃculty in training, and poor diversity ( 27). Many eﬀorts
have been devoted to obtaining better GANs through diﬀerent
optimization methods. Therefore, since 2014, theories and
articles related to GAN have emerged in an endless stream, andmany new GANs-based models have been proposed to improve
thestabilityandqualityofthegeneratedresults( 28).
A number of review articles have summarized and classiﬁed
the current GAN-related models ( 22,24,29). Creswell et al.
(22) classiﬁed the evolution of GAN models from the aspects of
architecturaldevelopmentandlossfunctionimprovement.Ho ng
et al. (29) summarized the development of GAN models from
theaspectsoftheoreticalanalysis,supervised,unsupervised ,and
common problems. Guo et al. ( 24) focused on the improvement
of the model structure, the expansion of the theory, the novel
application and so on. We will introduce several common
improvementsofGANhere.
Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks (CGAN)
CGANisanimprovedGANmodelproposedbyMirzaetal.( 30).
Unlike the original GAN, CGAN uses a supervised approach
increasing controllability of generated results. CGAN take s the
randomnoise zandthecategorylabel casinputsofthegenerator
andthegeneratedsample/realsampleandcategorylabelasinput s
of the discriminator to learn the correlation between label s and
images.Byintroducingaconditionalvariable yintothemodeling
andaddingconditionstothemodelwithadditionalinformat ion
y,thedatagenerationprocesscanbeguided.
Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks
(DCGAN)
One year after the ﬁrst GAN paper was published, researchers
found that the GAN model was unstable and required a lot of
trainingskills.In2015,Radfordetal.( 31)proposedanupgraded
version of the GAN architecture, named DCGAN. The authors
of DCGAN improved the architecture of the original GAN with
deepconvolutionalnetworks(CNNs).Sofar,DCGAN’snetwor k
structure is still widely used and is the hottest GAN archite cture
and a milestone in the history of GAN. Compared with the
original GAN, DCGAN almost completely uses the convolution
layer instead of the fully connected layer. The discriminato r is
almost symmetric with the generator. The entire network doe s
not have pooling layers and up-sampling layers. DCGAN also
used Batch Normalization algorithm to solve the problem of
vanishinggradient.
f-GAN
The objective function of the original GAN can be seen as
minimizing the JS divergence between two distributions. In
fact, there are many ways to measure the distance between
two distributions, and JS divergence is just one of them.
Deﬁning diﬀerent distance metrics can result in diﬀerent
objective functions. Nowozin et al. ( 32) applied f-divergence
to GAN ( f-GAN) for training generative neural samplers. The
f-divergence is a function Df(P/bardblQ) that measures the
diﬀerencebetweentwoprobabilitydistributions PandQ.Under
the framework of f-divergence, f-GAN generalizes various
divergencessothatthecorrespondingGANtargetcanbederiv ed
for a speciﬁc divergence. Many common divergences ( 33),
such as KL-divergence, Hellinger distance, and total variat ion
distance, are the special cases of f-divergence, coinciding with
a particular choice of f. Many improvements in GAN training
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164