Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
structure elements such as alpha helices and beta sheets. The
generatedmapswerehighlyvariableandsimilarbutnotident ical
to the actual data, indicating that the GAN model was not
just memorizing the training data. Finally, the authors ver iﬁed
that the generative model can reconstruct missing sections of
corruptedproteinstructures( 101).
Similarly, Yeh et al. ( 106) also proposed a 2D distance
map representation of protein GAN model to predict particular
missing regions in a protein structure using the idea of image
inpainting. The author used this model to learn the distribut ion
of a particular loop region with the context of the loop region
fromthecandidatepatchpoolandsuccessfullypredictedtheloo p
region (100). Compared to the traditional time-consuming and
expensive experimental methods such as X-ray crystallography
orNuclearMagneticResonance(NMR),thisGANmodelismore
convenientandtime-saving.
Accurate identiﬁcation of prognostic biomarkers is an
important but challenging goal in bioinformatics. Kim et al.
(107) applied GAN model to specify candidate prognostic gene
modulebygraphlearningalgorithmsandevaluatedgenesscor es
via a PageRank algorithm using multiple-omics data, includi ng
copy number, gene expression, DNA methylation, and somatic
mutation data from ﬁve cancer types. Firstly, they reconstruc ted
functional interaction networks (FIs network) that includ ed
known pathways in human biology. Then the reconstructed FIs
network was learned by GAN to select features via PageRank
with GAN weights, and ﬁnally, the prognosis was predicted.
They successfully identiﬁed a number of genes involved in
cancer development and analyzed their roles in biological
pathways. Their model showed better predictive accuracy than
existingmethods.
There are some other applications in bioinformatics using
GAN to enhance gene expression classiﬁcation. Huynh et al.
realized new data generation from original training datase ts
throughthecombinationofGANwithnonlinearSupportVector
Machines (SVMs). The results of GAN-SVM model displayed
a better performance than the most advanced classiﬁcation
methods, including k-nearest neighbors (KNN), SVMs, decision
tree (DTs) of C4.5, and random-forest (RFs) ( 108). Bhat
et al. proposed a deep generative machine learning architectu re
(DeepCancer) to test the ability of GAN in classifying breast
cancer and prostate cancer samples via the features learned by
the discriminator. The results showed that the generative m odel
achievedahighaccuracyscore( 109).
CONCLUSION
Inthisarticle,webrieﬂyintroducedtheorigin,workingpri nciple,
the development history of GAN, and numerous applications to
the areas of digital image processing, medical imaging analys is,
medicalinformatics,andbioinformatics.
In digital image processing, GAN can do image generation,
high-resolution images generation from low-resolution im ages
and image inpainting, which perform well and are widely used.
Considering too many applications in digital image processing ,
due to space limitations, we only selected the articles withthe most citations as the lead application to introduce, which
leads to some applications in the directions of image processin g
weren’t introduced comprehensively such as Style migration,
imagecoloring,etc.
From the application of GAN in medical images, we can
see that GAN-based models provide a good solution for data
shortage in medical image analysis. It can be regarded as one of
theimportantadditionstothemanuallabelingfromradiolog ists.
The models based on a single GAN are more used as data
augmentation methods to increase the variety and quantity o f
images in the same modality. On this basis, Cycle-GAN-based
models make translations between multiple modalities possible .
Involving in segmentation networks within the Cycle-GAN
models, cross-modality segmentations can be learned in an en d-
to-end manner. This will eﬀectively promote the application
and development of deep learning algorithms in medical image
analysis. However, GAN or Cycle-GAN still have limitations.
For example, the CT images from the head cannot be generated
from the CT images of the abdomen or MRI images from the
legs. Researchers need to carefully design their data ﬂow and
lost functions to avoid problems such as non-convergence or
model collapse. Additionally, some medical image analysis ta sks
require detailed 3D information of the organ. Involving 3D
feature learning or 3D segmentation in the GAN-based model
wouldbeachallenge.
Based on EMR or EHR data, although GAN can generate
realistic synthesized discrete data, continuous data, and even
time series data to solve the issues of fewer labels and
unbalanced classiﬁcations in medical informatics, there a re
still some limitations. How to evaluate these generated dat a
and how to apply these generated data to solve medical
problems has been controversial, which requires real data
tovalidate.
So far, the application of GAN models in bioinformatics
is still in a relatively early stage of development. Most
studies applied GAN to generate and/or augment datasets.
The above results have demonstrated the similarity of the
data generated using GAN models to the original data. Most
machine learning algorithms work well when the number of
cases in each class is roughly equal. So, using the generated
data, we can not only perform a lot of downstream analyses,
such as detecting marker genes, dimensionality reduction
and clustering, and reconstructing a particular secondary
structure, but also decrease the number of human and animal
experiments with a concomitant reduction in experimental
costs, addressing important ethical and ﬁnancial issues. In
addition, GAN framework can work with any type of
neural networks, so its application in bioinformatics will be
moreextensive.
In conclusion, more and more applications of GAN in
biomedical research are being proposed. Some of GANs
such as WGAN, Cycle-GAN, CGAN, medGAN are receiving
more and more attention because of their importance in
biomedical research. Although GAN has its advantages in
simulating various problems, there are also some limitations .
For example, when the sample size is small, the accuracy
of the model will be relatively low. As GAN uses deep
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164