Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 3 | Literatures for the application of GAN in medical informati cs.
References Model Public dataset
Choi et al. ( 84) medGAN PAMF, MIMIC III
Baowaly et al. ( 85) medGAN,
WGAN-GP, BGANMIMIC-III
Yoon et al. ( 86) RadialGAN MAGGIC
Che et al. ( 87) ehrGAN Private
Esteban et al. ( 88) RGAN, RCGAN Philips eICU database
Li et al. (89) GAN IQVIA longitudinal prescription (Rx)
and medical claims (Dx) database
Guan et al. ( 90) mtGAN Private
Yang et al. ( 91) GAN UCI medical database, Cerebral
stroke dataset
Tang et al. ( 92) IRGAN 4705 hyperlipidemia questions from
the internet
Hassounietal.( 93) GAN WISDM
to train parameters. The lack of medical data severely limits
the application of deep learning algorithms, especially artiﬁ cial
intelligence in the ﬁeld of medical informatics. Therefore , the
development of medical informatics is behind ﬁelds such as
medicalimages.
GAN has proven to play an important role in generating
images and has shown good performance in generating
continuous data. Since the gradient function is required to be
diﬀerentiable,thetraditionalGANcannotgeneratediscret edata.
Inmedicaldata,thediagnosisofadiseaseandtheseverityo fthe
disease are discrete data. Due to the high cost, less labeled , and
unbalanced classiﬁcation medical data are available. Ther efore,
we explored the application of GAN in generating discrete data
basedonrealmedicaldataandinsolvingproblemssuchasfewe r
labelsandunbalancedclassiﬁcations( Table3).
Choi et al. ( 84) generated synthetic electronic health records
(EHR) by using medical Generative Adversarial Networks
(medGAN) based on the Sutter Palo Alto Medical Foundation
(PAMF) and the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care
(MIMIC-III)datasets.TheoriginalGANcannotbedirectlyuse d
to learn the discrete data of patients. medGAN can handle high -
dimensional multi-label discrete variables (binary and co unt
variables such as diagnoses, medications, and procedure cod es)
by leveraging the autoencoder to overcome the limitation fr om
the original GAN. The autoencoder learned from real patient
records and the same decoder in autoencoder was used to
construct the discrete output after the generator. The autho rs
obtained impressive results for discrete variables. Baowal y et al.
(85) synthesized more realistic EHR than those generated
by the medGAN using MIMIC-III, extended MIMIC-III, and
TaiwanNationalHealthInsuranceResearchDatabase(NHIRD).
Two synthetic data generation models, Wasserstein GAN with
gradient penalty (WGAN-GP) and boundary-seeking GAN
(BGAN),wereappliedbasedonthemedGANframework.These
two GAN models were named as medWGAN and medBGAN,
respectively. The count (the frequency of a speciﬁc ICD or
procedure of disease) and binary data (presence or absence of
a speciﬁc ICD code) were created using medGAN, medWGAN,
and medBGAN. Their results showed that the two improved
FIGURE 4 | The architecture of LSTM-based GAN in medical informatics.
GANmodelsoutperformedthemedGAN.medBGANperformed
bestinthesethreemodels.
Yoon et al. ( 86) used the auxiliary datasets, external datasets
from related but diﬀerent hospitals, as the noise for a GAN
framework based on the fact that the patient distribution from
one hospital will be better matched by the patient distribution
from another hospital than by random noise such as Gaussian,
enlarging the target dataset eﬀectively. They used 14 studies of
MAGGIC to create target datasets and compared the prediction
performancebetweentheproposedradialGAN,target-onlyGAN
and benchmarks such as conditional-GAN and starGAN, etc.
Integrating datasets from diﬀerent hospitals by radialGAN ca n
improvetheperformanceoftarget-speciﬁcpredictivemodels.
Che et al. ( 87) used two longitudinal real clinical datasets
of heart failure and diabetes to investigate how well ehrGAN
generated EHR as real samples. The structure of the basic
prediction model was adopted in the discriminator. Based
on the variational contrastive divergence, the generator w as
altered for semi-supervised learning setting. Data augment ation
was performed by semi-supervised learning utilizing ehrGAN
to boost risk prediction; thus, generalization capacity and
predictionperformancewereimproved.
Esteban et al. ( 88) presented a recurrent GAN (RGAN)
and a recurrent conditional GAN (RCGAN) to generate
sequences without/with some conditional inputs. Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) was selected as the architecture for both
discriminator and generator. They predicted whether or not a
patient will become “critical” in the near future based on the
four most frequently recorded variables measured by bedsid e
monitors from Philips eICU database using a method named
“Train on Synthetic, Test on Real” (TSTR). The models trained
on the synthetic dataset from LSTM-based GAN ( Figure4)
achievedperformanceattimescomparabletothatoftherealda ta
ontheeICUdataset.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164