Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
TABLE 4 | Literatures for the application of GAN in bioinformatics.
References Model Public dataset
Ghahramani et al. ( 98) Wasserstein-GAN (WGAN)
with gradient penalty loss
functionGSE90848, GSE67602,
GSE99989
Marouf et al. ( 99) Conditional single-cell
GAN68,579 PBMCs (healthy
donor A)
Xu et al. ( 6) Generative adversarial
networks for scRNA-seq
imputationGSE65525
Li et al. (100) GAN Not applicable
Anand and Huang ( 101) GAN Protein Data Bank
Killoran et al. ( 102) GAN Not applicable
Gupta and Zou ( 103) Feedback GAN Uniprot database
Wang et al. ( 104) GAN GEO, GTEx, 1000G
RNA-Seq expression data
of epidermal diﬀerentiation and the representation features c an
be used to predict the eﬀect of cell state perturbations on gene
expressionathightemporalresolution.Thetaskofthegenera tor
was to produce realistic output data from a random latent
spacevectors z.Correspondinglatentspacevectorsofterminally
diﬀerentiated and undiﬀerentiated cells ( zdiﬀerentiated andzbasal)
were obtained according to the correlation between the real
expression proﬁles and those generated, and the diﬀerence
betweenthesevectorswascalculatedas δ=zdiﬀerentiated −zbasal.
Then 1,000 time points were interpolated between the latent
space diﬀerentiation vectors δ(98), so the dynamics of time-
seriesgene expressionovercell diﬀerentiationcouldbe explo red
usingtheGANmodel,whichcannotbedetectedbyexperiments.
By doing so, transiently expressed and subsequently down-
regulatedgenesassociatedwiththeprocessofdiﬀerentiatio ncan
be identiﬁed. They also performed a sensitivity analysis of th e
discriminator network to identify biological state-deter mining
genes. By analyzing those networks, the authors obtained
regulatoryrelationshipsforinferredgenes.
Marouf et al. ( 99) built a single cell GAN model for scRNA-
seq data generation using a Peripheral Blood Mononuclear
Cell (PBMC) scRNA-seq dataset with 68,579 cells. A customed
LibrarySizeNormalization(LSN)functionandFully-Conne cted
Neural Network with Batch Normalization were used in the
scGAN’s generator to improve training speed and stability.
scGAN was able to model the dependency and correlation of
intergenic, which are a hallmark of biological gene-regula tory
networks. scGAN also captured gene count distributions and
correlations well, and the training time was proportional to t he
complexityandsizeofscRNAseqdatasets.
Marouf et al. ( 99) proposed a conditional scGAN model
(cscGAN) for the realistic generation of single-cell RNA-seq
data. The projection discriminator, along with the Conditio nal
Batch Normalization and LSN function in the generator, is us ed
to generate speciﬁc cell types of interest while learning mult i-
cell type complex data. Conditional generation of cell types
could be used to augment the number of sparse speciﬁc cell
populations that might represent only a small part of the total
cellssequenced.However,itmayhelptosolvetheclassimba lanceproblem. Similar to the above research, Wang et al. used CGAN
for inferring target gene expression proﬁles by incorporating
both adversarial and L1-norm loss terms. Comparative analys is
showed that this model outperformed previous linear methods
ingeneexpressioninference( 104).
Xu et al. proposed the GAN for scRNA-seq imputation
(scIGANs), which uses generated realistic rather than obse rved
cells to avoid the limitations, such as many sources of techn ical
noises and dropouts, and the powerless for rare cells. ScIGANs
converts the expression proﬁles of individual cells to images a nd
feeds them to GAN. The trained generative network produces
expressionproﬁlesrepresentingtherealisticcellsofdeﬁnedt ypes.
Thegeneratedcells,ratherthantheobservedcells,arethenu sed
toimputethedropoutsoftherealcells( 6).
Hi-C is commonly used to study three-dimensional genome
organization. Hong et al. ( 105) developed a GAN, namely
DeepHiC, to predict high-resolution Hi-C contact maps from
low-coverage sequencing data. DeepHiC can reproduce high-
resolution Hi-C data from as few as 1% down sampled reads.
Application of DeepHiC to Hi-C data on mouse embryonic
development can facilitate chromatin loop detection with
higheraccuracy.
Killoran et al. ( 102) developed a WGAN-based deep
generativenetworkforcreatingnewDNAsequencesbyencodi ng
the discrete sequences of characters (the nucleotides A, C, G, T)
into a continuous representation using one-hot encodings. Th e
authors proposed a joint approach that extends an activation
maximization version by incorporating a trained generator
model on a dataset of 4.6M 50-nucleotide-long sequences
encompassing chromosome 1 of the human genome hg38. This
approach is suitable for discrete sequences such as DNA. They
found that the generative model can learn important structur es
fromDNAsequences,andcanbeusedtoexploreanddesignnew
DNAsequenceswithdesiredproperties( 102).
Guptaand Zou ( 103) proposed a novel feedback-loop
architecture, called Feedback GAN (FBGAN) to optimize
syntheticgenesequencesfordesiredpropertiesusinganexter nal
function analyzer. The feedback-loop model consists of two
components,includingGANandadiﬀerentiableneuralnetwork .
GAN was used to generate novel raw gene sequences. The
diﬀerentiable neural network named analyzer converted a
gene sequence into a probability that the sequence encoded
an antimicrobial peptide (AMP). The ntop-ranked favorable
generated sequences replaced the oldest ngenes present in the
discriminator training dataset. This model was able to gene rate
synthetic genes coding for peptides of up to 50 amino acids
in length, and the peptides can be optimized for the secondary
alpha-helicalstructureoftheresultingpeptides( 103).
Anand and Huang ( 101) applied GAN to generate protein
structures by encoding protein structures in terms of pairwise
distances between α-carbons on the protein backbone by
using data from the Protein Data Bank, and used the
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) and
Rosetta algorithm to transform 2D pairwise distances into
3D Cartesian coordinates. The authors compared their work
with traditional HMMs-based methods. They found that their
generator model could learn to construct meaningful seconda ry
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164