Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
FIGURE 3 | The experiment results from Cycle-GAN, where real B is the re al MRI image, fake A is the generated CT image based on the real MRI image, and rec B is
the reconstructed MRI image based on the generated CT image o f heart for a patient.
(MRI)toComputedTomography(CT)( 71)fordiagnosingsome
speciﬁcdiseases.
Wolterink et al. ( 71) applied Cycle-GAN to CT and MRI
images of brain tumors in the radiotherapy treatment planning .
Since a limited number of patients had paired CT and MRI
images, unpaired images were generated from the paired images
by ﬁrst padding the images into a larger resolution and
then cropping them into the same smaller resolution. Their
results showed that Cycle-GAN trained with unpaired images
outperformsasingleGANtrainedwithpairedimages.
Hiasa et al. ( 4) improved the Cycle-GAN architecture by
adding the gradient consistency loss with the goal of better
edge alignment between the MRI images and CT images.
Comparing the generated CT/MRI images with the actual ones,
the gradient consistency had improved the synthesis accurac y
andsegmentationaccuracy.
Huo et al. ( 80) combined Cycle-GAN and segmentation
network in an end-to-end manner to take advantage of
the complementary information between synthesis and
segmentation. The ﬁnal lost function of their network consi sted
of the Cycle-GAN lost functions and the segmentation
loss function. Compared with the ﬁrst synthesis and then
segmentationmethod( 81),themethodfromHuoetal.achieved
better segmentation results on the spleen and other organs.
Their experiments indicate that MRI images with multiple
organ labels can be used to generate corresponding segmented
CT images. Tanner et al. ( 73) used Cycle-GAN for MRI-CT
deformableimageregistrationofthoracicandabdominalor gans.
Jin et al. ( 82) applied Cycle-GAN for CT-MRI image synthesis.
A discriminator was added for the real paired CT-MRI images
and generated paired CT-MRI images. The combination of
paired images and unpaired images achieved the lowest mean
absoluteerror.
Yue et al. ( 74) proposed a task-driven generative model
for X-ray image segmentation. A U-Net-based network ( 76)was trained supervised on Digitally Reconstructed Radiographs
(DRRs) for organs segmentation. Thereafter, a Cycle-GAN was
trained for DRRs and X-ray images synthesis. Speciﬁcally,
the segmentation loss generated by the previously trained
segmentation network was added to the cycle of real DRRs to
fakeX-raytoreconstructedDRRs.Inthatcase,thesegmentati on
resultsofX-rayimagesweregreatlyimproved.
Zhang et al. ( 75) replaced discriminators with segmenters to
address shape consistency problem. 3D fully convolution laye rs
were used in the Cycle-GAN network and long-range U-Net
network. Experiment results showed that the Cycle-GAN-base d
synthesis network and segmentation network were mutually
beneﬁcialinsegmentingcardiovascularvolumes.
WeappliedCycle-GANtoachieveagoodconversionbetween
the CT and MRI images based on the data from MICCAI
Workshop( Figure3).
APPLICATION OF GAN IN MEDICAL
INFORMATICS
With the development of health informatization, hospital
information systems, Internet of Things (IoT)-based healt h
Platform, wearable devices and other platforms have led to th e
explosive growth of medical data, such as electronic medical
records (EMR) ( 83). The growth in the quantity and quality of
medical data has also facilitated the use of scientiﬁc researc h
and algorithms in medicine. However, due to data security,
especially privacy security, although patient’s data can be de -
identiﬁed, the medical data after de-identiﬁcation can sti ll be
re-identiﬁed by some combinations. Because there are barrie rs
between the health information systems, it is very diﬃcult to
correlatemedicaldatacollectedfromdiﬀerentmedia,resul tingin
lessmedicaldataavailableforscientiﬁcresearch.Theapplic ation
of medical informatics often requires a large number of data
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164