Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
just focusing on the digital image processing ﬁeld. We searche d
in the top conferences of computer science and Google Scholar
withkeywordsrelatedtoGAN.Throughscreeningtheliterat ure
abstracts by our team in digital image processing, medical
imaging analysis, medical informatics, and bioinformatic s,
respectively, the literature that was very relevant to our su bject
was retained for full text reading. The contents of these eli gible
literaturesaresummarizedbelow.
A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF GAN
Origin of GAN
Ingeneral,deeplearningmodelscanbedividedintodiscrim inant
models and generative models ( 9). In the perspective of the
probability and statistical theory, a discriminant model is a
method of modeling the relationship between unknown data
yand known data x. A generating model refers to a model
that can randomly generate observations, especially under t he
condition of given some implicit parameters ( 10). Due to the
invention of algorithms such as Back Propagation (BP) and
Dropout, the discriminant model has been evolved rapidly.
The development of the generative model is lagged due to the
diﬃcultyofmodeling,thoughthegenerativemodelhasapivot al
role in the history of machine learning. When processing larg e
amountsofdata,suchasimages,speech,text,genomics,etc. ,the
generative models can help us simulate the distribution of t hese
high-dimensionaldata.Itwillbebeneﬁcialformanyapplicat ions,
such as super-resolution, data augmentation, image and medi cal
image conversion, caption generation, electronic health re cords
data generation, biomedical data generation, data imputati on,
andotherill-posedproblems( 11–15).
Likelihood describes the probability of the event under
diﬀerentconditionswhentheresultsareknown( 16).Sometimes
we may not know the distribution function, but we know the
observed data. Therefore, the maximum likelihood estimati on
is applied to evaluate model parameters using the observed
data.TraditionalgenerativemodelssuchasRestrictedBolt zmann
Machine (RBM) ( 17,18), Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
(19), Naive Bayes Model (NBM) ( 20), Hidden Markov Model
(HMM)( 20)andsoon,aremostlybasedonmaximumlikelihood
estimate. However, while the explicitly deﬁned probability
density function brings computational tractability, maxim um
likelihood estimation may not represent the complexity of
the actual data distribution and cannot learn the high-
dimensional data distributions. The majority of generativ e
models require the utilization of Markov chains. GAN uses
latent codes to express latent dimensions, control data impli cit
relationships, etc. and does not require Markov chains ( 21).
Adversarial networks can represent very sharp, even degenera te
distributions, while Markov chain-based approaches require
somewhat ambiguous distributions so that the chains can
be mixed between patterns. Various types of loss functions
can be integrated into GAN models. This allows diﬀerent
types of loss functions to be designed for diﬀerent tasks,
all of which can be learned and optimized under the GAN
framework. GAN is also a nonparametric modeling method
and does not require an approximate distribution of trainingdata to be deﬁned in advance. When probability density is not
computable, some traditional generative models that rely on the
statistical interpretation of data cannot be used for learnin g and
application.ButGANcanstillbeusedinsuchcases.
Speciﬁc Principles of GAN
In this section, we will introduce the architecture and speciﬁ c
principles of GAN. Basic GAN model is composed of an
input vector, a generator, and a discriminator. The generato r
and discriminator are implicit function expressions, usually
implementedbydeepneuralnetworks( 22).
We use abstract mathematical language to explain the basic
principles of the GAN. The ﬁxed distribution Pdata(x)is usually
calculated based on the assumption that the data distribution
for the training sample xisPdata. However, this distribution is
diﬃcult to be determined. The traditional methods assume th at
the distribution Pdata(x)obeys a Gaussian mixture distribution
andusesthemaximumlikelihoodasthesolution.However,whe n
the model is complicated, it is often unable to calculate and th e
resulting performance is limited ( 23). This is due to the limited
expressionabilityoftheGaussiandistributionitself.Thus, neural
networks were proposed to deﬁne the distribution Pg(x). The
generator is a neural network with parameter θg. It collects the
randomvariablezfromthepriordistributionandmapsittothe
pseudo-sample distribution through the neural network, that i s,
the generated data is recorded as G(z)and the data distribution
is recorded as Pg(z). The input zusually uses Gaussian noise,
whichisarandomvariableorarandomvariableinthepotentia l
space.Accordingto θg,asimpleinputdistributioncanbeusedto
generate various complex distributions. The Pg(x) generated by
the generator and the real image distribution Pdata(x)should be
as similar as possible ( 24). So, for the generator, the target is to
ﬁndaG∗asshownbelow.
G∗=argmin
GDiv(Pg,Pdata) (1)
Thenthenextquestionishowtocalculatethediﬀerencebetwe en
the two distributions. If the form of Pdata(x)andPg(x) is
known,itcanbecalculatedtomake Pdata(x)andPg(x)getclose.
Althoughwedon’tknowthespeciﬁcdistribution,wecansample
from it. So, GAN proposed a very magical way, discriminator,
to calculate the diﬀerence between the two distributions. The
discriminator was deﬁned by the original GAN as a binary
classiﬁer ( 25) with θd. During training, when the input is a real
samplex,theoutputofdiscriminatorshouldbe1,otherwise,the
outputgoesto0.Fordeﬁningdiscriminator,Goodfellowetal .(1)
usedbinarycrossentropyfunction,whichiscommonlyusedfor
binaryclassiﬁcationproblems.
Loss= −(ylog/parenleftbig
ˆy/parenrightbig
+/parenleftbig
1−y/parenrightbig
log(1− ˆy)) (2)
Whereˆyis the probability that the model prediction sample is a
positiveexample,and yisthesamplelabel.Ifthesamplebelongs
to a positive example, the value is 1; otherwise, the value is 0.
A speciﬁc sample may come either from the real distribution
or the generated distribution. The positive and negative case s
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164