Lan et al. GAN in Biomedical Informatics
FIGURE 5 | Bioinformatics diagram of GAN.
Lietal.(89)usedGANtopredictifapatienthasararedisease.
Thelogprobabilityofunlabeleddataasrealdatawasmaximiz ed
and added in the objective function of the discriminator bas ed
on the IQVIA longitudinal prescription and medical claims
database. Compared to the baseline techniques, the predictio n
accuracy of the semi-supervised learning framework for rare
disease detection (precision-recall curves and area under t he
curve)was5%higher.
Guanetal.( 90)usedmedicaltextGAN(mtGAN)toreinforce
theelectronicmedicalrecordtexts.mtGANisaconditional GAN
that takes designated disease features as input and generate s
corresponding EMR text to address privacy issues as well as
inadequate and unbalanced and the insuﬃcient and imbalance
samplesproblem.
Yang et al. ( 91) presented a semi-supervised method in
association with GAN to support medical decision making. In
theirstudy,GANgeneratedsyntheticdatabytakinglabeled setas
input.Labelsoftheunlabeledsetwerepredictedbytwolearne rs.
By taking the expanded labeled set as input, GAN was used
again to generate the labeled set. Both expanded labeled set a nd
syntheticsetwereusedasthetrainingsettobeclassiﬁedba sedon
thecerebralstrokesetcollectedfromIoT-basedplatform.
Tang et al. ( 92) proposed a GAN-based method to
automatically retrieve patient questions. Supervised deep
learning-basedapproacheswereusedtodeterminethesimilar ity
between patient questions. Their study showed that ﬁne tunin g
with GAN can improve performance. Hassouni et al. ( 93) used
GAN with LSTM to generate realistic simulation environment s
based on the WISDM dataset. Their results showed that the
model trained on the data artiﬁcially generated by the GAN ha d
similarperformancetrainedonrealdata.
APPLICATION OF GAN IN
BIOINFORMATICS
As a branch of the life science, bioinformatics is a new
multidisciplinary ﬁeld that understands and organizesinformation related to biomolecules through a combination
of disciplines such as applied mathematics, biology, computer
science, and statistics ( 94). It applies conventional statistics,
modern computer science, machine learning, and other
modeling algorithms to explore large volumes of biological
data, including molecular sequences of DNA, RNA, proteins
and metabolites, and other whole genome data. Bioinformati cs
researchandapplicationsincludeanalysisofmolecularsequ ence
and genomics data; genome annotation; molecular folding,
modeling, and design; building biological networks; analys is
of the cellular organization and computational evolutionary
biology(95,96).
One of the most important and diﬃcult issues for
bioinformatics researchers is the accessibility and avail ability
of large datasets. Though the increased throughput and
technological advances have changed the landscape of
metagenomics, the cost of sequencing is still relatively hig h. In
addition, since the accessibility of data for research purpose
involves many legal and ethical issues, bioinformatics dat a
is highly sensitive ( 97). The lacking of available biological
samples could result in imbalanced datasets, which can lead
to over-ﬁtting problems and poor classiﬁcation performance.
Recently, researches have used GAN to generate data samples to
overcome these problems ( Figure5). Here, we present some of
bioinformaticsapplicationcases( Table4).
Ghahramani et al. ( 98) successfully simulated realistic
scRNA-seq data using WGAN-GP, covering diverse scRNA-seq
datasetsofvariouscelltypes,includingmouseepidermal,mou se
neural and human hematopoietic single-cell RNA-seq data
spanningfromdiﬀerentlaboratoriesandexperimentalprotocol s.
The performance was evaluated at diﬀerent checkpoints using
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ( t-SNE) and the
correlationbetweenrealcellsandgeneratedcells.Asthetrai ning
steps increased, the generator was capable of producing cells
mappingtomultipleclustersinthe t-SNEplot,coveringdiﬀerent
celltypes,cellstates,celloriginandexperimentalbatches present
inthecombinedrealdataset( 98).Byusingthegenerativemodel,
the researchers were able to obtain a universal representati on
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 164