in (Liu et al., 2019b), which selected a single best random architecture among an initial set of 8 after
training for 300 epochs only. As shown in Appendix D.2, some models that perform well in the early
training stages may yield worse performance than others after convergence. Therefore, choosing the
best random architecture after only 300 epochs for PTB and 100 for CIFAR-10, and doing so for a
single random seed, might not be representative of the general behavior.
3.2 S EARCH IN A REDUCED SPACE
Because of the size of standard search spaces, one cannot understand the quality of the search by
fully evaluating all possible solutions. Hence, we propose to make use of reduced search spaces
with ground-truth architecture performances available to evaluate the search quality. For RNNs,
we simply reduce the number of nodes in the search space from 12 to 2. Given that each node is
identiﬁed by two values, the ID of the incoming node and the activation function, the space has a
cardinalityjSj=n!jOjn, wheren= 2nodes andjOj= 4operations, thus yielding 32 possible
solutions. To obtain ground truth, we train all of these architectures individually. Each architecture is
trained 10 times with a different seed, which therefore yields a mean and standard deviation of its
performance. The mean value is used as ground truth—the actual potential of the given architecture.
These experiments took around 5000 GPU hours.
For CNNs, we make use of NASBench-101 (Ying et al., 2019), a CNN graph-based search space
with 3 possible operations, conv3x3, conv1x1 and max3x3. This framework deﬁnes search spaces
with between 3 and 7 nodes, with 423,624 architectures in 7-node case. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the ﬁrst to evaluate the NAS methods used in this paper on NASBench.
4 E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To analyze the search phase of the three state-of-the-art NAS algorithms mentioned above, we ﬁrst
compare these algorithms to our random policy when using standard search spaces for RNNs on
(PTB) and CNNs on CIFAR-10. Details about the experiment setting are in Appendix C.5. The
surprising ﬁndings in this typical NAS use case prompted us to study the behavior of the search
strategies in reduced search spaces. This allowed us to identify a factor that has a signiﬁcant impact
on the observed results: Weight sharing. We then quantify this impact on the ranking of the NAS
candidates, evidencing that it dramatically affects the effectiveness of the search.
4.1 NAS C OMPARISON IN A STANDARD SEARCH SPACE
Below, we compare DARTS (Liu et al., 2019b), NAO (Luo et al., 2018), ENAS (Pham et al., 2018)
and BayesNAS (Zhou et al., 2019) with our random search policy, as discussed in Section 3.1. We
follow (Liu et al., 2019b) to deﬁne an RNN search space of 12 nodes and a CNN ones of 7 nodes. For
each of the four search policies, we run 10 experiments with a different initialization of the sampling
policy. During the search phase, we used the authors-provided hyper-parameters and code for each
policy. Once a best architecture is identiﬁed by the search phase, it is used for evaluation, i.e., we
train the chosen architecture from scratch for 1000 epochs for RNN and 600 for CNN.
validation pplAverageBest
Figure 2: Validation perplexity evolution in the
12-node RNN search space. (Best viewed in color)RNN Results. In Figure 2, we plot, on the
left, the mean perplexity evolution over the 1000
epochs, obtained by averaging the results of the
best architectures found using the 10 consec-
utive seeds.3On the right, we show the per-
plexity evolution for the best cell of each strat-
egy among the 10 different runs. Random sam-
pling is robust and consistently competitive. As
shown in Table 1, it outperforms on average the
DARTS and NAO policies, and yields the overall
best cell for these experiments with perplexity
3Starting from 1268, which is right after 1267, the seed released by Liu et al. (2019b). Note that, using this
seed, we can reproduce the DARTS RNN search and obtain a validation PPL of 55.7 as in (Liu et al., 2019b).
5