(a) Search Phase(c) Our Evaluation Phase
(b) Standard Evaluation PhaseTrained Policy Sampler
Top modelTrain from scratchsampleRepeat until stop
Search space
Policy SamplerENASDARTSNAO…One Architecture
SampletrainParam. updateevaluateupdateTrained Policy Sampler
Top modelTrain from scratchsampleRandom modelRandom sampleRepeat n timesSearch spaceSearch spaceFigure 1: Evaluating NAS. Existing frameworks consist of two phases: (a)The search phase, where
a sampler is trained to convergence or a pre-deﬁned stopping criterion; (b)The evaluation phase that
trains the best model from scratch and evaluates it on the test data. Here, we argue that one should
evaluate the search itself. To this end, as shown in (c), we compare the best architecture found by
the NAS policy with a single uniformly randomly sampled architecture. For this comparison to be
meaningful, we repeat it with different random seeds for both training the NAS sampler and our
random search policy. We then report the mean and standard deviations over the different seeds.
Search: The goal of this phase is to ﬁnd the best candidate architecture from the search space2.
This is where existing algorithms, such as ENAS, DARTS and NAO, differ. Nevertheless, for all
the algorithms, the search depends heavily on initialization. In all the studied policies, initialization
is random and the outcome thus depends on the chosen random seed.
Evaluation: In this phase, all the studied algorithms retrain the best model found in the search
phase. The retrained model is then evaluated on the test data.
The standard evaluation of NAS techniques focuses solely on the ﬁnal results on the test data. Here,
by contrast, we aim to evaluate the search phase itself, which truly differentiates existing algorithms.
To do this, as illustrated in Fig. 1(c), we establish a baseline; we compare the search phase of existing
algorithms with a random search policy. An effective search algorithm should yield a solution that
clearly outperforms the random policy. Below, we introduce our framework to compare NAS search
algorithms with random search. The three NAS algorithms that we evaluated, DARTS (Liu et al.,
2019b), NAO (Luo et al., 2018) and ENAS (Pham et al., 2018), are representative of the state of
the art for different search algorithms: reinforcement learning, gradient-descent and performance
prediction, and are discussed in Appendix C.
3.1 C OMPARING TO RANDOM SEARCH
We implement our random search policy by simply assigning uniform probabilities to all operations.
Then, for each node in the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) that is typically used to represent an
architecture, we randomly sample a connection to oneprevious node from the resulting distributions.
An effective search policy should outperform the random one. To evaluate this, we compute the
validation results of the best architecture found by the NAS algorithm trained from scratch, as well
as those of a single randomly sampled architecture. Comparing these values for a single random
seed would of course not provide a reliable measure. Therefore, we repeat this process for multiple
random seeds used both during the search phase of the NAS algorithm and to sample one random
architecture as described above. We then report the means and standard deviations of these results
over the different seeds. Note that while we use different seeds for the search and random sampling,
we always use the same seed when training the models from scratch during the evaluation phase.
Our use of multiple random seeds and of the same number of epochs for the NAS algorithms and for
our random search policy makes the comparison fair. This contrasts with the comparisons performed
in (Pham et al., 2018), where the results of only a single random architecture were reported, and
2Details about search spaces are provided in Appendix B.
4