cell that correctly predicts the next word given the input sequence, and ﬁnding a convolutional cell
that maximizes the classiﬁcation accuracy. The quality of a candidate is then evaluated using the
perplexity metric and top-1 accuracy, respectively.
In the evaluation phase, we always use the same model backbone and parameter initialization for all
searched architectures, which ensures fairness and reﬂects the empirical observation that the searched
models are insensitive (accuracy variations of less than 0.002 (Liu et al., 2019b)) to initialization
during evaluation. For our RNN comparisons, we follow the procedure used in (Liu et al., 2019b;
Pham et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2018) for the ﬁnal evaluation, consisting of keeping the connections
found for the best architecture in the search phase but increasing the hidden state size (to 850 in
practice), so as to increase capacity. Furthermore, when training an RNN architecture from scratch,
we follow (Yang et al., 2017; Merity et al., 2017) and ﬁrst make the use of standard SGD to speed up
training, and then change to average SGD to improve convergence. For all CNN architectures, we use
RMSProp for fast optimization (Ying et al., 2019) and enable auxiliary head and cut-out (DeVries &
Taylor, 2017) to boost the performance as in Liu et al. (2019b).
C.6 A DAPTATION TO REDUCED SEARCH SPACE
When changing to reduced search spaces, we adapted the evaluated search algorithms to achieve the
best performance. Below, we describe these modiﬁcations.
RNN reduced space
For DARTS, no changes are needed except modifying the number of nodes in the search space.
For NAO, to mimic the behavior of the algorithm in the space of 12 nodes, we randomly sample
20% of the possible architectures to deﬁne the initial candidate pool. We train the encoder-
predictor-decoder network for 250 iterations every 50 epochs using the top-4 architectures in the
NAO ranking. At each search iteration, we sample at most 3 new architectures to be added to the
pool. The rest of the search logic remains unchanged.
For ENAS, we reduce the number of architectures sampled in one epoch to 20 and increase the
number of batches to 10 for each architecture. All other hyper-parameters are unchanged.
CNN reduced space
For DARTS, again, no changes are needed except modifying the number of nodes in the search
space.
For NAO, since the topology of the NASBench space is very similar to the original search space,
we kept most of the parameters unchanged, but only change the embedding size of the encoder
proportionally to the number of nodes (12 node - 12).
For ENAS, we set the LSTM sampler size to 64 and keep the temperature as 5.0. The number of
aggregation step of each sampler training is set to 10.
D S UPPLEMENTARY EXPERIMENTS
We provide additional experiments to support our claims.
D.1 I NFLUENCE OF THE AMOUNT OF SHARING
Depending on the active connections in the DAG, different architectures are subject to different
amounts of weight sharing. In Figure 6 (a), let us consider the 3-node case, with node 1 and node 2
ﬁxed and node 3 having node 1 as incoming node. In this scenario, the input to node 3 can be either
directly node 0 (i.e., the input), or node 1, or node 2. In the ﬁrst case, the only network parameters that
the output of node 3 depends on are the weights of its own operation. In the second and third cases,
however, the output further depends on the parameters of node 1, and of nodes 1 and 2, respectively.
To study the inﬂuence of the amount of sharing on the architecture ranking, we performed an
experiment where we ﬁxed the ﬁrst two nodes and only searched for the third one. This represents a
space of 12 architectures (3 possible connections to node 3 4 operations). We train them using the
14