Furthermore, even when using such heavy computational resources, vanilla NAS has to restrict the
number of trained architectures from a total of 109to104, and increasing the sampler accuracy can
only be achieved by increasing the resources.
ENAS (Pham et al., 2018) was the ﬁrst to propose a training scheme with shared parameters, reducing
the resources from thousands of GPU days to one. Instead of being trained from scratch each sampled
model inherits the parameters from previously-trained ones. Since then, NAS research has mainly
focused on two directions: 1) Replacing the RL sampler with a better search algorithm, such as
gradient descent (Liu et al., 2019b), bayesian optimiziation (Zhou et al., 2019) and performance
predictors (Luo et al., 2018); 2) Exploiting NAS for other applications, e.g., object detection (Ghiasi
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019), semantic segmentation (Liu et al., 2019a), and ﬁnding compact
networks (Cai et al., 2018b; Wu et al., 2018; Chu et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2019).
Characterizing the search space. Ying et al. (2019) introduced a dataset that contains the ground-
truth performance of CNN cells, and Wang et al. (2019) evaluated some traditional search algorithms
on it. Similarly, Radosavovic et al. (2019) characterizes many CNN search spaces by computing the
statistics of a set of sampled architectures, revealing that, for datasets such as CIFAR-10 or ImageNet,
these statistics are similar. While these works support our claim that evaluation of NAS algorithms is
crucial, they do not directly evaluate the state-of-the-arts NAS algorithms as we do here.
Evaluation of NAS algorithms. Typically, the quality of NAS algorithms is judged based on the
results of the ﬁnal architecture they produce on the downstream task. In other words, the search and
robustness of these algorithms are generally not studied, with (Liu et al., 2019b; So et al., 2019) the
only exception for robustness, where results obtained with different random seeds were reported.
Here, we aim to further the understanding of the mechanisms behind the search phase of NAS
algorithms. Speciﬁcally, we propose doing so by comparing them with a simple random search policy,
which uniformly randomly samples one architecture per run in the same search space as the NAS
techniques.
While some works have provided partial comparisons to random search, these comparisons unfortu-
nately did not give a fair chance to the random policy. Speciﬁcally, (Pham et al., 2018) reports the
results of only a single random architecture, and (Liu et al., 2018b) those of an architecture selected
among 8 randomly sampled ones as the most promising one after training for 300 epochs only. Here,
we show that a fair comparison to the random policy, obtained by training all architectures, i.e.,
random and NAS ones, for 1000 epochs and averaging over multiple random seeds for robustness,
yields a different picture; the state-of-the-art search policies are no better than the random one.
The motivation behind this comparison was our observation of only a weak correlation between the
performance of the searched architectures and the ones trained from scratch during the evaluation
phase. This phenomenon was already noticed by Zela et al. (2018), and concurrently to our work
by Li & Talwalkar (2019); Xie et al. (2019); Ying et al. (2019), but the analysis of its impact or its
causes went no further. Here, by contrast, we link this difference in performance between the search
and evaluation phases to the use of weight sharing.
While this may seem to contradict the ﬁndings of Bender et al. (2018), which, on CIFAR-10, observed
a strong correlation between architectures trained with and without weight sharing when searching
a CNN cell, our work differs from (Bender et al., 2018) in two fundamental ways: 1) The training
scheme in (Bender et al., 2018), in which the entire model with shared parameters is trained via
random path dropping, is fundamentally different from those used by state-of-the-arts weight sharing
NAS strategies (Pham et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019b; Luo et al., 2018); 2) While the correlation
in (Bender et al., 2018) was approximated using a small subset of sampled architectures, we make
use of a reduced search space where we can perform a complete evaluation of allarchitectures, thus
providing an exact correlation measure in this space.
3 E VALUATING THE NAS S EARCH
In this section, we detail our evaluation framework for the NAS search phase. As depicted in
Fig. 1(a,b), typical NAS algorithms consist of two phases:
3