C NAS A LGORITHMS
Here, we discuss the three state-of-the-art NAS algorithms used in our experiments in detail, including
their hyper-parameters during the search phase. The current state-of-the-arts NAS on CIFAR-10 is
ProxylessNAS (Cai et al., 2018b) with a top-1 accuracy of 97.92. However, this algorithm inherits the
sampler from ENAS and DARTS, but with a different objective function, backbone model, and search
space. In addition, the code is not publicly available, which precludes us from directly evaluating it.
C.1 ENAS
adopts a reinforcement learning sampling strategy that is updated with the REINFORCE algorithm.
The sampler is implemented as a two-layer LSTM Hochreiter & Schmidhuber (1997) and generates a
sequence of strings. In the training process, each candidate sampled by the ENAS controller is trained
on an individual mini-batch. At the end of each epoch, the controller samples new architectures
that are evaluated on a single batch of the validation dataset. After this, the controller is updated
accordingly using these validation metrics. We refer the reader to (Pham et al., 2018) for details about
the hyper-parameter settings.
C.2 DARTS
It vectorizes the aforementioned strings as discussed in Section B and shown in Fig. 5(c). The
sampling process is then parameterized by the vector , which is optimized via gradient-descent in
a dual optimization scheme: The architecture is ﬁrst trained while ﬁxing , andis then updated
while the network is ﬁxed. This process is repeated in an alternating manner. In the evaluation
phase, DARTS samples the top-performing architecture by using the trained vector as probability
prior, i.e., the ﬁnal model is not a soft average of all paths but one path in the DAG, which makes its
evaluation identical to that of the other NAS algorithms. Note that we use the same hyper-parameters
as in the released code of Liu et al. (2019b).
C.3 NAO
It implements a gradient-descent algorithm, but instead of vectorizing the strings as in DARTS,
it makes use of a variational auto-encoder (V AE) to learn a latent representation of the candidate
architectures. Furthermore, it uses a performance predictor, which takes a latent vector as input to
predict the corresponding architecture performance. In short, the search phase of NAO consists of
ﬁrst randomly sampling an initial pool of architectures and training them so as to obtain a ranking.
This ranking is then used to train the encoder-predictor-decoder network, from which new candidates
are sampled, and the process is repeated in an iterative manner. The best architecture is then taken as
the top-1 in the NAO ranking. We directly use the code released by Luo et al. (2018).
C.4 B AYES NAS
Bayesian optimization was ﬁrst introduced to the neural architecture search ﬁeld by Kandasamy et al.
(2018) and Jin et al. (2019). We chose to evaluate BayesNAS (Zhou et al., 2019) because it is more
recent than Auto-Keras (Jin et al., 2019) and than the work of Kandasamy et al. (2018), and because
these two works use different search spaces than DARTS, resulting in models with signiﬁcantly worse
performance than DARTS. BayesNAS adopts Bayesian optimization to prune the fully-connected
DAG graph using the shared weights to obtain accuracy metrics. The search space follows that of
DARTS (Liu et al., 2019b) with minor modiﬁcations in connections, but exactly the same operations.
Please see (Zhou et al., 2019) for more details. Note that BayesNAS was only implemented in CNN
space. We use the search and model code released by Zhou et al. (2019) with our training pipeline,
since the authors did not release the training code.
C.5 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Following common practice in NAS, we make use of the word-level language modeling Penn
Tree Bank (PTB) dataset (Marcus et al., 1994b) and of the image classiﬁcation CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). For these datasets, the goals are, respectively, ﬁnding a recurrent
13