In this paper, we therefore propose to investigate the search phase of existing NAS algorithms in a
controlled manner. To this end, we compare the quality of the NAS solutions with a random search
policy, which uniformly randomly samples an architecture from the same search space as the NAS
algorithms, and then trains it using the same hyper-parameters as the NAS solutions. To reduce
randomness, the search using each policy, i.e., random and NAS ones, is repeated several times, with
different random seeds.
We perform a series of experiments on the Penn Tree Bank (PTB) (Marcus et al., 1994a) and CIFAR-
10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets, in which we compared the state-of-the-art NAS algorithms whose
code is publicly available—DARTS (Liu et al., 2019b), NAO (Luo et al., 2018) and ENAS (Pham
et al., 2018)—to our random policy. We reached the surprising conclusions that, as shown in Table 1,
none of them signiﬁcantly outperforms random sampling. Since the mean performance for randomly-
sampled architectures converges to the mean performance over the entire search space, we further
conducted Welch Student’s t-tests (Welch, 1947) , which reveal that, in RNN space, ENAS and DARTS
cannot be differentiated from the mean of entire search space, while NAO yields worse performance
than random sampling. While the situation is slightly better in CNN space, all three algorithms still
perform similarly to random sampling. Note that this does not necessarily mean that these algorithms
perform poorly, but rather that the search space has been sufﬁciently constrained so that even a
random architecture in this space provides good results. To verify this, we experiment with search
spaces where we can exhaustively evaluate all architectures, and observe that these algorithms truly
cannot discover top-performing architectures.
In addition to this, we observed that the ranking by quality of candidate architectures produced by the
NAS algorithms during the search does not reﬂect the true performance of these architectures in the
evaluation phase. Investigating this further allowed us to identify that weight sharing (Pham et al.,
2018), widely adopted to reduce the amount of required resources from thousands of GPU days to a
single one, harms the individual networks’ performance. More precisely, using reduced search spaces,
we make use of the Kendall Tau metric1to show that the architecture rankings obtained with and
without weight sharing are entirely uncorrelated in RNN space ( = -0.004 over 10 runs); and have
little correlation in the CNN space ( = 0.195 over 10 runs). Since such a ranking is usually treated as
training data for the NAS sampler in the search phase, this further explains the small margin between
random search and the NAS algorithms. We also show that training samplers without weight sharing
in CNN space surpasses random sampling by a signiﬁcant margin.
In other words, we disprove the common belief that the quality of architectures trained with and
without weight sharing is similar. We show that the difference in ranking negatively impacts the
search phase of NAS algorithms, thus seriously impeding their robustness and performance.
In short, evaluating the search phase of NAS, which is typically ignored, allowed us to identify two
key characteristics of state-of-the-art NAS algorithms: The importance of the search space and the
negative impact of weight sharing. We believe that our evaluation framework will be instrumental in
designing NAS search strategies that are superior to the random one. Our code is publicly available
athttps://github.com/kcyu2014/eval-nas .
2 R ELATED WORK
Since its introduction in (Zoph & Le, 2017), NAS has demonstrated great potential to surpass the
human design of deep networks for both visual recognition (Liu et al., 2018b; Ahmed & Torresani,
2018; Chen et al., 2018; Pérez-Rúa et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019a) and natural language process-
ing (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2018; Zoph et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018b;
Cai et al., 2018a). Existing search strategies include reinforcement learning (RL) samplers (Zoph
& Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2018), evolutionary algorithms (Xie & Yuille, 2017;
Real et al., 2017; Miikkulainen et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018b; Lu et al., 2018), gradient-descent (Liu
et al., 2019b), bayesian optimization (Kandasamy et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2019) and
performance predictors (Liu et al., 2018a; Luo et al., 2018). Here, our goal is not to introduce a new
search policy, but rather to provide the means to analyze existing ones. Below, we brieﬂy discuss
existing NAS methods and focus on how they are typically evaluated.
Neural architecture search with weight sharing. The potential of vanilla NAS comes with the
drawback of requiring thousands of GPU hours even for small datasets, such as PTB and CIFAR-10.
1The Kendall Tau (Kendall, 1938) metric measures the correlation of two ranking. Details in Appendix A.1.
2