123yOutput XInput
3yX123yX23yXSearch space(a) Search Space
BestWorst architecture rank #. of shared param. matrix (b) Impact of weight sharing
Figure 6: A toy search space to assess the inﬂuence of weight sharing in RNN space.
(a) Top: the reduced space. (a) Bottom: The amount of sharing depends on the activated path.
(b) Ranking obtained from weight sharing training, that best ranked architectures has weight matrix
to share.
same setting in Section 4.3. The ranking of the 12 architectures is shown in Figure 6 (b), where color
indicates the number of shared weight matrices, that is, matrices of nodes 1 and 2 also used in the
search for node 3. Note that the top-performing architectures do not share any weights and that the
more weights are shared, the worse the architecture performs.
Table 5: Ranking disorder of weight
sharing in CNN.
# of shared matrix 0 1 2 3
Kendall Tau  0.67. 0.33 -0.33 0.0In CNN space, we conduct a similar experiment in NAS-
Bench. With total node equals to 6, we only permute the last
node operation and connection to one of the previous nodes.
In short, we will have a total 4 connection possibility and
3 operation choices, in total 12 architectures. We compute
the Kendall Tau among the architectures with the same con-
nection but different operations, and the results are reported in Table 5. Clearly, the correlation of
architectures decrease while the weight sharing matrices increase.
D.2 R ANDOM SAMPLING COMPARISON
epocharchitecture rank Randomin [2]Our Random11616212611
31
Figure 7: Rank changes while training .
Each line represents the evolution of the
rank of a single architecture. The mod-
els are sorted based on their test perfor-
mance after 1000 epochs, with the best-
performing one at the top. The curves were
averaged over 10 runs. They correspond
to the experiment in Section 4.2. The verti-
cal dashed lines indicate the epoch number
where random sampling was performed,
either by the random policy in Liu et al.
(2019b), or by ours.As discussed before, the random policy in (Liu et al.,
2019b) samples 8 architectures, and picks the best after
training them for 300 epochs independently. It might
seem contradictory that DARTS outperforms this ran-
dom policy, but cannot surpass the much simpler one
designed in our paper, which only randomly samples
10 architectures (1 per random seed), trains them to
convergence and picks the best. However, the random
policy in DARTS relies on the assumption that a model
that performs well in the early training stage will re-
main effective until the end of training. While this may
sound intuitive, we observed a different picture with our
reduced search space.
Since we obtained the ground-truth performance ranking,
as discussed in Section 4.2 of the main paper, in Figure 7,
we plot the evolution of models’ rank while training
proceeds, based on the average validation perplexity
over 10 runs. Clearly, there are signiﬁcant variations
during training: Good models in early stages drop lower
in the ranking towards the end. As such, there is a
non-negligible chance that the random policy in DARTS
picks a model whose performance will be sub-optimal.
We therefore believe that our policy that simply samples
one model and trains it until convergence yields a more
fair baseline. Furthermore, the fact that we perform
our comparison using 10 random seeds, for both our
approach and the NAS algorithms, vs a single one in (Liu et al., 2019b) makes our conclusions more
reliable.
15