EDITORIAL
The clinician ’s guide to interpreting a regression analysis
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to The Royal College of Ophthalmologists 2022
Eye(2022) 36:1715–1717; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41433-022-01949-z
INTRODUCTION
When researchers are conducting clinical studies to investigate
factors associated with, or treatments for disease and conditionsto improve patient care and clinical practice, statistical evaluation
of the data is often necessary. Regression analysis is an important
statistical method that is commonly used to determine therelationship between several factors and disease outcomes or toidentify relevant prognostic factors for diseases [ 1].
This editorial will acquaint readers with the basic principles
o fa n da na p p r o a c ht oi n t e r p r e t ing results from two types of
regression analyses widely used in ophthalmology: linear, and
logistic regression.
LINEAR REGRESSION ANALYSIS
Linear regression is used to quan tify a linear relationship or
association between a continuous response/outcome variable or
dependent variable with at least one independent or explana-tory variable by ﬁtting a linear equation to observed data [ 1].
The variable that the equation solves for, which is the outcome
or response of interest, is called the dependent variable [ 1]. The
variable that is used to explain the value of the dependentvariable is called the predictor, explanatory, or independent
variable [ 1].
In a linear regression model, the dependent variable must be
continuous (e.g. intraocular pressure or visual acuity), whereas, the
independent variable may be either continuous (e.g. age), binary
(e.g. sex), categorical (e.g. age-related macular degeneration stageor diabetic retinopathy severity scale score), or a combination ofthese [ 1].
When investigating the effect or association of a single
independent variable on a continuous dependent variable, thistype of analysis is called a simple linear regression [ 2]. In many
circumstances though, a single independent variable may not be
enough to adequately explain the dependent variable. Often it is
necessary to control for confounders and in these situations, onecan perform a multivariable linear regression to study the effect orassociation with multiple independent variables on the depen-
dent variable [ 1,2]. When incorporating numerous independent
variables, the regression model estimates the effect or contribu-tion of each independent variable while holding the values of all
other independent variables constant [ 3].
When interpreting the results of a linear regression, there are
a few key outputs for each independent variable included in themodel:
1. Estimated regression coef ﬁcient —The estimated regression
coefﬁcient indicates the direction and strength of the
relationship or association between the independent anddependent variables [ 4]. Speci ﬁcally, the regression coef ﬁ-
cient describes the change in the dependent variable foreach one-unit change in the independent variable, ifcontinuous [ 4]. For instance, if examining the relationship
between a continuous predictor variable and intra-ocular
pressure (dependent variable), a regression coef ﬁcient of 2
means that for every one-unit increase in the predictor,there is a two-unit increase in intra-ocular pressure. If the
independent variable is binary or categorical, then the one-
unit change represents switching from one category to thereference category [ 4]. For instance, if examining the
relationship between a binary predictor variable, such as
sex, where ‘female ’is set as the reference category, and
intra-ocular pressure (dependent variable), a regressioncoefﬁcient of 2 means that, on average, males have an
intra-ocular pressure that is 2 mm Hg higher than females.
2. Con ﬁdence Interval (CI) —The CI, typically set at 95%, is a
measure of the precision of the coef
ﬁcient estimate of the
independent variable [ 4]. A large CI indicates a low level of
precision, whereas a small CI indicates a higher precision [ 5].
3.Pvalue —The pvalue for the regression coef ﬁcient indicates
whether the relationship between the independent anddependent variables is statistically signi ﬁcant [ 6].
LOGISTIC REGRESSION ANALYSIS
As with linear regression, logistic regression is used to estimatethe association between one or more independent variables witha dependent variable [ 7]. However, the distinguishing feature in
logistic regression is that the dependent variable (outcome) must
be binary (or dichotomous), meaning that the variable can onlytake two different values or levels, such as ‘1 versus 0 ’or‘yes
versus no ’[2,7]. The effect size of predictor variables on the
dependent variable is best explained using an odds ratio (OR) [ 2].
ORs are used to compare the relative odds of the occurrence ofthe outcome of interest, given exposure to the variable of interest[5]. An OR equal to 1 means that the odds of the event in one
group are the same as the odds of the event in another group;
there is no difference [ 8]. An OR > 1 implies that one group has a
higher odds of having the event compared with the reference
group, whereas an OR < 1 means that one group has a lower odds
of having an event compared with the reference group [ 8]. When
interpreting the results of a logistic regression, the key outputsinclude the OR, CI, and p-value for each independent variable
included in the model.
CLINICAL EXAMPLE
Sen et al. investigated the association between several factors
(independent variables) and visual acuity outcomes (dependentvariable) in patients receiving anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
therapy for macular oedema (DMO) by means of both linear and
logistic regression [ 9]. Multivariable linear regression demonstrated
Received: 8 January 2022 Revised: 17 January 2022 Accepted: 18 January 2022
Published online: 31 January 2022www.nature.com/eye1234567890();,: