Page 2 of 19 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
provides an opportunity for early detection of diabetic 
retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, and glau -
coma [2]. However, there are still many constraints on the 
use of data-driven artificial intelligence (AI) models in 
ophthalmology. Ocular imaging data have been expand -
ing globally [3], but there is a shortage of high-quality 
images and pathological data from patients to train AI 
models [4]. In addition, there are many diagnostic ocu -
lar imaging modalities such as color fundus photography, 
retinal OCT, ultra-widefield fundus photography, retinal 
angiography, ultrasonography, corneal tomography, and 
anterior segment OCT. Because imaging techniques dif -
fer from each other in terms of structural complexity and 
image dimensionality, the need for cross-modality image 
processing methods has increased to improve the disease 
prediction models.
In recent years, generative adversarial network (GAN) 
has become the technique of choice for image genera -
tion and translation in the field of medical imaging [5]. 
GAN, which is a new type of deep learning developed by 
Ian Goodfellow [6], can automatically synthesize medi -
cal images by learning the mapping function from an 
arbitrary distribution to the observed data distribution, 
which is the process of extracting mathematical relation -
ships from data distributions for matching input to out -
put data. As deep learning requires more data to build 
better accurate models, the medical research community 
requires more databases from various imaging modalities 
such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic reso -
nance imaging (MRI) [7]. Accordingly, many experiments 
have been performed to demonstrate the benefit of using 
GAN, which can generate realistic synthetic images. Pre -
vious publications in radiology have shown that the appli -
cation of GAN includes data augmentation, denoising, 
super-resolution, domain transfer between modalities, 
and segmentation [8]. They demonstrated that the poten -
tial gains from GAN can improve deep learning models 
for pathological conditions and can support clinicians for 
diagnosis using complex medical images. While medical 
image processing using GAN has been actively studied in 
radiology [9], there have been relatively few studies using 
GAN in the field of ophthalmology image domains.
A previous literature review showed that the adop -
tion of GAN for medical imaging is increasing rapidly 
[10], but it is not familiar to researchers in the field of 
ophthalmology. Since ophthalmology imaging tech -
niques are becoming more important for diagnosing 
ocular diseases, the use of GAN will gradually increase 
to achieve a more accurate diagnosis. In this work, we 
present a literature review on the application of GAN 
in ophthalmology image domains to discuss important 
contributions and identify potential future research 
directions. This paper attempts to guide future research on image processing in the ophthalmic domain through 
the proper application of GAN techniques.
Review
Overview
We detail the studies using GAN for ophthalmology 
image domains from available literature. We sum -
marized how GAN was utilized in the field of oph -
thalmology imaging. The type of GAN used in the 
analysis, task, imaging domain, and outcome of the 
application of GAN were collected to verify its useful -
ness. We searched for potentially relevant literature in 
PubMed, Embase, and Google Scholar databases using 
the following search strategy: ((generative adversar -
ial network) OR (GAN) OR (deep generative model)) 
AND ((ophthalmology) OR (diabetic retinopathy) OR 
(age-related macular degeneration) OR (fundus pho -
tography) OR (optical coherence tomography)). The 
initial selection of studies was performed based on 
texts with titles and abstracts. We included only peer-
reviewed articles published before June 2021. Arti -
cles that did not contain original research using GAN 
were excluded. Only articles written in English were 
included in the study, and studies without a specific 
description of the GAN model were excluded. In the 
case of multiple publications of the same research, we 
regarded them as one study. The initial search yielded 
855 articles. Of these, 806 were removed because 
their studies or manuscripts were not related to either 
GAN or ophthalmology images. A further three were 
excluded because they were duplicates of other stud -
ies in the list or were not research articles. Finally, 48 
articles were included in the final literature review. To 
limit bias in the search, additional searches were per -
formed using other common ocular diseases (such as 
dry eye, conjunctivitis, cataract, glaucoma, retinal vein 
occlusion, central serous chorioretinopathy, and stra -
bismus) and other imaging modalities found in the 
previous search. However, no additional research arti -
cles were obtained.
Since a comprehensive list of ophthalmology image 
datasets has been provided in previous studies [3 , 11], 
we found no reason to discuss ocular image datasets in 
this work. Traditional data augmentation refers to an 
increase in the number of training examples through 
the rotation, flipping, cropping, translation, and scaling 
of existing images to improve the performance of deep 
learning models, and can also be used to train GAN 
models. Generally, most GAN techniques rely on large 
amounts of annotated data, although several studies 
have targeted data augmentation in a small amount of 
pathological data.