Page 14 of 19 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
guarantee that GAN produces realistic images. This 
problem arises from the application of GAN not only 
in ophthalmology but also in all medical areas [10] and 
will continue to be a drawback for using GAN.
Discussion
We surveyed the literature relevant to GAN in oph -
thalmology image domains to guide future studies on 
image processing in ocular images. To our knowledge, 
this work is the first comprehensive literature review 
on the use of GAN techniques in ophthalmology image 
domains. Recently, a review of GAN in ophthalmology 
was reported, but the scope was limited to image synthe -
sis in fundus photography and OCT [73]. GAN research 
has thrived in the medical field because machine learn -
ing is data-hungry to achieve a more accurate diagnosis. 
In this review, we highlighted the various uses of GAN 
in that it can perform segmentation, data augmentation, 
denoising, domain transfer, super-resolution, post-inter -
vention prediction, and feature extraction. The num -
ber of publications relevant to this field has also grown 
consistently as GAN techniques have become popular 
among researchers. We found that GAN can be applied 
to most ophthalmology image domains in the literature. 
As imaging plays a crucial role in ophthalmology, GAN-
based image synthesis and image-to-image translation 
will be highly valuable in improving the quantitative and 
personalized evaluation of ocular disorders. Despite the 
increasing use of GAN techniques, we also found that it 
faces challenges for adaptation to clinical settings.
Recently, a previous paper suggested that the utility of 
GAN in image synthesis is unclear for ophthalmology 
imaging [73]. However, GAN techniques have shown 
better performance in the fields of radiology and pathol -
ogy than other generative deep learning models, such as autoencoders, fully convolutional networks (FCNs), 
and U-nets [74, 75]. In the anomaly detection task for 
retinal OCT, GAN models including AnoGAN, Pix2pix, 
and CycleGAN outperformed a traditional autoencoder 
model, which simply learns latent coding of unlabeled 
image data [76]. FCN and U-Net are well-established 
deep generative models for detection and segmentation 
tasks for biomedical imaging domains [77]. As these do 
not consider the detailed features of the output images, 
the GAN framework can improve the image synthesis 
performance of the FCN and U-Net models [78]. A pre -
vious study on retinal vessel segmentation showed that 
conditional GAN outperformed U-Net and other genera -
tive techniques [28]. Given this trend, GAN is expected 
to improve image analysis technologies in various tasks. 
A more accurate comparison and benchmarking of GAN 
techniques will be enabled by future studies and more 
clinical data.
The proper selection of the GAN technique and statis -
tical modeling of ocular imaging will improve the perfor -
mance of each image analysis. In this review, we found 
that a broad range of custom architectures from GAN 
variants was used for different tasks. There is no evidence 
of a particularly superior GAN technique. Researchers 
can analyze ocular images by newly defining the cus -
tom objective functions of the GAN to fit the specific 
task and domain. For example, Cheong et  al. modified 
the conditional GAN model to effectively denoise OCT 
images using a custom loss function including content, 
style, total variation, and shadow losses [16]. Moreover, 
researchers can incorporate prior information about each 
imaging domain to develop GAN models for specific 
tasks. For example, researchers have suggested several 
statistical distributions of retinal structures and noise 
modeling in OCT images [79]. Statistical modeling using 
Table 7 Summary of literature review for feature extraction task using GAN in ophthalmology imaging domains
GAN = generative adversarial network; OCT = optical coherence tomographyPublication Basic technique Domain Target Summary
Schlegl et al. [25] f-AnoGAN (Wasserstein 
GAN + latent space mapping)Retinal OCT Intra-retinal fluid detection 
(OCT anomaly detection)The GAN based unsupervised 
learning of healthy training data 
was trained with fast mapping 
from images to encodings in the 
latent space. Anomalies were 
detected via a combined anomaly 
score based on an image recon-
struction error
Xie et al. [26] Conditional GAN (with attention 
encoder and multi-branch 
structure)Ultra-widefield fundus 
photography (scanning laser 
ophthalmoscopy)Features for retinal diseases The GAN based on the atten-
tion encoder and multi-branch 
structure was used to extract 
features for retinal disease detec-
tion. The discriminator in GAN was 
modified to build the classifier to 
detect the disease images