Page 9 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
To remove speckle noise in retinal OCT images, a 
conditional GAN model with Wasserstein distance and 
perceptual loss was proposed [48]. Huang et al. showed 
that both super-resolution and noise reduction can be 
performed simultaneously using a conditional GAN 
[49]. Cheong et al. built DeShadowGAN using manually 
masked artifact images and conditional GAN with per -
ceptual loss and demonstrated the effectiveness of the 
model in removing shadow artifacts [16]. Similarly, con -
ditional GAN has also been applied to remove speckle 
noise in peripapillary retinal OCT [50] and anterior 
segment OCT [51]. However, image denoising methods 
using conditional GAN can match low- and high-quality 
image pairs; however, these data are typically unavailable 
in the medical field. Therefore, Das et al. used CycleGAN 
for super-resolution and noise reduction in retinal OCT 
images to facilitate unpaired image datasets [52].
Fundus photography has several artifacts and noise, 
including overall haze, edge haze, arcs, and lashes. In 
a super-resolution problem, artificial manipulation to 
reduce image resolution is possible. Since it is difficult 
to collect paired clean and artifact fundus photographs, 
CycleGAN has been used to improve the image quality 
of fundus photography [53, 54]. These studies showed 
that CycleGAN can effectively reduce artifacts to pro -
vide clearer retinal images to clinicians. PGGAN was 
also shown with a conditional design that was applied 
to super-resolution fundus photography [55]. Ha et  al. 
adopted that to generate high-resolution synthetic optic 
disc images with a 4-times up-scaling using SRGAN [56].
Domain transfer
Most machine learning works have performed the devel -
opment and validation of data from the same domain. To 
build a more generalized machine-learning model, data 
from different domains might be fused through domain 
transfer, which is the transfer between different imag -
ing modalities. The domain transfer task of GAN is the 
cross-modality image synthesis process by which images 
are generated for one modality based on another. Cross-
domain modality using the domain transfer technique 
has shown the possibility of obtaining additional clinical 
information without additional examinations [57]. Eight 
studies using GAN mainly focused on domain transfer 
for ophthalmology imaging domains (shown in Table  5). 
Notably, several studies that used image transfer genera -
tors were categorized as data augmentation tasks because 
they focused on image synthesis tasks. The concept of 
conditional GAN has been used in most studies because 
the generator must have an image input channel as a con -
ditional variable for domain transfer. Generally, GAN 
models without conditional inputs can generate new 
images infinitely by adjusting the latent vector, whereas one input corresponds to one output image in typical 
conditional GAN. GAN techniques allow for more high-
dimensional image transformation and realistic outputs 
than simple pixel-level transformation.
Initially, Costa et  al. demonstrated that a conditional 
GAN can be used to generate realistic fundus photo -
graphs guided by masked vessel network images [58]; 
an autoencoder was used to synthesize new retinal ves -
sel images apart from training the GAN. Zhao et al. also 
built a conditional GAN model that emphasizes the 
ability to learn with a small dataset [59]. Extending the 
conditional GAN, modified Pix2pix synthesized realis -
tic color fundus photographs to enlarge the image data -
set based on multiple inputs of the vessel and optic disc 
masked images [60]. Wu et al. showed that retinal auto -
fluorescence images could be synthesized based on reti -
nal OCT data using a conditional GAN framework [61]. 
In that study, en-face OCT images from volumetric OCT 
data were successfully transformed into synthetic auto -
fluorescence images to detect geographic atrophy regions 
in the retina. Tavakkoli et  al. demonstrated that realis -
tic retinal angiography images with diabetic retinopathy 
were generated via conditional GAN using fundus pho -
tographs [62]. Although the model was trained using a 
limited angiography dataset without detailed phase infor -
mation, the study showed the potential of image domain 
transfer for the diagnosis of diabetic retinopathy. Based 
on CycleGAN, ultra-widefield fundus photography can 
be transformed into classic color fundus photography 
to integrate retinal imaging domains [63]. In contrast, 
a study converting classic fundus photography to ultra-
widefield fundus photography via CycleGAN was also 
reported [ 64]. Larzaridis et  al. demonstrated that time-
domain OCT could be converted to spectral-domain 
OCT using conditional GAN with Wasserstein distance 
and perceptual loss, showing that the integrated dataset 
fused by the GAN improved the statistical power of the 
OCT measurements.
Post‑intervention prediction
The aim of post-intervention prediction is to gener -
ate an image that explains how the anatomical appear -
ance changes after treatment. Three studies investigated 
post-intervention prediction tasks for ophthalmology 
imaging domains (detailed in Table  6). As post-interven -
tion results are represented as images in several medi -
cal fields, this task is useful to clinicians and patients to 
understand how the intervention will affect the progno -
sis of diseases. However, the included studies have sev -
eral limitations in terms of short-term follow-up periods 
for prediction and unstandardized interventions [65]. 
In addition, attention should be paid to interpreting the 
results because anatomical prediction after treatment is