Page 12 of 19 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
Feature extraction
Another task that did not belong to these categories was 
feature extraction, including out-of-distribution detec -
tion. This task focuses on the discriminative aspect of 
GAN because the studies have directly used GAN archi -
tectures to detect pathologies. Two studies have used 
the concept of GAN in ophthalmology image domains 
(Table  7). Schlegl et  al. proposed an anomaly detection 
method using a GAN in the retinal OCT domain [25]. 
This GAN model estimated the latent space via inverse 
mapping learning from the input images and calculated 
anomaly scores from the feature space of normal sam -
ples. This anomaly detection architecture has been suc -
cessfully extended to other areas, such as industrial 
anomaly detection or chest lesion detection in X-ray 
images [10]. Xie et al. built a modified conditional GAN 
model for ultra-widefield fundus photography to improve 
the detection of retinal diseases [26]. They used an atten -
tion encoder for feature mining in the generator and designed a multi-branch structure in the discriminator to 
extract image features.
Other applications
Here, we address several studies that did not fit our 
search criteria, but the applications are noteworthy. A 
localization task refers to the identification of a region of 
interest rather than a specific pixel segmentation. Zhang 
et al. performed retinal pathology localization in fundus 
photography using CycleGAN [68]. In this localization 
task, the pathological area was detected by subtract -
ing the synthesized normal image from the pathological 
image.
Image registration is another task finding the geomet -
ric transformation to structurally align images. It is also 
important in automated analysis of multimodal image 
analysis such as domain transfer. For example, a data -
set for conditional GAN requires additional image reg -
istration of aligned image pairs for successful training. 
Table 5 Summary of literature review for domain transfer task using GAN in ophthalmology imaging domains
GAN = generative adversarial network; OCT = optical coherence tomographyPublication Basic technique Domain Summary
Costa et al. [58] Conditional GAN Vessel image → Fundus photography The study proposed a vessel network to retinal image 
translation framework producing simplified vessel 
tree and realistic retinal images by estimating latent 
space. Autoencoder was used to synthesize new 
retinal vessel images apart from training of GAN
Zhao et al. [59] Conditional GAN Vessel image → Fundus photography Retinal image synthesis can be effectively learned in 
a data-driven fashion from a relatively small sample 
size using a conditional GAN architecture
Yu et al. [60] Pix2pix (with 
ResU-net genera-
tor) (conditional 
GAN)Vessel image → Fundus photography To enlarge training datasets for facilitating medical 
image analysis, the multiple-channels-multiple-
landmarks (MCML) was developed to synthesize 
color fundus images from a combination of vessel 
and optic disc masked images
Wu et al. [61] Conditional GAN Volumetric retinal OCT → Fundus autofluorescence The en-face OCT images were synthesized from 
volumetric retinal OCT by restricted summed voxel 
projection. The fundus autofluorescence images 
were generated from en-face OCT images using GAN 
to identify the geographic atrophy region
Tavakkoli et al. [62] Conditional GAN Fundus photography → Fluorescein angiography The proposed GAN produced anatomically accurate 
fluorescein angiography images that were indistin-
guishable from real angiograms
Yoo et al. [63] CycleGAN Ultra-widefield fundus photography → Fundus 
photographyUltra-widefield images were successfully translated 
into traditional fundus photography-style images by 
CycleGAN, and the main structural information of the 
retina and optic nerve was retained
Ju et al. [64] CycleGAN Fundus photography → Ultra-widefield fundus 
photographyThe CycleGAN model transferred the color fundus 
photographs to ultra-widefield images to introduce 
additional data for existing limited ultra-widefield 
images. The proposed method was adopted for 
diabetic retinopathy grading and lesion detection
Lazaridis et al. [91, 108] Wasserstein 
GAN + percep -
tual loss (condi-
tional GAN)Time-domain OCT → spectral-domain OCT Time-domain OCT was converted to synthetic spec-
tral-domain OCT using GAN. The model improved 
the statistical power of the measurements when 
compared with those derived from the original OCT