Page 13 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
Mahapatra et  al. showed that an autoencoder based on 
GAN architecture provided better registration perfor -
mance for fundus photography and retinal angiography 
images [69].
Current limitations of GAN techniques
We found that GAN has several limitations that research -
ers should take note of (Fig.  4). First, mode collapse, 
which is a phenomenon that continues to output the 
same results, is a well-known problem of GAN [70]. To 
avoid this failure caused by a model stuck in a local mini -
mum, more variant training data or additional data aug -
mentation techniques are needed. Many GAN models 
were trained with no guarantee of convergence. Second, 
spatial deformities frequently occur when there are small 
training images without spatial alignment. In particular, 
in domain transfer using conditional GAN, paired images 
with structural and spatial alignment are critically chal -
lenging and require additional image registration in a 
preprocessing to obtain high-quality medical images [57, 
63]. Third, unintended changes could occur in image-to-
image translation because of the different data distribu -
tions of the structural features between the two image 
domains. For example, if only one domain contains many 
images with glaucoma in a domain transfer task, Cycle -
GAN can produce glaucomatous changes during image 
synthesis. Noise can be represented as unintended out -
liers/confounders and unintended fake features can be 
generated from noise for a generator in several GAN 
models [26]. Fourth, high-frequency noises and artifacts 
of checkerboard patterns are often detected in images 
synthesized by a generator with deconvolution [53]. 
Novel techniques have been developed to reduce noise 
and artifacts [71].GAN and its variants generally consist of two or more 
deep learning modules, for example, two generators 
and two discriminators in CycleGAN, and thus training 
GAN tends to be unstable compared to a single deep 
learning module [15]. A problem of vanishing gradients 
may also occur if the discriminator performs well, and 
the generator learns too slowly. Therefore, tuning the 
hyperparameters is sometimes important, and training 
can be stopped early to obtain better synthetic images. 
However, the occurrence of these problems depends on 
the amount of data and the distribution of embedded 
pixels and is unpredictable.
In our experience, most of the problems from train -
ing GAN models are solved to some extent by increas -
ing the amount of clinical data extracted from a variety 
of patients if the technique is appropriately selected. 
Although GAN is widely used for data augmentation, 
several previous studies using GAN for image-to-image 
translation also suffered from small amounts of data, 
similar to other deep learning algorithms [45]. As novel 
algorithms are emerging to solve these problems [72], 
GAN will eventually be easy to use for image process -
ing in ophthalmology.
Additionally, there is no standard metric for evalu -
ating the performance of GAN for realistic image syn -
thesis [73]. It now relies on subjective judgments from 
researchers and clinicians relevant to ophthalmology 
imaging [40]. Previous studies adopted classic image 
similarity indices, such as mean squared error, mean 
absolute error, and structural similarity index [15], but 
they are unable to evaluate the realism of synthetic 
images. Several studies have shown an improvement in 
the diagnostic performance of machine learning after 
GAN-based data augmentation [43, 46], but it does not 
Table 6 Summary of literature review for post-intervention prediction task using GAN in ophthalmology imaging domains
GAN = generative adversarial network; OCT = optical coherence tomographyPublication Basic technique Domain Intervention Summary
Yoo et al. [15] Conditional GAN, CycleGAN Periorbital facial images Orbital decompression surgery The developed model trans-
formed preoperative facial input 
images into predicted postopera-
tive images for orbital decom-
pression for thyroid-associated 
ophthalmopathy
Liu et al. [66] Pix2pix (conditional GAN) Retinal OCT Intravitreal anti-vascular 
endothelial growth factor 
injectionThe model generated individual-
ized post-therapeutic OCT images 
that could predict the short-term 
response of treatment for age-
related macular degeneration
Lee et al. [67] Conditional GAN (multi-channel 
inputs)Retinal OCT (with fluorescein 
angiography and indocyanine 
green angiography)Intravitreal anti-vascular 
endothelial growth factor 
injectionThe trained model generated 
post-treatment optical coherence 
tomography (OCT) images of 
neovascular age-related macular 
degeneration