Page 16 of 19 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
because their conditional GAN model provides real -
istic retinal fluorescein angiography, which can be 
used in a clinical setting [62]. Novel image process -
ing techniques using unpaired image datasets, such as 
CycleGAN, have extended the range of training image 
domains, so ocular images from more diverse modali -
ties are expected to be used for developing AI sys -
tems [38, 63]. Multi-domain GAN models that handle 
images from various domains at once have also been 
developed to fuse data for more accurate diagnosis. 
For example, Lee et  al. reported a conditional GAN 
using multi-domain inputs analyzing OCT and fluo -
rescein angiography to predict more accurate post-
treatment retinal state prediction [67]. In the future, 
new GAN techniques such as StyleGAN [13], which is 
excellent at extracting and transforming features, and 
StarGAN [23], which performs multi-domain transfor -
mation, are also expected to be used in the ophthal -
mology imaging domains to solve clinical problems. To 
adopt this rapid technical development, future stud -
ies require multidisciplinary (clinician–engineer) col -
laboration and collection of more multi-domain ocular 
images. Clinicians need to feedback to engineers to 
improve the technical completeness of GAN.
Most studies included in this review used train -
ing and validation datasets extracted from the same 
study group. We found that no clinical trials have been 
conducted that explored the use of GAN. Machine 
learning techniques, including GAN, do not guaran -
tee performance in external datasets independent of 
training sets. It has not been confirmed whether data 
augmentation through GAN can increase the diag -
nostic accuracy of AI systems for ocular diseases in 
real clinics. A GAN can be used to bridge the domain 
gap between training and external data from different 
sources [64]. If difficult access to reliable annotated 
data from multiple data sources remains problem -
atic, domain adaptation can be considered to address 
the generalization issue [87]. Domain adaptation via 
the domain transfer function of a GAN may provide a 
chance to use a machine learning system in different 
settings. For example, retinal images taken with ultra-
widefield fundus photography can be analyzed by an 
AI system developed with FP via domain transfer using 
GAN [63, 64]. Although GAN has several shortcom -
ings, its ability to adapt to domains and expand data 
by generating realistic images can increase generaliz -
ability and may help to increase the use of machine 
learning algorithms in ophthalmology image domains. 
However, further studies are required to determine 
whether the application of GAN techniques will 
improve the diagnostic performance of machine learn -
ing models in real world clinical situations.Conclusion
The findings of this work suggest that the direction 
of deep learning research in ophthalmology has ben -
efited from GAN. GAN techniques have established 
an extension of datasets and modalities in ophthal -
mology. The adoption of GAN in ophthalmology is 
still in its early stages of clinical validation compared 
with deep learning classification techniques because 
several problems need to be overcome for practical 
use. However, the proper selection of a GAN tech -
nique and statistical modeling of ocular imaging will 
improve the performance of each image analysis. We 
hope that this review will fuel more studies using 
GAN in ophthalmology image domains. More accu -
rate algorithms for the detection of pathological oph -
thalmic conditions would be enabled by selection of 
proper GAN techniques by maximizing the potential 
of ophthalmology datasets.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Authors’ contributions
AY conceived the idea, interpreted the literature, and drafted the manuscript. 
JJK reviewed the manuscript critically. IHR interpreted the several studies and 
revised the manuscript. TKY designed the study, interpreted the literature, and 
reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the 
public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Availability of data and materials
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or 
analyzed during the current study.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable. Ethical approval was not sought, as the study was based 
entirely on previously published data. All procedures were performed in 
accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its 
amendments.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
Jin Kuk Kim and Ik Hee Ryu are executives of VISUWORKS, Inc., which is a 
Korean Artificial Intelligence company providing medical machine learning 
solutions. Jin Kuk Kim is also an executive of the Korea Intelligent Medical 
Industry Association. They received salaries or stocks as part of the standard 
compensation package. The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.
Author details
1 School of Architecture, Kumoh National Institute of Technology, Gumi, Gyeo -
ngbuk, South Korea. 2 B&VIIT Eye Center, Seoul, South Korea. 3 VISUWORKS, 
Seoul, South Korea. 4 Department of Ophthalmology, Aerospace Medical 
Center, Republic of Korea Air Force, 635 Danjae -ro, Namil-myeon, Cheong-
won- gun, Cheongju, Chungcheongbuk -do 363-849, South Korea. 
Received: 15 July 2021   Accepted: 11 January 2022