Page 3 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
GAN techniques
This section provides the general concepts of GAN for 
analyzing ophthalmology images, especially the archi -
tectures most frequently encountered in the literature 
reviewed. The basic structure of a GAN is called a vanilla 
GAN [6]. The architecture of the vanilla GAN consists of 
two separate deep learning models, including the genera -
tor, which synthesizes candidate samples based on the 
data distribution of the original dataset, and a discrimina -
tor, which tries to distinguish the synthesized candidate 
samples from the real samples from the original dataset. 
These two modules are trained simultaneously because 
the gradient information is back-propagated to the gen -
erator to increase realistic image synthesis capabilities 
and to the discriminator to increase real/fake discrimi -
nating capabilities. After vanilla GAN was introduced, 
GAN was highlighted because of its ability to generate 
realistic synthetic images based on the original dataset. 
Figure  1 illustrates the structure of the vanilla GAN and 
retinal images generated. In the example of retinal image 
synthesis, vectors of late space are randomly selected ini -
tially; however, after training, they obtain an appropriate 
functional relationship with the generated image. Ran -
domly generated images and original real retinal images 
are classified by the discriminator and this result is back-
propagated and reflected in the training of both the gen -
erator and the discriminator. Finally, the desired outcome 
after training the GAN is that the pixel distributions from 
the generated retinal images should approximate the 
distribution of real original retinal images. According to 
the original paper describing GAN, the generator is like 
a team that produces counterfeit money, which wants to use counterfeit money without it being detected, and 
the discriminator is like the police detecting counterfeit 
money. The competition between the two teams results 
in better counterfeiting [6]. After image generation using 
GAN was popularized, novel GAN techniques were con -
stantly developed in the machine learning community. 
In this review, we found that most studies on ophthal -
mology images have used progressively growing GAN 
(PGGAN), conditional GAN, Pix2pix, and cycle-consist -
ent GAN (CycleGAN).
Currently, vanilla GAN is not widely used because 
of its low-quality outputs and instability during train -
ing. However, it has been the basis of recent GAN vari -
ant techniques (Table  1). A deep convolutional GAN 
(DCGAN) is based on the vanilla GAN by replac -
ing the building block with fully convolutional layers 
[10]. Wasserstein GAN is an improved version of the 
vanilla GAN that uses a metric of the distance between 
two probability distributions (Wasserstein distance) 
as a loss function [12]. PGGAN is an extension of the 
vanilla GAN with a progressively growing generator 
and discriminator to generate realistic high-resolution 
images. The main concept of PGGAN is to build gener -
ators and discriminators, starting from a low-resolution 
to a high-resolution network. The newly added layers 
model fine-grained details as the training progresses. 
As the images are generated from a random noise vec -
tor, the original PGGAN cannot generate new instances 
with objects in the desired condition. Additionally, 
StyleGAN is a variant of PGGAN that adds the style 
transfer function in a conditional setting to the archi -
tecture of PGGAN [13]. Style and feature changes in 
Fig. 1 An illustration of a basic architecture of GAN (vanilla GAN) for retinal image synthesis. The generator transforms a noise vector z from the 
distribution p(z) into a synthesized retinal image xg . The discriminator distinguishes the synthetic and real retinal images based on the distributions 
of xg and xr , respectively. The generated image samples form a distribution pg(x) , which is desired to be an approximation of pr(x) from real image 
sample, after successful training