Page 10 of 19 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
not necessarily related to functional outcomes such as 
visual acuity.
Yoo et al. proposed a postoperative appearance pre -
diction model for orbital decompression surgery for 
thyroid ophthalmopathy using a conditional GAN 
[15]. Although the experiment was performed at a 
relatively low resolution, the results show the poten -
tial of GAN as a decision support tool for oculoplastic 
and cosmetic surgeries related to the orbit. Two stud -
ies demonstrated that conditional GAN models could 
predict OCT images after anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) injection based on pre-
injection OCT images with exudative age-related mac -
ular degeneration. Liu et  al. showed that the Pix2pix 
model could generate synthetic post-injection OCT 
using pre-injection images to estimate the short-term 
response [66]. Lee et  al. designed a conditional GAN 
with a multi-channel input for anti-VEGF injection 
[67]. The model was trained using both pre- and post-
injection OCT images as well as fluorescein angiog -
raphy and indocyanine green angiography to predict 
post-injection OCT.Table 3 Summary of literature review for data augmentation task using GAN in ophthalmology imaging domains
GAN = generative adversarial network; DCGAN = deep convolutional GAN; OCT = optical coherence tomography; PGGAN = progressively growing GANPublication Basic technique Domain Summary
Diaz-Pinto et al. [39] DCGAN Peripapillary fundus photography (optic disc 
photo)DCGAN was able to generate high-quality synthetic 
optic disc images
Burlina et al. [40] PGGAN Fundus photography The GAN technique was used to synthesize high-
resolution realistic fundus images serving as proxy 
data sets for use by retinal specialists and deep 
learning models
Zheng et al. [43] PGGAN Retinal OCT (spectral domain) The image quality of real images vs.  synthetic OCT 
images generated by GAN was similar; the synthetic 
OCT images were able to serve as augmentation of 
training datasets for deep learning models
Zhou et al. [17] Conditional GAN Fundus photography To generate a large amount of balanced training 
data, the GAN model synthesized high-resolution 
diabetic retinopathy fundus images which can 
be manipulated with arbitrary grading and lesion 
information
Wang et al. [41] Multi-channel 
GAN (modified 
vanilla GAN)Fundus photography The model generated a series of sub-fundus images 
corresponding to the scattering diabetic retinopa-
thy features and made full use of both labeled and 
unlabeled data
He et al. [42] Label smoothing 
GAN (modified 
vanilla GAN)Retinal OCT The GAN model generated the synthetic unlabeled 
images from limited OCT training samples, and the 
mixing of the synthetic images and real images can 
be used as training data to improve the classification 
performance
Yoo et al. [45] CycleGAN Retinal OCT GAN generated OCT images of rare diseases from 
normal OCT images and increased the accuracy of 
diagnosing rare retinal diseases with few-shot clas-
sification
Kugelman et al. [44] Conditional GAN Retinal OCT (patch level) GAN was feasible to generate patches that are visu-
ally indistinguishable from their real variants and 
improved the segmentation performance
Zheng et al. [82] PGGAN Anterior Segment OCT The synthetic OCT images generated by GAN 
appeared to be of good quality, according to the 
glaucoma specialists, and the deep learning model 
for angle-closure detection was improved using 
both synthetic and real images
Yoo et al. [46] CycleGAN, PGGAN Ocular surface image To improve the diagnostic accuracy, GAN was 
adopted to perform data augmentation of ocular 
surface images with conjunctival melanoma
Abdelmotaal et al. [47] Pix2pix Corneal topography (Scheimpflug images) The synthesized images showed plausible subjec-
tively- and objectively-assessed quality. Training 
deep learning with a combination of real and 
synthesized images showed better classification 
performance to detect keratoconus