Page 11 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
Table 4 Summary of literature review for image enhancement (denoising and super-resolution) tasks using GAN in ophthalmology imaging domains
GAN = generative adversarial network; OCT = optical coherence tomography; PGGAN = progressively growing GANPublication Basic technique Domain Target Summary
Halupka et al. [48] Modified Wasserstein GAN + perceptual loss 
(conditional GAN)Retinal OCT (spectral domain) Removing speckle noise The GAN was used to reduce speckle artifacts 
in retinal OCT images. The method improved 
the image quality metrics for OCT
Mahapatra et al. [55] PGGAN with a conditional design Fundus photography Super-resolution Image super-resolution using multi-stage 
PGGAN outperforms competing methods 
and baseline GANs. The super-resolved 
images can be used for landmark and pathol-
ogy detection
Huang et al. [49] Conditional GAN Retinal OCT Super-resolution and removing noise The GAN model effectively suppressed 
speckle noise and super-resolved OCT images 
at different scales
Ouyang et al. [51] Conditional GAN Anterior Segment OCT Removing speckle noise The model removed undesired specular arti-
facts and speckle-noise patterns to improve 
the visualization of corneal and limbal OCT 
images
Yoo et al. [53] CycleGAN Fundus photography Removing artifacts and noise The GAN model removed the artifacts auto -
matically in a fundus photograph without 
matching paired images
Cheong et al. [16] DeshadowGAN (modified conditional GAN 
with perceptual loss)Peripapillary retinal OCT (spectral domain) Removing vessel shadow artifacts The GAN model using manually masked 
artifact images and perceptual loss function 
removed blood vessel shadow artifacts from 
OCT images of the optic nerve head
Chen et al. [50] Conditional GAN Peripapillary retinal OCT (spectral domain) Removing speckle noise The GAN model was designed for speckle 
noise reduction in OCT images and preserved 
the textural details found in OCT
Das et al. [52] CycleGAN Retinal OCT Super-resolution and removing noise To achieve denoising and super-resolution, 
adversarial learning with cycle consistency 
was used without requiring aligned low–high 
resolution pairs
Ha et al. [56] Enhanced super-resolution GAN (SRGAN) Peripapillary fundus photography (optic 
disc photo)Super-resolution The GAN approach was capable of 4-times 
up-scaling and enhancement of anatomical 
details using contrast, color, and brightness 
improvement
Yuhao et al. [54] CycleGAN Fundus photography Removing artifacts and noise The developed model dehazed cataractous 
retinal images through unpaired clear retinal 
images and cataract images