Page 8 of 19 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
receptive fields [32], and symmetric equilibrium genera -
tors with attention mechanisms [17]. Since most of these 
studies have been conducted using limited annotated 
vessel datasets without collaboration with ophthalmolo -
gists, validation with real patient data was not performed.
In addition, accurate cup-to-disc ratio calculation 
based on optic disc segmentation is an important prob -
lem for evaluating optic nerve damage and glaucoma. 
Damage to the optic nerve increases the cup-to-disc 
ratio, which is difficult to compare with the naked eye if 
the damage is small. In recent studies, GAN was useful 
for segmenting the optic disc and cup in fundus photo -
graphs using patch-based conditional GAN [33] and 
Wasserstein GAN [34]. The cup-to-disc ratio, a clini -
cally used measurement to assess glaucoma progression, 
can be directly calculated from the optic cup and disc 
segmentation using conditional GAN [35]. This study 
showed comparable performance in assessing the cup-to-
disc ratio for glaucoma screening.
Another application found in the literature is the seg -
mentation of retinal layers in OCT images. Retinal lay -
ers consist of the vasculature, neurons, glia, and their 
connections, and each layer changes differently under 
pathological conditions. Pix2pix was successfully applied 
to segment the retinal nerve fiber layer, Bruch’s mem -
brane, and choroid-sclera boundary in peripapillary reti -
nal OCT images [36]. GAN was also applied to evaluate 
corneal pathological conditions using in  vivo confocal 
microscopy images [37]. In this study, the segmentation 
of corneal sub basal nerves was achieved using a condi -
tional GAN to detect corneal diseases. The meibomian 
gland can be evaluated by the GAN to segment the area 
of the meibomian glands in meibography infrared images 
[38]. In this study, the conditional GAN outperformed 
U-Net and masked regions with convolutional neural 
networks (mask R-CNN).
Data augmentation
The development of a machine-learning model requires 
enough data. Imbalanced data is a barrier to the training 
model, and the lack of data often presents in many medi -
cal problems because of barriers to access and usability 
[3]. Traditional data augmentation is commonly unable 
to extrapolate the generated data, which leads to data bias 
and suboptimal performance of trained models. Many 
researchers have shown that data augmentation using 
GAN techniques can provide additional benefit over 
traditional methods [8]. Recently, GAN techniques have 
been widely used to synthesize realistic medical images 
for data augmentation. Here, 11 studies investigated data 
augmentation for ophthalmology imaging domains (see Table  3). Several studies using GAN have focused on fun -
dus photography and retinal OCT image generation to 
augment training datasets for machine learning.
In recent years, generating realistic fundus photo -
graphs has become a challenging issue. DCGAN was 
initially used to generate synthetic peripapillary fundus 
photographs [39]. The machine learning model based on 
DCGAN showed better diagnostic performance for glau -
coma detection than conventional deep learning models. 
Burlina et al. evaluated the performance of a PGGAN to 
generate realistic retinal images [40]. In their study, two 
retinal specialists could not distinguish real images from 
synthetic images. Zhou et  al. used a conditional GAN 
to generate high-resolution fundus photographs based 
on structural and lesion mask images [17]. The multi-
channel generator technique, which trains multiple GAN 
models for each feature such as exudates, microaneu -
rysms, and bleeding, was used to augment fundus pho -
tographs to overcome the imbalance of data to build a 
diabetic retinopathy detection model [41].
The generation of synthetic retinal OCT is another 
important task for data augmentation in the development 
of machine-learning models for automated OCT diag -
nosis. By integrating both normal and pathological data, 
GAN can generate synthetic OCT images with various 
pathological grades for data augmentation [42]. Zheng 
et al. showed that realistic retinal OCT images could be 
generated using PGGAN, which could improve the clas -
sification performance of deep learning models [43]. Data 
augmentation based on conditional GAN also improved 
the segmentation performance of retinal OCT images 
[44]. CycleGAN was applied to OCT data augmentation 
for rare retinal diseases in a few-shot learning system 
design [45]. GAN has been used for data augmentation of 
anterior OCT images for angle-closure glaucoma, ocular 
surface images for conjunctival disease [46] and corneal 
topography images for keratoconus detection [47].
Denoising & super‑resolution
Image enhancement tasks such as denoising and super-
resolution are important because ophthalmology images 
generally suffer from limitations of the device, the skill 
of the examiner, variations of ocular anatomy, and trans -
parency of the visual axis. Image quality may affect the 
diagnostic performance using ocular images although 
the device and software offer suppression of noise and 
artifacts. As each imaging domain has characteristic 
noise and artifacts, several research groups have tried 
to develop data-driven GAN models tailored to each 
domain. There are 10 studies investigating denoising or 
super-resolution for ophthalmology imaging domains 
(detailed in Table 4).