Page 7 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
Table 2 Summary of literature review for image segmentation task using GAN in ophthalmology imaging domains
GAN = generative adversarial network; OCT = optical coherence tomography; WGAN = Wasserstein GANPublication Basic technique Domain Target Summary
Iqbal et al. [27] Conditional GAN Fundus photography Retinal vessels The framework achieved retinal vessels image segmentation 
from a small training set
Wang et al. [33] Conditional GAN (using PatchGAN) Fundus photography Optic disc and optic cup Unsupervised domain adaptation for joint optic disc and cup 
segmentation using a patch-based discriminator
Son et al. [28] Conditional GAN (using U-Net as a generator) Fundus photography Retinal vessels The GAN model segmented retinal vasculature and the optic 
disc using a dataset, which consisted of fundoscopic images 
and manual segmentation of the vessels
Rammy et al. [29] Conditional GAN Fundus photography Retinal vessels Patch-based GAN with additional loss function to learn 
thin and thick vessel segmented retinal vessels with the 
enhanced performance
Park et al. [30] Conditional GAN Fundus photography Retinal vessels The proposed GAN model with a multi-kernel pooling and 
false negative loss could segment retinal blood vessels more 
robustly
Heisler et al. [36] Pix2Pix (conditional GAN) Peripapillary retinal OCT Nerve fiber layer, Bruch’s mem-
brane, choroid-sclera boundaryThe use of a generative adversarial network and unlabeled 
data can improve the performance of segmentation for the 
3D morphometric analysis of glaucomatous optic nerve 
head volumes
Yang et al. [31] Conditional GAN (topological structure-constrained) Fundus photography Retinal vessels The topological structure-constrained proposed GAN model 
identified retinal arteries and veins via segmentation from 
the complex background of retinal images
Yang et al. [106] Conditional GAN Fundus photography Retinal vessels To separate blood vessels from fundus image, the model 
could detect more tiny vessels and locate the edge of blood 
vessels more accurately
Zhao et al. [32] Conditional GAN (with a large receptive field) Fundus photography Retinal vessels The proposed retinal vessel segmentation algorithm using 
GAN with a large receptive field could capture large-scale 
high-level semantic vessel features
Kadambi et al. [34] Wasserstein GAN Fundus photography Optic disc and optic cup WGAN-based domain adaptation showed a better perfor -
mance than baseline models for the joint optic disc-and-cup 
segmentation in fundus images
Bian et al. [35] Conditional GAN (using U-Net as a generator) Fundus photography Optic disc and optic cup The proposed method successfully performed optic disc and 
cup segmentation. The cup-to-disc ratio was automatically 
calculated with a good performance
Khan et al. [38] Conditional GAN Meibography infrared images Meibomian gland The proposed GAN automatically identified the area of 
the meibomian glands and outperformed the state-of-art 
methods
Yildiz et al. [37] Conditional GAN In vivo corneal confocal micros-
copy imagesSub-basal nerves Automatic segmentation of sub-basal nerves in in vivo 
confocal microscopy images was performed using the U-Net 
and GAN-based techniques as a diagnostic tool for corneal 
diseases
Zhou et al. [107] Conditional GAN (using U-Net as a baseline architecture) Fundus photography Retinal vessels The GAN model strengthened retinal vessel segmentation in 
the low-contrast background using a symmetric equilibrium 
GAN (U-Net-based), multi-scale features refine blocks and 
attention mechanism