Page 5 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
synthetic images can be performed using an additional 
mapping network for the latent space in the generator 
of StyleGAN.
In many cases, synthetic images should be generated 
with the desired properties to adopt GAN for medi -
cal purposes. A conditional GAN is an extended archi -
tecture of vanilla GAN, where both the generator and 
discriminator are trained using not only the original 
dataset but also additional conditioning variables [14]. 
To achieve good image generation performance in multi -
ple domains, researchers have modified the generators of 
conditional GAN in various deep learning architectures. 
Currently, conditional GAN includes many types of GAN 
models because the condition variable can be any vari -
able including a single status variable [15], images of the 
same or different domains [16], masked images [17], and 
guided heatmap images [18]. If the conditional variable 
is set as an image, the training dataset should commonly 
contain aligned image pairs. The most widely used form 
of conditional GAN is Pix2pix, which contains an image-
to-image translation framework [19]. Instead of using a 
conventional encoder-decoder as a generator, Pix2pix 
adopts a U-Net-like architecture with skip connections to 
generate synthetic images from the input images. In Pix -
2pix, the discriminator is used at the local image patch 
level to improve the performance. The GAN architecture 
for a super-resolution task (SRGAN) was developed by 
adopting a conditional GAN and perceptual loss [20]. 
However, conditional GAN models, including Pix2pix, 
have a critical disadvantage in that the shortage of paired 
datasets restricts their application to real problems.
Recently, CycleGAN was developed to generate images 
without matching paired images [21]. CycleGAN involves 
the simultaneous training of two generators and two dis -
criminators. The CycleGAN adopts a cycle consistency, 
which is based on the idea that the output of the first 
generator can be used as input to the second generator, 
and the output of the second generator should be like the 
original image. This cycle consistency allows CycleGAN 
to learn the characteristics of the two image domains 
to transfer the domains without any paired dataset. The 
weights for the training parameters of CycleGAN mod -
ules can be tuned depending on the image domain or 
task. CycleGAN can perform denoising by mapping clean 
and noisy domains from unpaired training data [22]. Cur -
rently, variants of CycleGAN, such as StarGAN [23] and 
its variants [24], have been introduced to achieve high 
performance in a multiple domain transfer problem. The 
characteristics of typical GAN techniques and examples 
of general tasks in general medicine (especially radiology) 
and ophthalmology fields are summarized in Table  1. 
It should be noted that there are several cases where it 
is not classified as a specific type of GAN because the custom architectures of GAN were commonly designed 
for each imaging domain.
Applications in ophthalmology
Here, we survey the literature on GAN for ophthalmology 
image domains. Applications are introduced according to 
the type of tasks of GAN models, including segmentation 
(15 studies), data augmentation (11 studies), denoising (8 
studies), domain transfer (8 studies), super-resolution (4 
studies, two studies overlap with denoising), post-inter -
vention prediction (3 studies), and feature extraction (2 
studies). Figure  2 shows examples of the applications of 
GAN. Figure  3 shows the number of studies based on the 
tasks of the GAN and image domains. Some studies that 
handled the two image domains were double-counted. 
Most studies have focused on the generative aspect of 
GAN, and only two studies, f-AnoGAN [25] and AMD-
GAN [26] adopted the discriminative aspect with feature 
extraction. The survey showed that segmentation was 
the most studied task in GAN in ophthalmology. Among 
ophthalmology imaging domains, fundus photography 
(24 studies) has been most frequently analyzed using 
GAN in the literature. GAN has also been used in vari -
ous imaging domains, including retinal OCT (15 studies), 
retinal angiography (7 studies), ultra-widefield fundus 
photography (scanning laser ophthalmoscopy, 3 studies), 
anterior segment OCT (two studies), periorbital facial 
image for orbital diseases (1 study), ocular surface image 
(1 study), corneal topography (1 study), meibography 
infrared imaging (1 study), and in vivo corneal confocal 
microscopy (1 study). If one study deals with two modali -
ties, it was reviewed and double-counted if necessary. 
Although conditional GAN is most frequently mentioned 
in the survey, it is difficult to conclude that it has been 
most widely used because the conditional GAN mod -
els refer to a wide variety of deep learning structures for 
each study. A table detailing the literature is provided for 
each section of the application.
Segmentation
Image segmentation is a task where pixels or areas in 
an image are assigned a category label. Segmentation is 
the most frequently studied (14 studies) focusing on the 
identification of structures such as retinal vessels, retinal 
layers, and optic nerve. Identifying pathological areas on 
the ocular images can help clinicians to diagnose more 
accurately, and thus segmentation is an important task 
for developing AI models for medicine. Table  2 shows a 
summary of the literature review for the segmentation 
task using GAN.
GAN techniques are typically used to segment reti -
nal vessels from fundus photographs. For decades, reti -
nal vessel segmentation has been a challenging problem