Page 15 of 19
 You et al. Eye and Vision             (2022) 9:6 
 
prior information improved the performance of segmen -
tation of retinal layers and detection of diabetic retin -
opathy in OCT [80]. Since GANs are also mathematical 
models for learning the statistical relationship of distribu -
tions of training and target data [6], statistical modeling 
using a prior domain knowledge is expected to improve 
GAN performance. To adopt this concept in GAN for 
medical imaging, various mathematical attempts and val -
idations are needed in future studies.
Several studies have shown that GAN can be a good 
choice in overcoming data shortages and lack of large 
annotated datasets in ophthalmology [81]. Burlina et al. 
showed that a deep learning model trained with only syn -
thetic retinal images generated by PGGAN performed 
worse than those trained with real retinal images (0.9706 
vs. 0.9235 considering the area under the receiver oper -
ating characteristic curve) [40]. However, several stud -
ies have shown that machine learning models trained 
with data integrating both real and GAN-based synthetic 
images can outperform those trained with real images in 
retinal OCT [43], anterior segment OCT [82], ocular sur -
face image [46], and corneal topography [47]. GAN was 
also used for data augmentation of OCT images with rare 
retinal diseases in a semi-supervised learning manner 
[45]. Studies have shown that GAN-based data augmen -
tation can provide a tool to solve an over-fitting prob -
lem in imbalanced datasets owing to the lack of available 
pathological samples. The image synthesis ability of GAN 
also provides patient privacy because synthetic images 
preserve characteristics as they become unidentifiable. 
The synthetic data preserve the manifold in the feature 
space of the original dataset [83]. It might be possible that 
machine learning researchers release the synthetic data -
set generated by GAN instead of a real dataset to dem -
onstrate their model if there is a problem with patient 
privacy. Additionally, the annotation of the dataset can be incomplete and inaccurate because it is time-consuming 
and laborious. According to a previous report regarding 
cell segmentation in microscopy images, GAN can be a 
solution for this weak annotation problem [84].
Studies using image-to-image translation frameworks 
of GAN have focused on segmentation, domain trans -
fer, denoising, super-resolution, and post-intervention 
prediction. The denoising function of the GAN may be 
effective in decreasing the effect of adversarial attacks 
in ophthalmology image domains [85]. Recently devel -
oped GAN architectures, such as Pix2pix and CycleGAN, 
have been widely applied in medical image domains 
[27]. However, these techniques require spatial align -
ment between the two image domains to obtain high-
quality results. Therefore, additional image registration is 
required before the GAN performs a domain transforma -
tion [57]. If the structures in the images are not aligned, 
the GAN may perform an image-to-image translation 
with deformed results in synthetic images. In this review, 
we found that only one study performed image registra -
tion to align the retinal structures between classic fundus 
photography and ultra-widefield fundus photography to 
improve the performance of CycleGAN [63]. We antici -
pate that this image alignment issue for training GAN 
models will be highlighted when data from various cent -
ers measured from multiple devices are collected. More 
research is needed, but recent studies have shown that 
GAN can also provide solutions to this image alignment 
issue [69, 86].
As the deep learning techniques associated with 
GAN have been developed, the scope of medical image 
processing is rapidly expanding. For example, when 
GAN was first introduced, simple vessel segmentation 
was the most frequent application of GAN. The recent 
work of Tavakkoli et al. achieved a significant advance -
ment in the retinal vessel segmentation problem 
Fig. 4 Examples of problems encountered using GAN techniques. a Mode collapse where the generator produces limited varieties of samples. b 
Spatial deformity due to small training images without spatial alignment. c Unintended changes due to the difference of data distribution between 
two domains. d Checker-board artifacts in synthetic images. All of the images were generated according to publicly available datasets and the 
standard GAN methods