Active Federated Learning
Jack Goetz
University of MichiganKshitiz Malik
Facebook AssistantDuc Bui
University of MichiganSeungwhan Moon
Facebook Assistant
Honglei Liu
Facebook AssistantAnuj Kumar
Facebook Assistant
Abstract
Federated Learning allows for population level models to be trained without cen-
tralizing client data by transmitting the global model to clients, calculating gra-
dients locally, then averaging the gradients. Downloading models and uploading
gradients uses the client’s bandwidth, so minimizing these transmission costs is
important. The data on each client is highly variable, so the beneﬁt of training on
different clients may differ dramatically. To exploit this we propose Active Fed-
erated Learning , where in each round clients are selected not uniformly at ran-
dom, but with a probability conditioned on the current model and the data on the
client to maximize efﬁciency. We propose a cheap, simple and intuitive sampling
scheme which reduces the number of required training iterations by 20-70% while
maintaining the same model accuracy, and which mimics well known resampling
techniques under certain conditions.
1 Introduction
As machine learning models are deployed in the real world, the assumptions under which they were
developed are often shown to be incompatible with user requirements. One assumptions is unre-
stricted access to the training data, either on a single machine or distributed over many researcher
controlled machines. Due to privacy concerns users may not want to transmit data from their per-
sonal devices, making such centralized training impossible. Federated Learning enables the training
of models on this data, but transmission costs between the server and the client are high, and re-
ducing these costs is important. In this paper we introduce Active Federated Learning (AFL) to
preferentially train on users which are more beneﬁcial to the model during that training iteration.
Motivated by ideas from Active Learning, we propose using a value function which can be evalu-
ated on the user’s device and returns a valuation to the server indicating the likely utility of training
on that user. The server collects these valuations and converts them to probabilities with which the
next cohort of users is selected for training. By using simple a value function related to the loss the
user’s data suffers under the current model, we can reduce the number of training rounds required
for the model to achieve a speciﬁed level of accuracy by 20-70%.
2 Related Work
Since its introduction [11, 14], reducing the communication costs of Federated Learning has been
an important goal [8, 4]. However as discussed in Li et al. [10] there are few existing techniques
which change the method of selecting users. In Hartmann [6] the author suggests stratiﬁcation based
on contextual information about the users, and in Nishio and Yonetani [12] the authors group users
based on hardware characteristics. In contrast our work is closer to Active Learning (AL) [13]
where the selection policy is dependant on the current state of the model and the data on each user.
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:1909.12641v1  [cs.LG]  27 Sep 2019