In both paradigms training data must be selected under imperfect information; in AL the covariates
are fully known, but the label of candidate data points is unknown, whereas in AFL both labels and
covariates are fully known on each client, but only a summary is returned to the server. Additionally,
in standard AL individual data points may be selected in an unconstrained manner, whereas in AFL
we train on all data points on each selected user, creating predetermined subsets of data.
3 Background and Notation
Assume we have labelled data (x;y)and a model for predicting y2Y givenx2X which we
denote by ^y=f(x;w), where w2Rdare our model parameters. These model parameters will
be learned by minimizing some loss function l(x;y;w). Assume our training data is distributed
over multiple clients (or users) U=fU1;:::;UKg, where we denote the data of client Ukby
(xk;yk)2XnkYnk. Our model parameters will be learned during training iterations, so we
will let w(t)denote the value of our parameters at training iteration t. During each training iteration
we select a subset of users S(t)U;jS(t)j=mand send w(t)to each user in the set. Each user
then performs some training Tusing their local data and produce updated model parameter values
w(t+1)
k=T(xk;yk;w(t)). In its most simple form this training could be a single step of gradient
descent, though in practice it is often more complicated, such as multiple passes of SGD. These
updated model parameter values are then returned to the server and aggregated to produce the next
model parameters using Federated ADAM [9]. In traditional Federated Learning the subsets S(t)
are selected uniformly at random and independently at each iteration. Our goal in AFL is to select
our subsetsS(t)such that fewer training iterations are required to obtain a good model.
4 Active Federated Learning (AFL)
Inspired by the structure of classical AL methods, we propose the AFL framework which aims to
select an optimized subset of users based on a value function that reﬂects how useful the data on that
user is during each training round. Formally, we deﬁne a function V:XnkYnkRd!Rwhich
is evaluated on each user. Once evaluated, each user Ukreturns a corresponding valuationvk2R
to the server, which is used to calculate the sampling distribution for the next training iteration. The
valuations are a function of w(t), but since transmitting the model is expensive we only get fresh
valuations of users during an iteration in which we train on them, meaning that
v(t+1)
k=(
V(xk;yk;w(t))ifUk2St
v(t)
kotherwise.
Ideally the computation of the value function should require minimal additional computation, since
the computations are done using the clients hardware, and should not reveal too much about the data
on each client. Once the server has all valuations it converts them into a sampling distribution.
Server 
Client probabilities 
Client Client 
1 1 1 12
3 3 3 3
Client Client Active Federated Learning algorithm for a 
binary classification problem. The red and 
blue dots on each client show the private 
data on the client. At each training step the 
following happens: 
1.Clients send their valuations to the 
server. 
2.Server converts individual client 
valuations into probability of each 
client being selected in the next batch. 
3.Server selects next training batch 
randomly using these client 
probabilities .
Figure 1: Active Federated Learning framework for a binary classiﬁcation problem.
2