X. Ma et al.      
 In the early stage,  the majority of  traffic prediction studies  that focus on small -scale roadway 
networks are normally  fulfilled based on statistical models with limited transportation data. In recent 
years, advanced data-driven machine learning  methods have been  widely adopted fo r network -wide 
traffic state prediction  with the rapid development in traffic sensing technologies and c omputational 
power . Machine learning models have outperformed classical statistical models due to their capabilities 
of handling high-dimensional and complicated spatiotemporal data . However, the potential of machine 
learning  models  for traffic prediction  has not been fully  utilized  until the rise of deep neural network (NN) 
models (also referred to as deep learning models)  (Ma et al., 2015 ). 
Deep learning models  have  achieve d superior performance in traffic forecasting  tasks compar ed 
with conventional mach ine learning models . With the  utilization of  fully connected  NNs (Park and Rilett , 
2010 ) for traffic prediction, many advanced and powerful deep learning models, such as  deep belief 
networks (DBN s) (Huang et al.,  2014) , convolutional NNs (CNNs)  (Ma et al., 2017) , and recurrent NNs 
(RNNs)  (Lint et al., 2002) , have been applied  to extract high -dimensional features of traffic states and 
have  achieve d good  prediction performance . However,  these models should be improved  in terms of 
capturing the  spatial and temporal dependencies in high -dimensional traffic data . Most of the  existing 
studies  on traffic prediction  have  model ed spatial dependencies with CNNs  (Ma et al., 2017 ; Zhang et al., 
2016 ) and capture d temporal dependencies via RNNs  (Ma et al., 2015; Cui et al., 2017 ). They  (Yu et al., 
2017; Li et al. 2018; Zhang et al., 2014) have also proposed models  by combining CNNs and RNNs to 
fulfill this task. However, conventional CNNs and RNNs have their limitations when handling 
network -wide traffic dat a.  
Conventional CNNs are appropriate for capturing spatial relationships in Euclidean space that are  
represented by two-dimensional ( 2D) matrices or images. On this basis , spatiotemporal traffic data  
learning  using CNNs can be roughly categorized into two strategies . The first strategy  (Ma et al., 2017 ) 
uses CNNs to learn spatiotemporal traffic data as a 2D matrix , in which the  spatial and temporal 
dimension s are separately distributed in two directions . However,  the actual  structure of a complicated 
roadway network can not be properly represented  by a 2D matrix , and CNNs inevitably capture a certain 
amount of spurious spatial relationships. The second strategy  (Zhang et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017 ) 
employs  CNNs to capture  the spatial dependencies by projecting various traffic states to their 
corresponding physical roadway links  using different colors  and by processing  a traffic network map as 
an image. In this way,  the actual  spatial features  of the traffic network are learn ed. However,  CNN -based 
feature  extraction models still fac e challenges . First, the pooling operations in CNNs proactively discards 
substantial information ; thus,  critical correlations of traffic states between links may be lost . Then , the 
neurons in conventional CNNs are  unsuitable in  representing  the various properties of a particular entity  
(Sabour et al., 2017) , such as  pose, deformation, albedo, hue, and texture . Given that the structure of a 
traffic network is fixed in a map-based image , the various colors of pixels  located on roa dways  that 
represent  traffic states  can be considered as the textures or poses  of the traffic network viewed from 
different perspectives.  Thus, the CNN approach is insufficient to capture the relative spatial 
dependencies between  colored pixels  when  these  colors gradually change  in a sequence of map-based 
images . In addition , the interdependencies between roadway links cannot be  captured by CNNs for 
several specific complicated  road network structures  that contain viaducts, intersections, and side roads, 
as shown in Fig. 1.