X. Ma et al.      
  
 
 
Forecasting Transportation Network Speed Using Deep 
Capsule Networks with Nested LSTM Models  
 
Xiaolei Ma  1,2, Yi Li  1, Zhiyong Cui  3*, Yinhai Wang  2,3* 
 
1 School of Transportation Science and Engineering, Beijing Key Laboratory for Cooperative  Vehicle 
Infrastructure System and Safety Control, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China  
2 Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang  University, Beijing 
100191, China  
3 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, 
United States  
 
*Corresponding author  
 
 
Abstract  
 
Accurate  and reliable  traffic forecasting for complicated transportation network s is of vital importance to 
modern transportation management. The complicated spatial dependencies of roadway links and the 
dynamic temporal patterns of traffic states make it particularly challenging. To address these challenges, 
we propose a new capsule network (CapsNet) to extract the spatial features of traffic n etworks and utilize 
a nested LSTM (NLSTM) structure to capture the hierarchical temporal dependencies in traffic sequence 
data. A framework for network -level traffic foreca sting is also proposed by sequentially connecting 
CapsNet and NLSTM . On the basis of  literature review, our study is the first to adopt CapsNet and 
NLSTM in  the field of  traffic forecasting.  An experiment on a Beijing transportation network with 278 
links show s that the proposed framework with the capability of capturing complicated spati otemporal 
traffic patterns outperforms multiple state -of-the-art traffic forecasting baseline models. The superiority 
and feasibility of CapsNet and NLSTM are also demonstrated , respectively,  by visualizing and 
quantitatively evaluating the experimental re sults.  
 
1. Introduction  
 
Traffic prediction  has becom e crucial for individuals and public agencies due to the requirements of 
accurate  travel time estimation and dynamic transportation management . Traffic prediction aims  to 
forecast the future traffic states of connected roadway segments on the basis of historical traffic data 
within a n underlying roadway  network  structure.