X. Ma et al.      
 where a∈(1,2,⋯,n), 𝑘 is the number of vehicles passing through the link during th e time interval, and 
𝑉𝑖𝑡 represents the average speed of each vehicle.   
To learn traffic as images, the average speed of each link is projected in the road network combined 
with a GIS map  to establish  the spatial correspondence between  the links and traffic state s. As shown in 
Fig. 2, the calculated speed on each link is visualized with different colors . We then convert the color 
image to  a single -channel grayscale image . 
 
 
Fig. 2. Transp ortation network representation
 
The traffic state s of the road network are characterized by matrix  images  through a gridding process.  
The road network is divided into multiple grids with a certain spatial latitude and longitude range.  The 
schematic of  processing  is shown in Fig. 3, in which a small part o f the road network  is used  as an 
example. First, the road network is segmented by grid s with a size of 0.0001°  × 0.0001° ( latitude and 
longitude ). Subsequently , the value of each grid is determined on the basis of the speed of links using the  
following cri teria:  if no link passes through the grid area , then the value is zero; if only one link passes 
through the grid area , then the value is t he speed of this link ; if multiple links occupay the same grid area , 
then their average speed  is assigned  to the grid.  
 
Fig. 3. Schematic of the gridding process  
 
On the basis of the above process, each grid is taken as a pixel  with one channel, in which its  value 
is the projected velocity value.  Sequences of images are generated  as data samples , and the time interval 
in these sequ ences is  2 min. These images not only represent  the traffic state but also  contain  the spatial 
structure of the road network and the relative topology among different links . 
 
3.2. Spatial features captured by C apsN et 
 
In the aforementioned rev iew, the CNN approach  has shown  promising results  in capturing the 
spatial relationships among  the links in urban road networks, where a congestion occurring on a far -side