X. Ma et al.      
  
Fig. 1. Viaducts, intersections, and side roads in a traffic network  
 
RNN and its variants, such as long short -term memory (LSTM ) network (Hochreiter  and 
Schmidhuber , 1997) , are effective for captur ing the temporal features of traffic state s. Existing studies 
have used stacked LSTMs to enhance the short -term traffic prediction performance  (Cui et al., 2017) . 
Generally, traffic conditions  are not only influenced by short -term historical information that is directly 
relevant to current  traffic states  but also  by upper -level long-term traffic patterns  with strong periodicity 
and regularity. However , long-term temporal dependencies  under severe weather or disasters do not 
contribute considerable  short -term information to  traffic prediction and should be selectively captured . 
According to  (Moniz  and Krueger , 2018) , a stacked LSTM or a single -layer LSTM cannot 
comprehensively characterize a temporal hierarchy.  
To overcome the drawbacks of conventional  CNNs  and LSTM s, we propose a new capsule network 
(CapsNet) to extract  the spatial features  of traffic networks  and utilize a newly  proposed nested LSTM 
(NLSTM) structure to improve the performance of time -series learning.  The CapsNet utilizes capsules in  
vector form  rather than in  scalar form  as neurons in the NN. The direction and length of a capsule vector 
encode the state of high -level features  and the detection  probability of a feature , respectively . With the  
aid of capsule s and a dynamic routing algorithm between them , the CapsNet considers slightly  active 
features  and largely addresses the existing problems in conventional CNNs . The NLSTM with the 
capability to access inner memories selectively in constructing temporal hierarchies is utilized to capture 
the hierarchical temporal de pendencies in traffic data  dynamically . The e valuation results show  that the 
proposed framework with the combin ation of  CapsNet and NLSTM  outperforms multiple state -of-the-art 
traffic forecasting baseline models.  
In summary, our main contribution s are as follows . 
1) We learn the traffic network as an image and propose a new CapsNet  to capture  the spatial 
dependencies between the roadway links and extract  the high-level  spatial  features of 
network -level traffic states ; 
2) We utilize an NLSTM structure to capture the hierarchical temporal dependencies in traffic 
sequence data  dynamically ; 
3) We propose a new framework for network -level traffic prediction by combining CapsNet and 
NLSTM. On the basis of literature  review , our study  is the first  to adopt  CapsNet  and NLSTM in 
traffic forecasting;  
4) The superiority and feasibility of CapsNet and NLSTM are demonstrated by visualizing and 
quantitatively evaluating the experimental results . 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . Section s 2 and 3 present s the related work s and 
our methodology , respectively . Section 4 shows the experimental data and results.  Finally , Section 5  
concludes the paper  and open questions for future research.  
 
2. Literature review  
 
The approaches i n the existing literature on short -term traffic prediction  can be divided into two 
families , namely,  statistical methods and artificial intelligence. Statistical methods, such as