X. Ma et al.      
 activation function.  The latter two layers use a novel nonlinear “squashing ” activation function for the 
vector form of capsules , as shown as follows : 
𝑣𝑗=‖𝑠𝑗‖2
1+‖𝑠𝑗‖2𝑠𝑗
‖𝑠𝑗‖,                                   (2) 
where 𝑣𝑗 is the output vector of capsule 𝑗, and 𝑠𝑗 is the input  vector . The squashing operation ensures 
that the short vectors shr ink to  approximately  zero length and long vectors shr ink to a length slightly 
below 1. Thus, the length of the output vector of a capsule can represent the probability of the existence 
of the extracted local features.  
To obtain the spatial relationship between the local features of network -level traffic state  extracted by 
the PrimaryCaps layer and advanced features , an affine transformation is performed by multipl ying the 
local features  with a weight matrix  𝑊𝑖𝑗. 
𝑢̂𝑗|𝑖=𝑊𝑖𝑗𝑢𝑖,                                   (3) 
where 𝑢𝑖 is the local features extra cted by a primary capsule 𝑖, and 𝑢̂𝑗|𝑖 is the input  vector associated 
with an advanced capsule 𝑗. 
For the TrafficCaps , input 𝑠𝑗 to an advanced capsule 𝑗 is the weighted sum over all input vectors  
𝑢̂𝑗|𝑖 from the primary capsules in the layer . 
𝑠𝑗=∑𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑢̂𝑗|𝑖𝑖 ,                                (4) 
where weights 𝑐𝑖𝑗 are the coupling coefficients that determined by  an iterative dynamic routing 
algorithm ( Sabour  et al., 2017) . The essence of the dynamic routing algorithm is to find a part of primary 
capsules  that is highly correlated to the advanced capsule s, that is, to determine the local features with 
high probability to be associated with the high -level feature . This process  represents the capability of the 
model to explore  the spatial rel ationship s among  the distant links. For example, the dynamic routing 
algorithm will associate  advanced capsule 𝑗 with a set of primary capsules that contain s the local 
features that affect congestion  when it represents a severe congestion at a viaduct . The specific process of 
the dynamic routing algorithm is  described  as follows . 
1) For each primary capsule 𝑖 in the PrimaryCaps layer, the coupling coefficient s 𝑐𝑖𝑗 with all the 
advanced capsules 𝑗 are summed to 1 by using a SoftMax  function:  
𝑐𝑖𝑗=exp(𝑏𝑖𝑗)
∑exp(𝑏𝑖𝑘)𝑘,                               (5) 
where routing logit 𝑏𝑖𝑗 is the log prior probability that capsule 𝑖 should be coupled to capsule 𝑗, and  
output  𝑐𝑖𝑗 represents the normalized probability that primary capsule 𝑖 is associated with advanced 
capsule 𝑗. In the first iteration, the initial value of  routing logit 𝑏𝑖𝑗 is set to zero in which  the 
probabilit ies of the primary capsule accepted  by each advanced capsule are equal.  
2) After all the weights 𝑐𝑖𝑗 are calculated for all the primary capsules, each advanced capsule j of 
the TrafficCaps is weighted  by using  Equation (4).  
3) In this step , all the capsules  from the last step are activated by  the squashing nonlinear function , 
as shown in Equation (2). In thi s process , the direction of the  vector is preserved  in output 𝑣𝑗 and its 
length is  enforced to be less than 1, which corresponds to the  detection  probability of high -level feature s. 
4) In the iteration process, the initial coupling coefficients are iteratively refined by updating 𝑏𝑖𝑗 on 
the basis of  the following rule:  
𝑏𝑖𝑗=𝑏𝑖𝑗+𝑢̂𝑗|𝑖∙𝑣𝑗.                              (6) 
Routing logit  𝑏𝑖𝑗 is updated by using the dot product  of the input to capsule  j and its output.  In the 
field of math ematics, the dot product becomes large for similar vectors.  Therefore, the corresponding 
routing logit increase s when  the input and output are similar ; thus, the primary  capsule is coupled  to the