X. Ma et al.      
 advanced  capsule  with a  similar  output . This process represents the association of  local features with the 
high-level feature.  
5) The algorithm s from Steps 1–4 are repeated several times  to obtain  the optimal routing weights . 
The dynamic routing algorithm is easy to be optimized , and e xperiments show that the CapsNet model 
can be optimized by iterating three times  on an MNIST dataset ( Lecun  and Cortes , 2010) . 
Overall, a set of vectors is generated to express the spatial features of network -level traffic state  by 
applying the CapsNet mod el on the input traffic images  for subsequent  operations  in the next step .  
 
3.3. Long short -term temporal features captured by NLSTM  
 
The traffic state normally has strong time evolution patterns and long -term dependenc ies, and a 
congestion state may last for several hours.  LSTMs, which introduce memory units to optionally decide 
information through different cell states , have achieve d promising learning capability of long -term time 
series  (Hochreiter  and Schmidhuber , 1997) . In thi s study, a novel nested architecture of LSTM s, which  is 
evaluated to outperform stacked and single -layer LSTMs on various character -level language modeling 
tasks  (Moniz  and Krueger , 2018) , is used to  capture  the temporal features  of traffic state.  In stack ed 
LSTMs  (Cui et al., 2017) , all the information extracted from a low LSTM must be input ted to the 
subsequent high -level LSTM layer and must  be filtered again.  
𝜎𝑓 
𝜎𝑖 
𝜎𝑐 
𝜎𝑜 
𝜎ℎ ⊙
⊙
 ⊙
⊙
 ＋
⊙
𝜎 𝑓 
𝜎 𝑖 
𝜎 𝑐 
𝜎 ℎ 
𝜎 𝑜 
⊙
𝑥𝑡 
ℎ𝑡−1 
𝑐𝑡−1 
𝑓𝑡 
ℎ𝑡 
𝐼𝑡 
ℎ 𝑡−1 
𝑥 𝑡 
𝑜𝑡 
ℎ 𝑡 
𝑐 𝑡−1 
𝑐 𝑡 
𝐼 𝑡 
𝑓 𝑡 
𝑜 𝑡 
𝑐𝑡 
 
Fig. 5. NLSTM architecture  
 
NLSTMs add depth to LSTMs by nesting rather than  stacking. As shown in Fig. 5, the value of a 
memory cell in an NLSTM is computed by  using  an LSTM structure, which  acts as  an internal unit that 
has its own inner memory cell s. The long-term information  learned by the internal unit can be selec tively 
read and writ ten by using the standard LSTM gates.  This process  enables  the inner memories to 
remember and process traffic events on long time scales , especially  when these events are irrelevant to 
the immediate present. Such selective access to inner memories in NLSTM exhibits a stable and efficient 
performance in capturin g the long -term dependencies of traffic states.  
The equations  that updat e the cell state and gates in  an internal LSTM unit are similar to the 
standard LSTM unit, as shown as follows (the parameters with superscript ~ belong to the internal LSTM 
unit):