X. Ma et al.      
 road segment may also influence the near -side traffic condition. However, this method has several 
important drawbacks . First,  the CNN approach  extract s the spatial dependencies on many  distant links by  
using  successive convolutional layers or max pooling , where valuable information  is lost. Second, the 
CNN approach cannot effect ively distinguish between two links that are not spatially connected  for 
several  complicated road structures, such as viaducts . Third,  the CNN approach cannot   sufficiently 
handle the overlapping areas due to  the low resolution in  the grid-based image pro cess.  Thus , in this 
study , a CapsNet is utilized  to solve the limitations of  the CNN approach  in extracting the spatial features 
of network -level traffic states .  
A CapsNet is a new type of  NN structure that is characterized by the use of “capsules ” in a vector 
form  rather than  traditional scalar forms of neurons. In extracting  the local features in images, all 
important information about the state of  the feature s that  the capsules  detect  is encapsulated in the vector 
form.  Partic ularly , the length of an o utput vector encode s the detection  probability  of a feature . The 
direction of the vector  encod es the state of the features , such as  rotation angle, direction,  and size. The 
CapsNet inherently can detect  multiple objects. Therefore, the CapsNet can effectively distinguish  the 
spatial interlaced links and overlapping regions  on several  complicated road structures and 
low-resolution problem in traffic images  by using such state of the features implied in the output vectors.  
In addition , the CapsNet can retain all the extracted local features by replacing the pooling operation  with 
a dynamic routing operation  between  the capsules  and thus avoid the problem of missing several  spatial 
relationships  among  the links.  
ReLU Conv 1
PrimaryCaps128
9x99x9
8
1616
30
TrafficCaps
 
Fig. 4. Layers of CapsNet  
 
In this study, t he CapsNet model is  composed of two  convolutional layer s and a fully connected 
layer  (called TrafficCaps ), as shown  in Fig. 4. For the input images that represent the  traffic state of the 
road network, the first convolutional layer is used to extract the spatial relations  between the adjacent 
links, that is, the local feature s of traffic state s. The second convolution  layer  is then utilized  in the 
primary capsule layer ( named PrimaryCaps ), and the “neurons ” that use a single scalar output  are 
converted to primary capsules in the vector form  with a dimension of 8 . Finally, the TrafficCaps  is 
employed  to capture  the spatial relationship between the local features implied in all primary capsules  
and to output  the features  to a set of advanced capsules  with a dimension of 16 . The details of each part 
are subsequently explained.  
In CNNs, high-level neurons receive input scalars from low -level neurons through weighting 
operations and activation functions, and the weights are learned by backpropagation  (Lecun et al., 1990) . 
By contra st, the weighting  operations, activation functions , and learning method of weights between 
primary and advanced capsules are different  because the  capsules are in the vector form in  the CapsNet . 
The first  convolution  layer is the same as the convolutional layer in CNN  by using R eLU as the