X. Ma et al.      
  
 
 
Table 4  Comparison of NLSTM and LSTMs  
Category  Prediction steps  2 min  10 min  20 min  
Time lags  30 min  40 min  30 min  40 min  30 min  40 min  
Loss  
(MSE)  LSTMs  41.67  43.09  44.67  45.12  48.11  47.32  
NLSTM  39.55  39.41  44.49  44.65  47.32  46.96  
Efficiency 
(s) LSTMs  42 47 34 46 34 45 
NLSTM  19 23 18 23 20 22 
 
In comparison with LSTMs, the MSE value s of NLSTM fluctuate mor e slightly when using 
long-term historical data in predict ing multistep traffic speeds, especially in the 2-min interval 
short -term prediction. In terms of the number of parameters, the stacked and nested structures have the 
same scale of 8 .8 M, and the NL STM algorithm consumes small  time in perform ing the prediction. 
These comparison results indicate that the NLSTM exhibits a stable and efficient performance in 
learning a long time series, which is the same as we expected . 
Overall, the CapsNet outperform s the CNNs in capturing the spatial features of traffic states , and 
the NLSTM performs better in terms of stability and efficiency compared with  the stacked LSTMs. 
These results demonstrate the superiority of our CapsNet+NLSTM model  over the state -of-the-art deep 
learning algorithms , which shows promising potential in forecasting  the traffic states of large -scale 
urban road networks.  
 
5. Conclusions  
 
Traffic prediction remarkably influence s the overall performance of traffic management and control 
systems. In this  study , a Caps Net+NLSTM approach is presented  to address the important drawback s of 
statistical models and  machine learning methods in handling the complex spatial  relationships among  the 
links when performing network -level traffic state prediction.  We use the traffic roadway network as an 
image to capture the spatial structure of the road network and the relative topology among  the different 
links. Many  spatial relationships among  the links are preserved , and considerable  spatial features of the 
network are encapsulated in the vector form of capsules, such as position, direction , length , and travel 
speed of the road segment , by using the new CapsNet rather than  conventional CNNs . The incorporated 
NLSTM model can achieve a stable performance in time -series prediction compared with the traditi onal 
stacked structure of LSTM. The e xperimental results indicate that the Caps Net+NLSTM model 
outperforms  other baseline  models.   
The major contribution s of this study are summarized as follows . (1) A new CapsNet is developed  to 
extract  the comprehensive spatial features of roadway networks . (2) An NLSTM model is sequentially  
incorporated  to captur e the hierarchical temporal dependencies  of traffic states. (3) The proposed model 
with the capability of capturing complicated spatiotemporal traffic patterns achieves  the best prediction 
performance  compar ed with  the baseline models . (4) The v isualiz ed prediction results display the 
proposed model ’s promising capability in handling complicated road network s that contain interlaced 
and compact links , such as viaducts and side roads.  
Several potential extensions in this research  are considered. For example, the dynamic routing