Image Data
Augmentation
Basic 
Approaches
Image 
ManipulationImage Erasing Image MixAdvanced 
Approaches
Flipping, 
Rotation, Scaling 
Ratio, ... Cutout, 
RandomErasing, 
Grid Mask, ...Pairing Samples, 
Mixup, 
CutMix, ...Auto AugmentFeature 
AugmentationDeep Generative
Models
AutoAugment, 
Fast 
AutoAugment, ...FeatMatch , 
Moment 
Exchange, ...GAN, 
CycleGAN,
StarGAN, ...Figure 1: A taxonomy of image data augmentation methods.
reviews existing face data augmentation works from perspec-
tives of the transformation types and deep learning. However,
the survey is aimed at the face recognition tasks only. One
work mainly focuses on different data augmentation tech-
niques based on data warping and oversampling [Khosla and
Saini, 2020 ]. However, it does not provide a systematic re-
view of different approaches. Another work closely related
to ours is [Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019 ]which present
some existing methods and promising developments of data
augmentation. However, it does not provide an evaluation
on the effectiveness of data augmentation for various actual
tasks and lacks some newly proposed methods, such as, Cut-
Mix [Yun et al. , 2019 ], AugMix [Hendrycks et al. , 2019 ],
GridMask [Chen et al. , 2020 ], etc.
In this paper, we aim to fill the aforementioned gaps by
summarizing existing novel image data augmentation meth-
ods. To this end, we propose a taxonomy of image data aug-
mentation methods, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Based on this tax-
onomy, we systematically review the data augmentation tech-
niques from the perspectives of common CV tasks, including
object detection, semantic segmentation and image classifi-
cation. Furthermore, we also conduct experiments from the
perspectives of these three CV tasks. Based on experiment
results, we compare the performance of different kinds of
data augmentation methods and their combinations on vari-
ous deep learning models with open image datasets. We will
also discuss future directions for image data augmentation re-
search.
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. We
present the basic data augmentation methods first, such as tra-
ditional image manipulation, image erasing based methods
and image mix based methods. Then we discuss some ad-
vanced techniques, including auto augment based methods,
feature augmentation techniques, and deep generative mod-
els. To evaluate the effect of various kinds of data augmen-
tation methods, we conduct experiments in three typical CV
tasks with various common public image datasets. Finally,
we highlight some promising directions for future research.
2 Basic Data Augmentation Methods
2.1 Image Manipulation
Basic image manipulations are focusing on image transfor-
mations, such as rotation, flipping, and cropping, etc. Most
of these techniques manipulate the images directly and are
easy to implement. The methods considered are shown witha concise description in Table. 1.
However, the drawbacks exist. First of all, it is meaningful
to apply basic image manipulations only under the assump-
tion that the existing data obeys the distribution close to the
actual data distribution. Secondly, some basic image manip-
ulation methods, such as translation and rotation, suffer from
the padding effect. That is, after the operation, some areas of
the images will be moved out of the boundary and lost. There-
fore, some interpolation methods will be applied to fill in the
blank part. Generally, the region outside the image boundary
is assumed to be constant 0, which will be black after manip-
ulation. Moreover, regardless of the CV task, the object of
interest should not to be moved off the frame.
2.2 Image Erasing
Image augmentation approaches based on image erasing typ-
ically delete one or more sub-regions in the image. The main
idea is to replace the pixel values of these sub-regions with
constant values or random values.
In[DeVries and Taylor, 2017b ], authors considered a sim-
ple regularization technique of randomly masking out square
regions of input during training convolutional neural net-
works (CNNs), which is known as cutout. This method is
capable of improving the robustness and overall performance
of CNNs. [Singh et al. , 2018 ]proposed Hide-and-Seek (HaS)
to hide patches in a training image randomly, which can force
the network to seek other relevant content while the most dis-
criminative content is hidden. [Zhong et al. , 2020 ]proposed
random erasing, which selects a rectangle region in an image
randomly and replaces its pixels with random values. This
method is simple, but makes significant improvements. Re-
cently, in [Chen et al. , 2020 ], authors analyzed the require-
ment of information dropping and then proposed a structured
method, GridMask, which is also based on the deletion of
regions in the input images. Unlike Cutout and HaS, Grid-
Mask neither removes a continuous region nor randomly se-
lects squares, the deleted regions are a set of spatially uni-
formly distributed squares, which can be controlled in terms
of density and size. Furthermore, to balance the object occlu-
sion and information retention, FenceMask [Liet al. , 2020 ]
was proposed, which is based on the simulation of object oc-
clusion strategy.
2.3 Image Mix
Image mix data augmentation has received increasing atten-
tion in recent years. These methods are mainly completed
by mixing two or more images or sub-regions of images into
one.
In[Inoue, 2018 ], authors enlarge the dataset by synthe-
sizing every new image with two images randomly selected
in the training set, known as pairing samples. The synthesis
method used is to average the intensity of two images on each
pixel. [Zhang et al. , 2017 ]discusses a more general synthe-
sis method, Mixup. Mixup, which is not just average the in-
tensity of two images, conducts convex combinations sample
pairs and their labels. Therefore, Mixup establishes a linear
relationship between data augmentation and the supervision
signal and can regularize the neural network to favor sim-
ple linear behavior in-between training samples. Similar with