3.2 Feature Augmentation
Rather than conduct augmentation only in the input space,
feature augmentation performs the transformation in a
learned feature space. In [DeVries and Taylor, 2017a ], au-
thors claimed that when traversing along the manifold it is
more likely to encounter realistic samples in feature space
than compared to input space. Therefore, various augmen-
tation methods by manipulating the vector representation of
data within a learned feature space are investigated, which
includes adding noise, nearest neighbor interpolation and ex-
trapolation. Recently, [Kuo et al. , 2020 ]proposed FeatMatch
which is a novel learned feature-based refinement and aug-
mentation method to produce a varied set of complex trans-
formations. Moreover, FeatMatch can utilize information
from both within-class and across-class prototypical repre-
sentations. More recently, authors in [Liet al. , 2021 ]pro-
posed an implicit data augmentation method, known as Mo-
ment Exchange, by encouraging the models to utilize the mo-
ment information of latent features. Specifically, the mo-
ments of the learned features of one training image are re-
placed by those of another.
3.3 Deep Generative Models
The ultimate goal of data augmentation is to draw samples
from the distribution, which represent the generating mech-
anism of dataset. Hence, the data distribution we generate
data from should not be different with the original one. This
is the core idea of deep generative models. Among all the
deep generative models methods, generative adversarial net-
works (GANs) [Goodfellow et al. , 2014 ]are very representa-
tive methods. On the one hand, the generator can help gen-
erate new images. On the other hand, the discriminator en-
sures that the gap between the newly generated images and
the original images is not too large. Although GAN has in-
deed been a powerful technique to perform unsupervised gen-
eration to augment data [Perez and Wang, 2017 ], how to gen-
erate high-quality data and evaluate them still remains a chal-
lenging problems. In this subsection, we would like to in-
troduce some image data augmentation techniques based on
GAN.
In[Isola et al. , 2017 ], based on conditional adversarial net-
works [Mirza and Osindero, 2014 ], authors proposed Pix2Pix
to learn the mapping from the input images to output images.
However, to train Pix2Pix, a large amount of paired data is
needed. It is challenging to collect the paired data. Therefore,
in[Zhu et al. , 2017 ], unlike Pix2Pix, a CycleGAN model is
proposed to learn the translation on an image from the source
domain Xto a target domain Yin the absence of paired sam-
ples. As the number of source and target domains increases,
CycleGAN has to train models for each paired domain sepa-
rately. For instance, if the task is to do transformation among
ndomains, we need to train n×(n−1)models between every
two domains. To deal with this issue, [Choi et al. , 2018 ]pro-
posed StarGAN to improve the scalability and robustness in
handling more than two domains. Generally, StarGAN builds
only one model to perform image-to-image translation among
multiply domains. In the generation phase, we just need to
provide the generator with the source image and an attribute
label which indicates the target domain. However, StarGANtakes the domain label as an additional input and learns a de-
terministic mapping per each domain, which may result in
the same output per each domain given an input image. To
address this problem, [Choi et al. , 2020 ]proposed StarGAN
v2, which is a scalable approach that can generate diverse
images across multiple domains. In this work, researchers
define the domain and style of images as visually distinct cat-
egory groups and the specific appearance of each image, re-
spectively. For example, the dog can be used as a domain, but
there are many kinds of dogs, such as Labrador and Husky.
Therefore, the specific dog breed can be viewed as the style
of an image. In this way, StarGAN v2can translate an im-
age of one domain to diverse images of a target domain, and
support multiple domains.
4 Evaluation
In this section, based on our taxonomy, we conduct extensive
evaluations in three typical CV tasks, semantic segmentation,
image classification, and object detection, to show the effec-
tiveness of data augmentation in improving performance. To
show fairness, we use the most and commonly used public
datasets for this task.
4.1 Semantic Segmentation
In this subsection, we conduct experiments of semantic
segmentation on PASCAL VOC dataset. In table 2, we
report the performance improvement on Intersection over
Union(IoU) metric with several semantic segmentation mod-
els: deeplabv3+ [Liuet al. , 2021b ], PSPNet [Zhao et al. ,
2017 ], GCNet [Cao et al. , 2019 ], and ISANet [Huang et al. ,
2019 ].
In our experiment, we apply different data augmentation
methods based on our taxonomy in Fig 1. Specifically, the
applied image manipulation methods include flipping, scal-
ing ratio, rotation, noise injection, cropping, translation and
sharpening. The applied image erasing methods include ran-
dom erasing, GridMask, FenceMask, Cutout, and HaS. The
applied image mix methods include mosaic, Mixup, CutMix,
and Fmix. Table 2 presents the mean IoU with and with-
out data augmentation on semantic segmentation models. We
observe that data augmentation methods bring IoU improve-
ments for all models.
Modelw/o aug
(%)w/ aug
(%)Improvement
(%)
DeepLabV3+ 75.32% 75.75% 0.53%
PSPNet 73.38% 74.33% 0.95%
GCNet 71.86% 72.93% 1.07%
ISANet 71.65% 74.26% 2.61%
Table 2: Semantic segmentation improvement from data augmenta-
tion based on IoU and accuracy.