Image Data Augmentation for Deep Learning: A Survey
Suorong Yang1,2,Weikang Xiao1,3,Mengchen Zhang3,Suhan Guo1,3,Jian Zhao4,Furao
Shen1,2∗
1State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
3School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
4School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, China
sryang@smail.nju.edu.cn, mg20370042@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhangmengchen@pjlab.org.cn,
dg20370004@smail.nju.edu.cn, jianzhao@nju.edu.cn, frshen@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
Deep learning has achieved remarkable results in
many computer vision tasks. Deep neural networks
typically rely on large amounts of training data to
avoid overfitting. However, labeled data for real-
world applications may be limited. By improving
the quantity and diversity of training data, data aug-
mentation has become an inevitable part of deep
learning model training with image data.
As an effective way to improve the sufficiency and
diversity of training data, data augmentation has be-
come a necessary part of successful application of
deep learning models on image data. In this paper,
we systematically review different image data aug-
mentation methods. We propose a taxonomy of re-
viewed methods and present the strengths and limi-
tations of these methods. We also conduct exten-
sive experiments with various data augmentation
methods on three typical computer vision tasks, in-
cluding semantic segmentation, image classifica-
tion and object detection. Finally, we discuss cur-
rent challenges faced by data augmentation and fu-
ture research directions to put forward some useful
research guidance.
1 Introduction
Deep learning has made incredible progress in many fields,
including computer vision(CV) [Hassaballah and Awad,
2020 ], recommender system (RS) [Liuet al. , 2021a ], natu-
ral language processing (NLP) [Torfi et al. , 2020 ]and so on.
The development of these research field is mainly affected
by the following three aspects: the progress of deep network
architectures, great computing power, and access to big data.
Firstly, the scale of the network architectures is often
proportional to its generalization ability, such as 152-layers
ResNet [Heet al. , 2016 ], which, compared with shallow net-
work, can gain significant accuracy form the increased depth.
Secondly, the development of computing power has a sig-
nificant impact on deep learning. With stronger computing
∗Contact Authorpower, it is possible to design models with deeper architec-
ture. Finally, sufficient open datasets like Imagenet [Rus-
sakovsky et al. , 2015 ], MS-COCO [Linet al. , 2014 ]and
PASCAL VOC [Everingham et al. , 2015 ]are crucial to the
development of deep learning models.
However, we observe some imbalance among the develop-
ments of these three perspectives. While various network ar-
chitectures for different CV tasks have been proposed and the
computation power of graphics processing unit (GPU) have
rapidly been increasing, fewer attention has been paid to us-
ing data augmentation methods to generate qualified training
data. The core idea of data augmentation is to improve the
sufficiency and diversity of training data by generating syn-
thetic dataset. The augmented data can be regarded as be-
ing extracted from a distribution that is close to the real one.
Then, the augmented dataset can represent more comprehen-
sive characteristics. But some research challenges remain in
image data augmentation methods. First, image data aug-
mentation techniques can be applied into various CV tasks,
such as, object detection [Liuet al. , 2020 ], semantic segmen-
tation [Minaee et al. , 2021 ]and image classification [Algan
and Ulusoy, 2021 ]. But the challenge is that data augmenta-
tion methods are tasks-independent. Because the operations
are performed on the image data and labels at the same time,
and the label types are different under different tasks, the data
augmentation methods for object detection task can not be di-
rectly applied to semantic segmentation task. This results in
inefficiency and low scalability.
Second, there is no theoretical research on data augmenta-
tion. For example, there is no quantitative standard on the size
of sufficient training datasets. The size of generated training
data is usually designed according to personal experience and
extensive experiments. In addition, paradox may exist when
the size of the original dataset is so small. We will face the
challenge of how to generate qualified data based on very lit-
tle data.
To the best of our knowledge, works related to image data
augmentation research did not review image data augmenta-
tion methods in terms of CV tasks. One work [Wang et al. ,
2017 ]explores and compares multiple solutions to the prob-
lem of data augmentation in image classification, but it only
relates to image classification task and experiments with only
traditional transformations and GANs. [Wang et al. , 2020 ]arXiv:2204.08610v2  [cs.CV]  5 Nov 2023