Water 2019 ,11, 1387 2 of 19
these models do not predict the increase of the downstream ﬂow if the upstream ﬂow has sudden
ﬂuctuations caused by the discharge from large dams and reservoirs, especially for large river basins
located in many countries.
The second approach for predicting river ﬂow consists of data-driven methods, based on the
statistical relationship between input and output data. One of the common data-driven models is
the Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) model. The amount of data required for the models, as well
as the ability of the model to both linear and nonlinear systems without the need to make any
assumptions, are implicit in most traditional statistical approaches. The data-driven approach, ANNs,
may o er a promising alternative to the existing methods for the hydrological forecast of streamﬂow [ 2].
With the development of computer science in the last two decades, the ANN models have been widely
used in various aspects of science and engineering because of the simplicity of its model structure.
Researchers have applied various neural network model techniques such as using them alone or in
combination with process-based models to reduce errors and improve the models’ prediction accuracy.
Yaseen et al. [3] reviewed papers on the application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) based on models for
streamﬂow forecasting from 2000 to 2015 and indicated that the AI had exhibited signiﬁcant progress
in forecasting and modeling non-linear hydrological problems. This paper also recommends the
potential application of ANNs in modeling and forecasting streamﬂow. In addition, several studies in
which the ANN model-based approaches were used for river stage forecasting are reviewed in the
following paragraphs.
An ANN model was developed by Hidayat et al. [ 4] to forecast discharge in a tidal river for the
Mahakam River, Indonesia. Input data includes information on upstream water levels, tide levels,
and ﬂow rates. The performance of the model is evaluated through three criteria: The coe cient
of determination (R2), the Nash–Sutcli e eciency (NSE), and the root mean square error (RMSE).
The study revealed that it could predict discharge for two days with reliable performance and the
ANN model could be used to ﬁll data gaps in a disrupted discharge on a time series scale. Elsaﬁ [ 5]
suggested an ANN model for one-day ﬂowrate forecasting at the Dongola station in the Nile River
basin (Sudan) based on upstream ﬂow data. The author concluded that the ANN model provided a
reliable means of detecting the ﬂood hazard on the river with an accuracy (R2value) of about 97%.
This acts as a precursor to the establishment of a ﬂood warning system for certain sections of the Nile
River. Khan et al. [ 6] established an ANN model that exploited daily information data of discharge
and water level at the stations along the river as the inputs to forecast one-day streamﬂow ahead
for the Ramgama River in India. The results of this research demonstrated that the selected model
could be useful for predicting discharge and water level for the Ramganga River with an accuracy of
about 93.4% for monsoon ﬂow pattern. Sung et al. [ 7] constructed an ANN model for hourly water
level forecasting at Anyangcheon Stream, Korea with a lead-time of one to three hours. The model’s
accuracy was validated by three statistical methods: RMSE, R2, and NSE. They concluded that the
model provided good results when forecasting a one-hour to two-hour water levels.
In addition, several other techniques have also been combined with data-driven models to improve
ﬂow forecasting performance, for example, support vector regression [ 8], fuzzy inference systems [ 9],
back-propagation neural network algorithms [ 10], genetic algorithms [ 11,12], and wavelet neural
networks [ 11,13]. The review of the aforementioned studies illustrates the potential of ANN models
for related hydrology ﬁelds. However, according to Govindaraju [ 14], the understanding of watershed
processes is a limit of the ANNs model. Additionally, there is no speciﬁc reference for selecting
architectures and parameters within the ANN network [ 5,15], as well as no really e ective solution for
sequential data problems such as hydrological problems [ 16]. Another major issue with ANNs is the
lack of memory when calculating problems with sequential or time series data [17,18].
Recently, owing to the breakthrough in the ﬁeld of computational science, deep learning or deep
neural network (DNN) methods based on ANNs have received a growing interest both academically
and practicality from scientists [ 18]. Moreover, the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network,
one of the state-of-the-art applications of DNN, has been successfully applied in various ﬁelds (especially