Water 2019 ,11, 1387 10 of 19
data to update numerous values in the internal cell states. Contrastingly, the LSTM models do not
include the principles of mass conservation or momentum conservation. Therefore, the input data
does not include topography data. However, the LSTM models learn these physical principles during
the training and calibration processes from the input data and observed data, and are optimized to
forecast the discharges as accurately as possible.
The setup details are summarized in Table 3. Several training options and parameters of the
model were changed to select the best results. The adaptable parameters of the neuron network were
also updated depending on a given loss function of an iteration step.
Table 3. Details of the LSTM model setup.
Items Detail
Prediction TargetDischarge forecasting at Hoa Binh Station for:
- Day one
- Day two
- Day three
Input VariableObserved daily rainfall and ﬂow data include:
- Rainfall data at seven meteorological stations
- Flow rate data at ﬁve hydrological stations
Training Parameters- Learning rate: 0.0001
- Number of units: 20; 30; 50
- Number of epochs: 100,000
The raw data of the proposed model consists of daily measured data series of ﬂow and rainfall from
the hydro-meteorological stations within the Da River basin. This input data layer must be reformatted
into three-dimensional (3D) vectors to match the architecture of the LSTM model. The input vector
(3D) comprises of samples, time steps, and features with the shape num_samples, num_timesteps,
and num_features, respectively. The num_samples are the data rows or the total of time steps collected.
The num_timesteps are the past observation for the feature, i.e., a lag variable. The num_features are
the data columns or the number of gauge stations, which are twelve and ﬁve corresponding to the 1st
and 2nd scenarios, respectively.
In order for the LSTM model to learn the dependencies more e ectively, there have been several
modiﬁcations related to the arrangement and format of data for the input layer. Instead of using
the input data vector as only the data at a speciﬁed time step, this vector has been formatted into a
sequential data with a selected sequence length of ten time-steps. This may explain that the changing
trend of the forecasted values can be seen from the observed values of the ten most recent time steps.
In fact, depending on the data structure, data type, and data characteristics, there will be di erent
choices for this sequence length value. For the time series problem, the inﬂuence of sequential lengths
on the predicted values depends closely on the observed frequency. For example, in the ﬁeld of
hydrology, the water level values observed by the hour and observed by day will have di erent
tendencies and characteristics. Theoretically, when the value of sequential length increases, the model
can capture a better trend of change. However, the selection of this high value may make the LSTM
model coping with many di culties such as consuming a large amount of time and resources of the
computer during the training process because the model must train for a complex neural network.
This may lead to the same limitations as the traditional RNN model mentioned above. Moreover,
when the value of the sequence length varies from ﬁve to 15 or more, the model demonstrates equally
excellent performance. Therefore, the sequence length value of 10 has been recommended for this study.
Another important problem in constructing the structure of a DNN model is the selection of
training parameters (hyper-parameters) such as optimizer, learning rate, number of units or number of
epochs. The recommended optimization algorithm for this study is Adam [ 45]. This is an extension
of stochastic gradient descent procedure to update network weights iterative based in training data,
which has been widely applied for deep learning application in computer vision and natural language