Water 2019 ,11, 1387 16 of 19
4.2.2. Results for Flood Peak Forecasts
The next step in evaluating the e ectiveness of the LSTM model is to compare the maximum
ﬂowrate between the forecasted value and the measured value in the test dataset. Accurate ﬂood
forecasting will act as the precursor for planning, managing, and ﬂood risk mitigation. In the 1984
test dataset, the maximum discharge value recorded at the Hoa Binh Station was 10,000 m3/s on July
15th. Base on the optimal parameters selected for the scenarios, the prediction results of the one-day,
two-day, and three-day ﬂood peaks are depicted in Table 5.
The predicted ﬂood peaks in both scenarios appear at the same time as the observed peaks.
An error value of approximately 5% and 14%, respectively, is the acceptable tolerance value in
the hydrological forecast for the case of forecasting the maximum ﬂowrate one day and two days
ahead. This is because the accurate prediction of the maximum discharge value during the ﬂood
season is di cult, especially for areas with complex topography and steep slopes like the study area.
Moreover, the ﬁgures in Table 5 indicate that in all forecast cases, the second scenario has a tendency to
provide a slightly better predictive performance than the ﬁrst scenario in ﬂood peak value prediction.
The di erence between the relative error values in the forecast of the ﬂood peaks of the two scenarios
ranges from 1.5% to 3.5%, with the highly accurate predicted results belonging to the second scenario.
The LSTM model is a data-driven model based on statistical relationships between input data and
output data. Therefore, the correlation between the data series at the target-forecast station and other
stations is one of the vital factors determining the accuracy of the model. Meanwhile, the correlation
between the series of precipitation data and the ﬂowrate at Hoa Binh station is often signiﬁcantly lower
than the correlation between ﬂowrate stations (see Table 1). This explains why the second scenario
tends to forecast the largest ﬂow value better than the ﬁrst one, because occasionally the occurrence of
precipitation data may result in the ﬂow forecast becoming less accurate.
The analysis described above proves the outstanding advantage of the LSTM model in its ability
to learn short dependencies e ectively, and this model can completely be applied to forecast the ﬂow
two days or even three days ahead with accuracy of over 86%. Data-based methods are an e ective
approach with high accuracy to modeling the hydrological process owing to their simplicity, especially
for developing countries such as Vietnam, where the application of remote sensing technology in
constructing a real-time ﬂood warning system is limited.
5. Conclusions
This paper has proposed an e ective approach to ﬂood forecasting based on the data-driven
method. The LSTM neural network model was constructed and carefully assessed to forecast one-day,
two-day, and three-day ﬂood ﬂow at the Hoa Binh Station on the Da River. Contrary to requiring a
variety of input data such as land-use and topography for rainfall-runo simulation, the developed
model uses only the measured data information available at the target station and the upstream
meteorological and hydrological stations to forecast the ﬂowrate at the target station for multi-step
output. The LSTM model has learned long-term dependencies between sequential data series and
demonstrated reliable performance in ﬂood forecasting.
Two scenarios have been considered to assess the model’s performance in ﬂowrate forecasting
and the inﬂuence of input data characteristics on the model’s ﬂood forecasting capability. The model
was validated and tested by applying criteria such as NSE value, RMSE value, as well as relative error
values in forecasting the maximum ﬂow rate using the independent data sets. For validation and testing
phases, both scenarios illustrated equally good performance. Additionally, there is no substantial
dierence in the simulation results for all three discharge forecast cases. However, when considering
the ﬂood peak forecasting factor, the second scenario indicated slightly better-forecasted results.
The aforementioned analysis revealed that the input data type has more inﬂuence than the quantity
of input data. For the data-driven model, when the correlation coe cient between the input data series
and the data at the target-forecast station is higher, the model will operate more e ciently, speciﬁcally
during the longer forecast period. In the case of ﬂood forecasting, discharge data represented a more