Water 2019 ,11, 1387 17 of 19
important role than rainfall data. Precipitation data does not clearly improve the accuracy of the
forecast results. Occasionally, the existence of this data causes noise in accurately predicting the
maximum ﬂowrate value.
LSTM neural network (with Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)) is one of the state-of-the-art architectures
designed to address problems of sequential data or time series e ectively. Streamﬂow prediction
belongs to the class of sequential data problems because the observed data ﬂuctuate continuously over
time. The LSTM-based model provides the most viable option for actual ﬂood forecasting, instead
of traditional methods when input data is missing (not available at all sites) or di cult to obtain.
The LSTM model has been successfully applied to produce for one-day, two-day, and three-day ﬂow
forecasting. In addition, the model can also be developed to provide streamﬂow forecasts with di erent
periods depending on forecasting requirements and data processing. For example, producing forecasts
for time steps of one-hour (one-hour, two-hour ahead) if data is observed with hourly frequencies or
producing forecasts for six-hour time steps (six-hour, twelve-hour ahead) if the data is observed every
six-hour. Another advantage of the data-driven model or LSTM model compared to physical-based
simulation models is the ability to produce high-performance streamﬂow predictions in areas a ected
by the tide regime. These are areas where conventional hydrological models have not yet indicated
their e ectiveness.
Despite the fact that the LSTM model resolves sequential data problems e ectively, there are
several limitations that need to be considered. LSTM models, in general, are data-driven models that
result in the inadequate simulation of hydrological processes like physical-based models. Speciﬁcally,
LSTM (or ANN)-based models only provide highly accurate forecasts at speciﬁc locations in the
study area. Therefore, these models should be combined with meteorological models such as rainfall
forecasting model to obtain better performance with long-term forecasts.
The ﬁndings of this study suggest the potential of applying the LSTM model in the ﬁeld of
hydrology in constructing and managing real-time ﬂood warning system. This model is a viable
option for developing countries or large river basins such as the Da River basin, where the river basin
stretches from China to Vietnam. The streamﬂow at downstream (Vietnam) may ﬂuctuate due to
ﬂooding discharge from a large number of upstream dams and reservoirs.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.H.L.; Methodology, X.H.L. and S.J.; formal analysis, X.H.L. and
H.V .H.; writing—original draft, X.H.L.; supervision, G.L.
Funding: This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2017R1D1A3B03033402).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Thirumalaiah, K.C.; Deo, M. Hydrological forecasting using neural networks. J. Hydrol. Eng. 2000 ,5, 180–189.
[CrossRef]
2. Ki¸ si, Ö. A combined generalized regression neural network wavelet model for monthly streamﬂow prediction.
KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 2011 ,15, 1469–1479. [CrossRef]
3. Yaseen, Z.M.; El-shaﬁe, A.; Jaafar, O.; Afan, H.A.; Sayl, K.N. Artiﬁcial intelligence based models for
stream-ﬂow forecasting: 2000–2015. J. Hydrol. 2015 ,530, 829–844. [CrossRef]
4. Hidayat, H.; Hoitink, A.J.F.; Sassi, M.G.; Torfs, P .J.J.F. Prediction of discharge in a tidal river using artiﬁcial
neural networks. J. Hydrol. Eng. 2014 ,19, 04014006. [CrossRef]
5. Elsaﬁ, S.H. Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) for ﬂood forecasting at Dongola station in the River Nile,
Sudan. Alex. Eng. J. 2014 ,53, 655–662. [CrossRef]
6. Khan, M.Y.A.; Hasan, F.; Panwar, S.; Chakrapani, G.J. Neural network model for discharge and water-level
prediction for Ramganga River catchment of Ganga basin, India. Hydrol. Sci. J. 2016 ,61, 2084–2095.
[CrossRef]
7. Sung, J.; Lee, J.; Chung, I.-M.; Heo, J.-H. Hourly water level forecasting at tributary a ected by main river
condition. Water 2017 ,9, 644. [CrossRef]