Water 2019 ,11, 1387 4 of 19
This study focuses on assessing the model’s ability in ﬂood forecasting and the e ects of input data
characteristics on model performance (sequential data). Therefore, the type of input data, the amount of
input data, and the correlation of the data series are considered. The daily measured data was retrieved
from hydrographic data at the Vietnam National Center for Hydro-meteorological Forecasting from the
period between 1961 to 1984 before the Hoa Binh Dam was built. The LSTM model was constructed to
forecast the ﬂood ﬂowrate at the Hoa Binh Station with one day, two days, and three days of lead time.
Location of gauge stations in the study area is shown in Figure 1.
Water 2019 , 11, 1387 4 of 19 
 Forecasting from the period between 1961 to 198 4 before the Hoa Binh Dam was built. The LSTM 
model was constructed to forecast the flood flowrate at the Hoa Binh Station with one day, two days, and three days of lead time. Location of gauge stations in the study area is shown in Figure 1. 
  (a)  S t u d y  a r e a                           ( b) Location of the study area in Vietnam 
 
(c) Location of the gauge stations on Da River basin 
Figure 1. Location of the study area and the gauge stations. ( a) Description of Da River basin in 
provinces of Vietnam; ( b) Description of provinces in Vietnam; ( c) Description of location of gauge 
stations on the Da River basin.  
The data collected in the study area included data on daily flowrate and precipitation. The length 
of the collected data series, information on hydro-me teorological stations, as well as the correlation 
between the flow data series at Hoa Binh station wi th other data series, are provided in Table 2. The 
rainfall was measured in millimeters (mm) and the flowrate was measured in cubic meters per second (m
3/s). 
Table 2. Information about hydrological stations. 
Figure 1. Location of the study area and the gauge stations. ( a) Description of Da River basin in
provinces of Vietnam; ( b) Description of provinces in Vietnam; ( c) Description of location of gauge
stations on the Da River basin.
The data collected in the study area included data on daily ﬂowrate and precipitation. The length
of the collected data series, information on hydro-meteorological stations, as well as the correlation
between the ﬂow data series at Hoa Binh station with other data series, are provided in Table 2.
The rainfall was measured in millimeters (mm) and the ﬂowrate was measured in cubic meters per
second (m3/s).