Water 2019 ,11, 1387 7 of 19
update the weights following the modiﬁcation of the feedback process. Therefore, it is commonly
referred to as the backpropagation through time (BPTT). The BPTT process uses a working-backward
approach, layer by layer, from the network’s ﬁnal output, tweaking the weights of each unit according
to the unit’s calculated portion of the total output error. The information loops repeat resulting in huge
updates to neural network model weights and lead to an unstable network due to the accumulation of
error gradients during the updating process. Therefore, BPTT is not su ciently e cient to learn a
pattern from long-term dependency because of the gradient vanishing and the exploding gradient
problems [ 29]. This would be one of the crucial reasons leading to di culties in the training of recurrent
neural networks [34–36].
2.4. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Neural Network
Long Short-Term Memory, an evolution of RNN, was introduced by Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber [ 37] to address problems of the aforementioned drawbacks of the RNN by adding
additional interactions per module (or cell). LSTMs are a special kind of RNN, capable of learning
long-term dependencies and remembering information for prolonged periods of time as a default.
According to Olah [ 33], the LSTM model is organized in the form of a chain structure. However,
the repeating module has a di erent structure. Instead of a single neural network like a standard RNN,
it has four interacting layers with a unique method of communication. The structure of the LSTM
neural network is shown in Figure 4.
Water 2019 , 11, 1387 7 of 19 
 Figure 3 illustrates a simple RNN with one input unit, one output unit, and one recurrent hidden 
unit expanded into a full network, where Xt is the input at time step t and ht is the output at time step 
t. During the training process, RNN uses a backpropagation algorithm, a prevalent algorithm applied 
in calculating gradients and adjusting weight matrices in ANN. However, it will adjust and update 
the weights following the modification of the feedba ck process. Therefore, it is commonly referred to 
as the backpropagation through time (BPTT). The BPTT process uses a working-backward approach, 
layer by layer, from the network’s final output, tweaking the weights of each unit according to the unit’s calculated portion of the total output error. The information loops repeat resulting in huge updates to neural network model weights and lead to an unstable network due to the accumulation 
of error gradients during the updating process. Ther efore, BPTT is not sufficiently efficient to learn a 
pattern from long-term dependency because of the gradient vanishing and the exploding gradient 
problems [29]. This would be one of the crucial reasons leading to difficulties in the training of recurrent neural networks [34–36]. 
2.4. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Neural Network 
Long Short-Term Memory, an evolution of RNN, was introduced by Hochreiter and 
Schmidhuber [37] to address problems of the aforementioned drawbacks of the RNN by adding additional interactions per module (or cell). LSTMs are a special kind of RNN, capable of learning 
long-term dependencies and remembering informatio n for prolonged periods of  time as a default. 
According to Olah [33], the LSTM model is organize d in the form of a chain structure. However, the 
repeating module has a different structure. Instead of a single neural network like a standard RNN, it has four interacting layers with a unique method of communication. The structure of the LSTM neural network is shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. The structure of the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network. Reproduced from
Yan [38].