neering or Biomedicine, among others.
3.8. Ensemble Methods and Hyper-heuristics
The concept of ensemble in optimization refers to the use of multiple search strate-
gies, subpopulations, algorithms, rules for selecting next generation population, op-
erators and/or parameter values to tackle an optimization problem [239]. The idea is
that the ensemble strategy can obtain better results than a single strategy, speciﬁcally,
better than the ensemble composites working on their own, when applied to a given
optimization problem. Following [239], ensembles for optimization can be classiﬁed
by taking into account different characteristics of the technique at hand, mainly the
type of constituent elements and the applied implementation technique. First, when
the ensemble combines different types of search strategies, operators or constraint han-
dling techniques, it is known to be a low-level ensemble . On the other hand, high-level
ensembles refer to methods that adaptively select the best optimization algorithm for
a given problem among a set of candidate algorithms [240, 241]. Ensemble methods
can be also categorized regarding their implementation structure, resulting in competi-
tive single/population, competitive multi-population, and cooperative multi-population
ensembles.
Low-level ensembles include multi-methods and multi-strategy approaches devel-
oped in the last decade. Multi-methods algorithms consider the combination of differ-
ent operators or algorithms to solve an optimization problem. Examples of low-level
competitive single population approaches are those proposed in [242], where different
search operators are jointly applied and self-adapted in the same genetic population, or
[238, 243], where a set of “substrates” are deﬁned in a Coral Reef Optimization algo-
rithm, representing the application of different search operators deﬁned in a single pop-
ulation. Multi-methods have been also applied to improve multi-objective optimization
problems [244, 245]. Other multi-methods operate on different sub-populations, yield-
ing competitive multi-population approaches such as the one in [246]. Alternative low-
level ensembles involving other algorithmic components have been also proposed in
the literature, such as neighborhood sizes [247], constraint handling techniques [248]
or niching [249] among others.
High-level ensembles have been also applied to optimization problems with suc-
cess. For example, [250] proposes a portfolio of different algorithms to be applied
in optimization problems, choosing the best combination of algorithms depending on
the problem under consideration. In [251] a comparison of different high-level multi-
method ensembles is carried out. Multi-strategy ensembles choose among different
versions of the same search strategy to solve optimization problems, usually in a com-
petitive fashion in single or multiple populations. Ensembles of multi-strategy ap-
proaches based on different algorithms have been proposed in the literature, for exam-
ple, based on DE [252, 253], PSO [254], Artiﬁcial Bee Colony algorithms [255] or
Biogeography-based optimization [256].
Closely related to the idea of ensemble methods, the hyper-heuristic paradigm ap-
peared in the early 2000s as a novel computation paradigm useful to tackle hard op-
timization problems. As already mentioned in Subsection 3.3, hyper-heuristics have
been deﬁned as “search methods or learning procedures for selecting or generating
heuristics for a given optimization problem” [257]. Hyper-heuristics operate on a set
29