of evaluations is obtained, and in multimodal-optimization is used the ratio of found
optima. For multi- and many-objective problems, there are special measures for the
Pareto front. The benchmarks, to compare algorithms, usually only the average mea-
sure (and occasionally the median, because average is very sensible to data) is used to
compare algorithms, remarking which algorithm obtain best results by each function.
Since in some cases highlighting which algorithm is better in each functions is not in-
formative enough, it is very common to calculate the average ranking in order to sort
all algorithms as per a single global ranking. Recently, rankings are transformed into
a certain number of points (more points to better ones), combining the total ranking
for each dimension when there are several dimension values (giving more importance
to results with greater dimension value, because the difﬁculty increases with the di-
mension). This is actually mainly used for the organizers of competitions rather than
in comparisons made in research papers. We believe that this comparison methodol-
ogy could be more widely adopted in the future, not only for competitions and other
workshops alike.
Nowadays, in order to compare several algorithms it is crucial to ensure that im-
provement in results are not due to stochastic differences in runs. Thus, it is mandatory
to apply statistical tests to clarify the statistical signiﬁcance of the performance gaps
found among algorithms [343]. However, the majority of benchmarks in Table 1 do
not consider the application of statistical testing, neither in their experimental setting
(the number of runs is lower than those recommended for them), nor in the compari-
son criterion established by the organizers. About statistical testing, it has been proven
that required assumptions were not fulﬁlled in some benchmarks [344], so in general
these statistical tests are not recommended. Non-parametric tests can be used instead
which, despite less powerful, do not require any assumption to be met by the sample
beforehand. Among them, the most popular is arguably the Wilcoxon test, that allow
comparing results achieved by two algorithms. Since in these non-parametric tests the
expected error increase with each one-by-one comparison, for multiple comparisons
post-hoc tests such as as Holm/Hochberg/Hommel (they are very similar to each other)
are rather adopted to maintain the expected error controlled. A prescription of good
practices on statistical tests for comparison among EC and SI algorithms can be found
in [345, 346]. Recently, new trends in the ﬁeld of statistical comparison of algorithms
indicate that bayesian tests, which provides a distribution over the parameter of interest,
are a promising approach in this regard. The meaning of p-value in null hypothesis sta-
tistical tests (parametric and non-parametric) is usually misinterpreted, as if it were the
probability of not complying with the null hypothesis. Bayesian tests actually return
the probability distribution of the null hypothesis. Therefore, while in the hypothe-
sis statistical tests when null hypothesis is not rejected there is no information at all,
bayesian tests provide useful information. In addition, they offer more robust results,
as they are not as inﬂuenced by the number of observations as the previous ones [347].
There is an open challenge that has become increasingly entangled through the
years [317]. In theory these benchmarks should serve to identify which bio-inspired al-
gorithms offer the most promising behavior when optimizing different problems. Their
ultimate goal should be to dictate which algorithms to apply to a new real-world prob-
lem, choosing from the most promising alternatives tested in functions and problems
similar (or at least, related) to the problem at hand. However, over the last decade
42