compensate for the weaknesses of different scalarizing functions. The selection is
conducted through an indicator called s-energy, which measures the even distribu-
tion of a set of points in k-dimensional manifolds. Combining different performance
indicators within an indicator-based multi-objective solver is the proposal of [132],
in which IGD+,+,pandR2are adopted as possible density estimators (i.e., the
low-level heuristics). Another strategy connected to hyper-heuristics and automatic
algorithm composition is the combination of different off-the-shelf algorithms under
a single control mechanism, as done in e.g. AMALGAM [133].
Despite the impulse around multi-objective hyper-heuristics exposed above, we still
need more theoretical studies to better comprehend their superior performance in
the reported cases so far. In fact, some work in that direction has been already
done. For instance, Qian et al. provided in [134] a theoretical study on the effective-
ness of selection hyper-heuristics for multi-objective optimization, concluding that
selection hyper-heuristics applied to any of the three major components of a multi-
objective evolutionary algorithm (selection, mutation, and acceptance) can exponen-
tially speed up the optimization process. More theoretical ﬁndings to be contributed
in the future should unveil new possibilities for the design and construction of hybrid
multi-objective optimization algorithms, specially bearing in mind the emergence of
new bio-inspired search operators.
An aspect that has also attracted great attention in the last couple of years is the scal-
ability of multi-objective techniques when addressing problems with many objec-
tives. The reason behind this research trend lies on the fact that off-the-shelf multi-
objective solvers do not scale properly under such circumstances. For instance, the
number of non-dominated solutions is known to grow exponentially with the num-
ber of objectives [135], which makes the selection mechanism in Pareto-based meth-
ods completely useless since all the non-dominated solutions are considered equally
good. There is also another interesting problem related to scalability: as we increase
the number of objectives, the number of solutions required to sample the Pareto front
also grows exponentially, further complicating an efﬁcient exploration of the search
space of the problem at hand. in this context it is also interesting to highlight the
empirical work reported in [136], where it was shown that a random search is more
effective than NSGA-II when dealing with more than 10 objectives. As a result,
many-objective optimization deals with the design of scalable search algorithms for
problems characterized by many (typically more than 3) objective functions.
In the early days of this area, two types of approaches were commonly adopted to
cope with many-objective optimization problems: 1) to adopt or propose a prefer-
ence relation that induces a ﬁner grain order on the solutions than that induced by
the Pareto dominance relation; or 2) to reduce the number of objectives of the prob-
lem during the search process or during the decision making process. Many other
approaches are possible, including, for example, the use of machine learning tech-
niques (as in MONEDA [137]), performance indicators (as in SMS-EMOA [138]),
-dominance or the two-archive MOEA, which uses one archive for convergence and
another for diversity [139].
The source of difﬁculty in many-objective problems has been extensively studied in
17