local search method. Different mechanisms of collaboration between these two search
procedures may render different degrees of exploration and exploitation. Without an
in-depth understanding of when this trade-off must be tuned and how it is difﬁcult to
design algorithms that can balance these two components. In this regard, further re-
search is needed towards achieving new procedures for detecting and quantifying the
level of stagnation, as well as appropriate, conﬁgurable countermeasures (e.g. diversity
induction) well suited to be inserted in classical frameworks for memetic computing.
Although we foresee an exciting future for research on this topic, the community
investigating on Memetic Algorithms should avoid falling into the temptation to hy-
bridize the myriad of bio-inspired optimization techniques reported to date with local
solvers just for empirical serendipity. Though qualitative improvements may eventu-
ally be obtained, the lack of mathematical rigor or argued design decisions may hinder
the discovery of memetic patterns that could bring real value to the area. In fact, it
still remains unclear how to combine components from different algorithms to make a
hybrid more computationally efﬁcient and effective for a given optimization problem.
Workarounds to this lack of knowledge take advantage of the availability of computa-
tional resources to automatically construct hybrid heuristics. This is the case of recent
studies dealing with evolutionary hyper-heuristics deployed over large computation
grids composed by volatile computing nodes [275]. Nevertheless, a detailed analysis
shedding light over this worrying concept in Memetic Algorithms is urgently needed
in order to gain informed intuition rather than factual observations.
3.10. Large-Scale Global Optimization
Evolutionary Algorithms are a very popular tool in the ﬁeld of real coding opti-
mization, in the industrial and scientiﬁc domain. However, sometimes these problems
require complex models with hundreds, if not thousands, of real parameters. This
high number of dimensions greatly worsens the behavior of algorithms designed for a
smaller number of variables, because the domain search increases exponentially with
the dimension (the curse of dimensionality [276]). This type of optimization problems,
with thousands of variables, is called Large-Scale Global Optimization (LSGO).
Tackling LSGO as a special category within bio-inspired optimization allows re-
searchers to design algorithms tailored for them, as well as to propose special bench-
marks to analyze and compare their performance. This has a special interest for differ-
ent reasons. On one hand, these benchmarks may, in some ways, reﬂect the character-
istics of many real problems, where the contribution of variables to the outcome of the
objective function varies greatly from one another [277, 278]. On the other hand, the
development of algorithms that can efﬁciently explore these large search spaces allows
for more efﬁcient optimization algorithms, if not more scalable with respect to the size
of the problem. Indeed, this is an increasingly valued feature given the growing trend
of processing large volumes of data and variables.
The community working on this particular computation paradigm has united reg-
ularly in special sessions co-located in renowned conferences since the ﬁrst was held
in 2008 [279, 280]. In 2010 another special benchmark was proposed [281]. In 2011,
there was a special issue in Soft Computing journal with another benchmark [282].
Later, in 2013 another benchmark for LSGO was proposed in [277], which was spe-
cially designed by combining functions with different levels of separability and depen-
33