into bio-inspired optimization techniques, ultimately leading to valuable advances and
improved methods. Without a consensus, research niches of acknowledged relevance
in the ﬁeld will remain largely unexplored and unfairly dominated by controversial
discussions, subtle and incremental algorithmic proposals, and a worrying lack of fresh
breezes and fertile prospects.
This work responds to this need for a common meeting point by suggesting the
audience to pause and reﬂect on which research directions should be pursued in the fu-
ture in regards to bio-inspired optimization and related areas. For this purpose we pay
special attention to numerical optimization, which was underneath the advent of the
ﬁrst bio-inspired solvers that were later adapted to combinatorial optimization. In this
manuscript we provide an informed insight of the status of this ﬁeld from both descrip-
tive ( where we stand ) and prescriptive ( what’s next ) points of view. This manuscript
suggests and highlights several key research challenges that should captivate newcom-
ers and experienced researchers for years to come, with scientiﬁc soundness at the core
of their raison d’ ˆetre. We hope that our envisioned future for bio-inspired computa-
tion acts as a suggestive guiding light for the community, bringing together different
views that have remained so far quite different from each other to date, and potentially
unifying them into a comprehensive multi-disciplinary view of the ﬁeld.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: ﬁrst, Section 2 provides a brief
albeit informative overview of the history of bio-inspired computation. Section 3 and
subsections therein undertake a comprehensive analysis of several areas of the ﬁeld,
stressing on their current status, trends, and open challenges. Section 4 elaborates on
the general issues and research niches of bio-inspired computation, and ﬁnally Section
5 concludes this paper.
2. Recent History of Bio-inspired Computation
Bio-inspired computation has emerged as one of the most studied branches of Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence during the last decades. Hundreds of novel approaches have been re-
ported along the years, showcasing the adaptability of different bio-inspired behaviors
and characteristics to yield a near-optimal performance over a wide range of complex
academic and real-world paradigms. This growing attention has led to a continuous
increase in the number of publications related to the ﬁeld, mainly focusing on the anal-
ysis, adaptation and/or improvement of different heuristic solvers.
Over the past, a diversity of optimization problems has been tackled using differ-
ent bio-inspired techniques. According to the practical concerns of the time, the ﬁrst
ones addressed with this algorithmic portfolio were continuous and combinatorial opti-
mization problems, which hinged on seminal formulations such as the Traveling Sales-
man Problem (TSP) or the Knapsack Problem (KP). In the late 60s and 70s, Fogel,
Rechenberg and Schwefel reported their ﬁrst pioneering studies related to Evolution-
ary Programming (EP, designed to optimize the behavioral linkage between solutions
to a problem and their offspring) and Evolution Strategies (ES, conceived for numerical
optimization since its very inception), laying the ﬁrst compounding bricks of an incipi-
ent community that revolved around these concepts [3, 4, 5]. Another ground-breaking
contribution was made by Holland with the publication of his seminal book in 1975 [1]
3