ﬁrst bio-inspired methods that fell within the SI umbrella. A myriad of bio-inspired
SI methods have been proposed ever since, with inspirational motifs found in phe-
nomena observed in Nature. two branches tie together within this category. The ﬁrst
one relates to biological processes, such as the geographical distribution of biological
organisms (Biogeography-Based Optimization [25]) or the chemotactic movement of
bacteria (Bacterial Foraging [26]). The second inspirational motivation is the behav-
ioral patterns of animals, such as bees (Artiﬁcial Bee Colony [27]) or ﬁreﬂies (Fireﬂy
Algorithm [28]). The current list of bio-inspired SI is huge and grows almost on a daily
basis. Exhaustive compendiums can be found in [29, 30].
Social and political behaviors have also served as an inspiration for the proposal
of many heuristic solvers; for instance, adaptations of political practices such as impe-
rialism (Imperialist Competitive Algorithm [31]) or anarchy (Anarchic Society Opti-
mization [32]). On the other hand, social attitudes have also inspired several methods,
such as Society and Civilization [33] or hierarchies in which human organizations and
structures are often arranged [34]. Likewise, physical processes have also laid the
foundation for several optimization approaches, such as the dynamics of water (Water
Cycle Algorithm [35] or Hydrological Cycle Algorithm [36]), gravitational kinematics
(Gravitational Search Algorithm, [37]) or optics systems [38]. A recent survey provides
a thorough overview of this literature strand which, jointly with biologically inspired
solvers, gave birth to the immense ﬁeld of nature-inspired optimization [39]. We note,
however, that solvers inspired by physical processes or social behaviors have been re-
markably outnumbered by those with a biological simile at their core. This being said,
even though most conclusions, drawn in this manuscript also hold for optimization
algorithms inspired in Physics or social behavioral patterns, we will concentrate our
discussion on bio-inspired optimization techniques due to their higher prominence and
relative maturity in current research.
Apart from bio-inspired EC and SI methods, which are monolithic approaches with
their own intrinsic characteristics, an uprising trend has lately protruded over the lit-
erature mainstream: the hybridization of different algorithms. Since the dawn of bio-
inspired computation, many researchers have focused their efforts on combining dif-
ferent methods and functionalities into a single solver in order to overcome the dis-
advantages and/or improve the performance shown by off-the-shelf methods. In this
regard, Memetic Algorithms (MA) spearhead this design principle by exploiting the
synergy between a bio-inspired global optimization approach with local search proce-
dures tightly coupled to the problem at hand [40]. The intense activity around MA
has made them constantly grow to furnish more complex solvers characterized by ex-
tremely sophisticated cooperative mechanisms. In addition, Cooperative Coevolution
(CC, [41]) has also played a historical role in the bio-inspired realm for its notable per-
formance in highly complex problems, mainly by virtue of its capability to divide them
into subcomponents ( species ) that are solved independently from each other.
For the sake of a better understanding of its development so far, Figure 1 depicts
a historical timeline of bio-inspired computation to date, spanning from the seminal
contribution of EP and ES to the bibliographic ﬂood of metaphor-based SI methods
registered in the last couple of decades. When it comes to scientiﬁc production, EC
captained the prominence of literature in the dawn of this ﬁeld, with GA and DE at its
foremost. A quantitative estimation supporting this statement can be made by inspect-
5