such a decomposition, sub-problems in which it is split can be solved independently, so
that once the optimization process has been completed the solution of the problem can
be obtained by assembling all produced solutions to the sub-problems together. How-
ever, when complex interdependencies exist between sub-problems, the CC model can
still be applied in such a way that each computing node performs a local evolution pro-
cess in a solution subspace. Then, by enforcing communication between nodes, they
can adaptively adjust their search direction and cooperatively move towards regions of
higher optimality for the problem at hand. A dimension-based approach is also present
in multi-agent models [218], which differs from CC in that they do not require any di-
rect coordination of agents to evolve. Instead, agents are endowed with game-theoretic
behavioral rules such that they optimize local functions and negotiate mutually to reach
some stable equilibrium and thereby, complete the optimization task efﬁciently.
Recent activity on dEAs has been intense, with many different real-world appli-
cations having been addressed by parallel bio-inspired techniques falling within this
category. Remarkable advances in this regard include [219], where new approaches
for migration in dEAs based on biological invasions are proposed and proven to be
particularly well suited for island genetic algorithms, showing improvements over al-
ternative migration schemes. Another interesting work in this line is [220], where a
new discretization scheme for Big Data processing based on a multivariate dEA is pro-
posed and tested in different large-scale classiﬁcation instances, such as ECBDL14 , a
highly unbalanced classiﬁcation database consisting of 32 million instances with an
unbalance ratio over 98%. In all the tested problems the proposed dEA-based dis-
cretizer performed best, attaining superior accuracy rates. Unsupervised classiﬁcation
over large-scale datasets has also been tackled by adopting dEAs, such as [221], where
an island genetic algorithm is proposed for fuzzy partition problems, or [222], where
dEAs are applied to improve a k-Means clustering algorithm. There has been also
active research around more practical versions of dEAs, in areas such as large-scale
optimization [223, 224, 225], Electromagnetism [226], Computational Fluid Mechan-
ics [227], energy planning [228] or neural networks training [229].
Besides large-scale data mining, a multi-objective optimization is another research
subarea where dEAs can yield proﬁtable computational gains. The main motivation
to develop parallel multi-objective solvers is to deal with expensive objective func-
tions, which are common in real-world applications comprising multiple criteria. How-
ever, something surprising is that the design of new parallel approaches is very rare in
the specialized literature [230]. We are lacking work on the development of asyn-
chronous parallel multi-objective solvers, and their comparison with respect to their
synchronous counterparts (quite in line with the work in [231]). We also need parallel
multi-objective optimizers designed to run on GPUs, following early work in [232].
Another interesting topic is the change of granularity in a parallel multi-objective al-
gorithm (with a unidirectional topology) with the aim of performing a more efﬁcient
search [233]. There are many other possibilities. For example, the use of asynchronous
parallelism combined with the use of micro-populations was adopted in [234] to yield
S-PAMICRO (PArallel MICRo Optimizer based on the S metric), a computationally
efﬁcient (parallel) version of SMS-EMOA that uses exact hypervolume contributions.
Above all, a crucial task that the community should engage with is to exploit parallel
architectures by designing multi-objective bio-inspired techniques that explicitly take
27