recent times, with speciﬁc complexity factors that by themselves open up new chal-
lenging avenues in this area. Several works are the baseline reference in this regard:
to begin with, Ishibuchi et al. considered in [140] ﬁve types of difﬁculties that arise
in many-objective problems, including the typical ones (e.g., difﬁculties to generate
a good approximation of the entire Pareto front) and others that are not so obvious
(e.g. difﬁculties to assess performance). By that time, Sch ¨utze et al. had already con-
cluded that adding more objectives for a given problem does not necessarily make
it harder [141], an insight that was later empirically conﬁrmed in [140] by showing
that NSGA-II could properly solve many-objective knapsack problems whose ob-
jectives were highly correlated. However, many other challenging aspects related to
many-objective optimization deserve to be studied in the near future, from density
estimators (what to use and what sort of distributions do we aim to ﬁnd?), the visual-
ization of high-dimensional Pareto fronts and performance indicators suited for this
family of optimization problems (at least not as expensive as the hypervolume).
A multi-objective optimization area that has lately attracted attention is the scalabil-
ity of multi-objective solvers in terms of the number of decision variables. Almost
no work had been published on this topic until a few years ago, when a small study
reported results in problems that were scaled up to 100 decision variables [15], later
extended to more than 2,000 variables and several multi-objective solvers [142]. Re-
markably, in this work, PAES was found to be the most salient technique from the
several compared (NSGA-II, SPEA2, MOCell, OMOPSO, and PESA-II). OMOPSO
did very well up to 256 decision variables and ranked second between 512 and 1024
decision variables. Years later, the ﬁrst multi-objective solver designed for large-
scale multi-objective optimization was proposed in [143], where CC (Cooperative
Coevolution) was used to tackle problems amounting up to 5,000 decision variables.
Although other large-scale multi-objective optimization techniques have been pro-
posed since then [144, 145, 146], several topics remain to be explored in this area.
For example, there are no many sets of test problems explicitly designed for testing
large-scale multi-objective problems [147]. Furthermore, large-scale many-objective
optimization problems have recently entered the research arena, e.g. [148], thereby
unfolding many challenging paths blending together complexities from both areas.
Clearly, the main challenge for the coming years is to continue to open new venues
of research in bio-inspired multi-/many-objective optimization. This is becoming in-
creasingly difﬁcult, given the huge volume of research that has been conducted and
is currently ongoing around the world. We need to be more creative: there are still
plenty of topics to study within this ﬁeld, but some of them require moving outside
the main stream of the research that is currently being conducted. For example, we
need new performance indicators, particularly for many-objective optimization. We
lack appropriate performance indicators for assessing diversity in many-objective op-
timization, although there are some interesting choices (e.g. s-energy). It is also im-
portant to design new mechanisms (search operators, encoding strategies) realistically
modeling speciﬁc features of real-world problems (e.g., heterogeneous and/or variable
length encoding [149, 150, 151], expensive objective functions, uncertainty or highly-
constrained search spaces [152]). Co-evolutionary approaches can help solve complex
18