bio-inspired algorithms have been profusely exploited to expedite the learning pro-
cess of ML models, with particular emphasis on neural networks of different kind
[428, 429]. Correspondingly, ML models lie at the core of surrogate-model assisted
optimization in which, as introduced in Subsection 3.6, computationally expensive ob-
jectives are replaced by cheaper regression models built on a few evaluated individuals
[430]. Likewise, bio-inspired heuristics are often utilized for prescribing near-optimal
actions based on the predictions produced by ML models, completing what has lately
been known as actionable data science [431]. Examples of the mutually rewarding re-
lationship between Markov Chain Monte Carlo and bio-inspired optimization are also
enlightening: the efﬁciency of complex MCMC simulations has been shown to improve
by leveraging DE-based heuristics [432], whereas DE solvers encompassing MCMC
elements have been shown to better choose the scale and orientation of the distribu-
tion modeling the underlying mutation operator [433]. Recently Wang et al. [434]
evolved a population of generators which competed against the discriminator network
in the framework of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) through an adversarial
game and by using specially deﬁned mutation operators. The resulting evolutionary
GAN not only alleviated some of the inherent problems associated with the training of
conventional GANs, but also exhibited improved generative capabilities.
Besides other multiple scenarios leveraging this proﬁtable complementarity (such
as feature selection/construction [435], opposition-based learning for bio-inspired op-
timization methods [436] or their hybridization with elements from Reinforcement
Learning [437]), possibilities for the future are foreseen to sprout sharply given the
enormous number of parameters featured by the family of Deep Learning models,
which are lately prospecting the adoption of bio-inspired LSGO techniques as an ef-
ﬁcient replacement for gradient back-propagation [438, 439]. Another ML research
niche with a noted predominance of bio-inspired heuristics is automated ML which,
despite being known for decades under different denominations (e.g. neuro-evolution
[440]), it is now when the area has been reforged as a result of the increasing design
complexity and variety of algorithmic components of Deep Learning models [441, 442,
443]. Surely ML and bio-inspired computation will enjoy a mutually rewarding mar-
riage in years to come.
4.6. New Challenges of Bio-inspired Techniques for Human-centric Applications
Human-centric applications such as Video Games or Virtual Reality/Augmented
Reality (VR/AR) are currently at the forefront of scenarios where bio-inspired opti-
mization can provide unprecedented levels of machine intelligence [444]. Such appli-
cations are often characterized by a continuous interaction between the user and the
machine, thereby requiring superior capabilities of the underlying algorithms for dy-
namic adaptation, incremental learning and bounded complexity. Despite these com-
putational constraints, the countless opportunities that bio-inspired computation may
bring to these application domains – from improved self-localization to the optimized
simulation of crowds or the optimal manipulation of virtual objects– can drive signif-
icantly efforts towards adapting them to these computing environments. For instance,
latency in VR/AR is known to be severely limited by the so-called motion to photon
threshold (20 ms), which poses challenging design constraints on any bio-inspired
optimization method designed to e.g. improve the user experience or optimize the
49