cer classiﬁcation, or [373], where the Bat Algorithm is used to isolate skin lesions
in medical images. Compendiums on the applications of bio-inspired methods to
medicine and health can be accessed in [374, 375, 376].
Cybersecurity , which recurrently informed security breach incidents have spurred
on the interest in methods aimed to increase the resilience of computer systems and
processes. This ﬁeld currently spreads beyond local security threats such as virus de-
tection and intrusion detection to also consider more elaborated, global phenomena
such as cyberterrorism [377] or cybercrime [378]. Whatever the threat may be, bio-
inspired methods have been lately applied to improve the overall response and re-
siliency of computer-based systems, thereby facing with success common computer
attacks such as phishing [379], eavesdropping [380], Denial-of-Service or spooﬁng
[381]. Closely related to these exempliﬁed cases, the automatic detection of malware
has also leveraged the application of bio-inspired algorithms in recent contributions.
For instance, in [382] a hybrid method encompassing an adaptive neuro fuzzy infer-
ence system and PSO is proposed to ﬁnd the optimum parameters that can be used
to facilitate mobile malware identiﬁcation. The work presented in [383] reports the
development of an innovative active security system that acts as an extension on the
ART (Android Run Time) Virtual Machine architecture, and uses a Biogeography-
Based bio-inspired solver for training a Multi-Layer Perceptron that classiﬁes Java
classes of a software application as benign or malicious. Finally, in [384], a novel
method that employs Deep Learning models to improve the detection of malware is
proposed. In this approach a Bat Algorithm addresses the problem of class imbal-
ance among different malware families, which is a frequent problem in data-based
studies related to cybersecurity. We refer to [385, 386, 387, 388, 389] for baseline
material about the past history of bio-inspired computation applied to problems re-
lated to cybersecurity, as well as a prospect of the research directions in this matter.
Video games have massively embraced Artiﬁcial Intelligence in a large number of
problems and challenges, such as Procedural Content Generation (PCG), bots gen-
eration or the development of virtual players [390]. To begin with, the automated
creation of content for video games via PCG techniques [391] is a critical aspect.
The industrial beneﬁts, economically speaking, are clear: PCG can reduce develop-
ment costs and enlarge the life of commercial video games (with the corresponding
earnings increase). For this reason, most PCG methods are focused on the generation
of a speciﬁc type of contents (e.g. maps o non-player characters strategies). Different
approaches, such as co-evolutionary competitive bio-inspired algorithms, have been
proposed to generate simultaneously two different kind of contents, namely maps
and game AI [392]. The development of game bots that can dynamically adapt to
different difﬁculty levels as well as variable game environments is another research
line with AI methods at its core. An example is [393], which focuses on develop-
ing a generic framework, called AntBot , that builds on SI methods (in particular,
ACO heuristics), to implement real-time gaming bots for dynamic game environ-
ments. In [394], the performance of ACO and GA was assessed when dealing with
graph-constrained models in video games problems. In [395], a naive PSO solver
was shown to automatically create complex two-dimensional graphic characters by
evolving modiﬁcations made to a base character. Overviews on the applicability
45