In this regard, the presence of EC methods has been especially notable, among which
two main algorithmic design mainstreams can be identiﬁed. In all of them, population
diversity is renowned to be a design factor of pivotal importance, in a similar fash-
ion to the well-known stability-plasticity dilemma in learning over non-stationary data
streams:
Active approaches, by which the change in the problem formulation is explicitly
detected. The solver reacts upon a detected change by altering its standard search
procedure (e.g. by resetting part of the population or increasing the mutation rate).
Here, diversity is introduced after the change occurs, which makes this design ap-
proach closely dependent on the performance of the technique used to detect the
change. This is the reason why many authors have lately invested efforts in enhanc-
ing the performance of change detectors when combined with bio-inspired solvers,
either by evaluating periodically candidate solutions or by identifying whether key
indicators of the solver’s performance vary along time. In either case, both elements
from EC and SI have been explored lately, with a dominance of the latter noted in
the last couple of years [77]. Notable milestones in this ﬁeld include the design of
full or partial random restart strategies [78, 79], the so-called hyper-mutation oper-
ator [80], which imprints an increase of the mutation rate once a change has been
detected; or the migration of individuals among subpopulations in multi-population
schemes for dynamic optimization, a strategy to actively diversify the pool of can-
didate solutions handled by the solver [81, 82]. In this literature strand challenges
reside in controlling the amount of diversity to be induced after the change (which
should be coupled to the estimated characteristics of the detected change in terms
of severity and speed), as well as in the development of new methods for change
detection, specially for slowly-evolving and/or subtle problem changes.
Passive approaches, in which diversity in the population/swarm is steadily main-
tained during the search process over time. In this case, the idea is to sacriﬁce
search performance during those time intervals where the problem formulation can
be deemed static for a better reaction of the algorithm when a change in the problem
occurs. This is accomplished by injecting diversity in the population/swarm of the
bio-inspired solver anyhow, to prevent it from converging to optima that might be-
come eventually obsolete. This insertion of diversity has been so far done in many
ways, including the generation of random candidate solutions, tailored crossover op-
erators that favor the generation of offspring strongly differing from their parents,
explicit convergence avoidance or the use of multiple sub-populations/swarms that
are enforced to track changes of the problem with time [83]. Despite the obvious
beneﬁts of this approach with respect to its active counterpart (no need for explicit
change detection, effective with sharp changes in the problem), there are still ques-
tions to be addressed in regards to the balance between diversity and performance,
particularly in what refers to the coupling between the characteristics of the change
(speed, severity) and the amount of diversity to be injected. As such, when the
change evolves slowly and/or does not differ dramatically from the previous prob-
lem status, the diversity to be induced for optimal performance should be less than
when the problem formulation changes radically in a certain instant of time. To
this end, the interest has steered towards the use of self-adaptability in both active
12