heuristics [267] leading the algorithmic streamline during this period. The main
difference between these techniques and the classic MAs is the use of a group of
local search methods. On the one hand, in multi-meme methods, simple inheritance
mechanisms are used for the transmission of the memetic material (i.e. the choice
of the local optimizer). On the other hand, in hyper-heuristics, the groups of pre-
deﬁned memes compete among themselves to decide which one to choose for local
reﬁnements. This competition is based on their previous performance by resorting
to a reward mechanism. Interested readers on this speciﬁc generation are referred
to [268], in which an extensive survey on Memetic Algorithms considering multiple
learning methods inside an evolutionary strategy is presented.
Finally, the search process of methods considered to compose the third generation of
Memetic Algorithms also rely on multiple local optimizers. Additionally, memetic
information is also passed on to offspring produced by crossover operators. How-
ever, the main novel ingredient of third-generation Memetic Algorithms with respect
to their preceding counterparts is that the mapping between the evolutionary trajec-
tory and the choice of the local optimizer is learned from experience. Two principal
trends emerge from this third category: self-adaptive schemes [269] and co-evolving
memetic methods [270].
A great upwelling of contributions has been lately noted in the literature, all fo-
cused on the discovery of new synergistic memetic approaches with biological inspira-
tion at their core. In [271], for example, the hybridization of a Cuckoo Search with a
dynamic local search is studied for multi-objective optimization problems. The same
design principle is observed in [272], where a recently proposed SI approach – Brain
Storm Optimization – is combined with a metric-based clustering method, which is put
to practice for optimally composing ﬂight formations in swarms of unmanned aerial
vehicles. Interesting works are also noted at the junction between other areas of bio-
inspired optimization, such as the one in [273], where a large-scale capacitated arc
routing problem is tackled by using a Memetic Algorithm combining decomposition
strategies, co-evolution, and extended neighborhood search. Another relevant study to
highlight is the one introduced in [274], where a many-objective, dynamic schedul-
ing problem is faced by using a proactive rescheduling Memetic Algorithm based on
Q learning. The key concept of the designed approach is to learn the most proﬁtable
global and local search methods in an adaptive way for the dynamically changing prob-
lem environment.
Next research waypoints to be visited in this area should include, at ﬁrst, the deriva-
tion of self-adaptive mechanisms to tune the balance between exploration and exploita-
tion. For any algorithm to work well in practice, a certain balance between explorative
search and exploitative search is needed. Exploration enables to search a larger area
in the search space, while exploitation focuses on the local regions that can poten-
tially speed up the overall convergence. However, too much exploitation and too lit-
tle exploration can lead to premature convergence, while too much exploration and
too little exploitation can slow down the convergence and increase the computational
costs dramatically. Thus, a ﬁne balance between these two-opposing components is
needed. This is uniquely critical in bio-inspired Memetic Algorithms, where diversiﬁ-
cation is empowered by the bio-inspired solver and intensiﬁcation is delegated on the
32