ate surrogate due to the variety of available models. In this study authors discuss on
frequently used approaches for obtaining surrogates, stressing particularly on recent
advances in this regard. Regression models such as linear regression and support vec-
tor regression are discussed, despite an emphasis is placed on Kriging and Radial Basis
Functions (RBF). These two interpolation models are among the most popular ones for
feasibility analysis and optimization by virtue of their capability to provide a quanti-
tative measure of prediction uncertainty. This has allowed these models to prevail in
many applications, such as design simulation [196] and pharmaceutical process simu-
lations [197] in the case of Kriging, and parameter estimation [198] or water pumping
optimization [199] in the case of RBF.
Several important challenges can be outlined within this speciﬁc topic. To begin
with, it remains unclear how surrogate models could efﬁciently tackle complex prob-
lems composed by a high number of dimensions. A growing amount of studies are
recently echoing this issue [194, 200], putting in question the efﬁciency of traditionally
used methods like the ones mentioned previously [201, 202]. New mechanisms and
existing methods are being lately combined to face this issue, as in [201] where Krig-
ing is hybridized with partial least squares. Deep Learning models could also enter this
arena by incorporating techniques proposed lately to quantify the statistical reliability
of their predicted output, as those exempliﬁed by [203] or provided off-the-shelf by
Bayesian deep models [204]. The challenge for the deep models will be to learn within
a limited number of function evaluations.
A higher dimensionality of the problem under consideration also requires further
improvements for the optimization algorithm itself. Sophisticated evolutionary meth-
ods are receiving attention in recent years, such as cooperative PSOs [200], hierarchi-
cal PSOs [205] or Cooperative Co-evolutionary approaches [206]. The applicability
of LSGO techniques should also be inspected in this regard in combination with the
aforementioned Deep Learning surrogates. We foresee that this synergy may have a
groundbreaking effect in the scalability of problems addressed with surrogate models
and bio-inspired optimization.
3.7. Distributed Evolutionary Algorithms
Since most real-world applications can be highly nonlinear and large-scale, bio-
inspired algorithms that work well for small-scale or moderate-scale problems need
to be modiﬁed and parallelized in implementations. Though multi-agent, population-
based algorithms can be suitable for parallelization, it is not clear what is the best way
to parallelize them. In addition, simple processing parallelization may not be enough
to solve truly large-scale problems with thousands or millions of variables. Certain
modiﬁcations and enhancements are needed, even though it is not clear yet how to
achieve such effective modiﬁcations at the moment.
In this context distributed Evolutionary Algorithms (dEA) come to the scene by
deploying different populations of solutions on distributed systems in order to improve
the performance of sequential (traditional) evolutionary solvers [207, 208]. dEAs also
include co-evolution type algorithms, which tackle high dimensional problems through
distributed divide-and-conquer mechanisms. A recent tutorial of the most important
distributed techniques in EAs is given in [209], which classiﬁes dEAs in population-
based models (island, cellular, master-slave, hierarchical and pool) and dimension-
25