Bio-inspired Computation:
Where We Stand and What’s Next
Javier Del Sera,b,c,, Eneko Osabab, Daniel Molinad, Xin-She Yange,
Sancho Salcedo-Sanzf, David Camachog, Swagatam Dash, Ponnuthurai N.
Suganthanj, Carlos A. Coello Coelloi, Francisco Herrerad
aUniversity of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48013 Bilbao, Spain
bTECNALIA, 48160 Derio, Spain
cBasque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM), 48009 Bilbao, Spain
dDaSCI Andalusian Institute of Data Science and Computational Intelligence,
University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain
eMiddlesex University London, The Burroughs, London NW4 4BT, United Kingdom
fUniversity of Alcala, 28871 Alcala de Henares, Spain
gUniversidad Autonoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain
hElectronics and Communication Sciences Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 700108, India
iCINVESTAV-IPN, 07360 Mexico, DF , Mexico
jNanyang Technological University, 639798, Singapore
Abstract
In recent years, the research community has witnessed an explosion of literature deal-
ing with the adaptation of behavioral patterns and social phenomena observed in nature
towards efﬁciently solving complex computational tasks. This trend has been espe-
cially dramatic in what relates to optimization problems, mainly due to the unprece-
dented complexity of problem instances, arising from a diverse spectrum of domains
such as transportation, logistics, energy, climate, social networks, health and industry
4.0, among many others. Notwithstanding this upsurge of activity, research in this vi-
brant topic should be steered towards certain areas that, despite their eventual value and
impact on the ﬁeld of bio-inspired computation, still remain insufﬁciently explored to
date. The main purpose of this paper is to outline the state of the art and to identify
open challenges concerning the most relevant areas within bio-inspired optimization.
An analysis and discussion are also carried out over the general trajectory followed in
recent years by the community working in this ﬁeld, thereby highlighting the need for
reaching a consensus and joining forces towards achieving valuable insights into the
understanding of this family of optimization techniques.
Keywords: Bio-inspired Computation, Evolutionary Computation, Swarm
Intelligence, Nature-inspired Computation, Dynamic Optimization, Multi-objective
Optimization, Many-objective Optimization, Multi-modal Optimization, Large-Scale
Global Optimization, Topologies, Ensembles, Hyper-heuristics, Surrogate model
assisted optimization, Computationally Expensive Optimization, Distributed
Evolutionary Computation, Memetic Algorithms, Parameter Tuning, Parameter
Adaptation, Benchmarks
Preprint submitted to Swarm and Evolutionary Computation April 16, 2019
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2019.04.008
Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, vol. 48, pp. 220-250 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2019.04.008