why landscape analysis is propelling a vibrant research activity in the last year [62, 63],
with recent insights being reported such as the need for a close match between the
coordinate system used by the heuristic and the ﬁtness landscape [64]. Unfortunately,
such approaches can be largely problem-speciﬁc. This area is still at a very early stage
of maturity to be embraced systematically by the community.
The study of the search efﬁciency of bio-inspired heuristics has also attracted great
attention in recent times, especially in what regards to the balance between their di-
versiﬁcation (exploration) and intensiﬁcation (exploitation) capabilities [65, 66]. The
former refers to the generation of diverse candidate solutions within the search process
leading to wide coverage of the solution space on a global scale, whereas the latter
stands for the capacity of the solver to focus the search process in local regions of the
solution space. In the wider context of randomized search heuristics (within which
bio-inspired solvers can be thought to be a subset), many theoretical tools have been
proposed to quantify numerically the aforementioned capabilities, such as the mea-
surement of different metrics of diversity over the population of evolved solutions, that
might be an indicator of the level of diversiﬁcation of the algorithm along iterations. In-
terestingly, diversity has been identiﬁed as a driver for the success of heuristic solvers,
to the point of replacing the ﬁtness of the problem itself as the criteria to control the
evolution of candidate solutions under what has been coined as novelty search [67].
However, it is also known that some loss of diversity is required for some heuristics
to converge properly [68, 69]. This suggests that more theoretical studies are needed
in regards to the role of diversity and the balance of local search and global search re-
quired to undertake a certain problem efﬁciently. To shed light on these crucial aspects,
we postulate that further developments around the study of landscapes should gradu-
ally consider behavioral aspects featured by speciﬁc bio-inspired algorithms, yielding a
theoretical ﬁeld that has been lately known as dynamic ﬁtness landscape analysis [62].
Another valuable research direction for this purpose is the assessment of structural bias
in population-based heuristics, namely, the limitation of certain heuristics to focus on
some part of the solution space [70]. Due to their internal features, such algorithms
may sample solutions more often either close to the origin, or close to the boundary, or
close to any other speciﬁc part of the search space. Structural bias can degrade severely
the performance of heuristic solvers, as has been already found for some important bio-
inspired algorithms [71]. Similar studies alike should also be carried out with modern
heuristics so as to clear up their behavior when sampling the solution space.
Some words of reﬂection should be posed around the fundamental comprehen-
sion of bio-inspired optimization approaches. A blossoming succession of innovative
bio-inspired optimization methods has emerged during the last decade, particularly in
metaphor-based SI. However, despite their inherent utility to discern the novelty of
such methods with respect to the state of the art, theoretical insights on these meth-
ods have been reported at a signiﬁcantly lower pace than their plain experimental per-
formance assessment. This shortage of mathematical background is jeopardizing the
discovery of new research directions in bio-inspired computation, reducing it to a des-
perate, senseless race for bio-inspired exoticism and creativeness. Efﬁcient problem
solving is by no doubt the ultimate goal of bio-inspired computation, goal for which
Nature provides countless mechanisms for learning and self-adaptation in complex cir-
cumstances. However, the emulation of such mechanisms in the form of bio-inspired
10