4. Bio-inspired Computation: a Curly Road Ahead
In the previous section we have identiﬁed possible research paths to follow in im-
portant research areas within bio-inspired computation. Unfortunately, the ﬁeld still
undergoes general issues that threaten to jeopardize true advances in years to come. A
synergistic push from the community should be made towards addressing these issues
for the beneﬁt of Science. We herein provide some thoughts so as to constructively
foster research efforts in such directions:
4.1. More is not Always Better
The ﬁrst big issue within bio-inspired computation is to decide whether we need
to improve methods discovered so far by the community, or instead look for new bio-
logical sources of inspiration to conceive new algorithmic developments. The recently
witnessed controversy around metaphor-based approaches has not achieved any com-
mon grounds in regards to the strategy that the community should embrace in regards to
this ﬁeld, nor has it stopped the emergence of more and more optimization techniques
relying on allegedly innovative bio-inspired methods [416]. It is sadly concerning that
part of this literature outbreak is motivated by a lack of perspective about the real needs
of the ﬁeld. However, without a consensus on how new algorithms should be evaluated
both theoretically (novelty, properties) and empirically (comparison methodologies,
benchmark problems), it is absolutely unfeasible to separate the wheat from the chaff .
We herein advocate for starting over a clean sheet in the ﬁeld, and thus focus on the
fundamental paradigms that underlay bio-inspired computation as a whole, so that new
advances to come will help clear up controversial questions within the community.
4.2. Towards a Uniﬁed Notation and Description of Bio-inspired Algorithms
Closely related to the above, much has been discussed around the analogy between
oldandnewbio-inspired heuristics, specially within SI. Notable are the cases of Har-
mony Search and Evolution Strategies [417, 418]; Particle Swarm Optimization and
Fireﬂy Algorithm [419]; and Ant Colony Optimization [420] and Intelligent Water
Drops [421]. In most cases disagreements could have been avoided by unifying the se-
mantics by which bio-inspired heuristics are described, so that their novel ingredients
can be put on relevance in a more cohesive manner. As a matter of fact, the myriad
of new bio-inspired algorithms that are reported on a regular basis justiﬁes by itself
the adoption of a standard notation focused on the domain-agnostic description of new
algorithmic operators and design patterns of heuristics and meta-heuristics. Such a
standardized, metaphor-free vocabulary would prevent the community from obscure
mathematical formulae widely employed nowadays to obfuscate the real mechanisms
of newly proposed methods. By virtue of this metaphor-free description, for instance, a
candidate solution would be identiﬁed explicitly as such and not as e.g. an egg, a water
drop or a bee’s nest. This need for notational uniqueness was highlighted recently in
[422], where metaphorical aspects characterizing different honey bee inspired solvers
were decoded to standardized optimization terms. Other beneﬁts would stem from this
standardization process beyond the assessment of differences and similarity between
bio-inspired solvers, such as a higher modularity and reusability of heuristic compo-
nents, a better detection of possible sources of unnecessary algorithmic complexity,
47