its restricted scalability in objective function space, which is usually circumvented
by using an overly large population size. Another alternative to overcome from this
limiting issue is to change the density estimator, but this option has not been too
popular.
An alternative design choice often followed in multi- and many-objective optimiza-
tion is to opt for decomposition-based methods. The core idea of these approaches
is to transform a multi-objective problem into several single-objective optimization
problems which are simultaneously solved using information from its neighboring
subproblems. Unfortunately, the performance of decomposition-based MOEAs is
strongly affected by the scalarizing function that they adopt, and are further sensi-
tive to the method used to generate weights. This dependence entails a more tedious
parametric tuning process when aiming to solve a certain problem, thus jeopardizing
the universality of this optimization strategy. By contrast, as opposed to Pareto-
based methods they are scalable in objective function space, although an increase in
the number of objectives will require a higher population size and thereby, a heavier
computational load of the overall solver.
Another particularly proﬁtable design strategy is to rely on a performance indica-
tor for the selection of individuals during the search, as is done in indicator-based
multi-objective solvers. However, the mere use of a performance indicator in the
density estimator was discovered to sufﬁce for rendering a good performance (as
in e.g., SMS-EMOA in which the hypervolume is adopted as a density estimator
that replaces the crowded comparison operator of NSGA-II). Unfortunately, the only
performance indicator which is known to be Pareto compliant is computationally ex-
pensive in highly-dimensional objective spaces (i.e., the hypervolume). Many other
performance indicators are available [122], some of which are weakly Pareto com-
pliant (e.g., R2and IGD+). However, they have not attracted much attention in
recent literature.
A common practice of current research in multi-/many-objective optimization is to
propose new algorithmic variants based on existing benchmark functions (e.g. ZDT,
DTLZ, WFG, UF), or adapt bio-inspired solvers to accommodate multi-objectivity.
The community will also continue producing new ﬂavors of the most popular MOEAs
in current use (i.e. MOEA/D and NSGA-III), but there is surely room for more creative
enhancements and unprecedented algorithmic developments that can pave unexplored
research avenues in this ﬁeld. Some thoughts and niches of opportunity in this direction
are outlined in what follows:
There is an urgent need for new ideas regarding the design of multi-objective solvers
that fall aside the current research mainstream represented by the three major design
criteria noted above (i.e., Pareto-based, decomposition-based, and indicator-based).
Looking into new ways of solving multi-objective problems may be more proﬁtable,
in the long term, than producing continuous updates to existing algorithms that, in
most cases, are not adopted by an important number of researchers. The recent ap-
proach reported in [123] can serve as a simple example of the viability of this claim:
in this work, a multi-objective optimization problem is transformed into a linear as-
signment problem using a set of uniformly scattered weight vectors. The uniform
15