or frequency by which bio-inspired operators are applied, replace the stochastic na-
ture of parent selection strategies, or to control the migration of individuals between
different basins.
Two main niching strategies can be adopted when facing multimodal optimization
problems with population-based meta-heuristics: 1) index-based topologies for nich-
ing, which deﬁne the neighborhood of an individual based on its index within the
population and a predeﬁned topology (e.g. a ring or a star); and 2) Euclidean dis-
tance based niching, which ﬁxes the neighborhood relationship between encoded
solutions in the population based on their Euclidean distance. Euclidean neighbor-
hood was ﬁrst used to generate offspring in [165] for single-objective bound con-
strained problems. Subsequently, [166] was the ﬁrst work to use Euclidean distance
for generating offspring within each neighborhood, enhancing, as a result, the local
exploitation around each niche. Several other contributions have since then used
Euclidean distance based neighborhood niching induction for multimodal problems
[167, 168, 169, 170]. However, the use of neighborhoods and other concepts related
to topology spans further possibilities in other areas of bio-inspired optimization,
such as multi-objective optimization (e.g. MOEA/D resorts to the deﬁnition of a
neighborhood structure to transfer information between subproblems).
In the last few years, bio-inspired solvers have thrived as the default algorithmic
choice in multimodal optimization, producing new algorithms and drawing up new
paradigms related to this optimization casuistry. Of special interest are the ﬁndings
reported in [171], where it was shown that a single-objective multimodal problem can
be reformulated as a bi-objective optimization problem, so that heuristics developed
for this alternative problem statement were proven to efﬁciently tackle more complex
multi-modal search spaces than contemporary algorithms, comprising a larger number
of variables and number of optima. Beyond the relatively improved performance of its
proposed approach, this work paved the way towards the application of multi-objective
bio-inspired solvers to the multimodal case, and further exempliﬁed how the synergy
between different areas in bio-inspired computation can yield new efﬁcient approaches
to tackle classical problems. In fact, this intuition has been at the core of a number of
recent publications, see e.g. [167, 172] and citing contributions thereafter. It is also
worth noticing that niching is also considered a very effective strategy to improve the
performance of multi-objective algorithms [158], an observation which reinforces even
further the aforementioned proﬁtable synergy between both areas of bio-inspired opti-
mization. Research efforts in the future should strive for exporting advances of one area
to another and vice versa. This being said, late advances in many-objective optimiza-
tion could serve as a source of inspiration to develop new approaches for effectively
solving multimodal optimization problems.
An alternative research line in multimodal optimization aims at deﬁning tailored
solvers with biological inspiration at their core to when addressing these problems,
among which we underscore the prominent role taken by PSO in recent times [173,
174, 175]. Indeed, the notion of memory, inherent to PSO, is exploited to induce
niching behavior. Usually, a swarm is divided into two parts: 1) an explorer swarm
(with the current particles) and 2) a memory swarm (with only the best particles found
so far by the algorithm). The underlying idea is that best particles within the memory
21