offspring when the population converges to compensate for the lack of diversity [310].
There are many proposals in GA to encourage diversity, such as an adaptive mutation
[311] or and adaptation of the selection mechanism to recombine the most dissimilar
individuals. As for DE, most of the contributions dealing with this heuristic propose to
adapt the CR and F parameters that balance the difference between a newly produced
solution and its reference solutions (encouraged by the improvement obtained). In the
majority of cases the values are not ﬁxed, but change from solution to solution by
sampling a distribution with a central value. This central value is adapted based on
successful solutions, considering as such those that are introduced into the population.
First DE versions harnessing this design principle, like SaDE [312] or JADE [313],
used only a mean value for each parameter, which is adapted along the run. However,
in order to obtain a higher level of robustness, alternative versions like SHADE use
a memory of several F and CR mean values; in that way, the search can be done by
alternating among different mean values. Another recent trend is to consider not only
the best solution to guide the search, but a group of the best psolutions (selected one
random for each solution), and adapt that parameter pduring the search by 1) using a
reducing value to increase diversity at initial stages, and 2) centering the search around
most promising solutions in later stages. All these techniques are complementary, and
in many algorithms they are used in combination.
In memetic algorithms or in co-evolutionary algorithms, in which several algo-
rithms are used in combination, there are also parameters that control how these algo-
rithms interact with each other. The self-adaptation of these parameters makes it pos-
sible to enforce the application to each algorithm based on the improvement achieved
by each one, using one reinforcement learning technique [314]. The most widespread
method is to select one algorithm based on a probability, which is periodically updated
as a function of the relative improvement obtained by each component. This model has
been used to select the local search method [315], or to choose the mutation operator
[312]. This model has been proven to be specially good in complex search spaces. For
instead, proposals like [291] or [242] combine different classic algorithms and some
speciﬁc local search methods, obtaining very competitive results that clearly surpass
those obtained by each of its components. The excellent survey in [316] describes in
depth different parameter control strategies reported in recent times.
To summarize, although the adaptation of parameters has been an active research
line for years, the good results obtained by recent proposals have revived the interest in
these techniques. Not only they can result in the best performance, but they also allow
algorithms to better adapt to a wider range of problems and, consequently, get closer to
the fundamental goal pursued in meta-heuristic optimization. Additionally, making a
parameter self-adaptive reduces tuning problems exposed in the previous section, and
yields a more readily usable search algorithm to solve real-world problems.
3.13. Benchmarks and Comparison Methodologies
In order to assess the convenience of a new bio-inspired algorithm, researchers
must properly gauge its performance over one or several optimization problems, and
compare it with other algorithms in the literature. To this end, traditionally researchers
proposing a new bio-inspired algorithm selected a group of theoretical functions to use,
and the experimental conditions under which the algorithm(s) would be tested. This,
38