1. Introduction
Over millions of years, Nature has evolved to give rise to intelligent behavior char-
acteristics and biological phenomena, where adaptability, self-learning, robustness, and
efﬁciency enable biological agents (such as insects and birds) to undertake complex
tasks. While cases exemplifying these capabilities are truly multi-fold, the most illus-
trative ones revolve around the social behavior of animals such as ant colonies, beehives
and bird ﬂocks, where concepts such as stigmergy and the collective swarming move-
ment of organisms often lead to the so-called Swarm Intelligence (SI), where improved
exploration mechanisms over complex search spaces can be achieved by agents obey-
ing local rules without any central control. The overall functionalities of the swarm
are much richer than the simple sum of individual actions. Similarly, other renowned
examples arise from the genetic inheritance process, the immune system of the human
body or the neural activity of the brain. We refer to [1] for a comprehensive material
summarizing these inspirational sources found in Nature.
Inspired by different behaviors observed in biological systems, many researchers
in the research community investigating on computational paradigms have emulated
intelligent bio-inspired processes in the form of computational algorithms, in an at-
tempt to mimic the inherent advantages of such biological systems to address complex
modeling, simulation, and optimization problems. In this regard, special attention has
been paid to optimization problems, whose complexity has unleashed a rich substratum
where to grow many bio-inspired population-based heuristic approaches, each differ-
ently balancing between computational efﬁciency and optimality of solutions. While
the ﬁrst contributions in this area are largely based on observation and emulation of
Darwinian evolutionary principles, nowadays the number of bio-inspired solvers in the
literature has increased dramatically, with very diverse inspirational rationale under-
neath their algorithmic design. This spotted ﬂourishing of novel bio-inspiration opti-
mization methods becomes even more intense when shifting the focus on other aspects
related to optimization, such as multi-objective criteria, evolving (dynamic) optimiza-
tion problems or distributed computing schemes, to mention a few.
However, quantity and diversity do not necessarily involve scientiﬁc value when it
comes to science. The development of the ﬁeld has lately undergone a gold rush for
bio-inspired streamlines that stimulate new algorithmic strands, around which some
controversy has sprung regarding their relevance and novelty [2]. Debates around this
topic are counterproductive, for which they waste efforts towards research directions
with scarce – or even null – added scientiﬁc value. The same may occur in other
research subareas as the ones exempliﬁed above, where most algorithmic contributions
build upon empirical performance observations rather than upon a deep, thoughtful
and rigorous analysis of their design and internal operation. Futile debates should set
aside to allow the entire community to start over with a clean common ground on
the key research directions to be pursued in the future. We must ally to focus our
efforts on important unresolved questions that can potentially produce greater insights
Corresponding author. University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Alameda Urquijo S/N, 48013
Bilbao, Bizkaia, Spain. Phone: +34 664 113 013. Email address: javier.delser@ehu.eus
2