could be improved signiﬁcantly.
Since these grouping techniques are very costly in evaluations, and they are not
useful for function with overriding [287], currently they cannot be considered com-
petitive enough in comparison with algorithms specially designed for LSGO, thus the
develop of algorithms specially designed for them is still a very interesting and open
research line. Among these techniques, Multiple Offspring Sampling (MOS, [291])
has been considered the state of the art during many years, because since its ﬁrst ap-
pearance in the LSGO panorama [292] it has not been improved signiﬁcantly. MOS is
an algorithm that combines several generic optimization algorithms and more speciﬁc
solvers for LSGO, such as local search methods that are applied to the same population
in rounds with an adaptive mechanism that decides which algorithm should be applied
in each round, considering the historical performance of previous applications of every
algorithm. Very recently, another proposed algorithm, SHADEILS [293], surpassed
results obtained by MOS (specially in more complex functions), becoming the new
state of the art in LSGO supported by the results attained by this algorithm in the latest
CEC’2018 competition [294]. SHADEILS is a memetic algorithm that combines an
advanced version of DE with two local search methods and an adaptive mechanism to
decide which one of the local search should be applied in each round (DE is always ap-
plied). As in other recent references [295], we observe that DE has lately prevailed as
the most utilized bio-inspired search algorithm in LSGO optimization. However, addi-
tional characteristics of recent proposals like the memetic computing strategy followed
in SHADEILS suggest that there is still room for more efﬁcient LSGO algorithms.
To summarize, in a future we expect that new grouping variable techniques could
reduce the cost of evaluations to the point of compensating for the use of such tech-
niques rather than optimizing all variables together. Another promising ﬁeld is to im-
prove existing specially-designed algorithms. A third promising research line is to
replace the algorithms usually used in CC, usually classical algorithms, with speciﬁc
algorithms for LSGO, to avoid the possible limitations that could prevent these algo-
rithms from reaching their full potential.
3.11. Parameter Tuning
The majority of bio-inspired optimization methods are very ﬂexible algorithms,
with many parameters driving their search behavior. Thus, assigning proper values to
these parameters is crucial for obtaining the best possible results for a given problem.
This selection can be theoretical to meet some desired properties of the algorithm itself
(as occurs in the design of CMA-ES [8]). More usually, parameters are rather set in a
experimental way by e.g. using a value grid or, less regularly, by mirroring parameter
settings used in similar studies to the proposed one. Unfortunately, it is often the case
that bio-inspired algorithms have too many parameters, so that seeking the best value
for each one of them can be regarded as another optimization problem by itself [296].
This problem, namely, to decide the best parameter values for the algorithm, is referred
to as tuning oroff-line tuning (because a decision is made on the parameter values
before running the algorithm).
When a new bio-inspired algorithm is proposed within the community, the values
of its parameters should be tailored in regards to the experimental setup under choice,
for which a small study of parameter sensitivity is usually carried out aside. Depending
35