what follows we brieﬂy describe some of the most classical approaches for niching in
evolutionary algorithms [157]:
Fitness sharing, originally introduced in [159], consists of dividing the population
of a bio-inspired algorithm into subgroups, according to a measure of similarity
between solutions. Thus, an individual must share its information with individuals
belonging to the same niche area. To this end, a rule must be deﬁned by which every
individual’s ﬁtness is decreased by an amount depending on the number of similar
individuals in the population. A usual way to proceed in this matter is to modify the
ﬁtness of the i-th individual in the population as f0
i=fi
mi, wheremiis known as
the niche count measuring the approximate number of individuals close to the i-th
individual. The niche count is usually established depending on the similarity dij
between the i-th andj-th individual. The similarity dijis typically measured over
the genotype or the phenotype of the problem.
The clearing method is very close to the ﬁtness sharing approach but is instead based
on the concept of limited resources of the environment [160]. Instead of sharing
resources between all individuals of a single subpopulation as in ﬁtness sharing,
clearing methods assign them only to the best members of the subpopulation, in
such a way that this operator preserves the ﬁtness of the some of the best individuals
(dominating individuals) of the niche, and resets the ﬁtness of the others individuals
in the population (correspondingly, dominated individuals).
In crowding schemes for multimodal optimization [161], only a percentage of the
population reproduces and dies in each generation of the evolutionary search. The
newly generated individuals replace similar ones in the population. For this purpose,
a subset of individuals is drawn at random from the population, whose cardinality (in
% with respect to the population size) is referred to as Crowding Factor . Then, a new
generated individual replaces the most similar element in this sample, taking into
account a distance function dijsimilar to the one deﬁned above. This approach was
improved in [162] leading to probabilistic crowding, where different tournaments
between similar individuals (parents and offspring) are carried out. When producing
offspring, however, the whole population is used, hence parents can be potentially
drawn from different niches. This results in a poor exploitation capability of the
overall search heuristic in distinct niches, thereby motivating alternative strategies
as the ones following hereafter.
Speciation [163] and islanding [164] are other ways of dealing with multimodal op-
timization problems. On one hand, the speciation technique divides the population
into several species according to their similarity, so each species focuses on a differ-
ent solution of the problem. Islanding follows the same design principle but deﬁnes
several subpopulations or islands where individuals are independently evolved.
The induction of niching behavior within the individuals produced by a bio-inspired
solver can make them converge efﬁciently around different basins of attraction. To
this end, in addition to the general niching strategies outlined above, an alternative
is to exploit the concept of neighborhood, a relationship between individuals over
a distance space that can be used, for instance, to adaptively adjust the amplitude
20