3.9. Memetic Algorithms
Memetic Algorithms were ﬁrst conceived [261] and later forged [262] as a branch
of bio-inspired computation characterizing a speciﬁc kind of hybrid evolutionary meta-
heuristics. Initially deﬁned as modiﬁcations of Genetic Algorithms employing local
search mechanisms, the community was doubtful about Memetic Algorithms even
years after their advent [40]. It is important to note that at the time of their inception,
PSO, DE and other adaptations for real-valued optimization problems had not been yet
contributed to the community. Memetic Algorithms were, thus, designed as an efﬁcient
workaround to endow global search heuristics at that time (e.g. binary-coded GA) with
local search capabilities. However, many EC and SI heuristics reported shortly there-
after have been shown to be able to perform both global and local search provided that
their search procedure is based on the difference between any pair individuals (as in the
aforementioned DE and PSO). In the initial stages of the search process, global search
is enforced inherently due to the diversity of the population (large differences between
individuals), whereas local search is performed when the population converges around
an optimum (correspondingly, small differences between individuals). Furthermore,
other sophisticated bio-inspired approaches have shown an ability to perform global
and local search simultaneously; this is the case of CMA-ES when conﬁgured with a
highly adaptive step size [263], or the more recent HCLPSO approach [184], which
deﬁnes two subpopulations (with parameters selected for one to favour exploration, the
other for exploitation) so that information is exchanged only from the exploration to the
exploitation subpopulation. Therefore, the separation between global and local search
established in Memetic Algorithms is progressively disappearing in favor of monolithic
methods jointly comprising both functionalities.
From their advent the family of Memetic Algorithms blossomed into a massive
diffusion, being today one of the most proliﬁc ﬁelds within Operations Research.
Nowadays, the distinguishing concept behind Memetic Algorithms has evolved to a
more generic conception of this algorithmic branch, deﬁned as the combination of
bio-inspired approaches for global optimization with separate local improvement and
individual learning mechanisms, possibly incorporating domain-speciﬁc knowledge of
the problem at hand.
Due to the intense activity on this speciﬁc ﬁeld and with the intention of being
adapted to the time’s needs, Memetic Algorithms have been growing at a constant pace
to yield complex techniques with extremely sophisticated cooperative mechanisms. As
a result of this fertile activity, a fair amount of Memetic Algorithms coexists in the
current literature, which can be classiﬁed in many different and equally appropriate
ways. In our brief survey of the state of the art we embrace the taxonomy introduced in
[264, 265], in which three different chronological generations are distinguished based
on their intrinsic characteristics and communication mechanisms:
The ﬁrst generation started with the pioneering work by Moscato and Norman men-
tioned above, in which the beneﬁts of combining population-based global optimiza-
tion solvers with local search procedures were ﬁrst explored. Methods framed within
this ﬁrst category are characterized by the use of a single local search heuristic.
The second generation of Memetic Algorithms delved into the memetic transmission
and design selection, with Multi-meme evolutionary algorithms [266] and hyper-
31