of bio-inspired optimization to games have been published during the last decade
[396, 397], but new paradigms such as serious games have lately rekindled the inter-
est in this topic and enlarged its application scope far beyond leisure (see e.g. [398]
for rehabilitation robotics).
The above list of selected topics must be regarded as an exemplifying excerpt of
the plethora of applications where bio-inspired optimization is becoming a relevant
technological enabler. Many other ﬁelds such as intelligent transportation systems
[399, 400, 401], automated manufacturing [402, 403, 404, 405] or energy systems
and smart grids [406, 407, 408, 409] have also been bolstered by bio-inspired opti-
mization methods. In all these sectors we discriminate several challenges related to
the practicality of bio-inspired solvers when deployed in real problem setups. First,
real-world scenarios are often subject to constraints that must be modeled and in-
cluded in the mathematical problem statement but, most importantly, considered by
the optimization algorithm during its search process. When this is the case, many
strategies to handle different types of constraints have been reported by the community
[235, 410, 411, 412]. However, there is no clear consensus about how to deal with
practical problems that undergo a high number of restrictions. When this is the case,
it might not be of practical value to face it as an optimization problem, but rather as a
constraint satisfaction problem [413, 414]. Different design patterns can be followed
depending on how the problem is modeled, but it is the added value to the application
what should drive the decision whether to opt for one modeling approach or the other.
Just ﬁnding a solution satisfying all imposed constraints is enough in many practical
cases. From a research perspective, the community lacks a formal, methodological
study on the conditions that should be met to select a good modeling approach for a
practical optimization problem, capable of realistically reﬂecting its particularities and
constraints (such as latency, complexity or scalability), yet properly balancing the cost
per value of the solver designed to solve it efﬁciently.
Aligned with the above objective, the expert knowledge accumulated by users of the
system to be optimized along years of operation is a very valuable source of inspiration
for the design of efﬁcient ad-hoc heuristics [415]. In a sense, it can be regarded as the
byproduct of an adaptation of a learning machine (the human) to a problem as a result
of a series of repeated trial-and-measure iterations over time. Unfortunately, expert
knowledge is often overseen in practice; meta-heuristic algorithms are instead preferred
to expedite the achievement of good solutions at the cost of a slower convergence or
a lower optimality. In problems of increasing complexity and/or when convergence
speed is a critical design factor, expert knowledge should be exploited during the search
process by including specialized operators that model the solving patterns followed
traditionally in the scenario at hand. In most practical situations information revealed
by experts can yield better search operators or higher convergence rates; in short, a
better overall search performance than those of the most sophisticated bio-inspired
optimization method.
46