and passive approaches, always with bio-inspired solvers at their algorithmic core
[77, 84].
Research directions in the ﬁeld of dynamic optimization are foreseen along the di-
verse axis: to begin with, most dynamic optimization problems tackled to date are de-
ﬁned over unconstrained, continuous-variable search spaces. This experimental choice
ﬁnds its motivation in the lack of informed answers to the challenges still faced by
the community in regards to the role played by the diversity in dynamic environments
of varying characteristics. There are validated empirical pieces of evidence that align
with the intuition, such as the need for ensuring a higher diversity in population-based
heuristics the wider the differences between shifting problems are. While this state-
ment has been assessed over extensive dynamic optimization benchmarks comprising
continuous variable problems, this question still remains insufﬁciently addressed when
the scope is placed on discrete problem formulations, evolving constraints and/or re-
current concepts. When this is the case, it is not clear yet how to control or even deﬁne
the level of diversity injected to the solver [77].
There are other research venues around dynamic optimization that should be ex-
plored in the near future. Among them, change detection mechanisms relying on char-
acteristics of the optimization algorithm itself are known to perform poorly when the
optimization problem varies by any other reason than a change in the problem formu-
lation itself, such as noisy objectives and/or constraints. In real environments, it is
often the case that the objective evaluation is affected by external noise sources that
make the ﬁtness value vary over time. This must not be understood as a change in the
problem formulation, but in this case detection mechanisms based on monitoring the
ﬁtness value might misinterpret it as a problem change and trigger a false alarm. Other
dynamic scenarios where change detection mechanisms are known to fail catastrophi-
cally (e.g. slowly evolving/subtle problem changes) lead to the overall conclusion that
change detection should be avoided and efforts rather invested on passive/self-adaptive
schemes [77, 85].
On the other hand, stochastic optimization is a research topic that came to public at-
tention several decades ago [86, 87, 88], with comprehensive overviews contributed to
the literature ever since [89, 90]. This kind of optimization problems has rapidly grown
in importance and led to the emergence of different trends such as Fuzzy Programming
[91] or Stochastic Dynamic Programming [92]. Among them, Robust Optimization
[93] has particularly protruded in last times: algorithms within this broad family of
solvers deﬁne a so-called uncertainty set of possible realizations of the uncertain pa-
rameters underneath the problem at hand. Robust optimization focuses on optimizing
against worst-case realizations within this set so that a guarantee of optimality can be
given with respect to the deﬁned uncertainty set [94]. Key design challenges in Robust
Optimization reside, on one hand, in the choice of an uncertainty set properly suited
to the problem at hand, so that a good balance between representativeness and conser-
vativeness can be met for the problem at hand. For this purpose, several recent studies
have elaborated on different methodological proposals to build good uncertainty sets,
including approaches hinging on the partial availability of data for better adapting them
[95, 96]. On the other hand, a crescent need for robust optimization of simultaneous
objectives has been noted lately in related contributions [97, 98, 99], with essential
13