and a more straightforward and reliable reproducibility of results. Even though a mani-
festo for transparency through descriptive standardization was already published years
ago [423], no signiﬁcant steps have been taken ever since in this direction, despite the
signiﬁcant impact any minor advance could incur in the ﬁeld.
4.3. New Theoretical Directions to Better Understand Bio-inspired Algorithms
Different empirical observations and numerical simulations have elucidated that
bio-inspired algorithms can work surprisingly well in practice, but in most cases we
rarely understand why they work under the given conditions for a given type of problem
[424, 425]. Though there are some progress in theoretical analysis as we have seen
earlier, it is highly needed to use more systematic approaches – ideally, an uniﬁed
framework – to analyze bio-inspired algorithms so as to gain mathematical insight
into their working mechanisms, to estimate their rates of convergence and assess their
conditions for stability. In this regard, fresh theoretical studies lately proposed within
the community seem to be promising for analyzing and understanding bio-inspired
heuristics, such as the use of network science to characterize swarm-based algorithms
[426]. Ultimately, we hope that such insights can help to choose the right algorithms
for a given set of problems so as to solve them efﬁciently.
4.4. From Efﬁcacy to Efﬁciency in Bio-inspired Optimization
When it comes to performance assessment, most contributions to date revolve
around effectiveness (e.g. ﬁtness statistics) for a given complexity level (correspond-
ingly, number of ﬁtness evaluation) when comparing among different bio-inspired ap-
proaches. Nonetheless, there is an increasing global concern with energy efﬁciency,
which has lately coined the so-called Green Computing concept [427]. Algorithms
under this umbrella are designed with environmental sustainability as a design goal
itself, imprinting severe constraints in several steps of their execution thread. Impor-
tant modiﬁcations result from the adoption of this design directive, in aspects such
as resource allocation, memory indexing or processing time. Most importantly, the
way an algorithm is implemented also renders a signiﬁcant effect on the its actual ef-
ﬁciency, which calls for the adoption of Green Computing from the very beginning
of the algorithm design procedure. Good practices aligned with this range should en-
force the community to always perform a complexity analysis of novel algorithmic
proposals (by quantifying it in terms of number of sums/products and other similar
implementation-agnostic indicators). In any case, studies on the algorithmic efﬁciency
of bio-inspired approaches should avoid reporting on measurements closely linked to
the implementation and deployment of the algorithm itself, such as timing logs or net
memory consumption, which are strongly biased by non-algorithmic matters. A cor-
respondence between the characteristics of algorithmic components and their expected
carbon footprint should be also derived in the future.
4.5. Bio-inspired Machine Learning and Deep Neural Processing
Traditionally the useful intersection between bio-inspired optimization and Ma-
chine Learning (ML) has drawn close attention in the literature, combining both ﬁelds
of knowledge into single data-based models for manifold reasons: to mention a few,
48