based approaches (co-evolution and multi-agents). We review here the most important
characteristics of dEAs following a similar structure for describing each model of dEA,
i.e. starting with population-based dEAs and ﬁnishing with dimension-based models
such as co-evolution algorithms. A schematic representation of all these parallel com-
putation strategies for bio-inspired computation is depicted in Figure 4.
To begin with, the master-slave model is a simple albeit effective dEA model [209,
210]. In this class of distributed optimization models, bio-inspired search operators
are executed in the so-called master part of the algorithm, and evolved individuals are
then delivered to slave processors for ﬁtness evaluation. In this case, it is considered
that the ﬁtness evaluations of the individuals are independent, so there is not a need for
communication among slaves processors. The distributed ﬁtness computation featured
by these dEAs makes them especially well-suited for those cases where most of the
computational complexity of the problem at hand is concentrated on the computation
of the ﬁtness. Therefore, when parallel processing capabilities are available they are an
efﬁcient alternative to other methods such as surrogate-model assisted optimization.
The second dEA discussed in this subsection is the island model [211], which is a
coarse-grained evolutionary algorithm where different sub-populations of solutions are
considered, each processed by a different processor. Communications between islands
are allowed and occur when certain individuals migrate among them at given times of
the evolution. The migration mechanism is an important design part of island models,
including the migration topology, its frequency, and extent, as well as the replacement
policy in the destination island.
Slightly linked to the island model introduced above, a cellular dEA model [212]
is a ﬁne-grained, spatially-structured approach, which consists of just one population
whose individuals are arranged on a grid of processors ( cell). Interaction among indi-
viduals handled by the evolutionary algorithm is done by using communications paths
deﬁned by a network topology in the dEA. Thus, each individual in the population can
only interact with those individuals within its neighborhood. As the neighborhoods of
individuals are overlapping with each other, good individuals tend to propagate to the
entire population of the algorithm.
A rather different strategy is followed in the hierarchical dEA model, also referred
to as the hybrid model [213]. It combines two (or more) distributed models hierar-
chically, such as the hisland, master-slave iorhisland, cellulari, among other combi-
nations. The underlying idea of these approaches is to improve the search capabilities
of the whole heuristic by embedding characteristics of both models into a single al-
gorithm. The last population-based dEA reviewed in this subsection is the pool dEA
model, in which a set of autonomous processors are deployed to work on a shared re-
source pool. Processors are loosely coupled, in such a way that they do not know each
other’s existence and only interact with the pool [214]. The pooled model provides a
natural approach to asynchronization and heterogeneity in dEAs, of inherent interest
for their deployment in non-controlled computing frameworks.
In what refers to dimension-based models, Cooperative Co-evolution (CC) pro-
vides a powerful divide-and-conquer architecture for computationally hard optimiza-
tion problems, such as LSGO [215, 216, 217]. In CC a highly-dimensional or com-
plex optimization problem is divided into several simpler sub-problems, which will be
solved by different meta-heuristics. Provided that the problem formulation allows for
26