design is adopted to obtain the set of weights, and the Kuhn-Munkres (Hungarian) al-
gorithm is used to solve the resulting assignment problem. This approach was found
to perform quite well (and at a low computational cost) in many-objective optimiza-
tion problems. This approach does not belong to any of the three previously indi-
cated families of multi-objective algorithms. Besides exploring new research paths,
it is important to gain a deeper understanding of the major algorithms in current use.
For example, knowing that some scalarizing functions offer advantages over others
[124] is very useful to design good decomposition-based and even indicator-based
multi-objective solvers (algorithms based on R2normally rely on decomposition).
Another interesting idea is to combine components of different multi-objective tech-
niques under a single framework that allows to exploit their advantages. This is
the basic idea of Borg [125], which adopts -dominance, a measure of convergence
speed called progress, an adaptive population size, multiple recombination oper-
ators and a steady-state selection mechanism. This hybridization of operators, in
fact, can lead to the automated design of algorithms as has been already suggested
by researchers from automated parameter tuning for single-objective evolutionary
solvers. In this context, a very promising option is the use of hyper-heuristics to
coordinate the use of several types of heuristics with the aim of combining their
advantages in a wide class of problems. As we will later revisit in Subsection 3.8
(which is partly dedicated to this branch of bio-inspired computation), the idea be-
hind hyper-heuristics is the use of a collection of basic (low-level) heuristics, which
on their own do not produce good solutions to a given optimization problem, to come
up with a much better solution by combining them (or by generating new heuristics
from them) by means of a high-level algorithm [126]. Their main motivation is to
have a more general search engine that can solve a wider variety of hard optimization
problems. Hyper-heuristics have been mostly developed for discrete search spaces
and have been used to solve mainly single-objective optimization problems. Sur-
prisingly, few researchers have developed multi-objective hyper-heuristics, despite
their inherent potential to yield improved heterogeneous solvers for given families of
multi-objective problems. For instance, McClymont and Keedwell [127] proposed
one of the few multi-objective hyper-heuristics that has been designed for continuous
optimization problems. Their approach applies a heuristic selection method modeled
as a Markov chain to the DTLZ test problems. Maashi in her Ph.D. Thesis [128] pro-
posed an online learning selection choice function based hyper-heuristic framework
for multi-objective optimization. Her proposed approach controls and combines
the strengths of three well-known bio-inspired multi-objective solvers (NSGA-II,
SPEA2, and MOGA), which are adopted as her low-level heuristics. The indicator-
based multi-objective sequence-based hyper-heuristic (MOSSHH) algorithm pro-
posed in [129] was the ﬁrst attempt to use a hyper-heuristic in many-objective prob-
lems. The study compares three indicators (one based on average rank, the hyper-
volume and the favour relation) with Pareto dominance in many-objective problems.
In [130] a multi-objective hyper-heuristic based on a choice function was proposed
to adaptively select appropriate low-level heuristics (operators) within MOEA/D.
The pool of low-level heuristics consisted of ﬁve differential evolution operators.
More recently, a hyper-heuristic was proposed in [131] to combine the strengths and
16