however, produced an important disadvantage: results from different papers could not
be compared to each other because they considered different functions and/or experi-
mental conditions. Indeed, authors should compare the results of their proposed solvers
to those obtained by other reference algorithms in the literature, over the same set of
problems and under the same experimental conditions. This approach, however, posed
several main drawbacks:
In strong connection to the structural bias that has been identiﬁed in certain heuristics
(see Subsection 3.1), problems could have also properties that might favor some
algorithms over others. For instance, in many problems, the optimum is at the center
of the domain search, favoring algorithms prone to explore this area of the search
space.
It is difﬁcult to decide which algorithms to compare with, as it is hard to identify the
current state-of-the-art algorithms.
While the parameter values set for the newly proposed bio-inspired algorithm are
rather adequate for the experimental problem, the reference algorithms are conﬁg-
ured with the parameter values retrieved from the papers were such algorithms were
originally presented (and thus, recommended by their authors). Although this is a
widespread practice, it is usually very unfair because the parameter values recom-
mended by the authors might be suitable for the original experiments, but not for
eventually new ﬁtness functions and/or experimental conditions used in the paper
of the new proposed solver. For the sake of fair comparisons, all parameter values
should be automatically tuned for the new benchmark (see Section 3.11); otherwise,
strongly impairing non-tuned algorithms could mislead the conclusions drawn from
the benchmark, as was shown in [298].
In order to overcome the above disadvantages, in the last years the community has
embraced the use of standard test suites or benchmarks. These benchmarks deﬁne a
group of functions to optimize, including all their related experimental conditions, so
that the authors can compare directly the obtained results for their proposed solver.
There are many benchmarks available in the literature, most of them proposed by or-
ganizers of speciﬁc special sessions and competitions in conferences from the ﬁeld.
Such benchmarks have also been widely adopted in other fora (e.g. journal papers) as
standard benchmarks. Thus, these benchmarks not only allow researchers to compare
directly their results, but also give a ranking of the best algorithms for the benchmark
(ranking that can be completed by the proposals published in journals). This makes
it very easy to identify the current state-of-the-art for any given benchmark, thereby
becoming a clear reference algorithm for comparing optimization techniques proposed
in the future [317].
Unfortunately, more than ten years after the ﬁrst benchmarks too many proposals
are still published without a right comparison methodology, mainly because the pro-
posals were not compared against the considered state-of-the-art algorithms in many
proposals in the literature. Authors of many contributions do not compare with algo-
rithms identiﬁed as the state-of-art, but most worryingly: they limit their benchmark to
classic algorithms (such as off-the-shelf versions of PSO or DE) proposed more than
39