twenty years ago. Such deceptive works thus ignore a whole series of variants that have
been proposed over the years, and that have been found to be much more competitive
than their original counterparts and variants of other bio-inspired algorithms. In [318]
reference algorithms selected in new proposals published in well-known and recog-
nised journals were analyzed, concluding that in the majority of cases, such reference
algorithms did not perform competitively enough to be selected as such.
We must also pay special attention to the huge number of new bio-inspired pro-
posals contributed in last years [319]. The previous lack of right comparative against
competitive and modern algorithms is specially relevant for these new proposals. In
many times they are very innovative in its biological inspiration, and so is it remarked
in their description and terminology. However, it is mostly the case that similarities
with respect to previous algorithms are not highlighted – even not acknowledged at all.
Furthermore, no proper performance comparison is done with state-of-the-art variants
of currently available heuristics. When addressing real-world optimization problems,
achieving competitive results and a good searching behavior are the most important fac-
tors, not the originality of their source of inspiration [2]. Thus, when new bio-inspired
algorithms are introduced, the proposing authors should incorporate experiments by
using any of the proposed benchmarks, and thereby check competition websites to ﬁnd
state-of-the-art algorithms to use them as a baseline in their selected benchmarks. Re-
sponsible research when proposing new bio-inspired optimization methods should be
also enforced by reviewers and other stakeholders along the editorial workﬂow, en-
suring that quantitative, statistically reliable evidences of the claims held in upcoming
publications are provided by the authors.
In this context we summarize in Table 1 the main proposed benchmarks in the
literature related to different type of optimization problems, remarking some of their
characteristics. For all these benchmarks:
A group of optimization functions is considered, with different levels of difﬁculty.
A measure of error is computed for each function.
A different number of dimensions is considered for each function.
Each algorithm is run several times (usually no less than 25) for each function and
dimension. The more times the algorithm is executed, the better the statistical char-
acterization of the algorithm’s performance will be.
A stopping criterion is set, which can be either a maximum number of function eval-
uations, that linearly depends on the dimension value, or a required accuracy level,
so that the performance of each algorithm is given by the number of evaluations
needed to achieve it.
A criterion is deﬁned to rank the algorithms. In multimodal optimization, the mea-
sure to optimize is the ratio of local optima found by the algorithm at hand; in multi-
and many-objective there are speciﬁc measures related to the Pareto optimality and
diversity; in real optimization the criterion relies in a weighted global ranking mea-
sure, granting more importance to the results obtained for more difﬁcult functions
40