of simple heuristics – which by themselves do not render good results for a given opti-
mization problem – and combine them via a higher-level algorithm towards achieving
much better solutions [126]. In other words, a hyper-heuristic seeks the automated
construction of new heuristics highly adapted to efﬁciently solve a given optimization
problem; for this purpose, the hyper-heuristic algorithm at hand must explore a search
space spanned by low-level heuristics by using hyper-heuristic operators deﬁned for
selecting, modifying, combining and/or constructing heuristic methods.
Following [126], hyper-heuristics can be classiﬁed in different categories depend-
ing on the nature of the heuristic search space. Thus, hyper-heuristics are classiﬁed
into hyper-heuristics for heuristic selection , that comprises those methodologies fo-
cused on choosing or selecting existing heuristics, and hyper-heuristics for heuristics
generation , that includes those methodologies focused on creating new heuristics from
existing ones. Focusing on heuristic selection, the process to construct the complete al-
gorithm is quite simple: ﬁrst, it is necessary to select a set of good low-level heuristics
for the optimization problem at hand. Note that this idea is quite related to the concept
of low-level ensembles. It is not necessary that the heuristics on their own are very
effective in solving the problem, but their number should be large enough to generate
a large search space [258]. Then, a high-level approach must be selected in order to
obtain the best set of low-level heuristics and how to apply them to solve the problem.
In many cases, this high-level algorithm is a meta-heuristic (evolutionary algorithm,
ants algorithm, particle swarm, etc.), which requires a proper encoding of the low-level
encoding to perform the search. This encoding strategy stringently depends on the
problem being solved, and the algorithm’s performance depends also on this selection.
A number of tutorial and reviews papers focused on hyper-heuristics can be found in
the literature for the interested reader [257, 259, 260].
There are several lines which are currently hot research topics when it comes to
ensembles and hyper-heuristics [239, 257]. First, an important issue, currently under
research in both topics, is the application of these techniques to large-scale optimization
problems. In large-scale problems, the application of ensembles or hyper-heuristics be-
comes much more involved than usual: the encoding strategy is not straightforward, the
exploration capabilities of the algorithms become inefﬁcient, and sometimes the com-
putational complexity of standard ensembles is too high to tackle this kind of problems.
Further research is still needed to solve these issues. Different lines are currently under
development related to intelligent encoding methods to alleviate the high computa-
tional complexity inherent to large-scale optimization. The second central challenge
in ensemble and hyper-heuristics is the speciﬁc selection of methods to be assembled
or low-level heuristics in the hyper-heuristic method. In many cases, it is possible
to choose among a large set of low-level methods or heuristics, but the appropriate
selection of these composing pieces of the ensembles or hyper-heuristic approaches
remains an issue not fully solved when it comes to real application setups. Finally,
the combination of high-level with low-level methods/heuristics is another hot topic in
ensembles for optimization, also with application in hyper-heuristics. The idea is to
combine multiple-methods approaches with multiple strategies in the high-level algo-
rithm, which leads to challenging problems related to the algorithms tuning and the
computational complexity of the ﬁnal ensemble.
30