questions still to be addressed such as the deﬁnition of uncertainty in Pareto fronts.
Given the paramount importance gained in recent times by EC and SI as algorithmic
propellers of multi-objective solvers, we postulate that further developments should
be made in deriving new bio-inspired search operators capable of handling problem
uncertainty at the very core of their deﬁnition.
Another rich substrate of new research lines stems from the need for reliably mod-
eling of real optimization scenarios where the characteristics of several of these prob-
lems hold, thereby hybridizing modeling aspects and assumptions from several classes
of optimization paradigms. This is the case of large-scale stochastic optimization [100]
and multi-objective stochastic optimization [101, 102, 103, 104], which have been put
to practice in different scenarios with high levels of realism and complexity such as In-
telligent Transportation Systems, engineering, robotics [105], power system planning
[106], and hydrology [107]. Multimodal optimization in dynamic environments has
been likewise addressed in [108, 109]. Many sophisticated heterogeneous approaches
have been proposed for addressing these demanding problems, such as Memetic Algo-
rithms [110, 111] or EC and SI solvers tailored to deal with real-world environments
with noisy objectives [112]. In this context, we highlight the upturn of research around
the conﬂuence of Dynamic and Robust Optimization in what has been coined as Ro-
bust Optimization over Time (ROOT), in which the goal is to ﬁnd solutions that remain
acceptable (statistically robust) over the course of time [113, 114]. Despite the relative
age of this research area and its inherent practical interest, we foresee that signiﬁcant
advances can be done if an eye is kept on other sciences and disciplines dealing with
uncertainty in dynamical systems, such as Risk Theory [115] or Lyapunov Optimiza-
tion [116]. We expect that the hybridization of concepts and techniques from these
ﬁelds with bio-inspired search operators will give birth to a new generation of robust
bio-inspired solvers suited for dynamically evolving environments.
3.3. Multi- and Many-objective Optimization
Problems comprising several conﬂicting objectives have sprung a vibrant research
activity during the last 20 years, with an ever-growing body of literature, competitions,
and benchmark focused on deriving new bio-inspired solvers suited to produce Pareto
optimal solutions with increased efﬁciency and efﬁcacy. The old days in this subarea
of bio-inspired computation focused on two main strategies to deal with multiple ob-
jectives [117, 118]: 1) non-elitist non-Pareto-based methods, including lexicographic
ordering, linear aggregating functions, VEGA, -constraint techniques and target vec-
tor approaches; and 2) non-elitist Pareto-based methods such as Pure Pareto ranking,
MOGA, NSGA, NPGA, and NPGA-2. Nowadays most methods rely on some sort of
elitism [119], yielding renowned schemes such as SPEA and SPEA2, NSGA-II, PAES,
PESA, PESA II, GA2and many others. More recent variants include MOEA/D (and
its many variants), SMPSO, SMS-EMOA, HyPE and NSGA-III [120], which can be
classiﬁed in three main families depending on their design strategy [121]:
In Pareto-based methods the selection mechanism is based on Pareto optimality, for
which most of them adopt some form of non-dominated sorting and a density esti-
mator (e.g., crowding, ﬁtness sharing, entropy, adaptive grids, parallel coordinates,
etc.). A well-known limitation of this family of multi-objective solvers resides in
14