benchmarks have undergone a sharp evolution mainly in terms of an increasing level of
difﬁculty, reaching a situation where it is possible that the functions included in these
benchmarks are overly complex when compared to real-world problems. Thus, an un-
solved issue for benchmarks is to bridge the computational gap between part of their
constituent functions and the characteristics of real-world problems, towards improv-
ing the relevance and practicality of these artiﬁcially-constructed benchmarks.
Another important disadvantage in these benchmarks is that the used stopping cri-
terion is not realistic. In real-world problems it is not only interesting to discern which
algorithm performs best with a ﬁxed and non-realistic number of evaluations, but it is
also relevant to assess which algorithm attains an acceptable error within the minimum
time/number of evaluations. Thus, benchmarks measuring the evaluations to achieve
a certain accuracy are more realistic, when the expected accuracy is adequate. In gen-
eral the scalability of algorithms does not receive enough attention in the competition
benchmarks. Moreover, a minority of contributions has studied how evaluation num-
bers inﬂuence the convenience of one type of algorithm over another. In [348] it is
observed that for a low number of evaluations, mathematical methods could be better
suited than evolutionary algorithms. However, extensive competitions have shown also
that for a reduced number of evaluations, speciﬁcally designed evolutionary algorithms
are also a good option. This conclusion goes in line with recent studies about how bio-
inspired optimization algorithms perform over budget-limited problem instances with
respect to deterministic global optimization methods [349]. In [350] the performance
of many algorithms is studied, concluding that PSO algorithms are more adequate for
a low number of evaluations, while DE algorithms can obtain more precise results but
they often require a higher number of evaluations. These type of studies are very useful
and practical, yet lacking in the current literature. This promising research line could
reduce the gaps between theoretical benchmarks and the applicability of bio-inspired
heuristics to real setups.
To summarize, even while the proposal and use of benchmarks have become a
de-facto standard in almost all areas of bio-inspired optimization, there is still room
for improvement and open issues to be addressed, such as new benchmarks with re-
duced gap among them and real-world problems [351], and new and better comparison
methodologies, including more attention to scalability and new statistical testing ap-
proaches such as the use of Bayesian tests.
3.14. Applications of Bio-inspired Optimization
Bio-inspired algorithms and methods have been successfully applied into a wide
variety of domains [30]. A comprehensive and detailed analysis of the current applica-
tions based on bio-inspired methods is outside the scope of this article. However, it is
interesting to delve into some highly relevant areas of applications, such as social data
analysis, medicine and health, cybersecurity, or video games (among many others),
where these methods have been profusely utilized in recent times. Next we provide a
short description of these selected application areas, along with a brief digest of the
activity therein related to bio-inspired methods:
Social Network Analysis (SNA), which comprises topics such as social-based ap-
plications for data mining, data analysis, community detection or social mining,
43