The lack of sensitivity information and numerical noise usually present in experimen-
tal outcomes can also be deemed as issues falling within this speciﬁc context. These
problems, and other related ones can be mitigated by the adoption of surrogate models,
which reliably portray the expensive simulation-based model in a cheaper and analyt-
ically tractable way. Simulation-driven studies supported on surrogate model assisted
optimization have gained great popularity, allowing the community to address prob-
lems that could not be tackled otherwise, and dramatically reducing the computational
costs of the problem-solving process. Furthermore, once built to achieve an admissi-
ble accuracy level, the surrogate model can be exploited to provide hints about where
promising candidate solutions are located over the solution space, thereby serving as a
driver for optimized heuristic search operators.
Several comprehensive surveys can be found in the literature, highlighting different
aspects of this speciﬁc ﬁeld. Two remarkable overviews are the ones in [186] and [187],
which focus on aerospace sciences, a sector where surrogate model based optimization
has been utilized in manifold design applications due to the complexity of conduct-
ing real experiments. In fact, many other recently published contributions revolve on
applications within this sector: this is the case of [188], for example, which aims at
showcasing that surrogate-based global optimization is feasible for aerodynamic shape
optimization with a high number of design variables. Likewise, in [189] a solver based
on the Kriging surrogate model and parallel inﬁll-sampling method is proposed for the
aerodynamic shape optimization of a swept natural-laminar-ﬂow wing. Authors of that
study claim that the main challenge in this study links to the trustable prediction of
laminar–turbulence transitions and reasonable compromise of viscous and wave drags.
Another recently presented work is [190], which explores the feasibility of a hybrid
approach based on evolutionary algorithms and support vector regression to reach op-
timal conﬁgurations of the landing gear master cylinder. In this research study, the
aerodynamic shape design problem is also approached by using surrogate models and
intelligent estimation search with sequential learning (IES-SL, [191]).
Surrogate models are also appropriated for problems arisen in other disciplines and
sectors. For instance, the design of different types of antennas for wireless communica-
tions has also undergone signiﬁcant research with surrogate models in recent years. In
[192], for instance, the design of an ultra-wideband antenna with an integrated balun is
faced by an automated numerical surrogate-based optimization. Authors in [193] claim
that the design of contemporary antennas requires the conﬁguration of an unprecedent-
edly high number of parameters to conﬁgure, which exacerbates the complexity of the
overall design problem. To alleviate it, they introduce a novel two-level method for the
surrogate modeling of antenna structures using Kriging interpolation models. Another
example of the prevalence of surrogates in antenna design problems is [194], where
a multi-objective formulation of this problem is tackled by considering performance
and robustness as conﬂicting objectives, and by automatically selecting the best surro-
gate among a portfolio of possible models (namely, polynomial regression, Gaussian
process regression, and Kriging).
A stimulating general review on the area of the surrogate model assisted optimiza-
tion has been recently presented in [195]. Among many other interesting aspects, this
review highlights that the efﬁcient use of surrogates entails great savings in terms of
computational resources, but also pinpoints the complexity of selecting an appropri-
24