on the number of parameters and their explored range of values, the search space can
become computationally unaffordable even for very coarse value grids. One of the most
important decision is to decide which parameters should be tuned, or ﬁxed assigned
based on the intuition or convention, as the recommended values by other researchers
or authors of the original algorithm. When searching for the best performing parameter
set over value grids recommended by other authors [297, 298], the expensive cost of
tuning usually restricts the number of selected parameters. Moreover, in some complex
problems, it is not unusual to spend time and efforts executing the algorithm with many
different combination of parameters, obtaining that only a few of them have a strong
inﬂuence over the results. Therefore, many combinations can be avoided, reducing
the overall computation time. A parametric sensitivity analysis, or robustness studies,
can be very useful to identify the relevant parameters to tune (and hence conventional
values are used for the remaining ones).
Another important question is if the improvement yielded by parameter tuning de-
serves the computational cost required by this process. The answer depends strongly on
each particular case, but in general, it is worthwhile when real-world problems must be
optimized many different times, or when small objective improvements due to param-
eter tuning can yield signiﬁcant gains in some practical aspect, e.g., lower economic
costs associated to the solution. When tuning is demanding in terms of computational
burden, a very popular option is to delegate the process to tool as REV AC [299] or
I-RACE [300], capable of automating the parameter tuning process. Among them I-
RACE has lately become one of the most widely adopted schemes. I-RACE is a freely
available software that uses racing tuning [296] to allow researchers to easily adjust
the values of the parameters of an algorithm over a speciﬁc group of functions. The
mechanism of I-RACE is simple: from an executable algorithm and a list of parameters
(indicating, for each one, the type and range of possible values), the software samples a
distribution for each parameter to be tuned, and updates it with the best conﬁgurations
(as per a racing mechanism) to bias subsequent sampling stages towards parameter val-
ues in the best conﬁgurations found so far. After several sampling iterations, the best
conﬁguration is returned. In this way, although tuning still remains costly in terms
of time processing, researchers are alleviated from time-consuming parameter tuning
phases.
When a research work proposing a new optimization algorithm reports a bench-
mark with other solvers from the state of the art, it is often the case that parameter val-
ues are carefully tuned for the proposed approach. However, for the rest of algorithms
the values proposed by their authors in related contributions are instead adopted, under
the assumption that their optimality also holds for the problem under consideration.
In some cases these adopted values were obtained under experimental conditions (e.g.
dimensionality, range, or evaluation limits) that could strongly differ from the prob-
lem(s) considered in the benchmark at hand. In these cases, when the experimental
conditions are very different and/or the proposal is tuned more exhaustively than its
counterparts, a similar parameter tuning process should be done with each of the refer-
ence approaches in the benchmark to ensure fairness in the comparison [301]. In [298]
extensive comparisons were carried out with competitive algorithms with and with-
out automatic tuning. As a conclusion, results were shown to greatly differ based on
whether default values or the tuned parameters were used, remarking the importance
36