rendering process of media content from streaming servers. Here we venture a vast al-
gorithmic territory to be explored in the future, unleashing new interesting paradigms
such as continual optimization for multiple, recurrently varying problem statements (in
clear connection to Continual/Lifelong Machine Learning [445]) and self-impacting
models, in which actions taken on the basis of their predictions may affect subsequent
predictive outcomes thereafter.
4.7. Bio-inspired Optimization and Emerging Computing Paradigms
In addition to the many-sided research avenues outlined above, the entire commu-
nity should keep a close eye at the impending arrival of new computing paradigms,
from the Map/Reduce model that lies underneath Big Data architectures to Ephemeral
Computing, Exascale Computing and Quantum Computing. Roughly a decade ago
we did not expect computing technology to evolve as fast as we have witnessed ever
since, developing data-intensive technologies capable of ingesting, storing and han-
dling huge amounts of data. Nowadays Map/Reduce implementations of bio-inspired
algorithms are available for their deployment on Big Data platforms [446, 447, 448].
In terms of processing power a similar trend can be noted nowadays in the form of
Ephemeral Computing [449] and Exascale Computing [450], both providing efﬁcient
means for scaling up complex bio-inspired algorithms. Yet still at its infancy, Quantum
Computing is already spanning its applicability towards the ML realm and anticipating
astonishing gains in terms of processing throughput for many other ﬁelds, including
ML and large-scale optimization [451, 452].
We do not know which other computing paradigms we will encounter in the future
and most importantly, how they will impair the design and deployment of bio-inspired
optimization methods. Nevertheless, we must prepare ourselves for their eventual ar-
rival by conducting research efforts along valuable directions in this ﬁeld. Unless we
all acknowledge this pressing need for joining forces and agree on the real priorities
of bio-inspired computation, we will wander erratically and blind through incremental
research paths that lead nowhere in this ﬁeld.
5. Conclusion: an Exciting Future for Bio-inspired Computation
In this manuscript we have shared our envisioned status of bio-inspired computa-
tion, which calls for a profound reﬂection on the research paths that the community
should follow in the future. To this end, we have brieﬂy reviewed the history of this
ﬁeld from the very advent of EC to the plethora of new SI methods appearing in the
late literature. Grounded on this historical perspective we have identiﬁed research paths
for a number of selected areas within bio-inspired optimization that should congregate
most of the global research efforts in years to come.
Nature is truly fascinating and full of intriguing phenomena still to be understood.
Unrevealed paradigms underneath this science will surely continue fostering new ad-
vances in bio-inspired optimization, featuring unseen levels of performance and com-
putational efﬁciency. Today we, the research community, have the chance to leave
misleading research paths behind, and face together an overwhelming future for this
ﬁeld in a harmonized, principled and scientiﬁcally enriching manner.
50