of a good parameter tuning (whenever it is practically feasible and affordable) in new
bio-inspired algorithm proposals to come.
3.12. Parameter Adaptation
To overcome the problem of setting parameter values, an uprising trend is to use
adaptive or self-adaptive parameters. On one hand, adaptive parameters are changed
during the run by means of an adaptation strategy that is set before the algorithm is
actually executed. On the other hand, self-adaptive parameters are parameters whose
values are evolved at run-time along with decision variables according to the interme-
diate results obtained by the algorithm during its search [302]. This could be online
tuning , because the results obtained during the run are used as feedback to adapt cur-
rent parameters values. These two techniques can be combined based on the parameter
type. We consider that these adaptation mechanisms, with may also hinge on the use of
ensembles or hyper-heuristics (already introduced in Section 3.8), constitute a promis-
ing research topic within bio-inspired optimization.
A current tendency in this context is to use self-adaptation mechanisms for very
sensible parameters that have a strong inﬂuence on the results. Not only it reduces
the parameters to tune (making the algorithm simpler to use on new problems), but it
can also yield great improvements. For instance, the most successful proposals in the
family of DE-based heuristics during the last few years hinge on the adaptation of the
main parameters of this bio-inspired solver, namely, the F (differential weight) and CR
(crossover probability) parameters [303].
One of the most difﬁcult parameters to adapt in a bio-inspired solver is the popu-
lation size. Although it is usual to resort to the same population size than in previous
related works, this is a parameter with a strong inﬂuence on the trade-off between
exploration and exploitation. An encouraging approach is to use an adaptive or dy-
namic population size: while it is well-known that a higher population size is useful
for maintaining diversity in the ﬁrst stages of the search process, in the last stages it is
more important to foster exploitation around the best individuals within the population.
Thus, enforcing a higher population size at the beginning of the search and including
a reduction mechanism (in combination with elitism) could improve the performance
of algorithms. This is a simple strategy that can render very good results [304, 305].
Also, there are additional factors that could affect the population size, like to use a
survey parameter related to each individual (reducing the lifetime for worse solutions),
varying the population based on the ﬁtness of its individuals (like [306]), or incest pre-
vention mechanisms. Also, sometimes the population size is affected when a restart is
done in the algorithm [8], or even several populations with different sizes are simulta-
neously used [307]. In fact, there are studies like the one in [308] that analyze in depth
different criteria for the population size, concluding that the proper value of this param-
eter depends on the problem itself. To date, self-adaptive population size mechanisms
is an open issue, with interesting modern contributions being contributed regularly in
the community (see [309] for a comparison among different adaptive population size
strategies).
Other parameters that possess a great inﬂuence over the search are those controlling
the variation operators (like crossover or mutation) used to generate the new solutions.
For long time ago it has been proposed to increase the diversity between parents and
37