multi-objective optimization problems, which also unleashes another interesting path
for future research. Besides large scale problems, co-evolution can be useful in other
domains – e.g. dynamic multi-objective optimization problems [81] – but its potential
has been scarcely studied [153].
However, it is important to keep in mind that a great source of diversity regarding
research ideas is the knowledge coming from other disciplines. For example, our ﬁeld
has adopted advanced data structures (e.g., red-black trees), concepts from computa-
tional geometry (e.g., convex hulls, quadtrees and V oronoi maps), and from economics
(e.g., Game Theory) to design novel search algorithms and operators. We also need
to explore more ways of bridging the gap between this ﬁeld and elements from Oper-
ations Research, such as mathematical programming [154]. Another one is the use of
the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker optimality conditions to estimate proximity of a solution to
the Pareto optimal set [155]. All in all, diversity, heterogeneity and synergy between
different disciplines must be ensured within the community working in order to attain
more disruptive and scientiﬁcally valuable advances not only in multi-/many-objective
optimization, but also in other areas within bio-inspired optimization. Otherwise, if we
only investigate by analogy, research in this area will eventually suffer from stagnation.
3.4. Multimodal Optimization
Multimodal optimization problems consist of ﬁnding multiple optimal solutions
within a single algorithm run, in order to have a better knowledge about the different
solutions in the search space [156]. Population-based bio-inspired algorithms are the
most used approaches to solve multimodal optimization problems, specially those in-
cluding diversity-preserving mechanisms, also known as niching methods [157, 158].
Research on multimodal optimization techniques, mainly evolutionary algorithms, had
a boom in the early 2000s, and has been an research topic of importance until today,
as can be seen in Figure 2 (stacked bar colored as ). According to [158], there are
several reasons why multimodal search is important in real-world problems:
Locating multiple optimal solutions of a problem improves the knowledge of the
problem domain, much more than in single-solution cases.
Multiple solutions with optimal quality provide a decision maker with a wider port-
folio of options for consideration, based on which different factors can be applied to
choose the best option in each case.
Looking for multiple optimal solutions can be good in terms of improving the search
capabilities of the algorithm since the computational effort is diversiﬁed to explore
different regions of the search space.
Diversity methods involved in multimodal optimization algorithms are able to im-
prove the quality search of the algorithm since they counteract the effect of genetic
drift, which causes diversity loss in bio-inspired algorithms.
Motivated by these beneﬁts, the literature has been rich in regards to niching ap-
proaches that have been combined with bio-inspired heuristics in order to help them
properly search over multimodal ﬁtness landscapes. For the sake of completeness, in
19