solvers should be grounded on a solid design rationale, either by showing theoretical
ﬁndings that motivate design choices or by proving that the designed heuristic has im-
proved theoretical properties in terms of convergence speed, ﬁtness stability and other
characteristics alike. For this to occur, more contributions combining empirical assess-
ment and theoretical developments are needed in years to come so as to steer away
from the ’look, it’s working’ publishing frenzy witnessed in recent literature.
Finally, we believe that the theoretical and mathematical analyses of bio-inspired
algorithms can be carried out from different perspectives so as to gain insight from
different angles [45]. Interesting algorithmic properties can be studied using Markov
chain theory, self-organized systems, ﬁlter theory, discrete and continuous dynamical
systems, Bayesian statistics, computational complexity analysis and other frameworks
[57]. Ultimately, truly in-depth understanding and insights will be gained by leveraging
expertise, theories, and frameworks from mathematics, computer science, statistics,
machine learning, control theory, complex systems, and other disciplines.
3.2. Dynamic and Stochastic Optimization
Most optimization problems historically addressed in the related literature built
upon static ﬁtness functions and constraint sets that do not vary along time. Further-
more, problems may rely on parameters whose values are assumed to be ﬁxed and
known a priori. However, in certain application scenarios, the dynamic characteris-
tics of the environment where the problem is formulated do not meet these assump-
tions: the ﬁtness function(s) and/or constraints are often subjected to non-stationary
phenomena that make them prone to changes over time. Classical examples include
the arrival of new tasks and/or machinery failures in production scheduling problems,
or road accidents in trafﬁc routing problems. These phenomena yield a stringent need
for dealing with the obsolescence of the formulated problem in the heuristic search
of the bio-inspired solver, as well as with the eventual uncertainty held on parame-
ters participating in the problem deﬁnition. This dynamic context for optimization
problems reﬂects realistically the intrinsic characteristics of avant-garde application
domains such as Social Networks, Smart Cities, Industry 4.0 or Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems, among many others. As such, dynamic optimization collectively refers to
all those techniques tailored to efﬁciently undertake problems whose objectives and/or
constraints may change along time. Likewise, stochastic optimization studies the de-
velopment of solvers capable of dealing with uncertainty within the problem deﬁnition
(involving e.g. random objective functions or random constraints). Such research areas
are closely linked to one another, and both account for more realistic problem formu-
lations in real setups.
To begin with, dynamic problem formulations can be found in optimization sce-
narios where the ﬁtness landscape used by the solver is a function of time, thereby
unchaining the need for reacting to eventual changes in the landscape and hence, pro-
vide new optimal solutions at any time instant. This area has a long history in the
literature, with surveys dating back as soon as the late past century [72], and studies
contributed thereafter on different theoretical aspects, such as the behavior of evolu-
tionary operators when dealing with dynamic problem instances [73, 74]. In the last
few years, dynamic optimization has ignited a great research activity, resulting in spe-
cial issues, workshops and competitions [75, 76] in frontline conferences and journals.
11