swarm act as solution niches, eventually locating multiple solutions to the problem.
Alternative proposals to multimodal problems using PSO algorithms have gravitated on
the use of multi-swarms [176], the induction of Euclidean-based niching [168] or a ring
topology in the neighborhoods within the swarm [177]. Another bio-inspired solver
successfully applied to multimodal optimization is DE, which has been hybridized with
ﬁtness sharing [11], speciation and islanding [178]. In light of this preceding research
record, it is only a matter of time that the community will receive studies dealing with
the hybridization of new bio-inspired techniques with traditional strategies to tackle
multimodal problems.
Finally, Machine Learning should capitalize on bio-inspired solvers for multimodal
optimization, in problems related to feature selection [179] or model calibration [180].
We do think that this is an extremely interesting research line that spans far beyond
multimodal optimization, which we expect will be further growing in the near future.
We will later revolve on this statement.
3.5. Topologies
Contributions related to the design of topologies within population-based heuristics
elaborate on the control of the information ﬂow among population members by speci-
fying the nature and outreach of their interactions [181, 182]. By appropriately deﬁning
topologies within the population/swarm, it becomes possible to emphasize global ex-
ploration and/or local exploitation. The rationale behind the design of topologies lies
on the widely acknowledged fact that the overall search performance of evolutionary
algorithms can be signiﬁcantly biased by how individuals in the population are or-
ganized and interact with each other. As such, many different topological schemes
have hitherto been proposed by advancing over the so-called panmictic topology, in
which all population members can mate with any other member. This simple topology,
which lies at the core of naive versions of well-known evolutionary algorithms such as
GA, is known to foster the rapid dissemination of information among the individuals,
yielding a progressive loss of diversity and ultimately, a potentially premature conver-
gence of the overall search process. This is the reason why more elaborated topological
schemes have been extensively analyzed in recent years, often relying on the deﬁnition
of a structural neighborhood between individuals. A recent comprehensive overview
on this topic can be found in [183].
As has been foretold in Subsection 3.4, the criterion by which the above neigh-
borhood relationship is deﬁned established two general categories of topologies for
population-based heuristics: those based on the population index of the individuals
and a predeﬁned structure (e.g. ring, wheels, random, von Neumann or star, among
others) that dictates how information ﬂows among them; and those based on a mea-
sure of distance to dynamically determine which solutions are neighbors of each other.
Furthermore, topologies can be endowed with further characteristics to make them
better perform in certain problem setups. As such, topologies can be static or dy-
namically adapted along the run. Likewise, heterogeneous topologies [184] enforce
different topological relationships (e.g. tighter or looser connectedness) between sub-
populations, to the extreme of generating them in a randomized manner [185]. Once
the topology is established, good solutions encountered during the search process are
22