dency between the variables. Since 2013, many competitions have been held where
these same benchmarks have been maintained. Furthermore, many research works
have used them to develop their own proposals. As evinced by Figure 2 (stacked bar
colored in ), the evolution of LSGO in last years shows a rising trend in number of
contributions, with no clear predominance of EC or SI approaches. All in all, achieve-
ments as the ones outlined in what follows are symptomatic of the momentum of this
subarea, with biological inspiration taking a leading role in recent contributions [20].
In fact, research in LSGO not only has allowed to design evolutionary algorithms,
but also to develop further other research lines closely linked to the computational
problems derived from large problem scales. First and more evident, LSGO has cat-
alyzed the design of parallel and distributed algorithms to reduce the high processing
time needed for efﬁciently addressing large-scale problem instances. This crossroad
between areas has already been noted in the previous subsection.
An interesting research line triggering many contributed schemes in the last years
is to use the aforementioned benchmarks to develop new techniques that automati-
cally infer relationships among variables. This inference permits to identify groups of
variables that could be optimized in isolation with the minimum loss of efﬁciency. In
combination with a CC, this approach can be very effective, because grouping variables
allows the algorithm to optimize a lower number of variables. These grouping variables
techniques are in essence decomposition methods based on a divide-and-conquer strat-
egy, which allows decomposing large-scale problems into multiple low-dimensional
subcomponents that can later be optimized by one or several algorithms capable, in
most cases, of running in parallel. This decomposition is crucial to obtain good results
[283, 284]. The most straightforward approaches in this regard are random [215] or
dynamic grouping (i.e. changing it during the run) [285]. Later, the work in [286]
proposed to adapt the subcomponents size based on the historical performance. More
advanced techniques strive to detect the interaction between variables to group together
those with more interactions, because they can signiﬁcant improve the results [287].
An example of this strategy is the delta grouping approach proposed in [288]. Delta
grouping tries to identify interactions between variables by measuring the differences
in ﬁtness when the variable values change in isolation and when they are simultane-
ously changed. More recently, the same authors proposed an improved delta grouping
scheme in which the number of evaluations required is halved, furthermore exhibiting a
more robust behavior than its previous counterpart [284]. We refer to [289] for a more
detailed description of the evolution of the LSGO area.
Anyway, even considering the improvement in computational performance yielded
by these grouping methods, such gains obtained by the decomposition usually do not
compensate for the cost in terms of evaluations required for detecting variable depen-
dencies. Thus, last proposals try to reduce this high cost in evaluations. A signiﬁcant
new approach in this direction is to apply the decomposition in a recursive way, like in
[290]. Deﬁnitely there is a research niche in this noted drawback of current grouping
LSGO techniques, because when the reduction in complexity could compensate the
additional evaluations in the process, it could be applied in all types of problems, not
only large-scale problems. Even more, their application to many real-world problems
is also expected, because these problems could encompass variables with many and few
relationships with others, thus the optimization process with one grouping mechanism
34