on Genetic Algorithms (GA). This optimization method impacted deeply on the com-
munity at that time, unleashing a ﬂurry of activity and a vast area of research that gave
birth to what would be subsequently coined as bio-inspired computation. These three
streams developed in isolation until the early 90s, when they came to be the corner-
stone of a uniﬁed algorithmic branch denoted as Evolutionary Computation (EC, [6]).
A special mention should be also given to Differential Evolution (DE) by Storn and
Price [7], which embodied another breakthrough achievement within the EC commu-
nity. Several other milestones in the EC realm were reported to the community in years
thereafter, with emphasis on improved versions of nominal EC solvers (e.g. CMA-ES
[8], IPOP-CMA-ES [9] or the more recent SHADE approach [10]).
Simultaneously to the forge of the EC ﬁeld, the availability of more computational
resources made it possible to cope with more complex and diverse optimization prob-
lems, especially those for which an analytical formulation cannot be stated mathemat-
ically (as occurs in e.g. simulation-based or black-box optimization). New problem
ﬂavors such as multi-modal and multi-objective optimization paved their way within a
research community eager to delve into the beneﬁts of bio-inspired computation. As for
multi-modal optimization (i.e., problems where most of its multiple optimal solutions
must be found), several studies have evinced that bio-inspired computation approaches
can perform extremely well in practice [11, 12, 13], as opposed to classical optimiza-
tion methods. In regards to problems comprising several conﬂicting objectives, the rise
and development of this subarea has gone side by side with multi-objective optimiza-
tion methods relying on bio-inspired processes (e.g. NSGA-II [14], MOEA/D [15],
SMPSO [16] and others proposed along the years [17, 18]). Recently, this stream has
evolved to what is now referred to as many-objective optimization , an emerging topic
where bio-inspired computation still prevails [19]. Another class of optimization prob-
lems gaining momentum today is Large-Scale Global Optimization (LSGO), which
aims at dealing efﬁciently with the ever-growing complexity of real-world problems
in any of its design dimensions (number of objectives, variables and/or constraints).
LSGO techniques are designed to capitalize on the higher availability of computa-
tional resources and the emergence of new computing paradigms for massively parallel
processing, which unleashes a very suitable scenario for the design and development
of parallel or multi-population bio-inspired approaches. Some comprehensive com-
pendiums on this noted suitability can be found in [20]. In addition, another class of
optimization problems with the assumption that ﬁtness function(s) and constraints can
be unstable and varying over the period in which the produced solution is applied. As
such, dynamic optimization techniques are designed to deal with problems that evolve
along time, a more realistic setup when the problem is deﬁned over non-stationary
scenarios [21].
In parallel to the maturity reached by EC, bio-inspired solvers evolved to algo-
rithms with a higher level of sophistication, embracing the emulation of other pro-
cesses and behaviors observed in Nature. The most acknowledged milestone in this
regard is the birth of what is currently known as Swarm Intelligence (SI, [22]), a
branch of bio-inspired computation based on the emergence of collective intelligence
from large populations of agents with simple behavioral patterns for communication
and interaction. This is essentially the fundamental principle behind Ant Colony Op-
timization (ACO, [23]) and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO, [24]), arguably the
4