vergence properties and computational complexity with different mathematical frame-
works and tools [53, 54]. One of the most studied topics is related to the convergence
of these search algorithms, including the identiﬁcation of the conditions under which
such a convergence can be guaranteed. Following the insights drawn for Simulated
Annealing and other heuristics by using Markov models, ﬁxed-point theory, variance
analysis, and dynamical systems, much attention has lately been paid to the extrapo-
lation of these tools to model the agent-based behavior of population-based heuristics
[45]. For example, the theory of dynamical systems has unveiled very interesting prop-
erties of PSO, such as the range of parameter values under which this algorithm can be
proven to converge [55]. Logistic maps, a polynomial recurrence relation capable of
modeling the non-linear demographic dynamics of a population of organisms, has been
used for similar purposes [56]. An alternative approach to convergence analysis resides
on the adoption of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods to model the interactions be-
tween multiple search agents in bio-inspired solvers [57]. However, the use of this
mathematical framework with more recent heuristics still remains largely unexplored
for many other algorithms.
Another theoretical aspect that has undergone intense research in the last few years
is the relationship between the solution space of the problem to be solved and the de-
sign of the bio-inspired optimization technique. In this regard, much attention has been
devoted to the theoretical analysis of the so-called landscape of the problem, which
is composed not only by the ﬁtness function that assigns a metric value to a given
candidate solution, but also by a neighborhood operator that relates different encoded
solutions and the solution encoding strategy itself [58]. Fitness landscape analysis
ﬁnds its motivation in the need for a better understanding of how a search algorithm
can perform on a family of problem instances, rather than on a single problem instance.
To some extent, preliminary studies have shed light on commonalities within a given
problem family that eventually lead to theoretically buttressed design directives for the
search algorithm. For instance, the landscapes of many combinatorial optimization
problems such as the symmetric TSP and the graph -coloring problem are elementary
on their own or can be decomposed into a number of elementary landscapes. Theoreti-
cal properties unveiled by landscape analysis regarding the suitability of neighborhood
operators are favorable to the inclusion of local search methods within the bio-inspired
solvers. An example of this design strategy is the work in [59], where appropriate
bio-inspired meta-heuristics were selected for the protein structure prediction problem
based on ﬁtness landscape analysis with random walks. However, such approaches are
often problem-speciﬁc and cannot be generalized to solve other problems.
Other interesting properties that can be inferred from landscape analysis range from
the runtime performance estimation to the evolvability of a population of individuals
induced by the landscape, the neutrality of the landscape, the discovery of optimal
parametric settings for heuristic operators or the quantiﬁcation of certain topological
properties of the landscape of interest for the application of bio-inspired heuristics,
such as the presence of attraction basins, barriers, or multi-modality or ruggedness (for
which the concept of auto-correlation becomes essential) [60]. Reported attempts at
establishing a formal methodology to decompose a problem in a series of elementary
landscapes [61] are promising paths that should be continued further in the near future,
for the community to argue their new bio-inspired design choices. This is the reason
9