spread throughout the whole population or exploitation subpopulation, yielding an im-
proved convergence and superior optimality in many ﬂavors of optimization problems
such as bound constrained single-objective optimization, multi-objective optimization
and multimodal niching.
Topologies can be also deﬁned within the subpopulations or islands (also referred
to as demes ) of a distributed EA. Although we will elaborate further on this area of
bio-inspired optimization in Subsection 3.8, it is important to note that the interaction
between such isolated islands (which evolve independently) takes usually the form of
a migration policy, which selects which individuals are moved or copied between sub-
populations. Therefore, the migration policy can be regarded as a topology between
demes in distributed bio-inspired solvers. By carefully tailoring the migration policy
one can balance between exploration (demes do not interact with each other and search
over the solution space in isolation) and exploitation (individuals are occasionally mi-
grated between islands). Therefore, independent intra-deme evolution and migration
schemes must be devised to match a good balance between exploration and exploita-
tion, which in turn intersects with the characteristics of the optimization problem at
hand and the operators of the heuristic algorithm themselves.
Regarding this noted threefold intersection, certain population topologies have been
found to perform better than others when applied to solve a given class of optimization
problems. An example supporting this statement can be found in multimodal optimiza-
tion problems where, as mentioned in Subsection 3.4, topology-based niching methods
relying on multiple subpopulations have been extensively studied in the literature. In
problems composed by single optima, however, panmictic topologies are more suit-
able than their sub-population based counterparts. Unfortunately, there is still no clear
understanding of the theoretical foundations behind this match between problems and
topologies, nor can we predict which topology performs best for a given problem. This
unsolved issue triggers a wave of future research towards extensively designing new
population topologies capable of dealing with problem classes that have been tackled
with topology-based heuristics to a much lesser extent than multimodal and unimodal
problems, such as constrained, multi-objective, large-scale, or bi-level, among oth-
ers. Efforts are also foreseen to be needed towards the extrapolation of the topology
concept to other heuristics than DE and PSO, which have so far monopolized the liter-
ature related to this area. Finally, a promising research direction is to jointly consider
topologies and ensemble strategies (Subsection 3.8) as a means to leverage the superior
explorative/exploitative powers of ensembles and delegate the search intensiﬁcation in
tailored topologies set within the population of each member of the ensemble.
3.6. Surrogate Model Assisted Optimization
In certain applications such as aerospace design, optics or biomedical engineering,
problems tackled by bio-inspired optimization methods usually rely on computer sim-
ulations. Such simulations are conducted not only for testing purposes but also to prop-
erly tune the conﬁguration of the overall system by providing a quantitative indicator
of its performance. Unfortunately, accurate testing processes entail high computational
efforts, with evaluation times that range from hours to days per experiment. Hence,
the efﬁcient design of bio-inspired solvers is often an extremely time-consuming task,
becoming prohibitive even for the powerful computation means available nowadays.
23