Global AI Ethics 15 conflict.89 Social issues of this magnitude can have widely-felt repercussions, for example by increasing global migration or disrupting international financial markets.90 Therefore, even if the most troubling negative effects of AI systems are initially felt by only a small portion of a population, this does not mean that ill-effects will be contained to one social group. Any increase in social inequality carries risks for entire societies.   Social Organization and Control  AI poses hard questions. At a meeting of the UN High-Level Panel on Digital Cooperation in January 2019, Assistant Secretary-General for Strategic Coordination Fabrizio Hochschild reflected on these risks and uncertainties:   “Will emerging technologies contribute to peace overall or will they undermine it? Will they generally further access to sustainable development or will they further inequality? Will they facilitate respect for human rights or will they provide new tools to those who wish to contain or violate the realization of human rights?”91   As AI principles are translated and put into practice around the world, these are difficult questions to confront. AI systems offer powerful tools of social organization and control. AI will be leveraged in many pro-social ways: from guaranteeing the integrity of elections, to increasing the efficiency of public transportation systems, to more effectively responding to natural disasters. However, AI systems can also be used for non-democratic ends, such as intensive surveillance of citizens and to intimidate activists and dissidents.92  Social control is exercised not only by what governments can do but what a population believes they can do. Thus, governments routinely both exaggerate and minimize the sophistication of their surveillance capabilities in order to appear more powerful or less threatening, depending on their aims. For example, during the Obama administration, the U.S. government exaggerated the success of the National Security Agency’s surveillance programs in averting terrorist attacks.93 Likewise, the Chinese government routinely overstates its capabilities to appear more omnipotent, evidenced by a widely circulated story of the unlucky concertgoer caught for “economic crimes” by a facial recognition system among a crowd of 60,000 at a pop concert.94   The reality is often more modest. Surveillance is patchy, and much of the technology is not yet as powerful as it appears. As The New York Times reported, although police wear sleek smart glasses, the facial recognition technology they use requires someone to stand still for several seconds to make an identification; they are mostly used to check identity not nab crooks.95 The infamous billboards displaying the faces of jaywalkers are the result of humans sifting through photos taken at crosswalks, not facial recognition.96 Social control relies not only on technological sophistication, it is also closely connected to cultural imagination.   CASE STUDY: SINGAPORE, SURVEILLANCE, AND SARS In Singapore, state surveillance is widely accepted as a fact of life.97 For example, the telecommunications firm SingTel has been criticized since the early 2000s for its role in mass surveillance, but this appears to generate little controversy among Singaporeans,