Global AI Ethics 2 INTRODUCTION  The ethical implications and social impacts of artificial intelligence are topics of compelling interest to industry, researchers in academia, and the public. However, current analyses of AI in a global context are biased toward perspectives held in the U.S., and limited by a lack of research, especially outside the U.S. and Western Europe. To effectively engage with the global community on issues related to the ethics of AI-driven technologies (indeed all digital technologies), it is essential to understand how these technologies are understood and implemented around the world.   The importance of a global conversation about the social impacts and ethics of AI has appeared in industry and government reports,1 as well as in academic debates,2 and is only beginning to receive sustained attention. This article offers an important step toward a meaningful conversation about AI ethics across cultures. Regional differences constitute a critical blind spot that has gone largely unexplored and represents an opportunity to advance the industry discussion on AI ethics. This path-breaking global research project offers a foundational framing of the debate and provides a review and synthesis of relevant social science research through perspectives and case studies from Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, as well as Southern and Eastern Europe.   A key contribution of this research asserts that in order to understand ethics, we must understand culture, and vice versa. Societies have unique ethical vocabularies, understandings, and expectations.3 Terms like “fairness” and “privacy” can mean different things in different places.4 This is not to say that all systems of values are created equal. Even the most cursory glance at human history confirms that societies have elaborated ethical systems that support human flourishing, but also systems that cause profound suffering. Ethics is not just a subject for study by philosophers or anthropologists. Nor is it simply principles that we encounter already existing in the world. Ethics is also something that we do. It requires action and engagement.5 To understand AI ethics, we must think deeply about the relationship between society and technology across the globe. But deliberation is not enough. We must also commit to an active ethical engagement that ensures AI technologies support human flourishing around the world.   KEY FINDINGS   1) Regional differences are significant While scholarship on the global impacts of AI is lacking, social science research has a deep record of analyzing the relationship between society and technology more generally. This research suggests that AI is highly likely to have markedly different social impacts depending on cultural setting. Likewise, perceptions and understandings of AI are likely to be profoundly shaped by local cultural and social contexts.   2) AI can exacerbate social inequality  Research in U.S. settings demonstrates that AI-driven technologies have a pattern of entrenching social divides and exacerbating social inequality, particularly among historically-marginalized groups. Our research findings indicate that this pattern exists on a global scale, and suggest that