Global AI Ethics 7 Limits of the Culture Concept  Even when “culture” is used with good intentions, problems can arise. Using a “trait list” approach can make it seem like “culture” is the answer to all questions of difference, distracting from other important considerations.   The limitations of “trait list” notions of culture have become very clear in medical settings. Physicians are increasingly committed to developing what they call “cultural competency,” or core skills of cross-cultural understanding and communication. However, studies reveal that physicians regularly make the mistake of attributing to “culture” issues that have other causes and require unrelated solutions.31   For example: a doctor in California is treating a recent Mexican immigrant who is HIV positive. The man's wife died of AIDS one year earlier, and their four-year-old son is also HIV positive. Despite the doctor’s attempts to explain the importance of regular medical treatment, the man has not been bringing his son to the clinic regularly for care. The doctor consults with a medical anthropologist to understand what cultural beliefs about health and medicine are preventing the man from seeking treatment for himself and his son. The anthropologist discovers that the man is a low-paid bus driver and he cannot afford to miss work to take his son to the clinic regularly. He misses appointments not because of cultural differences or distinct beliefs, but due to his practical socioeconomic situation.32  While such practical considerations may seem obvious, they often get overlooked in the name of culture. The insights gained from blind spots in “cultural competency” in medicine are important to issues of technology across cultures. Cultural differences exist alongside other differences (like economic status). This is true when we are thinking about technology, as well as medicine. Cultural differences will shape the way that people around the world respond to new technologies, but so will more everyday concerns, like literacy and broadband speed. To deeply understand people’s experiences we must move beyond oversimplified “trait list” approaches to culture.  Culture: A Working Definition  We propose a working definition of culture that honors the complex social lives of human beings but is also simple enough to be useful. Culture is a dynamic and ever-changing repertoire of shared understandings, inseparable from history, politics, and economics.   1. Culture is shared  Culture is a loosely-bounded system of shared experiences and understandings, some of which are explicit (consciously known, openly discussed, and present in public documents like rules and laws) and some of which are implicit (unconsciously known in the form of assumptions, intuition, and “common sense”). However, “shared” does not always mean agreed upon. Current debates in the U.S. about immigration and healthcare (sometimes called “the culture wars”) offer evidence that cultural experience can be shared without being agreed upon.   2. Culture is heterogeneous Culture is not homogenous or seamless. It encompasses a diversity of subcultures, social groups, and individual differences. Cultural processes frequently differ even within close groups.