Global AI Ethics 16 where state surveillance in the form of CCTV, monitoring of social media, and “lateral surveillance” by peers appear to be an established norm.98  Singapore’s response to the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 2003 revealed the extent of state authority and the political will for surveillance and social control. The Singapore government enforced exceptional measures, including: blanket screening of entering visitors, school closures, placing 8,000 people under home quarantine (including extensive video monitoring by a security company), placing 4,300 people under telephone surveillance, and issuing electronic wrist tags for quarantine violators.99 While Singapore had the third largest rate of infection in Asia, it managed to contain the disease in just over three months. Not only did the population comply with the extreme measures, many observers see the government’s handling of SARS as having increased national pride and allegiance to the state.100   Tolerance, Acceptance, and Resistance  As AI technologies become more pervasive and their social impacts more deeply felt, we can expect a range of responses. In any given society, facial recognition technologies are likely to be embraced by some people and greeted as a threat by others. Some people will find it convenient not to have to use a card at the ATM or feel safer in public spaces with police surveillance. Other people will worry about their privacy, immigration documentation, or parole status. The social impacts will not be “one size fits all” even within the same country or city.   Likewise, societies will evaluate the ethics and social impacts of AI systems differently. While some societies appear poised to embrace or at least tolerate wide-scale government surveillance enabled by AI systems, in other places in the world these technologies are sparking resistance.   In countries like Singapore and China, surveillance, whether AI-driven or in other forms, does not seem to generate much controversy among citizens. State surveillance appears to be an acceptable exchange for security and stability.101 However, in other regions there have been signs of discontent. In 2016, Venezuela introduced a national ID system, “carnet de la patria,” or “fatherland card.”102 Developed with support from Chinese telecom ZTE Corp, the card tracks users across a range of services and is linked to healthcare and social programs, including subsidized food. Shortly after its introduction, activists hacked into the national database and deleted accounts of prominent politicians in an act of political defiance.103  A 2019 study examining the ubiquitous presence of cameras and social media in Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories noted that while Israeli state surveillance is aimed at tracking Palestinian dissidents and alleged terrorists, the faces of Israeli soldiers are also captured and circulated on social media, giving rise to demands for personal accountability. This study demonstrates that surveillance intended as top-down may move in bottom-up directions, being used by people under surveillance in unexpected ways.104  In Part I of the article, we discussed a case in which Saudi Arabia replaced “yellow slips” requiring male consent for women’s travel with an app. While this demonstrates how states can use technologies to monitor and constrict citizen movement, it also illustrates how ordinary women contested new forms of technologically-mediated surveillance, for example when activist