Global AI Ethics 6 compliments of the Saudi ministry of interior, is not only a vicious reminder that Big Brother is watching me but that now he will snitch and tell my ‘guardian’ every time I leave the country.”24   In this case, the technology itself was not necessarily biased or flawed, but it was deployed under existing social conditions with results that were both predictable (it enforced the status quo) and surprising (women found ways to speak up against the technology, in some cases by using other technologies, like Twitter).25   Technologies are used in the wild, in a complex and imperfect world. They can have unintended consequences and unexpected results. They can be used in ways that are creative and politically liberating or inequitable and repressive.   B) DEFINING CULTURE   By now it should be clear that we cannot understand the impacts and ethics of AI without understanding the social world within which it is embedded. This requires grappling with the importance of culture. At first glance, the concept of “culture” may seem straightforward and intuitive. Yet when we begin to unpack its definition, culture turns out to be quite complex. The scholar Raymond Williams famously wrote that “culture is one of the two or three most complicated words in the English language.”26   Beyond Simple Slogans Culture is often discussed in terms of ethnicity, nationality, and language. People from a particular culture are assumed to have a core, unchanging set of beliefs and characteristics. Harvard anthropologist and physician Arthur Kleinman names this prevalent form of talking about culture the “trait list approach.”27 Based on his immersive research in the United States and China, he critiques this common approach as far too simplistic. He warns that it leads to sweeping generalizations like the “Chinese believe this” and the “Americans believe that” — “as if entire societies or ethnic groups could be described by these simple slogans.”28 Anthropology rejects the “trait list approach” because it dangerously simplifies human experience, and leads to stereotyping rather than true understanding.  The Problem with Culture Anthropologists are wary of how oversimplified ideas about “culture” can be used in service of troubling political projects—like arguing for the innate superiority of one group of people over another and justifying racism and xenophobia.   For example, anthropologist Charles Briggs documented a cholera epidemic in an indigenous community in Venezuela.29 Cholera is highly treatable, but the Venezuelan Ministry of Health failed to respond adequately and scores died. In response, officials blamed the deadly outbreak on “indigenous culture” which was portrayed in stereotypes and caricatures of dirty, poor, and ignorant indígenas. In this case, as in many others, “culture” was used to blame the victim, deflect responsibility from institutions, and place responsibility for a devastating public health crisis on people’s supposed “way of life” rather than their access to clean water or adequate medical care.30