Global AI Ethics 4 From an anthropological view, artificial intelligence is best understood as a “technosocial system,” meaning that the technical aspects of AI are intrinsically and intimately connected to its social aspects. Social values and assumptions shape how we perceive, design, and use AI, as well as inform our perceptions, hopes, and fears of these technologies.7   Perception and Imagination A subtle way that technology and society are woven together can be found in how we imagine technology. What hopes and fears drive the technologies we choose to develop, and how we accept, reject, and use the technologies around us?   Technologies emerge from a society’s vision of the world and new technologies spark new ways to imagine the future.8 When a society develops a technology, it does so because it has attained the technological mastery and know-how, but also because it has stories that inform the imaginations of makers. For example, Martin Cooper created the first personal cell phone after seeing Captain Kirk’s communicator on an episode of Star Trek.9   A society’s cultural imagination and its technologies are closely connected. For example, scholars have noted that the popularity of violent science fiction movies like the Terminator series has influenced how Americans imagine technology, leading to fears of killer robots.10 By contrast, in Japanese cultural imagination, robots may be more likely to be associated with Mighty Atom (Astro Boy), a beloved manga character, perhaps leading to less hesitancy about coexistence with robots/AI.11   Some scholars, both Japanese and non-Japanese, attribute importance to Shintoism which recognizes all beings (including robots) as having spirits.12 They theorize such cultural traditions lead to a preference for artificial intelligence technologies that take material form (hence the convergence of robotics and AI in Japan). Such an explanatory framework may account for why robots like Sony’s AIBO and Honda’s ASIMO were accepted so easily in Japan.13  However, many ethnographers and other scholars have recently noted that this ideal of the happy coexistence of robots and humans is not the whole story. For example, despite attempts to introduce robots as caregivers for the elderly to meet the challenge of Japan’s aging population, most families are rather unwilling to utilize robots, preferring the human touch.14 Thus we see that cultural imagination plays an important—but not always predictable—role in the relationship between technology and society. Ethnographic research can highlight the unexpected swerves and influences of cultural categories held in a collective imagination.  Design and Development  The social world in which AI is embedded shapes its development and design. People invent, design, and program technical systems. The general public has most often been alerted to the social aspects of AI design by dramatic problems and failures that make the news. But, even when AI systems function as intended, social values and cultural assumptions are always integrated into their design. When considering how development and design impact AI ethics across cultures, we must ask: who makes AI and who is AI made for?