Global AI Ethics 18 China’s social credit system is currently a patchwork of public-private partnerships piloted in various second-tier cities. It is not yet the sinister dragnet that Western media fear, nor is it a ruse. These tools offer a set of population monitoring and evaluation metrics that are still a work in progress, with potentially far-reaching consequences in store.  CONCLUSION  In our review and synthesis of social science research in five world regions with particular focus on fourteen countries, our analysis finds that AI can be expected to have critical social impacts around the world, and that these impacts will have significant regional variation. Likewise, perceptions and understandings of AI are likely to be profoundly shaped by cultural context. Consequently, further research will be required to make sense of the social impacts and ethical implications of emerging and future AI technologies.   The Case for Ethnography  AI systems are created and used in a flawed, imperfect, and unpredictable world. It is the meeting of AI technologies and the real world that demands our attention, and must be a research priority. We call for further research on the social and ethical impacts of AI, through ethnographic inquiry that is attuned to how these technologies are affecting communities in all parts of the world.   Kate Crawford of AI Now has long advocated for empirical research to assess the social impact of AI technologies at all stages, from design to deployment and regulation.111 Data & Society, founded by Microsoft Research Principal Researcher danah boyd, has recently established an initiative to support “empirically grounded research rather than speculation” because the social impacts of AI “can only be fully understood by observing, listening, and speaking with people on the ground.”112   As AI principles and AI practices travel around the world, we—thinkers and makers—must travel with them. We must closely engage with them, whether they are being used across the globe or across the street. We must track them at every step from design to daily use, paying close attention to how they are translated, understood, and implemented. We must not stop asking hard questions, or accept easy answers. If we do this, AI systems can work to increase human flourishing around the globe rather than amplify inequality.  This article has argued that AI systems have demonstrated a pattern of exacerbating inequality, often in the most unequal societies and particularly for the most vulnerable populations. While AI-based technologies offer enormous promise to better the lives of people everywhere, they also bring risks. The unwanted social impacts of AI may be felt most immediately by historically marginalized groups, but they are unlikely to be limited to any particular group. Their repercussions may be widely felt. The most socially vulnerable populations are the canaries in the data mining, so to speak. As Virginia Eubanks has so trenchantly observed, if we want to predict the future of technological impacts on society, we need only train our eyes on how these systems affect the most vulnerable among us: “Systems tested in low rights environments will eventually be used on everyone.”113