Global AI Ethics 9  C) DEFINING ETHICS: A Plurality of Ethical Frameworks  Western moral philosophy is built on three pillars: Aristotelian virtue ethics, Kantian deontology, and consequentialism. But formal moral frameworks have originated in societies across the world, including Confucian, Shinto, and Hindu thought, as well as the religious frameworks of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, among many others.37 Not only do a multitude of moral frameworks exist across cultures, there is significant variation within these frameworks, adding to their diversity. We need only consider the differences between Catholic and Protestant thought in Christianity, or Sunni and Shiite thought in Islam, to see that this is the case.   While formal moral frameworks drawn from philosophy and religion are important, they form only one aspect of a cross-cultural study of ethics. Every culture has a living system of ethics, which includes formal moral frameworks, but also many other factors such as politics, history, law, customs, common sense, and individual experience.38 These multiple aspects of a culture’s living system of ethics are linked together.39 In other words, ethics and culture are inseparable.   To understand ethics, we must understand culture, and vice versa. Ethics and culture must be considered together as interlocking strands of social DNA. These twin helices constitute each other. To understand any culture, we must consider its values; to understand values, we must understand their cultural context. Because ethics and culture are joined, we cannot study ethics solely as a philosophical abstraction. Ethics must be studied in everyday cultural context to be fully understood. In other words, it is not enough to know the “rules of the game,” we must also understand how people play.40 Up-close and on-the-ground research is vital.  Part I Conclusion In ‘Part I: Defining the Terms,’ we have defined the terms AI, culture, and ethics. We explained how artificial intelligence is shaped by social context at all phases of development and use. Our working definition recognizes culture as a vibrant and dynamic, not as a dry and dusty list of unchanging traits. We examined ethics as much more than just rules, but a living system. We argued that culture and ethics are ultimately inseparable.   PART II: ASKING HARD QUESTIONS   Rather than offering a simple set of solutions, situating AI ethics within heterogeneous and malleable cultural milieus complicates the way AI technologies interface with global populations. To address questions of the social impacts and ethical implications of artificial intelligence technologies, technology companies and governments are increasingly developing ethical principles. In 2018, sixteen countries released national AI strategies, all of which included at least some stated ethical principles.41 While such principles can offer an important first step in discussions about ethical AI across borders and cultures, they also raise difficult questions. How are terms like “fairness” and “privacy” understood in countries outside the United States? Is inclusive AI the same everywhere? Could a system empower people in one part of the world, and be disempowering somewhere else? How will we know how these technologies are playing out on the ground? Is understanding local legal statutes and relying on independent assessments from global NGOs enough?