Global AI Ethics 3 low- and middle-income countries may be more vulnerable to negative social impacts of AI and less likely to benefit from positive outcomes. Any amplification of social inequality can increase social instability, putting entire societies at risk, with potentially far-reaching geopolitical consequences.  3) Further action is essential Despite the clear and evident need for global understandings of AI, research has been neglected. High quality, on-the-ground research is unavailable, resulting in major gaps in our understandings of the social impacts of these technologies around the world. Rigorous, independent ethnographic research is needed to investigate the ethical and social implications of AI across cultures. This is particularly critical to understand where AI systems may be amplifying social inequality and how harms may be mitigated.   Methods This research project assessed the state of AI and related technologies in five global regions with particular focus on fourteen countries. A team of social science researchers reviewed more than 800 academic journal articles and monographs. Analysis was carried out in over a dozen languages and also assessed numerous policy papers, government reports, and local and regional media.6  Our analysis found major gaps in the scholarly literature. In fact, little systematic research has been done on the social impacts or ethical implications of AI systems anywhere in the world. Therefore, in order to think through these effects, we included consideration of adjacent technologies. As proxy technologies, these tools and systems are similar to or correspond to AI but are not explicitly aligned; examples include social media, cell phones, and forms of surveillance like CCTV. We believe that these technologies provide leading indicators of the social impacts of AI systems.   This article is a synthesis of a vast review of available literature in the social sciences. Assessment of academic databases suggests this is the first analysis of its kind: a large-scale, systematic review of the ethical implications and social impacts of artificial intelligence around the world.  PART I: DEFINING THE TERMS    A serious conversation about AI ethics across cultures must begin with an interrogation of key terms: artificial intelligence, culture, and ethics. We argue that a) artificial intelligence is shaped by its social context at all phases of its development and use. As such, it takes distinct forms in different places. We propose a working definition of b) culture that avoids reductive thinking that can lead to stereotyping in favor of a dynamic and nuanced understanding of social context. We show how c) ethics are ultimately inseparable from culture. We demonstrate how ethnographic research methods are uniquely capable of analyzing ethics and culture in tandem.    A) DEFINING AI: A Social View of AI