Global AI Ethics 8 Differences in age, gender, political persuasion, class, education, religious conviction, ethnic identity, regional roots, and personality are just a few of the markers of diversity within a culture. For example, Vladimir Putin, Garry Kasparov, and Maria Sharapova are all Russian and share many cultural understandings, but their differences refute any easy notion of Russian culture as homogenous.    3. Culture is always changing Culture is not static or permanent; it is always changing. Some aspects change quickly: music tastes, hairstyles, fashion trends, and diet fads. Other aspects change slowly: wealth disparity between black and white households in the U.S. has remained much the same since the 1950s.33 The gender pay gap is entrenched.34 Achieving diversity among corporate, political, and military elites has taken place at a glacial pace.35  4. Culture is interconnected Culture is connected to and informed by political and economic structures, and inseparable from experiences of history. We can’t understand German culture without understanding National Socialism and the Stasi. We can’t understand South African culture without understanding colonialism and apartheid. We can’t understand Irish culture without the potato famine and the Penal Laws banning Catholics from holding public office and buying land.   5. Culture is reflexive  Finally, we can only reflect on other cultures through the lens of our own culture and experience. Are apartments in Paris small? It depends on whether you are coming from Tokyo or Texas. Is Mexican pico de gallo salsa spicy? Not if you grew up in Tamil Nadu eating Chettinad cuisine. Is swimming topless at a public beach scandalous or expected? Do armed units patrolling the street give you a sense of safety or fear? Your answers depend on your cultural background and personal experience. There is no simple way to eradicate this cultural “baggage.” The best cross-cultural thinkers and researchers embrace their own unique cultural background and use it as a tool. They don’t try to think about culture in a vacuum, but understand it as a meeting of experiences.  CASE STUDY: COLONIAL LEGACIES New technologies are tied to existing histories. For instance, the history of colonialism in Africa has created a continuing legacy of distrust. The late nineteenth century “Scramble for Africa” in which European powers fought to occupy territory and exploit resources on the continent continues to impact contemporary African-European collaborations. In one case, an African research partnership for an anti-malarial drug disintegrated when local scientists affiliated with foreign drug companies received foreign patents.36 Some traditional healers have become suspicious of scientists and potential intellectual property theft, and now refuse to share their herbal knowledge. Cases like this raise profoundly important questions of ownership, international patents, and the ongoing foreign appropriation of African resources and knowledge practices. What will this mean for AI developers and local concerns over intellectual property? How can foreign researchers navigate the boundaries between collaboration and exploitation?