Global AI Ethics 5 1) Who makes AI? Who gets to participate in designing AI technologies? As will be discussed at greater length in Part II of the article , the persistent global digital divide excludes people from many parts of the world from participating in the design and development of AI technologies. For example, in many places, people lack the educational opportunities necessary to gain the specialized skills needed for AI.15 Girls and women are especially affected by this skills gap.16 These dispersed inequities raise the question: What are the long-term social consequences of AI technologies that are developed without full participation of women from the global south?   Even when people acquire skills and training to cross the digital divide, they may encounter obstacles. For example, African scholars persistently encounter visa issues that prevent them from participating in international conferences held in North America and Europe.17 Visa issues led the International Conference on Learning Representation, a major AI symposium, to move their 2020 meeting to Addis Ababa, so that African researchers can participate.18  2) Who is AI made for? What cultural logics and assumptions are written into AI design? Data, the necessary foundation of AI, is deeply interwoven with society. People generate data. And people decide what counts as data and how, where, when, and why it should be gathered, sorted, and used. As Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research and founder of AI Now Kate Crawford explains, “data will always bear the marks of its history.”19   From a cross-cultural perspective, a key concern is that much of the world leaves a thin digital footprint. People from low- and middle- income countries are likely to be radically underrepresented in the datasets central to developing AI systems, reinforcing the exclusion of their interests and needs. As a 2018 white paper from the World Economic Forum points out, an average U.S. household can generate a data point every six seconds. In Mozambique, where about 90% of people lack internet access, the average household generates zero digital data points.20 In a world where data plays an increasingly powerful social role, to be absent from datasets may lead to increasing marginalization with far-reaching consequences.   Implementation and Use  The close relationship between the social and the technological informs how AI is designed, but more importantly how it is utilized. Technology is rarely used under laboratory conditions or by people with the same demographic profile as those who designed it or tested it.   Technologies enter a world that is already living, that is built on history, and that is shaped by economic and political structures.21 As MIT Technology Review’s Karen Hao argues, “Even the fairest and most accurate systems can still be used to infringe on people’s civil liberties.”22 The most thoughtfully-designed technologies can work in ways that are not just because they are used in the real world with all its imperfections and problems.   For example, in Saudi Arabia women cannot travel abroad without the signed consent of their male guardians (muharram)—husbands, fathers, brothers or adult sons. A 2015 ethnographic case study examined a mobile app intended to replace this infamous “yellow slip.”23 Initiated as part of the Saudi e-government strategy, the app alerted male relatives of women’s movements through SMS messages. Journalist Safa Alahmad wrote, “The new compulsory text service,