Global AI Ethics 13 software.66 Taken together, these incidents reveal a pattern in which AI systems disproportionately affect historically disadvantaged, marginalized, and vulnerable groups.   A Global Pattern AI’s pattern of entrenching and amplifying social inequality does not stop at national borders. In fact, countries outside the U.S. and Western Europe, particularly low- and middle-income countries, may be more vulnerable to the negative social impacts of AI systems, and less likely to benefit from positive outcomes. The World Economic Forum Global Future Council on Human Rights has determined that risks for discriminatory outcomes in machine learning are “especially high” for these countries.67  Nearly half of the world lives on less than $5.50 per day, political corruption is a significant problem for two-thirds of the global population, and more than a third of humanity lives under authoritarian rule.68 AI systems are produced and used in imperfect, unequal landscapes in which any amplification of inequality could have profound and devastating effects.   We have already seen that stigmatized and persecuted groups, like religious, ethnic, sexual, and gender minorities, are particularly at risk. The role of social media distribution algorithms in the genocidal oppression of Myanmar’s Rohingya population, 69 China’s intensive surveillance of Uighur communities,70 and the surveillance of political activists and dissidents by authoritarian-minded governments71 are among recent well-known examples on the international stage. Any consideration of the ethics of AI across cultures must take into account how AI technologies may further entrench and amplify social inequalities.   CASE STUDY: FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEMS AND POLICING IN BRAZIL   “Fairness” is an important ideal in discussions of AI ethics. In the context of the United States, the use of AI in judicial sentencing and policing has received wide critical attention for bias and unfairness. As detailed in investigations from ProPublica and Georgetown Law Center, these technologies are least accurate for those they are most likely to affect: African Americans.72  Research on fairness and bias of AI systems in the U.S. context raises troubling questions for how such technologies will travel. As of now, there has been little rigorous, on-the-ground research on the social impacts of these technologies outside the U.S., so we can only speculate. But given what we know from the U.S. context, we should take the intersection of AI technologies and existing social biases in policing and sentencing very seriously.  A case in point: In January 2019, Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro’s ultraconservative Social Liberal Party (PSL) introduced a bill to permit security cameras with integrated facial recognition technology in public spaces for purposes of policing.73 The same month, a government delegation visited China with an eye to buying facial recognition technology.74   Deepening Digital Divides Despite high global rates of connectivity, the digital divide persists.75 The emergence of AI technologies may reinforce the current digital divide and introduce new forms of exclusion.76