Global AI Ethics 10 There are no easy answers, but ethical deliberation requires that we not back away from hard questions. In this section, we will explore two hard questions:  1) How do AI principles translate linguistically and culturally across borders? 2) How do AI principles translate in practice around the world?  AI PRINCIPLES IN TRANSLATION   How do AI principles translate linguistically and culturally across borders? When translating concepts like “fairness” and “privacy” across cultures, we can expect to encounter mistranslations and misunderstandings along the way. The value-laden terms used in AI principles do not seamlessly translate between languages. In 2017, a machine-translation error caused a Palestinian man’s Facebook post of “good morning” to be rendered as “attack them,” leading to his arrest by Israeli police.42 Even as machine translation becomes ever-more sophisticated, and errors of this type less likely, language carries subtle meaning.   In a more nuanced case, Facebook’s “like” button is translated as curtir in Brazilian Portuguese, which is closer to the English word for “enjoy.” People’s reluctance to “enjoy” negative events led to algorithmic filtering with political consequences for indigenous land rights activism in Brazil.43 Anthropologists Rodrigo Ochigame and James Holston followed an indigenous collective in Mato Grosso do Sul struggling to regain control of their land from the powerful agribusinesses that control it. The group uses Facebook as its primary mode of outreach to the public, and often posts videos of violent acts carried out by private agribusiness militias and photos of the funerals of murdered indigenous activists. The researchers found that although many Facebook users found the posts to contain important information, they were reluctant to “enjoy” posts of violence and oppression. Because users did not “like” the posts, Facebook’s filtering algorithm considered them unpopular and reduced their visibility. Consequently, land rights activists faced barriers in spreading their message through social media.   This was not a case of mistranslation, but an illustration of the subtle power of words and the nuanced meanings they carry. AI principles are inevitably value-laden terms, dense with significance. Such terms, even when thoughtfully translated, can have distinct connotations and meanings in different cultures.   Culture and Understanding  “Privacy” is a term frequently mentioned in discussions of AI ethics. Yet, when ethical principles call for “privacy” what do people hear? The answer depends very much on who is listening. Conceptions of privacy differ by culture. An American visiting the Netherlands is likely to be struck by the lack of curtains on windows, with families eating dinner and watching TV in clear view of the street. Americans are likely to have been raised with the ideal that privacy is a natural right of the individual, whereas someone who grew up in China is more likely to have absorbed a notion of privacy as something that pertains to the family rather than the individual. In China, the concept of privacy appears to be shifting. While it was once seen in primarily negative terms, often closely related to ‘‘selfishness,” that has softened.44   In the U.S., conversations about General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) revolve around “privacy,” but in Europe, the discussion centers on “data protection.” As Julie Brill, former