Global AI Ethics 11 Commissioner of the Federal Trade Commission, and current Microsoft Corporate Vice President and Deputy General Counsel has pointed out, these are not merely semantic differences, but reveal distinct cultural conceptions and concerns about the relationship between individuals, governments, and corporations. When Americans talk about “privacy” instead of “data protection” in the EU, they often miss this subtle but important cultural difference.    Conceptions of privacy are shaped by culture and intersect with our understandings of the nature of personhood and the relationship between the individual and society.45 The ethical ideas informing AI principles do not travel light, but come encumbered with social histories and cultural assumptions.   AI PRINCIPLES IN PRACTICE  AI principles are not just words. They are intended to guide practice. In this section we ask: How do AI principles translate in practice around the world? Is an AI system “fair” or “inclusive” the same way everywhere?  Our literature review reveals a dearth of research on the social impacts of AI systems, especially in settings outside the U.S. and Western Europe. Without further rigorous ethnographic research, this remains an open question. However, existing social science research on the intersection of society and technology gives us important clues to understanding how AI principles may translate in practice.   AI Everywhere AI technologies can be expected to take shape in distinct ways in different places.46 When big ideas and big technologies come into contact with local cultures, everything and everyone is changed by the encounter. Instead of thinking of big ideas and big technologies as being “brought” to a place, we should think of them as colliding with a place, and creating tensions, friction, and new possibilities. We can also think of technologies as being transplanted to a place, taking root in local soil.47 The result may be an “invasive species” that causes unanticipated and long-lasting harm, or hardy hybrids that bear new fruit.48  We can be sure that as AI principles and systems travel, in every place they collide with a local culture, something new and different will happen. AI will take different forms in different regions.   We are seeing the fruits of AI technologies as they crop up around the world.   • In Brazil, AI is being used to decrease corruption by “Rosie,” an AI system that detects and tweets unusual patterns of payment to politicians.49  • India is home to a quarter of tuberculosis cases across the world. In Delhi, a leading hospital is using AI to screen digital chest X-rays with remarkable success.50  • In Nigeria, machine learning is being used for “data-driven farming,” to analyze soil and help farmers decide what crops to plant and how to manage them.51 • A start-up has developed an algorithm for use in classrooms in India, to gauge student comprehension of material by reading facial expressions.52