33
How are those AI concerns impacting education and 
especially digital education?
The following is an explanation on how these concerns may 
arise from an educational perspective.
●●Access to educational systems. Increasingly more 
educational institutions are using Machine Learning 
algorithms to accept or reject students. Two potential 
problems with this approach include:
 −Lack of explainability. Some ML techniques (e.g. Deep 
Learning) cannot easily explain why certain students 
are accepted while others are rejected. Should a 
rejected student have the right to understand those 
reasons? 
 −Unfair discrimination. When Machine Learning 
algorithms are trained on a certain data set (let’s say 
with students from a Western European country), 
then the result might not be directly applicable to 
students from other parts of the world. The training 
data set might be biased towards a certain group and 
therefore might discriminate unfairly when used on a 
different group. 
●●Recommendations to individual students. Like the 
previous point, if recommendations are “machine-
learned” based on a large set of previous data, the 
resulting recommendation might not be adequate for 
students from a different target group. Of course, if the 
recommendations are based on the individual learning 
history of the student, then this problem does not exist. 
●●Personal data concentration. In the case that -like in the 
digital world- educational platforms will be owned by a 
few major players in the world, two concerns arise
 −The concentration of personal (student and teacher) 
information, which might create a privacy risk. Large 
concentrations of personal data are an attractive 
target for cyber criminals.
 −Dominating platforms could forge data monopolies 
cornering the market on the ability to develop 
the best algorithms. This would give them a great 
degree of power and also increase the “explainability” 
concern when those “best” algorithms take the 
majority of educational decisions for student learning 
paths. ●●Liability. What happens if the automated decisions that 
guide students in their learning process turn out to be 
wrong? Who or what is responsible and accountable? The 
platform owner? The assigned teacher? The algorithm?
●●Impact on work. If AI systems automate increasingly more 
tasks that are normally performed by teachers, what 
happens to their jobs? AI systems can assess the student’s 
initial level, guide the student through the course based 
on collective intelligence combined with individual 
experience, automatically evaluate test results and even 
automate the student-teacher interaction using chatbots 
and NLP techniques. 
While those concerns need to be dealt with, we should not 
forget that without using AI for education, the outcome 
might be much worse. For one thing, AI can automate 
many mechanical, repetitive and boring tasks and this 
gives human teachers more time for more complex cases, 
leveraging the human interaction and make sure that more 
students become successful. Another positive aspect is that 
AI in Education can help scale up upskilling the workforce 
to become AI-ready. The workers whose jobs will be mostly 
affected by AI automation have an opportunity to get 
trained in skills needed to work alongside AI systems. 
Data privacy and security almost immediately come up 
in discussions regarding data ethics. The main challenge 
lies in being able to use personal data while ensuring that 
personally identifiable information and individual privacy 
preferences are protected. Installing necessary safeguards 
to prevent data theft is also critical. In education, this 
becomes even more challenging in the context of young 
learners, who, in legal terms, cannot yet provide express 
consent regarding the collection and use of their personal 
data.
Despite these important concerns, however, less than 30% 
of countries across all regions, excluding Europe, have 
comprehensive data protection laws in place (UNCTAD, 
2016). This is at least partly due to a lack of understanding 
of legal issues in data privacy among policymakers and law 
enforcement entities (UNCTAD, 2016). While the increase 
in global, regional and national frameworks concerning 
the protection of personal data certainly marks a growing 
understanding of how urgent the issue is, many of these 
frameworks still do not offer adequate protection to  AI in education - challenges and policy implications       Section III