24
However, coordination is not the only way by which TVET 
institutions can collaborate with industry. Ministries of 
education and labour can partner with industry players 
to share the training ‘burden’ of bridging the AI skills gap. 
Since industry stands to benefit from a larger AI-capable 
talent pool, it should also invest in training and upskilling, 
recognising that bridging the AI skills gap is not the 
education sector’s sole responsibility.
Governments indeed recognise the important role of TVET 
in bridging the AI skills gap, with some even installing 
welfare mechanisms to support the upskilling and 
retooling of individuals holding jobs that are vulnerable to 
automation such as the cases of Singapore and Germany. 
However, bridging the AI skills gap should not be confined 
to reforms in formal education.
Non-formal and informal learning
‘Schooling’ must be distinguished from ‘learning’: While 
schooling happens within structured learning environments 
contained within a fixed time and place, learning occurs 
in a continual fashion, regardless of time and place. With 
the existence of mobile technologies, for instance, it has 
even become more apparent that learning can occur 
well outside the bounds of traditional, brick-and-mortar 
educational institutions (Woolf et al., 2013). Massively 
open online courses (MOOCs) and online learning 
platforms such as Khan Academy are alternative channels 
by which individuals can access training on AI-related 
skills, with various universities offering online courses on 
programming, data science and machine learning, for 
instance. There have also been grassroots initiatives such as 
Code.org and EU Code Week, whose outreach only continues 
to grow over time (European Commission, 2016).
 MOOC platforms are in fact good examples of learning 
systems that contribute to bringing training on AI-
related skills and use AI techniques to make the most 
of themselves. This is because of their inherent digital 
character. Coursera, edX, iversity, Future Learn, Udacity, 
CognitiveClass.ai, etc. are examples of such platforms 
which, in some cases, say that they are applying NLP 
(Natural Language Processing) and Machine Learning in 
combination with Crowdsourcing, for example, to grade 
short answers, coding exercises, vocabulary and even 
automatically generate ‘wh’ (who/what/when/where/why) 
questions. 
The impact of these kind of platforms lies in the virtuous 
circle that they can generate among four factors: (i) Global 
Reach, which produces a big amount of usage data as they reach the whole World, (ii) they can combine Synchronous 
and Asynchronous learning, which means flexibility for 
students, (iii) they offer an opportunity for “career changers” 
for lifelong learners, and (iv) they let the owners and 
teachers research and experiment.
It must be noted, though, that given the relatively recent 
appearance of these informal learning platforms, data 
and research on their overall effectiveness still have a 
long way to go insofar as they must be well measured and 
contrasted. When it comes to measuring the effectiveness 
of these platforms, in fact for any learning system at scale, 
the definition of relevant key performance indicators is of 
course a very complex task. It is easy to start using simple 
indicators like participation, persistence, completion, 
satisfaction and activity. But more sophisticated metrics 
should arise, ranging from correlations between different 
measures of activity to non-trivial successful/unsuccessful 
patterns that can be discovered using the power of AI. 
MOOCs may be considered to fall within a wider category 
of “Large-scale Learning Environments” . Apart from the 
examples of formal MOOC platforms given above, other 
less formal systems, usually based on communities, have a 
relevant impact in how many people learn: citizen science 
communities, YouTube channels by volunteer teachers, 
collaborative programming communities (Scratch, GitHub), 
community tutorial and forums systems (StackOverflow), 
shared critique communities (DeviantArt), informal 
communities of learners (“Explain It Like I’m Five” sub-
Reddit), etc. 
It remains important to invest in such non-formal and 
information learning programmes. The aforementioned 
case of the national Finnish strategy to make 1% of the 
total population AI literate provides a good example of how 
informal and non-formal capacity development initiatives 
can also be fostered through ICT-based platforms. Given the 
rapid pace at which AI technologies are evolving, constant 
and continuous upskilling will always be needed. Moving 
forward, however, when there is more data available 
regarding the results of these lifelong learning initiatives, 
governments can begin to monitor and evaluate and 
therefore make the necessary adjustments to render those 
initiatives more effective.Section II        Preparing learners to thrive in the future with AI