Section I        Leveraging AI towards improving learning and equity
12While part of Artificial Intelligence (Clancey, 1987) since its 
very outset, AI in education has nevertheless faced many 
difficulties to grow because education systems around the 
world are more reluctant to technological changes in their 
traditional organisation. AI was part of the vision promising 
to transform education by creating tutor systems that could 
personalise learning. This promise is starting to unfold as 
present technology has begun experimenting with different 
models worldwide, bringing many questions to the field of 
education.
This first section focuses on the ways in which AI could be 
used to improve learning and equity in education in the 
developing world. The section addresses two main topics: 
one dedicated to improving personalisation through AI 
(pedagogical scale) and the other focused on education 
management information systems (systemic management 
scale).
Before discussing real experiences, a brief reference to 
a key technology that applies to the two main topics in 
this section: Learning analytics, while still a young field, is 
a powerful resource for informed decisions and getting 
better learning results. Learning analytics applies different 
areas of knowledge such as sociology, psychology, ethics, 
pedagogy, etc. and can now access the digital revolution to 
collect a lot of data that can be analysed to extract insights 
or even develop helpful smart tools for educational or 
administrative tasks.
Analysing and getting the most out of data is no easy 
task. For this purpose, advanced data analysis techniques 
are used, which in turn relay on other disciplines such as 
statistics-based big data technologies to efficiently handle 
large data volumes, machine learning algorithms that 
learn from the data and visualisation tools for efficient 
communication with people who must ultimately make 
decisions. 
All these software layers for intelligent data processing will 
allow us to draw insights, detect learning patterns, predict 
future situations or give recommendations to optimise 
available resources. Analysis is also a very important step 
in developing future AI solutions that, with the help of 
powerful libraries, including yet not limited to natural 
language recognition, language translation and game 
theory, will enable us to, for instance, create avatars that 
simulate the behaviour of a virtual teacher for students 
or an assistant for teachers. The bright prospects of the 
future allow us to visualise an AI ecosystem that can help 
us overcome the different challenges in learning analytics. Although the future of AI solutions is very promising in the 
medium term, current solutions are more focused on taking 
full advantage of data mining/analysis technologies.
The section hereunder provides examples of public policies, 
philanthropic engagements and private sector initiatives 
in developing countries as a glimpse into the first stages of 
implementation of AI-based interventions in education.
(1) AI to promote personalisation and 
better learning outcomes
In light of the existing initiatives and technologies to 
come, different studies (Laanpere et al., 2014; Luckin et 
al., 2016; Mayer-Schönberger & Cukier, 2014; Montebello, 
2017) have recently contributed to the ways in which AI 
can help improve learning opportunities for students and 
management systems. 
Sustainable Development Goal 4 aims to ensure inclusive 
and equitable quality education and promote lifelong 
learning opportunities for all. It emphasises equal learning 
opportunities for all throughout life. AI technologies are 
used to ensure equitable and inclusive access to education. 
It provides marginalised people and communities, people 
with disabilities, refugees, those out of schools, and those 
living in isolated communities with access to appropriate 
learning opportunities. For example, telepresence robotics 
allow students with special needs to attend schools at 
home or hospital, or maintain continuity of learning in 
emergencies or crises. In this way, it is able to support 
inclusion and ubiquitous access. 
AI can help advance collaborative learning. One of the most 
revolutionary aspects of computer-supported collaborative 
learning is found in situations where learners are not 
physically in the same location. It provides students variable 
choices insofar as when and where they wish to study. In 
respect to computer-supported collaborative learning, 
online asynchronous discussion groups play a central role. 
Based on AI techniques such as machine learning and 
shallow text processing, AI systems are used to monitor 
asynchronous discussion groups, thus affording teachers 
with information about learners’ discussions and support 
for guiding learners’ engagement and learning.
AI can help personalise learning through various ways. 
AI can help create a better professional environment 
for teachers to work more on students with difficulties. 
Teachers spend plenty of time on routine and 
administrative tasks such as making assignments and