9   Executive Summary
The table above contains some definitions of AI by Stuart J. 
Russell and Peter Norvig in their book “Artificial Intelligence: 
A Modern Approach (2010)” (Refer to the Annex for further 
details).
Research in AI has focused chiefly on the following 
components of intelligence: learning, reasoning, problem 
solving, perception and using language. There are two 
types of AI, namely data-driven AI through Machine 
Learning (see below) and knowledge-based AI, based on 
an explicit representation of domain knowledge that a 
machine reason about. The current success of AI is mostly 
due to advances in data-driven AI.
In 1959, Arthur Samuel coined the term machine learning  
only a few years after AI’s birth, defining the concept as 
“the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed” . 
At its core, machine learning is simply a way to achieve AI. 
It is important to remark that you can get AI without using 
machine learning, but this would require building millions 
of lines of codes with complex rules and decision-trees. 
Refer to the annex for additional definitions.
Deep learning is another widely used term that is also 
one of the many approaches to machine learning. The 
long list of further approaches includes decision tree 
learning, inductive logic programming, clustering, 
reinforcement learning and Bayesian networks. Deep 
learning is a specific subfield of machine learning, viz. a 
new take on learning representations from data that puts 
an emphasis on learning successive layers of increasingly 
meaningful representations. In deep learning, these layered 
representations are (nearly always) learned via models 
called neural networks structured in literal layers stacked on 
top of each other. See annex for additional definitions.
AI thrives on data. AI application outcomes become 
more accurate with more data. AI needs data to build its intelligence (e.g., using machine learning). Given that big 
data enables AI to reach its full potential, it would be fair 
to say that there is no data-driven AI without big data. A 
modern definition of the term big data is: “Datasets whose 
size is beyond the ability of typical database software 
tools to capture, store, manage and analyse” (Manyika et 
al., 2011). Those datasets are a combination of structured 
and unstructured data, and big data is often said to be 
characterised by 3 Vs, namely Volume (of data), Variety (of 
types of data) and Velocity (at which data are or should be 
processed). Refer to the annex for additional definitions.
Educational data mining and learning analytics are two 
specific areas in which big data can be used for education:
Data mining: In computer science, data mining is the 
process of discovering interesting and useful patterns and 
relationships in large volumes of data. Refer to the annex 
for additional definitions. Educational Data Mining (EDM) 
develops methods and applies techniques from statistics, 
machine learning and data mining to analyse data collected 
during teaching and learning. EDM tests learning theories 
and informs on educational practice (US Department of 
Education, 2012).
Learning analytics: Learning Analytics (LA) is an emerging 
discipline seeking to improve teaching and learning by 
critically evaluating raw data and generating patterns to 
characterise learner habits, predict learner responses and 
provide timely feedback. Moreover, LA supports decision-
making, tailors readable content, simplifies realistic 
assessments and provides personal supervision of learners’ 
progress. The goal is to scale the real-time LA exploitation 
by learners, teachers/academics and educational computer-
based systems to enhance learners’ accomplishments at 
both course and individual levels. Refer to the annex for 
references.